
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  genealogical chart
                  THE AVNCIENT HISTORIE AND onely trewe and ſyncere Cronicle of the warres betwixte the Grecians and the Troyans, and ſubſequently of the fyrſt euer cyon of the auncient and famouſe Cytye of Troye vnder Lamedon the king, and of the laſte and fynall deſtruction of the ſame vnder Pryam, wrytten by Daretus a Troyan and Dictus a Grecian both ſouldiours and preſent in all the ſayde warres and digeſted in Latyn by the lerned Guydo de Columpnis and ſythes tranſlated in to englyſhe verſe by Iohn Lydgate Moncke of Burye. And newly imprinted. An. M.D.L.V.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the reader.
            
               ALthough the battayles betwixte the Grecyans and the Troyans before the laſte and fynall euerſion of ye Cyty of Troy (as an hiſſtorye worthye of eterne memorye hath paſſed through the pennes of ſundry famouſe Poetes and great clerkes, Grekes, and Latynes, as Homer, Vergyle, Ouyde, and others, whych for that theyr workes ther of came to the handes of moſt men, haue therfore hytherto ben holden as chiefeſt reporters of that hyſtorye. Of whom neuertheleſſe part lye by affection towardes theyr countreythemen, as Homer fauourynge the Grecyans, and Virgyle and Ouyde the Troyans, and partelye breakynge out (as who ſayth) into theyr poetycall fictions, the hiſtorye was ſo peruerted: that the verye trouthe therof is not to be had in theyr dygeſtes. What we maye then hope to fynde of the trouthe, in theyr doynges that haue onely laboured as tranſlators of Virgyle & Homer into theyr peculyer and vulgare languages, as it is eaſelye to be conſydered. Of whome, although ſome I do confeſſe haue learnedlye and that ryghte well perfourmed theyr enterpryſe therin. Yet hath there ben other ſome, ſo beaſtly bolde to vndertake wtout eyther wyt or any learning, to tranſlate the ſame hiſtory namelye the Eanedes of Virgyle into englyſhe, not vnderſtandynge ſearſe any word what Virgile mēt in all that worke. As by example, if a man ſtudyouſe of that hiſtorye, ſhoulde ſeke to fynde the ſame in the doynges of Wyllyam Caxton in his leawde recueil of Troye: what ſhoulde he then fynde thyncke you? aſſuredlye none other thynge, but a longe tedious and brayneles bablyng, tendyng to no end▪ nor hauyng any certayne begynnynge: but proceadynge therin as an ydyot in his follye, that can not make an ende tyll he be bydden. Muche lyke the foolyſhe and vnſauerye doynges of Oreſtes, whom Iuuinall remembreth, that after he had wryt his booke to the iuſte volume, filled then the mergentes and outwarde ſydes with his madnes, whych after both that with in and wythout conſydered tended to no purpoſe at all. whych Caxtons recueil, who ſo lyſt wyth iudgement peruſe, ſhall rather thyncke his doynges worthye to be nūbred amongeſt the trifelinge tales and barrayne luerdries of Robyn Hode, & Beuys of Hampton, then remaine as a monumēt of ſo worthy an hiſtory. Yet hath there not wanted the faythful & trew reporters of ye hiſtorye, as Daretus the Phrigyan, and Dytus the Grecyan, who both curyouſe of the worthy dedes of theyr countreithes, & both lykewyſe preſēt in al the ſayd warres haue dyligently regeſtred the ſame, whoſe bokes although by iniurye of the tyme, were not of long extant, yet at the laſt beyng founde at Athenes, haue ſins by dewe conference ben founde hooly to agre, in all the dyſcourſe of ye ſayd warres, which the labores aſwel of Darete as Dyte, at the laſte came to the ſyght & handes of the lerned and dylygent Guydo of Columpna, who hath ſyncerelye and pythely digeſted the ſame in one latyne volume. And ſo by theſe degrees, hath bene at the laſte by ye diligence of Iohn Lydgate a moncke of Burye, brought into our englyſhe tonge: and dygeſted as maye appere, in verſe who eſtranayle as well in other his doynges as in this hathe wythout doubte ſo muche preuayled in this our vulgare language, that hauynge his prayſe dewe to his deſeruynges, may worthyly be numbred amongeſt thoſe that haue chefelye deſerued of our tunge. As the verye perfect diſciple and imitator of the great Chaucer, ye onelye glorye and beauty of the ſame. Neuertheles, lykewyſe as it hapned ye ſame Chaucer to leaſe ye prayſe of that tyme wherin he wrote beyng then when in dede al good letters were almoſt aſlepe, ſo farre was the groſeneſſe and barbarouſneſſe of that age from the vnderſtā
               dinge of ſo deuyne a wryter. That if it had not bene in this our time, wherin all kindes of learnyng (thancked be god) haue as much floryſhed as euer they did by anye former dayes within this realme, and namelye by the dylygence of one willyam Thime a gentilmā who laudably ſtudyouſe to ye polyſhing of ſo great a Iewell, with ryghte good iudgement trauail, & great paynes cauſing the ſame to be ꝑfected and ſtamped as it is nowe read, ye ſayde Chaucers workes had vtterly peryſhed, or at ye leſt bin ſo depraued by corrupcion of copies,

that at the laſte, there ſhoulde no parte of hys meaning haue ben founde in any of them. Euen the ſame iniurye almoſt hathe happened to this wryter in this his Pamphlite of the euerciō of Troye: being printed about .xlii. yeares agoe, euen then in the tayle (as it hapned) of the dercke and vnlearned times, ſuche was then the ignoraunce of bothe the prynter and correctour, neyther of them as it ſhoulde ſeme eyther learned or dnderſtandynge engliſhe, yt ye ſame worke is ſo falſed in his verſe by either lacke, foliſhe ſurplus, or diſplaſinge of ye wordes, that thereby ye ſentence and cōſequētlye ye hiſtorye is ſo confuſed and obſcured, that in moſt places, there can be almoſt nothing gathered therof. I therfore muche meruaylinge how it hath happened, whether for lack of copies, (as in dede they be but few) or otherwiſe yt this boke being thouly trew & ſincere engliſh Cronicle, of that ſo worthye an hiſtorye whervpon ſo many great clerkes in other languages haue voutſafed theyr trauayles, hath not before this tyme (whiche in deede lacketh not that haue already by their doynges ſhewed them ſelfes to haue ryght good iudgement in our language) bin purged of his falſyties, & reduſed as nere as mgiht be with conueniēce to the auctours tranſlation. Haue therfore taken vpon me as one ſtudyous of ye language of my countreyth although I muſt confeſſe ye leaſt able of a great nūbre, to, bring again this hiſtorian into lyght ſomewhat I truſte more perfecte & poliſhed then before, not inuertyng therin eyther matter or ſentence, but leauyng that to the auctour his commendacyon, as of right apperteineth. Natheles if I would haue ben withdrawen from this myne attempte, wt that which I myght iuſtly haue recompted wt my ſelfe, that is, to conſyder how great an enterpriſe he vndertaketh, that goeth aboute to brynge perfected into the handes of men ye corrupted labours of former wryters, and howe lyttle thanke is gained therby I ſhulde neuer then haue dared, to haue beſtowed hereof one penful of yncke. Conſideryng that who ſo trauaylethe in other mennes doynges is thought to do nothinge of him ſelfe, and therby in ſome mens iudgmentes hath before hād the thancke that he deſerueth. But if any ſuch be that ſhal ſo diſcerne hereof. I may accompt his iudgement like indifferent as is that mās that ſhould iudge, that he whych hath purged an ouergrowē felde of thornes, & ſtones, hath alſo ſowed ye ſame wyth corne, & ſhuld in ye end be no partaker of ye fruytes or increaſe therof. And ſurelye who ſo euer ſhall take vpon hym thus to trauayle in others mens labores, whether ye lyſt to waye ye difficultie of the thing or the commoditye & pleaſure that ſhall enſewe to theym that be deſirous to vnderſtande the pryueties of our engliſhe tonge, me thincketh ſuch one worthy of his praiſe. And that I may ſay my iudgemēt his trauayle ought not to be thought muche leſſe then is his that writeth of his owne inuēcyō. For if the one commend ye quickenes of ye witt, thother declareth the ripenes of iudgement. He hauyng a large fielde to diſcourſe in, thother cōpelled withī ye ſtraight boūdes of ye writer. The one may vſe ye frugalitye of inuencion & wytt, thother muſt ſo moderate the ſame, yt when he hath greateſt neade therof, yet may he not paſſe the lmittes. Not one onely copye muſt be peruſed, but many exāplars loked ouer, & therin he maye not choſe ſuch as lyketh his fantaſye, but yt which ſhal ſeme to come more nere to ye auctours meninge, and maye moſt pleaſe and pleaſure the readers. So that therin, he ſhall be compelled to put on (as it were) theyr fantaſye, and yet that ſo ſparinglye, yt he maye neither adde nor take awaye, but where he ſhalbe thereto ledd by certaine & ſure iudgmentes. Al which thinges how eaſie they be, who ſo liſt practiſe the ſame maye ſone diſcerne. Thus muche I haue thought good to ſet in wrytynge before this worke. To thend the readers maye be admonyſhed, that this without other is the very trewe and ſincere engliſhe hiſtoryan of the lamentable battels, deſtinye, and vtter euerſion of the auncient and famouſe Cytye of Troye and alſo to preuent the malice of ſuche, as ſhal happlye accompte my trauayle herein, rather raſhe preſumpcyon, then anye vertuouſe imitacion of wel doynge.
            Finis.
            
               
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     Robert Braham.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶The prologue of the Tranſlatour.
            
               O Myghty mars that wt thy ſterne lyght,
            In armys haſt the power and ye myght.
            And named arte from eaſte tyl occident,
            The myghty lorde, the god Armipotent.
            That with the ſhininge of thy ſtremes rede:
            By influence doſt the brydell lede,
            Of chiualrie as ſoueraygne and patron.
            Full hote and drye of complexion:
            Irous woode and malencolyke,
            And of nature brent and collerike.
            Of colour ſhininge like the fiery glede,
            Whoſe ferſe lokes ben as ful of drede,
            As is the leuene that alighteth lowe,
            Downe by the ſkies from Iupiter his bowe,
            So bene thy ſtremes paſſing diſpyteous,
            And to beholde ſo inly furious.
            Thou cauſer art with thy fyrie beames,
            Of werre and ſtrife in many ſūdrye realmes.
            Whoſe lordſhyp cheifeſt is in Capricorne,
            But in the crabbe is thy power lorne.
            And cauſer art of conteke and of ſtrife.
            Now for the loue of her Vlcanus wife,
            With whom whilom yu were at miſchiefe take,
            So helpe me now onely for her ſake,
            And for the loue of thy Bellona,
            That with the dwelleth beyonde Cirrha,
            In Lybye londe vpon the ſandes rede:
            So be my helpe in this great nede,
            To do ſuccour my ſtile to dyrecte,
            And of my penne the traces to correcte.
            Whiche barrayne is of aureat lycoure.
            But in thy grace I finde ſome ſuccoure:
            For to conuoy it with thine influence,
            That ſtumbleth aye for fault of eloquence.
            For to reherſe or writen any worde:
            Now helpe o mars yt art of knighthode lorde:
            And haſt of manhode the magnificence.
            And other goddes yt arne of highe prudence,
            This worke texplete that ye not refuſe,
            But maketh Clyo for to be my muſe,
            With her ſyſtren that on Pernaſus dwelle,
            In Cirrha by Helycon the welle.
            Renning full cleare with ſtremes criſtallyn.
            And called is the fountayne Caballyn,
            That ſpringeth by touche of the Pegaſe.
            Helpe me alſo o thou Callyope,
            That were mother vnto him Orpheus.
            Whoſe dytees weren ſo melodius,
            That the werbles of his reſowninge harpe,
            Appeaſed all the wordes ſherpe:
            Bothe of Parchas and furyes infernall,
            And Cerberus ſo cruell founde at all.
            He coyed alſo bothe beaſt foule and tree.
            Now of thy grace be helpyng vnto me.
            And of thy golden dewe let the lycoure wete,
            My dulled breſt that with thy hony ſwete:
            Sugreſt the tunges of Rethoryciens,
            And mayſtreſſe art to all muſciens.
            Now be mine helpe tenlumine wt thy worke:
            Which am beſet with cloudes dimme & derke,
            Of ignoraunce in making to procede:
            To be to theym luſtye that ſhall it reade.
            And in herte I am ſo full of drede,
            Whan prudent lyſters hereto ſhall take hede:
            Who as in makinge more ſkill can than I:
            That they voucheſafe I pray full beningly,
            Of theyr goodneſſe to haue compaſſion:
            Where as I erre in my tranſlacion.
            For god I take highly to witneſſe:
            That I this worke of hertie lowe humbleſſe,
            Toke vpon me of good entencion,
            Deuoyde of pride and al preſumpcion.
            For to obey withouten varyaunce,
            My lordes biddynge fully and pleſaunce.
            Which hath deſyre ſothely for to ſayne,
            Of very knighthod to reporte agayne,
            The worthineſſe if ſo I ſhall not lye:
            And eke the proweſſe of olde cheualrye.
            Bycauſe that he hath ioye and great deintye,
            To reade in bokes of olde antiquitye.
            To finde onely howe he may vertue ſewe,
            By theyr ample alſo and to eſchewe:
            The curſed vyce of ſlouthe and idelneſſe.
            So he enioyneth in verteous buſineſſe,
            In all yt longeth to manhode dare I ſayne,
            He buſyeth him and therto is ſo fayne,
            To haunte his bodye in playes marciall,
            Through exerciſe to exclude ſlouthe in all,
            After the doctrine of Vigecius.
            Thus is he manfull and eke vertuous,
            More paſſingly than I can of hym write.
            I want conning his renowne to endite.
            So much of manhode men may in him ſene,
            And for to witen whō that I would meane,
            He eldeſt ſonne is of the noble kinge,
            Hēry ye fourth of knighthode well and ſpring.
            In whom is ſhewed of what ſtock he grewe,
            The rootis vertue thus can the ſett renewe:
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               In euery parte the tarage is the ſame.
            Lyke his father of maners and of name.
            In ſothfaſtnes and this no fable is,
            Called Henry eke ye worthy prince of Wales.
            ¶To whom ſhall longe as by ſucceſſion,
            For to gouerne this Brutis albion,
            Which hath me bydde the drery pyteous fate,
            Of them of Troye in ynglyſhe to tranſlate.
            The ſiege alſo and deſtruction.
            Lyke as the latyn maketh mencion,
            For to compile and after Guido make,
            So I could and write it for his ſake.
            Bycauſe he would that both to highe & lowe,
            The noble ſtorye openly were knowe.
            And in our tunge about in euery age,
            Written it were as well in our language,
            As in the latyn and the frenſhe it is.
            That of the ſtorye we the truthe not mys.
            No more than doth eche other nacion:
            This was the fine of his entencion.
            ¶The which empriſe anon I ginne ſhall,
            In his worſhyp as for memoryall.
            And of the tyme to maken mencion,
            Whan I began on this tranſlation,
            It was the yeare ſothly for to ſeyne,
            Fourtene complete tho of his fathers reygne.
            The time of yeare ſhortly to conclude,
            Whan .xx. grees was Phebus altitude.
            The hour whā he hath made his ſtedes draw
            His roſen chariet lowe vnder the wawe,
            To bathe his beames in the wawy ſea,
            Greſed lyke golde as men myght playnly ſe,
            Paſſyng the bordure of our Occion.
            And Lucina of coloure pale and wan,
            Her colde ariſynge in Octobre dyght,
            Tenchaſe the darkenes of the froſty nyght,
            That then amiddes was of the Scorpion.
            And Heſperus gan faſt to weſter down,
            Her courſe to haſte againe the morowe gray.
            When Lucifer the nyght to voyd away,
            The meſſenger is called of the day.
            Our hemiſpher to put out of Affray,
            With bright kalēdes of Phebus vpriſt ſhene,
            Out from ye boundes of Proſerpin ye quene.
            Where Pluto dwelleth the darke region,
            And there the furyes haue theyr manſion.
            Tyll after ſoone Apollo lyſt not tarye,
            To take his ſoiourne in the Sagittarye.
            ¶Which time I gan the prologue to behold,
            Of Troye boke ymade by dayes olde.
            Where written was of Auctours vs beforne,
            Of al the dede the very trewe corne,
            So as it fell ſeuered from the chaffe.
            For in their hande they holde as for a ſtaffe,
            The truth onely which they haue compyled,
            Vnto this fyne that we were not begiled,
            Of necligence thorough foryetfulneſſe,
            The which ſerpent of age by longe proceſſe.
            Engendred is fierſely vs to aſſayle,
            And of the trouth to maken vs to fayle,
            For nere writers all were out of minde,
            Not ſtoryed onely but of nature and kinde,
            The true knowing ſhuld haue gon to wrake,
            And our wittes from ſcyence put abacke.
            Ne had our elders ſerched out and ſoughte,
            The ſothfaſt pythe to impe it in our thought,
            Of thinges paſſed fordyrked of theyr hewe,
            Which through the writing be refreſhed new.
            Of Aūceters and left to vs be hynde.
            To make a myrrour onely to our minde.
            To ſe eche thinge truly as it was,
            As bright and cleare as it were in a glaſſe.
            For nere theyr writynge nowe memoryall,
            Death wt his ſwerde ſhuld haue ſlayne all,
            And ydimmed with his ſodayne ſhowres,
            The great proweſſe of theſe conquerours.
            And derked eke the brightneſſe of their fame,
            That ſhineth yet by reporte of her name.
            For vnto vs their bokes repreſent,
            Without fayninge the waye that they went,
            In theyr dayes when they were alyue,
            Agayne the trouth who ſo euer ſtriue,
            Or counterplede or make any debate,
            The ſouth is redde of high or lowe eſtate,
            Without fauour who ſo lyſt take hede,
            For after death clerkes litell drede,
            Of theyr deſerte for to beare wytnes,
            Nor of a tyraunt the truthe to expreſſe.
            ¶As men deſerue without excepcion,
            With lak or pris they graūt their guerdon.
            Wherfore me ſemeth euery maner man,
            Shulde by his lyfe in all that euer he can,
            For vertue ſake eſchewe to do amys:
            For after death playnly as it is,
            Clerkes willlyn write and except none,
            The playne trouth when a man is gone.
            And by olde time for theyr writinge trewe:
            They cheryſhed were of lordes yt thē knewe.
            
               And honoured greatly as in tho dayes.
            For they enacted and gilt with theyr ſayes,
            Theyr high renowne their māhod & prowes:
            Their knighthod eke and theyr worthines.
            Their trihumphes al and eke their victories,
            Their famous cōqueſt & their fonge glories.
            ¶Fro point to poynt reherſinge all ye trouth,
            Without fraude neclygence or ſlouth.
            They did theyr labour and theyr beſineſſe,
            For elles certayne the great worthineſſe:
            Of all theyr dedes had bene in vayne.
            For dyrked age elles would haue ſlayne,
            By length of yeares the noble worthy fame,
            Of conquerours and playnly of theyr name,
            For dimmed eke the letters aureat.
            And eke deffaced the palme laureat,
            Which yt they wan by knighthod ī their dayes.
            Whoſe freting ruſte newe and newe aſſayes,
            For to eclipſe the honour and the glory,
            Of highe prowes which clerkes in memory,
            Haue truly ſet through dilygent laboure,
            And enlumined with many curious floure,
            Of Rethorike to make vs comprehende,
            The trouth of all as it was tho kinde.
            Byſied them and faithfully trauailed,
            Agayne all that that age wold haue aſſayled,
            In theyr bokes euery thinge yſet,
            And with the key of remembraunce is ſhet.
            Which laſteth yet and dureth euer in one.
            Recorde of Thebes that was ſo longe agone.
            Of which the ruyne and deſtruction,
            Ye may beholde by good inſpection.
            Croppe and roote right as it was in dede,
            On Stace loke and there ye may it rede.
            Howe Polynece and Eteocles,
            The brethern two ne could not liue in peace:
            Till Thebes brought was to his ruyne.
            And all the maner howe they diden fyne,
            That death alſo of worthy Tideus,
            And howe Edipp with teares full pyteous,
            Wept out his eyen and all his drery payne,
            And how ye ſmokes departed were in twaine,
            At the feaſt of fyres funerall.
            In great Stace ye may reden al.
            The ſyre engendred by brotherly hatred,
            Where through ye deathe was the cruel mede.
            ¶In very ſothe of many worthy man,
            Lyke as mine Auctour well rehearſe can.
            Of Troye alſo that was of latter yeares,
            By diligence of theſe Cronycleres.
            Ye may beholde in theyr writinge well,
            The ſtrife werre the ſiege and euery dell.
            Right as it was ſo many yeares ſin paſſed,
            Whoſe ſtorye yet age hath not diffaced,
            Nor cruell deathe with his mortall ſtrokes,
            For maugre death ye may beholde in bokes,
            The ſtorye fully reherſed newe and newe,
            As freſhe as floure of coloure and of hewe.
            From day to day quicke and nothinge feinte,
            For clerkes haue this ſtorye ſo depeynt,
            That death nor age by any other weye,
            The trouth may not make for to deye.
            ¶Al be that ſome haue the trouth ſpared,
            In their wrytynge and playnty not declared.
            So as it was nor tolde out faythfully,
            But it tranſformed in theyr poeſy,
            Through vayne fables which of entencion,
            They haue contriued by falſe tranſſumptiō.
            To hide trouth falſly vnder cloude.
            And the ſothe of malyce for to ſhroude.
            As Homer did the which in his writinge,
            I feyned hath full many dyuers thynge,
            That neuer was as Guydo lyſt deuiſe.
            And thinges done farre in anotherwiſe,
            He hath tranſformed then the trouth was,
            And feyned falſly that goddes in this caſe.
            ¶The worthy Grekes helpe to warrey,
            Agayne Troyens & how that they were ſey,
            Lyke lyfely men among theym day by day.
            And in his dytyes that were freſhe and gay,
            With ſugred wordes vnder hoony ſote,
            His galie is hyd lowe by the roote.
            That it may not outward be aſpyed,
            And all for he with Grekes was alyed.
            Therfore he was to theym fauorable,
            In much thyng whych is not commendable.
            Of theym that luſt to deine after ryght,
            For in making loue hath loſt his ſight.
            To gyue a prys where none is deſerued,
            Cupide is blinde whoſe domes ben obſerued,
            More after luſt then after equytye:
            Or after reaſon how the trouth be.
            For ſyngulertee and falſe affeccion,
            Reyſeth ful ofte by vayne lauſion,
            A man to worſhyp that deſerueth none.
            By falſe reporte and thus full many one,
            Without merite hath his fame blowe,
            Wherof another the renowne is vnknowe,
            
               That ī armes hath ſūdry meruailes wrought
            Of whō peraunter ſpeaketh no mā nought.
            For fauour only is foſtred more thē rightes,
            That hindred hathe many worthy knightes.
            ¶Ouide alſo poete egally hath cloſed,
            Falſhed with trouthe yt make the men enoſed:
            To which parte that they ſhall theym holde,
            His miſty ſpeche ſo hard is to vnfolde.
            That it entriketh readers that it ſee.
            Virgil alſo for loue of him Ene,
            In his Eneyd reherſeth much thinge:
            And was in partie trewe of his writing.
            Except onely that him liſt ſomwhile,
            The traces folowe of Homeris ſtile.
            ¶And of this ſyege wrote eke Lollius,
            But tofore all Daretus frigens.
            Wrote moſt truely after that he fonde,
            And Ditus eke of the Grekes londe.
            For they were preſent and ſene euery dell,
            And as it fill they write trewe and well.
            Eche in his tunge by ſuche conſonaunce,
            That in theyr bokes was no variaunce.
            Which after were vnto Athenes brought,
            And by proceſſe ſerched out and ſought,
            By diligence of one Cornelius,
            Who neuewe was vnto Saluſtius.
            Of rome yborne which did his dewe,
            Them to tranſlate and the traces ſewe,
            Of theſe Auctours by good auiſement,
            But for bycauſe he ſet all his entent,
            For to be brefe he lefte muche behinde:
            Of the ſtory as men in bokes finde.
            The firſte meninge and cauſe originall,
            What was the ginninge and roote in ſpeciall,
            Ne how they come by lande or by nauy,
            How firſte the ſparke was kindled of enuy,
            Betwixt Grekes and theim of Troye towne,
            Of this Cornelie maketh no menciowne.
            Of theyr ſhyppes nor of theyr vytayle,
            Nor how that Grece is called ytayle.
            And the laſſe as bokes verifye,
            ¶Is named nowe the lande of Romanye,
            What numbre of kinges and of Dukes wēt,
            Towarde the ſyege all of one aſſente,
            To wynne worſhyppe and for exercyſe,
            Of armes onely in full knyghtly wyſe,
            Abydyng there to ſe the verſion,
            Of the cytye and noble Illyon.
            Nor what the maner was of theyr armure,
            ¶Nor at the ſyege who longeſt did endure.
            In what wiſe eche other dyd aſſayle,
            Nor how often they met in battayle,
            How many worthy loſt theyr his lyfe,
            How olde hatred wrought vp newe ſtryfe,
            Nor of theyr death he dateth not the yeare,
            For his wrytinge was ſo partyculere.
            Without fruite he was compēdious:
            This foreſayd Romayne this Cornelius.
            ¶Wherfore but late in comparyſowne.
            There was an Auctour of ful highe renowne
            That beſyed hym the traces for to ſewe,
            Of Dite & Daret & caſt him not tranſmewe.
            In all the ſtory a worde as in ſentence.
            But foloweth theym by ſuch conuenyence,
            That in effect the ſubſtaunce is the ſame:
            And of Columpna Guydo was his name.
            Which had in writing paſſing excellence,
            For he enlumineth by crafte and cadence:
            This noble ſtorye with many freſhe coloure.
            Of Rethorik and many ryche floure,
            Of eloquence to make it ſounde the bett.
            ¶He in the ſtorye ymped hath and ſet.
            That in good fayth I trowe he hath no pere,
            To recken all that write of this mattere.
            As in his boke ye may beholde and ſe.
            To whom I ſaye knelyng on my kne.
            Laude and honour and excellence of fame,
            O Guydo mayſter be vnto thy name.
            That excelleſt by ſouerayngtye of ſtyle,
            All that wryte this matter to compyle.
            Whom I ſhal folow as nere as euer I may,
            That god graunte it to be to the paye,
            Of hym for whom I haue it vndertake,
            So as I can this ſtorye for to make.
            Prayinge to all that ſhal it read or ſee,
            Where as I erre there to amende me.
            Of humble herte and lowe entencion,
            Committing all to theyr correction.
            And therof thanke my will is yt they wyn,
            For through theyr ſupport thus I wil begin.
            The ende of the prologue
         
      
      
         
            
            The fyrſte boke.
            
               ¶How ye knge of Theſſalie named Pelleus loſt all his men by diuine puniſhemēt who after by his praiers obtained others. Ca. i.
               
                  IN ye reigne and land of Theſalye,
               The which is now ynamed ſaloni
               There was a king called Pelleus:
               Wyſe and diſcrete & alſo vertuous.
               The which as Guido liſt to ſpecifie,
               Helde the lordſhippe and the regalye,
               Of this yle as gouernour and kynge.
               Of whych the people by recorde of writinge,
               Mirundones were called in tho dayes.
               Of whom Ouide fayneth in his ſayes,
               Metamorphoſeos where as ye may rede,
               How this people ſothfaſtly in dede,
               So as mine Auctour maketh mencion,
               Were brought echeone to deſtruction
               With ſodayne tempeſt and with fyry leuen,
               By the goddes ſent downe from the heauē,
               For they of yre without more offence,
               With ſwerde and with ye ſtroke of peſtilence,
               On this yle whilom toke vengeaunce:
               Like as it is put in remembraunce.
               For this people deſtroyed were certayne,
               With thunder dint & with hayle and rayne,
               Full vnwarely as Guido liſt deſcriue,
               For there was none of them left a liue,
               In all the lande that the vyolence,
               Eſcape might of this peſtilence.
               Except the kinge the which went alone,
               Into a wood there to make his mone,
               Sool by him ſelfe all diſconſolate,
               In a place that ſtode all deſolate.
               Where this kinge ronnynge to and fro,
               Complayninge aye of this his fatall woo:
               And the harmes that he did endure,
               Till at the laſt of caſe or auenture.
               Beſide an holt he ſawe where ſtode a tree,
               Of full great hight and large of quantitye:
               Holowe by thee roote as he coulde knowe,
               Where as he ſawe by the earthe lowe,
               Of Antes crepe paſſing greate plente,
               With which ſight he fell downe on his kne.
               And made his prayer in his panim wiſe,
               To the goddes with humble ſacrafiſe.
               Vpon his wo and great aduerſytee,
               Onely of mercy for to haue pytee.
               To turne theſe Antes into fourme of man:
               Thus gan he praye with coloure pale & wan.
               His lande tenhabite which ſtandeth deſolate,
               And he alone awhaped and a mate,
               Comfortles of any creature:
               Him to releue of that he did endure.
               And as Ouide maketh mencion,
               The god Iupiter herde his oriſon,
               And hath ſuch routhe on him at the leſte,
               That he anone fulfilleth his requeſt.
               And of his might which that is diuine,
               His grace he made from heuen for to ſhine,
               Beningly vnto the earth adowne,
               That by a ſodayne tranſmutaciowne,
               The Antes were brought to fourme of mē anon,
               Which on their fete vpright gan to gon.
               To Theſaly and ſalue there the kinge,
               And like his lieges toke theyr dwellinge,
               Within a citye called tho Egee,
               As in Ouide ye may beholde and ſe.
               The which people for theyr worthineſſe,
               For theyr ſtrength and great hardineſſe,
               Mirundines ſo longe haue bore the name,
               As in the life ye reade may thee ſame.
               Of ſaincte Mathewe how they be called ſo,
               Where the Apoſtle ſo much had a do.
               Which for their wiſdome their prudent aduertence,
               Beſy labour and wilfull diligence,
               By forſeing and great diſcrecion,
               As I ſuppoſe in mine opinion:
               That this fable of Antes was contriued,
               Which by their wiſdōe haue ſo much acheued.
               Through their knighthod who ſo liſt to loke,
               Their manly dedes throughout Troye boke,
               In al miſchiefe ſo wel they haue theim borne,
               That they full wiſely prouided were toforne,
               Of that it fil both in werre and peace:
               For of ſlouthe they weren not reckles.
               ¶But as the Ante to eſchewe idelneſſe,
               In ſomer is ſo full of beſineſſe,
               Or winter comme to ſaue her from the colde:
               That ſhe to fore aſtored hath her holde.
               ¶But in this matter I holde no ſermon,
               Ywill no longer make diſgreſſion,
               Nor in fables no more as nowe ſoiourne,
               But there I lefte I will agayne retourne:
               Of Pelleus ferther to procede.
               ¶Which king forſothe in ſtory as I rede,
               And as mine Auctour liſteh to endite,
               
                  Hadde a wife that called was Tethite.
               Of whyche twayne platly this no lees,
               The manly man the hardy Achilles,
               So as Guido liſte to termine,
               Deſcended was ſothely as by lyne.
               Moſte renoumed of manhode and of might,
               Amonges Grekes and the beſt knyghte,
               Yholde in ſothe throughout all the lande:
               In worthines preued of his hande.
               Whoſe crueltye Troyens ſore abought,
               By his merueyles that he there wrought,
               Durynge the ſyege as ye ſhall after lere:
               Pacyently yf ye ſhall liſt to heare.
               ¶This Pelleus that I of ſpake aforne,
               A brother had of one mother borne,
               That hight Eſon ſo ferre yronne in yeares,
               That he of luſt hath loſt all his deſyres:
               So ferre he was cropen into age,
               That all his wyt was turned to dotage.
               For bothe minde and memoriall,
               Furdulled wer and dercked ſo in all,
               That veryly his diſcrecyon:
               Was him berafte in concluſion.
               Wherfore the reigne and land of Theſalye,
               Crowne and ceptre with all the regalye,
               He hath aſſigned his brother for to queme:
               Eſtate royall and alſo diademe.
            
            
               ¶Howe Eſon the kyng for that he was olde and myghte no longer welde the gouernayle cauſed to crowne his brother Pelleus. Ca. ii.
               Bycauſe he croked was lame and blinde,
               And to gouerne loſt both wit and minde,
               So feble was his celle retentife,
               And forderked his imaginatife,
               That loſt were bothe memorye and reaſon.
               For whiche he made hathe reſignacion,
               To his brother nexte heyre by degre:
               And nyeſt allye of his affynytye.
               But as ſome Auctors in theyr bokes ſayne,
               To youth he was reſtored newe agayne,
               By crafte of Mede the great Sorcereſſe.
               And renewed to his luſtineſſe.
               For with her herbys and with her pocions,
               By ſubtyl workynge of confexions,
               By queintiſe eke of her inſtrumentes,
               Wyth her charmes and enchauntmentes,
               She made a drinke in bokes as it is tolde,
               In whych a yerde that was drye and olde,
               Without abode anone as ſhe it caſt,
               To blome and budde woulde begin faſt:
               And eke grene and freſhe to beholde.
               And through this drinke ſhe hathe fro yeares olde,
               Eſon reſtored vnto luſty age.
               And was of wyt and reaſon eke as ſage,
               As euer he hadde in all his life aforne.
               The whiche Eſon of his wife yborne,
               Had a ſonne and Iaſon was his name,
               In worke of whō nature was not to blame.
               For ſhe her crafte platly and conninge,
               Spent vpon him hooly in workynge.
               Whan ſhe him made with hert wil & thought,
               That of her crafte behind was right nought.
               To reken his ſhape and alſo his fayrneſſe,
               His ſtrength, his beauty, and his liuelyneſſe,
               His gentylnes and his wiſe gouernaunce,
               How large he was and of dalyaunce,
               The moſt goodly that men coulde knowe,
               In all his porte both to highe and lowe,
               And with all this auiſe and eke tretable,
               That of conning god wote I am not able,
               For to diſcriue his vertues by and by.
               For as myne Auctour telleth faithfully,
               He was beloued ſo of olde and yonge,
               That through ye lād ſo is his honour ſprong.
               But for yt he was yet but yonge and ſlendre,
               Of age alſo inly grene and tendre,
               He was committed to the gouernaile,
               Of Pelleus to whom withouten fayle.
               In euery thinge he was as ſeruiable,
               As diligent in chambre and at table,
               As euer was childe or any man:
               Vnto his lorde in al that euer he can.
               Glad in herte, of faithful obeyſſaunce,
               So that in cheare nor yet in countenaunce,
               Inwarde in hearte nor outward in ſhewing,
               His vncle againſt was he not grutching,
               All be he had hooly in his hande,
               The worthy kingdome and the riche lande.
               Of this Iaſon and the heritage.
               Onely for he was tho to yonge of age.
               ¶Vnto whom Pelleus did his payne,
               Againſt his herte falſly for to fayne,
               To ſhewe other that he mente not in herte,
               And kept him cloſe yt nothing him outſterte.
               Like an addre vnder floures fayre,
               For to his herte his tunge was al contrayre.
               
                  Benigne of ſpeche of mening like ſerpent,
               For vnder coloure was the treaſon blente.
               To ſhewe him goodly vnto his allye,
               But inward brent of hate and of enuy,
               The hoote fyre and yet there was no ſmeke,
               So couertly the malyce was yreke.
               That no man might as by ſigne eſpie,
               Towarde Iaſon in herte he bare enuye,
               And meruayle none for it was cauſeles,
               Saue he dradde that he for his encres,
               And for his manhode likely was tatteine,
               For to ſuccede as in his fathers reigne.
               Whiche Pelleus vniuſtly occupieth,
               And daye by day caſt and fantiſyeth.
               How his venim may by ſome purſute,
               Vpon this Iaſon be fully execute.
               Here on he muſeth euery houre and time,
               As he that dradde to ſe an haſty prime,
               Folowe chaunge as it is wonte to done,
               Sodenly after a chaunge or newe mone.
               He caſteth wayes and compaſſeth ſore,
               And vnder coloure alway more and more
               His fell malice he gan to cloſe and hide,
               Like as a ſnake that wonted is to glide,
               With his venim vnder freſhe floures.
               And as the ſonne is right hote after ſhoures,
               So of enuy hotter brent the glede.
               Till on a time he thought he would procede,
               To execute his meaninge euery dell.
               In port a lambe in herte a lion fell.
               Double as Tygre ſlyghtly to compace,
               Galle in his breſte and ſuger in his face.
               That no man hath to him ſuſpection,
               How he purueyeth the deſtruction,
               Of his neuewe and that within a while,
               Pretending loue all be the fine was gile:
               His malice was yſhet ſo vnder keye,
               That his entent there can no man bewreye.
               It was conceled and cloſed in ſecre,
               Vnder the cloke of priuye enmitye.
               And that in ſo the greued him the more,
               Vpon him ſelfe the angre frette ſo ſore,
               Abidynge aye tyll vnto his entent,
               He finde may leyſur conuenient,
               Vpon his purpoſe platly to procede,
               For to perfourme it fully vp in dede.
               Wherof Iaſon hath full lytell rought,
               His vncle and he ne were not in one thought.
               Of whoſe meaninge was no conuenience,
               For ſo was malice linked with innocence.
               And grounde of all ſo as I can deuiſe,
               Was falſe enuye and hatefull couetiſe.
               Whiche frette ſo ſore falſly for to winne,
               As croppe and roote of euery ſorowe & ſinne.
               And cauſe hath bene ſith go full yore,
               That many a realme hath bought ful ſore,
               The dreadful venim of couetiſe alas.
               Let them beware that ſtande in this caſe.
               ¶To thinke afore and for to haue in minde.
               That all falſhed draweth to an ende.
               For though it bide and laſt a yeare or two,
               The ende in ſothe ſhall ſorowe be and woo.
               Of all that bene falſe and enuious,
               Hereof no more but forth of Pelleus
               I will you tell that hath ſo longe ſought,
               Vpō this thing till they were to him brought,
               Tydinges newe and that ſo merueylous,
               That he aſtoned was and all his houſe.
               Of a meruayle that tho was newly falle,
               Beſide Troy the plage orientalle,
               Howe in Colchos as the tidinges cam,
               Within an yle encloſed was a ram,
               Whiche bare his fleſe full richly all of golde.
               And for the richeſſe it was kept in holde,
               With great aduice and great dilygence,
               That no man might there to do offence.
               And in this ile there was a gouernour,
               A noble kinge a worthy warrour.
               That Oetes hight wiſe diſcrete and ſage.
               Which was alſo yronne farre in age.
               That in his time as bokes can deuiſe,
               Had vnderfonged many great empryſe.
               In peace & warre and much worſhip wonne,
               And he was alſo ſonne vnto the ſonne.
               That gaue him vre to honour to atteyne,
               So as theſe poetes liſten for to feyne.
               Touchinge his line I leue as nowe ye greate,
               And of this Ram my purpoſe is to treate.
               That was commit I dare you well aſſure,
               To the keping and the buſy cure,
               Of cruell Mars the mighty god of werre,
               Which with the ſtremys of his rede ſterre.
               And influence of his deytee,
               Ordeyned hath by full great crueltee.
               This Ram to kepe bullis full vnmilde.
               With braſen fete ramageous and wilde.
               And there with all fell and diſpitous,
               And of nature wood and furious.
               
                  To hurte and ſlee euer of one deſyre,
               Out of whoſe mouthe, leuen and wylde fyre.
               Lyke a flawme euer blaſed out,
               To brenne all theim that ſtode nygh aobut.
               Eke of their eyen the lokes moſte horrible,
               To a fourneys the ſtremes were viſyble.
               And who that wolde tencreaſe his glorye.
               This Ram of golde wynnen victorie.
               Fyrſte he muſt of very force and myght,
               Vnto oultraunce with theſe bulles to fyght.
               And theim vanquiſhe alder fyrſt of all,
               And make theim humble as any oxe in ſtall.
               And ſithe theim yoke and do them ere ye land,
               Of very manhode this muſt he take in hand.
               And after that he muſt alſo endure,
               With a ſerpent of huge and great ſtature.
               Without fauour playnely haue to do,
               To oultraunce eke without wordes mo.
               The whiche ſerpent ſhortly for to tell,
               Was lyke a fende comyng out of hell.
               ¶Full of venym and of cruell hate,
               And with ſkales harde as any plate.
               He armed was to ſtande at defence,
               And by his brethe werſe then peſtilence,
               Infecten wolde enuiron all the eyre,
               In eche place where was his repeyre.
               He was ſo full of foule corruption,
               And eke ſo dredefull of infection.
               That deth in ſoth ſhortly to deuyſe,
               Was the fyne of this hygh Empryſe.
               To ſuche as wolde this quarell take in hond,
               Ylyke in one both to free and bonde.
               But if he coulde the bet him ſelfe defende,
               And of his conqueſt this was eke the ende.
               That when he had the myghty ſerpēt ſlawe,
               He muſt anone by cuſtome and by lawe.
               ¶Out of his head his tethe echeone arrace,
               And after ſowe theim in the ſelfe place.
               Where as the oxen eryd had aforne,
               Of which ſeede there ſprange a wōder corne.
               Knyghtes armed paſſynge of great myght,
               Eueryche with other redy for to fyght.
               Til eche his brother had ybrought to groūd,
               By mortall fate and yeue his dethes wound.
               This was the ende of euerychone,
               For ſowfaſtly of all there was non.
               That liue myght by that fatall lawe,
               A longer tyme then lyued his fellowe.
               ¶And by this way dredfull and peryllous,
               Who ſo deſyreth to ben victorious.
               He paſſe muſt and manly to endure,
               And how ſo fall take his auenture.
               For of eſtate was no excepcion,
               Cheſe who ſo wyll for this concluſyon,
               He may not ſcape for fauour ne for mede,
               Who ſo begynneth a vyſe him wel I rede.
               For by the ſtatute of the kyng he may,
               Who ſo that wyll entre and aſſaye.
               But after that he ones hath begonne,
               He may not cheſe tyll he haue loſt or wonne.
               Yet as ſome other of this Ram expreſſe,
               And of his fleſe alſo bere wytneſſe.
               It was nothyng but golde & great treaſour,
               That Oetes kynge with full hye laboure.
               Made kepe it as by Incantacions,
               By ſorſerye and falſe illuſyons.
               ¶That was ſpoke of in realmes fer about,
               For whiche many put theyr lyfe in doubte.
               Of hye deſyre that they had for to wyn,
               The great treaſoure that was ſhyt within.
               Colchos londe, as ye haue harde deuyſe,
               Whoſe purſuyte roſe out of couetyſe.
               Grounde and roote of wo & of myſchaunce,
               By vayne reporte theim ſelfe to auaunce.
               For whiche they put theim ſelfe in ieopardy,
               Without reſcues lykely for to dye.
               There was no helpe ne no ſleyght of armes,
               That vaile might againe ye curſed charmes.
               So were they ſtronge and ſuperſticious,
               That many worthy in knighthode famous.
               Enhaſted were vnto their deth alas,
               That ieoparde liſt their liues as in this caſe.
               ¶This laſteth forthe tyll afterwarde byfell,
               That Pelleus platly hath hard tell.
               The great miſchiefes and deſtructions,
               In Colchos wrought on ſundry nacions.
               That haue purſued thes auntres to cōquere,
               Tyll Pelleus ſo ferforth gan enquere.
               That he knewe hooly how the trouth was,
               And in his herte anone he gan compaſſe.
               How that he myght by any ſlyght make,
               His neuewe Iaſon for to vndertake.
               This hye Empryſe in Colchos for to wende,
               For by that way he myght hym beſt ſhende.
               ¶And gan pretende a colour freſhe of hew,
               Ygylte outwarde ſo luſty and ſo newe.
               As though there were no treaſō hyd within,
               He ſawe alſo it was tyme to begyn.
               
                  On his purpoſe tho fyrſt he made it queint,
               And gan forthwith with golde & aſure paint.
               His gaye wordes, in ſownyng glorious,
               Knowynge Iaſon was yonge and deſyrous.
               Vnto ſuche thynge & lyghtly wolde enclyne,
               Therfore he thought that he wolde not fyne:
               Playnely to worke to his concluſyon,
               And made anone a conuocation.
               Of his lordes and of his baronye,
               Aboute enuyron the lande of Theſalye.
               For to aſſemble eſtates of eche degree,
               Of all his realme within the chiefe citee.
               To holde a counſeyle vtterly he caſte,
               Therby to acheue his deſyre as faſte.
               And ſo his courte continued dayes three,
               Tyll at the laſte his hyd iniquitie.
               He out gan rake that hath be hyd ſo longe,
               For he ne myght no longer forth prolonge.
               The venym hyd that fret ſo at his herte,
               In ſo ſlye wyſe that no man myght auerte.
               Vpon no ſyde but that he mente well,
               So was his treaſon couered euerydell.
               And curtined ſo vnder trechery,
               For he this thynge ſo ſlyghtly gan to gye.
               At pryme face that no man myght deme,
               By any worde as it wolde ſeme.
               In chere, in porte, by ſygne or dalyaunce,
               But that he caſte knyghtly to auaunce.
               His yonge neuewe as by lykelyneſſe,
               To hye honour of manhode and proweſſe.
               For of thentent of whiche he gan purpoſe,
               No man cowde ſpye theffect he dyd ſo gloſe.
               The texte was ſo conueyed with flatery,
               That the people cowde not then eſpye,
               Lyttell or nought of his entent within.
               For whiche anone to preyſe him they begyn.
               That he ſuche honour to his neuewe wolde,
               For with ſuche chere he began vnfolde,
               Tofore theim all this entencion.
               That he hath voyded all ſuſpection.
               From all that were aſſembled in the place,
               And towarde Iaſon he tourne gan his face.
               Full louyngly in countenaunce and chere,
               And to hym ſayde that all myght it here.
               Throughout ye court whē maked was ſilēce,
               Thus worde by worde platly in ſentence.
            
            
               ¶Howe Pelleus fearynge to be depoſed by his brothers ſon Iaſon, a worthye & valiaūt yonge knight, coūſayled him to vndertake ye perellous & almoſt inuincible conqueſt of the golden fleſe at Colchos, who by his perſwacion vndertoke the ſame. Cap. iii.
               
                  COſyn Iaſon take hede what I ſhal ſain
                  For the I am ſo inly glad and fayne,
                  And ſo ſurpriſed with mirth through my hert
                  That it enchaſeth and voideth all my ſmerte.
                  For to conſyder in myne inſpection,
                  Of thy youthe the diſpoſicion.
                  The whiche ſhortely for to comprehende,
                  Saue to vertue to nothyng do entende.
                  Vnto worſhyp and to gentylneſſe,
                  To manly fredom and to hye largeſſe.
                  That veryly whether I wake or wynke,
                  My ioye is onely there on for to thyncke.
                  My ſelfe I holde ſo paſſinge fortunate,
                  And all my lande of hye and lowe eſtate.
                  That lykely are in honour for to flete,
                  And to lyue in reſte and perfecte quiete.
                  Through thy ſupporte & worthy gouernaile,
                  Whoſe manhode may ſo muche to vs auayle.
                  By likelyhod and eke ſo moche amende,
                  In very ſoth to ſaue vs and defende.
                  Agayne al tho as I can deſcryue,
                  That of malis wolde againſt vs ſtryue.
                  Or rebell be in any maner waye,
                  Of ſurquedrye or pryde to werraye.
                  Our worthineſſe aſſured in tranquyll,
                  From all aſſaute of them that wolde vs ylle,
                  For to perturbe our noble ſtate royall,
                  Agaynſt whome thou arte our only wall,
                  Our myghty ſhyelde and our protection,
                  Thus deme I fully in myne opynion.
                  ¶For of thyne age, thy wyt, thy prouidence,
                  Thy knyghtly herte thy manly excellence,
                  Reported ben and thyne hye renowne,
                  In many londe and many regyowne,
                  This rounde worlde aboute in circuite.
                  Howe myght I than ſtonde in better plyte.
                  For thyne honour lyke as it is founde,
                  To my worſhyp ſo hyghly doth rebounde,
                  That I wolde playnly ſeke & nothyng ceaſe,
                  If I coulde helpe thyne honour to encreaſe,
                  And hygh renowne Ywys in euery houre.
                  And therupon ſpenden my treaſoure.
                  This hye deſyre withouten any fayle,
                  Of entier loue me dothe ſo ſore aſſayle,
                  
                     That nyght nor daye I maye haue no reſte,
                  And all ſhall tourne I hope for the beſte.
                  For tenhaunce thyne honour to the heauen,
                  Aboue the poole and the ſterres ſeuen,
                  To whiche thinge I haue awaye eſpyed,
                  As I my wyt therto haue applyed,
                  This is to meane what ſhuld I longer dwel,
                  My dere Coſyn as I ſhall after tell,
                  If it ſo were by manhode ſouerayne,
                  Of thy knyghthode that thou durſt attayne,
                  The fleſe of gold to conquere by thy ſtrength,
                  Whiche is ſpoke of ſo fer in bredth and length,
                  And home returne in body ſaufe and ſounde,
                  If ſo this conqueſt myght in the be founde,
                  That thou acheue durſt this hyghe empriſe,
                  More hertes ioye coulde I not deuyſe.
                  In all this worlde, for ſothly at the beſte,
                  My realme and I were fully then in reſt.
                  For by thy manhode all men wolde vs drede,
                  Wherfore Coſyn of knyghthode & manhede:
                  Take vpon the my praier and requeſt.
                  ¶And here my trouth and take it for beheſte,
                  What euer nedeth in meyne or coſtage,
                  I wyll my ſelfe towarde this viage,
                  Ordaine ynoughe in harneyſe and araye,
                  That nought ſhal faile yt may be to thy paye.
                  And furthermore I playnly the enſure,
                  That if I ſee thou do thy beſy cure,
                  This hyghe empryſe for to bryng aboute,
                  Thou ſhalt not feare nother ben in doubt,
                  After my daye by ſucceſſyon,
                  For to be kyng of this Region,
                  And hooly haue ſceptre and regaly.
                  Wherfore Iaſon lyfte vp thyne hertes eye,
                  Thynke thy name ſhalbe longe recorded,
                  Throughout ye world wherfore be accorded,
                  Within thy ſelfe and plainly not ne ſpare:
                  Of thyne entent the ſentence to declare.
               
               
                  VVhan Iaſon had his vncle vnderſtāde,
                  He muche reioyſeth for to take on hand,
                  This dredfull labour without auiſement.
                  He nought aduertith the menyng fraudulēt,
                  The priue poyſon vnder ſuger cured,
                  Nor howe to galle with hony he was lured.
                  The dercke deceyte the cloudy falſe engyne,
                  Ygylt without but vnder was venyme.
                  Wherto Iaſon, hath none aduertence.
                  The kynge he wende of cleane conſcience,
                  Withouten fraude had all this thyng yment.
                  Wherfore anon he yeueth full aſſent,
                  At wordes fewe and plainely gan to ſeye,
                  His vncles will that he wolde obeye.
                  He was accorded in concluſion,
                  With humble herte and hoole entenſyon,
                  Wherof the kynge receyueth ſuche gladneſſe,
                  That he vnneth myght the ſame expreſſe.
                  But ryght as faſte dyd he his beſy paine,
                  For this iourney in haſt there nedes ordaine.
                  And for aſmoche as Colchos the countrey,
                  Encloſed was inuyron with a ſea,
                  And that no man how longe that he ſtryue,
                  Without ſhyp thyder may arryue,
                  To his preſence anone he dyd call,
                  Famous Argus that coulde moſt of all,
                  To make a ſhyp and fyrſt that art yfonde,
                  To ſayle with by ſea fro londe to londe.
                  And he hath wrought a ſhyp by ſotyl crafte,
                  Whiche was the fyrſt that euer wawe rafte,
                  To haue entre and Argon bare the name.
                  Gramariens do yet recorde the ſame.
                  The which ſhyp fyrſt for that meruayle,
                  Is called ſo whiche proudely bare her ſayle,
                  As Guydos boke doth vs ſpecifye.
                  But how it happed forthe of this nauye.
                  ¶Whan all was ready meyne and vytayle,
                  They byde nought but wynde for to ſayle.
                  And many worthye was there in companye,
                  Of noble byrthe and of great allye.
                  In that vyage ready for to gon,
                  Bothe for loue and worſhyp of Iaſon.
                  Amonge the whiche the great Hercules,
                  Of force and myght of ſtrength pereles.
                  And he begetten was vpon Alcmene,
                  So inly fayre and womanly to ſene.
                  Of Iubiter, and that full longe agone,
                  Takyng lykelyneſſe of Amphitrion.
                  Downe fro the heuen for all his deyte,
                  He rauiſſhed was through luſt of her beaute.
                  For he her loued with herte and hole entent,
                  And of them two ſothly by diſcent,
                  Came Hercules the worthy famous knyght,
                  Moſt renoumed of manhode and of myghte.
                  Whiche in his tyme was ſo meruaylous,
                  So excellent and ſo victorious,
                  That Ouyde liſte recorden all hym ſelue,
                  In Methamorphoſis his dedes twelue.
                  Whiche ben remembred there inſpeciall,
                  
                     In his honour for a memoryall.
                  ¶And theim reherſe in ordre by and by,
                  If ye lyſt here I purpoſe vtterly.
                  He ſlough Antheon in the eyer on hyght,
                  And many an other Gyaunt by his myght.
                  He hath outrayed for all their lymes rude,
                  The ſerpent Hydra he ſlough eke in pallude.
                  And Serberus the hounde he bonde ſo ſore,
                  At hell gates that he brake no more.
                  And made him voide his venym in ye ſtrife,
                  And vpwarde gaue hym ſuche a laxatyfe,
                  That all the worlde his brethe contagyous,
                  Infected hath it was ſo venymous.
                  That with an blaſt he althinges wold do die,
                  He toke the Harpyes byrdes of Archady.
                  And ſlough the Centaurus beſtꝭ mōſtruous.
                  The fyerſe Lyon he berafte his houſe.
                  This is to ſayne whan that he was ſlawe,
                  Out of his ſkynne he hath him ſtript & flawe.
                  With cruell herte throughe his hye renowne.
                  The golden applys he berafte the dragone.
                  The fyrye catte he ſlough withouten more,
                  Of Archadye likewyſe the cruell bore.
                  And at the laſt on his ſhuldres ſquare,
                  Of veray myght the fyrmament he bare.
                  But for that I ne may not reaken all,
                  His paſſynge dedes whiche ben hiſtoryall,
                  Redeth Ouide and there ye ſhall theim fynd.
                  And of his trihumphes how he maketh mīde.
                  Thoughout ye world how he his honour fet,
                  And of the pyllers that at gades he ſet.
                  Which Alexſaundre of Macedone ye kyng,
                  That was ſo worthy here in his lyuynge.
                  Rood in his conqueſt as Guydo liſt to write,
                  With all his hooſt proudely to viſyte.
                  Beyonde whiche no londe is habitable,
                  Nor ſea to ſayle ſothly conuenable.
                  So ferre it is beyonde the Occian,
                  That ſhypmen thenſe no further no ſkill can.
                  And Sibilles ſtreightes maryners it call,
                  And theſe boundes named be of all,
                  Of Hercules for he hym ſelfe theim ſet.
                  As for his markes all other for to lette,
                  Ferther to paſſe as Guydo maketh mynde,
                  And yet the place is called as I fynde.
                  Saracenica as fyne of his laboure,
                  Of Longa, Saphy, recorde of mine auctour.
                  ¶Of this matter what more ſhuld I ſayne,
                  For vnto Iaſon I wyll retourne agayne.
                  That in all haſte doth him ready make,
                  Of his vncle whan he hath leue take.
                  Towarde the ſea and Hercules yfeare,
                  With all his men anone as ye ſhall here.
               
               
                  THe tyme of yere whan the ſhene ſonne,
                  In his ſphere was ſo farre vp ronne,
                  That he was fully paſſed the Gemyny.
                  And hath his chare whyrled vp ſo hye,
                  Throughe the draught of Pirrous the reed,
                  That he had made in the crabbes head,
                  His manſion and his ſea royall,
                  Where halowed is the ſtondyng eſtiuall,
                  Of freſhe Appollo, with his golden wayne.
                  When herde men in herte be ſo fayne,
                  From the hete to ſhroude them in the ſhade.
                  Vnder theiſe braūches & theiſe bowes glade.
                  Whan Phebus beames that ſo bryght ſhine,
                  Deſcended ben right as any line,
                  And cauſe the eyer by reflection,
                  To be full hoote, that luſty freſhe ſeaſon.
                  Whan cornes gyn in the fielde to ſede,
                  And the graſſes in the grene mede,
                  Fro yere to yere ben of cuſtome mowe,
                  And on the playne caſte and leyde full lowe,
                  Tyll the moyſture conſumed be awaye.
                  On holte and hethe the merye ſomers daye.
                  At whiche time the yonge knyght Iaſon,
                  With Hercules is forth to ſhyp gon.
                  And with theim eke as I reherſe can,
                  Of Grekes alſo many a luſty man.
                  Shypped echon with royall apparayle.
                  And whan they were croſſed vnder ſayle,
                  Within the ſhyp whiche that Argus made,
                  Which was ſo ſtaūche it might no water lade
                  They gan to ſayle and had wynde at wyll.
                  The ſhyp gan breake the ſturdy wawes yll.
                  Vpon the ſea and ſo both daye and nyght,
                  To Colchos warde they held the waye right.
                  Gydyng their courſe by the lode ſterre,
                  Where ere they ſayle by coſtes nigh or ferre.
                  For Philoctetes was their alder guide,
                  That coulde afore ſo prudently prouyde,
                  Of great inſyght to caſte afore and ſee.
                  Tempeſt or winde both on lande and ſea.
                  Or whan there ſhuld trouble of ſtormes fall,
                  For he was mayſter plainly of them all.
                  In ſhipman craft and choſe their gouernour.
                  And coude them warne afore of euery ſhour,
                  
                     That ſhuld be fall, whan ſterres dyd appere,
                  And ſpecyally as Guydo doth vs lere,
                  This Philoctetes whiche was tho no fole,
                  Had moſte his ſyght erecte vnto the pole.
                  His aduertence and cleare inſpection,
                  To the ſterres and conſtellacion,
                  Whiche the artre rounde aboute gone,
                  That clerkes call the ſeptemtrion.
                  For the pole ycalled Articus,
                  Euer in one appereth vnto vs.
                  Ryght ſo in ſothe who can loke aryght,
                  Antarticus is ſhrouded from our ſyght.
                  But to ſhypmen that be diſcrete and wyſe,
                  That lyſte their courſe prudently deuyſe,
                  Vpon the ſea haue ſuffyſaunce ynoughe,
                  To gye theyr paſſage by Arthourys ploughe.
                  For it to them is playne direction.
                  Vnto the coſtes of euery region.
                  With helpe only of nedle and of ſtone,
                  They may not erre what coſtes yt they gone.
                  For maryners that be diſcrete and ſage,
                  And lyke expert be of their lodmanage,
                  By ſtraunge coſtes for to ſayle ferre,
                  Gynne their courſe only by the ſterre.
                  ¶Whiche that Arthur compaſſeth enuiron,
                  The whiche cercle and conſtellacion,
                  Ycalled is the cercle Artophilax.
                  Who knoweth it nedeth no more to axe.
                  For it to ſhypmen on the ſterry nyght,
                  Is ſuffyſaunt whan that they ſee his lyght.
                  ¶And as poetes of theſe pooles twayne,
                  In their bokes lyken for to fayne,
                  And in their ditees manifeſt to vs,
                  Calixto and the yonge Archadius,
                  Her owne ſonne were both yſtellyfyed,
                  In the heauen and there defyed,
                  For that Iuno had to her enuye.
                  With Iupiter whan ſhe did her eſpye.
                  ¶For whiche ſhe was into a bere tourned.
                  And for her gilte ſhe hath in erth mourned.
                  Till into heauen Naſon can you tell,
                  She was tranſlate eternally to dwell.
                  Amonge ſterres where ſhe as is ſtalled,
                  And vrſa maior is of clerkes called.
                  So as her ſonne for his worthy fame,
                  ¶Of vrſa minor beareth yet the name▪
                  
                  Of ſuche, the courſe might not aſterte,
                  Philectetes that was the moſte experte,
                  Of all ſhypmen that euer I herde tell▪
                  
                  For of cunnynge he might beare the bell.
                  ¶And whan the Grekes had longe be,
                  Fordryue and caſte ſaylynge in the ſea,
                  And all forweried after their trauayle,
                  They caſte to aryue if it wolde auayle.
                  Theim to refreſhe and diſporte in ioye,
                  Vpon the boundes of the londe of Troye.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Iaſon in his expedicion towardes Colchos, caſually with his felowſhyp arryued in the territoryes of Troye, meanynge onely there for a whyle to refreſhe and reſte theim. Cap. iiii.
               VUhan Hercules & Iaſon on his honde,
               Out of their ſhip taken haue the londe,
               And wt theim eke their knightes euerichone,
               That fro the ſea be to londe gone,
               Sore forweried after their trauaile,
               As they in ſothe come to aryuaile,
               At Symeonte an hauen of great renowne,
               That was but litle diſtant fro Troy towne.
               And they were glad to be in ſykerneſſe,
               From ſtorme and tempeſt after werineſſe.
               For they ne mente treaſon, harme, nor gyle,
               But on the ſtronde to reſten theim awhyle.
               No wight to hurt of any maner age,
               Nor in that yle for to do damage,
               To man nor beaſt where euer that they go,
               But as to abyde for a daye or two,
               Theim to refreſhe and efte repaire anone,
               When that the rage of the ſeas were gone,
               And whyle that they vpon the ſtronde laye,
               They did nought els but to diſporte & playe,
               And bath & waſhe them in the freſhe ryuere.
               And dronke waters that were ſoote & cleare:
               That ſprange like criſtall in the colde well.
               And toke right nought but if it were to ſelle.
               It was nothyng in their entencion,
               Vnto no wyght to do offenſyon.
               Or to moleſte or greuen any wyght.
               But the vnſtable rule of fortunes might,
               Hath euer enuye that men liue in eaſe.
               Whoſe haſtie courſe vnwarely doth diſeaſe.
               For ſhe was cauſe god wote cauſeles,
               This gery fortune, this lady recheles,
               The blinde goddeſſe of tranſmutacion,
               To tourne her whele by reuolucion,
               To make Troyens vniuſtly for to wene,
               
                  That Grekes were ariued theim to tene.
               So that the cauſe of this ſuſpicion,
               Hath many brought vnto deſtruction.
               Full many worthy of kinges and princes,
               Throughout ye world reckened in prouinces.
               Were by this ſlaundre vnto miſchief brought.
               For thinge alas that neuer was be thought.
               For it was cauſe and chiefe occaſiowne,
               That this citye and this royall towne,
               Deſtroyed was as it is playnly founde.
               Whoſe walles hie were betē downe to groūd.
               And many a man & many a worthye knight,
               Were ſlayue there and many a lady bright,
               Was wedowe made by dureſſe of this werre.
               As it is kouthe and ſith reported ferre.
               And many a mayde in grene and tender age,
               Be lefte were ſole withouten mariage.
               Behinde theyr fathers alas it fall ſhulde,
               And for nought elles but yt fortune would,
               Shewen her might and her crueltye.
               In vengeaunce taking vpon this citye.
               ¶Alas that euer ſo worthy of eſtate,
               Shuld for ſo lytell fallen at the debate,
               Whan it is gon it is not like to ſtaunche.
               For of the graffing of a litell braunche,
               Full ſturdy trees growen vp full ofte.
               Who clymbeth hye may not fall ſofte.
               And of ſparkes that be of ſight ſmall,
               Is fyre engendred that deuoureth all.
               And as a gnat firſt of litell hate,
               Encauſeth flawme of contek and debate.
               And enuiouſlye to ſprede abrode full ferre.
               And thus alas in realmes mortall werre,
               Is firſt begonne as men may reade and ſe,
               Of a ſparke of litell enmitye.
               That was not ſtaunched fyrſt whē it begōne.
               For when the fire is ſo ferre yronne,
               That it embraſeth hertes by ſuch hatrede,
               To make them brenne as hote as any glede.
               On other partye through his cruell tene,
               Ther is no ſtaunche but ſherp ſwerdes kene.
               The which alas conſumeth all and ſlethe,
               And thus the fine of enmite is death.
               And though the ginning be but caſuell,
               The biding frete is paſſingly cruell.
               To voyde realmes of reſte peace and ioye,
               As it fill whilom of this worthy Troye.
               It doth me wepe of this caſe ſodayne,
               For euery wight ought it to complayne.
               That litell gilt ſhuld haue ſuche vengeaūce,
               Except percaſe through goddes purueaunce,
               That this miſchiefe ſhuld perhappes be,
               The enſuing cauſe of great felycitye.
               For Troye brought thus vnto deſtruction,
               Was the ginninge and occacion,
               In mine auctour as it is ſpecified,
               That worthy Rome was after edified.
               By the of ſpringe of worthy Eneas.
               Whilom from Troy whan he exiled was.
               The whiche Rome reade and ye may ſe,
               Of all the worlde was head and chiefe citye.
               For the famous paſſing worthineſſe.
               And eke whē Troy was brought thus in diſtreſſe,
               And ye walles caſt & broke adowne,
               It was in cauſe that many regiowne,
               Begonne was and many a great citye,
               For this Troyan this manly man Enee,
               By ſundrye ſeas gan ſo longe to ſayle,
               Till of fortune he came into Itayle.
               And wan that lande as bokes tellen vs,
               With whom was eke his ſonne Aſcanius.
               That after Enee doth by line ſuccede,
               The land of Itale iuſtly to poſſede.
               And after him his ſonne Siluius,
               Of whom came Brute ſo paſſingly famous.
               After whom if ſo I ſhall not fayne,
               Whilom this land called was Britayne.
               For he of geauntes through his māhode wā,
               This noble yle and it firſt began.
               ¶From Troye alſo with this ilke Enee,
               Came worthy Francus a lorde of hye degre.
               Which after Rome tēcreaſe his high renowne
               Builded in his time a full royall towne,
               Which he ſothely his honour to auaunce,
               After his name he made do call it Fraunce.
               And thus began as I vnderſtande,
               The name firſt of that worthy lande.
               And Anthenor departing from Troyens,
               Began the cytie of the Veneciens.
               And Sycanus within a litell while,
               Began tenhabite the land of Cecile.
               And after parting of this Sycanus,
               His worthy brother called Syculus,
               So as I finde reygned in that yle,
               And after him it called was Cecile.
               But Eneas is forth to Tuſcy gone,
               It tenhabite with people right anone.
               And in Cicile he Naples firſt began.
               
                  To which full many Neopolitane,
               Longeth this daye ful riche & of great might.
               ¶And Diomede the noble worthy knight.
               Whan Troye was fall with his toures faire,
               Howe to his reygne he caſt to repayre.
               His lieges tho began a quarell fayne,
               And him withſtode wt al their might & maine.
               And of malyce and conſpiraciowne,
               They him wtheld both ſceptre & the crowne.
               Their deutye and theyr olde aligeaunce,
               And him denied both trouth and obeyſſaūce.
               Wherfore anone ſo as the bokes tell,
               With all his folkes he went for to dwell,
               To Calabre and gan it to poſſede.
               And there the knightes of this Diomede,
               That fro Troye haue him thither ſewed,
               To fourme of byrdes wer anone trāſmewed,
               By Circes crafte doughter of the Sonne,
               And in the eyer to flee anone they gonne.
               And called bene in I ſodore as I reade.
               Amonge Grekes the byrdes of Diomede.
               Not as ſome bokes of theim liſt beare witnes
               This chaūge was made by Venꝰ ye goddeſſe.
               Of wrathe yt ſhe had to this worthy knight,
               Onely for that ſhe ſawe him ones fighte,
               With Eneas her ownely ſonne deare.
               At which time as they faughte yfeare,
               And Diomede with a darte ygrounde,
               Gan ame at him a deadly mortall wounde.
               ¶His mother Venꝰ gan anone him ſhroud,
               Vnder a ſkye and a miſty cloude.
               To ſaue him tho that time fro miſchaunce.
               And for this ſkill Venus toke vengeaunce,
               Into byrdes to tourne his meyne.
               And in that fourme from yere to yere they fle,
               Vnto his tombe where as he is graue,
               So yt on him as yet a minde they haue.
               That of cuſtome for a remembraunce,
               A rite they holde and an obſeruaunce,
               At his exequies theſe byrdes euery chone,
               A dayes ſpace and thence not ne gone.
               And moreouer as it to them is dewe,
               They loue the Grekes & platly they eſchewe,
               Latins all for ought that may betyde,
               For they preſent anone they flee aſide.
               And eche from other as bokes vs aſſure,
               Theſe byrdes knowe onely of nature.
               Grekes and latines kindely aſſonder,
               Whan they theym ſe yt which is ſuch a wōder,
               Vnto my wit that I can not eſpye,
               The cauſes hidde of ſuch ſorcerye.
               But well I wote though my wit be blent,
               That roote of all was falſe enchauntement,
               But of our fayth we ought to defye,
               Such apparences ſhewed to the eye.
               Which of the fende is but illuſion,
               Therof no more & thus whan Troye towne,
               Euerſed was and that brought to nought,
               Full many citie was ybylde and wrought.
               ¶And many lande and many ryche towne,
               Was edifyed as by occaſiowne,
               Of this werre as ye haue herde me telle.
               Whiche to declare as now I may not dwelle.
               From poynt to poynt like as bokes ſayne,
               For to Iaſon I wyll reſorte agayne,
               That landed is with worthy Hercules,
               At Symeonte the hauen that he ches.
               As I haue tolde to reſte them and comforte,
               And for not elles but onely to deſporte.
               But to the kyng reygnyng in Troye towne,
               That was that tyme called Lamedowne.
               Of falſe enuye reported was and tolde,
               How certayne grekes were of herte bolde,
               His londe to entre the which they not knewe.
               Well arayed and in a veſſell newe.
               Which to aryue had there no lycence.
               And theym purpoſe for to done offence.
               By likelyhed and his lande to greue.
               For they of pride without any loue,
               Or ſafe conduite haue the ſtronde ytake.
               And ſuch maſteries on the land they make,
               As in theyr power were all maner thinge,
               Without regarde playnly to thy kinge.
               ¶Of his eſtate taking tho none hede.
               Of ſuch ſtraungers great is for to drede.
               If men by laches other neclygence,
               Fully to wete what is theyr pretence,
               But forth prolonge and no perill caſte,
               Such ſodeyne thinge wolde be wiſt as faſt,
               And not differred till the harme be do.
               For it were wiſedome that it were ſo.
               Men may to longe ſuffer and abide,
               Of necligence for to let ſlide,
               For to enquere of theyr gouernaunce,
               This was the ſpeche of the dalyaunce,
               Eueriche to other by reuelaciowne,
               In euery ſtrete throughout Troye towne.
               Some rowning and ſome ſpake abrode,
               
                  And this ſpeche ſo longe there abode,
               From one to an other ſothely that the ſowne,
               Reported was to kinge Laomedowne.
               As ye haue herd the which of wilfullneſſe,
               Without counſayle or auiſeneſſe.
               To haſtely maked hath his ſonde,
               To wit how they were hardy for to londe.
               Beſide his leue of preſumption.
               Wherfore he bad that in concluſion,
               Without abode ſoone to remewe.
               Or finally they ſhuld not eſchewe,
               To be compelled maugre who ſayeth nay.
               And ſo the king vpon a certayne day,
               In haſte hath ſente his imbaſſadore,
               Vnto Iaſon of Grekes the gouernoure,
               That nother thought harme nor villanye,
               But Innocent with his companye,
               Diſported him endlonge on the ſtronde.
               And euer hath do ſith he came to londe.
               And of the charge that he on him layd,
               And worde by worde to Iaſon how he ſayde,
               As in effect with euery cyrcumſtaunce,
               This was the ſomme playnly in ſubſtaunce.
            
            
               ¶How Lamedon king of Troye ſent to Iaſon commaundyng him and his felowſhippe forthwith to depart the confines of his countreith and of their aunſwere ſente ayen to the kinge. Ca. v.
               
                  THe wiſe worthy & famous of renowne,
                  The mighty king ye noble Lamedowne,
                  Hath vnto you his meſſage thus yſent.
                  Of which theffect as in ſentement,
                  Is this in ſothe that he hath meruayle,
                  Into his lande of your ariuayle.
                  Bringing with you Grekes not a fewe,
                  And haue no conduite for you for to ſhewe.
                  Protection playnly nor licence,
                  In preiudice of his magnificence.
                  Wherfore he hath on me the charge layde,
                  And will to you that it be platly ſayde,
                  That ye anone without more delay,
                  Without noyſe or any more affraye,
                  Of Troye land the bondes that ye leue,
                  Or you and yours he caſteth for to greue,
                  And better it is with eaſe to departe,
                  Than of folye your liues to Ieoparte.
                  In any wiſe for lacke of prouidence.
                  Againſt his will to make reſiſtence.
                  Other of pride or of wilfulneſſe,
                  For to be bolde without auiſeneſſe,
                  To interrupt his high felicitye.
                  For he deſireth in tranquilitie,
                  To holde his reigne withouten perturbaūce▪
                  
                  In whoſe parſon is made ſuch alyaunce,
                  Atwene his manhode and Royall mageſtye,
                  That they will ſuffer none of no degre,
                  Him to diſquiet in any maner wiſe.
                  Wherfore I counſayle as ye ſemen wiſe,
                  To take good hede vnto this that I ſeye,
                  And this his bidding not to diſobey.
                  ¶Leſt ye offende his knightly excellence.
                  For ye ſhall finde as in experience,
                  Without feyninge the ſothe of that I telle.
                  Take hede therfore I may no longer dwelle.
                  From point to point ſith ye be wiſe and ſage,
                  For this is hoole the effect of my meſſage.
               
               
                  VVhan Iaſon herd had of the meſſegere,
                  Theſe wordes al he gā to chaūgē chere.
                  And kept him cloſe with ſobre countenaūce,
                  And was not Ireful haſtye for greuaunce,
                  Ne for no rancoure he caughte of his tale,
                  Saue in his face gan to waxen pale,
                  Longe abiding or he ought would ſayne,
                  And or he ſpake any worde agayne.
                  As vnto him that fro the kinge was ſent,
                  He gan diſcloſe the ſomme of his entent,
                  Vnto his folkes ſtanding rounde aboute,
                  For vnto them he tho diſcured oute,
                  The meſſage hole and firſt when he abreyde,
                  Then worde by worde thus to theim he ſayd.
                  ¶Syrs he ſayeth to you be it well knowe,
                  Take hede I pray and that both hye & lowe.
                  How Lamedone that is the king of Troye,
                  Hath ſent to vs a wonderful Lenuoye.
                  Chargyng in haſt to hye out of his land,
                  And axeth howe we thus vpon the ſtronde,
                  For to ariue hadden hardineſſe.
                  Withouten leue ſe there his gentilneſſe.
                  And his fredome the which is not alite.
                  Howe like a kinge he can him ſelfe aquite.
                  Vnto ſtraungers that entre in his yle.
                  For nought god wote but for a litell while,
                  Them to refreſhe and to departe anon.
                  Like as ye can recorden euerychon.
                  And hereof bearen witneſſe al and ſome.
                  
                     Alas fredome where is it nowe become.
                  ¶Where is manhode and gentilneſſe alſo,
                  Which in a kinge togither both two,
                  Shulde of cuſtome haue theyr reſting place.
                  And where is honour yt ſhuld alſo embraſe.
                  A lordes herte which of kyngely right,
                  Of manly fredome with all his full might,
                  Shuld ſtraūgers halfe refreſhe & recomfort.
                  That afterwarde they might of him reporte.
                  ¶Larges experte manhode and gentilleſſe,
                  That they haue founde in his worthineſſe.
                  For if nobleſſe were aught of his allye,
                  And fredome eke knit with his regallye,
                  So as longeth to honour of a kinge,
                  He ſhulde haue charged firſt of all thinge,
                  His worthy lieges with al that might pleaſe,
                  To haue ſhewed theyr comforte & theyr eaſe;
                  With all theyr might and theyr buſy cure,
                  Vnto ſtraungers that of auenture,
                  Were in the ſea fordryuen and diſmayed.
                  And of our comming not be euill appayed.
                  For yf that he in any caſe ſemblable,
                  Oether by fortune that is variable,
                  By ſort or hap that may not be withſtande,
                  Aryued had into Grekes land,
                  More honeſtly and like to his degre.
                  He ſhuld of vs haue there receyued be.
                  Lyke as it longeth vnto gentrye,
                  But ſith that he for ought I can eſpye,
                  Hath fredom honour and humanytye,
                  At ones made out of his courte to flie,
                  Choſe diſhonour and let worſhip gone,
                  There is no more but we ſhall euerichone,
                  That he hath choſe helpe to fulfiil,
                  When that power ſhall not be like his will.
                  That is to ſaye and ſothe it ſhall be founde,
                  That his dede ſhall on him ſelfe rebounde.
                  Sith of malyce he hath this worke begonne,
                  Perauenture or that the ſomer ſonne,
                  To zodiak hath thriſe gone about.
                  For let him truſt and nothing be in doubte,
                  We ſhall him ſerue wt ſuch as he hath ſought,
                  For if I lyue it ſhall be dere abought.
                  Albe therof I ſet as nowe no tide,
                  And in this lande I will no longer abyde,
                  Till I haue leyſur better to ſoiourne.
                  And with that worde begā anone to fourne,
                  With manly face and with a ſterne cheare,
                  All ſodeynly vnto the meſſagere.
                  That fro the kinge was ſo vnto him ſent.
                  And in this wiſe he ſheweth his entent.
                  ¶My frende quod he I haue wel vnderſtād,
                  The meſſage hoole that yu haſt toke in hand,
                  From thy kinge to bringen vnto vs.
                  Right nowe vnwarely & ſith it ſtandeth thus,
                  That nowe I haue his meaninge euery dele,
                  From poynt to poynt and vnderſtande it wel.
                  Worde by worde and playnly it conceyued,
                  And the giftes that we haue receyued,
                  On his behalfe in this our great nede,
                  I will remembre and take of it good hede.
                  To euery thing that thou haſt to vs brought.
                  For truſte well that I forget it nought.
                  But ſhall imprinte it ſurely in my minde.
                  And withall this how goodly that we finde,
                  The great bountie in all maner thinge.
                  Within this land of Lamedone the kinge.
                  His welcominge and his great cheare,
                  And goodly ſonde that thou bringeſt here.
                  Not accordinge as to our entent.
                  For god well wote that we neuer ment,
                  Harme vnto him nor playnly no domage,
                  To none of his of any maner age.
                  And there vpon the goddes inmortall,
                  That of theyr kinde ben celeſtiall,
                  Vnto recorde with all mine herte I take.
                  And touching this my borowes I thē make.
                  In witneſſing we ment none offence,
                  Ne haue not taken as by violence,
                  Within this realme of woman childe or man,
                  And ſo thou mayeſt reporte if thou can.
                  But for that we fordriuen in the ſea,
                  Compelled were as of neceſſyte,
                  For to ariue as thou haſt herd me ſayne.
                  Onely to reſte vs here vpon the playne.
                  Without more vnto a certayne daye,
                  And afterwarde to hold furth our way,
                  Vpon our Iourney and make no tarying.
                  Like as thou mayſte recorde vnto thy kinge.
                  And ſaye him eke he ſhall the time ſe,
                  That he perauenter ſhal mowe thanked be,
                  Whan time commeth by vs or by ſome other.
                  Go furth thy way & ſay him thus my brother.
                  ¶And then anone as Iaſon was in peace,
                  
                     The manly knight the worthy Hercules,
                  Whē he had herd this thinge fro point to poīt,
                  He was anone brought into ſuch diſioynt,
                  Of haſty rancoure and of ſodeyne Ire,
                  The whiche his herte almoſt ſet a fyre,
                  That ſodeynly as he abreyde abacke,
                  Of hie diſdeyne euen thus to him he ſpake.
                  With chere aſkoyne vnto the meſſengere.
                  And ſayd felowe be nothing in feare.
                  Of our abydinge but do the well certayne,
                  That are Titan his bemes reyſe agayne,
                  We ſhall departe and hence to ſhyppe gone,
                  That of our men ſhall not be lefte one,
                  Within this lande & god to forne to morowe.
                  And there vpō haue here my faith to borowe.
                  For we no longer ſhall holde here ſoiourne,
                  For elles where we ſhall make our retourne,
                  To morowe early by the daye dawninge,
                  On payne of reprefe and ſo go ſaye thy kinge.
                  And or thre yeare yf god vs graunt life,
                  Maugre who grutcheth or maketh any ſtrife
                  Vnto this lande we ſhall agayne retourne,
                  And caſt anker a while to ſoiourne.
                  Take hede therof and note well the time.
                  A newe chaunge ſhall folowe of this prime.
                  And thē his power ſhall not ſo large ſtretche,
                  Of his ſafe conduit litell ſhall we reche,
                  I ſay the platly as is our entent,
                  We will not haue vnto his maundement,
                  But ſmall regarde and we that day abyde.
                  For taking leue ſhalbe ſet aſide.
                  Bycauſe he hath begonnen here a playe,
                  Which we ſhal quite by god if that we may.
                  That tourne ſhall into his owne ſhame.
                  And ſpare not to ſay thy kinge the ſame.
                  ¶This meſſeger then gan agayne replye,
                  And ſayd ſyr ye may not me denye,
                  Of honeſte my meſſage to declare,
                  Auiſe you well for I will not ſpare.
                  The kinges ſonde playnly for to tell.
                  And where ſo beye liſte to go or dwell,
                  Ye may yet cheſe who ſo be lefe or lothe,
                  Ye haue no cauſe with me to be wrothe,
                  For it ſit not vnto your worthineſſe,
                  If ye take hede by waye of gentelleſſe,
                  Of manaſſing ſuche arowes for to ſhete,
                  For bett it were your thretninge to lete,
                  And kepe ſecret till ye be at your large,
                  For certaynly no parcell of my charge,
                  Is to ſtriue with you or make debate.
                  But better is betimes than to late.
                  That ye beware for harmes that mighte fall.
                  And for my parte I ſay vnto you all,
                  It were pytie that ye deſtroyed were.
                  Or any man ſhulde hinder or do dere,
                  So worthy perſons in any maner wiſe.
                  Which likly ben to be diſcrete and wiſe.
                  And leſt wt wordes as nowe I do you greue,
                  I ſaye no more I take of you my leue.
               
               
                  THe nighte ypaſſed at ſpringing of ye day,
                  When that the larke with a bleſſed laye,
                  Began to ſalue the luſty rowes rede,
                  Of Phebus chare yt ther were freſhly ſprede,
                  Vpon the bordure of the oriente.
                  And Aurora of herte and hole entent,
                  With the ſwetenes of her ſiluer ſhoures,
                  Bedewed had the freſhe ſomer floures,
                  And made the roſe wt newe bawme to flete,
                  The ſoote lylye and the margarete,
                  For to encloſe theyr tender leues white,
                  Oppreſſed hertes with gladnes to delite.
                  That drery were afore of nightes tene.
                  And hony ſuckels among the buſhes grene,
                  Enbawmed had enuyron all the eyre.
                  Longe or Titan gan make his repayre,
                  With the brightnes of his beames merye,
                  For to reioyſe all our Hemiſperie.
                  For longe aforne are he did ariſe,
                  This worthy Iaſon in full haſty wiſe,
                  And his felowe Hercules alſo,
                  Ycharged haue theyr ſhypmen haue ado,
                  To hale vp anker and theym ready make,
                  And bad in haſte euery man to take,
                  The right way vnto the ſhyppe anone.
                  For in ſothnes this manly man Iaſon,
                  Thought he was not ſtuffed of meyne,
                  To gin as than a werre on Troye citye.
                  For he was not ſhortly to conclude,
                  Egall in nombre nor in multitude,
                  As for that time a werre to beginne.
                  It was not likely that he ſhuld wynne.
                  Victorye as tho for they were but a fewe.
                  And it ſitteth nought for a man to hewe,
                  Aboue his head when it is ouer hye,
                  Leſte that the chippes do fall in his eye.
                  Wherfore of Troye they leue the coſtes bliue,
                  They drewe vp ſayle the ſhip began to driue,
                  
                     The winde was good the goddes fauorable,
                  Fortune theyr frende though ſhe be variable,
                  And thus to Colchos ſafe they ben ycome.
                  And vnto lande ſafe both all and ſome,
                  They ben ariued in a litell ſpace.
                  For in the ſea founde they haue ſuch grace,
                  Of Neptunus that cauſed them as blyue,
                  As I ſayd erſt at Colchos to aryue.
               
               
                  NOw in this yle and in this lytell lande,
                  That Colchos hight ye ſhal vnderſtāde,
                  Howe that there was a royall cheife cyty,
                  In al that reygne moſt of dignitye.
                  Of worthineſſe of ryches and of fame,
                  And Iacomtes tho it bare the name.
                  Chefeſt of all to ſpeake of buylding,
                  With ſtretes large and curyous of houſinge.
                  And therwith all dyched well without.
                  Stronge walled and toured rounde about.
                  Of huge height and aloft battayled,
                  And ye ryght ſtrongly leſte they were aſſailed,
                  With many paleys ſtately and royall,
                  For there was tho the ſeat moſt principall,
                  The kinge to abide better than elles where.
                  And at that time it happed him be there.
                  And he was called Oetes as I reade,
                  Full renōmed of knighthod and of manhead,
                  And him about a well beſene meane,
                  Like as was ſitting vnto his degre.
                  And euery where the landes enuirowne,
                  The fame ſpredde of his hye renowne.
                  And al about this mighty chiefe citye,
                  Where as Oetes helde his royall ſea,
                  Were riuers freſhe of which ye waters cleane,
                  Lyke criſtall ſhone agayne the ſonne ſhene.
                  Fayre playnes as Guydo beareth wytneſſe,
                  And holſome hilles full of luſtineſſe,
                  And many lake and many luſty welle.
                  And there were eke mine auctour cā you tell.
                  Full many a parke full fayre & freſhe to ſene,
                  And many wode and many a medowe grene.
                  With ſundry floures among ye herbes meynt,
                  Which on theyr ſtalke nature hath depeynt,
                  With ſundry hewes within and eke withoute.
                  After the ſeaſon as ſomer came aboute.
                  For fiſhing fouling for hauking eke alſo,
                  For venery and hunting both two,
                  The place was right inly delytable.
                  Of corne and grayne paſſingly greable.
                  And plenteous in all maner thynge.
                  For their men harde the birdes freſhely ſyng.
                  In tyme of yere in their hermonye.
                  That the noyſe and ſoote melodye,
                  On freſhe braunches full delycious,
                  Reioyſe wolde theſe folkes amerous.
                  Whom loues bronde had fyred to the herte,
                  And efte adawen of their paynes ſmerte.
                  That certeynly whan that grene Vere,
                  Ypaſſed was aye fro yere to yere,
                  And May was come the month of gladnes,
                  And freſhe flora of floures Empereſſe,
                  Had cladde the ſoyle newe at her deuyſe,
                  This noble place was lyke to Paradyſe.
                  And Ceres goddeſſe of largeſſe and foyſon,
                  Suche plentye gaue vnto that regyon,
                  Of fleſhe, of fyſhe, wyne, vitaile and corne,
                  That the lycour of her full horne,
                  Vpon the londe ſo gan to raine and ſnowe.
                  That all aſtates yea both high and lowe,
                  Lad their life in ſoueraiane ſuffyſaunce.
                  With al that nature coulde or might auaūce.
                  This litle yle with her giftes great,
                  Lyke as toforne ye haue harde me treate,
                  For ther was plētie & ther was habundaūce,
                  And there was al that might do pleaſaunce.
                  To any harte and all commoditee.
                  And ſo befell that to this citie,
                  Iaſon is come and with him Hercules.
                  And after them foloweth al the pres.
                  Full well arayed and royally be ſayne.
                  Their armes encloſed togyther twayne and twain
                  A people choſe as it were for ye nones.
                  And therwith all of brawnes and of bones,
                  Eueriche of theim of makyng and facion,
                  Full well complete as by preportion.
                  Yonge of age and of good ſtature,
                  Sadde of countenaunce and full demure.
                  That euery wight had great pleaſaunce.
                  To ſe the maner of their gouernaunce.
                  So yonge, ſo freſhe, hardy and meke alſo,
                  And all at ones they to the paleys go.
                  With ſuche a chere that eueriche hath diſport,
                  To ſee the maner of their noble porte.
                  So gentylmanly they demeaned were,
                  That the people preſe gan euery where,
                  To ſee theſe ſtraungers lyke the grekes gyſe.
                  Demeane them ſelfe in ſo thryfty wyſe.
                  And of deſire the people ne wolde ceſſe,
                  
                     Aboute them to gather and impreſſe.
                  And to enquere what they myght be,
                  That of newe with ſuche a royalte,
                  Ben ſodeynly entred into the towne.
                  Thus eueriche wold with his felowe rowne.
                  They were ſo rude to ſtare and to gaſe,
                  To gape and loke as it were in a maſe.
                  As towniſh folke done ſo comonly,
                  Of euery thynge that falleth ſodeinly.
                  But how Oetes lyke a worthy kyng,
                  Whan that he harde fyrſt of their comyng,
                  Receyueth them and hooly the manere,
                  If that ye lyſt anone ye ſhall it here.
               
               
                  VVhan yt the king hath ſothly vnderſtāde
                  How the grekes come were to lande,
                  And how Iaſon was alſo there with all,
                  Borne by diſſente of the blud royall,
                  Of Theſalye and lykely to be heyre,
                  If he by grace haue againe repeire,
                  The auentures achyued of Colchos.
                  The kynge anone out of his ſea aroſe.
                  Of gentilleſſe in all the haſte he may,
                  In goodly wyſe to mete theim on the waye.
                  And them receiueth with a cheare benigne,
                  And vnto them anone he doth aſſygne,
                  His offycers tawayte them night and daye.
                  Chargynge them in euery maner waye,
                  That what ſoeuer may to them do eaſe,
                  Or any thyng that may them queme or pleſe,
                  That they it haue in foyſon and plente.
                  Eueryche of them lyke to his degree.
                  Thus he commaunded in al maner thyng,
                  And than anone this noble worthy kyng,
                  As he that was of fredome a myrrour,
                  Through many halle and many riche toure,
                  By many tourne and many dyuers waye,
                  By many gree made of marbyll graye,
                  Hath them conueyed a full eaſy paſe,
                  Tyll he thē brought there his chambre was.
                  Where he with them helde his daliaunce.
                  And there anone with euery circumſtaunce,
                  Of manly fredome he made vnto them chere.
                  And in his chambre engloſed bright & cleare,
                  That ſhone ful ſhene with gold & with aſure,
                  Of many ymage that there was in picture.
                  He hath commaunded to his offycers,
                  Only in honour of thē that were ſtraungers,
                  Spyces and wyne and after that anon,
                  The yonge freſhe the luſty man Iaſon,
                  As faſt gan by lycence of the kyng,
                  For to declare the cauſe of this comyng.
                  But fyrſt the kyng with great royalte,
                  Aſſended is into his royall ſea.
                  Clothes of golde ranged enuyron,
                  After the cuſtome of that regyon.
                  That to beholde it was a noble ſyght,
                  Stondyng aboute many a worthy knight.
                  And many a ſquyre and many a gentylman,
                  Full well beſene and the kyng right than,
                  Vnto Iaſon ſtondyng in preſence,
                  Commaunded hath of his magnifycence,
                  With Hercules to ſytte a downe beſyde.
                  And Iaſon than no longer lyſte abyde,
                  Of his commyng the cauſe for to ſhewe.
                  The effect of which was this in wordes fewe.
                  Saue Iaſon fyrſt ere he his tale began,
                  Full well auiſed and chered lyke a man.
                  Conceyued hath and noted wonder well,
                  From poynt to poynt his mater euerydell.
                  And not forgot a worde in all his ſpeche.
                  But euen lyke as rethoryke doth teache,
                  He gan his tale ſo by crafte conueye,
                  To make ye kyng to that which he wold ſeye,
                  Condeſcende and rather to enclyne.
                  For to aſſente that he myght fyne,
                  Of his comyng the knightly hye empryſe,
                  Thus word by worde as I ſhall here deuyſe.
               
               
                  RIght worthy prince preſēt in this place,
                  Only with ſupporte of your hye grace,
                  And your goodnes moſt excellēt & dign
                  With pacience of your fauour benygne,
                  Diſpleaſe it not that I may ſaye and ſhewe,
                  And efte declare with wordes but fewe,
                  The fynal grounde and cauſe of my coming.
                  So that ye lyſte whiche ben ſo noble a kyng,
                  In goodly wiſe without more offence,
                  Of curteſye to gyue aundience.
                  To my requeſt and that ye not diſdayne,
                  Goodly to graunte that I may atteyne,
                  In this yle if it may me auayle,
                  The fleſe of golde frely to aſſayle.
                  As the goddes in this myne auenture.
                  Lyſte to ordeyne for my fatall eure.
                  In whom lyeth all playnly and fortune,
                  For to gouerne thynges in comune.
                  In werre and peace conqueſt and victorye,
                  
                     And of armes the renowne and glory.
                  Diſcomfyture and bryngyng to outraunce,
                  All lyeth in them to hyndre or tauaunce,
                  Ayen whoſe might no mortal mā may cheſe,
                  But for all this where ſo I wynne or leſe,
                  Or lyfe or deth be fyne of my labour,
                  If that ye lyſte to do me this fauour,
                  To gyue me leue and no more delaye,
                  I am accorded fully for to aſſaye,
                  Lyke as the ſtatute maketh mencion,
                  Me lyſte to make none acception.
                  Vpon no ſyde fauour for to fynde.
                  But as the rytes playnly maken mynde,
                  What euer fall I ſhall them vnder fonge.
                  Lowly beſechynge that ye not prolonge,
                  My purpoſe now nor make no delaye,
                  But of your grace ſette to me a daye,
                  Myne enterpryſe that I maye achyeue.
                  For myne abode ſtant vpon your leue.
                  Saithe but one word of grauntyng at ye leſt,
                  And than I haue the fyne of my requeſte.
                  ¶And whan the kyng had herde ceriouſly,
                  Thentent of Iaſon ſayd ſo manfully,
                  He ſtynt alyte and kepte hym cloſe a whyle,
                  Tyll at the laſt he goodly gan to ſmyle,
                  Towardes Iaſon and ſaid vnto hym thus.
                  Iaſon quod he albe thou deſyrous,
                  To vnderfonge this paſſyng hye empryſe,
                  My counſayle is lyke as I ſhall deuyſe.
                  Full prudently for to caſte aforne,
                  The mortall peryll or that thou be lorne.
                  For in this thynge there is a lawe yſette,
                  By chauntement that may not be ylette,
                  Nor remedyed for fauour nor for mede.
                  For deth in ſoth who ſo taketh hede,
                  Is the guerdon platly or they twynne.
                  Of them that caſte the fleſe of golde to wyn.
                  For helpe is none in manhode nor fortune,
                  The ſtreyght waye is ſo importune,
                  So dredefull eke and ſo full of rage,
                  That ſaue deth there lyeth no paſſage.
                  Of victorye the palme to conquere.
                  For ſothly Iaſon as I ſhall the lere,
                  Founded of olde by meruaylous workyng,
                  By the ſtatutes of this mortall thinge,
                  So ſore bounde vnder my regalye,
                  That the rygour I may not modifye.
                  Wherfore Iaſon or thou this thinge attame,
                  Leſte afterwarde on me were laide ye blame,
                  Of thy leſynge or thy deſtruction,
                  Of faythfull herte and true entencion,
                  I warne the my ſelfe for to quyte.
                  So that no man iuſtely ſhall me wyte.
                  Though thou of youth & of thy wylfulneſſe
                  Thy lyfe deſtroye without auyſyneſſe.
                  Sith I Iaſon of this peryllous caſe,
                  From poynt to point haue tolde the al ye caſe,
                  Be now auiſed and put no faulte in me,
                  For the ſurplus frely lyeth in the.
                  Of all this thinge ſyth thou mayſt cheſe,
                  And where ſo be that thou wynne or leſſe,
                  No man to me it iuſtly may arecte.
                  For that lawe that Mars hym ſelfe ſette,
                  No mortall man of right may duelye paſſe.
                  For hie or lowe he getteth none other grace.
                  Than the goddes lyſte for hym ordeyne.
                  What euer he be that caſte hym to darrayne,
                  This diuers thyng moſt furious of drede.
                  Wherfore Iaſon how euer that thou ſpede,
                  I haue to the openly declared,
                  Hooly the peryle and for fauour ſpared,
                  As fer in ſoth as reaſon wyll and ryght.
                  For thou woteſt wel it lyeth not in my might,
                  For to declare or any man to lette,
                  That of manhode knightly caſte to ſette,
                  Vpon this thing as thou haſt herde me tell.
                  What ſhulde I longer in this mater dwell.
                  It were but vaine for now thou knoweſt all,
                  Beware of her that tourneth as a ball.
                  For at this tyme thou getteſt no more of me,
                  Do as thou lyſte I put the choyſe in the.
                  And with that word the kyng roſe vp anone,
                  Vpon the tyme whan he ſhulde gone,
                  Vnto his meate and Iaſon by his ſyde.
                  As ye ſhall here if ſo ye lyſte abyde.
               
               
                  THe time approcheth & gan to neigh faſt,
                  That offycers full buſyly them caſt,
                  To make redy with all their buſye cure.
                  And in the halle bordes for to cure.
                  For by the dyal the hour they gan to marke,
                  That Phebꝰ ſouthward whirled vp his arke
                  So hye a lofte that it drewe to none.
                  That it was tyme for the kyng to gone,
                  Vnto his meate and entre into halle.
                  And than Oetes with his lordes all,
                  And with his knightꝭ aboute hym euerichon,
                  With Hercules and alſo with Iaſon,
                  
                     It ſette to meate in his royall ſea.
                  And euery lorde lyke to his degree.
                  But fyrſte of all this worthy man Iaſon,
                  Aſſygned was by the kynge anone,
                  For to ſytte at his owne borde.
                  And Hercules that was ſo great a lorde.
                  Was ſette alſo faſte by his ſyde.
                  And the marſhall no longer lyſte abyde,
                  To aſſygne eſtates where they ſhulde be.
                  Lyke as they were of hye or lowe degree.
                  And after that on ſcaffolde hye alofte,
                  The noiſe gan loude and nothynge ſofte.
                  Of trumpeters and eke of clarioneres.
                  And there with all the noble offycers,
                  Full thryftely ſerued haue the halle.
                  Lyke as the ſeaſon gan that tyme fall.
                  With all deyntes that may rekened be,
                  That ſothfaſtly the foyſon and plente,
                  Of kyngly fredom vnto hye and lowe,
                  So fulſomly gan there to reygne and ſnowe,
                  That through ye hall was ye manhod praiſed.
                  Of the kyng and his renowne reyſed.
                  That can his geſtes ſothly for to ſey,
                  Whan that hym lyſteth chere and feſtey.
                  So lyke a kyng and in ſo thryfty wyſe,
                  With all deynte that man can deuyſe,
                  For at this feaſt and ſolempnitie,
                  The grekes myght the great nobely ſee,
                  Of kyng Oetes and the worthyneſſe,
                  And by reporte therof beare wytneſſe,
                  Where ſo they come after all their lyue.
                  I wante connynge by ordre to diſcryue,
                  Of euery courſe the diuerſitees.
                  The ſtraunge ſewes and the ſotyltees.
                  That were that day ſerued in that place,
                  Haue me excuſed thoughe I lyghtly paſſe,
                  Though I can not all in ordre ſayne,
                  Mine englyſhe is to rude and eke to playne.
                  For to endite of ſo hye a thyng.
                  But forthe I will reherſe how the kyng.
                  To ſhewe his geſtes his nobley ouer all.
                  Hath for his doughter ſent in ſpeciall.
                  And byd ſhe ſhulde forth anone be broughte,
                  The which in ſouth though men had ſought,
                  The world thrughout I do you plain aſſure,
                  Men might a founde no fayrer creature.
                  More womanly of porte nor manere.
                  Nor more demure nor ſadder of her chere.
                  Whoſe beaute was not lykely for to fade,
                  And whan ſhe came the grekes for to glade,
                  The halle in ſoth ſhe walketh vp and downe,
                  Of womanhede and pure affectiowne.
                  To make chere vnto theſe geſtes newe.
                  And thus Medea, with her roſen hewe,
                  And with the freſhneſſe of the lyllye whyte,
                  So entermedled kyndly by delyte,
                  That nature made in her face ſprede,
                  So egally the white with the rede,
                  That the medlynge in concluſyon,
                  So was ennewed by proportion,
                  That fynally exceſſe was there none.
                  Of one nor other for both two in one.
                  So ioyned were longe to endure,
                  By the empreſſe that called is nature.
                  For ſhe her made lyke to her deuiſe,
                  That to beholde it was a paradyſe.
                  In verye ſoth bothe to one and all,
                  Of olde and yonge that ſytten in the hall.
                  Therto ſhe was as by ſucceſſyon,
                  Borne to be heyre of that regyon.
                  After her father by diſcent of lyne.
                  If ſhe abyde and dure after his fyne.
                  Syth he ne had by ryght to ſuccede,
                  One heyre male that I can of reade.
                  She was alſo the boke maketh mencion,
                  Were vnto yeres of diſcretion.
                  Able for age maryed for to be.
                  And not withſtondynge alſo eke that ſhe,
                  Was of beaute and of womanhede,
                  One of the fayreſt that I can of read,
                  Yet none of bothe haue her youth let,
                  That to clergy was her deſyre ſet.
                  So paſſyngly that in ſpeciall,
                  In all the artes called lyberall,
                  She was expert and knowynge at the beſte,
                  It was her vre to konne what her lyſte.
                  Of ſuche a woman herde I neuer telle.
                  At Helicon ſhe dranke ſo of the welle.
                  That in her tyme was there none ſemblable.
                  I founde in ſothe ne none that was ſo hable,
                  As to conceyue by ſtudye and doctrine.
                  And of natures to diſpute and termine,
                  She coude alſo and the cauſes fynde,
                  Of althinges formed as by kynde.
                  She had in lernyng ſo her tyme ſpente,
                  That ſhe knewe of the fyrmament,
                  The trewe courſe and of the ſterres all.
                  And by their meuynge what that ſhulde fall.
                  
                     So was ſhe lerned in aſtronomye.
                  But moſte ſhe wrought by nycromancye.
                  With exorſiſmes and cōiuracions,
                  And vſed alſo to make illuſyons,
                  With her charmes ſayde in ſondrye wyſe.
                  And with rytes of diuers ſacrifyſe.
                  Encens and ryches caſte into the fyre,
                  To ſhewe the thynges lyke to her deſire,
                  With gootes hornes and with milke & blude.
                  Whan the mone equat was and ſtode,
                  In the fyfthe or in the ſyxte houſe.
                  And was fortuned with lokyng gracious.
                  To theſe an houre that were conuenient,
                  And fortunate as by enchauntement,
                  To make and worke ſundry apparences,
                  So well ſhe knewe the heauenly influences.
                  And aſpectes bothe wrothe and glade,
                  For ſhe by them all her thynges made.
                  That apperteyne to ſuche experimentes.
                  For whan her lyſt by her enchauntementes,
                  She coude make the wyndes for to blowe,
                  To thondre lighten and to haile & ſnowe.
                  And freſe alſo to greue men with payne,
                  And ſodeynely ſhe coude make to rayne.
                  And ſhewe what wether that her liſt to haue.
                  And gaſten men with ſodeyne erth quaue.
                  And tourne the daye vnwarely vnto nyght:
                  And then anone make the ſonne bryght.
                  Shewe his beames full perſyng & ful ſhene,
                  With golden hornes to voyde nyghtes tene.
                  And reiſe ye floodes wt many a dredful wawe,
                  And whā her liſt ſhe coude them eft wtdrawe.
                  Eke yonge trees to ſere roote and rynde,
                  And afterward make them againe in kinde.
                  With luſty braunches blome & budde newe.
                  Alſo in wynter with floures freſhe of hewe,
                  Aray the yerth and tapyte hym in grene.
                  That to beholde a Ioye it was to ſene.
                  With many colour ſhewynge full diuers,
                  As whyte and rede grene ynde and pers.
                  The deyſy with her ryche perled crowne,
                  And other floures that winter made frowne,
                  Vpon their ſtalke freſhly for tappere.
                  And ſodeynely with a deadly chere,
                  She coude ſomer into winter tourne.
                  Cauſynge the daye with myſtes for to mone.
                  And olde men ſhe coude make yonge,
                  And efte agayne or any here was ſpronge,
                  She coude them ſhewe both in head & berde.
                  Ful hore and graye in crafte ſo was ſhe lerede.
                  And trees wt fruite ſhe coude alſo make bare,
                  Of rinde and leafe to do men on them ſtare.
                  Eclipſe the mone and the bryght ſonne,
                  Or naturally they had theyr courſe yronne,
                  To them apropred which they mai not paſſe.
                  For if that Tytanes courſe by kindly traſe.
                  Whan ſo he meueth vnder the clyptik lyne,
                  The clipſe mott folow as auctours liſt diffine
                  So that there be by their diſcription,
                  Of bothe twayne full coniunction.
                  And that the ſonne with his beames red,
                  Haue his dwellyng in the dragones head.
                  And the mone be ſet eke in the tayle,
                  As by nature than it maye not fayle,
                  That there muſt fall eclyps of veary nede,
                  In ſondry bokes like as ye may read.
                  Bycauſe of certayne interfecacions,
                  Of diuers circles and reuolucions,
                  That maked ben in the heauen alofte.
                  Whiche cauſen vs for to fayle ofte.
                  Of the freſhe and comfortable ſtremes,
                  That be vs ſhad from Phebꝰ bryght bemes.
                  For ſo the mone hath made deuiſyon,
                  By this ſodeyne interpoſicion,
                  That of our ſyght the ſtremes viſuall,
                  May not beholde nor yet yſene at all.
                  Nor to our luſte fully comprehende,
                  How Phebus in his chaire is cheuanſende.
                  As we were wonte aforehande for to ſee.
                  But of all this the great Ptholome,
                  Kyng of Egypt telleth the cauſes why.
                  Within his boke and that compendiouſly.
                  Bothe of Eclyps and coniunction.
                  And why they fall by naturall mocion.
                  But of Medee though this clerke Ouyde,
                  Tencreaſe her name vpon euery ſyde,
                  Lyſt ſuche thynges in his fables tell,
                  Though he of poetes was the ſpryng & well,
                  Yet god forbede ye ſhulde gyue credence,
                  To ſuche feynyng or do ſo hyghe offence.
                  Sith of nature it muſt be denyed.
                  Al ſuche affirmyng and likewiſe be diffyed,
                  Of euery chriſtien ſtedfaſt in beleue.
                  For certainly it wolde hyghly greue.
                  Our conſcience in any wyſe to wene,
                  Agaynſt kynde whiche is ſo hye a quene.
                  That any wight or lyuynge creature,
                  Shulde haue power I do you plaine aſſure,
                  
                     So curſed thynges ſuperſticious,
                  To do or worke to kynde contrarious.
                  ¶For god almyghtye Iudge of Iudges all,
                  Hath ſette a lawe the whiche may not falle.
                  Amonge planettes eternally tendure.
                  Afore ordeyned in his eternall cure.
                  The whiche may not as clerkes lyſt termine,
                  Vpon no ſyde bowen nor declyne.
                  But as they were from diſcorde or debate,
                  Eternally yformed and create,
                  Through the fynger of his ſapience,
                  Alway to meue in their intelligence,
                  Lyke as they be to his lordſhyp bounde,
                  For neuer yet was eclyps yfounde,
                  The mone not beinge inconiunction.
                  As I haue tolde ſaue in the paſſyon.
                  The which eclyps was tho againſt kinde,
                  Nature her knot that tyme lyſt vnbynde.
                  Whan goddes ſonne ſtarfe vpon the roode,
                  The ſonne of lyfe was derked for our good.
                  Whan heauen and erth wt hye compunction,
                  Haue ſygnes ſhewed of lamentacion.,
                  By earthquakes light tourned to derkenes,
                  And dead bodies vpwarde gan them dreſſe.
                  From their tombes againe from deth to liue,
                  Stone and rocke a ſonder gan to ryue.
                  In the temple the veyll was kut a two,
                  And ſygnes many were yſhewed tho,
                  That for ye wondre and tokens meruailous,
                  The great worthy Dyonyſyous,
                  Vhiche at Athenes as clekes of hym write,
                  Was called in ſcholes Ariopagyte.
                  He whan he ſawe this noble famous clerke,
                  The bryght daye ſodeynely ſo derke,
                  Although he were apaynym in tho dayes,
                  And was infecte with rytes of their layes,
                  As he that was moſte chiefe and principall,
                  Of phyloſophers for to reken all.
                  Yet that tyme aſtoned in his mynde,
                  Sayde platly other the god of kynde,
                  Suffreth the death other out of doubte,
                  This rounde worlde which is ſo large about,
                  Shalbe diſſolued and ybrought to nought.
                  By ſodayne chaunge haſty as a thought,
                  By his clergye he knewe no better ſkyll,
                  For god may all chaungen at his wyll,
                  And hath power of ſuche coaction,
                  Vnder whoſe myght and diſpoſicion,
                  Is lawe of kynde conſtreyned ſoth to ſeye,
                  From poynt to poynt lowely to obeye.
                  In euery thynge that hym lyſt ordeyne.
                  Of elementes he may the courſe reſtreyne.
                  As holy wryt doth witneſſe ye may ſe,
                  How at requeſt of worthy Ioſue,
                  The bryght ſonne ſtode at Gabaon,
                  Adayes ſpace in one degree and ſhone.
                  Shewynge token to his trewe knyght,
                  Fynally and for to gyue him lyght,
                  That he myght by his hye proweſſe,
                  His cruell foon manfully oppreſſe.
                  Whan that he fought this knight this Ioſue,
                  With fyue kinges reignyng in Amoree.
                  So longe laſte the purſuite and the chaſe,
                  Tyll they were take & for their hye treſpaſſe,
                  Dempt to be dead the Bible can you tell.
                  Now ſyth that god thus hyghly lyſt fulfyll,
                  This his knyghtes requeſt and oriſon,
                  What wonder was though in the paſſyon,
                  Of Chriſte Ieſu incarnat for our ſake,
                  The ſonne beames as tho were waren blak.
                  Syth he hath lordſhip of the planettes all.
                  And as hym lyſt it muſt nedely fall.
                  For of Medea though Ouydyus,
                  In his fables writeth and ſaith thus,
                  As he that lyſt her name ſo hyghe exalte,
                  Yet in the truth ſomewhile doth he halte.
                  Albe ſhe were a paſſynge ſorcereſſe.
                  And chefeſt named of any chauntereſſe.
                  ¶I wyll paſſe ouer agayne to my matere,
                  And howe ſhe came to meate ye ſhall en here.
                  Whan her father had thus for her ſent,
                  Se came anone at his commaundement.
                  But or ſhe came I fynde that tofore,
                  For to make her beautie ſe men more,
                  She in her cloſet toke her beſt araye.
                  For tencreaſe in all that euer ſhee maye,
                  Natures worke with royall apparayle.
                  For theſe women gladly wyll not fayle,
                  Whā they of beautie, haue plēteuous largeſſe,
                  It to embellyſhe they do their buſineſſe.
                  With ryche a tire vpon euery ſyde.
                  If ought be myſſe they can it cloſe and hyde.
                  For all the foule ſhall couertly be wryed,
                  That no defaute outwarde be eſpied.
                  ¶But ſhe was faire and alſo well be ſayne,
                  And in her porte ſo womanly certayne,
                  That at her comynge gladeth all the halle.
                  For it was ioye both vnto one and all,
                  
                     To ſe the maner tho of her entree.
                  To whom her father bad to take her ſee,
                  Beſyde Iaſon hym for to diſporte.
                  Of womanhede and for to recomforte.
                  ¶But oh alas here lacked hye prudence.
                  Diſcrete auyſe of inwarde prouydence,
                  Wyſedome alſo with perell caſte aforne,
                  To truſte amayde of tendre yeres yborne,
                  Of lyght vnhappy fonde wylfulneſſe.
                  For this kynge of his gentylneſſe,
                  Commaunded hath to his confuſyon,
                  To his diſhonour and deſtruction,
                  His owne doughter borne to be his heyre,
                  That was alſo ſo womanly and fayre,
                  So ſodaynly downe for to diſcende.
                  Conſydered not the myſchyefe of the ende.
                  Alas why durſt he in her youth affye,
                  To make her ſytte of his curteſye.
                  Where as ſhe myght by caſuell mocion,
                  Full lyghtly catche or haue occaſyon,
                  To do amyſſe alas why dyd he ſo.
                  Why liſt he not take better hede therto.
                  Nor to auerte in his diſcretion,
                  Wyſely to caſte afore as in reaſon,
                  The vnware chaunge that is in womanhed.
                  Whiche euery wyſe man oughte for to drede.
                  For who was euer yet ſo mad or wood,
                  That ought of reaſon coude aright his good,
                  To gyue fayth or haſtyly credence,
                  To any woman without experyence.
                  In whom is nother truſt nor ſykerneſſe.
                  They ben ſo double and full of brytylneſſe,
                  That it is harde in them to aſſure.
                  For vnto them it longeth of nature,
                  From theyr birth to haue alliaunce,
                  With doubleneſſe and with variaunce,
                  Their hertes be ſo fraile and ſo vnſtable,
                  Namely in youthe ſo meuynge and mutable.
                  That ſo as clerkes of them lyſt tendyte,
                  Albe that I am ſory for to wryte,
                  They ſayen that chaunge and mutabilite,
                  Apropred ben vnto feminite.
                  This is affyrmed of them that were ful ſage,
                  And ſpecially whyle they be grene of age.
                  In their wexyng and whan yt they be yonge,
                  Whoſe herte full ſelde accordeth wt her tonge.
                  For if the trouth inwardely be ſought,
                  With ye ſurplus & remnaunt of their thought,
                  Men may anone the true patron fynde.
                  Of inconſtaunce whoſe flaſkyſable kynde,
                  Is to and fro meuynge as a wynde.
                  That Hercules were not ſtronge to binde,
                  Nother Sampſon ſo as I beleue,
                  A womans herte to make it not remeue.
                  For as the blaſe whyrleth of a fyre,
                  So to and fro they flee in their deſyre.
                  Tyll they accomplyſhe fully their delite,
                  For as nature by kyndly appetyte.
                  Kyndly ſeketh to ſewen after fourme,
                  Tyl he his courſe by proceſſe may performe.
                  Euen ſo theſe women refraine them ne can,
                  To ſewe their luſte as fro man to man,
                  They will not ceaſe till all be aſſayed.
                  But wolde god as nature is apayed,
                  With one fourme and holdeth him content,
                  Whan of his boundes he hath the terme went
                  And not deſyre ferther to procede,
                  But ſtyll abyte and wyll it not excede,
                  That by example all ſortes women wolde,
                  Abide in one as they of duety ſhoulde.
                  And holde them paide and ſtylle there abyde,
                  But faile of foting doth them ofte to ſlyde.
                  For they be not content with vnitee,
                  But faſt they ſewen to finde pluralitee.
                  So of nature to menynge they be ſhewed,
                  Although among by ſignes outward ſhewed
                  They ofte pretende a maner ſtableneſſe.
                  But vnder that is hyd their doubleneſſe.
                  So well yreke that outwarde at the eye,
                  Full harde it is the treaſon to eſpye.
                  Vnder curtyn and veyle of honeſte,
                  Is cloſed chaunge and mutabilitye.
                  For their deſyre is kepte full cloſe in mewe,
                  Of thyng that they had leueſt for to ſewe.
                  Only outwarde for to haue a laude,
                  They can declyne wt faynyng & with fraude.
                  ¶Wherfore Oetes thy wyt was to barayne.
                  That thou afore by prudence naddeſt ſayne.
                  What ſhulde folowe of this vnhappy caſe.
                  Why were thou bolde thus to ſuffer alas.
                  Thine owne doughter inly freſhe of hewe,
                  With ſtraunge geſtes entred but of newe,
                  So folilye for to lete her dele.
                  Where thrugh thin honor worſhip & thin hele
                  Was loſt in haſte & ſhe to miſchiefe brought.
                  In ſtraūge lande wt ſorowe & with thought.
                  Where as ſhe in ſclaunder of thy name,
                  With miſerie with ſorowe and with ſhame.
                  
                     An ende made and thou were left ſole,
                  That myghteſt well complayn & makē dole.
                  Alas the whyle if by prudent forſyght,
                  Thou haddeſt had grace for to record aright,
                  And to haue caſt by diſcrete purueaunce,
                  And wyſely weyed by meaſure in balaūce,
                  The fraude of women and the frayltye,
                  In whom full ſelde is any ſykertye,
                  As in his latyn Guydo doth expreſſe.
                  Wherfore Oetes of verye rycheleſneſſe,
                  Thou haſt at ones in augment of thy wo,
                  Without recure bothe the two forgo.
                  Fyrſt thy treaſure and thy doughter deare,
                  That was to the ſo paſſingly entere.
                  And eke thyne heyre for whē yt ſhe was gone,
                  As ſayth mine Auctour other was ther none.
                  After thy daye for to occupye,
                  Thy royall ceptre nor thy land to gye.
                  ¶But what was worth the great prouidēce,
                  The waker kepyng the buſy diligence,
                  Of myghty Mars that god is of battayle,
                  What might it helpe defende or ought auaile,
                  Agayne the wyt of woman or the ſleyght.
                  Whoſe fraudes bene of ſo huge weyght,
                  That as theym lyſt aye the game goeth,
                  Theyr purpoſe bydeth who ſo be lief or lothe.
                  They be ſo ſlye ſo prudent and ſo wyſe.
                  For as this ſtorye playnly doth deuiſe,
                  This Medea by her engyne and crafte,
                  From her father hath his treaſure raft.
                  Through the working of her ſleightie gyle,
                  As ye ſhall heare within a litell whyle.
                  For as ſhe ſat at meate tho in that tide,
                  Her father next and Iaſon by her ſide,
                  All ſodeynly her freſhe and roſen hewe,
                  Ful ofte tyme gan chaungen and renew.
                  An hundreth ſithes in a litell ſpace.
                  For now the bloud from her goodly face,
                  Vnto her herte vnwarely gan avale.
                  And therwithall ſhe waxeth dead and pale.
                  And eft anone who therto can take hede,
                  Her hewe returneth in to goodly reade,
                  But ſtill among temblyſhe her coloure,
                  The roſe was meynt aye with the lyly floure.
                  And though the roſe ſome dele gan to pace,
                  Yet ſtill the lylye bydeth in his place.
                  Till nature made theym eft ayene to mete.
                  And thus with colde and eke wt ſodayne hete,
                  Was Medea in her ſelfe aſſayled,
                  And paſſyngly ſore vexed and trauayled.
                  For nowe ſhe brent and now ſhe gā to colde.
                  And aye the more that ſhe gan beholde,
                  This Iaſon yong the more ſhe gan deſire,
                  To loke on hym ſo was ſhe ſet afyre.
                  With his beaute and his ſemelyneſſe.
                  And euery thing ſhe inly gan inpreſſe,
                  What that ſhe ſawe both in minde & thought,
                  She all emprynteth and forgetteth nought.
                  For ſhe conſydereth euery circumſtaunce,
                  Both of his port and his gouernaūce,
                  His ſonnyſhe hayre criſped lyke golde wire,
                  His knightly loke and his manly chere.
                  His countenaunce with many noble ſigne.
                  His face alſo moſt gracious and beninge.
                  Moſt acceptable vnto her pleſaunce.
                  For as ſhe thought it was full ſuffyſaunce.
                  Without more as vnto her alone,
                  Well to bethynke and loke on his parſone.
                  For in that time withouten any drede,
                  Of meate or drynke ſhe toke but litell hede.
                  For ſhe of foode hath loſt her appetite,
                  To loke on hym ſhe hath ſo great delite.
                  He was ſo prynted in her remembraunce,
                  Loue hath her caught ſo newely in a traunce.
                  And her ymarked with his fyery brond.
                  That ſhe may not eſcape from his honde.
                  Nor yet eſchewe his ſtroke in ſpeciall,
                  For ſhe was yolde body hert and all,
                  Vnto this Iaſon platly for to ſeye.
                  And euer eft on him ſhe caſt an eye,
                  Whan that ſhe founde a leyſer opportune.
                  But of her wyſedome ſhe wolde not contune,
                  To loken longe leſt men dempt amys.
                  But as the maner of theſe women is,
                  She kept her cloſe and wonderly ſecre,
                  That by her chere no man could ſe,
                  What that ſhe ment by none occaſyon.
                  She put theym out of all ſuſpection.
                  For openly there was no tokens ſene,
                  She caſt rather that men ſhulden wene,
                  That the encheſon of her abſtinence,
                  And why that ſhe abode in thus ſylence,
                  How that it was onely of womanhede,
                  Of honeſt ſhame and of chaſte drede,
                  That both together in her herte met.
                  The whych twayne haue ſo this maydē let,
                  For meate and drinke as it wold ſeme.
                  Thus by her wit ſhe made theim for to deme.
                  
                     And ſo to caſt in theyr opynion.
                  And thus ſhe blent them by diſcreſcion.
                  For ſo her cheare could euery thinge excuſe,
                  She gaue to fooles no matter on to muſe.
                  ¶No chere vnbrideled that tyme her aſterte,
                  For there was one thyng cloſed in her hert,
                  An alder other in her chere declared.
                  For maydens haue ofte ſyth ſpared,
                  To ſhewe out that they deſyre in dede.
                  As it falleth who ſo can take hede.
                  That while they flouren in virgynitye,
                  And for theyr youth haue no lyberty,
                  To ſpecyfy that theyr hertes woulde,
                  They kepe theym cloſe for they be not bolde,
                  To ſhewe out the ſumme of theyr ſentence.
                  And thus Medea kepyng aye ſylence,
                  Ne let no worde by her lippes pace,
                  But couertly with ſobre chere and face,
                  And what ſhe ment ſheweth with her eye,
                  In ſuch a ſorte that no man could eſpye,
                  The hoote fyre in her breſte yreke.
                  And in her ſelfe right thus ſhe gan to ſpeke.
                  As ſhe in ſothe that ſo much good can,
                  So would god this yong luſty man,
                  Which ſo fayre and ſemely in my ſight.
                  Aſſured were to be my owne knight.
                  Which is to me moſt pleſaunt and entyre.
                  With berde yſprong ſhining lyke golde wyre.
                  So wel ylimed and compact by meaſure,
                  Well growe on heyght and of good ſtature,
                  And lyketh me in euery parte ſo wele,
                  That by aſſent of Fortune and her whele,
                  I ewred were to ſtandē in his grace.
                  For as me ſemeth vpon his knightly face,
                  It is to me an heauen to beholde,
                  Albe therwith my herte I fele colde.
                  And yet in ſothe it may none other be,
                  Alas why nill he not do pyty me.
                  Or at the leſte he knewe in his entent,
                  How much trouth to hym that I ment.
                  Of which alas he taketh no maner hede.
                  Albe for him I brenne as doth the glede.
                  And to be dead I dare not me diſcure.
                  Alas my piteous woful auenture,
                  To rewful is helples my mortall paine,
                  Thus to be dead & dare me not complayne.
                  To frende nor foo of this my chaunce alas.
                  To finds ſome helpe or ſuccour in this caſe.
                  And trewly nathles as I ſhall deuiſe,
                  I nothing meane but that in honeſt wyſe.
                  Lyke as it ſhall well openly be founde.
                  For I deſyre to be knyt and bound,
                  With him in wedlock & neuer thens to twine,
                  So is my meaning cleane devoyde of ſyn.
                  Grounded and ſet vpon al clenlyneſſe,
                  Without fraude or any doubleneſſe.
                  So clean and pure is mine entencion.
                  Lo aye the maner and condicion,
                  Of theſe women that ſo well can fayne,
                  And ſhewe one though they thinke twayne.
                  And couertly that nothing be ſayne,
                  With humble chere and with face playne,
                  Encloſe theyr luſtes by ſuch ſubtyltye,
                  Vnder the boundes of al honeſtye,
                  Of theyr entent though the trecherye,
                  Withal the ſurplus ſmothely couered be.
                  And though that they fayth afore pretend,
                  And can theyr fraude with floriſhing defēde,
                  And ſpeake full fayre the word forth to blēde,
                  With doubleneſſe encloſed in the end.
                  Yet a deceyte is couertly yment,
                  Vnder the ſuger of fayned cleane entent.
                  As it were ſothe in very exiſtence.
                  But truſte me well al is but apparence.
                  They can ſhewe one and another meane,
                  Whoſe blewe is lightly dyed into grene.
                  For vnder floures depeynt of ſtableneſſe,
                  The ſerpent dareth of newfangelneſſe.
                  So playn they ſeme with wordes fair gloſed,
                  But vnderneth theyr couerte wiles be cloſed.
                  For what thing is deareſt to theyr paye,
                  They will deny and ratheſt ſwearen naye.
               
               
                  THis lyketh Guydo of womē to endite,
                  Alas that he ſo curſedly would wryte,
                  Agaynſt them or with theym haue debate.
                  I am right ſory in englyſhe to tranſlate,
                  Reprefe of theym or any euyll to ſeye,
                  For me were leuer for theyr loue to deye.
                  Wherfore I pray theym to take pacience,
                  I purpoſe not to do to theym offence,
                  They be ſo good and perfyte euerychone.
                  To reken all I trowe there be not one,
                  But that they be in will and hert trewe.
                  For though amōg they cheſe thē loues newe.
                  Who wayeth it wel they be nothing to blame,
                  For often tyme they ſe men do the ſame.
                  They muſt puruay thē when men thē refuſe,
                  
                     And yf I coulde I wolde theim full excuſe.
                  It ſytteth not a woman lyue alone,
                  It is no ſtore but they haue mo than one,
                  Praying to theim for to do me grace,
                  For as I hope to theim is no treſpace,
                  Though my makyng be the ſame in all,
                  As Guido wryteth in his oryginall.
                  Where he miſſayeth do let hym beare ye wyfe,
                  For it ſyt well that the vengeaunce byte,
                  On him that ſo theſe women hath offended,
                  And if I myght it ſhuld be well amended.
                  He ſhulde receiue duely his penaunce,
                  For yf he died withouten repentaunce,
                  I am diſpeyred of his ſaluacion.
                  How he ſhulde euer haue remiſſion.
                  But yf he were content to do redreſſe.
                  It may not bene as clerkes beare witneſſe.
                  And by my trouth and he were alyue,
                  I meane Guido and I ſhulde him ſhryue,
                  So bytter penaunce playnly he ſhulde haue,
                  That to the tyme that he were depe ygraue,
                  He ſhulde remembre and platly not aſterte,
                  For to repente with all his hoole herte.
                  That he ſo ſpake to his confuſyon,
                  I wyll no longer make diſgreſſyon,
                  From my matter but letteth Guydo be,
                  And tell I ſhall the workynge of Medee.
                  That hath lycence of her father nome,
                  And to her chamber is alone ycome.
                  Whan out of hal withdrawen was al ye pres,
                  And whan Iaſon and this Hercules,
                  Lyke as the kynge after meate badde,
                  To their chambres conueied were and lad.
                  Full royally arayed and well be ſayne,
                  For euery wall was couered in certayne,
                  With clothe of golde in full ſtately wiſe,
                  And in this whyle as ye haue herde deuiſe,
                  Was Medea to her chambre gone.
                  Wherby her ſelfe complaynynge euer in one,
                  She gaue an iſſue to her paynes ſmarte,
                  That her ſo ſore hath wounded to the harte.
                  For loue hath brought her in ſo ſodeine rage,
                  That was not lykely ſoone for to aſwage,
                  For in ſothneſſe the furious god Cupide,
                  Hath ſuch a fyre kyndled in her ſyde,
                  That it was neuer lykly for to lete.
                  So violent and feruent was the heate.
                  That more and more encreaſe gan her paine.
                  For in her breſt there was atwyxt twayne.
                  A great debate and a ſtronge battayle.
                  So feruently eche other dyd aſſayle.
                  And this contek in ernes and in game,
                  Departed was betwixt loue and ſhame.
                  Metynge together there at vnſet ſteuen.
                  Albe the fielde was not tho parted euen,
                  For loue in ſoth full of hye renowne,
                  Was bolde and hardy lyke a fierſe Lyowne.
                  And was not fereful of ſpere ſwerd nor knife
                  But hote and haſty for to auntre lyfe.
                  Eke ſurquidous ſtoute and full of pryde,
                  Chiefe champyon of the god Cupyde.
                  That cauſeth ofte both to free and bonde,
                  Full many peryll for to take on honde.
                  And cauſed hath full many man his death,
                  And many one to yelden vp the breth.
                  And made ther woundes largly for to blede,
                  For of peryll loue taketh none hede.
                  To get hym honour by excellence of fame.
                  ¶But contrary his enmye called ſhame,
                  Lyke a coward faynte and hertles,
                  As he that neuer dare be ſene in pres,
                  For lacke of māhod draweth hī euer abacke,
                  He is ſo ferd and dreadfull of the wrake.
                  Like to a chylde yonge and tender of age.
                  For he hath nother herte nor yet corage,
                  For to aſſayle ſo feble is his myght,
                  And yet full ofte he hath ſtonde in the ſyghte,
                  Of many louer and lete him for to ſpede,
                  Through falſe cōſpiring of his brother dred,
                  For drede and ſhame when they be allyed.
                  Of one aſſent haue piteouſly denyed,
                  As vnto loue both hert and herdineſſe.
                  That he ne durſt out a worde expreſſe.
                  For whā that loue of māhode willeth ſpeake.
                  The wood fyre out of his breſt to reke,
                  Vpon the poynte when he ſhulde aſſaye,
                  Shame cometh anone & vtterly ſayeth nay.
                  And cauſeth loue his hornes for to ſhrynke,
                  Tabaſhe his chere & pitiouſly to wyncke.
                  Cowardly his cauſe tho to appayre.
                  And thus is ſhame froward & like contraire,
                  Through helpe of drede loues folke to feare.
                  For doubtleſſe if ſo be ſhame nought ne were,
                  As it is kouthe aſwell nigh as ferre,
                  Loue in his lawes ſhuld often tyme erre.
                  And winde him out of honeſtye his cheyne,
                  Of his bondes both bridell breake & reyne.
                  Right as an horſe out of the trayſe at large,
                  
                     For lite or nought louers wolde take charge,
                  To vſe their wyll and all their luſt tenſewe.
                  But al the while that ſhame is kept in mewe,
                  Within his breſt ſo that no wight it knowe,
                  Outward in porte loue beareth him ful lowe,
                  For ne were ſhame as clekes haue compiled,
                  Out of their hertes daunger were exiled.
                  Al ſtraungeneſſe and feyned falſe diſdeyne,
                  For ne were ſhame playnly the wardeyne,
                  Of theſe women by wrytyng of theſe olde,
                  Without aſſaulte the caſtell were yyolde.
                  It were no nede a ſyege for to layne,
                  For in ſuche caſe longe treaty were in vayne.
                  For of nature they louen no proceſſe.
                  ¶But nowe alas dread and ſhamfaſtnes,
                  Haue daunted loue in full lowe maner,
                  And made him humble both of port & cheare.
                  And they haue eke by their vyolence,
                  For all his manhode put him in ſylence.
                  And ben great cauſe of morning of his paine.
                  And thus amiddes of either of theſe twaine,
                  Of loue and ſhame euen ſo vpon the poynt,
                  Medea ſtode as tho in great diſioynt.
                  That ſhe ne may the paine not to endure,
                  So hoote ſhe brent this wofull creature.
                  Betwixt both I meane loue and ſhame.
                  For whan that loue wolde any thing attaine,
                  Of his deſyres to declare them out,
                  Came ſhame anone & put him in a doubte.
                  With redy dread her luſt for to deny.
                  And thus ſhe ſtode in doubtfull Ieopardy,
                  Of loue and ſhame in maner of a traunce,
                  Full euenly vphanged in balaunce.
                  For ſhame was great & loue was yet yt more,
                  As well appeared by her ſyghes ſore,
                  And by her ſtormy cruell auenture,
                  For dread and ſhame durſt ſhe not diſcure,
                  The fyre that loue hath in her breſt encloſed.
                  Whiche was full harde for to be depoſed.
                  And thus ſhe hange amyddes betwene two,
                  That ſhe ne wiſt what was beſt to do.
                  Tyll that fortune with her double face,
                  Vnhappely hath wrought to get her grace,
                  With the whyrlyng of her whele about,
                  That cauſeth wretches full lowe adowne to loute,
                  Whā they beſt wene to ſittē hye aloft.
                  By plaine profe as men may ſe full ofte.
                  By gerineſſe of this her reuolution.
                  For ſo this lady of tranſmutacion,
                  Full ofte time falſe and full vnſtable,
                  Enhaſteth thynges to fooles full agreable.
                  Which in the ende to their confuſyon,
                  Can vnder ſuger ſhroude her poyſon.
                  For aye fortune as her maner is,
                  To wretches ſheweth other than it is.
                  By fayre ſemblant and face of flattery,
                  As ſhe that can with full beninge an eye,
                  Fully of fooles parfourmen the entent.
                  Where through they be in great miſchefe ſhēt
                  At the ende and can no crafte teſchewe,
                  To ſodeyne harme that at her taile doth ſew.
                  Ryght as it fell whylome of Medee,
                  Gynning and grounde of her aduerſitye.
                  ¶For this lady that called is Fortune,
                  Ygraunted hath a leyſer opportune,
                  To ſhewe Iaſon hooly all her herte,
                  Which made her after wt repentaunce ſinerte.
                  For on a daye after Meredien,
                  Whan that Apollo with his beames ſhene,
                  From the ſouthe plage gan to weſter faſt,
                  Oetes her father hath yſent in haſte,
                  To Medea to com to hym anone.
                  And bad to her that ſhe ſhuld gone,
                  Vnto Iaſon and to Hercules,
                  To make thē chere amiddes of al the pres.
                  And when ſhe caught hath oportune & ſpace,
                  To her deſyre and ſawe eke in the place,
                  That then her father was moſt occupied,
                  As ſhe that thought not for to bene eſpyed.
                  Well apperceiuing his great buſyneſſe,
                  Towardes Iaſon anon ſhe gan her dreſſe.
                  And he in haſte with a full knightly chere,
                  In curteys wiſe gan to drawen nere.
                  Towardes her ayen & ſawe there was no let.
                  And when that they were thus together met,
                  This Mede a with ſyghing firſt abrayde,
                  And ſyth to Iaſon euen thus ſhe ſayd.
               
            
            
               ¶How Iaſon through the only helpe of Medea Oetes daughter, the kynge of Colchos enamored of him he achieued the conqueſt of the golden fleſe. Cap. vi.
               
                  IAſon quod ſhe of thyne hye nobleſſe,
                  Of thy manhode and of thy gentilneſſe,
                  In thy perſon aſſembled both yfeare,
                  But of thy knighthode firſt I the requere,
                  In thy conceite and thyne opinion,
                  
                     Not to arrecte as to preſumption,
                  To doubleneſſe nor yet to inconſtaunce,
                  Of womanhead neither to variaunce,
                  That I am bolde & can for nothynge ſpare,
                  To you my meaninge platly to declare,
                  Without deceyte in wordes trewe and playn,
                  Beſeching firſt to that which I ſhal ſayne,
                  Without more of your goodly hede,
                  Beningnely for to taken hede.
                  And pacyently that to my wordes ye lyſte,
                  And what I ſaye to take it for the beſt.
                  In your entent and nothing you to greue,
                  For thinges two myne hert ſore ameue,
                  That is to ſaye loue and gentylneſſe,
                  What that I meane clerely to expreſſe,
                  To your perſon and nothing to concele.
                  Or we departe by profe as ye ſhall fele.
                  For as me ſemeth firſt of curteſye,
                  In ſothfaſtnes and ſith of gentrye,
                  That to ſtraungers euery maner wight,
                  Is bounde and holde of very due right,
                  To maken cheare and trewely as for me,
                  Bycauſe Iaſon for that I in you ſe,
                  So much manhode & ſo great worthineſſe,
                  I will not fayne with all my buſineſſe,
                  To further you in all that may you lyke.
                  And with that worde of hert ſhe gan to ſike,
                  As for his ſake and ſayd thus ouermore,
                  For you I fele full great anoy and ſore.
                  That mened are without auiſeneſſe,
                  Onely of youth and wilfull hardineſſe,
                  The fleſe of golde to getten if ye may.
                  The which empriſe who euer that aſſay,
                  More perillous is playnly to achieue,
                  In verye ſothe than ye coulde wene or leue.
                  For doubtles this I do you well aſſure,
                  The finall mede of this great auenture.
                  Is not but deathe ſaue report of ſhame.
                  For there ye wene to getten you a name.
                  The end playn ſhall tourne into contrayre,
                  From the ginning ſo ſhall the fine varye.
                  For wit of man no engine force or might,
                  Though he be neuer ſo expert in fight,
                  Or haue in armes paſſing exerciſe,
                  With all ye ſleyghtes of olde or newe empriſe,
                  Or though he be beſt brethed to endure,
                  Or what deuiſe there be of his armure,
                  Or what ſo euer wepen that he bringe,
                  Harded with ſtele trenchaunt or perſing.
                  Yet at the laſt whan he hath all ſought,
                  Without me auayle he may right nought.
                  ¶Wherfore Iaſon I haue compaſſion,
                  On this your youthe by pure affection.
                  That wilfully ye ſhulden thus be lorne,
                  That ben of bloode and line ſo high yborne.
                  For certaynly it may none other be,
                  But if that ye your counſayle take of me.
                  For none but I may do you helpe or eaſe,
                  Alas Iaſon why wyll ye not appeaſe,
                  Your manly corage in this caſe yblent,
                  And to my counſayle bene obedient.
                  Then durſt I ſwere ye ſhuld haue victory,
                  Ben remembred and put in memory,
                  Perpetually & through your knighthod win,
                  The fleſe of golde the which is yonde within,
                  In the yle that ſtandes here beſide.
                  Of which that Mars is gouernour and gide.
                  Wherfore at ones in your ſelfe aſſente,
                  And to my counſayle fully do conſent,
                  At fewe wordes if ſo ye liſt to ſpede,
                  And leue your luſt and worketh by my reade.
               
               
                  TO whom Iaſon with full humble chere,
                  Anſwered & ſayd mine owne lady deare,
                  I thanke it you in all my beſt wiſe,
                  Right thus as ferre forthe as I may ſuffiſe,
                  And as my power platly may attayne,
                  Mine hertes quene and lady ſoueraine.
                  Whom ye may hooly I you well enſure,
                  All the while that this my life may dure.
                  Truſteth right well me liſte not for to fayne.
                  To liue or dye ſhall at your luſt reſtrayne,
                  As him that is your owne aſſured man,
                  You to obeye in all that euer I can,
                  Without chaunge or any doubleneſſe,
                  While that I liue in very ſothfaſtnes.
                  For that you liſt of trewe affection,
                  Vpon my life to haue compaſſion,
                  Of gentilleſſe and that ye liſt to haue,
                  Suche chierte my body for to ſaue.
                  That in good fayth of verye due right,
                  I am ybounde to be your owne knight:
                  Vnto mine ende and that more ſpecially,
                  That of your grace ye ſo beningnely,
                  Liſteth your ſelfe of my counſaile be.
                  That neuer erſt to you in no degre.
                  Ne did ſeruice to your woman heade.
                  And with your wordes ful of goodliheade,
                  
                     Your owne man liſteth recomforte.
                  The which in ſothe ſo as I can reporte,
                  A thouſande folde be the more pleſaunt,
                  That neuer erſt no merite gat him graunt,
                  Ne no deſert requeſt nor prayer,
                  But rather frely of your herte entere,
                  Lyſt vnrequired on my woo to rewe.
                  And vndiſſerued be to me ſo trewe.
                  That I enſure vpon my fayth as faſt,
                  In your ſeruice I ſhall vnto my laſte,
                  Parſeuer ſothely that there ſhalbe no ſlouth,
                  Nor variaunce and thereto here my trouthe.
                  For finally I ſaye withouten wene,
                  At fewe wordes in all right as I meane.
                  Me liſt not fayne flatter nor delude,
                  For my beheſte with deathe I ſhall conclude,
                  When Parcas ſhall my liues threde do rend,
                  This all and ſome and thus I make an ende.
               
               
                  VVell thā quod ſhe ful wiſely in your hert,
                  Ye muſt afore conſydre and aduerte,
                  The aduenture that ye ſhall take on hande,
                  And prudently the perill vnderſtande,
                  And warely caſt and haue full well in minde,
                  The mortall harme at the tayle behinde.
                  That is well more then it is credible.
                  For leue me well it is an impoſſible,
                  To ginne in honour and alſo for to fine.
                  For thilke fleſe by hye power diuine,
                  Preſerued is and that wyth Marcys mighte,
                  That who ſo therfore entreth in to fight,
                  It were full harde to him thence to eſkape.
                  The fyery flawme when the bulles gape,
                  That bene of braſſe trapped all in leuen
                  Ben more to dread thē lightening of ye heauē.
                  Tofore the dint of the great thonder.
                  That ſeuered hath full many toure a ſunder.
                  For vnto aſhes they will a man conſume.
                  Wherfore I rede that ye not preſume,
                  The Ram to aſſayle leſt ye your laboure leſe.
                  yet to withdraw your foote ſith ye may cheſe,
                  By good aduiſe and by diſcreſiowne,
                  Your honour ſafe and your hye renowne.
                  Where ſo ye liſt of your worthineſſe,
                  Onely of folye and of haſtineſſe,
                  To this empriſe of head to procede,
                  Or where ye liſt like as I you rede,
                  Saue your ſelfe from woo and al miſchaūce,
                  Like as ye ſhall if to mine ordinaunce,
                  Ye you commytte and lowely lyſte obeye,
                  Without fraude there is no more to ſeye.
               
               
                  ANd Iaſon ther thā ſitting at the borde,
                  Of Medea emprintynge euery worde,
                  Waxed for Ire almoſt vnpacient,
                  And ſayd alas and is this your entent,
                  Me to counceyle to leue this my empriſe,
                  Certes it were to foule a cowardyſe,
                  To gyn thynge that I myght not a chyeue.
                  For euery man wolde me of ſhame repreue,
                  And eke reporte to my confuſyon,
                  That I of pride and of preſumption,
                  Toke this on me whan I was at large,
                  So hye a thynge and ſo great a charge,
                  That I durſt not diſtruſtyng of myſchyefe,
                  Accomplyſhe it whan it came to the prefe.
                  Leuer me were myne owne lady dere,
                  For to ieoparde and to put in were,
                  My ſelfe at ones and at wordes fewe,
                  On ſmale pyeces to be all to hewe.
                  Rather than I ſhulde cowardely forſake,
                  Thylke empryſe that I haue vndertake.
                  As ye well knowe and leue it thus alas.
                  Let be your counſeyle plainly in this caſe.
                  For what ſo euer happe or falle of me,
                  Truſteth ryght well it ſhall none other be.
                  For if that I ſhulde of my cowarde harte,
                  Fro this my purpoſe by any way diuerte,
                  Without laude my lyfe I ſhulde lede,
                  And ſhame eternall iuſtlye by my mede.
                  Throughout the worlde noted ouer all.
                  In euery lande ſpoke of in ſpeciall.
                  That Iaſon hath ſo hyghly vndertake,
                  Wherof for feare he dare none ende make.
                  Thynketh ryght well that it ſhall not betide,
                  For lyfe or deth what miſchiefe I abyde.
                  And thervpon my trouth I you enſure,
                  That ſo ferforth as this my lyfe may endure,
                  I ſhall parfourme that I haue nowe begon.
                  And though ſo be no honor may be wonne,
                  But that I muſte with my deth it beye,
                  I wil not leue for bett were me to deye,
                  Than liue aſhamed of cowardiſe & ſlouth.
                  For as me ſemeth it is to hygh a routhe.
                  A man tappere or dare do ſhewe his head,
                  Whan he hath ones his honour vyllanede.
                  And after time whan yt his name is ſlayne.
                  For euery man ſhulde coueite rather faine,
                  
                     To dye in honour than liue as a wretche.
                  And though this thinge to my death ſtretche,
                  Welcome beit I ſhall it well abyde,
                  This all and ſome what ſo of me betyde.
               
               
                  IAſon quod ſhe than ſyth it ſtandeth ſo,
                  That ye algates deſyre to haue a do,
                  There is no more by ought I can eſpye,
                  But ye had leuer ſhortly for to dye,
                  Rather than lyue and haue ye ſaye a ſhame,
                  And yet it is an erneſt and no game,
                  With ſuche monſters vnwarely for to deale.
                  Lyke as in dede hereafter ye ſhal feale.
                  And therfore I am meued of pytee,
                  And greatly ſteered that ye of volunte,
                  Without aduyſe or by diſcreſion,
                  Counſayle or elles deliberation,
                  Lyſt take on you this meruailous voyage.
                  For both your youth and alſo your courage,
                  Gouerned ben chiefely in this matere,
                  All after luſte for both the two I feare,
                  Inparded ben if ye your purpoſe ſewe.
                  For impoſſyble is that ye eſchewe,
                  A ſodeyne death for nother free nor bonde,
                  By crafte of man hath power to withſtonde.
                  ¶Wherfore I thinke of herte & good entent,
                  To caſt for you yea yet or ye be ſhent,
                  And to your tourne to ſhape a remedye.
                  Suche routhe I haue that ye ſhulden dye,
                  For to my father whom I loue moſt,
                  Rather then ye ſhulde in this wiſe be loſte,
                  I ſhall offende and vtterly diſpleaſe,
                  And all my friendes ſo it may do you eaſe.
                  For I ſhall fynde ſuche a meane weye,
                  That at the leaſt I will not ſe you deye.
                  For in this caſe I thinke to be your gyde,
                  So that for you I ſhall do ſette aſyde,
                  Firſt my diſcent as of the ſtocke royall.
                  ¶And ouer more myne heritage withall.
                  Lykewiſe my honour ſhal I put abacke,
                  You for to helpe that there ſhalbe no lacke,
                  Yfounde in me ſo ye be to me kinde,
                  And that ye lyſte for to haue in mynde,
                  As I deſerue goodly me to quyte.
                  Conſyderyng firſt that it is nat alite,
                  To ſaue your lyue that ſtant in Ieopardye,
                  More peryllous than ye can ought eſpye.
                  But for all this I ſhall it ſo ordeyne,
                  All by my crafte only atwyxe vs twayne,
                  That or we parte I hope all ſhall be well,
                  Vpon this poynt if ſo that I may fele,
                  Faythfully for ioye woo or ſmarte,
                  With full accorde of body will and herte,
                  To my deſire that ye condeſcend.
                  I vndertake to make therof an ende.
                  ¶This ſothly ladye ſayde this Iaſon tho,
                  I am aſſented without wordes mo,
                  For to fulfyll with euery circumſtaunce,
                  What euer thinge may be to you pleſaunce.
               
               
                  THan quod ſhe there is no more to ſaine,
                  But firſte of all wt fayth & herte plaine,
                  With all your myght and your buſy cure,
                  And meanyng hole that ye do me aſſure,
                  Hereafter for to take me for your wyfe,
                  To holde and kepe by terme of your life.
                  So that your dede accorde may wt your heſt.
                  This is the fyne and ſumme of my requeſte.
                  Except only that ye ſhall ordeyne,
                  In your repayre to your fathers reigne,
                  That faithfully ye ſhall me with you lede,
                  And after that whan ſo ye ſhall ſuccede,
                  As by his death into your heritage,
                  With herte aye one and with lyke corage,
                  Ye ſhall to me alwayes be founden true,
                  And cheriſhe me for chaunge of any newe.
                  Like mine eſtate without varyaunce.
                  And while ye lyue haue in remembraunce,
                  My gentleneſſe in this your great nede.
                  For there is none aliue that may ought ſpede
                  What ſo he be that lyueth here mortall,
                  For to aſſayle the forces marcyall,
                  Of both the dragon and the bulles yfeare.
                  But it ſo be of me that firſt he lere,
                  Hooly the manere howe he ſhall him gye,
                  Like as to you I thinke to ſpecifye.
                  Whan ſo it happeth that we mete againe,
                  For none but I may helpe herin certayne,
                  As in this caſe whiche platly ye ſhall fynde,
                  And I naught aſke but ye ayene be kynde.
               
               
                  SOthly quod Iaſon al this ſhalbe do,
                  As ye deuyſe I will that it be ſo.
                  And here my faith theron I you aſſure,
                  Oh goodlieſt of any creature.
                  That euer yet I ſawe vnto my paye.
                  And fayreſt eke in ſoth it is no naye.
                  And of bountie ye ben incomparable,
                  
                     For of my death ye ben ſo marciable,
                  That whyle I lyue I ſaye you by my fayth,
                  Myne herte meneth as my tunge ſayth.
                  I wyll be founde your aldertreweſt man,
                  For life or death in all that euer I can.
                  So that of grace it be to you pleaſaunt,
                  For to perfourme your heſtes & your graunt.
                  And fully worke to my ſaluation,
                  As ye haue ſayde in full concluſyon.
                  For truely ye of all that bearen lyfe,
                  In beaute haue ſuch prerogatife,
                  Paſſyng echone me liſt not for to gloſe.
                  Amonges floures as doth the rede roſe.
                  Which in ſomer amyd the leues ſoote,
                  After that Vere hath made out of the roote,
                  The humidyte kyndly to aſcende,
                  The barrayne ſoyle to clothe and to amend,
                  And them whom winters blaſtes haue ſhakē bare,
                  With ſote bloſmes freſhly to repayre
                  And the medowes of many ſundry hewe,
                  Tapited bene with diuers floures newe,
                  Of ſundry motlees luſtly for to ſene,
                  And holſome bawne is ſhad among ye grene.
                  ¶Ryght as the roſe is fayreſt of echone,
                  Ryght ſo hath nature ſet you all alone.
                  When ſhe you made firſt at her deuiſe.
                  Aboue all other for to haue a pryſe.
                  As ye that bene of bounte ſpring & welle,
                  Therto in beaute ſothly ye excelle,
                  All that beare life for no comparyſon,
                  Ne may be made ſo of diſcreſcion,
                  Ye paſſen all as euery man may ſe.
                  And with all this I finde you vnto me,
                  The goodlyeſt that euer yet was borne.
                  Without whom I were as now but lorne.
                  Of helpe and ſuccoure fully deſtitute,
                  Ne were that I had founde in you refute.
                  Frō whō al fredom to meward doth haboūd,
                  So paſſingly that I am euer bounde,
                  As ferre forth as my ſely life may ſtretche,
                  That for your ſake of death I ne reche,
                  If vnto you it might a pleaſure bene,
                  That to my helpe ſo goodly liſt to ſene.
                  For if that I of neclygence ſhuld,
                  In Any thing refuſen that ye would,
                  I might of reaſon full well merked be,
                  And noted eke of wilfull nycetye.
                  So folylye to voyde away my grace,
                  It were a rage aman from him to chaſe,
                  Wilfull fortune whan ſhe is beninge.
                  Wherfore as nowe hooly I reſigne,
                  Herte body my lyfe and eke my death,
                  Into your hande while ye me laſteth breath,
                  With all the othes that I affirme may,
                  For to parſeuer to mine endinge daye,
                  Your trewe ſpouſe as I haue ſayd & ſworne.
                  And you beheſted playnly here toforne.
                  And there vpon in euery thinge obeye,
                  That may you pleaſe till ſuch time as I deye.
                  This all & ſome what ſhuld I longer tarye,
                  From this beheſt I ſhall me neuer varye.
                  ¶Thus whan Medea ſawe his ſtedfaſtnes,
                  She was ſuppriſed with ſo hye gladneſſe,
                  With ſo great ioye pleynly in her herte,
                  That ſhe was voyde of euery wo and ſmert,
                  For he ſo lowly to her luſt obeyd.
                  That or ſhe went thus to him ſhe ſeyde.
                  ¶Iaſon quod ſhe than ſhall I well ordayne,
                  A meane waye wherby we both twayne,
                  May eft agayne at leyſure mete ſone.
                  For to perfourme all that is to done.
                  In this matterlike to our entent.
                  Where ſhall be made a finall ſacrament,
                  Of our deſire that no man ſhall vnbinde.
                  Though nowe therto we may no leiſure fīde.
                  And that toward eue it ſhall not me eſkape.
                  Truſt me right well a time for to ſhape,
                  Right ſecretly that we may mete yfeare.
                  For I ſhall ſende a priuy chambre,
                  To you of mine which ſhall you do conuye,
                  Vnto my chaumbre by a priue wey.
                  A certayne houre withouten any fable,
                  To our entent that ſhalbe moſt greable.
                  Vpon the point when Phebus wt his light,
                  Yweſtred is and eke the dercke night,
                  Hath wt his dimmeſſe of his ſhadowes black,
                  Our Hemiſperye fully ouertake,
                  That oft giueth by fauoure of fortune,
                  Vnto theiſe louers a leyſour opportune.
                  For to perfourme their luſtes and achieue.
                  And right anone as it ſhall drawe to eue,
                  I ſhall for you vnto my cloſet ſend,
                  Of euery thinge there for to make an ende.
                  Where we togither ſhall at leyſur ſpeake,
                  Euerich with other and our hertes breake.
                  And eft declare the ſumme of all our will,
                  And when we haue ſpoken all our fill,
                  By good leyſur I fully you byhete,
                  
                     We ſhall ordeyne whan ſo vs luſt to mete,
                  To ſet a time who euer that ſay nay,
                  Alway by nyght whan paſſed is the day.
                  For myghty Ioue as wyſely me ſuccour,
                  As hence forth I wyll be hooly your,
                  Whyle that I lyue both wakyng & a ſlepe,
                  If it ſo be that ye your heſtes kepe.
               
               
                  TO whom Iaſon lowly gan enclyne,
                  And ſayd as far as man may ymagine,
                  Or any wight may clearly comprehende.
                  I wyll to you vnto my liues ende,
                  As ſeruaunt trewe faythfully me quyte.
                  And though that I can not ſaye but lyte,
                  My fayth to you ſhalbe nertheleſſe.
                  And though I can not paynt nor compaſſe,
                  No gay proceſſe my ſoueraigne hertes quene,
                  Tyll I be dead I ſhall but trewly meane.
                  Haue here my trouth whyle I haue lyfe and mind,
                  As in the end ye ſhall hereafter finde.
                  And of theyr ſpeche an ende thus they make,
                  And Medea ſhope her for to take,
                  Her leue anone amonges all the preſe,
                  Firſt of her father ſyth of Hercules.
                  No longer bode but forthwith that anone,
                  In haſte ſhe is vnto her chambre gone.
                  Where vp and downe ſhe made many went,
                  None of her meine wetyng what ſhe ment.
                  Caſting wayes her purpoſe to achieue,
                  And in her wittes gan buſyly to meue,
                  As ſhe thus rometh in her habytacle,
                  On any ſide if let were or obſtacle,
                  Or other thinge which would her ſore greue,
                  This was her ſtudy till it drewe to eue.
                  Where I her leue complaining in her wo,
                  With many a thought walking to and fro.
                  ¶The midday hour is gone and ouerſlide,
                  Tytan ſo faſt doth in his chayre ryde.
                  The daies arke from eaſt to weſt compaſſed,
                  His fyry ſtedes haue almoſt ouer paſſed,
                  Our orizonte and drowen downe ful lowe,
                  His golden waine that no man might know,
                  Where as he hidde his fyery beames bright,
                  In his diſcence full farre out of our ſyght.
                  And Hirenes with her copes myrke,
                  The euening begon for to dirke.
                  In the Twylight when the day gan faide
                  And Heſperus with her beames glade,
                  That ben ſo freſhe ſo luſty and ſo merye,
                  Gan recomforte all our Hemiſperye.
                  ¶Whan thus Medea by her ſelfe alone,
                  Of hyghe deſyre gan to make her mone,
                  That ſhe ſo longe abode after her knyght.
                  Alwaye accountyng the houres of the nyght,
                  So full of trouble and of buſye thought,
                  Which hath full ſtreitly ſerched out & ſought,
                  A ready waye wel ſetting her purpoſe,
                  Albe that ſhe kept it in full cloſe,
                  Amyd her herte quapping as a wawe,
                  For dreade and feare tyll hope gan adawe,
                  And bad ſhe ſhuld be ryght mery and glad.
                  Tyll dreade agayne it made ſobre & ſadde.
                  Leſt her deſyre troubled were or let,
                  And thus ſhe was at abay yſet.
                  Amyd hope and fearfull dreade alſo.
                  That ſhe ne wyſt what was beſt to do.
                  ¶For her deſyre and hygh affection,
                  So hoote they brent in her opynyon,
                  Of luſt ſhe had to mete with this Iaſon,
                  And there agaynſt dreade come in anone,
                  And made her fearfull leſt ſhe were eſpyed.
                  But all her ill was holpe and remedyed,
                  Onely by fortune and the derke night.
                  By whych ſhe was made full glad and lyght,
                  For recomforted onely thoſe two.
                  And with good hope that made her glad alſo.
                  She gan anone to caſten and deuyſe,
                  When that the moone on heauē would aryſe.
                  And whan that ſhe with her hornes pale,
                  Wolde ſhed her lyght vpon the hylle & vale,
                  She gan acounte and caſte well the tyme,
                  And founde a quarter paſſed after pryme.
                  As ſhe that was well knowyng in that arte,
                  And ſawe in ſoth that the fourth part.
                  Of the mone was ſhadde with newe lyght,
                  And paſſed was in her courſe aryght,
                  After the tyme of coniunction,
                  Three ſygnes full by computacion.
                  And dayes ſeuen complete were of her age.
                  ¶At which time ſhe brennyng in her rage,
                  As one through darted with cupides arowe,
                  Gan for to loke and beholde narowe,
                  At euery dore and liſten buſely,
                  If any wyght that ſhe myght eſpye,
                  Of all the courte other walke or go.
                  Or any man romyn to or fro.
                  So ſore ſhe dradde goynge vp and downe,
                  Whan ſo ſhe herde noyſe or any ſowne.
                  
                     Or whā ſhe heareth whiſperyng any where,
                  It was venim ſothly in her ere.
                  She wiſhed all had ſlept faſt a bed.
                  This pytyous lyfe the longe nyght ſhe led.
                  wtout reſpite though no wyght coude knowe,
                  Till hye mydnyght that the cockes crowe,
                  At whych tyme whan al was buſhte & ſtyl,
                  For taccomplyſhe the remnaūt of her wyll,
                  And euery where made was ſylence,
                  She cleped anone vnto her preſence,
                  And aged vecke fer in yeares yronne,
                  That in ſuch crafte ſo mikle helpe kon.
                  Thriftly to bryng this thing about,
                  For they afore can caſten euery doubte.
                  ¶Of yeares paſſed olde experyence,
                  Hath gyue to theim ſo paſſyng hye prudence,
                  That they in loue all the ſleyghtes knowe,
                  And ſhe was made as dogge for the bowe,
                  To whom Medea diſcureth al her thoughte,
                  Fro poīt to poīt & hath forgat righte nought,
                  And charged her in releaſe of her ſmerte,
                  And recomforte of this her troubled herte.
                  To haſte her anone vpon her waye,
                  Vnto her chambre Iaſon to conuaye,
                  And ſhe anone not rekles in that caſe,
                  Is gone for hym forthe an eaſy paſe,
                  As ſhe that was of newe not to lere,
                  And hath him brought as ye ſhal after heare.
               
               
                  VVhā that the cock comon Aſtrologere,
                  The midnight hour wt his voyce clere,
                  Began to ſowne and did his buſy payne,
                  To beate his breſte with his wynges twayne.
                  And of the time a mynute wyll not pace,
                  To warne them that weren in the place,
                  Of the tides and ſeaſon of the night.
                  Medea to awayte vpon her knight,
                  Full ready was the entre for to kepe.
                  As ſhe that lyſt full lytell for to ſlepe.
                  For that ne was no parcell of her thought.
                  And whā Iaſō was to his chambre brought,
                  Without eſpying of any maner wight,
                  Than ſhe anone conueyeth hym full ryght,
                  Into her cloſet in all the haſte ſhe maye.
                  Full well beſene with great and ryche araye.
                  Where by her ſyde ſhe made him take his ſee.
                  And firſt of al this ylke leaſe of thre,
                  By her that moſt expert was in this caſe,
                  All ſodeynly was tourned to a braſe.
                  For the olde vecke to ſtare vpon the mone.
                  Is walked out and hath theym left alone.
                  And when Medea the dores had faſt ſhet,
                  By Iaſon downe anone ſhe hath her ſet.
                  But firſt I finde with all her buſy might,
                  About the chambre that ſhe ſet vp light,
                  Torches of great and cyerges ful royall,
                  Aboute on pyllers and on euery wall.
                  Whych gaue a lyghte like ye ſonne ſhene.
                  And to a cheſte wrought of cryſtall clene,
                  Firſte of all ſhe taketh her paſſage.
                  Out of the whych ſhe toke a ryche image,
                  Of pure golde full luſty to beholde,
                  That by theyr cuſtome of the rytes olde,
                  To myghty Ioue eterne and increat,
                  Yhalowed was and alſo conſecrat.
                  The whych Image deuoutly as ſhe ought,
                  With humble hert to Iaſon firſt ſhe brought.
                  And made him lowly theron take his othe,
                  Vnto his laſt other for lyef or lothe,
                  That he her ſhuld take vnto his wyfe.
                  Fro that daye forthe duryng all his life.
                  With herte vnfayned and fayth inuyolate,
                  And cheryſhe her lyke to her eſtate.
                  Fro till that tyme I finde how that ſhe,
                  Had euer floured in vyrgynitye.
                  And as myne Auctour well reherſe can,
                  Aye kept her cleane from touche of any man.
                  In thought and dede and neuer did amys.
                  For ſhe of herte all hooly gyuen is,
                  Vnto Iaſon and that for euer mo,
                  And he anone hath put his hande vnto.
                  And ſwore fully as ye haue heard me ſaye,
                  All her requeſtes without more delaye,
                  To kepe thē aye while that his life may laſte.
                  But oh alas how ſoone he ouercaſt,
                  His heſt his fayth wt which he was aſſured,
                  And had his fraude with flatterye y
                        •
                     ured.
                  So couertly that both her innocence,
                  Her trewe meanyng and her diligence,
                  And all that euer ſhe deuyſe can:
                  Deceyued was by falſhed of this man.
                  And though ye trouth apparent was aboue,
                  Yet doubleneſſe ſo ſlyghly was in ſhoue,
                  As though he had ſothely be allyed,
                  With trewe meaning ſo yt nothinge eſpyed,
                  Vnder fayre chere was faining and fallaces,
                  for what might ſhe haue wrought more ī this caſe.
                  Thā for thy ſake ceptre & regallye,
                  
                     And all the lordes eke of her alie,
                  Forſoke at ones and toke of them no hede,
                  And of pitye and of very goodly hede,
                  Loſte her friendes and her good fame,
                  Only Iaſon to ſaue the this fro ſhame.
                  And yet moreouer forſoke her heritage,
                  She that was borne of ſo hye parage,
                  And ſhulde haue be by ſucceſſion,
                  Heyre by diſſent of that Region.
                  But womanly for ſhe wolde her quite,
                  Of all yfeare ſhe hath not ſet a mite.
                  But in one houre all ſhe hath forſake,
                  And vnto the ſhe hath her holy take,
                  Only for truſt thou ſhouldeſt haue be kynde.
                  Riches and honour ſhe hath ylefte beynde.
                  And in exyle hath choſe with the to gone,
                  From all her kynne this ſely mayde alone.
                  ¶Alas I wepe for thyne vnkyndeneſſe,
                  What hath ſhe not fro death and fro diſtreſſe,
                  Preſerued the? and yet thou takeſt none hede
                  That ſhuld haue died ne had ſhe be thy read.
                  Of thy conqueſt ſhe was the very cauſe,
                  That I may not ſhortly in a clauſe,
                  Write her bountie nor briefly comprehende,
                  Effectually perfourmed to the ende.
                  At wordes fewe ne may it not be tolde.
                  Thrugh whom yu haſt the riche fleſe of golde,
                  Manly conquered which withouten doubte,
                  Vnlikely was that to haue brought about.
                  For whan thou were of helpe tho deſtitute,
                  She was thine only comforte and refute.
                  And with all this thou maieſt it not denye,
                  All erthly honour how ſhe gan defye,
                  The to conſerue out of all heuineſſe.
                  And eke her father hath of his richeſſe,
                  So enpeyred that pitie is to here.
                  By whoſe example women may well lere.
                  How they ſhuld faith or truſten on any man.
                  Alas Medea that ſo mykle can,
                  Both of ſterres and of aſtronemye,
                  Yet ſawe ſhe not afore her deſtinye.
                  Loue hath her put ſo out of gouernayle.
                  That al her crafte ne myght her not auayle.
                  She was to ſlowe by calculation,
                  To caſte afore the conſtellation,
                  Of her birthe and eke her wofull fate.
                  For rekleſhed ſhe ſawe it all to late.
                  But I ſuppoſe her connyng was fallyble,
                  And doubtles as me ſemeth incredible.
                  For if ſhe had wiſte of it toforne,
                  So piteouſly ſhe had not now be lorne.
                  As ye ſhall ſe hereafter haſtely.
                  So as the ſtory teacheth by and by.
                  How it befell of Iaſon and Medee,
                  But fyrſt ye ſhall the maner holly ſee,
                  How ſhe gan wirche for after he was ſwore,
                  The ſame night alas ſhe hath forbore,
                  Her maydenhead and that was great pitie.
                  And yet ſhe mente naught elles but honeſtye,
                  As I ſuppoſe ſhe went haue be his wyfe,
                  But touchyng that I holde as now no ſtrife,
                  And yet one thing I dare afyrme and ſayne,
                  That both ſo the meaning of theſe twayne,
                  Ne was not one but wonder fer atwene.
                  For all that ſhe truely gan to meane,
                  Of honeſte thynkyng no outrage,
                  Like as a maide all innocent of age,
                  He to perfourme his fleſhly falſe delight,
                  And to acheue his fylthy appetite,
                  Wrought euery thing to her entent contraire.
                  Alas that ſhe was tho ſo debonaire,
                  As for to truſte vpon his curteſye.
                  Or to acquite her of her gentery,
                  So haſtely to rewe vpon his ſmarte.
                  But women ben ſo pytefull of herte,
                  That they wyll gladly ſhewen petie all.
                  When in miſhappe they ſe a man is fall.
                  And ſaue his lyfe rather than he ſhoulde dye.
                  And ſo Medea ſhortly for to ſeye,
                  Caſtyng no peryll after that ſhall fall,
                  But his deſyres and his luſtes all,
                  Holy obeyeth with all her full might.
                  And that ſo longe almoſte that the night,
                  Hath his courſe rounde about gone.
                  At whiche tyme thus ſpake to her Iaſon,
                  And lowly ſayde my lady it is time,
                  That we aryſe for ſoone it wyll be pryme.
                  Ye may ſee well the day beginneth to ſpringe.
                  For we may here howe the byrdes ſynge,
                  Prayinge to you in all my beſte wyſe,
                  How I ſhall worke that ye lyſte deuyſe.
                  And ceriouſly in euery thyng diſpoſe,
                  I you beſeche o goodly freſhe roſe.
                  Myne enterpryſe to bring vnto an ende.
                  And than at erſt fro henſe will I wynde.
                  Saue that I thincke firſt with you to treate,
                  In what maner ye ſhall this countrey lete.
                  And into Grece repaire agayne with me.
                  
                     Whiche is a lande of great felicitie.
                  For truſteth wel and be nothyng adrede,
                  Into that reygne with me I ſhall you lede.
                  After my conqueſt if ſo be that I wynne.
                  Wherfore I pray you goodly to begynne.
                  How I ſhall worke in all the haſt we may,
                  For in good fayth anone it wil be daye.
                  ¶To whom ſhe ſpake ſaying as ye ſhal here,
                  Myn owne Iaſon and vnto me more deare,
                  Than is my ſelfe as in concluſyon.
                  I am aſſented with ful affection,
                  Of all my wittes and with my hole herte,
                  You to enfourme how ye ſhall aſterte.
                  Euery daunger of that lytell yle,
                  If it ſo be ye lyſt bide a whyle.
                  And vp ſhe roſe in all the haſte ſhe maye,
                  And to a cofer where her treaſour laye,
                  She wēt anone and brought him in her hōde,
                  A ryche ymage of ſyluer that ſhe fonde.
                  Which ſothely was of meruaylous entayle.
                  Whoſe power was and vertue to auayle,
                  Effectually to her both entent,
                  Agayne all magik and enchauntement.
                  And to with ſyt the force of Sorcerye.
                  For it was made ſo by Aſtronomye.
                  In houre choſen equat for the nones,
                  By clerkes olde that full long agone is.
                  Whilom whā they were flouring ī their ages,
                  That they vſed to make ſuch ymages,
                  As did the kyng called Thelomee,
                  And ſo to Iaſon wylled hath Medee,
                  To beare this ymage on hym pryuely.
                  As ye haue herd to worke effectually,
                  In euery thynge as ſhe dyd aſſygne,
                  And then ſhe toke to hym a medycine,
                  Made as in maner of an oyntment,
                  Hym to enoynt that he be not brent.
                  That was more riche & precious thā bawme
                  Agayne the malyce of eche fire and flawme.
                  And after that ſhe toke to hym anone,
                  A ryche rynge wherin was ſet a ſtone,
                  That vertue had all venym to deſtroye.
                  That on no ſyde it myght hym not anoye.
                  The which ſtone had furthermore this might
                  That yf a man coude it beare aright.
                  Within his hand next the ſkyn encloſed,
                  The ſtrength of ſyght ſhuld be depoſed,
                  Of theim that would gaſen or beholde.
                  For who ſo euer in his hand it holde,
                  By ſuch vertue as was infallyble,
                  The ſtorye ſayeth he was inuyſible.
                  The which ſtone theſe prudent clerkes call.
                  Achates moſt vertuous of all.
                  And it is founde ſothly in Cecile.
                  Of which ſtone whylom wrote Virgyll,
                  Now that Venus it to Eneas ſente,
                  Firſt whan that he into Cartage went.
                  ¶And after this ſhe to Iaſon toke,
                  A certayne byll wrytten lyke a boke.
                  That to his Iourney myght much auayle.
                  And bad him wyſely that he not ne fayle,
                  If he bethought him graciouſly to ſpede,
                  Firſt of all the ſcripture that he rede,
                  Or he the Ram touche in any wyſe.
                  Him charging eke afore this hye empryſe,
                  With humble hert and great deuocion,
                  That he knelyng ſaye that oryſon,
                  That vp and downe was wrytten on the bill.
                  Praying the goddes lowely to fulfyll,
                  His requeſt and mercy for to haue,
                  Of very pitye from miſchiefe him to ſaue.
                  And after that for his chiefe ſocoure,
                  She toke to hym a vyoll with lycoure,
                  And bad him manly without feare or drede,
                  When that he come vnto the bulles reade,
                  If he hym caſt knightly to eſcape,
                  That as faſt as he ſeeth theim gape.
                  Into theyr golles that he the lycour caſte.
                  Than hym nede but lytel of theim gaſte,
                  For theyr iawes togither it ſhall glyewe,
                  That on no ſyde they ſhall not eſchewe,
                  To bide his luſt in what hym lyſt conſtreyne.
                  For doubtles maugre al theyr buſye peyne,
                  He ſhall theim daunte & therwt make ſo tame.
                  That where hym liſt in earneſt or in game,
                  He myght theym make louten and encline.
                  And do theym bowen both in backe & chyne,
                  The lycour ſhall theyr iawes ſo coharte,
                  That lyghtly they ſhall not a ſundre parte.
                  For to offende or noyen any wight.
                  And whē ſhe had thus ſayd vnto her knight,
                  In euery thynge and gyue inſtruction.
                  Playn doctrine and informacyon,
                  How he ſhall ſcape the daungers by and by,
                  If he take hede and worke auyſely.
                  ¶And thus agreyd they thought it for ye beſt,
                  For to parte or men out of theyr reſt,
                  Awaked were for it drewe towardes daye.
                  
                     As they well ſawe by the morowe graye,
                  And leſt men had to theym ſuſpiciō,
                  Of hye prudence and diſcrecion,
                  Atwene the twelight and the rody morowe.
                  They toke theyr leue wt ſaint Iohn ye borow.
                  With oft kyſſyng as louers whē they twinne.
                  And ſo he went and ſhe is left within.
                  Beyng in hope to mete agayn ſome daye,
                  And Iaſon than as faſt as euer he maye,
                  Gan ordayne him his Iourney to achieue,
                  And thought he would anō go take his leue,
                  And in that wyſe wtin a litel whyle,
                  After the maner of my rude ſtyle,
                  My purpoſe is ſothly and not to ſpare,
                  With your ſupporte playnly to declare.
               
               
                  VVhan that the rowes & the rayes rede,
                  Eſtward to vs full early gonnen ſprede,
                  Euen at the twelyght in the dawnynge,
                  When that the larke of cuſtome gynneth ſing,
                  For to ſalue in her heauenly laye,
                  The luſty goddeſſe of the morowe graye.
                  I meane Aurora which afore the ſonne,
                  Is wonte tench
                        •
                     ſe the blacke ſkyes donne,
                  And the derkeneſſe of the dymmy night.
                  And freſhe Phebus with cōforte of his light,
                  And with the brightnes of his beames ſhene,
                  Had ouergylt the hye hylles grene.
                  And floures eke agayn the morowe tyde,
                  Vpō their ſtalkes gā playn theyr leues wide.
                  Whan that Iaſon with all his companye,
                  Toward the kynge full faſt gan hym hye.
                  Whom than he fonde lyke to his eſtate,
                  With ſceptre in hādeful pompous and elate.
                  Hye in the ſee of his regally,
                  Sittyng full kyngly amid his cheualrye,
                  And his lordes about him enuiron.
                  ¶At why 
                        •
                     he tyme this yonge champion,
                  Vnder a vowe ſtanding of the Ram.
                  With ſterne face tofore the kyng in cam.
                  Beſechyng hym of his magnificence,
                  The ſame day to graunt him lycence,
                  To do hys armes and make no mo delayes.
                  Concluding playnly that at all aſſayes,
                  He will that daye in the felde be found.
                  For to achieue lyke as he was bound,
                  Of olde beheſt and not a poynt declyne.
                  For life nor death till he parfourme and fine.
                  Holy the auntres that to the fleſe belonge,
                  The kynge requyryng no lōger him prolōge,
                  But goodly graūt the fine of his empryſe.
                  And than the kynge in ful ſobre wyſe,
                  Conſydering the ſumme of his demaunde,
                  To Iaſon ſpoke & ſayd he ſhall commaūd,
                  That his requeſt perfourmed were in haſt.
                  Albe quod he I am ful ſore agaſt,
                  Of wylfulneſſe thou ſhulde deſtroyed be,
                  Leſt men thy death arected vnto me.
                  And therupon would a blame ſet,
                  Of royall power that I not ne let,
                  Thy manly youth from ſuch Ieopardy
                  Which were in ſothe a great vylany,
                  And preiudice to my eſtate and name.
                  That afterward men ſhould put me ī blame,
                  Through falſe reporte & wrong opynyon.
                  That I withſtode not thy deſtruction.
                  ¶Wherfore I rede that yu be yet bet auyſed,
                  And my counſayle let not be diſpyſed.
                  For better it is with honoure in certayne,
                  Into thy country to repayre againe,
                  Than wilfully for to take on hande,
                  A mortall thyng that no man may withſtād.
                  That is my rede and fully myn aduiſe.
                  Take hede therto ſyth ye aren wyſe.
                  Leſt thou repent when it is to late,
                  And yf ſo be that thou wilt algate.
                  Thy purpoſe holde and not do as I rede,
                  Almyghty Mars I praye to be thy ſpede.
                  The for to gyde whatſoeuer ſhal befall,
                  And eke I praye to the goddes all,
                  Safe and ſound thy body to reſtore,
                  This all & ſome on me thou getteſt no more.
                  ¶And whan Iaſon thus had herd the kyng,
                  Not diſmayed nor ſtoned in no thyng,
                  In knyghtly wiſe did him reuerence.
                  Thankyng highly his royall excellence,
                  That of his grace and beningnytye,
                  Vpon his death hym lyſt to haue pytye.
                  Fully concluding touchyng his battayle
                  That nother rede nor other counſayle,
                  In no wyſe his purpoſe ſhould withdrawe.
                  But lyke the ſtatute playnly and the lawe,
                  Right ſo far forth as fortune wyll hym eure,
                  What ſo beſyde of this his auenture,
                  Settyng aſyde euery feare and drede,
                  He platly ſayd that he wyll procede,
                  For to parfourme that he hath vndertake.
                  It were in ydle mo ſkylles for to make.
                  
                     Or to allege more there againe.
                  And Iaſon than full openly and plaine,
                  Touching ye ſurplus of this dredfull thing,
                  At his departyng thus ſayd to the kyng.
                  In audience tho of his lordes all.
                  What ſo of me hereafter now be fall,
                  Or who ſo euer of malys theron muſe,
                  To all the worlde fyrſt I you excuſe.
                  And to the goddes platly you acquyte.
                  That though I deye ye be nothyng to wyte.
                  Ne no man ſhall arecte it you of ſkylle,
                  For that I worke is freely at my wyll.
                  Agayne the aduice of your hye prudence,
                  And lyfe or death here in your preſence,
                  Hooly of herte and neuer for to flytte,
                  Vnto the goddes and fortune I commytte.
                  So as them lyſt for me to ordayne.
                  Againe whoſe wyll I ſhall neuer plaine.
                  Nor them nor you ne ſhall put in no blame,
                  What ſo betide honour, ioye, or ſhame.
                  And of this thyng thus an ende I make,
                  And for this tyme of you my leue I take.
                  And of all tho that you about ſtande.
                  And one by one he toke them by the hande.
                  And in what wyſe forth he gan hym dreſſe,
                  To you anone I thyncke it to expreſſe.
               
               
                  VVhan that Titan had wt his feruēt hete
                  Drawen vp the dewe fro the leues wete,
                  Towarde myd morowe as I can diffine,
                  Vpon the houre whan the clocke is nine.
                  Iaſon full manly and full like a knight,
                  Armed in ſtele of cherefull glad and lyght,
                  Gan dreſſe hym forth what hap that euer fal.
                  And ſayd a dieu vnto his feres all.
                  He in the boote and they vpon the ſtronde,
                  And all a lone whan he came to londe,
                  And in the water had his veſſell lafte,
                  He fyrſt of all remembryng on the crafte,
                  Of Medea with all the circumſtaunces,
                  And how he ſhulde kepe his obſeruaunces,
                  In euery thing and had it well in mynde.
                  And than anone full manly as I fynde,
                  He ſhope him forth and went a knyghtly paſe
                  Toward the bulles that forged wer of braſe.
                  But at the point whan he his iourney gan,
                  For him Medea wexed full pale and wan.
                  So ſore agaſt that nothing might her glade.
                  A ruthe it was to ſee what wo ſhe made.
                  For ſo her teares on her chekes twayne,
                  Full pyteouſly gan to deſtylle and rayne,
                  That all fordewed were her wedes blake.
                  And aye this ſorowe ſhe made for his ſake.
                  Lyke a woman fearefull and in doubte,
                  While he his armes ful māly brought about.
                  To ſobbe and ſyghe ſhe can not be in a peace,
                  Leſt he for haſt were ought rekles.
                  Fro point to point to do as ſhe him bad,
                  This was the life that ſhe hath for hym lad.
                  ¶And for to ſe how he ſhulde him defende,
                  She gan anone by greces to aſſende,
                  Of a Touret in to an hye pynacle.
                  Where as ſhe myght haue tho none obſtacle,
                  Nor lettyng nother for to haue a ſyghte.
                  Of hym that was her owne choſen knight.
                  And euer amonge with wordes out ſhe brake
                  And ſtoundemell thus to her ſelfe ſhe ſpake.
                  ¶O thou Iaſon my ſouerayne hertes heale,
                  If thou ought knew what wo for the I fele,
                  Sothly I trowe it ſhulde the not aſterte,
                  For to be trewe with all thy hole herte.
                  And god I praye this iourney at the leſte,
                  May this tyme tournen for the beſt.
                  And kepe ye ſaulfe & ſounde in euery membre,
                  And yefe the might fully to remembre,
                  As I the taught and in the ſame fourme,
                  Euery thynge fully to perfourme.
                  Only this day thine honour to anaunce.
                  Which for to ſe were all my hole pleaſaunce.
                  For certes Iaſon if the fylle ought amiſſe,
                  Fare well my helth and all my worldly bliſſe.
                  And fare well than my mirthe and my ſolace,
                  And my welfare, my fortune, and my grace,
                  And all at ones my hartes ſuffiſaunce.
                  ¶Lo this for him was her gouernaunce.
                  Firſt fro ye time that he the lande hath nome.
                  And firſt of all whan he was thether come,
                  Where as the bulles fell and diſpiteous,
                  Out caſte their fyre and flawme furious,
                  Fro out their mouthes wonder large & huge,
                  Againe the whiche for his chiefe refuge,
                  Hym for to ſaue that he were not brent,
                  He was enoynted with an oyntement,
                  On his body that kept him from damage.
                  Of thilke fyre that was ſo full of rage.
                  And the ſmokes darke and full horrible.
                  Whiche to eſcape was almoſte impoſſyble,
                  For any man of what eſtate he be,
                  
                     Without comforte and counſayle of Medee.
                  By whoſe doctryne Iaſon can ſo worke,
                  That he is ſcaped from the miſtes darke.
                  Of the ſyre with the blaſes blake.
                  That all the eyre ſo cloudy hath do make.
                  She had hym made ſo diſcrete and ſage.
                  By vertue onely of thilke ſame ymage.
                  Whych that he about his necke bare,
                  Wherby he was ſo prudent and ſo ware,
                  That when ye bulles haue moſt feerſly gaped
                  He hath theyr malyce ſo auyſedly ſcaped.
                  For the enfection of theyr troubled eyre
                  He hath vanquiſhed and was in no diſpeire.
                  For in effect agayne the foule fume,
                  That would a man vnto the death conſume,
                  The ymage was a ful preſeruatyfe.
                  Him to diffend and to ſaue his lyfe.
                  And more ſurely to kepe him out of drede,
                  Ful ofte ſythe the wrytte he did rede.
                  For the vertue of thilke ſame oryſon,
                  Was vnto hym a full protection.
                  That he not fell therby in no diſtreſſe.
                  And after that for rather ſykerneſſe,
                  Him to preſerue in this his mortall caſe.
                  He toke the lycoure that in the vyall was,
                  And therwithall full lyke a manly man,
                  That all at ones he toke the bulles than.
                  And nought forgat ſo warely it to caſt,
                  That therwtal theyr iawes were cloſed faſt.
                  And by the vertue ſo mightely englued,
                  That he ther through hath vtterly eſchewed,
                  The hole enfection of the ſmoky leuen.
                  And whē the eyre gan clere and al ye heauen,
                  And that ye myſtes were waſted him toforne,
                  With māly hert he raught hath by the horne,
                  The ſterne bulles and by his vyolence,
                  He drew them forth in whom was no defēce.
                  And yo
                        •
                     keth them ſo as the maner was,
                  And with the plough he made them go a paſe.
                  Now vp now down and ſo to eare the londe,
                  And at his lyſt ſo buxom he them fonde,
                  That the ſoyle ſmothe bare and playn,
                  They redy made to bearen any grayne.
                  And on renges it tourned vp ſo downe.
                  For tho in theym was no rebellyowne.
                  But humble meke and redy at his will,
                  All his deſyres playnly to fulfyll.
                  ¶And Iaſon than lyke a champyon,
                  Gan him enhaſte towardes the dragon,
                  That was a beaſt ryght great & mōſtruous,
                  Foule and horrible and deadly venimous,
                  And was armed in ſcales large and thicke,
                  Of whom the breath more perillous & wicke,
                  Was then the eayre of any peſtylence.
                  His venim was of ſuch a vyolence,
                  That it full deadly was and eke mortall,
                  And at his throte there iſſued out with al,
                  A flawme of fyre as of a fournes mouthe,
                  Or lyke the leuen that downe by the ſouth,
                  Out of the Eaſt is wont in tempeſt ſmite.
                  Right ſo this dragon ſothely for to wite,
                  Out at his mouth had a flawme blaſed.
                  Wherof Iaſon a lytell firſt amaſed,
                  Was in his hert of that dreadfull thynge.
                  But whā that he remembred on his ringe,
                  All feare and dread was layd aſyde and gone,
                  For in that ringe there was ſet a ſtone,
                  Ful ryche noble and right vertuous.
                  Of whych as teacheth great Yſydorus.
                  And in mine Auctour alſo as I finde,
                  Moſt comenly cometh out of ynde.
                  And muſt be kept chaſte and wonder cleane,
                  And of colour ſurmounteth euery grene.
                  Whoſe vertue is all venym to deſtroye.
                  And to withſtand that it may not anoye.
                  Of dragon ſerpent of adder and of ſnake.
                  And ſpecyally if ſo that it betake,
                  And be yholden in the oppoſyte,
                  Of any worme euen agayn the ſyte,
                  Without abode in ſothe he may not cheſe,
                  Of his venym the force muſt he leſe.
                  How ſtronge it be or vyolent of rage,
                  But to the ſtone it doth ful great damage.
                  For whan he hath his vertue do as blyue,
                  On peces ſmale it gynneth all to ryue.
                  And in it ſelfe abydeth whole no whyle,
                  For in the land that called is Cecyle.
                  There is a worme yt Bufo beareth ye name.
                  And when men of malice make him tame,
                  And his venym vtterly expreſſe,
                  They take a quil mine Auctour beareth witneſſe,
                  Whā they wyll worke or a large can,
                  And in the ende this ſtone they ſet than,
                  And line right agayne the wormes heade,
                  They holden it tyll that he be deade.
                  For that is ſothly his vertue of nature.
                  That no venim laſt may nor endure,
                  In the preſence of this ryche ſtone.
                  
                     And as I finde this Bufo ryght anone,
                  Through myght therof bruſteth euē a twain,
                  Onely by kynde that no mā may reſtrayne.
                  For the goddeſſe that called is Nature,
                  Whych next her lorde al thyng in cure,
                  Hath vertue gyue to herbe gras and ſtone,
                  Whych no man knoweth but her ſelfe alone.
                  The cauſes hyd be cloſed in her hande.
                  That wyt of man can not vnderſtande,
                  Openly the myght of her workyng.
                  And ſo Iaſon by vertue of this rynge,
                  And through his ſton yt might hī moſt auaūce
                  Hath the dragon brought to vttraunce,
                  In whom he fonde no maner reſyſtence.
                  Hym to wythſtand force nor diffence.
                  Neyther by venym nor none other ſtryfe,
                  Wherfore he hath beraft him of his lyfe.
                  In manly wiſe and in the fielde outrayed,
                  And Iaſon then full glad and well apayed,
                  Hath wt his ſword ſpēt on him many a ſtroke.
                  And layde on hym as men newe on an oke.
                  His bryght ſkales were ſo hard and dure.
                  That well vnneth he ne might endure.
                  Hym to dyſmembre and ſmite of his head.
                  And then anone in the ſtede of ſede,
                  He gan his tethe out of his head arace,
                  And right forth with in the ſelfe place,
                  He gan them ſowe right as men do corne.
                  Vpon the land that eared was aforne.
                  Of whych fede there ſprāge a wonder grayn,
                  Bright armed knyghtes ſtanding on ye playn.
                  The which anone wt ſharpe ſwerdes groūde,
                  Eueriche gan other for to hurt and wounde.
                  Tyll eche his felowe hath cruelly yſlawe.
                  This of theyr fate was the fynal lawe.
                  That none of theim ſhuld by vyctorye,
                  The death reioyce of other by memorye.
                  For all yfeare thus haue they made an ende.
                  And after this Iaſon gan to wende,
                  Vnto the Ram with all his dylygence.
                  In which he fonde no power nor defence.
                  No maner ſtryfe nor rebellyowne,
                  And mightely the Ram he draweth downe.
                  And ſet an hand vpon eueryche horne,
                  And ſlewe it firſt and than he hath it ſhorne.
                  Out of his fleſe of golde ſo paſſyng ryche.
                  That in this world ther was no treaſour lich
                  And after that he maketh no delay,
                  To take his boote in all the haſt he may.
                  And roweth forthe into that other yle,
                  Where Hercules all the meane whyle,
                  Vpon the bryncke with many other mo,
                  Abode Iaſon till he had ydo.
                  And euerychone I finde that as blyue,
                  Onely for ioye when he did aryue,
                  They gan to thanke to theyr goddes all.
                  So gracyouſly that it hath yfall.
                  And that the fleſe he hath ſo knyghtlye wōne,
                  That ſhone as cleare as the ſomer ſonne.
                  Which that he brought with hym vnto lōde,
                  His feares all abydyng on the ſtronde.
               
               
                  ANd whan Apollo of his dayes arke,
                  Had in ye weſt almoſt yronne his marke,
                  And faſt gan downward drawen & declyne,
                  And on the wawes full watry gan to ſhine,
                  Yet or that he was paſſed the Occian,
                  Iaſon is come with many a manly man,
                  Of his coferes in preſence of the kinge.
                  As he that had acheued euery thynge,
                  Which that longeth to conqueſt of the Ram.
                  And than Oetes as ſoone as euer he cam,
                  To make hym chere outward hath hī pained.
                  Albe in herte ſothely it was but fayned.
                  For he full ſory was withouten dread.
                  Of the exployte and of the happye ſpede,
                  Of this Iaſon that he the fleſe hathe wonne.
                  But lyke in ſothe as the feyners koune,
                  When that theim lyſt craftely compace,
                  To ſhewe outward a faythful meanyng face,
                  Albe the venym cloſed hole within,
                  As in meaning there was no maner ſyn.
                  Ryght ſo the kyng wyth loke & forhead clere,
                  Made vnto Iaſon outward right good chere
                  And gan to hym to ſpeake in wordes fewe,
                  Of frendly head and many ſygnes ſhewe,
                  As though his conqueſt hole and euery dele,
                  From poīt to point did like him wonder well.
                  And be full glad that he was ſo fortuned.
                  Vnto the ende that he hath ſo contuned.
                  And ioyeth both in ſpeche and countenaunce,
                  That fortune lyſt ſo far forthe him auaunce.
                  And to his paleys gan him fayre conueye,
                  And daye by daye ful rychely him feſteye.
                  Albe that it was nothing done of herte.
                  For this no les he felt full great ſmerte,
                  That of his treaſour he was deſpoyled ſo,
                  And that he hath the ryche fleſe forgo.
                  
                     To his domage and his confuſyon.
                  And thus there was a great dyuyſyon,
                  Atwirt his chere & meanyng of his thoughte.
                  Oft as it fareth if yt be dewlye ſought.
                  That many man in meanyng falſe & double,
                  Can with the calme couer ſo the trouble,
                  Of hyghe malyce hyd in his deſyre,
                  And rake falſly the wycked couert fire,
                  Ful hote brennynge inwarde of enuye,
                  So wel were hym that cowd theim out eſpye.
                  And knewe theyr meanynge falſe & fraudelēt
                  Where through alas ful many an innocent,
                  Deceiued is that wote not what they meane,
                  And namely ſuche that not but trouthe wene.
                  And euery cheare that men to theim make,
                  Of innocence they for the beſt take.
                  And in no wyſe thynke not but well,
                  Ryght ſo certayne this Iaſon euery dell,
                  Hath take in gre what ye kyng hath wrought.
                  Not aduertyng ye grutchyng of his thoughte.
                  For doubtles tho it ſat the king full ſore.
                  That he the Ram hath loſt for euermore.
                  But when that he hath vtterly yſayne,
                  Thoughe he ſtill grutche that therin was no gayne.
                  But fynally as of neceſſety,
                  As at that tyme it might none other be.
                  And playnly ſawe that he may not cheſe,
                  But that algate the fleſe he muſt leſe,
                  Whether it were that he were lyef or lothe,
                  He fayneth chere as though he wer not wroth
                  For onely he as of his gentilneſſe,
                  No ſigne outward of grutching doth expreſſe.
                  But daye by daye of verye curteſye,
                  He cheareth Iaſon and his companye.
                  At whych tyme aboute enuirowne,
                  From euery partye of his regyowne,
                  The people came to ſtaren and to gaſe,
                  Vpon the Ram as it were on a maſe.
                  They loke wonder and deme what thē lyſt.
                  On whoſe domes is but lytell tryſt.
                  They oft varie and tourne to and fro,
                  That who that wyſely taketh hede therto,
                  The comon people chaungeth as a phane.
                  To day they wexe & to morow do they wane
                  As doth the mone they be ſo flaſkeſable.
                  Who truſteth thē ſhall finde thē full vnſtable.
                  For ſome were glad that Iaſon ſped ſo wel,
                  And ſome ſory and lyke it neuer adell.
                  Some other ſayd they wōder how he myght,
                  Agayne the dragon or the bulles fyght.
                  Or how that he agaynſt the force of Marte,
                  Out of the yle alyue might aſtert.
                  Some other ſayde that perauenture,
                  By craft was wrought all this dyſcomfeture.
                  Other by charme or ſome ſorcerye,
                  Thus eche of them after theyr fanteſye,
                  Gan deme of hym all the longe daye.
                  But at the laſt bout makyng of delay.
                  Ful glad and lyght Medea downe deſcēdeth,
                  From her chambre & outwardly pretendethe.
                  Sadnes of chere as ſhe nothīg ne knewe.
                  For nought could men cōceiue as by her hew,
                  Her ſecret meaning ſo hath ſhe womanly,
                  Demened her and eke ſo prudently.
                  That ſhe auoyded by diſcreſcion,
                  All fanteſye and all ſuſpection.
                  That no man coude as of her working deme,
                  Nothyng but well for as it ſhuld ſeme,
                  By porte and cheare there was no cauſe whi.
                  And ſo by proceſſe drewe her pryuely,
                  Towarde Iaſon for ſhe was not to lere,
                  And ſecretly ſhe bad him in his ere,
                  In any wyſe that he not ne leue,
                  To her chambre for to come at eue.
                  For matter they hadden for to treat.
                  Which he ſhal knowe at leiſur whē they mete.
                  And ſo anone when entred was the night,
                  Sole by hym ſelfe without torche or lyght,
                  To Medea he hath the waye take.
                  And ſhe abode ſleples for his ſake.
                  Wonder deuoutly deſyryng as I geſſe,
                  With him to treate of ſome holyneſſe,
                  Touching matters of contemplacion.
                  For ſhe was ſmitte with ſuch deuocion,
                  Of freſhe Venus to holde a memorye,
                  With him alone in her oratorye,
                  Not openly as ypocrytes praye.
                  In dyuers angels ioyning on the waye.
                  Of the people for to be commended,
                  But they haue not the night ſo diſpended.
                  For vayne glorye nor none other laude,
                  But by them ſelfe thynkyng on no fraude,
                  Secretly this ilke twayn alone.
                  Without light of eyther ſonne or mone.
                  The long nyght haue led wythout reſt,
                  For as them thought it was not for the beſte.
                  To ſpeake of ſlepe till that it was pryme.
                  For they them caſt to leſe as tho no time.
                  
                     And thus the nyght together they diſpende,
                  That I am dull for to comprehende,
                  The obſeruaunces of ſuch relygyous,
                  Prolyx in workyng or compēdyous,
                  Demeth your ſelfe ye get no more of me.
                  For well ye wote in euery faculte,
                  Who ſo hath knowyng and experyence,
                  Men wyll to hym rather gyue credence.
                  Wherfore I ſaye ye that be wyſe and can,
                  Are not me whych am ſo rude a man,
                  To deme a thyng and namely when that it,
                  Paſſeth my knowing alſo and my wyt.
                  Fordulled is myne imagynatyfe,
                  To deme in practike or in ſpeculatyfe,
                  Wherfore I paſſe and let it ouer ſlide.
                  And forthe I thynke if ye liſt abide,
                  Playnly to tell of Iaſon and Medee.
                  The whych accorded and aſſented be,
                  That ſhe with him ſhould into Grece wēde,
                  When that he goeth ſhortly this the ende.
                  Vnwyſt her father and euery other wyght.
                  Saue he alone that hath his trouth plyght,
                  For to be trewe both in well and wo,
                  Vnto his laſt to her and to no mo.
               
            
            
               ¶How Iaſon after this conqueſt with Medea and felowſhyppe retourned agayne into Theſalye. Cap. vii.
               
                  ANd whan Iaſon after his Iournee,
                  Full rychely lyke vnto his degree,
                  Refreſhed was in Colchos of the kynge,
                  Withall that might be to his lykynge,
                  And a moneth paſſed was and gone,
                  He with his Grekes aſſented into one,
                  Purpoſed hath ſhortly yf he might,
                  With Medea to ſtele away by nyght.
                  Takyng wt hym great treaſour & ye rych fleſe,
                  With ful aſſent alſo of Hercules.
                  ¶But O Medea thou haſteſt all to faſt,
                  Thou were to ſlawe wyſely for to caſt,
                  What ſhuld befall when yu thy iourney toke.
                  For how that he in miſchiefe the forſoke,
                  And how that he was falſe and eke vnkinde,
                  For all his othes to the wherof I fynde,
                  And how that thou both at eue & morowe,
                  Thy fatall chaunce and thy pyteous ſorowe,
                  By wepteſt after and gan thy ſelfe to rende,
                  Tyll death of all made a wofull ende,
                  It were but vaine to maken reherſayle.
                  I wote nothynge howe it might auaile.
                  Nor howe Iaſon vnkynde for the nones,
                  Receyued hath penam tallionis,
                  Of the goddes for his diſnaturelneſſe.
                  For he in miſchiefe and in wretchedneſſe,
                  Made eke an ende, though the cruell hate,
                  Of felle Mars loo here the mortall fate,
                  Of theſe twayne that made their ende ſo.
                  But I ſuppoſe lyke as writeth Guydo,
                  For their gynnynge was not vertuous,
                  An ende foloweth full contagious.
                  Alas yf they hadde taken hede aforne,
                  Than had they not in miſchiefe be forlorne.
                  But who wyll not afore this miſchiefe ſe.
                  May not eſchewe to haue aduerſitie.
                  In the ende platly to deuyne.
                  For euen lyke right as a medicyne,
                  Auayleth not whan the ſycke is dead,
                  For what may helpe the ſtomake or the head,
                  Lectuarye emplayſtre or pocyon,
                  Or any receite or confection,
                  Herbe or ſtone or that the leches knowe,
                  Whan that the corps is layde in earth alowe.
                  ¶Or whan a beaſt is tourned to careine,
                  Myne auctour ſayth that it is but veyne,
                  For his recure to ſeken any halowe,
                  Or to his ere for to leyne a ſalowe.
                  For veryly after his fantaſye,
                  It helpeth not nor doth no remedy.
                  For thynge perfourmed in his due date,
                  More vertue hath thā whā it cometh to late.
                  Right ſo in caſe veryly ſemblable,
                  Of worldly truſt falſe and full mutable,
                  Who caſte no peryll tyll that it be falle,
                  In ſtede of ſugre ofte taſteth galle.
                  Blended with luſte which tho is preſent,
                  And of the future ſlouthe and necligent.
                  That theim ne lyſte afore no miſchiefe caſte,
                  Tyll in the ſnare they be englued faſte.
                  For to prouyde they be graceles,
                  Full indiſcrete and wilfully richeles.
                  To caſte the peryll or that it be tyde.
                  They ſewe their luſt their reaſon goeth aſide.
                  As it befell whylom of this two,
                  Of Medea and of Iaſon alſo.
                  ¶But how ſo euer of Iaſon that it be,
                  I fynde playnly the harme alone had ſhe.
                  The great damage and the fynall ſmerte,
                  
                     For lacke of wyſedome ſhe ne wolde aduerte,
                  What ſhuld be fall whā ſhe her iourney toke.
                  And then her father folyly forſoke.
                  But ſyth ſhe wrought only of wylfulneſſe,
                  Without counſayle or auyſeneſſe,
                  Me lyſt no more her harmes to bewayle.
                  For lyte or nought it myght now auayle.
                  Let her alone complainyng her damage,
                  For well I wote touchynge her paſſage,
                  It was not take in good plyte of the mone.
                  Of haſtyneſſe ſhe began to ſoone.
                  Cheſynge an houre which was not fortunat,
                  For ſhe alone of frendes deſolate,
                  Colchos forſoke and is to ſhyp gon.
                  And in all the haſte be byddynge of Iaſon.
                  Hercules and all his companye,
                  That with him comyn out of Theſalye.
                  Without tarying forthwith at a worde,
                  Yentred ben within ſhyppes borde.
                  Only for cauſe that the wynde is good.
                  And euery thyng tho at their luſte ſtode.
                  And thus aſſented ſtale awaye by nyght,
                  With all the treaſure that they catche myght,
                  And with them ladde plente of vitayle,
                  And forthe anone they began to ſayle.
                  By many coaſt and many ſondry yle,
                  Towardes Grece and all this meane while,
                  Was Medea glad and of good chere.
                  She and Iaſon ſyttynge both yfeare,
                  And Hercules of very gentylneſſe,
                  Her to comforte did his buſyneſſe,
                  Al faynyngly for the maner ſake.
                  As theſe louers full queynte can it make.
                  Tyll they haue had hooly their pleaſaunce,
                  Their luſt fulfylled than vttreth varyance.
                  As it by Iaſon was preued vtterly.
                  That hath forſaken full vnkyndly,
                  This Medea in paine ſorowe and wo.
                  Of her Guydo ne wryte no wordes mo.
                  Nor maketh of her none other mencion,
                  Bycauſe I trowe in myne opynyon,
                  That her ſorowes ende and euery deale,
                  Reherſed be full openly and weale,
                  Methamorphoſeos & writē there full plaine.
                  Where as Naſo recordeth in certayne,
                  Her death not only nor her heuyneſſe,
                  But percell eke of the vnkyndneſſe,
                  Of this Iaſon and telleth playnly howe,
                  Medea hath both her ſonnes ſlowe.
                  For they were lyke their father of viſage.
                  And telleth eke that put her moſt in rage,
                  How falſly he I can hym not excuſe,
                  Loued an other that called was Ceruſe.
                  Eke in his piſtelles who ſo taketh hede,
                  Her deadly ſorowe there may beholde & rede.
                  And howe that ſhe her trouth aboughte ſore,
                  Of Medea ye gete of me no more.
                  In all this boke nor of her auenture,
                  But I wyll nowe do my buſy cure,
                  Hooly to tourne my ſtile to Iaſon.
                  And of the werre he made on Lamedon,
                  Like as in Guydo is openly deſcribed,
                  After that he in Grece was aryued.
               
               
                  FIrſt whan Iaſon and Hercules alſo,
                  Ylonded were with many an other mo,
                  Within the land & reygne of Theſalye,
                  Kyng Pelleus with all his chiualrye,
                  Caſte hym playnly that he wyll not fayle,
                  To mete his neuewe at his ariuayle.
                  And whan they mette in countenance & chere
                  Made it outwarde as hoole and as entere,
                  As he had had ſoueraygne gladneſſe.
                  Of his knighthode and his highe proweſſe.
                  Of his renowne and his manlyhede,
                  Of his expleyte and of his good ſpede.
                  And that fortune to encreaſe his name,
                  Hath cauſed him with ſo noble fame,
                  Out of Colchos with honour to repayre.
                  Albe his chere was vtterly contraire.
                  To his entent that euer he came agayne.
                  But for all that with face hole and playne,
                  He welcomed hym but al againſt his herte.
                  Full ſore aſtoned that he euer aſterte,
                  The auentures of Colchos peryllous,
                  And is retourned ſo victorious.
                  But couertly his treaſon for to hyde,
                  All delaye he gan to ſette aſyde.
                  And to Iaſon with chere full benyng,
                  His heritage fyrſte he gan reſygne.
                  Septre and crowne and kingdome at ye leſte,
                  For to perfourme the ſumme of his beheſte.
                  Like as he was aſſured by his bonde.
                  And Iaſon toke all into his honde.
                  And gan his vncle in full lowe manere,
                  Firſt to thanke with all his herte entere.
                  ¶And after that ful knightly gan him pray,
                  Goodly to here what that he wolde ſaye.
                  
                     Of a mattere that fret his herte ſore,
                  From daye to daye encreaſyng euer more.
                  Beſechyng hym to graunt hym audience,
                  Touchyng a wronge and a vyolence,
                  Done vnto hym whan he no harme ne ment.
                  In Troye lande to Colchos as he wente.
                  This is to ſaye the kynge of Troye towne,
                  Within the bondes of his region,
                  Whan I and myne in great aduerſitye,
                  With winde and wether fordryuen in the ſea.
                  Vs to refreſhe to lande dyd aryue.
                  Not in purpoſe with hym for to ſtryue.
                  But for to reſt vs after all our wo,
                  A lytell whyle and forth anone to go.
                  For we in ſothe no maner harme ne thought,
                  But he vnkyngly of very malyce ſought,
                  Agaynſt vs to fynde occaſyon.
                  Byddyng in haſte to voyde his region.
                  Notwithſtanding that we come in peace,
                  Lyke as my brother knoweth Hercules.
                  Vnto no wyght doyng no diſtreſſe,
                  Wherfore we praye to your hygh nobleſſe,
                  To our purpoſe for to condiſcende.
                  Of whiche platly this the fynall ende.
                  That we be ſette in full concluſyon,
                  Hooly to worke to his deſtruction.
                  Lyke our auowe whan we thenſe went.
                  If it ſo be ye goodly lyſte aſſent.
                  And all at ones, ſtrongly and not ſpare,
                  Maugre his myght to Troye for to fare.
                  So that we may fynde in you fauoure,
                  Vs to refreſhe with golde and with treaſure.
                  And only eke of our curteſye,
                  Vs ſtrength alſo with your cheualrye.
                  ¶And Pelleus without more abode,
                  Anone as he this matter vnderſtode,
                  Aſſented is of herte and wyll alſo,
                  In this voyage with theim for to go.
                  And all the worthy of that regyowne.
                  Kynges, Dukes, and Lordes of renowne.
                  Be accorded there is not one ſaieth naye,
                  To go with theim and helpe what they may.
                  And of this iourney chiefe ſolicitour,
                  Was Hercules the worthy conquerour.
                  ¶And he in haſte his retenewe to make,
                  Towarde Spartos hath the way take.
                  Whiche is an yle to Grekes pertinent.
                  Fully obeying to their commaundement.
                  In whiche Pollux and Caſtor eke alſo,
                  The worthy kingꝭ the mighty brothern two,
                  Were as I fynde that tyme gouernours.
                  And bare their crowne like noble werreours.
                  And brothern weren alſo vnto Eleyne.
                  And as poetes lyketh for to fayne,
                  That Iupiter for all his deyte,
                  Vpon Leda begat them all three,
                  That in beautie all other dyd excelle,
                  And as for Eleyne lyke as bokes telle.
                  Conceyued was in Tyndarys the yle,
                  Vnto the londe ioynyng of Cecyle.
                  Therfore of ſome I fynde that ſhe is,
                  After the yle called Tyndaris.
                  Of their byrth me lyſt no more to endite,
                  But forthe I thyncke of Hercules to wryte.
                  That hath beſought theſe noble kingꝭ twain,
                  With mighty hande to do their buſy payne,
                  Only to graunte with him for to wende,
                  To Troye warde ſhortly this the ende.
                  And to aſſente they ſaye not ones nay.
                  With all the power that they catche may.
                  Againe what tyme that him lyſt aſſygne,
                  And Hercules with chere full beninge,
                  Thanked them of that they him behyght,
                  And forth he wente in all the haſte he might,
                  Toward Meſſene the ſtronge mighty londe,
                  Within whiche the noble king he fonde,
                  The knightly man the worthy Thelamon,
                  Lorde and prynce of that region.
                  That in armes was one the manlyeſt,
                  That was a lyue and egall with the beſte.
                  And whan he knew that Hercules was com,
                  For ioye he hath hym in his armes nome.
                  And him receyued in all maner thynge,
                  Lyke as it ſat to a worthy kyng.
                  And whan he wiſte ſothly what he mente,
                  Without more anone he dyd aſſente,
                  With hym to gone Troyens for to greue.
                  And Hercules goodly toke his leue,
                  And hym enhaſteth to Theſalye agayne.
                  To Pelleus and telleth hym certayne,
                  Howe he hath ſpedde beſechynge hym alſo,
                  In all the haſte that it may be do,
                  Letters to ſende and all his lordes call,
                  And to aſſemble his worthy knyghtes all,
                  Thrughout his lād yt were both nigh & ferre.
                  Suche as he knewe yt were experte in werre.
                  And them alſo that were of counſayle ſage,
                  For wyt of them that be yronne in age,
                  
                     Is more than force without experience.
                  But whan manhode is mente with ſapience,
                  Who loketh well it may double auayle.
                  And they that longe haue vſed to trauayle.
                  Lyke as it is playnly to ſuppoſe,
                  May helpe moſte our iourney to diſpoſe.
                  For vnto age experience and wytte,
                  To youth force and hardineſſe ſytte.
                  And whan that both be of one entent,
                  Fully accorded to worken by aſſent,
                  With a quarell grounded vpon ryght,
                  Thrugh helpe of grace yt hath treble myght,
                  Thē nede not drede with ſpere nor wt ſhelde,
                  In knyghtly wyſe for to holde a feilde.
                  For of knighthode the fame and the glory,
                  Nor in armes conqueſt nor victory,
                  Be not aſſured vpon multitude.
                  But on manhode ſo grace lyſte conclude.
                  ¶Therfore let vs for to auenge our wrong,
                  Firſt with right make our ſelfe ſtronge,
                  And efte our force manly for to ſhewe,
                  Of knyghtes choſe taken out a fewe,
                  And ſo auoyde encombraunce of numbre.
                  And ſo we ſhall our foes beſte encombre.
                  And of all that that Hercules hath ſayde,
                  Kyng Pelleus was tho right well apayde.
                  For as him thought his counſaile was righte good,
                  And Hercules without more abode.
                  Is in great haſte with his meine gon,
                  To a prouince that called is Pilon,
                  In whiche there was a duke of noble fame,
                  And as I fynde Neſtor was his name.
                  Full renowmed and ſtronge of chiualrye,
                  And he was eke of kinred and allye,
                  To Hercules and of the ſame bloud.
                  And whan that he plainly vnderſtode,
                  The purpoſe hole and cauſe of his coming,
                  He graunted hym without more taryinge,
                  To go hym ſelfe with hym in this voiage.
                  With all the worthy of his baronage.
                  And to be ready agayne a certayne daye,
                  And Hercules as faſte as euer he maye,
                  Repaired is ayen to Theſalye.
                  Where gathered was holy the nauye,
                  Of the lordes full redy apparayled,
                  Well enarmed and rychely vitayled.
                  ¶And Pelleus hath taken fyrſte the ſea,
                  And euery lorde lyke to his degree,
                  Yſhypped is and ready for to gon,
                  With Hercules and alſo with Iaſon,
                  Their beheſtes manly to fulfyll,
                  Towardes Troye the Citie for to ſpylle.
                  And after that ſothly as I fynde,
                  They not abyde but vpon the wynde.
               
            
            
               ¶Nowe Iaſon, Hercules, and all the prynces of Grece, aſſembled to aduenge ye vncurteſy done to theim by Lamedon in this expedicion towardes Colchos. Cap. viii.
               
                  VVhan that the ſote ſtormes of Apryll,
                  Vnto the roote full lowe gan deſtille,
                  His luſtye licour with many holſome ſhoure,
                  To reyſe the vertue hyghe vpon the floure.
                  And Phebus was aſcendyng in his ſphere,
                  And on the breſt ſmote his beames cleare.
                  Of the Ram full colerike at all:
                  Halowynge in veer the Equinoctiall.
                  Whan Mayes kalendes entren in for ſothe,
                  And zephirus with ſwete breath and ſmothe,
                  The tendre braūches enſpireth & doth ſpryng
                  When euery buſhe is freſhe and bloſomynge.
                  And from the hylle the water is reuolued,
                  Of ſnowes whyte yt Phebus hath diſſolued.
                  For than the bawme vapoureth vp a lofte,
                  Into the eyre from the herbes ſofte.
                  The rotes vertue by colde of wynter hydde,
                  Hath full his myght and his force ykydde.
                  Out of the erth in herbe and euery tree,
                  Shade in the braunches his humiditee,
                  Arayſed only with the ſonnes heate,
                  And with the moyſter of the raynes ſwete.
                  Whan ſiluer welles ſheden out their ſtremes,
                  In ryuers gylte with the ſonne beames.
                  And for he had with newe greene againe,
                  Her largeſſe ſhad vpon euery playne.
                  And nightingales that all the wodde ronge,
                  Full amorouſly did welcome in their ſonge,
                  The luſty ſeaſon freſhe and deſyrous.
                  Namely to hertes the whiche ben amorous.
                  And whan the ſea calme is & blaundiſhinge,
                  Fro trouble of wynde or wawy boylynge.
                  And is from tempeſt ſure to eſcape.
                  The ſame ſeaſon Grekes forth them ſhape,
                  Towardes Troye, Erles, Dukes, & kynges.
                  Their ſhyppes ſtuffed wt all maner thynges,
                  That to werre myght them moſt auayle,
                  And ryght anone they began to ſayle,
                  
                     Whan all was redy without more abode,
                  Eche ſhyppe by other on the water rode.
                  And whan the winde at their luſt gan blowe,
                  A ioye it was to ſe them go by rowe.
                  Whiche made thē haſt & ſpeden on their waie,
                  That in ſhort tyme they comen ben to Troy.
                  And in the hauen called Symeonte,
                  Whan Phebus fer vnder their oriſente,
                  I weſtred was that men no myght hym ſe,
                  Grekes byn paſt all peryll of the ſea,
                  And caſt their ancrees thynking for the beſt,
                  In their ſhippes the ſame night to reſte.
               
               
                  ANd in ye morowe whan the larke ſonge,
                  The worthi Grekes ſo māly & ſo ſtrōge
                  Began to lande in all the haſte they myghte.
                  On Troye grounde and their tentes pighte.
                  Afore the towne with great dylygence,
                  For they ne founde no maner reſyſtence,
                  And all this whyle they ſette good awayte,
                  On euery ſyde leſte there were deceyte.
                  Tyll on the houre that the ſonne bryght,
                  Had in the morowe ſhade his rody lyghte,
                  Amyd the fielde vpon euery tente,
                  At whiche tyme all of one aſſente,
                  The Grekes were aſſembled euerychone.
                  And by the byddyng of the kynge anone,
                  Iaſon fyrſt and with him Hercules,
                  With many worthy beyng in that preſe,
                  Ben to the tente of Pelleus ycome.
                  And whā theſe lordes of grece both al & ſome
                  Aſſembled were and in that place met,
                  And eche of them in his degree was ſet.
                  Than Pelleus whan al was whiſt and ſtyll,
                  Right thus began ye ſentence of his wyll.
                  ¶O noble & worthy of hye eſtate and lowe,
                  whoſe knightly fame throughout ye worlde yknow,
                  Reported is as fer as ſhineth ſonne.
                  That Grekes yet neuer thynge begonne,
                  That they ne had the victorye at ende.
                  For with ye lawrer ſo fer as men may wende,
                  They crowned ben of what thei toke on hād.
                  Suche is thier happe both on ſe and lande.
                  ¶Wherforeye lordꝭ moſt worthi of renowne
                  Ye can remembre of kyng Lamedowne,
                  And of the wronge yt he vpon you wrought,
                  Whan harme to him none of you ne thought.
                  Which muſt be quit ſhortly this the ende.
                  For we be come to ſtroie them and to ſhende,
                  Wherfore anone in all the haſte we may,
                  Lette vs ſet on without more delaye.
                  But fyrſt I rede that we taken hede,
                  To thre thynges moſt helpyng in this nede.
                  ¶Firſt by aduyſe and good diſcretion,
                  For our defence and good ſaluacion,
                  So prudently our wardes for to make,
                  That none of oures be at miſchiefe take,
                  This ylke daye for lacke of prouidence.
                  The ſeconde is to do our diligence,
                  With all our might and hole entention,
                  So to labour that full diſtruction,
                  Come to our foes & to our ſelues glory.
                  ¶And this the thirde that we may victorye,
                  Inioye of them platly at the laſte.
                  And ouer this ye maye afore well caſte,
                  If we of knighthode through our hardineſſe,
                  May vanquiſhe them we ſhal ſo hye richeſſe,
                  Conquere of them to our poſſeſſyowne,
                  For it is knowen how that Troye towne,
                  Of all plentie as it ſhalbe founde,
                  Of golde & treſour doth paſſingly habounde.
                  That our ſhyppes ſothly as I wene,
                  For to receiue ne ſhall not mow ſuſteine,
                  The habundaunce that is yonder within.
                  If it ſo be that we the Citie wyn.
                  As god vs graunte if ſo it be his wyll.
                  ¶And alſo faſte as the kynge was ſtyll,
                  The noble knight the ſtronge Hercules,
                  In the preſence of that worthy preſe,
                  Said his counſaile was highely to cōmende.
                  For wyſe begynnynge is preyſed by the ende.
                  But to effecte our purpoſe for to brynge.
                  My counſayle is that in the mornynge,
                  Tofore or we diſcured byn by daye,
                  That we vs arme in all the haſte we maye.
                  And on this fielde that we do our payne,
                  For to deuyde our mayne into twayne.
                  And of the tone ſhall kyng Thelamowne,
                  Be gouernour of his hye renowne.
                  And of the other kyng Pelleus ſhall haue,
                  The gouernaunce wiſely theim to ſaue.
                  And I my ſelfe and Iaſon here my brother,
                  Shall ſecretely go with all the other,
                  Vnder the Citie or the ſonne ſhynes.
                  And in the buſhaile and the thicke vynes,
                  We ſhall vs hyde and kepe vs there full koye.
                  For Lamedon that is kyng of Troye,
                  
                     Anone as he may here or may eſpye,
                  Of the Grekes with his cheualrye,
                  Out of the Citie will yſſue out anone.
                  With vs to fyght & venge hym of his fone.
                  But whan he cometh to our ſhippes warde,
                  Neſtor the duke ſhall in the firſt warde,
                  Mete with hym and Caſtor ſhall alſo,
                  Whan he ſeeth time knightly haue ado,
                  To helpe Neſtor if that it be nede.
                  The thirde warde Pelleus ſhall lede,
                  And whyles ye do thus him occupye,
                  Iaſon and I ſhall vs as faſte hye,
                  Vnto the Citie vnwiſt of them echone.
                  I doubte not we ſhall it wyn anone.
                  Doth by counſayle and it will you auayle,
                  And here my trouth that ye may not fayle,
                  For to conquere the Citie yonde tofore.
                  This all and ſome ye gete of me no more.
                  ¶And they accord wt al their ſtrēgth & might
                  Enarme theim in ſtele yt ſhone full bryght,
                  Againe the ſonne at morowe whan he riſeth,
                  And wrought at all as Hercules deuiſeth.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the battaile betwixt the Grecians and the Troians, wherin the Troyans were diſcomfeted, their kinge ſlayne, and after their Citie taken, raſed, and deſtroyed. Ca. ix.
               
                  KYng Lamedon whan that he herde tell,
                  Of their cōming him liſt no longer dwel,
                  But out he went with many a noble knighte,
                  Flouryng in youth and deſyrous to fyght.
                  And all tho that mighten armes beare,
                  Or that coude ſhote or handell durſte a ſpere.
                  ¶And whan they were aſſēbled in the fielde,
                  Eueryche his armes depeint vpon his ſhilde,
                  Brouded or bete vpon his coote armure,
                  Than Lamedon with all his buſy cure,
                  Set them in ordre and his wardes maketh,
                  And in the fielde forth his waye he taketh,
                  Towarde the Grekes as any lyne right.
                  Fully purpoſynge there to abide and fight.
                  He was not ware of thē that were behynde,
                  He not aduerteth or caſteth in his mynde,
                  The great ſleyght nor the treachery,
                  That him was ſhape he coude it not eſpye.
                  But forthe he wente with his wardes ſet,
                  And the Grekes anone with him hath met.
                  With herte bolde aſtoned not at all.
                  Duke Neſtor firſt ſturdy as a wall,
                  In whoſe manhod was neuer foundē lacke,
                  Full knightly than vpon his horſe backe,
                  To herte his men and his knightes eke,
                  Gan preſe in with many worthy Greke,
                  With Lamedon ſturdely to mete.
                  At whiche tyme they felte it full vnſwete.
                  For in the frounter many manly man,
                  With ſharpe ſperes firſt together ran.
                  And eft with ſwordes ſharpe & kene ygroūde
                  Was thilke daye geuen many a wounde.
                  Where as they met thus on euery ſyde,
                  Thrugh plate & maile their woundes bledde wide,
                  And baſenettes they riue to ye crowne,
                  The noyſe of ſtrokes in the eyre gan ſowne.
                  And of the blode that tho was ſhad of new,
                  The grene ſoyle chaunged hath his hewe.
                  For it was dyed playnly in to red.
                  Vpon the whiche full many man lay dead.
                  And many worthy loſt their his lyfe,
                  And certainly than in this mortall ſtryfe,
                  The Grekes had diſcomfyted be echone,
                  Ne had Caſtor ſocoured them anone,
                  The folke of Troy ſo manly haue them bore,
                  That many a knight of grekes was ylore.
                  But after Caſtor entreth in bataile,
                  With his knightes ſo ſore he did aſſayle,
                  The worthy Troyans yt with ſpere & ſhielde,
                  Grekes agayne recouered haue the fielde.
                  That many one lieth ſlayne vpon the grene,
                  Thrugh girt the body wt ſharpe ſperes kene.
                  That they of Troye in this mortall ſtoure,
                  Were driue a backe tyll there came ſocour,
                  To them in haſt of worthy Lamedowne.
                  Whiche entred in like a wodde lyowne,
                  And made a waye vpon euery ſyde.
                  And where as he made his ſwerde to glyde,
                  There was but deth ſo manly he hym bare.
                  That well vnneth was there none that dare,
                  Abyde his ſtroke for rydynge vp and downe,
                  He made waye about him enuirowne.
                  In the renges he hath his foen out ſoughte,
                  That dai ī armes meruailes hath he wroute.
                  Than by his manhod and his worthines,
                  He the grekes hath brought in ſuche diſtreſſe,
                  That they his ſwerde flyen as the death,
                  Marciles ſo many of them he ſleeth.
                  Of which ſlaughter the grekes wer confuſe,
                  Tyll Pelleus came to their reſcuſe,
                  
                     Irous and wood as he were fall in rage.
                  He thought he wold ye great pompe aſwage,
                  Of them of Troye and ſo he dyd anone.
                  For he vnhorſeth of them many one.
                  And felly ſlough all that ſtode him aforne,
                  And many harueys he hath yt daye to torne.
                  And made ſheldes for to ryue a ſonder,
                  That to beholde it was a very wondre.
                  Til Lamedon his people ſawe go backe,
                  For Pelleus brought them ſo to wracke,
                  Wherof in herte he felte full great payne.
                  Beſeching them efte to repaire againe,
                  And kyth their might & like as men endure,
                  And ſo the fielde he made them to recure.
                  Tyll duke Neſtor knewe that Lamedowne,
                  Amid the fielde was kynge of Troye towne,
                  And right anone without more abode,
                  Agaynſt hym a full great pace he rode.
                  And whan the kyng did him firſt eſpye,
                  Of hye diſpite of rancour and enuye,
                  In knightly wyſe gan to tourne againe.
                  Nothynge agaſt but of hye diſdayne,
                  With yrons herte enbolned all with pride,
                  His horſe fyerſly ſmytyng in the ſyde,
                  That from ye pricke out ran the red bloud.
                  And forth to Neſtor like as he were wood,
                  He rode anone and he his ſpere brake.
                  But he full knightly kept his horſe backe,
                  And full delyuerly him againe to quite,
                  With ſpeare full ſharpe whette for to byte,
                  Thrugh ſheld & breſt gaue him ſuch a woūde
                  That fro his hors he felde hī down to groūd.
                  Of whiche fall the kyng nothyng a ferde,
                  Vpriſe ayene and knightly drewe his ſwerd,
                  So angre fret hym at his herte rote,
                  That he vnhorſed fyghte muſte on fote.
                  Wherof he was in partyfull confuſe,
                  Tyll one Cedar came to his reſcuſe.
                  That was made knight ye ſelfe ſame yere,
                  Yonge freſhe and luſty and of noble chere.
                  Syttyng that tyme on a noble ſtede,
                  And whan that he gan to take hede,
                  And ſaw the kyng on foote at miſchiefe fight,
                  Gan forth to pryke in all the haſt he might,
                  Toward Neſtor and with a ſpere him hytte,
                  From his ſadell that he made him flytte.
                  Downe to the ground afore kyng Lamedon,
                  But he anone full lyke a champion,
                  Recured vp and hymſelfe defendeth,
                  And many a ſtroke eche on other ſpendeth,
                  With ſharpe ſwerdrs kene for to byte.
                  Eueriche at other gan foyne and ſmyte.
                  Tyll Lamedon with a diſpyteous chere,
                  From of his face raſed his viſer.
                  And by that ſtrype he of at ones ſinet,
                  A ryche cercle from his baſenet.
                  Of large perle goynge enuyrowne.
                  With creſte and all he fyerſly beate a downe.
                  That whyles Neſtor thus afore hym ſtode,
                  His face was all depeint with his bloud.
                  That certainely the ſoth to conclude,
                  Had not Grekes with great multitude,
                  Reſcued him he had of Lamedowne,
                  Be ſlayne as faſte for he was bore a downe,
                  Vnto the earth amonge the horſe feete.
                  But Caſtor thought that he ne wolde lete,
                  To be his helpe as he behelde yfeare,
                  And yrouſly he toke a mighty ſpere,
                  And to Cedar that I ſpake of late,
                  He gan to ryde and pricke in deadly hate.
                  But or he came and toke him there doubtles,
                  A Troyan knight called Segnerides,
                  Coſyn to Cedar whan he hath this ſene,
                  On a courſer rode anone bytwene,
                  And with a ſpere he ſmote Caſtor ſo,
                  That with the ſtroke it broken is a two.
                  To whom Caſtor withouten more areſte,
                  Hath with a ſpere amyddes of the breſt,
                  Segnerides gyue a mortall wounde.
                  That lykely was neuer for to ſounde.
                  Wherfore Cedar caught hath ſuche enuye,
                  That he anone of fell melancolye,
                  And of diſpyte boylynge in his herte,
                  Segnerides when he beholde ſo ſmerte,
                  Maugre who grutcheth amiddes of ye fielde,
                  Of very myght from Caſtor toke his ſhelde.
                  And through vyſer of rancour and of rage,
                  He wounded hym amyddes of his vyſage.
                  And eke his horſe fro hym alſo he caughte,
                  And to his ſquier manfully it raught.
                  That certainely he ſtode in ſuche diſioynt,
                  This worthy Caſtor that he was in poynt,
                  To haue be taken of them of Troye tho.
                  For he on foote with him muſt haue go,
                  Ne had Pollux with many manly knyght,
                  Mo then .vii. hundred in ſtele armed bryght,
                  The rather come Caſtor to reſcue.
                  Whiche after them ſo ſore gan to ſewe,
                  
                     That maugre them Caſtor when he fond,
                  Of force he reſte him from his enemies hōd,
                  And to his horſe reſtored hym agayne.
                  And after that this Pollux in certayne,
                  Of very anger and of feruent Ire,
                  Agayne Troians with rancoure ſet a fyre,
                  That al at ones he vpon theim ſet,
                  And in his mode by fortune as he met,
                  A Troian knight called Eliatus,
                  In armes yonge freſhe and deſyrous,
                  Wonder ſemely and yet of tendre age,
                  The kinges ſonne alſo of great Cartage,
                  And neuewe eke vnto king Lamedon.
                  Whom Pollux hath like a fierſe Lyon,
                  Without compaſſion pytye or mercye,
                  Within the renges ſlayne ful cruelly.
                  That Lamedon whan he gan take hede,
                  Of inwarde dole felt his herte blede,
                  Whan he hym ſawe in point vpon the deathe,
                  Full pyteouſly yelden vp the breathe.
                  Vpon the playne as he lay him beforne.
                  For whiche anone he made ſowne a horne,
                  At which time there came in riche araye,
                  Seuen .M. knigh tin all the haſte they may,
                  Vpon his deathe auenged for to be.
                  Which merciles of theyr great crueltye,
                  The Grekes haue here and there confoūded,
                  Here lyeth one dead & here another woūded.
                  So that they might with them hold no tacke.
                  So mortally they made theim go abacke,
                  That all gan tourne to theyr confuſion.
                  And fynally that daye wyth Lamedon,
                  The triumphe had and the fielde ygone,
                  Saue that alas out of the towne anone,
                  Vnto the king there came a meſſengere,
                  That hath him tolde wt a ful piteous cheare,
                  How the Grekes haue his Citye take.
                  ¶Then for to ſe the wo he tho did make,
                  It would haue made a piteus herte as bliue,
                  Of very dole a ſundre for to riue.
                  So ſore he gan within him ſelfe to mourne.
                  He wiſt not to what partye he may tourne.
                  But in a weuer he abiding longe.
                  Afore him ſawe the mighty Grekes ſtronge,
                  And in the Citie another hooſt behinde,
                  Almoſte for wo he went out of his minde.
                  And ſodeynly backward as he behelde,
                  Toward the Citye he ſawe come in the felde,
                  Firſt Hercules and with him Iaſon.
                  That by theyr ſleyght wonnen had ye towne.
                  And in all haſt this cruell Hercules,
                  The mighty giaunt of force pereles,
                  Lyke a Lyon wood and diſpiteous,
                  Or a Tygre ramage and furyous,
                  Gan of newe theim of Troye aſſayle.
                  And with his ſworde perce plate & mayle.
                  Which of laboure were full mate and feynt,
                  And of longe fight with werineſſe atteynt.
                  And he came in luſty freſhe and grene,
                  That they his force might him not ſuſtene,
                  For as he rode among theim here & yonder,
                  In cruell wiſe he ſeuered theim a ſonder.
                  And put theim hooly in this high miſchaunce,
                  Out of rule and from all gouernaunce.
                  So that the kinge oppreſſed al with dole,
                  Out of his wardes deſtytute and ſole,
                  At miſchiefe left and all infortunate,
                  And of comforte fully diſconſolate.
                  This Hercules with full diſpiteous loke,
                  With ſharpe ſpores his ſtede felly toke,
                  And cruelly rode forthe to Lamedowne,
                  And to the earth fierſly bare him downe.
                  And vpon him in all the haſt he might,
                  Downe of his horſe ſodeinly alighte,
                  And mightely rent of his Baſenet.
                  And with a ſwerd ſharpe grounde and whet,
                  Smote of his head there was no other grace
                  And caſt it forth in the ſelfe place.
                  Amonge the horſe by cruel violence.
                  Without pytye or any reuerence.
                  And in arage raught his horſe agayne,
                  And like a Lion renning on the playne.
                  Bare down & ſlough what ſo cā in his weye.
                  And many Troyan at yt time made deye.
                  That like to ſhepe were forſkatered wide,
                  All deſtitute of gouernour or guide.
                  Ne can no reade ſhortly to conclude,
                  For the Grekes with double multitude,
                  Gan theim enchaſe to the death ful blyue.
                  That wel vnneth there left was one alyue.
                  The felde they haue & ben that day victours.
                  And with triumphe like as conquerours,
                  To the citye they toke their waye after,
                  And rende adowne both wall ſparre & rafter.
                  And all the treaſour and riches of the towne
                  They toke anone to theyr poſſeſſyowne.
                  Who euer grutche or be lefe or lothe,
                  What they found there plainly wt them gothe.
                  
                     And in the temples did great violēce.
                  There to the goddes doyng no reuerence.
                  For all they ſpoyle without dread or feare,
                  And vnto ſhippe euery thing they beare.
                  And mercyles on croked olde and lame.
                  Theyr ſwerdes they made cruelly to tame.
                  And childrē ſoukyng at theyr mother breſte.
                  They kill and ſley withouten more areſt.
                  And yong maydens wepyng in diſtreſſe,
                  Full gentyl borne and of great ſemelyneſſe,
                  With theym they led & may not them excuſe,
                  Theyr freſhe beaute falſly to miſuſe.
                  They waſte bren and conſumen all,
                  And roūde aboute they brake adowne ye wall.
                  And Exyone the kinges doughter dere,
                  That was to him ſo paſſingly entere,
                  By his life I meane to Lamedon,
                  Meke and bening of her condicion.
                  This Hercules hath anone her take,
                  That in her dreadful pyteouſly gan quake.
                  And her delyuered vnto Thelamowne,
                  For that he entred firſt into towne.
                  And he his gift receyued hath at gree,
                  Bycauſe ſhe was ſurmounting of beautee.
                  And treated her after as he would,
                  Not like as he a kinges doughter ſhuld.
                  For ſyth he hath her wonne by victorye,
                  For his worſhip and his owne glorye,
                  Hauing regarde to her highe degree,
                  He ſhuld rather of knightly honeſtee,
                  And of knighthode wedded her therfore,
                  Sith that ſhe was of blode ſo gentill bore.
                  Than of falſe luſt agayne all goodlihead,
                  Vſed her beautye and her womanhaede,
                  Diſhoneſtly and in ſuch ſinfull wiſe.
                  Of royall blode not lyke the high empryſe.
                  Nor the doctrine of natures right.
                  Nor like to nurture of a gentil knight.
                  Conſydered fyrſt her birth and her kinrede,
                  Her grene youth and eke her maydenheade,
                  So good ſo fayre ſo womanly therto,
                  A kinges doughter of byrth ſhe was alſo,
                  To haue her wed it coulde haue be no ſhame.
                  Now Thelamō in ſothe thou were to blame,
                  For through the errour of thy gouernaunce,
                  There kindled was of ful highe vengeaunce,
                  So hote a ſparke after of enuye,
                  That through ye world ye fire gan multeplye.
                  Which was not like to quenche of his hete,
                  For hatred olde to bren can not lete.
                  With newe flawme who ſo taketh hede,
                  If it not ſmoke it is the more to dread.
                  As in this ſtorye hereafter ſhall be knowe.
                  & whā this towne was brēt & brought ſo low,
                  Bothe toure and wall wt ye ſoyle made playn,
                  And nothing ſtode of all that might be ſein.
                  So vtterly the Grekes theym oppreſſe,
                  Makyng all waſte like a wyldernes.
                  ¶For good treaſour & ryches infynyte,
                  With many iewell full pleaſing of delyte,
                  To theyr ſhippes out of the towne they lede,
                  And in ſhorte tyme homeward do they ſpede.
                  With treaſour ſtuffed & habūdaūce of good.
                  And when they ſawe that the wether ſtode,
                  The wynd alſo at theyr luſt they had.
                  They gā to ſaile and with thē home they lad,
                  Yong Exione and many a mayde mo.
                  That out of Troye into Grece go.
                  And ſayling forth within a litell ſpace,
                  They be eſcaped fro the ſea by grace.
                  And vnto land aryued merely.
                  At whoſe commyng the Grekes vtterly,
                  So ioyfull be of theyr good ſpede,
                  And ſpecially in Guido as I reade,
                  Theyr ſhyppes were wt golde & treaſour lade.
                  Wherof in herte they wexe wonder glade.
                  And for they had outward ſo well thē borne,
                  To ouerthrowe and haue ſo fewe ylorne,
                  Of theyr meyne they thanke theyr goddes al.
                  And of the grace that to theym is fall.
                  For wt ye treaſour yt haue they home brought,
                  Full many pore was made vp of nought,
                  Throughout yt lād there was ſuch habūdaūce
                  So much good and ſo great ſuffiſaunce.
                  That no wight had among theim nede,
                  And many day this bleſſedfull lyfe they lede.
                  From yeare to yeare by reuoluciowne,
                  And for theyr manhod & theyr high renowne,
                  Theyr honour ran round the world about.
                  That theim toffende many lāde hath doubte.
                  For theyr knighthod & for they were ſo wyſe.
                  Vntill the ſtorye laſt agayne deuiſe.
                  In this matter ferther to procede,
                  With the fauour of your goodlyhead,
                  I wil me reſt for a lytel ſpace.
                  And thā vpborne wt ſupporte of your grace,
                  For taccompliſhe as I you vndertoke,
                  And here an ende of the firſt boke.
                  
                     I make now with quakyng hand for dreade,
                  Onely for feare of you that ſhall it reade,
                  Leſt ye alas of haſty mocion,
                  Ne will not haue no compaſſyon,
                  Pytye nor routhe vpon my rudeneſſe.
                  Lowly beſechyng to your gentilceſſe,
                  Of mercye onely both nigh and ferre,
                  Where ye finde that I fayle or erre,
                  For to correcte or ye further flyt.
                  For to your grace I hooly all commit.
               
            
         
         
            
               ¶The Tranſlatour complaineth the miſfortune of the Troians in the loſſe of theyr City, liuely deſcribyng the tykle eſtate of Fortunes gouernaunce, beginning in the ſame chapyter his ſecound boke perſewing the matter of the ſayd hiſtorye. Ca. x.
               
                  THe enuious ordre of fortunat meninge,
                  In worldly thynge falſe and flikerynge,
                  Nil ſuffer vs as in this preſent life,
                  To lyue in reſte without werre or ſtryfe.
                  For ſhe is blinde fikel and vnſtable,
                  And of her courſe falſe and ful mutable.
                  Who ſitteth higheſt ſhe cā him downe encline,
                  Whē he leaſt weneth and bring hym to ruine.
                  With the awaytes that gladly ben ſodayne.
                  And with her face that parted is in twayne.
                  Shewe moſt hole whā ſhe is leſt to tryſt,
                  That well were him that her deceytes wiſt.
                  And her engines and her trappes knewe.
                  That in her courte euery daye be newe.
                  Of which in ſothe I well affirme dare,
                  No mortall man may in this life beware.
                  For ſhe vneuen peyſing in balaunce,
                  With counterfete and fayned countenaunce,
                  With lo
                        •
                     ing playn & cheare of flatterye,
                  Vnwarely can do blere a mannes eye,
                  And him begile this the very ſothe,
                  With a face blandiſhing and ſmothe.
                  When ſhe hath him frō high degre made low,
                  Full falſly ſmile and make to him the mowe.
                  And yet ſomewhyle moſt varyaunt of hewe,
                  She vnto ſome pretendeth to be trewe.
                  For ſhe whylom to ſome is fauorable,
                  And to ſome falſe and like deceiuable.
                  She can reiſe one and bring another downe,
                  This falſe lady of tranſmutacyowne,
                  To ſome ſhe giueth renowne & victorye,
                  And doth theym floure in honoure & glorie.
                  And ſome ſhe can appayre with falſe fame,
                  And giltles perde put a man in blame.
                  To ſome ſhe is goodly and beninge,
                  And of diſdeyne ſhe can alſo malygne,
                  Agayne an other and make hym lowte lowe,
                  And frō their ſee ſhe can great kinges throwe
                  And theim auayle for all their high toures,
                  And ſhe can plonge worthy Emperours.
                  From the hyll of hye proſperetye.
                  Into the vaile like of aduerſytye.
                  The ryche empriſhe of rancoure & dyſdayne,
                  And eft the pore ſhe can enhaūce agayne,
                  This falſe goddeſſe with her eyen blinde,
                  Set one afore another goeth behinde,
                  And doth one renne & maketh another halte,
                  And one ſhe can high in riches exalte,
                  And an other plonge in pouertye,
                  In whom no man may haue ſecurytye.
                  To ſome ſuger and hony ſhe diſtilleth,
                  And to other ſome ſhe the bottel fylleth,
                  With bytter gall mirre and aloes.
                  And thus this lady wilfull and rechles,
                  As ſhe that is froward and peruers,
                  Hath in her ſeller drinkes ful diuers.
                  For ſhe to ſome of fraude and of fallas,
                  Miniſtreth piment bawme and ypocras.
                  And ſodeynly when the ſoote is paſt,
                  She of cuſtome can giue him a caſt,
                  For to conclude falſly in the fine,
                  Of bytter eyſell and of egre wine.
                  And corroſynes that fret and perce depe.
                  And Narcotikes that cauſe men to ſlepe.
                  Thus ſhe to theim that her can aproche,
                  After ſwete the bitter can a broche.
                  Thus in her reygne this quene of varyaunce,
                  Whoſe ioye alwayes fineth with miſchaunce.
                  Who truſteth her ſhe will him ouercaſt,
                  And him deceyue playnly at the laſt.
                  Of what eſtate ſoeuer that he be,
                  This double lady of mutabilitye.
                  Se here example of king Lamedon,
                  Whom ſhe hath brought to confuſion.
                  For litel cauſe and for a thing of nought,
                  Her crueltye he hath to deare abought.
                  Wherfore I reade euery man take hede,
                  To gin a quarell where as is no nede.
                  For litell fyre vnder aſhes reke,
                  So may be kindled that it will out breake,
                  
                     Into ſuch flawme men may it not apeaſe.
                  Who beſt can ſuffer moſte ſhall haue his eaſe,
                  Therfore ye kynges and lordes euerychone,
                  Make you a myrroure of this Lamedone,
                  And be well ware to do no violence,
                  Vnto ſtraungers when they do none offence.
                  Whan they come fer into this region,
                  Ne ſuffer theim by none oppreſſion,
                  Within your bondes for to haue no wrong.
                  For in your owne though that ye be ſtrong,
                  And mightye eke among your lieges all,
                  Another daye perauntre may befall,
                  That when that ye ful lytell thynke on it,
                  Of ſodeyne caſe thus may ye be aquyt.
                  And ythanked in another place,
                  Of auenture where ye may fayle of grace.
                  Therfore when ye may any ſuch eſpye,
                  Do theym good cheyre of your curteſye.
                  And prudently conſyder in your witt,
                  That to a lorde of gentilneſſe it ſyt,
                  To euery ſtraunger goodly him to haue.
                  There is nothing may more his honour ſaue.
                  Than to refreſhe them frely and diſporte,
                  Than may they after good of him reporte.
                  By whoſe cōtrary hath much wo be wrought
                  Afore this time if ſo it be well ſought.
                  The firſt Troye thus vtterly deſtroyed,
                  And the people in ſorowe and wo acloyed.
                  Lad into exyle a farre from theyr Cytye,
                  Lyuing in thraldome and captiuitye.
                  And Exyone as ye haue herde me tell,
                  Led into Grece with Thelamon to dwell.
                  For whō there was as Guido cā you teache,
                  After take ſo great vengeaunce & wreche.
                  On eyther parte that in very trouthe,
                  For to heare it is to great a routhe.
                  As in this boke ye may hereafter rede,
                  Ceryouſly if that ye liſt take hede,
                  For gladly aye by reuoluſyon,
                  Of fatall thing by diſpoſicion,
                  So enuyous is and alway meynt with wo,
                  That in this world where ſo that we go,
                  We truely may aduert as in our thought,
                  That for the value of a thyng of nought.
                  Mortall cauſes of werres firſt begonne.
                  Strife and debate here vnderneth the ſonne.
                  Were meued firſt of ſmall occaſyon,
                  That cauſed after great confuſyon,
                  That no man can the harmes halfe endite,
                  And for a cauſe deare inough a mite.
                  Eche one is redy to deſtroye other.
                  A man for litel ſtryue will with his brother.
                  Blode is vnkynde which greatly is to drede,
                  Alas why ne will they take better hede,
                  For olde Troye and after that the newe,
                  Through ſmal encheſō who the trouth knew,
                  Were fynally brought to deſtruction.
                  As olde bokes make mencion.
                  And many worthy and many noble knight,
                  Slayne in the felde by dureſſe of that fight.
                  Kynges and prynces at the ſiege ben deade,
                  Whā Attropos lyſt breake theyr liues threde.
                  That for to tel the miſchiefe and the wo,
                  I want connyng and I fele alſo,
                  My pen quake and tremble in my hand.
                  Lyſt that my lorde dradde on ſea & lande,
                  Whoſe worthines thrugh ye world doth ſprede
                  My rude makyng ſhal beholde and reade,
                  Whych of colour full naked is and bare.
                  That but if he of his mercye ſpare,
                  For to diſdayne and liſt to haue pytye,
                  For feare I tremble that he ſhuld it ſe.
                  ¶But onely mercye yt doth his hert embraſe,
                  Byd me preſume fully in his grace,
                  Seyng in hym moſt vertuous and good,
                  Mercye annexed vnto royall blode,
                  As to a prince longeth nigh and ferre,
                  Aye to fore ryght pytye to preferre.
                  For through the ſupport of his high nobleſſe,
                  As now I will ayene my ſtyle dreſſe,
                  To wryte forth the ſtorye by and by.
                  Of newe Troye in ordre ſeryouſly.
                  As mine auctour in latyn Guydo wryt.
                  Praying ye reader wher as my wordes miſſit,
                  Cauſyng the metre to be halte or lame,
                  For to correct to ſaue me from blame.
                  Let hym not wayte to haue curyoſytye,
                  Sith that in rime Englyſhe hath ſkerſytye,
                  I am ſo dull certayne that I ne can,
                  Guido enſewe that clerke and curyous man.
                  Whych in latyn hath by rethoryke,
                  Set ſo his wordes that I cā not be lyke.
                  To ſewe his ſtyle in my tranſlation.
                  Worde by worde like the conſtruction.
                  After the maner of gramariens.
                  Nor like the ſtile of rethoriciens.
                  I toke but on me this ſtorye to tranſlate,
                  For me to further Clio came to late.
                  
                     That in ſuch craft hath great experience,
                  I leue the wordes and folowe the ſētence.
                  And trouthe of metre I ſet alſo aſyde,
                  For of that arte I had as tho no guide.
                  Me to reduce whan I went a wrong,
                  Taking ſmall hede eyther of ſhort or long.
                  But to the trouth and lette curioſite,
                  Both of making and of metre be,
                  Not purpoſyng to much for to varye,
                  Nor for to be dyuers nor contrarye,
                  Vnto Guydo as by diſcordaunce.
                  But me conforme fully in ſubſtaunce.
                  Onely in meanyng to conclude all one.
                  Albe that I ne can the waye gone,
                  To ſewe the floures of his eloquence.
                  Nor of peyntyng I haue none excellence.
                  With ſundry hewes noble freſhe and gay,
                  So ryche coloures byggen I ne may.
                  I muſt procede with ſable and with blacke,
                  And in ennuyng where ye fynde a lacke,
                  I axe mercy or that I fro you twyn,
                  And with your fauour I will nowe begyn.
                  And in all haſte my ſtile forth right directe,
                  And where I erre I pray you to correct.
               
               
                  THe ſame tyme whē that Troye towne,
                  Deſtroyed was & yt king Lomedowne,
                  Was alſo ſlayne through the crueltye,
                  Of Hercules and that tofore his cytye.
                  He had a ſonne the ſtorye telleth vs,
                  Which was his heyre ycalled Priamus.
                  Wonder manly diſcrete eke and prudent,
                  Which at that time from Troye was abſente,
                  When ſo his father loſt hath ſo his lyfe.
                  For at that tyme with Hecuba his wyfe,
                  And with his ſonnes aboute a caſtell laye.
                  And all his knightes to get it if they may.
                  That hath on theym mightely werreyed,
                  For they his father falſly diſobeied.
                  And vnto hym be rebell wonder longe.
                  Albe Priam with ſautes huge and ſtronge,
                  Theim had aſſayled oft and many ſyth.
                  His ſtrength on them like a knight to kyth,
                  To get in armes worſhip and honour,
                  And theim to daunt like a conquerour,
                  He caſt him fully or that he departe,
                  For day by day his life he gan Ieoparte,
                  Tofore their walles for to preue his mighte,
                  With many baron & many worthy knight.
                  For he was flowing yet luſty bloude,
                  And was of age flouryng in knighthode.
                  And at aſſautes and ſuch maner ſtrife,
                  On with the firſt auenture his life.
                  To herte his men him lyſt not be behind.
                  For dread of death ſothly as I find.
                  Afore the caſtell hygh & thyck ywalled,
                  And by his wife that Hecuba was called.
                  This Pryam had ful worthy of degre,
                  Fiue ſonnes and yonge doughters thre.
                  ¶Of whych the eldeſt Hector called was,
                  Which alſo fer as Phebus in compaſe,
                  A naturall daye his cercle goeth about,
                  So fer of hym withouten any doubte,
                  Reported was the renowne and the name,
                  The worthyneſſe and the noble fame.
                  For like as bokes of him ſpecifye,
                  He was the roote and ſtocke of chiualrye.
                  And of knighthod very ſoueraygne floure,
                  The ſours and well of worſhip and honoure.
                  And of manhode I dare it well expreſſe,
                  Patron & myrrour and of high proweſſe,
                  Ginning and grounde & with all this yfeare,
                  Wonder benynge and lowely of his cheare.
                  Diſcrete alſo prudent and vertuous,
                  Of whom the dedes and actes merueilous,
                  Remembred ben of ſo long a gone.
                  For he alone excelled euerychone.
                  In olde Auctours reade and ye may finde,
                  Of his knighthod how yet they makē mynde.
                  ¶The next brother called was Parys,
                  To whom nature gaue to her deuys,
                  Of ſhape and fourme beautye & ſemelyneſſe,
                  That to recorde his excellent fayrneſſe,
                  He in his time withouten any dread,
                  Ferre paſſed all that I can of reade,
                  And he was eke a full manly knight.
                  But moſt he vſed when ſo he ſhuld fight,
                  In his hand to beare a mighty bowe.
                  For ſuch an archer no man coud knowe.
                  None might be foūd to ſeke both fer & nere,
                  That of ſhoting might hardely be his pere.
                  As he was founde whan he had a do,
                  And Alexſandre called he was alſo.
                  ¶The third ſonne hight Deiphobus,
                  A worthy knight and a chiualrous.
                  And had in armes a ful great renowne,
                  And was a man of high diſcreſciowne.
                  And wife of coūſail min auctour ſayeth thus.
                  
                     ¶The fourth brother called was Helenus.
                  Sad and diſcrete and of highe prudence,
                  And was alſo a man of great ſcyence,
                  And renommed therwith in ſpecyall.
                  In al the artes called lyberal,
                  For he in theym was full experte a ryght.
                  ¶The fyfth ſonne was a worthy knyght.
                  Freſhe and luſty and yongeſt of theim all,
                  And as ſayeth Guido Troylus men him call.
                  A manly man valyaunt in battayle,
                  And fearſely hote his fomen to aſſayle.
                  One of the beſt in his time yfounde,
                  For called he was Hector the ſecound.
                  For his manhode throughout Troye booke,
                  Within the werre ful oft vpon him toke.
                  Of his knighthode many high empryſe,
                  As the ſtorye lyke after ſhall deuyſe.
                  ¶And in his boke like as wryte Vergile,
                  The poete olde wt ſoueraintye of ſtyle.
                  How that the king Pryam had alſo,
                  By Hecuba other ſonnes two.
                  And by recorde of this Vergelius,
                  The one was named Pollidorus.
                  Whom Priamus in his grene youthe,
                  When that ye cominge was of Grekes kouth,
                  To Troyewarde in all the haſte anone,
                  With golde treaſour and many ryche ſtone,
                  Hath ſent him forthe beſyde vnto a kinge,
                  Of ful great truſt to haue him in kepyng.
                  Till tyme he ſawe what concluſyowne,
                  There ſhuld befall after of the towne.
                  And eke what fine the werres ſhoulden take,
                  That vpon theym the Grekes tho did make.
                  But thilke kyng of falſe couetyſe,
                  Of his treaſour that ye haue herde deuyſe,
                  Whan that he ſawe fortunes varyaunce,
                  Toward Pryam and his vnhappy chaunce,
                  Lyke a tyraunt and murderer alſo,
                  The childes throte made do cutte a two.
                  And after that he full of crueltye,
                  Made his men to burye him priuelye,
                  That no man might his treaſon vnderſtond.
                  Beſyde a ſea depe vnder the ſtrond.
                  ¶The other ſonne alſo that I of reade,
                  In Vergile called was fayre Ganimede.
                  Whom Iupiter hath in a foreſt hente,
                  Vpon a daye as he on huntinge wente.
                  And bare him vp aboue the ſterres clere,
                  And in the heauens made him butlere.
                  Eternally with hym to wonnen there,
                  In ſtede of Hebes his owne daughter dere.
                  ¶The fyrſt doughter of kyng Pryamus,
                  Was hoote Creuſa as ſayeth Vergilius,
                  In his Eneydos ſothely as it was.
                  And ſhe was wedded vnto Eneas,
                  And eke this ſtorye ſayeth that this Enee,
                  Was wonderfull in his natyuytye.
                  Of whom the father as I fynde doubtles,
                  Was in his tyme called Anchyſes.
                  That hym begat on Venus the goddeſſe.
                  For after her he was of ſuch fayrneſſe,
                  That to no wyght could neuer yet be ſe,
                  A man that was more paſſyng of beautye.
                  Of whom this ſtorye touchyng his workyng,
                  Shall you declare many wonder thyng.
                  For it is he to whom ſo great a loos,
                  Vergyle hath giue in his Eneydos.
                  For he that booke in worſhyp of Enee,
                  Compyled hath like as ye may ſe.
                  Of his knyghthood and many ſtrong batayl,
                  By hym acheued before he wan Itayle.
                  Full long time after that the royall towne,
                  Of Troy was brought to his confuſiowne.
                  And of his conqueſt yf ye lyſt take hede,
                  In this poete ye may by ordre reade.
                  And how in armes he wrought in al his age,
                  And of his comyng alſo to Cartage,
                  Fro Troywarde within a litell while,
                  Al this ye may behold in great Vergile.
                  ¶Another doughter alſo it is founde,
                  Kyng Pryam had of birth the ſecound,
                  Called Caſſandra of ful great ſadneſſe.
                  And was in maner a diuinereſſe.
                  And in eche arte had experience,
                  Of thynges future fully the preſcience,
                  To tell afore what that ſhall betide.
                  Of whom the fame ſprang in coſtes wide,
                  Which kept her chaſte aye in virginitye,
                  And eke in prayers and in honeſtye.
                  She led her life and in deuocion,
                  After the rites and the religyon,
                  Of Pagyniſme vſed in tho dayes.
                  The obſeruaunces keping of their layes.
                  ¶The third doughter hight Pollicene,
                  Yongeſt of all and ſtil a mayde cleane,
                  She kept her ſelfe & honeſt in her lawe.
                  Vnto the time that Pirrus hath her ſlawe.
                  Of ſhape of fortune was neuer by nature,
                  
                     Wrought to beholde a fayrer creature.
                  Eke as I fynde this noble kynge alſo,
                  Hadde thirty ſonnes the boke ſaith & no mo.
                  Hardy in armes and noble founde at all,
                  That called were his ſonnes naturall.
                  And they were all exceptinge neuer one,
                  Worthy knyghtes and manly men echone.
                  And their names who ſo lyſte to knowe,
                  He ſhall them fynde wryte vpon arowe,
                  After in ſtory eueryche after other,
                  Begynnyng fyrſt at the eldeſt brother.
                  ¶And whiles Pryam at the ſyege laye,
                  Tofore the caſtell to gette it if he may,
                  And therabout hath many way ſought,
                  The wofull tydynges be vnto him broughte,
                  How the grekes haue taken Troye towne.
                  And ſlayne his father worthy Lamedowne.
                  And how the Citie of olde foundaciowne,
                  Full piteouſly was tourned vp ſo downe.
                  The worthy lordes and gentle men echone,
                  Taken and ſlayne and ylefte not one,
                  Of them a lyue through Grekes crueltie.
                  After the ruyne alas of their Citie.
                  And Exion his owne ſyſter dere,
                  Lad in exyle with her eyen cleare.
                  ¶Wherfore the kyng in herte aſtoned ſo,
                  For very ſorowe he niſt what to do.
                  His ſodayne wo gan hym ſo conſtrayne.
                  He ſobbeth wepeth that of mortall payne,
                  He thought his herte wolde a ſondre breſte.
                  Of hye diſtreſſe for he myghte haue no reſte.
                  And into teares he gan him ſelfe deſtylle,
                  That for to deye was fynally his wyll.
                  ¶And fortune that can ſo falſly varye,
                  With drery herte gan bytterly to warye.
                  That ſhe to hym was ſo deceyuable.
                  So inly cruell and vnmercyable.
                  So diſpyteous and ſo ſterne of face,
                  So vengeable and ſo deuoyde of grace.
                  For of enuy with a raged thought,
                  She hath hir worſt of malis on hī wrought.
                  And felly ſhewed what ſhe myght do.
                  That in this worlde was neuer wight ſo wo.
                  As I ſuppoſe of no maner of age.
                  To reaken all her harmes and damage.
                  For whiche anone in all that euer he maye.
                  In haſt he chaungeth all his ryche araye,
                  Tryſte and heuy with deadly face pale,
                  So aſtoned with this mortall tale,
                  That his deſyre was to haue be dead,
                  With countenance enclined and with head.
                  This lyfe he lad and clad him all in blacke,
                  And ſodaynly he the ſyege brake,
                  And wolde as tho no lenger there abyde,
                  But with his folke anone he gan to ryde,
                  That pyteouſly gan likwiſe wt him morne,
                  And toward Troy attones they efte returne.
                  ¶And whan that he hath the Cyty founde,
                  Plaine with the ſoyle & euen wt the grounde,
                  The hye walles whylom thicke and longe,
                  Ybeate downe that made were ſo ſtronge,
                  And his toures and paleys pryncypall,
                  That was in buildyng ſo excellent royall,
                  So famous ryche and of great nobleſſe,
                  He founde tourned into wylderneſſe.
                  His people ſlayne, his ſyſter ladde awaye,
                  For very wo he ne wyſte what to ſaye.
                  For the conſtraynt of his aduerſytie,
                  And for his harmes that wyll not cured be.
                  For in that time he was right fully ſure,
                  Vpon no ſyde there foūde might be recure.
                  Wherfore he can nought do but ſobbe & wepe
                  And fro his breſt wt ſyghes ſought full dede,
                  Broken out with pale and dead viſage,
                  And thus alas in this furious rage,
                  Full pyteouſly all his hooſte and he,
                  Without reſpite continued dayes three.
                  Tyll at the laſte the darke ſkyes blacke,
                  Gan of their wo in partye for to ſlacke.
                  And the tempeſt ſome deale gan withdrawe,
                  And of their wepynge blādyſhe gan ye wawe.
                  And whan the floode of wo is ouer paſte,
                  The ebbe of ioye folowe muſt in haſte.
                  To ſorowe euer it wolde their hertes ſhende.
                  And at a terme euery wo muſt ende.
                  for though for frēdes mē may wepe & wayle,
                  After their deth their teares may not avayle.
                  Wherfore the kyng after all his care,
                  Hath ſought a waye the Citie to repaire.
                  And caſte hym fully if it wolde ſo be,
                  To make a vertue of neceſſytie.
                  And manfully after all his tene,
                  Whan that the eyre gan to wexen clene,
                  Of the myſtes of his cloudy ſorowe,
                  And that ſome deale adawe gan the morowe
                  Of heuyneſſe after the derke nyght,
                  Chaced awaye with a ſonne bryght,
                  Of newe ioye for aye the fyne of wo,
                  
                     Muſte be gladneſſe whan ſorowe is ygo.
                  And ſo Pryam after a certayne ſpace,
                  Whan his ſorowe gan lyte and lyte to paſſe,
                  And of wyſedome in all his pytious ſmerte,
                  Gan prudently to plucken vp his herte,
                  And of his eyen the wawes gan to clere,
                  Anone he wroughte as ye ſhall after here.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Pryam ſonne to Lamedon and ſuccedynge his father, buylded the Cytye agayne. Cap. xi.
               
                  THe ſorowe aſwaged & the ſyghes olde,
                  By longe proceſſe lyke as I you tolde,
                  This worthy kyng called Pryamus,
                  In his herte is nowe ſo deſyrous,
                  Vpon the playne that was ſo waſte & wilde,
                  So ſtronge a towne of newe for to buylde,
                  At his deuyſe a Cytie edifye,
                  That ſhall the aſſautes vtterly defye,
                  Of enmyes all and the mortall foone.
                  With riche toures and walles of harde ſtone.
                  And all aboute the countreyes enuiron,
                  He made ſeke in euery regyon,
                  For ſuche workemen as were curyous,
                  Of wyt inuentife of caſtyng meruaylous,
                  Or ſuche as coulde crafte of geometrye,
                  Or were ſotyll in their fantaſye.
                  And for euery ſuch as was a good deuyſour,
                  Maſon, hewer, or crafty quarreour,
                  For euery wryghte and paſſyng carpenter,
                  That may be founde eyther ferre or nere,
                  For ſuch as coulde graue groupe or carue,
                  Or ſuche as were able for to ſerue,
                  With lime and ſtone for to reyſe a wall,
                  With bataylyng and creſtes marciall.
                  Or ſuch as had connynge in their head,
                  Alabaſter other white or read,
                  Or marbell grey for to pullyſhe playne,
                  To make it ſmothe of vaynes and of grayne,
                  He ſente alſo for euery ymage our,
                  Both in entayle and euery portreyour,
                  That coulde wel drawe or wt colour peynte,
                  With hewes freſhe yt the worke not feynte,
                  And ſuche as coulde wt countenaunce glad,
                  Make an ymage that wyll neuer fade.
                  To counterfeate in mettall tree or ſtone.
                  To ſotill worke of hym Pygmaleon.
                  Or of Appollo whiche as bokes do tell,
                  In ymagerye all other did excelle.
                  For by his crafte and workyng curyous,
                  The tombe he made of kyng Daryus.
                  Whiche Alixſandre dyd on heyght reyſe,
                  Only for men ſhulde his fame preyſe.
                  In his conqueſt by Perce when he went.
                  And thus Priam for euery mayſter ſente,
                  For eche caruer and curious ioyner,
                  To make knottes wt many a queynt floure.
                  To ſette on creſtes within and eke without,
                  Vpon the wall the Citie rounde aboute.
                  Or who that were excellyng in practike,
                  Of any arte called mecanyke.
                  Or had a name flowryng or famous,
                  Was after ſente to come to Priamus.
                  ¶For he purpoſeth this noble worthy kyng,
                  To make a Citie royall in buildyng.
                  Brode, large, and wide, & leſt it were aſſailed,
                  By werre about proudely enbatayled.
                  And fyrſt the grounde he cauſed to be ſought,
                  Full depe and lowe that it fayle nought.
                  To make ſure the foundaciowne,
                  In the place where as the olde towne,
                  Was fyrſt ybuylded he the walles ſette.
                  And he of lande many myle out mette,
                  About in compaſſe for to make it large.
                  As the maiſters that toke on them the charge
                  Deuyſed haue the ſettynge and the ſcyte.
                  For holſome eyre to be more of delyte.
                  ¶And when the ſoyle defouled with ruyne,
                  Of walles olde was made playne as a lyne.
                  The workmen gan this Citie for to founde.
                  Full mightly with ſtones ſquare and rounde.
                  That in this worlde was none vnto it lyche,
                  Of workemanſhyp nor of buylding riche.
                  Nor in crafte of curyous maſonrye,
                  I can no termes to ſpeke of geometrye.
                  Wherfore as now I muſt them ſette a ſyde,
                  For certaynly I neuer redde Enclide.
                  That the maiſter and the foundour was,
                  Of all that worke by ſquare or by compaſſe.
                  Or kepe their meaſure by leuell or by lyne,
                  I am to rude as clearely to diffyne,
                  Or to diſcriue this worke in euery parte.
                  For lacke of termes longyng to that arte.
                  But I dare well of trouth affyrmen here,
                  In all this worlde ne was there neuer pere.
                  Vnto this Citie and write it for a ſothe.
                  As in his boke my maiſter Guydo dothe.
                  
                     And that it myghte in his proſperitie,
                  In hyghe honour and in felicitie,
                  From all aſſaut perpetually contune,
                  It rayſed was in worſhyp of Neptune.
                  And named Troye as it was tho toforne,
                  Like the firſt that was through grekes lorne.
                  The length therof was ſhortly to conclude,
                  Three dayes iourne and lyke the latitude.
                  That neuer erſt I herde make mencyon,
                  Of ſuche a nother of foundacion.
                  So huge in compaſe nor of ſuch largeſſe,
                  Nor to counte ſo paſſyng of fayreneſſe.
                  So edifyed or luſty to the ſyghte,
                  And as I read the walles were on heyght,
                  Two hundred cubytes all of marbell grey.
                  Magecolled without for ſautes and aſſaye.
                  And it to make more pleaſaunt of delyte,
                  Amonge the marbel was alblaſter whyte,
                  Meynt in the walles & rounde ye towne about
                  To make it ſhewe within and eke without.
                  So freſhe ſo ryche and ſo delectable,
                  That it alone was incomparable.
                  Of all Cities that any mortall man,
                  Sawe euer yet ſyth that the world began.
                  And at the corner of euery wall was ſette,
                  A crowne of golde with ryche ſtones yfrette.
                  That ſhone full bryght againe ye ſonne ſhene.
                  And euery towre bretexed was ſo clene,
                  Of choſe ſtone that were not ferre a ſonder,
                  That to beholde it was very wonder.
                  Therto his Citie compaſſed enuirowne,
                  Had gates .vi. to entre into towne.
                  The fyrſt of them and ſtrongeſt eke withall,
                  Largeſt alſo and moſt principall,
                  Of mighty buildyng by him ſelfe pereleſſe,
                  Was by the kyng called Dardanydes.
                  And in ſtory lyke as it is founde,
                  Tymbrya was named the ſeconde.
                  And the thirde was called Helyas,
                  The fourth gate hyght alſo Cetheas.
                  The fifth Troiana the ſyxth Antinorydes,
                  Stronge & mighty both in werre and peace.
                  With ſquare toures ſet on euery ſyde,
                  At whoſe corners of very pompe and pryde,
                  The workmen haue with ſterne & fel viſages,
                  Of riche entayle vp reyſed great ymages.
                  Wrought out of ſtone and neuer lyke to fayle,
                  Full curiouſly enarmed for batayle.
                  And through the wall their fomen for to lette,
                  At euery toure were great gonnes ſette.
                  For aſſautes and ſodayne auentures.
                  And on eche tourettes were reyſed vp figures
                  Of ſauage beaſtes as Beares & of Lyons.
                  Of Tygers, Bores, of Serpētes & Dragons
                  And Hertes eke with their brode hornes,
                  Of Elyphauntes and large Vnicornes.
                  Bugles, Bulles, and many great Gryffon,
                  Forged of braſſe of coper and laton.
                  That cruelly by ſygnes of their faces,
                  Vpon their foon made felle menaces.
                  Barbycans and alſo bulworkes huge,
                  Afore the towne made for hyghe refuge,
                  When nede ſhulde be early and eke late.
                  And portekoles ſtronge at euery gate.
                  That of aſſautes they nede take no charge,
                  And the lockes thycke brode and large.
                  Of al ye gates wel wrought of ſhyning braſſe.
                  And eke within the mighty ſhytting was,
                  Of yren barres ſtronge ſquare and rounde.
                  And great barres pytched in the grounde,
                  With huge cheynes forged for diffence.
                  Whiche ne wolde breake for no violence.
                  That harde it was through theym for to win.
                  And euery houſe that buylded was within,
                  Euery paleys and euery manſyowne,
                  Of marbell were throughout all the towne.
                  Of crafty buildyng & working moſt royall.
                  And the highte was of euery wall,
                  Sixty cubytes from the grounde accounted.
                  And there was none yt other hath ſurmoūted.
                  In the Citie but of one hyght aliche,
                  In very ſoth both of pore and ryche.
                  That it was harde of hye eſtate or lowe,
                  Houſe or paleys a ſonder for to knowe.
                  So egally of tymbre and of ſtone,
                  Theyr houſes were reyſed euerychone.
                  And yf I ſhuld reherſen by and by.
                  The corne knottes by craft of maſonry,
                  The freſhe enbowīg wt verges right as lynes
                  And the houſyng ful of backewines,
                  The ryche coyning the luſty tablementes,
                  Vinettes ronning in caſementes,
                  Though ye termes in Engliſhe wolden rime,
                  To ſhewe theim all I haue as now no time.
                  Ne yet language picked for the nones,
                  To tell the ſotyll ioynyng of the ſtones,
                  Nor howe they put in ſtede of mortere,
                  In the ioyntoures coper gylte full clere.
                  
                     To make them ioyne by leuell and by lyne,
                  Amonge the marbell freſhely for to ſhyne.
                  Agaynſt he ſonne whan his ſhene lyght,
                  Smote on the golde that was burned bright.
                  To make the worke gliſter on euery ſyde,
                  And of this towne the ſtretes large & wyde.
                  Were by crafte ſo prudently prouyded,
                  And by workmen ſette ſo and deuyded,
                  That holſome eyre amyddes myght enſpyre,
                  Erely on morowe to them that it deſyre,
                  And zephirus that is ſo comfortable,
                  For to nouryſhe thinges that bene vegetable,
                  In tyme of yere throughout euery ſtrete,
                  With ſugred ſauour luſty and ſo ſwete,
                  Moſte pleaſauntly in the eyre gan ſmyte,
                  The Citezeynes onely to delyte.
                  And with his breth them to recomforte,
                  Whan they lyſte walke theim ſelfe to diſporte.
                  And thrugh the towne wt crafty purueiaunce,
                  By great auiſe and diſcrete ordenaunce,
                  By compaſe caſt and ſquared out by ſquyers,
                  Of pulliſhed marble vpon ſtronge pyllers,
                  Deuyſed were longe large and wyde,
                  Of euery ſtreate in the fronter ſyde,
                  Freſhe alures with luſty hye pynacles,
                  And moūſtryng outward coſtly tabernacles.
                  Vauted aboue lyke to reclynatoryes,
                  That called were deambulatoryes.
                  Men to walke togithers twaine and twaine,
                  To kepe thē drye when it happed to rayne,
                  Or them to ſaue fro tempeſt winde or thundre
                  If that them lyſt ſhroude thēſelfe there vnder
                  And euery houſe couered was with lead,
                  And many gargoyle and many hydous head,
                  With ſpoutes thorough & pipes as they aught
                  From the ſtone worke to the canell raught.
                  Voydyng fylthes lowe into the grounde,
                  Thorough grates made of yron perced roūd.
                  The ſtretes paued bothe in length and brede,
                  In cheker wyſe with ſtones whyte and reade.
                  And euery crafte that any maner man,
                  In any lande deuyſe or reken can,
                  Kyng Pryamus of hye diſcreciowne,
                  Ordeyned hath to dwell in the towne.
                  And in ſtreates ſeuered here and yonder,
                  Eueryche from other to be ſet a ſonder.
                  That they myght for there more commoditie,
                  Eche by hymſelfe worke at his lybertye.
                  ¶Goldſmythes fyrſt and riche Iewelleres,
                  And by them ſelfe crafty brouderers,
                  Weuers alſo of wollen and of lyne,
                  Of clothe of golde damaſke and ſatyn.
                  Of veluet ſendell and double ſamyt eke,
                  And eueryche clothe that men lyſte to ſeke.
                  Smythes alſo that coulden forge wele,
                  Pollaxes, ſwerdes, and ſperes ſharpe of ſtele.
                  Dartes daggers for to mayme and wounde,
                  And quarelheades ſharpe & ſquare ygrounde.
                  There were alſo crafty armerers,
                  Makers of bowes and alſo theſe fletchers,
                  And ſuche as coulde make ſhaftes playne.
                  And other eke that dyd their buſy payne,
                  For the werre to make alſo trappures,
                  Baners beate and royall cote armures,
                  And by diuers Standardes and penouns,
                  And for the fyelde freſhe and gaye getouns.
                  And euery crafte that may reckened be,
                  To tell ſhortly was in this Citie.
                  And through this towne ſo ryche & excellent,
                  In the myddes a large ryuer went,
                  Cauſynge to them full great commoditie.
                  The whiche on twayne hath parted the Citie.
                  Of courſe full ſwyfte wt freſhe ſtremes clere,
                  And hyght Xantus as Guydo doth vs lere.
                  And as I rede that vpon this flode,
                  On eche a ſyde many a mylle ſtode.
                  Whē nede was their graine & corne to grinde,
                  Them to ſuſteyne in ſtorye as I fynde.
                  This ryuer eke of fyſhe full plenteous,
                  Deuided was by workemen curious,
                  So craftely through caſtynge ſouerayne,
                  That in his courſe the ſtremes might attaine,
                  For to areche as Guydo doth coniecte,
                  By arches ſtronge his courſe for to reflecte.
                  Through condite pypes large & wyde withal,
                  By certayne meanes artifyciall,
                  That it tho made a full purgacion,
                  Of all ordure and fylthes in the towne.
                  Waſſhyng the ſtretes as they ſtode a rowe,
                  And the gutters in the earth be lowe.
                  That in the Citie was no fylthe yſene,
                  For the cauell ſcoured was ſo clene.
                  And eke deuoyded in ſo ſecrete wyſe,
                  That no man myght eſpye or deuyſe,
                  By what engyne the fylthes fer nor nere,
                  Were borne awaye by courſe of the ryuer.
                  So couertly euery thyng was coured.
                  Wherby the towne was vtterly aſſured,
                  
                     From engendryng of all corruption.
                  From wycked eyre and from infexion,
                  That cauſe ofte by their vyolence,
                  Mortalitie and great peſtilence.
                  And by example of this flode there was,
                  Made tybre at Rome and wrought by Eneas
                  The whiche alſo departeth Rome a two.
                  Myne auctour ſaith. I note if it be ſo.
                  And tenhabite this royall chiefe Citie,
                  Kynge Pryam hath about in eche countre.
                  Made for to ſerche with all his hole entent,
                  And in prouinces that were adiacent,
                  In borowes townes and in ſmales vyllages,
                  Ygathred had out of all maner ages,
                  And of thropes folkes full dyuers,
                  Of ſuche as were vacant and diſpers,
                  About Troye in any regyowne,
                  He made hath to entre into towne.
                  Great multitude what of yonge and olde.
                  It tenhabyte as ye haue herde me tolde.
                  And thoſe that were afore to him foreynes,
                  He hath in Troye made them Citezeynes,
                  Full diſcretly lyke as it is founde.
                  And whan they gan with people to abounde,
                  Kynge Priamus of hye affectiowne,
                  After the buyldyng of this myghty towne,
                  Hath in his harte caughte a fantaſye,
                  His newe Cytie for to magnifye,
                  And it to put the more in remembraunce,
                  He fully caſte to do ſome obſeruaunce,
                  To myghty Mars ſterne and ferſe of hewe.
                  And ſpecially with certayne playes newe,
                  On horſe and foote in many ſondry wyſe,
                  To gyue his men in knyghthode excercyſe.
                  Eueryche to put other at aſſaye.
                  In iuſtes lyſtes and alſo in tourney.
                  To preue their force whā they happe to mete,
                  The which plaies were founded firſt in Crete
                  And in that lande of hye and lowe eſtate,
                  In Martys honour they were dedicate.
                  And in palaſtre on wakes on the nyght,
                  Were other plaies as men taſſaye their might,
                  Only on foote with many ſotyll poynt,
                  And ſome of them were naked and enioynt,
                  To wynne a pryſe they dyd their full entent.
                  And there was founde by clerkes full prudent
                  Of the cheſſe the playe moſte gloryous,
                  Whiche is ſo ſotill and ſo meruaylous,
                  That it were harde the matter to diſcryue.
                  For though a man ſtudied all his lyue.
                  He ſhall aye fynde dyuers fantaſyes,
                  Of wardes makynge and newe inparties,
                  There is therin ſo great diuerſytie,
                  And it was fyrſt founde in this Citie.
                  During the ſyege lyke as ſayth Guydo,
                  But Iacobus de vitriaco,
                  Is contrary in his opynyon.
                  For lyke as he maketh playnly mencion,
                  And affyrmeth at full in his aduyſe,
                  How Philometer a philoſopher wyſe,
                  Vnto a kynge to ſtynte his crueltee,
                  Foūde firſt this playe and made it in Caldee.
                  And into Grece from thence it was ſent.
                  Alſo in Troye by great auiſement,
                  The playe was founde firſt of dyce & tables,
                  And caſtynge the chaunces deceyuables,
                  That cauſe haue byn full ofte of great debate,
                  For if that one be now founde fortunate,
                  To wynne a whyle by fauour of his chaunce,
                  Or he be ware with ſodeyne varyaunce,
                  Vnhappely he is put cleane a backe.
                  And other folke that ſtode vpon the wracke,
                  And by their loſſe were plonged in diſtreſſe,
                  They reyſed haue in haſte to hye rycheſſe.
                  Gladneſſe of one is to an other rage,
                  A deuaunt of haſarde and paſſage.
                  If one haue ioye a nother ſuffreth wo,
                  Lyke as the bones ronnen to and fro,
                  An hundred ſyth in a daye they varye.
                  Now blandyſhing & now they be contrary,
                  No man with them aſſured is in ioye.
                  ¶And firſt alſo I read how that in Troye,
                  Were ſonge and red many freſhe comedies,
                  And other dities that called ben tragedies.
                  And to declare ſhortly in ſentence,
                  Of bothe two the fynall difference.
                  ¶A comedye hath in his gynnynge,
                  A pryme face a maner complaynynge,
                  And afterwarde endeth in gladneſſe.
                  And it the dedes onely doth expreſſe,
                  Of ſuch as be in pouerte plonged lowe.
                  ¶But tragedye who ſo lyſte to knowe,
                  It ſtyll begynneth in proſperitie,
                  And endeth lykewyſe by aduerſytie.
                  And it doth alſo of the conqueſt treate,
                  Of ryche kynges and of lordes great.
                  Of mighty men and olde conquerours,
                  Which by fraude of fortunes ſodeine ſhoures,
                  
                     Be ouer caſte and whelmed from their glory.
                  And whylom thus was halowed ye memorye,
                  Of tragedyes as bokes maken mynde.
                  When they were red and ſonge as I fynde.
                  ¶In the theatre there was a ſmale aulter,
                  Amyddes ſette that was halfe Circuler,
                  Which into Eaſt of cuſtome was directe,
                  Vpon the whiche a Pulpet was erecte,
                  And therin ſtode an auncient poete,
                  For to reherſe by rethorykes ſwete,
                  The noble dedes that were hyſtoryall.
                  Of kynges & prynces for memoryall.
                  And of theſe olde worthy Emperours,
                  The great empryſe eke of conquerours.
                  And how they gate in Martes hye honour,
                  The lawrer grene for fyne of their labour.
                  The palme of knighthod diſſerued by old date
                  Or Parchas made them paſſen into fate.
                  ¶And after that with chere and face pale,
                  With ſtyle enclyned gan to tourne his tale,
                  And for to ſynge after all their looſe,
                  Full mortally the ſtroke of Attropoſe.
                  And tell alſo for all their worthy head,
                  The ſodeyne breaking of their liues threde.
                  How piteouſly they made theyr mortall ende,
                  Thrugh falſe fortune yt al ye world wil ſhende.
                  And how the fyne of all their worthyneſſe,
                  Ended in ſorowe and in hyghe triſteſſe.
                  By compaſſynge of fraude or falſe treaſon,
                  By ſodaine murder or vengeaunce of poyſon.
                  Or conſpyryng of fretyng falſe enuye,
                  How vnwarely that they dydden dye,
                  And how their renowne & their mighty fame,
                  Was of hatred ſodeynly made lame.
                  And how their honour dawnward gā decline,
                  And the miſchiefe of their vnhappy fyne.
                  And how fortune was to them vnſwete,
                  All this was tolde and red of the Poete.
                  And whyle that he in the pulpet ſtode,
                  With deadly face all deuoyde of blode,
                  Synging his ditees with muſes all to rent,
                  Amyd the theatre ſhrowded in a tent,
                  There came out men gaſtfull of their cheres,
                  Diſfygured their faces with viſeres,
                  Playing by ſygnes in the peoples ſyght.
                  That the Poet ſonge hath on heyght,
                  So that there was no maner diſcordaunce,
                  Atwene his ditees and their countenaunce.
                  ¶For lyke as he a lofte dyd expreſſe,
                  Wordes of ioye or of heauineſſe,
                  Meaning and chere beneth of theim playing,
                  From poynt to poynt was alway anſwering.
                  Now triſte, now glad, now heuy, & now light,
                  And face ychaunged with a ſodeyne ſyght.
                  So craftely they coulde them tranſfygure.
                  Conformyng them to the chante plure.
                  Now to ſynge and ſodaynely to wepe,
                  So well they coulde their obſeruaunces kepe.
                  And this was done in Apryll and in May,
                  Whan bloſmes new both on buſhe and hey,
                  And floures freſhe gynne for to ſprynge.
                  And the byrdes in the wood ſynge.
                  With luſt ſuppryſed of the ſomer ſonne,
                  Whan theſe playes in Troye were begon,
                  And in the theatre halowed and yholde.
                  And thus the rytes of tragedyes olde,
                  Pryamus the worthy kyng began,
                  Of this matter no more tell I can.
               
               
                  BVt I wyll forth of this ſtorye wryte,
                  And on my matter boyſtouſly endyte,
                  How Pryamus was paſſyng dylygent,
                  Ryght deſyrous and inwardly feruent,
                  If ſo he myght amonge his workes all,
                  Do bylde a palays and a ryche hall.
                  Whiche ſhulde be his choſe chyefe dungyon.
                  His royall ſee and ſouerayne manſyon.
                  And whan he gan to his worke approche,
                  He made it builde hye vpon a roche.
                  It for to aſſure in his foundation,
                  And called it the noble Ylion.
                  The ſyght of whyche iuſtly circuler,
                  By compaſſe caſt rounde as any ſphere.
                  And who that wolde ye content of the grounde
                  Truely acounte of this place rounde,
                  In the theatre fyrſt he muſte entre,
                  Takyng ye lyne yt carueth through the centre.
                  By geometrye as longeth to that art.
                  And trebled it with the ſeuenth parte,
                  He fynde myght by experience,
                  The meaſure hole of the circumference.
                  What lande alſo playnly eke with all,
                  Conteyned was within the ſtronge wall.
                  The creſt of which in place where loweſt was,
                  Vpreyſed was full ſyxe hundred paſe.
                  Builded of marbell ful royall and ful ſtronge.
                  And many other ryche ſtone amonge,
                  Whoſe toures were reyſed vp ſo hye,
                  
                     And who that lyſt by greces vp aſſende,
                  He there might ſe in his inſpection,
                  The fayre boundes of many regyon,
                  And prouinces that ſtode rounde about.
                  And the walles within and eke without,
                  Endlonge were with knottes grauen cleane,
                  Depeynt with aſure, golde, cinople, & grene.
                  That verely when ſo the ſonne ſhone,
                  Vpon the golde meynt amonge the ſtone,
                  They gaue a lyght withouten any were,
                  As doth Apollo in his midday ſphere.
                  And all the windowes and eche feneſtrall,
                  Wrought were of beryle & of cleare cryſtall.
                  ¶And high amiddes this noble Ylion,
                  So ryche and paſſing of foundacion,
                  Whych clerkes yet in theyr bokes prayſe,
                  Kyng Priam made an hall for to rayſe.
                  Excelling all in beaute and in ſtrengthe,
                  The latitude according with the lengthe,
                  And of marbyll outward was the wall,
                  And the tymbre noble in ſpeciall,
                  Was halfe of Cedre as I reherſe can,
                  And the remnaunt of the ryche Heban.
                  Which moſt is able as I dare ſpecifye,
                  With ſtone to ioyne by craft of carpentrye.
                  For they of tymber haue the ſoueraynte.
                  And for to tel of this Heban tree,
                  Lyke in bokes ſothely as I finde,
                  It cometh out of Ethiop and ynde.
                  Blacke as is geate and it wyll waxe anone,
                  Whan it is korne as harde as any ſtone.
                  And euermore laſt wil and endure,
                  And not corrupt with water nor moyſture.
                  And of this hall further to diffine,
                  With ſtones ſquare by leuel and by line,
                  It paued was with full great dilygence,
                  Of maſonrye and paſſyng excellence,
                  And all aboue reyſed was a ſee,
                  Ful curyouſly of ſtones and perre.
                  That called was as chiefe and pryncipall,
                  Of the reygne the ſeate moſt royall.
                  Tofore which was ſet by great delyte,
                  A borde of Heban and of yuerye white.
                  So egally yioyned and ſo clene,
                  That in the worke there was no ryft yſene.
                  And ſeſſyons were made on euery ſyde,
                  Onely the ſtates by ordre to deuide.
                  Eke in the hall as it was conuenable,
                  On eche partye was a dormaunt table,
                  Of yueree eke and of this Heban tree.
                  And euen agayne this kynges royall ſee,
                  In the partye that was therto contrayre.
                  Yrayſed was by many crafty ſtayre,
                  High in the hall in the other ſyte,
                  Ryght as lyne in the oppoſytr,
                  Of pured metall and of ſtones clere,
                  In brede and length a full rych aultere.
                  On which there ſtode of fygure and vyſage,
                  Of maſſy golde a wonderful ymage,
                  As to be honoured in that high ſeate,
                  Onely in name of Iupyter the great.
                  ¶And the ſtatue for all his huge weyght,
                  Fyftene cubytes compleyt was of heyght.
                  A crowne of golde high vpon his heade,
                  With heauēly ſaphyres & many ruby redde,
                  Fret enuyron with other ſtones of Inde,
                  And amonges were medled as I fynde,
                  Whyte pereles maſſye large and rounde.
                  And for moſt chefe all dirkeneſſe to confound,
                  A Carbuncle was ſet as kyng of ſtones all,
                  To recomforte and gladden all the hall.
                  And it to enlumine in the black night,
                  With the freſhenes of his ruddy light.
                  The value was therof ineſtymable,
                  And the ryches playnly incomparable.
                  For this ymage by diuiſion,
                  Was of ſhape and of proporcion,
                  From heade to foote ſo mayſterly entayled,
                  That in a poynt the workmā hath not failed,
                  It to parfourme by crafty excellence.
                  Whom Priamus with dread and reuerence,
                  Honoured hath aboue the goddes all,
                  In all miſchiefe him to clepe and call.
                  For in him was his hole affection,
                  His ſoueraygne truſt and chefe deuocion.
                  His hope alſo and his affyaunce,
                  His welth his ioye and his aſſuraunce.
                  And his welfare and his proſperytye,
                  He hath committed to his deyte.
                  Wening in herte wonder ſykerly,
                  To be aſſured from all miſchefe therby.
                  And diffended in eche aduerſytye,
                  And holde his reygne in high felicitye.
                  And in honour contynually to ſhyne,
                  While Iupyter through his power diuine,
                  Hym and his hath in protection.
                  This was his truſt and full opinion.
                  And thus this worke to the ende achyeued,
                  Wherof Pryam with ioye full releued.
                  That he his Citye and noble Ilion,
                  Hath fully brought vnto perfection,
                  
                     Lyke his entent whā he therof began.
                  And thus Pryam this king this worthy man
                  Full many a day in this newe Troye,
                  With his lyeges lad his lefe in ioye,
                  Where I hym leue in his royall ſete,
                  Soueraygnly reygning in quyete.
                  Procedyng forth if ſo ye liſt to heare,
                  Vnto the effect anone of my matere.
               
            
            
               ¶How king Pryā ſend Anthenor into Grece to haue reſtored ayen his ſiſter Exion. Ca. xii.
               
                  
                     O Hateful harme which moſt is for to dred
                  Kindled ſo longe o ſparke of olde hatred
                  Roote and debate grounde of enuy and yre,
                  With newe flawme hertes for to fyre.
                  O grayne of malyce cauſer of all offence,
                  Of rancour ruſted of impacyence.
                  Which haſt of newe made feſtred ſores ſmert,
                  Whan thou art ones raked in an herte.
                  Which for diſdayne of mercye mayſt not lete,
                  A man no whyle to lyue as in quyete.
                  But delueſt vp malyce manyfolde,
                  Debates newe that buryed were of olde.
                  And falſly quyckeſt ſtrifes to reſtore,
                  That enuious ſerpēt that was ſlayne of yore,
                  Which felly hath this addre enuyous,
                  Out of his reſt awaked Pryamus.
                  And with his venim ſo perſyng and ſo ille,
                  Made him wery to lyue a lyfe tranquille.
                  And meued hym of his iniquitee,
                  Vpon the Grekes auenged for to be.
                  For where as he in peace held his reygne,
                  With his lyeges in ioye ſouereygne,
                  Without anoye or any perturbaunce,
                  This ſerpent hath wyth newe remembraūce,
                  Without aduyſe or diſcrete areſte,
                  So hote a flawme kindled in his breſte,
                  Of olde enuye with freſhe rancour meynte,
                  That lykly is neuer to be queynte.
                  For Pryam nowe in his entenciowne,
                  Caſt and compaſſeth reuoluing vp & downe,
                  Howe ſtrong he was of ryches and meyne,
                  How noble and mighty was his newe Citye,
                  And habundaunt ſhortly to conclude,
                  Both of plentye and of multitude,
                  Of men of armes and of chyualrye.
                  Which ſtered him to haue a fanteſye.
                  Alas the whyle to his vnhappy chaunce,
                  That to be dead he take will vengeaunce,
                  Vpon his foon the fyre of hote enuye,
                  So brent him inward by melancolye.
                  Standing in purpoſe yt no man chaūge may,
                  Of his domages auenged be ſome day.
                  And of iniuryes yt thei on him haue wrought.
                  ¶And when that he had a tyme out ſought,
                  To his purpoſe moſt conuenient.
                  Anone he hath for all his lordes ſent.
                  And his knightes called euerychone,
                  To come in haſte excuſed was not one.
                  Namely of theim that were of hygh degre.
                  And they obeying with all humylitye,
                  His bydding hooly and made no delay,
                  To come echeone agayne a certayne day,
                  And his ſonnes were alſo tho preſent,
                  Hector except that was that tyme abſent.
                  In the ſtronge and mighty regyon,
                  Of Panomye which in ſubiection,
                  Kinge Pryam held through his worthyneſſe,
                  And to amende thinges and redreſſe,
                  Hector was gone into this Panomye.
                  Certayne cauſes for to iuſtifye.
                  As in his reaſon he thought for the beſt,
                  To ſettle theim in quiet and in reſt.
                  For he was aye ſo iuſt and ſo prudent,
                  So well aduyſed and ſo pacient,
                  And ſo demeaned in his gouernaunce,
                  That him was lothe for to do vengeaunce,
                  Where as he might in eaſy wiſe treate.
                  For to reforme thinges ſmall and great.
                  For lothe he was this noble worthy knighte,
                  For any haſte to execute vnright.
                  Or cauſeles by rygour to condempne.
                  And in this while full worthy and ſolempne,
                  Kinge Priamus of lordes great and ſmall,
                  Within Troye held a court royall,
                  As he that lyſt for no coſt to ſpare.
                  And ceryouſly his meaning to declare,
                  He in his ſee his lordes enuyron,
                  Gan to ſhewe his hertes entention.
                  ¶O worthy lordes aſſembled here preſent,
                  Faythfull and trewe of herte and of entēte.
                  It is well knowen to your diſcrecion,
                  The great domages and foule oppreſſion,
                  Which that ye Grekes haue vpon vs wrought
                  Without cauſe for a thinge of nought,
                  This other daye as who ſayeth yet but late.
                  That as I trowe ſo newe is yet the date,
                  That it is freſhe remembred in your mynde,
                  Vnto your blode if ſo that ye be kinde.
                  For I ſuppoſe no foryetfulneſſe,
                  May put away the mortal heuyneſſe,
                  
                     Of harmes olde whych aye renewe agayne.
                  As in my mynde I ſaye you in certayne.
                  And as I trowe playnly in your thought,
                  It yet is grene and ne dyeth nought,
                  How they haue ſlaine our olde progenitours,
                  That whylom were ſo noble werreours.
                  Our Cytye brent and brought vnto ruyne,
                  And robbed it falſly by rauyne,
                  And tourned all into wilderneſſe,
                  And into Grece caryed our rycheſſe.
                  My father ſlayne that hyght Lamedon,
                  Without cauſe or iuſte occaſyon.
                  And raught frō him his golde & his treaſour,
                  Which as me ſemeth is a foule errour.
                  We might of ryght amendes well chalenge,
                  And eke deſyre to be fully aduenge,
                  Afore the goddes of full high offence,
                  Onely of reaſon and of conſcience.
                  And paſſyng all theyr mortall crueltee.
                  There is one thinge that moſt greueth me,
                  That they vngoodly agaynſt all gentylleſſe,
                  Without regarde as to the worthineſſe,
                  To the byrth ne the royall blode,
                  Of her that is ſo fayre and eke ſo good,
                  I meane my ſyſter called Exyon.
                  Whom they alas to theyr confuſyon,
                  Diſuſe and kepe not like to her degre,
                  From day to day in ſuch diſhoneſtee,
                  Where thrugh her honour & her name is lorn
                  Cōſiderīg nought of what ſtock ſhe was born
                  For they are blinde for to take hede,
                  Or to aduert the roote of her kindred,
                  Of ſurquidrye they be ſo indurate.
                  And ſyth that ſhe borne of ſo highe eſtate,
                  Ytreated is like as ye may ſe,
                  We may coniecte that thoſe of lowe degre,
                  Gouerned be paſſing diſhoneſtly.
                  For ye may thinke and demen truely,
                  How wyues and maydens in that companie,
                  With other eke that be of your allye,
                  Yhaunted be and vſed at theyr luſte.
                  On the Grekes I haue no better truſte.
                  For they ne ſpare nother blode nor age,
                  And thus they liue in torment & ſeruage.
                  Without routhe mercy or pitee.
                  The which toucheth you as well as me.
                  And as me ſemeth of equite and of ryght,
                  Ye ought echone with all your ful might,
                  Of the wronges with which ye be offended,
                  To ſeke a waye how it might be amended.
                  And that we worke all by one aſſent,
                  And ſins procede like to our entent.
                  Of theyr malyce and curſed crueltee,
                  All at ones auenged for to be.
                  And that we be in herte wil and thought,
                  Of one accord and ne varye nought.
                  For then our force is doubled and pouſte,
                  For right and reaſon and good equite,
                  Requyre vengeaunce on him yt doth ye wrōge,
                  Though it ſo be we differre it longe.
                  I truſte alſo the goddes rightwiſeneſſe,
                  That they ſhall helpe our harmes to redreſſe.
                  And fauour vs in our innocence,
                  To chaſtice them that wrought this offence.
                  ¶Alſo ye knowe how that this our Citye,
                  Is ſtronge mighty and of great ſuertye.
                  With toures high & walled for the werre,
                  That alſo fer as ſhineth ſonne or ſterre,
                  There is none like for to reken all.
                  That may in force be therto peregall.
                  Ye knowe alſo as it ſhall eft be founde,
                  With cheualrye how that we habounde,
                  Except in armes and of olde aſſayed,
                  That yet for dreade neuer were diſmayed.
                  And we haue plenty alſo of vytayle.
                  Of frendſhyp eke that ne will vs fayle,
                  With all theyr might to do to vs ſuccour.
                  Wherfore I reade without more ſoiour,
                  To ſet vpon theim ſith we be well able,
                  And time is nowe me ſemeth couenable,
                  For manhode byd to make no more delaye,
                  To venge a wronge hap what ſo euer maye,
                  For in differring is oft drawen in domage,
                  To worke in time is double auauntage.
                  For to our purpoſe lacketh neuer a dele,
                  And through our manhod we be aſſured wel,
                  But that we be not holde to haſty,
                  Or to rakell to worken wilfully.
                  And werre alſo ſtant in auenture,
                  For aye of Mart doubtous is the eure.
                  I reade firſt to Grekes that we ſende,
                  To wyt if they our harmes will amende,
                  Without ſtryfe werre or more debate.
                  Then may we ſayne that we be fortunate.
                  And yf they be contrarye of reaſon,
                  To condiſcende to this concluſyon,
                  To graunte our aſkyng of equite and righte,
                  Then haue we cauſe for to preue our might.
                  
                     But are that we proceden by rygour,
                  We ſhall aſſaye them fyrſt meaſure,
                  As fer as ryght and reaſon eke requere.
                  And of diſdeyne yf them lyſt not here.
                  Than our quarell deuoyde of wylfulneſſe,
                  Yrooted is vppon good ſykerneſſe.
                  And if that we of their great offence,
                  Demaunde amendes fyrſt in pacience,
                  God and fortune I hope wyll not aſſent,
                  That in the ende we ſhulde the ſame repent.
                  And it is better by peace to haue redreſſe,
                  Than gyn a werre without auiſeneſſe.
                  Therfore let vs our wofull auenture,
                  Paciently aye ſuffre and endure.
                  And in our porte both humble be & playne,
                  Tyll they to vs their anſwere ſend ayene.
                  For though ſo be in myne entencion,
                  I meaued am by iuſte occaſyon,
                  In Irous ſort proceadyng to vengeaunce,
                  I wyll put all out of remembraunce,
                  And letten ſlyde by foryetfulneſſe,
                  The wronges do and voyde all heauineſſe,
                  Toward grekes and axe of them no more,
                  But that they wyll Exiona reſtore.
                  To vs againe whiche is to me moſt dere,
                  Only to ſtynte hatred debate and werre.
                  For the ſurplus of our mortall eure,
                  We ſhall deſſymule and prudently endure,
                  Our harmes olde forth in pacience.
                  If ye accorde vnto my ſentence.
                  Saye here vpon as ye be full auyſed.
                  For yf this ſonde be of them deſpiſed,
                  And that them lyſte to reaſon not obeye,
                  Than we may iuſtly ſeke a nother waye,
                  To haue redreſſe for now there is no more.
                  Saue I purpoſe to ſenden Anthenore,
                  Whiche is a man diſcrete and well auyſee,
                  And ſpecially in mater of treatee,
                  For he is both wyſe and eloquent,
                  As ye well knowe and paſſyngly prudent.
                  And whan the kyng had tolde his tale anone,
                  To his counſeyle they conſent echone,
                  That Anthenor this iourney vndertake.
                  And he in haſt gan him ready make,
                  Without abode and wyll not ones denye,
                  To take on hym this embaſſadrye,
                  Full well auiſed in his diſcrecion,
                  Toke or he went informacion,
                  From poynt to poynt of this great charge,
                  For he hym caſte to ſtande at his large,
                  Without errour as he that coulde his good,
                  For he theffecte full playnly vnderſtode,
                  And euery thyng he prynted in his thought,
                  Or that he went & hath forgat ryght nought.
                  For of a worde he caſte him not to fayle,
                  To ſhyppe he goth and began to ſayle,
                  And in ſhort tyme he and his companye,
                  Aryued be vp into Theſalye,
                  At a citie called Monoſyus,
                  Where by fortune was kynge Pelleus,
                  The ſame tyme and Anthenor anone,
                  Vnto the kynge the right way is gone.
                  Of whom he was as Guydo hath conceiued,
                  At pryme face right beningly receyued.
                  But whan he knewe the cauſe of his comyng,
                  He bad in haſt without more tarying,
                  To Anthenor with a fell viſage,
                  Shortly to ſaye theffecte of his meſſage.
               
               
                  THis Troian knight aſtoned neuer adel,
                  But full demure and auyſed well,
                  Not to haſty nor rakle for to ſayne,
                  But abydyng with loke and face playne,
                  To Pelleus with a manly chere,
                  Sayde in effecte right thus as ye ſhall here.
                  ¶The worthy kyng called Pryamus,
                  So wyſe, ſo noble, ſo manly and famous,
                  And of knighthod paſſyng excellent.
                  Hath fyrſt to you in goodly wyſe ſeyt,
                  Out of Troye his royall chiefe Eitie,
                  His full entent and meſſage here by me,
                  As I ſhall ſaye to you in wordes playne.
                  If it ſo be that ye not diſdayne,
                  Paciently to gyue audience.
                  Remembryng fyrſt in your aduertence,
                  Of the harmes not full longe ago,
                  And the wronges that ye wrought alſo,
                  Full cruelly with other eke of yours,
                  In Troye lande on his progenitours.
                  What iniuryes and what deſtruction,
                  Cauſeles without any occaſyon,
                  Ye ſhewed haue of very cruelty,
                  And mercyles deſtroyed his Citie.
                  Slayne his father named Lamedowne,
                  And his cytie brent and beat adowne,
                  And nother lefte paleys houſe nor toure,
                  And lad awaye his rycheſſe and treaſour,
                  And nother ſpared as I reherſe can,
                  
                     In your ſlaughter woman childe nor man.
                  There might none from your ſwerde aſtert.
                  And yet one thynge yt moſt he hathe at herte,
                  That his ſyſter called Exyon,
                  Is hold and kept of kinge Thelamon,
                  Diſhoneſtly agayne all gentrye.
                  To great diſhonour and great vyllanye,
                  Of her kindred lyke as ye may ſe.
                  Treated nor cheriſhed like to her degre.
                  Wherfore ſyth ye be ſo wyſe a knight,
                  Ye ought aduert and to haue a ſyght,
                  To ſuch thinges of iuſt affection.
                  And conſydre in your diſcrecion,
                  Of gentilneſſe and of equite,
                  How ſuch wronges might amended be.
                  Wherfore Pryam of great auiſeneſſe,
                  As he that fully with all his buſyneſſe,
                  Of herte and will deſyreth peace and reſte,
                  Sendeth to you beſeching for the beſte,
                  That ye wil do your buſy diligence,
                  To make to hym this litell recompence.
                  That he may haue the reſtytucion,
                  Through your knightly mediacion,
                  Of his ſyſter withouten longer ſpace.
                  And the remenaunt he wyll let pace,
                  Strife and werre onely to eſchewe.
                  For he deſireth fully for to ſewe,
                  Peace and quyete of hole affection.
                  And to purſue meaſure and reaſon.
                  And finallye lyke as ye may ſe,
                  All occaſyon of werre for to fle,
                  Conſyder this that holdē be ſo ſage,
                  For this the fine fully of my meſſage.
                  ¶Whan Pelleus hym playnly vnderſtode,
                  Of ſodayne yre in hert he waxed woode,
                  Of cheare and loke fell and furyous.
                  And of rancoure right melancolyus.
                  That he ne might attempre nor appeaſe,
                  The haſty fyre that gan his herte ſeaſe.
                  For he anone in full diſpytous wiſe,
                  Gan Pryamus threten and deſpiſe,
                  And of malyce ſet his ſond at nought,
                  With al the meanes yt Anthenor hath ſought.
                  And gan alſo this Troian knight manace,
                  And bad in haſte that he auoyde his place,
                  Vpon peryll that after fall might.
                  And he anone went out of his ſyght.
                  And in all haſte he and his meynee,
                  Without abode taken haue the ſee.
                  And gan to ſaylen out of Theſalye,
                  And in theyr waye ſo faſt they gan theim hye,
                  That in ſhorte tyme they aryued be,
                  Vp at Salerne a mighty ſtrong Citye.
                  Where by fortune in this royall towne,
                  This Anthenor fonde king Thelamowne,
                  And to his paleys he hath the waye nome.
                  And firſt I finde that when he was come,
                  He was accepted vnto his preſence,
                  Beningly without all offence,
                  For Exyone was preſent in that tyde.
                  Of auenture ſtanding by his ſyde.
                  And at reuerence of her womanheade,
                  Of Anthenor he toke the better hede.
                  Albe of cuſtome that kyng Thelamon,
                  Had hye deſpyte and indignacion,
                  Of euerye Troyan that he could eſpye.
                  For ſpecially to them he had enuye.
                  Of rancour onely through the bytter rage,
                  Which in his hert might neuer yet aſwage.
                  But for al that he in pacience,
                  To Anthenor hath giuen audience,
                  The which anone in ful ſobre wiſe,
                  His tayle gan as I ſhall deuiſe.
                  ¶Syr quod he with ſupporte of your grace,
                  So ye me graunt oportune ſpace,
                  For to declare the cauſe of my cominge,
                  I will reherſe without more tarying,
                  My matter hole brefely in ſentence.
                  To make it kouthe to your magnificence.
                  Signifying without diſpleſaunce,
                  That Priamus which hath the gouernaūce,
                  Of Troye towne hath vnto you ſent,
                  Of faythfull meaning and of clene entent,
                  Beſechyng firſt to your goodlyheade,
                  All other wronges forgotten and eke deade,
                  That ye onely of your hygh nobleſſe,
                  Of equite and of gentilneſſe,
                  Ye will reſtore Exyona agayne.
                  Which that ye hold to ſpeake in wordꝭ playn,
                  In very ſothe not like to her eſtate.
                  Wherfore he prayeth to ſtinten all debate.
                  And euery harme to put from memorye,
                  Of knightly honour for your owne glorye,
                  To ſende her home and make delyueraunce,
                  Goodly of her withouten varyaunce.
                  Whom ye haue holde ſo many longe dayes,
                  Ne tarieth not nor ſetteth no delayes,
                  Ne let in you be founden any ſlouthe.
                  
                     For ſothfaſtly it is to great a routhe,
                  As to recorde how ye haue her abuſed,
                  It may of trouthe not goodly be excuſed.
                  Which we ſhall lett lightly ouerſlyde,
                  So that ye beningly liſt prouyde,
                  To ſende her home like as I haue ſayde.
                  Lo here the charge that was on me layde,
                  Without more abiding in certayne,
                  What goodly anſwere ye will ſende agayne.
                  ¶Whan Thelamon herkened had his tayle,
                  For haſty yre he gan to wexen pale.
                  The fyery collor hath him made ſo woode,
                  That from his face aualed is the blode,
                  Within his herte and gan to frete and bite.
                  Wyth loke aſkoye and tourned vp the whyte.
                  Of hye diſdayne with face diſpytous,
                  With pale ſmilyng and laughter furyous.
                  Gan rake out the fearful mortall fyre,
                  Of fretinge hate that brent in his deſyre.
                  And ſhortly made in concluſyon,
                  To Anthenor put this ilke obiection,
                  And ſayde frende what euer that thou be,
                  I wonder greatly for meruayle is to me,
                  What auenture or ſodaine newe thinge,
                  Vnprudently meueth nowe thy kinge,
                  Vnto me to make ſuch a ſonde.
                  Thou were a foole whā ſo thou toke on hōd,
                  Eyther vnhappy or elles infortunate,
                  To me to bring this proude embaſſete.
                  For I with him wyl nothing haue a do,
                  Nor he with me and loke thou ſay him ſo.
                  For we ne be aqueynted but a lyte,
                  Nor I nothing platly me delyte,
                  At ſhort wordes if thou liſt to heare,
                  To do for hym nor ought at his prayer.
                  For I ne haue delyght ioye ne feſte,
                  To do the thinge wherof he maketh requeſte.
                  This wote I well that but a whyle a go,
                  I was at Troye my ſelfe and other mo.
                  For to reforme a thinge that was amys.
                  Through your offence ſhortly thus it is.
                  For certaine thing wrought by Lamedowne,
                  And by our manhod wonnē there ye towne.
                  And ſlewe the kyng & all that with him helde,
                  In knightly wiſe him meting in the felde.
                  And for that I as euerye man might ſe,
                  Did ieoparde firſt to enter that Cytye,
                  It was to me graunted for memorye,
                  In onely ſigne of mine hygh victorye,
                  Withouten any contradiction,
                  By all the Grekes to haue poſſeſſion,
                  Of her that is to me the moſt entere,
                  Exiona whom nowe thou claymeſt here.
                  But be well ſyker thyne aſking is in vayne.
                  For truſte me this & be right well certayne,
                  Thou getteſt her not at one worde yf I may.
                  For there ſhal firſt be made full greate affray.
                  Or I her leue during all my liue.
                  Who euer grutche or there agaynſt ſtriue.
                  It were not ſittyng me to leue her ſo,
                  For whom I had whilom ſo great a do.
                  Or I her gat with ſpending of me blode.
                  For who ſo wrothe be therwith or wood,
                  I will her kepe as it ſhall be founde,
                  For whom I had ſo many mortall wounde.
                  At Troye towne or that I her thenſe wan.
                  And in good fayth as fer forthe as I can,
                  She ſhall not lightly fro my handes pace.
                  For ſhe alone ſo ſtandeth in my grace,
                  For her beaute and her ſemelyheade,
                  For of her bounte and her godlyheade,
                  That if I ſhal my reaſon ſhortly fine,
                  She is in ſothe the moſt feminine,
                  That euer I ſawe and without dreade,
                  Of porte & conning and of womanheade,
                  She hath alone in very exiſtence,
                  The ſouereynte and perfect excellence.
                  That Priamus for ought that thou cā ſayne,
                  While that I lyue getteth her not agayne.
                  But he her bye with many deadly wounde.
                  With ſharpe ſwerdes & ſquare ſperes groūde.
                  For there ſhal firſt be reyſed ſuch a ſtrife,
                  That it ſhall coſt many mannes lyfe,
                  Or ſhe to him agayne reſtored be.
                  Take this forſothe yu getteſt no more of me.
                  And when him liſt he may wel beginne,
                  But I ſupoſe he ſhall but litell winne.
                  None otherwiſe but as I haue the tolde.
                  And woteſt yu what a great foole I the holde,
                  The to put thy ſelfe ſo ferre in Ieopartye,
                  To execute this his embaſſadrye.
                  The manly Grekes ſo boldly to offende.
                  Beware therfore that he no more the ſende.
                  Vpon thy ſelfe for rancoure nor for pride.
                  Now go thy waye for yf that thou abide,
                  Any longer ſothly in my ſyght,
                  Thou woteſt ye pryſe yt I haue the hyght,
                  Thou ſcapeſt not who that be liefe or lothe.
                  
                     Than Anthenor anone to ſhyp he goth.
                  And forth ſayleth hym liſt not to delaye,
                  Towarde an yle that called is Achaye.
                  And whan that he taken hath the lande,
                  At his ryuayle of auenture he fonde,
                  The worthy kynges Pollux and Caſtor.
                  And ryght anone this Troyan Anthenor,
                  Without abode to the courte is fare,
                  Vnto them his meſſage to declare.
                  And together when they were preſent,
                  Right thus he ſayd as in ſentement.
                  ¶The noble kynge of Troye the Citee,
                  Hath vnto you ſent his wyll by me.
                  Beſechyng you in full lowe maner,
                  That ſhe voucheſafe as vnto his prayer,
                  Of equitie for to condeſcende,
                  And goodly helpe a certeine wrong to mende.
                  Touchyng his ſyſter called Exion,
                  That he may haue reſtitucion,
                  Of her agayne by your diſcrete aduyſe.
                  For ſyth ye be ſo manly and ſo wyſe,
                  It lykely is in his oppynion,
                  That ye by your good medyacion,
                  May eaſely agayne reſtored be.
                  For to cheryſhe peace and vnitee.
                  Wherfore he prayeth wt all his herte entere,
                  In goodly wyſe to done your deuere,
                  That holde byn ſo knyghtly and ſo ſage,
                  And he wyll playnly all the ſurpluſage,
                  Of wronges olde put as in ſuſpence.
                  For he deſyreth of knyghtly hygh prudence,
                  To ſtynte warre and to nouryſhe peace.
                  For he is nother rakle nor rekles.
                  But euell auyſed in his workes all,
                  To caſte afore what that ſhall after fall.
                  And thynges future aduertynge from a ferre,
                  And ſeeth what peryll that there is in werre.
                  Wyll hym conforme vnto peace and reſte,
                  For he conceyueth that it is the beſte.
                  For euery man vnite to ſewe,
                  And prudently alſo to eſchewe,
                  Of all debates the hole full occaſion.
                  Lo here the fyne of this entencion,
                  Which I commyt vnto your iugement.
                  ¶This Caſtor then of yre inpacient,
                  For haſtineſſe ne might not abyde,
                  His cruell herte ſo ſwolen was with pride.
                  Brake out anone with right deſpiteous face,
                  And ſayde frende I knowe of no treſpace,
                  That euer grekes did vnto thy kynge,
                  To axe amendes it is a wonder thynge.
                  Of vs that neuer dyd him none offence.
                  Saue that we made a maner recompence,
                  Of a wronge wrought by Lamedon.
                  The whiche fyſte ſought occaſyon,
                  Agaynſt grekes in vngoodly wyſe,
                  That cauſed vs vpon hym tho to ryſe,
                  All at ones and manly on hym ſette,
                  Of due ryght for to quyte our dette.
                  Lyke his deſerte we haue him playnly ſerued,
                  And nothīg wrought but as he hath deſerued
                  To axe amendes he gynneth now to late.
                  For we coueyte more his mortall hate,
                  His vtter malys and his enmyte,
                  Then outher peace accorde or vnite.
                  As in effecte hereafter he ſhall fele,
                  If ſo he dare hereafter with vs deale.
                  The bargayne ſhall full dere ben abought,
                  And we his frendeſhyp ſothly ſet at nouhgt.
                  And ouermore I ſpeake now as to the,
                  It lykely is as ſemeth vnto me,
                  That Pryamus they loued but a lyte,
                  Not as I thincke, the value of a myte,
                  Whan he the ſent forth on this meſſage.
                  And thou of folye dyddeſt great outrage,
                  To take on the ſo hyghe a peryllous thynge,
                  Vnto grekes to bryngen ſuche tydynge.
                  Where throughe thy lyfe is put in inpartye.
                  But I the counſayle faſte that thou the hye▪
                  
                  Out of my ſyght leſt that thou repente.
                  ¶And Anthenor forth to ſhyp went,
                  And with the wynde gan to ſayle anone,
                  Towarde an yle that called was Pylon.
                  And in all haſt whan he dyd aryue,
                  He ſhope hym forth to the court as blyue,
                  Where duke Neſtor in all maner thynge,
                  His houſholde helde royall as a kinge.
                  And Anthenor full ſad and auyſee,
                  Tofore Neſtor ſyttyng on his ſee,
                  Whan that he was admytted for to ſayne,
                  His tale he tolde full openly and playne.
                  From poynt to poynt as ye herde afore,
                  It were but vayne for to reherſe it more.
                  For he alway concluded hath in one,
                  As ye haue herde touchyng Exion.
                  ¶But duke Neſtor with face nothyng red,
                  But of hewe of any aſſhes dead,
                  Fret with collor ſo inwardly was he,
                  
                     That his blode from eche extremitee,
                  Withdrawen is downe alowe vnto his herte.
                  Which for his yre ſo ſore made hym ſmerte,
                  That he gan quake in euery ioynt and vayne.
                  That he his hande vnneth may reſtreyne,
                  For melancolye a venged for to be.
                  Lyke a Lyon ſo wood and wroth was he.
                  Fer from hym ſelfe he was ſo alyenate,
                  And inwardly of rancour paſſyonate,
                  With loke reſerued and furious of ſyghte,
                  That tho to rule hym ſelfe vnneth he myghte,
                  He felte of anger ſo great aduerſytie,
                  And ſyth amyddes of all his crueltie,
                  Of ſodeyne haſte at ones he out brake,
                  And euen thus to Anthenor he ſpake.
                  ¶O thou quod he with al thy wordes whyte,
                  As I ſuppoſe that thou wotteſt full lyte,
                  Tofore whom thou haſte thy tale tolde.
                  For I meruayle howe thou arte ſo bolde,
                  Thus to preſume myne eares to offende.
                  And for Pryam ſo proudely to pretende.
                  A maner tytle in thy kynges name,
                  The worthy grekes for to put in blame,
                  And vniuſtly of foule hardyneſſe.
                  Requere of them for to haue redreſſe,
                  Of Iniuryes wrought by Lamedon.
                  Boldely affyrmyng of falſe preſumpcion,
                  Vpon grekes wronkes outragious.
                  Whiche in myne eres be ſo odyous,
                  So fretyng eke ſo bytyng and ſo kene,
                  For to lyſte that I may not ſuſteyne,
                  In my hearyng ſo hatefull is the ſowne.
                  That ner the honour of my hye renowne,
                  Refrayned me I ſhulde in cruell wyſe,
                  Execute full haſtely Iuſtyce.
                  Through the rygour of my mortall law,
                  With beſtes wylde fyrſte to do the drawe,
                  And thervpon for thy fayned tale,
                  Diſmembre the all on peces ſmale,
                  In deſpyte of Pryamus thy kynge.
                  To teache other to bryng more tydyng,
                  Preſumptuouſly or any tales newe,
                  To any lorde but he hym better knewe.
                  Thus ſhuldeſt thou haue for thy preſūpcion,
                  Thy laſt mede and fynall guerdon,
                  Without mercy lyke as I haue behyght.
                  And in all haſt bego out of my ſyght,
                  For vtterly it doth to great offence,
                  Vnto myne eye to haue the in preſence.
                  For through diſdeine it cauſeth myne vnreſte.
                  ¶Than Anthenor thought as for the beſt,
                  It was not holſom longer to abyde.
                  But caſte wyſely for rancour or for pryde,
                  That it was beſte for to beare him fayre,
                  And to his ſhyppe he gan anone repayire,
                  And in all haſte by poſſybilitee,
                  Without abode he taken hath the ſea.
                  And gan to ſayle and homeward faſte drawe,
                  But ſodeynly to boylen gan the wawe,
                  The ſeas to ryſe and the cloudes blacke,
                  For to appere and the wynde a wake,
                  Wonder gaſtfull alſo was the heauen,
                  With dredfull fyre of the bryght leuen,
                  The thonder ſmote. ſo gan the tēpeſt driue,
                  That toppe and maſt aſunder gynneth ryue.
                  Now alofte and now in poynt to drowne,
                  The fell wether gan ſo on theim frowne,
                  That naught they awayte but on the death.
                  Euen at the poynt of yeldyng vp of the brethe.
                  For they ne ſawe none other remedy,
                  Styll amonge they gan to clepe and crye,
                  Vnto their goddes and auowes make,
                  And deuoutly for to vndertake,
                  Eche of them as he was growen of age,
                  If they eſcape to go on pylgremage.
                  Lyke the rytes of their paynym wyſe,
                  To the goddes to do their ſacrifyſe.
                  So as they were of ſubſtaunce & of myght,
                  And ſodeinly the wether derke as nyght,
                  With newe lyght by grace gan adawe.
                  The ſea ware calme and ſmothē gan ye wawe.
                  So that of happe amonge euerychone,
                  For all the tempeſt periſhed not one.
                  But tofore Troye within a lyttell ſpace,
                  They be aryued euerychone by grace,
                  Eſchaped ſafe from euery ioypardye.
                  Bothe Anthenor and all his companye.
                  And to the temple he toke the ryght way,
                  And in his prayer there full longe he laye.
                  With many another alſo for his ſake,
                  Thankyng their goddes yt lyſten ſo to ſlake,
                  Euery peryll and tempeſt of the ſea.
                  And after this vnto the kynge goeth he.
                  That with his lordes about him full royall,
                  In his paleys and dongyon pryncipall,
                  Sat and abode full ſolempnelye.
                  To heare reporte of this embaſſadrye.
                  And this knyght of all that hath hym fall,
                  
                     Hath tolde the kynge tofore his lordes all.
               
               
                  THis Anthenor hath fyrſt made mencion,
                  Tofore the kynge by iuſte relacion,
                  Of his exployt by ordre by and by,
                  And in what wyſe and howe vncurteouſly,
                  He was receyued of kynge Pelleus.
                  Of the thretes, and wordes deſpyteous,
                  That he had ſuffred of kyng Thelamon,
                  As ferſe and cruell as a wood Lyon.
                  And afterwarde he gan alſo complayne,
                  Of the deſpyte of the bretherne tawyne,
                  Of his rebuke and his great dread,
                  And at Neſtor howe he happed to ſpede,
                  That with his lyfe he myght vnneth eſcape,
                  All this he tolde and gan an ende make,
                  Of his iourney and eke of his repayre.
                  Wherby Pryam was fully in diſpayre,
                  Outher by force or yet by aduenture,
                  That he his ſyſter neuer might recure.
                  For he conceyueth in his aduertence,
                  By cleare reporte of experte euydence,
                  That aye the more he was to theim beninge,
                  The more vngoodly ayen him they malinge.
                  & where he ſheweth him ſelfe moſt debonayre,
                  There he ayeneward fond thē moſt cōtrayre.
                  So frowardly euer they theim quite.
                  Shewing by ſygnes that they ſet but lyte,
                  By his frendſhyp for ought he could aduerte.
                  Wherof he was ful ſorowfull in herte,
                  That he conſtrayned ryght of very nede,
                  Was tho compelled iuſtly to procede,
                  To haue redreſſe onely by rygoure:
                  For profered peace myght haue no fauour.
                  To be admitted by tytle of rightwyſeneſſe,
                  Through hygh deſpite of haſty wylfulneſſe.
                  For euery meane of meaſoure was in vayne,
                  Saue onely werre engendred by diſdayne,
                  Began and cauſed all of olde hatrede.
                  Which gan anone ſuch a broyle to brede,
                  Of newe enuy within the kynge his breſte,
                  That Priamus without more areſte,
                  So inly Irous and with rancour fret,
                  And with diſdayne ſo ſore ground & whet,
                  That where ſo be that he muſt leſe or wyn,
                  Vpon Grekes he wyll a werre begyn.
                  And therin Ieoparde manly as a knight,
                  His lyfe and deathe bycauſe he had ryght.
                  And caſt hym firſt a nauye for to ſende,
                  In haſt to Grece his fomen to offende.
                  And like a knight his force there to haunte,
                  In knightly wiſe he caſt him for to daunt,
                  The pompe of Grekes and the ſturdineſſe,
                  And fynally theyr pride to oppreſſe.
                  ¶But ſaye me Priam what infelycitye,
                  What newe trouble, what hap, what deſtiny,
                  Or from aboue what hateful influence,
                  Deſcended is by vnware violence,
                  To meue ye thus thou canſt not liue in peace.
                  What ſodayne ſorte what fortune graceleſe,
                  What chaunce vnhappy without auiſeneſſe,
                  What wilfull luſt what fonde hardineſſe,
                  Haue put thy ſoule out of tranquilitye,
                  To make the werye of thy proſperitye.
                  What ſauoureſt yu in bitter more thē ſwete,
                  That canſt not lyue in peace nor in quiete.
                  Thou art trauayled with wilfull mocions,
                  And ouer mayſtred with thy paſſions.
                  For lacke of reaſon and of hyghe prudence,
                  Derked and blinde from all prouydence.
                  And full barayne to caſt afore and ſe,
                  The harmes folowyng of thine aduerſitye.
                  Thou were to ſlowe wiſely to conſydre,
                  For want of ſyght made the thus to ſlydre.
                  Through myſt of errour falſly to forueye,
                  By pathes wronge from the right weye.
                  To voyde reaſon of wylful haſtyneſſe,
                  Where was thy guyde where was thy mayſtreſſe,
                  Diſcrecion ſo prudēt & ſo ſadde,
                  Auyſely that ſhould the there haue lad,
                  From the traces of ſenſualitee.
                  Though it ful ſelde in mannes power be.
                  By ſufferaunce him ſelfe to refrayne,
                  Whan ſodayne yre doth his herte ſtrayne.
                  thou ſhuldeſt afore better haue caſt thi chaūce
                  Wrought by counſayle & not put in balaunce,
                  Thy ſykerneſſe alas why diddeſt thou ſo.
                  And haue ſymuled ſome dele of the wo.
                  And caſt thy chaunge wel afore the prime,
                  To haue forgotten wronges of olde time.
                  And thought afore as in thine aduertence,
                  That oft it falleth in experyence,
                  That whiles men do moſt theyr buſyneſſe,
                  Vengeably olde wronges to redreſſe,
                  With double harme or that they beware,
                  They fall agayne in a newe ſnare.
                  And domages that were forgotten cleane,
                  By falſe reporte of rumour freſhe & grene,
                  
                     Renewed be through the ſwyfte fame,
                  That fleeth fer to hurt a lordes name.
                  Namely whan ſo they to a purpoſe wende,
                  Only of head and not forſee the ende.
                  For of pryde and of ſodayne heate,
                  They voyde them ſelfe out of all quyete,
                  Aduertyng not to worke auyſely,
                  Nor the prouerbe that teacheth comonly,
                  He that ſtande ſure enhaſte hym not to meue,
                  For yf he do it ſhall him after greue.
                  And he that walketh ſurely on the playne,
                  Where if he ſtumble it is but in vayne,
                  Onleſſe ſo be he lyſte of his folye,
                  Be neclygent to put hym wylfully,
                  In auenture and of hym ſelfe to reche,
                  To eſchewe peryll I holde he be a wreche.
                  For ſothly Pryam thou were to recheleſe,
                  For to commytte thy quyete and the peace,
                  So dredfully durynge by no date,
                  To cruell fortune or to fykell fate.
                  Whoſe maner is of cuſtome comonly,
                  That whan a man truſteth moſt ſuredly,
                  Of this goddeſſe blynde and full vnſtable,
                  Then ſhe to hym is moſte deceyuable.
                  Hym to abate from his royall ſtalle,
                  And ſodeynly doth make hym downe to falle.
                  And with a tryp throwe him on the backe,
                  Who that gayne ſtriueth ſhal haue lytle tacke.
                  She is ſo ſlyely with her gylefull ſnare,
                  That ſhe can make a man for his welfare,
                  With her pantre that is with fraude englewed
                  Whā he leaſt weneth for to be remewed.
                  Therfore no man may hope affyaunce,
                  In fortunes rule ſo full of varyance.
                  Ne lete no wyght his eaſe more Iuparte,
                  Then he ne recke how ſhe the game departe,
                  To tourne his chaunce outher to well or wo,
                  For ſelde in one ſhe doth the game go.
                  As ye may ſee example of Pryamus,
                  That of his foly is ſo deſyrous,
                  To worke of head and folow ſo his wylle.
                  That troubled is the calme of his tranquille.
                  As in the boke hereafter ſhalbe founde,
                  Hym and his citie platly to confounde.
                  And vtterly to his confuſyon,
                  That afterwarde by longe ſucceſſyon,
                  It ſhalbe red in ſtory and in fable,
                  And remembred with dytees delytable.
                  To do pleaſaunce to them that ſhall it here,
                  That by this ſample they beware and lere,
                  Of haſty luſt or of raſhe voluntee,
                  To gyn a thyng wherin no ſuretee,
                  Dependeth aye as ſtryfe werre and debate.
                  For in ſuch play vnwarely cometh check mate
                  And harme ydone to late is to amende,
                  Whoſe fyne is ofte other then they wende.
                  In this ſtory as ye ſhall after ſee,
                  And lette Pryam alwaye your myrrour be.
                  Haſty errour by tymes to correcte,
                  For I anone my poyntill wyll directe,
                  After the maner of his traces rude,
                  Of this ſtory the remnaunt to conclude.
               
               
                  THis worthy kyng euer of one ſentence,
                  Aye more and more fyred with feruence,
                  Hath his breuettes and his letters ſente,
                  For his lordes to holde a parlement.
                  And them cōmaunded in al the haſt they may
                  To come anone at their aſſygned daye.
                  From euery warde and party of the towne,
                  For to aſſemble in noble Ilyowne.
                  Chiefe of his reigne & when they were echone
                  With hym preſent this noble kyng anone,
                  Tofore theim all as ſhortly as he can,
                  His wyll declareth and thus he than began.
                  ¶Syres quod he bycauſe ye be ſo wyſe,
                  It nedeth not longe proceſſe to deuyſe,
                  For to reherſe of your comynge the cauſe,
                  But for to tell ſhortly in a clauſe,
                  What I meane and maketh no more delaye.
                  Ye wotte how I now this other day,
                  Sent into Grece by counſayle of you all,
                  A knyght of myne that Anthenor is call.
                  To haue recured Exiona agayne,
                  Whoſe meſſage tho was not but in vayne.
                  For of grekes full vncurteyſly,
                  He was receyued and diſpyteouſly,
                  Threte and rebuked in poynt to haue be dead.
                  Vnneth he myght eſcape with his head.
                  They put on hym ſuch hygh offence & blame,
                  That muche redoundeth to our alder ſhame.
                  And day by day it muſt encreaſe the more,
                  But we ordeyne ſome remedy therfore.
                  For there as we all meaſure haue them offred,
                  They haue to vs werre and ſtryfe yprofred.
                  Of hyghe deſpyte of rancour and of heate,
                  And of malys cruelly vs threate.
                  And where as we wold peace of thē purchace,
                  
                     For wronges done they felly vs manace.
                  And for ye harmes yt they haue to vs wrought.
                  They not purpoſe playnly in their thought,
                  Other redreſſe nor amendes make.
                  But vtterly with werre vs to awake.
                  Whoſe ioye is fully encreaſe of our greuaunce
                  So wolde god they were with repentaunce.
                  Contryte in herte to ſtynten all myſchiefe,
                  That lykely is to fall and eke the grefe,
                  On outher parte that it myght ouer ſlyde.
                  But they alas with rancour & with pryde,
                  Are ſwole of new to threaten more and more.
                  But god defende halfe deale of the ſore,
                  By infortune that euer ſhulde be fall,
                  As they purpoſe to euery of vs all.
                  But ſyth they haue deuyſed thus for vs,
                  We muſt reſyſte their wyll malicious,
                  Through myght of god as of neceſſitie,
                  In our deffence it wyll none other be.
                  And beſte I holde vnto our entent,
                  To worke and do all by one aſſent.
                  So we our purpoſe ſoneſt ſhall achieue,
                  Where is diſcorde there may no quarell preue.
                  For on that parte where hertes be not one,
                  Victorye may no way with them gone.
                  Chiefe of conqueſt is peace and vnitie.
                  Ryght as diſcorde is of aduerſytie.
                  Wherfore I read that of a wyll and harte,
                  Lette vs ſet on to do the grekes ſmerte.
                  For ſothfaſtly if ſo ye lyſte to ſe,
                  I dare affyrme that we farre ſtronger be,
                  Than be the grekes vpon euery parte,
                  And haue of armes parfytly the arte.
                  And be accoūted of knighthod crop and roote,
                  And plenty haue of horſemen and on foote.
                  Arrayed well eueryche in his degree,
                  And therwith alſo ſtronge is our Citie.
                  For to withſtonde our fomon euerichone,
                  You counſayling, and ſyth ordayne anone,
                  Fyrſt taſſemble holy your nauye,
                  And ſtuffe them ſtrongly wt our chiualrye,
                  And into Grece haſtely them to ſende,
                  The proude grekes manly to offende.
                  And of iuſte cauſe and by tytle of ryght,
                  On theim to werre with all our force & might.
                  Their townes bren and their fyeldes waſte,
                  With herte vnfayned alſo vs enhaſte,
                  To quite them as they deſerued haue,
                  For by my read we ſhall none of them ſaue.
                  But cruellyf to do on theim vengeaunee,
                  Ne hath no eare ne let be no greuaunce,
                  Though they tofore by fortune were victours
                  And ſlewe our fathers & progenitours.
                  For he that was of vnhap fyrſte put downe,
                  Remounteth ofte and that to hyghe renowne.
                  As by the charge and duble varyance,
                  Of werre and ſtryfe that aye is in balaunce.
                  For he that this day is aſſured wele,
                  We ſee to morowe caſt downe of the whele.
                  The victor ofte lykewyſe in aduenture,
                  And vanquiſhed as by diſcomfyture,
                  Of hym that had afore the victorie.
                  Now vp ſyth downe in armes ſtant the glory.
                  In Martes chaunce no man may him aſſure,
                  But as it cometh ſo muſt he take his eure.
                  For gery Mars by ſudden influence,
                  Can gyue a man whylom excellence,
                  To wynne a pryſe lyke a conquerour,
                  And ſodaynly as falleth the ſomer floure,
                  He can his honour make for to fade.
                  For whan that he all his aſpectes glade,
                  From any man lyſteth for to wrythe,
                  His olde renowne goth away as blythe,
                  As after floode the ebbe foloweth aye.
                  As men deſerue prayſe them for the daye.
                  For though to day Phebus mery ſhyne,
                  To morow he may his bemes downe decline.
                  Through the thickneſſe of the miſtes trouble,
                  Ryght ſo of Mars are the chaunces double.
                  Now vp, now downe, now low, & now alofte,
                  As fortune will whiche that chaungeth ofte,
                  Lyſt on her whele make a man aſſende,
                  And vnwarely downe agayne deſcende.
                  Stounde mele his honour to auaunce,
                  And with aſweigh throwe him to miſchaunce.
                  Now with fauour ſet him vp full hye,
                  Erſt him auale with twyngling of an eye.
                  Her playe vnſtable tourneth as a ball.
                  Whyle one goeth vp an other hath a fall.
                  She reyſeth one and doth another loute,
                  For euery man whan it cometh aboute,
                  Muſt take his tourne as her playe requireth.
                  Who is experte and her fraudes lereth,
                  Shall with hir ſugre fynde gall ymeynt.
                  And her hony aye with bitter ſpreynt.
                  In peace and werre in honour and in fame,
                  In dignities in renowne and in ſhame,
                  Be at her lykyng as her lyſt to graunt,
                  
                     Therfore no man his hap to muche auaunte.
                  ¶For though grekes whylom were a lofte,
                  It may them happe hereafter full vnſofte.
                  Wherfore echone ſhewe your worthyneſſe,
                  That ſo are named of ſtrength & hardineſſe.
                  And to fortune playnly you commytte,
                  And lette no feare your manly hertes flytte.
                  But ſtonde hole and be in meanyng playne,
                  And therupon let ſe what ye wyll ſayne.
                  And at ones their voyce they gan reyſe,
                  And his ſentence hyghely for to preyſe.
                  And of one herte manly gan expreſſe,
                  They wil at ones deſpende goodes & rycheſſe,
                  And their bodyes put in Ieopardye,
                  There was not one that wolde it tho denye.
                  And of this graunt he thanketh them echone,
                  And gaue them leue where them lyſt to gone.
                  For he diſſolued hath his parlement,
                  And euery man on his waye is went.
                  And repayred to his manſiowne,
                  The kynge alone lefte in Ilyowne,
                  Sole by hym ſelfe inwardly muſynge,
                  How he his purpoſe myght about brynge.
                  For he in ſoth on nothyng elles thought,
                  And therupon in fyne thus he wrought.
               
               
                  KYng Pryamus makyng thus his mone,
                  As I you tolde in chambre all alone,
                  Many wayes caſtyng vp and downe,
                  For to perfourme his concluſyowne,
                  And to fulfyll the fyne of his entent,
                  He fyrſte of all prudently hath ſent,
                  For his ſonnes to come to hym in haſte,
                  As well for them that were borne in baſte,
                  As for the other taſſemble there yfeare.
                  For this purpoſe lyke as ye ſhall here.
                  To haue a counſaile for nedeful purueaunce,
                  Againſt grekes to maken ordenaunce.
                  Fyrſt by them ſelfe alone pryuely,
                  And when they were in ordre by and by,
                  Eueryche of them ſet in his dewe ſee,
                  Lyke as they were of age and of degree,
                  And Hector fyrſt floure of chyualrye,
                  Repayred home out of Panonye,
                  Moſt acceptable in euery wyghtes grace,
                  Nexte his father taken hath his place.
                  ¶And whan Pryam his leyſer did eſpye,
                  With ſyghes ſore caſtyng vp his eye,
                  To them echone ſyttyng enuyron,
                  Gan to declare his hertes mocyon.
                  But firſt or he might ought his wil expowne
                  In ſalt teares he gan hym ſelfe drowne,
                  So inly was his wo outragyous,
                  That for wepyng and ſobbyng furyous,
                  Vnneth he myght with any word out breake.
                  Nor vnto them for diſtreſſe ſpeake.
                  Nor openly his inwarde meanyng ſhewe,
                  Tyll at the laſt he in wordes fewe,
                  Gan to abrade in all his pyteous fare,
                  Euen thus in ſentence gynnyng to declare.
                  ¶My dere ſonnes ſo louyng and ſo kynde,
                  As I ſuppoſe that ye haue in mynde,
                  And remembre diſcretly and aduerte,
                  And eke imprente full freſhly in your herte,
                  How the grekes agayne all ryght and lawe,
                  With cruell ſwerde mundred haue and ſlawe,
                  Our auncetours whylom of hyghe renowne,
                  And deſtroyed brent and beate downe,
                  The fyrſt Troye with his walles olde.
                  And how vngoodly alſo they withholde,
                  Myne owne ſyſter called Exion.
                  To full great ſhame and confuſyon,
                  And hyghe repryfe to your worthyneſſe,
                  That me ſemeth of very kyndeneſſe,
                  And of nature ye ought be agreued,
                  And inwardly in herte ſore amened.
                  To ſuffer her in hyndring of her name,
                  So to be treated for your alder ſhame.
                  Alas why nyl ye do your beſyneſſe,
                  This highe deſpyte knyghtly to redreſſe.
                  You for tauenge vpon their crueltie,
                  Recure to fynde of her iniquitie.
                  Sith that ye be ſo myghty and ſo ſtronge.
                  Certes me ſemeth ye byden all to longe,
                  From day to day that ye ſo differre,
                  In knyghtly wyſe to gyn on them a werre,
                  Your force and myght manly to aſſaye.
                  I am pure ſory that ye lyſte delaye,
                  You to confyrmen vnto my deſyre,
                  That in their hate bren as hoote as fyre.
                  And vpon them lyke as ye may ſee,
                  Of frettynge yre auenged for to be.
                  Lyke their deſert to quyten them their mede.
                  And ye alas that lyſten take no hede,
                  Whyle your renowne doth ſo freſhly ſhyne,
                  Vnto my luſte your hertes to declyne.
                  Conſyderyng lyke as it is well kouthe,
                  How I my ſelfe from your tender youth,
                  
                     Y foſtred you and brought you forth echone,
                  Fro thilke daye that firſt ye coud gone,
                  As tenderly as I could or might,
                  To which thynge in your inward ſyght,
                  Ye ſhuld aduert alway newe and newe,
                  And of nature on my ſorowes rewe,
                  To remedye this mine aduerſytee.
                  Whych toucheth you alſo as wel as me,
                  Sith that ye wote how ſore it doth me greue,
                  Ye ſhulden ſhape myne harmes to releue.
                  And ſodeinly as he thus gan mourne,
                  Towardes Hector he gan his face tourne.
                  And ſayd Hector my truſte and all my ioye,
                  Mine heyre alſo, like to reygne in Troy,
                  After my daye and be my ſucceſſoure,
                  And named art the very ſouerayne floure,
                  Of worthyneſſe and of manhod the well.
                  And al thy brethren in knighthod doſt excelle.
                  And in armes lyke a conquerour,
                  Called the ſtock of worſhyp and honour,
                  I hertely praye though thou ſytteſt ſtyll,
                  Be wyllinge nowe my purpoſe to fulfyll,
                  To execute that I deſyre ſo.
                  For fynally in the and in no mo,
                  Is full my fayth to bryng this thinge about.
                  Now take on the and be nothinge in doubte.
                  To be chefetayne and alſo gouernour,
                  Of this purpoſe and vtterly ſocour,
                  Into thine hande this Iourney I committe.
                  Hooly of herte ſo that thou ne flytte,
                  The to confourme by good auyſement.
                  Vp to perfourme the fine of mine entent.
                  For of reaſon beſt to the it ſyt,
                  Whych art ſo prudent and ſo ful of wyt,
                  Strong and deliuer flouryng eke in youthe,
                  Of whom ye fame through ye world is kouthe.
                  Yonge of yeares olde of diſcreciowne,
                  Eurous to loue, paſſyng of renowne.
                  Vnto whoſe will thy brethren ſhall obeye,
                  And ſtande with the both to lyue and deye.
                  Now cōdeſcēde to accomplyſhe my requeſt,
                  And what thou feleſt anſwere at the leſte.
                  ¶And whē the kinge hath ſhewed his ſētēce,
                  Demure of cheare humble of reuerence,
                  This worthy Hector example of gentrie,
                  With ſoft ſpeche as teacheth curteſye,
                  His anſwere gaue with ſobre countenaunce,
                  The effecte of which was this in ſubſtaunce.
                  ¶Mine owne lorde and my father dere,
                  Beningly if ſo ye liſt to heare,
                  After the force and the great might,
                  And after eke the ſumme of natures ryght,
                  Which euerye thinge by kinde doth conſtrain,
                  In the bondes of her large chayne,
                  It ſytting is as ſhe doth enſpyre,
                  And to that ende that euery man deſyre,
                  Of wronges done to haue amendement.
                  And to her lawe ryght conuenient,
                  Namely to ſuch that with nobylytye,
                  Kinde hath endewed and ſet in high degre,
                  For to ſuch great reprefe is and ſhame,
                  When any wronge be do vnto theyr name.
                  For eche treſpaſſe muſt conſydered be,
                  Iuſtly meaſured by the qualyty,
                  Of hym that is offended and alſo,
                  After the parſon by whom the wrong is do,
                  Be it in werre in conteck or debate.
                  For greater grefe is to high eſtate.
                  To ſuffer harme of caſe or auenture,
                  Or any wronge vniuſtly to endure,
                  Or iniuryes compaſſed by malyce,
                  Is more offence by diſcrete aduyſe,
                  To theim that be famous in manhod,
                  Well renoumed and borne of gentyl blode,
                  Than to ſuch one that holde is but a wretch
                  Wherfore we muſt greatly charge and retch
                  Onely of knighthod our worſhyp for to eke,
                  Of wronges done a mendes for to ſeke.
                  Our ſtate conſydered & our high nobleſſe,
                  And in what plyte we ſtand of worthyneſſe,
                  Whan that beaſtes of reaſon rude & blinde,
                  Deſyre the ſame by iuſt inſtinct of kinde.
                  ¶And for my parte truſteth in certayne,
                  Ye haue no ſonne that woulde half ſo fayne,
                  Vpon Grekes auenged be as I.
                  For here my trouthe I ſay you faythfully,
                  For yre of theim I bren as doth the glede,
                  I thurſt their blode more than other mede.
                  For ryght as I eldeſt am of age,
                  Amonge your ſonnes ſo am I moſt wt rage,
                  I fret within iuſtly of knighthode,
                  With my right hand to ſhed the grekes blode.
                  As they ſhalle fele peraunter or they wene.
                  Whan time cometh the ſothe ſhalbe ſene.
                  ¶But firſte I rede wiſely in your minde,
                  To caſt afore and leue not behinde,
                  Or ye begyn diſcretly to aduert,
                  And prudently conſydre in your herte,
                  
                     All onely not the gynnynge but the ende.
                  And yt the middes what way in they wil wēd.
                  And to what fine fortune will theim lede,
                  If ye thus do amiſſe ye may not ſpede.
                  For that counſayle in mine opinion,
                  Is worthy lytell by diſcrecion,
                  To haue a pryſe that caſt not by and by,
                  The courſe of thinges by ordre ceryouſly.
                  What waye they trace to wo or to delyte.
                  For though a ginninge haue his appetite,
                  Yet in the ende playnly this no fable,
                  There may thīg fall which is not cōmēdable.
                  For what is worthe a ginninge fortunate,
                  That cauſeth after ſtrife and great debate.
                  Wherfore in ſothe begynninges are to dread,
                  But mē well knowe what fine ſhall ſuccede.
                  For a ginninge with grace is well fortuned,
                  Whan ende and middes a lyke be contuned.
                  But when that it in wele ne may conteme,
                  It is well better rather to abſteine,
                  Than put in doubt that ſtandeth in ſuerte.
                  For who ſo doth hath aduerſitee.
                  But humble this to your eſtate royall,
                  Of herte I pray let not offende at all,
                  That I am bolde to ſay my mocion.
                  For in good fayth of none entencion,
                  I nothing meue to do to you offence,
                  But onely this that your magnificence,
                  Procede not of heade to wilfully.
                  Ne that no haſt you meue to foly.
                  To gyn a thing that after wil you ſhende,
                  For lacke that ye ſe not tofore the ende.
                  Nor take hede in your aduertence,
                  To conſydre by good prouidence,
                  How Grekes haue in theyr ſubiection,
                  Europe and Affryke with many region.
                  Ful large & wide of knighthod moſt famous,
                  And of rycheſſe wonder plenteous.
                  Right renoumed alſo of worthineſſe,
                  With your ſupporte I dare it wel expreſſe.
                  Ful peryllous is theim diſpleaſe or diſturbe
                  For yf that we our quyet nowe parturbe,
                  Which ſtandeth fully in peace is to drede.
                  For though all Aſſye helpe vs in our nede,
                  If it be loked on euery parte aryght,
                  They be not egal vnto Grekes might.
                  ¶And though alſo mine Aunte Exion,
                  Agayne all right be holde of Thelamon,
                  It is not good for her redempcion,
                  To put vs all vnto deſtruction.
                  I rede not that we bye her halfe ſo deare.
                  For many of vs perhappes that ſyttē here,
                  And other mo might for her ſake
                  Death vnderfonge and an ende make.
                  Which were no wiſedome lyke as ſemeth me,
                  And it may happe alſo how that ſhe,
                  In ſhorte time her fatall courſe ſhall fine.
                  Whē Attropos the thredde a two ſhal twine.
                  What had we then wonne and ſhe were go,
                  But enmite, thought, ſorowe and wo.
                  Slaughter of our men death and confuſyō,
                  Wherfore I reade without diſcencion,
                  Without more that we our wo endure.
                  And not to put our ſelfe in auenture.
                  This holde I beſt and worke as the wyſe,
                  But doubtles for no cowardiſe,
                  I ſaye not this in your high preſence.
                  But forcauſe I holde it no prudence,
                  To fortune knowen ſo ful of doubilneſſe,
                  Syth we be ſure to put our ſykerneſſe.
                  Thus all and ſome the effect of my will.
                  And with that worde Hector helde hym ſtyll.
               
               
                  ANd whan yt Hector by ful high prudēce,
                  Cōcluded hath the fine of his ſētence.
                  Ful demurely he kept his lippes cloſe.
                  And therwithall this Paris vp aroſe,
                  And gan his tale thus afore the kinge.
                  My lorde quod he ſo it be lykinge,
                  To your highneſſe for to taken hede.
                  As me ſemeth we ſhuld litell dread,
                  In knightly wiſe for to vndertake
                  Vpon Grekes a werre for to make,
                  All at ones theyr pride to confounde.
                  Sith that we ſo paſſingly habounde,
                  Of chiualry here within our towne.
                  And haue plenty and poſſeſſyowne,
                  Of eche thinge that may to werre auayle,
                  Stuffe in our ſelfe and royall apparayle.
                  Of all that longeth to aſſautes marciall.
                  And with all this more in ſpeciall,
                  Helpe and ſuccour of many region,
                  With vs to worke to theyr deſtruction.
                  The pompe and pryde manly to abate,
                  And of Grekes the malyce to amate.
                  For al that they of herte be ſo ſtoute,
                  Me ſemeth ſhortlye that we nede not doubte,
                  Nor on no parte for to be diſmayed.
                  
                     Wherfore I reade let not be delayed,
                  Our ſhyppes fyrſt ready for to make,
                  And I my ſelfe wyl fully vndertake,
                  So it to you be liking and pleſaunce,
                  Of this empryſe hooly the gouernaunce,
                  And you aſſure and put in certayne.
                  Exyona for to recure agayne.
                  And in what fourme that it ſhall be wrought,
                  I haue a waye deuiſed in my thought.
                  That likely is hereafter to be done.
                  Which vnto you I will declare anone,
                  Firſt I haue caſt with ſtrōg & myghty hand,
                  For to rauyſhe ſome lady of that land,
                  Of high eſtate and make no taryinge,
                  And mightely into Troye her brynge.
                  Maugre her might for this concluſyon,
                  That ye may haue reſtitucion,
                  By chaunge of her that ye deſyre ſo.
                  And therupon ſhall not be longe ado,
                  I you behete for all the Grekes ſtronge,
                  And for that I ſhall not this tale prolonge,
                  I wil you ſayne excluding euerye doubte,
                  How this aduiſe ſhal well be brought about.
                  Firſt how that I ſhal this purpoſe fine,
                  The goddes haue thrugh their power diuine,
                  Shewed to me by reuelacion.
                  For therupon I had auiſyon,
                  But late agone as I laye in a ſlepe,
                  Vnto the which if ſo ye take kepe,
                  Ye may not fayle nor be in no deſpayre,
                  To haue recure of her that is ſo fayre.
                  For whom ye haue now ſo much care.
                  ¶And the maner hoole I wyl declare,
                  Of this dreame to your magnificence,
                  If it ſo be ye lyſteth giue credence,
                  To this my tale for I ſhal not dwelle,
                  Ceryouſly in ordre for to tell,
                  The very trouthe and no fable fayne.
                  To you that be my lorde moſt ſouerayne.
                  ¶Firſt if that ye remembre in your minde,
                  This other daye when I was laſt in Inde
                  By your aduyſe and commaundement,
                  For a matter which in your entent,
                  Was ſpecially had in cheirte,
                  As it is knowen betwene you and me,
                  Of whych I toke vpō me tho the charge,
                  Within the bondes of that land large.
                  ¶The ſame time your deſyre to ſpede,
                  When that Titan with his beames rede,
                  From Geminy droue his chayre of golde,
                  Toward the Crabbe for to take his holde.
                  Which named is the paleys of Diane,
                  The bent moone that wex can and wane.
                  When halowed is the ſonnes ſtacion,
                  Nigh the middes of the moneth of Iuyn.
                  At which ſeaſon early in the morowe,
                  Whan that Phebus auoiding nightes ſorow,
                  Doth Pirrous his wayne vp to drawe,
                  And Aurora Eſtward doth adawe,
                  And with the water of her teares rounde,
                  The ſiluer dewe cauſeth to habounde,
                  Vpon the herbes and the floures ſoote,
                  Ful kindly noryſhyng both crop & roote.
                  ¶Vp I roſe out of my bed anone,
                  Ful deſyrous on huntinge for to gone,
                  Pricked in herte with luſty freſhe pleſaunce,
                  To do to loue ſome dewe obſeruaunce,
                  And Diana that daye to magnifie.
                  Which called is lady of Venerye,
                  And reuerendly rites to obſerue,
                  Of Citherea her as tho to ſerue,
                  I and my feres our hertes to releue,
                  Caſt vs fully til it drewe to eue,
                  Within a foreſt to playe vs and diſporte,
                  And pleſauntly vs to recomforte,
                  As it longeth to loue of luſtyneſſe.
                  For thilke day to Venus the goddeſſe,
                  Yſacred was by full great excellence.
                  With great honour and dewe reuerence,
                  Done vnto her both of one and all,
                  And on a fryday is this aduenture fall.
                  Whan we gā haſte vs to the woodes grene,
                  In hope that day ſome game for to ſene.
                  With great labour riding to and fro,
                  Til that we had full many bucke and doo,
                  By ſtrengthe ſlayne as we might thē fynde.
                  The herte ychaſed with hoūdes & the hinde,
                  Through the downes and the dales lowe,
                  Till Phebus high vpon his dayes bowe,
                  Amid the arke was of Meredien,
                  For than his beames ful hote were and ſhene▪
                  
                  And we moſt buſy were vpon the chaſe.
                  That me befell a wonder diuerſe caſe.
                  For of fortune it happed ſodeynly,
                  While I was ſeuered from my companye,
                  Sole by my ſelfe amonge the holtes hore,
                  To finde game deſyrous euermore,
                  Or I was ware through thicke & thyn,
                  
                     A ful great harte I ſawe afore me ryn.
                  Downe by the launde and the vales grene.
                  That I in ſothe ne might not ſuſtene,
                  He was to ſwift for to nigh hym nere.
                  Though hym to ſewe I pricked my courſere,
                  Nigh to ye death through many ſundry ſhawe
                  Out of my ſyght ſo fer he can withdrawe,
                  For al that euer that I ſewe myght,
                  That I anone loſt of hym the ſyght.
                  In a wood that I dabare the name.
                  And I ſo faynt gan wexen of that game,
                  And mine horſe on whych I tho did ryde,
                  Fomyng full whyte vpon euery ſyde,
                  And his flankes all with blode diſtayned.
                  In my purſute ſo ſore he was conſtrayned,
                  With my ſporres ſharpe and dyed redd,
                  After the harte ſo prycked I my ſtede.
                  Now vp now downe with a ful buſy thought,
                  But my laboure auayled me right nought.
                  Tyll at the laſt amonge the bowes glade,
                  Of aduenture I caught a pleſaunt ſhade,
                  Ful ſmothe and playn and luſty for to ſene,
                  And ſoft as veluet was the yonge grene,
                  Where fro my horſe I did alight as faſt,
                  And on a bowe aloft his reyne caſt,
                  So faynte and mate of weryneſſe I was,
                  That I me layde downe vpon the gras.
                  Vpon a bryncke ſhortly for to telle,
                  Beſyde the ryuer of a criſtall welle.
                  And the water as I reherſe can,
                  Like quicke ſiluer in his ſtreames ran.
                  Of whych the grauell and the bryght ſtone,
                  As any golde agayne the ſonne ſhone.
                  ¶Where ryght anone for very weryneſſe,
                  A ſodayne ſlepe gan me ſo oppreſſe,
                  That ſyth the tyme that I firſt was borne,
                  I neuer was aſleped ſo toforne.
                  And as I lay I heard a wonder ſweuen.
                  For as me thought high downe from heauē,
                  The wynged god wonderful of cheare,
                  Mercuryus to me did appeare,
                  Of whom I was ſome dele firſt aferde,
                  For he was gyrde with his croked ſwerde.
                  And with him brought alſo in his hande,
                  His ſlepy yerde as plyaunt as a wande.
                  With a ſerpent goyng enuyrowne,
                  And at his fete alſo lowe adowne,
                  Me ſemed alſo that there ſtode a cocke,
                  Singing his houres trewe as any clocke.
                  And to the mouth of this god Mercurye,
                  Were pypes ſet that ſonge wonder merye.
                  Of whych the ſwete ſugred Hermonye,
                  Made to mine eares ſuch a melodye,
                  That me ſemed tho in mine aduyſe,
                  I was rauyſhed into paradiſe.
                  And thus this god dyuerſe of likneſſe,
                  More wonderfull than I can expreſſe,
                  Shewed him ſelfe in his apparence,
                  Like as he is deſcryued in Fulgence.
                  In the boke of his methologies.
                  Where be reherſed many poeſyes,
                  And many likeneſſe like as ye may ſe,
                  And for to take the moralitee,
                  His longe yerde right as is a lyne,
                  Whiche on no ſyde wrongly may decline,
                  Signifyeth the prudent gouernaunce,
                  Of diſcrete folke yt through theyr purueyaūce
                  Caſt a peryll or that it befall.
                  And his pypes loude as any ſhall,
                  That through muſyke be entuned trewe,
                  Betokeneth eke with many luſty hewe,
                  The ſugred dytees by great excellence,
                  Of Rethoryke and of eloquence.
                  Of which this god is ſoueraigne & patrowne.
                  And of this cocke the ſwete and luſty ſowne,
                  That iuſtly kepeth the houres of the night,
                  Is vtterly the aduiſe of inward ſight,
                  Of ſuch as voyde by waker diligence,
                  Out of theyr court ſtouthe and necligence.
                  And his ſworde which croketh ſo againe,
                  That is not forged nor ymade in vayne,
                  Is to reuoke to the right weye,
                  Such as wrongly for trouthe forueye.
                  And the ſerpent whiche that I of tolde,
                  Which wrincled is as ye may beholde,
                  Vpon the yerde and about goeth,
                  Signefyeth that falſhode wood & wrothe,
                  That lieth in wayte by many ſleyghty weye,
                  With his ginnes the trouthe for to werrey.
                  And of this god of eloquence the kinge,
                  Brought with him eke in his comminge,
                  Citherea whom theſe louers ſerue,
                  Iuno and Pallas that called is Minerue.
                  And this Venus her lieges to delite,
                  About her head flikered douues white,
                  With loke beninge and eyen debonayre,
                  Aye circuling with ſnowy winges fayre.
                  For to declare ſothly in ſentence.
                  
                     By the douues very innocence,
                  Of theim in loue yt but trouth meane,
                  And yt theyr groūde ſhuld honeſte be & cleane.
                  Ytokned is clerely by witneſſe.
                  Without ſoyling of any vnclenneſſe.
                  And the freſhneſſe of the roſes redde,
                  That in ſomer ſo luſtyly doth ſprede,
                  And in wynter of theyr coloure fade,
                  Signifieth the hertye thoughtes glade,
                  Of yonge folkes that ben amerous.
                  Feruent in hope and inly deſyrous,
                  Whan loue gynneth in theyr hertes floure,
                  Till longe proceſſe maketh theim to loure,
                  With the wynter of vnweldy age.
                  That luſt is palled and dulled with the rage,
                  Of febleneſſe when ſomer is a gone.
                  As folkes knowe I wott well mo than one.
                  And therfore Venus fleteth in a ſee,
                  To ſhewe the trouble and aduerſytee,
                  That is in loue and in her ſtormye lawe,
                  Whych is byſet with many ſturdye wawe.
                  Nowe calme now rough who ſo taketh hede,
                  As hope aſſayled aye with ſodeyne dreade,
                  And next Venus Pallas I behelde,
                  With her ſpere and her bryghte ſhelde
                  And a raynbowe rounde about her head,
                  That of colour grene was blewe and rede.
                  And her tofore as I can diſcryue,
                  She growyng had a grene freſhe olyue,
                  And therupon with his browes fowle,
                  In the braunches I ſawe ſyt like an Owle.
                  And firſt the ſhilde of Pallas the goddeſſe,
                  Signifyed as I can expreſſe,
                  In vertue force by manly high diffēce.
                  Agayne vyces to maken reſiſtence.
                  And her ſpere ſharpe and kene ygrounde,
                  By iuſt rygour was forged to confound,
                  Theim that be falſe and to put abacke,
                  And for that mercy ſhall medle wt ye wrack.
                  The ſhafte in ſothe ſhauen was full playne,
                  Leſt mercyles that right ne wrought in vain.
                  And after werre to make falſe releaſe,
                  There was the Oliue that betokeneth peace.
                  The Owle alſo ſo odious at all.
                  That ſonges ſyngeth at feaſtes funerall.
                  Declaring playnly fine of euery glorye,
                  Is onely death who hath it in memorye.
                  And the raynbowe grene read and perſe,
                  Signifyeth the chaunges ful diuerſe,
                  That oft falleth in werre and battayle.
                  Now to winne and ſodeynly to fayle,
                  Now ſtable as blew chaūging now as grene,
                  For Pallas playe is alwaye meynt wt tene.
                  And alder laſt as nowe I haue in minde,
                  With her nimphes Iuno came behinde.
                  Whyche of cuſtome Fulgencius ſo telles,
                  Abydeth in floudes and in depe welles.
                  And this Iuno as theiſe poetes fayne,
                  A mayden is and of fruyte barayne,
                  And the Pecock to this freſhe quene,
                  Yſacred is with his fethers ſhene.
                  Splayed abrode as large as a ſayle,
                  With Argus eyen emprinted in his tayle.
                  ¶The waters ronninge in ryuer & in floud,
                  Is the labour that men haue for good,
                  The great trouble and the beſyneſſe,
                  That day and nyght they ſuffer for rycheſſe.
                  That who ſo euer in theſe floudes rowe,
                  Let him beware for aye after the flowe,
                  Of nature ryght by courſes it is dewe,
                  Folowing ye moone there muſt an ebbe ēſewe.
                  The moſt dread is aye vpon the full.
                  Leſt fortune do the freſhe fethers pull,
                  Of ryche folkes that ſhine in golde ſhene,
                  Sith ſhe of chaūche the lady is & quene.
                  ¶And Argus eyen that ſet are aye behinde,
                  Are nygardes hertes yt oft ſythes be blinde.
                  Which not aduert of goodes to the ende,
                  That like an ebbe ſodeynly wil wende.
                  Whyche they nothinge conſydre in their ſight,
                  For as the fayre luſty fethers bright,
                  Of a Pecock vnwarely fall awaye,
                  Right ſo ryches ſhortly at a daye,
                  Will theyr mayſter ſodeynly forſake,
                  Saying adewe & thens theyr leue take.
                  And as Iuno barayne is of fruyte,
                  Right ſo naked bare and deſtitute,
                  Are theſe gredy hertes couetous.
                  Which to gather be ſo deſyrous.
                  That in nothing can haue ſuffyſaunce,
                  The fret of dred thē putteth ī ſuch miſchaūce.
                  Imagening that the world wil fayle.
                  And in theyr feare agayne ye wynd they ſayle.
                  Till all at ones they muſt departe there fro,
                  And thus of good aye the fine is wo.
                  Namely of theim that ſo pinche and ſpare,
                  For this no dread as clerkes can declare,
                  The fruite of good is to ſpende large,
                  
                     And who ſo euer ſet but lytell charge,
                  But frely parteth his treaſour in commune,
                  When he diſcretely ſeeth time opportune,
                  He hath no ioye to put his good in mewe.
                  For who in herte that fredome liſt to ſewe,
                  Of gentylneſſe taketh no hede therto.
                  ¶And in this wyſe Pallas and Iuno,
                  With freſhe Venus be adowne deſcended,
                  Like as I haue ſhortly comprehended,
                  Vnder the guyding of Mercurius.
                  Whych vnto me began his tale thus.
                  ¶Parys quod he lyft vp thine eyen & ſee,
                  Lo theſe goddeſſes here in nombre thre,
                  Whych from heauen wyth theyr eyen clere,
                  So dyuerſly vnto the appere,
                  Were at a feaſt wherof I tell ſhall,
                  With all the goddes aboue celeſtyall.
                  That Iupyter helde at his owne borde,
                  Was none abſent ſaue onely diſcorde,
                  And for deſpyte ſhe was not there preſent,
                  To be auenged ſet all her entent,
                  And in her wyttes many wayes ſought,
                  Tyll at the laſt euen thus ſhe wrought.
                  Of olde Poets lyke as yt is tolde.
                  She toke an appel rounde of pure golde,
                  With Greke letters grauen vp and downe,
                  Whych ſayd thus in concluſyowne,
                  Without ſtrife let it be gyue anon,
                  Vnto the fayreſt of theim euerychone,
                  And of diſcorde this lady and goddeſſe,
                  As ſhe that is of conteke mayſtreſſe,
                  Hath this appel paſſyng of delyte,
                  Brought to this feaſt of malyce & deſpyte,
                  And caſt it downe among theim at the borde.
                  With deynous chere ſpeaking not a worde.
                  But on her waye faſt gan her hye,
                  And ſodeynly ſo inly great enuye,
                  Into the courte this appel hath in broughte,
                  So great a werre & ſuch a conteck wrought,
                  In the hertes of theſe ilke thre,
                  That after longe may not ſtaunched be,
                  Amonge theim ſelfe ſo they gan diſdayne.
                  Whiche in beaute was moſt ſeueraygne,
                  And whych of theym hath moſt tytle of right,
                  For to cōquere this burned apple bryght.
                  And firſt they gan thus for beaute ſtryue,
                  That of rancour almoſt theyr hertes ryue.
                  To wite of ryght who ſhuld it firſt poſſede.
                  ¶Lo yet enuye reygneth in womanhede.
                  That one is fayrer than an other holde,
                  For eche woman of her kinde would,
                  Haue on ſome parte priſe aboue an other.
                  In eche eſtate in ſothe it is no other.
                  And eche of theim in her owne aduiſe,
                  Hath ioye in beaute for to haue a priſe,
                  For none ſo foule doth in a myrrour prye,
                  That ſhene is fayre in her owne eye.
                  But like a foole he him ſelfe doth quite,
                  That aumber yelowe cheſeth for the white.
                  A goundy eye is deceyued ſoone,
                  That any colour cheſeth by the moone.
                  For ſome colour with fyre is made fine,
                  And ſome encreaſed with ſpices & wyth wine.
                  With oyntementes and with confections,
                  And on the night by falſe illuſyons,
                  Some appeare wonder freſhe and fayre.
                  That loke full derke by day light in the ayre.
                  There is no prefe but early by the morowe,
                  Of ſuch as nede no beaute for to borowe,
                  But as nature hath her ſelfe diſpoſed,
                  Therfore faſting or boxes be vncloſed,
                  Make thy choſe ſo byddeth the Ouide,
                  Whan euery drugge and pot is ſet a ſyde,
                  Leſt haply thou be after his ſentence,
                  Deceyued lightly by falſe apparence.
                  For now a dayes ſuch craft is ful ryfe,
                  And in this wiſe firſt began the ſtryfe,
                  Betwixt Iuno, Venus, and Pallas.
                  That be decended for this ſodayn caſe,
                  By one aſſent touchyng theyr beaute,
                  The dome therof committed vnto the.
                  I ſpeake to the that called art Parys,
                  And holdē arte ful prudent and right wyſe,
                  Be wel auyſed how thy dome ſhal fyne,
                  For they ne may to nor fro decline,
                  But muſt obeyen all by one aſſent.
                  Without ſtrife as to thy iudgement.
                  But hercke firſt or that thou procede,
                  Of eche of theim what ſhall be thy mede.
                  Conſydre a ryght and take good hede therto.
                  If thou the appel graunt vnto Iuno,
                  She ſhall the gyue plenty of richeſſe,
                  Hyghe renowne of fame eke worthyneſſe,
                  With habundaunce of golde and of treaſour.
                  And do the reyſe to ſo hyghe honour,
                  That thou alone all other ſhalte excelle.
                  For thy guerdon lyke as I the telle.
                  ¶And yf to Pallas goddeſſe of prudence,
                  
                     The lyſt the fyne conclude of thy ſentence,
                  That ſhe may lady of the appell be,
                  For thy mede ſhe ſhall aſſure the,
                  That of wyt and eke of ſapyence,
                  Thou ſhalte hooly haue the excellence.
                  And of wyſedome and of diſcrecion,
                  As to diſcerne by clereneſſe of reaſon,
                  Alſo fer as Phebus caſt may his lyght,
                  There ſhall not be a more prudent knyght.
                  Nor in this worlde ſyth it fyrſt began,
                  Of iuſt reporte a more manly man.
                  Nor to thy name none equipollent.
                  ¶And if to Venus of true and clene entent,
                  The lyſte to graunt in this concluſyon,
                  Of the Appell to haue poſſeſſyon,
                  The freſhe goddeſſe that ſyt ſo hyghe aboue,
                  Shall the enſue to haue vnto thy loue,
                  The fayreſt lady that is or was tofore,
                  Or in this worlde hereafter ſhalbe bore.
                  And in Grece thou ſhall her knightly wynne.
                  Now be aduiſed or that thou begynne.
                  Iuſtly to deme and for no thynge ſpare.
                  ¶And I anone gan loke vp and to ſtare,
                  Greatly aſtoned what me was beſt to do.
                  Tyll at the laſte I ſpake Mercurye to,
                  And ſayde certayne that I ne wolde there,
                  Gyue no dome but they naked were.
                  So that I myght haue fully lybertee,
                  Eueriche of them aduiſedly to ſee.
                  And well conſider euery circumſtaunce,
                  Who fayreſt were vnto my pleaſaunce.
                  And goodlyeſt to ſpeake of womanhede.
                  And after that wolde to my dome procede.
                  ¶And they anone as ye haue herde me ſeye,
                  To my deſyre mekely gan obeye.
                  In all haſte to do their buſy cure,
                  Them to diſpoyle of clothing and veſture,
                  Lyche as the ſtatute of my dome them bonde,
                  For in no point they wolde it not withſtonde.
                  That I myght haue full inſpection,
                  Of fourme and ſhape and eche proporſyon,
                  For to diſcerne as I can remembre,
                  A vyſedly by ordre euery membre,
                  And than at erſt to iudge after the ryght.
                  ¶But whan yt I of them had thus the ſyght,
                  I gaue to Venus the Appell right anone.
                  Bycauſe ſhe was fayreſt of eche one.
                  And moſt excellyng ſothly of beatie,
                  Moſte womanly and goodly on to ſee.
                  Tho as I demed playnly in my ſyght.
                  For the ſtremes of her eyen bryght,
                  Yleche glade and of egall lyght,
                  Were like yt ſterre yt ſheweth towardes ye night
                  Whiche called is Heſperus ſo ſhene.
                  Venus her ſelfe the freſhe luſty queene.
                  The whiche anone this heauenly Empereſſe,
                  After my dome of harty hyghe gladneſſe,
                  That of the appell ſhe hooly hath the glorye,
                  And wonne it thus iuſtly by victory,
                  Reioyſed her more than I can tell.
                  That ſhe her feares in beautie dyd excell.
                  And ſhe in haſt of trewe affection,
                  Concluded hath fully for my guerdon,
                  Full demurely lowe and not a lofte,
                  To Mercury with ſobre wordes ſofte.
                  Deuoyde both of doubleneſſe and ſlouthe,
                  Lyke her beheſt holde wyll her trouth.
                  And ſodaynly without more Iniurye,
                  They diſapered and the god Mercurye,
                  Streyght to heauen the ryght waye he toke,
                  And I anone out of my ſlepe a woke.
                  ¶Wherof my lord whom I moſt loue & drede
                  If ye aduerte and wiſely taketh hede.
                  That this beheſt affyrmed in certayne,
                  Was vnto me aſſured not in vayne.
                  Of goodly Venus lyke as I haue tolde,
                  Wherfore I rede ye be of herte bolde,
                  Me for to ſende with ſtronge & mighty hande
                  Without abode into the Grekes lande.
                  After the fourme that I haue to you ſayde.
                  For thus I hope ye ſhall be well apayde,
                  Whan I haue ſpede as Wenus hath be hight.
                  And home retourne with my lady bryght.
                  So ſhall ye beſt me lyſte not ſpeake in vayne,
                  As by exchaunge your ſyſter wyn agayne.
                  Whom Thelomon withholden hath of yore.
                  Lo this is all I can ſay you no more,
                  Touchyng theffect hooly of myne aduyſe.
                  And after that tho ſatte hym downe Parys,
                  As he that had hym ſelfe full well aquytt.
                  But ſaye Pryam alas where was thy wytt,
                  Of neclygence for to taken kepe,
                  Thy truſte to ſette on dremes or on ſlepe.
                  Full thynne forſothe was thy diſcrecion,
                  To take a grounde of falſe illuſyon,
                  For to procede lyke to the fantaſye.
                  Vpon a ſweuen meint with flattery,
                  Alas reaſon was tho nothynge thy guyde,
                  
                     For Pallas was wrongly ſette a ſyde.
                  Not receyued with dewe reuerence.
                  And Iuno eke for all her ſapience,
                  For all her good and lokynge debonayre,
                  With her treaſour and her heſtes fayre,
                  Refuſed was alas of wylfulneſſe.
                  And ſhe that is of loue the goddeſſe,
                  And eke alſo of Vulcanus the wyfe,
                  In whoſe ſeruyce is euer werre and ſtrife,
                  Preferred was the appell to poſſede.
                  Againe all ryght for Paris toke none hede,
                  Saue vnto luſte and ſette aſyde the trouth,
                  Where through alas & yt was ful great routh,
                  The myghty ryche and the noble towne,
                  Of Troye was brought to full confuſyowne.
                  Only for he knyghthode hath forſake,
                  Prudence, and golde, and in his choyſe ytake,
                  A woman only, and holde hym therto,
                  That after was the roote of all their wo.
                  As this ſtory ceriouſly ſhall tell,
                  But I in dreames will no longer dwell.
                  But write forth how that Deiphobus,
                  That was the thirde ſonne to Priamus,
                  His tale began in open audience,
                  And to the kynge ſhortly in ſentence,
                  As he that lyſte a trouthe not to ſpare,
                  Euen thus he gan his fantaſye declare.
                  ¶My lorde quod he if that euery wyght,
                  Aduerte ſhulde and caſte in his ſyght,
                  Of future thynge the peryll and the doubte,
                  And ſerche it wel within and eke without,
                  From poynt to poynt alwaye in reaſō,
                  To caſte doubtes and tournen vp ſo downe,
                  Than ſhulde no wyght to no purpoſe wende,
                  In any matter for to make an ende.
                  Eyther preſume by manhode in his thought,
                  Who caſteth doutes achieueth lite or nought.
                  For if the plowman alway caſt aforne,
                  How many graynes in his fielde of corne,
                  Shalbe deuoured of foules rauynous,
                  That he doth ſowe in fieldes plenteous,
                  Than ſhulde he neuer in vale nor in playne,
                  For cowardſhyp throwe abrode his grayne.
                  Let all ſuche drede now be layde aſyde.
                  I holde if folye longer to abyde,
                  But yt Parys my brother make hym ſtronge,
                  With his ſhyppes for to venge our wronge.
                  Vpon grekes with all his payne and might,
                  To preue ſhortly that he is a knight.
                  For of reaſon ye this conſyder may,
                  How that no man iuſtly may ſaye nay,
                  But that Parys hath counſayled wele.
                  For by my trouth as fer as I can fele,
                  It were errour his purpoſe to contrary.
                  Wherfore let hym now no longer tarye,
                  But holde his waye with a ſtronge nauye,
                  For to auenge the ſhamefull velanye,
                  That grekes haue done if ſo ye lyſt take hede,
                  In alder dayes to vs and our kynred.
                  And eke for fynall execucion,
                  Of the recure as touchyng Exion.
                  Whom they demeyne in ſuch diſhoneſt wyſe,
                  Agaynſt all ryght and title of iuſtyce.
                  Wherof to thinke it giueth my hert a wounde.
                  The ſhame of which ſo newly doth rebounde,
                  Vpon vs all that be of her ally.
                  Wherfore the beſt that I can eſpye,
                  Is that Parys take maye this voyage,
                  With ſuche as be of freſhe and luſty age.
                  Manly to wende into grekes lande,
                  And by force of their myghtye hande,
                  Maunger the Grekes proude and moſt elate,
                  Rauiſhe there ſome lady of eſtate.
                  And thā ye may by knighthod of my brother,
                  If ye lyſte after chaunge her for that other.
                  This is moſt redy and ſhort concluſyon,
                  That I can ſe for reſtytution,
                  Of Exyon if ſo that Parys wende,
                  And of my counſayle ſhortly thus the end▪
                  
                  ¶And than as faſte full diſcrete and ſage,
                  Helenus the fourth ſonne as of age,
                  Roſe from his ſeate with humble reuerence,
                  Praying his father graunte hym aundience
                  That he may ſay in preſence of them all,
                  Openly what after ſhalbe fall,
                  As he that moſt of ſecrete thynges can.
                  And ſoberlye thus he his tale began.
                  With cleane entent and trewe affection.
                  ¶My lorde quod he with ſupportacion,
                  Of your grace wherin is moſt my truſt,
                  Let none offence be vnto your luſte,
                  Nor you diſpleaſe yf ſo I my conceyte,
                  As now declare ſyth I meane no decetie.
                  For neuer yet fayled no ſentence,
                  But that it fyll efte in experyence,
                  Lyke as I tolde in partie and in all.
                  In pryuye treate and eke in generall.
                  Without meanynge of any doubleneſſe.
                  
                     That it folowed as I dyd expreſſe.
                  Remembryng you as ye ſhall fynde it trewe,
                  And yf god wyll I ſhall not now of new,
                  Spare for to ſay lyke as I conceyue,
                  Nor to be dede with fraude you deceyue.
                  Declaryng fyrſt of trewe entention,
                  As it ſhall folowe in concluſion.
                  ¶That yf he Parys into Grece wende,
                  Truſteth me well it wyll vs all ſhende.
                  For the goddes ſo by reuelacion,
                  Haue made to me playne demonſtration,
                  And eke I knowe it by aſtronomye.
                  For neuer yet as in my prophecye,
                  I was deceyued of that ſhulde after fall.
                  Nor none that lyſte me to counſayle call.
                  So am I taught of thyng that ſhall betyde,
                  Wherfore I praye for rancour nor for pryde,
                  Nor for enuye wrought of olde hatred,
                  To take vengeaunce that ye not procede,
                  In your aduyſe lyke as ye purpoſe.
                  I ſaye you playnly for me ylyſt not gloſe,
                  Ye ſhall repente if ſo ye Parys ſende.
                  Into Grece the whiche god defende.
                  Wytte this full well for the concluſyon,
                  Shall fully tourne to our deſtruction,
                  And fynally vnto our ruyne,
                  Lyke as to you I gan afore deuyne.
                  For this the fyne that there folowe ſhall,
                  Subuercyon both of towne and of wall.
                  Of houſe and paleys here in our Citie,
                  Al goth to nought ye get no more of me.
                  Forme ſemeth it ought ynough ſuffyſe,
                  That I haue ſayd ſyth that ye be wyſe.
                  For yf that ye aduerten to my ſawe,
                  I doubte not that ye wyll withdrawe,
                  Your hande be tyme or that more domage,
                  Aſſayleth you by conſtraynte of this rage.
                  For better is betymes to abſteyne,
                  From this purpoſe whiche is yet but grene,
                  Than of hede thus haſtely aſſente,
                  To thynge for which we ſhal echone repente.
                  For plenerly there ſhall nothynge ſocoure,
                  That there ſhal folowe both of you and your,
                  Deſpyteful death without excepciowne.
                  Of one and all abydynge in this towne.
                  Fyrſt on your ſelfe playnly to endite,
                  Shall the vengeaunce of the grekes byte,
                  Through the fury of their mortall tene,
                  And your wyfe fayre Hecuba the queene,
                  Shall lede her lyfe through grekes crueltie,
                  In ſorowe wo and in captiuitie,
                  And your lyeges by the ſworde ſhall pace,
                  Of cruell death withouten any grace.
                  And innocentes merciles ſhall blede,
                  In your aduyſe if that ye do procede,
                  Of wylfulneſſe a werre for to make.
                  And folyly thus for to vndertake,
                  As to parturbe your quyete and your reſt,
                  Which ſhal retourne nothyng for the beſt.
                  But to ruyne of you and of vs all.
                  I can no more but or that miſchyefe fall,
                  My counſayle is afore that ye prouyde,
                  And letteth wylfulneſſe be ſette aſyde.
                  Specially whan death as I you tolde,
                  Muſt be the fyne if ye your purpoſe holde.
                  Lo here is all without wordes mo.
                  Into Grece if ſo that Parys go.
                  ¶And in this wyſe whan that Helenus,
                  Had playnly ſayde as Guydo telleth vs,
                  Tryſte and heuy with pale and deadly face,
                  Agayne reſorteth to his ſyttynge place.
                  Of whoſe ſentence aſtoned euerychone,
                  Sat in ſylence ſtylle as any ſtone.
                  Powerles their hertes efte to reſume.
                  To ſpeake a worde no man dare preſume,
                  Of all the preſe but kept their lyppes cloſe,
                  That at the laſte Troylous vp aroſe,
                  Yonge freſhe and couragyous alſo,
                  And aye deſyrous for to haue a do,
                  In armes manly as longeth to a knight.
                  And whan that he of chere ful glad and light,
                  Sawe his father and brethern euerychone,
                  So inly troubled thus he ſpake anone.
                  ¶Oh noble and worthy ſyttyng enuiron,
                  Of hyghe prudence and great diſcrecion,
                  Manfull alſo and of hyghe courage,
                  What ſodein fere hath brought you ī this rage
                  What new trouble is cropen in your breſt,
                  For the ſentence of a coward prieſt.
                  Syth they echone as ye ſhall euer fynde,
                  Deſyre more veryly of kynde,
                  To lyue in luſt and voyde awaye trauayle,
                  And deadly hate to here as of battayle.
                  For they their wyt fynally applye,
                  To ſewe their luſt and lyue in glottony.
                  To fyll their ſtomake and reſtore their mawe,
                  To reſte and eaſe euermore to drawe.
                  And to ſewe their inwarde appetite.
                  
                     This their ioye and this their delyte.
                  In eatyng, drynkyng, and in couetyſe,
                  Is their ſtudye fully to deuyſe,
                  How they may folow their luſt without more.
                  Of ryght nought elles ſetten they no ſtore.
                  Alas for ſhame why be ye ſo diſmayde,
                  And ſytte mate aſtoned and afrayde,
                  For the wordes of hym this Helenus,
                  Fearefull for drede as a lyttle mouſe.
                  That he quaketh to here ſpeake of fyght.
                  And moreouer agayne all ſkylle and ryght,
                  In preiudice of the goddes all,
                  He taketh on hym to ſay what ſhall be fall.
                  Of thynge future for to ſpecyfye.
                  As yf he had a ſpirite of prophecye,
                  Graunted to hym alone in ſpeciall.
                  As though he were in connyng perygall.
                  To the goddes hauynge preſcience.
                  To ſhewe afore through his ſapyence,
                  What ſhall betyde outher euyll or good.
                  Let be let be for no wyght is ſo woodd,
                  That hath his wyt to gyue therto credence.
                  That any man by crafte or by ſcyence,
                  That mortall is hath connyng to deuyne,
                  Fortunes courſe or fates to termyne.
                  Suche cauſes hyd conceled in ſecree,
                  Reſerued be to goddes priuitee.
                  Men may dyuyne but all is but folye,
                  To take hede for they do but lye.
                  Wherfore I rede as in this mattere,
                  Both one and al and you my lorde moſt dere,
                  Exclude all drede and all that may diſturbe,
                  Out of your herte and let nothyng perturbe,
                  Your highe courage that Helenus hath tolde.
                  And yf that he of herte be not bolde,
                  As manhod wold to helpe venge our wronge
                  Let hym go hyde him in the temple ſtronge.
                  And kepe him cloſe in contemplation.
                  To wake and praye by deuocion,
                  Without ſocour on dayes and on nyghtes.
                  And ſuffer ſuche as be luſty knyghtes,
                  To haunte their youth and grene luſtyneſſe,
                  Manly in armes to preue their hardineſſe.
                  That they may haue the better acqueintaūce,
                  In tyme comyng for to do vengeaunce,
                  On their enmyes and their cruell foen.
                  And ſith cōmaunde yt Parys may forth gone,
                  To execute the fyne of your entent.
                  Afore purpoſed in your parlement.
                  Vpon grekes for their offention,
                  For to perfourme the payne of talyon,
                  For wronges olde of whiche yet the fame,
                  Reherſed is vnto our alderſhame.
                  Through out the world ye wote this is no lece
                  And therwithall Troylous helde his peace.
                  And ſodeynly all that were preſent,
                  Began at ones holly by one aſſent,
                  Troylus counſayle greatly for to preyſe.
                  And his manhode to the heauen reyſe.
                  His freſhe courage and his hygh proweſſe,
                  His feruent zeale and his hardineſſe.
                  And of one herte greatly him commende,
                  And ryght anone there they made an ende.
                  Than Pryamus whan that all was done,
                  Vpon the tyme of the houre of none,
                  To mete goeth within great Ilyon,
                  All his ſonnes ſyttyng enuyron.
                  And after mete he called hath Parys,
                  And Deiphobus alſo that was full wyſe.
                  And ſecretely bad they ſhulden go,
                  The ſame day with other lordes mo,
                  To Panonye in all the haſte they maye,
                  To make them ready agayne a certayne day,
                  Wyth all the araye of worthy cheualrye,
                  That they maye get in their companye,
                  Towardes Grece to ſaylen haſtely.
                  And after that the kynge ſodeynly,
                  The next day made his counſayle call,
                  And euen thus he ſayde afore them all.
                  ¶Oh noble lyeges beynge nowe preſent,
                  My purpoſe is to ſaye you myne entent,
                  Without abode to here it if ye lyſte,
                  For as I thyncke to you is not vnwyſte,
                  How the grekes of pryde and tyrrannye,
                  Of malys olde compaſſed by enuye,
                  In many wyſe haue agayne vs wrought,
                  Whiche is ſo grene that I foryet it nought.
                  For day by day encreaſynge euer mo,
                  By remembraunce renewed is my wo.
                  Whan I recorde and caſten vp and downe,
                  Our greues all and how that Exiowne,
                  In ſeruytude amonge them doth ſoiourne.
                  Whiche ofte a day cauſeth me to mourne.
                  And hath my herte almoſt aſonder ryue.
                  For to conſyder and ſe it by my lyue.
                  Whoſe crueltee we haue to dere bought,
                  And albeit that I haue meanes ſought,
                  To haue had reſte without any more,
                  
                     Whan into Grece I ſent Anthenore,
                  Peaſably my ſyſter to recure.
                  And paciently the ſurplus to endure.
                  But all for nought they toke of it no hede,
                  What I offred them of goodlyhede,
                  It was not herde for lacke of gentilneſſe.
                  Recorde of whiche doubleth my diſtreſſe.
                  ¶Wherfore we muſt as teacheth ſurgerye,
                  With ſharpe Irous ſeken our remedye.
                  To cutte away by the roote rounde,
                  The dead fleſhe feſtred in the wounde.
                  Whiche wyll not voyde wt oynetmentes ſofte,
                  Albe that they applyed be full ofte.
                  Right ſo we muſt attempte as by dureſſe,
                  To get recure whan that with fayreneſſe,
                  We may none haue wherfore by your aduyſe,
                  My purpoſe is in haſt to ſende Paryſe.
                  Forth into Grece ſome lady there to wyn,
                  And bringe her home & we ſhal here within,
                  Strongly her kepe mauger who ſayth nay.
                  Tyll that we ſee ſome agreable day,
                  That they be fayne lyke myne opinion,
                  To haue exchaunge for her of Exion.
                  My ſyſter namely whom I loue ſo.
                  We may not fayle that it ſhal thus be do,
                  So that the goddes be to vs fauourable,
                  And this counſayle be alſo acceptable,
                  To you echone as it is to me.
                  For whan a thynge toucheeh a comonte,
                  Of wyttye men as it is affyrmed,
                  Of all the comon it ought to be confyrmed.
                  Thyng touchyng all ſhuld be fyrſt appreued,
                  Of euerychone or it were achieued.
                  Wherfore I caſte by aduiſe of you all,
                  Plainly to worke. & forthwith there withall,
                  This noble Pryam was ſodeynly in peaſe.
                  And after that amonges all the preaſe,
                  Whan all was whyſhte in their alder ſyghte,
                  A knyght vp roſe and Percheus he highte.
                  That ſonne was to great Euforbyus,
                  De tranſformatis as ſayth Ouidius
                  Into whom he fayneth that there was,
                  Whylom the ſoule of Pithagoras,
                  Hooly tranſſumed ſo as wryte Ouyde.
                  As touchyng that I wyll not longer byde,
                  But tell forth of this Percheus.
                  Afore the kynge whiche gan his tale thus.
                  ¶My lyege lorde vnto your hygh nobleſſe,
                  Diſpleaſe it not nor to your worthyneſſe,
                  Though here in preſence of your maieſtye,
                  That I ſhall ſaye for to acquyte me,
                  Towardes you of my fayth and trouthe.
                  For ſothfaſtly in me may be no ſlouthe,
                  Touchyng your honour that without dread,
                  With zeale of fayth I bren as doth the glede.
                  Of all harmes to byd you ye beware.
                  For doubtleſſe this affyrme well I dare,
                  If ſo ye ſtande in your firſte aduyſe,
                  As ye purpoſe to ſenden forth Paryſe,
                  I doubte it not that it ſhall you rewe.
                  For god well wote of olde and not of newe,
                  I had a father called Enforbius,
                  Diſcrete and wyſe and ryght vertuous,
                  And knowyng had afore of euery thynge,
                  By preſcyence and before wyttynge.
                  To tell playnly through his philoſophye,
                  So heauenly he ſawe and that at eye,
                  That there nas thyng that might ſo ſecretely,
                  Be hyd from hym ne yet no pryuytee.
                  That he ne knewe he was of wyt ſo ſage.
                  And at the laſte whan he was of age.
                  An hundred yere with lockes grey and hore,
                  I well bethincke how he complayned ſore,
                  And wepte alſo of pitie tenderly,
                  Fully affyrmyng if Parys vtterly,
                  Wente into Grece to rauyſhe hym a wyfe,
                  There ſhulde inſue ſuche a mortall ſtryfe,
                  Vpon vs all that ſothly this citie,
                  Shulde into ſcindred aſſhes tourned be.
                  And that there ſhulde nothyng do vs ſocour,
                  But grekes ſworde ſhulde cruelly deuoure,
                  Both hye and lowe and playnly ſpare none.
                  Wherfore I praye amonge you euerychone,
                  Of that I tell haue ye no deſpyte,
                  Your wronge to venge putteth in reſpyte,
                  And rancour olde I reade that ye lete.
                  And the tranquyll now of your quyete,
                  Of haſtyneſſe that ye not ſubmytte.
                  To fortune lyſte that can ſo falſely flytte.
                  And trouble not for auncient enmyte,
                  With newe ſterynge your felycitie.
                  For if that ye this Iourney thus aſſente,
                  Ye euerychone full ſore ſhall repente.
                  And yf ye wyll algates thether ſende,
                  In Parys ſtede let ſome other wende.
                  Leſt his voyage be to you no ſpede.
                  Loe this my counſayle and fully my rede,
                  Sayde vnder ſupporte only of your grace.
                  
                     ¶And ſodaynly they gan echone to chace,
                  At Penthens and loude agayne hym crye.
                  Repreuynge hym and the prophecye,
                  Of this father to their confuſyon.
                  ¶But oh alas the reuolucion,
                  Of ioye or wo or of felicitee,
                  For thing tofore ordeyned muſt nedely be,
                  The ſtate of thynges wt fate is ſo englewed,
                  For that ſhall fall may not be eſchewed.
                  Whiche cauſed them for taſſent in one,
                  In al the haſt that Parys ſhulde be gone,
                  Vnhappely wt hap they were enuolued.
                  ¶And thus concluding their counſaile is diſſolued,
                  But caſuelly loe it befell ryght than,
                  That this aduyſe vnto the eres ran,
                  Of Caſſandra and ſhe with great afraye,
                  Of ſodayne wo gan cryen welaway.
                  ¶Alas quod ſhe alas what wyll ye do,
                  What? and ſhall Parys into Grece go?
                  And with that worde ſhe braſte out to wepe.
                  Full piteouſly with inwarde ſyghes depe.
                  She gan to wayle and ſowne for the payne,
                  And furyouſly with noyſe to complayne.
                  With wofull rage and many pyteus ſowne,
                  She made a mortall lamentatiowne.
                  For to be deade ſhe might her not withholde.
                  With heare to torne and with fyſtes folde,
                  She ſayde alas more than and hundred ſyth.
                  Ah ſtormy fortune why lyſt thou to kythe,
                  Thy cruell force to oure aduerſytie.
                  Vpon vs all and eke on this Citie,
                  Of mortall yre and gery violence,
                  with ſword of vengeaunce worſe thā peſtilēce.
                  ¶Oh Troye Troye what is the gylte alas,
                  What haſt thou done what is thy treſpas,
                  To be euerſed and tourned into nought.
                  With wylde fyre thy ſynne is dere abought.
                  Ah Pryam kynge vncely is thy chaunce,
                  What haſt thou gylte outher do greuaunce,
                  To thy goddes or wyrched through vnryght,
                  Them to prouoke to ſhewe their cruell might,
                  Vpon thy bloud alas what haſt thou do?
                  Oh mother myne Oh Hecuba alſo,
                  What maner cryme or importable offence,
                  Haſt thou cōmyt to haue ſuch recompence.
                  The daye to abyde Oh noble worthy quene,
                  Of thy ſonnes ſuche vengeaunce for to ſene.
                  Oh wofull deth cruell and horryble.
                  Alas why are ye no more credible,
                  To my counſayle ſuche harmes to eſchewe,
                  Your mortall purpoſe fully to remewe.
                  That he go not as it is ordeyned.
                  The thought of which my hart hath ſo cōſtrained
                  That vnneth I may this my wo endure,
                  And to her father this wofull creature,
                  Helde ſtreight her way & falleth plat to groūd
                  And of her wepyng all in water drownde,
                  By her chekes ſo gan the teares rayne,
                  And as ſhe myght for conſtraint of her paine,
                  Vpon hym ſhe gan clyppen and crye,
                  Beſechynge hym to ſhape a remedye,
                  With pyteous voyce as ſhe yt knewe ful wele,
                  In this matter playnly euerydele,
                  What ſhall befall and had it full in mynde.
                  The ſodeyne harmes that ſhal inſue behynde,
                  But all her clamour was not but in vayne,
                  For that ſhall fall as ſome clerkes ſayne,
                  Ne may not well of men eſchewed be.
                  And eke fortune by great aduerſytie,
                  Of haſty Ire furyous and wood,
                  And aye vnkynde vnto the Troyan bloud,
                  Cauſeleſſe agaynſt them ſore agreued,
                  And of rancour ſodaynly amened,
                  With blind awaite to catche them in a traūce,
                  By vyolence of her vnhappy chaunce,
                  Hath wt a ſweyght tourned her whele vnſtable,
                  As ſhe that is enuyous and mutable,
                  To haſten Troyens to theyr confuſyon,
                  Of wylfulneſſe and vndiſcretion,
                  Agaynſt grekes quarell for to make,
                  And therupon haue their counſayle take.
                  And haue achieued as ye herde deuyſe,
                  Without aſſent of the moſt wyſe.
                  For yf ſo they the diffynycyon,
                  Of Hector herde concluded in reaſon,
                  In this matter and of Helenus,
                  The counſayle take, and to Percheus,
                  Aduerted wyſely as to his ſentence,
                  And without faynyng gyuen full credence,
                  To her Caſſandra that neuer lyſt to lye,
                  And by aduyſe had harde the prophecye,
                  From poynt to poynt for to caſte aforne,
                  In ſuch miſchief they had not tho be lorne,
                  But floured yet in theyr felycitie.
                  Without domage and aduerſytie.
                  But fortune will fortholde her courſe alway.
                  Whoſe wyll abydeth who ſo ſayth ye or nay.
                  For ſhe it was that cauſed this voyage,
                  
                     With forhead playne & blandiſhing vyſage.
                  With ſugre ſhad and venim in the roote,
                  Bytter of taſte and in ſhewing ſoote.
                  Wrynckled double like an horned ſnayle,
                  Fayth in her face & fraud ay in her tayle.
                  To haſte the Troyans to accorde into one,
                  That Parys ſhuld into grece gone.
                  As ye haue herde there is no more to ſayne,
                  For herupon they caſt theim to ordayne.
               
            
            
               ¶How Priam the king ſent Paris Deiphobus and others of the worthies of Troy into Grece, to aduenge the rauiſhinge of his ſyſter Exion, & how they before their returne rauyſhed the faire Heleine wife to Menelaus and brought her to Troye. Ca. xiii.
               
                  THe time approched whē ye ſon ſhene,
                  His golden wayne whyrleth vp atwene,
                  The cleare ſterres of Hyades ſo read,
                  Which haue theyr ſcyte in the Bulles head,
                  And Pleyades the ſeuenth ſterre ſo bryght,
                  Of whych ſyxe appearen to our ſyght,
                  For the ſeuenth draweth her aſyde,
                  And couertly doth her beames hide,
                  Whylom for ſhe hath done a great offence,
                  That vnto vs cauſeth her abſence.
                  For ſhe dare not ſhewe her ſtremes cleare,
                  Nor with her ſyſtren openly appeare,
                  Whelom for ſhe as with a god mortall,
                  A ſyn committed that was cryminall.
                  Which noyſed was & kouth thrughout ye heuē
                  
                  That ſhe alone amonge the ſiſtrē ſeuen,
                  Shroudeth to vs ſhamefeſtly her chere.
                  ¶And when as Titan in the zodiak ſphere,
                  Atwene theſe ſterres taken had his ſee,
                  Of the bul in the ſixtenth degre,
                  Vpon the time of Ioly grene Maye,
                  When that Flora with her hewes gaye,
                  Hath euery playne medowe hil and vale,
                  With her floures quicke & nothing pale,
                  Ouer ſpred and clad in lyuery newe.
                  And braūches bloſme with diuerſe luſty hewe
                  And byd vs fully to be glad and lyght,
                  For by aſſuraunce they their fruit haue hight,
                  Agayne Autumpne who ſo that liſt thē ſhake.
                  When on the vines ripeth euery grape.
                  For thus this ſeaſon moſt luſty of diſporte.
                  Embraſeth hertes with newe recomforte,
                  Onely of hope by kinde as it is dewe,
                  That holſom fruite ſhall the bloſmes ſewe.
                  Whan time cometh by reuolucion.
                  And thus in May ye luſty freſhe ſeaſon,
                  Whan byrdes ſynge in theyr hermonye,
                  The ſame time out of Pannonye,
                  Repeyred be Deiphobus and Parys,
                  And with theim brought choſen by deuyſe,
                  Thre thouſande knightes redy for to gone,
                  With theim to grece and ſhippes many one,
                  Ful vitayled of all that may theim nede,
                  And of theſe ſhippes the nomber as I rede,
                  Was two and twenty like as wryte Guydo.
                  And after this without more ado,
                  The kinge commaundeth vnto Eneas,
                  To Anthenor and to Polydamas,
                  In al the haſte that they theim redy make,
                  With Parys knyghtly for to vndertake,
                  As ye haue herde this Iourney to acheue.
                  And on the time whan they toke theyr leue,
                  Pryamus with ſhorte concluſyon,
                  Sheweth the effect of his entencion.
                  And ſpecially they theyr deuer done,
                  For to recure his ſyſter Exione.
                  As ye haue herde here tofore me tell.
                  What ſhuld I more in this matter dwell.
                  Whan they were ready without more ſoioure,
                  This Parys firſt as lord and gouernour,
                  Of this voyage made by Pryamus,
                  And his brother called Deiphobus,
                  Theyr leue haue take as longed of deutye.
                  And after that to ſhip right manfully,
                  Without abode they gan theym ſelues dreſſe,
                  And in the name of Venus the goddeſſe,
                  And mighty Ioue they taken theyr Iourney.
                  With anker hoiſt forth by the large ſea,
                  They gan to ſaile and haue the winde at wil.
                  The water calme blandiſhing and ſtill.
                  Without trouble of any boyſtous wawe,
                  And to the coſtes they ginnen faſt to drawe,
                  Of grekes lande for nothing ne theim let,
                  And of fortune in theyr courſe they met,
                  A grekiſhe ſhyp mine Auctour telleth thus,
                  In whych there was the king Menelaus,
                  Towarde Pyram a famous ſtronge Citie,
                  For to viſite a duke of high degre,
                  That Neſtor hight and this Menelaus,
                  Was brother eke vnto the king famous,
                  The wiſe worthy great Agamenon.
                  Greateſt of name and reputacion,
                  
                     Amonges the Grekes for his worthineſſe,
                  And Menelay this ſtorye beareth wytneſſe,
                  Huſbande was to the quene Heleyne.
                  And ſhe was ſyſter to the brethren tweyne,
                  Caſtor and Pollux whych as I you tolde,
                  Were of their hand ſo worthy knightes hold.
                  And in that time like to their degre,
                  In Stryneſter theyr moſt cheif Citye,
                  They helde a houſholde ſolempne & royall.
                  The loue of whom was tho ſo ſpeciall,
                  Of wyll and herte accordinge with the dede,
                  Atwixe theim two of very brotherhede,
                  That none from other could lyue alone.
                  With whom was eke the mayde Hermyone,
                  The yonge doughter of the quene Heleyne,
                  Of fayreneſſe moſt inly ſouereyne.
                  Moſt paſſyngly excellyng in beaute,
                  ¶And thus the Troians ſayling on the ſea,
                  Towarde grece amonge the wawes wete,
                  Of auenture theim happed for to mete,
                  Kinge Menelaus ſayling by theyr ſyde,
                  And none of theim liſt of very pryde,
                  For to enquere what that other was,
                  But paſſen forthe a ſwyft and luſty paſe,
                  For none of theym could then other knowe,
                  And aye the wynde peaſebly gan blowe,
                  The Troian flete cauſyng in a whyle,
                  For to approche to the noble yle,
                  That called is Cithera at this daye.
                  And in the hauen in all the haſte they may,
                  They anker caſt & boūd theyr ſhippes ſtrōge,
                  And after that theim liſt not tarye longe,
                  To take the lande ful many luſty man,
                  Araying theim as freſhly as they can.
                  ¶Now in this yle of paſſyng excellence,
                  There was a temple of great reuerence,
                  That buylded was of olde foundacion,
                  And honoured moſt as in that region,
                  Throughout the land both of fer and nere,
                  The feaſt day aye from yere to yere,
                  Like as it fil by reuolucion,
                  Repeyringe thither of great deuocion,
                  In honour onely of Venus the goddeſſe.
                  Whom the grekes with al theyr buſineſſe,
                  Honoured moſt of euery maner age.
                  With giftes brynging and with pilgremage.
                  With great offryng and with ſacrafiſe,
                  As vſed was in theyr paynem wiſe.
                  ¶For in this Phane as they knele & wake,
                  With herte contryte and theyr prayer make,
                  The ſtatue gaue of euery queſtyon,
                  Perfect anſwere and ful ſolucion,
                  With ceremonies to Venus as they loute,
                  Of euery thinge wherof they were in doubt.
                  They hadden there ful declaracion.
                  And thus the grekes vpon Citheron,
                  Halowe this feaſt with riche & great araye.
                  With rytes dewe as fer forthe as they may.
                  In hope fully the better for to thryue.
                  ¶And of fortune when he did aryue,
                  Vp to the land by aduenture or caſe.
                  The ſame tyme this feaſt halowed was.
                  Of many a greke coming to and fro,
                  From euery coſte that to the temple go.
                  On pilgramage theyr vowes to acquite.
                  Of the place the reliques to viſyte.
                  And after Parys all this did eſpye,
                  He choſen hath out of his companye,
                  The worthieſt that he there cheſe may.
                  And to the temple he toke the right way.
                  Ful wel beſene and in knightly wiſe.
                  And did his honour and his ſacrafiſe.
                  Ful humble and to the Grekes liche,
                  With many an ouche and many iewel riche.
                  With golde and ſyluer ſtones and riche perre,
                  He ſpendeth there like to his degre.
                  And quit him manly in his oblacions,
                  And ful deuoutly in his oryſons,
                  He him demeneth that ioye it was to ſe.
                  ¶Now was Parys of paſſing great beaute,
                  Amonges all that euer were alyue.
                  For there was none that might wt him ſtriue,
                  Troian nor greke to ſpeake of ſemeliheade,
                  Wonder freſhe and luſty as I reade.
                  And in his porte full lyke a gentil knighte,
                  Of whoſe perſon for to haue a ſight,
                  They gan to preaſe both of nigh and fere.
                  So royally he bare him in his gere.
                  And all preaſe both high eſtate and loowe,
                  What knight he was deſyren for to knowe.
                  And of his men they aſken buſyly,
                  From whenſe he came and the cauſe why.
                  Of his coming enquyring one by one,
                  But prudently they kept theym euerychone,
                  That nothing was openly eſpyed,
                  In theyr anſwer ſo they them ſelues guyde.
                  That euery thing kept was ſecree,
                  Eueriche of theim was ſo auiſee.
                  
                     Albe that ſome openly declare,
                  What that he was and ne liſt not to ſpare,
                  But tolde playnly the cauſe of his cominge.
                  And howe Pryam the ſtronge mighty kinge,
                  His father was moſt royall of renowne.
                  And how he came alſo for Exiowne.
                  Thus eche of theim gan with other rowne,
                  At pryme face whan he came to towne.
                  And therupon were ymagynatyfe,
                  Sore muſyng and much inquiſitife,
                  Eche with other as by ſuſpection,
                  Deminge therof lyke theyr opynyon.
                  And ratheſt they that nothinge ne knewe,
                  As folkes done of thinges that be newe.
                  And whyles that they of this matter treate,
                  In ſondry wiſe among theyr wordes greate,
                  The ſaying of theim gan anone atteyne,
                  To the eares of the quene Heleyne.
                  Nigh there beſide in that regyon.
                  And when ſhe herde as by relacion,
                  And by reporte of them that come bytwene,
                  This fayre Heleyne, this freſhe luſty quene,
                  Anone as ſhe the ſothe vnderſtode,
                  Without delay or any more abode,
                  She caſteth her to this ſolempnytye,
                  The freſhe folke of Phrigia to ſe.
                  Wel more god wote in her entention,
                  To ſe Parys than for deuocion.
                  Vnder colour of holy pylgramage.
                  To the temple ſhe taketh her voyage,
                  With a great meyne and royal apparayle,
                  Parys to ſe for ſhe wyll not fayle.
                  ¶But oh alas what luſty newe fyre,
                  Her herte hath nowe enflawmed by deſyre,
                  To go to vigiles other to ſpectacles.
                  None holyneſſe to heare of myracles,
                  Hath meued her that there ſhal befall,
                  But as the maner is of women all,
                  To drawe thether platly to conclude,
                  Where as they be ſure that multytude,
                  Ygathered is at lybertye to ſee,
                  Where as they may finde oportunitye,
                  To theyr deſyre ful narowe they awayte.
                  Now couertly theyr eyen for to baite.
                  In place where as ſet is theyr pleſaunce.
                  Now pryuely to haue dalyaunce,
                  By ſome ſygne or caſting of an eye,
                  Or tokens ſhewing in hert what they drye.
                  With touche of hādes ſtole amonge the preſe,
                  With arme or fote to catche vp in theyr leſe,
                  Whom that them lyſt, all be he free or bonde,
                  Of nature they can holde him in honde.
                  Ayen whoſe ſleyght auaileth wyt nor myght.
                  For what theim liſt be yt wronge or ryght,
                  They aye achieue who ſo ſayth yea or nay.
                  Agayne whoſe luſt defend him no man may.
                  ¶Thus Guydo aye of curſed falſe delyte,
                  To ſpeak thē harme hath caught an appetite
                  Throughout his boke of women to ſay yll,
                  That to tranſlate it is agayne my wll,
                  He hath aye ioye theyr honour to ramuerſe.
                  And I ryght ſorye that I muſt reherſe,
                  The fel wordes in his booke yfounde,
                  To all women I am ſo mikle bounde.
                  They be echone ſo goodly and ſo kynde,
                  I dare of theim not ſay but as I finde.
                  Of Guydoes write throughout Troy booke,
                  For when I redde for feare my herte quoke.
                  And veryly my wyttes gan to fayle,
                  Whan I therof muſt maken reherſaile.
                  Like his decrete but Guydo now do wyte,
                  For ye ſhall heare anone how that he chit,
                  The quene Heleyne for cauſe that ſhe went,
                  With herte deuoute her offryng to preſente.
                  To the temple of Venus the goddeſſe,
                  Thus word by word he ſayth to her expreſſe.
                  ¶O mortal harme that moſt is for to dread,
                  A fraude ycaſt by ſleyght of womanhead.
                  Of euery wo ginning crop and roote,
                  Agaynſt whych helpe may no bote,
                  Whan luſt hath dryue in theyr herte a nayle,
                  Aye deadly venim ſeweth at the tayle.
                  Which no man hath power to reſtreyne,
                  Recorde I take of quene Heleyne.
                  That inly brent alas in her deſyres,
                  Of newe luſt to dele with thoſe ſtraungers.
                  Whom ſhe knewe nat ne neuer ſawe beforne,
                  Wher through alas ful many mē were lorne,
                  Of cruel death embraſed in a cheyne.
                  Without pyty now ſaye thou quene Heleyne,
                  What ghoſt or ſpyryte alas hath meued the,
                  Sole fro thy lorde in ſuch royaltye,
                  Out of thy houſe to go among the preaſe.
                  Why were yu wery to liue at home in peace.
                  But wenteſt out ſtraungers for to ſe,
                  Taking no hede vnto thine honeſtye.
                  Thou ſhuldeſt haue kept thy cloſet ſecretly,
                  And not haue paſſed out ſo folyly,
                  
                     In the abſence of thy lorde alas.
                  Thou were to wilful and rakel in this caſe.
                  To ſe afore what ſhuld after ſewe,
                  For al to ſone thou were drawē out of mewe.
                  That coulde not kepe at home tho thy boūdꝭ.
                  Thou wēteſt out as hare among ye houndes.
                  For to be caught of very wilfulneſſe.
                  And thy deſyre coudeſt not compeſſe.
                  For though thy luſt lyſt not to refrayne,
                  O many woman hath caught be in a trayne,
                  By goyng out ſuch halowes for to ſeke.
                  It ſyt theim better at home for to kepe,
                  Cloſe in theyr chaumber and fle occaſyowne.
                  For neuer ſhyp ſhuld in peryl drowne,
                  Nor ryue on rocke nor be with tempeſt rente,
                  Nor with Caribdis dreached or yſhent,
                  Nor to go to wrake with no wethers yll,
                  If it were kept in the hauen ſtyll.
                  For who wil not occaſyons eſchewe,
                  Nor dread no peryll for it is to ſewe,
                  He muſt nedely as by neceſſytie,
                  Or he beware endure aduerſytie.
                  And who can not his fote fro trappes ſpare,
                  Let him take hede or he fall in the ſnare.
                  For harme ydone to late is to compleyne,
                  For if whylom the noble quene Heleyne,
                  Her ſelfe had kept at home ſecrete and cloſe,
                  Of her there ne had be ſo wicke a loſe.
                  Reported yet grene freſhe and newe.
                  Whoſe chaūce vnhappi eche mā ought to rew
                  That cauſe was of ſuch deſtruction,
                  Of many worthy and confuſyon,
                  Of her huſband and many other mo.
                  On grekes ſyde and thoſe of Troye alſo.
                  In this ſtorye as ye ſhall after reade.
                  ¶And ſo this quene as faſt as ſhe may ſpede,
                  To the temple hath the way ynome,
                  Full royally and whan that ſhe was come.
                  Ful deuoutly within Citheron,
                  Made vnto Venus her oblacion,
                  In preſence and ſyght of many one.
                  With many iewell and many ryche ſtone.
                  ¶And whē that Paris had this thing eſpied,
                  To the temple anone he hath him hyed.
                  Ful thriftely in all the haſt he myght.
                  Wher he forthwith as he had a ſyght,
                  Of the goodly fayre freſhe quene,
                  Cupides darte that is whet ſo kene,
                  Or he was ware hath him marked ſo,
                  That for aſtoned he niſt what to do.
                  So much he meruayleth her ſemelineſſe,
                  Her womanhead her porte and her fayrneſſe.
                  For neuer erſt ne wende he that nature,
                  Coud ought haue made ſo fayre a creature.
                  So aungellyke ſhe was of her beaute,
                  So feminine ſo goodly on to ſe.
                  That ſothly he her dempte as by liklyneſſe,
                  For her beaute to be ſome goddeſſe.
                  For ſo his herte did him aye aſſure,
                  That ſhe ne was a mortall creature.
                  So heauenly fayre and ſo celeſtyall,
                  He thought ſhe was in partye and in all.
                  And eft conſydereth for auyſely,
                  Her features all in ordre by and by.
                  So curyouſly aye in his reaſon,
                  Of euery thinge by good inſpection.
                  Her golden heare like the ſonne ſtreames,
                  Of freſhe Phebus with his bright beames.
                  The goodly heade of her fleſhly face,
                  Full replete of beaute and of grace.
                  Ylike enewed with quickenes of coloure,
                  Both of the roſe and the lyly floure.
                  So egally that nother was to wite,
                  Through none exceſſe of much nor of lite.
                  Within the cerclynge of her eyen bryght,
                  Was paradiſe compaſſed in her ſyght.
                  That through eche hert ye beaute gā to perce.
                  And certaynly if ſo I ſhall reherce,
                  Her ſhape her fourme her features by & by,
                  As Guydo doth by ordre ceryouſly,
                  From head to foote clearly to deuyſe,
                  I want englyſhe that therto may ſuffyſe.
                  It wil not be our tunge is nothing like,
                  I want alſo the floures of Rethorike.
                  To ſewe his flouryſhyng or his peynture,
                  For to diſcryue ſo fayre a creature.
                  For ſo my coloures feble be and feynte,
                  That nother can ennewe nor wel depaynte.
                  Eke I am not acqueynted with no muſe,
                  Of all the nine therfore I me excuſe,
                  To you echone not all of neclygence,
                  But for defaute onely of eloquence.
                  And you remit to Guydo for to ſe,
                  How he deſcriueth by ordre her beaute.
                  To take on me it were preſumpciowne.
                  ¶But I wil tell how Parys vp and downe,
                  Gothe in the temple and his eye caſt,
                  Towardes Heleyne and gan preſen faſt,
                  
                     As he that brent hoote in loues fyre,
                  That was enflawmed greatly by deſyre.
                  And oft he chaungeth coūtenaunce & cheare,
                  And euer he neygheth to her nere and nere,
                  Ydarted through with her eyen tweyne.
                  And in likewyſe this freſhe quene Heleyne,
                  As hote ſhe brent in herte priuely,
                  Albe no man it outward could eſpye.
                  For as her thought ſhe neuer erſt to fore,
                  Of all men that euer yet were bore,
                  Se none ſo fayre nor like to her pleaſaunce.
                  On him to loke was hartes ſuffyſaunce.
                  For in the temple ſhe taketh hede of nought,
                  But compaſſeth and caſteth in her thought,
                  How ſhe may catche ſome oportunitye,
                  With him to ſpeake at further lybertye.
                  This hooly was all her buſyneſſe.
                  For him ſhe felt ſo inly great diſtreſſe.
                  That oft ſhe chaūgeth coūtenaūce & hewe,
                  For Venus hath theim marked ſo of newe,
                  With her brondes fyred by feruence,
                  And enflawmed by ſodayne influence,
                  That egally they brought were in rage.
                  And ſaue the eye atwene was no meſſage.
                  Eche on other ſo fyxe haue caſt theyr ſight,
                  That they conceyue and wyſt anone right,
                  Within theim ſelfe what theyr herte ment.
                  And nere to her euer Parys wente.
                  To ſeke fully and get occaſyon,
                  When as they might by ful relacion,
                  Theyr hertes conceyte declare ſecretly.
                  And ſo befell that Parys nigheth nye,
                  To the place where the quene Heleyne,
                  Stode in her ſee, & there atwene thē tweyne,
                  They broke out al & ſum of theyr whole hert.
                  And gaue yſſue to theyr inward ſmerte.
                  But this was done leſt they were eſpyed,
                  Whan the people was moſt occupyed,
                  In the temple for to ſtare and gaſe.
                  Now here now there as it were on a maſe.
                  They kept theim cloſe that no worde aſterte,
                  There was no man the treaſō myght aduert.
                  Of theim twayne ne what they would mene.
                  But at the laſt Parys and this quene,
                  Concluded haue wyth ſhorte auyſement,
                  Fully the fine of theyr both entent.
                  And ſet the time betwyx theim in certayne,
                  Whan they appoynten for to mete agayne.
                  But leſt men had to theim ſuſpection,
                  They made an ende without more ſermō.
                  And ſyth departe albe that they were lothe.
                  And ſoberly anone this Parys gothe,
                  From the temple with breſt in euery parte,
                  Fully through gyrt with loues fiery darte.
                  And to his ſhippes he helde the right way,
                  Where he anone in al the haſt he may,
                  Whan that aſſembled was his chiualrye,
                  One and other and al his companye.
                  In fewe wordes as ſhortly as I can,
                  Tofore theim all his tale he thus began.
               
               
                  LOrdinges quod he ſhortly to expreſſe,
                  The cauſe is kouthe as to youre worthineſſe,
                  Why my father into Grece vs ſent.
                  For as ye knowe the chief of his entent,
                  Was to recure his ſiſter Exion,
                  Out of the handes of mighty Thelamon.
                  The which thinge for ought I can eſpye.
                  Is impoſſible ſhortly in mine eye.
                  By any waie as fer as I can ſe,
                  He is ſo great and ſtrong in his countre.
                  Of his allyes aboute on euery ſide,
                  And in herte ſo inly full of pride,
                  To yelde her vp he hath not but diſdayne.
                  Therof to treate it were not but in vayne.
                  Therfore the beſt that I can deuiſe,
                  Sith our power may not now ſuffiſe,
                  To werrey him in this regiowne,
                  We be not egall of might nor of renowne,
                  For lacke of men with him to holde a felde.
                  We may not win with ſpere nor wt ſhelde,
                  Tencountre him with all his multitude.
                  Wherfore the beſt that I can conclude,
                  Is ſith fortune hath vs hither brought,
                  And the goddes haue eke for vs wrought,
                  So graciouſly to make vs for to londe,
                  At Venus temple faſt here by the ſtronde.
                  Whiche aboundeth with ful great richeſſe,
                  Of grekes offringe vnto the goddeſſe,
                  By londe and ſea fro many ſundry porte,
                  Of men and women that hyther haue reſort,
                  To that place in worſhyp of Venus,
                  So that the wife of kinge Menelaus,
                  Is there preſent. ful riche and wel beſeyne,
                  And if that we by manhod might atteyne,
                  To rauiſhe her and the temple ſpoyle,
                  And of theyr treaſour cheſen out and coyle,
                  The chefe iewels and chargen our ſomers,
                  
                     Wyth golde and ſyluer and wyth pryſoners,
                  And maugre theim to our ſhyppes brynge,
                  This ſame night without tarying,
                  We may not fayle who euer that ſaythe nay,
                  If ye aſſenten of a worthye pray.
                  Wherfore in haſte that ye now redy make,
                  And euery man anone his harnes take,
                  And arme hym well in his beſt aray.
                  And they aſſente without more delaye,
                  And in theyr ſhyppes they bydē till at night,
                  Whē Phebus chaire wtdrawē had his light,
                  Vnder the wawes and ſterres did appeare,
                  On the heauen with theyr ſtreames cleare.
                  And or the moone that time did aryſe,
                  They ſhope theim forth in ful thrifty wiſe,
                  The manly Troians armed in ſtele bryghte,
                  To the temple holding theyr waye aryght.
                  For they caſten no longer for to tarye,
                  But proudly enter in the ſanctuarye,
                  Into the chappel called Citheron,
                  Without reuerence or deuocion.
                  Done to Venus in her oratorye.
                  For it was cleane out of theyr memorye.
                  Honour and dread and all obſeruaunce,
                  For fynally all theyr attendaunce,
                  As myn Auctour ſothly can diffine,
                  Was to ryght nought but onely to rauyne.
                  They token all that came to theyr hande,
                  Rycheſſe and treaſour that was in the lande,
                  Golde and ſyluer ſtones and riche Iewelles,
                  Releques ſacred the holy eke veſſels,
                  Without abode out of the ſacrary,
                  And all yfeare to theyr ſhippes carye.
                  It is a wonder to thynke on the good.
                  They kil & ſley all that theim withſtode,
                  And likewyſe pytie for to ſe theim blede,
                  And of the Grekes how they to ſhip lede.
                  That after lyued in captyuytie,
                  Ful many a yeare in Troye the Citye.
                  ¶And there whiles goth Parys to Heleyne,
                  And her embraſeth in his armes tweyne,
                  Full humble and with great reuerence.
                  In whom he found no maner reſyſtence.
                  It ſat her not ſhe was ſo womanly,
                  For ther to Parys ſhe yolde her vtterly.
                  Her herte in hap was yolde or he came there,
                  Therfore to yelde ſhe had leſſe feare.
                  She can not ſtryue nor no woman ſholde,
                  And he anone as gentilneſſe him wolde
                  Comforteth her as he beſt can or may.
                  And led her forthe without more delaye,
                  Vnto the ſhyppes and there full buſyly,
                  He ſet wardes to kepe her honeſtly.
                  While to the temple he retourneth agayne,
                  To ſpoyle and robbe and to make all playne,
                  Through the temple withe his walles wyde.
                  ¶Nowe ſtode a caſtell faſt there beſyde,
                  Yſtuffed well with Grekiſhe Souldeours,
                  The whych awoke wyth noyſe of pylours.
                  The ſame nyght and gan make a ſhoute.
                  And therwithall anone they yſſue oute,
                  Armed in ſtele the temple to reſkewe.
                  And manfully after theim they ſewe.
                  And ſo befell whan they togyther mette,
                  Wyth ſperes ſharpe and ſwerdes kene whet.
                  ¶They ran togither as theſe Tygres wilde,
                  Like wood Lions or theſe Bores vnmilde.
                  There was no fayninge foūd in theyr fyght,
                  Albe the felde was not departed ryght.
                  For the Troians doubled them in nomber,
                  That vtterly the Grekes they encoumbre.
                  And at miſchefe made theim faſt to flee
                  And in purſute ful cruelly theym flee.
                  Without mercy to the caſtell gate.
                  There was no reſcuſe for they came to late.
                  Of this ſkermyſhe for the fine was deathe,
                  Nowe here now there thei yeldē vp ye breath.
                  So mightely the Troians theim aſſayle.
                  That to withſtāde it might not theim auaile.
                  For of manhod they the felde haue wonne.
                  And after that ryght cruelly begonne,
                  In haſty wyſe to ranſacke that caſtell,
                  And to ſhyppe they broughten euerydell.
                  Treaſour & golde & what that they may win,
                  And on the morowe to ſalen they begyn.
                  Stuffed with good by the grekyſhe ſea,
                  Towarde the coſtes of Troye the Citye.
                  The ſea was calme and fully at theyr will,
                  Both of tempeſt and of ſtormes ill.
                  And cleare alſo was the bryght heauen,
                  That in ſpace almoſt of dayes ſeuen,
                  At the caſtel called Tenedowne,
                  They are aryued ſixe mile from the towne.
                  And glad and light they to land wente.
                  And after that I finde this Parys ſente,
                  His meſſāger ſtreyght vnto the kinge,
                  That him enfourmeth of his home cominge,
                  Of theyr exployt he tolde theim euery dele,
                  
                     And Pryamus it lyketh wonder wele,
                  That ſo manly they haue borne them out,
                  And made to publyſhe in all the towne about,
                  Theſe tydynges new with great ſolempnitie,
                  To hygh and lowe through out the cytie.
                  And that for ioye the moſte and eke the leſte,
                  For remembraunce halowe and holde a feſte.
                  And thanke their goddes in full humble wyſe,
                  With obſeruaunces and with ſacrafyce,
                  On their aulters with great deuocion,
                  And all this whyle he at Tenedon,
                  Holdeth ſoiourne with the quene Heleyne.
                  The whiche her hap gan rewfully complain,
                  Her vnkouth life to dwellen with ſtraungers.
                  Diſconſolate amonge the pryſoners.
                  Ferre ſequeſtred away from her countrey,
                  All ſolytarye and in captiuitie.
                  She wepeth and cryeth with a pyteous chere
                  With wawes vpboyled from her eyen clere,
                  Wherof the ſtremes by her chekes rayne.
                  And for conſtraynt of her inwarde peyne,
                  Full often ſythes her ſonge was wel away.
                  With ſobbing voice that ſhe ſo fer awaye,
                  Departed is from Menelaus,
                  For whoſe abſence in rages furyous,
                  She hateth her lyfe and curſeth eke fortune,
                  And in this wo ſhe euer doth contune,
                  Without ſoiourne alway more and more.
                  And for her brethern Pollux and Caſtor,
                  And for the loue of her doughter dere,
                  Now pale and grene ſhe wexeth of her chere,
                  That whylom was freſher for to ſene,
                  Than is lyilye on his ſtalke grene.
                  Alas chaunged is her roſen hewe.
                  And aye elyche her wo encreaſeth newe.
                  That lyke no woman ſhe was to beholde,
                  For aye ſhe wepte as ſhe to water wolde.
                  ¶Till at the laſte in all her heauyneſſe,
                  Parys to her came of gentylneſſe,
                  To recomforte and to appeſe her rage.
                  He beſyeth hym her ſorowes to aſwage.
                  Sayeng to her alas what may this mene,
                  That ye in one oh goodly freſhe quene,
                  Lyſt thus your ſelfe in ſorowynge diffygure.
                  I wonder greatly how ye may endure,
                  So moche water cauſeles thus to ſhede,
                  That with weping haue dewed ſo your wede.
                  For like a conduite the ſtreames ran a downe
                  And as a penitaunt in contriciowne,
                  Ye you diſraye alas why do ye ſo.
                  Let be this fare and let it ouer go.
                  All your wepynge thought and heauineſſe,
                  And be no more my lady in diſtreſſe.
                  Make here an ende now of your greuaunce,
                  For all the eaſe comforte and pleaſaunce,
                  That men may do truſte well ye ſhall haue,
                  It is but foly in ſorowe thus to raue.
                  Lette paſſen ouer all theſe ſharpe ſhoures,
                  And here my trouth ye and all youres,
                  Of what your lyſte you ſhal haue ſuffyſaunce.
                  As ferforth and more in haboundaunce,
                  Than haue ye had amonge the grekes there,
                  I you enſure and be nothyng in feare.
                  That I ſhall holde all that I haue hyght,
                  On my trouthe as I am true knyght.
                  In worde and dede with all my herte entire,
                  And ſhe anone with a dolefull chere,
                  So as ſhe myght forſobbyng tho ſuffyce,
                  Anſwered agayne in full lowly wyſe.
                  ¶I wote quod ſhe were me lothe or lefe,
                  Syth I am caught & take at this miſchiefe,
                  Vnto your wyll I may not now with ſeye,
                  I am ſo bounde that I muſt obeye.
                  Vnder your daunger that I may not flee,
                  In holde diſtrayned and in captiuitee.
                  ¶Ye wot alſo by nature out of dreade,
                  That it ne longeth vnto womanhead.
                  In ſtraunge ſoyle to ſtryue or to rebell.
                  And namely there where as her quarell,
                  Shall haue no fauour nor ſuſteyned be,
                  But yf ye lyſte now to haue pitee,
                  On me or myne of your goodlyhead,
                  Ye may of god deſerue thanke and mede.
                  That wyll rewarde iuſtly geue to tho,
                  And comforte them that be in care and wo.
                  ¶Now lady myne, than quod Parys,
                  What that maye lyke or be at your deuyſe,
                  All ſhall be do truſteth me ryght wele.
                  For by my trouthe as ferre as I can feele,
                  In any thyng that may do you pleaſaunce,
                  Ye ſhall it haue and that in habundaunce.
                  This I enſure of heſte not fallyble,
                  Be not agaſte but fully be credible,
                  To my wordes and heſtes euerychone.
                  And therwithall he ladde her ryght anone,
                  Into a place of royall apparayle,
                  To comforte her if it wolde auayle.
                  And ſecretely there betwene them two,
                  
                     This Parys fyrſte without more a do,
                  Spake vnto her and ſayde my lady dere,
                  I fayne it not but ſpeake of herte entyer,
                  And that I hope ye ſhall hereafter fynde.
                  Wherfore I praye enprenteth in your mynde,
                  What that I ſaye and in your remembraunce.
                  This is to ſaye ſyth ye by purueyaunce,
                  Ben of the goddes brought as now therto,
                  And fortune eke will that it be ſo,
                  I dare affyrme playnly for the fyrſte,
                  That they diſpoſed haue not for your worſte,
                  But for your good and ſo ye muſt it take,
                  Wherfore I reade ſuffer ouer ſhake,
                  All heauyneſſe and loketh that ye be,
                  As glad and lyght here in this countrey,
                  As though ye were in your owne lande.
                  For faythfully I do you tunderſtande,
                  Ye ſhall haue here as moche habundaunce,
                  On euery parte with full ſuffyſaunce,
                  Of all that you ſemeth to be pleaſaunt,
                  For of one thyng I dare me well auaunt,
                  That in this countrey as it ſhalbe founde,
                  In euery thyng we plenteouſly habounde.
                  And more at ful then do your grekes yonder,
                  And though ye ben farre from them a ſonder,
                  Out of the lande that called is Achaye,
                  There is no cauſe whye ye ſhoulde diſmay,
                  Syth ye at worſhyp and more reuerence,
                  At more honour and greater excellence,
                  Here ſhalbe cheriſhed than ye were afore.
                  And where ye playne that ye haue forbore,
                  Your owne lord and be as now left ſole,
                  For whom ye maken al this wo and dole,
                  Ye ſhall in haſte be ſette at better eaſe.
                  For certaynly ſo it not diſpleaſe,
                  Nor offende vnto your womanhead,
                  In ſtede of hym I purpoſe out of dread,
                  To wedde you and be your trewe man,
                  To loue and ſerue in all that euer I can,
                  Without faynyng to my lyues ende.
                  And be to you as lowly and as kynde,
                  As dylygent and eke more laborous,
                  Than whylom was your Menelaus,
                  In euery thynge your luſtes to obeye.
                  Haue here my trouthe tyll tyme that I deye.
                  ¶And though that I in wordes be but plain,
                  For the loue of god haue no diſdeyne,
                  Of my requeſt nor grutche not at all,
                  For at the leaſt of the ſtocke royall,
                  I am deſcended and come as hygh of bloud,
                  As Menelay and of byrth as good,
                  And can in loue to you be farre more trewe,
                  Than erſt was he and chaunge for no newe.
                  ¶Wherfore leue of thus to playne and wepe,
                  And let ſome comforte in your boſome crepe,
                  Your wo appeaſe which is not worth an haw,
                  And lette ſome myrth in your herte adawe.
                  This I beſeche you and of womanhead,
                  To my wordes that ye lyſt take hede.
                  ¶Alas quod ſhe how myght this befall,
                  That haue ylefte my frendes one and all,
                  In ſtraunge lande and here am al alone,
                  How ſhuld I thā but ſtil complaine in one,
                  I haue no cauſe god wote for to pley,
                  Nor yet my chekes for to kepe drey.
                  From ſalte teares alas it wyll not be,
                  That can none ende of myne aduerſyte.
                  For in good fayth it were agaynſt kynde,
                  So ſodaynly tabandon out of mynde,
                  Thilke thyng that eyther for ioye or ſmerte,
                  In all this worlde ſytteth nexte my herte.
                  For whom alas ſo ſore I am deſtrayned.
                  But ſyth the goddes haue as now ordeyned,
                  No better chaunce of hope vnto me,
                  I can no more I muſt it take at gre.
                  And humbly accepte alſo their ſonde.
                  For I am weake their power to withſtonde.
                  Wherfore I ſhal agayne my wyll now ſtriue,
                  Al be for wo my herte I fele ryue.
                  For to conſent and lowly to admytte,
                  Thylke thynge fro whiche as now I may not flytte.
                  Maugre my wyll of neceſſytie,
                  Fully to obey what ye lyſt do with me.
                  It wil not helpe although I ſayed you nay.
                  And thus ſhe playneth in al that euer ſhe may
                  Little and little her ſorowe to aſwage.
                  What ſhulde ſhe aye lyue in wo and rage.
                  To leſe her ſelfe ſo tender a creature,
                  An herte of ſtele ne myght it not endure.
                  But aye of women the maner is and kynde,
                  That they can not of ſorowe make an ende.
                  Tyll they by leyſure wepte haue at full.
                  But at the laſte whan they gynnen dull,
                  To make ſorowe it happeth them as faſte,
                  That by grace they ſoone it ouer caſte.
                  And lyghtly catche comforte for their ſmerte.
                  They be ſo tender yt men may them conuerte,
                  Fro wo to ioye & thought from them diſſeuer,
                  
                     There is no ſtorme that may laſte euer,
                  As clerkes wyſe in bookes lyſte diſcerne,
                  Thynge vyolente may nothyng be eterne.
                  For after ſtormes Phebus bryghter is.
                  And ſo by comforte and counſayle of Parys,
                  She is adawed of her olde ſorowe.
                  For euen lyke as the glade morowe,
                  Of veray kynde ſeweth the dercke nyght,
                  So by proceſſe her herte wexeth lyght.
                  And of her wepyng dryed is the well.
                  Lyke as the ſtorye ſhall anone vs tell.
               
            
            
               Howe Parys was receyued in Troye at his retourne, and of his maryage to Heleyne. Capitulo. xiiii.
               
                  VVhan ſo ye quene that called is Heleine,
                  Adawed was of her drery peyne,
                  And the wawes of her heauy cheare,
                  On her chekes gonnen for to clere:
                  Parys in herte freſhe and amerous,
                  In haſte hath ſente to kyng Pryamus,
                  For horſe and men and other apparayle,
                  Clothes of golde full noble of entayle,
                  Made for Heleyne, & wrought for the nones,
                  With ryche perle and many ſondry ſtones,
                  Agayne her commyng into Troye towne.
                  And after that Parys from Tenedowne,
                  Shappeth him to lede her into Troye.
                  And Pryamus mette them on the waye,
                  Full royally as faſte as he myght hye,
                  With many a lorde in his companye,
                  Full many lady freſhe and well beſeyne,
                  And many mayde that ryde them agayne,
                  Fyrſt eſtates and after communers.
                  Nowe had Parys all his pryſoners,
                  Set before in order tweyne and tweyne,
                  And he rode next with the quene Heleyne.
                  And Deiphobus vpon the other ſyde,
                  And his knyghtes enuyron him dyd ryde.
                  But nexte hym rode the worthy Eneas,
                  And the Troyan called Pollydamus,
                  His meane ſuynge eche in his degree,
                  So gentylmanly that ioye it was to ſee,
                  Eche from other kepyng a certayne ſpace.
                  And forth they ryden but a ſofte pace,
                  Tyll that the kyng them mette ſodaynly,
                  And them receyued hath full ſolempnely,
                  As he beſte coulde and goodly toke the rayne,
                  Into his hande of the quene Heleyne.
                  And her conueyed forth to his Citie.
                  Great was the preyſe that abode to ſee,
                  Of ſondry folke that ſhoued faſte and croude.
                  The ſhyrle trumpettes were yreyſed loude,
                  Vp to the ſkye goth the blyſfull ſowne,
                  Whan all this people entreth in the towne.
                  And many a nother dyuers inſtrumente,
                  That all tofore in at the gates went,
                  In ſondry wyſe that made melodye.
                  That to here the heauenly armonye,
                  By muſycke touched vpon ſtrynge and corde,
                  So euen in one and iuſtly they accorde,
                  It wolde an herte rauyſhe into ioye.
                  And whan they weren entred into Troye,
                  Amydde his palayſe Pryamus alight.
                  And then anone as faſte as euer he myghte,
                  Into a chambre ryche and well beſey,
                  The quene Heleyne in haſte he dothe conuey.
                  Cōmaundyng eft with herte wyll & thought,
                  His offycers that her fayle nought,
                  Of any thynge that ſhe can bethyncke.
                  The ſpyces parted anone ye wyne they drinke.
                  And than the kyng toke leue tyll ſupper,
                  And ſhe there whyles chaungeth her attyre.
                  ¶But of the ioye that was in the towne,
                  In euery place where men went vp & downe,
                  I am to rude ſothly all to wryte.
                  So muche in herte the Troyans them delyte,
                  That ſafe and ſounde retourned in Parys.
                  They wende haue ben for ioye in paradyſe,
                  That he ſo well ſped in his iourne.
                  And hath not one loſte of his meyne.
                  Wherof they be in herte glad and lyghte.
                  And in all haſte after the nexte nyght,
                  As wryte Guydo without tarying longe,
                  Erely the morowe before the larke ſonge,
                  In Pallas temple as myne auctor ſayth,
                  Aſſured was by othe and eke by fayth,
                  The bond of wedlocke of him and of Heleine,
                  For euermore to laſte atwixte them tweyne.
                  The knotte is knitte of this ſacrament.
                  And thus was done fully by thaſſent,
                  Firſt of the kyng and alſo by thaduyſe,
                  Of all the Citie in fauour of Paryſe.
                  And ſo the feaſt and great ſolempnitee,
                  Continued was with muche royaltee,
                  Of this weddyng in myrthe and ſolace,
                  Through the towne by eyght dayes ſpace.
                  
                     What ſhulde I wryte the reuell or ye daunces,
                  The freſhe aray or the countenaunces,
                  The ſcole touches the lokes amerous,
                  The priue grutche of them yt were Ialous,
                  The great iuſtes bourdes or tornaye,
                  Amydde paleſtre with many ſundry playe,
                  The dyuers courſes eke at euery feſte,
                  The large plente done to moſt and leſte,
                  The ſtraunge meates the maner of ſeruyce.
                  I haue none englyſhe all for to deuyce,
                  I paſſe it ouer for I was not there.
                  ¶But whan this weddyng came vnto ye ere,
                  Of Caſſandra and fyrſte it dyd eſpye,
                  A thouſande ſythe alas ſhe gan to crye,
                  Of pyteous wo with vntreſſed heeres.
                  And ſayde thus albe ſpreynte with teeres.
                  O wretched Troye errynge in this caſe,
                  Within thy ſelfe to ſuffer this treſpaſe,
                  For to conſente vnto ſuche folye,
                  In ſuſteynyng of foule auouterye,
                  That Parys ſhulde taken vnto wyfe,
                  The quene Heleyne whoſe huſband is alyue,
                  Oh wofull Troye to cruell is thy fate,
                  For to beware it is almoſt to late.
                  The tyme is come thou ſhalte deſtroyed be,
                  For many father ſhall his ſonne ſee,
                  Hole on the morne that ſhalbe ſlayne or eue.
                  Amyddes the fyelde that wyll him ſore greue.
                  And many wyfe ſhall carefully bewepe,
                  To ſe her huſband with large woundes depe.
                  Gryde through the body pale colde and grene
                  Alas how ſhall ye the ſorowe mowe ſuſteyne.
                  ¶Ah wretched mothers how ſhall ye endure,
                  To ſe your children by cruell aduenture,
                  Afore you ſlayne withouten remedye.
                  It wyll not helpe though ye clepe and crye.
                  ¶Ah mother myne Heccuba the quene,
                  How ſhalt thou byde ye ſharpe ſtoundes kene,
                  Thy worthy ſonnes to ſe afore the ſlawe.
                  And in the fyelde by cruelte ydrawe.
                  ¶Ah blynde people of death yu takeſt no hede,
                  Why nylte thou worke and do after my rede,
                  And in this caſe more prudent be and wyſe,
                  To take awaye this Heleyne fro Paris,
                  As right requireth withouten any more,
                  And to her lorde iuſtely her reſtore.
                  ¶What trowen ye his thefte & cruel dede,
                  Shall paſſe thus nay nay withouten drede,
                  The ſword of vengeaūce ſhal ful ſharply byte
                  For his offence and we ſhall beare the wyte.
                  Paleys and houſe to ſe within a throwe,
                  And toures hye layde on the erthe alowe.
                  Alas alas I ſaye to the Heleyne,
                  Vnhappy woman cauſer of our payne.
                  Harde, vnſely, and alſo graceleſe,
                  Vnwealfull woman diſturbler of our peace.
                  Thou haſt vs brought in miſchefe & in were,
                  Kyndled a bronde to burne vs all yfeare.
                  Alas thou arte the grounde and roote of all,
                  Of many drery feaſt funerall.
                  That ſhall beholde amonge vs in this towne.
                  And in this wiſe Caſſandra vp and downe,
                  Aboute ran in ſubarde and in ſtrete,
                  And crieth in one whom euer that ſhe mete,
                  Full ofte ſyth alas and welaway.
                  Tyll Pryamus bycauſe of her affray,
                  And for the noyſe that ſhe as tho did make,
                  Without abode anone he doth her take,
                  And bounde her faſt and fetred in pryſon,
                  Without mercy or remyſſyon:
                  They toke no hede to her ſadde trouthe,
                  Nor to her wordes it was the more routhe.
                  But ſhet her vp in bondes great and ſtronge,
                  Without pitie where ſhe abyde longe.
                  And thus in pryſon a whyle I let her morne,
                  And to the grekes I wyll agayne retourne.
               
               
                  THunhappy tyme & in the ſame whyle,
                  That falſe fortune frendly gan to ſmyle,
                  Vpon Troyans and bad them to be mery,
                  For which highly they gan their goddes hery
                  Wenyng with ioye to haue aſſured weale,
                  Nothyng aduerting the tournyng of ye whele,
                  Of her that laſteth ſtable but a throwe.
                  Whē men moſt truſt her ſhe can make a mowe
                  Tourne her forhead and her face wrythe,
                  Suche ioye ſhe hath her doubleneſſe to kythe.
                  And to wrappe her clereneſſe vnder cloude,
                  Agaīſt whoſe might ther mai no mā hī ſhroud
                  Whē moſt ſhe flattereth thē is ſhe leſt to triſte,
                  For in her ioye the Troyans lyttell wyſte,
                  What ſhe hath mente to their confuciowne.
                  For whyle that they aboute in all the towne,
                  Wende of grekes haue gotten full recure,
                  Of their domages and to haue be ſure,
                  Through thilke pray ye Paris had thē wonne.
                  The wycked fame and rumour is yronne,
                  With ſwift wingꝭ of al yt they haue wroughte,
                  
                     To Menelay the fydynges were ybrought,
                  Whyles he abode with Neſtor at Pirrha,
                  Firſte of the temple in Cithera,
                  How it was ſpoyled and the robberye,
                  Of golde and treaſoure and the tyrrannye,
                  Vpon his men by Troyans execute,
                  Both of aſſaylyng and of all the ſuite,
                  That on the grekes they made cruelly,
                  And how that they ne ſpared vtterly,
                  Man nor woman that came in their waye,
                  That they ne toke and ladde as for praye,
                  To theyr ſhyppes. alſo of the fyght,
                  Afore the Caſtell that was on the nyght.
                  ¶And alder laſte he heareth of his wyfe,
                  Whom he loued as derely as his lyfe,
                  More tenderly god wote a thouſande folde.
                  For whom at herte he waxed is as colde,
                  As any ſtone and therto pale of hewe,
                  His hertye wo ſo inly gan renewe.
                  That fyrſt whan he harde her name ſowne,
                  Without more anone he fell in ſowne,
                  For he ne myght endure for to ſtande.
                  Til that duke Neſtor toke hym by the hande,
                  And hym adawed of his deadely ſwowe.
                  Alas quod he why haue I loſt and howe,
                  My lyues luſte my hertes ſuffyſaunce.
                  Ah death come now & make of my greuaūce,
                  Fully an ende with thy cruell darte.
                  That wounded am through on euery parte,
                  My herte alſo korne in euery veyne,
                  For you my wyfe for you myne owne Heleine
                  That be deforced fro me welaway.
                  Farewell my ioye farewell my olde playe.
                  Now haue ſtraungers of you poſſeſſyon.
                  Whiche wyll to me be full confuſyon.
                  Alas I not how they cheryſhe or trete,
                  My fayre Heleyne that were to me ſo ſwete.
                  Now ye are gone penſyfneſſe me ſleath,
                  I may not wayte now but after death.
                  And after this amyd in all his wo,
                  This Menelay ſhope hym for to go,
                  To his reygne but lyttell there beſyde.
                  He axeth horſe and ſaid how he wolde ryde,
                  Sole to complaine of yt he felte him greue,
                  But all this whyle Neſtor wyll not leue,
                  To go with hym for conſolacion.
                  Of frendly ryght hauynge compaſſion,
                  Hym to comforte with all his full myght.
                  Leading with him many a worthy knyght.
                  Into the reygne of this Menelaus.
                  ¶Than fyrſt of all the ſtory telleth vs,
                  How they ſent for kyng Agamenon.
                  And for Caſtor to come to him anone.
                  And for Pollux if it myght ſo be,
                  And when that they comen were all three,
                  And ſaw their brother ī ſuch miſchief brought
                  Almoſt murdred with his owne thought,
                  Without abode the wyſe Agamenon,
                  To gyue him hoope and conſolacion,
                  Dyd his labour and diligence entere.
                  Sayinge to hym as ye ſhall after here,
                  ¶Oh brother mine, what wo, what heuineſſe,
                  What deadly ſorowe thus inly may oppreſſe,
                  Your knightly hert or trouble your manhead.
                  More furiouſly ywys than it is nede.
                  For though that ryght required vtterly,
                  You for to ſorowe and hadden cauſe why,
                  Yet me ſemeth by iuſte prouidence,
                  Ye ſlyly ſhulde dyſſymule your offence.
                  Sith eche wyſe man in his aduerſytie,
                  Shulde fame chere and kepen in ſecree,
                  The inwarde wo that bynt hym in diſtreſſe.
                  By manly force ratheſt there compeſſe,
                  The ſpyryte of Ire and melancolye,
                  Where the people myght it not eſpye.
                  The doctryne of them that be prudent,
                  Than whan a man with furye is to rent,
                  To fayne chere tyll tyme he ſe leyſure,
                  That he of vengeaunce kyndell may the fyre.
                  For ſorowe out ſhewed if I ſhall not fayne,
                  Who ſo taketh hede it doth thynges twayne,
                  It cauſeth frendes for to ſyghe ſore,
                  And his enemyes to reioyſe the more.
                  Thy frende in herte is ſorye of nature,
                  Thyne enemye glad of thy myſaduenture.
                  Wherfore in herte whā wo doth moſt haboūde
                  Faineth gladneſſe thyne enemye to confound,
                  And ſhew in chere as thou roughteſt nought.
                  Of that moſt is greuous in thy thought.
                  And where yu haſt moſte matter to complayne,
                  Make there good face & glad in porte ye faine.
                  For into teares though thou all diſtylle,
                  And rende thy ſelfe as thou woldeſt the ſpylle,
                  It helpeth not to a ledge thy greuaunce.
                  For honour nother purſuite of vengeaunce,
                  With ſorowe makynge mowe be execute.
                  Though it laſt ay ther cometh therof no frute,
                  Men ſay how he that can diſſimule a wronge,
                  
                     How he is ſlyghe and of herte ſtronge.
                  And who can be peaſyble in his ſmerte,
                  It is a token he hath a manly herte.
                  Not to wepe as women in their rage,
                  Whiche is contrary to an hygh courage.
                  With word & weping for to auenge our paine,
                  And no meanes to worſhyp to attayne,
                  Let vs with ſworde & not with wordes fyght.
                  Our tunge appeſe, by māhod preue or might.
                  Worde is but winde and water that we wepe.
                  And though the tempeſt and of fluddes depe,
                  Of this two encreaſe euer mo,
                  They may not do but augment our wo.
                  And to our foon therof when they here,
                  Both of our dole and our heauy chere,
                  All is to them but encreaſe of ioye,
                  Wherfore brother a whyle do acoye,
                  The cruel tourment that byndeth you ſo ſore,
                  For in prouerbe it hath be ſayd full yore.
                  That the proweſſe of a manly knyght,
                  Is proued moſt in miſchyefe and his myght.
                  To be aſſured in aduerſitee,
                  Strongly ſuſteyne what wo that it be,
                  Not cowardly his courage to ſubmytte,
                  In euery peryll nor his honour flytte.
                  Through no diſpeyre but hope alway wele,
                  And haue a truſte trewe as any ſtele.
                  Tacheue aye what he take an hande,
                  For fynally I do you vnderſtande,
                  That of hym ſelfe who hath good fantaſye,
                  To ſet vpon and put in inpartye,
                  What that befall or happe what happe may,
                  Takyng what chaunce tourneth on his play,
                  The fyne of ſuche gladly is victorye.
                  They fayle ſelde of the palme of glorye.
                  And tyme is now to ſpeke in wordes fewe,
                  Oh brother myne manhode for to ſhewe.
                  To plucke vp herte and to make you ſtronge,
                  And to venge your damages and wronge.
                  We ſhall echyone helpe and lay to hande,
                  Kynges, Dukes, and lordes of this lande.
                  And all atones do our buſyneſſe,
                  I you behyght your harmes to redreſſe.
                  And in deſpyte who that euer vs lette,
                  We ſhall vs lodge and our tentes ſette.
                  Euen in the fyelde afore Troye towne.
                  And it beſeage to their deſtructiowne.
                  Albe therof I ſet as now no daye.
                  But brother firſt in all the haſte we may,
                  Let maken letters without more ſermon,
                  To all the lordes of this region,
                  Of matter touchynge this your vyllanye.
                  To come to gyther and ſhape a remedye,
                  This is theffect of all that I can ſayne.
                  ¶And thus releaſed ſomwhat of the payne,
                  Is Menelays through cōfort of his brother,
                  For whan he ſawe it myght be none other,
                  And of his tale the kynge made an ende,
                  Thrugh out ye lande he did his letters ſende.
                  Fyrſt to her kynne and to his allye,
                  To come to helpe hym of their curteſye.
                  ¶And fyrſt of all to Menelaus,
                  Came Achylles and with him Patroclus.
                  And alder nexte the ſtronge Dyomede,
                  And many another to helpe in this nede.
                  And all echone in open Parlement,
                  They were accorded full by aſſente,
                  To be gouerned as Agamenon,
                  Lyſt to ordayne in his diſcrecion.
                  Of this voyage they made hym gouernour,
                  And of their hooſte chieftaine and Emperour.
                  Amonge them all there was full vnitee,
                  Vpon Troyans auenged for to bee.
                  And from this purpoſe neuer to remewe,
                  But fyrſt I fynde Parys for to ſewe,
                  The voyage toke ye worthy brethern tweine,
                  Pollux and Caſtor to recure Heleyne.
                  Yet neuertheles as ſome bokes lyſten tell,
                  That theſe kynges no longer wolde dwell,
                  But alder faſte as Parys was agone,
                  They toke a ſhyppe and folowed hym anone.
                  With many worthy in their company,
                  And doubtleſſe but yf olde bokes lye,
                  That or they had ſayled dayes three,
                  To Troyewarde in the large ſee,
                  The tempeſt roſe and wyndes dyd awake,
                  The heauen derke with the cloudes blake,
                  That haue the day tourned into nyght.
                  And bryght Phebus was mirked of this light
                  The fyry lenen and ſtroke of the thonder,
                  Smote in the maſte and ſhyuerde it a ſonder.
                  It was ſo derke no lyghte myght adawe,
                  The ſea gan ſwell with many ſturdy wawe.
                  That roſe on hyghte large as any mounte,
                  And fell downe and ſwapped in the frounte,
                  Euen of the ſhyppe and plunged it full lowe.
                  Now vp now downe forcaſt and ouerthrow,
                  Their ſhyppes were with tempeſt to and fro.
                  
                     The fomy waters grene, whyte, and blo,
                  Of feruent boylyng and as pytche blacke,
                  With ſtorme & wynd that al goeth to wracke.
                  So hydouſly the blaſtes at theim dryue,
                  That euery borde gan from other ryue.
                  And all is peryſhed there ſcaped not a man.
                  But all atones as I reherſe can,
                  Be dead & drowned with tempeſt ſodaynly,
                  There ſcaped none I ſay you certaynly.
                  Except the brethern ſuch as bookes tel,
                  The one in heauen the other lowe in hel,
                  Were lordes made tabyde eternally.
                  ¶And ſome fayne in theyr poeſy,
                  How the goddes haue theim defyed,
                  Like in heauen and yſtellifyed.
                  After theyr ſhyppes ware ygo to wrake.
                  They were made ſterres in the zodyake.
                  And to the ſygne tranſfourmed vtterly,
                  Whych is of clerkes called Gemyny.
                  The whych ſygne and conſtellation,
                  Is to Mercury houſe and manſyon.
                  And is of kinde femell and maſculyne,
                  In whych the Egle and alſo the Dolphyne,
                  Haue theyr aryſyng by reuolucion,
                  The tayle alſo aboue the Dragon,
                  Is exaltate in the thyrd degree,
                  Of Gemyny whych ſygne hathe moſt pouſte,
                  In hande and armes of man oute of doubte,
                  Like as Lucina halt her courſe aboute.
                  And in this wyſe were the brether twayne,
                  To heauen rapt as theſe poetes fayne.
                  After the tempeſt ye get no more of me.
                  For in this wiſe the grekes in the ſea,
                  An ende made and that ful wylfully.
                  This erneſt firſt came vnhappely,
                  To theim echone as ginning of theyr wo,
                  And finall chaunce to the brether two.
               
            
            
               ¶How ye Grekes aſſembled to be aduēged of yt Troians for the rauiſhing of Helein. Ca. xv
               BVt for aſmuche as Dares frigius,
               Was in his boke whilom curyous,
               The fourme of Troiens & grekes to deſcriue
               Lyke as he ſawe this auctour by his lyue,
               The ſhape the fourme & complexiowne,
               Both of the partye of theym of Troy towne,
               And of the grekes by good auiſement,
               In time of trewſe amonge theim as they wēt,
               Seyng the maner of theyr gouernaunce,
               Their porte theyr chere wt euery circūſtaūce,
               Namely of tho that were of high degre.
               He not forgate one looſe nor qualyte,
               Condicions and alſo theyr ſtature,
               All to deſcryue Dares did his cure.
               In Grekiſhe tunge beginning at Heleyne.
               Like as tofore ye haue herd me ſeyne.
               Of her beaute and her ſemelyneſſe,
               How ſeryouſly Guido doth expreſſe,
               Saue he ſayd as in a lytell ſpace,
               A ſtrype there was endlong in her face,
               Whych as he wryte became her wonder wele.
               Embelyſhing her beaute euerydele.
               Like as Dares maketh deſripcion.
               ¶And firſt he ſayeth how king Agamenon,
               Was of good ſhape and high of his ſtature,
               And might in laboure at the beſt endure.
               Vnpacient to lyue in quyet,
               He was to armes ſo egall and ſo mete,
               Of coloure whyte and good proporcion,
               And flemytek of his complexion.
               Diſcrete and hardy and wonder vertuous,
               And of ſpeche ryght facundious.
               And coud him wel in euery thinge demene,
               ¶But Menelay of ſtature was but meane.
               Proporcioned atwix ſhorte and longe,
               Worthy in armes delyuer and ryght ſtronge.
               Of courage and of hert vygorous,
               Semely alſo and aye more deſyrous,
               To lyue in werre rather than in peace.
               ¶And furthermore to ſpeake of Achilles,
               He was ryght fayre and of great ſemelyneſſe.
               With aborne heyr criſpyng for thickneſſe.
               With eyen glawke, large, ſtepe, and great,
               & ſhuldred brode wt breſt ful ſquare & mete,
               To endure in armes fel and coragious.
               And of his loke wonder amerous.
               High of ſtature and large of giftes eke,
               And more of ſtrength than any other Greke.
               And to ſpend he ſet lytel charge,
               He was of herte ſo plenteous and large.
               And in the felde paſſyng chyualrous.
               ¶And for to tell forth of Tantalus,
               Of ſanguine hewe hauing much of reed,
               Diuerſe eyed aye meuing in his head.
               Of huge making alſo & of great ſtrengthe,
               Wel anſweryng hys brede to his lengthe.
               Hatinge to ſtriue where he ſawe no nede,
               
                  Ryght trewe of worde alſo as I reade,
               And neuer quarel wolde he take on hande,
               To fyght for but he might vnderſtande,
               That it were fully grounded vpon ryght.
               And than he wolde quyte hym like a knyght.
               ¶Cilcus Ayax was right corpulent,
               To be well cladde he ſet al his entent,
               In ryche aray he was ful curyous.
               Although he were of body corſyous,
               Of armes great wt ſhoulders ſquare & brode,
               It was of him almoſt a horſe lode.
               Hygh of ſtature and boyſtous in a pres,
               And of his ſpeche rude and rechles.
               Ful many worde in ydel hym aſterte,
               And but a coward was he of his herte.
               ¶An other Ayax Thelamonyous,
               There was alſo dyſcrete and vertuous,
               Wonder fayre and ſemely to beholde,
               Whoſe heyr was black & vpward ay gā folde.
               In compas wiſe rounde as any ſphere,
               And of muſyke was there none his pere.
               Hauing a voyce full of melodye.
               Right well entuned as by Hermonye.
               And was inuentife for to counterfete,
               Inſtrumentes aſwell ſmal as grete,
               In ſundry wiſe longing to muſyke,
               And for all this yet had he good practike,
               In armes eke and was a noble knyght,
               No man more orped nor hardyer for to fight.
               Nor deſyrous for to haue vyctorye,
               Deuoyde of pompe hatyng all vaynglorye,
               All ydle laude ſpent and blowe in vayne.
               ¶Of Vlyxes what ſhall I alſo ſayne,
               That was ſo noble and worthy in his dayes,
               Ful of wyles and ſleyghty at aſſayes.
               In meaning double and deceyuable,
               To forge a leyſyng alſo wonder able.
               With face playn he coud make it toughe,
               Mery worded and but ſelde loughe.
               In counſayling diſcret and ryght prudent,
               And in his tyme the moſt eloquent.
               And holpe to Grekes often in theyr nede.
               ¶And for to ſpeake of worthy Diomede,
               Full wel compact and growe well in length,
               Of ſturdy porte and famous eke of ſtrength.
               Large breſted and ferſe alſo of ſyght,
               And deceyuable of what euer he hyght.
               Haſty teſtyf to ſmyte reckles,
               And medlyng aye and but ſelde in peace.
               To his ſeruauntes ful inpacient,
               And baraytous where that ſo euer he went.
               For lytel worthe of diſpoſycion,
               And lecherous eke of complexion.
               And had in loue oft ſyth his parte,
               Brenning within of Cupydes fyery darte.
               And ſpechles ful ofte felt he his ſore.
               ¶What ſhal I ſayne eke of Duke Neſtore,
               Of longe ſtature and wel compact wythall,
               With corbe ſhoulders and of middell ſmall.
               In handes ſtrong with armes large & roūde
               In counſalyng prudent and wyſe yfounde.
               Whoſe wordes were ſugred wyth pleaſaunce,
               Vpon his frende hauing aye remembraunce.
               For of his trouthe he ne coud fayne.
               But in anger he might him not refrayne.
               He was ſo fret wyth melancolye,
               That no man myght his yre modefye.
               Albe it laſte but a lytell ſpace,
               Who could him ſuffer anone it would pace.
               Lightly it came and lyghtly went awaye.
               ¶And Protheſalyus yt freſhe was of araye,
               Wonder ſemely and of great beaute,
               I trowe a fayrer might no man ſe.
               Of good ſtature delyuer and ful lyght.
               No man ſwyfter and to ſpeake of myght,
               Of his makyng he was paſſyng ſtronge.
               Ferſe of courage and lothe to take a wronge.
               ¶And to tell of Neptolomus,
               He was of making wonder corſyous.
               Whoſe heyr was blacke ſhining as doth geat,
               With eyen rounde brode and therto great,
               Large breſted with a ryſyng backe,
               And in ſpeche ſtamerd whan he ſpacke.
               But in cauſes he could medle wele.
               And in the lawe ful depe he did fele.
               For all his luſt was beſet on plees.
               ¶But for to tell of Pallamides.
               King Naulus ſonne withouten any wene,
               Of face fayre of body longe and lene.
               Of manful hert hardy in battayle,
               And deſyrous his enemye to aſſayle.
               Famylyer curteyſe and therto right tretable,
               In al his dedes and inly worſhipable.
               In giuing large and paſſing of grete fame,
               Of whoſe bounteful wide ſprange the name,
               In many land the ſtorye telleth thus.
               ¶And next I finde of Polydamus,
               The worthy Greke was of great thyckneſſe,
               
                  Of wombe ſwolle enboſſed with fatneſſe.
               That vnneth he might him ſelfe ſuſtene,
               And yet of herte he was ful proude & kene,
               Right ſurquidrous and ful of penſyfeneſſe,
               And ſelde glad ſo thought did him oppreſſe.
               ¶But Machaon like as wryte Guydo,
               Of longe and ſhort was betwyx two.
               Ful proude and ferſe deuoyde of pacyence,
               And vengeable who hym did offence.
               And yet he was as balde as is a coote.
               On whoſe forhead euen by the roote,
               The heyr was fallen & waſted clene away.
               And ſelde or neuer he would ſlepe a daye.
               ¶And ouermore to tellen of Cryſyde,
               Stumbleth my pen for longe or ſhe dyed,
               My mayſter Chauncer did his diligence,
               As to deſcryue the great excellence,
               Of her beaute and that ſo mayſterly,
               To take on me it were but high folye:
               In any wyſe to adde more therto.
               For wel I wote anone as I haue do,
               That I in ſothe no thāke deſerue maye:
               By cauſe that he in wrytyng was ſo gay.
               And but I wryte I muſt the trouthe leue,
               Of Troye booke and my matter breue.
               And ouer paſſe and not go by and by,
               As doth Guydo in ordre ceryouſly.
               And that I muſt don offencion,
               Through necligence or preſumpcion,
               So am I ſet euen amiddes twayne,
               Great cauſe haue I & matter to complayne.
               On Attropos that through her enuye,
               Tho brake the thred and made for to dye,
               Noble Galfryde chefe Poete of Brytayne.
               Among our Engliſhe yt cauſed firſt to rayne,
               The golden droppes of Rethorike ſo fyne.
               Our rude language onely tenlumine,
               To god I praye that he his ſoule haue.
               After whoſe helpe of nede I muſt craue.
               And ſeke his boke that is left behinde,
               Some goodly worde therin for co finde,
               To ſet amonge the croked lines rude,
               Whych I do wryte as by ſymylitude,
               The rubye ſtant ſo royall of renowne,
               Within a ryng of coper or latowne.
               So ſtant the making of him doubtles,
               Amonge our bokes of Englyſhe pereles.
               They be ful eaſy knowen ſo they be excellēt.
               There is no making to his equipolent.
               We do but halte who ſo taketh hede,
               That medle of makyng without any drede.
               Whan as we would his ſtyle counterfete.
               We may alday our colour grinde and bete,
               Tempre our aſour and vermilyon,
               But al I holde but preſumpcion,
               It foloweth not therfore I let be.
               And fyrſt of all I wil excuſe me,
               And procede as I haue erſt begon,
               And through his fauour certayn if I con.
               Of Troye booke for to make an ende.
               And there I left I wyl agayne nowe wende.
               Vnto Criſyde and though to my ſuccour,
               Of Rethoryke that I haue no floure,
               Nor hewes ryche ſtones nor yet perre,
               But al bare of curyoſytye,
               Though crafty ſpeche to enbroude with her ſleue,
               Yet for al that now I wil not leue,
               But be as ay bolde bayarde is the blynde,
               That caſt no peryl what way that he finde,
               Right ſo wil I ſtumble forth of haed.
               For vnconning and take no better hede,
               So as I can her beaute to diſcryue,
               That was in ſothe of al tho alyue,
               One of ye fayreſt this Calchas doughter dere
               Therto of ſhap of face and of cheare,
               There might be no fayrer creature,
               Of high nor lowe but meane of ſtature.
               Her ſonniſhe heyr like Phebus in his ſphere,
               Boūde in a treſſe bryghter thā gold wyere,
               Downe at her backe lowe downe behinde,
               Which with a thred of golde ſhe would binde.
               Ful oft ſyth of a cuſtomaunce,
               Therto ſhe had ſo much ſuffyſaunce,
               Of kindes worke without any were,
               And ſaue her browes ioyned were yfere,
               No man coud in her a lacke eſpyen.
               And furthermore to ſpeake of her eyen,
               They were ſo heauenly perſyng and ſo clere,
               That an herte ne might him ſelfe ſtere,
               Agayne her ſhyninge yt they ne woūd wolde,
               Throughout a breſt god wote & make it yold
               Alſo ſhe was for al her ſemelineſſe.
               Symple and wyſe and ful of ſoberneſſe,
               The beſt nouryſhed that eke might be,
               Goodly of ſpeche fulfylled of pytye.
               Facundious and therto right tretable,
               And as ſayth Guydo in loue variable.
               Of tender hert and vnſtedfaſtneſſe,
               
                  He her accuſeth and newfanglyneſſe.
               ¶And after this Dares doth reherſe,
               Amonges other how the kyng of Perſe,
               Came to grekes with many worthy knight,
               To helpe and further all that euer he myght.
               The whych kyng was of ſtature longe,
               And wonder fat & as he wryte right ſtronge.
               Whoſe berd and heyr redde as flawme of fire.
               With eyen ſtepe and feruent of deſyre,
               To haue ado and ſterne of cheare and loke,
               And oft ſythes of ſodayne yre he quoke.
               And had wertes plenty in his face.
               ¶And thus Dares ſhortly for to pace,
               No more of Grekes wryteth as I fynde.
               But of Troians for to make mynde,
               Ceryouſly he doth his ſtyle dreſſe,
               Them to diſcryue as I ſhall expreſſe.
            
            
               ¶The deſcryption of Priam, his ſonnes and doughters & of the ariuall of ye grekes tofore the Temple of Diane the goddeſſe. Ca. xvi.
               
                  ANd firſt he ſayeth how king Pryamus,
                  Was of his cheare bening & gracious.
                  Of ſtature hygh with lymmes ſklendre & lōg,
                  Delytyng much in muſyk and in ſonge.
                  And ſpecially was moſt deſyrous,
                  To heare ſonges that weren amerous,
                  A ſemely man and of great hardineſſe,
                  And ſpake but lowe as bookes vs expreſſe,
                  Deuoyde of dread hating flatterye,
                  And all that could other gloſe or lye,
                  Trewe of his worde and to euery wyght,
                  He did playnly equite and right.
                  For no mede him liſt not to declyne,
                  And loued early on morowe for to dine.
                  In his time one of the worthyeſt,
                  Of all kinges and he that loued beſt,
                  Worthy knightes & al that euer he knewe,
                  That manfull were and of herte trewe.
                  He coud cheriſhe no man halfe ſo wele,
                  With golde and gyftes that they myght fele,
                  His great fredome and larges eke withall.
                  ¶And of his ſonnes for to reken all,
                  The firſt of byrth ſo as bookes tell,
                  Was worthy Hector of knighthod ſprīg & wel
                  Floure of manhod of ſtrength pereles,
                  Sad diſcrete and prudent neuertheles.
                  Crop and roote ground of chyualrye,
                  Of cheare demure and of curteſye,
                  He was example therto of ſoberneſſe:
                  A very myrour and for his gentilneſſe,
                  In his time and therto moſt renoumed,
                  To reken all and of goodlyhead.
                  The moſt famous in peace and werre.
                  Whoſe fame ſtretched both to nygh and ferre,
                  On eche parte he was ſo vertuous.
                  And to be loued moſt gracious.
                  Of brawne and bones compact by meaſure,
                  So wel brethed in armes to endure.
                  So wel perfourmed by proporciowne,
                  So quicke ſo liuely and of moſt renowne.
                  So huge made ſo well growen of length,
                  So wel complet for to haue great ſtrengthe▪
                  
                  That in this worlde if I ſhal not fayne,
                  Was neuer none that fully myght attayne,
                  To the prowes of this worthy knight
                  To prayſe his herte as well as his might.
                  And therwithall ſo wyſe and aduyſee,
                  The lowlyeſt eke of his degre.
                  To ryche and pore and of wordes fewe,
                  Vnto all ſuche cheare he could ſhewe,
                  Of his preſence that glad was euery wight.
                  Whan they at leyſur had of him a ſyght.
                  He was ſo bening to them of the towne,
                  And to his enemyes like a ferſe Lyowne.
                  He could him ſhewe whan it was to do.
                  And in the felde there might no man ſo.
                  To reken all his labour halfe endure.
                  For the ſtorye doth vs plyan aſſure,
                  That he was neuer werye in battayle,
                  Nor faynt in herte his fomen to aſſayle.
                  Of all good I finde he was the beſt.
                  Proweſſe & vertue in him were ſet at reſt.
                  So paſſingly that neuer was or ſhall,
                  None bore of mother ſo perygall,
                  To him of manhod nor of chiualrie:
                  For all he paſſed but yf bokes lye.
                  In whom nature ne was nothing to wyte,
                  Saue in his tunge he was let a lite.
                  And as ſome Auctours make mencion,
                  He was ſanguine of complexion.
                  ¶And furthermore his brother Deiphobus,
                  Like as I finde and alſo Helenus,
                  Were lyke Pryam that ſothly of theim thre,
                  Was hard to eſpye any dyuerſyte,
                  Of ſhape or fourme or of countenaunce,
                  Saue of age there was no varyaunce.
                  
                     Their father olde & they were yonge & lyght,
                  And in Deiphobus was a worthy knight.
                  And in armes fame and excellence,
                  And Helenus in clergye and ſcyence,
                  Was well expert and toke but lytell hede,
                  Of al the werre knighthod and manhede.
                  ¶But ſothly Troylus if I ſhall diſcriue,
                  There was of herte no manlyer alyue.
                  Nor more likly in armes to endure.
                  Well growen of hight and of great ſtature.
                  Yonge, freſhe, luſty, hardy as a Lyō,
                  Deliuer and ſtronge as any champyowne.
                  And perygall of manhode and of dede,
                  He was to any that I can of reade.
                  In derryng do this noble worthy wight,
                  For to fulfyl that longeth to a knight.
                  Te ſecounde Hector for his worthineſſe,
                  He called was and for his high proweſſe.
                  Duryng the werre he bare him ſelfe ſo wele,
                  Therto in loue trewe as any ſtele.
                  Secre and wiſe ſtedfaſt of courage,
                  The moſt goodly alſo of viſage,
                  That might be and moſt beninge of cheare,
                  Without chaunge and of one herte entere.
                  He was alway faythfull iuſt and ſtable,
                  Perſeueraunt and of will immutable.
                  Vpon what thing
                        •
                      he ones ſet his herte,
                  That doubilneſſe might him dot peruert.
                  In his dedes he was ſo hole and playne,
                  But of his foon the ſothe for to ſayne,
                  He was ſo ferſe they might hym not wtſtand,
                  Whan that he helde his blody ſworde in hād.
                  Vnto Grekes death and confuſyon,
                  To them of Troye ſhelde and protection.
                  And his knighthod ſhortly to accounte,
                  There might in māhod no mā him ſurmoūt.
                  Through the world though mē wouldē ſeke,
                  To reken all Troian nouther greke.
                  None ſo named of famous hardineſſe,
                  As bokes olde of him do beare witneſſe.
                  Except Hector there ne was ſuch an other.
                  ¶And after him to ſpeake of his brother,
                  I meane Parys moſt paſſing of beaute,
                  That in this worlde no man might ſe,
                  In very ſothe a more ſemely knight,
                  For as I reade that he by title of right,
                  Of fayrneſſe bare aye away the floure.
                  With lockes yelowe like golde as of coloure,
                  And in ſhotyng moſt was his delyte,
                  Hauyng in hunting a full great appetyte.
                  And as Dares lyketh him diſcriue,
                  The beſt archer one that time a liue.
                  And of his hand was eke a noble knight.
                  A manly man delyuer and of good might.
                  And in the werre preued wel he was.
                  ¶And as I reade the Troian Eneas,
                  As mine Auctour lyſteth to endyte,
                  Was wel breſted and of body lyte.
                  And bare in Troye wonder great eſtate.
                  And in his workes diſcrete and temporate.
                  And had a fame of paſſyng eloquence,
                  Wiſe of counſayle and of great ſapyence.
                  Moſt renōmed alſo of lecture,
                  Delyting muche in bokes and ſcripture.
                  And euer glad both of porte and cheare,
                  Sterne of his loke with perſyng eyen cleare.
                  And amonge all dwellyng in the towne,
                  To ſpeake of goodes and poſſeſſyowne,
                  Of caſtelles and Toures great plentye,
                  I finde ſothly that none in that Citye,
                  Ne might attayne vnto his rycheſſe.
                  And had alſo for al his worthyneſſe,
                  Of golde and Iewellꝭ paſſyng great treaſor.
                  ¶And his felowe that hyght dan̄ Anthenor,
                  Was ſklender longe and of great dalyaūce.
                  And circumſpect in all his gouernaance.
                  Welbeloued alſo of Pryamus,
                  And of wordes wonder copyous.
                  Reſowning ay into myrth and playe.
                  And he was bouerdyng all the long daye.
                  Amonges his feres and in companye,
                  So dryely that no mā might eſpye.
                  So ſobre he was in his countenaunce.
                  That euery wight had great pleſaunce,
                  To heare him talke whan that he was glad.
                  And albeit that he of porte was ſad,
                  Yet all his ſpeche ful of bouerdes was,
                  ¶And his ſon called Pollidamas,
                  Was like his father of ſtature and of make.
                  Ythewed well that there was no lacke,
                  In his perſone gentill and right trewe,
                  Wonder ſtronge and pale alſo of hewe.
                  And to yre ſtered ſodaynly.
                  Albe in wordes he kept couertly,
                  But all his heate paſſe would anone.
                  ¶And to tell of king Mereone,
                  Large breſted and of his makyng all,
                  The beſt compacte & the moſt tall,
                  
                     Of ſhape and fourme that men coulde fynde,
                  And eke ſo well perfourmed vp by kynde,
                  That none was lyke to hym nye ne ferre.
                  His lockes yelow and criſping was his heare.
                  Styll of his porte and gentill with to playe,
                  And inly ſtronge maiſtryes to aſſaye.
                  Wonder curteyſe to no wyght rygorous,
                  And wrought in ariues dedes meruaylous.
                  As in this boke hereafter ſhalbe ſene.
                  ¶Nowe after him Heccuba the quene,
                  Lyke the ſtory my ſtyle I muſt enclyne.
                  Whoſe lymmes all rather dyd declyne.
                  To ſhappe of man than to womanhead,
                  As ſayth Guydo. but in worke and dede,
                  She was in ſoth the moſt womanly,
                  The beſte aduyſed and moſt prudently,
                  In her dedes could her ſelfe gouerne,
                  That mans wyt myght in no wiſe diſcerne,
                  To fynde a better doubtles than was ſhe.
                  So trewe example of femynyte.
                  She was in ſothe and to euery wyghte,
                  Benynge of porte and gracious of ſyghte.
                  To pore alſo pyteous and mercyable,
                  And vnto nedy wonder cherytable,
                  The wife of Hector her doughter eke in law
                  After her lore ſemed muche to drawe,
                  Andromecha the faythfull trewe wyfe.
                  So good, ſo iuſt, the whiche in all her lyfe,
                  In honeſte dyd aye her moſt delyte.
                  Longe of her ſhap with breſtes fayre & white.
                  With ruddy chekes ennewed by meaſure,
                  With perſynge eyen of angelyke fygure.
                  Leke golde her treſſes and roſen lyppes red,
                  Ylyche freſhe, of colour nothyng dead.
                  Therto ſhe was of chere the goodlyeſt,
                  To riche and pore and ſpake alwaye the beſt,
                  Of euery one aye helpyng that ſhe might,
                  That no man heauy went out of her ſyght,
                  And ouer this euery gentylman,
                  She further wolde in all that euer ſhe can.
                  And gladly euer dyd her dylygence,
                  To get grace to them that dyd offence.
                  This was her vſage and condicion,
                  She was ſo fylled of compaſſyon.
                  That women all myght of her lere.
                  ¶And Caſſandra her owne doughter dere,
                  Was of ſtature wonder womanly.
                  Of colour whyte and therwith ryght ſemely.
                  Saue in her face in ſondry places were,
                  Many wertes growyng here and there.
                  And all her ioye and felycytee,
                  Was to kepen her virginite.
                  In freelte that women haue of kynde,
                  Through vertue morall ſhe put out of minde.
                  And of all foly fleynge occaſyon,
                  So aye in ſtudy and contemplacyon,
                  Of ſondry bookes ſhe wolde her occupye.
                  But moſt of all to knowe Aſtronomye.
                  ¶Of prophecye a ſpyryt alſo had ſhe,
                  And ſome men ſaye ſhe was one of three,
                  Of thilke women that Cebyle bare the name.
                  Of whom ye renowne floureth and the fame,
                  Vnto this daye and is as yet full grene.
                  ¶And to tell of younge Polycene,
                  And to deſcryue her beautie vp and downe,
                  It were in ſoth a foule preſumpciowne,
                  To take on me now ſo great a thynge,
                  To clymbe ſo hye it paſſeth my connyng.
                  Syth nature hath in forgynge of this mayde
                  Her connyng all vtterly aſſayed.
                  To make her fayre aboue eche creature.
                  ¶And ſayd proudely ſe how I nature,
                  Whan that my lyſte enbellyſhe can my worke.
                  Lyke as Phebus amonge the cloudes derke,
                  Is paſſyng clere ſo in comparyſon,
                  I can my worke and operacion,
                  Right as me lyſte adourne and make fayre.
                  So painte and floryſhe it ſhall not appayre.
                  And my colours ſo craftely diſpoſe,
                  Of the lylye and of the freſhe roſe,
                  And ſo ennewe them yt they ſhall not fade.
                  But aye be one and in this wiſe I made,
                  My dere doughter as ye know whō I mene.
                  The yonge freſhe and fayre Polycene.
                  Aſkaunſe that none can this crafte but I,
                  This in her worke boſted vtterly,
                  Nature her ſelfe whan ſhe this may wrought.
                  As ſhe that fully in her herte thought,
                  Aboue all other to maken her excell.
                  And of beautie to be the very well.
                  And therwithall in ſhap nor in ſtature,
                  Ne was no lacke I dare you well aſſure.
                  And god aboue gaue her ſoueraintee,
                  In all thewes and wolde ſhe ſhulde be,
                  Crop and roote named of womanhead,
                  With fulſomneſſe of all goodlihead.
                  So paſſyngly that it were ydelneſſe,
                  Me to preſume in wordes to expreſſe,
                  
                     Her beaute all it were a vayne trauayle.
                  For wel I wote mine engliſhe would fayle.
                  In ſuch matter to talke felingely,
                  Who euer can it certayne it am not I.
                  Therfore I paſſe and ſtreight now wil I go,
                  To my matter for Dares of no mo,
                  In all his booke maketh menciowne,
                  Of theim of grece nor of Troye towne.
                  In ſpecial he put no mo in minde,
                  Than ye haue herde ſaue as ye ſhal finde,
                  In this ſtorye whan it cometh therto,
                  Of theyr knighthod & who that beſt hath do,
                  Laſting the ſiege the maner euerydell,
                  And ryght anone to ſharpe my poyntell,
                  I wil me dreſſe this ſtorye to entreate,
                  Of all the werre and to tellen you the great.
               
               
                  THe time nigheth after this as yore,
                  The breme wynter with his troſtꝭ hore,
                  Gan to aſwage of his bitter colde.
                  Whan Apollo paſſed was the holde,
                  Of the ſygne that we call Aquarye.
                  And in the fyſhe fer in Februarye,
                  Yronne was toward the Ariete.
                  And that ſeaſon with his feynte heate,
                  On hylles high gan his beames ſmyte.
                  Makyng the ſnowe with fayre flakes white,
                  Into water kyndely to relente.
                  Whych from aboue to the valey wente.
                  That nere floudes of the ſodayne thowe,
                  The grene mede gan to ouerflowe.
                  And the yſe gan ſ
                        •
                     oundmele deſtyll,
                  Downe fro the hight the brokes for to fyll.
                  With fomy ſtreames of the wawes ſmale,
                  By broke bankes as they did auale.
                  When luſty Vere with his yonge grene,
                  Yrecomforted by the ſonne ſhene,
                  Which lytel and litel his hewes ſtyl amēdeth,
                  Ayein his ſphere as Titan vp aſcendeth.
                  Whan Marche approcheth & braūches ouer all,
                  Gan blowe out and Equinoctiall,
                  Of Vere is halowed the ſeaſon amerous,
                  Whan the Grekes proude and couragious,
                  With hole the floure of the chiualrye,
                  Aſſembled were and hooly theyr nauye.
                  In the hauen that was moſt of fame,
                  And of Athenes that tyme bare the name.
                  Ygathered was by aſſent echone,
                  Towadre Troye to ſayle and to gone,
                  So great a nomber that ſith the world begā,
                  Is remembred of no maner man.
                  That togyther in one companye,
                  Was met yfeare ſo paſſyng a nauye.
                  Of manly men who ſo lyſt take hede,
                  In this ſtorye as ye ſhall after rede.
                  And by and by to make deſcripcion.
                  ¶Mine auctour telleth howe Agamemnon,
                  The worthi king an hondred ſhippꝭ brought,
                  With worthy knightes ſtuffed as thē ought.
                  ¶And Menelay on whom lay moſt ye charge
                  Hath wt him brought ſyxty ſhippes large.
                  Out of his land that called is Sperten.
                  ¶And from Boece ful of manly men,
                  Came fifty ſhippes ye ſtory telleth thus,
                  With Prothenor and with Achelaus.
                  ¶And from the land called Sithemenye,
                  Came ſyxty ſhippes in the companye,
                  Of the Duke that hyght Achalaphus,
                  With whō was eke freſhe and deſyrous,
                  Helmyus the Erle the worthy knyght.
                  ¶And fyfty ſhippes enarmed for to fyght,
                  With him brought the kyng Epiſtrophus.
                  Onely with helpe of king Thedius.
                  ¶And Thelamon whom Ayax men call,
                  Ful renowmed for to reken all,
                  Hath fifty ſhippes brought to his Iourney.
                  From Salerne his royall chefe Citye.
                  With Earles Dukes & many worthy knight,
                  Eueryche of theim in ſtele armed bryght.
                  ¶And Duke Tenter with Amphiacus,
                  Earle Daryon and noble Theſeus.
                  This ylke foure full worthy of renowne,
                  In this voyage came with Thelamowne.
                  ¶And olde Neſtor cruel of hert & thought,
                  Out of Pylon hath fyfty ſhippes brought.
                  ¶The kinge of Dyames yt full worthy was,
                  And eke the kinge that hight alſo Thoas.
                  Brought with theim in theyr companye,
                  An hundred ſhippes knightlye for to guye.
                  ¶And Thelamou ycalled Pyleus,
                  That was in armes fell and d
                        •
                     ſpytous,
                  With him brought from his lande ſo ferre,
                  Sixe and thyrty ſhippes for the werre.
                  ¶Amphymacus and kinge Polibete,
                  Thyrty ſhippes brought to the flete.
                  From Calcedoyne and Mereō the kinge,
                  With Ydameus had in theyr ledinge,
                  Foure ſcore ſhippes with theym out of Crete.
                  
                     ¶And Vlixes with the grekes dyd mete.
                  with fyfty ſhyppes ſtuffed out of Trace.
                  Towardes Troye proudly for to pace.
                  ¶Duke Mellens full of manly men,
                  Brought eke with hym great ſhyppes ten.
                  And moreouer the duke Prothecatus.
                  ¶And the duke named Protheſylaus,
                  To the hauen that called was Athene,
                  Brought fyfty ſhyppꝭ enarmed bright & ſhene
                  From Phylyarcha the ſtronge myghtye yle.
                  ¶And Machaon as Guydo doth compyle,
                  With his brother Polydris alſo,
                  From their countrey Trycionyco,
                  Brought two and twenty ſhippes as I finde.
                  ¶And from Phyces as it is had in mynde,
                  With Achilles came fyfty full by numbre.
                  ¶And from Rhodon Troyans to encombre,
                  Came twenty ſhyppes wt kyng Thelapolus.
                  ¶And with the duke that hyght Antipus,
                  Out of the lande that Heſyda men call,
                  Of whiche the folke be nyghe cherles all.
                  With ſayle croſſed agayne the bryght heauen,
                  In numbre came ſhyppes eke elleuen.
                  And with them was of name full famous,
                  The worthy duke called Amphymacus.
                  ¶And Polibethes the ſtronge myghty kyng,
                  Fyfty ſhyppes brought at his cōmynge,
                  Out of Richa the noble regiowne.
                  And with this kyng full worthy of renowne,
                  Was Latniſus the duke eke as I rede.
                  ¶And as I fynde the noble Diomede,
                  Of ſhyppes great I ſaye no ſmall barge,
                  Hath wt him brought fro Calidonye & Arge,
                  Foureſcore in numbre ſothly this no tale.
                  ¶And Thelemus and myghty Euryale,
                  Two manly men and in armes ſage,
                  With Dyomede came in this voyage.
                  ¶And Polyphebus brought ſhippes ſeuen.
                  And Phyneus the hardy kynge enleuen.
                  ¶And Prothoylus as I can ſpecifye,
                  Brought fyfty ſhyppes vnto this nauye.
                  Fro Demeneſa the myghtye regyon.
                  ¶And Carpenor as made is mencion,
                  Brought fyfty eke from Capadye his coūtrey
                  A great prouynce of whiche king was he.
                  ¶Tricorius of Beyſa lorde and kynge,
                  Brought two and twenty eke in his cōmyng.
                  And fynally if I ſhall not lye,
                  Full many ſhyppe was in this nauye.
                  Mo than Guydo maketh reherſayle,
                  Towarde Troye with grekes for to ſayle.
                  For as Homer in his diſcrypcion,
                  Of grekes ſhyppes maketh mencion,
                  Shortly affyrmyng ye man was neuer borne,
                  That ſuch a nombre of ſhippes ſawe toforne.
                  Countyng the ſhyppes that Palamydes,
                  Brought with him their nombre to encreaſe.
                  That whan theſe lordes aforſayd euerychone
                  Kynges, dukes, and erles all in one,
                  Aſſembled were without any wene.
                  Afore the hauen that called is Athene.
               
               
                  THe famous kynge great Agamenowne,
                  So wyſe, ſo worthy, & of ſo hye renown,
                  As he that was Prynce and gouernour,
                  Of grekes hooſte anone dyd his labour,
                  His buſy cure and waker dylygence,
                  By hyghe aduyſe and inwarde prouydence,
                  To deliberate wiſely in this nede,
                  What were to do or that he procede,
                  In this matter, caſtyng vp and downe,
                  And reuoluynge of hygh diſcreciowne,
                  That he may ſo begyn that the ende,
                  Conclude well that wylfulneſſe ne ſhende,
                  Hooly their purpoſe through no rakelneſſe.
                  Ne through none haſte without auyſeneſſe.
                  So that they may afore ſo wyſely ſee,
                  That fynally they in felicitye,
                  Accomplyſhe may their purpoſe in certayne.
                  ¶And ſo this king vpon a large playne,
                  Out of the Citie lyttle from the ſtronde,
                  With his lordes wyll for nothyng wonde.
                  To haue counſaile this wyſe Agamenon,
                  Makyng anone a conuocacyon,
                  Of ſuche as were more great inſpeciall.
                  He ſyttyng fyrſte in his ſee royall,
                  And his lordes eueryche in his ſee,
                  Lyke as they were of hye or lowe degree.
                  And all Tumulte ſtynted and ſcylence,
                  Was through ye preſe to gyne hym audyence,
                  Whan he anone in full ſobre wyſe,
                  Began his tale as I ſhall deuyſe.
               
               
                  SYres quod he I praye you taketh hede,
                  That be ſo noble and ſo renowmede.
                  Both of wyſedome and of worthineſſe,
                  Of manhode eke and of hyghe proweſſe.
                  That of knyghthode the reporte & the fame,
                  
                     Thrughout ye world reboūdeth to your name.
                  For doubtleſſe the floure of chyualrye,
                  Men may now fynde in this companye.
                  For who ſawe euer of manly men yfeare,
                  Together met as there be now here.
                  So younge, ſo freſhe, couragyous alſo,
                  So well beſene for to haue a do.
                  Or ſo lykely ſyth the worlde began,
                  Without raſkayle ſo many knyghtly man.
                  Of kynges, dukes, and many an other lorde,
                  As be now here of wyll and one accorde.
                  And of one herte aſſembled in this place.
                  That yf fortune and goddes of their grace,
                  Be not behynde our Iourney to repreue,
                  We may not fayle our purpoſe to achyeue.
                  For I deme hym playnly in arage,
                  Or worſe than wood that durſte this voyage,
                  In any wyſe perturbe or preſume,
                  To take agayne vs outher to aſſume,
                  By myght on hym of malys to exſcyte,
                  Our worthyneſſe were it neuer ſolyte,
                  Vs to prouoke to Ire or do offence.
                  That we ne ſhulde by mortall recompence,
                  Aquyte his mede as it lyeth in our myght.
                  In this aſſemble of many worthy knyght,
                  Amouges whiche an hundred and yet mo,
                  I coulde cheſe able for to go,
                  By manly force and knyghtly ſuffyſaunce,
                  To take on hym for to do vengeaunce,
                  Vpon Troyans by hym ſelfe alone.
                  For whyche that we be gathred echone,
                  That with his men were ſuffycient,
                  To execute the ſumme of his entent.
                  And it accomblyſhe in felicitee,
                  The cauſe I meane for whiche that all we,
                  Aſſembled ben together hye and lowe.
                  ¶And alſo this to you is not vnknowe,
                  Howe ſhamefully Troyans haue vs greued.
                  Prouoked vs and wylfully ymeued,
                  To ryſe agayne them to haue recure of right,
                  Of wronges done with all our force & myght.
                  Wherfore let vs by one aſſent and wyll,
                  Sette to haue as it is ryght and ſkyll.
                  Redreſſe to fynde of that we nowe complaine,
                  And of one harte do our buſy peyne,
                  Vpon Troyans a werre for to make.
                  And I ſuppoſe we ſhall them ſo awake,
                  That they ſhall lerne or we thenſe wende,
                  To remembre to the worldes ende,
                  Now they hereafter ſhall dare take an hande,
                  For to preſume in grece more to lande.
                  Or to be bolde while they haue lyfe or ſpace,
                  Agayne grekes more to treſpace.
                  For whoſe offence as who ſayth do but late,
                  Within our herte the deadly brennyng hate,
                  The feruent hete and the gredy yre,
                  Fro day to day ſo ſetteth vs a fyre,
                  That it reneweth the conſtreynt of our peine.
                  So inwardely that yf I ſhall not fayne,
                  We muſt of reaſon of ſo hygh greuaunce,
                  Our ſelfe enforce for to do vengeaunce.
                  As ryght requereth and our iuſte ſorowe,
                  Compelleth vs both at eue and morowe,
                  On Troyans our harmes to bewreke.
                  And for to ſtoppe the tounges that ſo ſpeake,
                  To our reprefe and to our villanye,
                  We muſt attones ſhapen remedye.
                  That our foen henſeforth may haue drede,
                  For to do worſe to vs as god forbed.
                  In tyme commynge yf through our pacience,
                  We lykely ſuffer their importable offence,
                  To paſſe forth and take of it no hede.
                  Syth neuer yet of Grekes coulde I reade,
                  That any man dyd reprefe to their name.
                  That iuſtly might rebounde to their ſhame.
                  Withouten this that they it quyte agayne,
                  Thrugh their manhode ſo openly & playne,
                  That no man myght of them ſeyne ere this,
                  In any wyſe or reporte amyſſe.
                  ¶Ne we ſhall not dyſſymule in this caſe,
                  With chere oppreſſed nor with dredfull face,
                  To let ſlyde or lyghtly ouer go,
                  The great offences that were ſo late ydo,
                  Which might happly tourne to vs and oures,
                  A great reprefe and to our ſucceſſours.
                  In tune comming and ſhamfully beſpoke,
                  Now that grekes durſte not be a worke,
                  Vpon their foon the whiche may not be.
                  I you enſure ſythe that all we,
                  Be of one wyll to refourme our wronge,
                  And therwithall ſo mighty and ſo ſtronge.
                  That who is he that coulde in brede & length,
                  A ryght reherſe our power and our ſtrength.
                  Or who durſte euer our worthyneſſe aſſayle,
                  That he ne ſhulde withouten any fayle,
                  Repente in herte or at the ende rewe.
                  Saue Troyans this other daye of newe,
                  Of wylfulneſſe in a foly rage,
                  
                     Into our lande made a voyage,
                  Vnware of vs & with their pray home wente,
                  The whiche they ſhall full haſtely repente.
                  For their treſpace and great offencyowne.
                  ¶For all the worlde knoweth vp and downe,
                  But late a gone how grekes but a fewe,
                  Vpon Troyans their power dyd ſhewe.
                  And ſlewe their kyng called Lamedowne,
                  Father to Pryam now kyng of that towne.
                  And cleane fordyd both toures and Citye,
                  And ſlewe vp all the commynaltye.
                  From grekes ſworde whom yt them liſt ſpare,
                  Thoſe amonges vs in ſeruitude and care,
                  Compleine their harme yt may not be recured
                  Than how may they ſtande full aſſured,
                  Agayne vs all to holde chaumpartye.
                  That haue ſo worthy in our companye.
                  For it is lykely a thouſande to acheue,
                  That foure or fyue ſo lyghtly myght preue.
                  And yet one thynge affyrme well I dare,
                  Of our cummyng Troyans are well ware.
                  And do their labour and their diligence,
                  Agaynſt vs to maken reſyſtence.
                  With al their myght I knowe it out of doute.
                  And gather frendes in countreys all about,
                  To helpe them & ſtrength them in their nede.
                  Vs to withſtande if ſo they may ſpede.
                  ¶But fynally one thynge I counſayle,
                  From this hauen or we ferther ſayle,
                  That we may be the more fortunate,
                  Of one aſſent to make ambaſſyat,
                  And prudently or we further wende,
                  Into Delos in all haſte we ſende.
                  Whiche is an yle a little here beſyde,
                  More diſcretely our iourney to prouyde.
                  That we may haue the better hap and grace,
                  Of Apollo Patron of this place.
                  To haue of him if that we maye ſpeade,
                  Fynall anſwere in this great nede.
                  Of our exployet how that it ſhall fall,
                  If it be ſo ye wyll aſſenten all.
                  To this counſayle the moſt and eke the leſte.
                  ¶And they echone thought for the beſt,
                  To condeſcende to this concluſyon:
                  Without any contradiction.
                  And all attones without any drede,
                  To preyſe his counſeyle and his wiſe rede,
                  And therupon diſtretly as they ought,
                  As ſayth this ſtory euen thus they wroughte.
               
            
            
               ¶How Achilles and Patroclus were ſent to Delos to receiue anſwere of god Apollo, how they ſhuld ſpede ayenſt ye Troyans. Cap. xvii.
               
                  AFter the tyme that Agamenon,
                  Concluded had fully his reaſon,
                  As ye haue herde and his ſentence fyned,
                  The grekes be of herte full enclyned,
                  And with one voyce accorded plainly thus,
                  That Achilles and alſo Patroclus.
                  For comon profyt ſyth they were ſage.
                  Shall take on them ye charge of this meſſage,
                  To Appollo for anſwere for to gone.
                  And to ſhyppe they them in haſte anone.
                  And ſayle forth by the large ſea,
                  Towarde Delos and in proſperitee,
                  They be aryued and ycome to lande.
                  The whiche yle as I vnderſtande,
                  And as myne auctor ſayth without les,
                  Hath his ſcyte amonges the Cyclades,
                  Where men with rockes haue ſo muche a do,
                  Amyd the ſee called Heleſpontico.
                  Of whyche yle to make deſcrypcion,
                  I muſt awhyle make diſgreſſyon,
                  Fro my matter as myne auctour doth,
                  For in this yle Iſodorus in ſoth,
                  Reherſeth playnly how Latona the quene,
                  Appollo fyrſt and Dyane the ſhene,
                  Ychilded hath by Iubyter her lorde.
                  Whan he and Iuno were at ſuche diſcorde,
                  As wryte Ouyde for a lyttell whyle,
                  And ſo befell that in this lyttell yle,
                  There was a temple whylom dedicate,
                  Vnto Appollo and alſo conſecrate,
                  In his worſhyp of olde foundacion.
                  That was honoured by great deuocion.
                  Bycauſe Appollo with his beames cleare,
                  After the floud fyrſt there dyd appere.
                  To ſhewe his hornes rather there and ſoone.
                  And eke Dyane that called is the moone,
                  Of whiche ſhewyng this yle bereth the name,
                  Into this day that is of ſo great fame.
                  Onely be apperyng of this ylke twayne,
                  For Delos is in greke no more to ſayne,
                  Than a ſhewyng or an apparence.
                  And thus began the great reuerence,
                  To Appollo fyrſt and the honor eke,
                  To hym ydone of ſo many greke.
                  And to his ſyſter that called is Dyane,
                  
                     The pale moone that can ſo waxe and wane.
                  And called is of Paynems a goddeſſe,
                  That whylom was in wod an huntereſſe.
                  And this lady with the ſonne her brother,
                  Of this yle hath lordſhyp and none other.
                  Only for they at their natiuitie,
                  Shewed their lyght fyrſt in that countrey.
                  The whyche yle grekes alſo calle,
                  Ortygya in their language all.
                  Bycauſe Curlewes were there fyrſte yſeyne,
                  For Otygyas is no more to ſeyne,
                  Than a Curlewe in Grewe I vnderſtande,
                  For they were fyrſt ingendred in that lande.
                  ¶And Appollo is called eke Tytan,
                  That in his tyme ſo moche worſhyp wan.
                  Longe afore or he was made a ſterre,
                  With Iubiter whan that he helde werre,
                  And he alſo ycalled is Phebus,
                  And of ſome ynamed is Phyteus,
                  For of Phyton he had the victorye.
                  When he hym ſl
                        •
                     we to his great glorye.
                  The great ſerpent here in erthe alowe,
                  With his arowes and his mighty bowe.
                  Of whiche conqueſte the great god Cupyde,
                  Hadde enuye and euen through the ſyde,
                  He wounded hym depe to the herte.
                  With ye arowe of gold yt made him ſore ſmerte.
                  And of Phyton that Phebus made thus fine
                  Came Phetonyſſes that can ſo deuyne,
                  I meane women that be deuynereſſes:
                  Through dead men theſe falſe ſorcereſſes.
                  As one whylom reyſed Samuel,
                  For loue of Saule the byble can you tell.
                  And in his temple large longe and olde,
                  There was a ſtatue all of pured golde.
                  Full great and hyghe and of huge weyght,
                  And therin was through the deuylles ſleyght
                  A ſpyryte vnclene by falſe illuſyon,
                  That gaue anſwere to euery queſtyon.
                  Not the ydoll dombe as ſtocke or ſtone,
                  And thus the people deceyued euerychone,
                  Were by the fende brought in great errour.
                  To do worſhyppe and ſuche falſe honour,
                  With ſacryfyce and curſed mawmentrye.
                  And in this wyſe began ydolatrye.
                  As in this place to telle I me caſte.
                  And eke how longe it abode and ſyth laſte,
                  Compendiouſly I purpoſe to deſcryue,
                  Gynnyng and ende as ye ſhall here blyue.
                  Withouten any ambyguytee,
                  For at the byrth and natiuitie,
                  Of chryſte Iheſu his incarnaciowne,
                  All the ydolles braſte & fell adowne.
                  And vanyſhed and were brought to nought,
                  Whan Herodes the bleſfull chylde ſought,
                  Through his malis and crueltye horryble,
                  As holy wryte recordeth and the byble.
                  For whiche purſuite and perſecucion,
                  There dyd appere tho by auiſyon,
                  An holly aungell to Ioſeph as he ſlepe,
                  And bad hym ryſe and alſo take kepe,
                  Vnto the chylde and alſo to Marye,
                  And go his waye or Herode hym aſpye.
                  Into Egypt the great regyon.
                  Lyke as the goſpell maketh mencyon.
                  And ryght anone as he came to that lande,
                  There was none ydol yt vpright might ſtand.
                  But to ſhyuered vnto pieces ſmall,
                  This holy wrytte plainly and no tale.
                  And was recorded fyrſt of Eſaye,
                  How that our lorde on an eaſy ſkaye,
                  Aſcende ſhulde and holde forthe his weye.
                  Towarde Egipt and therwithall ſhuld deye,
                  All mawmentrye and no longer dwell.
                  ¶But as the Iewes recorde of Iſmael,
                  That he was fyrſt yt mawmentrye hath fond,
                  And made of claye an ydoll with his honde.
                  ¶And as Paynems write and tellen vs,
                  That alder fyrſt as Prometheus,
                  That founde ydolles ſhortly to conclude.
                  For ſymulacrum cometh of ſymylytude.
                  That is nothyng playnly but lykeneſſe.
                  Made after man his ymage to expreſſe.
                  Vnto whiche paynems in their guyſe,
                  With falſe honour and curſed ſacryfyſe,
                  Begon fyrſt this ryte for drede of man.
                  And ſome ſaye how Belus fyrſt began,
                  Suche falſe worſhyp and ſuch mawmentrye.
                  In their bokes as clerkes ſpecyfye.
                  ¶That of Aſſiry was lord and gouernour.
                  After whoſe deth his ſonne is in honour.
                  ¶That Nynus hyght an ymage did do make
                  To be worſhypped only for his ſake.
                  All of brent golde by falſe effection,
                  And ſette it vp for conſolacion,
                  And for amynde and a memoryall,
                  Vnto the whiche with herte wyll and a
                        •
                     l,
                  Of ignoraunce and of fleſhely loue,
                  
                     He dyd honour as to god aboue.
                  In his temples moſt of excellence.
                  And made his people to do reuerence,
                  And ſayde in heauen he masdefyed.
                  That of no man it durſte be denyed.
                  Tyll after ſoone but a lyttell whyle,
                  A wycked ſpyryte folkes to begyle,
                  In this ydoll entred to abyde,
                  And gaue anſwere vpon euery ſyde,
                  To the people of what them lyſt demaunde.
                  And they agayne what he wyll cōmaunde,
                  Obey fully the folke of all Aſſyrye.
                  Whiche vnto god did great iniurye.
                  Makyng the people in ſuche errour fall,
                  And ſome Belus, and ſome Bell him call.
                  And ſome Balym, and ſome Belphegore,
                  And felle in errour alway more and more.
                  And Belzebub he named was alſo.
                  Whiche name is made of theſe wordes two,
                  Of Bel, and zebub that thus ſyngnyfye,
                  For Bell is God, and zebub is a flye,
                  Than Belzebub togyther ſpecyfyes,
                  Ioyned in one the great god of flyes.
                  And of this fayned falſe ydolatrye,
                  Gan all the worlde worſhyp mawmentrye.
                  ¶For ſome Saturne god of goddes all,
                  Gan in their errour falſely for to call.
                  That whylom was the myghty king of Crete
                  And gaue hym name after the planete,
                  That in heauen hath ſo large a ſphere.
                  And as Poetes in their fables lere,
                  That he before through his ſapyence,
                  Sawe in his diuine prouydence,
                  Howe a ſonne ſhulde of hym deſcende.
                  ¶And of Iuno the goddes as he wende,
                  That ſhuld him plainly fro his reigne expell,
                  And ſuffer hym no lenger for to dwell,
                  In his kyngdome whan he came to age.
                  Wherof Saturne fyll in ſuche rage,
                  That he wyll ſhape remedye therfore,
                  Byddyng his wyfe when ye childe were bore,
                  That ſhe to hym ſhulde it brynge anone.
                  In ſtede wherof to him ſhe brought a ſtone.
                  To ſaue her childe ſhe dyd her buſyneſſe,
                  And this Saturne through his gredineſſe,
                  The ſtone deuoureth in his melancolye.
                  And this Saturne but if bookes lye,
                  Had ſonnes thre a doughter and no mo.
                  ¶Iubiter, Neptunus, and Pluto,
                  But Iubiter greateſt was of name,
                  Moſte renowmed and worthyeſt of fame.
                  Amonge Paynems as it is veryfyed.
                  For they ſo hyghe haue hym magnifyed,
                  That they hym call god of fyre and eyre,
                  Next to Saturne borne for to be heyre.
                  ¶And next to hym in bookes as I rede,
                  Is god of batayle myghty Mars the rede.
                  ¶And next Appollo ſo clere ſhene and bright
                  The dayes eye and voyder of the nyght,
                  Cheriſher of fruite, herbe, floure, and corne,
                  The whiche god lyke as is ſayd toforne,
                  In Delos is worſhypped and honoured.
                  ¶And after Venus that often hath ſocoured
                  Many louer the fayre luſty quene,
                  And them aledge of their woundes grene,
                  That fyrſte was hurte with her fyrye bronde,
                  As ſhe that is goddeſſe of many lande.
                  And all the worlde hath in her demeyne,
                  Faſt enbraced in her fyry cheyne.
                  I meane the lady that called is Venus.
                  ¶And next in ordre is Mercurius.
                  That in ſpeche hath moſt excellence,
                  Of rethoryke and ſugred eloquence.
                  Of muſyke ſonge and of Hermonye,
                  He hath lordſhyp and hole the regalye.
                  ¶Next the Moone that wexe can and wane.
                  Called Lucyna and alſo eke Dyane,
                  That in Delos hath her mancyon,
                  Lyke as tofore is maked mencyon,
                  Now full of myght now horned pale is ſhe,
                  Lady of chaunge and mutabilitie.
                  That ſelde in one halte her any tyme.
                  And ſo fare they that be borne in her clyme,
                  That aye delyte in thynges that be newe,
                  Whoſe herte is cladde in many ſondry hewe.
                  So they be diuers in their affections,
                  And in this wyſe in ſondry regyons,
                  Of mawmentrye is the venym ronne,
                  Lyke as clerkes well deuyſe konne.
                  ¶For as I fynde of the Mauryens,
                  They worſhyp Iubam and Egypciens,
                  ¶Honour yſis after their connyng.
                  Whylom doughter of Inachus the kynge.
                  That taught thē firſt their lond to ere & ſowe.
                  And alſo letters for to reade and knowe,
                  And in lecture to ſette their buſyneſſe,
                  For whiche thyng they call her a goddeſſe.
                  ¶And Iubyter honoured is in Crete.
                  
                     Where he whylom helde his ſouerayne ſeate.
                  And on theim layde many dyuers charge,
                  With Egles beaten in his baner large.
                  And he was lorde of eyre land and ſee,
                  His royall kyngdome deuiding into three.
                  ¶In the higheſt him ſelfe doth contune,
                  ¶And hoole the ſea he gaue vnto Neptune,
                  And laſt the earth to holde his ſea royall,
                  ¶He gaue to Pluto that god is infernall.
                  And alder laſt whan he was ſtellyfyed,
                  This Iubiter was moſt magnyfyed,
                  Of theim of Crete aboute ouer all.
                  To whom they made for a memoryall,
                  A large tombe and ſtatue high alofte,
                  And him honoured in theyr rites ofte.
                  With encens and with other ſacryfyſe.
                  And of this matter ferther to deuyſe,
                  The latines wyth theyr buſy diligence,
                  In theyr rytes didden reuerence,
                  To the goddes yf it be credyble,
                  Ycalled Fawny that be inuiſyble.
                  And haue their dwelling in the wodes grene.
                  Albe that men theyr fygure may not ſene.
                  ¶And of the Romaynes further to deuyne,
                  They moſt ī honour haue their god Quirine.
                  The whych whylom as bokes tellen vs.
                  Amonges theim was called Romulus.
                  That bylte fyrſt the walles of the towne,
                  And from an herde he came to ſuch renowne.
                  Through his manhod and his worthineſſe.
                  The ſpere of whom as bokes ſayne expreſſe,
                  As he the heade pytched in the grounde,
                  It gan anone lyke as it is founde,
                  To flouryſhe floure and budde by myracle,
                  And of nature had none obſtacle,
                  To waxe grene with freſhe blomes newe.
                  And for the manhode that men in him knew.
                  For his knyghthod and his worthye fame,
                  The worthy knightꝭ of Rome bare ye name,
                  After him and were Quirites called.
                  High in heauen whan that he was ſtalled,
                  Amonge the goddes and ydeyfied,
                  And thus Romaynes haue him glorified,
                  As for their god with golde & great expenſes.
                  ¶And as I reade the Athenienſes,
                  Of hoole herte choſen haue to ſerue,
                  The goddeſſe great that called is Minerue,
                  And Pallas eke with her criſtall ſhelde,
                  That with Neptunus euen amyd the felde,
                  Helde champartye wyth women on her ſyde.
                  And he with men full ſurquedous in pryde,
                  Defendeth him for gyuing of the name,
                  To Athenes a Cytye moſt of fame.
                  That is to ſayne whether he or ſhe,
                  Shulde of ryght gyue name to the Citye.
                  Tyll it befell as they gan to ſtriue,
                  Sodeynly there ſprange a fayre Olyue,
                  For Pallas parte grene & fayre bloſſominge,
                  On the other ſyde a well gan to ſprynge,
                  For him Pluto with water large and depe.
                  Of whych thinge Apollo toke good kepe,
                  Whych in his dome was not reckles,
                  And for the Olyue tokeneth loue and peaſe,
                  Water trouble conteck werre and ſtryfe,
                  He gaue ſentence anone diffynitife,
                  How Pallas ſhould that called is Minerue,
                  The palme plainly of this ſtriue diſcerue.
                  And ſhe anone gaue name to the towne,
                  And called it by hygh diſcrecyowne,
                  Athenes the whych in ſpecyall,
                  Is to ſayne a Citie immortall.
                  For wyſedome firſt there began to floure,
                  And for this ſkyll this Citye did honoure,
                  Mighty Pallas goddeſſe of ſcience,
                  And her aye moſt had in reuerence.
                  ¶And they of Pauye in all their region,
                  Worſhyp moſt the quene of Citheron,
                  I meane Venus ful of doubilneſſe,
                  Of whom afore ſomwhat I did expreſſe.
                  And in her temple there full ſolemplye,
                  They ſet her higheſt and moſt rychly,
                  With gold and aſure her ſtatue they do paint.
                  And other coloures that may neuer faynte.
                  And ſet her vp in the higheſt ſee,
                  Of all the temple that all men may ſe.
                  And ſhe ſtant naked in a wawy ſee,
                  Enuyron her with goddeſſes thre,
                  That be aſſygned with buſy attendaunce,
                  To wayte on her and do her obſeruaunce.
                  And floures freſhe blewe, rede, and whyte,
                  Be her aboute the more for to delyte.
                  And on her heade ſhe hath a chaplet,
                  Of roſes rede ful pleſauntly yſet.
                  And from the heade downe vnto her foote,
                  With ſondry gommes & oyntementes ſoote,
                  She is ennoynte ſweter for to ſmell.
                  And all alofte as theſe Poetes tell,
                  By dowues whyte fleing and eke ſparowes,
                  
                     And her beſyde Cupyde with his arowes.
                  Her blynde ſone for to hurt and dere,
                  And loſeth ofte and ſmyte he wote not where.
                  As he muſt nedes bycauſe he is blynde,
                  And thus honoured and had moſte in mynde,
                  Amonge this people is Venus the goddeſſe.
                  ¶And Naxyens do theyr buſineſſe,
                  To ſerue Bachus the myghty god of wyne,
                  Whoſe lycour is moſt precious and fine,
                  To recomforte hertes and to make glade,
                  And to refreſhe hewes that be fade,
                  In faces pale and maketh wyttes ſharpe,
                  Loſeth tunges & make theym loude to carpe.
                  And cauſeth theim to walke at lybertee,
                  And to diſcure thynges that be ſecree.
                  Without aduyſe or diſcreſcion,
                  For where as wyne hath domynacion,
                  No ſecretneſſe may be kept in mewe.
                  And ſome of them that Bachus ſerue & ſewe,
                  Amonge to him haue ſuch deuocion,
                  That they ſome while voyde of all reaſon,
                  Haſty and wood and without all dreade,
                  And ſome alſo ſo toty in theyr heade,
                  That they are voyde of power and of myght,
                  And haue no foote for to ſtande vpryght.
                  And yet they be as Iargaunt as a pye.
                  Right pale cheared with a glaſye eye.
                  Full of reaſon til his winde be ſpent,
                  For or woman that is vynolent,
                  Is veryly a beaſt vnreaſonable.
                  And to my dome I holde theim eke vnable,
                  To be accepted in any companye.
                  Whan that theyr tunge wadeth on the lye.
                  That they ne may bryng forth a worde.
                  ¶And thus Bachus the ſtrōg & mighty lord,
                  Ful oft cauſeth folkes for to erre,
                  For to debate and to maken werre.
                  Of haſtyneſſe where as is no nede,
                  Wherfore it is wyſedome that men drede.
                  His ſleyghty workyng or they fall in ſnare,
                  And feble braines by meaſure for to ſpare.
                  Or they vnwarely areſted be and take,
                  And or Bachus make theim for to ſhake.
                  In a feuer worſe than tercyen,
                  If it of cuſtome be cotydyen.
                  Alterat with Bachus myghty Ious.
                  And affered of tourning of the hous.
                  And fordreynt on the drye lande,
                  When he hath loſt the vſe of foote & hande.
                  And with a ſtrawe playeth lyke an ape,
                  And deuoutly ginneth for to gape,
                  And noddeth oft wyth his Iowſy heade,
                  As he had on an heauy cappe of leade.
                  And who that be of this condicion,
                  He entre maye the relegyon,
                  Of myghty Bachus for habylite,
                  The whych lorde hath the ſouereynte,
                  Both of hony and of mylke therto.
                  And of bawme that is ſo ryche alſo.
                  And lordſhyp hath of high power diuine,
                  Both of grapes and of euery vyne.
                  Theim to nouryſhe through his influence.
                  Of whom the honour and the reuerence,
                  Is reyſed moſt as I vnderſtande,
                  Amonges vynters in euery maner lande.
                  Bycauſe he is to theim ſo gracious.
                  ¶And they of Lemnos worſhyp Vulcanus,
                  The god of fyre Iubyter his ſmythe,
                  The whych forgeth on his blacke ſtythe,
                  The great thonder hydous and horryble.
                  And the leuens that whylom be viſible,
                  Into the weſt out of the Oryent.
                  And gaſteth vs with his dredful dent.
                  The ſmotry ſmyth this ſwarte Vulcanus,
                  That whylom in herte was ſo Ialous,
                  Toward Venus that was his wedded wife,
                  Wherof there roſe a deadly mortall ſtrife,
                  Whan he with Mars gan her firſt eſpye,
                  Of hygh malyce and cruell falſe enuye.
                  Through ye ſhining of Phebus bemes bright,
                  Lying abed with Mars her owne knight.
                  For which in herte he brent as any glede,
                  Making the ſlaundre all abrode to ſprede.
                  And gan theron falſly for to muſe,
                  And god forbede that any man accuſe,
                  For ſo lytell any woman euer.
                  Where loue is ſet hard is to diſſeuer.
                  For though they do ſuch thing of gentilneſſe,
                  Paſſe ouer lyghtly and beare none heuineſſe,
                  Leſt that thou be to women odius.
                  And yet this ſmythe this falſe Vulcanus,
                  Albe that he had theim thus eſpyed,
                  Amonge Paynems yet was he defyed.
                  And for that he ſo falſly theim awoke,
                  I haue him ſet laſt of all my boke.
                  Amonge the goddes of falſe mawmentrye,
                  And in this wyſe gan ydolatrye,
                  As ye haue herde through oppynyons,
                  
                     Of people erryng in theyr affections.
                  That all is falſe who the trouthe ſerche.
                  For by teaching of all holy churche.
                  By holy doctryne and tradicions,
                  We ſhal deſpyſe ſuch opynyons.
                  Whych of the fende were founde not of late.
                  For whan aungelles in heauen were create.
                  He that of all had the prelacye.
                  Of whom the prophete called Eſaye,
                  Wryteth ryght thus how the Cedres grene,
                  Of Paradyſe were not ſo fayre to ſene,
                  Planys nor fyrre in heyght ſoth to ſayne,
                  To his highnes might not attayne,
                  Nor all the trees ſo delycious,
                  Of Paradyſe were not ſo precious,
                  Nouther in ſight nor in ſemelineſſe.
                  To be egall to him as in fayrneſſe.
                  But through his pryde and his ſurquidrye,
                  Whan ſo he ſayde to god that ſyt ſo hye,
                  He wyll be lyke and alſo ſet his ſee,
                  High in the north paſſyng his degre.
                  He was caſt downe wyth all his legyons,
                  From the fayre heauenly manſyons,
                  All ſodaynly into the pyt of hel,
                  Perpetually there for to dwell.
                  Of whom was ſayde whan he fel ſo ferre,
                  How fell thou ſo O thou morowe ſterre,
                  From the middes of the ſtones bryght,
                  That be ſo perſyng and fyery of theyr lyght.
                  That whilom were for thy great bryghtneſſe,
                  Called Lucifer of whō Chriſt ſayeth expreſſe,
                  In his goſpell how he ſawe fro heauen,
                  Sathan deſcende lyke the fyery leuene.
                  The olde ſerpent that is ſo lowe yfall,
                  Whom the Hebrues in theyr tunge call,
                  ¶Bemoth that doth in latin playne expreſſe,
                  A beaſt rude full of curſedneſſe.
                  The vile ſerpent he Leuiathan,
                  Whom I ſydore well deſcryue can,
                  Whych of kynde is neuer conuerſaunt,
                  In welles trouble and hath moſt his haunt,
                  Amonges waters and in the large ſea.
                  Of whom ſayth Dauid like as ye may ſe,
                  In his Pſalter making mencion,
                  Of the ſnake the monſtruous Dragon,
                  ful of venym and of hard grace,
                  Whych in the ſea large and great of ſpace,
                  Wyth foule adders hath his manſyon.
                  Vnto mankynde to do illuſyon.
                  Whom whylom ſawe the holy monke Brādā
                  
                  As he ſayled forthe by the Occyan,
                  Thorowen and deiect in a pyt horryble,
                  More foule and hydous than it is credible.
                  There to abide this tortuous ſerpent.
                  Vnto the daye playnly of Iudgement.
                  That of malyce enuyed ſo mankynde.
                  Whych with his ginnes & ſleightes as I find,
                  Came to our fathers firſt in paradyſe.
                  And to deceyue the bet at his deuyſe,
                  More couertly this worme in his paſſage,
                  Toke of a ſerpent the lykneſſe and ymage.
                  That is of cheare of loke and countenaunce,
                  Lyke a mayde and hath reſemblaunce,
                  Of a woman as recordeth Bede.
                  In his deceytes rather for to ſpede.
                  I meane the face onely and not elles,
                  For behynde ſo as clerkes telles,
                  Lyke a ſerpent of wombe backe and tayle.
                  He was whan he gan him to aſſaile,
                  And towarde Eue whan he gan to glyde.
                  He fyrſt enquereth as he her toke aſyde,
                  Why god forbad theim eten of the tree,
                  Whych if they eate ſothly they ſhulden be,
                  Like to goddes knowing good and yll.
                  And right forthwith as they gan fulfyll,
                  The fendes heſt theyr eyen were vncloſed,
                  And for theyr gylt ſodaynly depoſed,
                  From Paradyſe into wretchedneſſe,
                  To lyue in labour ſorowe and diſtreſſe.
                  And thus the fende whan that fyrſt he toke,
                  Fourme of a ſnake and a womans loke,
                  And made the tunge in her heade to meue,
                  By falſe engene mankinde for to greue,
                  So as he doth in theim that be trauayled,
                  With wycked ſpyrytes vexed and aſſayled,
                  To meue theyr tunges falſly out to breake.
                  Into blaſphemy what thinge yt they ſpeake,
                  The ſame ſerpent he Leuiathan,
                  Continuing aye falſely as he gan,
                  In curſed Idolles dombe, deafe, and blinde,
                  Ful oft ſpeaketh by ſpyrytes as I finde.
                  Which are but fendes Dauid wryte certayne▪
                  
                  The goddes all whom folkes ſo in vaine,
                  Honour with rites ſuperſticious,
                  As whilom was Apollo Delphicus,
                  Like as tofore ye haue herd deuiſe,
                  Which as for now ought inough ſuffiſe.
                  ¶And as I trowe the very cauſe why,
                  
                     That myne auctour reherſeth by and by.
                  Grounde and ginnyng of Idolatrye,
                  This the cauſe for ought I can eſpye.
                  For that he ſawe the matter was not knowe,
                  Ilyche well both to high and lowe.
                  Perauenture you to do pleaſaunce.
                  He hath the grounde put in remembraunce,
                  Of falſe goddes and of mawmentrye,
                  And moſt for theim that can no poeſye,
               
               
                  ANd to ye ſtorye reſorteth ſoone agayne,
                  How Achilles as ye haue herd me ſaine
                  And Patroclus haue the waye ynome,
                  To the temple and thyther be ycome.
                  To haue aunſwere of theyr embaſſadrye,
                  Of great Apollo whych may not lye.
                  Of ye pryeſtes they haue theyr counſaile take,
                  In the temple to praie and to wake,
                  Tyll they may finde vnto theyr entente,
                  To haue aunſwere at time conuenient,
                  To theyr purpoſe and leyſure oportune.
                  ¶And of one herte ſo longe they contune,
                  In praying faſtyng and oblacions,
                  Wyth ſacrifiſe and ſundrye oryſons,
                  Tofore the god awayting alwaye faſt,
                  Tyll he to theim anſwered at laſt.
                  With ſofte voyce and ſayde Achilles twye,
                  Home to Grekes faſt that thou the hye,
                  From whom thou were hyther to me ſente.
                  And ſaye thē ſothly the ſūme of their entent,
                  Shalbe fulfylled withouten wordes mo.
                  And how that they ſhall to Troye go,
                  And there abyde many ſtronge battayle.
                  But at the laſt withouten any fayle,
                  At ten yeares daye they win ſhall the towne,
                  And brynge it playnly to deſtructiowne,
                  Wall and toures fall ſhal to ruyne,
                  And with al this theyr purpoſe for to fyne,
                  Kyng Priamus and Hecuba his wife.
                  And theyr ſones in this mortall ſtryfe,
                  Shall there be ſlayne brother after brother,
                  This is the fine for it may be none other.
                  For there ſhal none eſcape in the place,
                  But ſuch as Grekes liketh vnto grace,
                  Of very routhe and of mercy take.
                  This all and ſome and thus an ende I make.
               
               
                  Of which aunſwere Achilles glad & light,
                  Was in his hert and with al his myght,
                  Thanketh Apollo of his bleſfull eure.
                  And ſodeynly of ſorte or aduenture,
                  The ſelfe tyme befell a wonder thynge,
                  For out of Troye from Pryamus the kynge,
                  Was ſent a byſſhop for the ſame caſe,
                  To haue anſwere and named was Calchas.
                  And he came in fool without preſe,
                  The ſame houre whyle that Achilles,
                  Was there preſent a man of great ſcyence.
                  I meane Calchas had experyence,
                  Eſpecially of calculacion,
                  Of ſorte alſo and dyuinacion.
                  And lerned was in aſtronomye,
                  And whan that he his tyme dyd eſpye,
                  To haue anſwere moſt conuenient,
                  Of Appollo lyke to his entent,
                  As heretofore maked is memorye,
                  He entred is in to the oratorye,
                  Doyng his rytes and his obſeruaunces,
                  Lyke the cuſtome with the circumſtaunces.
                  And beſely gan to knele and praye,
                  And his thinges deuoutly for to ſaye.
                  And to the god crye and call ful ſtronge,
                  And for Apollo would not tho prolonge,
                  Sodaynly his aunſwere gan attame.
                  And ſayd Calchas twies by his name.
                  Be right wel ware thou ne tourne agayne,
                  To Troye towne for that were but in vayne.
                  For finally lerne this thinge of me,
                  In ſhorte tyme it ſhall deſtroyed be.
                  This is in ſothe whych may not be denyed.
                  Wherfore I wil that thou be alyed,
                  With the Grekes and with Achilles go.
                  To theim anone my will is it be ſo.
                  For they ſhall haue as I haue diſcloſed.
                  Victorye and honour that may be diſpoſed.
                  For it is fatall and ne may not varye,
                  And thou to theim ſhalt be neceſſarye,
                  In counſeling and in yeuing rede,
                  And be right helping to their good ſpede.
                  And with that worde roſe him vp Calchas,
                  And to Achilles he went an eaſy pace.
                  And whan that he came to his preſence,
                  With great honour & muche reuerence,
                  He was receiued like to his eſtate.
                  And after ſoone they were confederate,
                  Swore togyther be bonde and aſſuraunce,
                  To be al one withouten varyaunce.
                  And than in haſte they togyther gone.
                  
                     To theyr ſhippes & ſhope theym forth anone,
                  With Patroclus goyng by theyr ſyde,
                  They hale vp the anker and no longer byde,
                  But ſayle forthe Calchas and they twayne.
                  Toward Grece theim nedeth not complaine.
                  On winde and wawe till they aryued be,
                  At Athenes that ſtode vpon the ſea,
                  A large Citye of olde foundacion,
                  And Achilles to kyng Agamenon,
                  Hath Calchas brought and alſo Patroclus,
                  And whan the Grekes the ſtorye telleth vs,
                  Aſſembled were they together went,
                  Tofore the king and Calchas repreſent.
                  To all the lordes and no longer dwell,
                  And right anone Achilles gan to tell,
                  Without abode in Delos how they mette,
                  Tofore Apollo where they aunſwer fette.
                  And how the god hath playnly determyned,
                  The Grekes purpoſe how it ſhal be fyned.
                  Vpon Troians and bad Calchas alſo,
                  In no wyſe that he to Troye go.
                  But with Grekes that he abyde ſtyll,
                  Tyll they theyr purpoſe fynally fulfyll.
                  Of whiche thyng the grekes glad of chere,
                  Calchas accepte with herte full entere.
                  For one of them confederate by bonde,
                  To be all one on water and on londe.
                  Without chaunge or any varyaunce.
                  The othe is made and put in remembraunce,
                  And they agayne fully hym aſſure,
                  To cheryſhe hym whyle theyr lyfe may dure,
                  For weale or wo and ſo they made an ende,
                  And after parte and to their lodgyng wende.
               
               
                  TIll on the morne after the ſterry nyght,
                  When Aurora was gladded wt the light,
                  Of Phebus beames the grekes vp aryſe,
                  And to their goddes with many ſacryfyce,
                  They do honour in what they can or may.
                  And deuoutly holdyng a feaſt daye,
                  After their rytes meynt with loue and drede,
                  In remembraunce of the good ſpede,
                  And of the anſwere ye goddes haue them ſent.
                  So agreable vnto their entent.
                  By Patroclus and by Achilles.
                  And after this amonges all the preſe,
                  Is Calchas come tofore Agamenon,
                  All his lordes ſyttynge enuyron.
                  Lyke their eſtates eche in his place dewe,
                  And humbly gan them all to ſalewe.
                  Vpon his knees with ſobre countenaunce,
                  And prayed them it be no diſpleſaunce,
                  To ſtynte a whyle and gyue hym audyence.
                  And ryght anone as made was ſylence,
                  Amonge them all Calchas gan abrayde,
                  And euen thus full ſobrely he ſayd.
               
               
                  OH ſyres quod he and my lordes dere.
                  Kynges, Princes, & Dukes that be here,
                  So noble echone worthy and famous,
                  And eke ſo manly and ſo vertuous.
                  Whiche in this place be now here preſent,
                  Is not the fyne and chiefe of your entent,
                  And cauſe alſo why that ye echone,
                  Aſſembled be to Troye for to gone,
                  With this power and this great ſtrength.
                  Your purpoſe is to longe drawe a length,
                  And differred forth from day to daye,
                  To your damage platly this no naye.
                  For to longe ye ſoiourne in this yle.
                  And trowe ye not that Pryam in this whyle,
                  Hath his eſpyes amonge you pryuely,
                  I wote it wele I ſaye you faythfully.
                  To knowe the fyne of your gouernaunce.
                  And he there whyles may make purueaunce,
                  Hym to defende while ye in ydell reſte.
                  Me ſemeth ſothly ye do not for the beſte.
                  For in abydyng and in ſuche delayes,
                  Great harme may fal certayne this no nay is.
                  I preue it thus for playnly whyle that yee,
                  To your enmyes graunte this lybertee,
                  Them to puruey they may with mighty hand
                  Enforce them your power to withſtande.
                  With their fryendes and their allyaunce,
                  And at leyſour make their ordinaunce.
                  It is foly that ye ſo dyfferre.
                  Syth ye be ready for to make a werre.
                  On your ennemyes with euery circūſtraunce,
                  For nothyng may a quarell ſo auaunce,
                  As haſty ſuite it will the ſharper byte.
                  The Iron hoote tyme is for to ſmyte.
                  And not abyde tyll that it be colde.
                  For it wyl neither plye then nor folde.
                  Go ſette vpon all of one accorde,
                  And to your ſhyppe anone within borde,
                  Enhaſte you for tyme is to remewe.
                  With all your might your quarell to purſue.
                  Agaynſt them that haue to you treſpaſſed,
                  
                     How many dayes be of ſomer paſſed,
                  And many monthes ronne and ouerſlyde,
                  And Titan oft with his chare hath ryde,
                  From Eaſt to Weſt and in the wawes depe,
                  His ſtreames bathed whyles that ye a ſlepe,
                  And ſpent your tyme in this place thus.
                  Whyle that the wynde called zephirus,
                  Beningly enſpyred hath alofte,
                  The attempre aier with wether fayre & ſoft,
                  The calme ſea from wawes ſtyll and playne,
                  Whyles ye waſte your dayes here in vayne.
                  That when your foon therto taken hede.
                  They wil ſuppoſe that it is for drede,
                  And be more bolde to ſet of you but lite.
                  Truſte forſothe for I wyll me quite,
                  Trewlye to you like as I am bounde.
                  And thynke how ye haue the goddes founde,
                  There toward bening and fortunate.
                  Your honour ſaued in high and lowe eſtate.
                  And ſo ſhall forthe if your ingratytude,
                  Prouoke theim not your purpoſe to delude.
                  Wylfully to ſlouthe your good fortune,
                  No wonder is though they not contune,
                  Towardes you for to ſhewe theyr grace,
                  Wherfore I reade henſe for to pace,
                  And ſhapeth you no longer to lye here,
                  But whyle the wether is ſo fayre and clere,
                  And luſty ſomer abydeth in his hete,
                  Or wynter come wyth his raynes wete,
                  And while the ſeaſon is ſo freſhe and grene,
                  I ſpeake of herte platly as I mene,
                  For your exployt and your alder eaſe,
                  Where it ſo be I angre you or pleaſe,
                  That forth in haſte ye to ſhyppe wende,
                  I can no more my tale is at an ende.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the Grekes nauye retourning from Athenes were diſtreſſed by tempeſt, and how they toke a caſtel of ye Troians called Saranaba. Ca. xviii.
               
                  ANd all at ones they be cōdeſcēded,
                  To his aduyſe & haue it wel cōmēded.
                  And in al haſte Agamenon the grete,
                  The luſty time and the ſeaſon ſwete,
                  Haſtyng the grekes both the high and lowe,
                  Made ſoūde a trumpe & to ſhipward blowe.
                  And they echone his bidding did obey,
                  And to theyr ſhippes they go the right weye.
                  Without abode they will no longer dwell,
                  What ſhuld I more of the nomber tell.
                  Of theyr ſhippes ſyth ye haue herde afore,
                  It nedeth not reherſe it any more,
                  I can not ſe what it might auayle.
                  But forthe they dreſſe thē and begā to ſayle,
                  And this is ſothe playnly and no wene,
                  So great a nauye was neuer yet yſene,
                  In all this worlde nor together met.
                  The winde was good yt they were not let,
                  On theyr waye fyrſt whan they begon.
                  But after ſoone gan the ſhene ſon,
                  The clearneſſe chaunge of his bryght face,
                  And dimme cloudes gan his light enbrace.
                  And ſodaynly in full ougly wiſe,
                  The heauen dercke & the wynde gan ryſe,
                  The hydous thunder and leuene clere,
                  Smote in the maſt bryght as any fyere,
                  And the blacknes of the ſmoky reyne,
                  Blindeth the eyre that nothyng may be ſene.
                  And the wawes gan to ryſe alofte,
                  And in theyr ſhippes fell nothyng ſofte.
                  But plonge a downe and theyr toppes ſmyte,
                  That theim thought they wanted but a lyte,
                  To haue be dead in the ſelfe ſtounde.
                  Tyll Calchas hath by his craft yfounde,
                  The cauſe of all and with his oryſons,
                  With his charmes and incantacions,
                  Made ſodaynly the tempeſt to appeaſe
                  And wt his craft done theim right great eaſe.
                  For he founde out the cauſe of euerydele,
                  How Dyane lyked nothyng wele,
                  That the grekes durſten take on hande,
                  To be ſo bolde to parte from the ſtronde,
                  Into the ſea in any maner wyſe,
                  And do to her no maner ſacrifyce.
                  Nouther offer tofore or that they gothe,
                  For which thyng the goddeſſe is ſo wroth,
                  Towarde grekes ſaylynge on the ſea,
                  That they echone wende haue drowned be.
                  Tyll at the laſte the kyng Agamenon,
                  Hath by counſayle and information,
                  Of wyſe Calchas made ſette vp to londe,
                  Into an yle and faſte his ſhyppes bonde,
                  And Aulydes that little yle hyghte.
                  In whiche he fonde vnware in his ſyghte,
                  A lyttle temple and an oratorye,
                  Founded of olde and made in memory,
                  Of great Dyane to which anone he wente,
                  
                     Full deuoutly his offerynge to preſent.
                  And quemed her with his oblacions,
                  And lay there longe in his oriſons.
                  After the rytes vſed in his lawe.
                  Tell after he ſawe the tempeſt gan adawe.
                  But ſome bokes maken mencion,
                  Touchyng this thyng that Agamenon,
                  As Ouyde lyſt reherſen in his boke,
                  How this kyng his owne doughter toke,
                  Effygenya benynge of face and chere.
                  And endelonge there vpon the aultere,
                  This mayde he layde diſpoyled of her wede,
                  Tofore Dyane to maken her blede.
                  To fyne only that he the heauenly quene,
                  With bloud that was innocent and clene,
                  Appeaſe myght and quemen of her rage.
                  And the goddeſſe gracious of viſage,
                  Hath mercy meynt with her magnifycence,
                  To ſuffer a mayde ſo full of innocence,
                  Gyltleſſe to be in her temple ſlawe.
                  Hath by myracle away her body drawe.
                  And it conſerued from all anoy and ſmerte,
                  And in her ſtede vnwarely caſte an herte,
                  By deth of whom as bokes maken mynde,
                  Agamenon fyrſt gan grace fynde.
                  In the goddes for to modefye,
                  Her cruell Ire and cleren gan the ſkye.
                  The ſea waxe calme and the wether fayre▪
                  
                  And Phebus eke to glade with the eyre,
                  Gan ſhewe newe and his beames caſte,
                  In to the ſea and the kynge as faſte,
                  Vnto ſhyppe repayred is agayne.
                  Thrugh helpe of her which is as clerkꝭ ſaine
                  Lady and quene is of wayes and of paſſage,
                  And goddeſſe is called of voyage.
                  After the ſentence and opynyon,
                  Of them that worke by calculacion.
                  And gyn their domes by Aſtronomy.
                  And moſt of all they her magnifye,
                  In the tenth and the twelfe houſe.
                  For there ſhe is they ſaye moſte gracious.
                  Beſt fortuned, clere, or in her ſhade,
                  If ſhe haue comeforte of aſpectes glade.
                  Of planettes ſtandynge tho as in good ſtate,
                  I meane ſuche planettes as be fortunate,
                  To voyage or iourney for to make.
                  And ſuch tyme Agamenon hath take,
                  His happy waye ſhypped for to be.
                  And in good houre he taken hath the ſea,
                  With the grekes the wether agreable,
                  And Eolus hath maked acceptable,
                  Wynde and eyre hoole at their wyll.
                  Nouther to loude playnely nor to ſtyll.
                  But in a meane ſo mery made it blowe,
                  That they attayne as in a lyttell throwe,
                  To certayne boundes of Troye the Citie.
                  Vnto a caſtell that ſtode vpon the ſea,
                  Right wonder ſtrong though it were but lite,
                  The name of whiche thoughe Dares liſte not wryte.
                  I meane Dares called Frygius,
                  Yet other auctours reherſe ſothly thus,
                  Saranaba that it was ycalled.
                  Rounde aboute diched and well walled.
                  With hyghe toures rounde ſquare and wide,
                  Where vnder went the ſea and faſt beſyde,
                  Was an hauen able for ryuayle,
                  At whiche playnely the grekes wyl not fayle,
                  With their power myghtely to aryue.
                  Maugre all tho that there agayne ſtryue.
                  They might well for it was not denied,
                  Only except that they were eſpyed,
                  Of them alone that in the caſtell dwell,
                  The whiche anone as they herde tell,
                  Of their commynge proudely in the berde,
                  With them to mete were nothyng aferde.
                  But iſſue out downe vnto the ſtronde,
                  In purpoſe onely to lette them to londe,
                  With all their might if it wolde auayle,
                  But the grekes ſo proudely them aſſayle,
                  That they ne myght in their defence endure,
                  For where as they wende to haue be aſſure,
                  Demyng the grekes plainly on the ſea,
                  For weryed and faynted to haue be,
                  With longe ſaylinge parbraked and forbroke,
                  Wherfore they caſt on them to haue be wroke,
                  All ſodeinly and ſette on the head,
                  And put them ſelfe in aduenture and drede.
                  Of rakelneſſe vnaduyſedly.
                  Wherof to them ſelfe vnhappely,
                  It befell when they with grekes mette,
                  With ſperes longe and ſwerdes ſharpe whet.
                  Eche on other manhode for to ſhewe.
                  But for cauſe Troyans were to fewe,
                  To yſſue out they dyd folyfye.
                  The fyelde was not parted egally.
                  For the grekes were innumerable,
                  That them to mete Troyans were not able.
                  For that tyme they mighten not ſuffyſe,
                  
                     They toke on them to paſſyng hygh empryſe.
                  And yet they wold for nothing them wtdrawe
                  Tyll that they were wounded and yſlawe,
                  And ouerlayne of grekes vtterly.
                  Now here, now there, bore downe cruelly.
                  Mercyleſſe as Guydo doth reporte,
                  That them behoueth home agayne reſorte,
                  Of verye nede and neceſſytee.
                  And all attones gan for to flee,
                  I meane ſuche as were lefte alyue,
                  To the caſtell they haſted them full blyue.
                  For they ne myght no longer holde the fyelde,
                  Agaynſt grekes with ſpere nor with ſhielde.
                  They were to feble ſhortely to conclude,
                  There to abyde ſo great a multitude.
                  And as they flee the grekes a great pace,
                  Ne ceaſe not to ſewe them in the chaſe,
                  Full haſtyly to the caſtell gate.
                  And entre in and by cruell fate,
                  They kyll and ſlea all both hye and lowe.
                  They ſpare none ne lyſt no wyght knowe.
                  Of none eſtate but felly them oppreſſe,
                  And what they fonde golde and eke rycheſſe,
                  Vnto ſhyppe they caryed it anone.
                  And of the caſtell they ne lefte a ſtone,
                  Aboue an other but tourned vp ſo downe.
                  Both wall & toure and the chiefe dongeowne
                  That nothynge ſtode ſo they vnder myne,
                  And whan that all was brought vnto ruyne,
                  Grekes anone to their ſhyppes haſte.
                  Of one aſſent and purpoſen as faſte,
                  Without abode of one wyll and herte,
                  Fro that hauen playnly to dyuerte.
                  And to ſayle towarde Tenedowne,
                  A ſtronge caſtell whyche from Troye towne,
                  In diſtaunce thenſe but ſyxe myle ſtode,
                  Ful of treaſour of rycheſſe and of good.
                  Replenyſhed of all in habundaunce,
                  And when that they with theyr ordynaunce,
                  Yſayled haue theyr Iourney ſafe and ſound,
                  And fro the ſea taken haue the grounde.
                  To theyr pleſaunce wonder agreable.
                  And of ſyght a place delectable,
                  Holſome of eyre the ſoyle fayre and grene,
                  And luſty playnes goodly on to ſene.
                  And was alſo haboundaunt of vitayle,
                  Replenyſhed of all that may auayle,
                  The oſteyng and to ſouldiours,
                  For firſt the land of freſhe floures,
                  Was plenteous both of corne and grayne.
                  Of wyne and fruyt yt no thynge laye baraine,
                  Of beaſtes and foules paſſyngly plentee,
                  And faſt by was adioyning the ſee.
                  Full habundaunt of fyſhe as I fynde,
                  After the ſeaſon of euery maner kynde.
                  And whan that they yt in the caſtell were,
                  The Grekes ſea londed from a ferre,
                  Without abode they arme them & went out,
                  And vpon theim make an hidous ſhoute.
                  Stuffyng the caſtel wt meyne ſtrong behinde,
                  And toke their waye in Guydo as I fynde.
                  Towarde their foen and knyghtly ſet vpon,
                  And right forth the grekes eke anone,
                  Mette with them vpon the other fyde.
                  Right ſurquidous and inly full of pryde.
                  Clenly armed in harneys all of ſtele,
                  Freſhe arayed and beſene ſo wele,
                  For in the fielde as thicke as ſworme of been,
                  On eche ſyde men may beholde and ſeen,
                  Spradde all the playne downe vnto ye ſtrond.
                  Tyll at the laſte they mette hande to hande.
                  Where as they yoyne wt ſquare ſperes groūd,
                  And hurtle yfere with many bluddy wounde.
                  There was no good day nor no ſaluynge.
                  But ſtrokes felle that men hardeen rynge,
                  On baſſenettes the fieldes rounde about.
                  So cruelly that the fyre ſprange oute,
                  Amonge the tuftes brode bryght and ſhene.
                  Of foyle of golde & fethers whyte and grene.
                  Eke in breſtes perced many ſhelde,
                  And courſers fledde abrode in the fyelde.
                  And many layde in that mortal ſtounde,
                  Full deadly pale lowe vpon the grounde.
                  With face gruf and bluddy ſtreames wyde.
                  And aldermoſt vpon the grekes ſyde,
                  The ſlaughter was and the diſcomfyture▪
                  
                  So mightly the Troyans dyd endure.
               
               
                  TIll at the laſte for they were ſo fewe,
                  With multitude the grekes on thē hewe,
                  For mo then forty were againſt one,
                  Of very force abacke they muſte gone,
                  Nothyng for lacke of manhode dare I ſeyne.
                  But for ſo many haue them ouer layne.
                  They no longer may in fyelde ſoiourne,
                  But to their Caſtel home agayne retourne,
                  In full great haſte ſuche as myght eſcape,
                  Away aliue. and ſome of them for rape.
                  
                     And drede of death toke them to flyght.
                  On horſe backe to Troye towne full ryght.
                  No wonder was though they haſte faſte,
                  For to the gates the chace of grekes laſte.
                  So cruelly after they purſewe.
                  And ſome of them that myght not remewe,
                  On Troye ſyde forweryed of the fyght,
                  The grekes ſlewe with all their full myght,
                  Now here now there whō they might atteine,
                  There may no raunſom nor no mercy gayne.
                  Of none eſtate without excepciowne.
                  And after that vnto Tenedowne,
                  The grekes went and it be ſette aboute.
                  That Troyan none myght eſcape out.
                  And when yt they the bulwerkes had ywonne
                  To ſkale the walle after they begoone.
                  And made a ſaute manfully and ofte,
                  And eke Troyans as they ſtode a lofte,
                  Dryue them of that enter they ne myght.
                  With caſte of ſtone and with quarelles bright,
                  With bowe turkeys and ſhote of Arbalaſters.
                  And their gonners ſtandyng at corners.
                  With this alſo and caſte of wylde fyre,
                  Of yrous hate full hote in their deſyre.
                  Lyke manly men them ſelfe they do deffende.
                  And aye the grekes as they vp aſcende,
                  Cruelly they dryuen to the grounde.
                  Tyll they without an ordynaūce haue foūde,
                  What with gynnes deuyſed for the nones,
                  And gonnes great for to caſte ſtones,
                  Bent to the toures ryght as any lyne,
                  And large ſowes lowe for to myne,
                  And ſome of them vpon the walle gone,
                  That were ſo thycke made of lyme and ſtone.
                  And in to entre they many wayes ſeke.
                  Sette their baſtyles and their hurdeys eke.
                  Rounde aboute to the harde walle,
                  And ſkalyng ladders for ſawtes marcyall.
                  They gan vp caſte with hokes for to holde,
                  And vp aſcende the ſturdy grekes bolde.
                  Tyll the Troyans from the creſtes caſte,
                  The great ſtones whyle as they woulde laſte.
                  And Rollers eke grekes to oppreſſe.
                  And wonder manly dyd their buſyneſſe,
                  In their deffence and made plonge them low,
                  With caſte of quarell and with ſhote of bowe.
                  Through Olyettes that of neceſſytee,
                  They put them of it may none other be.
                  And broke their neckes & their ſhulder bones,
                  As they fell downe with the ſquare ſtones.
                  And lyen dead pyteous pale of hewe.
                  But grekes aye gan the ſaute renewe,
                  With multytude Troyans to aſſayle,
                  That to withſtande they gynnen for to fayle.
                  And were feble for reſcuſe came their none,
                  And ſo of force the grekes be in gone.
                  Through ye walles when they haue thē broke,
                  And on Troyans ſo cruelly be wroke,
                  That fynally they lefte none alyue.
                  But ſlea and kylle and after that as blyue,
                  On the walles their baners they haue ſette.
                  And yonge and olde it myght be no bette,
                  All goth to wracke vpon Troye ſyde.
                  And after that they wyll no longer byde,
                  But treaſour golde & what ſo they may fynde,
                  They caſte on heape and together bynde.
                  And make ſpoyle of all that was within,
                  And then in haſte the walles they begyn,
                  Pynacle, toures, and alſo the dungeowne,
                  To brenne and hewe and to bete downe.
                  And with the ſoyle they made euen & playne.
                  And with great pray anone they went againe
                  To their ſhyppes glad and lyght of chere.
                  When the fyre with the flawmes clere,
                  The caſtell had conſumed and ybrent.
                  And after that auyſe and ryght prudent,
                  The manly man the worthy Agamenon,
                  Let make anone a conuocation,
                  Of the grekes and bad they ſhulden bryng,
                  Golde and treaſour without more taryinge,
                  With all the pray they wanne at Tenedowne,
                  To his preſence for this concluſyowne.
                  That he may make diſtribucion,
                  Amonges them without exception,
                  Lyke their deſert vnto pore and ryche.
                  He departeth to euery man a lyche,
                  But moſte to ſuche as dyd it beſt deſerue,
                  For to hym ſelfe him lyſt nothyng reſerue,
                  For he hath leuer their hertes then the good.
                  Of ſuche as had ſpente their owne bloud,
                  So manfully the caſtell for to wynne.
                  For who that can with largeſſe fyrſt begyn,
                  Ne fayleth not after well to ſpede.
                  Through helpe of men whē that he hath nede
                  For loue foloweth fredome comenly.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Howe Agamenon aſſembled a counſayle of the nobles of Grece, and determyned, & ſente Vlyxes and Dyomede in ambaſſade to kynge Pryam. Capi. xix.
               
                  ANd after this the kyng let make a crye,
                  That al the kinges & lordes of his oſtie,
                  Dukes and Erles come from euery coſte,
                  The next morowe afore him to appere.
                  The nyght ypaſſed Phebus gan to clere,
                  Their hemyſperye after the larke ſonge.
                  Whan yt the king amonge the grekes ſtronge,
                  Vpon the playne in his ſee royall,
                  And faſte by moſte chife and pryncipall,
                  Of his lordes were ſet in their degree.
                  And when the king ſawe oportunitee,
                  And that there was made ſcilēce euery where,
                  His lyeges ſtandynge enuyron here & there.
                  The kyng of chere ſad and not Iocounde,
                  As he that was of ſpeche full faucounde,
                  Began his tale with ſobre countenaunce,
                  The effect of whiche was this in ſubſtaunce.
               
               
                  Syres quod he full worthy of degree,
                  Of verye ryght and of neceſſytee,
                  We be compelled both the hygh and lowe,
                  With all our myght lyke as ye well knowe,
                  To redreſſe a thynge that is amys.
                  For through the worlde as it reported is,
                  We be of force of power and of myght,
                  Of worthyneſſe in euery wyghtes ſyght,
                  Moſt renowmed and moſt worſhypable.
                  And ydempt and iudged for moſte able,
                  Of all people and lyklyeſt to ſtonde,
                  For to perfourme what we haue take on hand
                  Who that euer grutcheth or ſayth nay,
                  Yet me ſemeth if it be your paye,
                  Thylke power moſte is acceptable,
                  Vnto goddes and longeſt ſtondeth ſtable,
                  That is deuoyde of ſurquidry and pryde.
                  For it is kouth vpon euery ſyde,
                  In eche lande both of one and all,
                  How many harmes and greues haue befall,
                  Through rancour onely pryde & wylfulneſſe.
                  So inportable as I coulde expreſſe,
                  Through pryde there as is done offence,
                  The hygh goddes maken reſyſtence,
                  To all tho that be ſurquydous.
                  Whiche is a vyce ſo contraryous,
                  That it ne may in no place abyde.
                  And in good fayth manhode is no pryde,
                  For who that hath any acqueyntaunce,
                  Outher by frendſhyp or by alyaunce,
                  With a proude man to be confederate,
                  With him in herte of hyghe or lowe eſtate.
                  He nedes muſt what euer that he be,
                  To many other of neceſſytee,
                  Be lothſomeſt enmy and contrayre.
                  For nothyng may a man ſo moche appayre,
                  As pryde in ſoth in highe or lowe degree.
                  Wherfore I rede playnely how that wee,
                  This foule vyce out of our herte arrace.
                  That our quarell may haue the more grace.
                  And ſpecyally that our dedes all,
                  Conueyed be how euer that it fall,
                  By ryghtwyſeneſſe more than voluntee.
                  For if trouth our ſothfaſt guyde be,
                  Vs to derecte by his rightfull lyne,
                  Than ſhall our quarell aye in honour ſhyne,
                  And contune in full felycytee.
                  ¶And ferthermore this knowen all ye,
                  How we are come for to done vengeaunce,
                  With our frendſhyppe and our alyaunce.
                  Vpon Pryam for wronges done of olde.
                  By hym and his as I haue ofte tolde.
                  And hereupon we haue his grounde ytake,
                  And ſome of his maked to a wake.
                  With manful hande and his caſtelles ſtronge,
                  I beate downe that ſtonde haue ſo longe.
                  And take there the rycheſſe that we founde,
                  And ſlewe his men with many bluddy woūde
                  And harmes mo done in his countre,
                  That I wote well if their enmytee,
                  Was vnto vs great and moche afore.
                  I dare ſaye now it is in double more,
                  That yf that they auenged myght be,
                  On vs echone anone ye ſhulde ſee.
                  Their great Ire ſo cruell and ſo huge,
                  Be execute without more refuge.
                  And yet in ſoth I wote they haue eſpyed,
                  Our beynge here though we be not aſkyred.
                  Of them as yet I dare ſaye vtterly,
                  They are well ware that we are faſte by.
                  And ouermore this wote I well alſo,
                  Of the harmes that we haue to them do,
                  The whiche as yet be but freſhe and grene,
                  If they were ſtronge and mighty to ſuſteyne,
                  I werre on vs anone they wolde it gynne,
                  
                     And yet the Citie in whiche that they be in.
                  Is walled ſtronge and toured rounde about,
                  That they wenen fully out of doute,
                  With the meyne that they haue gathred in,
                  Of theyr allyes that we ſhall not wyn,
                  Of them but ſmale in werre nor in ſtryfe.
                  For he in ſoth hath a prerogatyfe,
                  And aduauntage that in his countre,
                  Hym ſelfe deffendeth namely if that he,
                  Be ſtuffed ſtronge of frendes hym beſyde.
                  And of alyes where he doth abyde.
                  Lyke as the Rauen with his fether blacke,
                  Within his neſt will often tyme make,
                  Agayne the Faukon gentyll of nature,
                  Full harde diffence whyles hy may endure.
                  Or that he be vanquyſſhed and outrayed.
                  And yet ſome whyle the Faukon is delayed,
                  Whyles the Rauen beſyde his neſt doth flee,
                  Within his courte at his lybertee.
                  As euery foule is frowarde to areſte,
                  For to be daunted in his owne neſte.
               
               
                  ANd yet to you theſe wordes I ne ſaye,
                  In any wyſe to putten in a fraye,
                  Your knyghtly hertes ſo manly and ſo ſtable.
                  Nor that to you it ſhulde be doutable,
                  But we the Troyans fully ſhall confounde.
                  And their Citie in which they now habounde,
                  Playnly deſtroye albe that it be ſtronge.
                  And they and all that nowe be them amonge,
                  Shall fynally conſumpt be with death.
                  Thorowe grekes ſworde yelden vp the breth.
                  ¶But the cauſe without any drede,
                  Why I ſaye thus is that ye take hede,
                  For any pryde or preſumpcion,
                  To aduerte in your diſcrecion,
                  So prudently that reaſon in this nede,
                  For any haſte may our brydell lede.
                  And ſo ordeyne or we henſe wende,
                  That laude and prayſe after in the ende,
                  May be reported as I haue deuyſed.
                  For many man that hath not be aduiſed,
                  In his purſuite for lacke of prouidence,
                  To ſe tofore in his aduertence,
                  What ſhuld be fall to deth it hath thē brought.
                  Suche wylfull haſt were good to be thought,
                  Of vs by fore examynacion,
                  And well diſcuſſed by reuolucion.
                  ¶Of thynkyng ofte that we not repente,
                  And fyrſt remembre how that Pryam ſent,
                  To vs but late only for Exyon.
                  That yet is holde of kynge Thelamon.
                  Whiche was of vs without aduiſement,
                  Vndiſcretely denyed by aſſent.
                  Whiche hath to vs be none aduauntage.
                  But grounde and rote of full great damage.
                  For if that we through wyſe purueyaunce,
                  Of her had made tho delyueraunce,
                  The harmes great had be then eſchewed,
                  That after were of Parys ſo purſewed.
                  In the temple of faire Cythera,
                  That buylded is beſyde Cirrea,
                  The treaſour great alſo that he had,
                  And Iewelles thenſe that he with him ladde.
                  Than to Troye and the great rycheſſe,
                  The ſlaughte of men and the heauineſſe,
                  That yet is made for the quene Heleyne.
                  Throughout Grece and the great payne,
                  Of Menelaye all had ben nowe vnwrought,
                  If ſo we had foreſene this in our thought.
                  Wyſely tofore and reſtored Exyon,
                  Than had not the harmes ne of them one,
                  Enſewed on vs in very ſothfaſtneſſe.
                  Nor ſpent our labour ſo in ydelneſſe.
                  Treaſour nor good waſted ſo in vayne,
                  Nor come ſo ferre for to fetche agayne,
                  The quene Heleyne with coſtes inportable.
                  Withouten harmes now in eſchewable.
               
               
                  ANd for all this yet ne wote we,
                  Whether to ioye or to aduerſytye,
                  The thynge ſhall tourne that we be about.
                  Syth ofte ſyth dependent and in doubte,
                  Is fatall thyng vnſyker and vnſtable.
                  And fro the gynnynge often varyable.
                  The ende is ſene fortune can tranſmewe,
                  Her gery courſe and therfore to eſchewe,
                  The harmes poſſyble lykely for to fall,
                  My counſayle is here amonge you al,
                  Vpon arryuaile trauayle to eſchewe,
                  In this matter are we further ſewe,
                  To Pryamus without any more,
                  To ſende fyrſte agayne for to reſtore,
                  The quene Heleyne as ryght and reaſon is.
                  And other harmes done eke by Parys.
                  After his treſpaſſe and offencion.
                  Iuſtely to maken reſtytucion.
                  Than may we all in worſhyp and honour,
                  
                     Retourne home without more labour.
                  If they aſſente to do as we requere.
                  And our axynge if they lyſte not here,
                  But folyly of their wylfulneſſe,
                  Refuſen it than this our worthyneſſe,
                  Is double aſſured on a ſyker grounde.
                  By iuſte tytle Troyans to confounde.
                  With thynges two we ſhalbe vnder pyght,
                  Fyrſt our power borne vp with our ryght,
                  Shall for vs fyght our quarell to dareyne.
                  In balaunce euen to weye atwixe vs twayne,
                  To fyne that we ſhalbe more excuſed,
                  For they tofore haue wylfully refuſed,
                  Our iuſte profers made to them afore.
                  And we ſhalbe through the worlde therfore,
                  Without ſpot of treſpaſſe or of blame.
                  Of myſreporte in hyndrynge of our name.
                  Where they of foly ſhall ynoted be,
                  Of wylfull wodneſſe playnly where that we,
                  Shall ſtande free our power for to vſe.
                  And euery man ſhall vs well excuſe.
                  Though that we do execucyon,
                  By takynge vengeaunce for their offencyon.
                  Of men and chylde of eche ſecte and age.
                  That ſhall of death holden their the paſſage.
                  And by the ſworde without mercy pace,
                  One and other there is no better grace.
               
               
                  BVt yet tofore I counſayle taketh hede,
                  That ye to them with all meaſure bede,
                  This holde I beſte and moſte ſyckerneſſe.
                  And worke now by good auiſeneſſe.
                  Amonge your ſelfe and no longer tarye,
                  To whiche counſayle ſome weren contrary.
                  And varyaunt to his opinyon.
                  Saue they that were of moſt diſcrecion,
                  Aſſented be playnly to this ende.
                  And choſen haue to Pryam for to ſende,
                  Amonges them the ambaſſyat to ſpede,
                  Vlyxes wiſe and worthy Dyomede.
                  The whiche anone gan them ready make,
                  And ſhope them forth and their waye take,
                  Towarde Troye as any lyne ryght.
                  When the ſonne ſhone full ſhene and bryghte.
                  Holdyng the courſe of his fyry ſphere,
                  In mydday arke wonder bryght and clere.
                  And gylte eche hyll vale playne & roche,
                  With his beames, when they dyd approche,
                  To the walles and gates of the towne,
                  And in they go without noyſe or ſowne▪
                  
                  Full well be ſene and in their porte them had,
                  Ryght manfully and the waye them ladde,
                  To the paleyes ſtreyght as any lyne.
                  Them nedeth not aſyde to declyne.
                  But into a courte large wyde and ſquare,
                  And thei ful knightly for no wight wold ſpace
                  Vnto the effecte manly to procede.
                  To do their charge without feare and drede.
                  For their commyng was not tho refuſed,
                  And in tho dayes peraunter was not vſed,
                  To haue no conduite for embaſſadrye.
                  The cuſtome was to no man to denye,
                  As I ſuppoſe entre nor paſſage,
                  If it ſo were he come as for meſſage.
                  And in this courte builded ſo royally,
                  When they come fyrſt they meruayled greatly
                  The royall ſyght of ſo huge a ſtrength,
                  So well complete both in brede and length.
                  For they ne had in their lyfe tofore,
                  Sene none ſo fayre & yet they wonder more,
                  Into the paleyes as they together gone,
                  That paued was all of Iaſper ſtone,
                  Of a tree that amyddes ſtode.
                  On which to loke they thought it did thē good
                  Muſyng where it were Artifyciall,
                  Erecte or ſette by magyke naturall,
                  Or by engyne of workemen curyous.
                  Through ſubtyll craftes ſuperſticious.
                  Or other worke of Nycromancye,
                  Or profounde caſtynge of Phyloſophye,
                  By apparaunce or ylluſyon.
                  Outher by crafte of incantacion.
                  Vp and downe they caſten in their mynde,
                  Out by reaſon if they myghten fynde,
                  Rote and grounde of this wonder worke.
                  But the trouthe was to them ſo derke,
                  That in their wytte though they longe trace,
                  The pryuitee they can not compare,
                  To conceyue how it was poſſyble,
                  For to the eye as it was vyſyble,
                  In very ſoth without any fable,
                  To mannes hande ſo it was palpable.
                  Of whiche the ſtocke of Guydo as is tolde,
                  In ſothfaſtneſſe was of pured golde.
                  Whiche ſhone as bryght as the ſomer ſonne.
                  To enlumyne thinges that weren donne.
                  And the body as a maſte was ryght,
                  Proporcyoned moſt goodly to the ſyght,
                  
                     Subſtanciall and of huge ſtrengthe,
                  And twelue cubytes the body was of length,
                  And the croppe rounde and large of brede,
                  And in compaſſe gan flouriſhe ſo and ſprede,
                  That all the playne aboute enuyrowne,
                  With the bowes was ſhadowed vp & downe.
                  The ryche braunches and the leues fayre,
                  Twayne and twayne ioyned as a payre,
                  One of golde another ſyluer ſhene,
                  And meynt among wt ſtones whyte & grene,
                  Some rede and ſome ſapher hewed,
                  And euery daye the blomes were renewed,
                  And the bloſſomes with many ſundry ſuyte,
                  For ſtones Inde it bare in ſtede of fruyte.
                  As ſayth Guido I can no other tell.
                  And the Grekes will no longer dwell,
                  But holde theyr waye by many ſondry wente,
                  For to parfourme the fyne of their entent.
                  Tyll they atteyne the chamber pryncypall,
                  Where Pryamus in his ſee royall,
                  Lyke his eſtate in full kyngly wyſe,
                  Sat and aboute ful prudent and ful wyſe,
                  His lordes all in ſettes hym beſyde.
                  Whan the grekes ſurquedous of pryde,
                  With ſterne cheare & frowarde coūtenaunce.
                  As they that had lytell remembraunce,
                  Of gentylneſſe nor of curteſye,
                  For as Guydo doth playnly ſpecifye,
                  Enteryng in they taken haue theyr place,
                  In thoppoſyte of the kynges face.
                  And ſet theym downe without more ſermon,
                  Any obeyſaunce or ſalutacyon,
                  Worſhyp honour or any reuerence,
                  Done to the kyng for all his excellence,
                  In preiudyce of all gentylneſſe.
                  And than anone Vlixes gan expreſſe,
                  Cauſe of theyr comyng to kyng Pryamus.
                  Without abode ſaying euen thus.
                  Not forberyng preſence of the kynge.
               
               
                  MEruayle not nor haue no wondrynge,
                  Though we to the do no honour dewe,
                  In our comynge the for to ſalewe.
                  Syth it ne longeth in ſothe as thinketh me,
                  Where rancoure is and hertye enmyte.
                  Or deadly hate with ſalutacions,
                  Or with fayned falſe affections,
                  For to ſhewe where hertes ben a fyre.
                  For naturally no man ſhall deſyre,
                  Of his enmye the helthe nor welfare.
                  And platly now me lyſt not for to ſpare,
                  Shortly to ſhewe the fyne of our entent,
                  Lyke as we hauen in commaundement,
                  In our meſſage from Agamenowne.
                  The noble kyng moſt worthy of renowne.
                  Whych vs hath ſent there is no more to ſeyne,
                  Now vnto the for the quene Heleyne.
                  That was rauyſhed out of grekes lande.
                  And brought to Troy by force of mighty hād.
                  Agaynſt ryght and by vyolence,
                  Wherfore ſhortly without more offence,
                  We iuſtly axe without more demaunde,
                  That thou anone rightfully commaunde,
                  To Menelay that ſhe be ſent agayne.
                  And with all this we axe not in vayne,
                  That thou do make reſtytucion,
                  Of wronges done in that regyon.
                  Of pylfres great ſlaught & robberye,
                  By Paris done of wylfull tiranye.
                  Whych is thy ſon and by the ſuſteyned,
                  And in his errour wronfully maynteyned.
                  Wherfore come of and fully condeſcende,
                  Without grutching this wronges to amende.
                  For ſo thou mayſt beſt the goddes queme,
                  Lyke as thou mayſt in thy reaſon deme.
                  As right requireth & worke as the wyſe.
                  For if ſo be that thou now deſpyſe,
                  To execute that I haue the tolde here,
                  Truſte me right well a leſſon thou ſhalt lere,
                  Whych thou and thine ſhall hereafter rewe,
                  Without feyning thou ſhalt it fynde trewe.
                  That but if thou a better ende make,
                  Cruell vengeaunce ſhall on the be take.
                  And fynally what ſhuld I to the fayne,
                  The force of death this quarell ſhall darayne.
                  Vpon the and vpon all thy bloud,
                  Raunſomles other of golde or good.
                  And queſtionles reporte this of me,
                  That merciles this riche ſtronge Cyte,
                  Shall downe be bete & ylayde ful lowe,
                  Walle and Toures alſo ouerthrowe.
                  This all and ſome beth now well aduyſed.
                  That our axyng of the be not deſpyſed.
                  But wyſely worke and do as I haue ſayde.
               
               
                  ANd ſodaynly king Priamus abrayde,
                  Of haſty yre he ne might abyde.
                  Of the grekes whan he ſawe the pryde,
                  
                     The great outrage and preſumpcyon,
                  Without abode or delyberacyon,
                  To Vlyxes anone he gan out breake,
                  And vnto him euen thus to ſpeake.
                  ¶I wonder greatly in myn aduertence,
                  Beyng aſtoned how in my preſence,
                  So vngoodly ye dare make this demaunde.
                  Lyke as ye had power to commaundt.
                  And me conſtrayne your byddyng to obey,
                  And I for feare durſt you not with ſaye,
                  No maner thinge that ye axen here.
                  Nor contrayre what that ye requyre.
                  Wherof ſothly in herte I am amened,
                  And of your threttes inwardly agreued.
                  And aſtoned ſurely not a lyfe,
                  That ye ſo hardy are this to excyte,
                  And vylaynouſly myn honour to prouoke.
                  On your wordes for to be a worke.
                  But for all this truſteth me right wele,
                  I wyll not paſſe my boundes neuer a dele,
                  Nor the rather ſhortly at an ende,
                  To your axyng in ought to condeſcende.
                  ¶For to conſydre the fyne of your entente,
                  It were not ſyttyng nor conuenyent,
                  A kynge to graunte your axing though yt he,
                  Stode in myſchefe and captiuite,
                  Without recure to vttraunce ybrought.
                  It were outrage playnly to be thought.
                  To axe of hym that ye axe of me,
                  And ſothly yet I not beleue that ye,
                  Accomplyſhyng may ſo much auayle,
                  As ye haue ſayd for platly ye ſhall fayle,
                  Of your purpoſe I ſaye and god toforne.
                  Mauger your might though ye had it ſworn.
                  For your requeſt in euery mans ſyght,
                  Wanteth a grounde both of trouthe & righte.
                  To axe of me ſatyſfactyon,
                  And were your ſelfe fyrſt occaſyon,
                  Whan ye ſlewe my father Lamedowne,
                  And his lyeges and brent eke the towne,
                  And many harmes if they were out ſoughte,
                  On him and his cauſeles tho ye wrought.
                  That it were longe all for to reherſe.
                  Whych daye by daye through my herte perce.
                  My ſyſter eke called Exiona,
                  Out of this regyon ye haue ladde away,
                  The whych is not vnto her worthineſſe,
                  Ytreated lyke nor after gentilneſſe.
                  ¶And for all this ye would amendes haue.
                  Wrongly of me that whylom for to ſaue,
                  All thynges in peace and to ſtynt werre,
                  To you haue ſente into Grece ferre,
                  Onely to haue Exyona agayne.
                  Of whych ſonde ye hadden but diſdayne.
                  And cruelly in vngoodly wiſe,
                  My meſſenger ye gan as tho deſpyſe.
                  That he vnueth ne might eſcape awaye,
                  From out of grece ye knowe it is no naye.
                  Of you he had ſo vngoodly cheare,
                  And in good fayth me lyſt not nowe to heare,
                  Your requeſt nor gyuen audience,
                  To your axyng for your great offence.
                  For leuer I had ſhortly to deyen here,
                  Than condeſcende to ought that ye requere.
                  For I wyl fully for concluſyon,
                  That it be knowen to Agamenon,
                  That we haue leuer this is doubtles,
                  Fynally his werre that his peace.
                  Syth ye to me haue done ſo great treſpace.
                  And by my trouthe in this ſelfe place,
                  Cruelly anone ye ſhulden dye,
                  But for the offyce of embaſſadrye,
                  Agaynſt death is fully your diffence.
                  That be ſo bolde withouten reuerence,
                  In my preſence ſo to thret or ſpeake.
                  Truſte me right wel it ſhuld anone be wreke.
                  Wherfore in haſte without wordes mo,
                  My counſayle is that ye be ago.
                  Out of my ſight and voyde this my Cyte,
                  For thus it ſtandeth that whiles I you ſe,
                  In my herte may entre no gladneſſe.
                  The fret of yre ſo holdeth me in diſtreſſe.
                  That in good fayth I may it not ſuſtene,
                  So Inportune is the rage and tene,
                  That inwardly bindeth me for the whyle.
               
               
                  ANd Diomedes tho began to ſmyle,
                  And ſayd anone thus vnto the kinge.
                  If it be ſo that thou of our cominge,
                  In thine herte haſt ſo mykle payne,
                  Vs to beholde now that be but twayne,
                  And art therwith ſo inly ſet a fyre,
                  Than ſhalt thou neuer be withouten yre,
                  In all thy life nor deuoyde of wo.
                  Syth thou haſt ſo many cruell fo,
                  Of grekes now entred in thy lande.
                  An hundred thouſand almoſt at thyn hande.
                  Agayne whoſe might yu mayſt ye not aſſure,
                  
                     To reſyſt playnly nor endure,
                  Conſyder well how that they be ſtronge,
                  As thou ſhalt wyt peraunter or be longe.
                  So manly men and ſo well arayed,
                  Expert in armes and of olde aſſayed.
                  That no diffence may agayne theim vayle,
                  And wyte eke well that thou mayſt not fayle,
                  By death of ſworde of theyr hande to deye,
                  And all thyne there is no more to ſeye.
                  Though it ſo be proudly that thou ſpeake,
                  And with thy tunge onely to be wreake,
                  Afermeſt more than thou mayſt acheue,
                  Better it were ſuch boſtyng wordes leue,
                  And to wyſe counſayle taketh better hede.
               
               
                  BVt than in haſte agayne this Diomede,
                  Surquidous and inly full of pryde,
                  There roſe vp ſome by the kynges ſyde,
                  With ſwordes & drawe on him wold haue fal,
                  And al to hewen him there among theim all,
                  Of haſty yre brenning as the glede,
                  Tyll Pryamus gan to taken hede.
                  And roſe him vp ſeyng this diſeaſe,
                  And manfully this rage gan appeaſe.
                  Theim diffending vpon death and lyfe,
                  That none of theim be hardy in this ſtryfe,
                  The embaſſadoures to harme or to greue,
                  For though a fole his foly will not leue,
                  To preſume to ſpeake vnconningly,
                  A wyſe man muſt ſuffer pacyently.
                  And though that he happe to do offence,
                  Through foliſhe ſpeche for lacke of ſapyence,
                  A wyſe man ne ought ſothe to ſayne,
                  To taken hede or to ſpeake agayne.
                  For to a fole as it is pertynent,
                  To ſhewe his foly, right ſo conuenient,
                  Is to the wyſe ſothly with ſuffraunce,
                  In all his porte to haue tolleraunce.
                  For vnto foles belongeth kindely,
                  Without aduyſe to ſpeake folyly.
                  Vndiſcretly his mening to fulfyll.
                  Where as a wyſe man heare can and be ſtyll,
                  Tyll he ſe tyme and haue pacience,
                  And diſſimule in his aduertence,
                  The rage of foles that laſt but a throwe.
                  For by his tunge a fole is oft knowe.
                  And leuer I had I do you wel aſſure,
                  In my perſone domage to endure,
                  Then to ſuffer any meſſengere,
                  In my court of you that be here,
                  To haue a wronge other great or lite.
                  The ſwerde of rancoure may not alway bite.
                  To do vengeaunce for a thyng of nought,
                  For oft it falleth that a wronge is wrought,
                  For lytel exceſſe foloweth great reprefe.
                  And haſte is aye medled wyth myſchefe.
                  Wherfore I byd that ye ſytte adowne,
                  And in no wiſe of preſumpciowne,
                  Attempteth not in no maner wyſe,
                  By ſygne or worde more for to deſpyſe,
                  Thembaſſadoures from the Grekes ſente.
                  But let theim frely declare theyr entente,
                  And ye there whyles kepe your lippes cloſe,
               
               
                  ANd ſodaynly then Eneas roſe,
                  Whych next the kinge helde then his ſee,
                  So inwardly with rancour fret was he,
                  That he ne myght him ſelfe not refrayne,
                  And ſayd ſyr ſo ye not diſdayne,
                  That I ſhall ſaye me ſemeth that it is,
                  Wel according when one hath ſayd amys,
                  And rekly ſpoken vnaduiſed,
                  Of his foly that he be chaſtyſed.
                  That other maye example by him take.
                  To be wel ware ſuch noyſe and crye to make.
                  And ſpecially in open audience.
                  So to offende your royall excellence.
                  And ſothly yet I wote well that I might,
                  So me gouerne playnly in your ſyght,
                  Of haſtineſſe without auiſement,
                  That I ſhulde by your commaundement,
                  The death deſerue for my great offence.
                  And trewly yet ne were for your preſence,
                  Of this twayne that haue ſo yſpoke,
                  Without abode I ſhuld anone be wroke.
                  For it were worthy and ryght well ſittyng,
                  Whan that a fole in preſence of a kinge,
                  Is bolde or hardy of preſumpcion,
                  To take on him of indiſcreſcion,
                  Thinge to reherſe concluding in ſentence,
                  Preiudyce of his magnificence,
                  That he were taught better to gouerne,
                  His large tunge to konne bet and diſerne,
                  Whan he ſhal ſpeake or whan be in peaſe,
                  To ſuffer him to renne out of leſe.
                  As doth he this that ſpoke hath ſo large.
                  Wherfore in haſte I counſayle him & charge,
                  Without abode or any worde mo,
                  
                     Out of your ſyghte anone he be ago.
                  For it is beſt to do as I him rede.
               
               
                  TO whom anone ful proudly Diomede,
                  Not aſtoned but with a ſterne loke,
                  To Eneas that for yre quoke,
                  Anſwered agayne but with wordes fewe,
                  And ſayd ſyr thy wordes doth well ſhewe,
                  What ſo thou be that thou art ryght wiſe.
                  Well is that king that doth by thyne aduyſe.
                  Or hath the nye of counſayle for to be,
                  For he ne maye erre in no degre.
                  That art ſo rightful in thy iudgement.
                  Of wylfullneſſe without aduyſement,
                  To cauſe a lorde his bondes for to pace.
                  So would god in ſome other place,
                  That I myght by fauoure of fortune,
                  Mete with the at leyſure oportune.
                  Lyke my deſyre that canſt ſo well endite.
                  In olde fables thy labour for to quyte.
                  And the to thanke for thy gentyll chere,
                  Which ſo knightly thou haſt vs ſhewed here,
                  Truſte well therto and haue therof no drede.
               
               
                  ANd tho Vlixes of this Diomede,
                  Gan interrupte his wordes prudently,
                  And to him ſayde full aduyſely,
                  That it was beſt to ſtynt and be ſtill.
                  And now we know fully all thy will,
                  Quod Vlyxes full manly to the kynge,
                  We will go henſe without more taryinge.
                  Out of thy ſight to Agamenon,
                  And make to him playne relacion,
                  Of thy aunſwere in ordre by and by.
                  And to horſe they wenten ſodaynly,
                  And in ſhorte time ſo haſt them in their way,
                  That they be come there is no more to ſaye,
                  Where the kinge ſatte in his tentorye,
                  And worde by worde as came to memorye,
                  They reherſe the ſubſtaunce euery dele,
                  Wherof the grekes like nothing wele.
                  Conceyuing full there was no remedye,
                  As by reporte of the embaſſadrye,
                  Saue onely this vtterly procede,
                  How they theim ſhall gouerne in this nede,
                  Agayne Troians of neceſſitee.
                  For they well wote it may none other be.
                  And aſſented both in wyl and dede.
                  To puruey theim faſt they theim ſpede.
                  In this ſtorye as ye ſhall after fynde.
               
               
                  BVt fyrſt or I therof maken mynde,
                  I muſt a whyle of Eneas endyte,
                  As myne Auctour lyſt of hym to wryte.
                  The whych ſothly as bokes ſaye he was,
                  This manly Troian this worthy Eneas,
                  Anchiſes ſone of great worthineſſe,
                  Whylom gete of Venus the goddeſſe.
                  Conqueroure of many regyon.
                  Whan Troye was brought to deſtruction,
                  He wente his waye by the large ſee,
                  Called Tyrene and ſaylyng forth goth he,
                  By many coſte and many ſtreyght paſſage,
                  Many daunger tyll into Cartage,
                  He ryued is and thenſe gan to ſayle,
                  To the conqueſt of the great Ytale.
                  And ſo to Rome he hath the waye take,
                  Of whoſe ſpring as auctours mencion make,
                  Came Auguſtus Ceſar the Emperour.
                  That was whilom ſo noble a conquerour.
                  That his renowne to this daye doth ſhine,
                  And of Enee the Emperour Iuſtyne,
                  In his bokes called Autentykes,
                  Full playnly wryt therin the rubrykes,
                  That after Ceſar ſo as Ceſares,
                  Be named yet ryght ſo Eneades,
                  After Enee they name ſhoulden beare.
                  Whych fro Troye comen was ſo fere.
                  Vnto ytayle and of this Eneas,
                  As I haue tolde Ceſar deſcended was.
                  Downe lyne ryght ful manly and royall.
                  That fyrſt in Rome by ſceptre imperyall,
                  Maugre theyr myght had the gouernaunce,
                  And of wyſedome ſet the ordynaunce,
                  Of common thynges touchyng the Cytee.
                  And to procede further of Enee,
                  Hooly his lyfe and knyghthod by and by,
                  If that ye lyſt to reade ceryouſly,
                  Ye may ſe all ful autentyke of ſtyle,
                  In Eneydos compyled of Vergyle.
                  Albeit ſo that this noble clerke.
                  Was graue afore or cōplete was his werke.
                  As bokes olde maken mencion.
               
            
            
               ¶How Agamenon ſent Achilles and Thelephus into the Ilande of Meſſa for vytayles, and how they ſlewe the king and after ordeyned Thelephus the kynge there. Ca. xx.
               
                  
                  BVt nowe agayne to Agamenon,
                  Without more I wyll my ſtyle retourne,
                  The whych kyng will no more ſoiourne,
                  In this matter delayes for to make,
                  But in all haſte he hath his counſayle take.
                  Of his lordes beyng there preſent.
                  And ſuch as were not he hath after ſent,
                  For one and al, Earles, Dukes, and kinges.
                  ¶And ſayd ſyres amonge other thynges,
                  To our Iourney that be neceſſarye,
                  My counſayle is no longer that we tarye,
                  But fyrſt of all to make ordynaunce,
                  By one aſſent with prudent purueaunce,
                  That alder fyrſt we ſhape vs for vytayle.
                  Without whych none hooſt may auayle.
                  To parfourme a iourney thryftely.
                  Wherfore I reade here but faſt by,
                  If it to you be lykyng and pleſaunce,
                  Into an yle ful of habundaunce,
                  Called Meſſa that we ſende anone.
                  And at one worde aſſented euery chone,
                  They choſen haue worthy Achilles,
                  And Thelephus the ſone of Hercules,
                  To execute this purpoſe fynally,
                  With many worthy in theyr company.
                  Ychoſen out through the hooſt anone,
                  With Achilles are to Meſſa gone.
                  In whych lande ryche and plenteous,
                  Reygned a kynge worthy and famous,
                  That Tentran hyght whych in tranquylyte,
                  Without werre or aduerſyte,
                  Had holde his Sceptre and his royall ſete,
                  In this yle ſo pleaſaunte and ſo mete.
                  Albe that ſome ſaye that this lytell yle,
                  To the kyngedome longeth of Cecyle.
                  And hath his name gyuen of plente,
                  After Meſſane an huge great Cite.
                  Full plenteous both on ſe and lande.
                  The whych kyngdome as I vnderſtande,
                  Is ſayde Meſſena of Meſſes in latin,
                  Through habundaūce of fruyt corne & wyne.
                  At the aryuayle on the playnes large,
                  Where they are wont for to ſtuffe & charge,
                  Merchaunt ſhyppes of ſtraunge fer countre.
                  That thyther ſayle by the large ſea.
                  To fetche vitayle aye from yeare to yeare.
                  Fro many coſte of landes farre and nere,
                  Onely by eſchaunge of merchaundiſe,
                  And eke alſo as bokes can deuyſe.
                  And as Guido full playnly telleth vs,
                  That of a kyng called Meſſanus,
                  This countrey firſt of Meſſa toke the name,
                  That in his tyme was of great fame,
                  Paſſyng ryche and wonder plenteous.
                  But of all this Dares Frygyus,
                  In his boke maketh no mencion.
                  But ſhortly telleth in concluſyon,
                  How Achilles and Thelephus alſo.
                  To Meſſena be togither go.
                  With thre thouſande of grekes choſen out.
                  Moſt manly men amonges all theyr route.
                  The whych as faſt as they gan to londe,
                  And the kynge gan to vnderſtonde,
                  Of theyr comyng he is deſcended downe.
                  With all the worthy of his regiowne,
                  On horſe and foote in ſtele armed bryght,
                  Agaynſt Grekes manfully to fyght,
                  Theim to deuoyde playnly yf they can,
                  And ſodaynly thus the ſkermyſhe gan,
                  Atwixe Grekes and other mortall fone.
                  On other parte there was many one,
                  Slayne and hurte & to the death ywounded,
                  Neuer lykly therof to be ſounded.
                  ¶For other treate was theim not atwene,
                  But ſwerdꝭ ſharpe and ſperes ſquare & kene.
                  Now here now there that they go to ground,
                  For euery man his foo for to confounde,
                  His labour dyd and his buſyneſſe.
                  And though grekꝭ through theyr worthineſſe
                  Had on theyr foen much londe ywon,
                  Yet to retyre after they begon,
                  And meruayle none bycauſe that theyr fone,
                  Had alwaye thre in noumber agaynſt one.
                  For the time it may none other be,
                  Till Achilles gan beholde and ſe,
                  The mortall ſlaughter vpon grekes ſyde.
                  Tourning ye backe wt woundes large & wide.
                  Of haſty rancour chaungen gan his bloode,
                  And for yre furious and woode,
                  Whan he behelde his men leſe theyr lande,
                  He wt the ſwerd whiche he helde in his hande,
                  Made waye kylled and bare downe,
                  And in the felde like a fierſe Lyowne,
                  He fared in ſothe when yt his men were ſlawe.
                  Makyng his foen backwarde to withdrawe.
                  And his grekes ſo manly recomforte,
                  That maugre theim he made them to reſorte.
                  ¶And who that euer in his waye ſtode,
                  
                     Without mercy he kylleth in his mode.
                  There gayneth nought in his crueltee,
                  For doubtles ne had his manhod be,
                  His paſſyng renowne and his worthyneſſe,
                  His knighthod eke and his high proweſſe,
                  The Grekes had that daye fynallye,
                  Vanquiſhed be without remedye.
                  But through his helpe they recure all,
                  For Achilles ſturdy as a wall,
                  Gan ſerche ſheltrouns & theyr rāges brake,
                  Tofore whoſe face his fomen go to wrake.
                  ¶And alderlaſt whan he gan eſpye,
                  Tentran the kyng through his chyualrye,
                  Defende him ſelfe lyke a worthy knyght,
                  And as a Lyon bare him in his fyght,
                  Now here now there grekes ſo oppreſſe.
                  This Achilles of cruell hardyneſſe,
                  Ne would ceaſe in his purſewynge,
                  Through the warde tyll he came to the king.
                  Of manly force ſtoute and full of pryde,
                  Makyng a waye rounde on euery ſyde,
                  Agayne whoſe might nothyng might auayle.
                  ¶And of Tentran fyrſt the auentayle,
                  He raced hath and rent the male aſonder,
                  And al to hewe that it was a wonder,
                  To conſydre that daye his cruelte.
                  And after that al to broke hath he,
                  His baſſenet wyth many cruell wounde.
                  And by his myght ſmyt the kyng to grounde.
                  And in all haſte he maked hath no let,
                  From of his head to rende his baſſenet.
                  And merciles for to do vengeaunce,
                  His harme he gan on heyght to auaunce,
                  Fully in purpoſe that he ſhulde be dead,
                  And raunſomles gan amyn at his heade,
                  With blody ſwerde and deſpytous herte,
                  Caſtyng playnly he ſhulde not aſterte,
                  In his Ire he was ſo furyous.
                  ¶But of fortune it befell ryght thus.
                  Thelephus the yonge luſty knyght,
                  Caſuelly therof had a ſyght,
                  And of Achilles the maner ful behelde,
                  The ſtroke anone he bare vp with his ſhelde.
                  And gan Achilles mekely for to preye,
                  To haue pytye ſo to do him deye.
                  Syth he laye wounded almoſt to the deathe.
                  Brought to the poynt to yelden vp ye breathe.
                  Beſeching him for his beningnyte,
                  Of manly routhe and eke knightly pyte,
                  Withdrawe his hande and to do him grace,
                  And graunt him life for a lytell ſpace.
                  Syth euery knyght ſhould of gentilneſſe,
                  His enmye ſpare whan he is in diſtreſſe.
                  To vttraunce brought and ſpecyally whē he,
                  Mercy requireth of humble voluntee.
                  ¶To whom Achylles feruent in his yre,
                  As he that was of rancoure ſet a fyre,
                  Aunſwered agayne what lyſt the ſo to preye,
                  For him that nolde of pryde our wyll obeye.
                  But gyn a werre where as was no nede.
                  Of highe diſdayne and indignacion,
                  Hauyng a truſte of preſumpcion,
                  In his manhod which myght him not auaile.
                  Agaynſt grekes to holden a battayle.
                  As it is preuyd playnly in the ende,
                  All otherwyſe ſhortly than he wende.
                  For in the dyche iuſtely he is falle,
                  Which he hath made of malys for vs all.
                  ¶Where we of wyll nor entencion,
                  Gaue vnto hym none occaſyon,
                  Vpon no ſyde platly fer nor nere,
                  Nor miniſtred to hym no ſuch matere,
                  Nor to his lande menten no damage.
                  But he hym ſelfe grounde of all this rage,
                  Without offence done to hym of vs.
                  ¶And efte agayne this yonge Thelephus,
                  Humbly required hath of hym Achylle,
                  Of knyghtly routhe his axyng to fulfyll.
                  And to haue mercy on hym in this caſe.
                  For with my father this kynge whylom was.
                  Quod Thelephus by bonde confederate.
                  Whiche lyeth nowe here all diſconſolate.
                  Expectant only with a deadly face,
                  Vpon the houre whan his goſte ſhall pace,
                  Through gyrte alas wt many mortal woūde.
                  ¶And for bycauſe that I haue in him found,
                  Afore this tyme aſſured great kyndeneſſe,
                  For of manhode and of gentylneſſe,
                  In the boundes of his regiowne,
                  He vnto me through his highe renowne,
                  Whylom as I caſually gan ryde,
                  Shewed in ſoth vpon euery ſyde,
                  Full royal chere and great humanite.
                  That I am bounde as of very duytee,
                  To remembre and to haue in mynde.
                  And doubtles elles me ſemeth I were vnkind
                  Which after wolde my name foule a twyte,
                  And for that I in parte wolde him acquite.
                  
                     I you beſeche of reſpyte of his lyfe.
                  And Achylles withouten any ſtryfe,
                  Delyuered hath the ſtory telleth thus,
                  Tentran frely vnto Thelephus.
                  Whether hym lyſte to ſauen or to ſpylle.
                  And when that he had hym at his wyll,
                  He hath conſydered by his woundes grene,
                  That were ſo mortall ſothly and ſo kene,
                  Of very nede that he muſt dye.
                  There was no gayne nor no remedye.
                  Nor auayle maye no medecyne.
                  The houre whē Phebꝰ weſtward gan decline
                  And the battayle brought was to an ende,
                  Whyle the grekes to their ſhyppes wende,
                  The meane whyle Tentran for the payne,
                  Of his woundes gan more & more complain.
                  Without ſtaunche ſo pyteouſly they blede.
                  His offycers faſte gan them ſpede,
                  In a lytter made tho full royall,
                  Toward his paleys & doūge owne pryncipall,
                  To cary hym ſofte and eaſyly.
                  ¶And at his prayer full benyngly,
                  Thelephus and alſo Achylles,
                  Conueyed hym among all the preſe,
                  Tyll he was brought there as hym lyſt to be.
                  And they receyued lyke to their degree.
                  Full royally the kyng aye languyſſhyng,
                  As he that drewe towarde his endynge,
                  And might not longer drawen forth a length,
                  His wofull lyfe ſo weke was he of ſtrengthe,
                  That his ſpirite muſt algates wende.
                  And he in haſte cauſed for to ſende,
                  For Achylles and for Thelephus,
                  And whan they came he ſayd vnto them thus.
                  ¶Syres quod he full worthy of degree,
                  Helth and honour with longe proſperitee,
                  Be vnto you and goodly aduenture,
                  All the whyle that your lyfe may dure.
                  And ſpecyally of the Oh Thelephus,
                  Whiche haſte to me be ſo gracious,
                  Of gentilneſſe in my paynes ſtronge,
                  Onely of grace my lyfe for to prolonge.
                  But death alas I may not now eſchewe.
                  Nor his ſworde on no parte remewe.
                  Without recure knytte in bytter bondes,
                  Vpon the brincke fall of fatys hondes,
                  And of my lyfe all fully in diſpeyre,
                  Whiche of my body neuer myght haue heire.
                  After my daye by ſucceſſyon.
                  As to gouerne this lyttell regyon.
                  Whiche lykely is to ſtande diſconſolate,
                  Of gouernaunce and fully deſolate.
                  Which erſt I wan with full great trauayle,
                  And to this day with werre & ſtronge bataile
                  I haue it kept as ye well knowe echone.
                  And it defended from all maner fone,
                  Withouten loſſe yeres heretoforne.
                  But recurlees of yore I had it lorne,
                  Ne had I had helpe and eke ſocour,
                  Of Hercules the great conquerour.
                  That whylom was father to Thelephus.
                  So ſtronge ſo mighty and ſo chyualrous.
                  By whoſe manhode and whoſe hardineſſe,
                  By his knyghthode and great worthyneſſe,
                  Whiche daye by day is new of memorye,
                  Of all my foen I had the vyctorye.
                  He daunted them and made them ſo a ferde,
                  Only by rygoure of his ſharpe ſwerde,
                  That fynally through his manlyhede,
                  He cauſed me this reygne to poſſede.
                  Maugre their might in peace and quyete.
                  With ſeptre and crowne and my royall ſeate.
                  That none of them tyll that he was dead,
                  Hardy was to lyfte vp the head,
                  Agaynſt me to ſpeake but wordes fewe,
                  Wherby I may fully declare and ſhewe,
                  By euydence that this little yle,
                  Is perteynent and longeth to Cecyle.
                  Where Hercules for a memoryall,
                  Sette pillers in his conqueſt royall.
                  When he had ryde and gon tho ſo ferre,
                  And of Columpna yet the name they beare,
                  After hym called Herculea.
                  Though ſome ſaye they hyght Herracula.
                  The name chaungyng by corrupcion.
                  The whiche lande was whylom manſyon,
                  To the people of wylde Barbarye.
                  The whiche kyngdome for to magnyfye,
                  Frederyke ſothly the ſecounde,
                  Of golde and good paſſyngly habounde,
                  That choſen was to be Emperour,
                  Of Rome towne and mighty gouernour,
                  And whylom eke kyng was of Cecyle,
                  Whiche made reyſe in that large yle,
                  A myghty toure hyghe and thycke of wall,
                  As ſayth Guydo for a memoryall,
                  To put his name longe in remembraunce,
                  And for the ſoyle was to his pleaſaunce,
                  
                     With floures freſhe of many ſondry hewe,
                  In ſome bokes the lande was named newe,
                  And ycalled as I vnderſtande,
                  For his fayreneſſe the luſty newe lande.
                  But Tentran aye lyinge in his payne,
                  As he that faſte gan the houre attayne,
                  Of cruell death afore his lordes all,
                  He made in haſte Thelephus to call,
                  To his preſence and with a mortall chere,
                  Sayde openly that all men myghten here.
                  My ſonne quod he ſyth nedely I muſt pace,
                  Out of this worlde for gayne may no grace,
                  My lyfe to ſaue through no mannes myghte.
                  But for bycauſe of equytye and ryght,
                  I am compelled iuſtly in ſentence,
                  To declare clerely my conſcyence,
                  Tofore my death herynge all this preſe,
                  This to ſaye thy father Hercules,
                  The wyſe worthy and that knyghtly man,
                  Whylom this lond through his conqueſt wan:
                  The whiche onely of his godlyhead,
                  As he that was the ſtocke of manlyhead,
                  Toke vnto me by cōmyſſyon,
                  The gouernaunce of this regyon:
                  Of his free wyll with hole the regally.
                  And nolde him ſelfe the countrey occupye.
                  And ſothly yet his ryght was not the laſſe.
                  For loue of whom ſyth that I ſhall paſſe,
                  With full entent of my laſte wyll,
                  To the I graunt as it is ryght and ſkylle,
                  As very heire iuſtly to ſuccede.
                  Longe in honour therin thy lyfe to lede,
                  Makyng there a proteſtacion,
                  That in full token and confyrmacion,
                  This is the wyll fynall of myne hearte.
                  Fro the whiche no man may me diuerte,
                  Vpon no ſyde nor vtterly declyne.
                  ¶For fyrſt my wyll and diſſent of lyne,
                  Be together combyne now in one.
                  Fro whiche thyng no man may do me gone,
                  For this deſyre laſte of my langour,
                  That thou playnly be my ſucceſſour.
                  And fynally thus I conclude and deme,
                  That vnto the Septer and diademe,
                  Delyuered be with euery circumſtaunce.
                  But all his wyll for more aſſuraunce,
                  He made do write it in his teſtament.
                  The fyne concludynge of his laſte entent.
                  And after that he full piteouſly,
                  Beſought Thelephus moſt hertely,
                  Of manly routhe and knyghtly gentilneſſe,
                  To do his deuer and his buſyneſſe.
                  After his death like his eſtate royall,
                  To halowe and holde his feaſt funerall,
                  Solemply and the exequies do.
                  And ſodeynly without wordes mo,
                  The kyng Tentran yeldeth vp the goſte.
                  And went his waye I note to what coſte.
                  I can not deme of ſuche myſtyhede.
                  And whan Percas broken had the threde,
                  On the rocke and he was forth his waye,
                  Then Thelephus out of marbell graye,
                  Curiouſly a tombe made do carue.
                  The dead corps therin to conſerue,
                  Full rychely and aboue the graue.
                  An Epythaphe anone he dyd do graue.
                  In his honour playnly to expreſſe,
                  His knighthode both and his worthyneſſe.
                  And howe his goſte and he were deuorced,
                  With letters ryche of golde aboue enboced.
                  Rounde aboute wonder curious.
                  On his tombe that ſayden playnly thus.
                  Here lyeth Tentran the kyng doubtles,
                  Whylom ſlayne of cruell Achylles.
                  That his ſcepter and the regallye,
                  Hooly gaue whiche no man may denye,
                  To Thelephus the ſonne of Hercules.
                  Whiche in his tombe reſteth nowe in peace.
                  Whan this perfourmed was in euery thynge,
                  And Thelephus of Meſſa crowned kyng,
                  And hyghe and lowe all by one aſſent,
                  Had ſolempnely in open parlement,
                  Made fayth to hym and ydone homage,
                  Lyke their degrees as they were of age,
                  And with hole herte in all their beſt entent,
                  By othe aſſured and by ſacrament,
                  As trewe lyeges receyued him for kyng.
                  ¶Than Achylles without more taryinge,
                  Whan all was ſette in peace and gouernaunce
                  Without grutchinge or any varyaunce,
                  To their ſhyppes anone he made carye,
                  Euery thyng that was neceſſarye,
                  To the grekes, corne, fruite, or vitayle.
                  Fleſhe or, fyſhe, or what that might auayle.
                  To hoſteynge or helpe them in their nede.
                  Downe to the ſea he all this dyd lede,
                  Fully their veſſell for to ſtuffe and lade.
                  And Thelephus after this he made,
                  
                     Stylle in boundes of his regyon,
                  For to abyde for this concluſion.
                  That through his helpe and his diligence,
                  Buſynes and diſcrete prouydence,
                  Agayne all myſchyefe and all ſcarſytee,
                  Whan they nede he myght their ſocour be.
               
               
                  ALbe that he lyke as ſayth Guydo,
                  With Achilles full fayne wolde haue go,
                  But he abode ſothly for the beſte.
                  By bonde aſſured fully and beheſte.
                  In euery thynge grekes to releue,
                  And than in haſte Achilles toke his leue.
                  Of Thelephus and gan anone to ſayle,
                  All his ſhyphes ſtuffed with vitayle,
                  Towarde grekes as made is menciowne.
                  And in ſhorte tyme he at Tenedowne,
                  Aryued is and taken hath the grounde.
                  With all his knyghtes likwiſe hole & ſounde,
                  ¶And after this to Agamenon,
                  He fyrſte hath made full relacion,
                  Of his exployt lyke as it was fall.
                  In the preſence of his lordes all.
                  Sittyng enuyron many worthy knyght.
                  ¶And fyrſte in Meſſa he telleth of the fyght,
                  Whan they entred and of their welcomyng,
                  And ceryouſly he tolde eke of the kynge,
                  That Tentran hyght and playnly alſo how,
                  Achylles amydde the fyelde hym ſlowe.
                  And or his death how he of hole entent,
                  Fully ordeyned in his teſtament,
                  Thelephus alſo to be his heire.
                  All this he tolde and eke of his repayre,
                  Vnto the ſea and eke of the vyttayle.
                  ¶And Thelephus how he wyll not fayle,
                  To ſende them all that may them pleaſe.
                  Of whiche thynge the grekes in great eaſe,
                  Were brought of herte and lyke wonder well.
                  When Achilles had tolde them euerydell,
                  And greatly preyſed his hygh prouydence.
                  His manhode both and his ſapyence.
                  In his out beynge that he bare him ſo,
                  And after this Achylles is ygo,
                  To his lodgynge a lyttle there beſyde.
                  Where his knyghtes vpon hym abyde,
                  Myrmydones full glade of his comynge.
                  And hym receyued as longeth to a kynge.
                  Where he abode and reſted hym a whyle.
                  ¶But for Guydo declyneth here his ſtyle,
                  From the grekes to them of Troye towne,
                  I muſt alſo make digreſſyowne,
                  Of myne auctour the ſteppes for to ſewe.
                  Lyke as it is conuenient and dewe,
                  To my matter ſyth he is my guyde.
                  And for a whyle grekes ſette aſyde.
                  I wyll reherſe how Dares Frygyus,
                  In Troye booke declareth vnto vs,
                  And ceriouſly maketh menciowne,
                  Of the lordes that came to Troye towne,
                  To helpen them manly in their defence,
                  Agaynſt grekes to maken reſyſtence.
                  With ordynaunce of many dyuers thynges,
                  There came to thē, Erles, Dukes, & kinges.
                  As in Dares playnly is made mynde,
                  Reade his boke and there ye may yt fynde.
                  ¶And alder fyrſt I reade how that he,
                  Specyally ſpeaketh of kynges three.
                  Full manly men and alſo of great fame.
                  All be that he reherſeth not the name,
                  Of their kyndomes yet he wryteth thus,
                  ¶The fyrſt of theim was called Pandarus.
                  And as I reade Tapor the ſeconde,
                  The thirde Andraſtrus lyke as it is founde.
                  And as Guydo lyſt to ſpecyfye,
                  Thre thouſande knyghtes in their companye,
                  And manly men they were euerychone.
                  ¶And from an yle called Coleſon,
                  Lyke as Dares liſteth to expreſſe,
                  There came alſo of excellent proweſſe,
                  ¶Kynges foure of whiche the fyrſt was,
                  As he hath wrytte ynamed Carras.
                  And the ſeconde hyghte Ymaſyus.
                  Neſtor the thirde the .iiii. Amphymacus.
                  And fyue thouſande worthy knightes all,
                  There came with them manly for to fall,
                  Vpon the grekes in helping of the towne,
                  And fro ye prouince knowen of great renowne
                  Called Lycye came the kyng Glaucon,
                  And with him brought his ſonne Sarpedon.
                  A noble knight in armes full famous,
                  And was allyed to kyng Pryamus.
                  And thre thouſande yf I ſhall not fayne,
                  There came of knightꝭ wt theſe lordes twaine.
                  ¶And from Laryſſe a ryche lande alſo,
                  As I fynde there camen kynges two,
                  And them to quite manly as they ought,
                  A thouſand knightꝭ they to Troye brought.
                  ¶And from a kyngdome named Lycaowne,
                  
                     Euphemus a kyng of great renowne,
                  Brought with hym as Dares doth wytneſſe,
                  A thouſande knyghtes of great worthyneſſe.
                  And fyue hundred Dares telleth vs,
                  Came with Hupon and with Epedus,
                  Many knyghtes in plates of ſyluer bryght,
                  And with hym eke a kyng yt Remus hyght.
                  Brought .iii. thouſande to Troye many myle,
                  From Tabaria his large mightye yle.
                  And Dukes foure with all their chiualrye,
                  And Erles .viii. came in his companye.
                  Hauynge in armes great experyence.
                  And all they bare without difference,
                  Their men & they when they were in ye fyelde,
                  The chiefe of golde eueryche in his ſhielde,
                  Wherby the kynge and holy his nauy,
                  Amonge them all knowen mighten be,
                  Albe that other bore eke the ſame.
                  Alſo frō Trace kynge Pylex by his name,
                  Fro thylke Trace that is moſte excellent,
                  Whiche in the plage of the Oryent,
                  Haueth his ſcyte frō which this mighty kyng,
                  A thouſande knightꝭ brought at his cominge.
                  As myne auctor recordeth eke alſo,
                  An hundred knightes be to Troye go,
                  With Alchamus a worthy Duke famous.
                  That came with Pilex Guydo wryteth thus.
                  Troyans to helpe in their great nede,
                  And fro Pauonye ſothly as I reade,
                  Came Pretemeſſus the noble werryour,
                  Lorde of that lande kynge and gouernour.
                  And duke Stupex with him alſo had,
                  And of knyghtes a thouſande that he ladde.
                  Towarde Troye from his region.
                  And as this ſtorye maketh mencyon,
                  That prouince ſtandeth moſt by wilderneſſe,
                  And by woodes of plenteous thickeneſſe,
                  Wherin growe full many diuers tree,
                  And moſt is foreſt that men may there ſe.
                  For they there buylde houſes but a fewe.
                  And in that lande full diuerſly them ſhewe,
                  Many lykeneſſe queynte and monſtruous,
                  Beaſtes vnkouth to ſyght merueylous.
                  Stoundmele as by apparence.
                  By illuſyon falſe in exiſtence.
                  Wonder gaſtfull playnly for to ſene,
                  For dyuers goddes of the woodes grene,
                  Apperen there called Satyrye,
                  Bycornes eke Fawny and Incubye.
                  That cauſe often men to falle in rage.
                  And of this lande the people full ſauage.
                  Hardy knyghtes furyous and woode,
                  And deſyrous aye to ſheden bloude.
                  Greatly Experte ſpecyally to ſhete,
                  With darte and ſpere peryllous for to mete.
                  For they caſte euen as any lyne.
                  ¶And from an yle that named was Boetine,
                  In great araye to Troye the Citee,
                  Lyke as I fynde there came Dukes three.
                  The fyrſt of all called Amphymus,
                  Samus the ſecounde the thirde Forcius.
                  And as ſayth Dares which liſteth not to lye,
                  Twelue hundred knightes in their company.
                  ¶And fro Brotyne as made is remembrance
                  The riche lande that hath ſuch habundaunce,
                  Of ſpyces, gummes, fruites, corne, and wine,
                  Holſome rotes, ryndes, ryche and fyne,
                  Wonder vnkouth and precious alſo,
                  Out of which there comen kinges two.
                  Full knightly men in armes deſyrous,
                  Kynge Boetes and Epriſtuis,
                  And wt them brought to Troye from ferre,
                  A thouſande knightes arayed for the werre.
                  ¶And fro the lande called Pafflagonye,
                  Whiche ſeuered is from all companye,
                  As bookes ſaye that be hyſtoryall.
                  Vnder the plage that is Oryentall,
                  Sette ſo ferre as made is reherſayle,
                  That fewe or none to that lande trauayle,
                  For there to come is nere impoſſyble.
                  For whiche that lande is called inuiſyble,
                  Bycauſe onely of his remoſion,
                  And yet yt is a ryche regyon.
                  Of golde and ſyluer alſo and of ſtones,
                  And habundaunte of plentee for the nones.
                  It is ſo full of treaſour and of good.
                  And hath his ſcyte on the ryche floude,
                  Ynamed Tygre not fer from Eufrates,
                  As ſayth myne auctour that called is Dares.
                  From whiche lande in ſtele armed clene,
                  A thouſand knightes came with Phylomene.
                  The worthy kyng whoſe ſhildes out of drede,
                  Were of cuirboilye in Guydo as I read.
                  With golde depainte & fret with ſtones ryche,
                  that in this world I trow there was nōe liche,
                  Out of the floudes choſen by deuyſe,
                  Whiche haue their courſe out of Paradyſe.
                  The whiche kyng a Gyaunt of ſtature,
                  
                     And of his makynge paſſyng all meaſure.
                  Stronge and delyuer alſo as I fynde.
                  ¶And fro the lande yt marcheth vpon Inde,
                  Kyng Perſes came with many knightly man,
                  And he alſo that with his hande hym wan,
                  So moche honour the noble kyng Menon,
                  And eke his brother called Sygomon.
                  Whiche from the lande of their ſubiectiowne,
                  Of dukes, erles, and knyghtes of renowne,
                  Thre thouſande brought all in plates ſhene.
                  With ſperes rounde whet ful ſquare and kene
                  From Ethyope came this noble route.
                  ¶And from the kyngdome alſo out of doute,
                  That Thereo of Dares called is,
                  Came the kyngfull prudent and full wyſe,
                  The manly man named Theſeus,
                  And eke his ſonne that hyght Archylogus.
                  A thouſande knyghtes in their company,
                  And Theſeus full nyghe was of allye,
                  To Pryamus by diſſent of bloud.
                  And kynges twayne paſſyng ryche of good,
                  And renowmed of knighthode as by fame,
                  Albe that Guydo reherſeth not their name.
                  Yet in this ſtorye he maketh mencion,
                  That from Agreſta the lyttle regyon,
                  A thouſand knightꝭ they brought vnto Troy,
                  The grekes pryde to daunte and to acoye.
                  For they were choſen and pycked for ye nones.
                  ¶And from: he land beyond the Amazones,
                  Lyſſynya the kyng Epyſtrophus,
                  So wyſe, ſo worthy, and inly vertuous.
                  Paſſyng of counſayle and diſcreciowne,
                  And with all this full worthy of renowne.
                  He preued was alſo in ſpeciall,
                  And in the artes called lyberall,
                  He lerned was and expert a ryght.
                  Notwithſtandyng he was a worthy knyght.
                  In werre and peace manfull and ryghte ſage,
                  Albe that he was ronne ferre in age.
                  And as the ſtorye maketh reherſayle,
                  A thouſande knightꝭ cladde in plate & mayle,
                  To Troye towne I fynde that he ladde.
                  And with hym Guydo ſayth that he hadde,
                  A wonder archer of ſyght meruaylous,
                  Of fourme and ſhap in maner monſtruous,
                  For lyke myne auctour as I reherſe can,
                  Fro the nauell vpwarde he was man,
                  And lower downe lyke a horſe yſhaped,
                  And thilke parte that after man was maked,
                  Of ſkinne was blacke and rough as any bere,
                  Couered with here fro colde him for to were.
                  Paſſyng foule and horrible of ſyght,
                  Whoſe eyen twain were ſparkeling as bright,
                  As is a furneis with his reade leuene.
                  Or the lyghtnyng that falleth from yt heauen,
                  Dredefull of loke and reade as fyre of chere,
                  And as I reade he was a good archer.
                  And with his bowe both at euen & morowe,
                  Vpon grekes he wrought moche ſorowe.
                  And gaſted them with many hydous loke,
                  So ſterne he was that many of them quoke,
                  Whan they hym ſawe ſo ougly and horryble.
                  And more lothſome than it is credible.
                  That many one hath wounded to the death,
                  And cauſed them to yelden vp the breath.
                  On grekes ſyde as ye ſhall after here.
                  ¶And in this wyſe aſſembled byn yfere,
                  Kynges, Dukes, and Erles of renowne,
                  From ſundry landes within Troye towne,
                  That byn ygathred and come fro ſo ferre,
                  As ſayth Dares to helpe them in this werre.
                  That were in numbre as he maketh mynde,
                  Two and thirtye thouſande as I fynde.
                  Of worthy knyghtes and lordes of eſtate,
                  That ſyth the worlde was fourmed & create,
                  Ne was ſene I trowe in one Citee.
                  Together aſſembled of ſo hygh degree,
                  Nor of knightes ſo great a multitude.
                  And yet this Dares ſothly to conclude,
                  In his boke maketh of them no mynde.
                  That came to Troye out of ſmaler Inde.
                  Nouther of them moſte famous of renowne,
                  That were wt Priam yborne of Troy towne.
                  ¶That fynally if it be trewly ſought,
                  Syth ye houre that this world was wrought,
                  I dare affyrme vnder Phebus ſphere,
                  So many worthy were not mette yfere.
                  Of manly men flouryng in luſtyneſſe,
                  So freſhe, ſo yonge, and as by lyklyneſſe,
                  In euery poynt of ſhape and of arraye,
                  For to do well. for ſothly this is no naye,
                  Who lyſt conſyder vpon outher ſyde,
                  For through the world where men go or ryde,
                  The floure of knighthode and of worthineſſe,
                  Of chyualrye and of hyghe proweſſe,
                  Aſſembled was without and within,
                  Fully aſſented the werre ſo to begyn.
                  ¶Wherfore ye lyſters taketh now good hede,
                  
                     That you delyte in this boke to reade.
                  Fyrſt for how lyttle that this werre began,
                  How light the cauſe for which ſo many a man,
                  Hath loſte his lyfe in myſchyefe pyteouſly.
                  And yet no man can beware therby.
                  Almoſt for nought was this ſtryfe begonne.
                  And who lyſte loke they haue hereby nought wonne,
                  But only deth alas the hard ſtound.
                  So many knight caught his dethes wounde,
                  Without recure or any remedye.
                  ¶And for a woman if I ſhall not lye,
                  Gan all this ſtryfe it was the more pytie.
                  That ſo great miſchyefe or aduerſytie,
                  Of mortall ſlaughter euer ſhulde betyde.
                  Better had be to haue ſette aſyde,
                  Suche quarelles all dere ynough a myte,
                  And let thē paſſe or yt the vengeaunce byte.
                  For wyſedome were to caſte afore and ſe,
                  If ſuche ſklaunders myght eſchewed be,
                  Or the venym gynneth for to rype.
                  For though ye men with hornes blowe & pype,
                  Whan the houſe is fyred in his hete,
                  Of the ſparke to late is then to treate,
                  That cauſed all wherfore at the gynnynge,
                  The remedye is put of euery thynge.
                  As euery wyght may deme in his reaſon.
                  ¶And while that grekes lay at Tenedon,
                  Them to refreſhe and to reſte in peace,
                  The worthy kyng that hyght Pallamydes,
                  With thirtye ſhyppes out of grekes lande,
                  Stuffed wt knightꝭ ful worthy of their hande,
                  The beſte choyſe of all his regyon,
                  Aryued is vp at Tenedon.
                  Wherof the grekes whan they had a ſyght,
                  Reioyſynge them were ryght glad and lyght,
                  Hauynge regarde vnto his worthyneſſe.
                  Where they afore had made heuyneſſe,
                  For his abſence that he was ſo longe.
                  And ſome of them grutched at hym ſtronge,
                  For he ne kepte his mouſter at Athene.
                  But for to ſhewe that he was all clene,
                  Of any ſpotte in his conſcyence,
                  Full manfully in open audyence,
                  Lyke a knyght he gan him ſelfe excuſe,
                  Stoppyng all tho that theron lyſte to muſe.
                  ¶Of his abſence ſhewyng the cauſe why,
                  That for ſykeneſſe and ſodeyne malady,
                  He was cōſtrained his preſence to withdrawe
                  And for they ſawe that ſyckneſſe hath no law,
                  They helde excuſed fully his abſence.
                  ¶And for he was of moſt reuerence,
                  Amonge grekes ſo no wight the ſecounde.
                  And was alſo full wyſe and eke habounde,
                  Of golde and good auyſe and prudent,
                  That what ſo euer he ſette on his entent,
                  Knyghtly & wiſely he wolde aye well achieue.
                  And what ſoeuer he gan he nolde it leue,
                  Maugre his foen in no maner wyſe.
                  Tyll that he ſawe a fyne of his empryſe.
                  And for he was moſt of opinion,
                  Amonge grekes and reputacion.
                  They him beſought that he wolde be,
                  Of their counſayle auiſely to forſe,
                  What were to do in euery maner thyng.
                  And he aſſenteth vnto their axynge.
                  Benyngly of his great gentilneſſe.
                  And grekes than dyd theyr buſyneſſe,
                  To procede withouten more delaye,
                  Them to enhaſte in all that euer they maye,
                  To gyn a ſyege and differre it nought.
                  And ſundry waies they ſerched haue & ſought
                  In their wyttes how from Tenedowne,
                  They may remeue towardes Troye towne.
                  From the hauen where their ſhippes be.
                  And ſome thought moſte commoditee,
                  For beſt exployt by nyght pryuely,
                  Toward Troye towne that ſtode but faſt by,
                  Proudely to ſayle with their ſhyppes all.
                  And ſome ſayde great peryll might be fall,
                  Towarde night for take the ſea,
                  Leſt with derkeneſſe they ennoſed bee.
                  In their paſſage knowynge not the waye.
                  Wherof great harme after fall maye.
                  And thus diuers of opynyon,
                  Procedyng not to no concluſyon,
                  For in effecte their purpoſe not ne helde,
                  But ſtyl abyden lodged in the fyelde.
                  Lyke as they had entryked be with drede.
                  ¶Tyll on a daye the worthy Dyomede,
                  Of the grekes ſeynge the cowardyſe,
                  Euen thus he his counſayle gan deuyſe.
                  ¶Syres quod he that be here now preſent,
                  If that he lyſte all by one aſſent,
                  Goodly conſyder aduertyng prudently,
                  What I ſhall ſaye tofore you openly,
                  Whiche of knighthode haue ſo noble name,
                  ſothly me ſemeth we oughtē haue gret ſhame,
                  Whiche holde our ſelfe ſo mighty & ſo ſtronge,
                  
                     And in this lande ſoiourned haue ſo longe,
                  Nigh all this yeare and durſten in no wiſe,
                  Remoue henſe for very cowardiſe.
                  What haue we do nought elles certaynly,
                  But to our foen graunted folyly,
                  Euen at their luſt ſpace and liberte,
                  To make theim ſtronge and oportunite,
                  Vs to withſtande playnly at the hande,
                  And ſo they will ye may well vnderſtande.
                  ¶For daye by daye to our confuſiowne,
                  They ſought waies full wiſely vp & downe,
                  To get theim helpe in the meane ſpace,
                  And theim enforced aboute in euery place,
                  Their large Cite with barres & with palis.
                  Their walles maſcued and agayn our ſkalis,
                  Truſteth theron made great ordinaunce.
                  And with all this of our gouernaunce,
                  They haue eſpyed ſeyng that for drede,
                  We haue no herte manly to procede,
                  In our purpoſe to hold with them the werre.
                  And aye the more they ſe that we differre,
                  The more they will catchen hardineſſe.
                  Vs to reſyſte with al their buſineſſe.
                  Alſo I ſe and truſt it veryly,
                  That if we had afore hand manfully,
                  As we began knightly forth contynued,
                  Our Iourney had better be fortuned.
                  If ſodaynly with ſtronge and mighty hande,
                  They vnauyſed we had into their lande,
                  Without abode afore this time ariued.
                  Of which a while we muſt be depriued.
                  And delayed where fyrſt the victorye,
                  To our honour with palme of high glory,
                  We might ſothly ne had be our ſlouthe,
                  Our will complyſhed this the playne trouthe
                  Where maugre vs or we to lande ariue,
                  With ſtrōg defēce they will agayne vs ſtriue.
                  And put vs of or we the ſtronde may win.
                  For aye the more we tarye to begin,
                  The more in ſothe for me liſt not lye,
                  We put our ſelfe echone in Ieopardye,
                  What ſhould I ſayne or fage from ye trouthe.
                  For our tarying and our cowarde ſlouthe,
                  Are likely after to tourne vs to great ſorowe.
                  Wherfore betimes on the next morowe,
                  My counſayle is our ankers vp to pulle.
                  In this matter no longer that we dulle.
                  But to enarme our ſhippes for the werre,
                  And at the vpriſe of the morowe ſterre,
                  Let vs ordayne with knightly apparayle,
                  Out of thys hauen with the winde to ſayle.
                  Of manly herte and luſty freſhe courage.
                  Our courſe holdinge and our right paſſage,
                  Towarde Troye and landen openlye.
                  What euer fall for truſte ſykerlye,
                  Without ſcarmiſhe we may not ariue.
                  For they of Troye deſcende will as bliue,
                  Like manly men to mete vs in the berde.
                  But for all that let vs not be aferde,
                  But dreade avoyde and manhod ſet afore,
                  That cowardiſe ne entre at no bore.
                  For to adaunt the manhode of your herte.
                  And with that worde grekes gan aduerte,
                  The manly counſayle of this Diomede,
                  And in effect to procede in dede,
                  Vnto the poynt and for nothinge wyll ſpare,
                  And in what wiſe anone I will declare.
               
            
            
               ¶How the grekes lāded tofore Troy, where they were ſtoutly fought with all. Ca. xxi.
               
                  THe next morowe wonderly betime,
                  Or Phebus roſe longe or it was prime,
                  Whan it began full merily to dawe.
                  The grekes hooſt to ſhipward ginnen drawe,
                  With manly herte fully deuoyde of drede,
                  Onely through comforte of this Diomede.
                  But alder firſt anone as they awake,
                  The lordes wiſely gan their counſayle take,
                  And concluded amonge theim euerichone,
                  Which of their ſhippes ſhulde ye formeſt gone,
                  And on the ſea how they ſhoulde theim guye.
                  So to ariue that no man theim aſpye.
                  This was deuiſed at a certayne marke.
                  The night paſt at ſinging of the larke,
                  Grekes ben ſhipped without more tarying.
                  Both high and lowe rathe in the dawning.
                  ¶And firſt tofore an hūdred ſhippes of toure
                  Stuffed with many worthy werrioure,
                  Gan proudly ſayle as they had in charge,
                  And theyr baners brode bright and large,
                  Were diſplayed out on euery ſide,
                  As they departe the fomy wawes wyde.
                  That to ſight whelmen vp ſo grene.
                  And next to theim for werre enarmed clene,
                  ¶Another hondred folowed faſt by.
                  Which bare their ſayles paſſing proudly.
                  In which there was ful many worthy knight
                  
                     Armed in mayle and in plates bryght.
                  And after foloweth hooly their nauye,
                  That as I trowe ſuch a companie,
                  Of worthy knightes and lordes of degree,
                  Was neuer afore ſene vpon the ſee.
                  And Eolus was to them fortunate,
                  And eke Neptune made tho none debate,
                  wt winde nor trouble amōge ye ſterne wawes,
                  The attempre wether ful mery to thē dawes.
                  That in a tide as they ſayled tight,
                  Of Troye towne they caught anone a ſighte.
                  Wherof in herte full glad and light they be.
                  But whan Troians firſt their ſhippes ſe,
                  So proudely ſayle a litell from the ſtronde,
                  And ſawe how they caſt thenn for to londe,
                  They bode no more but arme theim haſtely,
                  In plate and mayle and Iackes richly,
                  With Irous herte and that was done anone,
                  And toke their horſe & forth in haſt they gone
                  Out at the gates and made no tariynge,
                  For they ne bide prince duke nor kinge.
                  Nor other lorde to guyde theim or gouerne,
                  But haſt theim forth ſo many & ſo yerne,
                  Through out the felde ſo great a multitude,
                  Amonges whom were no folkes rude,
                  But manly men thriftely be ſayne.
                  So clenly armed on the large playne.
                  That when ye grekes gan theim firſt beholde,
                  The great nomber made their hertes cold.
                  For there was none ſo manly theim amonge,
                  So yonge ſo freſhe ſo hardy nor ſo ſtronge.
                  Of high eſtate nor of low degre,
                  That he ne was aſtoned for to ſe,
                  The hardy Troiās ſo proudly down deſcend.
                  To let Grekes that they not aſſende.
                  That well they wiſt and ſeme vtterly,
                  There was none other meane tariue by,
                  But onely death or manly for to fight,
                  Or cowardly take theim to the flight.
                  For other conduyte playnly none there was.
                  But ſharpe ſworde and ſperes in this caſe.
                  Tyll ſodaynly the hardy fierſe kinge,
                  Protheſalius which in his gouerninge,
                  Formeſt of all an hundred ſhippes ladde,
                  Gan haſt him for Ire that he hadde,
                  To win the lande firſt if it would be.
                  To mete with theim ſo great deſyre had he.
                  But ſuch a winde gan in the ſayle driue,
                  Of his ſhippes whan he ſhope to ariue▪
                  
                  That he vnwarely ſ
                        〈…〉
                      vpon the londe.
                  On the getteys and the drye ſonde,
                  That his ſhippes ſhiuered all aſonder,
                  And ſome dreynt to broke here and yon
                        •
                     er.
                  And deuoured of the wawy ſee,
                  That it was routhe and pyte for to ſe.
                  For greater parte as tho gone to wrake,
                  And whiles ſome were buſy for to take.
                  The drye lande with filth and mudde ylade,
                  Troians of theim ful cruell ſlaughter made.
                  Maugre their might grekes ſo conſtrayned,
                  That wt their blud the wawes were yſtayned
                  So mortally that ſothly to beholde,
                  Amonge the ſonde pale dead and colde,
                  The grekes lye with woūdes freſhe & grene.
                  And all the eyre withe ſhote of arowes kene,
                  Yſhadowed was ye Phebus beames bright,
                  Vpon the ſoyle was derked of his light.
                  And newe alway Troians theim aſſayle,
                  That to grekes playnly this ryuayle,
                  So mortall was and ſo infortunate,
                  So vnwelfull and diſconſolate,
                  So vndiſpoſed through infelicitee,
                  That I trowe neuer erſt out of ſee,
                  Ne came none hooſt more harder to the londe.
                  But for all that grekes ne wolde wonde,
                  For lyfe nor death manly to aryue.
                  And ſo befelle of aduenture as blyue,
                  ¶Thre hundred ſhyppes ye next after ſewe,
                  Aduyſedly and in a tyme dewe,
                  Be entred and in haſte not to faſte.
                  And ſtryke ſayle and their ankers caſte.
                  For they were there ſtrongly enbatayled,
                  In their londyng leſt they were aſſayled,
                  And wiſely fyrſt they ſette their Arbalaſters,
                  And their gonners and their beſt archers.
                  With pauyſers for to go aforne,
                  Knightly to land though troiās haddē ſworn,
                  The contrary proudely them to lette,
                  Yet for all that fyerſly vp they ſette,
                  The grekiſhe ſhote made them to withdrawe.
                  And many of them on the lande laye ſlawe.
                  That maugre them the ſtrōde they recure.
                  And ſuche as myght moſte manfully endure,
                  Was ſette afore tyll they the lande haue take.
                  And all attones ſuche aſſaute they make,
                  Vpon Troyans and tho began the fyght.
                  When Protheſylaus ye noble worthy knighte,
                  Wonder lyfely and ryght paſſyng ſtronge,
                  
                     With the grekes that entred in amonge.
                  The hardy troians & euery where thē ſought
                  For he of armes meruayles on thē wrought,
                  Thilke daye through his worthineſſe,
                  That many Troyan he brought in diſtreſſe,
                  Where as he went they felt full vnſofte.
                  Through whoſe manhod grekes were alofte,
                  For thilke daye no had his knighthod be,
                  The grekes had in great aduerſite,
                  Be vanquiſhed by fatall purueyaunce,
                  And finally brought vnto vttraunce.
                  Yout abacke playnly this no lye,
                  But what auayleth all his chiualrye.
                  His worthineſſe or his fierſe courage,
                  What might it helpe or do auauntage.
                  Syth. vii. thouſande grekes had ado
                  With an hundred thouſād Troians tho.
                  It meruayle was how they might endure,
                  In any wiſe the ſtronde to recure.
                  Or ſo fewe for to holde a felde,
                  But in theim ſelfe one thinge they behelde,
                  Full prudently whych tho gaue theim herte,
                  That they ſawe they mighten not aſterte,
                  To ſcape with life if they woulden fle.
                  For at their backe was nothing but the ſee.
                  And them to fore an hooſt ſo great and huge,
                  And other waye was there no refuge,
                  But dye attones or fight manfully.
                  Wherfore they caſt and ſhope theim knightly,
                  Like manly men their liues rather ieoparte,
                  Than cowardly from their foen departe.
                  To leſe their grounde and drenchen in the ſee.
                  And thus as longe as it would be,
                  Grekes defende theim for aboue their might,
                  Albe that many killed were in this fight.
                  That the ſtreames of their red bloud,
                  Ran in the ſonde large as any flode.
                  So cruelly Troians on theim ſet.
                  With ſpere & ſwerd ful ſharpe ground & whet.
                  That routhe was and pyte for to thinke,
                  Till they almoſt droue theim to the brinke.
                  Where the grekes in miſchiefe and diſtreſſe,
                  In great anguiſhe and paſſing werineſſe,
                  Theim ſelfe defende mate and full ywery.
                  Where they ſhoulde haue peryſhed vtterly,
                  Recureles in ſothe for euermore,
                  Ne had Archelaus and worthy Prothenor,
                  From their ſhippes aryued vnto lande.
                  Of ſodayne happe with theim for to ſtande.
                  And yet they had full great aduerſyte,
                  For to ariue through the cruelte,
                  Of the Troians but yet the lande they win.
                  And grekes than cruelly begin,
                  Agayne their foen to ſtanden at defence,
                  With manly force and with great violence.
                  Tho gan encreaſe the blody werre newe,
                  That all ye ſoyle depeynted was wt the dewe.
                  That firſt was grene tourned into red,
                  On eche ſide ſo many one lay deade.
                  Vpon the grounde of his life depryued.
                  ¶But duke Neſtor all ſodaynly ariued,
                  With his knightes fell and full Irous,
                  And of herte right melancolious.
                  With his ſperes and archiers out aſide,
                  He entred in ſterne and full of pride.
                  With ſworde & are grounde ſharpe and kene.
                  They ran yfere and met vpon the grene,
                  And hoked arowes alway flewe amonge,
                  And ſhaftes ſhiuer braſt and tourne wronge.
                  And with their toles ſteled and well whet,
                  The longe daye they haue togither met.
                  And the ſlaughter newe alwaye began.
                  On euery halfe of many worthy man.
                  With woundes large and deſpytous.
                  ¶For Prothenor and king Archelaus,
                  With ſwerdes ſtiffe among the renges kerue,
                  That many Troian made for to ſterue,
                  They were that daye ſo paſſingly Irous.
                  And theim tauenge inly deſyrous,
                  Neuer ſeaſing in their purſewing,
                  ¶And to releue theim Alagus the kinge,
                  Ylonded is and eke king Attalus,
                  Which on Troians were full enuious.
                  Brenning of ire as the fiery glede,
                  And vpon theim of very olde hatrede,
                  With their knightes ſodeynly be fall,
                  And in their ire bitterer than gall,
                  Cruelly there they their foen oppreſſe,
                  And of aſſent did their buſineſſe,
                  Maugre theim backwarde to reſorte,
                  Amide the felde as I can reporte,
                  There was no choyſe ſo they were cōſtreyned
                  Of very force and of manhode payned,
                  To withdrawe to their confuſiowne.
                  But than in haſt downe from Troye towne,
                  Of worthy knightes freſhly armed newe,
                  With deuyſes of many ſondry hewe,
                  Without abode ſhortly to conclude,
                  
                     There came downe ſo great a multitude,
                  Eche his armes depaynte vpon the ſhylde,
                  That in their comming glittereth al the felde,
                  Of their armure as the ſonne bryght.
                  And whan that they were entred in to fight,
                  Grekes metynge felly by enuye,
                  They ſette vpon fret with melancolye.
                  With ſuch a will of herte and of courage,
                  With ſuch furye in their mortall rage,
                  That to accorde was none other mene.
                  But ſlaught and death theym to go betwene.
                  Thrugh ſtroke of axe of dagger and of ſpere.
                  That of force compelled the grekes were,
                  Theim retourne backwarde to the ſtronde.
                  To whoſe reſcuſe anone there came to londe,
                  The king Vlixes with his hole nauye.
                  And full knightly wyth his chiualrye,
                  Towardes Troians enhaſteth him anone.
                  And of one herte the grekes with him gone,
                  And theyr courage hooly they reſume,
                  And gan their foen felly to conſume.
                  Vnto the death their domage to reuenge.
                  That no wight may iuſtly theim chalenge,
                  Of manhode ſo well they haue theim borne.
                  To acquite again their harmes done beforne
                  At which time like a fierſe Lyowne,
                  Amonge Troians ranging vp and downe,
                  Vlixes wente with his ſwerde in honde.
                  He killeth ſleeth and knightly gan to fonde,
                  Thilke daye like a man be founde.
                  And here & there with many mortal wounde,
                  Vpon Troians he wrought all this wracke.
                  Thē bering downe on fote & on horſe backe.
                  In his ire his ſtrokes were ſo kene.
                  ¶At which time worthy Philomene,
                  Lorde and king of Pafflagonye,
                  Whan he behelde with his companye,
                  So many Troian of Vlixes ſlawe,
                  Towardes him anone he gan him drawe,
                  On horſe backe and with a ſpere rounde,
                  Out of his ſadyll bare him to the grounde.
                  But Vlixes roſe vp anone right,
                  Taking his horſe lyke a manly knight,
                  The which anone as Philomene hath ſayne,
                  Toke eft a ſpere and rode to him agayne.
                  So mightely and with ſuch violence,
                  That fynally there gayneth no diffence,
                  But that he ſmote him euen through ye ſhelde,
                  The which flewe aſonder in the felde.
                  And through his plates without any fayle,
                  The ſpere head and reſted in the mayle.
                  That forged was of ſtele ful ſhene & bright,
                  Which to perce the ſpere head hath no might.
                  So trewly made was the haberiowne.
                  But wt that ſtroke Vlixes was bore downe.
                  Yet efte agayne he haſteth vp anone,
                  Ne of this ſtroke herme felt he none.
                  And raught a ſpere ſharpe whet & ygrounde,
                  And Philomene he gaue ſuch a wounde,
                  With all the myght of his armes twayne,
                  Of yrous herte with ſo great a payne,
                  That through his ſheld both ye plate & maile,
                  He ſmote him vp through his auentayle,
                  Into the gorge that the ſtocke gan glyde,
                  That from his horſe he fell downe aſyde,
                  Full peryllouſly pyght vpon his head.
                  His knightes wenyng ſothly he were dead.
                  Which toke him vp and layde him on a ſhelde,
                  And bare him home in haſt out of the felde.
                  With great daunger or they might him wyn,
                  Through the grekes with their lord to twyn.
                  And for Troians ſuppoſed ſykerly,
                  That Philomene withouten remedye,
                  Had be dead they were aſtoned all.
                  That if this caſe that daye ne had befall,
                  Of Phylomene grekes on the ſtronde,
                  Had be outrayed arruing vp to londe.
                  Through the knighthod this is doubtles.
                  Of Phylomene whom that Vlyxes,
                  Vnhorſed hath with a mortall wounde,
                  In knightly wyſe Troians to confounde,
                  Wherof they were aſtoned euerychon.
                  ¶But Thoas than and Agamenon,
                  Of Grekes hooſte lorde and emperour,
                  Aryued is vnto theyr ſocoure.
                  With all his knightes and Menelaus,
                  And eke the worthy Thelamonious.
                  Called Ayax is to lande come.
                  And they at leyſure haue theyr horſe nome,
                  While other grekes Troians occupye,
                  Sore fighting and they gan faſt hye,
                  Towardes theim making no delay,
                  All in a fruſhe in all the haſt they may,
                  They ran yfere and their ſperes bracke,
                  With herte enuyous vpon horſe backe.
                  There myght men the worthy knyghtes ſe,
                  On their ſtedes eche at other flee.
                  With ſtyffe ſwordes ſhaftes great & rounde.
                  
                     With hedes ſquare the pointes kene grounde.
                  There myght men ſe in their furyous tene,
                  So many knightes dead vpon the grene.
                  But moſt the ſlaughter and confuſyowne,
                  Fell thilke time of theim of the towne.
                  The grekes were ſo myghty and ſo ſtronge.
                  And in the felde this contynueth longe,
                  ¶Til Protheſylay the ſtronge mighty king.
                  Which all the daye in ſkarmiſhe and fighting.
                  Full lyke a knyght had occupyed be,
                  Againe Troians in his cruelte,
                  Of manhode onely and of worthineſſe.
                  Of aduenture in his weryneſſe,
                  Him to refreſhe and to taken eyre,
                  And to abrethe him making his repeyre,
                  To the ſtronde where he did aryue,
                  Where as he thought his herte gan to ryue,
                  Of cruel yre and alſo of pyte,
                  That he hath caught onely for to ſe,
                  His men ſlayne endlonge on the ſtronde.
                  And ſome of theim comyng vp to londe,
                  Dreynt in the ſea amonge the flodes depe.
                  For whych thinge he gan anone to wepe,
                  Full pyteouſly all were it not aſpyed,
                  Whoſe wofull eyen might not tho be dryed,
                  For the conſtreynt which ſat ſo nygh his hert.
                  Till at the laſt amonge his paynes ſmerte,
                  So cruell yre gan his herte enbrace,
                  That ſodaynly with a deſpytous face,
                  Without abode thought how that he,
                  Vpon theyr death would auenged be,
                  Or finally attones with theim deye.
                  And on his ſtede he toke the right weye,
                  Towarde his foen ful yrous in his rage,
                  And line right he holdeth his paſſage,
                  Swift as grayhounde yt renneth out of leſe,
                  And where he ſawe that greateſt was ye prefe,
                  He preceth through amiddes of the felde,
                  And with the ſworde yt in his hande he helde,
                  That grounde was to kerue and to byte,
                  Full mortally aboute him gan he ſmyte.
                  That theſe Troians might him not aſterte,
                  That he ne ryueth ſome vnto the herte.
                  And ſome he woundeth ſothly to the death,
                  And ſome he made yelden vp the breath.
                  And ſome alſo vnhorſeth cruelly.
                  And whom he met that daye vtterly,
                  From his horſe he made him to alyght.
                  For where he rode they fled out of his ſighte,
                  And his preſence as the death eſchewe,
                  But ſtyll in one he gan theim after ſewe.
                  In his chaſe lyke as a wood lyon,
                  For thus he playeth with theim of the towne.
               
               
                  TYll Perſeus of Etheopye kinge,
                  Came from the Cyte ſodaynly riding,
                  With many a knyght and many lyuely man,
                  At whoſe coming of newe there began,
                  A freſhe ſkarmyſhe furyous and wood.
                  That many greke that daye loſt his blode.
                  So fell aſſaute Troians on theim make,
                  Amonge theim the Ethiopes blake.
                  To manly bare thē fighting here and there,
                  That where the Troians were afore in fere,
                  Remounted be and of newe aſſured,
                  yt through their helpe they haue ye feld recured
                  And made theim leſe alſo much agayne,
                  As they tofore wonnen on the playne.
                  For they ſo hole and ſo mightely,
                  Kept theim togyther and ſo auyſely,
                  Gouerned theim with glaue ſpere and ſhelde,
                  That grekes were compelled in the felde,
                  Maugre who grutche of neceſſyte,
                  To the ſtronde backwarde for to flee,
                  Almoſt diſpayred mate and comfortles.
                  But in that while kinge Pallamides,
                  To theyr reſcous came to aryuayle,
                  All luſty freſhe entreth into battaile,
                  With his knightes and his hole maynee.
                  Taking their horſe tho faſt by the ſee,
                  And proudly thenſe embuſhed all at ones,
                  With ſpere & ſwerde yground for the nones,
                  By wiſe gouernement in their doinge.
                  Haue ſo oppreſſed at their in coming,
                  The manly Troians that it was a wonder,
                  To ſe theim lye ſlayne here and yonder.
                  And this continueth til amonge the preſe,
                  Of auenture that Pallamides,
                  Brenning aye in his furious hete,
                  Amid the felde happeth for to mete,
                  A worthy knight called Sygamon,
                  Which brother was to the kyng Menon.
                  Neuewe alſo as Guido doth reherſe,
                  This manly man to the kinge Perce.
                  Which Grekes had that daye ſore oppreſſed,
                  By his knighthod as it is expreſſed,
                  For he the grekes to his worthineſſe,
                  Had oft ſithes brought in great diſtreſſe.
                  
                     The ſame daye to his great encreaſe.
                  ¶But of Fortune alas Pallamydes,
                  As I you tolde hath in the fyelde him mette.
                  And with a ſpere ſquare and ſharpe whette.
                  Whan he of knighthod was moſt in his pride,
                  He rode at hym and ſmote him through ye ſide,
                  And with that laſt deadly fatall wounde,
                  From his ſtede he bare hym to the grounde.
                  And on the playne of his bloud all red,
                  Pallamydes lefte him pale and dead,
                  Amonges them that of Troye were.
                  And forth he rode & bare downe here & there,
                  All that euer in his waye ſtode.
                  He was on theim ſo furyous and wood.
                  Maugre Troians tofore him on the playne,
                  Made reſorte to the walle agayne,
                  His manly knightes alway faſt by,
                  On him awayting ful ententifely.
                  Redy to honde at euery great empriſe,
                  But tho began the noyle to aryſe,
                  The wofull clamour and the pyteous crye,
                  Of theim of Troye the which vtterly,
                  Agayne grekes mighten not ſuſtene.
                  The mortall ſwerde was ſo ſharpe and kene,
                  Of the noble worthy famous knyght,
                  Pallamydes that with his great myght,
                  The longe daye hath yborne him ſo,
                  Agayne his foen and ſo knightly do,
                  In his perſone through his high renowne,
                  That chaſed hath almoſt to the towne,
                  Troians echone and manly made theim flee.
                  The noyſe of whom is entred the Cite,
                  The hydous crye and the mortall ſhoute.
                  ¶Wherof amened Hector yſſueth oute,
                  Furyouſly in all the haſt he can,
                  The ſon of Mars this knyght this māly mā,
                  Of all worthy yet the worthieſt.
                  That euer was and the hardieſt.
                  For as Phebus with his beames cleare,
                  Amonge the ſterres right ſo did he appeare,
                  Excellyng all in ſtele armed bryght,
                  On whom it was a very heauenly ſyght.
                  For it was he that both nigh and terre,
                  Of worthineſſe was the lode ſterre.
                  The whych whan he entred into felde,
                  Like as I reade bare that daye a ſhelde,
                  The fyelde of which was of pure golde,
                  With thre Lions in ſtorye as is tolde.
                  Of whoſe coloure is made no mencion,
                  But as I fynde by diſcripcion,
                  They were paſſant if I reporte a ryght,
                  Borne on the breſt of this Troian knyght.
                  That was ye ground & rote of high proweſſe.
                  And floure accompted of all worthineſſe.
                  The which ſo manly without more abode.
                  Amonge his knightes to the grekes rode,
                  So lyke a man that they in his cominge,
                  Aſtoned were as he gan in thringe.
                  Amonges thē which killeth downe & ſlethe,
                  And whom he met there was not but death,
                  Afore his ſwerd grekes go to wrake.
                  And their wardes of knightly force he brake,
                  Maugre theyr head & ſeuered thē a ſonder,
                  And bare all downe ridyng here and yonder.
                  And caſually he meteth in his waye,
                  ¶Protheſylaus whych all the longe daye,
                  Had ſore fought agaynſt theim of Troye.
                  And ſlewe all tho that comen in his waye.
                  This hardy knyght this worthy fierſe kinge,
                  Whych on Troians was euer purſewyng,
                  He had to theim ſo hertely great enuye.
                  The whych thinge whan Hector gan eſpye,
                  And of his knyghthod gan to taken hede,
                  Towardes him tho turneth he his ſtede,
                  And line right of haſty Ire he rode,
                  And with his ſwerde diſteyned al with blode,
                  He cloue his head through his baſenet.
                  With ſuch a might that his ſtroke nas let,
                  By force of mayle nor of thicke plate,
                  But fynally as was his mortall fate,
                  the ſwerd of Hector thrugh nerue bone & vain
                  This worthy kynge parted hath on twayne.
                  For vtterly there gayneth none armure,
                  Agayne the ſtroke of Hector to endure.
                  But that this kynge ſo full of worthineſſe,
                  Stronge mighty and of great hardineſſe,
                  Receyued hath his laſt fatall wounde.
                  And lyeth now dead parted on the grounde.
                  And Hector forth amonge the grekes rideth,
                  And whoſoeuer his ſtroke ſo abydeth,
                  Refute was none nor diffence but death.
                  And many greke thus that daye he ſleyth,
                  For whych of theim tho in his waye ſtode,
                  His ſharpe ſwerde he batheth in his blode.
                  That alſo ferre as they might him ſe,
                  As the death from his ſwerde they fle.
                  So mortal vengeaunce vpō thē he wrought.
                  And many a greke at his felowe ſought,
                  
                     And gan enquere what he might be,
                  For all their lyfe they coulde neuer ſe,
                  None ſo knightly haue him in battayle.
                  And playnly dempte as by ſuppoſayle,
                  It was Hector the noble warryour.
                  Whiche of knighthode bare away the floure,
                  Amonge all that euer yet were borne.
                  For there nas greke that him may ſtād aforne
                  Of all that day he gan them ſo enchace,
                  To the ſtronde euen afore his face.
                  For they ne durſte his mortall ſtroke abyde,
                  And when he had this on euery ſyde,
                  The grekes chaced to the wawy ſea,
                  Wounded and mate in great aduerſyte,
                  Then him to reſt this Troyan knight anone,
                  Lyke Mars himſelfe home to Troye is gone.
               
               
                  AT whoſe partynge grekes efte preſume,
                  Manly agayne their hertes to reſume.
                  And of newe their fomen to aſſayle.
                  And to inparte if it wolde auayle,
                  Lyfe and death to ſette at outraunce,
                  On fortunes lyſt if ſhe wold auaunce,
                  Their parte agayne in recure of the fyelde.
                  And thē enforce with might of ſpere & ſhielde,
                  Anone forthwith and maken no delay,
                  To wynne agayne on Troyans if they maye.
                  For .viii. tymes ſythen they begonne,
                  The felde they haue that day loſt and wonne.
                  Lyke as fortune lyſte to do their cure,
                  Vp or downe for to tourne her eure.
                  For as her whele went about rounde,
                  Right ſo that day they wan & loſt their groūd.
                  But ſpecially they weren moſt deſmayde.
                  Whē Hector came which hath thē ſo outraide,
                  Thrugh his knighthod made their hertꝭ ryue,
                  And to reſorte where they dyd aryue.
                  And thus continued mauger all their myght,
                  While in the fielde was this Troyan knyght.
                  ¶Tyll Phebus chere gan to weſtre downe,
                  That he repayred is into the towne,
                  Whiche had grekes wrought afore full yll.
                  ¶But now the hardy cruell fyres Achyll,
                  Aryued is with his knyghtes all,
                  Myrmydones whom men are wonte to calle.
                  Whyche from the ſea taken haue the playne,
                  At whoſe cōmynge grekes haue agayne,
                  The fyelde recured and put them ſelfe in preſe
                  Only through helpe of worthy Achylles.
                  Whiche is ſo felly Troyans fall vpon,
                  That he of them hath ſlayne full many one.
                  For thre thouſande in ſtele armed bryght,
                  With hym he brought redy for to fyght.
                  Knyghtes echone full worthy of renowne.
                  Whiche with Achylles grekes champyowne,
                  Haue mercileſſe in their crueltee,
                  Slayne many Troyan out of the Citie.
                  They were ſo feruent in their mortall Ire.
                  So enuyous of hate to deſyre,
                  Newe and newe for to ſhede their bloud.
                  For Achylles thought it dyd him good.
                  With his ſworde ye Troians bloud to ſhede,
                  And on the ſoyle to ſe them lye and blede.
                  Rowthleſſe in his melancolye.
                  For he to them hath ſo hote enuye,
                  Without their deth that it may not quenche.
                  And he his ſworde ful depe hath made drenth,
                  Throughout the day in the Troyans bloud.
                  And batheth it as it were in a floude.
                  Whiche forged was and ywhette ſo knene.
                  That many ryuer ſothly on the grene,
                  Ran here and there of the hurtes ſore.
                  And with his knyghtes alway more & more,
                  Purſued them afore hym as they flee.
                  Harde to the walles of Troye the cytee.
                  Where dolefully they made a pyteous crye.
                  And in this whyle I fynde in the ſtorye,
                  ¶The grekes hooſt hooly is aryued,
                  Lyke in Guydo as it is deſcryued.
                  Of men of armes ſuche a multytude,
                  And of knightes ſhortly to conclude,
                  That from their ſhyppes of newe landed be,
                  That they of Troye aſtoned were to ſe,
                  And abaſhed gan to wexen all,
                  For ſodaynly there gynneth on them fall,
                  On euery halfe paſſyngly great preſe.
                  And euer in one this hardy Achilles,
                  With his ſworde made their ſydes red,
                  For here and there laye the bodyes dead,
                  He wounded ſome at entre of the gate,
                  And knightly there with them he gan debate.
                  And furyouſly this fell cruell knyght,
                  The chyldren ſlewe in their fathers ſyght.
                  That to beholde it was great pyte,
                  And yet the ſlaughter tho greater had be,
                  Numbreleſſe of them of the towne,
                  Perpetually to their confuſyowne,
                  Lykely for euer to haue be ouercome,
                  
                     ¶If Troylus ne had to reſcuſe come.
                  Yenge, freſhe, luſty, and inly deſyrous,
                  With whom come Paris and Deiphobus,
                  And many worthy their partye to ſocoure,
                  So that the grekes tho ne myght endure,
                  Agaynſt them to ſtanden at deffence.
                  For all their pryde nor maken reſyſtence.
                  Worthy Troylus ſo well yt time hym quytte.
                  For this in ſoth what greke that he hytte,
                  Outher he maymeth or he made hym deye.
                  Wherfore as deth they fled out of his weye.
                  And fyerſe Achylles with his companye,
                  For it was nyght homewarde gan hym hye.
                  Towarde grekes with glorye and honoure,
                  And they receyue hym lyke a conquerour.
                  Whiche at that tyme ſo happely were mette.
                  ¶And they of Troye haue their gates ſhet.
                  And made thē ſtrong throughout al ye towne,
                  ¶And in this tyme kyng Agamenowne,
                  Yſerched hath a place couenable,
                  Which to him was thought moſt agreable,
                  By liklyhod and moſt conuenient,
                  For euery lorde to pytchen there his tente.
                  And in a fylde that was full large of ſpace,
                  Moſte competent as for lodgyng place,
                  In dewe ſcyte ſette for the Cite,
                  Eche lorde was ſigned where as he ſhulde be.
                  ¶And gan anone ordeyne manſyons,
                  Pytched their tentes and pauyllyons,
                  And ſuch as there might no Tentoryes haue,
                  From ſtorme and rayne them ſelfe for to ſaue,
                  They deuyſed other habytacles.
                  Tiguryes and ſmalle receptacles,
                  To ſhroude them in and all the night alſo,
                  From their ſhyppes they hadden moche ado.
                  Or they might well haue their horſe to lande,
                  And to ordeyne where they ſhulden ſtande.
                  And they alſo buſye for to carye,
                  Other thynges that weren neceſſarye,
                  And nedefully vnto a ſyege longe.
                  And eke they made tye their ſhyppes ſtronge,
                  For in the porte their ankers haue they caſte.
                  And of aſſent they buſyed them full faſte,
                  For to confyrme of one entenciowne,
                  To ſet a ſyege tofore Troye the towne,
                  And thervpon a bounde aſſured faſte,
                  For to abyde whyle their lyfe many laſte.
                  Fynally without repentaunce.
                  And prudently they made their ordynaunce,
                  As they beſt coulde all the longe nyght,
                  They bete their fyres which brennen wonder light,
                  And at a ſpace deuyded fro the fyres,
                  They ſette vp lyke to theſe barriers,
                  And rounde about where their lodgyng was,
                  They paled them all the fyelde compaſe.
                  And to acheue the fyne of their purpoſe,
                  They ſlyly wrought & kept thē ſelfe aye cloſe.
                  ¶And the kynge that no treaſon fall,
                  Let make watche without his tentes all.
                  Of ſuche as had reſted them afore.
                  And his mynſtrelles he made ouermore,
                  As ſayth Guydo all the longe nyght,
                  To kepe their tydes tofore the fyres bryght.
                  Meryly to ſowne their Inſtrumentes,
                  And them he made reſte in their tentes,
                  That had afore wery be of fyghte.
                  And in the ſea were faynted of their might.
                  And others eke he made in their armure,
                  Awayte wyſely agayne all aduenture.
                  That no deceite were founde vpon no ſyde.
                  ¶And thus this kyng knightly can prouyde
                  In his aduyce that nothyng hym eſcape.
                  And al the night I fynde how he dyd wake.
                  ¶Tyll on the morowe that the rowes red,
                  Of Phebus chare gonne for to ſprede,
                  And thus eche thynge diſpoſed as it ought,
                  I wyll procede to tellen how they wrought.
                  Ceryouſly without and eke within,
                  With your ſupport the thirde boke begyn.
               
            
            Thus endeth the ſeconde boke.
         
         
            
            The thyrde boke.
            
               ¶Of the firſt battaile wherin Hector ſhewed hym ſelfe in valyauncye tofore all other. Capitulo .xxii.
               
                  
                     WVhen Aurora with her pale lyght,
                  Vnder ye mantel of the mirke night.
                  And the curtyne of her hewes fade,
                  Yſhrouded was in the derke ſhade,
                  Abaſhed rud dy as I can defyne,
                  Only as ſhe that is Femynyne,
                  For aſhamed durſte not tho be ſeyne,
                  Bycauſe ſhe had ſo longe a bedde leyne,
                  With freſhe Phebus her owne choſen knight.
                  For whiche ſhe hydde her ſothly out of ſyght.
                  Tyll his ſtede that called is Flegonte,
                  Enhaſted hym aboue oure Orizonte.
                  And Appollo with his beames clere,
                  Hath recomforted her oppreſſed chere.
                  This to ſaye after the dawnynge.
                  When Tytan was vp in Eaſt ryſinge.
                  Of his hete atempre and ryght ſofte,
                  Their hemiſphere for to glade a lofte.
                  ¶The ſame houre the Troyan champiowne,
                  Gouernour of werres of the towne,
                  Worthy Hector whiche in the Cite,
                  Nexte Pryam had of all the ſouereyntee,
                  The towne to guyde by knightly excellence,
                  For his manhode and his ſapyence.
                  Of Troyan knyghtes lorde & eke cheuetaine,
                  Whiche hath commaunded in a large playne,
                  To hyghe and lowe he exceptynge none,
                  Kynges, prynces, and lordes euerychone,
                  The ſame morowe for to mete yfere,
                  In their araye to muſtre and appere.
                  Lyke as they were of name and of eſtate.
                  Beſyde a temple whylom conſecrate,
                  To the goddeſſe that called is Dyane.
                  Moſte honoured in this riche phane.
                  There to array them in all the haſte they can,
                  Lyke the deuyſe of this knyghtly man.
                  ¶And in this playne paſſynge fayre to ſe,
                  Was ſette amydde of Troye the Cite.
                  Smoth & right faire & full of freſhe floures.
                  Where all the worthy noble werryours,
                  Of Troye towne togyther aſſembled be,
                  And many other to beholde and ſe,
                  The famous knyghtes arme them in yt place.
                  And ſome of them gan full ſtreyte lace,
                  Their doublettes made of lynnen clothe.
                  A certayne folde that aboute hym goth.
                  And ſome alſo dempte moſte ſureſte,
                  To arme them for batayle of areſte,
                  And dyd on fyrſt after their deſyres,
                  Sabatons greues cuſſues with voyders,
                  A payre brech alder fyrſt of mayle,
                  And ſome there were eke that ne wolde fayle,
                  To haue of mayle a payre braſe.
                  And therwithall as the cuſtome was,
                  A payre guſſettes on a pety coote,
                  Garniſhed with golde vp vnto the throte.
                  A paunce of plate whiche of the ſelfe behynde,
                  Was ſhot and cloſe and theron as I fynde,
                  Enuyron was abordure of ſmalle mayle,
                  And ſome choſe of the newe entayle,
                  For to be ſurmyd of all their foes,
                  And hole breſte plate with arere dors.
                  Behynde ſhet or elles on the ſyde,
                  And on his armes rynged not to wyde,
                  There were voyders fretted in the mayle.
                  With cordes rounde and of freſhe entayle,
                  Vambras with wynges and rerebras therto,
                  And theron ſette were beſaguys alſo,
                  Vpon the head a baſenet of ſtele,
                  That within was locked wonder wele,
                  A craftye ſyght wrought in the viſer,
                  And ſome wolde haue of plate a bauer,
                  That on the breſt faſtned be aforne,
                  The canell pece more eaſy to be borne.
                  Gloues of plate of ſtele forged bryght,
                  And ſome for they wold armed be more light,
                  In thicke Iackes couered with ſatyne.
                  & ſome wolde haue of mayle wrought ful fine,
                  An hawberion of late wrought caſſade,
                  That with weight he be not ouer lade.
                  Hym ſelfe to welde lyke a lyfly man,
                  And ſome wyll haue of choſe geſeran,
                  On his boublet but an hawberyon.
                  And ſome only but a ſure gepon,
                  Ouer his polrynges rechinge to the knee.
                  And that the ſleues eke ſo longe be,
                  
                     That his vambras may be cured ner.
                  A pryckynge palet of plate the couer.
                  And ſome wyll haue alſo no vyſer,
                  To ſaue his face but onely an aſer,
                  And ſome wyll haue a payre of plates lyghte,
                  To welde hym well whan that he ſhall fyght.
                  And ſome wyll haue a target or a ſpere,
                  And ſome a pauade his body for to were.
                  And ſome a targe made ſtronge to laſte,
                  And ſome wyll haue dartes for to caſte.
                  Some a poilax headed of fyne ſtele,
                  And pycked ſquare for to laſte wele.
                  And ſome a ſwerde his enemye for to mete,
                  And ſome wyll haue a bowe for to ſhete.
                  Some an arblaſt to ſtanden out a ſyde,
                  ¶And ſome on foote and ſome for to ryde.
                  Array them ſelfe their fomen for to ſayle,
                  And many one was buſye for to nayle,
                  His felowes harneys for to make it ſtronge,
                  And to dreſſe it that it ſette not wronge.
                  With poyntes taſſhyes & other maner thinge,
                  That in ſuche caſe longeth to armynge.
                  I haue no connynge euery thynge to telle,
                  And vnto you were to longe to dwelle,
                  Where I fayle ye mot haue me excuſed,
                  For in ſuche crafte I am but lyttle vſed.
                  And ignoraunce doth my pennelette,
                  In order dewe my termes for to ſette.
                  And ofte chaūgeth ſuche harneys and deuyſe,
                  And ye that be therin expert and wyſe,
                  Diſdeyne not that I ſpeake in this place,
                  Of their armynge for all is in your grace.
                  Right at your lyſt correcte it euerydell.
                  ¶And when Hector ſawe that al was well,
                  And euery man armed and arrayed,
                  This worthy knight no longer hath delayed,
                  Aduyſedly his wardes for to make,
                  And prudently badde they ſhulden take,
                  Their grounde in haſte to put all in certayne,
                  And ſtande in order endlonge on the playne.
                  So that no man founde were recheles.
                  ¶And the gate called Dardanydes,
                  Without abode Hector made vnſhette,
                  And after bad that men ſhulde do fette,
                  To his preſence that it were done in haſte,
                  ¶Cyncynabor his brother borne in baſte.
                  And vnto hym fyrſt of euerychon,
                  ¶And to a lord that named was Glaucon,
                  The kynges ſonne of Lycye and his heire,
                  With many baner auaunſed in the eyre,
                  To theſe two Hector gaue the guarde.
                  And gouernaunce of the fyrſt warde.
                  In which he hath a thouſande knyghtes ſette,
                  With ſperes rounde and ſwordes kene whette.
                  And on their breſt full many ryche ſhyelde,
                  And they were choſen out in all the fielde,
                  Amonge the beſte that endure myght.
                  Agayne grekes manly for to fyght.
                  And vnto them Hector bad anone,
                  In goddes name that they ſhulden gone.
                  Out at the gate ſothly as I rede.
                  ¶And leſt they fyll in miſchiefe or in nede,
                  He aſſygned in the ſelfe place,
                  With manly chere to the kynge of Trace,
                  Wyſely on hym to be awaytyng.
                  A thouſande knyghtes to haue at his ledyng.
                  In a wynge knyghtly to abyde,
                  To wayte on hym vpon euery ſyde,
                  And with hym his ſonne Archylogus,
                  Of his age a man ryght vertuous,
                  To fulfyll that longeth to a knyght,
                  For both he had herte and alſo myght.
                  ¶And next to them Hector gan deuyſe,
                  The next warde to the kyng of Fryſe,
                  That in his time called was zantipus.
                  And vnto hym ſtronge and deſyrous,
                  He aſſygned to wayte on his banere,
                  Thre thouſand knightꝭ armed bryght & clere.
                  With whiche warde kyng Alcanus alſo,
                  Of Hector was commaunded for to go,
                  And to his byddyng he mekely dyd obeye,
                  And full knyghtly taken haue their waye,
                  Out at the gate paſſyngly arrayed.
                  Towarde grekes with baners all diſplayed.
                  And their penons vnrolled euerychone.
                  ¶And Hector then aſſygned hath anone,
                  To the noble yonge luſty freſhe and free,
                  His brother Troylus ſo goodly on to ſe.
                  Whiche in knyghthode had all ſuffyſaunce.
                  The thirde warde to haue in gouernaunce.
                  With thre thouſand knightes yonge of age,
                  Flourynge in force hardy of courage.
                  Suche as he was of cuſtome wont to lede.
                  To whom Hector of very brotherhead,
                  Full goodly ſpake and ſayd at his partynge.
                  Brother quod he my herte is ſo louynge,
                  Towardes the of very kyndneſſe,
                  That though I haue in party gret gladneſſe,
                  
                     Of thy manhode that ſo ferre is kouthe,
                  And the knyghthode of thy grene youthe.
                  Yet doubtleſſe I in my fantaſye,
                  Ful ofte a daye ſtande in iupardye,
                  Of penſyfehead and in buſye drede,
                  Whan I remembre vpon thy manhead.
                  Leſt thy courage be to vyolent.
                  Of thy lyfe to be neglygent.
                  Thy ſelfe to put to ferre in aduenture,
                  Of ſurquidrye ſo moche to aſſure.
                  In thy force knightly to a ſterte,
                  Euery peryll in thy manfull herte.
                  Hauynge regarde in ſuche mortall ſtryfe,
                  Of wylfulneſſe nouther to death nor life.
                  Nor aduertence to thy ſauacyowne
                  But as fortune turneth vp and downe,
                  Her whele meuable hye and after lowe.
                  In Martes Ire as the wynde doth blowe.
                  Whiche cauſeth me ful ofte ſyghe and thincke,
                  And to wake whan that I ſhulde wynke.
                  Reuoluynge aye thy haſty wylfulneſſe.
                  But gentyll brother for any hardyneſſe,
                  Thus ylke daye vpon euery ſyde,
                  I praye the ſo wyſely to prouyde,
                  For hate or yre thy foes purſuynge,
                  Not to excede more than is ſettynge.
                  But let prudence kepe the in a mene,
                  And wyſdome eke holde agayne the reyne.
                  Of thy herte and thy fyerſe courage,
                  That fyred haue thy grene tendre age.
                  Deuoyde of drede eche peryll to endure,
                  That our ennemyes of thy myſauenture,
                  Reioyce not myne owne brother dere.
                  And myghty Mars I praye of herte entere,
                  Thus euery day on the Troyans grounde,
                  From their handes the to kepe ſounde.
                  Lyke as I wolde that he dyd do me.
                  ¶To whom anone with all humilite,
                  In manly wiſe this yonge luſty knight.
                  This worthy Troylus in herte freſhe & light,
                  Anſwered agayn and ſayd with glad cheare,
                  Mine owne lorde and my brother deare,
                  And god tofore I fully ſhall obeye,
                  And all fullfyll what you lyſt to ſeye.
                  Now vnto me of your gentilneſſe,
                  And not decline through none reckleſneſſe,
                  In any poynt from your commaundemente.
                  But with hole herte in all my beſt entente,
                  I ſhall take hede and playnly do none other.
                  Than ye haue ſayd mine owne lord & bother.
                  So lothe me were offende you or greue.
                  And in this wiſe he lowly toke his leue.
                  And forth he rode ſo lyke a manly knyght,
                  That to beholde it was a noble ſyght,
                  Amonge his men he haueth hym ſo wele.
                  Thre thouſande knightes armed all in ſtele,
                  Enuyron rode with Troylus into fyelde.
                  And as that day he beareth in his ſhielde,
                  Paſſant of golde thre Lyons rychely.
                  The champe of aſure wrought full craftly.
                  And by the gate he yſſued out anone,
                  And with him ladde his knyghtes euerychon,
                  To the grekes holdyng the next waye.
                  ¶And Hector haſteth all that euer he may,
                  Prudently his wardes to ordeyne.
                  And to the noble worthy bretherne twayne,
                  To kyng Hupon and Andelius.
                  Aſſygned he the ſtory telleth thus,
                  The fourth warde to guye and to wyſſe.
                  And in the lande that called was Laryſſe,
                  The brethern two there had reigned longe.
                  And this Hupon was paſſyngly ſtronge,
                  And of ſtature lyke a chaumpyowne.
                  And ſaue Hector in all Troye towne,
                  Was none to hym egall as of myght.
                  More delyuer nor a better knight.
                  And on his foen paſſyng deſpytous.
                  Whiche with his brother Andelyus,
                  Foure thouſande knyghtes hadde for to lede.
                  And ſeuen thouſande ſothly as I rede,
                  And to them lyke as wryte Guydo,
                  Worthy Hector aſſygned hath alſo,
                  One of his brothern called Dimarchus,
                  A noble knight in armes ryght famous.
                  And had in manhode paſſyng excellence,
                  And of Hector they taken haue lycence,
                  And rode their waye amonge all the preſe,
                  Through the gate of Dardanides.
                  ¶The fyfte warde to haue at his ledyng,
                  Was by Hector commytted to the kyng,
                  That of Ceſoyne lorde and prynce was.
                  And to his brother called Pollidamas.
                  Theſe Cyſones were of hye ſtature,
                  And might in armes paſſyngly endure.
                  Vpon whom full many man behelde.
                  And their kyng bare nothynge in his ſhyelde,
                  But a fyelde of Gules as I fynde.
                  Of other ſygne Guydo maketh no minde.
                  
                     And forth he rode a full ſterne paſe,
                  This noble kynge and Pollydamas,
                  Whan they had of Hector lene take.
                  Whiche euer in one full buſye was to make,
                  The ſyxth warde with all his diligence.
                  And to the kyng called Pretemenſe,
                  That was full worthy both in werre & peace,
                  ¶And to a duke that hyght Sterepes,
                  Whyche was alſo full worthy of his honde,
                  He toke the folke of Poenye lande.
                  Them to gouerne in the fyelde that day.
                  The whiche people hath in cuſtome aye,
                  Without plate hawberion or mayle,
                  On ſwyfte horſe their fomen for to aſſayle.
                  With mighty bowes & arrowes ſharpe groūd.
                  Through an harneys mortally to wounde.
                  And with this folke of Hector eke alſo,
                  Deyphobus aſſygned was to go.
                  In the fyelde to guyde them and to lede.
                  And on their waye they faſte gan theim ſpede.
                  But or they paſſe by Dardanydes.
                  Full diſcretely Hector for them cheſe,
                  Panyſers cladde in mayle and plate.
                  Them commaundyng at yſſuyng of the gate,
                  And with the archers in to fyelde to gone.
                  And many worthy well armed euerychone,
                  To awayte on them that they were not lore.
                  For this folke that I of ſpake tofore,
                  Of Poenye hadden none armure.
                  But prudent Hector for to make them ſure,
                  Out of Agreſt the myghty regyowne,
                  Hath choſen out full worthy of renowne,
                  The beſt knightes of them euerychon.
                  ¶And with the kynges Eſdras and Phylon,
                  Aſſygned them for to taken hede.
                  To the fotemen when that they haue nede.
                  The whiche Phylon ordeyned full rychely,
                  Rode in a chere all of Yuery.
                  Of whyche the wheles wrought full curious,
                  Were of a tree ycalled Hebanus,
                  The whiche tree groweth ferre in Inde.
                  Blacke of hewe and alſo as I fynde,
                  When it is korne this tree wyll were anone,
                  Of his nature harde as any ſtone.
                  Whan it is graue eyther rounde or ſquare.
                  And of pure golde roued was this chare.
                  Fret with perle and many ryche ſtones.
                  That ſuche an other I trowe now there none is.
                  In all this worlde if I ſhall not fayne,
                  And it was ladde of mighty knightes twaine.
                  Men of armes within eke and without,
                  Armed in ſtele rydyng rounde aboute.
                  Theſe worthy kynges Eſdras and Phylon,
                  And Hector hath called to hym anone.
                  One of his brethern what ſo that be falle,
                  To be guyde and leder of them all.
                  The name of whom was Pytagoras,
                  ¶And to the great Troyon Eneas,
                  Of whom tofore made is mencion,
                  Hector by good deliberation,
                  The ſeuenth warde aſſygned hath to kepe.
                  And vpon ſtedes luſty for to lepe,
                  Of ſuche as were vſed moche to ryde,
                  Full manly knightes to haue by his ſyde.
                  Whiche with Ewpheny vnto Troye towne,
                  Come ſo ferre from their regyowne.
                  To ſuccour them and that for Hectors ſake.
                  And when they had of hym leue take,
                  They rode full proudely forth with Eneas.
                  Out at the gate a wonder knightly paſe,
                  The brode fyelde tyll they haue atteyned.
                  ¶And in this whyle Hector hath ordeyned,
                  Lyke myne auctour as I can reherſe,
                  The eyght warde of the folke of Perce.
                  Worthy knightes manly and ryght wyſe,
                  The whiche were committed to Paryſe.
                  On him that day tawayte buſyly.
                  To whom Hector tho full beningly,
                  Spake and ſaide thus at his departyng.
                  Oh brother myne in all maner thynge,
                  Whan thou arte paſſed by Dardanides,
                  This daye to ferre put the not in preſe.
                  Amonge grekes nor in iupardye.
                  Leſt thy toen in miſchyefe the eſpye.
                  To whom they haue of olde and newe date,
                  In their hertes full freſhe and mortall hate.
                  The fyre of which their breſt hath ſo enbraſed
                  That it were harde out to be araced.
                  Wherfore brother loke that thou euer be,
                  In any wiſe not to ferre fro me.
                  But kepe the nye that no miſauenture,
                  Fall vpon the ſo that I may ſuccoure,
                  This daye to the mine owne brother deare.
                  To whom Parys with full humble cheare,
                  Anſwered and ſayd that in euery thinge,
                  He would obeye vnto his bidding.
                  And rode his waye anone with his meyne,
                  Into the felde out of the Cite.
                  
                     The ninth warde in ordre for to dreſſe,
                  Whych he thought hym ſelfe for to lede,
                  In whych he put ſothly as I rede,
                  Fiue thouſand knightꝭ borne of Troy towne.
                  The worthyeſt and greateſt of renowne.
                  And paſſyngly famous in knighthode.
                  Borne by diſcent on the Troians bloud.
                  ¶And of his brethern taketh wt hym ten,
                  Suche as he knewe the moſt manly men.
                  That were forayne from ſtocke of regallye,
                  Out of the lyne borne in baſtardye.
                  Whom Hector had in great chyerte,
                  For the knyghthod he could in theim ſe.
                  And whan he had by knightly purueaunce,
                  All his wardes ſet in gouernaunce,
                  Lyke Mars him ſelfe faſt gan him ſpede,
                  Without abode for to take his ſtede,
                  Whych was in bokes called Gallathe.
                  Of all horſe hauyng the ſoueraynte.
                  As ferre as men ryde in any coſte,
                  Of whom Dares maketh ſo great a boſte,
                  Of ſhape of heyght and alſo of fayrneſſe,
                  Of ſtrengthe of loke and of great ſwyftneſſe,
                  So lyke an horſe perfourmed out and oute,
                  And wt a wyer men might him tourne about.
                  Lyke as Dares maketh menciowne,
                  Of whō Hector rydeth through troye towne.
                  Armed at all that came him wonder well.
                  From foote to head full rychly euerydele,
                  That ſhone as bright as ſon on ſomers daye.
                  And to Pryam he helde the ryght waye,
                  And whan that he was come to the kinge,
                  He reherſeth in ordre euery thynge,
                  How he hath done and all his ordynaunce,
                  And lowly ſayd ſo it be pleſaunce,
                  To your noble royall excellence,
                  I haue choſen with buſy dylygence,
                  A thouſand knightes full of ſuffyſaunce,
                  With fyue hundred to haue attendaunce,
                  On your perſone alway where ye be,
                  With all footmen that be in the Cyte,
                  That ſhall awayte on you euer in one.
                  Wherfore my lorde as faſt as we are gone,
                  Lowly I praye to your worthineſſe,
                  To ſewe vs by good aduyſeneſſe.
                  Out at the towne alway eke that ye,
                  Togyther kepe your knightes and meyne.
                  This I beſeche with all my full myght,
                  Within the boundes where as we ſhall fight.
                  That ye ſuffer none of theim paſſe,
                  But kepe ye hole in the ſelfe place,
                  Atwyxe vs and this ſtronge Cyte,
                  If we haue nede that ye maye aye ſe,
                  Vs to releue kepyng you aſyde,
                  And ſpecially there for to abyde,
                  Where moſt is lyckly our partye to ſuſtene,
                  For euer amonge there ſhal men go betwene,
                  Of our exployt the trouthe to reporte.
                  For which parte Mars lyſt the fielde to ſorte.
                  Of his power this ilke daye fatall,
                  For ye ſhal be our caſtell and our wall,
                  And our refuge to ſaue vs from all ſmerte,
                  And ſpecially one thynge ye aduerte,
                  That no deceyt fraude nor treaſowne,
                  Compaſſed be behynde to the towne,
                  Of our foen through our reckleſneſſe,
                  Whyles that we don hooly our buſyneſſe,
                  Agaynſt theim in the fielde to fight.
                  In all wiſe therto haue a ſyght.
                  That nothynge tourne vnto our domage,
                  Through their engine but worke as ye ſage,
                  With victorye that we maye conclude,
                  So that grekes with fraude vs not delude,
                  By no engyne of vnware vyolence.
                  Hopyng alway that it is none offence,
                  To your highnes that I haue here ſayde.
                  And with that worde Pryamus abrayde,
                  Beningely of cheare and countenaunce,
                  And ſayde Hector my ſothfaſt ſuffyſaunce,
                  My fynall truſte and ſupportacion,
                  In thy diſcreat diſpoſycion,
                  Hooly I put as thou liſt ordaine,
                  For next god if I ſhall not fayne,
                  My fayth my hope and all my ſikerneſſe,
                  And my welfare in very ſothfaſtneſſe,
                  Committed be hole into thy hande.
                  And gouernaunce playnly of my lande,
                  As thou ordayneſt it muſt nedes be,
                  And this prayer I make nowe for the,
                  To the goddes aboue celeſtyall,
                  The to preſerue in partye and in all,
                  From eche myſchiefe and aduerſyte,
                  That thou mayſt home ayene to this Cite,
                  Repaire in honour with laude and victorye,
                  So that the praiſe renowne and memorye,
                  Of thy name be put in remembraunce,
                  Perpetually thine honour to auaunce,
                  And fare now well mine owne ſonne deare.
                  
                     And Hector tho with full humble cheare,
                  His leue toke and forth he rode anone,
                  Amonge his lordes & knyghtes euerychone,
                  As he that was the roote of nobleſſe.
                  Of knyghthode groūd of ſtrengthe & hardyneſſe
                  The very ſtocke and therto inuincyble,
                  For as muche as it was poſſyble.
                  That nature myght to him graunt or kynde,
                  Touchyng manhode in bokes as I fynde,
                  He hadde in him ſoueraygne excellence,
                  And gouernaunce medled with prudence.
                  That nought aſterte he was ſo wyſe & ware,
                  And in his ſhelde I fynde that he bare,
                  Vpon his breſt this Troian champyon,
                  The chyefe of golde of gowlys a lyon,
                  Depeynt therin and in his baner bete,
                  The ſelfe ſame and ſo amydde the ſtrete,
                  He toke the waye to Dardanydes,
                  That to beholde huge was the preſe,
                  Noyſe of trumpettes and of claryons,
                  Baners vnrolled and longe freſhe penons,
                  Of red and whyte grene blewe and blacke,
                  And in this wyſe Hector hath ytake,
                  The felde wythout wt herte and hole entente,
                  As Mars him ſelfe had tho be preſente.
                  And they that he as Guydo maketh mynde,
                  Rode with in warde that lefte was behinde,
                  Of his manhode he would not abyde,
                  But ſmote his ſtede ſharply in the ſyde,
                  Of fell courage he hath his horſe ſo payned,
                  The fyrſte warde that he hath atayned.
                  By vale and hylle tofore in the frounteres.
                  Not aſtoned of the fell cheares,
                  Of the grekes nor platly not aferde,
                  But lyke a knyght euen afore theyr berde,
                  He gan preaſe in as theyr foo mortall.
                  ¶And in this whyle vpon Troye wall,
                  In ſondry places on the hygh toures,
                  As freſhe beſene as May is with his floures,
                  The ladyes be aſcended of the towne.
                  So fayre ſo yonge ſtandinge enuyrowne,
                  The quene Heleyne paſſyng fayre to ſene,
                  The kinges doughters & goodly Pollycene,
                  And many other whych of womanheade,
                  In herte weren full of buſy dreade,
                  Inly agaſte and of feare afrayde,
                  Whan they behelde in the fyelde diſplayde,
                  The brode baners that ſome of tenderneſſe,
                  Some of loue and ſome of kyndneſſe.
                  Pale and dreadfull for theyr lordes were.
                  And ſome theyr faces hyden eke for feare,
                  That were not bolde to lyfte vp theyr ſyghte,
                  For to heholde the armure cleare and bryght,
                  So glytterynge aye agayne the ſonne ſhene,
                  Theyr hertes tender myght not ſuſtene,
                  And in theyr dreade thus I lette theim dwel.
               
               
                  ANd of grekes forth I ſhall you tell.
                  Yf ſo be ye liſt abyde but a whyle,
                  For now muſt I my fordulled ſtyle,
                  Agayne dyrect to Agamenon.
                  Well maye I make an exclamacion,
                  On ignoraunce that ſtaunt ſo in my lyght.
                  Which cauſeth me with a full cloudy ſyght,
                  In my makynge to ſpeken of the werre.
                  For lacke of tearmes I muſt nedely erre,
                  Conningly my wardes for ſette,
                  Cruell Alecto is buſy me to lette,
                  The nyghtes doughter blynded by derkneſſe,
                  By crafte of armes the trouthe to expreſſe,
                  In ordre dewe a felde to deſcryue.
                  And Chauncer nowe alas is not alyue.
                  Me to refourme or to be my rede,
                  For lacke of whom ſlower is my ſpede,
                  The noble Rethor that all did excelle,
                  For in making he dranke ſo of the welle,
                  Vnder Pernaſo that the muſes kepe,
                  On which hylle I neuer yet might ſlepe,
                  Vnneth ſlombre for whych alas I playne.
                  But for all this there is no more to ſayne,
                  Though my wede be not pollymyte,
                  As of coloures forth I wyll endyte,
                  As it cometh euen to my thought,
                  Playnly to write how ye kinge hath wrought,
                  The manly knight the great Agamenon.
                  Lyke as the latyn maketh mencion.
                  ¶What trowen ye that he in his entente,
                  Was founde ſlowe other neclygente,
                  On grekes halfe his wardes for to make,
                  Nay nay not ſo for him lyſt to wake,
                  That tyme more ſothly than to ſlepe,
                  For lyke a kinge that daye the felde to kepe,
                  No neclygence myght his herte fade,
                  For in that daye I fynde that he made,
                  Syxe and twenty wardes by and by,
                  So well deuyſed and ſo prudently,
                  That no man might amende his ordynaūce.
                  And of the fyrſt he gaue gouernaunce.
                  
                     To the manfull noble Patroclus,
                  That wt him ladde myn auctour telleth thus,
                  Myrmydones ſo myghty and ſo ſtronge,
                  With all the folke that to Achilles longe.
                  Beſyde thylke that were of his meyne,
                  Whych that he brought out of his countre,
                  At his cominge to the ſiege of Troye,
                  And he rode forth with theim on his waye.
                  Into the ſyelde and made no delaye.
                  Now fell it ſo on the ſame daye,
                  That Achilles kept him in his tente,
                  And for ſyckneſſe that daye out ne wente.
                  For his lecheſſe made him to abſtene,
                  For his woundes freſhe were and grene.
                  That he caught on the daye tofore,
                  Whych for to heale of theyr akyng ſore,
                  He by counſayle kept him ſelfe cloſe,
                  And from his bedde that daye not ne roſe.
                  In hope onely the better to endure,
                  Whan that he was reſtored vnto cure,
                  But all his men he toke to Patroclus,
                  Which was in armes paſſyngly famous.
                  And by diſcent come of great kynrede.
                  And was alſo of hym as I reade,
                  Hoboundaunt of golde and of rycheſſe.
                  And ferre commēded for his gentilneſſe,
                  And had a name of hygh dyſcrecion,
                  ¶Now were they aye of ſuche affection,
                  Of entyre loue trouthe and faythfulneſſe,
                  So great deſyre and inwarde kyndeneſſe,
                  Buſy thynkyng and ſo great feruence,
                  So much frendſhip wt thoughtful aduertēce,
                  So huge brennyng ſo paſſyng amerous,
                  Betwyxt Achilles and this Patroclus.
                  That theyr hertes were locked in a cheyne,
                  And what ſoeuer if I ſhall not fayne,
                  The tone hath wrought as brother vnto brother,
                  In herte it was confermed of the other.
                  For wyll and goodes weren both commune,
                  And to the death they euer ſo contune,
                  Without chaunge theyr loue ſo abode.
                  ¶And Patroclus forth anone rode,
                  Into the fyelde with Myrmydones,
                  And in his tente abydeth Achilles.
                  ¶The ſecounde warde to kinge Menon,
                  Aſſygned was by Agamenon.
                  ¶And to the worthy kinge Ydumenee,
                  And to a Duke called Meneſtee,
                  Thre thouſand knightes in ſtele armed clene,
                  Wyth all the folke that comen from Athene,
                  Aſſygned were wyth theim for to go.
                  ¶The thyrde warde to king Aſcalapho.
                  And to his ſone that hyght Phylomene,
                  With the knightes that came from Cumane,
                  ¶The fourth warde without more lettynge,
                  To Archelaus the noble worthy kynge,
                  To Prothenor and to Securydan,
                  Whych in his dayes was ſo ſtronge a man,
                  Aſſygned was holly to theſe three,
                  And all the knyghtes with theim for to be,
                  Of Boece the myghty lande famous.
                  ¶The fyfth warde to kinge Menelaus,
                  With all the folke of the regyowne,
                  Called Spertence of full high renowne,
                  And of yles that were adiacent.
                  All theſe with the baner wente,
                  ¶Of Menelay freſhe and couragyous,
                  The .vi. warde to kynge Epyſtrophus,
                  Was aſſygned and to the kinge Gelyde,
                  With many worthy rydyng by his ſyde,
                  Of the prouynce and the famous yle,
                  That called is in Guydo Fordeſyle.
                  ¶The ſeuenth warde to Thelamonius,
                  Called Ayax the great kynge famous,
                  Was aſſygned ſhortly to termyne,
                  With the folkes that from Salomyne,
                  He with him brought and many another mo.
                  And foure Earles with hym went alſo,
                  ¶Theſeus and eke Amphymacus,
                  And the thyrde that called was Doxus,
                  And the fourth named Polyxarye.
                  The .viii. warde if I ſhall not tarye,
                  By good aduyſe that daye aſſygned was,
                  Vnto the kinge that called was Thoas,
                  ¶Ayax Cileus the .ix. warde tho ladde,
                  And the tenth king Philoctetes hadde,
                  ¶And to the kinge the .xi. he did aſſigne,
                  That ſothly was both of byrth and lyne,
                  So renowmed and of ſo great encreaſe,
                  The mighty kynge called Pallamides,
                  Kinge Naulus ſon higheſt borne of blode,
                  And Duke Neſtor full famous in knighthod,
                  The .xii. warde ladde on grekes ſyde.
                  Melancolyke and ſurquedous of pryde.
                  And kinge Honux ſon of one Maberte,
                  Into the fyelde by hym ſelfe aparte,
                  In ordre hadde of wardes the thyrtene,
                  Proudly muſterynge endlonge on the grene.
                  
                     Agayne Troians redy for to fyght.
                  ¶And eke the kinge that Vlyxes hight,
                  Ladde with him the fourtene as I rede,
                  ¶And eke Humelius the kinge did lede,
                  The fiftenth mine auctour writeth thus.
                  ¶And a Duke called Curibulus,
                  The ſixtenth had in gouernaunce that daye,
                  In which the knightes of king Protheſylay,
                  Aſſygned were by great ordinaunce,
                  To enforce theim to do vengeaunce,
                  Vpon the death of their worthy kinge.
                  By Hector ſlayne at grekes ariuinge.
                  ¶And kinge Rodus ladde the ſeuentene,
                  And he that was the kinge of Occymene.
                  ¶The eyghtenth warde had at his ledinge,
                  He zantipus that was of Lyde kinge.
                  Had to kepe committed to his garde,
                  On grekes ſyde the .xix. warde.
                  ¶And the twenty mine auctour lerneth vs,
                  Had the kinge called Amphimacus.
                  Like a kinge to guyde theim and to wyſſe.
                  And Philoctetes that kinge was of Laryſſe,
                  The one and twenty ladde eke as I reade,
                  The two & twenty hadde king Diomede.
                  ¶And Eneus kinge of Cyparye,
                  That was whylom ſo noble and ſo worthy,
                  The thre and twenty had in gouernayle.
                  And the Troians proudly for taſſayle,
                  The .xxiiii. with ſwerde ſpere and ſhelde,
                  ¶King Prothecatus lad into the felde.
                  ¶And Carpenor of Carpedye the kinge,
                  In werre expert and right wiſe in workynge,
                  The fiue and twenty riche and well beſayne,
                  On grekes ſyde brought into the playne,
                  ¶The ſyxe and twenty ſothly and the laſte,
                  As he that could ſe afore and caſte,
                  Euerye thinge by good inſpection,
                  The wiſe kinge the great Agamenon,
                  Had with him this prudent werriour,
                  As he that was ordayned Emperour,
                  Of grekes hooſt as wyſeſt of echone.
                  ¶And in this wiſe forth the grekes gone,
                  In the felde with pompe full royall,
                  With thenſignes and tokens marcyall.
                  Haue take their grounde paſſingly araied,
                  And on theyr ſtanderdes richly tho diſplayed.
                  Brode baners and many freſhe penowne,
                  Againe the winde ye made an hidous ſowne.
                  And right dredfull playnly for to heare,
                  And there men ſawe many criſtes cleare,
                  And many tufte of golde and ſyluer ſhene,
                  Meynt with fethers red, whyte, and grene.
                  And deuiſes wonder meruaylous,
                  And ſuch of folkes as weren amerous.
                  The tokens borne to ſhewe openly,
                  How they in loue brent inwardly.
                  Some high empryſe that daye to fulfylle,
                  And there were herde the loude noyſes ſhryle,
                  Ferre in the felde and the dreadfull ſownes,
                  Both of trumpettes and of claryownes,
                  That kalendes bin of ſheding out of blode,
                  And with the noiſe almoſte for rage wood,
                  The fomy bridelles and the mouthes blede.
                  And furious neyhing of many baſtarde ſtede.
                  ¶Praunſyng of horſe vpon eyther ſyde,
                  With the enſygnes that might be of pryde.
                  On grekes partye and on Troye alſo,
                  In knightly wiſe for to haue ado.
                  Euery warde ſtanding in his place.
                  ¶The firſt aſunder but a lytell ſpace,
                  Began to approche with all their ful entent,
                  And Hector tho ful vnpacient,
                  Formeſt of all on the ſyde of Troye,
                  The yre of whom no man might accoye.
                  But lyke a Lion in his hungry rage,
                  Yſſued out furyous of vyſage,
                  Towarde grekes on his mighty ſtede,
                  That with his ſporres made his ſides blede.
                  His knightly herte ſo inly was toforne,
                  Of mortall yre and as he rode forne,
                  Brenning full hote in his melancolye,
                  The whych thinge whan grekes gan eſpye,
                  ¶Patroclus then withouten more abode,
                  Of ſurquedrye afore the wardes rode.
                  Out all toforne in both hooſtes ſyght.
                  For to encountre playnly if he might,
                  With worthy Hector whan he him ſawe a fer,
                  And as lyne right as is Dyameterre,
                  Rode vnto him in his hatefull tene,
                  And with a ſpere ſharpe grounde and kene,
                  Throughout his ſhelde tho of enuyous rage,
                  He ſmote Hector without more domage.
                  Except onely that the head of ſtele,
                  That was afore whet and forged wele.
                  Through plate & mayle mightly gan to glace
                  But to the ſkinne for nothing might it race.
                  Albe it came wt paſſing violence,
                  Yet to Hector it done hath none offence,
                  
                     Out of his ſaddell ones him to flytte.
                  For though that he ſturdely him hitte,
                  He might not backward bēd or bow his chine
                  Nor on no partye make him to encline.
                  ¶But fatally to his confuſyon,
                  This mighty man this Troian champion,
                  In his Ire aye brenning more and more,
                  Vpon him the hate aye fret ſo ſore,
                  Left his ſpere mine Auctour wryteth thus,
                  And with a ſworde rode to Patroclus,
                  Auyſed fully that he ſhall be dead,
                  And furiouſly gan aymen at his head,
                  And roue him downe there was no maner let
                  Into the breſt through his baſſenet,
                  As ſayth Guydo with ſo great a payne,
                  That with his ſtroke he parted him ī twayne
                  His mortall ſwerde whetted was ſo kene.
                  That Patroclus myght not ſuſtene,
                  Vpon his horſe but fell downe to grounde,
                  As he that caught his laſt fatall wounde.
                  ¶Beyng preſent his knyghtes euerychon,
                  And delyuerly vpon him anone,
                  Worthy Hector from his ſtede adowne,
                  Deſcended is like a wood Lyowne,
                  Of hatefull yre brenning as the fyre,
                  Hauing in hert inly great deſyre,
                  To ſpoyle him of his armure there anone.
                  In which there was full many riche ſtone,
                  Both of rubies and of Saphyres ynde,
                  For that dayes playnly as I finde,
                  Kinges lordes and knightes this no naye,
                  To battayle went in their beſt araye.
                  And ſothly Hector whan he firſt gan ſe,
                  The multitude of ſtones and perre,
                  On Patroclus ſo oryent and ſheyne,
                  Vpon his arme he hinge his horſe reyne,
                  The meane while while he of hole entente,
                  To catche his praye was ſo diligent.
                  Of couetiſe in theyr alder ſyghtes.
                  ¶Tyll king Menō wt thre thouſād knighꝭ,
                  Armed in ſtele rounde about him all,
                  Is ſodaynly vpon Hector fall,
                  The dead corps of Patroclus to ſaue.
                  That his purpoſe Hector may not haue.
                  At lybertye the riche kinge to ſpoyle,
                  Which cauſed hym in angre for to boyle,
                  To whom the king that called is Menon,
                  Irous and wood ſayde amonge echon,
                  Oh gredy Liowne Oh wolfe moſt rauinous,
                  Oh hatefull Tygre paſſing enuyous,
                  Of aueryce Oh beaſt inſaturable,
                  And of deſyre ſothly vnſtaunchable.
                  ¶Vpon this praye thou ſhalt not now ye fede.
                  Go elles where to ſewen for thy mede.
                  For truſteth well in concluſyon,
                  Fyfty thouſande to thy deſtruction,
                  Of one entent playnly will not fayle,
                  Thine hatefull pryde attones for to aſſayle.
                  And ſodeynly with ſperes ſharpe whet,
                  On euery halfe they gan him beſette.
                  Maugre his force his might & his manhode.
                  Enforſyng theim to reue him of his ſtede.
                  That ſothfaſtly of great violence,
                  He was conſtrayned for all his ſtrong defēce,
                  As ſayth Guydo to fall vpon his kne.
                  But through his might and magnanimite.
                  He of manhode hath his horſe recured,
                  And maugre grekes is ſo ferre aſſured,
                  In his ſtrengthe and in his great might,
                  That he recured like a worthy knight,
                  His ſtede agayne amiddes of all his foen,
                  And right as lyne he rode to kinge Menon.
                  Full deſyrous on him auenged be.
                  In his furye of haſty cruelte.
                  For therupon was ſet his hole delyte,
                  That in his mortall cruell appetite,
                  In very ſothe he had him ſlayne anone,
                  Saue that the kinge that called was Glacō,
                  Came him to reſcue with kinge Theſeus.
                  And his ſone that hight Archilogus.
                  As I haue tolde Menon to reſkewe.
                  And thre thouſande knightes gan him ſewe,
                  Full aſſented attones in battayle,
                  For life or death Hector to aſſayle.
                  In awayte vnware on him to ſet.
                  But al this whyle with whō that euer he met,
                  With his ſworde he killed and bare downe.
                  That fynally there gayneth no raunſowne,
                  For any greke that durſte with him mete,
                  But or he went he felt it full vnſwete,
                  ¶He made a waye aboute him euery where,
                  That they him fledde as the death for feare.
                  For where he rode he made a patth ful plaine
                  And as I reade to Patroclus agayne,
                  He is repeyred to ſpoyle him if he might.
                  Amid the felde in the grekes ſyght.
                  As he that would his praye not lightly lete.
                  Till Idume the mighty king of Crete,
                  
                     With two thouſande cladde in plate & mayle,
                  Worthy knightes Hector to aſſayle,
                  Whiles that he was ſo inly deſyrous,
                  As I haue tolde to ſpoyle Patroclus,
                  And newe agayne to his confuſion,
                  Like as I finde came king Merion,
                  And or Hector might of theim take hede,
                  They of force reft him of hys ſtede.
                  That ſothly he there was none other boote,
                  Compelled was for to fight on foote.
                  And of knighthod his herte he reſumeth,
                  And wt his ſwerde about him he conſumeth,
                  All that withſtande both the horſe and man.
                  And furyouſly this Troian knight began,
                  Armes legges and ſhoulders by the bone,
                  To hewe of amid his mortall fone.
                  That grekes might afore him not ſuſtene,
                  And as I reade that he ſlewe fiftene,
                  Of theim that were buſy him to take.
                  And ſuch a ſlaught he gan among thē make,
                  That they ne durſt abyde afore his face.
                  ¶And Merion in the ſelfe place,
                  This meane while toke vp Patroclus,
                  With heuy cheare and face full piteous.
                  And on his ſtede he layd it him beforne.
                  And to his tente anone he hath it borne.
                  Alway grekes in their cruell mode,
                  About Hector furyous and wode,
                  Felly abode fyghting vpon fote,
                  Of which ſome felt it full vnſote.
                  That preſumed vpon him to preſſe.
                  But of manhode they ne woulden ceſſe,
                  Him to beſet rounde on euery ſide.
                  Hauing a truſt in their great pride,
                  Fynally at miſchiefe him to take.
                  For they dempt he might not eſcape,
                  Their handes ſhortly by none aduenture,
                  Nor his ſtede by lyklyhede recure,
                  For of force they caſten him to let.
                  And all attones gan on him to ſet.
                  And ſpecially amonge theim euerichone,
                  I finde in ſothe how that there was one,
                  A grekiſhe knight of right worthy fame,
                  ¶And Carion playnly was his name,
                  That him enforced Hector to oppreſſe,
                  Whan he was moſt in miſchiefe and diſtreſſe.
                  Beſet with grekes him enuyroning,
                  Tyll of fortune aye on him awaytinge,
                  The longe daye in that fell fight,
                  To his reſcuſe there came a Troian knighte.
                  Midde of grekes whan he was beſet,
                  And hent two dartes ſharpe and kene whet,
                  And furiouſly fyrſt he ſhoke the toen,
                  And through ye herte he ſmote this Carion,
                  That the darte into the felde gan glide.
                  By playte & mayle throughout outher ſide.
                  That fatally of that deadly wounde,
                  This Caryon glode anone togrounde.
                  Amonge an hundred knightes of his ferys.
                  Afore conſpyred with their fell chearis.
                  To haue ſlayne Hector by ſome maner waye.
                  But eft agayne this yonge knight of Troye,
                  Full delyuer raughte another ſpere,
                  And caſt at one that he ſawe yfere,
                  Auaunce him ſelfe on Hector in the felde
                  And through his plates playnly & his ſhelde,
                  Line right that he ne ſhould aſterte,
                  Of very might roue him through the herte.
                  ¶And after that in all the haſt he coude,
                  Vpon Troians he gan to crye aloude,
                  To enhaſte theim knightly to ſuccoure,
                  Worthy Hector that ſtode in aduenture,
                  Amonge grekes hauing no refute,
                  Sole he him ſelfe of helpe deſtitute.
                  At whych crye on grekes all vnware,
                  ¶Fyrſt of all came worthy Cincibare.
                  That brother was to Hector borne in baſte,
                  Ridinge him ſelfe tofore in all haſte.
                  And ye knightes of whom he tho was guyde,
                  Wonder proudly pricking by his ſyde.
                  Sodaynly together one and all,
                  In a froſhe be on the grekes fall,
                  That had Hector rounde beſet aboute.
                  And through manhode of this great route,
                  That be enbuſhed on theim at the backe.
                  Thre hondred knightes of which yt I ſpacke,
                  For aſtoned gan theim to withdrawe.
                  But thurty firſt cruelly were ſlawe.
                  And maugre theim Hector of manhede,
                  Amid the felde taken hath his ſtede,
                  And entred is in amonge the prees,
                  As he that daye of knighthode pereles.
                  While he helde his blody ſworde in hande,
                  All tho that there in felde agayne him ſtande,
                  There was no helpe playnly nor no rede,
                  But that he brake and karfe a two the threde,
                  And the knotte of cruell Attropos.
                  Onely for he was let of his purpoſe,
                  
                     At his leyſer to ſpoylen Patroclus.
                  Therfore in Ire wood and furious,
                  Full cruelly grekes quytte he their mede.
                  Whiche from his face faſte gan them ſpede.
                  Whoſe ſharpe ſworde bathed in theyr bloud,
                  Was dyed red for it dyd hym good,
                  Vpon them tho auenged for to be.
                  For that daye a Lyon played he,
                  Vpon grekes his manhode for to haunte.
                  For he their pryde ſo mortally gan daunte,
                  That they hym fledde where ſo that he rode,
                  Makyng all hote the ſtreintes of their bloud,
                  Endlonge to renne and ſhede vpon ye grene.
                  ¶Tyll the tyme the duke of great Athene,
                  That called was whylom Meneſteus,
                  With thre thouſande knyghtes full famous,
                  Of whom he was both lorde and guyde,
                  The fyelde hath take vpon the lefte ſyde.
                  For a deceyte in full ſecrete wyſe.
                  ¶Where Troylus was with ye folke of Friſe.
                  Whiche hath that daye who ſo lyſte to ſeke,
                  By his knighthode kylled many greke.
                  Lyke a Tygre gredy on his praye.
                  Troylus bare hym all the longe daye,
                  Sleynge of grekes many worthy knyght,
                  And whyle that he was buſyeſt in fyght,
                  ¶Agayne his foen with kyng Antipus,
                  And the kynge that hyght Alchanus,
                  Vpon grekes ylyche freſhe and newe,
                  Making their ſides all of blody hewe.
                  By one aſſent theſe thre through their māhed,
                  And ſpecially vpon his bay ſtede,
                  Where ſo euer that this Troylus rode,
                  Euery greke that his ſworde abode,
                  Sodaynly he made for to ſterue.
                  Through their plates he gan ſo depe kerue.
                  ¶And this continued tyll duke Meneſte,
                  Of Troylus ſawe the great cruelte.
                  And the ſlaughter that he of grekes made,
                  Of haſty yre with face pale and fade,
                  ¶Hent a ſpere and threwe it in the reſt.
                  And Troylus ſmytte euen amydde the breſt,
                  So ſternely that maugre his renowne,
                  To the earth anone he bare him downe.
                  In the myddes of his mortall foen,
                  That cruelly hym beſette anone,
                  And hym to treyne layde out hoke and laſe,
                  Rounde about in maner of compaſe.
                  With ſpere & darte and ſwordes forged bright
                  But he hym ſelfe deffendeth lyke a knight.
                  With great manhode his honour to auaunce,
                  Albe his lyfe was hanged in balaunce.
                  Where he ſtode and felte full vnſwete.
                  In poynt of deth amonge the horſe fete,
                  With great awayte of duke Meneſte,
                  Howe this Troylus myght haue take be.
                  Of mortall hate caſtynge in his thought,
                  At myſchyefe take that he eſcape nought.
                  On euery halfe he was ſo beſette,
                  With ſworde & ſpere kene grounde & whette.
                  Alone alas mortally beſtadde,
                  They ſeaſed hym & forth they haue him ladde.
                  Tyll Meſers a worthy knight of Troye,
                  Gan to crye as he ſtode in the waye,
                  Sore abaſhed in ryght furyous wyſe,
                  Oh ye noble worthy men of Fryſe,
                  Manly knightes aye preued in the fyelde,
                  Moſte renowmed both with ſpere and ſhielde
                  Conſyder now vnto your hyghe fame,
                  And aduert the glorye of your name.
                  How this daye throughe your neclygence,
                  By the power and myghty vyolence,
                  Of the grekes Troylus is ytake.
                  Sool in the fyelde for ye haue hym forſake.
                  That ſhall rebounde to your alder ſhame.
                  For ye in ſoth greatly are to blame,
                  If he that is of worthyneſſe the floure,
                  Betake of grekes for lacke of your ſuccoure.
                  That but yf ye taken haſty wreche,
                  Shameful reporte your honour ſhall apeche,
                  Perpetually and ſaye therof amys,
                  In your defaute that Troylus taken is.
                  Whiche named be ſo worthy and famous,
                  And with that worde the kyng Alcamus,
                  Of melancolye felte his herte ryue.
                  And in his yre hente a ſpere blyue,
                  And pryckyng after enchaſteth what he might
                  Tyll he of them playnly had a ſyght.
                  That buſy were Troylus for to lede.
                  And he full knyghtly ſyttyng on his ſtede,
                  Ran one through that he fell downe dead,
                  And efte agayne pale and nothyng redde,
                  In his rancour no longer wolde he lette,
                  But a greke the fyrſte that he mette,
                  Through the body ſmet he with a ſpere.
                  That men myght ſe therof the poynt a fere.
                  By breſt and plate through the ſhulder bone,
                  That to the ground he fel downe dead anone.
                  
                     And tho forthwith the worthy Fryſes all,
                  Came flokmele downe and on the grekes fal,
                  So myghtely that maugre their diffence,
                  They ſette vpon with ſo great vyolence,
                  That Troylus is from all daunger free.
                  And through their knightly magnanimyte,
                  They maden hym there to recure his ſtede.
                  And ſpecially helpyng in this nede,
                  Was zantipus the ſtronge manly kyng.
                  Whiche of diſdaine at his commyng,
                  On Meneſte he gan his ſpere grate.
                  And through his ſhielde mayle & thicke plate,
                  So ſore he ſmote that this Meneſte,
                  Had be dead ne had his armour be.
                  Whiche for Ire gan tremble tho and ſhake,
                  That Troylus was from his handes take,
                  And eſcaped to be pryſoner.
                  Diſpyte his berde and maugre his power.
                  Wherfore he gan of haſty hote enuye,
                  On his knyghtes furyouſly to crye,
                  That were ſo mighty renowmed and ſtronge,
                  To payne them for to venge his wronge,
                  Vpon Troyans to mete them in the face.
                  ¶And they in haſt gan mightely enbrace,
                  Their ſharpe ſperes grounde for to byte,
                  And felly foyne and together ſmytte.
                  ¶For tho began the great mortall werre,
                  The fyre braſt out ſhene as any ſterre.
                  On baſenettes and their plates bryght,
                  That through ye fielde flaumeth ye fereful light
                  To lyfe nor death they toke tho no hede.
                  And downe the plaine both in length & bredth
                  The wardes gan proudly to auale.
                  And with lokes ryght enuyouſly pale,
                  They aproche and aſſemble yfere.
                  In hate brennyng that no man may ſtere.
                  And gan hurte with ſpere ſworde and darte,
                  And mortally vpon euery parte,
                  The ſlaughter gan greatly for to rewe,
                  And ylyche alwaye newe and newe,
                  Hector grekes through his worthyneſſe,
                  Where he rode manly dyd oppreſſe,
                  And mercyleſſe ſlowe them and bare downe,
                  Now here now there without excepciowne,
                  So furyouſly that routhe was to ſee.
                  ¶And then of new duke Meneſte,
                  Repayred is with full enuyous herte,
                  From his hondes that Troylus ſo a ſterte,
                  And for the ſlaughter eke of his meyne,
                  That where he rode buſy was to ſlee.
                  The troian people whan he myght them mete
                  For him tauenge for nothyng wolde he lete.
                  Tyll caſually amonges all the preſe,
                  ¶A knight he mette that hyght Myſeres.
                  Whyche in diſpyte of this Meneſte,
                  Had at the reſcuſe of worthy Troylus be.
                  And maugre him put hym from his praye,
                  And ſo befell on the ſelfe daye,
                  As they mete agayne of aduenture,
                  That Meneſte by his cote armure,
                  Marked hym by armes that he bare.
                  And ſodeynly or that he was ware,
                  And or that he might taken any hede,
                  Furiouſly on his mightye ſtede,
                  And with a ſpere amyd the renges all,
                  Bare hym ouer and made hym for to fall.
                  Mauger his might to the earth adowne.
                  ¶And than I fynde howe the kynge Hupon,
                  Deſcended is the ſtorye lyſte not lye,
                  Two thouſande knyghtes in his companye,
                  Whiche on grekes felly gan to ſette.
                  And in ye berde kynge Prothenor them mette.
                  And Archelaus the noble werryour,
                  Of Boece the lorde and gouernour.
                  With helpe onely of this Prothenor,
                  Lyke to a Tygre or a wood Bore,
                  Gan Troyans aſſaylen to the deth.
                  And many one him ſelfe that daye he ſleeth.
                  But kyng Hupon through his chyualrye,
                  Full fell that tyme in his melancolye,
                  Full many greke gaue his dethes wounde.
                  And thus they gan eche other to confounde.
                  Such mortall hate amonges them there was
                  Tyll of fortune a knyght Pollydamas,
                  ¶On Troye ſyde ſonne of Anthenor,
                  With his knightes and hym ſelfe tofore,
                  Is on grekes right enuious of pryde,
                  Amyd their wardes fallen in a ſyde,
                  And gan them breke & knightly to diſſeuer,
                  Againe whoſe ſword they might not perſeuer,
                  He was on them ſo inly furyous.
                  ¶And him to helpe came the kyng Remus,
                  With a wynge on that other parte,
                  Breakyng in with many ſpere and darte,
                  Agayne grekes with thre thouſand knightes,
                  That to beholde how felly that he fyghtes,
                  It was in ſothe vnto them of Troye,
                  A very luſte and heauenly aioye.
                  
                     To ſee how grekes brake there aſondre,
                  That the noyſe loude as any thonder,
                  In the fyelde of ſtrokes gan aryſe.
                  ¶And while Remus as ye haue herde deuiſe
                  Vpon grekes was ſo enuyous,
                  Into the fyelde came Menelaus,
                  With his worthy knightes of Spartenſe,
                  Agayne Remus to maken reſyſtence.
                  And full proudely makyng no delaye,
                  This worthy Remus and kynge Menelaye,
                  On horſe backe with ſharpe ſperes whette,
                  Amydde the fielde byn together mette.
                  And through their manly proweſſe & renown,
                  From horſebacke eche bare other downe.
                  For none the ſtroke of other tho might ſhone.
                  And in that whyle of Anthenor the ſonne,
                  Pollydamas luſty freſhe and lyght,
                  As he that was in his delyuer myght,
                  And deſyrous to honour to attayne,
                  Mette in the fielde the neuewe of Heleyne,
                  The mighty duke called Mereus.
                  Flouringe in youthe and ryght vertuous.
                  Freſhe armed newe and luſty of courage,
                  And was in ſothe but twenty yere of age.
                  Whyche of ſo yonge was a noble knight.
                  Right renoumed bothe of herte and might.
                  But of fortune it befell alas,
                  The Troian knight Dan Pollidamas,
                  With a ſpere throughe ſhelde maile and plate,
                  Hytte hym ſo that by cruell fate,
                  Amonge grekes that he fallen is downe dead
                  Of whiche thyng when Menelaye toke hede,
                  And ſawe hym lye ſlayne on the grene,
                  In his herte remembrynge on the quene,
                  The quene Heleine to whom he neuewe was.
                  For dole of which a full delyuer pas,
                  To Remus rode in his cruelte,
                  Alſo ferre as he might him ſe.
                  And full knightly mette him in the berde,
                  And ſmytte at him with his ſharpe ſwerde,
                  Vpon the head in his hatefull tene,
                  That on his ſtede he might not ſuſtene.
                  His wounde was ſo paſſingly mortall,
                  That with the ſtroke and the perillous fall,
                  His knightes wende dead that he had be.
                  ¶And hent him vp and began to fle,
                  To Troye warde with him a great paſe.
                  ¶But it befell that Pollidamas,
                  The maner of theim when that he behelde,
                  Made theim repayre knightly into felde,
                  Except that ſome as they in bidding hadde,
                  Worthy Remus home to Troye ladde.
                  Pale and dead with his woundes wide,
                  And tho came in on the grekes ſyde,
                  ¶Celydys the luſty freſhe kinge.
                  Of whom Dares ſayeth in his wrytinge,
                  And for a ſothe in his boke lyſt tell,
                  How Celydys all other did excell,
                  Both in beaute and in ſemelyheade.
                  Of ſhape of porte and of goodlyheade,
                  Surmounting all as Dares liſt deſcriue.
                  As in fayrneſſe all tho that time alyue,
                  All his limmes compact were ſo clene.
                  And as I rede the yonge freſhe quene,
                  Of feminye which was of beaute floure,
                  Kinge Celidys loued as paramoure.
                  That vpon him was hooly her pleſaunce.
                  He was ſo printed in her remembraunce.
                  For chiefe reſorte ſothly of her herte,
                  Was vpon him eche houre to aduerte.
                  For fynally he departed nought,
                  Day nor night nor houre from her thoughte.
                  For he was fully all her owne knight.
                  ¶But of fortune he luſty freſhe and light,
                  Smote his ſtede ſharply in the ſyde,
                  Of ſurquedrye and proudly gan to ryde,
                  Of mortall hate a full furyous paſe,
                  Right as lyne to Pollidamas.
                  And with a ſpere made him for to flytte,
                  From his ſadell in which he tho did ſytte,
                  He marked him with ſo great a might.
                  And eft ayene this noble troian knight,
                  Pollydamas with a deſpitous face,
                  Or Celidys departed fro the place,
                  With a ſwerde ſo ſmyt him on the heade,
                  From his ſtede that he fell downe deade,
                  Which to grekes was great confuſion.
                  And all this tune fierſer than a Lyon,
                  Hector grekes knightly gan enchaſe,
                  And oft made theim for to leſe their place.
                  Where euer he rode of neceſſyte.
                  Afore his ſwerde he made theim for ſo fle,
                  Suche vengeaunce he hath on theim take.
                  That they the felde were fayne to forſake,
                  And to purſewe would he neuer fyne,
                  Till amonge the people of Salomine,
                  Hector met the worthy kinge famous,
                  That was their lorde and hight Theſalus,
                  
                     That many Troian that daye had yſlawe.
                  And as Hector towardes him gan drawe,
                  Kynge Tenter eke that was of grece alſo,
                  A manly knight and prudent both two,
                  Raught a ſpere in all the haſte he can,
                  And at vnwares he to Hector ran,
                  And through his ſhelde plate & mayle of ſtele,
                  The ſpeare head forged was ſo wele,
                  So ſharpe ſquare and ſo kene ygrounde,
                  That he to Hector gaue a perillous wounde.
                  But as Hector tournen gan his ſtede,
                  Proude Center to aquite his mede,
                  He full wyſely in all the haſte he myght,
                  Was ryght ferre ſeuered from his ſyght.
                  Wherof Hector melancoleous,
                  And of herte wood and furyous,
                  For the akynge of the wounde grene,
                  In haſte tauenge the conſtraynte of his tene,
                  What greke after ſhortly that he mette,
                  That was ſo bolde his waye to with ſette,
                  Without mercy he was his death anone.
                  And as I read he encountred one,
                  Whiche of pryde his purpoſe wolde diuerte
                  Whom with his ſworde he roue to the herte,
                  Through his herneys of melancolye.
                  The whiche ſtroke whan grekes gan eſpye,
                  They aſtoned of one entencyon,
                  Peryllouſly be ſette hym enuyron,
                  And ſuche aſſaute gan aboute hym make,
                  Though their manhod if they might him take
                  And of accorde with great multitude,
                  Cruelly they gan him to include,
                  By lykelyhode in that mortall ſtryfe.
                  He myght not eſcapen with the lyfe,
                  On hym they were ſo fell and enuyous.
                  Tyll that a kynge whiche hyght Theſeus,
                  On grekes ſyde onely of gentylneſſe,
                  Suche routhe caught vpon his dyſtreſſe,
                  To ſe hym ſtande ſo nye vpon the wrake,
                  Thus vnto hym of manly pety ſpake.
               
               
                  OH flour of knyghthode rote of hardynes,
                  Welle of manhode ſtoke of worthynes,
                  Whylyſt ye not to haue none aduertence,
                  Thy lyfe to ſaue of knyghtly prouydence.
                  But wylfully where moſt is to drede,
                  Thy lyfe Iupardeſt and take lyſte no hede,
                  In mortall peryll howe thou art beſette,
                  Amonge ſo many cloſed and yſhette.
                  Alone alas deuoyde of all ſocoure,
                  And to thy ſelfe wylte do no fauoure,
                  But as fortune lyketh to ordayne,
                  That euery wyght ought to complayne,
                  To beholde that ſuche a worthy knyght,
                  Whiche through the world caſt ſo clere a lyght
                  In worthineſſe and wyll him not withdrawe,
                  Rekleſly this day thus to be ſlawe,
                  So pyteouſly thy perſone for to leſe,
                  Withdrawe thy hande yet ſyth yu mayſt cheſe,
                  Thy hygh proweſſe compelleth me to preye,
                  At ſuche myſchefe that thou not ne deye.
                  ¶And whan Hector of hym gan take hede,
                  He thanked hym of his goodly hede,
                  And maugre ſothly the power and the myght,
                  He from the grekes lyke a worthy knight,
                  Eft ſcaped is mydde of all his foen.
                  And went his way through them euerichone.
                  His blody ſworde alway in his honde,
                  And in his waye Pollydamas he fonde,
                  Full lyke a man with all his buſy payne,
                  Defende him ſelfe agayne the kinges twaine,
                  Menelay and Thelamonius.
                  Which vpon him were full furyous.
                  And wt a ſpere this greke this Thelamowne,
                  Pollydamas ſmote to the earthe adowne.
                  Compellyng him there was none other bote,
                  Agayne theim two to fyght eu on his fote.
                  Aſſented fully on him to be wroke.
                  And fyrſt they haue hewen and to broke,
                  The mighty charnelle of his baſſenet,
                  And whan his vyſer after was of ſmet,
                  And his face naked was and bare,
                  They fell on hym in that mortall ſnare,
                  And haue him take the ſtorye can deuyſe,
                  And ſent him forth in full cruell wyſe,
                  Towarde grekes with many worthy knyght.
                  But whan Hector therof had a ſyght,
                  And ſawe the myſchefe of Pollydamas,
                  He caſte fully to ſocoure in this caſe,
                  And prycked after wooder than Lyon,
                  And where he rode aboute hym enuyron,
                  With his ſwerde he made a large ſpace,
                  Tyll that he came to the ſelfe place,
                  Amonges grekes furyous and wood,
                  Pollydamas the ſelfe tyme ſtode,
                  Socourles deuoyde of remedye,
                  Tyll that he on Hector caſte his eye,
                  That grekes made haſtely withdrawe,
                  
                     And thirty fyrſt of them hath he ſlawe.
                  And ſeuered them maugre all their pryde,
                  Tofore his ſworde they durſte not abyde.
                  Agaynſt hym nor make none obſtacle.
                  But of knighthode by very hyghe myracle,
                  Pollydamas in myſchyefe fyrſte awhaped,
                  From grekeſhe hande frely is eſcaped.
                  ¶But freſhly tho the kynge Epyſtrophus,
                  Menelay and Thelamonyus,
                  With all their knyghtes togyther hole & cloſe,
                  Agayne Troyans to getten them aloſe,
                  Be of new entred in battayle.
                  With great ſtrength and paſſynge apparayle,
                  That mightely Troyans they compell,
                  In their waye that they dare not dwelle.
                  Notwithſtandyng their great worthyneſſe.
                  Nor of Hector the knightly hygh proweſſe.
                  That fought ſo manly that tyme as I read,
                  But cowardly they haue ſlayne his ſtede,
                  That he conſtrayned was to fyght on fote.
                  That many greke felte full vnſote.
                  For there was none that aboute hym ſtode,
                  With his ſwerde that he ne ſhadde his bloud.
                  Though he ſo thycke about was be layne.
                  He voyded them and made a ſpace playne.
                  In compaſſe rounde behynde and eke afore,
                  And on his fete ſo well he hath hym bore,
                  That day. that greke was none certayne,
                  That hardy was hande on hym to layne.
                  He was ſo ſtronge and ſturdy as a wall.
                  And whan his brothern called naturall,
                  Sawe hym a fote amyd of all his foen,
                  On a fruſhe they fell in euerychon,
                  And founden hym the ſtory maketh mynde,
                  Deffende him ſelfe as Tygre doth in Inde.
                  And him to helpe through their high renown,
                  They fallen fyrſt on kyng Thelamowne.
                  For he on Hector was ſo cruell founde.
                  They gaue to hym many blouddy wounde.
                  Tyll one of them named Dyndaron,
                  Hath ſo ferre amonge the renges gone,
                  And bore hym ſo only of manhead,
                  That he hath wonne a paſſyng myghty ſtede.
                  ¶And brought to Hector ſothly there he ſtode
                  Amonge grekes all bathed in their bloud.
                  The whiche in haſte ful knightly he be ſtrode,
                  And thē amonge lyke Mars himſelfe he rode.
                  Full many greke makyng for to ſterue.
                  And with this ſworde whetted for to karue,
                  He daunted hath their enuious pryde.
                  Tyll Deyphobus entred in a ſyde,
                  Into the fyelde with a knightly chere,
                  And with hym brought many good archer,
                  Of Boeme whiche with their arrowes kene,
                  And with fethers of Pecock freſhe and ſhene,
                  Vpon grekes haue the fyelde recured.
                  In their ſhotte they were ſo muche aſſured.
                  That through mayle and thicke plate of ſtele,
                  They perced haue their harneys euery dele.
                  ¶And Deiphobus full lyke a manly man,
                  To kynge Tentran on horſe backe tho ran.
                  And furyouſly gan his ſwerde enbrace.
                  And wounded hym euen amyd the face.
                  Through the vyſer in his felle tene.
                  On horſe backe that he myght not ſuſtene,
                  And thus on grekes the Troyans are yron,
                  That they agayne hath the fielde ywonne.
                  They were on them ſo yrons and ſo wood,
                  But Theſeus full knightly them withſtode,
                  With the knightes that he with him ladde,
                  ¶And as I read Hector a brother hadde,
                  The ſtory ſayth that hyght Quintilene,
                  Yonge freſhe and luſty armed bryght & ſhene,
                  Whiche with the kinge called Modernus,
                  Is proudely falle vpon Theſeus,
                  And theſe twayne togither of aſſent,
                  Be falle on hym with great aduiſement,
                  That fynally to his vnhappy chaunce,
                  With their knyghthode broughte hym to outtraunce,
                  And caſt ſhortly that he ſhalbe dead.
                  Of whoſe purpoſe as Hector gan take hede,
                  He vnto them of very gentery,
                  With all his myght loude gan to crye,
                  Beſechyng them for nothyng that he deye.
                  And lowely they his byddyng dyd obeye.
                  And them withdrewe for to do vengeaunce,
                  For Hector had fully remembraunce,
                  Now Theſeus the ſame daye tofore,
                  Towarde hym ſo goodly had hym bore,
                  Whan he hym ſawe in miſchyefe and dyſtreſſe,
                  And knightly thought quyte his gentilneſſe.
                  Lyke as it longeth to euery gentylman.
                  ¶And Theſeus full lowly tho began,
                  To thanke Hector that he was eſcaped.
                  ¶But kyng Thoas tho hath faſte yraped,
                  Into the fyelde with other knightes many,
                  And ſpecyally with them of Calydony,
                  ¶Came Phyloctetes the myghty kinge alſo,
                  
                     Agayne the Troyans for to haue ado,
                  And fyrſt Thoas with a ſpere ran,
                  ¶Furyouſly to Caſſybellan,
                  One of the ſonnes of kynge Pryamus.
                  And gaue hym tho a wounde ſo greuous,
                  Without recure that he fell downe dead.
                  Of whiche ſtroke when Hector gan take hede
                  In his herte gan his death complayne,
                  And in all haſte dyd his buſy payne,
                  On his brother auenge him if he myght,
                  And many one he made to a lyght,
                  Through his knighthod from his horſe backe
                  That ſothfaſtly all went to wrake,
                  On grekes ſyde what came in his waye.
                  So worthely he bare hym all that daye.
                  ¶Tyll duke Neſtor is entred in to fyght,
                  With fyue thouſande in ſtele armed bryght,
                  Agayne the Troyans grekes to ſocoure,
                  And with hym mette of very auenture,
                  ¶The kynge Eſdras ſo mighty and ſo bolde,
                  And kyng Phylon in his chare of golde,
                  With all the worthy noble chyualrye,
                  That from Agreſta came with Iaconye,
                  The kynges ſonne of the ſame lande,
                  Full renowmed and worthy of his hande.
                  And as they ſemble and together ran,
                  The ſame tyme many worthy man,
                  Hath loſte his lyfe vpon eyther ſyde.
                  And of the ſlaught with large woundes wyde
                  All the ſoyle of bodyes that laye dead,
                  Lyke a ryuer ran with ſtreames red.
                  With their cheres gryſely pale and fade,
                  That in the bloud men might go and wade,
                  To the ancle the ſlaughter was ſo huge.
                  ¶And kyng Phylon ſocour and refuge,
                  Vnto Troyans ſo bare hym in that ſtryfe,
                  That many greke he made leſe his lyfe,
                  The ſame day ſo well his ſworde was whette.
                  But he vnwarely was ſo ſore beſette,
                  With multytude of grekes rounde aboute,
                  That of his lyfe he playnly ſtode in doubte.
                  For lykely was he myght not eſcape,
                  And of grekes he ſhulde anone be take,
                  Ne had the helpe be of worthy Iaconye,
                  That to Eſdras loude gan to crye,
                  Alas quod he of routhe and pyte,
                  ¶Worthy Phylon the kyng ſhall taken be.
                  Amonge grekes through your necligence,
                  But in all haſte ye do your diligence,
                  For to reſcue this noble worthy kynge.
                  And all attones without more taryinge,
                  Maugre all tho that maden reſyſtence,
                  From grekes ſwerde by myghty vyolence,
                  They haue reſcued the noble kyng Phylon.
                  And at his large with them he is gone.
                  Of his eſcape wonder gladde and lyght.
                  ¶And Hector than with many luſty knight,
                  Retourned is and Deiphobus alſo,
                  Pollydamas and many an other mo,
                  Of Troyan knightes that deſyre newe,
                  To cauſen grekes ſore for to rewe.
                  For of aſſent they fully them purpoſe,
                  In ſuche miſchiefe grekes to encloſe,
                  That if they might fewe ſhulde eſcape.
                  And therupon knightly they them ſhape,
                  And them began freſhely for to aſſayle,
                  That in the fielde grekes gan to faile,
                  Of their power and to leſe their lande.
                  That fynally through the mighty hande,
                  And the force of the Troyan knightes,
                  The grekes had maugre all their mightes
                  Be brought that day to confuſyowne.
                  ¶But Menelay and kyng Thelamowne,
                  When they them ſawe febly and apeyre,
                  They of knyghthode made them to repeyre,
                  And ſo lyke men they haue thē ſelfe deffended,
                  Tyll Eneas from Troye is deſcended.
                  With Ewfremus the duke the manly man,
                  And with their knightes of newe they began,
                  Efte agayne grekes to oppreſſe.
                  And Hector aye through his worthyneſſe,
                  Lyke a Lyon with a ſterne face,
                  Euer in one ſo gan them to enchace,
                  That compelled of great neceſſytye,
                  They were echone afore his ſworde to fle.
                  And conſtrayned ryght of very nede.
                  Of whiche thynge when Ayax gan take hede,
                  He had in herte great compaſſyon,
                  To ſe the ſlaughter and confuſyon,
                  On grekes ſyde Guydo maketh mynde.
                  And gan to loke at his backe behynde,
                  And ſawe where many warde ſtode abrode,
                  And many baner and penowne that abode,
                  Amyd the fielde hole and not for broke,
                  That redy were attones to be wroke,
                  If nede were on them of Troye towne,
                  In whiche wardes without excepciowne,
                  Was hole the floure of grekes chyualrye.
                  
                     ¶To whom anone Ayax gan him hye,
                  As he that was in herte ſore agreued,
                  And with his crye he hath thē ſo commened,
                  That they in haſte theim comen to reſkuſe,
                  Amonges whom was there no reffuſe,
                  And as faſt as they gan aſſemble,
                  Of noyſe of horſe the earthe gan to tremble,
                  Furyouſly as they together flynge.
                  There might men the ſtrokes heren ringe,
                  Of ſperes ſharpe through the harneys borne,
                  And through ſheldes wrought of ſtele & horn
                  Into the breſt ſturdy ſquare and brode.
                  ¶And there I fynde how that Ayax rode,
                  ¶To Eneas and he to him alſo,
                  So great enuye was atwyxe theim two,
                  That not but death might their ire apeaſe.
                  For in herte nother might haue eaſe,
                  Tyll with ſperes ſharpe ground and whette,
                  On horſe backe they togyther mette,
                  And at copyng ſo ſore haue they hytte,
                  That eueryche other to the earth ſmytte.
                  That to beholde was a knightly ſyght.
                  And after they bothe on foote fyght,
                  By lyklyhead tho in theyr wood rage,
                  Other to fall in full great domage,
                  Amonge the horſe bycauſe that they ſtode,
                  Vpon the ſoyle all ouer ſpredde with blode.
                  ¶But Phyloctetes is to Ayax come,
                  And hath him vp amonge the horſe ynome,
                  That knightly fought as made is memorye,
                  For ſothly elles Troians with victorye,
                  Had had the fyelde playnly for to ſayne.
                  Tyll Philoctetes with his wardes twayne,
                  Euen in the face manly theim withſtode.
                  And with a ſpere he fyrſt to Hector rode.
                  And vpon him the ſhafte I fynde he brake,
                  But ſothly he vpon his horſe bake,
                  Kept him ſo well for all that fell ſtroke,
                  Remeuinge not but ſturdy as an oke,
                  Sat in his ſadell vpryght with his chine,
                  And wyth a ſpere ryght as any lyne,
                  Into the body depe through the ſhyelde,
                  Philoctetes he ſmote into the fielde,
                  That of his lyfe hys knightes were in doubt.
                  ¶But tho came in with ſo great a route,
                  ¶Kynge Humerus and Vlixes eke,
                  And with them brought many worthy greke.
                  Ten thouſād knightes manly men echone,
                  That gan Troians for to aſſayle anone.
                  And cruelly on euery halfe certayne,
                  With multytude they haue theim ſo belayne,
                  That diſpayred and diſconſolate,
                  And of longe fyght a waped and a mate,
                  Gan withdrawe faynted in battayle,
                  And eke theyr horſe ſothly gan to fayle,
                  That on theyr ſyde all went vp ſo downe.
                  ¶But Parys tho with them of Troy towne,
                  Is entred in in ful manly wyſe,
                  And fyrſt he mette with the kynge of Fryſe.
                  That to Vlyxes nye was of allye,
                  Whom Parys ſmote with ſo great enuye,
                  That he hym ſlewe wherof grekes were,
                  Sore abaſhed and after wyth a ſpere,
                  ¶Vlyxes rode to auenge him if he might.
                  And fyrſt when he of Parys had a ſyght,
                  Into the breſt he gan his ſpere throwe,
                  That fynally for he bare to lowe,
                  Fayling of Parys ſothely as I reade,
                  Vnder him he ſlewe his mighty ſtede.
                  That maugre him he to grounde is gone.
                  And he on him would haue fall anone,
                  ¶But Troilus tho mette him in the berde,
                  And furyouſly with his ſharpe ſwerde,
                  He ſmote Vlyxes throughout his viſer.
                  That lyke a condyte or a ſmall ryuer,
                  Downe by his face of bloud the ſtreames ran.
                  But Vlyxes tho lyke a manly man,
                  Of that ſtroke aſtoned not at all,
                  But on his ſtede ſtiffe as any wall,
                  With his ſwerde ſo mightely gan race,
                  Through the vmber into Troylus face.
                  That he him gaue a large mortall wounde,
                  Of which ſtroke paſſingly ioycounde,
                  The grekes were ſuppoſing in theyr thought,
                  How Troians fynally were brought,
                  Vnto outtraunce and ſothly ſo they hadde,
                  Saue that Hector wt knightes which he lad,
                  And with him Parys and Deiphobus,
                  And al his brethern ī knighthod moſt famous
                  Troylus alſo for all his laſte wounde,
                  That was alway ſo noble knight yfounde.
                  All at ones be ioyned into one,
                  And vpon grekes ſodaynly be gone.
                  ¶And worthy Hector alder fyrſt began,
                  Grekes to enchaſe that afore him ran,
                  Like as beaſtes that fledde fro the death,
                  And euer in one thus he killeth and ſleyeth,
                  Whom he mette or durſt his ſtroke abyde.
                  
                     And on his foen with freſhe woundes wyde,
                  The ſlaught he made alway to renewe,
                  And thylke daye in blody roſen hewe,
                  He hath theyr plates & their harneys ſteined,
                  And thought it had bloud from heauē rained.
                  The ſoyle redder might not tho a ben,
                  And aye ylyche as a ſwarme of been,
                  The grekes flockmele fledde out of his way.
                  And Guydo ſayth that all that ylke daye,
                  Hector had formeſt on the playne,
                  In the frounter of the grekes layne.
                  That behynde the knyghtes of his garde,
                  For lacke of hym were all out of warde.
                  Wherfore when he had ſought full longe,
                  And grekes ſawe of new wexen ſtronge,
                  To his knyghtes he is agayne repeyred.
                  Whych in theim ſelfe greatly were diſpayred,
                  For his abſence. but tho when they him ſe,
                  Full inwardly recomforted they be,
                  And with glad hert haue theyr lorde receiued.
                  And theyr gladneſſe when he hath perceyued,
                  ¶Spake vnto theim full affectiouſly.
                  And lykewyſe prayed theim full beningly,
                  To remembre knyghtly in their herte,
                  And conſyder wyſely and aduerte,
                  Firſt the wronges that grekes haue them do.
                  Of yore ago and ouermore alſo,
                  If grekes had that daye the victorye,
                  Farewell for aye the honour and glorye,
                  Of Troyan bloud in concluſyowne.
                  For fynally we and eke our towne,
                  Shall mortally tournen to ruyne.
                  And our honour that was wont to ſhyne,
                  Throughout the world and our worthineſſe,
                  Eclipſe ſhall and tournen to derckneſſe.
                  But ye this daye lyke as men you quyte.
                  Wherfore I praye that no man ne atwyte,
                  Your hygh renowne of any cowardiſe,
                  To ſette vpon in full manly wiſe,
                  And not to ſpare for dread of death I praye.
                  ¶And they echone full lowly gan obeye,
                  To his deſyre withouten longer tale.
                  And entryng in by a certayne vale,
                  Vpon grekes theſe worthy knyghtes all,
                  Folowing Hector ſodaynly be fall,
                  Full mortally or that they were ware.
                  And Hector tho no greke would ſpare,
                  But euery where to theyr confuſyon,
                  He killed and ſlewe aboute him enuyron.
                  And his knyghtes riding by his ſide,
                  Made theyr foen maugre all their pryde,
                  To leſe their lande & flewe out of their ſighte.
                  ¶Tyll that the kinge which ye Thoas hight,
                  On grekes ſyde inwarde gan him dreſſe,
                  And of newe fulll knyghtly gan oppreſſe,
                  Them of Troye this knight this manly mā.
                  ¶That had afore ſlayn Caſſybellan,
                  One of the ſonnes of king Pryamus.
                  But as he rode of fortune it fell thus,
                  That all the brethren on a fruſhe he mette,
                  Which of aſſent enuyron him beſette,
                  And from his ſadell that many greke beheld,
                  Amonge the horſe ſmyt him into felde.
                  And of they rente firſt his baſenet,
                  And cruelly they had his head of ſmet.
                  For he vnarmed all at myſchief ſtode.
                  ¶Saue that the Duke furyous and wood,
                  Of Athenes riding tho a great paſe,
                  Reſkued him in this mortall caſe,
                  With his knightes that about him rode.
                  And him to helpe without more abode,
                  With a ſpere ſharpe whet and kene.
                  ¶Fyrſt of all he fell on Quintiline,
                  That buſy was Thoas to haue ſlawe.
                  And the bretherene made alſo withdrawe,
                  Whan Quintiline of his horſe was throwe.
                  ¶But Parys thē drewe vp his mighty bow,
                  And to this Duke let an arowe glyde.
                  And through his plates hit him in the ſide,
                  Vpon a rybbe that made him ſore to blede.
                  Of whych ſtroke he ne toke no hede,
                  Bycauſe onely that he ſo feruent was,
                  Amid his foen to helpe thus kinge Thoas,
                  Amonge the horſe that was bore to grounde,
                  In poynt of death with many mortall woūd.
                  Onely for he was naked on the head.
                  But this Duke fully deuoyde of dread,
                  Of his knighthod in this perillous caſe,
                  Amid his foen hath holpe the king Thoas,
                  And with his lyfe made him ſcapen fre.
                  And Hector aye of cruell enmitee,
                  Iliche freſhe for nothing would leue,
                  Vpon grekes his manhode for to preue.
                  Enforſing him to their deſtructiowne.
                  ¶And as he rode amonge theim vp & down,
                  ¶Kinge Humerus hath a bowe take,
                  And to ſhote gan him redy make.
                  And hatefully therin ſet an arowe,
                  
                     And to Hector he marked hath ſo narowe,
                  That he ſmote him euen amid the face.
                  But or he might any ferther pace,
                  Hector ſmyt him with ſo great a payne,
                  That wt his ſwerd he roue his head atwayn.
                  ¶The death of whō when the grekes know.
                  Mine auctour ſaith they haue an horn yblow
                  That vnwarely with that dreadfull ſowne,
                  Seuē thouſād knightꝭ came at ones adowne
                  About Hector without more abode.
                  But of force through theim all he rode.
                  Maugre theyr might that him tho withſette.
                  And ſlowe all tho that his way lette.
                  And would do ſtynt playnly tyll he came,
                  To his father the worthy kinge Pryam.
                  With many worthy full famous of renowne,
                  That wyth his knyghtes faſt by the towne,
                  Laye all the daye with men on horſe & foote,
                  As he that was of knighthod crop and roote,
                  And kept him cloſe in full high prudence,
                  Tyll Hector came vnto his preſence,
                  And him beſought in this great nede,
                  With thre thouſand that he would him ſpede,
                  Vpon grekes in theyr full rage,
                  To fall on theim at moſt auauntage.
               
               
                  ANd thē in haſte this worthy Priamus,
                  With his knightes freſhe & deſyrous,
                  Towarde grekes hath the waye ytake,
                  And ſuch a mordre gan vpon theim make,
                  That many grekes laye dead on the playne.
                  For Pryamus hath theim ſo ſore belayne.
                  On euery halfe through his great might,
                  That they full faſt fledde out of his ſyght.
                  So ſore of newe he vpon theim ſette.
                  ¶And as I fynde they tohether mette,
                  ¶Hector and Ayax of cruell auenture.
                  And on their ſtedes ſtronge and wonder ſure,
                  The ſtorye ſayth in all the haſte they konne,
                  Lyke wood Lyons they together ronne.
                  With ſo great might yt were they lefe or lothe,
                  Vpon the playne they were vnhorſed bothe.
                  ¶And in this whyle Menelay the kinge,
                  Sodaynly as he camen ridinge,
                  He ſlewe of Troye a worthy admyrall.
                  And thus the ſlaughter paſſingly mortall,
                  Renewed aye for that Celidonas,
                  The neuewe ſlewe of the kinge Thoas.
                  And Madā met mine auctour writeth thus,
                  A grekyſhe kinge called Cedeus.
                  Which wt his ſwerde ſuch a ſtroke him ſette,
                  That through ye vmber out his eye he ſmette.
                  ¶And Sardellus that was of Troye eke,
                  The ſame whyle ſlewe a worthy greke,
                  A lorde of name and of high proweſſe,
                  Although Guido his name doth not expreſſe.
                  ¶And then alſo came Margaryton,
                  On Troye ſide agayne Thelamon,
                  And both two inly ſet a fyre,
                  Of high diſdayne and of hatefull yre.
                  As they met on horſe backe both yfere,
                  Kinge Thelamon ſothly as I lere,
                  Gaue vnto him a deadly wounde cruell.
                  ¶But tho came in the Troian Phanuell.
                  And Prothenor ſmote downe of his ſtede,
                  And thus the ſones playnly as I reade,
                  Of Pryamus nothing nat diſmayde,
                  The grekes haue on euery parte outrayed.
                  And ſo knightly all the daye theim borne,
                  That many greke fatally hath lorne,
                  His life in ſothe of hate and enmyte.
                  And kinge Anglas is fall on Meneſte,
                  Of Athenes Duke and gouernoure,
                  And with a ſpere of yre and olde rancoure,
                  He ran and ſmet him tho amyd the ſhyelde.
                  But for al that his ſadell yet he helde.
                  ¶And for that the Duke ſpere had none,
                  He with a ſwerde to Anglas rode anone,
                  And through yt owmber roue of nigh his naſe
                  That he aſtoned ſtode as in a maſe,
                  When that he ſawe the condyte of his blode,
                  So ſtreame out but for all that he rode,
                  Out aſyde fully deuoyde of feare,
                  Vnto the time that he ſtaunched were.
                  ¶But Deamor his owne brother deare,
                  When he behelde his mortall blody cheare.
                  ¶Of high diſdayne he rode to Meneſte,
                  And him vnhorſeth but vp anone ſterte he,
                  And or he might fully vp aryſe,
                  Another brother in full creuell wyſe,
                  Is fall on him ſo that of them thre,
                  Attones weten vpon Meneſte,
                  Fully in purpoſe he ſhall leſe his lyfe.
                  But he ſo knightly bare him in that ſtryfe,
                  Agaynſt theim that wonder was to ſe.
                  And vpon him moſt cruell of theim thre,
                  Was one Thoas eldeſt of echone.
                  Which him to ſleye was buſy euer in one.
                  
                     For all to broke they haue his baſenet,
                  ¶But when that Tenter ſawe him ſo beſet,
                  A grekiſhe kinge as made is mencion,
                  Had in his herte great compaſſyon,
                  And thought playnly of manhode him releue
                  And if he might his fomen for to greue.
                  But all for nought was his buſy payne,
                  For Hector tho fallen is on both twayne,
                  ¶Vpon Tenter and on Meneſte,
                  ¶And had theim ſlayne ne had Ayax be.
                  Which vnto Hector faſte gan him hye,
                  A thouſande knightes in his companye,
                  Him to withſtande and Meneſte to ſaue.
                  From his handes if he might him haue.
                  ¶But Parys tho and the king of Perce,
                  With fiue thouſande as I can reherſe,
                  Of worthy knightes and many troian mo,
                  Be vnto Hector all at ones ygo.
                  In thryfty wiſe cydyng on a rowe,
                  For Parys made a trumpet to be blowe,
                  At whych there came knightly enbattayled,
                  Many Troian full well apparayled,
                  Whych in the fielde of Hector were conueyed.
                  For of one herte they fully haue obeyed,
                  Vnto the bydding of this Troian knight,
                  All freſhe and newe to begyn a fyght,
                  Vpon grekes as ferre forth as they can.
                  Of whom was ſlayne many manly man.
                  And aye the ſlaughter pyteouſly reneweth,
                  That many greke ſore in herte reweth,
                  Theyr great loſſe and deſtructiowne,
                  Wrought vpon thē by theim of Troye towne.
                  And ſpecially of Hector as I finde.
                  Whych on that day as Dares maketh minde,
                  With his hande a thouſande knightes ſlowe.
                  That neuer were adawed of their ſowe,
                  For greke none dare in his waye dwell.
                  For wt his ſwerde he coud theim ſo compell,
                  To leſe theyr grounde of neceſſyte,
                  And lyke as ſhepe afore the wolfe to fle.
                  ¶And as I reade amiddes this victorye,
                  Hector hath met vnder a Tentoree,
                  ¶Amonges grekes Mereon the kinge.
                  To whom he ſpake without more tarying.
                  Oh thou tratoure thy houre aprocheth faſte,
                  For thou art come ſothly to thy laſte,
                  Thy fatall daye hath his courſe yronne,
                  For truſte well or weſtrynge of the ſonne,
                  I caſte platly to quyten the thy mede.
                  And with my ſwerd in haſte thy bloud to ſhed.
                  For thou ſo bolde were on me to daye,
                  Me to diſturben of my ryche praye,
                  At the ſpoylyng of kinge Patroclus.
                  That for cauſe thou were preſumptious,
                  Me to diſturbe thou ſhalt anone be deade.
                  And downe he ſterte & ſmote of firſt his head.
                  ¶And him to ſpoyle alſo gan him haſte.
                  ¶But Meneſte came on him as faſte,
                  Whan he behelde trauerſe at his backe,
                  And wt a ſpere in which was no lacke,
                  Smote him in with ſo great violence,
                  Without ſyght or any aduertence,
                  Of worthy Hector or any takyng hede,
                  The wound of whom ſore gan to blede.
                  But out he went and made it faſte bynde.
                  ¶And Meneſte ſtale away behinde,
                  Not in purpoſe ſothly if he maye,
                  To mete Hector of all that ylke daye.
                  ¶But when that he was ybounde ſore,
                  His wound to ſtaunche that it blede no more,
                  More furyous than he was erſt tofore,
                  Repeyred is with angre al to tore,
                  So aye the yre on his herte fret.
                  That he bare downe all that euer he met.
                  Slayth and kylleth he was ſo mercyles,
                  All tho that put theim ſelfe in the preaſe,
                  Or hardy were wyth hym for to mete.
                  For in his boke lyke as wryte Darete,
                  For very ſothe and in the ſtorye ſayth,
                  If it be ſo that men may gyuen fayth,
                  And full credence of poſſybylyte,
                  As in Guydo clearly ye may ſe,
                  After that he caught his latter wounde,
                  Fynally the grekes to confounde,
                  So as it is affermed in certayne,
                  A thouſand knightꝭ wt his hande were ſlayn,
                  Without theim tho that I ſpake of rathe.
                  And newe alway he gan his ſwerde to bathe,
                  In grekes bloud that ſodaynly they be,
                  So ouerlayne through his cruelte,
                  That greke was none of high nor low eſtate,
                  That he ne was awhaped and amate,
                  Of his knighthod and manly excellence.
                  For there was none to maken reſyſtence,
                  Nor vtterly that durſte take on hande,
                  Of all that daye Hector to wythſtande.
                  ¶And as is made alſo mencion,
                  Thylke daye kyng Agamenon,
                  
                     As ſayth Guydo came not into felde,
                  For cauſes great his preſence he withhelde,
                  On grekes ſyde that al goeth vp ſo downe,
                  Hector on them ſo playeth the wood Liowne.
                  That to theyr tentes they fledde for ſocours,
                  And they of Troye proudly as victours.
                  Sewed after theim by traces of theyr bloud,
                  And there they wan treaſour and great good.
                  And ſpoyled theim in full great dyſtreſſe,
                  Of their armure and of theyr richeſſe,
                  And fell on theim or that they were ware,
                  And home to Troye all that good they bare.
                  For fynally that daye wyth myſchaunce,
                  Grekes had be brought vnto outraunce,
                  Without recure in ſothe for euermore,
                  On euery parte they were belayde ſo ſore,
                  Through the manhode of Hector & ye mighte,
                  With helpe of many other worthy knyght,
                  That ſo felly agayne the grekes wrought,
                  For to ſuch miſchief playnly they thē brought,
                  That ne had be theyr owne pyteous ſlouthe,
                  Of pryde onely and of folye routhe,
                  They had of theim at theyr volunte,
                  That daye for euer had the ſoneraynte.
                  And recured through theyr hygh renowne,
                  Lordſhyppe of theim and dominacyowne,
                  Whych ſhoulde haue laſte and be continuall,
                  Victoryouſly and perpetuall.
                  Haue endured ſaue that cruell fate,
                  Is redy aye with fortune to debate,
                  Agayne thynges that gynne in wilfulneſſe.
                  To make theim fine aye in wretchedneſſe.
                  Through theyr enuyous diſpoſytion,
                  Of ſodayne chaunce and reuolucion,
                  And vnware tourning of her falſe whele,
                  That wyll not byde when a thinge is wele.
                  Alas freyle deuoyde of ſykerneſſe,
                  The cauſe was dimmed ſo with derckneſſe,
                  That hath troians through falſe opynyon,
                  Yblinded ſo in theyr diſcreſcion.
                  And ſpecially fordercked ſo the ſyght,
                  Of worthy Hector the prudēt manly knyght.
                  To ſe afore what ſhulde after ſewe,
                  By good aduyſe the miſchyefe to eſchewe.
                  That folowed theim at the backe behinde.
                  Alas they were wilfully made blynde.
                  The ſame daye when they ſytten ſofte,
                  By victorye on the hill alofte.
                  That they ne could of neclygence not ſe,
                  The after fall of theyr felycite.
                  So put abacke was theyr aduertence.
                  For lacke of reaſon and of high prudence.
                  For they their hap haue voided & theyr grace,
                  That preſently were ſet afore theyr face.
                  For in a man it is not commendable,
                  If fortune be to him fauorable,
                  And blandeſhing with a forhead cleare,
                  To ſmyle on him with a pleſaunt cheare,
                  Onely of fauoure for to helpe him oute,
                  When he in myſchyefe is beſet aboute,
                  If he refuſe his hap of wylfulneſſe,
                  Fortune auoyding through vnkindneſſe,
                  Whan ſhe miniſtreth to him of her grace,
                  Another tyme he ſhall not her embrace.
                  Whan he hath nede to her helpe at all,
                  To ſuccour him or he catche a fall.
                  But rather then for his ingratitude,
                  Frowardly with mowes him delude,
                  Whan he beſt weneth to ſtande in ſikerneſſe.
                  Fortune is aye ſo full of brotilneſſe,
                  Remouable and ready for to flytte.
                  ¶Her welfull houre yt who lyſt not admytte,
                  With her fauour for to be allyed,
                  Another time it ſhall be denied,
                  When he were leueſt finde her fauorable.
                  For in ſome houre ſothly this no fable,
                  Vnto ſome man ſhe graunteth his deſyres,
                  That will not after in a thouſande yeares.
                  Peraunter ones condeſcende,
                  Vnto his will nor his luſt him ſende.
                  ¶As it hath fall this daye vnhappely,
                  To worthy Hector that ſo wilfully,
                  Wrought of head grekes for to ſpare,
                  Fatally when they were in ſnare.
                  For he of theim lyke a conquerour,
                  With victorye tryumphe and honour,
                  Might haue brought thrugh his hye renown
                  The palme of conqueſt into Troye towne.
                  Which he that daye refuſed folylye.
                  ¶For as he rode this Hector cruelly,
                  Amonges grekes ſlowe and bare all downe,
                  Caſually he mette Thelamowne,
                  I meane Ayax nygh of his allye,
                  That of hate and cruel hote enuye,
                  To Hector rode lyke as he were wood,
                  Albe to him he was full nygh of bloud.
                  Yet for all that this yonge luſty knight,
                  
                     Dyd his power and his full myght,
                  Without fayning to haue borne hym downe.
                  Whoſe father hyght alſo Thelamowne,
                  That hym begat the ſtorye telleth vs,
                  Of Eryon ſyſter to Pryamus.
                  And this Ayax flourynge in yonge age,
                  Freſhe and delyuer and of great courage,
                  Sette on Hector of knyghtly hygh proweſſe.
                  And as they met both in theyr woodneſſe,
                  On theyr ſtedes theſe manly champyons,
                  Eueryche on other lyke Tygres or Lions,
                  Began to fall and proudly to aſſayle,
                  And furyouſly ſeuere plate and mayle.
                  Firſt with ſperes longe large and rounde,
                  And afterwarde with ſwerdes kene ygroūde.
                  And fyghtyng thus longe they do contune,
                  Tyll it befell of caſe or of fortune,
                  Token or ſygne or ſome apparence,
                  Or by natures kyndly influence,
                  Whych into hertes doth full depe myne,
                  Namely of theym that borne be of one lyne.
                  Whych cauſe was peraunter of theſe twane.
                  Naturally theyr rancour to reſtrayne,
                  And theyr yre for to modefye,
                  Onely for they ſo nygh were of allye,
                  Vnwyſt of other and therof vnſure,
                  Tyll they were taught onely of nature.
                  For naturally bloud wyll aye of kynde,
                  Drawe vnto bloud where he may it fynde.
                  Whych made Hector kyndely to aduerte,
                  To be meued and ſtered in his herte,
                  Both of knyghthod and of gentilneſſe,
                  Whan he of Ayax ſawe the worthyneſſe,
                  ¶Spake vnto him full beningnely.
                  And ſayd Coſyn I ſaye the trewly,
                  If thou lyſt grekes here forſake,
                  And come to Troye I dare the vndertake,
                  To thyne allyes and to thy kynrede,
                  Thou ſhalt be there withouten any dreade,
                  Full well receyued in partye and in all,
                  Of theim that be of the blode royall,
                  Sothly decended and hygheſt of degre.
                  That it of ryght ſhall ſuffyſe vnto the,
                  And kyndely be to the great pleſaunce,
                  For to repayre vnto thyne allyaunce,
                  Of gentyll herte ſythe nothyng is ſo good,
                  As be confedered with his owne bloud.
                  For I conceyue by thy worthyneſſe,
                  Whych nature doth kyndly in the impreſſe,
                  Of Troian bloud that thou art deſcended.
                  Whych of grekes longe hath be offended.
                  Wherfore I reade to leue theim vtterly,
                  And he aunſwered agayne full humbly,
                  That ſythen he of byrthe was a greke,
                  And was of youthe among them foſtred eke,
                  From the tyme of his natiuitye,
                  And taken had the ordre and degre,
                  Of knighthod eke amonges theim aforne,
                  And ouer this bounde was and ſworne,
                  To be trewe as to theyr nacion.
                  Making of bloud none excepcion,
                  He ſwore he would conſerue his beheſte.
                  And to Hector he made this requeſte,
                  That if that he of manfull gentilneſſe,
                  Would of knyghthod and of worthineſſe,
                  Shewe vnto hym ſo great affectiowne,
                  To make theim that were of Troye towne,
                  Onely withdrawe grekes to purſewe,
                  And for theyr tentes make theim to remewe,
                  And reſorte agayne vnto the towne.
                  Of knighthode routhe and compaſſyowne,
                  Without aſſaylynge or anye more affraye,
                  Made on the grekes for that ilke day,
                  Sythe vnto theim ought ynoughe ſuffyſe,
                  That of the fielde in ſo knightly wyſe,
                  They were of manhead fully poſſeſſours,
                  And of theyr fomen fynally victours,
                  Like as tofore fully is defyned.
                  To whoſe requeſt Hector is enclyned.
                  Alas the while of haſty wilfulneſſe,
                  And made anone without auyſeneſſe,
                  Amydde the fielde trumpet for to blowe,
                  Wherby Troians fully mighten knowe,
                  His wil was that they ſhulde thē withdrawe,
                  After cuſtome playnely and the lawe,
                  And the vſaunce both of nyghe and ferre.
                  Amonges them that be experte in werre.
                  Whan they were moſte feruent for to fyght,
                  Vpon grekes for to preue their might.
                  And had them chaced lowe to the ſtronde,
                  That they were weake of power to withſtāde
                  For they of Troye all of one deſyre,
                  Gan ſette on with ſhotte of wylde fyre,
                  To brenne their ſhyppes & of high miſchaūce,
                  Fynally to put them at outtraunce.
                  ¶And ſo they had this the very trouth,
                  Ne had Hector had vpon them routh,
                  Makyng Troyans repayre ayene to towne,
                  
                     Vngraciouſly to their confuſyowne.
                  As the ſtory ſhall after ſpecifye,
                  For tho he put alas in iupardye,
                  Lyfe & death whiche elles might haue be ſure,
                  And whiche againe they ſhall neuer recure.
               
            
            
               ¶How the grekes through their ſuite opteyned of kyng Pryam a trewce for eyght wekes and of their battayles after the trewce ended. Capitulo .xxiii.
               
                  THey haue matter to complaynen ſore,
                  For fro that daye farewell for euermore,
                  Laude victory and fro them of the towne,
                  To them denyed by diſpoſyowne,
                  Of mortall fate whiche contrarye,
                  In this matter me lyſte no lenger tarye.
                  For they of Troye be entred their Citie,
                  And ſhet their gates for more ſuretie,
                  For of that daye lyke as made is mynde,
                  Thus was the ende in Guydo as I fynde,
                  They wende haue done peraunter for the beſt.
                  ¶And when the ſonne was ygo to reſt,
                  They toke their eaſe all that ylke night,
                  Tyll on the morowe Tytan clere and bryght,
                  Shadde his beames on their hemiſpherye,
                  Makyng the daye for to ſhewe merye.
                  At whiche tyme Troyans anone right,
                  They that were hole and luſty for to fyght,
                  Gan arme theim in purpoſe full that daye,
                  Their foen to mete platly if they maye.
                  For that was hole their wyll & playne entent.
                  And eke they had in commaundement,
                  Tofore of Hector redy them to make.
                  Out of their ſlepe a morowe whan they wake
                  Of whiche thynge they were not neclygent,
                  But to Pryam the grekes haue yſent,
                  There meſſangers the ſame day or pryme,
                  To take trewce onely for the tyme,
                  Of eyght wekes the whiche Pryamus,
                  With Hectors wyll the ſtory telleth thus,
                  Hath graunted them and by auctoritye,
                  Of all the wyſe that were in the Citie.
                  In whiche tyme whyle they leyſer haue,
                  The grekes gan to burye and to graue,
                  The bodyes that afore weren ſlawe,
                  Lyke their rytes in their paynem lawe.
                  With all their might and their buſy cure,
                  For ſome brent and ſome by ſepulture,
                  Encloſed were lyke their eſtate in all,
                  And thus they helde the feaſt funerall,
                  Fro day to day duryng aye the peace.
                  ¶In whiche ſpace I fynde how Achelles,
                  Of Patroclus the death hath ſore playned.
                  As he that was with teares all be rayned,
                  So inwardly he loued hym in herte.
                  That for the anguyſhe and the cruell ſmerte,
                  He longe abode in lamentacion,
                  And dyd make by great affection,
                  A large toumbe for a remembraunce,
                  Myd the fielde as tho was the vſaunce,
                  Amonge grekes with great reuerence.
                  Lyke the honour and the excellence,
                  ¶Of royall burying. ſo this Patroclus,
                  Ygraue was and Protheſelaus,
                  In their toumbes korue of marbyll graye.
                  And nye together in a playne they laye.
                  The werke about them rychly was ywrought
                  And to the earth they were together brought.
                  Solempnely lyke the obſeruaunces,
                  Of their rytes with the circumſtaunces,
                  Of grekes vſed ſothly in tho dayes.
                  Fro poynt to poynt as longeth to their layes.
                  Of ſuche as weren of eſtate royall,
                  So holden was the feaſt funerall,
                  Of theſe two whyles the trewſe doth laſte.
                  ¶And they of Troye buſyed them full faſte,
                  With all their might and their bufy eure,
                  The grene hurtes and woundes for to cure.
                  By their aduyſe that were in ſurgerye,
                  Full well experte to ſhapen remedye,
                  Their ſwolle ſores to ſoften of their payne.
                  That in the ſpace of theſe monthes twayne,
                  They were reſtored to helth in euery thynge,
                  In whiche time Priamus the kinge.
                  ¶Suche ſorowe made for Caſſybellan,
                  In his herte that no wyght ne can,
                  Hym recomforte of his heuineſſe.
                  For day by day of inwarde tenderneſſe.
                  Full pyteouſly he gan to ſobbe and wepe.
                  ¶And the body he made for to kepe,
                  Aboue the earth for a certayne ſpace,
                  Tyll he had choſen out ſome worthy place,
                  To his burying and his ſepulture,
                  And as Guydo vs fully doth aſſure,
                  ¶In Venus temple ryche as any ſhryne,
                  He made his men a toumbe for to myne,
                  In marbell greye and metall rychely,
                  
                     In whiche he put full ſolempnely,
                  The dead corps of this Caſſybellan.
                  Beinge preſent full many manly man.
                  In the phane of Cytherea.
                  The whiche thynge when that Caſſandra,
                  Within her ſelfe conſydered and behelde,
                  And ſawe vp offred his helme & eke his ſhelde,
                  His ſworde alſo and vnto Mars his ſtede,
                  Of inwarde wo ſhe felte her herte blede.
                  Heryng the noyſe and the pyteous crye,
                  The tender wepynge and ſorowyng vtterly,
                  Of them of Troye and lamentaciowne,
                  Which for their frendꝭ throughout al ye towne,
                  They gan to make that were ſlawe afore.
                  With ſodeyne rage her herte was all to tore.
                  So inwardely ſhe might her not reſtrayne,
                  Furyouſly to crye and to complayne,
                  And ſayde alas full ofte and welawaye.
                  ¶Oh wofull wretches that ye be this daye,
                  Vnhappy eke and graceles alſo,
                  Infortunate and inly wo bego.
                  How ye may ſuffre the great harmes kene,
                  Whiche ye are lykely hereafter to ſuſtene,
                  Duryng the ſyege in this towne belocke,
                  Seynge your foen redy to be wroke,
                  Aboute you beſet on euery ſyde.
                  To be venged on your great pryde.
                  I wote ryght well ye may them not eſchewe.
                  That they ne ſhall vnto the death purſewe,
                  You euerychone beſyeged in this place.
                  Without mercy rewth or any grace.
                  Alas alas why wyll ye beſy be,
                  Ye wofull wretches ſhet in this Cite.
                  With the grekes for to ſeken peace,
                  Or the ſworde of vengeaunce mercyles.
                  On hygh and lowe do execuciowne,
                  And or this noble worthy royall towne,
                  Euerſed be and ybrought to nought.
                  Why lyſt ye not conſyder in your thought,
                  How the Modres with their children ſmale,
                  In ſtretes ſhall with face dead and pale,
                  Lye murdred there through grekes cruelte,
                  And yonge maydens in captiuite,
                  Be wepe ſhall in myſerye and wo.
                  Their ſeruitute and this towne alſo.
                  So famous ryche alas it is pyte,
                  With grekes fyre ſhall deſtroyed be.
                  In ſhorte tyme ſothly this no were.
                  Heleyne of vs alas is bought to dere.
                  Syth for her ſake we ſhall euerychone,
                  Poore and ryche exceptyng neuer one,
                  An ende make wofull and pyteous.
                  The yre of them ſhalbe ſo furious.
                  Vpon vs all there is none other meane,
                  Saue onely death vs to go betwene.
                  ¶This was the noiſe and the pyteons crye,
                  Of Caſſandra that ſo dredefully,
                  She gan to make aboute in euery ſtrete.
                  Through ye towne whom euer ſhe might mete
                  Lyke as ſhe had be out of her mynde,
                  Tyll Pryamus faſte made her bynde,
                  And ſhytte vp it as the more routhe,
                  She was not harde albe ſhe ſayd trouth.
                  ¶For neyther wyſedome nor diſcrecion,
                  Counſayle nor wyt prudence nor reaſon,
                  Trouth nor rede withouten any lye,
                  Nor the ſpirite of trewe prophecye.
                  Auayleth not nor all ſuche ſapyence,
                  In place where there is no audyence.
                  For be a man inly neuer ſo wyſe,
                  In counſaylyng or in hyghe deuyſe,
                  In workyng outher or in eloquence,
                  Eche thynge to ſe in his aduertence,
                  Or it be falle afore in his reaſon,
                  Amyd the eye of his diſcrecion.
                  Yet for all this it is the more dole,
                  Without fauour he holden is a fole.
                  For vnfauoured wiſedome vayleth nought,
                  Neyther trouth how dere that it be bought.
                  As Caſſandra for all her wyſe rede,
                  Diſpyſed was and taken of no hede.
                  Of them of Troye to their confuſyon,
                  But cruelly ythrowen in pryſon,
                  Where as a whyle I wyll lette her dwelle.
                  And of grekes forth I wyll you telle.
               
               
                  ANd fyrſt of all how Pallamydes,
                  Gan to grutche agaynſt them yt cheſe,
                  He beyng abſent kyng Agamenon,
                  To haue lordſhyp or domynacyon,
                  On them all namely ſyth that he,
                  Was not worthy to ſuche dignite,
                  For to gouerne ſo great a myghty hoſte.
                  Throughout the world come from euery coſt,
                  Of kynges, prynces, ſo worthy of renowne.
                  For he therof had indignaciowne.
                  ¶And ſayd himſelfe was of more pouſtee,
                  Amonge grekes and greater of degree,
                  
                     Concludyng that by no maner weye,
                  To his power he ne wolde obeye.
                  In peace and werre as by ſubiection.
                  Syth he ne was at his election.
                  Platly affyrmyng how there were but thre,
                  Whan he was choſe kynges of degre,
                  Where as thurty were that tyme abſent,
                  For whiche he ſwore it was not his entent,
                  Nor accordyng with his opynyon.
                  ¶In any wyſe that Agamenon,
                  Of grekes ſhulde haue ſuche gouernaunce.
                  ¶Lo what myſchyefe lyeth in varyaunce.
                  Amonge lordes whan they not accorde.
                  For to drawe fully by one corde.
                  Enuye is cauſe of ſuche dyuyſyon,
                  And couetyſe of domynacyon.
                  That eueryche wolde ſurmounten his felowe,
                  This curſed vyſe often hath withdrawe,
                  Hap and grace in many regyon.
                  For whan diſcorde and falſe diſcencion,
                  Allyed ben in hertes for to ſtryue,
                  Among lordes that kingdom may not thriue.
                  Tyll they reformed be agayne to peace.
                  Amonge them ſelfe playnely this no leaſe.
                  Of whyche thinge grekes token hede,
                  And thought not good ferther to procede,
                  In the matter that Pallamydes,
                  Ymeued had amonges all the preſe.
                  And through their wyt they ſet all in quyete,
                  And made him his rancour for to lete.
                  And to accorde fully in his herte.
                  But nowe muſt I my ſtyle agayne dyuerte,
                  Vnto the werre and telle on the maner,
                  After the trewes how they mette yfeare.
               
               
                  LYke as the ſtorye maketh mencion.
                  The worthy kyng the great Agamenon,
                  When the trewes were paſſed and ygone,
                  In all haſte he gan ordeyne anone,
                  With all myght and waker dylygence,
                  Deuoyde of ſlouthe and all neclygence,
                  To ſette his wardes full auyſely.
                  ¶And to Achylle he full prudently,
                  The fyrſte warde cōmytteth for to lede,
                  And the ſeconde vnto Diomede.
                  The thyrde alſo to kyng Menelay,
                  And the fourth on the ſame daye.
                  ¶He had Meneſte the duke of Athene,
                  At his lodyng in ſtele armed clene.
                  And other wardes folowyng by and by,
                  Agamenon the kyng full manfully,
                  Ordeyned hath how they ſhall procede,
                  As he that was in all his worke and dede,
                  Full circumſpect both in werre and peace.
                  ¶And worthy Hector was not reckles,
                  To ſette his wardes of them of the towne.
                  In knightly wyſe of diſcreciowne,
                  And to Troylus ſo yonge freſhe and lyght,
                  The fyrſt warde with many luſty knyght,
                  He hath aſſygned and other wardes ſet,
                  So prudently they ne myght be no bet.
                  And forth in haſt hym lyſte no longer byde,
                  With many worthy rydyng by his ſyde.
                  Out at the gates he went of the towne,
                  Towarde grekes this Troyan champiowne.
                  And fyrſt whan he ſawe the fyerſe Achylle,
                  He ne coulde no lenger kepe hym ſtyll,
                  But ſmote his horſe felly in the ſyde,
                  And towarde hym cruelly gan ryde.
                  The whiche thynge with a diſpyteous eye,
                  Whan Achylles ſothly gan eſpye,
                  Agayne Hector of manfull hardyneſſe,
                  With herte enuyous gan his ſtede dreſſe.
                  And in the fyelde together as they mette,
                  With rounde ſperes the poyntes kene whette,
                  At the encountryng of knightly excellence,
                  Eueryche other through great vyolence,
                  By very force bare other vnto grounde.
                  As full ofte it happeth and is founde,
                  Whan ſtronge doth mete with his peregall.
                  There is no more but eueryche had a fall.
                  But Hector fyrſt of ſtrength moſt aſſured,
                  His ſtede agayne hath anone recured.
                  And lefte Achylle tho of gentilneſſe,
                  And in great haſt forth he gan hym dreſſe,
                  Amonge grekes and where ſo that he rode,
                  He kylled and ſlewe all that hym with ſtode.
                  For wt his ſworde he made their woūdes wide
                  And through the breſt & ſome through the ſide,
                  He perced hath and waged them for euer,
                  And ſheltroūs brake & made them to diſſeuer.
                  For in his herte him thought it did him good,
                  To hath his ſworde in the grekes bloud.
                  And this continued tyll that Achylles,
                  Caught his ſtede agayne amonge the preſe.
                  And entred in amonges them of Troye,
                  And with his ſwerde he made large weye.
                  Sleeth and bare downe whom yt euer he met,
                  
                     For there was none hardy hym to lette.
                  Tyll it befell in his melancolye.
                  ¶Hector he mette rydyng ſodainly,
                  And when they ſawe eche other come a ferre,
                  Without abode eueryche caught a ſpere,
                  And ran together there was no more a reſte.
                  ¶But Hector fyrſt ſmette him in the breſt,
                  That his ſpere playnely this no tale,
                  All to ſhyuered into peces ſmale.
                  That Achilles of neceſſyte,
                  To grounde goth it wolde none other be.
                  And vnhorſed at the earth laye.
                  And Hector then in all the haſte he may,
                  Enforced hym for to catche his ſtede.
                  But many a greke in this great nede,
                  Came to reſcues of this Achylles.
                  And for his loue put them ſelfe in preſe.
                  Thrugh help of whō his horſe he doth attaine
                  Enhaſtyng him with al his might & payne,
                  To be auenged of his great iniurye.
                  And ſodeynly in his wood furye,
                  With a ſworde ful ſharpe ground and whette,
                  ¶He ſmote Hector vpon the baſenet,
                  That from his ſadell he made hym to remewe
                  The whiche ſtroke he might not eſchewe,
                  But for all that this noble worthy knight,
                  Of very force through his great myght,
                  Maugre his foen his ſadell hath recured.
                  As he that was in manhode moſt aſſured.
                  And ſodeynly in herte he wexed ſo wroth,
                  That in arage to Achylles he goth,
                  And with his ſworde ſo ſmyt him on the head,
                  Through the baſenet that the bloud all red,
                  By his face gan to ronnen downe,
                  Lyke a ryuer his chekes enuyrowne.
                  But he hym ſelfe deffendeth as a knyght,
                  And tho of newe began the cruell fyght.
                  Atwene them two to ſe that it was wonder.
                  For euery ſtroke great as dent of thonder,
                  Range in the eyre for none wolde other ſpare.
                  And this the ſoth in their fyght they fare,
                  Lyke wood Tygres or Bores in their rage,
                  Or ſterne Bulles whan they be ſauage.
                  That it ſemyd in very ſothfaſtneſſe,
                  If theſe two ſo full of worthyneſſe,
                  Contune longe in fyghtynge and endure.
                  The tone or both of cruell aduenture,
                  Muſt haue be dead of neceſſyte.
                  The whiche thyng had great petye be.
                  Bycauſe they weren worthy knyghtes bothe.
                  But whyle that they in fyghtyng fell & wroth,
                  Moſt buſy were the grekes tho begyn,
                  With their wardes for to entre in.
                  And they of Troye the ſtorye maketh mynde,
                  On their partye lefte not behynde,
                  But in the fyelde enhaſte them euerychone.
                  In knightly wyſe to mete with their fone,
                  That with the preaſe here and alſo yonder,
                  The knyghtes two ſeuered were a ſonder.
                  ¶And tho came in ſterne Dyomede.
                  With the knyghtes whiche he there dyd lede,
                  Full luſtly and in the ſelue place,
                  With whom hath mette proudly in the face,
                  Worthy Troylus on his horſebacke.
                  That neuer had yet in manhode lacke.
                  And as they countre the ſtorye doth vs lere,
                  Eueryche vnhorſed knightly hath his feare.
                  ¶But fyrſt his horſe recureth Dyomede,
                  And in all haſte gan him for to ſpede,
                  Taſſayle Troylus ſtondyng vpon foote.
                  And when he ſawe there was none other bote
                  And knightly yet as dyd erſt any man.
                  Agaynſt hym to deffende tho he began.
                  But Dyomede hote as any fyre,
                  Wonder enuyous and hatefull of deſyre,
                  With his ſworde of rancour for the nones,
                  The ryche Cercle full of Inde ſtones,
                  That was that tyme on Troylus baſenet,
                  Full cruelly hath raced of and ſmet.
                  But Troilus nolde for that him wtdrawe,
                  For hym deffendynge he hath the ſtede ſlawe,
                  On whiche ſat that tyme Dyomede.
                  That mauger him he muſt alyght nede.
                  And whan they were on fote both twayne,
                  They dyd their myght and their cruell payne,
                  Eueryche of them other to aſſayle.
                  With ſwordes ſharpe ſo that plate and mayle,
                  They gan to ſeuere and a ſonder race.
                  As wood Lyons with mortall chere and face,
                  Tyll the Grekes ſtronge ſtoute and felle,
                  As myne auctour in his boke can telle,
                  Haue through their might cauſed Dyomede,
                  All ſodeynly to recure his ſtede.
                  And Troyan knightes on the tother ſyde,
                  Haue Troylus brought a ſtede for to ryde.
                  ¶And when they were horſed both two,
                  Without more they efte togyther go.
                  With ſtronge foynes and yfeare ran,
                  
                     Eche at other as felly as they can.
                  Tyll at the laſte cruell Dyomede,
                  Lyke as ye may in myne auctour rede,
                  Were it by caſe hap or aduenture,
                  In whiche no man fully may aſſure,
                  Or by fortune with her falſe vyſage,
                  Had that tyme of Troylous avauntage.
                  For he on hym was fallen at myſchyefe,
                  The whiche thynge to hym was no reprefe,
                  Though he him toke amonge ſo great aroute
                  On euery halfe with grekes ſet aboute.
                  Syth doubtous euer is the fyne of fyght.
                  Now vp, now down, now derk, & after bright,
                  For no wyght may be aye vyctoryous,
                  In peace nor werre nor ylyche eurous.
                  Let euery man ſyth hap it ſette in doute,
                  Take his tourne as it commeth aboute.
                  Though troylus now was take of Diomede,
                  An other tyme he ſhall him quite his mede.
                  For as the ſtorye telleth in this place,
                  This Dyomede but a lyttell ſpace,
                  Troylus ladde forth as pryſoner,
                  That to reſkewes in ſtele armed clere,
                  Many Troyan came pryckynge in this nede,
                  That maugre all the myght of Dyomede.
                  They Troylus haue from his handes take,
                  And tho began the ſlaughter for his ſake,
                  On euery halfe that wonder is to telle,
                  Of the Troyans and the grekes felle.
                  ¶Than into fyelde is entred Menelay,
                  Whiche on Troyans all that ylke daye,
                  Full buſy was auenged for to be.
                  To them he had ſo cruell enmyte.
                  ¶And whan Parys ſawe hym in the fyelde,
                  Towardes hym the ryght waye he helde.
                  And of purpoſe they their wardes ſette,
                  Eche on other tyll they together mette.
                  And tho the ſkyrmyſhe & the ſlaughter gan,
                  On outher parte of many manly man.
                  ¶And all this whyle Hector ne wolde ceaſe,
                  Amonge grekes cruelly to preaſe.
                  And new and new of hym as I read,
                  Alyke freſhe the bloud of them to ſhede.
                  For of his ſworde the traces were yſene,
                  That the grekes ne myghten not ſuſtene,
                  To reſyſte nor ſtande afore his face.
                  But where he rode aye they gaue him place.
                  ¶Tyll that a knyght whiche Boetes hyghte,
                  Yonge of age whan he had a ſyght,
                  How Hector ſlewe the grekes mortally,
                  On euery ſyde hauynge no mercy.
                  He preaſed in to encreaſe his name.
                  Perpetually to purchaſe him a fame.
                  And furiouſly in herte not aferde,
                  He caſte platly to mete him in the berde.
                  The whiche thynge when Hector gan aduert,
                  So hyghe rancour enbraced hath his herte,
                  That with his ſworde of indignaciowne,
                  He rofe hym euen to the nauell downe.
                  Fro the crowne with ſo great a payne,
                  That in the fyelde he parted laye in twayne.
                  And Hector tho aſſygned hath his ſtede,
                  To a ſquyer and bad he ſhulde it lede,
                  To Troye towne without more abode.
                  And all this while furyouſly he rode,
                  Amonge grekes and euer mercileſe,
                  He ſlewe all tho that put them ſelfe in preſe.
                  And ſhedde their bloud of herte deſpiteous.
                  The whiche thynge when kyng Archylogus,
                  Rydyng beſyde ſawe and gan eſpye,
                  How Boetes his coſyn and allye,
                  So cruelly was of Hector ſlawe,
                  Towardes him in haſt he gan him drawe.
                  Vpon his death auenged for to be.
                  And rode at him with great cruelte,
                  Fully in purpoſe Hector for to quyte.
                  And ſodeynly as he gan at hym ſmyte,
                  Hector vnwarely hyt him on the head,
                  So myghtly that he fell downe dead.
                  Parted on two by cruell aduenture.
                  Notwithſtanding his mighty ſtronge armure
                  Agayne his ſtroke it was of no deffence,
                  For it was geuen with ſuche violence,
                  That it holpe hym in no maner thynge.
                  ¶And then anone Prothenor the kynge,
                  Of hatefull yre and fole hardyneſſe,
                  Of ſurquedye and of haſtineſſe,
                  Of melancolye and indignacion,
                  Caught in his herte a preſumpcion,
                  To aſſayle Hector of in warde folyſhe pryde,
                  And goth to him attrauerſe on the ſyde,
                  Furyouſly with a diſpiteous herte.
                  That his commonge he might not aduerte,
                  Onely for he came at his backe behynde.
                  And vnwarely in Guydo as I fynde.
                  And Hector ſmote from his horſe to grounde,
                  In whom there was ſo muche manhod foūde
                  That he anone with a knightly herte,
                  
                     Without abode into his ſadell ſterte,
                  And ryght fyerſely Prothenor purſeweth,
                  That fynally his hande he not eſcheweth,
                  For with his ſworde he marked hym ſo wele,
                  Through the baſenet by his breſte of ſtele,
                  That into twayne without any fayle,
                  He roue him downe into his paunce of mayle.
                  And he fell downe in full pyteous wiſe.
                  Of whych ſtroke the grekes ſore agryſe.
                  ¶And ſpecially the hardy fierſe Achille,
                  When he behelde lyked it full yll.
                  ¶For Prothenor was nygh his coſyne,
                  And deſcended of the ſame lyne,
                  For death of whom he hath ſuch heuyneſſe,
                  So inwarde thought and ſo great diſtreſſe,
                  In all this worlde he ne wyſt what to do.
                  For him he had ſo much payne and wo.
                  And for the death of him Archilogus,
                  To be auenge he was full deſyrous.
                  And in his herte many waye he caſte,
                  And in the wardes gan to ſeke faſte,
                  With many greke on Hector to haue fall.
                  Conſpyred fully in ſothe amonge theim all,
                  Of one entente Hector to aſſayle.
                  But all for nought it would not auayle,
                  He was that daye ſo cruell in his rage,
                  They might of him haue none auauntage.
                  And Troian knightes by fauour of Fortune,
                  Vpon grekes ſo mightely contune,
                  Thrugh conueyeng of Hector and his might,
                  That they anone haue put theim to flyght.
                  And to theyr tentes maugre who that ſtryue,
                  In their purſuite forwoūded they them driue.
                  That here and there they laye as in a ſwowe,
                  And many a greke merciles they ſlowe.
                  The longe daye till it drewe to nyght.
                  And ſothly then for very lacke of lyght,
                  Theſe troians knightꝭ ful worthy of renowne
                  Aboute Hector repayren to the towne.
                  And entre in with honour and with glorye,
                  That daye of grekes hauing the victorye.
                  And thus I leue theim in their towne within,
                  And forth of grekes to tel I will begyn.
               
               
                  VVhan Heſperus the faire bright ſterre,
                  Agaynſt eue hath caſte his ſtreames fer,
                  And in the weſt ratheſt gan appeare,
                  Whan the twylight with a pale cheare,
                  In maner morneth thabſence of the ſonne.
                  And night aprocheth with his coopes dunne.
                  The ſame time when Titan toke his leue,
                  That clerkes call Crepuſculum at eue,
                  Whych is not elles but the meane lyght,
                  Of Phebus abſence and the dercke night.
                  And twylight hatte for it is a meane,
                  Of daye and night departing theim betwene.
                  Fully nother but of both ymeynt,
                  Or the heauen be cluſtered and depeynt,
                  With bryght ſterres in the eueninge.
               
               
                  AT whyche tyme Agamenon the kinge,
                  For his lordes ſodaynly hath ſente,
                  To come echone anone into his tente.
                  And when they were aſſembled all yfeare,
                  Tryſt and heuy with a ruthfull cheare,
                  They gan ye ſlaught of Hector to complayne.
                  Affirming playnly they ne maye attayne,
                  Vnto victorye while he were alyue.
                  Wherfore they gan to conſpyre blyue,
                  The death of him in many ſondry weye.
                  Echone concludynge whyle he were in Troy,
                  It was not lykely grekes for to wynne.
                  For he alone of them that were within,
                  Was chiefe deffence and protectiowne.
                  And ſoueraynly vpholder of the towne.
                  Their mighty Caſtell and their ſtronge wall,
                  And vnto grekes deadly foe mortall.
                  For they ne myght his great force endure,
                  Nor neuer aryght agayne their foes be ſure.
                  He ſtandyng hole they ſayde in no degre,
                  Nor whyle he floureth in felycitye.
                  Wherfore echone of one entencion,
                  They condiſcende to this concluſyon.
                  That by ſome ſlyght of awayte lyinge,
                  Whan he were moſte buſy in fyghtynge,
                  Amonge them in myſchyfe or diſtreſſe,
                  That Achylles do his buſyneſſe,
                  With all his might vnwarely hym to aſſayle.
                  That hym to ſlea for nothynge that he fayle.
                  ¶And grekes all gan their prayer make,
                  To Achilles for to vndertake.
                  Of this Empreſſe fynally the ſuite.
                  Through his manhode that it be execute,
                  The haſty deth of their mortall foe,
                  And Achylles without wordes mo,
                  Their requeſt aſſenteth to perfourme.
                  And to their luſte gan hooly hym confourme.
                  From that tyme lett hym beware I reade,
                  
                     To be to haſty this iourney for to ſpede,
                  Vpon Hector his power for to kythe.
                  Leſt fortune awronge her face wrythe,
                  To loke on him wyth a frowarde cheare,
                  Him to brynge vnto his handes nere.
                  Through ſorte or hap of Hector folylye,
                  To put his lyfe of death in Ieopartye.
                  Leſt vnto him it happe euen lyche,
                  To fall him ſelfe in the ſame dyche,
                  That he for Hector compaſſed hath & ſhape,
                  For it is wonder if that he eſcape.
                  Sith Hector had without any dreade,
                  As brennyng yre and as great hatrede,
                  To Achilles his death for to puruey,
                  If he hym founde or in any place to ſaye,
                  Conuenyent for execucion.
                  I trowe there ſhould gayne him no raunſon,
                  Nor other mede his herte to quyete,
                  But onely death when ſo that they mete.
                  This the ende and fyne of my mattere,
                  As in this boke after ye ſhall heare.
                  And thus Grekes made haue an ende,
                  Of theyr counſayle and anone they wende,
                  Eueryche of theim home to theyr lodgynge,
                  And toke theyr reſten till in the morninge.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the troians toke kinge Thoas pryſoner and led him captiue to Troie. Ca. xxiiii.
               
                  VVhan Aurora the ſyluer droppes ſhene,
                  Her teares ſhad vpon the freſhe grene,
                  Complayning aye in weping & in ſorow,
                  Her chyldrens death euery ſomer morowe,
                  That is to ſaye when the dewe ſo ſoote.
                  Enbawmed hath the floure and eke the roote
                  With luſty lycoure in Aprill and in Maye,
                  When that the larke meſſenger of daye,
                  Of cuſtome aye Aurora doth ſalue,
                  With ſundrye notys her ſorow to tranſmewe.
                  Or Phebus ryſe with ioye and gladneſſe,
                  Through hermonye to leue her heuyneſſe,
                  Taking her leue with ſainct Iohn to borow,
                  The ſame time Grekes by the morowe,
                  With luſty herte early did aryſe,
                  And armed theim in all theyr beſt wiſe.
                  For they theim caſte that daye for to gone,
                  Into the felde to mete with their fone.
                  ¶And Hector hath the ſame morowe alſo,
                  I caſt him fully with Grekes haue ado.
                  And yſſued is knightly out of Troye,
                  In herte he hath ſo great deſyre and ioye,
                  The ſame daye with grekes for to fyght,
                  And wyth him ladde many luſty knyght,
                  Of ſuch as were of the Cyte borne,
                  And forthe he rode him ſelfe all aforne,
                  ¶And Eneas with many a worthy,
                  Folowed after wonder faſt by.
                  ¶And Paris thē and next him Deiphobus,
                  ¶And ſyth Troylus that was coragious,
                  With all the wardes made of Troye towne,
                  In which as Dares maketh menciowne,
                  Within his boke there were on Troye ſyde,
                  Of fighting men yt went and that did ryde,
                  And hundred thouſande armed for to go,
                  Into the felde and fyfty thouſande mo.
                  Which haue theim caſt that daye or at eue,
                  Of one entent Grekes for to greue.
                  ¶And ſo they mette ſtrongly on other ſyde,
                  And gan aſſemble and together ryde,
                  Full cruelly and with great hatrede.
                  And with theim tho that Paris had to lede,
                  He entred in full mighty ſtronge archeres,
                  Of Perce lande with many Arbalaſters,
                  That with theyr arowes filed ſharp & roūde,
                  And wt quarelles ſquare whette and ground,
                  Full many greke hath reued of his lyfe.
                  And amiddes of this mortall ſtryfe,
                  ¶Agamenon into the felde is come.
                  Towardes whom Hector hath ynome,
                  The right way & threwe him from his ſtede,
                  Amonge his knightes that he there did lede.
                  He ſpared nought for all the great preſe.
                  ¶And therwithall anone came Achilles,
                  That in awayte of Hector tho had layne,
                  And ſodaynly with all his might and payne,
                  ¶Hector he ſmote on the head ſo ſore,
                  That wt ye ſtroke mine auctour ſayth no more
                  His baſenet was bowed and ycraſed.
                  ¶Of which ſtroke Hector not amaſed,
                  On Achilles ſhuld anone yfall,
                  Ne had Eneas with his knightes all,
                  And worthy Troylus come and go betwene.
                  The which twayne with their ſwerdes kene,
                  Gan Achilles felly for to aſſale.
                  To hewe his playtes and to perſe his mayle.
                  And tho began the ſlaught on euery ſyde,
                  Of men of foote and of theim that ryde.
                  ¶Like a condyte their woundes gā to blede,
                  
                     And in this whyle cruell Dyomede,
                  Were it by hap aduenture or caſe,
                  So as he rode mette wyth Eneas,
                  And ryght anone as he had him founde,
                  He ſmet at hym and gaue him ſuch a wound,
                  That lykly was he ſhould it not recure,
                  But if therto be do the better cure.
                  ¶And therupon full deſpyteouſly,
                  Thys Diomede in his melancolye,
                  Repreued hath this Troian knight Enee,
                  And ſayd to him all hayle for thou art he,
                  That whylom gaue to Pryamus the kinge,
                  A fell counſayle haſty and bytynge,
                  Me to haue ſlayne by ſodayne violence,
                  When I was laſt at Troye in his preſence.
                  That truſt me wel and haue it well in minde,
                  Amyd the fyelde if I the eft fynde,
                  Thou ſhalt thy counſayle mortally repente.
                  If that fortune hereafter will aſſent,
                  To brynge the aryght vnto my hande,
                  At good leyſer here in thine owne londe,
                  ¶I am full ſette thy laboure for to quyte.
                  & here my trouth this ſwerde ſhal kerue & bite
                  So kenely thy Troian bloud to ſhede,
                  That fynally death ſhall be thy mede,
                  The which I beare atwene my hādꝭ twayne
                  And wt that word he might him not reſtrayn,
                  This Diomede but rode all ſodaynly,
                  Vpon Enee and tho ſo furyouſly,
                  He ſmote at him this hardy cruell knight,
                  With ſuch a payne and ſo great a myght,
                  That from his horſe he made him for to fall.
                  Maugre the myght of his knightes all.
                  The which ſtroke he lyked but full yll.
                  ¶And in this while Hector hath Achylle,
                  Aſſayled ſo that through his baſenet,
                  He perced hath and with his ſwerde him ſmet
                  And hath ſo narowe brought him to ye poynt,
                  Of hye mychefe and in ſuche diſioynt,
                  Conſtrayned hym that of neceſſite,
                  He had hym take ne had only be,
                  Sodayne reſcues of thys chyualrous.
                  ¶That called is the ſonne of Tydyus,
                  I meane the fell fyrſe Dyomede.
                  Which Achilles hath holpen in his nede.
                  For he through force of his armes twayne,
                  Smote Hector tho with ſo great a payne,
                  That he him gaue a wounde full greuous.
                  But he nothyng mine auctour wryteth thus,
                  Aſtoned was this knight this manly man,
                  But with his ſwerde in all the haſte he can,
                  Smote Diomede ſo furyous and wrothe,
                  That from his horſe to the earth he gothe.
                  For all his pryde and his ſurquidrye.
                  ¶The which anone as Troylus did eſpye,
                  Without abode downe of his ſtede alyght,
                  With Dyomede a foote for to fyght.
                  And eche of theim in ſothfaſtneſſe than,
                  Aquyte him ſelfe lyke a manly man.
                  That nother was in muche nor in lyte,
                  In no degre of manhode for to wyte.
                  ¶And while they fought, Hector & Achilles,
                  Togyther mette agayne amonge the prees.
                  And ran yfeare fyerſly in theyr rage,
                  As wood Lyons when they be ramage.
                  Right ſo in ſothe they faired in their fighting.
                  And in that tyme Menelay the kinge,
                  Full proudly ſhope him Troians for to mete,
                  ¶Vlyxes eke and alſo Pollymete,
                  And after him came Neptolonyus,
                  ¶Pallamides and eke Scelemus.
                  ¶Duke Meneſte, Neſtor and Thoas,
                  ¶Currynulus and Phyloctheas.
                  ¶And Theſeus as it is made mynde,
                  With his knyghtes proudly came behinde.
                  ¶And on the partye of theim of the towne,
                  Came all the kinges without excepciowne,
                  That were aſſembled into their d
                        •
                     ffence,
                  Agayne Grekes to maken reſyſtence.
                  Except the knightes which yt Hector ladde,
                  And the wardes that he made hadde,
                  The ſame daye as ſayeth the Latin boke,
                  In knightly wyſe the fyelde when yt he toke.
                  And tho began the fell mortall fyght,
                  In which that daye ful many worthy knight.
                  In fates handes fynally are fall.
                  And of fortune amonge the wardes all.
                  ¶Agamenon the noble mighty kynge,
                  All ſodaynly as he came rydynge,
                  ¶Pantyſylaus in his waye he mette,
                  Agaynſt whom anone his horſe he ſette,
                  And he to him full knyghtly rode agayne.
                  And as they mette there is no more to ſayne,
                  On horſe backe whiles they weren wrothe,
                  Of violence they were vnhorſed bothe.
                  ¶And Menelay Parys mette of newe,
                  The whych two well togyther knewe,
                  Full deſyrous eche other for to dere.
                  
                     ¶But Menelay caught fyrſt a ſpere,
                  And hytte Parys wyth all his buſy cure.
                  But for ſureneſſe of his ſtronge armure,
                  And mighty plates his woūde was but ſmall.
                  Which in effect greued not at all.
                  But with that ſtroke vnto grounde he gothe.
                  Of whych fall Parys wexed wrothe,
                  Wonder confuſe and alſo red for ſhame,
                  Leſt the reporte in hinderyng of his name,
                  Came to the eares of quene Heleyne,
                  How he that daye might not atteyne,
                  With Menelay to holde chaumpartye,
                  Lykly to ſowne vnto his vilanye.
                  The whych at herte greued him full ſore.
                  And Adraſtus the kinge withouten more,
                  So as he rode the kinge Vlyxes fonde,
                  And knightly both they fought hōde to hōde,
                  And as they fought downe to the earth lowe,
                  From his horſe Vlyxes hath him throwe.
                  And ful proudly in ſygne of his victorye,
                  He ſente his horſe home to his Tentorye.
                  ¶And in that tyme amonges all the preſe,
                  ¶Full ſodaynly kynge Pallamydes,
                  Is fall on Hupon with his lockes hore,
                  And in his yre wounden him ſo ſore,
                  That he fell dead and grouelyng to ye groūd.
                  His mortall ſwerde was ſo kene ygrounde.
                  Beſyde whom Neptolonius,
                  Aſſayled hath kinge Archylogus,
                  The whych him ſelfe manly gan defende,
                  But as they faught and many ſtrokes ſpēde,
                  In their diffence it would be none other.
                  Eueryche of theim hath vnhorſed other.
                  ¶And tho came in riding on his ſtede,
                  ¶Pollidamas and gan to taken hede,
                  Amonge the renges a lytell him beſyde,
                  Where as the kinge Pollamides doth ryde.
                  And fierſely tho full lyke a manly man.
                  He ſmote his ſtede and to him he ran.
                  And maugre his might and his worthineſſe,
                  As the ſtorye playnly beareth wytneſſe.
                  Onely to venge the death of kinge Hupowne,
                  From his ſtede he proudly bare him downe.
                  And in his rancoure and his cruell hete,
                  Of that deſpyte gan him to rehete,
                  ¶And tho beſyde the kynge Scelenus,
                  Of deadly hate and herte full yrous,
                  With kinge Carras by aduenture hath met,
                  And furyouſly from his ſtede hym ſmet.
                  ¶And then alſo the kinge Philomene,
                  Is on the Duke fall of Athene.
                  That maugre both his manhode & his might
                  He hath his horſe berafte him in this fyght,
                  And lad with him proudly by his ſyde,
                  Where as him lyſt that it ſhoulde abyde.
                  ¶And Philoctetes the worthy kinge alſo,
                  The ſelfe tyme with Remus had ado.
                  And euery other ſothly as I reade,
                  His felowe made to voiden from his ſtede.
                  ¶And Theſeus the king that was ſo ſtrong,
                  Amid the fyelde ſo as he rode amonge,
                  In great preſe hathe met Curyalus.
                  The worthy king of knighthod moſt famous
                  And both two in armes wonder ſtronge,
                  By theim ſelfe fought at leyſer longe,
                  Til eche other with woundes freſhe & grene,
                  His felowe threwe from horſback on ye grene.
                  And afterwarde I fynde how they two,
                  Vpon foote knightly had ado.
                  They were in armes ſo inly deſyrous.
                  And of manhode paſſyngly famous.
                  ¶And all this whyle the ſonnes naturell,
                  Of Pryamus bare theim wonder well,
                  Amonge Grekes vp and downe ryding,
                  And prudently together abydynge,
                  Made a ſlaught of grekes full pyteous.
                  Of kinges, dukes and lordes right famous.
                  And as I reade how worthy Thelamowne,
                  That tyme mette kynge Sarpedowne,
                  And with theyr ſperes ſquared full ſharply,
                  Eueryche hath wounded other mortally,
                  Through ſhelde & plate & haberion of mayle.
                  That as the ſtorye maketh reherſayle,
                  How their harneys wexed of bloud red,
                  And how they fell almoſt bothe dead.
                  At great myſchyefe amonge the horſe fete.
                  Of whoſe bleding the ſoyle gan wexe wete,
                  Through theyr harneys as it gan deſtylle
                  Whiles kinge Thoas and the fyerſe Achille,
                  As they that were of kynne and allyed.
                  ¶Amyd the fyelde Hector haue eſpyed,
                  Where as he faught beſet amyd his foen,
                  And vpon him of one accorde they gone,
                  And mortally if that it would auayle,
                  On euery halfe they gan him newe aſſayle.
                  And of hate in herte borne of yore,
                  They haue beſet this Troian knight ſo ſore.
                  That they alas from his head hath ſmet,
                  By violence his ryche baſenet,
                  
                     And wounded him felly on the head.
                  But for all that he ne toke none hede,
                  This worthy man floure of chyualrye,
                  But him defending tho ſo myghtely,
                  ¶Kynge Thoas ſmet him in the face ſo,
                  That wyth a ſtroke he rafte his noſe a two.
                  And ſhorted it by the halfe dele.
                  To whych ſtroke the brother naturele,
                  Of manly Hector faſt gan theym hye,
                  To ſuccoure him when they firſt eſpye,
                  His great myſchyefe and at theyr in coming,
                  They ſo manly bare theim in fightyng,
                  ¶Agayne Grekes ye Thoas they haue take,
                  And Thelamon ſo they made a wake.
                  With newe aſſaute of ſharpe woundes kene.
                  That he was take and lefte vpon the grene.
                  And of his men borne home to his tente.
                  ¶And kinge Thoas home to Troye is wēt,
                  Maugre grekes which may hī helpe no more
                  For Deiphobus and alſo Anthenore,
                  Haue ſent him forth to Troye the Cyte.
                  ¶And Menelay tho began to ſe,
                  ¶So as he rode Parys ſtande aſyde,
                  And ſhope him ſhorty of hate & cruell pryde.
                  If it would fallon on his chaunce,
                  Sodainly to giuen him miſchaunce.
                  ¶But he was ware & kept him ſelf ſo narow
                  ¶That Menelay he marked with an arowe,
                  The head of which wt venym was enoint,
                  Intoxycate at the ſquare poynt,
                  That the king of that dreadfull wounde,
                  All diſpayred of his men was founde.
                  Whych in great haſte bare him to his tent.
                  And he anone for ſurgyens hath ſente,
                  Which fyrſt the head toke out of his wounde,
                  Albe it was yperced full profounde,
                  Through his harneys depe into the bone.
                  But cunningly they did theyr craft echone,
                  To drawe it out with their inſtrumentes,
                  And ſubtylly with certayne oyntmentes.
                  They ſerched haue the wounde enuyron.
                  To make it cleane from corrupcion.
                  And prudently firſt they token hede,
                  That the venum further nat procede.
                  Rounde in compaſſe clenſed it aboute,
                  And after that bounde it ſure without,
                  And defenſyues made on euery ſyde.
                  And Menelay no longer would abyde,
                  And bad in haſte to bryngen forth his ſtede,
                  ¶In purpoſe full Parys to quite his mede,
                  If he him finde the ſelfe ſame daye,
                  Him lyſt no longer put it in delaye,
                  What euer fall of his grene wounde.
                  And forth he rode tyll he hath him founde,
                  By aduenture vnarmed in the fyelde,
                  Without ſwerde pollax ſpere or ſhelde,
                  Or bowe in hande were it of recklyſneſſe,
                  Or to refreſhe him after weryneſſe.
                  ¶And Menelay a ſpere anone hath take,
                  And in his yre felly gan it ſhake,
                  Towarde Parys by great auyſeneſſe.
                  And ſhoulde haue ſlayne him as by lyklineſſe,
                  Ne had Eneas whych all this thinge beheld,
                  Bore of the ſtocke with his ſtronge ſhelde,
                  To defende him in this auenture,
                  Deſtytute and naked of armure.
                  ¶Parys that tyme in ſuche peryll was,
                  Wherfore in haſte hath this Eneas,
                  Ordayned knightes armed bryght in ſtele,
                  ¶Aboute Parys for to kepe him wele,
                  From all myſchyefe and confuſyowne,
                  Hym to conueye vnto Troye towne,
                  Right in deſpyte of kinge Menelay,
                  Which in awayte ſo for Parys laye.
                  ¶Whom Hector had ytaken ſodaynly,
                  And vnto Troye ladde hym vtterly.
                  Ne had Grekes come in his defence,
                  Agaynſt him to maken reſyſtence.
                  ¶Of which Hector as they came in his weye,
                  Full many Greke made for to deye.
                  And the remnaunt put vnto the flyght,
                  That through his māhode yt day & his might,
                  Troians made the Grekes for to fle,
                  Vnto their tentes of neceſſytee.
                  And theim to ſewe ne would neuer leue,
                  But ſlee and kill tyll it drewe to eue.
                  That Phebus gan faſte for to weſte,
                  To drawe thē home they thought for the beſt.
                  For Tytan was at his goyng downe,
                  Whan they gan entre into Troye towne.
                  Their gatꝭ ſhet they to their lodging wende.
                  And of this daye thus they made an ende.
                  Tyll on the morowe that the rowes red,
                  Of Phebus carte gan to ouer ſprede.
                  Afore his vpryſte in the Oryent.
                  At which tyme king Pryamus hath ſent,
                  For ſuch as were wyth him moſt pryue.
                  And of his counſayle inwardly ſecre.
                  
                     ¶And ſpecially he ſent for by name,
                  ¶For worthy Hector ye greateſt was of fame
                  ¶For Parys eke and for Deiphobus,
                  ¶And for Troylus freſhe and deſyrous.
                  ¶For Anthenor and for Pollidamas,
                  ¶And for the Troian called Eneas.
                  For he that daye caſt him not to gone,
                  Into the felde to mete with his foen.
                  And when they were to his paleys come,
                  Theſe lordes haue the right waye ynome,
                  Vnto the kinge within his cloſet.
                  And when the vſſher had the dores ſhet,
                  And eueryche had lyke to his degre,
                  His place take and his dewe ſee,
                  This worthy kinge as made is mencion,
                  Gan to declare his hertes mocion,
                  And his meninge afore theim ſpecifye,
                  And ſayd ſyres in whom I moſt affye,
                  ¶To you is knowē how ye king Thoas here,
                  Is in this Cite taken priſonere.
                  And is as yet belocked in priſowne,
                  Whych euer hath be vnto Troye towne,
                  An enemye great vnto his power.
                  And vs offended aye both ferre and nere.
                  In many wiſe albe we lytell retche,
                  As ferre as he his force might do ſtretche.
                  And now wt Grekꝭ came to beſiege our town,
                  As he that willeth our deſtructiowne.
                  And therupon hath do his buſyneſſe,
                  Wherfore of dome and of rightwyſneſſe,
                  Both of reaſon and of equite,
                  I ſaye playnly as ſemeth vnto me,
                  So that it be to you acceptable,
                  And that ye thynke my counſayle cōmēdable,
                  Like as he hath caſt our death and ſhape,
                  I holde it rightfull that he not eſcape.
                  But that by death he receyue his guerdon.
                  For ryght requireth and alſo good reaſon,
                  That death for death is ſkilful guerdonning.
                  Vnto my witte and right well ſyttyng.
                  ¶Say your aduiſe now playnly in this caſe,
                  ¶And fyrſt of all tho ſpake this Eneas,
                  And ſayd lorde ſo it be none offence,
                  To your highneſſe to gyue me audyence,
                  Thrugh ſupport here of thē that be full wyſe,
                  I ſhall reherſe playnly my deuiſe,
                  What is to worke as in this mattere.
                  Me ſemeth fyrſt my lyege lorde ſo deare,
                  That your noble royall excellence,
                  Conſydre ſhoulde with full high prudence,
                  In euery worke and operacion,
                  To caſte afore in concluſyon,
                  The fynall ende that may after ſewe.
                  For to a wyſe man onely is not dewe,
                  To ſe the gynning and the ende nought.
                  But both attones peyſen in his thought,
                  And weye theim ſo iuſtly in balaunce,
                  That of the fine enſewe no repentaunce.
                  Why I ſaye this and platly why I meane,
                  Is for that ye ought for to ſene,
                  How kinge Thoas one of the pryncipall,
                  Amonge the grekes is and of yt bloud royall.
                  If ye conſydre deſcended as by lyne.
                  Wherfore if he haue thus foule a fyne,
                  As to be ſlayne whyle he is in pryſon,
                  It happen might as in concluſyon,
                  That ye and yours that therto aſſente,
                  Here afterwarde ſhoulde it ſore repent.
                  ¶I preue it thus that by aduenture,
                  Of fortunes rule that no man may aſſure,
                  Some of your lordes were another daye,
                  Of grekes take as it happe maye.
                  Or of your ſonnes full worthy of renowne,
                  Or of kinges that here be in this towne.
                  Truſteth me well that ſuche lyke gentylneſſe,
                  As ye to theim ſhewen in their diſtreſſe,
                  They will you quyte when in caſe ſemblable,
                  Fortune to theim they fynde fauorable.
                  The which no man conſtrayne may or binde
                  Wherfore my lord haueth this thing in mind.
                  ¶For yf Thoas of ſhorte auyſemente,
                  Shall now be dead through haſty iudgemēt,
                  Another daye Grekes wyll vs acquyte,
                  And for rygour make their malyce byte,
                  On ſome of yours who euer that it be.
                  And nother ſpare high nor lowe degre.
                  Though he were peraunter of your bloud.
                  The which thinge for all this worldes good,
                  It might fall that ye ne would ſe.
                  Wherfore I reade to let kinge Thoas be,
                  Honeſtly kept in your preſowne,
                  Like his eſtate ſtill here in this towne,
                  Leſt as I ſayd that another daye,
                  Some lorde of yours as it happe maye,
                  Caſuelly were take of auenture,
                  By his eſchaunge ye might beſt recure,
                  Without ſtryfe your owne man agayne,
                  In this matter I can no more ſayne,
                  
                     But fynally this is my full rede.
                  ¶To which counſayl Hector toke good hede,
                  And for it was according to reaſon,
                  He it commendeth in his opynion.
                  ¶But Pryam euer of one entencion,
                  Stode alway fixe to this concluſion.
                  Playnly affirminge if greks may eſpye,
                  That we this kinge ſpare of gentrye,
                  They will arrecte it cowardyſe anone,
                  That we dare not venge vs of our foen,
                  For very dread hauynge none hardyneſſe,
                  Nor herte nother to do rightwiſeneſſe.
                  Yet neuertheleſſe after your aſſente,
                  That he ſhall lyue I wyll in myne entente,
                  To your deſyre fully condeſcende.
                  ¶And of this counſayle ſo they made an end,
                  Without more. ſaue Eneas is ygo,
                  ¶And Troylus eke and Anthenor alſo,
                  Into an hall excelling of beaute,
                  The quene Heleyne of purpoſe for to ſe.
                  With whom was eke Hecuba the quene,
                  And other ladyes goodly on to ſene,
                  And many mayde that yonge & luſty was.
                  And worthy Troylus with this Eneas,
                  Did their labour and their buſy payne,
                  For to comforte the fayre quene Heleyne,
                  As ſhe that ſtode for the werre in dreade.
                  But for all that of very womanheade,
                  Thilke time with all her herte entere,
                  As ſhe well could made to theim good chere.
                  Hauinge of conninge iuly ſuffyſannce,
                  Both of cheare and of dalyaunce.
                  And Hecuba beyng in this hall,
                  Very example vnto women all,
                  Of bounte hauinge ſoueraygne excellence,
                  In wiſedome eke and in eloquence,
                  Beſought theim tho wonder womanly,
                  And counſayled eke full prudently,
                  For any haſte both of nigh and ferre,
                  Auyſely to kepe theim in the werre,
                  And not ieoparte theyr bodies folyly,
                  But to aduerte and caſte prudently,
                  In diffence knightlyy of the towne,
                  Theim to gouerne by diſcreſciowne.
                  She ſpake of fayth & could nothing feyne,
                  And then of her and after of Heleyne,
                  They toke leue and no longer dwell,
                  But went their waye & forth I will you tell,
                  ¶How the Grekes on the ſame morowe,
                  Amonge thē ſelfe complayne & makē ſorowe,
                  Their harmes great in murmur and in rage,
                  The loſſe the coſtes and the great domage,
                  That they haue there endured folylye.
                  Laſtynge the werre and wiſten neuer whye.
                  The death & ſlaught of many worthy man,
                  That there were dead ſith yt the werre began.
                  Hunger and thurſt watche and colde alſo,
                  Full great vnreſte ſorowe, thought, and wo,
                  And all together for a thinge of nought.
                  In ſothfaſtneſſe if the grounde be ſought.
                  This was the noyſe & rumour eke that ran,
                  Throughout ye hooſt yt day from man to mā.
                  And moſt amonge the pore ſouldiours.
                  Which bare the bronte euer of ſuch ſhoures.
                  And the miſchiefe of werre comonly,
                  And though they plain they haue no remedy.
                  Of ſondry thinges which ſit theim full vnſoft.
                  And thus grekes complayned haue full ofte.
                  Of many miſchief that hath on theim fall,
                  The which they might haue eſchewed all,
                  If they ne had of foly gonne a werre.
                  Out of Grece nat come halfe ſo ferre,
                  To their miſchief and confuſyon.
                  This was that daye their lamentacion.
                  ¶Which to encreaſe the ſame nexte night,
                  So derked was without ſterre light,
                  So cloudy blacke and ſo thicke of ayre,
                  Dimmed with ſkyes foule and nothing fair,
                  So windy eke with tempeſt all belayne,
                  Almoſt for drenched with the ſmoky rayne.
                  And in the felde aſtoned here and yonder,
                  With ſodayne ſtroke of the dreadfull thonder,
                  And with opening of the hidous leuene,
                  That it ſemed in the high heauen,
                  The Cataractes hadden be vndo.
                  For both the cloudes and the ſkyes two,
                  Sodainly wexen were ſo blake,
                  Like as the goddes would haue takē wrake,
                  And had of newe aſſented be in one,
                  The lande to drenche of Deucalyon.
                  And all this world without more refuge,
                  To ouerflowe with a freſhe deluge.
                  The winde alſo ſo ſternly gan to blowe,
                  That their tentes ſtanding on a rowe,
                  Forpoſſid were and ybeten downe.
                  And furyouſly to their confuſyowne,
                  The flodꝭ raught thē from their ſtāding place
                  And bare theim forth frō thens a large ſpace.
                  
                     Wherof in myſchyefe and in great diſtreſſe,
                  In great laboure and hertye heauyneſſe,
                  The grekes bydde all the ſame nyght.
                  What for the tempeſt and for lacke of lyghte,
                  Tyll the floude gan agayne withdrawe,
                  The wynde to appeaſe and the day gan dawe,
                  And the heauen gan agayne to clere,
                  Without cloudes freſhly to appere,
                  And Phebus eke with a feruent hete,
                  Had on the ſoyle dryed vp the wete.
                  And the moyſture enuyrowne on the playne,
                  And grekes had their tentes ſette agayne,
                  And were adawed of their nyghtes ſorowe,
                  Through the apering of the glade morowe.
                  They them arayed nothynge for the peace,
                  And into fyelde fyrſt went Achylles,
                  As ye ſhall here of entencyowne,
                  That daye to fyght wt them of Troye towne.
               
               
                  VVhan dryed was the luſty large playne,
                  wt Phebꝰ bemes as ye haue hard me ſain
                  The troian knightes full worthy of renowne,
                  Deſcended be and ycomen downe.
                  And in the fyelde toke their fyghtyng place,
                  But Achylles to mete them in the face,
                  Tofore went out lyke as I you tolde,
                  With his lordes and his knightes bolde,
                  And fyrſt I fynde without more abode,
                  Vnto Hupon furyouſly he rode.
                  I meane Hupon that was of his ſtature,
                  Lyke a Gyaunt as bokes vs aſſure.
                  Whom Achylles with his ſharpe ſpere,
                  Through the body perced him ſo fere,
                  That he fylle dead his wounde was ſo kene.
                  And after this the kynge Octamene,
                  As he fyerſly on Hector wolde haue gone,
                  Without abode Hector hath ſlaine anone,
                  And cruelly quytte him his fatall mede.
                  And ſodaynely agaynſt Diomede,
                  ¶As zantipus the worthy kyng gan drawe,
                  Full pyteouſly he of hym was ſlawe.
                  And ryght anone the kyng Epyſtrophus,
                  And eke the kyng that hyght Cedius,
                  Of one aſſent proudly in battayle,
                  Begonne Hector mortally taſſayle.
                  And with a ſpere fyrſt Epyſtrophus,
                  Ran at hym with herte deſpyteous,
                  And as Guydo alſo doth deuyſe.
                  Rebuked him in vngoodly wyſe.
                  At hym ſo ſore in herte he was a meued.
                  Wherof Hector furyouſly agreued,
                  Hath mortally his wounde made ſo large,
                  That hym ne geyneth plate ſhelde nor targe.
                  For he fell dead amonge his men echone.
                  To whom Hector bad he ſhulde be gone,
                  And to the Furyes depe downe in helle,
                  Suche proude wordes amonges them to tell,
                  For here quod he men take of them no hede.
                  And thus whan he was waged for his mede,
                  ¶Anone his brother called Cedyus,
                  Suche ſorowe made for Epyſtrophus,
                  So hertye dole and ſo wofull chere,
                  That pytie was for to ſe and here.
                  So inwardely on his death he thought,
                  And with a thouſande knightꝭ yt he brought,
                  To be auenged by manhode of them all.
                  Deſpyteouſly on Hector he is fall.
                  Where he hym founde fyghtyng wt his foen,
                  That through the force of th
                        •
                     m euerycone,
                  So ſore enuyrowne they haue him beſet,
                  That frō his ſtede downe they haue him ſmit.
                  ¶Whom Cedyus aye in his cruell rage,
                  Whan that he ſawe to his ouauntage,
                  Hector vnhorſed and he on his ſtede,
                  His ſworde he lefte of inwardly hatred,
                  Markynge at hym with ſo great a payne,
                  With all the force of his armes twayne,
                  Fully in purpoſe withouten more delaye.
                  To ſlea Hector playnly if he maye.
                  But or his ſtroke deſcende myght downe,
                  Hector of hate and indignaciowne
                  With his ſworde that was full ſharpe whet,
                  From his ſhoulder hath his arme of ſmet.
                  And after that he reuyd hym his lyfe.
                  Than Eneas amyddes all this ſtryfe,
                  Came rydyng in ryght wood and furious.
                  And as he mette the kyng Amphymacus,
                  He fell on him and ſlewe hym in his rage.
                  And from the grekes holdyng their paſſage.
                  ¶There be diſcended fyrſt Menelaus.
                  ¶And after him kynge Thelamonius.
                  ¶The great duke alſo of Athene,
                  In whom there was ſo moche manhode ſene.
                  Vlixes eke and cruell Diomede.
                  And eke alſo to helpe them in their nede,
                  There came with them the kyng Machaon,
                  And alderlaſt the great Agamenon.
                  With all their wardes and fell in ſodeynly,
                  
                     Vpon Troyans and they full manfully,
                  Diffende them ſelfe agayne the grekes proude
                  And put them of full knightly as they coude.
                  And eche on other ſothly as they mette,
                  With ſpere and ſworde enuyouſly they ſette,
                  So mortall hate there was them betwene,
                  And whan the ſonne was merydyen,
                  In mydday angell paſſyng hote and ſhene,
                  The grekes gan felly in their tene,
                  So myghtely to falle on them of Troye,
                  That they them made for to geuen weye,
                  Of very force and neceſſytye.
                  ¶And Achylles ſo full of cruelte,
                  Amonge the renges as he gan hym drawe,
                  The kyng Phylem enuyouſly hath ſlawe.
                  ¶And amyd of grekes the ſame time Hector,
                  Maugre them all ſlewe kyng Alphenor.
                  ¶And eke the kynge called Dorius,
                  On them he was ſo cruell and Irous.
                  That through vertue of his knyghtly honde,
                  Troyans wonne haue agayne their londe,
                  Vpon grekes and made them for to flee.
                  ¶And thylke houre from Troye the Cite,
                  Epyſtrophus full of manlyneſſe,
                  The felde haue take through his worthineſſe.
                  And on grekes proudely for the nones,
                  With his knightes he fauleth all attones,
                  And ſeuered them & made them for to twinne,
                  And gan the fyelde faſt vpon them wynne.
                  ¶Hauyng that tyme in his companye,
                  Amonges other that he tho dyd guye,
                  ¶A certayne archer the whiche as I fynde,
                  Was monſtruous and wonderfull of kynde.
                  For from the myddell vp vnto the crowne,
                  He was a man and the remnaunt downe,
                  Bare of an horſe lykeneſſe and fygure.
                  And horſes heire this monſtre in nature,
                  Had on his ſkynne growyng enuyrowne.
                  Full rough and thycke & of his voice ye ſowne,
                  Was lyke the neyhynge of an horſe I reade.
                  And though his face both in length and brede,
                  Of ſhape were mannyſhe yet in ſothfaſtneſſe,
                  His colour was ſemblable in lykeneſſe,
                  Vnto the fyry hoote brennyng glede.
                  Whoſe cyen eke flawmyng alſo reade,
                  As the blaſe is of an ouen mouthe.
                  And for he was in ſyghte ſo vnkouth,
                  Where ſoeuer he was met in the berde,
                  Both man and horſe ſore were a ferde,
                  His face was ſo hatefull and ſo odyble.
                  And his loke ſo hydous and horrible.
                  And aye he had in cuſtome and vſaunce,
                  As in bokes is made remembraunce,
                  For to go vnarmed into fyelde.
                  Without ſworde, ſpere, axe, or ſhielde.
                  For he nothyng coulde of that myſter.
                  But as I fynde he was a good archer.
                  And bare a bowe ſtyffe and wonder ſtronge,
                  And for he was alſo of tyller longe,
                  His arrowes were lyke to his tyller.
                  In a buſhment truſſed wonder ner,
                  By his ſyde aye ready to his hande.
                  Where ſo he were outher on ſea and lande.
                  And as I fynde how that none armure,
                  Agayne his ſhot playnly myght endure.
                  And there was horſe ſtede nor couſer,
                  That durſt abyde nouther fer nor ner,
                  But fledde anone with all their full myght,
                  As faſt as they of hym had a ſyght.
                  To them he was ſo paſſynge odyous.
                  So lyke a deuyll and ſo monſtruous.
                  And there was founde none ſo hardy a knight
                  On horſebacke that had force or might,
                  To holde his horſe whan they myght hym ſe,
                  But that anone a backe he wolde do flee.
                  And of this archer I fynde wryten eke,
                  That he that day ſlewe full many greke.
                  And wounded them with his arrowes kene,
                  Throughout ye plates forged bryght & ſhene.
                  For there was none afore hym that abode,
                  But to their tentes faſte away they rode,
                  They myght not his hydous loke endure.
                  Tyll there befell a wonder aduerture,
                  Whyle they of Troye by helpe of this archer,
                  Sewe on the chaſe to their lodgyng ner,
                  And ſlewe of them in miſchiefe and in dreade,
                  ¶Beſyde a Tent mette hym Dyomede,
                  With this archer of neceſſyte.
                  For it ſtode ſo that he ne myght hym flee.
                  No maner way nor a backe remewe,
                  For lyfe nor deth he myght hym not eſchewe.
                  So many Troyan was tho at his backe.
                  That in his flyinge he had go to wracke.
                  ¶Wherfore anone this worthy Dyomede,
                  With cruell herte faſte gan hym ſpede,
                  And towarde him proudely for to dreffe,
                  But this archer by great aduyſeneſſe,
                  Fyrſt with an arrowe ſmytte Dyomede,
                  
                     Thrugh his harneys that he made him blede,
                  Of whiche ſtroke he wexed ſo wood & wroth,
                  That to this monſtre ſo hydous and ſo loth,
                  He went a paſe and hym vnarmed fonde.
                  And with yt ſworde that he helde in his honde,
                  He gaue to hym his laſte fattall wounde.
                  That he fell dead grouelynge vnto ye ground.
                  The death of whom grekes reioyſynge,
                  And in all haſte their hertes reſumynge,
                  Began them ſelfe for to recomforte.
                  And into fyelde proudely they reſorte.
                  ¶By conueyinge of Policenare,
                  The worthy Duke that ſo well hym bare,
                  Vpon Troyans that day in the fyelde.
                  But whan Hector the ſlaught of him behelde,
                  Vpon this Duke anone he gan to ſette.
                  And on their ſtedes fyerſly as they mette,
                  ¶Hector hym ſlewe of full great hatrede,
                  And after that on Gallathe his ſtede,
                  So as he rode forth amonge the preſe,
                  Or he was ware he mette with Achylles,
                  And with their ſperes longe large and round,
                  In purpoſe fully eche other to confounde,
                  They ran yfeare yrous and right wrothe.
                  That with the ſtroke they were vnhorſed both
                  ¶But Achylles with a diſpyteous herte,
                  Fyrſt as I reade into his ſadell ſterte,
                  And buſy was with all his inwarde peyne,
                  Gallathe to taken by the reyne,
                  Therof for euer Hector to depryue.
                  And bad his men to lede it home as blyue.
                  So that Hector there was none other bote,
                  Full lyke a man faught ſtandyng on his fote.
                  Amonges the grekes and his fomen all.
                  And to his knightes loude he gan to call,
                  For his ſtede that they ſhulden ſewe,
                  And they in haſte his horſe to reſcue.
                  Ben attones fallen vpon Achylle.
                  ¶And maugre him of force agayne his will,
                  They haue from hym berafte it on the plaine,
                  And vnto Hector reſtored it agayne.
                  Which in knighthod ſo moche him ſelf aſſureth
                  In their diſpyte his ſadell he recureth,
                  Whiche afterwarde full dere they aboughte.
                  For lyke a lyon all that day he wrought.
                  Amonges them rydyng here and there,
                  And as the death they fled his ſword for fere,
                  Through whoſe manhod troians efte begyn,
                  Vpon grekes the fielde agayne to wyn.
                  ¶But it befell amyd their great fyght,
                  That Anthenor a certayne Troyan knight,
                  Amonge the preſe is ſo fer ygone,
                  That of grekes he was take anone.
                  And to their tentes ſent in haſte he was,
                  Albe his ſonne called Pollydamas,
                  To reſcue hym dyd his dylygence.
                  So manfully that no neclygence,
                  Was founde in hym who ſo lyſte to ſeke.
                  And that full dere a bought many greke,
                  The ſame day through his worthyneſſe.
                  But for cauſe onely of derckeneſſe,
                  And for that it gan drawe towarde nyght.
                  They made an ende onely for lacke of lyghte.
                  And grekes went home to their lodgyng,
                  And eke Troyans tyll on the mornyng,
                  ¶That Phebꝰ gan his bryght beames ſhew.
                  And Aurora newe gan to dewe.
                  The herbes ſote and the grene leues,
                  Both on hayes and in freſhe greues.
                  Syluer bryght with rounde perles fyne.
                  That ſo clerely agayne the ſonne ſhyne,
                  And ſhewe them ſelfe ſo oryent and ſhene,
                  On hylle and vale and on euery grene,
                  The rody morowe tyll the hote beames,
                  Of bryght Phebus with his fyry ſtemes,
                  Vapoureth vp their moyſture into ayre.
                  The wether cleare agreable and fayre,
                  And attempre alſo of his hete.
                  Whan the Troians caſte them for to mete,
                  With their fomen platly if they maye.
                  And out they went in their beſte arraye,
                  With their wardes into fyelde by rowe.
                  ¶Agaynſt whom grekes were not ſlowe,
                  But ſhope them forth without longer lette,
                  Tyll they togyther manfully haue mette.
                  And with their ſperes and their ſwordes clere
                  They ran together with a diſpyteous chere,
                  Tyll ſhyuered was a ſonder many ſpere.
                  On ſheldes ſtronge them ſelfe for to were,
                  And ryuen was on peces many targe,
                  And with axes rounde brode and large,
                  On baſenettes as they tho ſmyte and ſhrede,
                  Full many knyght mortally gan blede.
                  In ſothfaſtneſſe and as I tell can,
                  The ſame day was ſlayne many a man,
                  On outher parte but moſt of Troye towne.
                  Albe Guydo maketh no mencyowne.
                  Of no perſon as in ſpecyall.
                  
                     On nouther ſyde but in generall,
                  Saue he concludeth playnely that this fyght,
                  Laſted fro morowe tyl that it was nyght.
                  The which Troyans haue ful dere abought.
                  For that day fortune holpe them nought,
                  But tourned hole to their confuſyowne,
                  And ſo they be repeyred to the towne.
                  And to their tentes grekes faſt them ſpede.
                  ¶Till on the morowe they ſenten Dyomede,
                  With Vlixes to Troye the cytie,
                  For a trewes onely for monthes thre.
                  If kyng Pryam therto wolde aſſente.
                  And as they two on this meſſage wente,
                  A certayne knyght borne of Troye towne,
                  That hyght Dolon of great diſcreciowne,
                  And alſo was ryght famous of rycheſſe,
                  Of curteſy and of gentylneſſe,
                  His deuer dyd and his diligence,
                  Them to conueye vnto the preſence,
                  ¶Of Pryamus in his paleys royall.
                  And in his ſea moſt chyefe and pryncipall.
                  Where as he ſatte his lordes enuirowne,
                  With many knyght full worthy of renowne.
                  They gan to hym fyrſt to ſpecyfye,
                  Hooly the ſubſtaunce of their embaſſadrye.
                  And of the trewes theyr entent they tolde.
                  If it ſo were that he aſſent wolde.
                  And the kyng benyngnely them herde,
                  And by aduyſe prudently anſwerde,
                  That thervpon his honour for to ſaue,
                  At good leyſer he wolde a counſayle haue.
                  With his lordes and fully hym gouerne,
                  In this matter lyke as they diſcerne.
                  ¶And to conclude ſhortly euerychone,
                  Aſſented be except Hector alone,
                  Vnto the trewes and wolde it not denye.
                  But Hector ſayde that of trecherye,
                  Onely of ſlaughter and falſe treaſon,
                  Their axynge was vnder occaſyon,
                  Fyrſte to burye grekes that weren dead,
                  And vnder coloure therof out of dread,
                  Afterwarde them ſelfe to vyttayle.
                  For he well knewe that their ſtuffe gan fayle.
                  And enfamyned leſte they ſhulden dye,
                  They ſought a ſpace them ſelfe to purueye.
                  By outwarde ſygnes that he dyd eſpye.
                  Wherfore quod he me lyketh not to lye,
                  By apparaunce as I dare preſume,
                  Whyles that we waſte thus and conſume,
                  Oure ſtuffe within as it is to dreade,
                  They wyll prouyde of what yt they haue nede,
                  For all that is to them auauntage,
                  Myght be to vs hyndryng and damage.
                  And whyles that they encreaſen and amende,
                  We ſhall our ſtore diſcreaſe and diſpende.
                  Yet neuertheleſſe how euer that it be,
                  Touchyng this trewes as for monthes thre,
                  Sythen ye all aſſent and it accorde,
                  From your ſentence I will not diſcorde.
                  In no wyſe as to be varyaunt.
                  And thus the trewes confirmed was by graūt
                  On outher ſyde they thought for the beſte.
                  Bycauſe they ſhulde in quyet and in reſte,
                  The meane whyle eaſe them and releue.
                  And they that felte their woundes ſore greue,
                  Myght leyſer haue their ſores to recure.
                  And in yt meane while trewes did thus endure
                  They fell in treatee and in communyng,
                  ¶Of Anthenor and of Thoas the kyng.
                  That Anthenor delyuered ſhulde be,
                  For kyng Thoas to Troye the cyte.
                  ¶And Thoas ſhuld to grekes home againe,
                  By this enchaunge as ye haue herd me ſaine,
                  One for an other as it accorded was.
                  ¶And in this while ye troian byſhop Calchas,
                  Remembred hym vpon his doughter dere,
                  Called Cryſeyde with her eyen clere,
                  Whom in Troye he had lefte behynde,
                  Whē he went thenſe as bokes maken mynde:
                  For whom he felte paſſyngly great ſmerte,
                  So tenderly ſhe was ſette at his herte.
                  And enprented both at eue and morowe,
                  And chiefe cauſe and grounde of al his ſorowe
                  For ſhe was lefte behynde him in the towne.
                  Without comforte or conſolaciowne.
                  As he caſte ſothly in his abſence.
                  And ſpecially for his great offence,
                  That he hath wrought agaynſt thē of Troye,
                  And as hym thought he ſhuld neuer haue ioye
                  Tyll he his doughter recured hath agayne.
                  ¶Wherfore Calchas the ſtory ſayth certaine,
                  In his wyttes many wayes caſte,
                  How he beſt might while the trewes doth laſt,
                  Recure his doughter by ſome maner waye.
                  And as I fynde vpon a certayne daye,
                  In his porte wonder humbly,
                  With wepyng eye wente full pyteouſly,
                  In his complaynyng of teares albe reyned.
                  
                     Whoſe inwarde wo ſothly was not feyned,
                  And on his knees anone he falleth downe,
                  Tofore the great kyng Agamenowne,
                  Beſechynge hym with all humilite,
                  Of very mercy and of hyghe pyte,
                  With other kynges ſyttyng in the place,
                  To haue routhe and for to do hym grace,
                  And on his wo to haue compaſſyon.
                  That he maye haue reſtitucion,
                  Of his doughter whom he loued ſo.
                  Praying them all their deuer for to do,
                  That through their prudent mediacyon,
                  For Anthenor that was in their pryſon,
                  With kyng Thoas ſhe myght eſchaunged be.
                  If that them lyſte of their benignite.
                  To his requeſte goodly to aſſent.
                  And they him graunt & forth anone they ſent,
                  To kyng Pryam for to haue Creſeyde,
                  For Calchas ſake and therwith al they leyde,
                  The charge for her wonder ſpecially,
                  On them that went for this embaſſadrye.
                  ¶To Troye towne and to kynge Pryamus,
                  To whom Calchas was ſo odyus,
                  So hatefull eke throughout all the towne,
                  That this reporte was of him vp and downe,
                  That he a treatour was and alſo falſe,
                  Worthy to be enhonged by the halſe.
                  For his treaſon and his doubleneſſe.
                  And euermore they ſayd eke expreſſe,
                  That he deſerued hath by ryght of lawe,
                  Shamefully fyrſte for to be drawe,
                  And afterwarde the moſte horryble death,
                  That he may haue to yelden vp the breth,
                  Lyke as a treatour in as dyſpyteous wyſe,
                  As any herte can thyncke or deuyſe.
                  Eueryche affyrmyng as by iudgement,
                  That death was none fully equypollent,
                  To his deſerte nor to his falſeneſſe,
                  As yonge and olde playnely bare wytneſſe.
                  Concludyng eke for his iniquyte,
                  That they wolde aſſent in no degree,
                  Vnto nothyng that myght his herte pleaſe.
                  Nor of Creſeyde for to do hym eaſe.
                  They caſte not to make delyueraunce.
                  Leuer they had to gyuen hym miſchaunce,
                  If they hym myght haue as at good large.
                  ¶But fynally the effect of all this charge,
                  Is ſo ferforth dryuen to an ende,
                  That Priamus hath graūted ſhe ſhal wende,
                  With kyng Thoas ſhortly there no more,
                  Vnto her father for Dan Anthenore.
                  Who euer grutche the kyng in parlement,
                  Hath thervpon geuen iudgement,
                  So vtterly it may not be repealed,
                  For with his worde the ſentence was aſſealed
                  That ſhe muſt parte with her eyen glade.
                  And of the ſorowe playnely that ſhe made,
                  At his departynge hereafter ye ſhall here,
                  Whan it agayne cometh to my matere.
               
            
            
               ¶How duryng a trewes of .iii. monthes Hoctor walked into the grekes hooſte, and of the talke hadde betwyxte Achylles and hym. Capitulo .xxv.
               
                  THe truſe affyrmed as ye haue herd deuiſe
                  On outher ſyde of them yt were full wiſe,
                  And full aſſented of them euerychone,
                  Tyll three monthes comen be and gone.
                  Lyke as I reade on a certayne daye,
                  Whan agreable was the morowe graye,
                  Blandyſhyng and pleaſaunt of delyte,
                  Hector in harte caught an appetyte,
                  Lyke as Guydo lyketh for to wryte,
                  The ſame daye he wolde grekes vyſyte,
                  Full well beſene and wonder rychely.
                  With many worthy in his companye.
                  Of ſuche as he for the nones cheſe,
                  And to the tent fyrſt of Achylles,
                  I fynde in ſoth that this Troyan knyght,
                  Vpon his ſtede hath take the weye ryght.
                  Full lyke a man as made is mencion.
                  ¶Nowe had Achylles great affection,
                  In his herte both by daye and nyght,
                  Of worthy Hector for to haue a ſyght.
                  For neuer yet by none occaſyon,
                  He myght of hym haue full inſpection,
                  Nor hym beholde at good lyberte.
                  For vnarmed he myght hym neuer ſe.
                  But wonder knightly aſwell in porte & chere.
                  They had them both as they mette yfere,
                  And ryght manly in their countenaunce,
                  And at the laſte they fell in dalyaunce.
                  ¶But Achylles fyrſt began abreyde,
                  And vnto hym euen thus he ſayde.
                  Hector quod he full pleaſynge is to me,
                  That I at leyſer naked may the ſe.
                  Syth I of the neuer myght haue ſyght,
                  
                     But whan thou were armed as a knyght.
                  And now to me it ſhalbe full greuous,
                  Whiche am to the ſo inly enuyous,
                  But thou of me there is no more to ſayne,
                  Be ſlayne anone with my handes twayne.
                  For this in ſoth were hooly my pleaſaunce.
                  By cruell death to take on the vengeaunce.
                  For I full ofte in werre and eke in fyght,
                  Haue felte the vertue and the great myght,
                  Of thy force. through many woundes kene,
                  That vpon me full freſhe byn and grene,
                  In many place by ſhedyng of my bloud.
                  Thou were on me ſo furyous and wood,
                  Aye compaſſynge to my deſtructiowne,
                  For many a mayle of myne haberiowne,
                  Thy ſharpe ſwerde racyd hath a ſonder.
                  And cruelly ſeuered here and yonder.
                  And mortally as I can ſygnes ſhewe,
                  My plates ſtronge perſed and yhewe,
                  And my harneys forged bryght of ſtele,
                  Myght neuer yet aſſured be ſo wele,
                  In thyne yre whan thou lyſte to ſmyte,
                  That thy ſworde ne wolde them kerne & byte,
                  Into my fleſhe full depe and full profounde.
                  As ſheweth yet by many mortall wounde,
                  On my body large longe and wyde,
                  That yet appere vpon euery ſyde,
                  And day by day full ſore ake and ſmerte.
                  For whiche thynge me ſemeth that my herte,
                  Enbolleneth newe nowe whan I the ſee.
                  Of hyghe deſpyte auenged for to be.
                  So am I fret of olde enuious rage,
                  That it may neuer in my breſt aſwage,
                  Tyll the vengeaunce and the fatall ſute,
                  Of cruell death be on the execute.
                  ¶And of one thyng moſt is my greuaunce,
                  That whan I haue fully remembraunce,
                  And in my mynde conſyder vp and downe,
                  Howe thou haſt made fynall deuyſyowne,
                  ¶Of me alas and of hym Patroclus,
                  So yonge, ſo manly, and ſo vertuous.
                  Whom I loued as it was ſkylle and ryght,
                  Euen as my ſelfe with all my full myght.
                  With as hoole herte and inly kyndneſſe,
                  As an tongue may telle or expreſſe.
                  Now haſt thou made a departiſyon,
                  Of vs that were by hole affection,
                  Yknyt in one of hertie allyaunce.
                  Without partyng or diſſeueraunce.
                  So entyerly our faythfull hertes twayne,
                  Ylaced were and locked in a chayne,
                  Whiche myght not for none aduerſyte,
                  Of lyfe nor death a ſonder twynned be.
                  Tyll cruelly thou madeſt vs departe.
                  Which thrugh my hert ſo inwardly doth darte
                  That it wyll neuer in ſoth out of my thought.
                  And truſteth well ful dere ſhalbe bought.
                  The death of hym and be nothyng in were,
                  Perauenture or ended be this yere.
                  For vpon the onely for his ſake,
                  Of cruell deth vengeaunce ſhalbe take,
                  I the enſure without other bonde.
                  If I may lyue with myne owne hande,
                  I ſhall of death do execucyon.
                  Without abode or longe delacyon.
                  For ryght requireth without any dreade,
                  Death for death for his fynall mede.
                  For I my ſelfe theron ſhall be wroke.
                  That through ye world hereafter ſhalbe ſpoke
                  How Achylles was venged on his ſoe,
                  ¶For Patroclus that he loued ſo.
                  And though that I be to the enuyous,
                  And of thy death inly deſyrous,
                  Ne wete me not nor put on me no blame.
                  For well I wotte thou arte to me the ſame.
                  And haſt my death many day deſyred,
                  And thervpon inwardly conſpyred,
                  And thus ſhortely as atwene vs two,
                  There is but death without wordes mo.
                  Whan fortune lyſt the tyme thereto ſhape.
                  I hope fully thou ſhalte not eſcape,
                  Truſte none other I ſaye the vtterly.
                  ¶To whom Hector not to haſtely,
                  Anſwerde againe with ſober countenaunce,
                  Auyſed well in all his dalyaunce,
                  As he that was in nothyng rekles,
                  ¶And euen thus he ſpake to Achylles.
                  Syr Achylles without any fayle,
                  Thou ne oughteſt greatly to meruayle,
                  Though with my power and my full myghte,
                  With herte and will of very dewe ryght,
                  Day by day I thy death conſpyre.
                  And euer in one it compaſſe and deſyre.
                  And do my laboure early and eke late,
                  It to purſue by full cruell hate,
                  Thou oughteſt not to wonder in no wyſe.
                  But fully knowe by ſentence of the wyſe,
                  In no maner who ſo taketh hede,
                  
                     Of ryghtwyſeneſſe it may not then procede,
                  That other I or any other wyght,
                  Should do him loue that with al his myght,
                  My death purſeweth and deſtruction.
                  And ouer this to more confuſyon,
                  Hath layde a ſyege aboute this Cyte.
                  On my kinrede and alſo vpon me.
                  And thervpon felly doth preſume,
                  With mortall hate of werre to conſume,
                  Vs euerychone ywyſſe I can not fynde,
                  In my herte as by lawe of kynde,
                  Suche one to loue of ryght nor equyte.
                  Nor haue him chere ſothly in no degre.
                  For of werre may no frendlyhead,
                  Nor of debate loue aryght procede.
                  ¶For ſothly loue moſt in ſpeciall,
                  Of faythfulneſſe hath the orygenall.
                  In hertes ioyned by conuenyence,
                  Of one accorde whom no difference,
                  Of doubylneſſe may in no degre,
                  Nother in ioye nor in aduerſyte,
                  For lyfe nor death aſunder nor diſſeuer.
                  For where loue is it contuneth euer.
                  ¶But of hate all is the contrarye.
                  Of whych ſothly from hertꝭ when they varye
                  Procedeth rancoure at eye as men maye ſe,
                  Debate, enuye, ſtryfe and enmyte,
                  Mortall ſlaughter both to nygh and ferre.
                  Mother of whyche in ſothfaſtnes is werre.
                  The fyne wherof longe or it be do,
                  Seuereth hertes and frendſhip cutte atwo.
                  And cauſeth loue to be leyde full lowe.
                  ¶But for all this I wil that thou knowe,
                  Thy proude wordes in herte nor in thoughte,
                  In very ſothe agaſten me ryght nought.
                  And if I ſhall furthermore out breake,
                  Without auaunt the trouthe for to ſpeake,
                  I ſaye the playnly henſe or two yeare,
                  If I maye lyue in the werres here,
                  And my ſwerde of knighthod forthe acheue,
                  I hope in ſothe ſo mortally to greue,
                  The Grekes all when I with thē maye mete
                  That they and thou ſhall fele it full vnſwete.
                  If ye contynue and the werres haunte.
                  I ſhal your pryde and ſurquedrye adaunte,
                  In ſuche a wiſe with my handes two,
                  That or the werre fully be ado,
                  Well many greke full ſore ſhall it rewe.
                  For well I wote of olde and not of newe,
                  That the grekes gathered here in one,
                  Of ſurquedrye are founde euerychone,
                  Onely for lacke of diſcreſcion,
                  To vndertake of preſumpcion,
                  So highe a thinge a ſyege for to layne.
                  And your ſelfe to ouer charge in vayne.
                  With empryſes withouten any fable,
                  That byn to you of weyght importable.
                  And the peys of ſo great heuyneſſe,
                  That fynally it will you all oppreſſe,
                  And your pride auale and lowe enclyne.
                  Which burthē ſhall enbowe backe and chyne,
                  And vnwarely cauſen you to fall.
                  Or ye haue done I ſaye to one and all.
                  ¶And ouer more be full in ſuerte,
                  ¶Thou Achilles I ſpeake this vnto the.
                  That fatall deathe firſt ſhall the aſſayle,
                  Tofore thy ſwerde in any thynge auayle.
                  Agaynſt me for all thy worthyneſſe.
                  ¶And if ſo be that ſo great hardyneſſe,
                  Courage of wyll, vygour force or myght,
                  Meue thy herte by manhode as a knyght,
                  To take on the as in derryng do,
                  For to darreyne here betwene vs two,
                  Thilke quarell how ſo that befall,
                  For the whych that we ſtryue all.
                  I wyll aſſent playnly to ieoparde,
                  Tyll that the death one of vs departe,
                  There is no more but that theſe lordes here,
                  Kinges and prynces wyll accorde yfere,
                  That it be do fully by one aſſent.
                  And holde ſtable of herte and of entente,
                  So that the felde onely by vs tweyne,
                  As I haue ſayde this quarell may darreyne,
                  And ended be by this condiciowne
                  That if it happe through thy highe renowue,
                  Me to venquiſhe or dryue to outtraunce,
                  I will you make fully aſſuraunce,
                  That fyrſt my lorde Priamus the kinge,
                  Shall vnto grekes in all maner thinge,
                  With crowne and ſceptre holy him ſubmitte,
                  And in a poynt varye nother flytte,
                  Fully to yelde to our ſubiectiowne,
                  All his lordſhip within Troye towne.
                  ¶And his lyeges in captyuytye.
                  Shall go theyr waye out of this cyte.
                  And leue it quyte as to your gouernaunce,
                  Without ſtryfe or any varyaunce,
                  And thervpon to make ſecuryte,
                  
                     To deuoyde all ambyguyte,
                  Tofore the goddes by othe of ſacrament,
                  We ſhall be ſwore in full good entente.
                  And ouermore our fayth alſo to ſaue,
                  To aſſure you in pledge ye ſhall haue,
                  The meane whyle and kepe thē on your ſide,
                  At your choyſe hoſtages to abyde.
                  From Troye towne of the worthieſt,
                  That ye lyſt cheſe and alſo of the beſte.
                  So that ye ſhall of nothyng be in were,
                  Of all that euer that I ſaye you here.
                  ¶And Achilles without wordes mo,
                  If that you lyſte accorde therunto,
                  That I haue ſayd thy honour to encreaſe,
                  To make this werre ſodaynly to ceaſe,
                  That lykly is for to laſte longe,
                  Betwene Troians and the Grekes ſtronge,
                  Thou ſhalt not onely wt honour & with fame,
                  Throughout the worlde winnen the a name,
                  But therwithall and that is not a lyte,
                  Thrugh thy knighthod to many man profite,
                  That fro the death ſhall eſcape alyue.
                  And to his countre hole and ſounde aryue.
                  That lykly are by cruell aduenture,
                  For to be dead if the werre endure.
                  Come of therfore and let not be prolonged,
                  But let the daye atwene vs two be ioyned.
                  As I haue ſayd in condiciowne,
                  If in diffence onely of this towne,
                  I haue victorye by fortune ouer the,
                  I axe not elles but anone that ye,
                  Breake vp ſiege and the werre lete,
                  And ſuffer vs to lyuen in quyete,
                  Into Grece home when ye are gone.
                  To which thinge Achilles there anone,
                  Hote in his yre and furyous alſo,
                  Brenning full hote for anger and for wo,
                  Aſſented is with a deſpytous cheare.
                  ¶And gan anone to Hector dreſſe him nere,
                  And ſayd he would delyuer him vtterly,
                  Fro poynt to poynt his axynge by and by,
                  And therin made none excepciowne,
                  But of hole herte and entencion.
                  His requeſte accepted euery dell.
                  And as it ſemed leked it right well.
                  And for his parte he caſte his gloue adowne,
                  In ſygne and token of confirmaciowne,
                  For lyfe or death that he will holde this daye,
                  Agayne Hector happe what happe maye.
                  Vnto the which Hector lyfely ſterte,
                  And toke it vp with as glad an herte,
                  As euer yet did any man or knyght,
                  That quarell toke with his foe to fight.
                  There can no man in ſothe a ryght deuyſe,
                  How glad he was of this high empryſe.
                  ¶Of whych the noyſe and the great ſowne,
                  Ran to the eares of kinge Agamenowne.
                  And he anone him ſelfe came to the tente,
                  With all the lordes of his parliament,
                  ¶Where Achilles and Hector were yfere,
                  To wytte their will as in this mattere,
                  Where they would aſſenten fynally,
                  To put the quarell full in Ieopardy,
                  Of other parte atwene theſe knightes tweyn
                  As ye haue herde fully to dareyne.
                  ¶And with one voyce Grekes it denye,
                  And ſayde they nolde of ſuche a companye.
                  Of kinges, Dukes, and of Lordes eke alſo,
                  Bothe life and death Ieoparte atwene two.
                  Nor to the courſe of fortune theim ſubmitte,
                  That can all daye her face chaunge & flytte.
                  And ſome of Troye in concluſyowne,
                  Ieoparde ne wold their liues nor their towne
                  In the handes onely of a knight,
                  To put all in auenture of fyght.
                  ¶Pryam except whyche ſothly in this caſe,
                  Within him ſelfe fully aſſented was,
                  Playnly to put and ſette in Ieopardye,
                  Hooly the honour of his regallye.
                  Suppoſynge aye as made is memorye,
                  That Hector ſhoulde haue had the victorye,
                  Of this empryſe if he toke it on hande.
                  ¶But for Priam might not tho withſtande,
                  Agayne ſo many of one entencion,
                  That were contrarye to his opynion,
                  Bothe of Grekes and on Troye ſyde,
                  He helde his peace and let it ouer ſlyde,
                  And ſo the Grekes parted be echone.
                  ¶And Hector is from Achilles gone,
                  Home to Troye where I him leue a whyle,
                  Whiles that I dyrecten ſhall my ſtile,
                  To tell of Troylus the lamentable wo,
                  Which that he made to parte his lady fro.
               
               
                  ALas fortune gery and vnſtable,
                  And redy aye for to be chaungeable,
                  Whē folke moſt truſt in thy ſtormye face,
                  Like their deſyre the fully to embrace,
                  
                     Then is thy ioye away to tourne and writhe,
                  Wpon wretches thy power for to kythe.
                  Record of Troylus yt from the whele ſo lowe,
                  By falſe enuye thou haſt ouerthrowe.
                  Out of the ioye whych that he was in,
                  From his lady to make hym for to twynne.
                  When he beſt wende for to haue be ſured,
                  And of the woe that he hath endured,
                  I muſte nedely helpe hym to complayne.
                  Whych that in herte felte ſo great payne,
                  So inwarde wo and ſo great diſtreſſe,
                  More than I haue cunning to expreſſe,
                  When that he knewe the partynge of Creſeyd
                  Almoſt for wo and for payne he deyed.
                  And fully wiſte that ſhe departe ſhal,
                  By ſentence and by iudgement fynall,
                  Of his father gyuen in parlyamente,
                  For which with wo and tourment al to rente,
                  He was in poynt to haue fallen in rage,
                  That no man might appeaſe nor aſwage,
                  The hidde paynes which in his breſt gā dare.
                  For lyke a man in furye he gan fare,
                  And ſuch ſorowe daye and nyght to make,
                  In complayninge onely for her ſake.
                  For when he ſawe that ſhe ſhould aweye,
                  He leuer had playnly for to deye,
                  Than to lyue behinde in her abſence.
                  For him thought without her preſence
                  He was but dead there is no more to ſayne.
                  And into teares he gan to berayne,
                  With which his eyen gan for to bollen,
                  And in his breſt the ſighes tho vppe ſwollen,
                  And the ſobbynge of his ſorowes depe,
                  That he ne can not do but rore and wepe,
                  So ſore loue his herte gan conſtrayne.
                  And ſhe ne felte not a litle payne,
                  But wepte alſo and piteouſly gan crye,
                  Deſyringe aye that ſhe might do dye,
                  Rather than parte fro him out of Troye.
                  Her owne knyght her luſt her lyues ioye.
                  That by her chekes the teares downe deſtyll,
                  And fro her eyen the teares round drops tryl
                  That all fordewed haue her blacke wede,
                  And eke vntruſſed her heyre abrode gā ſprede
                  Lyke golde wyre forrent and all to torne,
                  Yplucked of and not with ſheres ſhorne.
                  And ouer this her freſhe roſen hewe,
                  Whilom ymeynt with whyte lylyes newe,
                  With wofull wepynge pyteouſly diſteyned,
                  And like the herbes in April all bereyned,
                  Or floures freſhe with the dewes ſwete,
                  Right ſo her chekes moyſte were and wete.
                  With criſtall water vp aſcendinge hye,
                  Out of her breſt into her heauenly eye,
                  And aye amonge her lamentaciowne,
                  Full ofte ſythe ſhe fell in ſwowne adowne,
                  Deadly pale fordimmed in her ſyghte,
                  And ofte ſayde alas myne owne knight,
                  Mine owne Troilus alas why ſhal we parte
                  Rather let death with his ſpere darte,
                  Through my herte and the vaynes kerue,
                  And with his rage do me for to ſterue,
                  Rather alas than fro my knight to twinne.
                  ¶And of this wo Oh death that I am in,
                  Why nilt thou come & helpe to make an ende,
                  For how ſhulde I out of Troye wende,
                  He abyde and I to Grekes gone,
                  There to dwell amonge my cruell fone.
                  Alas alas I wofull creature,
                  How ſhoulde I there in the werre endure,
                  I wretched woman but my ſelfe alone,
                  Amonge the men of armes euerychone.
                  Thus gan ſhe crye all the longe daye,
                  This was her playnte with full great affray.
                  Her pyteous noyſe till it drewe to night,
                  That vnto her her owne trewe knight,
                  Full tryſt and heauy came agaynes eue,
                  If he might ought comforte or releue.
                  ¶But he in ſothe hath this Creſeyde founde,
                  All in a ſwowne liyng on the grounde.
                  And pyteouſly vnto her he wente,
                  With wofull cheare and her in armes hente.
                  And toke her vp and then atwene theim two.
                  Began of newe ſuche a deadly wo,
                  That it was routhe and pyte for to ſene,
                  For ſhe of cheare pale was and grene.
                  And he of coloure like to aſhes deade,
                  And fro her face gone was all the red.
                  And in his chekes deuoyded was the bloude,
                  So wofully atwene theim two it ſtode,
                  For ſhe ne might not a worde yſpeake,
                  And he was redy with deathe to be wreke,
                  Vpon him ſelfe his naked ſwerde beſyde.
                  And ſhe full ofte gan to the grounde glyde.
                  Out of his armes as ſhe fell a ſwowne,
                  And he him ſelfe gan in teares drowne.
                  She was as ſtille and dombe as any ſtone,
                  He had a mouthe but wordes had he none.
                  
                     The wery ſpyryte flykered in his breſt,
                  That of the death ſtode tho vnder a reſte,
                  Without maynpryſe ſothly as of lyfe.
                  And thus there was as it ſemed a ſtryfe,
                  Whiche of theim two ſhulde fyrſte ypaſſe.
                  For death portrayed both in herte and face,
                  With coloure ſuch as men go to theyr graue.
                  And thus in wo they gan togyther raue,
                  Diſconſolate all the longe nyght.
                  That in good fayth yf here I ſhould aryght,
                  The proceſſe hole of theyr bothe ſorowe,
                  That they made till the next morowe,
                  From poynt to poynt do it ſpecifye,
                  All to longe it would me occupye,
                  Of euery thynge to make mencion.
                  And tarye me in my tranſlacion.
                  If ſo I ſhoulde in her wo procede,
                  But me ſemeth that it is no nede,
                  ¶Syth my maiſter Chaucer here afore,
                  In this matter hath ſo well him bore,
                  In his boke of Troylus and Creſeyde,
                  Whych he mayde longe or that he deyed,
                  Reherſyng firſt how Troilus was cōtrayre,
                  For to aſcende vp on loues ſtayre.
                  And how that he for all his ſurquedrye.
                  After became one of the compaynye,
                  Of loues folke for all his olde game.
                  Whan Cupide had ſubdued him full tame,
                  And brought him lowe to his ſubiectiowne.
                  In a temple as he walked vp and downe,
                  When he his gynnes and his hookes leyde,
                  Amid the eyen cercled of Creſeyde,
                  Whych on that daye he might not aſterte,
                  For through his breſt perced hath his herte.
                  He went him home pale dead and wan,
                  And in this wiſe Troylus firſt began,
                  To be a ſeruaunt my mayſter telleth thus,
                  Till he was after holpe of Pandarus.
                  Through whoſe comforte and mediacion,
                  As in his boke is made relacion.
                  With great laboure fyrſt he came to grace,
                  And ſo continueth by many yeares ſpace.
                  Till gery fortune gan vpon him frowne,
                  That ſhe fro him muſt go out of the towne,
                  All ſodaynly and ſythe him ſe.
                  Lo here the ende of falſe felycite.
                  Lo here the ende of worldly brotilneſſe,
                  Of fleſhly luſt lo here thunſtableneſſe,
                  Lo here the double variacion,
                  Of wordly bliſſe and tranſmutacion.
                  This daye in myrthe and in wo to morowe,
                  For aye the fine alas of ioye is ſorowe,
                  For now Creſeyde with the kinge Thoas,
                  For Anthenor ſhall forth gon alas,
                  Vnto Grekes and euer with theim dwell.
                  ¶The hole ſtorye Chaucer can you tell.
                  If that ye lyſt no man better alyue,
                  Nor the proceſſe halfe ſo well diſcriue.
                  For he our englyſhe gilt with his ſayes,
                  Rude and boyſtous firſte by olde dayes.
                  That was full fer from all parfection,
                  And but of lytell reputacion.
                  Till that he came and with his poetrye,
                  Gan our tunge firſt to magnifye,
                  And adourne it with his eloquence.
                  To whom honour laude and reuerence,
                  Throughout this lande giuen be and ſonge,
                  So that the laurer of our engliſhe tonge,
                  Be to him giuen for his excellence.
                  Right as whilom by ful high ſentence,
                  Perpetually for a memoriall,
                  ¶Of Columpna by the Cardinall,
                  To Petrack fraūceis was giuen in Italye,
                  That the reporte neuer after fayle.
                  Nor the honour dirked of his name,
                  To be regiſtred in the houſe of fame,
                  Amonge other in the higheſt ſete.
                  My mayſter Galfride as for chiefe Poete,
                  That euer was yet in our language,
                  The name of whom ſhall pallen in none age,
                  But euer yliche without eclipſing ſhine,
                  And for my parte I will neuer fine,
                  So as I can him to magnifye,
                  In my writinge plianly till I dye.
                  And god I praye his ſoule bringe in ioye,
                  ¶And where I lefte I wil agayne of troye,
                  The ſtorye tell and firſt how that he Guydo,
                  Within his boke thus ſpeaketh Troylus to.
                  Rebuking him full vncurteyſly,
                  That he ſo ſette his herte folyly,
                  Vpon Creſeyde full of doubilneſſe.
                  For in his boke as Guydo liſt expreſſe,
                  That her teares and her complayninge,
                  Her wordes white ſofte and blandiſhinge,
                  Were meynt with fayning & with flatterye,
                  And outward farſed with many a falſe lye.
                  For vnderhid was all the varyaunce,
                  Cured aboue with fayned countenaunce.
                  
                     As women can falſly teres borowe,
                  In theyr herte though there be no ſorowe,
                  Lyke as they would of very trouthe deye,
                  They can thynke one and an other ſay,
                  As a ſerpent vnder floures fayre,
                  His venym hydeth where he doth repayre,
                  The ſugre afore the galle hydde behinde,
                  As propered is aye vnto theyr kynde.
                  To be dyuerſe and double of nature,
                  Ratheſt deceyuing when men moſt aſſure.
                  For vnder coloure euery thynge they werke,
                  The fayre aboue the foule in the dercke,
                  They hydde ſo that no man may eſpye.
                  And though ſo be that wyth a wofull eye,
                  They can outwarde wepe pyteouſly,
                  The tother eye can laugh couertly.
                  Whoſe ſorowes all are tempred with alleys,
                  And theyr coloure is euer meynt with rayes,
                  For vpon chaunge and mutabylyte,
                  Stande hole theyr truſte and theyr ſuerte.
                  So that they be ſure in doubylneſſe,
                  And alway double in theyr ſikerneſſe,
                  Seminge one when they beſt can varye,
                  Lykeſt to a corde when they be contrarye.
                  And thus they be moſt varyaunt in accorde,
                  And hooleſt ſeme when there is diſcorde.
                  And Guido ſayth how there are fewe or none
                  That in herte apayed is in one,
                  And yet they can be it to one or twayne,
                  To thre or foure in theyr ſpeche fayne,
                  Lyke as they were to one and to no mo,
                  Hoole in theyr loue for well and eke for wo.
                  That eneryche ſhall of hym ſelfe deme,
                  That he be next lyke as he doth ſeme.
                  And thus in hope ſtādeth eche in of theim all,
                  The treweſt aye redyeſt forto fall.
                  Who ſerueth beſt next to be appayred.
                  And thus in chaunge all theyr loue is fayred,
                  Let no man truſte but catche when he maye,
                  Farewell to morow though it be ſure to daye.
                  The fayre of chaunge laſteth all the yeare.
                  But it is folye for to bye to deare,
                  Thilke treaſour whyche harde is to poſſede,
                  But flieth away when men therof moſt nede.
                  And yf it happe that no chapman be,
                  As ſayth Guydo yet all daye men maye ſe,
                  It ſheweth out at large feneſtralles,
                  On chaumbers high & lowe downe in halles.
                  And in windowes eke in euery ſtrete,
                  And alſo eke men maye wyth theim mete,
                  At Pylgramage and oblacions,
                  At ſpectacles in Cityes and in townes,
                  As ſayth Guydo and all is for to ſelle.
                  But after him I can no further telle,
                  And eke he ſayth in his ſentement,
                  There is no fraude fully equypolent,
                  To the fraude and ſleyghty compaſſinge,
                  Of a woman nor lyke in their workyng.
                  For who that ſet all his faithfulneſſe,
                  Wening in theim to finde ſtableneſſe,
                  He ſhall theim fynde ſtedfaſt as the mone,
                  That is in poynt for to chaunge ſoone.
                  If he be yonge they caſte him in rage,
                  If he be olde he falleth in dotage.
                  Wherfore my counſayle is to bothe two,
                  Caſte of the brydell and lightly let theim go.
                  ¶This teacheth Guido god wote and not I
                  That hath delite to ſpeake curſedly,
                  Alway of women throughout all his boke.
                  As men maye ſe who ſo lyſt to loke.
                  To theim he hadde enuye in ſpecyall,
                  That in good fayth I am right wrothe wt al.
                  That he with theim lyſt ſo to debate,
                  For yre of which the Latin to tranſlate.
                  Inwardly my hert I felte blede.
                  Of high diſpite his clauſes for to rede,
                  That reſowned in concluſiowne,
                  Onely of malyce to accuſaſiowne,
                  Of thoſe women full euyll mote he thriue.
                  So generally their ſecte do deſcryue,
                  Whiche made not through in diſcrecion,
                  Of good nor badde none excepcion.
                  He was to blame foule mote he falle,
                  For cauſe of one for to hynder all.
                  For I dare well affyrmen by the rode,
                  Agayne one bad their ben an hundred good.
                  And though ſome one double be and newe,
                  It hyndreth not to them that be trewe.
                  And by example alſo though he ſhewe,
                  That ſome one whylom was a ſhrewe,
                  They that be good take ſhall no hede,
                  For it no hinderinge is to womanheade.
                  Though twaine or thre can double be & faine
                  For there agayne ſothly at Colayne,
                  Of vyrgyns weren inly full of grace.
                  A leuen thouſande in that holy place.
                  A man may fynde and in our kalender,
                  Full many mayde parfyt and enter,
                  
                     Which to the death ſtable were and trewe,
                  For ſome of theim with the roſen hewe,
                  Of Marterdome the blyſſe of heauen wonne
                  And ſome alſo as bokes telle konne,
                  With the lylye of vyrgynyte,
                  And vyolettes of parfyte chaſtyte.
                  Aſcenden be aboue the ſterres cleare.
                  And the ſercle of the nynthe ſphere.
                  Where ioye is aye with gladneſſe eterne.
                  Wherfore in ſothe as I can diſcerne,
                  Though ſome clerkꝭ of ſhrewes haue miſſaid
                  Let no good woman therof be miſpayde,
                  For lacke of one all are not to blame.
                  And eke of men maye be ſayde the ſame,
                  For to the trewe it is no reprefe,
                  Though it be ſo another be a thefe.
                  For what is he the worſe in his degre,
                  Though that the other be hanged on a tree.
                  Nor vnto women hinderyng it is none,
                  Amonge an hundred though yt there be one,
                  Of gouernaunce that be vicious.
                  For there agayne that byn ful vertuous,
                  Yf that ye lyſt a thouſande ye may fynde.
                  And though Guido write they haue of kinde,
                  To be double men ſhoulde it goodly take,
                  And there agayn no maner grutching make.
                  Nature in workynge hath full great powere,
                  And it were harde for any that is here,
                  The courſe of her to holde or to reſtreyne,
                  For ſhe will not be guyded by no reyne,
                  To be coarted of her dewe righte,
                  Therfore eche man with all his full might,
                  Shoulde thanke god and taketh paciently.
                  For yf women be double naturelly,
                  Why ſhulde men laye on theim the blame.
                  For though min auctour hīder ſo their name
                  In his writynge onely of Cryſeyde,
                  And vpon her ſuch a blame leyde,
                  My counſayle is lyghtly ouerpaſſe.
                  Where he myſſayth of her in any place.
                  To hyndre women other eue or morowe,
                  Taketh no hede but let theim be wyth ſorow.
                  And paſſe it ouer where ye liſt not rede.
                  Tyll ye be come where that Diomede,
                  For he was ſente into Troye towne.
                  Where ceryouſly as is made menciowne,
                  Fyrſt how that ſhe to him delyuered was,
                  ¶For Anthenor and for the kinge Thoas.
                  And how Troylus gan her to conueye,
                  With many other to brynge her on the weye.
                  ¶And after this how that Dyomede,
                  By the waye gan her brydell lede,
                  Tyll he her brought to her fathers tent.
                  And how that Calchas in full good entent,
                  Receyued her lodged there he laye,
                  And her ſpeche duryng all that daye,
                  And all the maner hole and euerydele,
                  All is reherſed ceryouſly and wele,
                  In Troylus boke as ye haue herde me ſaine,
                  To wryte it ofte I holde it were but vayne.
                  ¶But Guydo ſayth longe or it was nyght,
                  How Cryſeyde hath forſake her owne knight
                  And gaue her herte vnto this Diomede.
                  Of tenderneſſe and of womanhede.
                  That Troylus in her herte is now as colde,
                  Without fyre as byn theſe aſſhes olde.
                  I can none other accuſacion,
                  But onely kyndes tranſmutacyon,
                  That is appropryed vnto her nature.
                  Selde or neuer ſtable to endure.
                  By experyence as men maye ofte lere.
                  But nowe to tourne agayne to my matere,
                  I muſt reſorte though that I be ferre,
                  As I began to wryten of the werre.
               
            
            
               ¶Of their battayles after that trewſe, the deſcripcion of the Pallaſe of Ilion, of a great peſtylence in the grekes hoſte, whereby they were enforced to ſeke for trewſe, whiche vpon their ſuyte they obteyned for thyrtye dayes. Capitulo. xxvi.
               
                  THe tyme paſſed of the trewſe ytake,
                  the next morow whā Titā hath forſake,
                  The vnder partye of their hemyſperye,
                  Where al the night he had be full merye,
                  With Aurora liynge by his ſyde.
                  But in his bed hym lyſt no longer byde,
                  But ſhope him vp & caſte his ſtreames ſhene,
                  ¶On Troy wall whan Hector armed clene,
                  Into the fyelde faſte gan hym hye.
                  With fyftene thouſande in his companye,
                  Of worthy knyghtes and of manly men.
                  And as I fynde Troylus had tenne,
                  Of knyghtes eke that his baner ſewe.
                  And in all haſt Parys gan remewe,
                  Out of the towne with them of Perce londe,
                  With eche of thē a mighty bowe in his honde,
                  
                     And arrowes ſharpe truſſed by their ſyde.
                  And of knyghtes that aboute him ryde,
                  He had alſo thre thouſande as I fynde.
                  ¶And Deiphobus next him came behynde,
                  With thre thouſande knightes armed clene,
                  On whoſe plates the ſonne ſhone full ſhene,
                  ¶And nexte hym came the Troyan Eneas,
                  And as I reade ſothīy that there was,
                  The ſame day with them of Troye towne,
                  An hundred thouſande knyghtes of renown,
                  Lyke as recordeth Dares Frygyus.
                  And in his boke Guydo writeth thus.
                  ¶And with the grekes all toforre that day,
                  With ſeuen thouſande goeth Menelay.
                  Knyghtes echone whiche he tho dyd lede,
                  And with as many went this Dyomede.
                  And next them ſeweth the hardy Achylles,
                  With his mayne called Myrmydones.
                  ¶And zantipus the worthy kyng eke had,
                  Thre thouſand knightꝭ which wt hym he lad,
                  Into the fyelde agayn them of the towne.
                  And alderlaſte the great Agamenowne,
                  With ſuche a nombre of the grekes felle,
                  That wonder is for to heren telle.
                  And whan the wardes in the felde abrode,
                  Had take their place without more abode,
                  ¶A grekyſhe kyng which that Phillis hight,
                  Anone as he of Hector had a ſyght,
                  Towardes hym ſyttynge on his ſtede.
                  With his ſpere he gan him faſte ſpede,
                  But when Hector hath his commynge ſayne,
                  He hente a ſpere and rode to hym agayne,
                  And through his ſhyelde & his plates rounde,
                  He gaue to hym hys laſte fatall wounde.
                  Vpon whoſe deth auenged for to be,
                  Full many greke gan on Hector flee.
                  And fyrſt of all the worthy kyng famous,
                  ¶That of grekes was called zantypus,
                  Of hye diſdayne onely for Phyllys ſake,
                  Towarde Hector hath his courſe ytake,
                  And with a ſpere ran at him full ryght,
                  But Hector fyrſt hyt him with ſuche a might,
                  Through his harneys with his ſperes head,
                  That zantyhus fell to the grounde deade.
                  The death of whom the grekes ſore cōplaine
                  And dyd their myght and their buſy payne.
                  On euery halfe furyous and wood,
                  Them to auenge on the Troyans bloud.
                  And through their paſſyng cruell hardyneſſe,
                  They gan Troyans tho ſo ſore oppreſſe,
                  That many one that day ne myght aſterte,
                  Through the breſt yperced and the herte,
                  For to be dead and ſlayne amonge the preſe.
                  Amonge whiche cruell Achylles,
                  Slewe Lychaon and Eutorbyus,
                  Noble knyghtes ryght worthy and famous.
                  That were ycome out of their countre,
                  Agayne grekes to helpen the citie.
                  And while troians cōſtrained were ſo narow
                  Were it with ſpere quarell darte or arowe,
                  Hector was wounded throughout the vyſer,
                  Into the face that lyke a ryuer,
                  The red bloud downe began to rayle.
                  By his harneys through his auentayle,
                  Wherof aſtoned whan they had a ſyght,
                  Full many Troyan toke hym to the flyght,
                  And to the cyte faſte gan them drawe.
                  And in the chaſe full many one was ſlawe.
                  Or they myght efte out of the felde remewe.
                  And euer in one grekes after ſewe,
                  Vnto the walles almoſt of the towne.
                  Tyll that Hector the Troyan champyowne,
                  Of his knyghthode gan to taken hede,
                  Albe his wounde ſore gan to blede.
                  Yet of manhode he gan them recomforte,
                  And maugre them into the fyelde reſorte,
                  Namely whan he had inſpectiowne,
                  On the walles and toures of the towne.
                  How that Heleyne and Heccuba the quene,
                  And his ſyſter fayre Polycene,
                  With many other lady gan beholde,
                  Hym thought anone his herte gan to colde,
                  Of very ſhame his knygytes ſhulden flee.
                  And lyke a Lyon in his crueltee,
                  He made theim tourne manly euerychone,
                  And in his waye he meteth Meryon,
                  A grekyſhe kinge that was nygh of allye,
                  To Achilles as bookes ſpecifye.
                  And with his ſworde Hector ſmote him ſo,
                  That he his bodye clouen hath on two.
                  And when Achilles ſawe that he was deade,
                  Parted atwo euen fro the head,
                  He hēt a ſpere and thought he ne would fayl,
                  To hyt Hector through ſhelde plate & mayle,
                  And rode to him tho full enuyouſly,
                  And myd the ſhelde he ſmet him cruelly.
                  But with the ſtroke Hector neuer adell,
                  Remeueth not he ſat ſo faſte and well.
                  
                     But with his ſwerde anone & taryeth nought
                  He to Achylles with enuyous thought,
                  But knyghtly ran vpon his courſere,
                  And on his creſte that ſhone ſo bright & clere,
                  With ſuch a myght Hector hath hym ſmyt,
                  That he perced throughe his baſenet,
                  And raced eke from his auentayle,
                  With that ſtroke many pece of mayle.
                  That Achylles conſtrayned was of nede,
                  Maugre his myght to ſtagre on his ſtede.
                  To enclyne and to bowe his backe,
                  At whiche tyme Hector to hym ſpake.
                  And ſayde Achylles I do well aduerte,
                  The great enuye of thy cruell herte,
                  And ſpecyally that thou haſte to me.
                  But be well ware therfore I counſayle the,
                  Thy ſelfe to put ſo farre in aduenture,
                  For of one thynge I playnely the enſure,
                  As I deſyre at my luſte ſome daye,
                  Here in the fyelde yf I the mete may,
                  Truſt me ryght wel there gayneth no ſocour,
                  That I ne ſhal acquyten thy labour,
                  So mortally I do the vnderſtande,
                  With this ſworde that I holde in hande,
                  That with thy life thou ſhalt not thēſ
                        •
                      eſcape.
                  So cruelly the vengeaunce ſhalbe take,
                  Efte whan we mette euen vpon thy head.
                  ¶Of which thyng whan Achylles toke hede
                  Aduertynge all that he herde him ſayne.
                  Ryght as he wolde haue anſwered agayne,
                  ¶Vorthy Troylus knyghtly entred in,
                  And made them a ſonder for to twynne,
                  And through the manhode of his companye,
                  Of worthy knyghtes that he tho dyd guye,
                  And hyghe proweſſe of his owne might,
                  He hath the grekes put agayne to flyght.
                  And ſlayne of them that day out of dread,
                  Syxe hundred knyghtes ſothly as I reade.
                  For loſſe of whyche the grekes faſte gan flee.
                  To their tentes as of neceſſytee.
                  Tyll Menelay dyd his buſy cure,
                  To make them the fyelde agayne recure.
                  Through whoſe manhode yt day out of doute
                  And worthy knightes that weren him about,
                  The fyelde of grekes recured was anone.
                  ¶But tho fro Troye came kyng Odemon.
                  And in all haſt poſſyble that he may,
                  He came enbuſhed vpon Menelay,
                  And hym vnhorſeth in the ſelfe place.
                  And ſuche a wounde gaue hym in the face.
                  That from the death he wende not eſcape.
                  And doubtles anone he had hym take,
                  With helpe of Troylus and lad vnto ye towne
                  But of grekes ſuche a preſe came downe,
                  To reſcue hym in this great nede,
                  ¶That Odemon myght tho no further lede,
                  Kyng Menelay towarde the cyte.
                  Whan Dyomede came with his meyne.
                  And many worthy rydynge hym aboute,
                  When Troylus mette amonges al the route,
                  All ſodeynly of hap or aduenture,
                  Hath him vnhorſeth as it was his eure,
                  And after that anone he hent his ſtede,
                  And bad a ſquyer that he ſhulde it lede,
                  Vnto Cryſeyde onely for his ſake,
                  Beſechynge her that ſhe wolde it take,
                  As for a gyfte of her owne man.
                  Syth he that day for her loue it wan.
                  Amyd the fyelde through his great myght.
                  Of hym that was whylom her owne knight.
                  And he in haſte on his waye it went,
                  And therof made vnto her preſent.
                  ¶Prayinge her in full humble wyſe,
                  This lyttell gyfte that ſhe not deſpyſe.
                  But it receyue for a remembraunce,
                  And with all this that it be pleaſaunce,
                  Of very pitye and of womanhede,
                  On her ſeruaunt called Dyomede,
                  To remembre that was become her knyght.
                  And ſhe anone with harte glad and lyght,
                  Full womanly bad hym repayre agayne,
                  Vnto his lord and playnly to hym ſayne,
                  That ſhe ne myght of very kyndneſſe,
                  Of womanhead nor of gentylneſſe,
                  Refuſen hym platly from her grace,
                  That was to her there in ſtraunge place,
                  So kynde founde and ſo comfortable.
                  In euery thynge and ſeruyſable.
                  That it may not lykely out of mynde,
                  To thynke on hym that was ſo true & kinde.
                  ¶With which anſwere the meſſager is gone,
                  Vnto his lorde and tolde it hym anone,
                  Worde by worde lyke as ſhe hath ſayde,
                  And he therof was full well apayde.
                  That hym thought playnely in his herte,
                  He was recured of his paynes ſmerte.
                  And forth he had hym in armes as a knyght,
                  ¶But that day duryng the ſtronge fyght,
                  
                     They of Troye ſo manly haue them borne,
                  That grekes myght not ſtande them aforne,
                  For to their tentes they haue thē chaſed down
                  That ne had be kyng Agamenowne,
                  Grekes had be driuen clene out of the fyelde.
                  The whiche thyng anon as he behelde,
                  He came vpon with many worthy man,
                  And tho of new the ſlaught agayne began.
                  On euery halfe vpon the large playne.
                  That grekes haue Troyans ſo be laine,
                  That efte agayne they haue the fyelde ywon.
                  So that Troyans canſtrayned tho begon,
                  To leſe their lande tyll Pollydamas,
                  Whiche with his knyghtes there beſyde was,
                  Gan fall vpon endlonge on the grene,
                  Them of Troye full manly to ſuſtene.
                  And the grekes he gan ſo to enchace,
                  Whan he came in that they loſte their place,
                  And to the ſtronde euen vpon the ſee,
                  Thrugh his knyghthod he made thē for to fle
                  Of their lyfe that they were in dread.
                  The whiche miſchiefe whan that Diomede,
                  Behelde and ſawe how Pollydamas,
                  Mortally purſued on the chaſe,
                  On horſebacke both and in the fyelde yfere,
                  With cruell herte hent anone a ſpere,
                  And ſpryngyng out rode to hym full ryght,
                  And he agayne tacquyte him lyke a knyght,
                  As he that lyſte on no partye fayne,
                  Of his ſtede helde agayne the reyne,
                  ¶And raught a ſpere & threwe it in the reſt,
                  And Dyomede he ſmote ſo on the breſte,
                  That mortally lyke as it is founde,
                  He hym vnhorſeth with a greuous wounde.
                  And ryght anone with a knightly herte,
                  Pollydamas all attones ſterte,
                  Vnto the horſe of this Dyomede,
                  And by the reyne proudely gan it lede,
                  ¶Vnto Troylus where he on foote ſtode.
                  All forbathed in the grekes bloude,
                  On euery halfe whiche that he ſhadde,
                  Amonges them ſo knightly he him had.
                  That they ne myght endure nor ſuſtene,
                  His ſharpe ſworde grounde was ſo kene.
                  ¶And delyuer maugre all his foen,
                  Into the ſadell vp he ſterte anone,
                  Of very force armed as he was,
                  And vnwarely by aduenture or caſe,
                  With ſharpe ſwerdes for the nones whette,
                  As Achylles and he together mette,
                  Worthy Troylus of rancour and of pryde,
                  Achylles ſmote that he fell a ſyde,
                  Downe of his horſe lowe to the grounde.
                  And notwtſtanding his grene mortal woūde,
                  He roſe agayne and faſt gan hym ſpede,
                  If that he myght recure agayne his ſtede.
                  But all for nought it wolde not auayle.
                  For ſodaynly with a freſhe battayle,
                  They of Troye as made is mencyon,
                  In compaſewyſe beſet hym enuyron.
                  Eueryche of them armed bright and clene,
                  And Hector tho in his furious tene,
                  ¶As Dares telleth all the maner howe,
                  The ſame daye a thouſande knyghtes ſlowe.
                  Whiche them withſtode onely in diffence,
                  For Achylles to maken reſyſtence.
                  That tyme of death ſtandyng in ieopardye.
                  That certaynly but yf that bokes lye,
                  By lyklyhode he myght not tho eſcape,
                  In that miſchyefe to be dead or take,
                  Hector on hym was ſo furyous.
                  ¶But as I read kyng Thelamonyus,
                  Reſcued hym in this great nede.
                  And cauſed hym there to recure his ſtede.
                  Notwithſtandyng all that it diſdayne.
                  For he the duke and lorde of Athene,
                  Was in caſe of herte and hole entent,
                  To helpe Achylles wonder dylygent.
                  That with hym ladde many noble knyght,
                  ¶But for bycauſe that it drewe to nyght,
                  As the ſtorye maketh reherſayle,
                  They made an ende as of that battayle.
                  And they of Troye entred be the towne,
                  And after that as made is menciowne,
                  By and by hauyng no delayes,
                  Mortally they foughten thirtye dayes.
                  Without lette or interrupcyon.
                  On outher parte to great deſtruction.
                  But aldermoſt nathles their great pryde,
                  They loſt moſt on the grekes ſyde.
                  ¶Saue Pryamus loſt in ſpecyall,
                  Syxe of his ſonnes called naturall.
                  For whom he made great dole and heuineſſe.
                  And as the ſtorye lyketh to expreſſe,
                  This mene whyle Hector in certayne,
                  In his face wounded was agayne,
                  And thus they haue in this cruell rage,
                  On euery parte receyued great domage,
                  
                     Tyll Pryam hath from Troye ſent downe,
                  For a trewes vnto Agamenowne.
                  For ſix monthes if he aſſente wolde.
                  And therupon he hath a counſayle holde
                  With his lordes what were beſte to do.
                  And they echone accorded be therto,
                  And graunte his axynge concluſyon.
                  ¶And all this whyle within Ylyon,
                  Durynge the peas on outher parte aſſured,
                  Of his woundes fully to be cured
                  ¶Lay worthi Hector protector of the towne.
                  But of this ryche royall chefe doungeowne,
                  That Ilyon in Troye bare the name,
                  Whiche of buildyng had ſuche a fame,
                  If that I ſhuld commende it vp and downe,
                  As Dares doth in his diſcrypciowne,
                  I wante cunnynge my termes to aplye,
                  For in his boke as he doth ſpecifye.
                  In all this worlde was there newe ſo ryche,
                  Of hyghe deuyſe nor of buildyng lyche.
                  The whiche ſtode the more to delyte,
                  As he there ſayth on twelue ſtones whyte,
                  Of Alabaſtre ſhortly to conclude,
                  And twenty paſe was the latytude,
                  That grounde ypaued thrughout wt cryſtall,
                  And vp an hyght performed euery wall,
                  Of all ſtones that any man can fynde,
                  Of Dyamountes and of ſaphyres Inde.
                  The royall rubye ſo oryent and lyght,
                  That the derkeneſſe of the dymme nyght,
                  Enchaced was with the beames ſhene.
                  And euer amonge were emeraudes grene.
                  With ſtones all that any maner man,
                  In this worlde deuyſe or recken can.
                  That were of pryſe, value, or richeſſe,
                  Ther were wrought of large & gret roūdnes
                  As ſayth Dares, and Iuory the pyllers,
                  And thervpon ſet at the corners,
                  Of pured golde all aboue on hyght,
                  There were ymages wonder huge of weight.
                  With many perle and many ryche ſtone,
                  And euery piller in the halle had one.
                  Of maſſyfe golde burned clere and bryght,
                  And wonderfull to any mans ſyght,
                  For of this worke the merueylous faſſhyon,
                  Was more lyke by eſtymacyon,
                  A thynge ymade and founded by fayrye,
                  Than any worke wrought by fantaſye,
                  Through wytte of man as by lykelyneſſe.
                  For in his bokes Dares doth wytneſſe,
                  That it was lyke to recken ſyght and all,
                  In apparaunce a thynge celeſtyall.
                  Seeth in this boke ye get no more of me.
                  For but in wrytynge I myght neuer it ſe.
                  Albe that it all other dyd excelle,
                  No more therof I thinke nowe to telle.
                  But to retourne agayne to Pryamus.
                  Whiche all this whyle was inly curyous,
                  With all his myght and his buſy cure,
                  To ordeyne for the ſepulture,
                  Of his ſonnes that afore were dead.
                  ¶And all that tyme ſycke laye Dyomede,
                  With loues ſtripe wounded to the herte.
                  As he that felte inwardly the ſmerte,
                  Of woful ſyghes whiche in his breſt abreide.
                  Full ofte adaye for loue of her Creſeyde.
                  For he was ſhake with a feuer newe,
                  That cauſed hym to be full pale of hewe.
                  And to wexen megre poore and lene,
                  For pyteouſly he gan hym to abſtene,
                  For meate and drynke and from all ſolace,
                  As it was ſene in his deadly face.
                  And ofte a daye to her he wolde complayne,
                  Of his diſſeaſe and of his mortall payne,
                  Prayinge of grace that ſhe wolde do ſe,
                  Vpon his woo for to haue pytye.
                  And of mercy for to taken hede,
                  Of her ſeruaunt onely of womenhead.
                  Or playnely elles there is no more to ſeye,
                  For her ſake he ſayde that he wolde deye.
                  ¶But cunnyngly and in full ſleyghty wyſe,
                  To kepe hym lowe vnder her ſeruyce,
                  With delayes ſhe helde hym forth on hande▪
                  
                  And cauſed hym as in a were to ſtande.
                  Full vnſure betwene hope and diſpayre.
                  And whan that grace ſhuld haue had repaire
                  To put hym out of all this heuyneſſe,
                  Daunger of newe brought hym in diſtreſſe.
                  And with diſdayne to encreaſe his payne,
                  Of double were ſhe brought him in a trayne.
                  As women can holde a man full narowe,
                  Whan he is hurte with Cupydes arowe.
                  To ſette on them with many fell aſſayes,
                  Day by day to put hym in delayes.
                  To ſtande vnſure betwyxe hope and dread.
                  Ryght as Creſeyde lefte this Dyomede.
                  Of entent to ſette hym more a fyre,
                  As this women kyndly aye deſyre.
                  
                     Whan they a man haue brought in to a traūce
                  Vneuenly to hange hym in balaunce,
                  Of hope and dread to lynke hym in a chayne,
                  And of the fyne vnſure of bothe twayne.
                  To dryue hym forth yeres them to ſerue,
                  And do no force where he lyue or ſterue,
                  This is the fyne of loues fyry rage.
                  And for ſhe wolde haue hym in ſeruage,
                  She locked hym vnder ſuche a keye,
                  That he wote not where to lyue or deye.
                  Wherof in doubte thus I lette hym dwell.
                  And forth I wyll of the ſtory tell.
                  And to my matter eke reſorte agayne,
                  And as myne auctour recordeth in certayne,
                  After the trewſe were wered out and gone,
                  Twelue dayes ſuyng all in one,
                  The grekes haue faught wt thē of the towne.
                  To great damage and confuſyowne,
                  Of outher partye and aduerſyte.
                  And in this whyle a great mortalyte,
                  Both of ſworde and of peſtylence,
                  Amonge grekes by fatall influence,
                  Of noyous hete and of corrupte eyre,
                  Engendred was that tho in great diſpayre,
                  Of theyr lyfe in the fyelde they leye,
                  For day by day ſodaynly they deye.
                  Wherby theyr nombre faſt gan dyſcrece,
                  And whan they ſawe that it ne wolde ſece,
                  By theyr aduyſe the kyng Agamenowne,
                  For a trewſe ſent vnto the towne.
                  For thirty dayes. and Priamus the kinge,
                  Without abode graunted his axynge.
               
            
            
               ¶How Andromecha was by a dreame forwarned of the death of her huſbande Hector, if he the day folowing entred the fielde, wher of ſhe admonyſhed him, and he therto hauing no reſpect, was the next day ſlain of Achilles. Capitulo .xxvii.
               
                  VVhan the moreyne and the wofull rage,
                  Of peſtylence began for to aſwage.
                  And the trewſe were wered out and gone,
                  The grekes caſte to meten with their foen,
                  Vpon a day in plates armed clene.
                  Whan Phebus roſe with his beames ſhene,
                  Full pleaſauntly and gan to ſhede his lyghte.
                  ¶But as I fynde tofore the ſelfe nyght,
                  Andromecha the faythfull trewe wyfe,
                  Of worthy Hector hym louyng as her lyfe,
                  By whom he had gette chyldren two,
                  Wonder ſemely and inly fayre alſo,
                  ¶And Lamedowne called was the tone,
                  So yonge the tother that it ne myght gone.
                  ¶And Aſtyonax I read that he hyght,
                  Fetured well and paſſynge fayre of ſyghte,
                  And as Guydo lyſteth to endyte,
                  Of his moder at the pappes whyte,
                  For very yonge that tyme was ſuckynge.
                  And with his arme his breſtes embraſyng.
                  And ſhe that nyght as made is mencyon,
                  Had in her ſlepe a wonder vyſyon,
                  I note in ſothe what I may it neuene,
                  Outher a dreame or veryly a ſweuene,
                  Or fro aboue a reuelacyon,
                  As whylom had the kyng Scypyon,
                  Or a ſhewyng outher an Oracle,
                  Or of goddes a warnyng by myracle,
                  For in ſothneſſe ſlepynge as ſhe laye,
                  Her thought playnly if the nexte daye,
                  ¶Hector went his fomen for to aſſayle,
                  As he was wonte armed in battayle,
                  That he ne ſhulde eſcape vtterly,
                  In fates hondes to falle fynally.
                  And ouermore Attropos ſhall fyne,
                  For euermore his lyues threde to twyne.
                  And ſhewe the force of her fell myght,
                  When the Parodye of this worthy knyght,
                  A proche ſhall without wordes mo,
                  Into the fyelde playnly if he go.
                  Of which aſtoned ſtrete and ſhort of breth,
                  Where as ſhe laye abrayde vpon the death,
                  And with a ſyghe ſtynte for to ſlepe,
                  And pyteouſly braſt out for to wepe,
                  For the conſtraynte of her herty ſorowe.
                  And ſpecyally on the wofull morowe,
                  When that ſhe ſawe this ſtocke of worthineſſe
                  As he was wonte manfully hym dreſſe,
                  To arme hym in ſtele borned bryght.
                  This troian wall Hector this worthy knight.
                  She can no more but at his fete fell downe,
                  Lowly declaryng her a vyſyowne,
                  With quakyng herte of very womanhead.
                  Wherof god wote he toke full lyttle hede.
                  But therof had hygh indignacion.
                  Platly affyrmynge that no diſcrecion,
                  Was to truſten in ſuche fantaſyes.
                  In dreames ſhewed gladly meinte with lyes.
                  
                     Full of Iapes and of illuſyons,
                  Of whiche playnely the concluſyons,
                  Be not elles but folkes to delude.
                  Albe it ſo that theſe people rude,
                  Therin ſome whyle haue affection,
                  To iudge and deame in their oppynion,
                  Dyuerſly what they may pretende.
                  And ofte falle and happen as they wende,
                  And foloweth lyke in concluſyon.
                  For dread of whiche the lamentacion,
                  Encreaſe gan of this Andromecha.
                  And in her ſwone fyrſt ſhe cryed ha.
                  Sayinge alas myne owne lorde ſo dere,
                  Your trewe wyfe alas why nyll ye here.
                  Whyche of ſo faythfull hoole affection,
                  Deſyreth aye your ſaluacyon.
                  And vp ſhe roſe deadly of vyſage,
                  And lyke a woman caught with ſodayne rage
                  To kynge Pryam and Hecuba the quene,
                  In haſte ſhe went her ſelfe to be mene.
                  And of her wyfely herte trewe as ſtele,
                  Ceryouſly declared euery deale,
                  Her pyteous dreame which through myracle,
                  To her onely by deuyne oracle,
                  Yſhewed was through goddes purueyaunce.
                  And tolde them eke the fynall ordynaunce.
                  Of fortunes falſe diſpociſyon.
                  Fully purueyed to deſtruction,
                  Of her lorde without more delaye.
                  Into the fyelde yf he go that daye.
                  ¶Wherfore ſhe prayeth with a deadly hewe,
                  Vnto the the kynge of mercy for to rewe,
                  Vpon her wo to haue compaſſyon.
                  For to ordeyne by hyghe diſcrecion,
                  Of his lordſhyp and of ſoueraynte,
                  That her lorde may not deſtroyed be.
                  Of reckeleſhead or wylfulneſſe.
                  And with that worde of very kyndneſſe,
                  In whom was aye ſo moche loue founde,
                  Tofore the quene in ſowne fell to grounde.
                  And ſayde alas with a deadly chere,
                  Helpe in this caſe myne owne mother dere,
                  Of womanhead and routh do me grace.
                  That my lorde into the fyelde ne pace.
                  And do your deuer of motherly pytee,
                  Benyngnely and goodly for to ſe,
                  To his knyghthode and his hygh proweſſe,
                  For to reſtrayne his renowmed nobleſſe.
                  This ylke day to handle ſpere or ſhelde,
                  Nor that he go armed into fylde.
                  ¶And both twayne aſſent for the beſte,
                  And condeſcende vnto her requeſte,
                  Fynally accordynge into one.
                  That whē the wardes were redy euerychone
                  ¶On yſſuynge out and Troylus fyrſt of all▪
                  
                  And Parys next on grekes for to fall,
                  ¶And after hym the troyan Eneas,
                  Kinge Sarpedan and Pollydamas,
                  Kyng Eroys and kyng Epyſtrophus,
                  And eke the kyng ycalled Forcyus,
                  In plate and mayle eueryche armed clene,
                  And alderlaſt came kyng Phylomene,
                  Withall the kynges and lordes of renowne,
                  That in deffence come of the towne,
                  With the grekes knyghtly to debate.
                  ¶And Pryamus ſothly to the gate,
                  Conueyed them at theyr out goynge,
                  And ſet their wardes this noble worthy king.
                  Full prudently through his ſapyence,
                  And after gaue them congee and lycence,
                  Vpon grekes for to proue their myght.
                  Agaynſt whom full redy for to fyght,
                  Their fomen were with royall apparayle.
                  Amyd the fyelde abydyng the battayle.
                  ¶But Pryamus in the meane whyle,
                  Lyke as Guydo remembreth in his ſtyle.
                  For thylke fyne that ye haue herde me ſayne,
                  To whothy Hector repayred is agayne,
                  Hym contermaundyng that he ne ſhuld gone,
                  Thilke day to fyght agayne their foen.
                  For whyche thynge of hygh deſpyte he brent,
                  Whan that he ſawe other lordes went,
                  Out at the gate and he alone abode.
                  For whiche he wexed furyous and wood,
                  Hooly the cauſe arettynge to his wyfe,
                  That was of cheietie ſo tender of his lyfe.
                  Puttyng on her fully the occaſyowne,
                  Of his abydynge that day in the towne.
                  In preiudyce of his worthyneſſe,
                  And diſencreaſe of his hygh proweſſe,
                  And leeſt through tongues to his hygh eſtate,
                  Through falſe reporte it were derogate.
                  He caſte anone of a full knightly herte.
                  For lyfe nor death it ſhulde hym not aſterte,
                  Within the fyelde that daye to be founde,
                  Though it ſo were wt many mortall wounde,
                  He ſhulde on peces hewen be a ſonder.
                  Vpon the playne diſmembred here & yonder.
                  
                     So hole in manhod was his herte ſette,
                  That he anone without longer lette,
                  Agayne to arme hym was full dyligent,
                  Agayne the precept and commaundemente,
                  Of his father and rode on his waye,
                  For feare of whyche anone as ſhe would deye
                  His wife of newe crye gan and ſhoute.
                  And with her papes alſo hangynge oute,
                  Her lytell chylde in her armes twayne,
                  Tofore her lorde gan to wepe and playne,
                  Beſechynge him of routhe and pyte,
                  If ſo he would vnto her ſorowe ſe,
                  At the leaſt for her wyfely trouthe,
                  That he of manhode haue in herte routhe,
                  Vpon his childe and vpon her alſo,
                  Whych that ſhe bare in her armes two,
                  And not might him from criynge kepe,
                  Whan he ſawe his wofull mother wepe,
                  And knelynge downe vnto him ſhe ſayde,
                  In her ſobbynge as ſhe might abrayde,
                  Mine owne lorde haue mercy now on me,
                  And on this lytell chylde whych that ye ſe,
                  So pyteouſly afore you wepe and crye,
                  Haue mercy lorde on vs or that we dye,
                  Haue mercy eke vpon this Cite,
                  Myne owne lorde haue mercy or that we,
                  By cruell death paſſe ſhall echone,
                  For lacke of helpe alas when ye are gone.
                  ¶This was the crye of Andromecha,
                  With whom was eke her ſyſter Caſſandra,
                  ¶Hecuba and fayre Pollycene,
                  And Heleyne eke the luſty freſhe quene,
                  Which all atones fell him beforne,
                  With heyr vntruſſed and weping all to torne.
                  And loude gan to crye in the place,
                  Beſechynge him of mercy and of grace.
                  For thilke daye to abyde in the towne,
                  And in his hert to haue compaſſyowne,
                  On her complaynte and her wofull mone.
                  Sith all the truſte of the towne alone,
                  In him abode and all the reſyſtence,,
                  Agaynſt death he was their chiefe defēce,
                  And in him onely was their affiaunce,
                  Their ſuerte and their ſuffyſaunce,
                  In eche thinge that theim might greue.
                  ¶And yet all this ne might his herte meue.
                  For to abyde yet of goodlyheade,
                  They him beſought to their womanheade,
                  He would encline his herded herte of ſtele,
                  That they might a lytell droppe fele,
                  Onely of pyte on their woo to rewe,
                  That lykly was to more and renewe,
                  Fynally to their deſtructiowne,
                  For of the Cite and lykewyſe the towne,
                  His death in ſoth ſhulde fully be ruyne,
                  But yet all this might not him enclyne,
                  That he ne would out in concluſyon,
                  As indurate and harted as a Lyon.
                  He was alwaye continuinge in his rage
                  Whoſe herte might aſ often nor aſwage,
                  Nother prayer nor lamantacion,
                  Him to reſtrayne from his opinion.
                  For euery peryll he layde hath aſyde,
                  And on his waye gan anone to ryde.
                  Where through his wife none other bote can.
                  But in her rage to the kinge ſhe ran,
                  So amaſed in her mortall wo,
                  That ſhe vnneth might ſpeake him to.
                  So diffaced and rewefull of her ſight,
                  That by her hewe knoweth her no wight,
                  For loſte ſhe had bothe might and ſtrengthe,
                  And plat ſhe fell to the grounde at length,
                  Tofore the kynge that routhe was to ſene.
                  ¶Beſechinge him of entente full clene,
                  That he of grace conſider wolde her wo,
                  For but he helpe Hector was ago.
                  And he ſeynge her faythfull womanhead,
                  At her requeſt raughte anone his ſtede,
                  And pricked after onely for her ſake,
                  In ſo great haſte that he hath ouertake.
                  Worthy Hector within the Cite,
                  And hent his reyne with great difficulte,
                  And maugre him made him tourne agayne.
                  In ſuche wiſe he durſt it not with ſayne,
                  Albe that he was full lothe therto.
                  So that by prayer and by force alſo,
                  From his ſtede he made him to alyghte.
                  The areſte of whom eſchewe he ne myght.
                  For he ne would agayne his father ſtriue,
                  Albe that he felte his herte ryue,
                  Of melancolye and of hertye yre.
                  And of diſdayne newe ſet a fyre,
                  So inwardly ſtered was his blode.
                  That lyke a Tygre or a Lyon wood,
                  That were depriued newly of her praye.
                  Right ſo he fared all that ylke daye.
                  Or lyke a bore that his tuſkes whette,
                  Whyle the Grekes and they of Troye mette,
                  
                     Furyouſly walkynge vp and downe,
                  And in diffence ſothly of the towne,
                  Troylus fyrſte on his baye ſtede,
                  Of aduenture mette with Diomede.
                  And eche at other ſurquedous of pryde,
                  With ſharpe ſperes gan togyther ryde,
                  And Guydo ſayth without any dreade,
                  One or bothe had anone be deade,
                  Ne had Menelay knightly go betwene.
                  And after that in a furyous tene,
                  He ſmette his horſe in full knyghtly wyſe,
                  ¶And Mereon the mighty kinge of Fryſe,
                  Menelaus marked hath full well,
                  And wyth his ſwerde ful ſharp groūd of ſtele,
                  Vnhorſed him and threwe hym on the grene.
                  For he the ſtroke might not tho ſuſtene,
                  This Menelay was on him ſo wood.
                  That it was lykly euen there he ſtode,
                  With his lyfe he ſhoulde not thenſe eſkape.
                  For the Grekes ful haſtely theim ſhape,
                  This Meryon as ye haue herde me ſayne,
                  For to be ſette rounde vpon the playne,
                  And to ceſſe him by the auentayle,
                  On euery parte and cruelly to aſſayle,
                  All deſtytute in this wofull caſe,
                  ¶But him to helpe came Pollydamas,
                  With his knightes and gan to nighe nere,
                  When he him ſawe taken pryſonere.
                  And maugre all that there vpon him ſette,
                  From theyr handes Pollydamas him fette,
                  At whoſe reſkues there was ſo great a ſtrife,
                  That many one therfore loſte his lyfe.
                  For Grekes rather then he ſhoulde eſcape,
                  From their handes in that haſty rape,
                  Caſte theym playnly that he ſhoulde be dead.
                  Fully in purpoſe to haue hadde his head.
                  He ſtode of miſchyefe in ſo great diſioynt,
                  But him to ſelpe euen vpon the poynt,
                  ¶Came Troylus in moſt knightly of arraye
                  And of his manhod made ſuche affraye,
                  Amōges them in reſkuſe of this kinge,
                  That maugre theim at his in cominge,
                  Deliuered was this mighty kinge of Fryſe.
                  From cruell death as ye haue herde deuyſe.
                  But thervpon came Thelamonyus.
                  Proude in armes and euer ſurquidous,
                  With thre thouſande full worthy euerychone,
                  And he vnhorſeth Pollydamas anone.
                  Among his knightꝭ & proudly bare hī downe.
                  ¶But Troilus hath thrugh his hie renowne
                  Myd of his foen get him his horſe agayne,
                  But they of Troye ſo ſore were belayne,
                  On euery halfe throughe the grekes pryde,
                  That they ne might afore theim tho abyde,,
                  For newe and newe the hardy Achilles,
                  Aſſayled theim with his Myrmydones.
                  That they compelled of neceſſyte.
                  In miſchyefe were made for to flee,
                  Home to the walles and gates of the towne,
                  To great domage and confuſyowne.
                  Of theyr partye that abacke ſo gone.
                  ¶The whych thynge when Margaryton,
                  Behelde and ſawe howe the game gothe,
                  In his herte he gan to wexen wrothe.
                  And paſſyngly for to haue diſdayne,
                  As the ſtorye recordeth in certayne,
                  That he was bothe hardy and famous.
                  And ſonne alſo to kinge Priamus.
                  A noble knight and of great worthineſſe,
                  And when he ſawe the miſchyef and diſtreſſe,
                  Of theim of Troye add how they gan fle,
                  He caſte anone auenged for to be,
                  Vpon Achilles for all his great might.
                  And ran to him full lyke a manly knight,
                  On horſe backe for the townes ſake,
                  And him enforſeth Achilles for to take,
                  Amyd the felde amonge his knightes all.
                  ¶But Achilles alas it ſhould befall,
                  That daye him ſlewe by cruell aduenture.
                  Where through Troians mightē not endure,
                  The felde to holde but homeward gan thē hie
                  And mortally they maken noyſe and crye,
                  Firſt for the death of Margaryton,
                  ¶And for the purſuyte that king Thelamō.
                  Made on the chaſe through hys crueltye.
                  Home to the gates of Troye the Cite,
                  That ſlewe and killed alwaye as he rode,
                  Albe that Parys manly him withſtode,
                  With his brethrene that in baſte were borne,
                  But for al that their ground they haue lorne,
                  Lefte and forſake vtterly the felde.
                  And home they wēt and brought on a ſhelde,
                  The dead corps of Margaryton.
                  And after that theyr gates ſhette anone,
                  The whych miſchiefe as Hector gan beholde,
                  Of very yre his herte gan wexe colde,
                  And ſayd platly without more delaye,
                  He would auenge his death the ſame daye.
                  
                     And made in haſte his ſtede to be fet,
                  And vp he ſterte and on his baſenet,
                  Vnwyſte the kinge or who be lefe or lothe,
                  There was no gayne forthe anone he gothe,
                  Tyll he was paſſed the gates of the towne,
                  More furyous then Tygre or Lyowne.
                  At whoſe coming as thick as ſwarme of been.
                  Tofore his ſworde Grekes gan to fleen,
                  They thought it was tyme to withdrawe.
                  And fyrſt I finde how that he hath ſlawe,
                  Two worthy Dukes as he wyth theim met.
                  That buſy were his waye for to let,
                  The one ycalled was Eurypalus,
                  ¶And the other hyght Halcydius,
                  And ſo Troians the felde agayne haue won,
                  And of newe manfully begon,
                  Grekes to ſewe and folowe on the traſe,
                  And yet at myſchiefe Dan Pollydamas,
                  The ſame tyme was of Grekes take,
                  But Hector hath ſo borne him for his ſake,
                  Where as that he foreſt was belayne.
                  And thrugh his knighthod reſkued hī agayne
                  And put the Grekes in ſo great diſtreſſe,
                  Through his manhode and his worthineſſe,
                  That where ſo euer thylke daye he rode,
                  His ſharpe ſwerde he bathed in their bloud,
                  He was ſo cruell and ſo merciles.
                  ¶But then a knight called Leothydes,
                  Shope him anone with Hector for to mete,
                  While he was moſt yrous in his hete,
                  And ſet on him full preſumptuouſly,
                  But Hector tho deuoyde of all mercy,
                  Anone him ſlewe and threwe him in the felde
                  The whych thinge when Achilles behelde,
                  The great ſlaughter and the woundes wide,
                  That Hector made vpon euery ſyde,
                  He gan anone compaſſe in his herte,
                  And vp and downe caſte and aduerte,
                  How the grekes neuer maye be ſure,
                  Agayne their foen to fyght nor endure,
                  Nor kepe a felde with theim for to ſtryue,
                  All the whyle that Hector were alyue.
                  Wherfore he caſte and ſhope many weye,
                  By what engyne Hector might deye.
                  At auauntage if he might him finde,
                  ¶And therto eke Pollicenes of Inde,
                  A worthy Duke was alſo of aſſent,
                  Onely for he of herte and hole entente,
                  In hope ſtode his ſyſter for to wyue,
                  For loue of whom he felte his herte ryue.
                  And in her grace better for to ſtande,
                  He caſte fully for to take on hande,
                  This high empriſe as I haue you tolde,
                  But while that he was on him moſt bolde,
                  Hector him ſlew there was none other gayne
                  The whych anone as Achilles hath ſeyne,
                  For yre he wexed in his herte as wood,
                  As bore or Tygre in theyr cruell moode,
                  Vpon Hector auenged for to be.
                  And furyouſly he gan on him to fle.
                  ¶But Hector caught a quarel ſharp ygroūd
                  And threwe at him & gaue him ſuch a wound,
                  Throughout the thighe vpon other ſyde,
                  That in the felde he might not abyde.
                  But him withdrewe and anone is wente,
                  With all his men home vnto his tente,
                  And made anone a ſurgeyn for to binde,
                  His mortall wounde and after as I fynde,
                  Whan he was ſtaunche & ceaſeth for to blede,
                  In all haſte agayne he toke his ſtede,
                  And leeſt he were of that wounde deade,
                  Afterwarde as it was great dreade,
                  He thought fyrſt auenged for to be,
                  Vpon Hector if he might him ſe.
                  Of happe or ſorte yf it would fall,
                  For him thought to his paynes all,
                  It were to hym the beſte remedye,
                  Of his hande if he might dye,
                  For of his lyfe he routhe not a mite,
                  Be ſo that he Hector might acquyte,
                  Deathe for deathe in concluſyon,
                  For that was holy his entencion,
                  Of his deſyre fully ſuffyſaunce,
                  By death vnwarely to gyue him miſchaunce.
                  ¶But all this time Hector vp and downe,
                  As he was wonte playeth the Lyon,
                  Amonges Grekes in many ſondry place,
                  And with his ſwerde gan theim ſo enchaſe.
                  That as the death where they might hī ſeen.
                  They fledde afore him like a ſwarme of been.
                  For none ſo hardy was him to wythſette.
                  And in this while a grekiſhe kinge he mette,
                  Were it of hap or of aduenture,
                  The whiche in ſothe on his cote armure,
                  Embrouded had full many ryche ſtone,
                  That gaue a lyght when the ſonne▪ ſhone,
                  Full bryght and cleare that ioye was to ſene,
                  For Perles white and Emerawdes grene,
                  
                     Full many one were therin ſette.
                  And on the cercle of his baſenette,
                  And rounde enuyron of his auentayle,
                  In veluet fret all aboue the mayle,
                  Saphyres ynde and other ſtones red.
                  Of whoſe arraye when Hector taketh hede,
                  Towardes him faſt gan him drawe.
                  And fyrſt I fynde how he hath hym ſlawe,
                  And after that by force of his manheade,
                  He hente him vp afore him on his ſtede,
                  And faſt gan wyth him for to ryde,
                  From the wardes a lytell out of ſyde,
                  At good leyſer playnly if he maye,
                  To ſpoyle him of his ryche arraye,
                  Full glad and lyght of his newe empryſe.
                  But out alas of falſe couetiſe,
                  Whoſe gredy fret the which is great pytee,
                  In hertes may not lightly ſtaunſhed be.
                  The Etike draweth by ſo great diſtreſſe,
                  That it defaceth the high worthyneſſe,
                  Full ofte ſythe of theſe conqueroures.
                  And of theyr fame rente away the floures.
                  Deſyre of hauynge in a gredy thuoght,
                  To hygh nobleſſe ſothly longeth nought.
                  Nor ſuche pylfre ſpoylynge nor robberye,
                  Appartayne not to worthy chyualrye.
                  For couetyſe and knighthod as I lere,
                  In one chayne maye not be knet yfere.
                  For kouthe it is that ofte ſuche rauyne,
                  Hath cauſe be and roote of ruyne,
                  Of many worthy who ſo lyſt take hede,
                  Lyke as ye maye nowe of Hector reade.
                  That ſodaynly was brought to his endynge,
                  Onely for ſpoylynge of this ryche kinge,
                  For of deſyre to him that he hadde.
                  On horſe backe out whan he him ladde,
                  Rekleſly the ſtorye maketh mynde,
                  He caſte his ſhelde at his backe behynde,
                  To welde him ſelfe at more lyberte,
                  And for to haue oportunyte,
                  To ſpoyle him and for no wyght ſpare,
                  So that hys breſt diſarmed was and bare.
                  Except his plates there was no diffence,
                  Agayne the ſtroke to maken reſiſtence.
                  Alas why was he tho ſo reckles,
                  This floure of knighthod of māhode pereles
                  When that his foo all that ylke daye,
                  For him alone in awayte ſo laye,
                  If in miſchiefe of hate or of enuye,
                  In the fielde he might him ought eſpye,
                  This Achilles cruell and venymous,
                  Of hertye moſte melancolius,
                  Whych couertly houing him beſide,
                  When that he ſawe Hector diſarmed ryde,
                  He hente a ſpere ſharpe grounde and kene,
                  And of yre in his hatefull tene,
                  All vnwarely or Hector might aduerte,
                  ¶Alas the while he ſmote him to the herte,
                  Throughout ye breſt that dead he fel adowne.
                  Vnto the earthe this Troian champyowne,
                  Through neclygence onely of his ſhelde,
                  The death of whom when Odemon behelde,
                  The worthy kinge might hym not refrayne,
                  ¶But to Achilles rode with all his payne,
                  And hit him ſo amyd of all the preſe,
                  Maugre the might of his Myrmydones,
                  That for dead Guydo ſayth certayne,
                  Of that wounde fel grofeling on ye playne.
                  But his knightes on a ſhelde alofte,
                  The ylayde him and caryed him full ſofte,
                  Vnto his tente in all the haſte he can,
                  And there I leue this deadly wounded man,
                  Full ſore ſycke tyll he maye releue.
                  And after that when it drewe to eue,
                  They of Troye with great reuerence,
                  Did their laboure and theyr diligence,
                  The dead corps to carye into towne,
                  Of worthy Hector whē Titan went adowne
                  And to the temple dolefully they wende.
                  And of that daye this was the wofull ende.
                  I can no more but thus the longe night.
                  In heauineſſe as it is ſkill and ryght,
                  I will theim leue and agayne retourne,
                  To my matter to helpe theym for to mourne.
               
            
            
               ¶The complaynte of Lydgate for the death of Hector. Ca. xxviii.
               BVt nowe alas how ſhal I forth procede,
               In the ſtorye that for wo and dreade,
               Fele my hande bothe tremble and eke quake,
               Oh worthy Hector onely for thy ſake.
               Of thy deathe I am ſo lothe to wryte.
               Oh who ſhall now helpe me to endite,
               Or vnto whom ſhall I clepe or call,
               Certys to none amonge the muſes all
               That by accorde ſingen euer in one,
               On Pernaſus beſyde Helycon.
               
                  So aungelyke in theyr hermonye,
               That tunge is none that may ſpecifye,
               The great ſweteneſſe of theyr goodly ſonge,
               For no diſcorde is founde theim amonge,
               In theyr minſyke they be entuned ſo.
               It ſytte theim nought for to helpe in wo,
               Nor in maters yt be with mourninge ſhente,
               As tragydyes all to tore and rente,
               In camplayninge pyteouſly in rage.
               In the Theatre with a dead vyſage,
               To theim alas I clepe dare nor crye,
               My troubled penne of grace for to guye,
               Nother to Clyo nor to Callyope,
               ¶But to Alecto and to Theſyphone,
               And to Megera that euer doth complayne,
               As they that lyue aye in wo and payne.
               Eternally and in torment dwell,
               With Cerberus depe downe in hell.
               Whom I muſt praye to be gratious,
               To my matter which is ſo furyous,
               For to a wyght that is comlaplayninge,
               A drery feare is ryght well ſyttinge.
               And to a matter meynt with heuyneſſe.
               Accordeth well a cheare of dreryneſſe.
               To be allyed as by vnyte.
               ¶Wherfore helpe nowe thou wofull Nyobe,
               Some drery teare in all thy piteous payne,
               Into my penne dolefully to rayne.
               ¶And helpe alſo thou cruelly Yxione,
               And Belydes that dothe the bokette gone,
               And with thy ſtone helpe thou Secyphus,
               And in thy ryuer helpe eke Tantalus,
               That for hunger haſte ſo huge pyne.
               This wofull playute helpe me for to fyne.
               Me to further do your buſyneſſe,
               For now the ſtocke and roote of worthyneſſe,
               Of knighthod groūd of māhod ſoures & well,
               That tofore all bare away the bell,
               Of derrynge do this floure of high proweſſe,
               And was exaumple alſo of gentilneſſe,
               That neuer could do amiſſe or ſeye,
               ¶Alas Hector alas why ſhuldeſt thou deye.
               Oh cruell Parchas why toke ye no hede,
               So cruelly to twine his fatall threde,
               Ye were to haſty alas why were ye ſo,
               And namely when the threde ye brake a two
               Thou Attropos which thrugh thy gret enuye
               Oh Troye alas well mayſt thou wepe & crye,
               And make a wofull lamentacion,
               Whych haſte of newe to thy confuſyon,
               Loſte thy diffence and thy ſtronge wall.
               Thy berer vp thy ſuertie royall.
               By whom thy honour chiefely was begonne
               Alas alas for now thy bryght ſonne,
               Eclipſed is now ſtandeſt thou deſolate,
               Of all comforte and diſconſolate,
               Thy lyght is loſte and thou in derckneſſe,
               Yplounged arte for in ſothefaſtneſſe,
               Of all worthy thou haſte the worthyeſt,
               This daye yloſte and the knightlyeſt,
               That is or was or ſhall I the enſure
               Be euer borne whylſe the worlde may dure.
               No wonder is though thou be wale ſore,
               And daye by daye complayne for euermore.
               That was thy ſhelde bothe in ioye and wo,
               Whom thou were wonte for to loue ſo.
               So tenderly with all thy hole herte.
               That it maye not lyghtly the aſterte,
               To haue him euer in thy remembraunce.
               Which was in ſothe fully thy ſuffyſaunce.
               ¶For as Guydo maketh mencion,
               There was no man dwellinge in the towne,
               That he ne hadde of very kindeneſſe,
               For loue of him as he lyſte expreſſe,
               His childe more lefe to haue dyed in this caſe,
               Other his heyre ſo well beloued he was.
               If the goddes, fate, or deſtyne,
               Diſpoſed had that it might haue be,
               Women alſo of euery maner age,
               Be for his deathe fall in ſuche a rage,
               Through the Cite aboute in euery ſtrete,
               That with ſobbinge and with ſalte tearꝭ wete
               And heyre to rente for their deadly wo,
               Furyouſly they ronnen to and fro.
               So mortall was their aduerſyte.
               That to beholde alas it was pyte.
               Yonge maydes and lykewyſe matrones olde,
               Sobbe and ſyghe and their fyſtes folde.
               And loude crye and ſayde fynally,
               Alas nowe ſhall our fathers cruelly,
               In our ſyght be ſlayne day by day.
               Alas the while and no man ſhal ſay nay.
               Farewell our helpe nowe Hector is ygone.
               That in the ſureneſſe of vs euerychone,
               Was wonte to reſte now is he dead alas.
               ¶Of whom the body whan it caryed was,
               Into preſence of Pryamus the kynge,
               Anone he loſte the offyce of ſpeakynge.
               
                  And gan him ſelfe in ſalte teares droune,
               And pyteouſly therwith fell in ſwone,
               Vpon the corps cold as any ſtone,
               Inly deſyrous for to deye anone,
               Without tariyng on him as he laye,
               ¶But that he was by force rente awaye.
               His brethren eke when they token hede,
               Tryſte and pale for ſorowe well nyghe dead.
               That haue them ſelfe with rage al to torne,
               That neuer was I trowe ſene aforne,
               Of brethren yet ſuche an other care.
               For eche of theim with him ſelfe gan fare,
               As there they would haue dyed on the corſe,
               For of theyr life platly they gaue no forſe.
               But at the grounde with many ſorowes ſore,
               Lyke wilde bulles they gan crye and rore,
               That routhe was theyr deadly wo to ſene.
               An herte of ſtele myght it not ſuſtene.
               ¶What ſhall I ſaye of Hecuba the quene,
               Or of his ſyſter yonge Pollycene,
               Or Caſſandra the prudent and the wyſe.
               Or of his wyfe the ſorowe to deuyſe.
               Whiche rent them ſelfe in torment and in wo.
               As fynally they wolde them ſelfe for do,
               By cruell deth ſo they wepe and wayle.
               That yf I ſhulde maken reherſayle,
               To wryte their ſorowes & their complaynges
               Their pyteous ſobbyng ſorowes & wepinges
               The wofull cryes and pyteous ſownes,
               Their drery plaintes and lamentaciownes,
               And all their wo for to ſpecyfye,
               A large volume it wolde occupye,
               If eche thynge I ſhulde in order tell.
               I trowe it were to longe for to dwell.
               For any man and tedyous to here,
               For many day after as I lere.
               The women wepte afore the corps lyinge.
               Them ſelfe defacyng in their complaynynge,
               That wonder was how they myghte endure.
               But that they haue it ſothly of nature,
               And of kynde for to wepe and playne,
               To ſyghe ſore and into teares rayne,
               Tyll the tempeſt of their wofull rage,
               May by proceſſe lyt and lyt aſwage.
               And thus I lette them ſygh and ſorowe make
               This cely women that in their clothes blake,
               ſhroude their faces & wimpled more in vaine,
               While to my matter I retourne againe.
               To tell playnely how kyng Pryamus,
               In herte was inly deſyrous.
               To caſte awaye in his entencion,
               The corps to kepe from corrupcyon,
               Whiche naturally but men taken hede,
               Corrupte muſt ryght of very nede.
               For of kyndly diſpocyſyon,
               There may be made none oppoſycion,
               Aboue the grounde if the body lye,
               That by all reaſon it muſt putryfye.
               But yf crafte be aboue nature.
               Vncurrupte it may not there endure.
               ¶Wherfore the kyng ſhope hym to ordeyne,
               To preſerue it hole fro thynges twayne.
               From odoure and abhomynacion.
               And therwith eke by craftye operacyon,
               That in it ſlyght be not founde horrible,
               But that it be lyefly and viſyble,
               To the eye as by apparaunce.
               Lyke as it were quycke in exiſtence.
               What it coſte the kyng wyll ſpare nought.
               But made anone afore hym to be brought,
               The craftyeſt mayſters of the towne,
               Suche as moſte had of diſcrecyowne.
               To perfourme his axynge curyouſly.
               And they obeye his byddyng faythfully,
               With all theyr wyll and entyer dylygence.
               In the temple moſt of reuerence,
               Of all the towne whylom dedicate,
               And of full yore alſo conſecrate.
               To Appollo of olde foundaciowne,
               Beſyde a gate ſtandyng of the towne,
               ¶Called Tymbrya in their Troyan tongue.
               As in ſtorye is both red and ſonge.
               And in this phane that I ſpeake of here,
               They made fyrſte by the hyghe aultere,
               By great deuyſe a lyttell oratorye,
               Perpetually to be in memory.
               Where as was ſette a ryche receptacle.
               Made in maner of a tabernacle.
               Egall of ſyght for a large ymage,
               That reyſed was on a ryche ſtage,
               That was borne at eche of his corners,
               Of pured golde vpon foure pyllers.
               And on eueryche full craftely ydyght,
               An aungell ſtode of golde borne bryght.
               Ceryouſly the worke to ſuſtene,
               With craftye archys reyſed wonder clene,
               Enbowed ouer all the worke to cure,
               So merueylous was the celature.
               
                  That all the rofe and cloſure enuyrowne,
               Was of fyne golde plated vp and downe.
               With knottes graue wonder curyous,
               Fret full of ſtones ryche and precious,
               Of euery kynde that man can deuyſe.
               So royally and in ſo thryfty wyſe,
               That the derckeneſſe of the blacke nyght,
               With the beames of the clere lyght,
               Enchaced was where they dyden ſhene.
               And fro the grounde vpryght as a lyne,
               There were degrees men by to aſcende,
               Made ſo well that no man coulde amende.
               The worckmanſhyp & they were euerychone,
               Performed vp all of cryſtall ſtone.
               Attaynyng vp from the table baſe,
               Where the ſtandynge and the reſtynge was,
               Of this ryche crafty tabernacle,
               Hauynge aboue vpon eche penecle,
               A ryche rubye. and reyſed hye on hyght.
               Stode an ymage huge and large of weyghte,
               Of maſſye golde hauyng the lykeneſſe,
               Of worthy Hector that gan his face dreſſe,
               Towarde grekes where he tho dyd ſtonde,
               Aye thretyng them with his ſworde in honde.
               And amiddes all this great rycheſſe,
               They haue yſet by good auiſeneſſe,
               The dead corps of this worthy knight,
               To ſyght of man ſtandinge vp as ryghte,
               By ſubtyll crafte as it were lyuynge,
               Of face and cheare and of quicke lokinge,
               And of coloure ſouthly and of hewe,
               Beynge as freſhe as any roſe newe,
               And lyke in all as by ſuppoſayle,
               As he liued in his apparayle.
               ¶For on his ſtede lyke as it is tolde,
               Thrugh ſmall pipꝭ wrought & made of golde
               That by meaſure were enbowed downe,
               To an entre made in his crowne,
               By great aduyſe and ſubtilte,
               To eche partye and extremyte,
               Of his body craftely porrecte,
               Through nerfe and ſynewe driuen & directe.
               By ſecrete pores craftely to extende,
               Wherby the lycour might downe deſcende.
               To kepe him hole fro corrupcion,
               Withouten any tranſmutacion,
               Of hyde and hewe in any parte to tourne.
               And at his head of golde was an vrne,
               And that was fylde with bawme naturall.
               That ran through pipes artyfyciall,
               Through necke and head into many place,
               Penetrable by vaynes of the face.
               That thrugh vertue and force of this licoure,
               He was conſerued liuely of coloure,
               Freſhe of hewe quicke and nothynge pale,
               So mightely the bawme did auale.
               Compariſoned as it were ſemblable,
               To a ſoule that were vegetable,
               The whych without ſenſybelyte,
               Miniſtreth life in herbe, floure, and tre.
               ¶And ſemblably into euery vayne,
               Of the corps the vertue did attayne,
               By breſte and arme ſpredinge enuyron.
               For the moyſture by diſcencion
               To hande and foote ſouthly as I reade,
               Through bone & ioynt gan his vertue ſhede,
               And diſtillinge mightely is flete.
               And at his fete full of gummes ſwete,
               A viall ſtode tempred with bawne ymeynt
               That by proceſſe may not waxe feynt,
               But daye by daye encreaſe and amende.
               Of which the vapoure vpwarde gan aſcend,
               Cauſinge the ayre enuyron be delyſe,
               To reſemble a very paradyſe,
               For the ſauour more holſome was and ſoote,
               Than the odour of gumme ſpice or roote,
               And of pure golde were foure laumpes light.
               Tofore the corps brenninge daye and nighte,
               With oyle in ſothe if it be credyble,
               That was by crafte made in extinguible,
               For it ne might mine auctour ſayth certayne,
               Nother be queint with tēpeſt winde or rayne.
               Nor by proceſſe waſten of no yeares.
               Whiche in the ayre be bryght bourned wires,
               Full craftely reyſed were a lofte,
               Of whoſe ſwetenes men reioyced ofte,
               In theyr courage it lyked theim full well,
               And whē this worke was complete eueridell,
               Rounde enuyrowne ful ryche and freſhe to ſe
               ¶They made a parcloſe all of Eban tre
               That ſo longe laſte maye and dure.
               The which tree onely of nature,
               When it is cutte ſmelleth wonder ſwete,
               And maye not waſte nor brenne with no hete
               Though it be layde amonge the coles red,
               Midde the flawme of many fiery glede,
               It not conſumeth though men aſſaye ful ofte
               And in water it houeth not alofte,
               
                  But kyndely thenſe to the grounde it goth,
               To ſwymme on heyght in ſoth it is to loth,
               And lyke alſo as teacheth Plynyus,
               This tree whylom was paſſyngly famous,
               Of ſo hyghe pryſe and reputacion,
               That in the large myghty regyon,
               And worthy lande of Ethyope and Inde,
               Of yore agon the folkes as I fynde,
               Had this tree in ſo great honour,
               That they gaue trybute to the Emperour,
               ¶As is remembred of antiquite,
               Of golde and yuor and of this ryche tree.
               With theſe gyftes famous and royall,
               To quyte theyr dette to hym in ſpecyall.
               ¶And whan Pryam in full thryfty wyſe,
               Performed hath as ye haue herde deuyſe,
               This ryche worke noble and excellent,
               Of herty loue in all his beſte entent,
               Ordayned eke as Guydo can you tell,
               A certayne nombre of preſtes for to dwell,
               ¶In the temple in their deuocions,
               Contynually with deuoute oryſons,
               ¶For the ſoule of Hector for to preye.
               That the goddes his ſpyryte lyſte conuey,
               Eternally with them to dwell yfeare.
               In ioye and blyſſe aboue the ſterres clere.
               ¶To whiche preſtes ye kyng gaue manſyons,
               There to abyde and poſſeſſyons,
               The whiche he hath to them mortyſed,
               Perpetually as he haue herde deuyſed.
               And whyles that they knele praye and wake,
               I caſte fully me an ende to make,
               Fynally of this my thirde boke,
               On my rude maner as I vndertoke.
               And whyles they of Troye wepe and morne,
               Vnto grekes I wyll agayne retourne,
               And with dulle ſtyle on the ſtory trace,
               Onely borne vp with ſupporte of your grace.
            
            Thus endeth the thirde boke.
         
         
            
               
               ¶How the grekes depoſyng Agamenon, ordayned Pallamydes the general of their armye. Cap. xxix.
               
                  HEctor thus deade as ye haue herde ſaid,
               & Achylles in his tent ylayde,
               With his woundes mortall freſſhe and grene,
               Vpon a morning when ye ſon ſhene,
               Enchaced had away the derke nyght,
               ¶Agamenon the wyſe worthy knyght,
               In his workes paſſyngly prudent,
               Hath in all haſte for his lordes ſent,
               And when they were aſſembled euerychone,
               Within his tente to them he ſayde anone.
               ¶Syrs quod he and lordes that be here,
               Kynge, Prynces, and Dukes eke yfere,
               If ye aduerte by clere inſpection,
               Ye ought echeone with hygh deuocyon.
               Hooly of herte our goddes for to herye.
               And inwardely for to be ryght merye,
               If ye conſydre and wyſely do take hede,
               ¶How that our enemye Hector is now dead,
               That whylom was berer vp of Troye.
               Their full truſte their honour and their ioye.
               Their hoole deffence and their protection,
               And vnto vs death and confuſyon.
               Vnlykely euer to haue had victorye,
               Whyles with lyfe he floured in his glorye.
               Againe whoſe ſworde we mighten not auaile
               For ſlewe he not at our aryuayle?
               If ye remembre on the fyrſte day,
               ¶The noble kyng called Protheſelay?
               And after nexte if I ſhall not fayne,
               He Patroclus parted euen on twayne,
               In fyelde amonges vs euerychone,
               Slewe he not eke the worthy kynge Menon,
               Archylogus and alſo Prothenor,
               And eke the kyng that hyghte Alphynor,
               Phyllys alſo and kyng Epyſtrophus?
               ¶And to the ende he brought zantypus,
               And Meryon the myghty ſtronge kyng,
               In his waye as he came rydynge,
               He ſlayne hath and other kynges two,
               ¶Cedyus and Doryus alſo,
               Polyrenes and ſtronge Polybete,
               Letabonis and the kynge Phylete,
               The manly knyght the kynge Iſydyus,
               ¶And eke the kynge called Humerus?
               For in his Ire and his cruell tene,
               Of worthy kynges he ſlayne hath eyghtene,
               Whiche hyther came out of grekes lande,
               By the power of his myghty hande.
               ¶Nowe laude and honour to the goddes all
               Whiche cauſed haue that it is be fall.
               That he is dead to our encreaſe of ioye.
               And to diſcreſe of our foen in Troye.
               As they ſhall fynde in experyence.
               And laude alſo preſe and reuerence,
               Be to fortune that vs hath holpe wele.
               With her tournyng of her double whele.
               To hyghe comforte and conſolacyowne,
               Of vs echone ſyttynge enuyrowne.
               That ſtonde nowe in parfyt ſykerneſſe,
               Through deth of him yt dyd vs ſo oppreſſe.
               And what may they waite now in the towne
               But after deth and deſtructiowne,
               And haſtely for to ende in wo,
               Now that their truſte Hector is a go.
               Without whom they may not longe endure,
               Wherfore we may fully vs aſſure,
               Our purpoſe hole that we ſhall acheue.
               And fynally daunte them ſo and greue,
               That vnto them it ſhalbe importable,
               Of one aſſent if we ſtande ſtable.
               For their partye tourneth on the wrake,
               And their hope is fully put a bake.
               And diſpeired in nonſecurytye,
               For vtterly both they and their Citye,
               Shall more & more in weer of death depende,
               And we in ſoth ſhall day by day amende,
               With helpe of god both on ſea and lande.
               For now victorye is redy to our hande.
               Deuoyde platly of ambyguyte,
               And excluded at eye as ye may ſe,
               Both of wantruſt and of foreyne dread,
               But I counſayle or that we procede,
               Any ferther vpon our foen to ryde,
               Prudently a whyle to abyde,
               And kepe vs cloſe for to paſſe our boundes,
               
                  ¶Tyll Achylles be heled of his woundes.
               And then echone by myghtye vyolence,
               Shal thē oppreſſe when they haue no diffence
               As I haue ſayde through helpe of Achylles.
               And let vs nowe ſende for a peace,
               For two monthes to kyng Pryamus,
               If it ſo be he lyſte to graunt it vs.
               As it is lyke playnely that he ſhall.
               And they there whyle with flawme funerall,
               Conſume may the deade bodyes pale,
               That lye abrode on euery hyll and vale.
               Whiche by reporte of them that haue repeyre,
               From day to day infecten ſo the eyre,
               Throughout the fielde engendryng peſtilence
               Of ſtynke there is ſo great a vyolence.
               ¶And we there whyle may in eaſe and reſte,
               Our woundes cure me ſemeth for the beſte.
               ¶And they aſſent therto euerychone,
               And vnto Troye the meſſageres are gone,
               And haue the trewſe graunted of the kynge.
               And be repeyred without more taryinge.
               And thereof made full relacyon,
               To the grekes afore Agamenon.
               And after that when all was at an ende,
               Home to his tent euery lorde doth wende.
               And whyle the trewſe endureth and the peace
               Amonge grekes kynge Pallamydes,
               Cumplayneth ſore of Agamenon.
               That he ſo had the domynacyon,
               Aboue them all hauyng there at enuye.
               And on a day in his melancolye,
               Of hyghe deſpyte and indignacyon,
               Full inly fret with yrous paſſyon,
               He gan breke out and his rancour ſhewe.
               By certayne ſygnes though he ſpake but fewe
               Tyll on a day the wyſe Agamenon,
               Conceyued hath of highe diſcrecyon,
               Hooly this thyng & thought he ne wold ſpare,
               Fro poynt to poynt hym ſelfe to declare,
               Whan his lordes together were preſent,
               Tofore them all in his owne tent.
               As he that was this noble worthy kynge,
               Full circumſpect in euery maner thyng.
               Nought to rakell nor melancolyus,
               But by attempraunce inly vertuous.
               Well auyſed and wonderly prudent.
               Whan that he knewe the meaning and entent
               And the conceyte of this Pallamydes,
               He not to haſtye nor to rekles,
               But longe abydyng thrugh prudence & reſo
                     •
                  
               
               Within the boundes of his diſcrecion.
               Whoſe tongue was only of ſapyence,
               So reſtreyned that no neclygence,
               Of haſty ſpeche ſothly for to rape,
               Myght make a worde his lyppes to eſcape,
               Vnaduiſed for nothyng him aſterte,
               But it were fyrſt examyned in his herte.
               For aye his ſpeche in ſo thryfty wyſe,
               Conueyed was by doctryne of the wyſe,
               Vnder the reyne of wyt and hyghe prudence,
               And after that by fourme of eloquence,
               Alway ſo ſayde that reaſon went aforne,
               So that no worde was in his tale lorne.
               ¶And in this wyſe ſhewynge his ſentence,
               Tofore all in open audyence,
               Sayde euen thus whan that all was peace,
               Vnto the kynge called Pallamydes.
               ¶Sothly quod he if ſo ye take hede,
               Me ſemeth playnly that it were no nede,
               Auyſedly if he lyſte aduerte,
               To muſen ſo nor grutchen in your herte,
               Of all this hoſte that I haue gouernaunce,
               Wyſely conſydered euery circumſtaunce,
               How I the eſtate whiche no man may denye,
               Wolde in no maner neuer occupye,
               By other tytle then free election.
               Not interrupt by medyacyon,
               Of brocage other roted vpon mede.
               Aye vnder meynt with fauour or falſhede.
               Depeinte with coloure of trewe entencion,
               As might ſupport ſuche falſe ambicion.
               ¶Of whiche thyng here I wyll me quite,
               Tofore you all that I am not to wyte,
               In any wyſe of ſo hyghe offence.
               But ſtande clere in my conſcyence,
               Without ſpot of any ſuche vayne glorye,
               Touchyng the eſtate whiche is tranſytorye.
               ¶Yet neuertheleſſe I haue do my cure,
               With all my wyt to helpe and procure,
               That euery thyng touchyng the comentie,
               Perſeuer myght in proſperyte.
               Hauyng the eye of my inwarde ſyghte,
               Vnto the eſtate of euery maner wyght,
               That were commytted to my gouernaunce,
               With great laboure and buſy attendaunce.
               Indifferent vnto hye or lowe,
               To helpe & foſtre where as I might knowe,
               That any ſtode in myſchyefe or in neade.
               
                  Daye and nyght for to taken hede,
               As I beſte coulde by aduyſedneſſe,
               Aye dylygent that none felle in diſtreſſe.
               For ſothfaſtly who ſo loke aryght,
               My dayes thought and my watche a nyght,
               And of my herte the inly aduertence,
               Without fraude ſlouthe or neclygence,
               Was faythfully with all my full myght,
               Me to acquyte to euery maner wyghte,
               Lyke his eſtate without excepcion.
               So that no man iuſtly of reaſon,
               Greke nor other that is nowe a lyue,
               Vnto my gylte may duely do aſcryue,
               Any falſehede engyne or trecherye,
               Of loue or hate fauour or flaterye.
               In any cauſe named in ſpecyall,
               But that I haue be a lyke egall,
               To one and all with all my buſye payne.
               That no man hath mater to complayne,
               For his partie of hye or lowe eſtate,
               And to deuoyde of rancour and debate,
               Amonges you I haue do my deuer,
               In generall and thyng partyculer,
               That hyther toward nothing hath miſcheued
               And god wote well it ſhuld not haue agreued,
               To my herte to ſet at any pryſe,
               You to haue choſe by your diſcrete aduyſe,
               Some other to this domynacion.
               And I to haue be in ſubiection,
               With eaſe of herte and tranquillite.
               Lyke other lordes here of my degree.
               And in my wyll fully haue obeyed,
               Lyke one of you vtterly to haue deyed,
               In the quarell that we haue vndertake.
               If deſtyne had it ſo yſhape.
               I ſaye in ſoth me is full loth to fayne,
               And ouermore alſo where ye playne,
               That I was choſen without your aſſent,
               Meruayle not ſyth ye ne were preſent,
               Nor longe after yf ye remembre a ryght,
               Towarde Troye your waye was not dyght.
               If ye conſyder it was after nere,
               Or that ye came paſſed full two yere.
               And ſo longe to abyde your commyng,
               It had byn muche to grekes hyndryng,
               Paſſyng harme and full great damage,
               And huge lettynge vnto our voyage.
               For yf we had without any wene,
               ¶On your commynge taryed at Athene,
               It lykely is ye can not well ſaye naye,
               To haue be there yet vnto this daye.
               And where as ye thought it be not credyble,
               And eke affyrmed for an impoſſyble,
               That Grekes ſhulde in any maner wyſe,
               Dare take on them any great Empryſe,
               In your abſence manly to acheue.
               It is but wynde nothyng for to leue,
               For ſo it be to you none offence,
               The grekes haue without your preſence,
               Thrugh their force on water and on lande,
               Full many thynge parformed wt their hande.
               And acheued through their worthyneſſe.
               And of one thyng that in me ye geſſe,
               This to ſaye that of my degree,
               I ſhulde in herte ſo reioyſe me,
               Of this lordſhyp and this great eſtate,
               The more to be pompoſe and elate.
               In chere or porte that I it occupye,
               But me to acquyte trewely and not lye,
               And to deuoyde all ſuſpection,
               I wyll make a reſygnacion,
               Tofore you all for to excuſe me.
               Nowe be auiſed diſcretly for to ſe,
               Whom ye lyſt haue agayne to morowe prime.
               Without ſettyng of any longer tyme.
               Prolongyng forth or any more delaye,
               And thus they made an ende of that daye.
               And went their waye onely for that night,
               Tyll on the morowe yt Tytan ſhad his lyght.
               At whiche tyme a counſayle generall,
               The grekes helde but moſt in ſpecyall,
               Of lordes was there congregacion,
               As I haue tolde for the election.
               And when they were all mette yfere.
               ¶Agamenon anone as ye ſhall heare,
               Sayde euen thus with ſadde countenaunce.
               Lo ſyres quod he touching the gouernaunce,
               That I haue hadde and dominacion,
               I haue therto with hole affection,
               And clene entente do my buſyneſſe,
               That euery thinge might in wilfulneſſe,
               To your encreaſe perſeuer and contune.
               Recorde I take of god and Fortune.
               Whych haue conſerued and the cauſe be,
               You for to floure in felycyte,
               So that your honour and your high nobleſſe
               Stande hole and ſounde yet in ſykerneſſe.
               And whyle your fame is moſt in flourynge,
               
                  As ſemeth me it is ryght well ſyttyng,
               Myne eſtate fully to reſygne.
               Specially while fortune is beninge.
               ¶For of ſo many that be nowe preſent,
               I knowe my ſelfe onely inſuffycient,
               Without helpe for to bere the charge.
               Men with to muche may ouerlade a barge.
               And namely when tempeſt is and rage,
               And ſyth ye be ſo diſcrete and ſage,
               Of my burthen let me be releued.
               So that no man therwith be agreued.
               But let vs all of one entencion,
               Without ſtryfe or diſcencion,
               Choſe ſuche one that moſt be acceptable,
               To you echone and moſte couenable,
               You to gouerne by diſcrecion,
               And they echone with hole affection,
               Aſſented be to ſpeke in generall.
               Here men may ſe how it is naturall,
               Men to delyte in thynges that is newe.
               The truſte of people is faynt and vntrewe.
               Aye vndiſcrete and full of doubleneſſe.
               And varyable of their ſykerneſſe.
               Aye awaytyng in their opynyon,
               After chaunge and tranſmutacyon,
               Selde or neuer ſtandyng hole in one,
               To day they loue to morowe it is gone.
               In whom full ſelde is any ſykerneſſe.
               For onely now of newfangelneſſe,
               That hath embraced their affection,
               They haue in ſtede of Agamenon,
               Of newe choſe onely of fauour,
               ¶Pallamydes to be their gouernour.
               And of all Grece lyke as they deſyre,
               To haue the Sceptre of the hole Empyre.
               And to be called aboute in euery coſte,
               The onely Emperour of the Grekes hooſte.
               Ryght as tofore was Agamenon,
               And this was fyne and concluſyon,
               For that day of their Parlement.
               And after that euery man is went,
               To his lodgyng home the ryght way.
               ¶But in his tente wounded as he laye,
               The hardy knyght the fyerſe Achylles,
               Whan that he herde of Pallamydes,
               From poynt to poynt and of the election,
               He was diſpleaſed in his opynyon.
               And playnly thought as to his aduyſe.
               Agamenon was paſſyngly more wyſe,
               And more diſcrete vnto gouernaunce,
               Than was the tother as to his pleaſaunce.
               And ſayde it was none election,
               But a maner ſubrogacyon.
               Bycauſe hym ſelfe in the parlement,
               At the cheſyng was not there preſent.
               Arettyng it paſſyng great offence,
               That the choyſe was made in his abſenee.
               Wherwith he was of herte inly wrothe.
               But where ſo be that he be lefe or loth.
               There is no more but in concluſion,
               In his ſtrength ſtode the election.
            
            
               ¶Howe kyng Pryam in perſonne iſſued into batayle, for thaduēge of Hectors death, where he dyd ryght valyauntly. Cap. xxx.
               
                  THe trewſe paſſed and ywered out,
                  The wounded eke recured all aboute.
                  The nexte morowe after Pryamus,
                  In his herte was inly deſyrous,
                  With the grekes manly for to fyght.
                  Hectors death tauenge if he myght.
                  This olde Pryam knightly in the fyelde,
                  That whan Troyans in them ſelfe behelde,
                  The great will and the hygh courage,
                  Of hym that was ſo ferre yronne in age.
                  They gan reioyſe and plucke vp theyr herte,
                  And ſpecyally whan they gan aduerte,
                  His great manhode and his worthyneſſe.
                  His liuelyed and his hyghe proweſſe.
                  And for his ſake euery maner man,
                  Gan arme him in all the haſte they can,
                  With Pryamus that day to lyue or deye,
                  An hundred thouſand and fyfty of the towne.
                  Lyke as Dares maketh mencyowne.
                  And worthy knyghtes they were euerychone
                  Without other that with Pryam gone.
                  ¶And all afore went Deiphobus,
                  And Parys nexte and then Pryamus,
                  Menon the kyng and worthy Eneas.
                  And alderlaſt came Pollydamas.
                  And as I fynde ſterne and full of pryde.
                  Pallamydes came on the tother ſyde,
                  Into the fyelde with many ſtronge battayle,
                  And fyrſte when eche other gan aſſayle,
                  Kynge Pryamus knyghtly his way cheſe,
                  Through the wardes to Pallamydes
                  And hym vnhorſeth thrugh his hye renowne,
                  
                     And lyke a knyght he kylleth & bereth downe
                  The proude grekes where ſo that they rode.
                  Was none ſo hardy that his ſworde abode.
                  For ſo narowe he gan them to coharte,
                  That their wardes he made a ſonder parte.
                  On them he was ſo felle and furyous,
                  For he that daye dyd dedesfull meruaylous.
                  In armes wrought. that wonder was to ſene
                  And a maruayle how he may ſuſtene,
                  Of ſo great age in the fyelde tendure.
                  For in credible was I you enſure,
                  To ſe howe he through his great myght,
                  The grekes put proudely to the flyght.
                  ¶And Deiphobus was alſo not behynde,
                  Agayne his foen knightly as I fynde.
                  To acquyte him ſelfe & make thē to go backe,
                  And Sarpedowne in whom eke is no lacke.
                  Yfallen is on Neptolonius,
                  The proudeſt greke and moſte ſurquedous,
                  And moſt famous as of ſtrength and myght,
                  The whiche agaynwarde rode ful lyne ryght
                  To Serpedowne with a ſpere rounde,
                  And delyuerly ſmote hym to the grounde,
                  ¶But Sarpedowne full yrous in his herte,
                  Without abode on his fete vp ſterte,
                  ¶And Neptolonye in his yre all hote,
                  Thrughout the thighe wt his ſword he ſmote.
                  ¶And than anone the kyng of Perce lande,
                  That was ſo worthy & famous of his hande
                  Of Sarpedowne whan that he toke hede,
                  Knyghtly to hym reſtored hath his ſtede.
                  ¶Not withſtandyng that Menelaus,
                  Was vpon hym paſſynge deſpyteous.
                  And with hym eke the Duke of Athenes,
                  Encloſed haue amonge the great preſe,
                  The kynge of Perce alas it ſhulde befall.
                  And ſlewe hym as he amonge them all,
                  ¶Full knyghtly fought lyke a champyowne.
                  With multitude encloſed enuyrowne,
                  And he him ſelfe but alone alas,
                  All deſtitute in this mortall caſe.
                  Thrugh whoſe miſchefe they of Troy towne
                  Gan to withdrawe tyll that Sarpedowne,
                  Hath holpen them to recure there lande.
                  Full many Greke kyllyng with his hande.
                  ¶And kyng Pryam ſo manly founde at all,
                  With his ſonnes called naturall,
                  Whiche vpon hym where ſo that he rode,
                  The longe daye manfully abode,
                  Departynge not playnely from his ſyde.
                  And as the kynge and they togyther ryde,
                  Full mortally the grekes they confounde.
                  For Pryamus with many cruell wounde,
                  Hath ſlayne of them many worthy man.
                  On horſebacke amonge them as he ran.
                  For there was none that day yonge nor olde,
                  Of Troye towne ſo hardy nor ſo bolde,
                  Of none eſtate that hath ſo well hym borne,
                  Amonge Grekes or ſo well hath hym worne,
                  From poynt to poynt to reken euery thynge,
                  As hath Pryam the noble worthy kyng,
                  For he alone was confuſyon,
                  To the grekes and deſtruction.
                  Their outter miſchiefe and diſcomfyture,
                  Afore whoſe face they myght not endure.
                  For thynges two in his mortall yre,
                  Inwardely haue ſette hym ſo a fyer,
                  The harty hate that he bare of olde,
                  Vnto grekes double many folde,
                  With the death had in remembraunce,
                  Of worthy Hector by contynuaunce.
                  The whiche platly through his worthyneſſe,
                  With his ſworde he ſhope hym to redreſſe.
                  For fret of hate and conſtreynt of his peyne,
                  Were veryly thylke thynges twayne,
                  By whiche that daye who ſo loke a ryght,
                  His force was doubled and his myght,
                  Where thrugh he toke ſo cruelly vengeaunce,
                  That he the grekes brought to outtraunce.
                  And thrugh his knyghthod put thē to ye flight
                  ¶But grekes then attones dyd their myght,
                  By aſſent to aſſemble into one,
                  And for a ſleyght a ſyde out they gone,
                  Into a playne large and fayre to ſe,
                  Betwene Pryam and Troye the cytye,
                  To fyne onely in their entenciowne,
                  Hym to debarre the entre of the towne.
                  For euery waye the grekes haue with ſet,
                  That they of Troye had tho be let,
                  At their repayre the ſtorye telleth thus,
                  Ne had the manhode be of Priamus.
                  The whiche anone as any lyon ſtronge,
                  With his ſworde gan ryde them amonge,
                  And ſeuered them with large woundes wyde
                  And ſlewe all tho that wolde his ſword abide
                  Euery where endelonge on the playne.
                  ¶And Paris eke hath them ſo belayne,
                  With myghty ſhote of his ſtronge archers,
                  
                     And with the purſuite of theſe Arbalaſters,
                  That they ne might of the ſhote ſo kene,
                  The mortall harme abide nor ſuſtene.
                  But gan anone to fle out of the place,
                  And kinge Priam ſo narowe gan thē chaſe,
                  That of great nede and neceſſite,
                  Through the ſlaughter and the cruelte,
                  Of his ſworde ſharpe whet and grounde,
                  There was no Greke in the felde yfounde,
                  But fledde awaye eueriche to his tente,
                  And they of Troye be to their Cite wente,
                  Bycauſe it drewe faſte towarde night.
                  For Phebus hadde bereued them his light,
                  ¶And ſo the honour of his high victorye,
                  The worſhip eke the laude and memorye,
                  Perpetually and the palme alſo,
                  ¶Priam the kinge hath wonne and no mo.
                  For that daye in releaſe of his ſorowe,
                  ¶And as I reade on the next morowe,
                  He hath yſente out of Troye towne,
                  For a trewſe to Agamenowne.
                  Which graunted was the ſelfe daye at prime,
                  Albe therof reherſed be no tyme.
                  Howe longe it laſte in the boke expreſſe.
                  ¶During the which they did theyr buſineſſe,
                  Hertye laboure and inwarde diligence,
                  For to ordayne with great reuerence,
                  How that the corps of the worthy kinge,
                  Of Perce lande without more taryinge,
                  With kingly honour out of Troye towne,
                  Shall caryed be into this regiowne.
                  To be buryed with his predeceſſours,
                  With other kinges of his progenitours.
                  The whych thinge was complete by ye aduiſe
                  Of Aliſaunder that called was Paris.
                  And firſte the corps enbawmed richely,
                  Conueyed was and that full ſolempnely,
                  As write Guido with an huge route,
                  Of his knightes ridinge him aboute,
                  Triſte and heauy cladde in blacke echone,
                  And with the chare the right way they gone,
                  Towardes Perce ledinge of this kinge,
                  The dead corps towarde his buryinge.
                  Which halowed was like his eſtate royall.
                  ¶And in this while the feaſte funerall,
                  Was holde alſo with great deuociowne,
                  ¶Of worthy Hector within Troye towne.
                  Like the cuſtome vſed in tho dayes.
                  And the rites of their paynym layes.
                  The which feaſt as made is mencion,
                  Fro yere to yeare by reuolucion,
                  Yhalowed was the ſpace of fourtnight,
                  With many flawme and many hydous light,
                  That brent enuiron in the ſentuarye,
                  And called was the Aniuerſarye,
                  For that it came aboute yeare by yeare,
                  A certayne daye in theyr Kalendere.
                  In whych of cuſtome for a remembraunce,
                  The people ſhoulde by continuaunce,
                  Playne and wepe and alſo praye and reade,
                  For theyr frendes that afore were deade,
                  Ful piteouſly with theyr heyr to torne,
                  Mourninge in black and kneling aye aforne
                  The dead corps of this worthy knight.
                  Which in his time ſo paſſinge was of mighte.
                  And this was done while the trewſe dure,
                  So that the Grekes truſtely might aſſure,
                  When that theim liſt at good liberte,
                  Without daunger enter this cite,
                  Daye by daye and Troians might alſo,
                  Vnto Grekes frely come and go.
               
               
                  AT whiche time with full great delite,
                  Hath Achilles caught an appetite,
                  To entre and ſe the maner of the towne.
                  Without wiſedome or dtſcreſciowne,
                  For to beholde playnly and to ſe,
                  Hoole the maner of this ſolempnite.
                  And forthe he wente on a certayne daye,
                  Towarde Troye in all the haſte he maye.
                  Vnarmed ſothly as mine Auctour ſayeth.
                  Without aſſuraunce or any other fayth,
                  Except the trewſe who ſo be lyefe or lothe.
                  And firſt of all to the temple he gothe,
                  Of Apollo halowed where was the feaſte.
                  Throughout the towne downe vnto the leſt.
                  That cleped was the Anyuerſarye,
                  As ye haue herde what ſhuld I longer tarye.
                  And many worthy preſent was therat,
                  Amid the temple of high and lowe eſtate,
                  Lordes and ladyes of affecciowne,
                  From euery parte gathered of the towne.
                  ¶Now was the corps of this worthy knyght
                  As freſhe of colour kept vnto the ſyght,
                  As lyfely eke and as quicke of hewe,
                  To beholde as any roſe newe.
                  Through vertue onely of the gummes ſwete,
                  And the bawme that gan aboute flete.
                  
                     To euery ioynt and eche extremyte,
                  ¶And at this feaſt and ſolempnyte,
                  Was Hecuba and yonge Pollicene,
                  So womanly and goodly on to ſene,
                  With many other of high eſtate and lowe,
                  Tofore the corps ſyttinge on a rowe,
                  With heyr vntruſſed cladde in wedes blake,
                  That euer in one ſuche a ſorowe make,
                  That routhe was and pyte for to ſene,
                  Howe they playne and the death bimeane,
                  Of worthy Hecor of knighthod groūd & well.
                  ¶But trowe ye as Guydo lyſt to tell,
                  That Pollicene in all her wofull rage,
                  Ychaunged hath vpon her viſage,
                  Her natife coloure as freſhe to the ſighte,
                  As is the roſe or the lelye white.
                  Other the freſhenes of her lippes red,
                  For al the teares that ſhe gan to ſhede.
                  On her chekes as any criſtall cleare.
                  Her heyr alſo reſembling to golde wyere,
                  Whych laye abrode like vnto the ſighte,
                  Of Phebus beames in her ſphere bright.
                  Whan he to vs doth his light auale.
                  And aye ſhe rente with her fingers ſmale,
                  Her golden heyre on her blacke wede.
                  ¶Of whyche thing Achilles toke good hede,
                  And gan meruayle greatly in his thoughte,
                  How god or kinde euer might haue wrought,
                  In theyr workes ſo fayre a ceeature.
                  For him thought he might not endure,
                  To beholde the brightneſſe of her face.
                  For he felte through his herte pace,
                  The perſinge ſtreames of her eyen two,
                  Cupides darte hath him marked ſo,
                  For loue of her that in his deſyre,
                  He brente as hote as dothe any fyre,
                  And after ſoonewith ſodayne ire he quoke,
                  And alwaye fixe on her he had his loke,
                  So that the arowe of the god Cupide,
                  Hath perced him euen through the ſide,
                  To the herte and gaue him ſuche a wounde,
                  That neuer was likly to be ſounde,
                  And aye in one his loke on her he caſte,
                  As he durſte and gan to preſe faſte,
                  Towarde her namely with his eye.
                  That him thought he muſt nedes deye,
                  But if that he founde in her ſome grace,
                  There was no gayne for playnly in yt place,
                  Of newe he was caughte in loues ſnare.
                  That of healthe and of all welfare,
                  He was deſpeyred in his herte ſo,
                  That he ne knewe what was beſte to do.
                  Eche other thinge I do you well aſſure,
                  He ſet at nought and toke of it no cure,
                  His thought was on her and no mo,
                  The longe daye thus wente he to and fro,
                  Tyll Phebus cheyre lowe gan decline.
                  His golden axetre that ſo clere did ſhine,
                  This to ſaye the ſonne wente downe,
                  Whan Hecuba quene of Troye towne,
                  ¶And her doughter Pollycene alſo,
                  Out of the temple to the paleys go.
                  ¶And aye Achilles on her had a ſighte,
                  While that he might till for lacke of lighte,
                  He maye no more haue leyſure oportune,
                  To loke on her curſed be fortune,
                  For which in haſte he maked hath his wente,
                  With his knightes home vnto his Tente.
                  Where he anone without more taryinge,
                  To bedde goeth full tryſte in complayninge,
                  Aye in him ſelfe caſtinge vp and downe,
                  In his minde and eke in his reaſowne,
                  From head to foote her beaute euerydell,
                  And in his herte he felte and knewe ful well,
                  That fynall cauſe of his languyſhynge,
                  Was Pollicene of beaute moſt paſſinge.
                  For loue of whom ſo muche pay ne he felte,
                  That with the heat he thought his hert melt.
                  Aye on his bedde walowinge to and fro.
                  For the conſtreynt of his hidde wo,
                  For which almoſt him thought that he deyde,
                  And to him ſelfe euen thus he ſeyde,
                  ¶Alas quod he howe me is wo begone,
                  That of my ſorowe knowe ende none.
                  For I ſuppoſe ſith the worlde began,
                  Ne was there neuer a more wofull man.
                  For I that whylom was of ſo great myght,
                  So renowmed of euery maner wyght,
                  Throughout the worlde both of high & lowe
                  For there was none in ſothe that could know
                  A man in armes that was more famous,
                  Nor yet yholde more victorious,
                  Tofore this time remembred by no ſtile,
                  Vnto this daye alas the harde while,
                  Nother Hector playnly nor none other.
                  Of Pollicene that was the worthy brother.
                  That power had when they with me mette,
                  For all theyr might me to ouerſette.
                  
                     Nor in the felde my force for to daunte,
                  Here pryuely as I me dare auaunte,
                  ¶But nowe alas a mayde of tender age,
                  Hath ſodaynly me brought in ſuche a rage,
                  That with the ſtreames of her eyen twayne,
                  She perced hath and clouen euery vayne,
                  Of my herte that I maye not aſterte,
                  For to be dead thrugh conſtreynt of my ſmert
                  ¶For who ſhall nowe wiſhe me or teache,
                  Or who alas ſhall nowe be my leche,
                  Or who alas ſhall helpe me or ſaue,
                  There is but death and after that my graue,
                  For other hope playnly is there none.
                  Saue in her mercy alas and that is gone,
                  For nother prayer treaſour nor rycheſſe,
                  Force nor might nother high proweſſe,
                  Highnes of bloud byrthe nor kinrede,
                  Maye auayle nor helpen in this nede,
                  To meue her nor my ſadde trouthe,
                  Vpon my wo euer to haue routhe.
                  ¶What newe furye or inportune rage,
                  Hath brought my hertin to ſuche outrage,
                  Agaynſt whych I can not nowe debate,
                  ¶To loue her beſte that deadly doth me hate
                  ¶And in good fayth who wyſely lyſte aduert
                  Lytell wonder though ſhe me hate of herte,
                  Syth I am come hither, fro ſo ferre,
                  On her kinrede for to make werre,
                  In the whyche to my confuſyowne,
                  Her knightly brother moſt worthy of renown
                  Haue fatally with mine handes ſlawe.
                  Whych in this worlde had no felowe,
                  Of worthyneſſe nor of manlyheade.
                  Alas alas nowe maye I quake and dreade,
                  And of my lyfe fallen in diſpeyre.
                  For howe ſhoulde I be bolde to haue repeyre
                  Or dare alas come in theyr ſyghte,
                  I woful wretche I vnhappy wighte,
                  Or howe ſhall I be hardy to appeare,
                  In the preſence of her eyen cleare,
                  Certys I ſe none other mene weye,
                  But fynally that I muſt nedes deye.
                  So diſpeyred I ſtande on euery ſyde.
                  Of other helpe I con me not prouyde,
                  And ryght anone with ſcaldinge ſighes depe,
                  This Achilles braſte out for to wepe,
                  With deadly cheare pale and funerall;
                  And with his face tourned to the wall,
                  That routhe was and pyte for to ſene,
                  The hertye furye of his paynes kene.
                  For ſo oppreſſed he was in his thoughte,
                  Of lyfe nor death that he rought nought.
                  And this continued till it drewe to nyght,
                  That Titan hath withdrawe his clear light,
                  And euer in one like this wofull man,
                  Ilyche like of coloure pale and wan,
                  Without ſlepe ſo fretinge was his ſorowe.
                  ¶Tyll Lucifer on the next morowe,
                  Tofore the ſonne with his beemes cleare,
                  Full luſtely gan for to appeare.
                  In the oryent whan this Achilles,
                  Vnpacient wythout reſte or peace,
                  Quakinge aye in his feuer newe,
                  As it was ſene playnly in his hewe.
                  Tyll he abrayde of anguiſhe ſodaynly,
                  And called one that was with him pryue.
                  And of counſayle whom he truſteth well,
                  And vnto him he telleth euerydell,
                  Fro poynt to poynt with him howe it ſtode.
                  And ſent him forth bycauſe he could his good
                  On his meſſage ſtreyght to Troye towne,
                  With full aduiſe and informaciowne,
                  Of this mattere to Hecuba the quene.
                  Through his wiſedome for to be a mene,
                  If ſo he might by his diſcrecion,
                  Finde any waye as of ſaluacion,
                  Vnto his lorde that he loued ſo.
                  And to the quene anone he is go,
                  And his matter wiſely gan conueye,
                  Tofore or he of grace would her preye,
                  That ſhe enioyeth to gyue him audience,
                  For in his tale there was none offence.
                  ¶He was no foole nor newe for to lere,
                  Wherfore the quene goodly gan him here,
                  Of all that euer him liketh for to ſayne,
                  There was no word yloſt nor ſpoke in vaine.
                  For his tale no man could amende,
                  And craftely he gan to diſcende,
                  To the ſubſtaunce and tolde clerely oute,
                  With premiſſes full well brought aboute,
                  That fynally in concluſyon,
                  The chiefe he ſayde of his entencion,
                  Effectuelly if it would be,
                  Was for to make peace and vnyte,
                  Atwene Grekes and the folke of Troye.
                  To whych thinge he knewe no better weye,
                  Than of the werre for their alder eaſe,
                  By his witte prudently to appeaſe,
                  
                     The mortall ſtryfe and the bytter rage,
                  By allyaunce onely of maryage,
                  If that her lyſt this wiſe worthy quene,
                  ¶That her doughter fayre Pollicene,
                  Maye wedded be vnto Achilles.
                  Where through theyr might be a fynall peas,
                  If Hecuba by her diſcreſcion,
                  Through her wytte and medyacion,
                  And her prudence might about brynge,
                  That Pryamus were fully aſſentinge,
                  ¶That Achilles might his doughter wyue.
                  So that it might parfourmed be as blyue,
                  Lyke as tofore made is mencin,
                  By couenaunt onely and condicion,
                  That the Grekes ſhall theyr werre lete,
                  And ſuffer him to lyuen in quyete.
                  If the maryage of theſe ylke twayne,
                  Parfourmed be and knyt vp in a chayne.
                  ¶And when ye quene hath knowen his entēt,
                  Full ſoberly by good aduyſement,
                  Tofore or that any worde aſterte,
                  Full pyteouſly ſhe ſighed in her herte,
                  And at the laſte with a ſobre cheare,
                  Euen thus ſhe ſayd to the meſſagere,
                  My frende quod ſhe touchynge thy requeſte,
                  I can no more make the beheſte,
                  But at the leſte I will condeſcende,
                  What lyeth in me to bringe to an ende,
                  Thy lordes wyll with all my herte entiere.
                  But herevpon I muſt fyrſt requere,
                  The kinges wyll if he lyſt to aſſente.
                  To the purpoſe for whych thou arte ſente.
                  And ouermore I muſt wytte alſo,
                  If that Parys be willynge eke therto.
                  Of whych thynge with euery circumſtaunce,
                  I wyll my ſelfe maken enqueraunce,
                  ¶Full faythfully of Priam and Parys,
                  The meane whyle what is theyr aduyſe,
                  Without more within dayes thre.
                  At whiche time come againe to me,
                  From Achilles if ſo he will the ſende,
                  And fynally thou ſhalt knowe an ende,
                  Of this matter and an aunſwere playne.
                  And home he goeth to Achilles agayne,
                  ¶With full glad cheare his lorde the more to pleaſe,
                  And for to ſet his hert at better eaſe,
                  Auyſedly of high diſcreſcion,
                  He hath ſo made his relacion,
                  And tolde his tale in ſo thrifty wyſe,
                  As he that could his wordes ſo deuyſe,
                  To brynge in hope into his lordes herte,
                  With full releſe of his paynes ſmerte,
                  Wherby he made his ſorowe to withdrawe,
                  And thus whyle hope gan to adawe,
                  ¶Amid his breke. and Hecuba the quene,
                  ¶To Priam ſpake of this Pollycene,
                  Touchinge the ſonde of this Achilles,
                  And of his profre for to make a peace,
                  She tolde him all and forgate nothinge,
                  Wherof aſtoned Priamus the kynge,
                  Spake not a worde halfe an houres ſpace,
                  But in him ſelfe gan inly to compace.
                  Full prudently what it might meane,
                  That Achilles would haue Pollycene.
                  Vnto his wife aye wonderynge more & more
                  And at the laſte ſyghinge wonder ſore,
                  He hath diſcloſed the conceyt of his herte,
                  And ſayd alas howe ſore it doth me ſmerte,
                  To remembre that I may haue no peace,
                  The great offence of this Achilles,
                  Towardes me playnly when that he,
                  Slewe worthy Hector through his crueltye,
                  That hooly was vpon euery ſide,
                  The hoole aſſuraunce gouernour and guyd
                  Of me and mine platly for to ſayne.
                  And therwithall of myne eyen twayne,
                  He was alone the very ſothfaſt lyght.
                  Shelde & protectour thrugh his great might
                  And his manhode agayne the mortall rage,
                  Of Grekes werre in my croked age,
                  ¶But nowe alas to my confuſyowne,
                  He ſlayne is ſo worthy of renowne.
                  By Achilles which maye not out of minde.
                  That in my herte I can neuer fynde,
                  To be allyed with my mortall foo,
                  Roote and grounde of all my ſorowe & woo.
                  It were full harde my herte to appeaſe,
                  To loue him that cauſeth mine vneaſe.
                  On euery halfe where through my cruel foen
                  The proude Grekes harted be echone.
                  Agaynſt me nowe Fortune is contrayre.
                  Tourned of newe my quarell to apayre.
                  That cauſeth Grekes wood and furyous,
                  On me alas to be preſumptuous.
                  ¶Onely for Hector is me berafte awaye.
                  But ſythen I no other choyſe maye,
                  Agaynſt herte though it for anger ryue,
                  In this matter aſſaye I ſhall to ſtryue,
                  
                     Though me be lothe and ſytteth me full ſore,
                  Yet to eſchewe harmes that be more,
                  Which lykly be hereafter for to fall,
                  And for to ſaue myne other ſonnes all,
                  I will conſente that this Achilles,
                  So that he moke a trewe fynall peace,
                  Atwene Grekes and alſo this Cite,
                  Without more playnly howe that he,
                  Haue vnto wyfe my doughter Pollycene.
                  ¶But leſte that he any treaſon meane,
                  My will is firſte how ſo that it wende,
                  Of his beheſt that he make an ende,
                  Wythout fraude this is mine aduiſe.
                  ¶To whych counſayle aſſenteth eke Parys,
                  And more rather in concluſyon,
                  For there was made none excepcioon,
                  ¶In this Trete of the quene Heleyne,
                  That Menelaye neuer ſhoulde atteyne,
                  Her to recure agayne vnto hys wyfe.
                  For whyche Parys without noyſe or ſtryfe,
                  Or grutchynge other vnto this entente,
                  Within him ſelfe was fully of aſſente,
                  Therby hopynge without feare or dreade,
                  Perpetually Heleyne to poſſede.
                  Right at his luſte and no man ſhall ſaye nay.
                  And after this vpon the thirde daye,
                  ¶Achilles hath to wytte of this mattere,
                  To Hecuba ſente his meſſingere.
                  And ſhe him tolde the aunſwere of the kynge,
                  Ceryouſly gynninge and endinge.
                  And how that he aſſenteth well therto,
                  ¶And Parys eke and ſhe her ſelfe alſo,
                  If it ſo were playnly ſhe him tolde,
                  Touchinge the peace that the purpoſe holde.
                  And fyrſte that he his heſte brynge aboute,
                  That they be ſure therof nede not doubte,
                  That he ſhall haue his purpoſe euerydele,
                  If that he worke prudently and wele.
                  And herevpon with informaciowne,
                  This meſſenger out of Troye towne,
                  Without abode in all the haſte he maye,
                  To Achilles helde the ryghte waye.
                  And tolde him hole the effect of this mattere,
                  And he alwaye feruente and entiere,
                  In herte brent as hole as any glede,
                  And ſawe there was none other way to ſpede
                  But onely peace as ye haue herde me telle.
                  ¶And aye his breſt with ſighes gan to ſwel,
                  For the only loue of this Pollycene,
                  And caſte alwaye amonge his throes kene,
                  To his purpoſe a waye for to fynde,
                  And whyles he was buſy in his mynde,
                  How he ſhoulde his purpoſe brynge aboute,
                  And in him ſelfe caſteth many doubte,
                  ¶Anone diſpayre in a rage vp ſterte,
                  And cruelty caught hym by the herte,
                  Whych hath him throwe into ſuche a were,
                  That him thoughe it was in his power,
                  All his beheſte to fulfyll in dede.
                  Except he hadde well the leſſe dreade.
                  Euery thinge to put in certayne,
                  Wening no Greke would his luſte with fayne
                  From his deſyre to be varyable,
                  And to him ſelfe thus was he fauorable,
                  For to parfourme and nothynge to denye,
                  All that was luſty to his fantaſye.
                  As is the maner of louers euerychone.
                  That they ſuppoſe to acheue anone,
                  What thinge it be that they lyſt take on hand,
                  In what diſioynt that the matter ſtande,
                  All though it be a very impoſſyble,
                  In theyr foly they be aye ſo credible.
                  And ſo Achilles truſteth fynally,
                  For to fulfyll his heſtes vtterly,
                  Suppoſinge aye for his worthyneſſe,
                  For his manhode and his hygh proweſſe,
                  In whych he did him ſelfe gloryfye,
                  Some what of pryde and of ſurquedrye,
                  How the Grekes ſhoulden be deſpayred,
                  Both of theyr truſte & theyr might appeyred,
                  Vpon Troians to wynnen any lande,
                  If it ſo were that he withdrewe his hande,
                  To helpe theim and therwithall alſo,
                  Home into Grece that they wolden go,
                  From the ſyege onely for his ſake.
                  And their quarell vterly forſake.
                  ¶But it ſo were this daye fyerſe Achille,
                  With theym abode the cite for to ſpylle.
                  For whyche thinge the lordes by aſſente,
                  Aſſembled were to heren the entente,
                  Amonge theim all of thys Achilles.
                  By the byddinge of Pallamydes,
                  And when they were gathered all yfere,
                  Tofore theim all lyke as ye ſhall heare,
               
               
                  THis Achilles hath his tale begonne.
                  And ſayd ſyres that ſo muche konne,
                  Both of wyſedome and of high prudence,
                  
                     So renowmed eke of ſapyence,
                  Throughout the worlde & of diſcreciowne,
                  And be ſo worthy alſo of renowne.
                  Kynges and dukes of whoſe royall name,
                  From Eaſt to Weſt floureth yet the fame.
                  Both of knyghthode and of manlyhead.
                  To that I ſaye I pray you taken hede.
                  This to ſaye yf that ye conſyder,
                  The playne entent of our commyng hyther,
                  By good auyſe that our entencyon,
                  Had no grounde founded on reaſon,
                  Nor cauſe roted on no maner ryght.
                  If it ſo be that ye lyft vp your ſyght,
                  And aduerte clerely in your mynde,
                  Full ferre a backe wytte was ſet behynde,
                  Prudent lokyng and aduyſeneſſe,
                  For fyrſt whan that we of foly haſtyneſſe,
                  Toke vpon vs to come from ſo ferre,
                  Agayne Troyans for to gynne a werre.
                  And to ieoparte our lyues euerychone,
                  For the loue of one man alone.
                  Ye wote all I trowe whom I meane.
                  ¶Kyng Menelay defrauded of his quene.
                  To telle trouth me lyſte not for to feyne,
                  For ye well wote onely that Heleyne,
                  Was groūde and gynnyng of all this debate.
                  For whom ſo many worthy of eſtate,
                  Recurleſſe of any remedye,
                  Lyfe and good haue put in ieopardye.
                  Our landes lefte and eke our regyownes,
                  Our cyties alſo and our ryche townes.
                  Whiche by our abſence ſtonden deſolate,
                  Wyues and chyldren eke diſconſolate.
                  In woe abyde mournynge and diſtreſſe,
                  Whyles that we here the ſoth to expreſſe,
                  From day to day beſet on euery ryde,
                  Lye in the felde and our death abyde.
                  In ſorowe and care in labour and in wo,
                  And with all this ye wotte well alſo,
                  Sith fyrſt tyme that the werre began,
                  Of our grekes how many worthy man,
                  Hath loſte his lyfe thrugh deathes fatal woūd
                  That hytherto haue myght lyued & be ſounde
                  At home in Grece aſſured well in ioye.
                  If they ne had comen vnto Troye.
                  That to remembre it is full great pyte,
                  ¶And ouer this I ſaye alſo for me,
                  Amonge Troyans in their cruell mode,
                  I haue ſo moche loſte of my bloude.
                  That hath full ofte made pale of hewe.
                  ¶This other day alſo grene and newe,
                  I had of Hector ſuche a mortall wounde,
                  With a quarell ſharpe what and grounde,
                  Aboue the thygh ſo kene was the head,
                  The ſame daye afore that he was dede,
                  Of very happe as it was yſhape,
                  That from the death vnneth I might eſcape.
                  Whiche yet all freſhe is vpon me ſene.
                  Large and wyde and as yet but grene.
                  The ſmerte of whiche I yet ful ſore cōplayne.
                  ¶And in good fayth me ſemeth that Heleyne
                  If ye aduerte wyſely in your thought,
                  With ſuche a pryſe ſhulde nat haue be bought.
                  Where through our lyfe and our good yfeare,
                  And our honour are yput in were.
                  And dreadfully hangen in ballaunce.
                  For yf that ye in your remembraunce,
                  Conceyue aryght and caſten vp and downe,
                  The ſodayne chaunge and reuoluciowne,
                  That fallen hath ſyth the werre began,
                  The ſlaught & death of many worthy man,
                  That for her ſake hath here loſte his lyfe.
                  And yet the worſte of this mortall ſtryfe,
                  Doth moſte rebounde into our damage.
                  To diſencreaſe and eke diſauauntage,
                  And lykely is dayly to be more,
                  If ordenaunce be not made therfore.
                  And remedy ſhape on outher ſyde.
                  By fyne onely that Heleyne do abyde.
                  With them of Troye ſtyll here in the towne.
                  And let vs caſte by good inſpectiowne,
                  For our eaſe ſome other maner waye,
                  ¶So that the kynge called Menelay,
                  Cheſe hym a wyfe in ſome other londe.
                  Lyke his eſtate by ſuraunce or by bonde.
                  Vnder wedlocke confyrmed vp of newe,
                  That vnto hym wyll be founde trewe.
                  Syth that we without gylte or ſynne,
                  May him by the law from this Heleine twyn.
                  For of dyuerſe cauſes be ynowe,
                  Thrughout ye world of euery wight yknowe.
                  Of auoutry for the foule vyce,
                  That it to lawe is no preiudice,
                  ¶Though Menelay iuſtly her forſake.
                  Whan ſo his lyſte and an other take.
                  That ſhall hym both better queme and pleaſe
                  And ſo to vs it ſhall be full great eaſe.
                  Whan the werre is brought to an ende.
                  
                     Whiche lykely is many man to ſhende.
                  If it ſo be that it forth contune.
                  The great labour is ſo importune.
                  That we ne ſhall no whyle mowe ſuſtene.
                  For this is ſoth withouten any wene,
                  Troyans yet be flourynge in their myght.
                  And wt them haue full many worthy knighte.
                  To helpe them of hye and lowe degre,
                  And therwithall ſo ſtronge in their cite,
                  On euery parte without and eke within,
                  That we are not lykely for to wynne,
                  In our purpoſe though we euer abyde.
                  Wherfore by wyſedome let vs voyden pryde.
                  And wylfulneſſe onely of prudence,
                  To haue the eye of our aduertence,
                  To our profyt more then vaine glorye.
                  And while our honour ſhineth by victory,
                  A wyſedome is to withdrawe our honde.
                  Sith we may not conſtrayne by no bonde,
                  Fortunes whele for to abyde ſtable.
                  Wherfore I rede or ſhe become mutable,
                  This gery goddeſſe with her double chere,
                  Let vs gyue vp ſuche thynge as lyeth in were.
                  Whyles that we may our alder worſhyp ſaue,
                  For of the werre the laude yet we haue.
                  Conſyder well how by your manhead,
                  ¶Our moſt foe Hector is now dead.
                  And whyle that we in our honour floure,
                  My counſayle is before fortune loure,
                  As I ſayd ere to chaunge her bryght face,
                  Whyle that we beſte ſtonde in her grace,
                  By one aſſent and one oppynyon,
                  Without any contradiction,
                  Of herte and wyll both of one and all,
                  Or our honour on any partye pall,
                  Into Grece that we home returne.
                  For if that we longer here ſoiourne,
                  On the quarell that we haue longe ſewed,
                  Doutles it may not be eſchewed,
                  Full great damage this without fayle,
                  Or we haue done ſhall folowe at the tayle.
                  Wherfore beſte is our folye vp reſygne,
                  And whyle our hap is welfull and benynge,
                  Moſt blandyſhynge and of face fayre,
                  The tyme is beſte to make our repayre,
                  Whyle that we ſtande in party and in all,
                  With our enmyes in honour perygall.
                  And fer aboue playnly if that we,
                  Coulde haue an eye to our felicite.
                  Whyle that it is in his aſcencion.
                  ¶But leſt ſome man wyll make obiection,
                  That we may not ſo our honour ſaue,
                  To repayre playnely but we haue,
                  Helayne agayne that is cauſe of all.
                  To whiche thynge anone anſwere I ſhall.
                  ¶If any man in his fantaſye,
                  To diſhonour or to vyllanye.
                  Arrecte wolde in any maner kynde,
                  We to go home and leue her behynde.
                  Shortely to ſaye I holde it be no ſhame,
                  Syth that we haue one as great of name,
                  ¶As is Heleyne and of byrthe as good,
                  Amonges vs ycome of kynges bloud.
                  ¶Syſter to Pryam lorde of Troye towne.
                  ¶Exiona whom that Thelamowne,
                  In kepynge hath if I ſhall not feyne,
                  In Troye towne as Parys hath Heleyne.
                  And ſyth nowe it may be none other,
                  Let the tone be ſet agayne the tother.
                  And the ſurplus of olde enmyte,
                  Betwyxe vs and Troye the cite.
                  My counſayle is for our both eaſe,
                  By one aſſent wyſely to appeaſe.
                  This all and ſome and that we hence wende.
                  I can no more my tale is at an ende.
                  ¶To whom anone kyng Menelaus,
                  For very yre wood and furyous.
                  ¶And kyng Thoas the duke eke of Athene,
                  As they that myght no longer hym ſuſtene,
                  To ſuffre hym they were ſo reckles,
                  Spake all attones vnto Achylles.
                  Not onely they but through inpacyence.
                  The courte perturbed without prouydence.
                  With tumulte gonnen to repreue,
                  ¶This Achilles and proudely them cōmeue
                  Agaynſt hym and his opynyon.
                  And ſayde ſhortely in concluſyon,
                  Vnto his read they ne wolde aſſent.
                  Nor condeſcende to nothyng that he mente,
                  To be gouerned by him in this caſe.
                  ¶For whiche thynge anone Achylles was,
                  So full of yre and rancour in his herte.
                  That ſodaynely from his ſee he ſterte,
                  And went his waye as he were in a rage.
                  Tryſte and pale and a wood vyſage.
                  And ſhortly ſayde for him lyke not fayne,
                  That he ne wolde longer do his payne,
                  To helpe them how ſo that they ſpede,
                  
                     Agayne Troyans for no maner nede.
                  ¶And bad anone this hardy Achilles,
                  To his knyghtes called Myrmydones,
                  That they no more with ſpere nor with ſhelde
                  To helpe grekes entre into fyelde.
                  But kepe thē cloſe at home within thetr tente,
                  Thus in his yre he gaue commaundement,
                  To all his men as ye haue herde deuyſe.
                  Them to withdrawe at euery hygh empryſe,
                  Whan ſo euer they go into battayle.
                  And in this whyle ſcarſeneſſe of vyttayle,
                  Fell in the hooſt of fleſhe of bred and wyne.
                  That many Greke brought vnto his fyne.
                  For they ne myght endure for diſtreſſe,
                  Conſtreynt of hunger dyd thē ſo oppreſſe.
                  ¶Tyll at the laſte kyng Pallamydes,
                  As he that was in nothynge reckeles,
                  Hath therupon made purueyaunce,
                  Remedye and redye ordynaunce,
                  And by aſſent and counſayle of echone,
                  ¶He hath ſent wyſe Agamenon,
                  The worthy ſtyng to Meſſa there beſyde,
                  A lyttell Ile onely to prouyde,
                  For the grekes if he myght ſpede.
                  Them to releue in this great nede.
                  ¶And Thelephus kynge of that lande,
                  Of gentylneſſe hath put to his hande,
                  As he that was large and wonder free,
                  And renowmed of muche humanite.
                  To ſuccour them commaundyng aye anone,
                  His purueyours in all haſt to gone,
                  From euery party aboute enuyron,
                  Through all the landes of his regyon,
                  And faythfully to ſerche euery coſte,
                  To take vp vytayle for the grekes hooſte.
                  ¶And after that full haſtely he made,
                  To ſtuffe their ſhyppes playnly and to lade,
                  With euery thynge that was neceſſarye,
                  To the grekes and by water carye,
                  At requeſte of kynge Agamenon,
                  Without taryinge or delacyon.
                  ¶And ſo the kyng with plente of vytayle,
                  Fraughte and ylade gan anone to ſayle,
                  Towarde the ſyege he and his meynee.
                  Aye coſtynge by the grekyſhe ſee.
                  ¶The wynde was good & the kyng as blyue
                  With his nauye at Troye dyd aryue.
                  In fewe dayes and Grekes anone ryght,
                  Of his repeyre were full glad and light.
                  Of his exployt and his good ſpede.
                  That he ſo well hath borne him in this nede.
                  ¶And after this Pallamydes anone,
                  As ſayth Guydo is to his ſhyppes gone,
                  For to conſyder and loke all aboute,
                  Where nede was within and eke without.
                  Any of them to amende or repare,
                  As he that lyſte for no coſte to ſpare.
                  In euery thynge without neclygence.
                  Touchynge his charge to do his dylygence,
                  Tyll the trewſe fully were out ronne.
                  And the werres newe agayne begonne.
                  Whiche many man ſothly dere abought,
                  And ceryouſly to wryte howe they wrought,
                  My purpoſe is playnly in ſentence,
                  Vnder ſupporte of your pacyence.
               
               
                  DVrynge in one the deadly cruell hate,
                  That ſtynte may nor ceſſe by no date.
                  Atwyxe Grekes and them of the towne.
                  To great damage and deſtructiowne,
                  On outher parte felynge full vnſwete.
                  Tyll on a daye they caſte for to mete,
                  As they were wont proudely wt ſpere & ſhelde
                  With their wardes entrynge into fyelde,
                  Armed full bryght vpon outher ſyde.
                  ¶And enbatayled ſtoute and full of pryde,
                  Full knyghtly haue choſe their ground & take
                  Their large baners with the wynde yſhake,
                  Tyll they togyther ſodaynly haue mette.
                  ¶And alderfyrſt Deiphobus hath ſette,
                  Freſhe and luſty and of herte yrous.
                  ¶Vpon a kyng called Creſeus,
                  And of enuye the ſtorye telleth than,
                  On horſebacke as they together ran.
                  ¶Deiphobus fyrſte with his ſpere as blyue,
                  Throughout the breſte euen dyd hym ryue.
                  Vnto the herte that he ſpake no more.
                  The deth of whom Grekes playne ſore.
                  And for his loue ſuche a woe they make,
                  That all aſtoned they haue the fyelde forſake
                  And gan anone vnto theyr tentes flee.
                  The whiche in ſothe when they of Troye ſee,
                  Vpon the chaſe faſte gan them ſpede.
                  Vnto tyme that worthy Dyomede,
                  ¶And with him eke the kynge Pallamydes,
                  Of hye deſpyte cruell and mercyles,
                  With twenty thouſande worthy knyghtes al,
                  Vpon Troyans ſodaynly are fall.
                  
                     And mortally made them leſe their waye,
                  And to reſorte home agayne to Troye.
                  ¶And eke with grekes felle and furious,
                  The ſame tyme came Thelamonius,
                  That hyght Ayax the ſtronge knightly man,
                  And lyke a Lyon amonge them as he ran,
                  Vpon Troyans and them ouer ſette,
                  Caſually in his waye he mette,
                  ¶Cecylien luſty freſhe and lyght,
                  And of his tyme a wonder manly knyght.
                  And ſonne was to Pryam as I rede,
                  Whom Thelemon pryckyng on his ſtede,
                  Slewe cruelly with his ſworde anone.
                  Raſynge his arme from the ſhuldre bone.
                  That he alas fell dead in the fyelde.
                  The deth of whō whan Deiphobus behelde,
                  Wodder anone then Tygre or Lyon,
                  With a ſpere rauhe to Thelamon,
                  And ſmette him ſo through his plates bright,
                  Of very force that he made hym lyght,
                  And leſe his ſadell be ſet amonge the preſe.
                  ¶The whiche ſtroke whan Pallamydes,
                  Behelde and ſawe and clerely gan aduerte,
                  Irous and wood with a furyous herte,
                  Caſte hym anone to auenge Thelamowne.
                  On Deiphobus full worthy of renowne.
                  And mortally his guerdon him to quyte,
                  And with a ſpere grounde for to byte,
                  Sharpe and kene large rounde and ſquare,
                  Full cruelly or that he was ware,
                  Through his harneys without more areſte,
                  ¶Deiphobus he ſmote ſo in the breſte,
                  That with the ſtroke he brake ye ſhafte a two.
                  So that the tronchone and the head alſo,
                  Lefte in his breſte that there was no waye,
                  Fynally but that he muſt deye.
                  There was none helpe nor remedye at all,
                  The wounde was ſo cruell and mortall,
                  That with the lyfe he myght not abyde.
                  ¶And in this whyle Parys came beſyde,
                  Of auenture whyle this Deiphobus,
                  Was of his wounde ſo inly anguyſhous,
                  And gan in haſt for to approche nere,
                  With face pale and right an heuy chere,
                  And for his diſtreſſe wepte pyteouſly.
                  And his knightes commaunded haſtely,
                  His wounded brother a ſyde ſofte and feare,
                  In all haſt that they ſhulde forthwt do beare.
                  Out of the wardes from the great preſe.
                  Vnto his payne for to do releſe,
                  For to a brethe hym at leyſer and auente.
                  In open eyre and they vnto hym wente,
                  Maugre the grekes where he wounded was
                  And bare him out a full eaſy paſe,
                  Towarde the walle faſte by the towne,
                  And with great dole and lamentaciowne,
                  Full ſoftely on the grounde hym layde.
                  Tyll at the laſte this deadly man abrayde,
                  With mortall loke and face funerall,
                  And there pyteous ſo that eche ball,
                  Gan tourne vp of his deadly eye,
                  And euen thus to Parys he gan ſeye.
                  Oh brother myne whom that I loued ſo,
                  Haue now pyte and rewe vpon my wo,
                  Of kyndneſſe and of brotherheade,
                  And to my wordes of routhe take now hede,
                  Syth we by death muſte a ſonder twynne.
                  ¶For Attropoſe ſhal no longer ſpynne,
                  My lyues threde but the knotte breke,
                  Wherfore brother I praye the to be wreke,
                  Vpon my deth or I henſe pace.
                  If that thou lyſte to do me ſuche a grace,
                  Of kyndneſſe yet or I be deade.
                  Out of my breſte or this ſperes heade,
                  Be rent away that thou auenged be,
                  Vpon my foe as I truſte in the.
                  That I may wyt he be dead or I,
                  And that his ſpyryte it paſſe fynally,
                  And fyrſte diſcende depe downe in helle.
                  Eternally with Pluto for to dwelle.
                  Myd his boundes that derke byn and lowe.
                  That fynally ſo that I may knowe,
                  That he be dead there is no more to ſaye,
                  I gyue no force how ſoone that I deye.
                  ¶To whoſe requeſt Parys toke good hede▪
                  
                  And into fyelde faſte gan hym ſpede,
                  For thought and woe pyteouſly wepynge,
                  Whyle his brother laye there lanquyſhynge.
                  Not awaytynge but onely after death,
                  Vpon the poynt to yelden vp the breth.
                  ¶And with his knightes Parys vp & downe
                  The wardes ſought about enuyrowne,
                  ¶Tyll at the laſte Pallamydes he fonde.
                  With Sarpedon fyghtyng hande of hande.
                  Now was this king this worthi Sarpedown
                  Come in defence of them of Troye towne.
                  Whiche of his hande was a noble knight,
                  And whyle that he with all his full myght,
                  
                     ¶Moſte buſy was Pallamydes to preſſe,
                  Lyke a Lyon whetted with woodneſſe,
                  Pallamydes in herte not a ferde,
                  Let flye at hym with his ſharpe ſworde,
                  So myghtely that it was a wonder,
                  For he his thygh parted hath a ſonder,
                  And ſmote of by the herde bone.
                  ¶That Sarpedon fyll downe dead anone.
                  So that Troyans whan that he was ſlawe,
                  Were compelled of force them to withdrawe,
                  Through the purſuite of kyng Pallamydes.
                  Whiche vpon them was ſo merciles.
                  And as cruell as a wood Lyon.
                  ¶After the death of kyng Sarpedon.
                  The whiche alas whan Parys dyd eſpye,
                  He marked hym with a cruell eye,
                  And hente a bowe that paſſyngly was ſtrong
                  And with an arowe to his tyller longe,
                  Entoxycat with venym in the head,
                  That whom he ſmote therwith was but dead
                  And hytte hym ſo in the auentayle,
                  Throughout the ſtuffe and the thicke mayle,
                  Into the throte that it gan through pace,
                  That he fell dead in the ſelfe place,
                  ¶Pallamydes this manfull worthy knight.
                  Where through Grekꝭ toke them to the flight
                  And made a noyſe and a wofull crye,
                  The death complaynyng wonder piteouſlye,
                  Of their lorde and myghty gouernour.
                  But late choſe to be their Emperour,
                  Their chiefe ſocour and ſoueraine refute,
                  But now alas they ſtonde deſtitute,
                  Of gouernaunce broke and diſarayed,
                  Without guyde ryght as ſhepe diſmayed,
                  Diſconſolate and comfortleſſe yſhent.
                  That eche of them flyeth vnto his tente.
                  And they of Troye ſued on the chace,
                  On horſebacke a wonder huge pace,
                  And merciles ſlewe them as they fle.
                  On euery ſyde that pyte was to ſe.
                  Without mercy or any other grace.
                  For lyke the Lyons they gan them enchace.
                  Tyll they compelled of neceſſyte,
                  Conſtrayned were through their cruelte,
                  To tourne agayne and them ſelfe diffende.
                  And they of Troye downe anone diſcende,
                  Of horſebacke euen vpon the playne,
                  And attones there was none other gayne,
                  They gan the grekes proudely to outraye,
                  And cruelly do them ſo diſamaye,
                  That fynally there gayneth no diffence,
                  So mortall was the mighty violence,
                  Of Troyans that Grekes ſo diffoyle,
                  And alderfyrſte at leyſer they diſpoyle,
                  The grekes tentes of golde and rycheſſe,
                  At whiche time Troylus gan him dreſſe,
                  And Parys eke downe to their nauye,
                  With thirtye thouſande in their companye.
                  Kyllyng all tho playnly that they mette,
                  And on their ſhyppes wylde fyre they ſette.
                  That to the wall of Troye the Cyte,
                  Men myght well the hydous flawme ſe.
                  ¶And all had gone to deſtruction,
                  Ne had Ayax ycalled Thelamon,
                  Through his manhode & knyghtly excellence
                  Come anone and made reſyſtence,
                  Of the grekes with many worthy knyght,
                  And tho of new began the mortall fyght.
                  Atwene Troyans and the grekes ſtoute,
                  The red bloud raylyng all aboute,
                  Vpon the playne ſo hydouſly they blede,
                  And here and there both in length and brede;
                  Dead and maymed and full pale of ſyght,
                  Vpon the ſoyle full many noble knyght.
                  Atwyxe them ſo cruell was the hate.
                  For in their fyght togyther they debate,
                  As wylde bores euen ſo they fare.
                  For none of them lyſte other for to ſpare.
                  And in the fyelde worthy Thelamowne,
                  Through his knyghthod & his high renowne
                  So manly bare hym grekes to deffende,
                  That no mā might in manhode him amende.
                  Thrugh all ye world though men had ſought.
                  For he that day in his perſon hath wroughte,
                  Meruailes in armes thrugh his great might
                  That in ſothneſſe Grekes anone ryght,
                  Without hym had fynally be ſhent,
                  And their ſhyppes attones loſte and brent,
                  Through the purſuite of Parys that day,
                  ¶And worthy Troilus yt made ſuch affraye,
                  Amonges them through hygh proweſſe.
                  That fyfty ſhyypes Guydo doth expreſſe,
                  Were loſte and brent or that Thelamowne,
                  To reſkus came with his knightes downe.
                  Vnto the ſea the remenaunt for to ſaue.
                  But for all that Troyans that daye haue,
                  The hygher hande of this mortall fyght.
                  Through the force and the great myght.
                  
                     Of Troylus only which hath ſo many ſlaine,
                  Of the grekes in ſoth that they were fayne,
                  Them to withdrawe and the fielde to lete.
                  For in abydyng they fonde full vnſwete.
                  Wherfore they gan for to leſe their place,
                  ¶Amonge which the kinges ſonne of Trace
                  That Heber hyght wounded to the death,
                  That he ne myght vnneth drawe his breth,
                  With a ſpere in his breſte ſtyckynge.
                  ¶To Achylles he came in complaynyng,
                  Vnto his tent euen there he laye,
                  Whiche in the fyelde was not all that daye.
                  ¶For the ſake onely of Pollycene.
                  The loue of whom was ſo ſharpe and kene,
                  Aye at his herte ylyke grene and newe.
                  To whom Heber with a mortall hewe.
                  Complayneth ſore arrettyng cowardyſe,
                  And in manhode a very trewandyſe,
                  That he that day myght ſo for ſhame,
                  Withdrawe him ſelfe in hindring of his name
                  Out of the fyelde to hym full great reprefe,
                  Of the grekes ſeynge the miſchiefe,
                  That they were in. and confuſyon,
                  Vpon the brinke of their deſtruction.
                  Abrode the fielde to ſe them ſo lye deade,
                  And lyſte not ones for to take hede,
                  Of his knyghthode grekes to releue.
                  ¶And whyle Heber gan hym thus repreue,
                  And the ſpere whiche in his body was,
                  All ſodaynly was drawen out alas,
                  With Eye vp caſte in rancoure and in yre,
                  Full pyteouſly Heber dyd expyre.
                  ¶In the preſence of this Achylles.
                  And therwith came in a ſodayne res,
                  Into his tente a certayne knyght of his,
                  ¶Of whom Achylles axeth how it is,
                  Amonge the grekes and clerely how it ſtode.
                  And he anſwered full Irours in his mode,
                  Certes quod he full vnhappely,
                  For they of Troye haue ſo cruelly,
                  Our grekes all this daye in their fyght,
                  Full ſhamefully put vnto the flyghte.
                  So many ſlayne alas and welawaye,
                  That vnneth none eſcape myght awaye,
                  Vnhurte maymed or withouten wounde,
                  So fell on vs Troyans were yfounde.
                  And of them eke was ſuche multitude.
                  That I ſuppoſe ſhortely to conclude,
                  This daye there was to my opynyowne,
                  Not lefte a man within Troye towne.
                  That able was to ſtande in battayle.
                  With ſpere or ſworde his enmye to aſſayle,
                  I Wene in ſoth but they byn come out,
                  With vs to fyght there was ſo huge a route.
                  That we ne myght of force take on hande,
                  In the fyelde agaynſt them for to ſtande.
                  ¶But nowe my lorde it draweth vnto night,
                  That they be faynte any more to fyght.
                  If it were pleaſyng to your worthyneſſe,
                  To your manhode and your hygh nobleſſe,
                  To take on you to your encreſe of fame,
                  For euermore to getten you a name,
                  And there withall for your owne glorye,
                  Perpetually to be in memorye,
                  To ryſe vp and arme you anone,
                  And ſodaynely vpon them to gone,
                  Feble and weake to make reſyſtence,
                  Agaynſt your manly famous excellence.
                  There were no more but we were victours,
                  For e
                        •
                     er more and very conquerours.
                  Duryng the worlde to be in remembraunce.
                  And they for euer brought vnto outraunce,
                  In ſothfaſtneſſe I haue of it no dread.
                  ¶But Achylles toke of hym no hede,
                  Nor to Heber that laye afore him dead,
                  Full colde and ſtrake of coloure lyke to leade.
                  Nor ones lyſte to gyue hym audience,
                  Nor vnto hym haue his aduertence.
                  There may no worde in his herte myne,
                  To that he ſayde to maken hym enclyne.
                  For vtterly euen lyke he ferde,
                  As though he no maner worde ne herde.
                  For through his eares it paſſed as a ſowne.
                  ¶Lo here the maner and condiciowne,
                  The very cuſtome and the playne vſaunce,
                  Of theſe louers hangyng in a traunce.
                  ¶Honour, worſhyp, manhode and proweſſe
                  Strength, might, fame and hardyneſſe,
                  Encreaſe of name vertue and victorye,
                  Knyghthode, nobleſſe, and in armes glorye,
                  All theſe myghtye can loueley aſyde,
                  Suche is the myght of the god Cupyde.
                  Whiche hertes hye with his hoke can ſeaſe,
                  So loth they are playnly to diſpleaſe,
                  Outher in chere or in countenaunce.
                  In wyll or dede or diſobeyſaunce.
                  To her that is theyr ſouerayne lady dere.
                  For with a loke of her eyen clere,
                  
                     She can full well daunte all their pride.
                  For Venus ſoone ſo can prouyde,
                  His arrowes kene to perce nerfe and vayne,
                  And them enlace in his fyry chayne,
                  That onely through his importable charge,
                  They be reſtrayned for to go at large.
                  Whiche cauſe was this day doubtles,
                  That this noble hardy Achylles,
                  Wolde not withouten any wene,
                  Come in the fyelde for drede of Polycene.
                  Leſte that ſhe were offended in her herte.
                  If any thynge eſcaped or aſterte,
                  This Achylles throughe myſgouernaunce.
                  And whyles he hengeth thus as in balaunce,
                  The grekes faught with them of the twone,
                  Tyll bryght Phebus was at goinge downe,
                  That Troyans of neceſſytye,
                  For lacke of lyght entre the citye.
                  And whyle that they homewarde be repeyred
                  Laye Deiphobus of his lyfe diſpeyred.
                  Compleynyng aye on his deadly wounde.
                  And whan Parys & troylus haue hym found
                  In that myſchyefe they gan wepe and crye,
                  As they wolde for very routhe dye.
                  With wofull noyſe and with pyteous ſowne,
                  The ſalte teares gan to renne downe,
                  On their chekes vpon outher ſyde.
                  And whyles they vpon hym abyde,
                  This wounded man gan drawe to his ende.
                  Whoſe ſpyryte was redy for to wende,
                  Out of his breſt and his wery goſte,
                  Full haſtely into another coſte,
                  With deadly eyen tourned vp ſo downe.
                  Whan that he knewe by relacyowne,
                  ¶That Parys hath Pallamydes yſlawe.
                  Anone he bad that they ſhulde out drawe,
                  The large tronchone with the ſtelen head.
                  And there with all anone he fell downe dead.
                  And with the corps they gan them faſte ſpede
                  Towarde the towne but for it is no nede.
                  The dole to wryte and lamentaciowne,
                  That made was for the noble Sarpedowne,
                  Through the cytye and namely of the kynge,
                  And of the quene euer in wepynge,
                  Of his brethren and his ſyſters dere.
                  It were but vayne to reherſe it here.
                  ¶But Pryam hath with great dylygence,
                  Two towmbes of royall excellence,
                  For Deyphobus and kynge Sarpedowne,
                  With many ymage grauen enuyron,
                  And many a knotte koruen here and yonder.
                  And buryed them but a lyttle a ſonder,
                  Lyke the cuſtome of their rytes olde.
                  And whyles they the feſte halowe & holde,
                  That called is the feſte funerall,
                  The Grekes haue do make in ſpecyall,
                  A ryche toumbe to the worthy kyng,
                  ¶Pallamydes and for his buryinge.
                  Solempnely made ordinaunce,
                  Amonges them as it was vſaunce,
                  And with great dole and pyteous heuyneſſe,
                  They haue this kynge of great worthyneſſe,
                  Royally brought to his ſepulture.
                  ¶And for they myght longe not endure,
                  Without an head and a gouernour,
                  They choſen haue to their Emperour,
                  By one aſſente and affection,
                  The worthy kyng the wyſe Agamenon.
                  ¶And after they made no lettynge,
                  They of Troye the next day enſuynge,
                  With their wardes in to fielde to gone,
                  Fully purpoſed to fyght with their foen,
                  And grekes manly in the face them mette.
                  But worthy Troylus ſo them ouer ſette,
                  That greke was none ſhortly for to telle,
                  Thilke daye afore him myght dwelle.
                  So cruelly he gan them for to chace.
                  For where he came or rode in any place,
                  They fledde his ſworde of their lyfe in doubte
                  His yonge knightes ridinge him aboute,
                  Suche as he was vſaunt for to lede,
                  And euer in one the grekes bloud the ſhede.
                  Whiche lyke a ſtreame diſteined al the playne
                  And all this whyle was ſo huge a rayne,
                  The ſame day and ſo huge a myſte,
                  That euery man hath his felowe myſte.
                  Specially vpon the grekes ſyde,
                  That for the ſtorme and their woundes wide
                  And for the manhode of this Troian knight.
                  ¶Worthy Troilus ſo freſhe, ſo yonge, & light
                  They were coact through his cruelte.
                  Maugre their might for dred of death to fle,
                  To their tentes ſuccour for to fynde,
                  Troyans aye purſuynge behynde,
                  Iull mortally wiſh a ſterne paſe,
                  But for the ſtorme they ceaſe of the caſe,
                  And home repayre to their Eitie ſtronge,
                  Tyll on the morowe that the larke ſonge,
                  
                     That Troylus efte moſt manly to battayle,
                  The grekes newe caſte hym for to aſſayle.
                  ¶And Guydo wryt this yonge champyowne
                  Thylke daye as he rode vp and downe,
                  Amonge his foen through his hygh renowne
                  that there ne was king duke erle nor barown,
                  With his ſworde where ſo that he wende,
                  That of their lyfe he made a mortall ende,
                  All the whyle that Phebus gaue his lyght.
                  Tyll at the laſte that it drewe to nyght,
                  That he to Troye repayreth manfully.
                  ¶And ſeuen dayes ſuynge by and by,
                  This lyfe he ledde with his knyghtes felle,
                  Vpon grekes as Guydo can you telle.
                  Aye newe and new he gan them ſo confounde
                  His cruell ſworde was ſo kene grounde,
                  That they ne myght in his mortall tene,
                  Afore his ſyght abyde nor ſuſtene.
                  Nor the vengeaunce that he on them toke,
                  For where he rode the weye they forſoke,
                  In his traſe the renges were ſo redde.
                  Of them in ſoth that in the fielde lay dead.
                  For whiche ſlaughte and confuſyowne,
                  The grekes new ſent to the towne,
                  ¶For a trewſe to Pryamus the kyng.
                  And he anone graunted their axynge,
                  For two monthes fully by the aſſent,
                  Of all the lordes of his parlement.
                  Wherof they made full relacion.
                  ¶The enbaſſadours to Agamenon,
                  And to their lodgyng after forth they wente.
                  ¶But how that he vnto Achylles ſente,
                  The meane whyle his meſſangers wyſe,
                  So as I can I ſhall anone deuyſe.
               
               
                  AGamenon as Guydo lyſte endyte,
                  His lordes ſent Achylles to vyſyte,
                  For certayne cauſes lyke as ye ſhall here.
                  Whiche in the ſtorye be reherſed here.
                  And with Vlixes and worthy Diomede,
                  ¶Duke Neſtor wente playnely as I reade,
                  To fyne onely by their counſellyng,
                  Into his herte that they myght brynge,
                  And endure hym to haue a fantaſye,
                  To be wyllynge thorugh his chyualrye,
                  With them to ſtande as he hath do toforne.
                  That haue ſo many of Troye men ylorne.
                  For lacke onely of his hygh preſence.
                  ¶And Achylles with dygne reuerence,
                  Receyued them and with right knightly chere
                  And after that whan they were ſet yfeare,
                  Lyke theyr degree anone in aduenture,
                  ¶Whyle Vlixes full of eloquence,
                  Gan his tale prudently deuyſe.
                  ¶To Achylles ſaying in this wiſe.
                  ¶Syr Achylles moſte renowned of glorye,
                  Throughout the worlde to be in memorye.
                  And of his knyghthode very ſhoures and wel
                  Diſpleaſe it not now that I ſhall tell,
                  To your noble famous excellence,
                  Nor to your eares let be none offence,
                  That I ſhall ſay but of goodlyhead,
                  Pacyently that ye wyll take hede,
                  To my wordes ſayd of herte and thought,
                  I you enſure for I fayne noughte.
                  This to ſaye yf ye remembre wel.
                  The fyrſt cauſe and purpoſe euery dell,
                  Of the grekes yf ye haue mencyon,
                  Was fully ſette by one entencyon,
                  As well of you as of vs pardye.
                  Whan we come fyrſt to this citye.
                  Kynges prynces I except none.
                  Of whiche in ſoth to recken euerychone,
                  Your ſelfe was to ſpeake in ſpeciall,
                  One of the fyrſt and moſte pryncypall.
                  Aſſented full how Troye the Cite,
                  Through our manhode deſtroyed ſhulde be.
                  Perpetually brought vnto ruyne.
                  But nowe of newe I note what doth enclyne
                  Your worthyneſſe ſodeynly to varye.
                  And to our purpoſe for to be contrarye.
                  ¶Conſyder fyrſt of you that be ſo ſage,
                  The wronges done and the great damage,
                  In grekes lande of them of the towne.
                  Conſpyryng aye to our deſtructiowne.
                  If ye aduerte wyſely in your thought,
                  That ſlayne haue and to an ende brought,
                  Full many worthy ſyth gone full yore,
                  And of treaſour that no man may reſtore.
                  Diſpoyled vs and brought in great diſtreſſe.
                  Our goodes raught our golde & our rycheſſe▪
                  
                  Our ſhyppes brent through their cruelte.
                  And to all this alas ye lyſte not ſe.
                  Now that they be whiche may not be delayed
                  Through your manhode fynally outtrayed,
                  Sith ye haue ſlaine their hope their ſuffiſaūce
                  ¶Hector in whom was all their affyaunce.
                  Fully their truſte and diffence alſo.
                  
                     ¶And Deyphobus alſo is a go,
                  And lykely are more to be apeyred,
                  Fro day to day and fynally diſpeyred.
                  So frowardly fortune on them loureth.
                  And now your honour & your fame flouteth,
                  In his worſhyp and your high renowne,
                  Atteyned hath the exaltaciowne.
                  And hygheſt prycke of fortunes whele,
                  It were great wronge and ye loke wele.
                  Of wylfulnes for to be vnkynde.
                  To her that ye ſo frendly to you fynde.
                  Or to be frowarde whyle ſhe is benynge,
                  By influence graciouſly to aſſygne.
                  Her ſpoukes meue vnto your pleaſaunce,
                  And hap to tourne wt plente on your chaunce
                  After whoſe helpe you nedeth not to calle.
                  ¶Wherfore alas why wyll ye ſuffer palle,
                  Your noble fame of very wylfulneſſe,
                  Whyle it is hyeſt in his worthyneſſe,
                  Your knyghtly prudence it ſhulde not aſterte.
                  Of whiche thynge euery gentyll herte,
                  Shulde haue routhe and compaſſyon.
                  Wherfore we praye of 
                        •
                     iſcrecyon,
                  That ye you ſhape this purpoſe to amende,
                  And that ye wolde of herte condiſcende,
                  With vs to ſtonde knyghtly in this werre,
                  By your manhode that is ſpoke of ſo ferre.
                  That your renowne to the worlde ende.
                  Reported be where ſo that men wende,
                  Perpetually by freſheneſſe of hewe,
                  Day by day to encreaſe newe,
                  That the tryumphe of this hygh victorye,
                  Be put in ſtorye and eke in memorye.
                  And ſo enprynted that foryetfulneſſe,
                  No power haue by malys to oppreſſe.
                  Your fame in knyghthode derke or difface,
                  That ſhyneth yet ſo clere in many place,
                  Without Eclypſyng ſothly this no leſſe.
                  Whiche to conſerne ye be now reckeleſſe.
                  Of wylfulneſſe to cloude ſo the lyght,
                  Of your renowne ye whylom ſhone ſo bryght.
                  Your myghty hande of manhode to wtdrawe.
                  Conſyder fyrſt how grekes are yſlawe,
                  Tofore your tent wt mortal woundes wyde,
                  Through out the fyelde vpon euery ſyde.
                  And haue diſdayne onely for lacke of routhe.
                  Alas the whyle for a lyttle ſlouthe,
                  To ley to honde in their miſchyefe at all.
                  That whylom were their ſtrōge mighty wall
                  Their chiefe diffence and their champiowne
                  Souerayne helpe and protectiowne.
                  For whom ye haue ſo ofte ſhedde your bloud,
                  Agayne their foen with them whan he ſtode,
                  Full myghtely their enmyes to aſſayle,
                  Without whom they lyttell may auayle.
                  In very ſoth ne none of vs echone.
                  But ye of knyghthode lyſte with vs to gone,
                  Agayne Troyans as ye were wont to do.
                  And is our truſt and fynall hope alſo.
                  That ye ſhall helpe and our ſocour be.
                  ¶And hereupon we praye you that ye,
                  Saye your aduyce and your full wyll.
                  ¶And than anone the hardy fyerſe Achylle,
                  Whan Vlixes concluded had his tale,
                  Sith a face for anger dead and pale,
                  Sayde euen thus all openly and playne.
                  Sir Vlixes if ſo ryght as ye ſayne,
                  And haue declared in concluſyon.
                  That our purpoſe and entenſyon,
                  Was fynally to brenne and deſtroye,
                  This royall citie that is called Troye.
                  I holde in ſoth me lyketh not to lye,
                  That our entent was grounded on folye,
                  To put vs all through indiſcrecion,
                  Of reckleſhede and haſty mocyon,
                  Of lyfe and death in ſuche ieopardye.
                  And ſpecyally in all the Chiualrye,
                  Of grekes lande for ſo ſmale a thynge.
                  So many prynce and ſo many worthy kyng,
                  That haue ieoparted their body & their good,
                  Yloſte their lyfe and yſpent their bloud,
                  Which might haue be ful well at home ī peace
                  ¶And is not nowe the kyng Pallamydes,
                  Yſlawe alſo as who ſayth but of newe,
                  That was ſo wiſe, ſo manly, and ſo trewe,
                  Of whom the lyfe was of more pryce alone,
                  Than the cauſe for whiche that we echone,
                  Be gathered here who ſo loke a ryght.
                  And of grekes many a noble knyght,
                  That haue be ſlayne both of the worthyeſt,
                  The worlde to ſeke and the manlyeſt.
                  For out of euery lande and regyowne,
                  On grekes partye and with them of ye towne
                  Of chyualry & knighthod ye ſoueraine floure,
                  To wynne in arme worſhippe and honour,
                  Aſſembled be and come fro ſo ferre.
                  Of whiche in ſoth by dureſſe of this werre.
                  Full many one in the fyelde is dead.
                  
                     And veryly without any drede.
                  There ſhall well mo if the werre laſte,
                  Fro euery day the numbre laſſeth faſte,
                  Of worthy knyghtes dede without routh,
                  That I dare ſaye and conclude of trouth,
                  In this rage furyous and wood,
                  Full lykely is that all the gentyl bloude,
                  Through out this worlde ſhall deſtroyed be.
                  And rural folke and that were great pyty.
                  Shall haue lordſhyp and hooly gouernaunce
                  And Churles eke with ſorowe & miſchaunce,
                  In euery londe ſhall lordes be alone.
                  Whan gentyll men ſlayne be echone.
                  ¶Is not Hector that was ſo noble a knight,
                  That was this worldes very ſonne and light
                  Of manhode floure ſlayne pyteouſly.
                  In this werte in ſoth and ſo myghty I.
                  Parauenture whiche may not attayne,
                  To his nobleſſe if I ſhall not fayne.
                  For by what way ſhall we the death eſchewe.
                  With all our myght if we it purſewe,
                  Fro day to daye whyle that we lye here.
                  Therfore ſhortely me for to requere,
                  Touchynge the werre outher for to praye.
                  Is but in veyne and herken what I ſaye.
                  I wyll not purpoſe in this werre or ſtryfe,
                  For to ieoparte any more my lyfe.
                  For leuer I haue that Palled be my name,
                  Than for to be ſlayne and haue an ydle fame
                  For worthineſſe after death yblowe,
                  Is but a wynde and laſteth but a throwe.
                  For though renowne and priſe be blowe wide
                  Foryetfulneſſe leyth it ofte aſyde.
                  By length of yeres and oblyuion,
                  Through enuye and falſe concluſyon.
                  The lande of knyghthode and of worthyneſſe
                  Of wyſedome eke and of gentylneſſe.
                  Fredam, bounte, vertue and ſuche grace,
                  Foryetfulneſſe can darke and defface,
                  And therwithall males and enuye.
                  Yſered hath the palme of Chyualrye.
                  By falſe reporte wherfore I ſaye for me,
                  I wyll of wyſedome ſuche folye let be,
                  And in quyet forth my lyfe nowe lede.
                  ¶And ouer this to you three I rede,
                  To ſeke peace with Troyans if ye may,
                  In haſty wyſe without more delaye.
                  This my counſayle platly to you all,
                  Or that myſchyefe of death vpon you fall.
                  It were well done that ye toke hede,
                  ¶Both Vlixes and thou Dyomede.
                  ¶And Neſtor eke ſythen ye be wyſe,
                  To worke playnely lyke as I deuyſe.
                  This the ſumme and fyne of myne entent,
                  And ſo reporteth to hym that hath you ſent.
                  And they anone with ſhorte concluſyon,
                  ¶Repeyred be to Agamenon,
                  With ſuch anſwere as ye haue herde me ſeine
                  It nedeth not to wryte it newe againe.
                  ¶And herevpon kynge Agamenon,
                  Let make anone a conuocaſyon.
                  Of his lordes and in their preſence,
                  Fro poynt to poynt ſothly in ſentence.
                  He hath reherſed how that Achylles,
                  Was deſyrous for to haue a peace,
                  With them of Troye and platly how that he,
                  For no prayer wyll in no degree,
                  Agayne Troians with ſpere nor with ſhelde,
                  In helpe of grekes be armed in the felde.
                  Wherfore the kynge as he that was ful wiſe,
                  Hereupon axed their deuyſe,
                  And whan them thought what beſt for to do,
                  In this matter ſyth it ſtode ſo.
                  ¶And fyrſte of all ſpeaketh Menelay,
                  With angry chere and ſayde platly nay.
                  To haue a peace it was not his entent.
                  Ne that he wolde therto be of aſſent.
                  Sythen the Cyte in concluſion,
                  Stode on the prycke of his diſtruction.
               
               
                  NOw that Hector & Deiphobꝰ were dead
                  yt whylom were their truſt in euery nede,
                  And their diffence but now they are ago.
                  Farewell their truſte and their hope alſo,
                  Without more and all their hole pryde.
                  They maye not now but after death abyde.
                  ¶And truſte well without any leſſe,
                  Though it ſo be that this Achylles,
                  Ne helpe vs not towarde our empryſe,
                  We therof not drede in no maner wyſe,
                  Without hym for to haue victorye,
                  By our manhode and our owne glorye,
                  I am full ſure therof and certayne.
                  But Vlixes gan replye agayne.
                  Neſtor alſo of ſodayne mocyon,
                  Contrayre was to his opynyon.
                  Affyrmynge playnely that no wonder was,
                  Though Menelay ſothly in this caſe.
                  
                     Vnto the peace wolde not aſſent,
                  For openly they wyſte what he ment,
                  For he was ground and roote of al the werre
                  And cauſe alſo they come were ſo ferre,
                  Out of their lande he and the quene Heleyne.
                  ¶And for the ſake onely of them tweyne.
                  The grekes all whiche no man may denye.
                  Their lyues put in ſuche ieopardye,
                  For hym and her if the grounde be ſoughte,
                  For well they wyſte that he rought nought,
                  This Menelay what wo they endure,
                  So he his wyfe myght agayne recure.
                  ¶And where he ſayth that Hector is dead.
                  He hath an heyre to ſpeake of manlyhead,
                  And of knyghthode as it wyll be founde,
                  And called is Hector the ſeconde.
                  ¶Worthy Troylus whiche yt is his brother,
                  In all this worlde is not ſuche an other,
                  Of worthyneſſe for to recken all,
                  For he of Troye is the myghty wall.
                  ¶And diffence now Hector is a gone,
                  Ye knowe it well your ſelfe euerychone.
                  If it ſo be that ye lyſte take hede,
                  Whoſe ſharpe ſworde ſore doth vs blede,
                  Euery day in his furyous hete,
                  Amyd the fyelde whan we with hym mete,
                  And in ſtede of worthy Deiphobus,
                  Whiche in his tyme was wonderly famous.
                  ¶His brother Parys is nowe founde at all,
                  In worthyneſſe of knyghthode perygall.
                  So that of them we haue none auauntage.
                  Vnto this houre but rather great damage.
                  To recken all ſyth we be gonne,
                  This very ſoth we but lyttle wonne,
                  But we are lykely alwaye more to leſe,
                  If we contune but ſyth we may cheſe.
                  It were holſome to lyue in quyet.
                  To haue a peace and this werre lete,
                  By one aſſent ſyth ye be wyſe.
               
               
                  ANd with yt worde Calchas gan to ryſe,
                  The Troyan treytour wt a pale chere,
                  For very Ire and ſayde as ye ſhall here.
                  ¶A worthy prynces what thynke ye to done,
                  To chaunge ſo lyke as doth the moone.
                  Your olde purpoſe and your fyrſt entent,
                  Agayne the wyll and commaundement,
                  Of the godder that euery thynge gouerne,
                  By purueyaunce who ſo can diſcerne.
                  Alas alss why ne wyll ye at the leſte.
                  Credence and fayth geue to theyr heſte.
                  Whiche in no wyſe may not be fallyble.
                  For in ſoth it were an impoſſyble.
                  Vtterly but Troye the citye,
                  Of ordynaunce and neceſſytye,
                  Myght be deſtroyed henſe but alyte.
                  If your ſlouth be it not to wyte,
                  So that victorye worſhyp and honour,
                  And fynall palme eke of this labour,
                  To be reported on water and on lande,
                  Reſerued be hooly to your hande.
                  In your purpoſe yf ye forth contune.
                  And hynder not of foly your fortune.
                  This in ſoth I dare it well conclude.
                  And peryllous is the goddes to yllude.
                  Of neclygence or ſlouth wylfully.
                  Wherfore I read that now manfully,
                  Of herte and thought and of full vnyte.
                  Platly deuoydyng ambyguyte,
                  To ſet vpon and knyghtly to reſume,
                  Your force agayne fully to conſume,
                  Your cruell foen and let be ſhet without,
                  Wanhope and drede diſpeyre & euery doubte,
                  Caſtyng of parrell ſlouth and cowardyſe.
                  And let manhode vtterly diſpyſe,
                  All dread of death that cauſeth hertes feynt.
                  With cowardyſe and to be atteynt.
                  That fynally as goddes haue be hyght,
                  Through preſcyence of their eternall might,
                  To victorye that ye ſhall attayne,
                  Lyke your deſyre there is no more to ſayne.
                  ¶And whan Calchas in concluſyowne,
                  This falſe treytour vnto Troye towne,
                  The grekes had through his wordes fayre,
                  Touchynge the werre put out of dyſpayre.
                  Of herte all one they caſte them to fulfyll,
                  Hooly his counſayle though ſo that Achylle,
                  Be frowarde aye to helpe them in their nede,
                  They gaue no force nor toke of it no hede,
                  But euerychone they them redy make,
                  As ye ſhall here the fielde in haſte to take,
               
               
                  THe trewes paſſed of ye monthes twayne,
                  Into ye felde Grekꝭ gan theim ordayne,
                  And they of Troye agayne theim yſſue oute,
                  ¶And worthy Troylus with an huge route,
                  The Grekes gan alderfirſte aſſayle.
                  And with his ſwerde he made for to rayle,
                  
                     The red bloud through their harneys bright.
                  That as the death they fled fro his ſyght.
                  For he that daye thrugh his cruelte,
                  Caſte him platly auenged for to be,
                  Vpon the death of Hector vtterly.
                  ¶And as Dares wryteth ſpecyally.
                  A M. knightes this Troyan champyowne,
                  That day hath ſlayne rydyng vp and downe.
                  ¶As myne auctour Guydo lyſt endyte,
                  Saue after hym I can no ferther wryte.
                  In his boke he geueth him ſuche a name,
                  That by his manhode and his knyghtly fame
                  The grekes all were dryuen vnto flyght,
                  By all that daye tyll it drewe to nyght.
                  ¶And on the morowe in the dawnynge,
                  The grekes haue at Phebus vpryſynge.
                  Yarmed them with great dylygence,
                  Agayne Troyans to ſtanden at diffence.
                  Amonges whome that daye as I rede,
                  ¶So well hym bare worthy Dyomede,
                  That many Troyan through his cruelte,
                  ¶Hath loſte his lyfe. tyll Troylus gan to ſe,
                  This Dyomede in the fyelde rydynge,
                  To whom anone without more lettynge,
                  With his ſpere throwen into the reſte,
                  This Troylus rode & ſmote hym on the breſt
                  So myghtely that of very nede,
                  Downe of his horſe he ſmote this Dyomede.
                  Albe of wounde he tho had no domage.
                  And furyouſly Troylus in his rage,
                  Of hygh enuye gan him to abrayde,
                  Whan he was down ye loue of faire Creſeide.
                  Of his deceyte and falſe Trecherye,
                  And grekes than faſte gan them hye,
                  Amonge the horſe in miſchiefe whiche he lay,
                  To drawe him out in all the haſt yt they may,
                  And on a ſhelde broſed and affrayde,
                  They bare hym home ſo he was dyſmayde,
                  Of the ſtroke home vnto his tent.
                  ¶And Menelay the ſame whyle hath hente,
                  A myghty ſpere tauenge this Dyomede,
                  And towardes Troylus faſt gan him ſpede,
                  Fully auyſed to hym vnhorſe anone.
                  But Troylus fyrſte made his ſtede gone,
                  So ſwyfte a courſe towardes Menelay,
                  That he anone at the earth laye.
                  So myghtely ye hyt hym with his ſpere.
                  That ſhelde nor plate might his body were,
                  That he ne had there a mortall wounde.
                  But his knightes anone as they hym founde,
                  Out of the preſe when they had him rent,
                  They bare hym home to his owne tent.
                  The grekes aye ſtandyng in diſtreſſe,
                  Through the knighthode and ye hye proweſſe,
                  Of this Troilus whiche ſo hath them belaine
                  On euery part where he rode on the plaine.
                  ¶Tyll vnto tyme that Agamenowne,
                  Into the fyelde is a valed downe.
                  With many worthy about his banere,
                  That ſhone full ſhene agayne the ſonne clere.
                  And wt his knightꝭ hym rydyng enuyrowne,
                  He ſore enchaſed them of Troye towne,
                  Woundeth & ſleeth and put theim to ye flyght,
                  Hym ſelfe acquytynge lyke a manly knyght.
                  But for all that without more abode,
                  Amonge Troyans fyerſly as he rode,
                  ¶This worthy kyng great Agamenowne.
                  Troylus with a ſpere hath ſmytten downe,
                  Maugre his grekes there gameth no ſocour,
                  And whan they ſawe their lorde & gouernour
                  In ſuche myſchyefe at the grounde lyende,
                  They hente hym vp and made hym to aſſende
                  Through their manhode on his ſtronge ſtede
                  And he of wyt gan to taken hede.
                  And conſydered wiſely in his thought,
                  In what diſioynt Troilus had them brought
                  And how his grekes for all their great pryde,
                  Tofore his ſwerde myght not abyde,
                  He prudently of hygh diſcrecyon,
                  ¶This noble knyght this kyng Agomenon,
                  As he that hadde aye his aduertence,
                  On gouernaunce through his prouydence,
                  Whan he ſawe his grekes gan to fayle,
                  And wexe feble to ſtanden in battayle,
                  For lacke of ſtuffe that ſhulde them recomfort
                  Full prudently he made them to reſorte,
                  Eueryche of them to his owne tent.
                  ¶And after that he hath to Pryam ſent,
                  For a trewſe to Troye the Cyte,
                  For ſyxe monthes if it myghte be,
                  And by his counſayle Pryamus the kynge,
                  Without abode graunted his axynge.
                  Albe that ſome as Guydo lyſte endyte,
                  Were euyll apayde ſo longe to reſpyte,
                  Their mortall foen in any maner wyſe.
                  But yet his graunt as ye haue harde deuyſe,
                  Stode in his ſtrength fully as I read,
                  ¶In whiche tyme of very womanhead,
                  
                     Creſeyde lyſte no longer for to tarye,
                  Though her father were therto contrarye,
                  For to vyſyte and to haue a ſyght,
                  ¶Of Dyomede that was become her knyght
                  ¶Which had of Troilus late caught a woūd
                  And in his tent when ſhe hath hym founde,
                  Benygnely vpon his beddes ſyde,
                  She ſet her downe in the ſelfe tyde,
                  And platly caſte in her owne thought,
                  ¶Touchynge Troylus yt it was for nought,
                  To lyue in hope of any more recure,
                  And thought ſhe wolde for nothing be vnſure
                  Of purueyaunce nor without ſtore,
                  She gaue anone without any more,
                  Hooly her herte vnto this Dyomede.
                  Lo what pytye is in womanhead.
                  What mercy eke and benynge routhe,
                  That newly can all her olde trouthe,
                  Of nature lette ſlyppe and ouer ſlyde.
                  Rather then they lyſten ſo abyde,
                  Any man in myſchiefe for their ſake,
                  The chaunge is not ſo redy for to make.
                  In Lumbardſtrete of crowne nor doket,
                  All poyſe is good be ſo the prent be ſet.
                  Their letter of chaunge doth no man abyde,
                  So that the wynde be redy and the tyde.
                  Paſſage is aye who ſo lyſte to pace,
                  No man is loſte that lyſte ſeke for grace.
                  Daunger is none but counterfeyte diſdeyne,
                  The ſea is calme and from theſe rockes plain
                  For mercyles neuer man ne deyde,
                  That ſought for grace record of her Creſeide
                  Whiche fynally hath gyuen all her herte,
                  To Dyomede in releſe of his ſmerte.
                  And prayed hym to be right glad and lyght,
                  And calleth him her owne man & her knyght.
                  And hym behyghte rather then he deye,
                  In euery thynge howe ſhe wolde obeye,
                  That were honeſt hym to do pleaſaunce.
                  For leuer ſhe had chaunge and varyaunce,
                  Were founde in her than lacke of pytye,
                  As ſyttynge is to all Femynyte,
                  Of nature not to be vengeable,
                  For fayth nor othe but rather mercyable,
                  Of mannes lyfe ſtandynge in diſtreſſe.
                  ¶Hereof no more for now I wyll me dreſſe,
                  To tell forth in my tranſlacyon,
                  Ceriouſly how Agamenon,
                  Durynge the trewſe and the time of peace,
                  Hym ſelfe wente vnto Achylles,
                  Beſechynge him ſome regarde to haue,
                  Of his knyghthode Grekes for to ſaue.
                  And his preſence no more to withdrawe,
                  To ſuffer them ſo mortally to be ſlawe,
                  Of their enmyes Pompous and Elate.
                  ¶But Achylles alway indurate,
                  Ilyche newe both in herte and thought,
                  From his purpoſe platly chaungeth nought,
                  Fully enclyned for to haue a peace.
                  ¶But for as moche as this Achylles,
                  Of entyerneſſe and hyghe affection,
                  So louyng was vnto Agamenon.
                  He vnto hym graunted at the leſte,
                  A great parcell touchynge his requeſte.
                  This to ſaye that this Achylles.
                  Graunteth to hym his Myrmydones.
                  Full knyghtly men onely in his abſence,
                  With the grekes to maken reſyſtence,
                  In the fyelde agayne them of the towne.
                  For whiche graunte kynge Agamenowne,
                  And duke Neſtor thanked hym of herte,
                  But he alwaye conteynynge in his ſmerte,
                  For the loue of fayre Pollycene,
                  Ne knewe no gayne to his wounde sgrene,
                  But diſpeyred languyſheth euer in one.
                  And whan the trewſe paſſed were and gone,
                  Vpon a day the morowe full benynge,
                  Achylles his knyghtes dyd aſſygne,
                  The fylde to take with Agamenon,
                  And as the ſtory maketh mencion,
                  He gaue to them bandes freſhe of read,
                  That men may knowe by their manlyhead,
                  With whom they were withholde in ſpecyall▪
                  
                  And lyke a man deadly and mortall,
                  Within his tent this Achylles abode,
                  When they from him into the fyelde rode,
                  Only for dole they ſhulden from him twinne.
                  In his abſence a werre to begynne.
                  Maugre his wyll agayne them of the towne.
                  ¶But forth they went with Agamenowe,
                  Vpon Troyans ſterne and full of pryde.
                  And with them mette on the other ſyde,
                  The manly knyghtes of the Troyan bloud.
                  Whiche were on them ſo furyous and wood,
                  That cruelly the grekes they oppreſſe.
                  So that a backe for feare they gan thē dreſſe.
                  They were on them ſo inly fell and kene.
                  ¶Tyll that the myghty Duke of Athene,
                  
                     Entred in the grekes to diffende.
                  But vpon hym vnwarely or he wende.
                  Came myghty Troylus lyke a wood Lyown
                  And from his ſtede anone he bare him downe
                  And after that he put hym ſo in preſe,
                  Tyll he hath mette with theſe Myrmydones,
                  And of them ſlewe that daye full many one.
                  And ſo fer in Troylus is ygone,
                  That he grekes put vtterly to flyght.
                  Through his knyghthod til it drewe to night
                  & fro his ſwerde no raunſom might thē borow
                  And Guydo wryte that on the next morowe,
                  Full mortall was the ſlaught on outher ſyde.
                  Amyd the fielde as they togyther ryde,
                  Of manly knightes that wonder was to ſene
                  ¶And as they faught the kyng Phylymene,
                  With helpe onely of Pollydamas,
                  Taken hath the worthy kyng Thoas.
                  And gan hym leade towarde Troye ye towne
                  But Myrmydones him to helpe came downe
                  Wonder proudly and after gan to ſewe,
                  And through their myght Thoas they reſcue
                  And hym delyuer for they were ſo ſtronge.
                  ¶But Troylus then hurtled them amonge,
                  Furyouſly full lyke a champyowne,
                  Now here now there caſt & threwe thē downe
                  Some he ſlewe and ſome he made blede,
                  Tyll cruelly they ſlewe his myghty ſtede.
                  On whiche he ſat and yet neuertheleſſe,
                  He fought on foote agaynſt Myrmydones,
                  That caſt had Troylus to haue take.
                  ¶But Parys tho gan them ſo awake,
                  With his brothern that about hym rode,
                  That in the place where as Troylus ſtode,
                  Vpon his fete but him ſelfe alone,
                  Of Mirmydones they ſleine haue many one
                  That of knighthod through their mālyhead,
                  They vnto hym brought an other ſtede.
                  Amyd his foen and made hym to aſcende.
                  And he full knightly gan him ſelfe dyffende,
                  ¶Be ſet with grekes in the felfe ſtounde,
                  That neuer yet a better knyght was founde,
                  They felte it well that tho were his foen.
                  But than his brother called Margaryton,
                  So as he fought puttyng hym ſelfe in preſe,
                  Was ſlayne alas amonge Myrmydones.
                  The death of whom in a cruell yre.
                  This Troylus with anger ſette a fyer,
                  Playnely purpoſeth tauenge if he may.
                  And with his ſworde began to make way.
                  ¶And Parys aye faſt by hym rydyng,
                  With his brethern vpon hym awaytyng,
                  Whiche all yfeare were ſo mercyleſſe,
                  ¶And I fynde theſe Myrmydones,
                  That of force and neceſſyte,
                  They were compelled playnly for to flee,
                  Troylus was on them ſo furyous.
                  So vengeable eke and ſo diſpyteous.
                  That he them gaue many mortall wounde,
                  And yet in ſoth that day they were founde,
                  Noble knyghtes and quyt them wonder wele
                  For they the crafte knewe euerydele,
                  Longyng to armes of them as I reade.
                  But for all that he made their ſydes blede,
                  Through the mayle and their plates ſhene,
                  That they ne myght playnly him ſuſtene,
                  The ſword of Troilus them chaſing ouerall,
                  Albe they kepte them cloſe as any wall.
                  Hole together and went not a ſonder.
                  But Troilus aye them chaſeth here & yonder
                  And ſeuered them mauger all their myght.
                  Tyll into fielde with many worthy knyght,
                  Came Menelay and kyng Agamenon,
                  Vlyxes eke and cruell Thelamon.
                  And Dyomede whiche of his woundes grene
                  Recured was as ſayth myne auctour clene.
                  And on Troyans ſodaynly they fall,
                  With their wardes and their knyghtes all.
                  And tho began the fyght to renewe,
                  On euery halfe that with blouddy hewe,
                  The plates bryght were of newe yſteyned.
                  And they of Troy ſo manly haue thē peyned,
                  Agayne there foen in this myghty ſtryfe,
                  That many greke was berafte his lyfe.
                  And where they were moſt myghty in bataile
                  Troylus came in and gan them to aſſayle,
                  On euery parte with many blouddy wounde.
                  And by his knighthod gan them to confoūde,
                  That aye they fledde ſo they were a ferde.
                  The mortall ſtrokes of his ſharpe ſworde,
                  Their deadly foe and deſtruction.
                  And this contynueth tyll kyng Thelamon,
                  By his manhode whan that he behelde,
                  The grekes made recure agayne the fyelde.
                  And gan Troyans aſſayle wonder ſore,
                  And tho began the ſlaughter more and more,
                  On eche ſyde. till Troylus newe agayne,
                  The grekes hath ſo fyerſly ouerlayne,
                  
                     Myrmydones and them euerychone,
                  Afore his ſworde that he made them gone.
                  To their tentes and the fyelde forſake.
                  And with his hande that day he hath take,
                  An hundred knightes that came in his weye.
                  Through his proweſſe & ſent them into troye
                  And euer in one gan ſo to enchace,
                  ¶Myrmydones that they loſte their place.
                  ¶And to Achylles lying in his tent,
                  They be repeyred forwounded and to rent.
                  Their herneys broke both in plate and maile
                  And of their nombre I fynde that they fayle,
                  An hundred knyghtes ſlayne dead alas.
                  That after were founde in Taas.
                  Amyd the fyeld thrugh girt wt many woūde.
                  ¶Of Troylus ſword Hector the ſecounde.
                  Wherof Achylles when he had a ſyght,
                  So heauy was all the nexte nyght,
                  In his bedde walowynge to and fro,
                  Deuoyde of ſlepe for conſtreynt of his wo,
                  At his herte his wounde was ſo kene,
                  What for his men and fayre Polycene.
                  Wyttynge well if he dyd his payne,
                  To be venged he ſhulde not attayne,
                  In no wiſe vnto his deſyre.
                  And thus he brent in a double fyre,
                  Of loue and yre that made him ſyghe ſore.
                  But for cauſe loue was the more,
                  He was aferde agayne them of the towne,
                  In his perſon to do offenciowne,
                  ¶Leſte Pryamus and Hecuba the quene,
                  Offended were and namely Polycene,
                  And thus he ſtode in a double weer,
                  That at his herte ſatte him wonder nere,
                  With many wonder dyuers fantaſye,
                  As haue louers that be in poynt to dye.
                  Ryght euen ſo fareth this wofull man,
                  For very wo that no rede ne can.
                  So entryked that wende for to deye,
                  Of his recure he knewe no better weye.
                  And whyle he laye this in his throwes wyte,
                  Lyke as Guydo playnly lyſte endyte,
                  That the ſtory maketh mencyowne.
                  That dayes ſeuen they of Troye towne,
                  So encreſe and augment of the ſorowe,
                  With the grekes metten on euery morowe.
                  That thrugh ye force of alder both their might
                  On outher parte, was ſlayne many a knight.
                  ¶And all this whyle laye this Achylles,
                  Of grekes death ylyke reckeles.
                  For loue onely and toke no maner hede,
                  Who ſo were hole or mortally doth blede.
                  Or who that plaineth with his woundꝭ large
                  Hym thought it was no parcell of his charge.
                  So moche he hath on other thyng to thincke.
                  That ofte he waketh whan he ſhulde wynke▪
                  
                  Thoughtfull aye and ymagynatyfe,
                  And very wery of his owne lyfe.
                  ¶Tyll on a day kyng Agamenon,
                  Seynge the death and deſtruction,
                  On grekes halfe withouten remedye,
                  To Troye ſent by enbaſſadrye,
                  For a trewſe certayne dayes ſpace.
                  But he myght therof haue no grace,
                  Lenger tyme platly to endure.
                  Then for leyſer of the ſepulture,
                  Of worthy knyghtes that were dead aforne.
                  In the fyelde on outher party lorne.
                  Whiche in the Taas full buſyly they ſoughte,
                  And after this plainly how they wrought,
                  Durynge the ſyege with great vyolence,
                  I ſhall deſcryuen with your pacyence.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Achylles ſlewe the worthy Troylus vnknyghtly, & after trayled his body through the fyelde tyed to his horſe. Cap. xxxi.
               
                  THe cruell force and mortall yre,
                  Of martyrs myght alway ſet a fyre,
                  With newe enuye gonne of olde hatrede.
                  Brennyng in hertes hole as any glede,
                  Atwyxe grekes and them of Troye cytye.
                  Whiche lykely is not ſtaunched for to be,
                  Tyll deth conſume with mortall darte,
                  Full many worthy vpon outher parte.
                  To execute alas by fynall fate,
                  On eyther parte the enuious deadly hate,
                  Whiche they ne myght by deſtyne remewe.
                  For it was ſet, it nedely muſt inſewe.
                  And Attropos wyll ſuffer it none other,
                  That mayſtreſſe is & guyder of the rother,
                  Of deathes ſhyp. tyll all goth vnto wrake,
                  And fortune gan tourne her face abake,
                  Of highe diſdayne fro Troye the cytye,
                  As in this ſtory ſhortly ye ſhall ſe.
                  For whan the trewſe that they had ytake,
                  Were wered out they gan them redy make,
                  The proude grekes and into fyelde they gone
                  
                     Vpon a morowe whan Phebus bright ſhone
                  Armed full ſhene eueryche at his deuyſe.
                  ¶And Menelay hath firſt met with Paris,
                  That day in ſtorye as I read.
                  And eche of them ſmytte other of his ſtede.
                  At whiche tyme Dan Pollydamas,
                  ¶To Vlixes rode a ſterne paſe,
                  And eche at other of cruell enmyte,
                  With ſtyffe ſwordes gan together flee.
                  That nouther was of manhode for to wyte,
                  And with a ſpere ſquared for to byte.
                  ¶The myghty Duke called Meneſte,
                  Rode lyne ryght that all myght it ſe,
                  To Anthenor the Troyan full of pryde.
                  And from his ſadell caſte hym downe aſyde.
                  In his furye and his hatefull tene,
                  And tho in haſte come kyng Phylomene,
                  Only in helpe of them of the towne,
                  And gan aſſayle kyng Agamenowne,
                  Through his knyghthode and his hardineſſe
                  That he hym had brought in great diſtreſſe,
                  To vtter myſchyefe and confuſyon,
                  ¶Ne had be only that kyng Thelamon,
                  Full proudely came hym for to reſkewe.
                  And after ſore gan for to purſewe,
                  With a ſpere vpon Phelomene,
                  And for his horſe he layde hym on the grene,
                  Maugre his force the ſtory telleth thus.
                  For he to hym was mortally yrous.
                  And after that yonge Archylogus,
                  A mortall courſe ran vnto Brumius,
                  One of the ſonnes of Pryamus the kynge,
                  Yonge and delyuer and beſte in lykyng.
                  But he hym ſmytte with ſo great a myght,
                  That he fell dead this freſhe luſty knyght,
                  The death of whom whā they of Troy eſpye,
                  They made a ſhoute and pyteouſly gan crye,
                  Of wofull routhe and his death complayne.
                  Tyll the noyſe gan vtterly attayne,
                  To Troylus eares platly where he rode.
                  And he no lenger after that abode,
                  But to the place felly gan approche,
                  And with his ſworde for to ſette a broche,
                  Without routhe the grekes hatefull bloud,
                  And mercyles all that hym withſtode,
                  He ſlewe that daye by cruell auenture.
                  That greke was none yt which might endure
                  Tofore his ſworde he gan them ſo oppreſſe.
                  For of knyghthode and of hygh proweſſe,
                  He had them put vtterly to flyght,
                  Ne had byn the manhode and the myght,
                  ¶Of Myrmydones which al that longe day,
                  By one aſſent vpon Troylus lay.
                  Wherof he was full melancolyus.
                  And of courage and manhode moſte famous,
                  He ne lyſte no longer for to lette,
                  But all attones vpon them he ſette,
                  And furyouſly gan amonge thē ryde,
                  And ſome he ſmote euen through the ſyde,
                  Through the body and ſome through ye herte.
                  And wt his ſworde thrugh doublet & the ſhert
                  Through ſhelde & plate, and thrugh haberion
                  He perccd hath and lyke a wood lyon,
                  He ſlewe that day of them many one.
                  That maugre them they fledde eueryche.
                  With the grekes eueryche to his tent.
                  ¶And they of Troy after them he went.
                  Swyftly on horſe tyll they haue them take.
                  And ſuch a ſlaught of grekes ther they make,
                  That fynally there was a bette reſkuſe,
                  But only death ſo paſſyngly confuſe,
                  The grekes were at myſchyefe deſolate,
                  Troylus ſo narowe brought thē to chekmate
                  That they coulde tho no better remedye,
                  But hydouſly for to wayle and crye,
                  To death forwounded with a griſely chere.
                  ¶That Achylles whan he gan fyrſt to here,
                  The dredefull noyſe and the wofull ſowne,
                  That cauſed was by reflectiowne,
                  Of eyre agayne who ſo coulde it knowe,
                  In rochys harde and in kauernes lowe,
                  Lyke as it were one worde ſpoke of two,
                  That men are wont to callen an Ecco.
                  So confuſe was the lamentaciowne,
                  On grekes ſyde of whiche the deadly ſowne,
                  So pyteouſly to Achylles is ronne,
                  Of them that lay agayne the hote ſonne,
                  With mortall woundes yeldyng vp the breth,
                  With roumble & ſwowhe reſownyng into deth
                  Such a noyſe grekes maden there.
                  And what it ment Achylles dyd enquere.
                  And what the cauſe was of their clamour,
                  And they him tolde for lacke of ſocour,
                  The grekes were eche in his tentorye,
                  ¶Of Troylus ſlayne. ſo that the victorye,
                  Goth fynally with them of Troye towne,
                  For euermore in concluſyowne,
                  So many greke ſlayne laye in his tent,
                  
                     Gapynge vpwarde wt his bloud yſpent,
                  Through the conſtreynt of his wounde ſmert
                  ¶And whyle Achilles gan their caſe aduerte
                  Full ſodaynely there came to hym a man,
                  The whiche his tale euen thus began.
                  Alas quod he how may ye thus ſuſtene,
                  To ſe your men hereupon the grene,
                  Afore your face ſlayne and lye deade.
                  And lyſte not ones for to take hede,
                  But ſtande ſtyll penſyfe in your tent.
                  Vpon the poynt your ſelfe to be ſhent.
                  In haſty houre yf ye here abyde.
                  For fyfty thouſande knyghtes here beſyde,
                  Redy armed in plates and in mayle,
                  Caſte them playnly you for to aſſayle,
                  This no doubte vnarmed as ye ſtande.
                  But ye of knyghthode manly take on hande,
                  Them to reſyſte in this ſelfe place,
                  And lyke a man to meten in the face.
                  ¶For whiche anone in a cruell mode,
                  This Achylles lyke as he were woode,
                  Hath armed hym fomyng as a bore,
                  Farewell his loue he ſette of it no ſtore.
                  Of haſty hete his yre was ſo kene.
                  ¶That he forgat fayre Pollycene,
                  And her beaute yt whylom made him ſmert.
                  And in a rage vp anone he ſtarte,
                  And toke his ſtede as any Lyon wroth,
                  Agayne Troyans and into fyelde he goth.
                  Lyke a wolfe that is with hunger gnawe,
                  Ryght ſo gan he agayne his foen to drawe.
                  And where he rode without excepciowne,
                  He woundeth ſleeth killeth and bereth downe
                  Now here now there in a lyttle throwe,
                  That they of Troy gan his ſworde to knowe
                  Whiche was infecte of newe with their bloud
                  For there was none as yet yt him withſtode,
                  So mortally he gan aboute hym layne,
                  The dead bodyes enlonge the playne,
                  ¶Tyll caſually Troylus gan eſpye,
                  This Achylles as he caſte an eye,
                  And gan his horſe with all his might & payne
                  ¶But Achylles of hym was ware alſo,
                  Smette his ſtede and made hym for to go,
                  Towarde Troylus in the ſelfe tyde,
                  And with full courſe as they together ryde,
                  Full lyne ryght their ſperes ſharpe whette,
                  With ſuche a myght they haue together mette
                  Of hyghe dyſdayne there is no more to ſayne
                  That to the grounde they felle both tway
                        ••
                     
                  
                  ¶But Achylles caught hath ſuche a wounde
                  In his body depe and ſo profounde,
                  That longe he lay myn auctour ſaith certain,
                  Or he to helth reſtored was agayne.
                  ¶And Troilus eke thrugh plates maile & al
                  As wryte Guydo had a wounde ſmall.
                  Whiche vnto hym dyd no greunaunce.
                  And thus that daye by contynuaunce,
                  And dayes ſyxe ſuynge by and by,
                  The proude grekes mette cruelly,
                  Amyd the fyelde them of Troye towne.
                  To great damage and confuſyowne,
                  Of outher partye playnely this no nay.
                  For many worthy ſlayne was day by day.
                  In their rancour and hertye hoote enuye,
                  Albe Guydo doth not ſpecyfye,
                  None of theyr names playnely in this boke,
                  As ye ſhall fynde yf ye lyſte to loke.
               
               
                  ANd al this whyle for this ſodeine thinge
                  Penſyfe & tryſte was Pryamꝰ the kyng
                  That Achylles tourned hath ſo clene,
                  His luſte awaye from yonge Pollycene.
                  And for this chaunge ſo ſodeyne and ſo newe
                  Thought his beheſtes were not all trewe.
                  ¶But on deceyte and on doubleneſſe.
                  On fraude falſly and newe fangelneſſe.
                  On ſleyghty treaſon an vncouert gyle,
                  Or rage of loue that laſteth but a whyle.
                  Was vtterly founde in his beheſte.
                  For lyke as a wynde that no man may areſte
                  Faceth a worde diſcordaunt fro the dede,
                  Of whiche a wyſe man take ſhall no hede.
                  But lette paſſe as he were reckeleſſe.
                  For albeit that this Achylles,
                  Was whylom caught within loues ſnare,
                  Hym lyſte not nowe ones for to ſpare,
                  Of hygh rancour his lady to offende.
                  It was not lyke as they of Troye wende.
                  Hecuba nouther yet Pollycene,
                  And in an angre and gan her to abreyde,
                  That ſhe her truſte ſo entyerly hath leyde.
                  On Achylles that can ſo falſly mene.
                  Wherfore full tryſte was this Pollycene.
                  That was enclyned with her eyen clere,
                  By the counſayle of her mother dere,
                  ¶To haue be wedded to Achylles.
                  To fyne onely there ſhulde haue be a peace,
                  
                     Atwene grekes and them of Troy towne,
                  But all was falſe inconcluſyowne.
                  ¶In the fyne was the trouthe yſene,
                  For whan Achylles of his woundes grene,
                  Was fully cured by a certayne day,
                  He gan compaſſe in all that euer he may,
                  And ymagine in his enuyous herte,
                  To be venged of his woundes ſmerte.
                  Vpon Troylus thot ſtacke aye in his mynde.
                  At auauntage if he myght hym fynde.
                  To hym he bare ſo paſſyngly hatrede,
                  In his herte brennynge as the glede.
                  Whiche day nor nyght may in no degree,
                  Fully be queynt tyll he auenged be,
                  The hoote rancour gan ſo on hym gnawe.
                  Auyſed platly that he ſhall beſlawe,
                  Of his handes whan ſo that it be falle.
                  And on a day to hym he gan calle,
                  Myrmydones his knightes euerychone,
                  Vpon a morowe whan the grekes gone,
                  Tofore the towne in ſtele armed bryght,
                  Agayne Troyans of purpoſe for to fyght.
                  And they were come proudely into fielde,
                  In oppoſyte with many ryche ſhelde.
                  Newly depeynt with colours freſhe & fyne,
                  Vpon whiche full bryght gan to ſhyne,
                  Fyry Titan golde treſſed in his ſphere,
                  At his vpryſte with his beames clere.
                  Whan this felle enuyous Achylles,
                  To his knightes called Myrmydones,
                  ¶Vpon Troylus gan hym to complayne.
                  Beſechynge them for to do theyr payne,
                  Agayne this Troylus in the fielde that daye.
                  To catche hym at myſchyefe if they may.
                  And buſyly to do their dylygence,
                  On him to haue their full aduertence,
                  By one aſſent where that he ryde.
                  All other thynge for to ſette aſyde.
                  And of nought elles for to take hede.
                  Saufe fynally agayne hym to procede,
                  If ſo they myght catche hym in a trappe.
                  Within them ſelfe troylus for to clappe.
                  To encloſe and ſette hym rounde abouie.
                  In all wyſe that he go not oute,
                  And whan he were beſet amonge them all,
                  Not to ſiea him what euer that be fall.
                  But through their myght manly him cōſerue
                  Tyll he hym ſelfe come and make hym ſterue.
                  With his ſworde he and none other wyght.
                  ¶Lo here a manhode for to preyſe a ryght.
                  Vengeaunce of deth of rancour and of pryde,
                  Compaſſed treaſon knighthode layde aſyde.
                  Worthyneſſe by falſe enuye yſlawe,
                  Falſhede a lofte trouthe a backe ydrawe.
                  Alas in armes that it ſhulde befall.
                  Of trecherye there the bytter galle,
                  Shulde in this world in any knight be foūde
                  That be to trouth of their order bounde.
                  ¶Alas alas for now this Achylles,
                  Conſpyred hath with his Myrmydones.
                  The death of one and yt the worthyeſt wight,
                  That euer was and eke the beſte knyght.
                  Alas for wo my herte I fele deade,
                  For his ſake this ſtorye whan I rede.
                  But whan fortune hath a thynge ordeyned,
                  Though it be euer wayled and compleyned,
                  There is no gayne nor no remedye,
                  Though men on it galen aye and crye,
                  I can no more touchynge this mattere,
                  But wryte forth lyke as ye ſhall here.
                  How Myrmydones haue their lord behyght,
                  With all their power and their full myght,
                  To fulfyll his commaundement.
                  And into fielde with grekes they be went.
                  ¶But Troylus fyrſt in the oppoſyte,
                  Without abode manly them to mete,
                  He was ybrent with ſo feruent hete,
                  Of hardyneſſe and of hyghe courage.
                  Of worthyneſſe and of vaſſelage.
                  That him ne lyſte no longer to abyde,
                  But with his folke in began to ryde,
                  Amonge grekes this folke of hyghe renowne
                  And wt his ſword he woūdeth & bereth downe
                  Sleeth and kylleth vpon euery haiue,
                  So mortally that there may no ſalue,
                  Their ſores ſounde for there was but death,
                  Where ſo he rode and yeldyng vp the breth,
                  So furyouſly he gan them to enchaſe.
                  And made them leſe in a lyttell ſpace,
                  Their lande echone and afore him flee.
                  In Troylus ſworde there was ſuche cruelte.
                  That maugre them he the fielde hath wonne
                  The ſame tyme whan the bryght ſonne,
                  Hye in the ſouthe at mydday marke ſhone.
                  Euen at the houre when it drewe to noone.
                  When Myrmydones gathred all in one,
                  In compaſſe wyſe rounde aboute hym gone.
                  And furyouſly of one entenciowne,
                  
                     They made a cercle about him enuyrowne.
                  When they hym ſawe of helpe deſolate,
                  But he of herte not dyſconſolate.
                  Vpon no ſyde through his manlyhead,
                  Lyke a Lyon toke of theym no hede.
                  But through his famous knyghtly excellēce,
                  He as a Tygre ſtandeth at diffence.
                  And manfully gan them to encomber,
                  And gan to leſſe and dyſcreaſe their nomber,
                  And ſome he maymeth & woūdeth to ye death,
                  And ſome he made to yelden vp the breath.
                  And ſome he layde to the earthe lowe,
                  And ſome he made for to ouerthrowe,
                  Wyth hys ſwerde of theyr bloud all wete.
                  At great myſchyefe vnder his horſe fete.
                  Vpon his ſtede ſturdy as a wall.
                  This worthy knyght this man moſt mercial
                  Pleyeth his play amonge Myrmydones,
                  Hym ſelfe god wot alone all helples.
                  ¶But tho alas what might his force auayle
                  When thre thouſande knightes him aſſayle.
                  On euery parte both in lengthe and brede,
                  And cowardly fyrſt they ſlewe his ſtede.
                  With their ſperes ſharpe & ſo ſquare ygroūd.
                  For whych alas he ſtante now on ye grounde.
                  Wythout reſkuſe refute or ſocoure,
                  That was that daye of chyualrye the floure.
                  But well awaye they haue him ſo beſet,
                  That from his head they ſmote his baſenet.
                  And brake his harueys as they hym aſſaile,
                  And ſeuer of ſtele the myghty ſtronge mayle.
                  He was dyſarmed both necke and alſo heade,
                  Alas the whyle & no wyght toke none hede.
                  Of all his knyghtes longynge to the towne.
                  And yet alway this Troyan champyowne,
                  In knyghtly wyſe naked as he was,
                  ¶Hym ſelfe defendeth. tyll Achylles alas,
                  Came rydynge in furyous and wood,
                  And whā he ſawe howe that Troylus ſtode,
                  Of longe fyghtynge awhaped and a mate,
                  And from his folkes alone diſconſolate,
                  Sole by hym at myſchyefe pyteouſly,
                  This Achylles wonder cruelly,
                  Behynde vnwarely or that he toke hede,
                  With his ſwerde ſmyteth of his heade.
                  And caſt it forthe of cruell curſed herte,
                  And thought ſure it ſhould hym not aſterte.
                  To ſhewe his malice this wolfe vnmercyable
                  Full vnknyghtly to be more vengeable.
                  Vpon the body that dead laye and colde,
                  Alas that euer it ſhould of knyght be tolde,
                  Wryte or reherſed to do ſo foule a deede,
                  Or in a boke alas that men ſhall rede,
                  Of any knyght a ſtorye ſo horryble.
                  Vnto the eares paſſyngly odyble.
                  For this Achilles of crueltye alas,
                  The dead corps toke out of the taas,
                  And vengeably bonde it as I fynde,
                  At the tayle of his horſe behynde.
                  And hatefully that euery wyght behelde,
                  Drewe it him ſelfe endlonge the felde.
                  Through the renges and the wardes all.
                  But Oh alas that euer it ſhould fall.
                  A knyght to be in herte ſo cruell.
                  Or of hatred ſo ſpytefull and ſo fell,
                  To drawe a man after he were deade.
               
               
                  OH thou Homer for ſhame be now red,
                  And ye amaſe yt holdeſt thy ſelfe ſo wyſe,
                  On Achylles to ſet ſuche great a pryſe.
                  In thy bokes for his chyualrye.
                  Aboue echone that doſt hym magnyfye.
                  That was ſo ſleyghty and ſo full of fraude,
                  Why geueſt thou him ſo hye a prayſe & laude.
                  ¶Certys Homer for all thy excellence,
                  Of Rethoryke and ſugred eloquence,
                  Thy luſty ſonges and thy dytees ſwete,
                  Thy hony mouth that doth wyth ſugre flete,
                  Yet in one thynge thou greatly art to blame.,
                  Cauſeles to gyue hym ſuche a name,
                  With tytle ſuche of tryumphe and glorye,
                  So paſſyngely to put in memorye,
                  In thy bookes to ſaye and wryte ſo,
                  that he thrugh knighthod ſlain hath Hectors two.
                  Firſt him yt was lyke vnto none other,
                  ¶And ſithꝭ Troilus yt was his owne brother
                  If thou arte meued of affection,
                  Whych that thou haſt to Grekes nacion,
                  To preyſe him ſo for thou cauſt endyte.
                  Thou ſhouldeſt aye for any fauour wryte,
                  The trouthe playnly and be indyfferent,
                  And ſaye the ſothe clerely of entente.
                  ¶For when he ſlewe Hector in the felde,
                  He was afore diſarmed of his ſhelde.
                  And buſy eke in ſpoylynge of a kynge.
                  For yf he had beware of his comynge.
                  He had hym quyt through his chyualrye.
                  His falſe deceyt and his trecherye,
                  
                     That he ne had ſo lyghtly from him gone.
                  ¶Alſo Troylus naked and alone,
                  Amyd thre thouſand cloſed and yſhet,
                  ¶When Achilles hath his head of ſmet,
                  At his backe of full cruell herte.
                  When he nothing his treaſon dyd aduerte.
                  ¶Was that a dede of a manly knyght.
                  To ſlee a man forweryed in the fyght,
                  Faynt of trauayle all the longe daye,
                  Amonge ſo many ſtandynge at a baye,
                  A kynges ſonne and ſo hye borne,
                  Naked the head his armure all to torne.
                  Euen at the death on the ſelfe poynt,
                  At great myſchyefe and playnly out of ioynt,
                  Of his lyfe ſtandynge on the wrake.
                  ¶When Achilles came falſly at the bake,
                  Aſſaylynge hym when he was halfe deade,
                  And lyke a cowarde ſmote of then his heade.
                  That was tofore hurte and wounded ſore.
                  ¶Wherfor Homer ne praiſe him not therfore
                  Let not his preaſe thy royall booke difface,
                  But in all haſte his renowne outrace.
                  For here his name when I here it neuen,
                  Veryly vp to the thirde heauen,
                  As ſemeth me infecte is the eyre.
                  The ſowne therof ſo foule is and vnfayre.
                  For if that he had vſed aduertence,
                  Other the eye of his prouydence,
                  Vnto knyghthod or his worthyneſſe.
                  Other to manhode or to gentylleſſe,
                  Or to the renowne of his owne name,
                  Or to the reporte of his knyghtly fame,
                  In any wyſe to haue taken hede,
                  He hadde neuer done ſo foule a dede,
                  So vengeably for to haue ydrawe,
                  A kynges ſonne after he was ſlawe.
                  And namely hym that was ſo good a knight.
                  Whyche in his tyme who ſo loke aryght,
                  Paſſed Achylles I dare it well expreſſe.
                  Both of manhode and of gentylneſſe.
                  But for all that he is nowe dead alas.
                  ¶The death of whom when Pollydamas,
                  And Parys eke fyrſt gan eſpye,
                  They fared in ſothe as they woulden dye.
                  And ſpecyally wyth face dead and fade,
                  ¶Parys alas ſuche inly ſorowe made,
                  For the conſtreynt of his deadly wo,
                  When he ſawe well that Troylus was ago,
                  And that he ſhall in lyfe him neuer ſe.
                  Suche ſorowe alſo the Troyan Dan Enee,
                  For hym hath made and many other mo,
                  That all at ones they togyther go,
                  The dead corps to recure if they maye.
                  ¶But grekes were ſo fell on them that daye,
                  That all theyr haſte was vtterly in vayne.
                  In any wyſe the corps to get agayne.
                  Tyll that Menon the noble worthy kynge,
                  Whych loued Troylus ouer all thynge,
                  Caught ſuch routhe of affection,
                  That he in haſte fearſer than a Lyon,
                  On his death caſt him to be wreake.
                  And fyrſt for Ire thus he gan to ſpeake.
                  To Achylles for all his hye treaſowne,
                  Oh thou Tratoure, Oh thou Scorpyowne,
                  Oh thou Serpent full of Trecherye,
                  Whych in diſhonour of all chyualrye,
                  Through falſe engyne haſt this daye yſlawe,
                  The onely beſt that here hadde no felowe,
                  When he was whylom in this worlde alyue.
                  Alas alas who maye aryght deſeryue,
                  Thy venym hyd thy malice and vntrouthe.
                  Wythout pyte or any knyghtly routhe.
                  To drawe a knyght ſo gentyll and ſo good,
                  A kynges ſonne of ſo worthy bloud,
                  Through out ye feld at thy horſe tale behynde,
                  That euer after it ſhalbe in mynde,
                  This cruell dede and vngentylneſſe.
                  ¶And wyth yt word Menon gan him dreſſe,
                  Towarde Achylles wythout more areſte,
                  And wyth a ſpere ſmet him in the breſt,
                  Enuyouſly of ſo great hatrede,
                  That he vnneth kepte him on his ſtede,
                  And Menon after pulled out a ſwerde,
                  And caſt hym manly to mete him in the berde,
                  And rode to him fully deuoyde of dreade,
                  And ſuche a wound he gaue him on the head,
                  That maugre him in many mannes ſyght,
                  To the earthe he made him to alyght.
                  For all his pryde in a mortall traunce.
                  And of that wound he felt ſuch greuaunce,
                  That at the death he laye an huge whyle,
                  In a ſwowne the ſpace of halfe a myle,
                  Tyll Myrmydones aſſembled into one,
                  With great laboure and hente him vp anone.
                  Full deadly pale ſo he gan to blede,
                  But for all that they ſet him on his ſtede,
                  And at the laſt his hert he caught agayne,
                  And ſmet his horſe of hate and hye diſdayne,
                  
                     And towarde Menon faſt gan him hye.
                  But when that he his cominge gan eſpye,
                  Full lyke a knyght lyſt not to abyde,
                  But hit his horſe ſharply in the ſyde,
                  And mette Achilles proudly on the playne,
                  And wyth theyr ſwordes they togither layne,
                  And gan to hurtle on horſe backe tho yfere,
                  Wyth herte enuyous and deſpytous chere.
                  ¶But kynge Menon was at auauntage,
                  Of Achylles for all his wood rage,
                  In poynt to abrought him to confuſyowne,
                  Tyll yt the wardes of newe be comen downe.
                  On other parte both of theſe and yonder,
                  Whych ſodaynly ſeuered them aſonder.
                  And as the ſtory telleth playnly than,
                  Began the ſlaughter of many manly man.
                  For nother party the felde ne would leue,
                  Of very pryde tyll it drewe to eue.
                  That Phebus gan aſwage of his hete,
                  And gan to bathe in the wawes wete,
                  His bryght beames of the Occyan.
                  That fro the felde home goth euery man,
                  To theyr lodginge and after ſeuen dayes,
                  They faught yfere & made no more delayes.
                  ¶Full mortall by cruell aduenture,
                  Whyle Achylles full buſy was to cure,
                  His woundes grene and his ſores ſounde.
                  And then he had a newe treaſon founde,
                  To be venged vpon kynge Menon,
                  For all his wytte he ſette thervpon.
                  And ſo this cruell enuyous Achilles,
                  Ycharged hath his Myrmydones,
                  Worthy Menon amonge theim to enbrace.
                  If they hym founde of opportune in place.
                  With all theyr might and theyr buſy thought,
                  From theyr handes that he eſcape nought.
                  Tyll he hym ſelfe auenged on hym be.
                  ¶And ſo befell as they Menon ſe,
                  The nexte morowe lyke a manly knyght,
                  Agayne the Grekes armed for to fyght,
                  On Troye ſyde as he was wonte to do,
                  Of auenture that daye yt fell ſo,
                  That Achilles and this Menon mette,
                  And eche of theim gan on other ſette,
                  On horſe backe wyth full great emiye.
                  When as ſo longe in theyr melancolye,
                  Mine auctour wryt they togyther fyght,
                  That eche made other of force to alyght.
                  ¶And whan Menon ſtode vpon ye grounde▪
                  
                  Myrmydones wente aboute him rounde,
                  As they were charged of the fyerſe Achylle,
                  When he alas wythout goddes wylle,
                  Dyſſeuered was from his knyghtes all.
                  And at myſchyefe they vpon him fall,
                  Deſtitute alone and helples,
                  And in ſuche poynt ſlewe him Achylles.
                  But in the ſtory lyke as it is founde,
                  This Menon fyrſt gaue him ſuch a wounde,
                  Tofore his death in all this fell ſtryfe,
                  That he dyſpeyred was as of his lyfe,
                  This Achylles for all his falſe treaſon.
                  Take hede Homer and demeth in thy reaſon,
                  The falſe fraude and the ſleyghty gyle,
                  The treaſon caſte afore wyth many wyle,
                  Of Achylles and iudge now a ryght,
                  If euer he ſlewe any worthy knyght.
                  But if yt were by preodycyon.
                  Recorde I take of the kynge Menon.
                  So that the tytle of his laude alas,
                  Entriked is wyth fraude and with fallace.
                  ¶That thou Homer mayſt with no coloure,
                  Though thou paynte with gold & wt aſoure,
                  In thy wrytynge his venym not encloſe,
                  But as the thorne hyd vnder the roſe,
                  Whoſe malyce aye dareth by the roote,
                  Though the floure aboue fayre and ſoote,
                  That men the fraude vnder may not ſe,
                  Of his treaſon ye get no more of me.
               
               
                  BVt I wyll tell how Grekes do that day,
                  How Meneſte and kynge Menelay,
                  Dyomede and Thelamonyus,
                  On Troyans were paſſyng deſpytous.
                  For cruelly wyth theyr wardes all,
                  In theyr myſchyefe be vpon them fall,
                  And made theim flee home vnto the towne,
                  For whylom Troylus chyefe champyowne,
                  Is deade alas and hath them nowe forſake.
                  Of whom they haue the dead body take,
                  The ſame daye with great difficulte,
                  And dolefully they into the Cyte,
                  Haue tho it brought crying oft alas,
                  And for his death ſuch a wo there was,
                  That I trowe there is no man alyue,
                  Whych could aryght halfe dele deſcriue,
                  Theyr pyteous wo nor lamentacyowne,
                  
                     Certeyſe not Boys that hath ſuche renowne
                  With drery wordes to be wepe and crye,
                  ¶In complaynynge to Phyloſophye,
                  Throughe his boke accuſynge aye fortune,
                  That ſelde or nought can in one contune.
                  She is ſo full of tranſmutaciowne.
                  Oh ſtace of Thebes make no boſt nor ſowne
                  Of dreryneſſe for to wryte at all,
                  Nother of death nor feſtes funerall,
                  Of makynge ſorowe nor aduerſyte,
                  ¶Let be thy wepynge oh thou Nyobe,
                  ¶Ye ſyſter alſo of Ayeliager,
                  That cuſtome haue for to flee ſo fer.
                  Fro yere to yere your brother to complayne.
                  And thou that wepteſt out thine eyen twaine
                  Oedippus kyng of Thebes the cyte,
                  Thou wofull Myrrha and Calyxtone.
                  That ſo well can in rage you bemene.
                  And Dydo eke whylome of Cartage quene.
                  Lette be your dole and your contrycyon.
                  ¶And Phyllys eke for thy Dymophon.
                  ¶And eke Cecho that newe doſt begyn,
                  To crye and wayle. and alſo thou Corynne,
                  That whylom were in ſo great affray,
                  For death onely of thy Popyngay.
                  As in his boke telleth vs Ouyde.
                  Let all this wo now be layde aſyde,
                  And make of it no compariſowne,
                  Vnto the wo that was in Troye towne.
                  For death onely of this worthy knyght,
                  For loue of whom euery maner wyght,
                  Hygh and lowe olde and yonge of age,
                  Are falle of newe into ſuche a rage,
                  That they ne coulde of their wo none ende.
                  Whoſe ſalte teares wyll their eyen ſhende.
                  So pyteous was the lamentaciowne,
                  In euery ſtrete throughout all the towne,
                  Alas who coulde all their ſorowes telle.
                  ¶I trowe certeys Pluto depe in helle.
                  For all his torment and his paynes kene,
                  Nouther ſhe Proſerpyna his quene,
                  Nother the wery wood Tycius,
                  Iryon nor hungry Tantalus,
                  Ne coulde not well for all their bytter peyne,
                  So furyouſly wepen and complayne,
                  As do troyans Troylus for thy ſake.
                  For who can nowe ſuche a ſorowe make,
                  ¶Or who can wepe as kyng Pryamus.
                  Who wepeth now with face full pyteous,
                  Or ſorowe maketh. but Hecuba the quene,
                  ¶Who wepeth now but fayre Pollycene,
                  Who wepeth nowe but Parys and Heleyne,
                  Who can now wepe into teares reyne,
                  As Troyans do with deadly ſwole chere.
                  It neded them no wepers for to hyer.
                  They had ynough of their owne ſtore.
                  Alas for nowe they be for euermore,
                  Of helpe all ſole of comforte deſtytute.
                  For who ſhall nowe be to them refute.
                  ¶Nowe that Hector and alſo Deyphobus,
                  And Troylus eke that was ſo vertuous,
                  Be dead alas who ſhall their ſuccour be.
                  Or helpe ſuſtene the werre of there Cyte,
                  There is no more in concluſyon,
                  But after death fully deſtruction.
                  Of theyr towres and their walles ſtronge,
                  In this matter what ſhulde I playne longe.
                  It vayleth not alway ſo to morne,
                  Wherfore I wyll now agayne retorne,
                  To my matter and tell forth how the kyng,
                  To grekes hath without more taryinge,
                  For a trewſe and a peace yſent.
                  A certayne tyme by great auyſement.
                  Whyche graunted was of Agamenowne,
                  And they ayene repeyred to the towne,
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Parys ſlewe Achylles, and Archylogus Duke Neſtors ſonne, in the Temple of Apollo. Cap. xxxii.
               
                  KYnge Pryamus dyd his buſye cure,
                  For to make a ryche ſepulture,
                  For Troylus corps full noble and royall.
                  As ſayth Guydo of ſtones and metall,
                  And him encloſed of great affection,
                  ¶And nighe beſyde was the kyng Menon.
                  Solempnely buryed and laide in graue.
                  And after that day by day they haue,
                  Lyke the cuſtome of feſte funerall,
                  And other ryghtes ceremonyall,
                  For them bothe with dewe obſeruaunce,
                  Seruyſe done aye by contynuaunce,
                  In their temple lyke as was the guyſe.
                  Whiche were to longe me for to deuyſe.
                  And tedyus eke to you for to dwell.
                  
                     But I purpoſe ceriouſly to tell.
                  Howe Hecuba as I can endyte,
                  Her caſte fully Achylles to requyte,
                  His tirannye ſothly yf ſhe may.
                  And vnto her ſhe calleth on a day,
                  Alexſaunder in full ſecrete wyſe,
                  And vnto hym as I ſhall you deuyſe,
                  With wepynge eyen and full heuy chere,
                  Sayde euen thus as ye ſhall after here.
                  ¶Parys quod ſhe alas ſaue goddes wyll,
                  Thou knoweſt well howe the fyerſe Achylle,
                  My ſonnes hath ſlayne well nye euerychone,
                  There is none lefte but thy ſelfe alone.
                  He hath me made alas there is no gayne,
                  Full cowardly of chyldren now baraine.
                  Both of Hector and Troylus eke therto.
                  Whiche were to me in euery trouble and wo,
                  Fully comforte pleaſaunce and ſolace.
                  Wherfore I caſte playnely to compaſe,
                  By ſome engyne his death to ordayne.
                  And lyke as he by treaſon dyd his payne,
                  Trayterouſly with his ſworde to ſmyte,
                  Ryght ſo I thynke with treaſon him to quite.
                  As ſyttynge is of ryght and equyte.
                  And ſyth thou woteſt platly how that he,
                  Hath ſette his herte and his loue clene,
                  Vpon my doughter yonge Polycene,
                  To fyne onely to haue her vnto wyue.
                  For whiche I caſte to hym ſende blyue,
                  For to come and treate of that mattere.
                  ¶In the temple of Appollo here.
                  In the temple moſte chiefe of this Cyte.
                  At whiche tyme my wyll is that thou be,
                  Thy ſelfe armed there full pryuelye.
                  With certayne knyghtes in thy companye,
                  Armed alſo agayne the ſame daye.
                  That in no wyſe he ne ſcape maye,
                  From your handes but that he be dead.
                  As I haue ſaide and therfore take good hede
                  Vnto this thynge with all my herte I praye.
                  From poynt to poynt my byddyng to obeye.
                  And he aſſenteth with all his hole herte,
                  Behotynge her that he ſhulde not aſterte,
                  And with hym toke twenty and no mo,
                  Of manly men that ryght well durſte do.
                  And in the temple by full good aduyſe,
                  ¶They were yhid by biddynge of Parys.
                  Whyle Hecuba couert in her entente.
                  Her meſſager to Achylles hath ſent,
                  As ye haue herde in concluſyowne.
                  To come in haſte vnto Troye towne.
                  After the effecte whiche was of her myſſage,
                  Onely to treate of a maryage.
                  And he in haſte commeth at her ſonde.
                  As he that coulde nothyng vnderſtonde.
                  Her treaſon hyd nor playnly it aduerte.
                  He was ſo hote marked in his herte,
                  With loues bronde and his fyry glede,
                  Of lyfe nor death that he toke no hede.
                  But ſette a ſyde wytte and all reaſon,
                  To caſte afore by good diſcrecion,
                  What was to do with lokynge full prudent.
                  For he in ſoth was with loue blent,
                  Into Troye whan that he ſhulde gone.
                  Lyke as it fareth of louers euerychone.
                  Whan they haue caught in herte a fantaſye,
                  For no peryll though they ſhulden dye.
                  They haue no myght nor power to beware.
                  Tyll they vnwares be trapped in the ſnare,
                  Their maladye is aye ſo furyous.
                  ¶And thus Achylles and Anthylogus,
                  Neſtors ſonne haue the waye nome,
                  Towarde the towne and be togither come,
                  Into temple as ye haue harde me telle.
                  And Parys tho lyſte no longer dwelle,
                  But all vnwarely with his knyghtes all,
                  On Achylles is at myſchyefe fall,
                  Eueryche of them with a ſworde full bryght,
                  And ſome bokes ſaye it was done by night,
                  Whan his death longe afore deſyred,
                  ¶By Hecuba and Parys was conſpyred.
                  ¶But Achylles in this mortall caſe,
                  Amonge them all naked as he was,
                  Hent out a ſworde in the ſelfe ſteuen,
                  And lyke a knyght he ſlewe of them ſeuen.
                  Of very force mauger all their myght.
                  ¶But whan Parys therof had a ſyght.
                  Thre dartes raught that were kene & ſquare,
                  And ſodeynly are that he was ware,
                  Full ſecretely hyd vnder the ſhade,
                  Markynge at hym and no noyſe made,
                  Caſte at hym euen as euer he can,
                  That head and ſhafte through his body ran,
                  And therwithall knyghtes not a fewe,
                  With ſharpe ſwordes gan vpon hym hewe,
                  And lefte him not tyll he lay at grounde.
                  ¶Full pale dead with many mortall wounde
                  And ryghtfully of reaſon as it ſyt,
                  
                     Thus was the fraude and the falſhed quyt,
                  ¶Of Achylles for his hygh treaſon.
                  As deth for deth is ſkylfully guerdon,
                  And egall mede without any fable,
                  ¶To them that be mercyles vengeable,
                  For thilke daye Guydo wryteth thus,
                  That Achylles and Anthylogus.
                  ¶Of Parys were in the temple ſlawe.
                  And afterwarde the bodye was outdrawe,
                  Of Achylle fro the holy boundes,
                  And cruelly throwen vnto the houndes,
                  To be deuoured in the brode ſtreſte.
                  In canell rennynge of fylthy waters wete.
                  Without pytye or any maner routhe,
                  Lo here the ende of falſhed and vntrouth.
                  Lo here the fyne of ſuche trecherye,
                  Of falſe deceyte compaſſed by enuye,
                  Lo here the knotte and concluſyon,
                  How god aye quytteth ſlaughter by treaſon.
                  Lo here the guerdon and the fynall mede,
                  Of them that ſo delyten in falſhede.
                  For euery thyng platly for to ſayne,
                  Lyke as it is his guerdon doth attayne.
                  As ye may ſe of this Achilles,
                  Whiche on a nyght in the temple les,
                  His lyfe for he was aye cuſtomable,
                  By fraude and treaſon for to be vengeable.
                  ¶But it befell at requeſt of Heleyne,
                  That the bodyes of theſe ylke tweyne,
                  Conſerued were from the hungry rage,
                  Of beſte and foule gredy and ramage.
                  And yet they lay amyddes of the cytye,
                  Full openly that all men myght them ſe,
                  To great gladneſſe of them of the towne.
                  ¶Into tyme that Agamenowne,
                  To kyng Pryam ſent his maſſageres,
                  To haue licenſe to fette them home on beares
                  By graunt of whom they haue the corſes take
                  For whom grekes ſuche a ſorowe make,
                  That pytye was and routh for to here.
                  And eueryche ſpake thus vnto his feare.
                  Farewell our truſte nowe Achylles is dede,
                  Farewell our hope and hooly all our ſpede.
                  Farewell our ioye and our chiefe diffence,
                  That hadde in manhode ſo great excellence.
                  Farewell alas our ſouerayne aſſuraunce,
                  Farewell in knighthode all our ſuffyſaunce.
                  For now alas vnlykely is that we,
                  Shall euer wynne or getten this Cite.
                  To vs alas ſo frowarde is fortune,
                  But that they myghten not contune,
                  Alway in wo nor in payne endure,
                  They cauſed to make a ryche Sepulture.
                  To Achylles of ſtones precyous.
                  ¶And an other to Anthylogus.
                  What ſhulde I now any longer dwell,
                  Ceryouſly the rytes for to telle,
                  Of their buryinge nor what wo they make,
                  Their wepynge all nor of their clothes blake.
                  Nor how that ſome loure in their hode,
                  And how ſome go with mylke and bloud,
                  With dolefull herte and into fyre it ſhete.
                  And how that other caſten gummes ſwete,
                  Amydde the great flaumes funerall.
                  Nor of the playes called palleſtrall.
                  Nor of the wraſtlynge that was at the wake,
                  It were but vayne me to vndertake,
                  To tellen all wherfore I will lette be.
                  Fully in purpoſe lyke as ye ſhall ſe,
                  To reſorte as in concluſyon,
                  To tellen how the great Agamenon,
                  For his lordes in all the haſte hath ſent,
                  And when they were aſſembled in his tent,
                  Full prudently this kyng this manly man,
                  With great aduyſe thus he his tale began.
               
               
                  SYres quod he fortunes varyaunce,
                  Her chere froward & double countenance,
                  And ſodeyne tourne of her falſe vyſage,
                  Your hertes hath put in ſuche arage,
                  For the murdre to god and man odyble,
                  ¶Of Achylles and the death horryble,
                  By compaſſynge of Hecuba the quene.
                  Now ſemeth me that it ſhall be ſene.
                  If any manhode in your hertes be.
                  Or knightly force in aduerſytye,
                  For to endure by vertue of ſuffraunce.
                  Tyll of his death ye taken may vengeaunce.
                  And manly quyte this outragious offence.
                  Whan time cometh to make full recompence.
                  But ſyth that ye be manly and prudent,
                  I wolde fyrſt ſe the playne entent.
                  In this matter of you that be ſo wyſe.
                  And hereupon what is your aduyſe.
                  By one aſſent and voyce in comune,
                  Whether ye wyll the werre forth contune,
                  And the ſyege ygonne vpon this towne,
                  Tyll they be brought to deſtructiowne.
                  
                     Or into grece now reſorte agayne.
                  For cauſe only that Achylles is ſlayne.
                  That whilom was your ſtrong champiowne
                  Your diſtence and chiefe protectiowne.
                  But fynally now that he is dead,
                  Hereupon let ſe what is your reade.
                  Saye openly and no longer tarye,
                  ¶And ſome anone gonne for to varye,
                  And to grutche caſtynge to and fro,
                  Standynge in doute what were beſte to do.
                  ¶And ſome ſayde on the tother ſyde,
                  For lyfe or death they wolde an ende abyde.
                  And ſome of them that of wytte were rude,
                  For their partye gonnen to conclude,
                  That they wolde efte home agayne retourne.
                  And other ſayd that they wyll ſoiourne,
                  Styll at the ſyege happe what happe may.
                  And thus they treate all the longe day,
                  Euery man lyke his opynyon.
                  Tyll at the laſte in concluſyon,
                  They be accorded fully into one,
                  Fro the ſyege neuer for to gone,
                  Vnto the tyme they haue of the towne,
                  Through their knyghthode full poſſeſſyowne
                  At their free wyll to ſpylle or elles to ſaue.
                  Albe Achylles buryed was in graue.
                  For the truſte of euery worthy knyght,
                  Was fynally as goddes haue behyght,
                  That they in haſte ſhall the towne poſſede.
                  This was their hope fully deuoyde of drede.
                  Vndiſpeyred in their opynyon.
                  ¶And then anone Ayax Thelamon,
                  A worthy knyght and famous of his hande,
                  Amonge all tho that were of grekes londe,
                  Sayde euen thus playnly in ſentence.
                  ¶Syres quod he that here be in preſence,
                  My counſayle is platly and my rede,
                  Now it ſtandeth ſo that Achylles is dead,
                  For his ſonne in all the haſte to ſende.
                  Hyther to come for to ſe an ende,
                  Of the ſyege and helpe vs in this nede.
                  ¶Whiche nowe abyt with kynge Lycomede,
                  His byſayle and named is Pirrus.
                  And ſome hym call Neptolonyus.
                  Ryght luſty freſhe and by lykelyneſſe,
                  Able to attayne to great worthyneſſe,
                  As by reporte and the fame is kouthe.
                  If he drawe hym to armes in his youth.
                  ¶And ſothfaſtly but yf bokes lye,
                  As I haue redde and herde by prophecye,
                  That fynally Troye the Cyte,
                  Without hym ſhall neuer wonne be.
                  Thus bokes ſaye that be of olde memorye.
                  And howe grekes ſhall haue no victorye,
                  Tyll he come this ſonne of Achylles.
                  Wherfore in haſte and be not reckeles,
                  Sende for hym that it be done anone.
                  And they commende his counſaile euerichone
                  And to his reade fully them aſſent,
                  And by aduiſe full prudently they ſente,
                  In all the haſte on this embaſſyat,
                  The wyſe kynge full famous of eſtate,
                  I meane the prudent noble Menelay,
                  And forth he goeth the ſelfe ſame day,
                  And on his iourney gan hym faſte ſpede.
                  ¶Tyll that he came vnto Lycomede.
                  The olde kynge as ye haue harde me telle,
                  Where for a tyme I wyll lette him dwelle,
                  ¶And to Grekes in the meane whyle,
                  So as I can derecte againe my ſtyle.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Parys and Thelamon Ayax, ſlewe eche other in the fylde. Cap. xxxiii.
               
                  THe tyme of yere when the ſhene ſonne,
                  In the Crabbe had his courſe yronne,
                  To the hygheſt of his aſcencyon.
                  Whiche called is the ſomer ſtacyon.
                  Whan the vertue out of euery roote,
                  Is drawen vp and the bawme ſoote,
                  Into the croppe and the freſhe floure,
                  Moſt luſty is of hewe and of coloure.
                  Tyll Phebus chare in his diſcencion,
                  Out of the Crabbe towarde the Lyon,
                  Holdeth his courſe in the fyrmament.
                  I meane whan he is retrogradyent.
                  And dryeth vp the moyſture and the wete,
                  Of herbe and floure with his feruent hete.
                  And all that veer afore hym made grene,
                  To white he tourneth with his beames ſhene
                  Both ſede and grayne by decoction,
                  For naturally by dygeſtyon,
                  That fyrſt was rawe in fruites & in floures,
                  And watry eke by plente of humoures,
                  He dryeth vp and rypeth at the full,
                  With his feruence that men may them pull.
                  Eche in his kynde after the ſeaſon,
                  Fro yeare to yeare by reuolucyon.
                  
                     On their braunches freſhely as they ſprede,
                  Whan that Cheryes powbly be and rede.
                  ¶Firſt in Iune that ſeweth after Maye,
                  Whan the hote mery ſomers daye,
                  No dwery is but lyke a gyaunt longe.
                  The ſame tyme grekes ſtoute and ſtronge,
                  With rancour brent of their enuyous hete,
                  Haue ſhapen them with their foen to mete,
                  And bryght armed into fyelde they go,
                  And they of Troye out of the towne alſo,
                  And their wardes ordeyned euerychone,
                  The fyelde haue take to meten with their foen
                  And gan to aſſemble vpon outher ſyde.
                  ¶But Thelamon of foly and of pryde,
                  The ſame daye of hym as I reade,
                  As he that had of his death no dread,
                  Diſarmed was for battayle of areſt.
                  Of mayle and plate bare vpon his breſt,
                  For of foly and ſurquedons outrage,
                  Bare his heade and bare of his vyſage.
                  And bare alſo without baſenet,
                  And naked eke of vyſer and palet.
                  He rode all daye of nothynge tho aferde,
                  Hauynge no weapon but a naked ſworde,
                  For wylfully he lefte at home his ſhelde,
                  And his ſpere when he toke the fyelde.
                  Full lyke a knight ſyttynge on his ſtede,
                  ¶And after hym foloweth Dyomede.
                  Lyke Mars hym ſelfe about hym his meyne,
                  And faſte by came the duke of Meneſte,
                  Kyng Vlixes and Agamenon.
               
               
                  ANd Pryamus wt them of Troy towne,
                  Toke eke the fyelde wt a full heuy chere,
                  For he was both feareful and in were,
                  In great diſpeyre and inly full of dreade,
                  To yſſue out ſyth Hector nowe was dede.
                  ¶Worthy Troylus and alſo Deyphobus,
                  For in hym ſelfe he demed playnely thus,
                  That he was febled greatly of his myght,
                  After their death with grekes for to fyght.
                  But out he goth hap what hap maye,
                  And Parys eke full knyghtly of array,
                  ¶Kyng Phylomene and Pollydamas,
                  ¶Worthy Eſdre and with them Eneas.
                  By one aſſent there is no more to ſaye.
                  The ſame daye knightly to lyue or deye,
                  In their diffence and vtterly ieoparte,
                  As goddes lyſte the felde that daye departe.
                  And proudely fyrſte the grekꝭ they gan perce,
                  And Parys tho with thē that were of Perce,
                  Fell in a ſyde with the ſonne ſhene.
                  And his archers with arrowes ſquare & kene
                  The grekes gan a ſondre to diſſeuere,
                  For in the felde they myght not perſenere,
                  Onely for ſhot of the ſtronge archers.
                  Of Perce londe and the Arbalaſters.
                  Whiche made them fle ryght of very nede.
                  ¶Into tyme that proude Dyomede,
                  Whan he of grekes ſawe this ſodeyne flyghte
                  Them to releue lyke a manly knyght,
                  Is come vpon felly in his tene,
                  ¶And fyrſte of all he ſette on Phylomene.
                  A worthy kynge that came on Troye ſyde,
                  The whyche agayne gan at hym to ryde,
                  That Dyomede hath but lyttell wonne.
                  With ſwordes ſtyffe as they togyther ronne,
                  That to beholde it was a noble ſyght,
                  How eche of them quyte hym lyke a knyght,
                  As they togyther ran on horſe backe.
                  That no man coulde in nother ſe no lacke.
                  But euer in one Troyans were ſo felle,
                  Vpon grekes that they ne myght dwelle,
                  To kepe their londe ſo they made them blede,
                  Mauger the force of this Dyomede.
                  The ſlaughter was ſo hydous and ſo ſtronge.
                  That through ye fielde the woful noyſe ronge
                  And mortall crye of wounded folke that laye.
                  Slayne on the ſoyle endlonge the waye.
                  ¶Tyll Meneſte ſyttynge on his ſtede,
                  The worthy duke gan to take hede,
                  In what myſchyefe grekes were beſet,
                  And hent anone a ſpere ſharpe ywhet,
                  Smyttynge his horſe felly in the ſyde,
                  And through to renges knightly he gan ryde
                  And ſtynt not ſo furyous he was.
                  ¶Tyll that he mette with Pollydamas,
                  A Troyan knyght and a manly man,
                  And vnwarely at hym as he ran,
                  He hytte him ſo in many mannes fyghte,
                  To the erthe that he made him to a lyght.
                  And with a ſworde at grounde whan he laye,
                  He had him ſlayne the ſelfe ſame daye,
                  In his rage and his cruell tene,
                  Ne had be that kynge Phylomene,
                  Had him reſkewed in this auenture.
                  Whiche ſo frendely for hym dyde his cure,
                  Maugre the myght of this Meneſtee,
                  
                     From his handes that he went free.
                  All for hathed and be ſpreynt with bloude.
                  And all this whyle Ayax proudely rode,
                  Of ſurquedy and of wylfulneſſe,
                  Of foly rage and foule hardyneſſe,
                  Naked his body heade and euerydele,
                  Amyd his foen armed bryght in ſtele.
                  And of Troyans ſuche a ſlaughter made,
                  That they laye dead both in ſonne and ſhade
                  Throughout the felde where this Thelamon
                  Amonge them rode woodder then Lyon.
                  That Troian none might him tho withſtāde
                  While that he held his bloudy ſworde in hand
                  That wonder was naked as he rode,
                  Without wounde that he ſo longe abode.
                  ¶And as Guydo maketh reherſayle,
                  And wryteth eke for a great meruayle,
                  That he vnſlayne might ſo longe contune.
                  But whan a thynge is ſhapen of fortune,
                  It myght be falle what euer thynge it be,
                  In weale or wo ioye or aduerſyte.
                  Whan one ſhall dye or whan he ſhall eſcape.
                  But ſhe alas can alder fyrſt by iape,
                  And brynge a man vnwarely to myſchaunce,
                  Whan he beſte weneth to haue aſſuraunce,
                  In this ladye of tranſmutacyon.
                  Lyke as it fell of worthy Thelamon,
                  This ſame daye whiche of foly pryde,
                  Amonge his foen gan ſo ferre to ryde,
                  Ylyche freſhe ryght as he began,
                  ¶And ſlewe of Perce many a manly man.
                  And of hym ſelfe toke no maner hede,
                  His knightly herte ſo was deuoyde of drede,
                  Tyll Parys ſawe his great hardyneſſe,
                  And howe that he his knight dyd oppreſſe,
                  Enchaſynge them ſo mortally and narowe,
                  Without abode anone he toke an arowe,
                  Extoxycat ſharpe and venymous,
                  And in this Ire fell and deſpyteous,
                  And ſhot at hym in the ſelfe tyde,
                  As ſayth Guydo and ſmyt hym through ye ſide
                  That of that hurte there is no more to ſaye,
                  He felte well that he muſt deye.
                  ¶And whan he ſawe none other remedye,
                  For he rode ſuppryſed with enuye,
                  Thrughout ye preſe his ſword aye in his hand
                  Into tyme that he Parys fonde.
                  ¶And vnto hym with a pale chere,
                  He ſpake and ſayd anone as ye ſhall here.
                  ¶Parys quod he as this mortall wounde,
                  Of thyne arrowe ſharpe and ſquare yground
                  Hath fynally my lyfe put in diſpeyre,
                  Neuer into Grece to haue repeyre.
                  Ryght ſo ſhall I by ſhorte concluſyowne,
                  Awaye ſhape that into Troye towne,
                  With thy lyfe thou entre ſhalte no more.
                  At my herte the venym byt ſo ſore,
                  That other gayne is there none but death.
                  ¶But yet tofore or I yelde vp the breth,
                  Truſte me ryght well there may be no ſocour
                  That thou ne ſhalte be predeceſſour,
                  And go afore depe downe into hell.
                  There with Pluto eternally to dwell.
                  So as of ryght it is neceſſarye,
                  Thy time is ſet which thou maieſt not tarye.
                  And here my trouth for morgage of thy corſe
                  That in all haſt I ſhall make deuorſe,
                  Atwyxe the and the quene Heleyne.
                  And twynne a ſonder eke the falſe cheyne,
                  Whiche linked was by colour of wedlocke.
                  And hath ſo longe be ſhet vnder locke.
                  Only by fraude and falſe engyne alſo.
                  ¶But nowe the knotte ſhalbe broke a two.
                  With my ryght hande the trouth to darayne,
                  For through the cauſe onely of you twayne,
                  In this werre many worthy knyght,
                  His lyfe hath loſte and many an other wight
                  On outher ſyde for your both ſake.
                  But of all this I ſhall an ende make.
                  Of your loue and foule auoutrye.
                  ¶For fynally Parys thou ſhalte dye,
                  Of my handes as it is thy chaunce.
                  And with ye word his ſword he gan enhaunce
                  Aboue his heade and ſmote hym in the face,
                  That he fell dead in the ſelfe place.
                  For his heade he hath parted on twayne.
                  And ryght forthwith there is no more to ſaine
                  ¶Ayax alas of his mortall wounde,
                  Fell dead alſo gruflynge vnto the grounde.
                  Full pyteouſly and then they of Troye,
                  Haue Parys take vp out of the weye,
                  And bore hym home into theyr cyte.
                  ¶But Dyomede and duke Meneſtee,
                  With many greke rydynge enuyrowne,
                  Sewed the chaſe euen to the towne.
                  But for cauſe Tytan gan to lowe,
                  Downe by the arke of his dayes bowe,
                  For into weſt vnder the rowes redde,
                  
                     And Heſperus gan his lyght to ſhede.
                  This to ſaye or it drewe to nyght,
                  The Grekes be repeyred home aryght,
                  Eueryche of theim to his lodgynge place.
                  To take theyr reſte all that nyghtes ſpace.
                  ¶Saue as I reade that Agamenowne,
                  The grekes made faſt by the towne,
                  To ſette theyr tentes and pauylyons.
                  Of very pryde faſt by the wall,
                  Habytacles and newe manſyons.
                  And they of Troye dyſpeyred ouer all,
                  No refute could Grekes for to let.
                  But of aſſent faſt theyr gates ſhette.
                  And all the nyght on the walles wake,
                  And ouer this ſuche a wo they make,
                  Through the Cyte that Parys was ſo dead,
                  For fynally nowe they can no reade,
                  But wepe and crye and ſorowe euer in one.
               
               
                  NOwe al ye ſonnes of Priamꝰ were gone.
                  Fortune alas hath theim ſo appeyred,
                  That of theyr lyfe they be nowe dyſpeyred,
                  Of all hope and of good welfare.
                  Perpetually for to lyue in care.
                  Vnto the death and that was faſte bye.
                  For nowe there is no maner remedye,
                  Vpon no ſyde nor refute none at all,
                  But theym to kepe cloſe wythin the wall,
                  That for to ſe it was a pyteous thynge.
                  ¶And ſuche a wo maketh now the kynge,
                  ¶For Parys death that for deadly ſmerte,
                  Hym thought platly that his wofull herte,
                  Recureles would braſt and ryue a tweyne.
                  And into teares he gan dyſtylle and reyne,
                  As he would tho for very ſorowe deye.
                  ¶And of the quene alas what ſhall I ſeye,
                  ¶Hecuba his owne mother deare,
                  That crieth & wepeth with a woful cheare.
                  ¶Of Pollycene that was ſo wo begone,
                  And of his ſyſtren alſo euerychone,
                  That haue theyr heir & theyr clothes torne,
                  As yf they had theyr owne death yſworne,
                  For drery wo and for pyteous peyne.
                  ¶But for by all the fayre quene Heleyne,
                  Wayleth cryeth with a deadly cheare,
                  That her eyen whych whylom were ſo cleare,
                  Forderked were with dolefull teares ſmerte.
                  And to the corps ſodaynly ſhe ſterte,
                  And clypped yt in her armes twayne.
                  And pyteouſly embrace it and reſtrayne,
                  Lyke as ſhe would with him dye anone.
                  For ſtyll ſhe laye dombe as any ſtone,
                  As marbyll colde her lymmes craumpiſhing,
                  Redy at all towarde her buryinge.
                  Tyll men by force from the corps her hent.
                  And ſhe her heyr and her chekes rente.
                  As tho ſhe had be fallen in a rage.
                  That chaunged was alas in her vyſage,
                  Her natyfe coloure and her rody hewe,
                  Whylom as freſhe as any roſe newe.
                  Nowe is ſhe lyke vnto aſhes colde,
                  And wyth her handes aye togyther folde,
                  Her ſelfe ſhe ſmote on her pale face.
                  And euer amonge the corps ſhe did embrace,
                  In her ſwownes as ſhe fell to grounde,
                  Twenty tymes and wept full his wounde.
                  Wyth wo ſhe was awhaped and amate,
                  Of all comforte alas diſconſolate.
                  In herte beynge inly deſyrous,
                  Through her rage paſſynge furyous,
                  To dye attones with her owne knyght.
                  For towarde death encloſed was her ſyght.
                  As ſhe that lyſt to lyue nowe no more.
                  ¶And as I trowe that neuer man before,
                  No woman ſawe fall in ſuche diſtreſſe.
                  In ſuche diſioynt of deadly heuyneſſe.
                  Nor for no wo ſo pyteouſly yraue,
                  Not Cleopatre goynge to her graue.
                  Nor wofull Teſbe that fro the kaue ſterte,
                  Whan ſhe her ſelfe ſmote vnto the herte.
                  ¶Nor the faythfull trewe Oreſtylle,
                  When that ſhe ſawe her lord agayne her will,
                  ¶Marcus Prolancus vnto ſhyppe gone,
                  And for his loue fell downe dead anone.
                  ¶Nor the ſorowe of trewe Iulia,
                  ¶Nor the feruence of faythfull Porcia,
                  Of whych the one fell dead ſodaynly,
                  For ſhe ſawe bloud ſpent ſo cruelly,
                  On her lordes dredfull gardment.
                  ¶And Portia ſo trewe in her entent,
                  When that her lorde Brutus loſt his lyfe,
                  For bycauſe ſhe myght haue no knyfe,
                  Wyth rolys red ſlewe her ſelfe alas.
                  Was not alſo in the ſelfe caſe,
                  ¶Arthemyſya quene of Tarſe londe.
                  Of Mauſalus the graue whan ſhe foude,
                  Her owne knyght of whoſe bones ſmale,
                  Full wofully and wyth a cheare pale,
                  
                     She poudre made & dranke it euery morowe
                  ¶But all the wo and the furyous ſorowe,
                  Of theſe echone yet may not atteyne,
                  ¶Vnto the ſorowe of the quene Heleyne.
                  That fynally wyll her ſelfe fordo.
                  For Parys ſake whom ſhe loued ſo.
                  For after him ſhe wyll not lyue a daye.
                  But be awreke playnly yf ſhe maye,
                  Vpon her lyfe rather than dyſſeuere.
                  And thus in wo aye ſhe doth perſeuere,
                  In her herte Parys ſat ſo depe.
                  ¶Alas who ſayth that women can not wepe
                  Yes doubtles they haue it of nature.
                  Though it ſo be that they no wo endure.
                  Yet can they fayne and ſalte teares fynde,
                  Plenty ynough of thryr owne kynde,
                  And ſorowles morne and compleyne.
                  ¶I ſaye not this for the quene Heleyne,
                  That was wyth wo wounded to the herte.
                  That fro the death ſhe wende not ſterte,
                  For deathes darte her herte made ryue,
                  And yet ſhe roſe agayne fro death to lyue,
                  Onely by grace for all her fell rage,
                  For euery wo by proceſſe muſt aſwage.
                  And ouer gone and waſted by myracle,
                  For eche venym made is ſome Tryacle,
                  And euery wo hath his remedye.
                  ¶For though Heleyne as tho fayn wold dye,
                  Her kynde ne would aſſent yet therto.
                  So ſodaynly to ſlea her ſelfe for wo.
                  She was a woman no man ſhulde her wyte,
                  Me lyſte no more of her wo endyte.
                  Leſt vnto you that it were tedyous,
                  To heren all her paynes furyous,
                  Her cruell wo and lamentacion,
                  Whych would meue to compaſſyon,
                  In very ſothe to wryte euerydele,
                  Any herte though it were made of ſtele.
                  ¶For kynge Pryam and the quene alſo,
                  Had ſuche routhe of her pyteous wo,
                  To ſe her wepe and furyouſly complayne,
                  That they of her felte as much payne,
                  ¶As they dyd almoſt for hym Parys.
                  ¶Herof no more for Pryam by deuyſe,
                  After this rage and this mortall wo,
                  Amyd the Temple ſacred to Iuno,
                  Ordayned hath with full buſy cure,
                  For the corps a ryche ſepulture.
                  And in all haſte therin made it ſhette.
                  That in ſotheneſſe if I ſhould not lette,
                  To tell all the rytes and the gyſe,
                  That there were made in theyr paynim wiſe,
                  And the coſtes of his buryinge,
                  It ſhould be all to longe a taryinge,
                  Ceryouſly theron to abyde.
                  Wherfore as nowe I let ouerſlyde,
                  Their paynim rites ſuperſticious.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Pantiſilia quene of Amazonis comming in ayde of the Troians, was ſlayne by Pyrrhus Achylles ſonne. Ca. xxxiiii.
               
                  ANd telle I wyll how kyng Priamus,
                  Cōmaūded hath of miſchyefe & of nede,
                  Through Troye towne onely of very drede,
                  To ſhytte theyr gates ſtrongly as they maye.
                  And therupon both by nyght and daye,
                  To kepe watche for ſhortly they of Troye,
                  Dyſconſolate of all theyr olde ioye,
                  Can no refute but wepe and ſorowe make.
                  For they ne durſt no more vndertake,
                  Agayne Grekes into felde to gone.
                  ¶Tyll on a daye kynge Agamenon,
                  His meſſager by good auiſement,
                  To Pryamus into Troye hath ſent,
                  Requyrynge him of manhode lyke a knyghte,
                  To yſſue out wyth Grekes for to fyght.
                  As he was wonte wyth his chyualrye.
                  ¶But kynge Pryam his axinge gan denye.
                  And ſhortly ſayd to him that was ſent,
                  That he ne would at his aſſignement,
                  Not ones paſſe the gates of the towne.
                  But at his owne free electiowne,
                  Whan euer him lyſt without compellynge.
                  ¶And yet in ſothe cauſe of his taryinge,
                  ¶Was for the hardy quene of Femynye,
                  Towarde Troye that faſt gan her hye.
                  Out of her lande and lyttell regyon,
                  The whych as bokes make mencion,
                  After the ſcyte of the fyrmamente,
                  Is in the plage of the Oryent.
                  ¶And called is the reygne of Amazonis.
                  Of which the cuſtome and the vſe is,
                  That onely women therin ſhall abyde.
                  And they were wonte armed for to ryde.
                  And haue in armes great experyence.
                  For theyr laboure and theyr dylygence,
                  Is fynally to haue exercyſe,
                  
                     Fro daye to daye in Martes hygh ſeruyce.
                  ¶And ouermore theyr cuſtome and vſaunce,
                  As to this daye is made remembraunce,
                  Is that no man ſhall them nygh nere,
                  But yf it be thre monthes in the yeare.
                  ¶This to ſaye in Iune Apryll and Maye.
                  And then the women haue in cuſtome aye,
                  Vnto an yle a lytell there beſyde,
                  Where as the men by them ſelfe abyde,
                  Fro yere to yere togyther euerychone,
                  Vnto the men out of theyr lande to gone.
                  And there abyde in that regyon,
                  Tyll tyme cometh of concepcion.
                  Wythout taryinge any longer whyle.
                  For then anone home vnto theyr ile,
                  They be repeyred out of that countre.
                  Vnto tyme that they delyuered be.
                  And as faſt as the chylde is borne,
                  For lacke of kepynge that it be not lorne,
                  He foſtred is tyll thre yeres be agone,
                  Amonge the women and then ryght anone.
                  To the yle beſyde adiacent,
                  Vnto the men the chylde in haſte is ſent.
                  If that it be of kynde maſculyne,
                  And yf it fall that it be femynyne,
                  With the women abyde ſtyll it ſhall.
                  Tyll that it be in actes mercyall,
                  Full well expert and that ſhe can eke knowe,
                  A ſpere to haddle or to drawe a bowe.
                  Lyke the ſtatutes of that regyon.
                  The whych as bookes make mencyon,
                  Is ſette betwene Ewrope and Aſya.
                  ¶And of this lande was Pantaſilia,
                  Whylom lady and chyefe gouerneſſe.
                  Full renowmed of ſtrength and hardineſſe.
                  Thrugh out ye worlde both in length & brede,
                  And yet in ſothe to ſpeake of womanhead,
                  For all her myght ſhe had an huge pryſe.
                  For both ſhe was vertuous and wyſe.
                  Wonder dyſcrete and had an honeſt name,
                  Notwythſtandynge the excellence of fame,
                  Of her renowne in armes and in glorye.
                  For of conqueſt and of high victorye,
                  She was moſt ſurmountynge out of drede,
                  Of any woman that I can of rede.
                  And ſothely yet bookes bere wytneſſe,
                  Of womanhead and of gentylneſſe,
                  She kepte her ſo that nothynge her aſterte,
                  ¶The whych loued wyth all her hole herte,
                  Worthy Hector and wyth all her myght,
                  Onely for he was ſo good a knyght.
                  All her ioye and worldly pleſaunce,
                  Her harty eaſe and ſoueraygne ſuffyſaunce,
                  In very ſothe where ſhe wake or wyncke,
                  Was euer in one vpon him to thynke.
                  Of very fayth wythout any ſlouthe,
                  And vnto hym ſhe was by bonde of trouthe,
                  Confederate of olde affectiowne.
                  That when ſhe herde how that Troye towne
                  Beſeiged was of the Grekes fell,
                  Thys hardy quene lyſt no longer dwell,
                  But haſteth her as faſt as euer ſhe maye,
                  Towarde Troye infull good araye,
                  With all the worthy women of her lande.
                  Full well experte and preued of her hande.
                  Well horſed eke and armed rychely,
                  And as I fynde in her companye,
                  A thouſande maydens rydyng by her ſide,
                  This worthy quene that durſt well abyde,
                  She wyth her brought in ſtele armed bryght.
                  For loue of Hector her owne trewe knyght,
                  And on her waye faſt ſhe gan her ſpede,
                  To helpe hym yf ſhe ſe cauſe of nede.
                  For in nothynge ſhe could her more delyte.
                  Than towarde him her faythfully to quyte.
                  For that was all her luſt and hertes ioye,
                  ¶But when that ſhe come was to Troye,
                  And hath hard tell as by relacyowne.
                  That he was dead moſt worthy of renowne,
                  To whom ſhe was ſo louynge and ſo trewe,
                  Anone ſhe gan to chaunge cheare and hewe,
                  And pyteouſly gan to wepe and crye,
                  And fared in ſothe as ſhe would dye.
                  For very wo and hertely heuyneſſe.
                  And thought ſhe would thrugh her wortthyneſſe,
                  Auenge his death platly if ſhe maye.
                  On the Grekes and ſo vpon a daye,
                  ¶She prayeth Pryam wt great affectiowne
                  For to open the gates of the towne,
                  And to go out with Grekes for to fyght.
                  That they maye knowe and be expert aright
                  Of this women the great worthyneſſe.
                  And of this quene the famous hardyneſſe.
                  And ſo the kynge hopynge for the beſte,
                  Without abode graunted her requeſte.
                  The next morowe whē Phebꝰ ſhone ful ſhene
                  ¶And all tofore out goth Philomene,
                  The noble kinge wt them of Pafflagonye.
                  
                     And after him other knightes manye,
                  Folowed after with worthy Eneas.
                  The Troyan eke Dan Pollidamas,
                  And the quene Pantaſilla,
                  By the gate called Dardanica.
                  Towarde Grekes proudly yſſued oute,
                  With her women rydynge her aboute.
                  The whych anone when Grekes did eſpye,
                  Into felde gan them faſt hye.
               
               
                  ANd fyrſte of all worthy Meneſte,
                  Pantaſylla when that he dyd ſe,
                  Wyth his ſporres made his ſtede gone.
                  And wyth a ſpere rode to her anone.
                  ¶Of whom the quene aſtoned neuer a dele,
                  Kaught a ſpere that was ſquared wele,
                  Round ye ſhafte and the head well grounde,
                  Which as they coupe ſmet hī downe to groūd.
                  And maugre hym reued him his ſtede.
                  But then in haſte in came Dyomede,
                  And cruelly to the quene gan ryde,
                  And ſhe as faſt on the other ſyde,
                  Rode eke to him in plates bryght and ſhene,
                  And as they met wyth theyr ſperes kene,
                  She hytte ſo this fell Diomede,
                  For all his myght and his manlyhead,
                  That ſhe him made his ſadell for to leſe.
                  There is no more he myght tho not cheſe.
                  And in deſpyte of his men echone,
                  She hath his ſhelde him berafte anone.
                  And it delyuereth proudly as ſhe rode.
                  To a mayde that vpon her abode.
                  And lyke a Tygre in his gredyneſſe,
                  Or lyke in ſothe to a Lioneſſe,
                  That daye ſhe fared rydynge vp and downe,
                  Amonge the Grekes till that Thelamowne,
                  Gan to beholde the ſlaughter that ſhe made,
                  Of high deſpyte and rancour ouerlade,
                  As he that myght for yre not ſuſtene,
                  Gan reyne his horſe to fall vpon this quene.
                  ¶But when that ſhe his comynge dyd eſpye,
                  She fell on him in her melancolye,
                  So mortally maugre his knightes all,
                  That to the grounde ſhe made him for to fall
                  And Grekes put in ſo great diſraye,
                  Where euer ſhe rode all that ylke daye,
                  That they ne might afore her not ſuſtene.
                  And through the helpe of kyng Philomene,
                  As myn auctour recordeth in his boke.
                  Amyd the felde Thelamon ſhe toke.
                  And ſent him forth through her hie renowne,
                  As pryſoner towarde Troye towne.
                  ¶Tyll vnto reſkuſe came he Dyomede,
                  And cruelly on them that gan him lede,
                  He fell vnwarely with an huge route,
                  Of his knyghtes rydynge him aboute.
                  And from theyr hādes maugre al their might
                  He him delyuereth lyke a manly knyght.
                  At whych tyme the hardy quene anone,
                  With her women aboute her euerichone,
                  The Grekes hath afore her on the playne,
                  As wryt Guydo ſo mortally belayne,
                  That ſhe them made of neceſſytee,
                  Out of the felde wyth her ſworde to fle.
                  That verely it ſemed incredible,
                  And to leue a maner impoſſyble,
                  To ſe the women Grekes ſo enchaſe,
                  Which might not there abide afore their face,
                  For in the felde in any wiſe ſtande.
                  For they them dryue to the ſelfe ſtronde,
                  Downe to the clyffe of the ſalte ſee.
                  And ſlewe of them ſo huge and great plentee,
                  That fynally they had all be dyſtroyed,
                  For euermore and vtterly acloyed,
                  ¶Ne had Dyomede ſtande tho at diffence.
                  And of knighthod made theim reſiſtence.
                  For he that daye in partye and in all,
                  For Grekes ſtode as a ſturdy wall.
                  And was alone their helpe and chefe ſuccour
                  ¶But for all that with worſhyp and honour
                  Pantaſilla as made is memorye,
                  Repeyred is with conqueſt and victorye,
                  Wyth all her women into Troye towne.
                  Vpon the houre of Phebus goyng downe.
                  ¶And by the ſyde of this hardy quene,
                  ¶Armed in ſtele rode kynge Phylomene.
                  Whom Pryam hath wyth great reuerence,
                  Knightly receyued and did his diligence,
                  Theim to refreſhe with euery maner thinge,
                  That might be vnto theyr lykinge.
                  And as theyr hertes could beſt deuyſe.
                  ¶And after this in ful goodly wyſe,
                  He thanked hath the noble hardy quene,
                  Of her goodneſſe that her lyſt to ſene,
                  To helpe him in his great nede.
                  And offred her in Guydo as I reade,
                  All that he hath treaſour and rycheſſe,
                  Hopynge fully through her worthineſſe,
                  
                     Vpon Grekes auenged for to be,
                  And for to kepe hym ſafe in his Cyte,
                  Maugre Grekes whych of theim ſaye naye.
                  ¶For as I reade after daye by daye,
                  She ſlinte not proudly theim to aſſayle,
                  Agayne whoſe ſwerde they myght not auayl,
                  So mortally ſhe made theyr ſydes blede.
                  ¶Tyll Menelay fro kinge Lycomede,
                  Repeyred is with Neptolonyus,
                  Which in his bokes called eke Pirrhus.
                  Whylom the ſonne of cruell Achillles,
                  Whom for to ſe full huge was the preſe,
                  Of the Grekes goynge enuyron.
                  ¶And for he was as by ſucceſſyon,
                  ¶Borne to be heyre of this Achilles,
                  He hath receyued of Myrmydones,
                  With great honour and great ſolempnyte.
                  So glad were they theyr yonge lorde to ſe.
                  To whom echone they made affiaunce,
                  And were eke ſworne by bonde & aſſuraunce,
                  For lyfe or deathe to him to be trewe.
                  And his lieges and chaunge for no newe.
                  To obeye his luſt in all maner thynge.
                  ¶And after this Agamenon the kinge,
                  Made him knight and Thelamonius,
                  Wyth a ſwerde gyrte anone Pirrhus.
                  Sayinge to him in the ſelfe place,
                  With yt baudrik when he hym did enbrace,
                  ¶Take hede quod he mine owne coſin deare
                  To reſemble in manhode and in chere.
                  In knighthod eke and in worthineſſe,
                  To thy father which in ſothfaſtneſſe,
                  In his tyme was ſo noble a knight,
                  And ouermore with all thy full might,
                  To auenge his death that thou do thy payne
                  ¶And thē of grekes worthy Dukes twayne.
                  Full humbly began downe to knele,
                  And ſet a ſporre vpon eyther hele,
                  As was the maner of golde bourned bryght.
                  And in this whyle Pirrhus is made knighte.
                  As ye haue herde in full high preſence,
                  With great honour and due reuerence,
                  Lyke the cuſtome of the Grekes layes.
                  And the rytes vſed in tho dayes.
                  And then anone hath kyng Agamenon,
                  With full glad chere and great affection,
                  Delyuered hym fully by ſentence,
                  The armes hole without difference,
                  Which Achilles by his life bare,
                  His worthy father on his ſhoulders ſquare.
                  As for nexte heyre of lyne by diſcente,
                  And all his Treaſour alſo and his Tente.
                  Armure and all deliuered were anone.
                  Vnto Pirrhus and Grekes euerychone,
                  Eyght dayes ſuynge by and by,
                  Through out the hoſte full ſolempnely,
                  They halowe in honour of this yong knyght▪
                  
                  Til on a morow whē Phebꝰ ſhone ful bright
                  Which with his lyght that ſhineth fro ſo fer,
                  Diffaced hath the ſtreames of the ſterre,
                  Lucifer the dayes meſſagere.
                  When Grekes gan in plates bryght & clere,
                  Enarmed them that daye ſoure and ſwete,
                  Fulle in purpoſe wyth theyr fone to mete.
                  And manfully out of theyr tentes wide,
                  Agaynſt Troyans they began to ride.
                  Warde after warde proudly into felde.
                  And Pirrhus bare that daye vpon his ſhelde,
                  His fathers armes lyke as ſayth Guydo,
                  And of the ſame he had vpon alſo,
                  A cote armure that became hym wele.
                  And forth he rode armed bright in ſtele.
                  And caſually formeſt as he was,
                  He mette fyrſt wyth Pollydamas.
                  A knyght of Troye a full manly man,
                  ¶And furyouſly Pirrhus to him ran,
                  On horſebacke with a myghty ſwerde,
                  And gan to hurtle with him in the berde,
                  So myghtely that in this hatefull ſtryfe,
                  ¶Pollydamas had loſt his lyfe,
                  Ne had ben reſkued without more taryinge,
                  Of Phylomene the noble worthy kinge.
                  Onely of knighthod and of worthyneſſe,
                  ¶To whom Pirrhus haſtely gan him dreſſe
                  With his ſwerde and ſmit him in the ſyghte,
                  That from his horſe he made him to alighte.
                  For he the ſtroke might not ſuſtene.
                  And ſothfaſtly this worthy Phylomene,
                  Of Pirrhus had ytake be anone,
                  Saue his knightes aſſembled into one,
                  Of Pafflagonye came him to reſkue.
                  But Pirrhus aye ſo fyerſly gan purſewe,
                  Vpon this king with Myrmydones,
                  Beſet in myſchefe amonge the great preſe,
                  That many knight of this noble kynge,
                  Yſlayne was at his reſkuynge.
                  He ſtode of death in ſo ſtreyght a caſe.
                  ¶Tyl of fortune came Pollydamas,
                  
                     To his reſkuſe and did his full myght,
                  Him to delyuer and quyte him lyke a knight.
                  But in ſotheneſſe there was ſuche reſyſtence,
                  ¶Of Pirrhus knightes ſtanding at diffence
                  That aye in miſchyef ſtode king Philomene.
                  ¶Tyll Pantaſilla of femenie the quene,
                  With her women a great companye,
                  Gan this thinge of auenture eſpye,
                  Which were echone for the more delyte,
                  On theyr armure that daye clad in white.
                  That veryly there was no lylye floure,
                  Nor ſnowe yt flaketh frō Iubyters his towre
                  Of whyteneſſe that is freſher on to ſene,
                  Then in felde was this hardy quene.
                  Which firſte of all amonge the Grekes chees,
                  Proudly to fall on Myrmydones,
                  Amonges them rydinge vp and downe,
                  She thē vnhorſeth through her hie renowne
                  And ſlewe them vpon euery ſyde,
                  Makinge theyr renges for to ſeuer wyde.
                  Tyll Thelamon in a furyous heate,
                  With a ſpere vnwarely did her mete,
                  And in a rage ſmote her to the playne.
                  But ſhe anone ful lyfely roſe agayne,
                  ¶And wt her ſwerd ſo marketh Thelamown
                  That frō his horſe ſhe made him light downe
                  Plat to the grounde on his handes twayne.
                  And then her women did theyr buſy payne,
                  To make theyr quene her ſtede to recure.
                  ¶And all this while ſtode in auenture,
                  Of his life worthy Philomene,
                  Pirrhus knightes were on him ſo kene.
                  Maugre his men that they haue him take,
                  It geyneth not diffence for to make.
                  The Grekes haue ſo ſtrongly him beſet.
                  ¶And forth they lad him it might be no bet,
                  Toward theyr tentes throughout al the felde
                  The which thinge when the quene behelde,
                  With her women that aboute her rode,
                  Purſewed after without more abode,
                  That fynally they haue ſo after ſewed,
                  Through their force that he was reſkued,
                  Maugre the manhode of Myrmidones.
                  ¶And Pantaſilla was ſo mercyles,
                  Vpon the Grekes that of neceſſyte,
                  Through her force and her crueltee,
                  Afore her ſwerde they durſt not abyde,
                  ¶But when Pirrhus ſawe her great pryde,
                  To his knightes loud he gan to crye,
                  And ſayde it was ſhame and villanye,
                  For the women ſo to leſe theyr lande.
                  And to be ſlayne ſo felly of her hande.
                  Wherfore echone your hertes doth reſume,
                  And of aſſent let vs nowe conſume,
                  The pryde of them that none awaye eſcape,
                  For but if we ſome remedye do ſhape,
                  This ylke daye theyr force to confounde,
                  Shamefull reporte to vs ſhall rebounde,
                  Perpetually where we ſlepe or wake.
                  ¶And as Pirrhus gan his ſwerde to take.
                  Furyouſly and wyth a knyghtly chere,
                  This hardy quene happed for to heare,
                  ¶All that Pirrhus to his knightes ſpake.
                  All her lyſt not ones to tourne bake,
                  Nor of his thret for to take hede
                  For platly ſhe had of him no dreade.
                  But right proudly gan to drawe nere,
                  And to him ſayde anone as ye ſhall heare.
                  ¶Oh thou Pirrhe ſonne of Achilles,
                  That ſlewe Hector in knyghthod pereles,
                  Through his trenys and his trecherye,
                  By malice onely and by falſe enuye,
                  Vnware when he nothinge did aduerte.
                  The whych neuer maye out of my herte,
                  So grene it ſticketh in my remembraunce,
                  Vpon his death for to do vengeaunce,
                  And it ſyt well as ſemeth vnto me,
                  That his death be venged vpon the,
                  Fyrſte of all and on thy fathers bloud,
                  For loue of him ſo gentyll and ſo good,
                  The deth of whom ſhuld al ye world cōplayne
                  Not onely men do theyr buſy payne,
                  To quyte his death but women eke alſo,
                  With all theyr myght and helpe eke therto,
                  As right requyreth without excepcion.
                  There on to do full execution.
                  And I nowe ſtande in the ſame plyte,
                  And for thou haſt vs wonnen in deſpite,
                  Of our power ſhortly in ſentence,
                  Thou ſhalt in haſte haue experyence.
                  And knowe our force ſothly euerydele,
                  Right in ſhorte tyme truſte me right wele,
                  Here in this felde by ſhedynge of thy bloud.
                  Wherfore Pirrhus weren gan as wood,
                  As any Tygre bore or wood Lyon,
                  So fret the coloure in his complexion,
                  And in his Ire fell and deſpytous,
                  He toke a ſpere pale and furyous,
                  
                     And ran at her with al his myght and payne
                  And agaynwarde as ſhe that liſt not feyne,
                  Encountred hym all deuoyde of feare.
                  But Pirrhus fyrſte brake on her his ſpere,
                  Albe that he myght her not remeue.
                  In her ſadell nor but lyttel greue.
                  But ſhe agayne ſo ſore gan him hytte,
                  On his ſtede that he maye not ſytte.
                  But deſcendeth endlonge the playne.
                  And vp he roſe with full great diſdayne,
                  And toke a ſwerde in his hande anone,
                  And made his ſtede lyne ryght to gone,
                  Vpon this quene of paſſynge worthineſſe.
                  And inwardly of hate and of woodneſſe,
                  In herte yfret ſmet at her many ſtroke,
                  But euer ſhe ſat ſtyll as any oke,
                  And of force in her yre pale,
                  Efte agayne ſhe made him to auale,
                  To the earthe maugre all his payne.
                  And thus the fyght laſteth of theym twayne,
                  A large whyle till Myrmydones,
                  Haue take theyr lorde by force out of ye preſe.
                  And made him his horſe recure agayne.
                  ¶And in his tyme on the ſelfe playne,
                  With his baner he deſcended downe,
                  The worthy kinge great Agamenowne,
                  With kinges dukes endlonge the grene.
                  With theyr wardes that wonder was to ſene,
                  So prudently in the felde battayled,
                  That hath Troians mortally aſſayled.
                  ¶But tho in haſte kynge Phylomene,
                  As ye haue herde reſkued by the quene,
                  When he hath thanked to her worthineſſe,
                  With his knightes in he gan him dreſſe,
                  ¶And Pantaſilla aſſembled both in one,
                  Vpon the Grekes gan for to gone.
                  Where men may ſe wt ſperes ſharpe grounde
                  Eueryche other beare vnto the grounde.
                  There men maye ſe proudly without lacke,
                  The manly knightes renne on horſe backe.
                  ¶And the women mortally oppreſſe,
                  The fell Grekes through theyr hardyneſſe.
                  Onely through force of the myghty quene.
                  That dead they laye couerynge al the grene.
                  ¶Wherwith came in Dan Pollydamas,
                  Fro death reſkued and eke Eneas,
                  ¶Kinge Eſdras eke of Troye the cyte,
                  ¶And tho the wardes gan togyther fle,
                  On eyther partye fell and furious,
                  But moſt of all Neptolonius,
                  That Pirrhus hight ye grekes champiowne,
                  Irous and wood on them of Troye towne,
                  Made his ſwerde in theyr fleſhe byte.
                  ¶And Pantaſilla proudly her to quyte,
                  Ne ſpareth not wyth mortall woundes wide,
                  Grekes to ſlee vpon euery ſyde.
                  Now here now there to theyr confuſyon.
                  ¶And Pirrhus then is fall on Glawcon,
                  The halfe brother to Pollydamas.
                  For Anthenor eke his father was.
                  And Pirrhus ſo in a cruell yre,
                  With melancolye newe ſet a fyre,
                  Smote Glawcon ſo or that he toke hede,
                  Amonge the preaſe that he fell downe dead
                  ¶And Pantaſillya from her women all,
                  ¶The ſame tyde is on Pirrhus fall.
                  And he of her when he had a ſyghte,
                  Rode eke agayne lyke a manly knyght,
                  And as they hurtle on horſe backe yfere,
                  Of auenture with ſwerdes ſtyffe and clere,
                  Eueryche made other to alyghte,
                  And hatefully on fote ſo they fyghte.
                  Longe or other myght of other wynne,
                  Tyll they were made of force for to twynne,
                  By the wardes that wente them atwene,
                  I meane Pirrhus and this hardy quene.
                  ¶And all this tyme Dan Pollydamas,
                  So wood for yre in his herte was,
                  Amyd Grekes for his brothers deathe,
                  That whom he mette for his loue he ſleth.
                  Without mercy in his hateful tene.
                  That he alone and this worthy quene,
                  Suche a ſlaughter on the Grekes make,
                  That they the felde vtterty forſake,
                  And gan to fle to theyr tentes downe.
                  Tyll Dyomede and Ayax Thelamowne,
                  And Pyrrhus eke made tourne agayne,
                  But they in ſothe were ſo ouerlayne,
                  That they ne myght all that daye releue,
                  And thus they faughte tyll it drewe to eue,
                  To moſt domage of the Grekes ſyde.
                  Tyll Phebus gan his bryght chayre hyde,
                  Lowe in the weſt and to ſhroude his lyght,
                  Vnder courtayne of the blacke nyght,
                  That eyther parte thought for the beſt,
                  To departe and drawe to theyr reſte.
                  And toke theyr eaſe that nyght as they may.
                  And all the moneth ſuynge day by daye,
                  
                     Without any interrupcion,
                  They fought yfere albe no mencion.
                  Be made therof nor wryte in ſpecyall,
                  Of no perſon but in generall,
                  Who that euer dyd euyll or well,
                  In Troye boke I fynde neuer a dele.
                  Saue the quene lyke as wryt Guydo,
                  Of her women an hundred hath forgo,
                  That ſlayne were thylke moneth daye,
                  The death of whom playnly if ſhe maye,
                  Shall well be quyt if ſo that fortune,
                  Be fauorable frendly to contune,
                  That her face chaunge not contrarye.
                  But ſhe that can euery daye ſo varye,
                  Alas the whyle and ſelde in one ſoiourne,
                  Gan fro this quene her loke awaye to tourne
                  To enhaſte through her vngoodlyhead,
                  Attropoſe to breake her lyues threde,
                  As the ſtorye playnly ſhall you lere,
                  Beningly if ye lyſt to heare.
               
               
                  THe fatall houre harde for to remewe,
                  Of cruel deth which no mā may eſchewe
                  Nor in this lyfe fynally eſcape,
                  Specially when Parchas haue it ſhape,
                  Approche gan it may none other bene.
                  Alas the whyle of this hardy quene,
                  ¶Whych on a daye furyous and wrothe,
                  Into the felde out of Troye goth.
                  And gan on grekes proudly for to ſette.
                  And alderfyrſt Pirrhus with her met,
                  Of mortall hate and indignaciowne.
                  And ſhe in haſte by the renges downe,
                  Rode vnto him ſwyftly on her ſtede,
                  Whoſe ſpores ſharpe made his ſides blede,
                  And as they mette their ſperes in the reſte,
                  They bare ſo euen markynge at the breſte,
                  That theyr ſhaftes ſothly this no tale,
                  Gan to ſhyuer all on peces ſmale,
                  Without bowynge other backe or chine,
                  For neyther made other to enclyne.
                  Saue the head forged harde of ſtele,
                  Of Pantaſillia that was grounde wele,
                  In Pirrhus herte perced hath ſo depe,
                  That plate in ſoth nor maile might him kepe
                  But the ſharpneſſe of his ſperes head,
                  Was of his bloud in party redde.
                  The which ſtroke when Grekes gan eſpye,
                  For aſtoned loude gan to crye.
                  And all attones for the noyſe and ſowne
                  Vpon the quene in the felde came downe,
                  In compaſſe wyſe goynge enuyrowne.
                  But thrugh her proweſſe & her high renowne
                  She her defendeth that it was meruayle.
                  But they alas ſo ſore gan her aſſayle,
                  That all to hewe they haue her baſenet,
                  Amyd Grekes ſo thycke ſhe was beſet.
                  That wyth axes and ſwerdes ſquare.
                  Her ſhelde in ſothe made was all bare,
                  And her ſhoulders were naked eke alas,
                  The mayle hewen of and the rere bras.
                  ¶And Pirrhus then like as it is founde,
                  For anguiſhe onely of his grene wounde,
                  In doubte playnly where he ſhould eſkape,
                  Towarde this quene faſte gan him rape,
                  To be auenged whatſoeuer fall.
                  Amyd the felde amonge the Grekes all.
                  ¶And when ſhe ſawe that he came ſo faſte,
                  Of force onely to mete him yet ſhe caſt,
                  And wyth her ſwerde fyrſte gan him aſſayle,
                  But of her ſtroke it happed her to fayle,
                  Amonge the preſe ſo narowe ſhe was beſette.
                  ¶And Pirrhus ſworde was ſo ſharpe whet,
                  That ſodaynly of her arme he ſmet,
                  Alas there was none armure him to lette,
                  But raceth through al the ſhoulder bone,
                  So that this quene fel downe dead anone.
                  And of malice for to venge him more,
                  At his herte the yre fret ſo ſore,
                  That with a chere of very anger pale,
                  He hath her hewen all on peces ſmale.
                  The whych was to foule a cruell dede.
                  ¶But euer in one Pirrhus gan ſo blede,
                  Nigh to the death of his mortall wounde,
                  For lacke of bloud that he fell to grounde,
                  In a traunce full longe groflynge he laye,
                  Tyll knyghtes in all the haſte they may.
                  Haue take him vp and laid him on a ſhelde,
                  And dolefully home out of the felde.
                  They haue him borne wounded as he was.
                  ¶And the women of the quene alas,
                  For very ſorowe and inwarde deadly wo,
                  When they ſawe theyr lady was ago.
                  For to be dead they were ſo deſyrous,
                  That in all haſte wood and furyous,
                  In a rage without gouernayle,
                  Grekes they gan of newe to aſſayle.
                  To auēge their quene they wer ſo herty kīde
                  
                     That they ſlewe ſothly as I fynde,
                  Two thouſād grekꝭ on thē they were ſo wood
                  But oh alas in great dyſioynt they ſtode,
                  Onely for lacke they haue no gouernour,
                  For ſhe was gon yt was theyr chiefe ſuccoure.
                  Whych was alſo to ſpeake of hardyneſſe,
                  Of women al lady and mayſtreſſe,
                  As of her hande that I can of rede.
               
               
                  OH ye Troians ye ſtande in great dread,
                  Amid ye felde all out of gouernaunce,
                  The daye is come of your vnhappy chaunce,
                  For nowe haue ye leder none nor guyde,
                  Farewell your truſte now on euery ſyde,
                  And Grekes be vpon you ſo ſtronge,
                  That ye the felde maye not kepe longe.
                  For they caſte them felly you to quyte,
                  This ſame daye as Dares lyſt endyte.
                  For as he wryt homeward as they drawe,
                  Ten thouſand Troians were of grekꝭ ſlawe
                  For all theyr wardes came attones downe,
                  And mortally wythout excepciowne,
                  They kylle and ſlee al that them withſtode.
                  And moſt they were vpon the women wood,
                  To be auenged playnly as I reade,
                  On euery halfe and theyr bloud to ſhede,
                  Without mercy or remyſſyowne,
                  Chaſynge Troyans home into the towne
                  Out of the felde for there mas none abode,
                  So pyteouſly tho wyth them it ſtode,
                  That they ne can none other recure caſte,
                  But kepe theyr towne & ſhit their gates faſte
                  For all theyr hope clene was agone,
                  Any more to fyght wyth theyr fone.
                  For now theyr truſt of knyghthod was away
                  Theyr worthy men ſlayne welawaye.
                  Refute was none but in theyr cyte,
                  To kepe them cloſe it maye none other be.
                  For theim thought they might it kepe longe,
                  Their walles were ſo mighty and ſo ſtronge,
                  If they had plenty of vytayle,
                  Though all ye worlde attones them aſſayle,
                  They may be ſure while they kepe theim in,
                  For euermore that no men ſhall them wyn.
                  Yet neuertheleſſe earely and eke late,
                  The Grekes made tofore euery gate,
                  Full myghty watche and awayte full ſtronge
                  Wyth preuy ſpyes goynge in amonge,
                  That of theyr foen none eſcape away.
                  By none engyne as ferforth as they maye.
                  ¶And in this whyle wythin Troye towne,
                  More then I can make deſcriptiowne,
                  For the quene there was ſo great a ſorowe,
                  Of euery wyght both at eue and morowe,
                  That ſhe alas was ſlayne for her mede.
                  And aldermoſt for they ne myght haue,
                  The dead corps to burye and to graue,
                  With reuerence and wyth honour dewe,
                  For whych they gan to the grekes ſewe.
                  With great prayer and wyth great buſyneſſe,
                  But all in vayne and in ydelneſſe,
                  Was theyr requeſt yt Grekes were ſo wrothe.
                  And fynally wyth many ſondry othe,
                  Onely of malyce and of hote enuye,
                  The dead corps to theim they denye,
                  And ſhortly ſayde of mortall enmyte,
                  That of houndes it ſhall deuoured be,
                  There was no gayne their rācour to cōpeſſe.
                  ¶But Pyrrhus then of very gentylneſſe,
                  Ne would aſſent to ſo foule a dede,
                  But wood and wroth cruell Dyomede,
                  Sayde openly how it was ſyttynge,
                  That ſhe fayle of her buryinge,
                  That ſlaine hadde ſo many worthy man.
                  And thus the ſtryfe amonge the Grekes gan,
                  With great rumoure and alteraciowne.
                  Tyll at the laſte vnder Troye towne,
                  Of her they haue the dead corps ytake,
                  And cruelly in a profounde lake,
                  They haue her caſt where I let her lye,
                  And vnto Troye agayne I wyll me hye,
                  To tell forth how they lyue in pyne.
               
               
                  OH cruell Mars yt haſt made for to fyne,
                  Through thyne yre al ye worthy blode,
                  Of Troye alas why haſt thou be ſo wood,
                  Agaynſt them to ſlee theyr knightes all.
                  Why haſt thou let thy bitter venim fall,
                  On theim alas thou ſterre infortunate,
                  Wyth all the worlde to make them at debate.
                  Oh hatefull ſterre hote combuſt and drye,
                  Fyryirous grounde of all enuye,
                  Haſty euer ful of diſcenſion,
                  And coleryk of thy complexion.
                  In murdre and death is aye thy delyte,
                  In takinge vengeaunce moſt thin appetite,
                  Firſt meuer of anger and of hate,
                  Roote of contek cauſinge to debate.
                  
                     In ſtryfe and murmur moſt is thy deſyre,
                  Fearfull of loke as any wylde fyre.
                  And gaſtfull euer of thy wood ſyght,
                  As any leuen ſo flawminge is thy lyght,
                  Lyke in twyncklynge to the ſpakes redde,
                  In great fyres that abrode ſo ſprede,
                  Conſumynge aye by melancolye,
                  Hertes that be embraced wyth enuye,
                  Thy wrathe is aye ſo fretynge and ſo kene,
                  And cauſeth men to be longe and lene,
                  Comſumpt ſklendre browne & citren hewed,
                  Vnmercyable and right euell thewed.
                  Wonder ſleyghty and engenyous,
                  Compaſſynge and ſuſpecyous,
                  Tryſte and ſolen and full of heuyneſſe,
                  And aſſentynge to all curſedneſſe,
                  To awaytinge death and roberye,
                  To murdre alſo and to trecherye,
                  Without remors of any conſcyence,
                  So venymous is thine influence,
                  And helper arte vnto falſe treaſon.
                  The houſe of whom is the Scorpyon,
                  And crowned arte in the caprycorne,
                  But in the Bull is thy kingdome lorne.
                  For therin is thy deiection,
                  Thy power loſte and dominacion.
                  And haſt alſo in thy ſubiection.
                  Exyle, werre, chaynes and pryſon,
                  Proſcripſyon and captyuyte,
                  That for thy malyce on Troye the cyte,
                  So would god I could chyde aryghte,
                  That haſt on theim kydde thy fell myghte,
                  Of thy rancour hooly the outtraunce.
                  Firſt on theim for to do vengeaunce,
                  With ſperes ſharpe and ſwerdes kene whette,
                  And nowe in pryſon to encloſe them and ſhet.
                  So vengeably that they dare not out,
                  The Grekes fell aye lying them about,
                  They be not holde in maner wyſe,
                  In thy temple to do ſacrafyſe,
                  Nother with Bulles nor wt bores wylde,
                  Nor with beaſtes that euer be vnmylde.
                  As Tygres Beares nor the wood Lyon,
                  Of whych thou arte ſouerayne and patron.
                  They are not hold to do the brymſtone ſmoke
                  On thyne Aulters whiche art ſo felly wroke,
                  Of theym alas and now worſt of all,
                  Thou haſt ſhad out chefe of all thy gall,
                  Amonge them ſelfe to bryng in treaſon,
                  Fayned trouthe and ſymulacyon,
                  To make hertes amonge them ſelfe deuide,
                  Lo how the ſerpent of dyſcorde gan glyde.
                  Full ſlyly in tyll he haue caughte a place,
                  To voyde awaye both happe and grace,
                  With his venym of dyſcenſyon,
                  When it is ſpred in any regyon,
                  In any common borough towne or cyte,
                  Amonges men of high or lowe degre.
                  For when hertes in loue be not one,
                  Farewell fortune theyr grace is clene agone,
                  For where dyſcorde holdeth reſydence,
                  It is well worſe than ſwerde of peſtylence.
                  For what is worſe of her ferre or nere,
                  Than a foe that is famylyere,
                  For who maye more harme yf him luſt,
                  Then any enemye vpon whom men truſt,
                  That to deſcriue ſhortly in a clauſe.
                  The very roote and the trewe cauſe,
                  Of all myſchyefe and confuſyon,
                  In euery lande is diſcenſcion,
                  And more peryllous yf it be pryuye,
                  Recorde I take on Troye the Cyte.
                  That founde Fortune frendly aye at nede,
                  Tyll longe hid hate gan abrode to ſprede,
                  For prudence ſothly hath prouyded,
                  That a renge in it ſelfe deuyded,
                  Shall recureles tourne wylde and waſte,
                  And the dwellers deſolate in haſte.
                  For Mars that is of enuye lorde,
                  Amonge them ſelfe ſowen hath diſcorde,
                  Agayne the whych maye no ſucoure be,
                  For worſe than werre ſothly ſemeth me.
                  Treaſon cured vnder a fayned peace,
                  ¶And roote of all was olde Anchiſes,
                  ¶With his ſonne called Eneas.
                  Dan Anthenor and Pollydamas,
                  That haue contriued amonge theym vtterly,
                  And vnder veil conceyued ſecretly,
                  If it fall Grekes Troye to haue,
                  Fyrſt how they maye theyr owne lyues ſaue,
                  By ſome engyne ſleyghtes or treate,
                  And if ſo were that it maye not be,
                  As they caſte by no maner waye,
                  They would rather traytours be to Troye.
                  Pryuely ſo it were not ſpyed.
                  And couertly with Grekes ben allyed,
                  Then ſtande hole wyth the towne of trouthe,
                  And wylfully of neclygence and ſlouthe,
                  
                     Suraunce & othe of olde made to the towne,
                  Refuſe playnly in concluſyowne,
                  And allyaunce let ſlake and ſlyde,
                  And theyr lygaunce ſet alſo aſyde.
                  In theyr aduyſe they thought for the beſte,
                  For they theim caſte for to lyue at reſte,
                  And meryer eke for erneſt and for game,
                  To ſaue theyr life & wandre forth in ſhame,
                  Then wylfully dye at miſchyefe,
                  To trayiſh their town they held it no reprefe
                  So they might eſcape them ſelfe alyue,
                  Them lyſt nothynge for the towne to ſtryue,
                  They ſought in ſothe for ſoure or for ſwete,
                  A meane waye to lyue in queet.
                  And therupon they haue theyr waye nome,
                  Vnto the kinge. and when yt they were come,
                  To his preſence in full couert wyſe,
                  Vnder coloure they began deuyſe,
                  To tell theyr tayle ſo that fynally,
                  ¶Theyr counſayle was that Pryam vtterly
                  In no maner be not reckles,
                  To purſewe to Grekes for a peace,
                  If it ſo be that he it get maye.
                  And yelde againe to king Menelaye,
                  Without ſtryfe the freſhe quene Heleyne.
                  And ouermore that he not diſdayne,
                  The harmes done by Parys gon full yore,
                  In Citheron iuſtly to reſtore.
               
               
                  BVt oh alas of falſe iniquytye,
                  This counſayle roſe for vnder in ſecrete,
                  The venim was as ſugre vnder gall.
                  For well they wyſte that the Grekes all,
                  Ne would accorde in concluſyowne,
                  To haue a peace with them of Troie towne.
                  Whyles they were to ſuch miſchyefe brought
                  To treate therof in ſothe it was for nought.
                  ¶For Pryamus thē and Hecuba the quene,
                  With his ſonnes and with Pollycene,
                  That yet were left wyth him in the towne,
                  Myght haue reygned by longe ſucceſſyowne,
                  If that Grekes full and not repented,
                  Vnto a peace hooly had aſſented.
                  ¶But that counſayle gyuen was to late,
                  Sythen Grekes of well elder date,
                  Had profered fyrſt at Tenedowne,
                  By the aduyſe of kynge Agamenowne.
                  A fynall peace ſhortly for to ſeyne.
                  So he would reſtore agayne Heleyne,
                  With amendes requyred of reaſon,
                  Of damages wrought at Cytheron.
                  His meſſangers fyrſte whan that he ſente,
                  To Pryamus that wolde not aſſente,
                  To the requeſte iuſtly that they brought.
                  For of peace the meanes that they ſought,
                  Of very pryde were to them denyed,
                  By wylfulneſſe alas ſo they were guyded,
                  For lacke onely of wyt and of prudence.
                  But nowe they haue wt coſt & great diſpence,
                  With ſlaughter of men & many great damage
                  The ſharpe ſhoutes and the cruel rage,
                  Abyde fully of this mortall werre.
                  It is full ſure that they wyll not differre,
                  The tyme forth to treate for a peace,
                  Them lyſte nothynge to be ſo reckeleſſe,
                  Nor vnaduyſed what them ought to do.
                  Trowe ye they wyll ſo lyghtly go,
                  Home into Grece without recompence.
                  They wolde ſeme it were a neglygence.
                  Speake not therof for it wyll not be,
                  Specyally now Troye the cyte,
                  In myſchyefe ſtande vpon his fynall fate.
                  This remedye ſhape was to late,
                  For grekes thought ryght of very truſte,
                  That they of Troye ſtode at their luſte,
                  Holdynge them ſelfe veryly victours.
                  And of their foen fully conquerous.
                  Without doubte or ambyguyte,
                  For the counſayle of this ylke Enee,
                  ¶Of Anthenor and of this Anchyſes,
                  As ye haue herde to treate for a peace.
                  Ne roſe in ſothe but of doubleneſſe.
                  Onely of treaſon and of hyghe falſeneſſe,
                  As Pryamus conceyueth by theyr chere.
                  Lyke in this boke as ye ſhall after here.
                  ¶For on a daye whan that Pryamus,
                  With his ſonne called Amphymacus,
                  A counſayle helde with other of the towne.
                  This three haue made a ſuggeſtyowne,
                  Vnto the kynge touchynge the treate.
                  But he anone diſcrete and aduyſe,
                  Prudently or he woulde aſſente,
                  Gan vndergrope playnely what they mente,
                  Onely of wytte and diſcrecion,
                  Or he it put in execucion,
                  Makynge therof a maner of delaye.
                  But proudely then ſtandyng at a baye.
                  This Anthenor without reuerence,
                  
                     Spake to the kynge in open audyence,
                  And ſhortly ſaide with a ſterne chere,
                  If you lyſt our counſayle for to heare,
                  And do therafter platly thou mayſt cheſe,
                  And but thou wylt where thou wynne or leſe
                  This is the fyne thou getteſt no more of me.
                  Worke after them that of thy counſayle be.
                  To whom the kynge wonder ſoberly,
                  Anſwered agayne full beningenely.
                  Syr Anthenor ye ought you not greue,
                  For myne entente is not to repreue,
                  Your wyſe counſayle nor your prudent rede.
                  If it conclude to the common ſpede,
                  Of my people and ſaluacyon.
                  But wyte ryght well iuſtly of reaſon,
                  Vnder ſuger if there be cured gall,
                  In preiudyce of my lyeges all.
                  Cauſynge them in myſchyefe for to fyne,
                  I wyll there from vtterly declyne,
                  As ryght requyreth for our alder eaſe,
                  And me ſemeth this ſhould not diſpleaſe,
                  To thy conceyte nor do the none offence,
                  For euery man is holden of prudence,
                  The worſt to leue and the better take,
                  Wyſedome to ſewe and folye to forſake,
                  And remedye to ſeke for his ſore,
                  And with that worde the Troian Anthenor,
                  Of ſodayne yre gan to chaunge his bloud,
                  And abreydynge on his fete he ſtode,
                  And full felly ſayde vnto the kynge.
                  ¶Now ſykerly this is a wonder thynge,
                  How your wyſedome and auyſeneſſe,
                  Are blynded ſo of very wylfulneſſe,
                  That ye maye not on no ſyde ſe,
                  The great myſchyefe and aduerſytee,
                  That we are in vpon euery ſyde.
                  For we maye not diſſimule nor hide,
                  In what diſioynt playnly that we ſtande,
                  Be not our foen alſo here at hande,
                  And haue beſet our wall rounde aboute,
                  And we for feare dare not yſſue oute,
                  Nor be ſo bolde to vndo a gate,
                  With them to fyght that vs deadly hate,
                  We be ſo feble and they are ſo ſtronge,
                  For ſothly yet they haue them amonge,
                  Fyfty kynges worthy of renowne,
                  Confederat to our deſtructiowne.
                  And therupon platly wyll abyde,
                  Whych vowed haue in theyr great pryde,
                  Neuer parte henſe fro the towne,
                  Tyll the walles be tourned vp ſo downe.
                  Your worthy ſonnes alſo now be dead,
                  That you were wont to helpe in your nede,
                  Your manly knyghtes ſlayne euerychone,
                  That vs to ſaue remedye is none.
                  It is in vayne to treaty of dyffence,
                  Wherfore I read of reaſon and prudence,
                  Or we be ſlayne and our Cyte leſe.
                  Of two harmes the leaſt for to cheſe.
                  This to ſaye that in our entente,
                  As ſyttynge is and expedyent,
                  We treate of peace and no longer feyne,
                  And herewythall reſtore agayne Heleyne.
                  For loue of whom many worthy man,
                  Hath loſt his lyfe ſythen the werre began.
                  For nowe Parys is vnder ſtone ygraue,
                  The beſt rede in ſothe that ye maye haue.
                  To ſende her home agayne to Menelaye.
                  And to profre as fer forth as ye maye,
                  To reſtore within a littell whyle,
                  The harmes done by Parys in the yle,
                  Whych men are wont Cithera to call.
                  This is my reade here afore you all.
                  And wyth that word vp roſe Amphimacus,
                  To this counſayle full contraryous,
                  And ſhortly ſayde that it ſhall not be,
                  ¶As Anthenor hath rade in no degre.
                  And euer thus without more reſpyte,
                  He ſpake to him of very hygh deſpyte.
               
               
                  THou Anthenor I haue eſpyed wele,
                  We may truſte in the neuer a dele.
                  Wyth vs to ſtande in our great nede,
                  For trouth and fayth in the be nowe deade,
                  Falſhed hath ſlayne in the ſtabilneſſe.
                  And in ſtede of thy ſykerneſſe,
                  We fynde in the ſothly varyaunce.
                  Where is become the fayth of thy lygeaunce,
                  The heſtes made to ſtande wyth thy kinge.
                  Where be thine othes ſo double in meaninge.
                  Where is now hyd thy olde aſſuraunce.
                  Where is become thy fayned falſe conſtaunce.
                  In ſtede of whych mutabylyte,
                  Hath take his place like as ye maye ſe.
                  With dewe chaunge thou art ſo remewable.
                  Vpō no ground thou mayſt not ſtande ſtable
                  Thy trouth is gone of olde affectiowne,
                  That yu ſhuldeſt haue to ſtand with ye towne,
                  
                     Of fayth with vs for to lyue or deye.
                  For truſte and hope exyled be aweye,
                  In thy perſone ſhortly for to wryte,
                  That buſy arte the kynge to excyte,
                  In diſencreaſe of his eſtate royall.
                  Vnto Grekes now be ſo thrall,
                  To ſeke a peace as it were for dread,
                  Thou ſhouldeſt rather of thy manlyhead,
                  Haue profered him the Citye to diffende,
                  There on thy lyfe at outraunce to diſpende▪
                  
                  Wherfore in ſothe here I the aſſure,
                  Rather then we ſhoulde this endure,
                  Twenty thouſande ſhall with ſpere & ſhelde,
                  Vpon a daye be ſlayne in the felde,
                  Thy worde I holde for no prophecye,
                  For it procedeth of very trecherye,
                  Of doubilneſſe and of falſe treaſon,
                  Vndermyninge with prodycyon.
                  Though that thou outwarde ſhewe fayre,
                  The venym hyd thy tayle doth repayre,
                  Lyke a ſerpent ſtyngynge vnder floures,
                  Thereby to fele of ſuch counſayloures.
                  ¶And in this whyle with wordes deſpytous
                  ¶Full bytingly hath Amphymacus,
                  ¶All openly Anthenor repreued.
                  With his counſayle ſo he was agreued.
                  Seynge the treaſon that he would mene,
                  Tyll Eneas gan to go betwene,
                  With floryſhed ſpeche full of flatterye,
                  And gan his tale ſo to modefye,
                  Lyke as he mente trouth in his entente.
                  ¶But therin was double attendemente,
                  He ſpake but one and yet he mente twayne,
                  ¶Amphymacus onely to refrayne,
                  To attempre him of his melancolye,
                  Onely tyll he might a time eſpie,
                  Like his purpoſe that he maye procede,
                  To execute it fully vp in dede.
                  And when that he founde had a ſpace,
                  Vnder pretence of a trewe face,
                  With his tale he gan to breake oute,
                  Many a Troyan ſtandinge him aboute.
                  And ſhortly ſayde for concluſyowne,
                  Touchynge diffence playnly of the towne,
                  Howe that henge onely in balaunce,
                  For both hope truſt and aſſuraunce,
                  Of the Cyte taken haue theyr flyght,
                  For fynally our manhod and our myght,
                  And our knyghthod togyther be ago.
                  With the Grekes more to haue ado.
                  And with theim ſtoutly for to fyght,
                  The whych hath loſt many a worthy knyght.
               
               
                  ANd they be redy vpon vs to ſet,
                  And we dare not our gatꝭ more vnſhet
                  We be alas ſuppriſed ſo wyth dread.
                  Then ſemeth me how it is great nede.
                  ¶By good aduyſe for to ſeke a meane,
                  In this matter how we ſhall vs demeane.
                  ¶And for my parte ſothfaſtly I ſaye,
                  I knowe as nowe none ſo redy waye,
                  As prudentlye for a peace to treate.
                  ¶But Pyram then in a ſodayne heate,
                  Without abode of cheare and face pale,
                  Of rancoure gan interrupte his tale.
                  For he attempre myght not his herte,
                  So fretingely the treaſon made him ſmerte,
                  ¶And for he myght him ſelfe not reſtrayne,
                  Thus he ſayde vnto both twayne.
                  To Anthenor and alſo to Enee,
                  I wonder greatly that ye hardy be,
                  In very trouthe for ſhame ſo to varye,
                  And that ye be ſo rebell and contrarye,
                  Some onely of falſe colluſyon,
                  Vs to brynge in deſperacyon,
                  Me and my lyeges yf I ſhall not fayne,
                  Of falſe entente to catche vs in a trayne.
                  Alas howe maye you in your herte fynde,
                  Agayne nature for to be vnkynde,
                  That whylom were of my counſayle chefe,
                  Of euery thynge or it was brought to prefe,
                  ¶For ye abſente I could nothynge fyne.
                  And nowe alas ye caſte to declyne,
                  Awaye fro me barayne lefte and ſole,
                  That to remembre it is to great a dole.
                  How any wyght alas ſo chaunge can,
                  For who ſhall more truſte any man,
                  When ye be founde double of entente.
                  Can ye not thynke how by your aſſente,
                  By your counſayle and by your aduyſe,
                  Whylom how I ſente forth Parys,
                  Into Grece of full yore ago.
                  ¶And Anthenor thou woteſt thy ſelfe alſo,
                  How thou were fyrſte made imbaſſadour.
                  And therupon chyefe counſaylour,
                  Touchinge the ſonde made for Exeon.
                  But after that cauſe and mocyon,
                  Though were in ſothe that Parys ſhulde go,
                  
                     Into Grece thou woteſt well it is ſo.
                  For I ne durſte of preſumpcion,
                  Haue ſente Parys vnto Citheron,
                  Without aduyce and auctorytye,
                  Of Eneas playnly and of the,
                  Vpon Grekes a werre to haue gonne.
                  I trowe in ſothe that you neuer konne,
                  Excuſe him ſelfe and you be aduyſed.
                  For euerye thynge wrought was and deuiſed
                  And execute by counſayle of you twayne.
                  For when Parys went for Heleyne,
                  Grounde and roote to ſpeake in ſpeciall,
                  Were thou Enee and cauſe principall,
                  Preſent alſo when euery thing was wrought
                  Out of Grece when ſhe was hither brought.
                  For this the ſothe out of that regyowne,
                  She neuer had come to this towne,
                  If thou haddeſt he therto contrayre.
                  Albe thou wouldeſt with thy wordes fayre,
                  Thy ſelfe excuſe here in audience,
                  As thou knewe nought of that offence,
                  But fully were vnwittinge of the dede.
                  And nowe my ſonnes euerychone be deade,
                  And ye me ſe alone deſtitute,
                  Your counſayle is as for chyefe refute,
                  Me to purſewe to Grekes for a peace,
                  As I were foryetell reckles,
                  To remembre the infinite outrages,
                  The mortall werre ſlaughter and damages,
                  The cruelte and deſtructiowne,
                  That they haue wrought herupō this towne
                  That veryly when I all recorde,
                  For to be dead I can not accorde,
                  With them to treate like as ye deuiſe,
                  For I eſpye in many ſondry wyſe,
                  In your entente a right peryllous ſnare,
                  So couertly vnder falſhed dare,
                  That it wyll be to my confuſyon,
                  If ye acheue your entencion,
                  Fynally as ye haue it ſhape.
                  For impoſſyble it were to eſcape,
                  Shamefully at myſchyefe me to dye,
                  Without recure of any remedye.
                  For this the fyne I knowe it out of doubte,
                  Of the treate that ye be aboute.
                  ¶And ryght anone the Troian Eneas,
                  Of yre and rancoure ſo ameued was,
                  Agayne the kynge with a ſwellynge herte,
                  That ſodaynly out at the dore he ſterte,
                  After he had for to be awroke
                  Full many worde agayne the kynge yſpoke.
                  He wente his waye and Anthenor alſo.
                  ¶And Pyramus of very yre and wo,
                  Sodainly braſte out for to wepe,
                  He might him ſelfe not for anguiſhe kepe,
                  The anger fret vpon him ſo ſore,
                  Within him ſelfe conceyuinge more and more
                  By euydence of diſcreſcyon,
                  The couert guyle and the falſe treaſon,
                  That they for him and for his Cyte,
                  Yſhapen haue but he auyſed be,
                  Dredynge aye that theſe ylke twayne,
                  By ſome engyne or conſpyred trayne,
                  To the Grekes would hym betrayet
                  Wherfore the kynge caſte and would ſaye,
                  Shape awaye theyr malyce to withſtande,
                  So the treaſon that they toke on hande,
                  Onely of ryght in dede or it were founde,
                  Vpon them ſelfe myght agayne rebounde,
                  That the full execucyon,
                  Of theyr contryued conſpyracion,
                  Reſorte agayne in ful dewe wyſe.
                  Onely of theym that gan it fyrſte deuyſe.
                  Treaſon for treaſon is conuenyent,
                  For to falſhed the guerdon pertynente,
                  Is ſhamefull deathe and the fynall mede.
                  Wherfore to ſhape in this great nede,
                  ¶A remedye this olde Pryamus,
                  ¶Calleth his ſonne Amphymacus.
                  And pytyouſly alone but they twayne,
                  In teares drowned gan to him complayne,
                  On Anthenor and on this Eneas.
                  And ſayde ſonne take hede on this caſe,
                  And thynke how I am thy father deare,
                  And how there be now no more yfere,
                  Of my ſonnes lefte wyth me alyue,
                  But thou alone and therfore as blyue,
                  Touching ye treaſon conſpyred and yſworne,
                  What eu
                        •
                     r fall let vs be toforne,
                  Onely of wyſedome away for to make,
                  That we maye fyrſt in the trappe theim take
                  And to puruey for theym euen ylyche,
                  That iuſtly they maye fall in the dyche,
                  Whych they haue made and for vs ytreyned.
                  And in all haſte let ſo be ordeyned,
                  That this matter cloſe be kept in mewe,
                  To fyne onely that they not eſchewe.
                  For to be ſlayue of equite and ryght.
                  
                     In this place euen towarde night.
                  For I purpoſe playnly for theyr ſake,
                  Agayne that houre a counſayle for to make,
                  And vnder coloure make them both call.
                  And thou vnwarely ſhalt vpon them fall,
                  With knightes ſworne vnto the and me,
                  In this matter for to be ſecre.
                  And right anone this Amphimacus,
                  Aſſented is vnto Pryamus,
                  To accompliſhe in full ſecret wiſe,
                  Fro poynt to poynt as ye haue herde deuyſe.
               
               
                  BVt ſothe is ſayde of full yore agone,
                  Of olde wiſe ye counſayle is there none,
                  In all this worlde ſo pryuely ycaſte.
                  Tyll it will out platly at the laſte.
                  For the people whych that is rurall,
                  Sayth yt ſecretes which be not knowen at all,
                  The earthe will as they make mynde,
                  Diſcure theim of his owne kinde.
                  And of nature vp caſt and diſcloſe,
                  The thinge that men are wont in it to cloſe.
                  Let euery man beware as it is good,
                  Or his counſayle go to ferre abrode.
                  And ſpecially lordes haue great nede,
                  Of all men they ſtande moſt in dreade,
                  So great awayte is vpon them layde.
                  That when it happeth that a thinge be ſayde,
                  Or ones ſpoke of a lordes mouthe,
                  It falleth ofte that it is full kouthe,
                  And reported and yſprad full wyde,
                  In many coſte by theim that ſtande aſyde,
                  Or he be ware by ſodayne auenture.
                  For ſome in hap in whom he doth aſſure,
                  Wyll fyrſte of all him reporte amys.
                  Therfore in ſothe beſt for them is this,
                  For to beware and kepe theyr tonge.
                  A purpoſe caſte ſhould not be ronge,
                  Nor ſpoke abrode amonge folkes rude.
                  For gladly aye the worſte they conclude,
                  Of euery thynge while that it is newe,
                  In reporte varyaunt and vntrewe,
                  For after reaſon nothinge they expowne,
                  But after will the folke that be of towne,
                  Lyke the purpoſe which they deſyre.
                  For they fayre as a wiſpe of fyre,
                  When it brenneth brighteſt in his blaſe.
                  Sodaynly it waſteth as a waſe,
                  On ſuche folke platly is no truſte,
                  That fire and water holde in their fiſte,
                  Beynge with both ylke indifferente.
                  Now hote nowe colde lyke as theyr entente
                  Of newe chaungeth ſo in theyr courage,
                  After the calme foloweth ſodayne rage,
                  To daye they loue and to morowe hate,
                  To truſte a common laſteth by no date,
                  Let not a lorde make them to ſecre.
                  For nowe the counſayle is ronne to Enee,
                  That Pryam wende had be ful cloſe,
                  For the rumour and the winde aroſe,
                  By falſe reporte is ſo ferre yblowe,
                  That Eneas and Anthenor well knowe,
                  Ende and gynnynge and euery maner thyng,
                  And the hole counſayle of Pryamus the king
                  ¶And both two full of one entente,
                  With other eke that were of theyr aſſente,
                  Conſpyred be and togyther ſworne.
                  And couertly caſte a waye aforne,
                  That fynally Troye the Cyte,
                  By theyr engyne ſhall deſtroyed be.
                  And of accorde caſte playnly thus,
                  If it hap that kynge Pryamus,
                  Sende for theim ſhortly to conclude,
                  They would come with ſuch a multytude,
                  Of armed men if they ſe nede,
                  That of him they ſhoulde nothing drede.
                  For Eneas was in that Cyte,
                  Of great power and auctoryte,
                  Both of bloud and kynred allyed,
                  And for his golde greatly magnyfyed,
                  Through the Cyte moſte in ſpecyall,
                  That he in myght and power perygall,
                  As ſayth Guydo was vnto the kynge.
                  And Anthenor almoſt in euery thynge▪
                  
                  Was vnto hym egall of power,
                  And both twayne of one herte entyre,
                  Conſpyred haue in ſothe agayne the towne,
                  Fynally to this concluſyowne,
                  That they of Grekes myght haue ſuerte,
                  Wyth theyr treaſour to go at lybertee,
                  With theyr allyes borne of Troye towne.
                  When all were brought to deſtructyowne,
                  With life and good ſaufe without more.
                  At whyche tyme for Dan Anthenor,
                  And Eneas Pryamus hath ſente,
                  To accomplyſhe the fyne of his entente.
                  ¶And they in haſte with ſo great a route,
                  Came of knyghtes ſtuffed him aboute,
                  
                     That therof was aſtoned Pryamus.
                  ¶And made ſende for Amphimacus,
                  Commaundyng him to chaunge his purpoſe.
                  For well he wyſſe his counſayle was not cloſe
                  And by ſygnes gan well vnderſtande,
                  That the matter whiche they had in hande,
                  Diſcured was to his confuſyon.
                  Bothe the murder and conſpyration.
                  Apparceyuynge in his inwarde ſyght,
                  The great power of this Troyan knyght.
                  And the fauour of this Eneas,
                  And of the comon howe he foſtred was.
                  The whiche proudely in open audyence,
                  Tofore the kynge declareth his ſentence,
                  Fully concludyng maugre who ſayth nay.
                  How that there was none other meane waye
                  Refute nor gayne nor other remedye.
                  ¶But onely peace who ſo it denye.
                  Other eſcapynge playnely was there none.
                  And thervpon the commons euerychone,
                  With one voyce gan calle and crye,
                  And his counſayle gan greatly magnifye.
                  Albe the kynge was therto al contrary.
                  But Eneas lyſte no lenger tary,
                  Nor dyfferre the fyne of his purpoſe.
                  But wonder Irous from his ſee he roſe.
                  And full vngoodly ſpake vnto the kynge,
                  And ſhortely ſayde without more taryinge.
                  Where ſo befall thou be lefe or lothe,
                  Or with his purpoſe pleaſed outher wrothe,
                  Thou mayſt well truſte it ſhall none other be.
                  For fynally herken this of me.
                  Maugre thy wyll and alſo all the myght,
                  This ſame daye or it be nyghte,
                  For a peace with grekes we ſhall trete.
                  ¶ And whan the kinge ſawe the feruent hete
                  Bothe of the comon and of Eneas.
                  He gan anone diſſymule in this caſe.
                  For of prudence he gan to ſe,
                  For that tyme it may none other be.
                  Wherfore ſyth he myght it not amende,
                  He wiſely gan for to condeſcende,
                  To the purpoſe platly of Enee.
                  And ſayde he wolde goodly take at gree,
                  And except what them lyſte ordeyne.
                  And ſo the kynge lerned to fayne,
                  Agayne the conceyte platly of his herte.
                  For otherwyſe he coulde not aſterte,
                  Coacte of force and of vyolence.
                  And when he ſawe in his aduertence,
                  That he myght dyuerte on no ſyde,
                  From the fraude that ſowen was ſo wyde,
                  Without grutchynge he falſely gaue aſſent.
                  That Anthenor ſhulde forth be ſente,
                  By comon choyſe to treate for the towne,
                  Whiche was tofore inconcluſyowne,
                  With the grekes accorded fynally,
                  Touchynge the effecte of his ambaſſadrye.
                  Fro poynt to poynt where he wolde ſtonde,
                  Variaunt fro that he toke on hande.
                  And for they had afore hym full conceyued,
                  With better chere he was of them receyued.
                  And in this whyle that Anthenor was out,
                  For to treate with the grekes ſtoute,
                  As ye haue harde for a peace fynall.
                  In the towne aboute on euery wall,
                  They of Troye gan aſcende blyue,
                  Withe the braunches of many freſhe olyue,
                  In token of peace and grekes eke agayne,
                  Amyd the fielde endelonge the playne,
                  Shewed them that all myght ſene.
                  Eke of Olyue luſty bowes grene.
                  ¶And to confyrme this fro poynt to poynt,
                  And that nothinge ſtode in diſioynte.
                  The worthy kynge great Agamenon,
                  Commytted hath of hyghe diſcrecion,
                  Fully power and auctorytie,
                  For the grekes playnely vnto three.
                  Fyrſte of all for a peace to treat,
                  Vnto the wyſe kynge of Crete.
                  ¶To Vlixes and to Dyomede.
                  And to cheſe mo thē thought it was no nede,
                  For what they do they wyll holde ſtable.
                  And fynally not be variable,
                  From the ende platly that they make.
                  And thervpon was aſſuraunce take,
                  Of eyther parte by bonde of ſacrament.
                  And ſo they be with Anthenor ywent,
                  Out aſyde this worthy lordes three.
                  And when they were at theyr liberte,
                  From all tumulte alone pryuely.
                  This Anthenor full of trechery,
                  Reſpecte of falſhode and of doubleneſſe,
                  Gan his purpoſe vnto them expreſſe.
                  Behotynge them to traſhe the cyte,
                  So they wolde make him ſurety.
                  ¶That fyrſte hym ſelfe and with him Eneas
                  Shall fredom haue in euery maner caſe,
                  
                     With playne power commited to the towne.
               
               
                  BVt kinge Priam haſh aye ſuſpectiowne,
                  To Anthenor and alſo to Enee,
                  How that they ſhall deſtroye his cytye,
                  And to him ſelfe triſt of hertye wo,
                  He ſayde al as what is beſt to do,
                  In this myſchyefe that I am in fall.
                  And yet is this to me worſt of all,
                  That I am now through myn aduerſytye,
                  Bounde and compelled of neceſſytye,
                  Maugre my head in maner of raunſon,
                  For my lyfe to make redempcyon,
                  Vnto my foen that I haue moſt at herte.
                  I ſe ryght well it maye not aſterte,
                  For I muſt paye there gayneth no ſuccoour.
                  My good my golde ryches and treaſoure,
                  To my moſt foen and dare it not denye,
                  And yet I ſtonde moſt in ieopardye,
                  Without refute hanginge in balaunce,
                  Alas conſtreyned through my wofull chaūce,
                  To obeye theyr luſt that mortally me hate,
                  Dryuen therto of byrthe through my fate,
                  So Parchas haue my deſtynye yſhape,
                  By none engyne I maye it not eſcape.
               
               
                  ANd while Priā gan thus to complayne,
                  To Anthenor came the quene Heleyne,
                  Beſechynge him in his embaſſadrye,
                  Of gentylneſſe for to ſpecyfye,
                  Through his prudent medyacyon,
                  To fynde awaye in conſeruacyon,
                  Of her eſtate fynally that ſhe,
                  To Menelaye may reconſiled be.
                  If ſo fall that the treate holde,
                  So that her lorde of his grace would,
                  Reſtore her vnto her degre,
                  Onely of mercy and of high pytye.
                  ¶And Anthenor vnto her requeſt,
                  Gaue audyence makynge a beheſt,
                  How he would with all his herte entere,
                  Be dilygent to treate of this mattere.
                  And therwithal of hym ſhe toke her leue,
                  And this was done on the ſame eue,
                  That Anthenor I pray god giue him ſorowe
                  To Grekes went on the next morowe,
                  Onelye to treate for a peace fynall.
                  And in this whyle the feaſte funerall,
                  Was holde in Troye myne auctour wryteth thus,
                  Of a lorde that called was Glaucus,
                  A manly knight tofore in his lyuynge,
                  And ſonne was of Pryamus the kynge.
                  And ouer this lyke as ſayth Guydo,
                  The kynge Pryam buſyed him alſo
                  Of Pantaſylla how the body myght,
                  Be conſerued freſhly to the ſyghte.
                  And for loue of this hardy quene,
                  Of pured golde and of ſtones ſhene,
                  He let make a veſſell full royall,
                  And fylde it full wyth bawine naturall.
                  To kepe the corps from corrupciowne,
                  Tyll the werre of Grekes and of the towne,
                  Through the treate were yſtynted clene.
               
               
                  SO that the kynge called Phylomene,
                  This dead quene might of affection,
                  Carye it home into her regyon,
                  With the aunceters buryed for to be,
                  Lyke the maner of olde antyquyte.
                  It were in vayne more for to ryme,
                  I paſſe ouer vnto the Treatee,
                  Atwene Grekes and Troy the Cytee.
                  And for the partye of Grekes as I reade,
                  Fyrſte Vlyxes and with him Diomede.
                  Aſſygned were and the kynge of Crete,
                  With Anthenor and Eneas to mete.
                  And all yfere ſhortly in ſentence,
                  By conduyt firſt and after by lycence,
                  Of the noble wyſe Agamenowne,
                  They entred be into Troye towne,
                  By conueyinge of this Eneas,
                  Of whoſe cōmynge ſuch a ioye there was.
                  Of the comunes whych in thinges newe,
                  Reioyce aye after though they rewe.
                  Wenynge full well in theyr opinyon,
                  That by the good medyacyon,
                  Of Vlyxes and the kinge of Crete,
                  And Diomede that came eke to Treate,
                  That theſe thre ſhoulde make as faſte,
                  A fynall peace euer for to laſte,
                  And a full ende of theyr alder ſorowe.
                  And therupon earely the next morowe,
                  Pryam let make a conuocaciowne,
                  Of all the worthy within Troye towne,
                  And when they were aſſembled al in one,
                  The wyſe Vlyxes roſe vp anone,
                  And his tale gan in ſuche wyſe,
                  So prudently his wordes to deuyſe.
                  
                     That to herken euery man hath ioye.
                  And ſpecyally they that were of Troye,
                  That of his inwarde meanynge fraudelente,
                  Full lyttell wyſt nor of his entente,
                  To theyr pleaſaunce ſo he could fayne.
                  And fyrſte he axeth of them thinges twayne.
                  The one was this that of the Cytye,
                  He would haue golde an huge quantytye,
                  In recompence of harmes that were do.
                  An other thynge he axed alſo,
                  Without abode that Amphymacus,
                  That ſonne was to kynge Pryamus,
                  Perpetually that he exyled be,
                  Neuer to entre Troye the Cyte,
                  For golde, prayer, nor for no raunſon.
                  And this was done by ſuggeſtyon,
                  Of Anthenor falſe and malycyous,
                  Onely for he was contraryous,
                  That he ſhoulde treate for to a peace,
                  And for that he was not reckles,
                  To ſaye a trouthe this Amphimacus.
                  Therfore in ſothe this ſerpent enuyous,
                  Nowe he hath founde a time for to byte,
                  He though the would cruelly him quyte,
                  For trouthe onely that was in his entente.
                  ¶Therfore it is full expedyent,
                  Of prudence euery man to charge.
                  That his tunge be not ouer large.
                  Trouthes all be not for to ſayne.
                  For wyſedome is ſometyme to fayne,
                  And diſſymule in aduerſytye,
                  Specyally when men in trouble be,
                  And ſe theyr ſpeche maye them not auayle.
                  Better is then that theyr tunge fayle,
                  Than folyly to theyr domage ſpeake.
                  Men muſt amonge cure and ouer reke,
                  The trouthe of thynges onely of prudence,
                  And humbly ſuffer in pacyence,
                  For falſe reporte of folkes enuyous.
                  Who can ſo do I holde hym vertuous.
                  For better it is a whyle to abyde,
                  Than ſaye all out of rancour & of pryde.
                  Sylence in ſothe hath oft in haſty ſtryfe,
                  Had of vyctorye a prerogatyfe,
                  And the palme of debates wonne,
                  That well are they that ſo ſuffre konne,
                  And be of ſpeche not preſumptuous.
                  For as I tolde this Amphymacus,
                  Notwithſtandynge that he trouth mente,
                  Yet for a worde he into exyle wente.
                  Albe that god full iuſtly afterwarde,
                  Hath Anthenor quyt for his rewarde.
                  For wyth the ſame he was after hyt,
                  For his falſeneſſe duely as it ſyt.
                  This to ſaye of olde antyquytye,
                  He was to exyle and captyuytye,
                  Foriudged after into proſcripſyowne,
                  And relegate out of Troye towne,
                  Perpetually by the procurynge,
                  Of Eneas. loo howe the ryghtfull kynge,
                  That all maye ſe in his drouydence.
                  Full iuſtly can make recompence,
                  Of doubylneſſe and ſymulacyon.
                  And of all ſuche contriued falſe treaſon.
                  For who auengeth with falſhed on his parte
                  He ſhall be hyt with the ſame darte.
                  He ſkapeth not for to haue a wounde.
                  For falſhed aye wyll agayne rebounde.
                  Where it is roſe fyrſte to his orygynall,
                  Reſorte agayne ryght as doth a ball.
                  For who for fraude euer doth him caſte,
                  Truſte ryght well it wyll out at the laſte.
                  And who ſupplanteth ſhall ſupplanted be,
                  By good example as ye ſhall after ſe.
               
               
                  OF Anthenor the ſtorye yf ye reade,
                  And whiles that they treate & procede,
                  Touchynge the exyle and preſcripſion,
                  Captyuytye and relegacyon,
                  That they caſte for Amphymacus.
                  There was herde a noyſe meruaylous,
                  A great tumulte and a wonder ſowne,
                  Lyke as it were a lamentacyowne,
                  Of ſondry folke playning in diſtreſſe,
                  For hertye wo and inwarde heuyneſſe,
                  Out of the treate euen when they gone,
                  This confuſe crye after gan anone.
                  ¶Wherof Vlyxes and eke Dyomede,
                  Sodaynly fel in a dreade,
                  Suppoſynge in theyr oppynyowne,
                  That ſome rumour was fall in the towne,
                  Amonge the people in the comontee,
                  Of haſty rancour auenged for to be.
                  For the loue of Amphimacus,
                  That cauſeles was exyled thus,
                  Of volunte agayne all trouthe and ryght.
                  Wherfore the dradde when it drewe to night,
                  To be murdred of the comons of the towne,
                  
                     For the fraude and conſpiracion,
                  Falſly of olde enmytee.
                  By Anthenor and by falſe Enee.
                  And ſothly yet there was no maner man,
                  That could wyt wherof it began,
                  Nor eſpye firſte when it aroſe,
                  In all the paleys nor throughout the cloſe,
                  They herde it well but they ſaye nought,
                  Wherof they were aſtoned in their thought,
                  And affrayde of very ſodayne dreade,
                  Vlixes firſt and alſo Diomede,
                  Leſt with comons they had be byſet.
                  But Anthenor without longer let,
                  To make them ſure from all tumulte & crye,
                  The Grekes hath conueyed ſecretly.
                  And when they were aſſured of theyr place,
                  Vlixes firſte with a chaunged face,
                  Gan pynche ſore in the ſelfe whyle,
                  At Anthenor of reaſon and of guyle.
                  That with his heſtes ſo fro daye to daye,
                  Of very ſleyghte put them in delaye,
                  Semynge fully for ought he could eſpye,
                  There was deceyt fraude or trecherye,
                  In the couenauntes that he hath behight.
                  ¶To whom anone this falſe Troian knight
                  With ſadde cheare and ſobre countenaunce,
                  Well auyſed in his dalyaunce.
                  Aunſwered agayne and playnly did expreſſe,
                  Iwyſſe quod he I take vnto wytneſſe,
                  The hygh goddes that euery thynge may ſe,
                  Without fayninge that I haue buſy be,
                  Fro poynt to poynt your purpoſe to acheue.
                  So that I do you not greue,
                  And fynally that ye lyſt to heare.
                  There is one thinge perturbeth this mattere,
                  Whiche I ſhall ſo it be none offence,
                  Playnely remembre here in your preſence.
                  ¶This to ſaye of olde antiquitee,
                  Fyrſte at the buyldynge of Troye the Cytye,
                  That whilom was ycalled Yllion,
                  For cauſe onely at his foundacion,
                  Kinge Ylyus ſythe go full longe,
                  The founder was of the wall ſtronge.
                  After whom as made is mencion,
                  It called was and named Yllyon.
                  In the whych with great and buſy charge,
                  In Pallas name he made a temple large,
                  That paſſingly was had in reuerence,
                  And when this Phane of moſt excellence,
                  Perfourmed was by maſonry full wele,
                  And ſaue the roſe complete euerydele,
                  Of myghty ſtone the buyldinge well aſſured.
                  But or it was with lede and tymber cured,
                  Agayne tempeſt for to be obſtacle,
                  There tell a wonder onely by myracle,
                  That I dare well affyrme it in certayne,
                  Suche an other was there neuer ſeyne.
                  Who ſo liſt ſe and conſydre all,
                  This meruayle was ſo celeſtiall.
               
               
                  FOr there came downe from ye high heauē,
                  By Plyades and the ſterres ſeuen,
                  And through the eyre holdynge his paſſage.
                  Lyke a fayre and meruaylous ymage,
                  That in this world though men had ſought,
                  Ne was there none halfe ſo well ywrought.
                  For as it is truely to ſuppoſe,
                  Pygmalyon remembred in the roſe,
                  In his tyme had no connynge,
                  To graue or paynte ſo curyous a thynge.
                  For it was wrought wyth dylygent laboure,
                  By hande of Aungell in the heauenly toure.
                  Thrugh goddes myght and diuine ordinaūce
                  And hither ſent through his purueyaunce,
                  For a relyke onely of his grace,
                  There to abyde for a protection,
                  For a diffence and ſaluacion,
                  Perpetually whyle the worlde maye dure,
                  Agayne all miſchyefe and myſauenture.
                  Euery trouble and trybulacyon,
                  In ſuſteynynge and releuacion,
                  And ſoueraygne helpe eke of this Cyte.
                  The whych neuer maye deſtroyed be,
                  By no engyne that men maye purchaſe.
                  The goddes haue graunted ſuch a grace.
                  And ſuch vertue annexed eke therto.
                  That Troye in ſothe maye neuer be fordo,
                  Tyll this relyke ſtole be awaye.
                  And yet in ſothe there is no man that maye,
                  From the place ſlere it nor remewe,
                  But the preieſte to whom it is dewe.
                  Onely of offyce to touche it with his honde,
                  So mightely conſerued is the bonde,
                  That who attempteth in concluſyon,
                  It to remewe of preſumpcion,
                  At the fyne platly he ſhall fayle.
                  For force none maye him not auayle.
                  For it in ſothe will not remeued be,
                  
                     Except of him to whom of deutee,
                  It pertayneth as ye haue herde toforne.
                  And ouermore there is no man yet borne,
                  That reade can nor tell in no degre,
                  Veryly where it be ſtone or tree.
                  Nor howe it was deuiſed nor ywrought.
                  There is no wight ſo ſubtill in his thoughte,
                  Ceriouſly to tell the manere.
                  For Minerua that is ſo freſhe and clere,
                  The ſterne goddeſſe thrugh her great might,
                  That is ſo dreadful both of loke and ſight,
                  Which on her breſt hath of criſtall,
                  Her ſhelde Egys this goddeſſe immortall.
                  Ygraunted hath in bokes as I lerne,
                  Through her power which that is eterne.
                  This holy relike for a memoryall,
                  To her Temple of buildinge moſt royall,
                  It to conſerue from all aſſault of dreade,
                  And to ſuccoure in euery maner nede,
                  Agayne theyr foen vnto Troye towne,
                  While it is kept with deuocyowne.
                  So that alwaye by ſucceſſyowne,
                  From kinge to kinge in the line downe.
                  But iuſt tytle liuely ſuccede,
                  Therto annexed that they take hede,
                  Prudently auoyding necligence,
                  It to conſerue with due reuerence,
                  As they are bounde and yholde of ryght.
                  Thē ſhall no enemye power haue nor might,
                  To do domage in hindering of the towne,
                  And why it is called Palladyowne,
                  Lyke as clerkes wryte of it and ſayne,
                  Is for Pallas to make her towne certayne.
                  This relike ſente fro the heauen downe.
                  And to conclude ſhortly my reaſowne,
                  This the cauſe our purpoſe is ſo let.
                  ¶Than quod Vlixus ſith it maye be no bet,
                  Our labour is in ydell and in vayne,
                  Without recure if it be certayne.
                  As thou haſt ſayd this towne in no degre,
                  Through this relyke maye not deſtroyed be.
                  It was foly the to vndertake,
                  Vnto Grekes beheſte for to make,
                  Without this thou haddeſt be well ſure.
                  ¶Quod Anthenor yet there is recure,
                  As I haue hight ye ſhall haue the towne,
                  Although there be a dylacyowne,
                  And the maner anone I ſhall tell,
                  If it ſo be ye lyſt a whyle dwell,
                  Without noyſe other perturbaunce.
                  ¶The prieſte the whych the gouernaunce,
                  Of this relike ſhalbe ſpoke vnto,
                  By good aduyſe and ytreated ſo,
                  That he ſhall be full of our aſſente.
                  For he with golde and treaſour ſhal be blent,
                  That he accorde ſhall to our purpoſe,
                  To brynge the relyke which is kept ſo cloſe,
                  To what place that ye lyſte aſſigne.
                  Be ſtyll of porte goodly and benygne
                  In your workes tyll I haue brought about,
                  Fully this thinge and be nothyng in doubte,
                  I dare my ſelfe take it well on hande.
                  And when they had his meaninge vnderſtād
                  They toke leue and went out of the towne.
                  But fyrſt to voyde all ſuſpecyowne,
                  At theyr goynge Anthenor hath hyght,
                  How that he would go the ſame nyghte,
                  To Priamus to make ordynaunce,
                  How the bondes and the aſſuraunce,
                  Of the peace ſhould ymaked be.
                  And for to knowe eke the quantytye,
                  Of the golde that ye ſhall receyue.
                  Thus ſhall I beſt the purpoſe apperceyue.
                  Of the kinge and knowe it eueridele.
                  And they conſente and like it wonder wele,
                  Euery thinge that Anthenor had ſayde.
                  And ſo they parte glad and well apayde,
                  And went theyr waye and made no tarying.
                  ¶And Anthenor goth vnto the kinge,
                  Hym counſaylinge he make no delay.
                  To call his lordes agayne the nexte daye,
                  And his lyeges to aſſemble yfere.
                  Fynally to engroce this mattere,
                  As it was ſyttynge and expedyent.
                  And when the kinge in open perliament,
                  Crowned ſat in his regalye.
                  This Anthenor gan to ſpecyfye,
                  In audyence that men myght knowe,
                  To eche eſtate both to high and lowe,
                  The Grekes will if they agre therto,
                  And what the ſumme was of golde alſo.
                  Which they are if the peace ſhall ſtande,
                  Twenty thouſande marke to haue in hande,
                  Of pured golde which muſt anone be payde,
                  And of ſyluer that maye not be delayed,
                  They muſt eke haue the ſame quantytee.
                  And ouer this as they accorded be,
                  Certayne meaſures by couenaunt alſo,
                  
                     Of wheate and floure theyr lyues for to ſaue,
                  In theyr repayre by the large ſea,
                  When they ſayle home to theyr countre.
                  And that the collecte made be anone,
                  By good aduyſe of them euerychone,
                  That all be redy by a certayne daye,
                  There was no man that durſt tho ſaye naye,
                  Nor contrarye that Anthenor had ſayde.
                  Where ſo they were well or euyll payde,
                  But ful aſſent in concluſyowne.
                  And in all haſte throughout all the towne,
                  The collatours gathered vp the golde,
                  Lyke the ſumme that I haue you tolde,
                  Of poore & ryche there was ſpared none.
                  The whych tyme Anthenor is gone,
                  Vnto the prieſt that called was Tonaunt,
                  If he might in any wiſe him daunt,
                  To make his herte fully to enclyne.
                  Full craftely he layde out hooke and lyne,
                  With luſty bayte of falſe couetyſe,
                  Excytynge him in full ſecret wyſe,
                  That would be of his aſſente,
                  And condeſcende vnto his entente,
                  To put him in poſſeſſion,
                  Of the relyke called Palladion,
                  Without abode it maye delyuered be,
                  And gaue him golde an huge quantytye,
                  And him to blend much more behyght.
                  And this was done pryuely by nyghte.
                  Shortly concludinge if he condeſcende,
                  That he would his ſtate amende,
                  So paſſyngly that for euer more,
                  He and his heyres ſhoulde haue golde & ſtore
                  Plenty ynough that none indygence,
                  Shoulde haue power hym to do offence.
                  For vnto the this a vowe I make,
                  Quod Anthenor and platly vndertake,
                  Of golde & good thou ſhalt haue ſuffyſaunce,
                  And of treaſour paſſynge habundaunce,
                  That thou ſhalt in very ſykerneſſe,
                  All thy kyn excelle in rycheſſe,
                  If thou delyuer lyke to myne axynge,
                  Palladyon whych is in thy kepynge.
                  And I behote thou mayſte truſt me,
                  By bonde of it ſhalbe ſecree,
                  Leſt it were hyndrynge to thy name.
                  For if ſo be that thou dreadeſt ſhame,
                  To be eſclaundred of ſo foule a deede,
                  I ſhape ſhall that thou nede not drede,
                  Nor be agaſte in no maner wyſe.
                  For ſuch a waye in ſothe I ſhall deuyſe,
                  That no man ſhall be ſuſpecyous,
                  To thy perſon or engenyous,
                  To deme amyſſe how this matter goth.
                  For be well ware that me were as lothe,
                  To be diffamed of ſo foule a thynge,
                  To knowe therof or be aſſentynge,
                  In any maner that they of the towne,
                  Shoulde to me haue ſuſpecyowne.
                  Let be let be leuer I had deye,
                  We ſhall therfore caſte an other wey,
                  Our honour ſaue ſo that thou and I,
                  Shall go all quyte I ſaye the vtterly.
                  That neyther ſhall beholde ne perceyuere,
                  Of this thefte but ſtande hole and clere,
                  What euer fall without any ſhame.
                  For Vlyxes ſhall beare all the blame.
                  Of this dede and this thefe alſo.
                  For men ſhall ſaye when it is ago,
                  By his engyne and his ſleyghty wyle,
                  Through his traynes and his falſe guyle,
                  That he hath ſtole awaye Palladyowne,
                  From the temple in leaſynge of the towne.
                  That fynally durynge all his lyue,
                  Men ſhall to hym his falſhede deſcryue.
                  And all the gylte arreten his offence,
                  That thou and I onely of innocence,
                  Throughout the worlde of this iniquytye,
                  Shall be excuſed platly and go free.
                  It nedeth not tarye in this mattere.
                  Come of attones lo thy golde is here,
                  For thou ne ſhalt longer delayed be.
                  And ſith thou ſeeſt no difficultye,
                  Is on no parte perle nor reprefe,
                  Shame nor dread ſlaundre nor miſchyefe,
                  Delaye not to take this thinge on hande.
                  And firſt this prieſt gan him to withſtande,
                  Full myghtely and ſayde for nothinge,
                  Nother for prayer nor for manaſinge,
                  For golde nor good ne no maner mede,
                  He ne would aſſente to ſo foule a deede.
                  Thus he anſwered at the pryme face.
                  But ofte ſith it happeth men purchaſe,
                  By gifte of good to ſpeake in wordes playne,
                  That trouth in pouerte might neuer attayne
                  For mede more by falſhed maye conquere,
                  Than tytle of ryght that men in trouthe lere
                  And gyftes great hertes can enclyne,
                  
                     And golde they maye in ſtele & marbyll mine
                  This prieſtes herte hath ſo depe graue.
                  That Anthenor ſhall his purpoſe haue,
                  For to poſſede the Palladion.
                  Through falſe engyne and conſpiracion,
                  Of this prieſt that called was Tonaunte.
                  Which of falſhede myght him beſte auaunte,
                  That this relyke fro the temple rente,
                  And to Vlyxes Anthenor it ſente,
                  Out of the towne in all the haſte he might,
                  By a ſeruaunt ſecretly by nyght,
                  Wherof Troians mortally diſmayde,
                  And through treaſon fynally outrayed.
                  Wrought by this prieſt with couetiſe blent.
                  Falſe Anthenor beinge of aſſente.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the Grekes made an horſe of braſſe wherin was men of armes, and vnder colour of peace brought it into Troye, by the whych it was vtterly deſtroyed for euer. Cap. xxxv.
               
                  OH Troy alas wel mayſt yu morne & wepe
                  In complaynyng wt hertye ſighes depe
                  Falſly defrauded of Palladyon,
                  And put for euer out of poſſeſſyon.
                  ¶Oh mighty goddes yt the worlde gouerne,
                  And euerything through your might cōſerne
                  Ryght as it is of your dewtye,
                  And trouthe and falſhed maye togither ſe.
                  In euery herte through your purueyaunce.
                  Why toke ye not on this prieſt vengeaunce,
                  That traytourſly through his inyquytye,
                  For golde and good betrayſhed the cytye,
                  Of Troye alas without more recure.
                  Who ſhall emforth and more be ſuer,
                  Or any place ſtande in ſykertee,
                  Syth holyneſſe of ſo hygh degree,
                  Maye be infecte and corrupt with mede.
                  Euery herte ought quake and drede,
                  To ſe alas by falſe ypocraſye,
                  Prieſtes that ſhould the worlde exemplefye,
                  With good doctryne of perfection,
                  To make ſo ſoone a tranſmutacion,
                  Of double entent ſodainly to varye.
                  For doubtles if the Sanctuarye,
                  Be pollut founde in conuerſacyon,
                  Naked and bare of deuocyon,
                  And that the ſhynynge of theyr parfyte light
                  Ytourned be by derkeneſſe vnto nyght,
                  Vnto what place ſhall men further go,
                  To take example what them ought to do.
                  Certys the roote and ground of euerydele,
                  Is couetyſe who ſo loke wele.
                  Of whych the grayne is ſo farre yſowe,
                  That who ſo lyſt aueryce to knowe,
                  Amonge prieſtes he ſhall it ratheſt fynde.
                  For therwythall they be made blynde,
                  To theyr eſtate that they maye not ſe.
                  For in ſotheneſſe there is no degre,
                  Gredyer nor more rauynous,
                  Of worldly good more couetous,
                  Than prieſtes be to catche what they maye.
                  For it is gone ſyth many a daye,
                  That in theyr breſt fyxed was the roote,
                  Of couetyſe whych ſyt ſo ſoote.
                  That no man maye arrace it nor remewe.
                  For at theyr tayle euer it doth them ſewe,
                  This falſe worme mother and noryce,
                  Of all myſchyefe and of euery yvce,
                  For golde is nowe ſo ſhynynge and ſo bryght
                  So perſynge eke and ſo clere of lyghte,
                  That prieſtes be with his ſteemes blent.
                  For in ſothneſſe they be in theyr entente,
                  Of couetyſe very receptacle.
                  And to poſſede eke the tabernacle.
                  Theyr herte is aye ſo gredy to embrace,
                  That aueryce hath his dwellynge place,
                  Mid of their breſt this vice of vyces all.
                  That cauſeth vertue rather for to fall,
                  Where he abyde ſo he can ſupplaunte,
                  Recorde I take of the prieſt Tonaunte.
                  That for treaſour to Anthenor hath ſolde,
                  The ryche relyke that he had in holde.
                  Palladion while they of Troye towne,
                  Haue gathered vp aboute enuyron,
                  Of riche and poore throughout the citye,
                  Golde and ſyluer an huge quantytye,
                  Floure and whete to paye theyr raunſom,
                  The whych ſumme of entencion,
                  They made kepe wyſely and conſerue,
                  In the Temple that longeth to Mynerue,
                  Purpoſynge after of one affectiowne,
                  The citezyns throughout all the towne,
                  Hopinge therby for to fare the bet,
                  Vpon a daye aſſygned and yſet.
                  To Apollo in theyr panym wyſe
                  Solempnelye make a ſacrafiſe,
                  With ſlaughter of beſtes wt encenſe & bloude,
                  
                     On whych daye when the pryeſtes ſtode,
                  In compaſſe rounde about the aultere,
                  And gan to kyndle the coles bryght and clere,
                  Vpon the aulter playnly as I reade
                  To offer vp the beaſtes that were deade,
                  In the flawme and the great leuen,
                  To Apollo ſtellyfyed in heauen,
                  When they to offer were moſt laborous,
                  The fyrſte was that the ſacryde fyre,
                  Ne would brenne lyke to his deſyre,
                  Nor the flawme vp aſcende alofte.
                  Albe that they aſſayed full ofte,
                  More then ten tymes and yet it ne would be
                  For aye it queynt that they ne myght ſe,
                  Nought but ſmoky reſolucions,
                  Horryble and blake lyke exalacyons,
                  Of newe lyme when that it is meynt,
                  With water colde and of his heat queynt,
                  That they might in no maner wyſe,
                  For lacke of fyre do theyr ſacrafyſe.
                  For aye they found a wonder obſtacle,
                  And the nexte was a more myracle,
                  On theyr aulter when they gan to ſprede,
                  The entrayles of beaſtes that were deade,
                  To queme Apollo wt flawme bryght & faire.
                  There came anone downe out of the ayre,
                  A royall Egle full perfynge of his loke,
                  And in his clawes the offerynge vp he toke,
                  And the entrayles lyinge enuyrowne,
                  In his deſcence makynge ſuch a ſowne,
                  That none ſo hardy of herte nor manhode,
                  But that he was aſtoned there he ſtode,
                  And ſuppryſed through nerfe & euerye vayne,
                  Of this meruayle and this caſe ſodayne.
                  But the Egle abydynge there no more,
                  Ouer the towne full hygh gan to ſore,
                  Towarde Grekes enhaſtyng what he might,
                  And on theyr ſhyppes ſodaynly alyghte,
                  And the entrayles of the beaſtes all.
                  This Egle let from his clawes fal,
                  Wherof Troyans when they toke hede,
                  Diſmayed wyth a mortall dreade.
                  By ſygnes haue clerely comprehended,
                  That theyr goddes greatly were offended,
                  Agayne the towne when the fyre went out.
                  And for they would be put out of doute,
                  To be ſure what this meruayle mente.
                  To Caſſandra in all haſte they ſente,
                  Fully to haue declaracyon.
                  And therupon playne expoſycyon.
                  And ſhe tolde theim platly out of dreade,
                  That the quenchynge of theyr fyres red,
                  Was vnto them a demonſtracion,
                  Both of yre and indygnacion,
                  ¶That Apollo hath to Troye bore,
                  For the bloud that was ſhed before,
                  Of Achylles in his temple ſlawe,
                  Vengeably murdred and ydrawe,
                  Without any maner reuerence,
                  Or honour done to the excellence,
                  Of Apollo beynge there preſente,
                  That the Phane and plates adiacent,
                  Were deſolued and pollut wyth bloude.
                  Wherfore ſhe ſayde ſhortly it is good,
                  That they went on proſeſſyon,
                  With herte contryte and deuocyon,
                  To the tombe of Achylles at nyght,
                  Onelye to fette on theyr tapres lyght,
                  Sacred fyre brennynge at the wake,
                  Fully in purpoſe by aſſente to make,
                  For his mordre ſatiſfaction.
                  The whych fyre by none occaſyon,
                  Shall not quenche but his flawmes holde,
                  Through none aſſault of ſtormye windꝭ colde
                  The ſacrafyſe vpon the aultere
                  Tofore Apollo brenne ſhall ſo clere,
                  And they of Troye wrought by her rede.
                  But of the Egle ſhe bad them take hede,
                  That nothynge was but token of treaſon,
                  Pronoſtyke and declaracyon,
                  Fynally how Troye and Ylyon,
                  Shall tourne in haſte to deſtruction.
                  For the flyinge of this foule royall,
                  Ouer the towne and the myghty wall,
                  With his fethers mayled bryght and ſhene.
                  And the entrayles in his clawes kene,
                  To Troye was a fynall demonſtraimre,
                  Soth faſt ſhewynge and ſignifyaunce.
                  The grace and ewer and hap of olde fortune,
                  By lyklyhead might not contune,
                  Nor perſeuer in the fyrſt lyghte,
                  For all attones they haue take theyr flight.
                  Palladion might theym not witholde
                  That ſtole was lyke as I you tolde,
                  For no man maye his fatall chaunce refuſe.
                  And Grekes eke faſte gan to muſe,
                  And inwardly in theyr wyttes ſought,
                  Of the entrayles that the Egle broughte,
                  
                     And therupon gan togyther rounde,
                  Til that Calchas did euery thing expowne,
                  And vnto theym full gan aſſure,
                  That the fine of this auenture,
                  Conclude ſhould vpon theyr welfare.
                  And bad alſo for no coſte they ſpare.
                  To perſeuer and be of herte ſtable,
                  By fortune theym ſelfe to enhable.
                  Theym counſaylynge to do theyr buſy payne
                  Solempnelye in haſte to ordayne,
                  A certayne offrynge borne out of the felde,
                  To fayre Pallas with her criſtall ſhelde,
                  And to her make a ryche ſacrafyſe,
                  As the ſtorye by ordre ſhall deuyſe.
               
               
                  BYſhop Calchas wyth his lockes hore
                  Traytour forſworne ſyth go ful yore.
                  That falſed hath trouthe & his allyaunce,
                  Whom clerkes haue put in remembraunce,
                  In theyr lockes with letters olde and newe,
                  To exemplefye no man to be vntrewe.
                  For though yeares paſſe faſte awaye,
                  Ruſt of ſclaunder lightly wyll not deye.
                  The fret therof is ſo corroſyfe.
                  That it laſteth full many mannes lyfe,
                  And is full harde to arrace awaye,
                  Of whoſe venym full ſelde is made allaye,
                  Reporte therof blowen is ſo wyde.
                  Perpetually that it wyll abyde,
                  Remembred newe and freſhely had in mynde
                  Recorde of him that could a waye fynde,
                  Olde Calchas euyl mut he ſterue,
                  Vnder colour of offrynge to Mynerue,
                  To make Grekes entre into towne,
                  This ſleyghty ſerpent father and patrowne,
                  And fynder vp of treaſon and of guyle,
                  Compaſſed hath and yfounde a wyle,
                  How Grekes ſhall the Cytye wynne & take.
                  Pretendynge them ſacryfyce to make,
                  Vnto Pallas as I ſhall expreſſe.
                  For this traytour merour of falſeneſſe,
                  The Grekes bad for to do theyr payne,
                  To Minerua an offrynge to fayne.
                  And in all haſte that they ſhould theim ſpede.
                  And of aſſente they dyd make a ſtede,
                  Large and wyde of coper and of braſſe,
                  By crafte of Synon that contryued was,
                  That it myght receyue large and wele,
                  A thouſande knyghtes armed bright in ſtele.
                  Through the ſleyght and the compaſſynge,
                  The ſubtyll wytte and meruaylous working
                  Of this wyſe and crafty Greke Synon,
                  Which through his caſtynge and diſcreſion,
                  Perfourmed hath this ryche ſtede of braſſe,
                  As ye haue herde by byddinge of Calchas,
                  And by the aduyſe of Appius the wyſe,
                  That holpe alſo the ſtede to deuyſe,
                  To fyne onely that of deuociowne,
                  Grekes myght requere of the towne,
                  When it were made to graunt them licence,
                  It preſente in the reuerence,
                  Of myghty Pallas in ſtele armed bryght.
                  Amyd her temple large and ful of light,
                  By the offringe to fynde occaſyon,
                  To haue entre frely into towne,
                  By pylgramage theyr vowes to fulfyl,
                  In which ſtede daren ſhal ful ſtylle,
                  A thouſande knightes as Calchas by deuiſe,
                  Ordeyned hath that was ſo ſlye and wiſe.
                  By crafte of Synon and of Appyus,
                  This large ſtede of makinge meruaylous,
                  Vnder pretence of oblacyon,
                  Was completful to his perfection,
                  Of workemanſhyppe as I tolde afore,
                  When the ſiege ſothly gan to fine,
                  And the Cyte was brought to ruyne,
                  Through Grekes myght and the wall ſtrōge
                  Were bete downe large thicke and longe.
                  The which yeare as made is menciowne,
                  A lyttell afore takynge of the towne,
                  Kinges echone that came fro ſo ferre,
                  Alyue lefte after the mortall werre.
                  When they ſaw how Priam by couenaunte,
                  Vnto Grekes that vtterly made graunt,
                  All haſte poſſible to paye his raunſowme.
                  They toke leue and went out of the towne.
                  And fyrſte I fynde how kynge Phylomene,
                  With him lad the body of the quene,
                  Pantaſillia home to her countre.
                  Ful richely there to buryed be.
                  And of .ij. thouſande knightes that this kinge
                  Brought vnto Troye fyrſt at his comynge,
                  No mo than fyftye home with him he ladde.
                  And of women that the quene hadde,
                  Of a thouſand the ſtorye ſayth certayne,
                  But foure hundred home agayne.
                  And thus when all were fro Troye gone,
                  The morowe nexte Priamus anone,
                  
                     With his lordes rode out of the towne,
                  As was the accorde for confyrmaciowne,
                  Of peace fynall vpon outher ſyde.
                  ¶And in the fyelde Grekes hym abyde.
                  ¶And for grekes firſte ſwore Dyomede,
                  They of Troye takynge lyttle hede,
                  How the othe was in condicion,
                  Cured aboue vnder falſe treaſon.
                  Syth grekes tho in their ſwearynge,
                  Ne bounde them ſelfe to no maner thynge,
                  To ſtande to as in ſpecyall.
                  But for to holde and kepe in generall,
                  The poyntes hole engreſſed and no more,
                  In thilke treate that Dan Anthenor,
                  With grekes helde this traytour fraudulent.
                  In whiche they were full double of entent,
                  Meynt with treſon as ye haue herde toforne.
                  Whiche to obſerue onely they were ſworne,
                  By fraude of othe and not by wordes playne.
                  Their aduerſaryes to take in a trayne.
                  Excludynge them from their meanyng ferre.
                  Peace in the face, but in the herte werre.
                  All openly confirmed with their hande,
                  Inwarde treaſon by aſſuraunce of bonde.
                  But though the venym was cloſed wt a wall,
                  It was not hyd from him that knoweth all.
                  For certaynely as clerkes teache,
                  Who that ſwereth falſely in his ſpeche,
                  Flouryſhynge outwarde by a fayre coloure,
                  For to deceyue his trewe neyghbour.
                  He is forſworne what ſo euer he be.
                  The treaſon hyd though men may not ſe,
                  How ſo the worde be awaye yborne.
                  Who ſwereth by crafte by crafte is forſworne.
                  There may be made no excuſacion.
                  For god that knoweth the entention,
                  Demeth the herte and the word right nought
                  For he the wyll knoweth and the thought,
                  Of euery man nygh and eke aferre.
                  Therfore beware no man hym forſwere,
                  As grekes dyd Troyans to deceyue,
                  That the fraude coulde not conceyue.
                  Suppoſynge that Grekes had be,
                  Faythfull and trewe of their ſuretye.
                  ¶But nothynge on they in herte thought,
                  whiche in the ende they full dere abought,
                  When they founde fully the reuerſe,
                  And to their ſpeche the dede ſo dyuerſe.
                  It were but fayne by and by to wryte,
                  Their fayned othes nor their wordes whyte.
                  Nor the cheris that they coulde fayne,
                  But to conclude with the quene Heleyne,
                  Durynge the treate vpon the ſame daye,
                  ¶Delyuered was to kynge Menelaye.
                  And after that was payde the raunſowne,
                  Graunted tofore and gathered in the towne,
                  Golde and ſyluer where alſo and floure.
                  And to their ſhyppes with diligent laboure,
                  In full great haſte euery thyng was brought
                  Where through the citie after came to nought
                  ¶And grekes than by ſymulacyon,
                  Makynge a colour of deuocion,
                  Through holyneſſe vnder ypocriſye,
                  Falſly fayned by fraude and flaterye.
                  The kynge haue prayed to haue lybertye,
                  Frely to entre in to the Cytye.
                  To make aſſete by oblacyon,
                  For the thefte of Palladyon.
                  And offer vp the riche ſtede of braſſe,
                  To the goddeſſe that called is Pallas.
                  ¶What kynge Pryam lyketh to aſſygne.
                  That ſhe to them be wyllinge and beninge.
                  In their repeyre ſaylynge by the ſea,
                  Home into Grece towarde their countre,
                  When ſhe is quemed with his large ſtede.
                  Of whiche alas Pryam toke no hede.
                  ¶The treaſon hyd he coulde not aduerte,
                  But graunted them with all his hole herte.
                  When that them lyke to bringe it into towne,
                  By falſe entyſinge and ſuggeſtiowne,
                  Of Anthenor and alſo of Enee.
                  Hauynge no drede nor ambyguite,
                  In his entent nor ſuſpection,
                  Nother of fayninge nor of falſe treaſon,
                  But right frendely lyke to his beheſte,
                  Condeſcendeth vnto their requeſte.
                  Their auowes that they myght obſerue,
                  To offer vp this horſe vnto Mynerue.
                  And grekes tho with great diligence,
                  Full great honour and huge reuerence,
                  Haue ſhapen them with proceſſiowne,
                  To bringe the ſtede into Troye towne.
                  The men of armes beinge aye therin,
                  By whom they caſte Troye for to wynne,
                  In ſhorte tyme for it ſtode on the date.
                  And whan this horſe brought was to ye gate▪
                  
                  It was ſo narowe that there was no ſpace,
                  For the ſtede in to towne to paſſe,
                  
                     For the ſtede into the towne to pace.
                  Albe that they aſſayed ouer all,
                  Wherfore Pryam bet a downe the wall,
                  To make it large ryght at their deuyſe.
                  In whiche thinge alas he was vnwyſe.
                  For cauſe chyefe of his confuſyowne,
                  Was that this horſe came into the towne,
                  But humbly forth they gan to procede.
                  To the temple with this large ſtede.
                  And to Pallas mekely knelynge downe,
                  They all attones made there oblacyon.
                  With fayned chere and falſe deuociowne.
                  Wherof in herte glad was all the towne,
                  And ſpecyall they that were of Troye.
                  ¶But ſothe is ſayde that aye the fyne of ioye,
                  Who occupyeth as men full ofte ſe.
                  For vnwarely cometh aduerſytye,
                  After gladneſſe. wo and myſauenture,
                  When men beſte wene for to ſtanden ſure.
                  In worldly blyſhe there none affyaunce,
                  So dyuers is his vnhappy chaunce.
                  Full of deceyte euer meynt with trouble,
                  And for to truſte varyaunt and double.
                  And ſelde in one abydynge any throwe,
                  For worldly luſte though it be now blowe.
                  With pompe and pride & with boſte & ſowne,
                  Anone it paſſeth recorde of Troye towne,
                  That wende well by this ryche ſtede,
                  To haue be ſure and deuoyde of drede,
                  Perpetually as I haue tolde tofore.
                  But when grekes haue this horſe ybore,
                  Tofore Pallas as ye haue herde me telle,
                  Them lyketh not longer for to dwelle,
                  In the boundes of this myghty towne.
                  But of purpoſe to the Greke Synowne,
                  They haue committed hole the gouernayle,
                  Of this ſtede the whiche wyll not fayle,
                  When he ſeeth beſt opportunyte,
                  By this engyne to trayſhen the Cytye.
                  And grekes haue in this whyle founde,
                  A newe ſleyght them fully to confounde.
                  This to ſaye they haue made theyr ſonde,
                  To kynge Pryam they wolde go fro londe,
                  Vnto the ſea towarde Tenedowne.
                  And thyther ſayle for this concluſyowne,
                  For that Heleyne by good auyſement,
                  In ſecrete wyſe thyther ſhalbe ſent,
                  For they dradde if vpon the lande,
                  She were delyuered ſhortly to their honde,
                  Grekes wolde of malys do their payne,
                  The more party to ſleen this Heleyne.
                  For ſhe was grounde & gynnyng of their wo,
                  The very rote and the cauſe alſo,
                  Of the ſlaughter of many worthy man,
                  Sythen the tyme the ſyege fyrſt began.
                  Wherfore they ſayde for to ſtynte all ſtryfe,
                  And to be ſure for to ſaue her lyfe,
                  The beſt was to ſende her out of ſyght.
                  Secretely to Tenedowne by nyght.
                  Thus they fayned of full falſe treaſon,
                  Pryam to put from all ſuſpection.
                  As chaunce they wolde after in all their lyue,
                  Reſorte agayne vnto Troye for to ſtryue.
                  Thus they made Pryam for to wene,
                  But in the hande he was deceyued clene,
                  Of their deceyte knowynge neuer adele.
                  For in his herte he thought not but wele.
                  Grauntyng to thē all that might them pleaſe,
                  And when they had at leyſer and good eaſe,
                  Fro Troye ſayled vnto Tenedowne.
                  ¶With their nauye the falſe greke Synowne
                  In Troye waker gan to taken kepe,
                  The tyme when men were in their fyrſte ſlepe
                  And in all haſte with his ſleyghty gynne,
                  Many vyſe and many ſotyll pynne,
                  In the ſtede he made aboute gone.
                  The crafty lockes vndoynge euerychone,
                  And out he goth and gan anone to calle,
                  Within the horſe the worthy knyghtes all.
                  So ſecretly no man myght eſpye,
                  And trayterouſly he gan hym for to hye,
                  Vpon the walles the ſelfe ſame nyght,
                  And towarde grekes gan to ſhewe a lyght,
                  Where as they laye tofore Tenedowne.
                  Redy armed to falle vpon the towne.
                  And whan they had this ſodayne light eſpyed
                  On horſe backe anone they haue them hyed,
                  Towarde Troye armed clene at all,
                  And in they went by the ſame walle,
                  Whyche for the horſe was but late broke.
                  And mortally for to be a wroke,
                  The knyghtes eke in the ſtede of braſſe,
                  Haue with them met a full ſterne pace,
                  And gan anone throughout the Citye,
                  On euery halfe for to kylle and ſlea.
                  With bloudy ſworde vpon euery ſyde.
                  And made their woundes brode large & wide
                  Whyle they alas no thinge aduertynge.
                  
                     At mydnight houre abedde lay ſlepynge,
                  Full innocent and thought not be good.
                  All forbathed in their owne bloude.
                  Bothe man and childe without exception,
                  The grekes ſparynge no condicyon,
                  Of olde nor yonge woman wyfe nor mayde.
                  ¶That with the crye Pryamus abrayde,
                  Out of his ſlepe and ſodeynely awoke,
                  Whiche laye all nyght and no hede ne toke,
                  Of the ſlaughter nor murther in the towne.
                  ¶But tho he wiſte that there was treaſowne
                  Falſely compaſſed vnto his cytee,
                  By Anthenor and alſo by Enee.
                  Of whoſe malys he was no more in doubte,
                  For the venym was now taken oute,
                  And now the galle of conſpyracion,
                  That vnder ſugre of ſymulacion,
                  Hath ſo longe cloſed be and hyd,
                  In dede is nowe execute and kyd.
                  And nowe the fraude fully of treaſon,
                  The caſtes alſo of falſe colluſyon,
                  Be raked out and abrode yblowe.
                  And the auctours openly yknowe.
                  ¶Now hath enuye and contryued hate,
                  Of their engyne ſette abrode the gate,
                  Now hate deceyte and olde conſpyracye,
                  And fayned othes all of one allye,
                  All openly ſhewed theyr falſeneſſe.
                  And diſcloſed all their doubleneſſe.
                  So farre abrode that nowe is there no geyne
                  For nowe alas the wylde fyre is ſeyne,
                  In towers hye with the wynde yblaſed.
                  Wherof Pryam aſtoned and amaſed,
                  All awaped ſterte out of his bedde,
                  And comforteleſſe to the temple is fledde,
                  Of Apollo to ſaue hym yf he myght.
                  And aye the flawme of the fyres bryght,
                  Brent in the towne and conſumeth all.
                  The ryche byldynge whylom ſo royall,
                  That the walles with the rofes huge,
                  Couered with lede for a chyefe refuge,
                  Were now alas bare and bareyne makyd,
                  The grekes aye with their ſwordes naked,
                  Murdre and ſlea where ſo that they go.
                  That twenty thouſande they yt nyght and mo
                  There kylled haue longe or it was day.
                  And in this ſlaughter and this great affraye,
                  Spoyle and robbe and take what they finde,
                  Treaſour and good, and lefte not behynde,
                  By myghty hande and ſturdy vyolence,
                  And the temples without reuerence,
                  They haue deſpoiled throughout al the town
                  And gredely rent and raced downe,
                  Of golde and ſyluer the ornamentes all.
                  Tofore the goddes foule mote them fall.
                  ¶Kynge Pryam aye with a deadly chere,
                  To Apollo makyng his prayer,
                  Furyouſly this deadly wofull man,
                  As he in ſoth that no reade ne can.
               
               
                  BVt wayte his death & his fatall eure,
                  And Caſſandra that holy creature,
                  Of inwarde wo deſyrous to ſterue,
                  Complaynynge hyed vnto Mynerue,
                  Makynge to her a lamentaciowne.
                  With other gentyll women of the towne.
                  And there alas as they wolden dye,
                  Full pyteouſly they ſobbe wepe and crye,
                  And in their dole there I lette them dwelle.
                  For all there ſorowes if I ſhulde do telle,
                  In this ſtorye and theyr wo diſcryue,
                  My dulled penne of ruthe ſhulde alſo rite riue
                  ¶Reherſynge eke howe in euery ſtrete,
                  Their clothes blacke redy moyſte and wete,
                  As they alas both in one and all,
                  On their lordes downe aſwone fall.
                  With their bloude be dewed and yſprent,
                  Where men may ſee the cryſtall teares meynt,
                  Of their wepynge in their woundes grene,
                  That laye and blede agayne the ſonne ſhene.
                  With deadly eyen caſtynge vp the whyte,
                  It were but vayne their wofull caſe to wryte,
                  Nor the maner of their mortall ſorowe.
                  ¶But Guydo wryt that the ſame morowe,
                  How Anthenor and with him falſe Euee,
                  Conueyed haue throughout the cyte.
                  The myghty Grekes vnto Ilyon.
                  The royall toure and ryche manſyon,
                  That whylom was of moſt excellence,
                  In the whiche they founde as tho no dyffence
                  Of hyghe nor lowe nor of none eſtate,
                  For it was lefte alone all deſolate,
                  With all the golde and rycheſſe of the towne,
                  Shet and encloſed in the chyefe dongeowne.
                  But there was no man that withſtode,
                  They brake the lockes & raught away ye good
                  And the treaſure that was ſhet within,
                  Eche for his partie that he might wyn.
                  
                     They gaue no force who was lyfe or loth.
                  ¶And Pirrhus after to the temple goth,
                  Of Appollo by great cruelte.
                  And fell on Pryam knelyng on his kne,
                  And with his ſworde furyouſly and wood,
                  Tofore the aulter ſhadde there his bloud.
                  So hye raught both in length and brede,
                  What the ſtreames of his woundes redde,
                  That the ſtatute of golde borned bryght.
                  Of this Apollo for all his great might.
                  For all his power and his ſterne face,
                  Defouled was and pollut all the place.
                  Onely by death of this worthy kynge,
                  By Pirrhus ſlaine while he lay knelynge,
                  Of olde hatred and olde enuyous pryde.
                  Whyle Anthenor and Enee ſtode beſyde,
                  That routhe was and pytye to beholde.
                  To ſe him lye on the ſtones colde,
                  So pyteouſly tofore the aulter blede.
                  Wherof alas when Hecuba toke hede.
                  And her fayre doughter Polycene,
                  With heire to rent as any golde wyer ſhene.
                  Inly ſuppryſed with ſorowe to the herte,
                  When they began conſider and aduerte,
                  The noble kinge with bloudy ſtreames red.
                  All for drowned his eyen derke and dead.
                  With Pirrhus ſword girte thrugh outher ſide
                  For mortall feare they durſt not abyde.
                  But inwardly through darted with the ſight.
                  All in a rage toke them to the flyghte.
                  And yet in ſo the through out the Cite,
                  They wyſte neuer whytherwarde to flee.
                  Reſcuſe was none nor no remedye,
                  Of kynne nor friende nor of none allye,
                  With grekes ſworde the towne was ſo be ſette
                  And in her flight this wofull quene hath met,
                  Eneas cauſer of all this wrake.
                  Vnto whom rebukynge thus he ſpake.
                  Oh thou traytour moſt malycious,
                  Thou falſe ſerpent adder enuyous,
                  Croppe and roote fynder of falſeneſſe,
                  Soures and well of vnkyndeneſſe.
                  How myghteſt thou in thy hande fynde,
                  Vnto thy kynge to be ſo vnkynde.
                  Gynner and grounde example of treaſon,
                  And fynall cauſe of our deſtruction.
                  How myghteſt thou deuoyde of all pytye.
                  Beholdynge alas through thy cruelte,
                  Of the kynge ſhedde ſo the bloude,
                  That euer hath byn ſo gentyll and ſo good,
                  So gracious lorde ſpecially to the.
                  And ouermore throughe his highe bounte,
                  They honoured and ymagnefyed,
                  All his lyfe it may not be denyed.
                  That lyeth now dead in the temple alas.
                  Thou were not onely traytour in this caſe,
                  But to his death conſpyrynge and vnkynde.
                  Pirrhus conueying where he ſhuld him finde
                  Tofore Apollo myddes of this cyte,
                  Where thou ſhuldeſt of very duetye,
                  Rather haue byn his protection,
                  His myghty ſhelde and ſauacion,
                  That haſte this citie and this towne ylorne,
                  In whiche thou were foſtred and yborne,
                  On the greateſt of reputacion,
                  Of all the lordes dwellinge in this towne.
                  In which thou haddeſt whilom moſt pleſaūce
                  But all is now out of remembraunce.
                  ¶Yet in thy hert yf any drape be,
                  Of gentylneſſe mercy or pytye,
                  In this deadly rage full of tene.
                  Rewe on my doughter yonge Polycene,
                  From grekes ſworde her youthe for to ſaue.
                  If thy herte may any routhe haue,
                  Of manly pytye on her maydenheade.
                  Defende her nowe and kepe her out of drede
                  If thou canſte fynde any weye,
                  In any wyſe that ſhe maye not deye.
                  ¶That hereafter when men ſe and rede,
                  The falſe treaſon and the foule dede,
                  That thou haſte done vnto Troye towne.
                  It maye in partye be protectiowne,
                  To thy fame the venym to allye,
                  Of this treaſon when men wyll aſſaye,
                  By iuſte reporte thy name to accuſe.
                  This dede may the helpe to excuſe,
                  Agaynſt tonges that ſpeake of Enee.
                  Than wyll they ſaye thou haddeſt yet pytye,
                  On Polycene onely of gentilneſſe,
                  Therwith to ſugre all the bytterneſſe,
                  Of thy deſerte blowe forth by fame,
                  By reherſayle of the foule blame,
                  That ſhal of the through the worlde be borne
                  With ſklaūder infect whē thou art al to torne,
                  That thou ne ſhalte the ſhame mowe ſuſtene.
                  Then ſhall my doughter fayre Polycene,
                  Be thy defence agayne ſuche famous ſtryfe,
                  If it ſo be now thou ſaue her lyfe.
                  
                     Of me no force though thou make as blyue,
                  The ſworde of grekes through my herte ryue
                  ¶And ſo by prayer of this wofull quene,
                  This Eneas toke to hym Polycene,
                  Whoſe traytour herte for all his cruelte,
                  On her youthe was meued of pytye,
                  Onely of routhe that in his breſt aroſe.
                  And ſecretely put her vp in cloſe,
                  Leſt that grekes founde occaſyon,
                  Agaynſt hym and Ayax Thelamon,
                  Toke to his warde Andromecha.
                  Hectors wyfe and wyfe Caſſandra,
                  Out of the temple longing to Mynerue.
                  From grekes ſworde their lyues to conſerue.
                  ¶And Menelaye toke the quene Heleyne,
                  Into his garde for whom ſo great a payne,
                  Bode in his herte many daye toforne,
                  By whom alas the cytye is now lorne.
                  ¶And grekes aye were buſye in their yre,
                  To ſlea and kylle and crullly to fyre.
                  On euery ſyde and to beate downe,
                  Palyce and houſe and wall of the towne,
                  They ſpare nought for all goth to the fyre.
                  So feruent hate brent in their deſyre,
                  Of olde enuye auenged for to be.
                  That they ne lefte within the Cyte,
                  Nothynge vnbrent and alſo ylyowne,
                  Was in this rage tourned vp ſo downe.
                  There made were none exceptions.
                  Onely but take the poſſyons,
                  Of Anthenor euyll mote he fare.
                  And Eneas whom the grekes ſpare,
                  As th
                        •
                     y to them were bounde by their othe.
                  And thus the grekes furyous and wrothe,
                  Haue all that daye robbed and ybrent.
                  ¶Tyll that the kynge Agamenon hath ſent,
                  For his lordes to aſſemble yfeare,
                  In Pallas temple onely for to here,
                  There wyſe aduyſe vpon thynges twayne.
                  Fyrſte if they wolde holde and not fayne,
                  Hooly their hope without exceptiowne,
                  To thē by whom they wonne fyrſt the towne
                  ¶And ouer more he axed them alſo,
                  Touchynge the goddes what they wolde do,
                  With golde treaſour and poſſeſſyowne,
                  That they haue won thrugh their hie renown
                  ¶And they anſwered without more taryinge
                  They wolde their faith kepe in euery thynge,
                  As they were ſworne and heſtes holde.
                  And ouer this they ſayde howe they wolde,
                  That golde treaſour and good of the Cyte,
                  As ryght requietrh and alſo equitye,
                  Be iuſtly parted by deuyſion,
                  To euery wyght made diſtribucyon,
                  Lyke his meryt of hygh and lowe degree.
                  And that the kynge eke of reaſon ſe,
                  Eche to rewarde after his labour.
                  So as it longeth to a conquerour,
                  That no man haue matter to compleyne.
                  And ſo they felle in ſpeakynge of Heleyne,
                  Eueryche after his opynyon.
                  And tofore all other Ayax Thelamon,
                  Shortly ſayde ſhe hath deſerued death,
                  For whom ſo many haue yelde vp the brethe.
                  Playnely affyrmynge there in Parlement,
                  Of ryghtwyſeneſſe and trewe iudgement,
                  She ſhulde not eſcape with the lyfe,
                  That gynnyng was & cauſe of all their ſtrife
                  Rote and grounde of all their ſorowe and wo
                  And ſo ſayde eke many an other mo.
                  And for the noyſe and the great affraye,
                  ¶Agamenon nor kinge Menelaye,
                  Ne durſt a worde for her partye meue.
                  To ſaue ye quene leſt grekes wold them greue
                  Agaynſt them there was ſo great rumour,
                  Tyll Vlixes chiefely her ſocour,
                  Through his wyt and his eloquence,
                  His deuer dyd and his dylygence,
                  To haue her life and fully to purchace,
                  Of the grekes for to gette her grace.
                  ¶And as Guydo alſo doth vs lere,
                  Agamenon grekes gan requere,
                  To graunt hym for a chiefe guerdon,
                  Of Caſſandra to haue poſſeſſion,
                  All her lyfe with hym to abyde.
                  Eke Eneas and Anthenor beſyde,
                  Of Helenus to the grekes tolde,
                  How to the werre he neuer aſſente wolde,
                  And how that he prudennt and vertuous.
                  In counſaylyng was contrarious,
                  To all tho of hygh and lowe eſtate,
                  In Troye firſt that began debate,
                  Atwyxe grekes and this myghty towne.
                  Eke by his helpe and medyatiowne.
                  Achylles was buryed and ygraue,
                  The deade corps from houndes for to ſaue,
                  Whan he was ſlayne in full cruell wyſe,
                  By nyght tyme as ye haue herde deuyſe,
                  
                     For ſothly he and Caſſandra both,
                  Of this murder in herte were full wrothe.
                  And ſory eke of many an other thynge.
                  Wrought in the towne wtout their wyttynge.
                  ¶And for they were of malyce Innocent.
                  The grekes haue fully by aſſent,
                  Graunted to them a prerogatyfe,
                  By Parlement for to haue theyr lyfe.
                  But Helenus firſt in teares drowned.
                  Tofore the kynge pyteouſly hath ſowned.
                  And abraydynge with a deadly face,
                  In humble wyſe beſought hym of his grace.
                  Of knyghtly pytye to haue his aduertence.
                  To ſpare his ſworde fro bloud of Innocence.
                  And of mercy that he not diſdayne,
                  To graunt lyfe to the ſonnes twayne,
                  ¶Of worthy Hector his brother moſt entere
                  And eke to rewe on their mother dere.
                  Onely of grace that ſhe be not dead.
                  A wydowe lefte a lone and can not reade.
                  And ſo the kynge ameued in his herte,
                  And wote not whither that ſhe maye diuerte,
                  Of his wordes and his wofull chere,
                  Benygnely graunted his prayer.
                  And gaue eke lyfe and fredom for to go,
                  To the mother and her chyldren two.
                  ¶And to ladyes and gentyll women all,
                  That for mercy to his grace calle.
                  He graunted eke of compaſſyon,
                  A ſafe conduite and a fre pardon.
                  Where that them lyſte in the towne abyde,
                  Or in the countre adiacent beſyde.
                  He put it hole in their electiowne.
                  ¶And thanking him they fell on knees down
                  With many teare dewed in the face.
                  ¶And ſo the kynge parteth fro the place.
                  And after that grekes ryght anone,
                  Fully purpoſe to ſhyp for to gone,
                  In haſte to ſayle towarde their countre.
                  But ſuche a tempeſt roſe vp in the ſea,
                  Of wawe and wynde alſo of cloudes blacke,
                  All a moneth that they dare not take,
                  The water ſalte for drede of Neptunus.
                  ¶Of very Ire and alſo Golus,
                  Was vnto them in euery thynge contrary.
                  That on the londe made them longe tarye.
                  The ſea was aye ſo fell and boylynge,
                  ¶Tyll the grekes of Calchas enquyryng,
                  By one aſſent what it myght be,
                  That euer in one ſo dyuers was the ſea.
                  In his rage both eue and morowe.
                  ¶And he anſwered god gyue him euyl ſorow
                  This olde ſhrewe with all his prophecye,
                  That can ſo well when hym lyſte to lye.
                  How this tempeſt cauſed was at all,
                  By the goddes and furyes infernall,
                  That neuer wolde appeaſe nor be ſtylle,
                  Tyll the number platly of Achylle,
                  Auenged be and ſhedynge of his bloud.
                  ¶For whiche he ſayde Apollo was eke wood
                  For his temple to him conſecrate.
                  Was through his death in Troye violate,
                  By bloude agayne be made ſatiſfaction.
                  Wherfore there muſte throughe redempcyon,
                  Of her that was roote in ſpeciall,
                  Through her beautye and orygynall,
                  Cauſe of his death yonge Polycene,
                  And gynnynge fyrſt of his mortall tene.
                  Therfore to Apollo ſhe might vp offred be,
                  By ſacrafyce to pleaſe his deyte.
                  With death agayne to make recompence.
                  Right as by death fyrſt was the offence,
                  This grekes muſt vtterly fulfyll,
                  If they deſyre for to haue at wyll,
                  The large ſea to ſayle in quiet.
                  ¶And Pirrhus tho in a furious hete,
                  Gan enquire about of euery man,
                  For Policene but no wyght tell can,
                  Of her a worde nor ſhortely where ſhe was.
                  Saufe ſome ſayde howe that Eneas,
                  And Anthenor had hyd her pryuely.
                  Wherof there roſe amonge them ſodeynly,
                  Suche agrutchynge of grekes all aboute,
                  Of their lyfe that they were in doubte.
                  So inwardly this thinges they toke at grefe
                  ¶Till Anthenor god geue hym euyll prefe,
                  That may of treaſon as wardeyn bere ye keye
                  To ſhewe out his malys euery waye.
                  So longe hath ſought till in a chamber olde,
                  He hath her founde and the grekes tolde,
                  And brought her forth vnto their preſence,
                  By cruell force and hatefull vyolence,
                  Without pytye or compaſſyon,
                  And her delyuered to Agamenon.
                  ¶And he alas by haſtye Iudgement,
                  Without reſpyte or auyſemente.
                  Shortely hath dempte that ſhe ſhall be deade
                  That was flourynge in her maydenhead.
                  ¶And for to do excepcyon,
                  
                     ¶She was aſſygned by Agamenon,
                  Vnto Pirrhus and he of tirannye,
                  Ladde her forth and faſt gan hym hye,
                  To the place where ſhe ſhulde dye.
                  ¶Great was the preaſe that in the weye,
                  Gan croude and ſhoue to beholde and ſene,
                  This yonge mayde fayre Pollycene,
                  That for her beautye and her ſemlyneſſe,
                  Her womanhede and excellent fayreneſſe,
                  Of all yfere when they toke hede.
                  They had routhe that ſhe ſhalbe deade.
                  Without gylte or any more treſpace.
                  Where men may ſe vpon many face,
                  The ſalte teares faſte falle downe,
                  Of very pytye and compaſſyowne.
                  For man nor childe was none ſo harde of hert
                  But he felte for her ſake ſome ſmert.
                  Her goodly face whan they beholde and ſe,
                  And fayne wolde if it might haue be,
                  Delyuered her of very force anone,
                  Fro Pirrus hande but for they wende echone
                  Without her death neuer to haue repeire,
                  Into grece nor the wether fayre.
                  As Calchas had made ſuggeſtion,
                  And brought them all in opynyon.
                  ¶And at the laſte whan this Policene,
                  Of dede and wyll a very mayde clene,
                  Was to the graue of Achylles brought.
                  She kneleth downe & wt an humble thought
                  Caſte vp her eye and gan ſyghe ofte,
                  And to the goddes humbly and ſofte,
                  With dredfull herte and deuocion,
                  Made in this wyſe her lamentacion.
               
               
                  OH ye myghty yt in this worlde gouerne,
                  And euery thinge conſyder and diſerne,
                  By whom this world ſo huge large & rounde.
                  Both ayre and ſea heauen & eke ye grounde,
                  At your deuyſe with a worde was wrought.
                  And ſothfaſtly knowe euery thought,
                  Right as it is of euery maner wyght,
                  Without lettynge ſo perſynge is your ſyght,
                  That nothinge is conceyled nor ywrye,
                  From the beholdynge of your eternall eye,
                  And euery thinge maye attones ſe.
                  Vpon my ſoule haue mercy and pyte.
                  And of your grace and beninge cure,
                  Vpon my wo and pyteous auenture,
                  Haue ſome routhe nowe that I ſhall deye,
                  My wofull ſpyryte to lede and conueye,
                  Where as you lyſt now that I ſhall pace.
                  For vnto you in this ſelfe place,
                  I me confeſſe with all humilyte,
                  That hytherto I haue in chaſtyte,
                  Ladde all my lyfe and kept my maydēhead,
                  In your ſeruyce both in thought and dede,
                  In porte in chere and in countenaunce,
                  Or for feture of any daliaunce,
                  With one miſloke I neuer yet abrayde.
                  So that in ſothe I dye ſhall a maide,
                  As ye well knowe of ſynne all innocent,
                  Though I be nowe dempt by iudgement,
                  For to be dead without gilte at all.
                  Witneſſe on you that be immortall.
                  Clene of entente of that I am accuſed.
                  And yet alas I maye not be excuſed,
                  But that the ſwerde of vengeaunce muſt byte
                  Routheles which am nothinge to wite.
                  But ſtande cleare and pure of all offence.
                  And diſcharged in my conſcience,
                  I dare affirme and fully giltles,
                  Touchinge the murdre of worthy Achilles,
                  Which ſlewe my brother and after loued me,
                  And is nowe cauſe of mine aduerſyte.
                  And yet in will dede worde nor thought,
                  Vnto his death aſſentaunt was right nought
                  But therof was right ſory im my herte.
                  Albe that I maye not now aſterte,
                  For to be dead onely for his ſake.
                  On me alone vengeaunce ſhalbe take,
                  Without mercy in full cruell wiſe.
                  With my bloud to make ſacrafiſe,
                  To the goddes their wrathe for to queme.
                  Oh people blinde in ſothe amiſſe ye deme,
                  Agaynſt me your herte is ſo cruell,
                  To mercyles to yrous and to fell,
                  Without routhe to mikel indurate,
                  To ſley a mayde alone deſolate.
                  Out of your herte alas pitye is gone,
                  Harder in trouthe than any ſtocke or ſtone,
                  And more cruell in your opinion,
                  For lacke of pitye than Tigre or Lion.
                  Certis ye be greatly for to blame,
                  And ought therof for to haue great ſhame,
                  To aſſent to ſo foule a dede,
                  To ſley a maide quakinge in her dread,
                  And graunte her none oportunitye,
                  For to be wepe her virginyte,
                  
                     ¶That of this cruell & this piteous wreche.
                  My bloude your gylte hereafter ſhall apeche,
                  And accuſe alſo your great enuye,
                  To the goddes that ſhall iuſtyfye,
                  Euery vnright bothe of hygh and lowe.
                  Full egally and make to be knowe.
                  The trouthe plainly ſpare and no degree,
                  But make open that is now ſecree.
                  I ſaye not this nor my ſelfe complayne,
                  To haue redres of my fatall payne.
                  For death is now more welcome vnto me,
                  Than is my lyfe and more I take at gree.
                  Sithen my brother moſt worthy of renowne,
                  Be ſlayne all and buryed in this towne.
                  My father dead in his vnweldy age.
                  And I alone leſte in all this rage.
                  And haue abyde pyteouſely to ſe,
                  Fynally ruyne now of this cytye.
                  Whiche at my herte ſytteth now ſo ſore,
                  That leuer I haue then to wepe more,
                  Dye attones in releſſe of my wo.
                  Sith all my kynne is paſſed and ago.
                  Longer to lyue were to me a death.
                  For better is here to yelde vp the breth,
                  Then to be led out of this Cyte,
                  Amonge ſtraungers to lyue in pouertee,
               
               
                  OH death welcome and longer lette,
                  Thy dredefull darte to fyle & to whette,
                  My tender herte therwith all to ryue.
                  Agayne thy myght I wyll neuer ſtryue.
                  ¶Now is tyme to keth the power,
                  On me that am of wyll and herte entere,
                  A clene mayde ſo as I began,
                  Without touche of any maner man.
                  In all my lyfe to this ſame daye,
                  This lyttle auaunte yet make I maye,
                  In myne ende to the goddes all.
                  After whoſe helpe I clyppe and calle,
                  And to their mercy mekely I commende,
                  My woful ſpirite & pray them that they ſende
                  To euery mayde better happe and grace,
                  Then I haue nowe and a longer ſpace,
                  In hertye ioye and honour to contune,
                  Without aſſaulte of any infortune.
                  To leade their lyfe in proſperitye.
                  And all maydens remembreth vpon me,
                  To take enſample how ye ſhall you kepe.
                  And that ye wolde a fewe teares wepe,
                  When that ye thynke vpon fayre Pollyne,
                  That was of age and of yeres grene,
                  Whan ſhe was ſlayne by cruell auenture.
                  And to the goddes for to haue in cure,
                  My dredfull goſte holely I betake,
                  Eternally and thus an ende I make.
                  ¶And with yt word her head ſhe gan enclyne
                  Full humbly when ſhe ſhulde fyne,
                  And of her eyen helde the ledes downe.
                  ¶And Pirrhus then wodder then Lyon,
                  Diſmembred hath with his ſherpe ſworde.
                  This yonge made dredefull and aferde.
                  And ouer more his cruelte to ſhewe,
                  On peces ſmale he hath her all to hewe,
                  Endelonge his fathers ſepulture.
                  Alas how myght his cruell herte endure,
                  Mercyles to do ſo foule a dede.
                  I am aſtoned ſothly when I reade,
                  After her death how it did hym good,
                  Lyke a tiraunt to caſte abrode her bloude,
                  Or a Tygre that can no routhe haue.
                  Rounde enuyrowne about his fathers graue
                  He ſprent of hate and of cruelte.
                  Oh thou Pyrrhus thou mayſte well ybe,
                  Achylles ſonne by lyneall diſcent.
                  For lyke to hym of herte and of entente,
                  Thou were in ſoth deuoyde of all pytye,
                  And worſe then he yet in one degree.
                  For of thy father in all his lyuinge,
                  Ne radde I neuer yet ſo foule a thynge,
                  Though I wolde of hatred him abrayde,
                  For no rancour that euer he ſlewe amayde.
                  I fynde well that he had his parte,
                  Whylom in loue of Cupydes darte,
                  That made him ſore in his lyue ſmerte,
                  When that he was wounded to the herte.
                  With the caſtynge onely of an eye,
                  Wenynge therby wyſtly for to dye.
                  He myght not the ſodeyne ſtroke eſcape.
                  And afterwarde as his fate hath ſhape,
                  ¶He murdred was for the loue of Pollicene,
                  Whom thou haſte ſlayne in the cruell tene.
                  Furyouſly without routh or ſhame.
                  For whiche thynge the foule hatefull fame,
                  Through al the world hereafter ſhalbe ſpred.
                  When this ſtory reherſed is and red.
                  Then ſhalbe ſayd that Pirrhus routhleſſe,
                  Slewe in his yre a mayde gylteleſſe,
                  And woryed ſhall thy name moſt odyble.
                  
                     Be for this dede paſſyngly horryble.
                  For loue onely of fayre Pollycene.
                  The death of whom when Hecuba the quene
                  Hath ſene alas as ſhe beſyde ſtode.
                  For very wo gan to be wood,
                  And for ſorowe out of her wyt ſhe went,
                  And her clothes and heire ſhe rent,
                  All in a rage and wot not what ſhe doth.
                  But gan anone with handes and with tothe,
                  In her furye ſcrache and eke byte.
                  Stones caſtes and with fyſtes ſmyte,
                  Whom ſhe mette tyll grekes made her bynde.
                  And ſente her forth alſo as I fynde,
                  Into an yle to Troye partment,
                  Where ſhe was ſlayne onely by Iudgement,
                  Of the grekes and ſtoned to the death.
                  And whan ſhe had yelde vp the breth.
                  This wofull quene by cruell auenture,
                  The grekes dyd make a ſepulture,
                  Ceryouſly of metall and of ſtone.
                  And toke the corps and buryed it anone,
                  With great honour and ſolempnitee.
                  That longe after men there might ſe,
                  The ryche toumbe coſtfull and royall.
                  There ſet and made for a memoryall,
                  Of Hecuba whylom of great fame.
                  And after gaue to that place a name,
                  And called it to be longe in mynde.
                  ¶Locus in feſtus) in Guydo as I fynde.
                  And thus the quene onely for ſorowe wood,
                  Whan her doughter had ſhad her bloud,
                  Of grekes ſtones dyd her ende make.
                  As ye haue herde plainly for the ſake,
                  Of Policene whylom in Calchas,
                  Vnto Apollo falſly offred was.
                  By Pyrrhus ſworde Achylles auengyng,
                  To make the ſea calme and blandyſſhydg,
                  That the goddes take no vengeaunce,
                  Vpon grekes that on euyll chaunce,
                  Come to this falſe goddes euerychone.
                  And their ſtatues of ſtockes and of ſtone.
                  In whiche the ſerpent and the olde ſnake,
                  Sathan hym ſelfe gan his dwellyng make.
                  And fraudently folkes to yllude.
                  Full ſuttyll can hym ſelfe illude.
                  In ymages for to make his holde,
                  That forged be of ſyluer and of golde.
                  That by errour of falſe illuſyon,
                  He hath ybrought to confuſyon.
                  Through miſchance the worthy kinde of man
                  Syth tyme that alder fyrſte began,
                  The falſe honour of ydolatrye,
                  And the worſhyp vnto maumetrye,
                  By ſacrafyce of beaſtes and of bloud,
                  To appeaſe them when that they are wood.
                  And to queme bothe at eue and morowe.
                  I praye to god giue them all ſorowe,
                  Where ſo they be within or without.
                  I none excepte of the falſe route.
                  Saturne nor Mars Pallas nor Iuno,
                  Iubyter Mercurius nor Pluto,
                  Nother Flora that doth the floures ſprede.
                  Nother Bachus with grapes white & read,
                  Nor Cupydo with his eyen blynde.
                  Nother Daphne cloſed vnder rinde,
                  Through Tellus might of his laurer tree,
                  Nor thou Dyane with thy chaſtitee.
                  Myghtye Venus nor Citherea,
                  With thy dartes nor Proſerpyna,
                  That lady arte depe downe in helle.
                  Nor Bellides that draweth at the well.
                  Ixyon nor thou zezyphus,
                  Nor with thyne appyll thou cruell Tantalus
                  Nor the furies that be infernall.
                  Nor ye that ſpynne the lyues threde fatall,
                  Vpon the rocke of euery maner man.
                  Nor the Muſes that ſo ſynge can,
                  Atwene the Coppys of Nyſus and Cira,
                  Vpon the hylle beſyde Cyrrea.
                  Nor the Cybeles nor Ceres with thy corne,
                  Nor Golus of whom the dredefull horne,
                  Is herde ſo ferre when thou lyſte to blowe.
                  Nor Ianus Byfrons with backe corbed low
                  Nor Pryapes nor Genyus the preſt,
                  That curſed aye with candylles in his feſte.
                  Them echone that frowarde be to kynde.
                  Nor Ymeneus whoſe power is to bynde,
                  Hertes that be knit in maryage,
                  Tyll the goddeſſe of diſcorde and rage,
                  Diſſeuereth theim by diuiſion.
                  Nother Maues that haue their manſyon,
                  Myd the erthe in derkeneſſe and in wo.
                  Nor this Elues that are wont to go,
                  In vndyrmeles when Phebus is moſt ſhene,
                  Nother Fawny in tender greues grene.
                  Water nymphes nor this Naydes,
                  Satyrye nother Driades.
                  That goddes be of wood and wilderneſſe,
                  
                     Nor other goddes nother more nor leſſe,
                  As Morpheus that is the god of ſlepe.
                  I holde hym wood that taketh any kepe,
                  To do to them any obſeruaunce.
                  He may not fayle for to haue myſchaunce,
                  At the ende playnely for his mede.
                  For all ſuche feyned falſeneſſe out of drede,
                  Roſe of the deuyll and fyrſt by his engyne,
                  And of his ſleyghty treynes ſerpentyne,
                  Onely mankynde whan he made loute.
                  To falſe ydoles the whiche out of doubte,
                  Are but deuylles Dauyd beareth wytneſſe,
                  In the ſaulter where he wryt expreſſe.
                  And confyrmeth there as he endites,
                  Howe the goddes of Paganiſme rytes.
                  One and all he excepteth none,
                  Be made of golde of ſyluer and of ſtone.
                  Forged of braſſe of metall and of tree.
                  And eyen haue of and yet they may not ſe.
                  And all are fendes ſo as Dauyd ſayth,
                  That who in them haueth any fayth,
                  Hope credence or in them delyte.
                  It is no drede that they wyll hym quyte,
                  With ſuche guerdon as the ſoule ſleeth,
                  Perpetually ſo that the fyne is death.
                  Of their ſeruyce when men henſe pace.
                  And in their lyfe vnhap and euell grace.
                  Miſchyefe and wo and confuſyowne,
                  As men may ſe example by the towne,
                  That wende well aſſured for to haue be,
                  And to haue ſtande in longe proſperitye.
                  Agayne their foen through helpe of Apollo,
                  Of Venus eke and fauour of Iuno,
                  Through Pallas might Dyane & Mynerue,
                  Whom they were wonte to honour & ſerue,
                  With cerimonyes and with ſacrafyce.
                  As ye tofore haue herde me deuyſe.
                  That them haue brought now to ruyne,
                  By cruell death in a bed them to fyne.
                  Here may ye ſe how the venym bytes,
                  At the ende of ſuche olde rytes,
                  By euydence of this noble towne.
                  What may auayle now Palladyowne.
                  What may now helpe their frauded fantaſye,
                  Of all their olde falſe ydolatrye.
                  Alas alas they bought it all to ſore.
                  Now farewell Troye farewell for euermore.
                  Farewell alas to cruell was thy fall,
                  Of the no more now I wryte ſhall.
                  For thy ſake forſoth whan I take hede,
                  Of inwarde wo my herte I fele blede.
                  And when that I remembre in my thought,
                  By ruine how thou arte brought to noughte.
                  That whylom were ſo noble and ſo ryche,
                  That in this worlde I trowe none was liche.
                  Nor perygall to ſpeake of fayreneſſe.
                  To ſpeake of knyghthode or of worthyneſſe,
                  As clerkes ſay that thy byldynge knewe,
                  That all the worlde ought for to rewe,
                  On thy piteous waſte walles wilde.
                  Whylom ſo royall when men gan to bylde,
                  Thy towres hye and kynge Pryamus,
                  The fyrſt began moſt ryche and gloryous.
                  And ſette his ſee in noble Ilyon.
                  Oh who can wryte a lamentacion,
                  Conuenient Oh Troye for thy ſake,
                  Thy great myſchiefe to complayne and crye.
                  ¶Certes I trowe not olde Ieremye,
                  That ſo be wepte the captiuitye,
                  Of thylke noble royall chyefe Cyte,
                  Ieruſalem and his deſtruction.
                  With all the hole tranſmygracion.
                  ¶Of the Iewes nor thou Ezechyell,
                  That were that tyme when the miſchiefe fell,
                  Vnto the kynge ycalled Sedeclye,
                  In Babylon and for thy propheſye,
                  With ſtones were cruelly yſlawe.
                  Nor he that was departed with a ſawe,
                  Ye bothe two that colde ſo complaine,
                  Nor Danyell that felte ſo great peyne.
                  For the kynges tranſmutaſyon.
                  In a beaſt tyll through the oryſon,
                  Of Danyell he reſtored was.
                  To mynde agayne and eate no more graſſe.
                  ¶Yet veryly though ye all thre,
                  With your wepynge gan aliue be,
                  And preſent eke at the deſtructiowne,
                  Of this noble worthy royall towne.
                  To haue bewayled the miſchiefe and the wo,
                  And the ſlaughter at the ſyege do,
                  On outher partye in full cruell wyſe,
                  All your teares might not ſuffyce,
                  To haue bewepte their ſorowes euerychone.
                  By treaſon wrought aſwell as by their foen.
                  ¶Hereof no more for it may not auayle.
                  But lyke as he that gynneth for to ſayle,
                  Agayne the wynde when the maſte do ryue,
                  Ryght ſo it were but in vayne to ſtryue,
                  
                     Agayne the face bytter then galle,
                  By the vengeaunce vpon Troye falle.
                  Nor to preſume their furyes ſharpe whette,
                  Ceryouſly in this boke to ſette.
                  So great a thyng I dare not vndertake.
                  But euen here a pyteous ende I make.
                  Of the ſyege after my ſympleſſe,
                  And though my ſtile be blotted with rudeneſſe
                  As of metre both ruſty and vnfyled,
                  ¶The fourthe boke that I haue compyled,
                  With humble hande of drede yt doth me quake
                  Vnto your grace hooly I betake.
                  ¶Of your mercy nothynge in diſpryre,
                  So as I can makynge my repeyre,
                  To the grekes and no longer dwelle,
                  Their aduentures of the ſea to telle.
                  In their reſorte home to their countre.
                  And how that they there receyued be.
                  Onely of ſupporte ſo ye not deſpyſe,
                  The fyfthe boke I ſhortely ſhall deuyſe.
               
            
            ¶Thus endeth the fourth boke.
         
         
            
            The fyfthe boke.
            
               ¶Here begynneth the fyfth booke Howe the Grekes retourned into Grece after the diſtruction, and howe they were peryſſhed almoſte all in the ſea, and after they that eſcaped dyed myſcheuouſly. Cap. xxxvi.
               
                  
                     WHen Eolus whiche dothe the wyndes rore,
                  Appeaſed was yt he blewe no more
                  Whiche is of ſtormes gouernoure and lorde,
                  And was alſo fully of accorde,
                  With myghty Iuno lady of the ayre,
                  To make the ſkye and the wether fayre,
                  That cloude none in heauen dyd appere,
                  And Neptunus blaundyſhynge of chere,
                  Was of aſſent the ſtory ſayeth for ſoth,
                  To make the ſea fro tempeſt calme and ſmoth
                  Without boyling or trouble of any wawe,
                  The mighty grekꝭ to ſhipward gan thē draw
                  For to repeyre home to their countre.
                  After they had wonnen the citye,
                  And put their fomen fully at the werſe.
                  But fortune aye frowarde and peruerſe,
                  Hath with their mirth meynt aduerſyte.
                  For when they wende full aſſured be,
                  And haue ſtande ſtedfaſte in quyete,
                  This blynde lady falſly made to flete,
                  Into their ſugred galle of diſcordaunce:
                  Amonge them ſelfe to brynge in varyaunce.
                  And their hertes of rancour and of pryde,
                  Contagyouſly to ſeueryne and deuyde.
                  When they ſat hygheſt in their glorye,
                  With the palme of conqueſt and victorye,
                  Fully reioyſynge through their hye renowne,
                  The crowne of laurer in poſſeſſyowne.
                  And had alſo at their luſt all wonne,
                  When bryghteſt ſhone the luſtye freſhe ſonne.
                  From Eaſt to Weſt of their worthyneſſe,
                  A cloudye ſkye vnwarely with derkeneſſe,
                  Eclypſed hath a partye of their light.
                  And eke diffaced the holſome beames bryght,
                  Of their welfare and proſperitie.
                  By the enuyous falſe contagyoſytie,
                  Of the ſerpent pompouſe and ellate,
                  Amonge them ſelfe to make them at debate.
                  Induſynge in rancour and diſcorde,
                  For or they entre within ſhyppes borde,
                  Agayne Vlyxes worthy Thelamon.
                  In preſence of the kynge Agamenon.
                  Purpoſed hath playnely his mattere,
                  Tofore grekes anone as ye ſhall here.
               
               
                  SIres quod he ſo it you not greue,
                  Me ſemeth iuſtly of reaſon I may meue,
                  Touchyng ye winning & getting of the towne
                  With golde richeſſe and poſſeſſyowne,
                  Fully delyuered and taken to our hande,
                  With all the treaſour founde in the londe,
                  The whiche me thincketh in my inward ſight
                  Ne hath not ben departed halfe a ryght,
                  Amonge vs by iuſte deuyſyon,
                  Ne by egall dyſtribucion.
                  Conſydered fyrſt by tytle of equyte,
                  Of euery wyght the eſtate and dignitie,
                  Remembred eke howe in this ſharpe ſhoure,
                  The worthyeſt the meryte and labour,
                  And deſertes in this mortall ſtryfe,
                  Grauntynge to eueryche his prerogatyfe,
                  And lyke fortune as he hath deſerued.
                  But this ordre hath not be obſerued,
                  Amonges vs without excepcyon,
                  In delyueraunce of Palladyon,
                  Whiche Vlyxes I ſaye without drede,
                  Tofore you all vniuſtly doth poſſede.
                  On hym vſurpynge by falſe opynyon.
                  By merytorye retrybucyon,
                  And apparence his tytle for to grounde,
                  Vnder pretenſe of colour falſely founde,
                  That he this relyke reioyſe ſhulde of ryght.
                  By ſleyght wonne rather then of myght.
                  And vſurpeth by maner of a vaunt,
                  As it were gyuen vnto hym by graunt,
                  Of you echone for a chyefe guerdon.
                  But I wyll make a replycation,
                  That this relyke is not to hym mete.
                  Whiche he ſhall not reioyſe in quyete,
                  If that I maye diſturbe hym or do lette.
                  
                     For I it cleyme duely as of dette,
                  And for guerdon to me conuenyent,
                  So that ye lyſte to be indifferent.
                  Of reaſon onely as it doth you ſeme,
                  Atwene vs two egally to deme,
                  Iuſtly fyrſt with euery circumſtaunce,
                  Our outher meryte weyed in balaunce,
                  Firſte conſydered forth fro day to daye,
                  By all the longe whyle that the ſyege laye,
                  That ye ſhulde of plentye of vitayle,
                  On no ſyde fro no myſchyefe fayle.
                  ¶And if I ſhall without auaunt out breke,
                  As of armes and knyghthode for to ſpeke,
                  In the fyelde by longe continuaunce,
                  Of manly force and perſeueraunce,
                  Vpon our foen that were ſo felle and kene,
                  Day by daye I was armed clene,
                  It nedeth not to make mencyon,
                  With my right hand I ſlewe him Phylomene
                  As ye well knowe whiche had in his kepynge
                  The yonge ſonne of Pryamus the kynge.
                  Freſhe and luſty and of great fayreneſſe.
                  And with hym had infynyte rycheſſe,
                  Of treaſoure golde paſſyngly plentye.
                  And euery dele was brought to you by me,
                  If ye remembre and lyſte to take hede.
                  That ye were quyet of indygence and nede,
                  By occaſyon of that great good.
                  And through my manhode ſhed I not ye blode
                  Mercyles in full cruell wyſe,
                  For your ſake of the kynge of Fryſe.
                  And the treaſour in his cofers ſought,
                  And all yfeare to the ſyege ybrought,
                  And by my knyghthode ſyth go full yore,
                  Haue I not eke augmented and made more,
                  The grekes lande with poſſeſſyons,
                  By conqueſt onely of two regyons,
                  Through my prudence and my laboure won,
                  Sythen that ye the ſyege fyrſt begonne,
                  With prouynces to Troye adiacent,
                  To your encreaſe I was ſo dyligent.
                  ¶And with Achylles the worthy warryour,
                  Ye be experte full well of my laboure.
                  What we wrought to your auauntage.
                  And ſythen ye ſo prudent be and ſage,
                  Not foryetell but fully remembrynge,
                  It nedeth not reherſen euery thynge.
                  ¶And ſo to diſpreue manly as a knyght,
                  His tytle and cleyme that he hath no ryght,
                  The dome cōmyttynge to your opynyons,
                  By reherſayle of his condycyons,
                  He nother hath manhode nor proweſſe,
                  Force knyghthode nother hardyneſſe,
                  And at a poynt for to haue a rewarde,
                  In darynge do is preued a cowarde.
                  Experyence hath ſhewed you in dede,
                  How that he is when it cometh to nede,
                  But worde and wynde & ſleyghty cōpaſſyng,
                  And on falſhode euer ymagynynge,
                  For neuer yet to this daye was preued,
                  That any thynge was by hym acheued,
                  Whiche might be entitled to his laude:
                  But the ende medlyd were with fraude.
                  For vnder colour he can cure all,
                  Pretende fayre lyke a paynted walle,
                  Dyuerſe hewed that nother hye nor lowe,
                  There may no man his plaine mening know.
                  ¶And with ſuche ſleyght cōpaſſed by treaſon
                  Out of Troye he gat Palladyon.
                  Whiche is great ſhame & ſclaunder to vs all.
                  For of our conqueſt it is thus befalle,
                  More of treaſon we haue the cytye wonne,
                  Than of knyghthode as men reporte koune.
                  And crop and rote yf I reherſe ſhall,
                  Vlyxes there is grounde and cauſe of all.
                  And gynnynge fyrſte of this vnhappy fame,
                  That reboundeth to our alder ſhame.
                  And ſyth the trouthe is platly knowen & wiſte
                  My tale is ended demyth as ye lyſte.
               
               
                  VLyxes then in his aduertence,
                  Conceyued hath the great inpacyence,
                  Of Thelamon and the great enuye,
                  The feruent rancour and melancolye.
                  ¶Forbare him fyrſt by full great aduyſe,
                  As he that was full prudent and ryght wiſe,
                  And thought he wolde make therof no iape,
                  By no worde for haſte that ſhulde eſcape,
                  Nother by none vnbrydled countenaunce,
                  Outwarde conceyued in his regardaunce,
                  ¶And abraydynge with a ſtable face,
                  Syres quod he ſo I may haue grace,
                  Vnder ſupporte of your hyghe preſence,
                  That my tale maye haue audyence.
                  I nother am in doubte nor in drede,
                  Of equytye that I ſhall poſſede,
                  Palladyon durynge my lyues daye,
                  Maugre the myght of who that ſay naye.
                  
                     For yf ye lyſt of reaſon for to ſe,
                  At the ſyege layde fyrſt to this cyte,
                  I haue my ſelfe in double wiſe acquyt.
                  As well by knyghthod ſothly as by wyt,
                  And through my counſell and my buſy cure,
                  Be ofre cauſe of theyr diſcomfiture,
                  Aye dylygent to your auauntage,
                  Wrought and compaſſed vnto theyr domage.
                  That to this daye in ſothe ne had I be,
                  They had floured in theyr felycytye,
                  In theyr force contuned and welfare.
                  And if that I the trouth ſhall not ſpare,
                  If it be dempt and loked of reaſon,
                  I was moſt cauſe of theyr confuſyon,
                  Who ſo euer agaynſt it replye.
                  ¶How ofte went I on your imbaſſadrye,
                  With importable charge and dyſpenſe,
                  The treate aye concludynge in ſentence,
                  To the forthrynge of your entenciowne,
                  And diſencreaſe and hindringe of the towne.
                  And when I ſawe other meane none,
                  In myne aduyſe and wittes euerichone,
                  By our force the cyte for to win,
                  While they had yt relyke them within,
                  Therupon ſo ſotylly I wrought,
                  That vnto you Palladyon I brought.
                  Which Thelamon that of malyce ſtriueth,
                  Of olde hatred vnto my gilt aſcriueth.
                  Hooly this thinge yt I haue for you wrought.
                  ¶But ye that be ſo prudent in your thought,
                  Aduerteth wyſely and an ende maketh,
                  And in your hande this quarell fully taketh.
                  Palladion iuſtly to prouyde,
                  And all fauour let be layde aſyde.
                  Sith all this thinge ye platly vnderſtande,
                  And let vs both to our demynge ſtande.
                  By one aſſent how ſo the matter wende,
                  Lo here is all my tale is at an ende.
                  ¶Then Thelamon in Ire full feruent,
                  And through rancoure made inpacient,
                  And of enuye inwardely ameued,
                  Vlyxes hath diſpyteouſly repreued,
                  Onely of malys and of hyghe diſdaine.
                  And Vlixes rebukyng him agayne,
                  Full bytterly without abode anone,
                  And ſo they twayne made full mortall foen,
                  In the preſence of Agamenon.
                  ¶But furyouſly Ayax Thelamon,
                  Of melancolye pale and nothynge red,
                  Thrette Vlyxes that he ſhall be dead,
                  Of his handes he ſhulde it not eſchewe.
                  And grekes tho all rancour to remewe,
                  This quarell put in arbytration,
                  Of Menclaye and Agamenon,
                  That cauſed after a full mortall ſtryfe.
                  For by ſentence anone dyffynytyfe,
                  They put Vlixes in poſſeſſyon,
                  Perpetually of thilke Palladyon.
                  With hym confyrmynge to abyde ſtable.
                  And cauſe why they were fauourable,
                  To Vlyxes lyke as Guydo wryte.
                  Was for that he ſo goodly hath hym quyte,
                  Vnto Heleyne at gettynge of the towne.
                  Beynge in cauſe of her ſauaciowne,
                  Diſpeyred and of her lyfe in drede,
                  Grekes willynge to haue had her dead.
                  But through his prudent mediacyon,
                  Maugre the myght of this Thelamon,
                  He hath the quene fro the death preſerued,
                  Albe that ſhe the ſame had well deſerued.
                  As grekes ſayde in their opynyon.
                  And thus defrauded of Palladyon,
                  As ye haue harde was this worthy knyght,
                  For all his manhode and his great myght.
                  Where through there gan in his herte brede,
                  Paſſynge enuye and full great hatrede.
                  And thought he wolde auenged be ſome day,
                  Vpon Vlixes and on Menelay,
                  And eke alſo vppon Agamenon.
                  And out he brake lyke a wood Lyon,
                  With his knightes about him yt were ſtronge,
                  And ſayd playnly of this great wronge,
                  For to be dead he woulde auenged be.
                  And ſpecyally on this ilke three,
                  And therwithall furious and wrothe,
                  Tournyng his backe out anone he goeth,
                  In herte fret with full mortall tene,
                  With many greke his quarell to ſuſtene,
                  That in herte ſore gan dyſdayne,
                  Agayne Vlixes and the tother twayne.
                  But they full ware what ſo euer falle,
                  Their knightes made aboute them for to call
                  And with gret ſtuffe where they wake or ſlepe
                  To awayte on them and manly for to kepe,
                  With full good watche enuyron all the cloſe.
                  ¶But full erely or the ſonne aroſe,
                  This worthy Ayax in his bed vpryght,
                  Ymurdred was the ſelfe ſame nyght,
                  
                     And albe blede in the morowe founde.
                  On peces hewe with many mortall wounde.
                  That for this thyng cruell and horryble.
                  To god and man lothſome and odyble,
                  Full many greke that wofull morowe wepe.
                  To ſe a knyght ſo murdred in his ſlepe.
                  That the crye and the noyſe ran,
                  Throughout the hooſte anone fro man to mā
                  
                  And for conſtreynt of this foule deede,
                  Eueryche of them felte his herte blede,
                  Full deſyrous to make an ordynaunce,
                  On this murdre for to do vengeaunce.
                  Hauynge therof great ſuſpection,
                  To Menelay and to Agamenon.
                  ¶But to Vlixes moſt in ſpecyall.
                  By comon voyce to hym arrettynge all,
                  The foule fame he myght not aſterte.
                  ¶But Pyrrhus moſt toke this thyng at hert
                  Makyng a vowe furyous and wood,
                  To be venged playnely on the bloud,
                  Of Thelamon vpon Vlixes heade.
                  Hym manaſynge that he ſhalbe deade,
                  So ſore on hym frettynge was the ſorowe.
                  ¶But Vlixes erly on a morowe,
                  For dread of Pirrhus taken hath the ſea,
                  And with his ſhyppes faſte gan to flee,
                  ¶But or he wente platly as I reade,
                  Palladyon he toke to Dyomede,
                  Hauynge in herte therof full great remorſe.
                  ¶And Pirrhus then taken hath the corſe,
                  Of Thelamon for loue in ſpecyall,
                  And dyd make a flawme funerall,
                  Large and great of coles hote and red,
                  And amyddes the feruent fyry glede,
                  Full many a greke ſtondynge to beholde,
                  He lette it brenne into aſhes colde,
                  And in the ſtorye after as is tolde,
                  He cloſed them in an vrne of golde,
                  Full reuerently and after hath it ſhette,
                  And thervpon he hath the prynte yſette.
                  Of his armes curyouſly ygraue.
                  From all myſchyefe the aſſhes for to ſaue.
                  And ſent them home by great affection,
                  To be conſerued in the regyon,
                  Where he was kyng whyle he was a lyue.
                  And euery thynge was perfourmed blyue,
                  After the rytes in tho dayes vſed.
                  ¶ And euer in one Pyrrhus hath ymuſed,
                  Vpon this murdre trayterouſly ywrought,
                  And caſte it ſhulde be full dere abought,
                  The pyteous death of this Thelamon,
                  Hauynge aye hate as to Agamenon.
                  And had eke ſuſpecte olde Menelay,
                  That in a wayte eche for other laye,
                  Makyng thē ſelfe with their knightꝭ ſtronge,
                  To trye out who hath ryght or wronge.
                  For Pyrrhus ne wolde let it lyghtly gone.
                  And thus they were made mortall fone,
                  This ylke three platly to the death.
                  Through falſe enuy which their hertes ſleeth
                  And while they were amonge thē ſelfe vntrue
                  Stryfe vpon ſtryfe gan euery day renewe,
                  And debates for to multiplye.
                  Tyll Anthenor gan this thynge eſpye,
                  And by his wyſedome to ſtynten all diſdayne,
                  Them reconſyled vnto peace agayne,
                  And cauſed them to accorde in all.
                  And after made a ſolempne feaſt royall.
                  Beſechynge them full lowely al thre.
                  To graunt to hym therat for to be,
                  Of gentylneſſe that Grekes myghte echone,
                  Outwarde conceyue that they were al alone,
                  And to this feaſt he goodly made to calle,
                  As writ Guydo the worthy grekes all,
                  Of hye ne lowe was none excepcion.
                  But yf I ſhulde make deſcrypcion,
                  Howe the lordes and eſtates ſette,
                  Of ſundrye courſes and the gyftes great,
                  That Anthenor gaue on euery ſyde.
                  It were to longe to you for to abyde.
                  There was of plente ſo great ſuffyſaunce,
                  ¶And I fynde they fell in dalyaunce,
                  Syttyng at meate to ſpeken of Enee.
                  Brought in of hate and of enmite,
                  And of diſdaye ſhortely in ſentence,
                  They put on hym many great offence,
                  And ſpecyally in their haſty tene,
                  Whylom how he concealed Polycene,
                  And by his ſleyght made her be withdrawe,
                  Whiche was in cauſe Achylles was yſlawe.
                  Shortly concludyng by one opynyon,
                  His fynall exyle out of Troye towne.
                  Notwithſtandyng the graunt and lyberte,
                  Gyuen to hym to abyde in the cyte,
                  Alſo longe as hym lyſte deuyſe.
                  But grekes haue adnulled his fraunchyſe,
                  Fro the loweſt vp vnto the meſte,
                  That were preſent at this hye feſte.
                  
                     ¶But doubteleſſe I can not well eſpye,
                  By whom was brought this conſpyracye,
                  In Troye boke I fynde can no more,
                  Saue that hym ſelfe wytte it Anthenor,
                  Ylyche falſe bothe in one degre,
                  As ye haue herde betrayſhynge the Cytye.
                  Lyke as they had ſpronge out of one roote.
                  And whē he knew ther was none other boote
                  This Eneas his dome to modefye,
                  He prayed them of their courteſye,
                  At the leaſt to graunten him grace,
                  Foure monthes that he myght haue ſpace,
                  To make his ſtuffe and his apparayle,
                  And hym ſelfe to puruey of vytayle,
                  Eke to graunt hym that they wolde aſſent,
                  Thylke ſhyppes that with Parys went,
                  To Cytheron vnto that temple olde.
                  That were in nombre two and twenty tolde.
                  And with full graunt of his petycyowne,
                  He is retourned home to Troye towne.
                  Tryſte and heuy to ſe and beholde,
                  The waſte Cytye with his walles olde.
                  And for ſorowe felte his herte blede,
                  Within hym ſelfe when he taketh hede,
                  And remembred in his aduertence,
                  To falſe treaſon and the great offence,
                  By hym compaſſed to the towne aforne.
                  And how that he ſo ſodeynely hath lorne,
                  The grace of grekes and ſtode diſconſolate,
                  That whylom was of ſo great eſtate.
                  Now in his herte he fully diſpeyred,
                  That he vnwarely was ſo euyll apayred,
                  Vnto grekes beyonde at his backe.
                  Beynge vngylty and without lacke.
                  And by whome he coulde not well deme,
                  Saue by ſygnes as it ſhulde ſeme,
                  That Anthenor was moſte for to wyte.
                  And caſte playnely that he wolde hym quyte,
                  And through the towne he made ſende blyue,
                  For thilke fewe that were lefte alyue,
                  Commynge anone at his commaundemente,
                  And when they were euerychone preſent.
               
               
                  SIres quod he ye ſe howe that fortune,
                  Towardes me gynneth diſcontune,
                  Aye vnſtable with her eyen blynde,
                  As ye experte in your ſelfe now fynde,
                  Whilom frowarde now tourned into werſe,
                  That of clerkes called is aduerſe,
                  When her lyſt her cruelte to ſhewe.
                  Now ſo it ſtandeth ye be here but a fewe,
                  And I muſt parte and ye ſtyll abyde,
                  But it ſo be that ye will prouyde,
                  Standynge alone deuoyde of all ſuccoure,
                  Amonge your ſelfe to make a gouernoure,
                  I can not ſe beaute ſhalbe acloyed,
                  On euery parte and fynally deſtroyed,
                  As ſely ſhepe that ne can no reade,
                  All diſparkled when no man doth thē leade.
                  Wherfore beſt is in this dredefull thynge,
                  By one aſſent to choſen you a kynge,
                  And moſte able the eſtate to occupye,
                  From all aſſaulte manly you to guye,
                  Is Anthenor of knyghthode and renowne,
                  If it accorde with your opynyowne.
                  Wherfore in haſte vnto this entent,
                  Without abode lette for hym be ſent.
                  And at his comynge plainely into towne,
                  Vpon his heade lette be ſette a crowne,
                  Grauntynge to him ſcepter and regalye,
                  By his wyſedome that he maye you guye.
                  From all aſſaulte of any parturbaunce:
                  By his knyghthode & prudent gouernaunce.
                  And they aſſent makyng no delaye,
                  There was neuer one that lyketh to ſaye nay,
                  But were ryght gladde in all maner thynge,
                  As ye haue herde for to make hym kynge.
                  ¶But they full lyttle ſothly in their ſonde,
                  Of Eneas the meanyng vnderſtande,
                  For he ne mente but treaſon and falſehede,
                  Howe at his entrynge that he ſhalbe dead,
                  Full trayterouſly in awayte lying,
                  To ſlea hym falſely at his in commynge.
                  But Anthenor of all this nothyng ware,
                  Dyſarmed came and no weapen bare,
                  And Eneas with an huge route,
                  With ſwordes drawe ſet hym rounde aboute,
                  Tyll they of Troye both the yonge and olde,
                  Ran atwene and manly hym with holde,
                  And on their knees fell mekely downe,
                  Beſechynge hym to haue compaſſyowne,
                  Of worthyneſſe and alſo of manlyhead,
                  Lyke as a knyght for to taken hede.
                  Howe they were lefte but of people bare,
                  Beſechynge hym his dredfull ſworde to ſpare
                  And his rancoure and his yre leue.
                  Leſt the ſlaughter wolde them all greue,
                  And on the commō they beſought him rewe.
                  
                     As ſayth myne auctour at miſchiefe to ye londe
                  And there he was founde on the ſonde,
                  Almoſt at death without remedye,
                  To hym Mynerua hath ſo great enuye,
                  For he ſo woodly to her temple wente.
                  And Caſſandra after her autur hente,
                  By cruell force and hatefull vyolence.
                  ¶Lo what peryll is to do offence,
                  Of hye dyſpyte to any holy place.
                  I doubte not he ſhall fayle grace,
                  Who ſo euer vſeth it in deede.
                  At the laſte god wyll quyte his mede,
                  And rewarde him lyke as he dyſſerueth.
                  And for ſuch thyng many greke now ſtriueth
                  Bycauſe onely of ſuche occaſyon,
                  To exemplefye for no preſumpcyon,
                  Folyly to attaine as I haue tolde.
                  For agayne god who ſo be to bolde,
                  Shall repent ſooner than he weneth.
                  And many man that no harme ne meneth,
                  Suffreth vengeaunce for treſpaſſe of one.
                  The fyrſte Auctour goth not quyte alone,
                  But many other his offence abayth.
                  For ceryouſly Guydo wryt and ſayth.
                  Suynge in ordre the wofull auenture,
                  That euery greke homewarde dyd endure.
                  Of hygh and lowe ſparynge none eſtate,
                  Holſome welfull and ſome infortunate,
                  Both of their woo and of their welfare,
                  Ryght as it fell the ſtorye ſhall declare.
               
               
                  IN Grece whylom was a worthy kyng,
                  Manly and ryche and prudent of lyuynge,
                  And had in ſoth lyke as wryte Guydo,
                  In his tyme worthy ſonnes two.
                  Pallamydes was the eldeſt brother,
                  And Oetes called was the tother,
                  Bothe twayne of one mother borne,
                  And as the ſtorye reherſed hath toforne.
                  Pallamydes was a noble knyght,
                  Full famous eke of power and of myght,
                  And fer ſpoke of in many ſundrye coſte.
                  And had alſo of all the grekes hooſte,
                  For his wyſedome whylom gouernayle.
                  ¶But he alas was ſlayne in battayle,
                  Through vnhap of Martys cruell tene.
                  Whan the ſonne ſhone moſt bright and ſhene.
                  Of his knighthode and his worthyneſſe.
                  Lyke as tofore the ſtory beareth witneſſe,
                  And of his death doth playnely ſpecyfye.
                  ¶But nowe of malyce hatrede and enuye
                  Of ſuch as haue tunges infortunate,
                  To make onely kinge Naulus at debate,
                  With the Grekes contriued haue of newe,
                  An hye treaſon falſe and full vntrewe,
                  The which ī ſoth was neuer do nor wrought,
                  Nor in effecte ymagined nor thought,
                  But a falſe thinge yfeyned of malyce,
                  ¶That this kinge ſo manly and ſo wyſe,
                  And ſo prudent this Pallamides,
                  Shulde of enuye god wot cauſeles.
                  At the ſiege of Troye the Cyte,
                  Vpon a night falſly murdred be.
                  So that this ſlaughter & this lothſome dede,
                  By Vlixes and by Diomede,
                  Were fully wrought as ye haue herde deuiſe,
                  Whiche euery herte ought to agryſe.
                  ¶This falſe alſo that this tale haue fayned,
                  To king Naulus haue traiterouſly cōplained
                  Albe in dede it was neuer mente,
                  That grekes were alſo of aſſent,
                  To this murdre and conſpyration.
                  Both Menelay and Agamenon.
                  Albe in ſoth that euery dele was falſe,
                  That hanged be they hye by the halfe,
                  That can tales ſo forge and contryue,
                  To make frendes cauſeles to ſtryue.
                  For they through fraude of falſe colluſyon.
                  Kynge Naulus put in ſuſpection,
                  That grekes had conſpyred doubtles,
                  Vpon the murdre of Pallamydes.
                  Makyng their ground which they did fayne,
                  That fro Troye were ſent letters twayne,
                  To Pallamydes immediatly directe.
                  Whiche concluded treaſon in effecte.
                  Howe that he was for all his hyghe eſtate,
                  Falſely allyed and confederate,
                  To them of Troye for a ſumme of golde.
                  All this they haue fayned and ytolde.
                  And howe he had out of the Cytye,
                  Of good receyued huge quantite,
                  To fyne onely Grekes to betraye,
                  And to prolonge them platly and delaye,
                  At the ſyege in gettynge of the towne,
                  By his engyne and medyacygwne.
                  And to confirme all this in ſentence,
                  To make Naulus gyue full credence.
                  They ſayd playnely in confuſyowne,
                  
                     The letters which yt were ſent fro the towne,
                  Yfounde were encloſed in a ſhielde,
                  Vpon a knyght yſlayne in the fyelde,
                  Comprehendynge hole the trecherye.
                  The treaſon full and confederacye,
                  ¶Atwene the towne and Pallamydes.
                  Veryly though he were gyltles,
                  And to gyue more open euydence,
                  To make a prefe of this great offence.
                  ¶They ſayde Vlyxes affyrmyng in certayne
                  Accorded was with a chaumberleyne,
                  That was in offyce with Pallamydes.
                  Wonder ſecrete and nothynge reckeles,
                  For to aſſente to this conſpyracye.
                  Wrongly compaſſed of brennynge hote enuye
                  Behotynge him guerdon and great mede,
                  Lyke his deuiſe to execute in dede,
                  To take a treaſour and a ſumme of good,
                  Full ſecretly and knit it in a hode,
                  And hid it when voyded was the preſe,
                  Vnder the bedde of Pallamides.
                  And more to put Grekes in ſuerte,
                  The treaſour was the ſame of quantyte,
                  That it ne might after be denyed,
                  Lyke as the letters had ſpecyfyed.
                  ¶And when all this founde was & knowe,
                  Throughout the hooſt noiſed was & yblowe,
                  Both of the letters and the golde alſo,
                  Fro poynt to poynt accordynge both two,
                  Which that this kinge aſſentinge to treſowne
                  Receyued had out of Troye towne,
                  To be aſſented as ye haue herde me tell.
                  The Grekes tho no longer would dwell,
                  But ſhope theym forth all of one entente,
                  And in all haſte came vnto the tente,
                  Of this kinge full innocent and clene,
                  That litell knewe what they would mene,
                  ¶But vpon him full knightly as he ſtode,
                  In theyr yre furyouſly and wood,
                  To be venged loude gan to crye.
                  There maye no man theyr malice modefye.
                  They were on him ſo merciles at all,
                  And as I finde moſt in ſpecyall.
                  Kinge Menelay and Agamenon,
                  Onely meued of indignacion,
                  Would haue proceded vnto iudgemtnt,
                  Of haſty rancour without auyſement,
                  On this treaſon auenged for to be.
                  Notwithſtandinge al his hie degre.
                  But in ſothneſſe when this worthy kinge,
                  Conceyued hath this malice in workinge,
                  Firſt aſtoned in his inwarde ſyght,
                  All ſodaynly ſtert vplike a knight.
                  This wiſe worthy this Pallamides,
                  Hardy as Lyon amid all the preſe,
                  Nothinge agaſte him knightly gan expreſſe,
                  And playnly ſayde he would not refuſe,
                  To acquite him ſelfe of this mortall caſe,
                  Not acceptynge that he ſo worthy was,
                  Of byrth and bloud and of hye kinred.
                  Al this deuoyding of knighthod and māhed,
                  As he that gaue of life nor death no forſe,
                  Tofore theim all to ieoparde his corſe,
                  Within a felde where theim liſt ordeyne,
                  Like as a knight this quarel to dareyne,
                  With whom that liſt or durſt it vndertake,
                  Exception him liked none to make,
                  Of hye nor lowe who that were ſo bolde,
                  To proue the reaſon that I haue you tolde.
                  Beſechynge them to make no delaye,
                  Nor prolonge him but the ſame daye,
                  Manly requiringe it maye be do in haſte.
                  But they yt had falſly this thinge compaſte,
                  Of his aunſwere ſtoned were echone.
                  In all the hooſt that there was not one,
                  That hardy was if I ſhal not fayne,
                  In chaump cloſe this quarell to dareyne.
                  Nother Vlixes nor yet Dyomede,
                  Chefe workers of this foule dede.
                  But Vlixes as he was cuſtomabe,
                  In euery thynge to be deceyuable,
                  Double in his worke and aye full of deceyt,
                  Lyke a ſerpent that lyeth in awayte,
                  Which vnder floures gan ſo glide and trace.
                  Right ſo Vlixes with a fayned face,
                  When yt he ſawe the knightly hye proweſſe.
                  The manly cheare and the hardineſſe,
                  And high renowne of this Pallamides.
                  Anone of falſhed put him ſelfe in preſe,
                  And like a frende that mente not but wele,
                  Brotyll as glaſſe pretendinge outwarde ſtele
                  With one the fyrſt gan him to excuſe,
                  Theim counſaylinge no longer for to muſe,
                  On this matter for theyr alder eaſe,
                  And by crafte gan them ſo appeaſe.
                  Touchinge the rumoure of this hye treaſon,
                  That he hath voyded all ſuſpection,
                  Out of theyr hertes concludinge in certayne.
                  
                     This accuſynge made was in vayne,
                  And conſpyred onely of hatrede.
                  Albe him ſelfe was roote of all this dede.
                  ¶But when he ſawe he myght not acheue,
                  As ye haue herde this worthy kinge to greue
                  Some ſpot of treaſon on him for to laye,
                  He hath anone founde an other waye,
                  By the aſſente fully of Dyomede,
                  Vnder pretence playnly of frendlyhed,
                  Comynge to hym agayne a certayne nyght,
                  Vnder ſuraunce as he was true knyght,
                  Counſayle to kepe either for ſote or ſoure,
                  Enfourmynge him of a great treaſoure.
                  Of golde and good and infynite rycheſſe,
                  To him diſcured vnder ſecretnes.
                  The whyche ſothly no man dyd knowe,
                  Hyd and incloſed in a well lowe,
                  Within a felde a litell there beſyde.
                  The which hym lyſt fro hym not to hyde,
                  But of truſte vnto hym dyſcure,
                  So he would do his buſy cure,
                  The ſame nyght wyth him for to go,
                  Vnto the well they thre and no mo,
                  To fette away that great ſumme of good.
                  And he in ſothe that nothynge vnderſtode,
                  What they mente aſſented was anone.
                  And ſo they thre be togyther gone,
                  Vnto the well lyke as I haue tolde.
                  And for that he moſt manly was and bolde,
                  Pallamydes lyke as they him telle,
                  Deſcended is lowe into the well,
                  Suppoſynge to haue a treaſour founde.
                  But they alas hym falſly to confounde,
                  Haue murdred him wt ſtones great & huge,
                  He in the botome hauynge no refuge.
                  And whē they had accomplyſhed theyr entēt,
                  They be repeyred eueryche to his tent.
               
               
                  THis tale the ſtory telleth vs,
                  That feyned was to the kinge Naulus,
                  Touchinge the death of Pallamides,
                  Theim to deſclaunder that were giltles.
                  For Vlixes and wyth Dyomede,
                  Were innocent platly as I reade,
                  And Grekes all both nigh and ferre.
                  For he was ſlayne knightly in the werre,
                  Durynge the ſiege of Parys with an arowe.
                  But who is falſe, fayne can ful narowe,
                  To finde a tale that neuer yet was thought,
                  And of the treaſon yt ſhould haue be wrought
                  Touchinge the letters ſent out of the towne,
                  There was no ſuch conſpyracyowne,
                  By Grekes wrought but a fable vnſothe,
                  Falſly feyned to make Naulus wroth,
                  With Vlyxes and Dyomede alſo.
                  Agamenon and other Grekes mo,
                  To lette theym homewarde in theyr waye,
                  And hyndre alſo there is no more to ſaye,
                  As they repayre to theyr regyons.
                  And Naulus then by this occaſyons,
                  And Oetes his ſonne a manly man,
                  Accorded be in what they maye or can,
                  By one aſſente to auenge mercyles,
                  The cruell murdre of Pallamides.
                  And to ordayne at theyr home paſſage,
                  To worke fully into theyr domage.
                  For Grekes muſt of neceſſitye,
                  Homewarde ſale foreby his countre.
                  Wherfore this kinge ſhapen hath a wyle,
                  On hylles hye by a lytell yle,
                  In winter ſeaſon euery maner nyght,
                  To make fyres and to ſette vp lyght,
                  To cauſe theim on the ſea to erre,
                  For as Grekes ſawe the fyre a ferre,
                  Vnware of harme caſt theim for to lande,
                  As they that could no peryll vnderſtande.
                  But ſhope them with all theyr ful myght,
                  For to ariue faſt by the lyght.
                  Wherwith .ij. hundred of their ſhippes brake,
                  Amonge rockes and fully go to wrake,
                  That there was drowned many worthy mā.
                  And thus the vengeaunce alderfyrſt began,
                  That kinge Naulus hath on Grekes take,
                  Of deadly hate for his ſonnes ſake,
                  To great miſchiefe and confuſyon.
                  Of Grekes nauye. but Agamenon,
                  With great perill is the death eſcaped,
                  That had almoſt amonge them be beiaped,
                  For erles dukes & worthy kinges crowned,
                  Through his trayne in the ſea were drowned
                  But Menelay and alſo Dyomede,
                  Eſcaped this miſchefe as I reade.
                  And when they were from all daunger gone,
                  This Oetes wood for ire anone,
                  In his herte ſhope an other wile,
                  And thought he would Agamenon begile,
                  Compaſſynge a ful mortall ſtryfe,
                  Let ſende a letter anone to the wife,
                  
                     Of this mighty great Agamenon,
                  In whych chere was included falſe treaſon.
                  For euen lyke yf I ſhall not lye,
                  Thus in effecte they dyd ſpecyfye.
                  ¶Fyrſt how her lorde Agamenon the kinge,
                  Had at the ſyege wrought a wonder thynge,
                  In preiudyce and ſlaundre of her name,
                  Albe in her was no maner blame,
                  Lyke as he wrote platly nor treſpace,
                  His knyghtly honour of folly to difface.
                  ¶This to ſaye Guydo telleth thus,
                  He loued a doughter of kynge Pryamus.
                  And for beaute had her to wyfe take,
                  And her in herte fynally forſake,
                  This worthy quene whilom of great fame,
                  And Clemeſtra ſothly was her name,
                  Wonder ſemely and ryght fayre with all,
                  And by dyſcent borne of the ſtocke royall.
                  Her cellynge eke for all her excellence.
                  Albe that ſhe neuer dyd offence,
                  Yet her lorde of newfangilneſſe,
                  Toke an other the letters did expreſſe,
                  Fully in purpoſe anone at his repayre,
                  Though Clemeſtra were both good & fayre,
                  All ſodaynly her to exyle:
                  Out of his lande many thouſande myle,
                  Warning her that ſhe be prudente,
                  This was the ſubſtaunce as in ſentemente,
                  That Oetes wrote vnto this quene,
                  Albe the kynge was innocente and clene,
                  And was to her in all his fore liuinge,
                  Louyng and true in all maner thinge,
                  And her to pleaſe paſſyng ententyfe,
                  In worde and dede durynge all his lyfe.
                  As fer as oughte of reſon be deſyred.
                  But the letters that falſly was conſpyred,
                  They haue her put parcaſe of Innocence,
                  For to gyue to haſty credence,
                  ¶Thankynge firſte Oetes for his trouthe,
                  That ſo goodly hym lyſt to haue routhe,
                  Vpon her wronge of hygh compaſſyon.
                  And yet the ſtorye maketh mencion,
                  Here afterwarde as I ſhall deſcriue,
                  That ſhe was the fal'eſt one alyue,
                  Vnto her lorde and in his longe abſence,
                  And in all haſte ſhe made ſtronge diffence,
                  Agayne this thinge & gan her to purueye,
                  By ſuche fraude that ſhe not ne deye,
                  But of her worke in ſothe ſhe was to wyte,
                  The whych alas I muſt anone endyte,
                  As the ſtory platly doth me lere,
                  Whych doleful is and mortall for to heare.
               
               
                  OH vnſure truſte of all worldly glorye,
                  wt ſodayn chaunge put out of memorye,
                  Oh ioye vnſtable of vayne ambycyon,
                  With vnware tourne reuerſed vp ſo downe.
                  Oh ydell fame blowe vp to the ſkye,
                  Ouer whelmed with twincklinge of an eye,
                  Oh pompe oh boſte of tryumphe & victorye,
                  Lyke a ſhadowe waſte and tranſytorye,
                  Oh fortune falſe and vnaſſured,
                  That to no man maye fully be lured.
                  To hygh nor lowe of no maner eſtate,
                  With bonde of fayth to be conferate,
                  Agayne whoſe myght no mā may him diffēd,
                  But at his tourne that he ſhall diſcende,
                  When he ſyt hyeſt on thyne vnſtable whele,
                  Thy brotyll fauour forged not of ſtele,
                  Meynt and all allyed with mutabylytye,
                  For welfulneſſe and falſe felicitye,
                  With ſodayn ſweygh frowarde yu canſt auale.
                  Now freſhe of chere now for anger pale,
                  Of hygh diſdayne thou ſpareſt no degree.
                  For Princes Dukes higheſt in their ſee,
                  Mighty kinges and worthy Emperours,
                  That richeſt reygne in theyr royal floures,
                  With Sceptre & crowne yu canſt pul downe,
                  ¶I take wytneſſe of Agamenowne,
                  That was ſo noble and myghty in his lyue,
                  As ſondry auctours his hie renowne deſriue.
                  But ſothfaſtly for all his excellence,
                  He might not make no diffence,
                  With all his knightes that his baner ſewe,
                  Conſpyred murdre to voyde and eſchewe,
                  Reſcuſe was none that he could make.
                  For which alas I fele my pen quake,
                  That doth mine inke blotte on my boke.
                  Oh mighty god that wt thine inwarde loke,
                  Seeſt euery thing thrugh thy eternal might,
                  Why wilt thou not of equit and of ryght,
                  Puniſhe and chaſtice ſo horrible a thinge,
                  And ſpecyally the murdre of a kinge.
                  Alas the payne of Ixion in hell,
                  Or of Manes that with Sathan dwell.
                  Were not egall nor equipolent,
                  To venge murdre nor ſufficient,
                  For it excedeth in compariſon,
                  
                     Al felonye falſhed and treaſon.
                  Wherfore oh lord that ſeeſt and knoweſt all.
                  Through thy power that is eternall,
                  Suffre no ſuche to liue vpon the grounde,
                  Worſe than Tygre or Cerberus the hounde,
                  That chayned lyeth bounde at hel gate,
                  Whych of malyce playnly though he hate,
                  He berketh fyrſt or he do offence.
                  But murdre gladly is wrought in ſylence,
                  Or men aduerte or take any kepe,
                  ¶Alas a Prince to ſley him in his ſlepe,
                  On his pyllowe when he ſlepeth ſofte.
                  That cryeth wreche to hye god alofte,
                  And axeth vengeaunce to take as faſt,
                  Though it abyde it wyll out at the laſte.
                  Alas a kynge ſpoken of ſo ferre,
                  That was ſo worthy outwarde in the werre,
                  His cruell fate paſſynge odyous.
                  Dyſpoſed hath in his owne houſe,
                  His mortall ende to be execute,
                  Agaynſt whych there was no refute,
                  For ryght as he his ſhyp to lande ſette,
                  The quene Clemeſtra on ye ſtrond him mette.
                  With humble cheare and loke full beninge,
                  And ſhewed out full many faythful ſygne,
                  Of wyſely trouthe in her countenaunce,
                  Albe in herte there was varyaunce,
                  Not perceyued playnly in her face,
                  Whom the kynge goodly did embrace,
                  As he in ſothe that but trouth mente,
                  And to his paleys the hye waye he wente,
                  Not aduertynge the treaſon that was ſhape,
                  The whych alas he might not eſcape,
                  Of the falſhede he could nothinke fele,
                  But I ne maye no longer it conſele,
                  Agayne her lorde how Clemeſtra wrought.
                  For on her bond of wedlocke ſhe ne thought
                  The trewe loke ſothly of ſpouſayle.
                  Agayne her malyce lytell myght auayle,
                  Vnto her lorde her trouthe to conſerue,
                  Newfangilneſſe cauſed to ſterue,
                  Her olde fayth and her aſſuraunce,
                  Her loue abode on a fykell chaunce,
                  Longe abſence had her herte apalled,
                  She loued one that was Egiſtus called,
                  Which afore all in her grace ſtode,
                  That nother was of byrth nor of bloud,
                  Lytell or nought of reputacyowne,
                  Nor renowmed of manhode nor renowne,
                  Nor of knyghthod nor of hygh proweſſe,
                  But for his laboure and his buſyneſſe,
                  And good awayte vpon her by nyght,
                  Therfore he was beſt furthred in her ſyght.
                  Such dread had ſhe for to lyue alone,
                  Sorowles ſo well ſhe could grone,
                  I can not ſaye what life that ſhe ladde,
                  Except that ſhe by him a doughter had,
                  And Exyona Guydo ſayth ſhe hight,
                  And vnto him Clemeſtra behyght,
                  Aſſuringe him vpon payne of her head,
                  He ſhulde raygne when her lorde were dead.
                  And to enhaſte this concluſyon.
                  Her worthy lorde kynge Agamenon,
                  The next nyght was murdred and yſlayne,
                  By falſe Egiſtus and the quene full fayne.
                  No longer bode the ſtorye can you lere,
                  But in all haſte they wedded were yfere,
                  And by her falſe and ſleyghty compaſſynge,
                  Of Meſſene ſhe made him crowned kynge,
                  And put him full in poſſeſſyon,
                  ¶Alas that ſynne hath dominacion,
                  To further wronge and abate ryght,
                  For in this worlde falſhed hath more ryghte.
                  Full ofte ſyth than hath ryghtwiſeneſſe,
                  And in the eſtate ſette of worthyneſſe.
                  Lo how the ſynne of auoutrye,
                  Brought in murdre by conſpyracye,
                  Synne vpon ſynne lynked both twayne.
                  And embraced in the fendes chayne
                  Perpetually in hell to endure.
                  Alas who ſhall him ſelfe full aſſure,
                  Fro cruell murdre his body to withdrawe.
                  When that kinges in theyr bedde are ſlawe,
                  Whiche bringeth in alyenacyon,
                  By extorte tytle falſe ſucceſſyon,
                  There maye coloure of pretenſe ſeme,
                  But full ſtreyghtly god ſhall after deme,
                  And iuſtly venge with due recompence,
                  Intruſyon brought in by violence,
                  And felly quyte ſuche horryble thinges,
                  And ſodayne ſlaughter & ſpecially of kinges,
                  Greatly to dread in euery regyon.
                  ¶And as I fynde that Agamenon,
                  By Clemeſtra the falſe double quene.
                  Had a ſonne paſſynge faire to ſene,
                  Right gracious in euery mannes ſyght,
                  And Horeſtus the boke ſayth that he hyghte,
                  Wonder ſemely and but yonge of age,
                  
                     And for great feare of this mortall rage,
                  Leſt he were ſlayne as it was to dread,
                  To anul his tytle that he not ſuccede,
                  Him to preſerue that he were not ſhent.
                  Kinge Taltibus with power hath him ſente,
                  Ful ſecretly out of that countree,
                  Vnto a kinge called Ydume.
                  That helde his ſceptre and his royall ſete,
                  Full mightely in the lande of Crete.
                  And Carkaſis named was the quene,
                  That had a doughter called eke Climene,
                  Borne to be heyre of that regyon.
                  And as it is made eke mencyon,
                  This Horeſtes to reken all thynge,
                  Was with the quene and alſo with the kinge,
                  Cheriſhed as well the ſtorye can you lere,
                  As Climena theyr owne doughter deare.
                  And was eke kepte and had in cherte,
                  Fro poynt to poynt lyke to his degre,
                  With attendaunce conuenyent and dewe,
                  To his eſtate that euer vpon him ſewe.
                  Of ſuch as were moſt experte and ſage,
                  To gouerne him tyll he came to age,
                  To reioyce if god gaue him might,
                  His heritage to whych he had right,
                  By clere diſcent if happy were his chaunce.
                  Thus leue I him vnder gouernaunce.
                  The yonge ſonne of Agamenon,
                  For I muſt make a dygreſſyon,
                  Fro this matter and tell of Diomede,
                  The auentures in Guydo as I rede,
                  His wofull fate and his paynes ſmerte,
                  The whych alas he might not aſterte,
                  As is remembred playnly in writynge,
                  That Oetes ſonne of the riche kinge,
                  Called Naulus as ye haue herde toforne,
                  Such heuyneſſe in his herte hath borne,
                  Vnto Grekes repeyringe home fro Troye,
                  That his luſt and his inwarde ioye,
                  Was them to hyndre both high and lowe,
                  And cauſe why to you it is vnknowe,
                  To them he was ſo paſſynge enuyous.
                  In will and thought ylyke deſyrous,
                  If he might ſothly this no les,
                  The death to venge of Pallamides,
                  Lyke as tofore the ſtorye can deuyſe,
                  To you that be ſo prudent and ſo wyſe.
                  And how Oetes now of malice wrought,
                  And trayterouſly new meane ſought,
                  If he might by any maner waye,
                  Diomedes vnwarely to deſtroye,
                  Of all this thinge I caſt not to fayle,
                  Ceryouſly to make reherſayle.
               
               
                  IN Grece was a kingedome wide & large,
                  Coniunct in one Calidonye and Arge,
                  Full habundaunt of rycheſſe and of rente.
                  Of which the kinge called was Pollente,
                  A worthy man and of noble fame,
                  And had a ſonne Aſſandrus was his name,
                  And a doughter paſſinge fayre of ſyght.
                  And ſothly Egra I finde that ſhe hyght,
                  And for her father like as wryte Guydo,
                  Had no mo but theſe children two,
                  For them he hath of wiſedome ſo prouided,
                  This mighty reygne for to be deuyded,
                  Atwene theim two after his deceaſe,
                  Eche with his parte for to lyue in peace,
                  To exclude them fro indigence or nede.
                  And ſhe was wyfe vnto Diomede,
                  Albe tofore the ſtorye of him ſayde,
                  That he whilom loued one Cryſayde.
                  I can not ſaye where it was doubilneſſe,
                  But well wote I Guydo beareth wytneſſe,
                  And in his boke ſothly ſayth none other.
                  And how Aſſandrus his owne wiues brother
                  Full luſty freſhe and ful of manlyhead,
                  To Troye went with this Dyomede,
                  But in the ſea fordriuen vp ſo downe,
                  They riued vp in the regyon,
                  Called Boece all diſconſolate,
                  With tempeſt driue wery and full mate,
                  Them to refreſhe and for none other thinge.
                  In which lande Thelephus was kinge,
                  Of whoſe riuayle whan he herde ſayne,
                  In his herte he had high diſdayne,
                  That they were bolde to do ſo great offence,
                  To entre his grounde hauinge no licence.
                  And yet in ſothe they did no domage,
                  To high nor lowe of no maner age,
                  Nor toke nought that might diſauayle,
                  Vnto that lande but it were vytayle,
                  For which they payde iuſtly at the fine,
                  For fleſhe and fyſhe and for bread and wine.
                  Yet for all that of indignaciowne,
                  Kinge Thelaphus is deſcended downe,
                  With great array to harme thē if he might.
                  And ſo they gan to bicker and to fight,
                  
                     And Aſſandrus full of high proweſſe,
                  Like a Lion his fomen gan oppreſſe,
                  And wonder knyghtly the felde vpen thē wā,
                  And ſlewe that daye many worthy man,
                  Of hygh courage and of manly pryde.
                  And when the kinge whiche that ſtode aſyde,
                  Sawe his men ſlayne on euery parte,
                  Of hygh dyſdayne hent anone a darte,
                  And caſte at hym alas the mortall fate,
                  And perced hathe through mayles & through plate,
                  Of Aſſandrus that he fel downe dead,
                  The ſoyle about of his bloud all redde,
                  His deadly wounde ſo began to blede.
                  And wood as Tygre tho came Dyomede,
                  And hym to auenge bare hym lyke a knyght,
                  Sleeth and kylleth and put them vnto flight
                  And after that ſuch ſorowe gan to make.
                  Of knyghtly routh for his brothers ſake
                  That he ne wyſt what was beſt to do.
                  But as I finde myd of all his wo,
                  From beaſt and foule the dead corps to ſaue,
                  Like his eſtate he let make a graue,
                  And buryed hym after rites olde.
                  ¶But Oetes to his ſyſter tolde,
                  That he was ſlayne by fraude of Dyomede,
                  To fyne that he myght full poſſede,
                  The reygne of Arge hole without ſtryfe,
                  Wyth the purpartye annexed to hys wyfe.
                  For by his death he myght ſeaſon take.
                  And tolde her eke that ſhe was forſake,
                  This fayre Egra for all her womanhead.
                  Of her lorde callled Dyomede.
                  All this he tolde in hell be he chayned.
                  And ouermore he forged hath and fained,
                  How of enuye Aſſandrus loſt his lyfe,
                  And how her lorde hath take an other wyfe,
                  That was to her dyſhonour and ſhame,
                  And paſſyngly great ſclaunder to her name,
                  In preiudyce ydone of her eſtate.
                  All this he tolde to make them at debate,
                  Lyke as he wrote in concluſyon.
                  To Clemeſtra of Agamenon,
                  Whych her herte made ſore greue,
                  For he put her fully in byleue,
                  Of all the treaſon ye haue herde me tolde,
                  That for yre ſhe pale was and colde,
                  Vnkyndneſſe ſo her herte ſleeth,
                  And heuyneſſe of her brothers death.
                  For neuer yet Guydo doth aſſure,
                  No woman loued better a creature,
                  Than ſhe loued hym in no maner age,
                  For fyrſt at nought ſhe ſet her herytage,
                  In comparyſon of her brothers lyfe.
                  Lo how Oetes made a newe ſtryfe,
                  As ye haue herde in the ſtorye rede.
                  That gyltles worthy Dyomede,
                  When he hath longe at the ſyege layne,
                  And to his kingdom would haue come agayn
                  By migyhty hande of this worthy quene,
                  And her lyeges that aſſented bene.
                  He was exyled out of that regyon,
                  There may be made no medyacyon.
                  Thus in him ſelfe mate and dyſpeyred,
                  Dyſconſolate he is agayne repeyred,
                  To Salerne a londe of great rycheſſe,
                  Where that Tenter through his worthyneſſe
                  Wyth crowne & Sceptre had reygned longe,
                  Wyth hys lyeges and hys knyghtes ſtronge,
                  And brother was to Ayax Thelamon,
                  Murdred tofore as made is mencyon.
                  And Dyomede pore and deſtytute,
                  Maye in Salerne fynde no refute.
                  For whan Tenter firſt gan him eſpye,
                  He ſewed hym by full great enuye,
                  Hauynge to hym aye ſuſpection,
                  Touchynge the death of kynge Thelamon.
                  ¶But Dyomede on a certayne nyghte,
                  Full ſecretely hath taken him to flyght.
                  And fro Salerne faſt gan hym hye,
                  In hope to fynde better remedye.
                  Helpe or ſocour in ſome other place.
                  If fortune wolde graunte hym grace,
                  For of hym ſelfe aſhamed and confuſe,
                  As man forſake abiecte and refuſe.
                  Ryght ſo fared he wandrynge to and fro,
                  As he that ne wyſt what was beſt to do.
               
               
                  BVt I fynde the Troyan Eneas,
                  That all this while ſtill at Troye was,
                  Onely of routh and compaſſyowne,
                  To ſupport thē that were left of the towne,
                  Beynge alway of theyr life in doubte.
                  Of theyr fomen rounde beſet aboute,
                  As they that lyued for lacke of an hede,
                  Contynually in myſchyefe and in dread,
                  Knowing no refute nor cōfort in this caſe,
                  Tyll by counſell of this Eneas,
                  To ſupporte theym in this great nede,
                  
                     They ſent in haſte for this Dyomede,
                  Knowynge full well his deſolacyon,
                  How he was proſcrypt fro his regyon,
                  Beſechynge hym of manhode and of routhe,
                  Him to enhaſte wythout any ſlouthe,
                  With all the ſtuffe that he get can,
                  And ſouldyers alſo manly euery man,
                  Without abode and to Troye them lede,
                  To ſuccoure them in this great nede.
                  ¶And Dyomede came and taryed nought,
                  At theyr requeſt as he was beſought,
                  To releue them in this ſharpe ſhoure,
                  And wyth hym brought many a ſouldeour.
                  And Eneas on the waye him mette,
                  In frendly wyſe and into towne hym fette,
                  And to him made paſſyngly great chere,
                  And there they gan to commune yfere,
                  Theyr auentures both of lande and ſea,
                  Entermedled with great aduerſyte.
                  That no man maye deuoyde nor eſchewe,
                  But take his parte as it to him is dewe,
                  As ſorte or hap doth his brydell lede.
                  And in this ſtorye ſhortly to procede,
                  Cely Troyans that were almoſt ſhent,
                  With theyr fomen of yles adiacent,
                  That theim beſette aboute enuyrowne.
                  But through the manhod & the hye renowne,
                  Of Dyomede and his ſouldeours,
                  And other knyghtes noble werreours,
                  They were reſkued and holpen vtterly.
                  And foure dayes they fought by and by,
                  In knyghtly wyſe defendynge the Cytee,
                  And through proweſſe alſo of Enee.
                  They ſlewe and toke all that them withſtode
                  And in diffence of Troyanyſhe bloud,
                  Suche as they fonde to the cytye falſe,
                  They hange them vp hye by the halſe.
                  And punyſhed them for theyr great wronge.
                  ¶And Dyomede thus gan wexe ſtronge,
                  By longe proceſſe as made is mencyon,
                  Chiefe protectour now of Troye towne,
                  That enuye none by a large ſpace,
                  Durſt abyde that he had grace,
                  To his lygeaunce ſo he made them loute,
                  And thus his name ſprede gan aboute,
                  That of his fame the great opynyon,
                  Dylated is vnto the regyon,
                  By ſwifte reporte to Calydonye and Arge,
                  Which the quene greatly gan to charge.
                  And aſtoned when he taketh hede,
                  His power gan and his might to dreade,
                  Leſt he would her lande vpon her wynne,
                  And of knighthod a werre newe begynne,
                  And ſecretly gan muſe on this thinge,
                  That her lorde and her myghty kynge,
                  Late exyled and yput to flyght,
                  Hath grace founde in fortunes ſyght,
                  And is remonuted to high eſtate.
                  Wherof ſhe was in her ſelfe checke mate,
                  And wayes caſte as he that was prudent.
                  By hole aduyſe of her parliament.
                  Without grutchynge or rebellyon,
                  Him to reuoke to his regyon.
                  ¶And therupon to him lowly ſente,
                  And with letters the meſſager forth went,
                  The cauſe annullyng by which he was exiled,
                  And how he was fully reconſyled,
                  By hole aſſent of his lyeges all,
                  And ful lowly euerychone they call,
                  For theyr offence and of theyr treſpace,
                  Without rygour for to do them grace.
                  And he anone like a manly knyght,
                  More of mercy ſothly then of ryght,
                  When he hath theyr ſonde well conceyued,
                  And theyr meninge fully apparceyued,
                  To ſtynte all ſtrife thought for the beſt.
                  In goodly wiſe to graunt theyr requeſte,
                  And to his reigne within a certayne daye,
                  He is repeyred in full riche arraye,
                  Of whoſe comynge full glad his lieges bene,
                  And reconſiled both he and the quene,
                  And all rancour of any olde offence,
                  Onely of wiſedome they put in ſuſpenſe,
                  And of one herte a bliſful life they lede,
                  In Troye booke no more of hym I reade.
                  But let him liue in felycytee.
                  Agayne reſortynge to tell of Ene,
                  After how he hath his tyme ſpent,
                  Which is fro Troye wt many Troyan went,
                  His ſhippes ſtuffed he and his meyne,
                  Be ſayled forth by many ſtraunge ſea,
                  Many daunger and many ſtrayte paſſage,
                  Tofore or he aryued in Cartage,
                  Ledinge with him his father Anchiſes.
                  And by the waye I finde that he les,
                  His wife Crewſa by fatall auenture.
                  But all the wo that he dyd endure,
                  Who ſo liſt ceryouſly to ſene,
                  
                     And how that he falſhede the quene.
                  I meane Dido of womanhead floure,
                  That gaue to him her rycheſſe & treaſoure,
                  Iewelles and golde & al yt mighte him pleaſe,
                  And euery thing that might do him eaſe.
                  ¶But for all that how he was vnkinde,
                  Reade Eneydos and there ye ſhall it fynde,
                  And howe that he falſly ſtale awaye,
                  By nyghte tyme while ſhe a bedde laye,
                  And of his conqueſt alſo in ytayle,
                  Where he hadde many ſtronge battayle,
                  His auentures and his workes all,
                  And of the fyne that is to him fall,
                  Ye maye all ſe by ſoueraygne ſtyle,
                  Fro poynt to poynt compyled in Virgile,
                  Wryte and made ſythen go full yore.
                  For Troye boke ſpeaketh of him no more,
                  ¶But procedeth as I ſhall endyte,
                  How Horeſtes caſte him for to quyte,
                  His fathers death playnly and not ſpare,
                  If ye lyſt heare as Guydo doth declare.
               
               
                  IT is requyred of equit and of right,
                  Of that iudge that is moſt of myght,
                  And egally holdeth his balaunce,
                  On death conſpyred for to do vengeaunce.
                  The voyce of bloud doth ſo aye contune,
                  To crye wreche with clamour importune,
                  On them in ſothe that it iniuſtly ſhede,
                  For murdre wrought wil haue his egall mede
                  And his guerdon as he hath deſerued,
                  They maye not fle the iudgement reſerued,
                  Of him that ſit higheſt in his trone,
                  And all beholdeth by him ſelfe alone,
                  Full rightfully the noble mighty kinge.
                  For though he ſuffer he forget nothinge,
                  But all conſydreth in his in inſpectyon,
                  And for the murdre of Agamenon,
                  The mighty lorde yt is moſt ſoueraygne good
                  Made of mynyſtre of the ſame bloud,
                  Yonge Horeſtes full of high proweſſe,
                  To execute his dome of ryghtwiſeneſſe,
                  And gaue to him grace power and might.
                  And he anone toke the ordre of a knyght,
                  Of Ydumeus like as it is tolde,
                  When he was foure and twentye wynter olde
                  Freſhe and luſtye and wonderly prudent.
                  And inwardly deſyrous of intente,
                  If fortune would him not with ſayne,
                  His heritage to recure agayne.
                  ¶Which Egiſtas falſly hym denyeth,
                  And the crowne vniuſtly occupyeth,
                  By falſe tytle of her that was his wife.
                  ¶But Horeſt's will ieoparde his lyfe,
                  And auenture while him laſteth breth,
                  Fyrſt to be venged on his fathers death,
                  Vpon them tho that the treaſon wrought.
                  And alderfyrſt full lowly he beſought,
                  ¶Kinge Ydinne of his goodlyhead,
                  To further him in this great nede.
                  ¶And the kinge benignely anone,
                  Aſſigned hath with him for to gone,
                  A thouſand knightes manly and right ſtrōge,
                  To redreſſe the great horrible wronge,
                  Of Egiſtus wrought by violence,
                  And by his wiſdome and his dyligence.
                  This Horeſtes gan him ſo purueye,
                  Within a while there is no more to ſeye,
                  That he him gat the ſtorye will not lye,
                  An other thouſande to his companye,
                  Of worthy knightes all of one accorde,
                  To go with him as wt theyr ſoueraygne lorde
                  In euery thinge his biddinge to obeye,
                  As ye haue herde Egiſtus to werrey.
                  ¶And thus Horeſtes in full riche arraye,
                  Gan hooſte and made no delaye,
                  And his lodginge alderfyrſt gan cheſe,
                  In a Citye that called was Troyeſe.
                  Receyued there with great reuernece,
                  Of the kinge that named was Forence,
                  A manly knyght as bookes ſpecifye,
                  And bare in herte paſſinge great enuye,
                  To Egiſtus by double occaſion.
                  Fyrſte for the death of Agamenon,
                  And eke for he had a doughter deare,
                  That was to him inwardly entere,
                  Both good and fayre & but yonge of age,
                  That whilom was giuen in mariage,
                  To Egiſtus but he of doubilneſſe,
                  Of falſe treſon and newfangilneſſe,
                  The kinges doughter hath vtterly forſake.
                  And in all haſte did a libell make,
                  And forge a writ of repulſyon,
                  Albe he hadde no trewe occaſyon,
                  This Egiſtus that he her forſoke.
                  Saue that he falſſy to wiue toke,
                  The quene Clemeſtra agayne al right & law
                  When by aſſent they murdred haue & ſlawe,
                  
                     Agamenon as it afore is tolde,
                  That whylom was ſo myghty and ſo bolde,
                  And for the hatefull falſe conſpyraſye,
                  As well of murther as auoutrye.
                  To venge bothe by dewe recompence,
                  The worthy knyght ye mighty kyng Forence,
                  Offred Horeſtes for to make hym ſtronge,
                  And go with hym to helpe venge his wronge
                  And with hym ladde armed bryght in ſtele,
                  Foure hundred knightes horſed wonder wele
                  Takynge the fyelde with a manly chere.
                  And ſo Horeſtes and the kynge yfeare,
                  Be ryden forthe with many manly man.
                  ¶But Horeſtes or he this werre gan,
                  When bryght Phebus in the bole ſhone.
                  To the temple is full lowly gone.
                  And to the goddes in moſt beſt wyſe,
                  With humble herte dyd ſacryfyce.
                  Fully in hope the better for to fare.
                  Where he was bode for lyfe nor deth to ſpare,
                  Without mercy or remyſſyon.
                  The death to venge of Agamenon,
                  ¶On Clemeſtra that was moſte to wyte.
                  And that he make fyrſte his ſworde to byte,
                  On his mother with his handes twayne.
                  And ouermore to do his buſy payne,
                  Without pytye and no mercye ſhewe,
                  On ſmale peces tyll ſhe be to hewe,
                  And diſmembred a ſonder ioynt fro ioynt.
                  And eke that he for yet not a poynt,
                  Iuſtly to punyſhe by rycoure and by ryght,
                  ¶Egiſtus eke the falſe vntrewe knyght,
                  And that he be not ſlowe nor neclygent,
                  To execute the commaundement,
                  Of the goddes lyſte what after falle.
                  ¶And than Horeſtes with his knyghtes all.
                  ¶And Forenſes the mighty kynge alſo,
                  Of one herte be to the ſyege go,
                  Of the Cyte that called was Methene.
                  Within whiche was the falſe quene,
                  Clemeſtra god gyue her herde grace.
                  And when Horeſtes ſyeged hath the place,
                  With his knyghtes ſet it rounde aboute.
                  ¶Falſe Egiſtus was yryden out,
                  To gather men and to be a wreke,
                  And falle vpon and the ſyege breke.
                  ¶If he myght on any maner ſyde.
                  And with great ſtuffe thus he gan to ryde,
                  Takynge vp men fro euery coſte,
                  Tyll he hym made a full myghtye hooſte.
                  ¶But Horeſte whiche at the ſyege laye,
                  His gouernaunce eſpyeth daye by daye.
                  And ſent out men as he that was full ſage,
                  To ſtoppe wayes and lette his paſſage,
                  And made knyghtes a full huge route,
                  To purſue hym euery coſte aboute.
                  And of the ſyege manfully begonne,
                  By aſſaute he hath the towne ywonne,
                  And entred in on a nyght full late,
                  And ſette wardes ſtronge at euery gate.
                  And in a doungeon moſt ſtronge & princypall
                  That was of buildyng myghty and royall.
                  This Horeſtes fyrſte his mother fonde.
                  ¶The quene Clemeſtra lady of that lande,
                  Whiche for drede ſore gan to quake.
                  But mercyles anone he made her take,
                  And put in chaynes tyll the next morowe.
                  ¶And Egiſtus god gyue hym euyll ſorowe,
                  With all the ſtuffe that he myght accroche,
                  Towarde the towne faſte gan aproche.
                  ¶In purpoſe full Horeſtes for to greue.
                  And them within ſodeynely releue.
                  But all in ſothe myght not auayle,
                  For or that he the cytye myght abayle.
                  Horeſtes knightes vnwarely haue him mette
                  And all attones proudely on hym ſette.
                  Fyrſte ſlewe his men & put them to flyght,
                  ¶And taken hym maugre all his myght,
                  And with chaynes lyke as they hym fynde,
                  Mercyles full faſt they him bynde,
                  And ſhet hym vp fetryd in pryſowne.
                  And all falſe founde in the towne.
                  That were aſſented wyllinge or helpynge,
                  To the murdre of the worthy kynge.
                  Grekes workers and conſpyratours,
                  Agayne their lorde ryfynge as traytours,
                  All were take and bounde by rycour.
                  The ſame nyghte and ſhet vp in a toure,
                  Tyll on the morowe lyke as the lot be drawe,
                  Eueryche of them vnder fonge his lawe,
                  Lyke his decerte excepcion was none.
                  And when the nyght paſſed was and gone.
                  And Phebus roſe eſtwarde in his ſphere,
                  And on the toures ſhone full bryght & clere.
                  ¶When Clemeſtra rote of all falſehede,
                  Was brought forth quakyng in her drede,
                  ¶Before Horeſtes to iudgement yfet.
                  He with a ſworde ſharpe and kene ywhet,
                  
                     Like as the goddes charged him toforne,
                  On peces ſmale he hath her all to ſhorne,
                  And made her bere out of the townes boūdes
                  To be voured of beaſtes and of houndes,
                  Pytye was none in his breſte reſerued,
                  But quit her fully as ſhe hath deſerued.
                  Fro poynt to poynt and forgat right nought.
                  And thē chayned Egiſtus was furth brought
                  And iuſtly dempt by rigour of the lawe,
                  Of an herdell naked to be drawe,
                  Through the towne that all might ſe,
                  And after hye hanged on a tre,
                  For to rot and drye agaynſt the ſonne.
                  Lo how murdre hath his guerdon wonne,
                  Lo how falſhed his mayſter can awake.
                  ¶And all the traytours in the towne ytake,
                  Were on galowes enhanged euerychone.
                  Tyll they were ſeuered aſonder bone fro bone
                  Hye on an hill agayne the ſterres ſhene.
                  Thus was ye towne fro treaſon purged clene,
                  And with trouth augmented and ymored,
                  And to his reygne Horreſtes full reſtored,
                  As the ſtorye ſewinge ſhall expowne,
                  And of the daye when he toke his crowne.
               
               
                  ANd when the myſt & euery cloudy ſkye,
                  Of falſe treaſon and conſpyracye,
                  Were tried out vpon euery ſyde,
                  The falſhed hadde no place to abyde,
                  The ſtorye ſayth in ordre reherſynge.
                  The ſame time Menelay the kinge,
                  Out of the ſea ful of wawes wete,
                  Fro Troyewarde yriued was in Crete,
                  Frely eſcaped many dread and peyne,
                  With his quene the goodly freſhe Heleyne.
                  And for cauſe ſhe was ſo famous fayre,
                  Great was the pres and meruaylous repaire
                  Fro euery parte her beaute to beholde,
                  For whom Troye with walles not ful olde,
                  Deſtroyed was the noble royall towne,
                  And many man ful worthy of renowne,
                  Hath loſt his life there may no man ſay naye,
                  All for Heleyne wife to Menelay.
                  When thinge is done it may be none other.
                  But when this kinge knewe fully of his brother,
                  Agamenon murdre and euerydele,
                  He was full triſt and liked nothinge wele,
                  But inwardly felte ful great ſmerte,
                  ¶And his neuewe he had alſo at herte,
                  I meane Horreſtes that ſo mercyles,
                  Like a tyraunt that were graceles,
                  His mother ſlewe and had no pytye,
                  Of mortall yre in his crueltye.
                  And fully caſte that he would bline,
                  Of ſceptre and crowne platly him depriue,
                  Full afferminge of this mortall caſe,
                  By all lawe that he vnworthy was,
                  His fathers reygne as heyre to poſſede,
                  Iuſtly conſydred his horrible dede.
                  And all at ones furyous and wroth,
                  Without abode vnto ſhip he goth,
                  Melancolike in his great tene,
                  Out of Crete ſaylinge to Athene,
                  And toke the lande out of ſhippes borde,
                  Where duke Neſtor was gouernour and lord
                  Which them receyueth like a gentyll knyghte,
                  With all his power diligence and myght.
                  But Menelay of rancour and great heat,
                  Gan with the duke ſecretly to trete,
                  To fynde a meane in his inward ſyght
                  ¶For to depriue Horreſtes of his right.
                  And therupon to haue a iudgement,
                  At Athenes was holde a Parliament,
                  Of all the lordes of that regyon,
                  To giue theron a diffinicion.
                  In whych was ſhewed openly ynough,
                  How Horreſtes his owne mother ſlough,
                  And the maner of his great offence,
                  Him ſelfe tho beynge in preſence.
                  And when this thinge he fully did eſpye,
                  For his partye he gan agayne replye,
                  As he that felte him frely at his large,
                  For him alledginge how he had in charge,
                  Of the goddes ſhortly to declare,
                  His mortall ſworde that he not ne ſpare,
                  Vpon Clemeſtra roote of falſe treaſon,
                  That ſlewe her lorde kinge Agamenon,
                  And the murdre through her malice wrought
                  Wherfore Horreſtes humbly beſought,
                  The lordes all with a manly herte,
                  Of equit conſydre and aduerte,
                  For no malice rancour nor for rage,
                  Him to depriue of his heritage,
                  Sith he was ſonne of Agamenon
                  Borne to be heyre of that regyon,
                  As ye haue herde that called was Methene,
                  Albe his mother Clemeſtra the quene,
                  Compaſſed had his deſtruction.
                  
                     ¶But duke Neſtor ymeued of reaſon,
                  In ſuſtaynynge of Horeſtes ryght,
                  Roſe vp anone lyke a manly knyght,
                  Offrynge hym ſelfe proudely for his ſake,
                  This hye quarell for to vndertake,
                  With his body to the death darreyne.
                  With whom that lyſt his tytle to withſeyne.
                  ¶But there was none in all that companye,
                  That durſte a worde agayne hym replye.
                  So hoole he ſtode in his opynion,
                  And by his knyghtly mediacyon.
                  He bare hym ſo feynynge in nothynge,
                  That Horeſtes was ycrowned kyng,
                  Of Meneſte all beynge of aſſent.
                  And whan diſſolued was the parlement.
                  This Horeſtes of his lyeges trewe,
                  Receyued was with a crowne newe,
                  And by treate of lordes many one.
                  Kyng Menelay and he were made attone,
                  And gan their Ire and their rancour lete.
                  ¶And Ydume the worthy kynge of Crete,
                  So prudently gouerneth this mattere.
                  That Hermyone the yonge doughter dere,
                  ¶Of Menelay and the quene Heleyne,
                  So yonge ſo freſhe of beaute ſouerayne,
                  Ywedded was without more taryinge,
                  To Horeſtes the yonge luſty kynge.
                  And bycauſe of this allyaunce,
                  Deuoyded was all rancour and diſtraunce,
                  Atwene the kynges Menelay the olde,
                  And Horeſtes of whom ryght nowe I tolde.
                  Thus leue I them as it was the beſte,
                  Eche in his reygne lyue in peace and reſte.
                  For all ſtryfe was ceaſed in this caſe.
                  ¶But Erygona that the doughter was,
                  Of Egiſtus as ye haue herde me telle,
                  For ſorowe and drede lyſte no longer dwelle,
                  But toke a rope and lyſt nothynge to ſpare.
                  And therwithall gan her ſelfe to gnare.
                  The ſtorye ſayth hye vpon a tree.
                  This was her fyne ye gette no more of me,
                  But I wyll forth ceryouſly entreate,
                  Of the ſtorye to telle you the great.
               
               
                  OH Vlixes by ordre in my wrytynge,
                  Thyne auentures come on the rynge.
                  Full wonderfull both on londe and ſea,
                  Entermedlyd with great aduerſytye.
                  For Guydo fyrſte deſcryuynge thy repayre,
                  Saith how thou founde wether foule & fayre
                  Nowe agreable now the thonder ſowne,
                  Now ſtyll and ſmoth now wt cloudes frowne
                  And ſayth alſo that thou dyddeſt ordeyne,
                  To thy paſſage myghty ſhyppes twayne.
                  Apparayled all for marchandyſe,
                  That thou myghteſt in moſt ſecrete wyſe,
                  Euery myſchyefe of the ſea eſcape.
                  ¶But for all that thou haddeſt a felle iape,
                  For as this auctour thy reſorte doth wryte,
                  He ſayth Vlyxes for all his wordes whyte.
                  Yrobbed was of rycheſſe and of good,
                  Contraryous wynde ſo agayne hym ſtode.
                  That he was dryue to his confuſyon,
                  In to the myghty ſtronge regyon,
                  Where Thelamon reygned by his lyue.
                  And there he was hent and take blyue.
                  ¶By myghtye hande ſeaſed by the breſt,
                  And mercyles put vnder areſt.
                  For they hym had ſuſpecte in workynge.
                  Touchynge the murther of the ſame kynge,
                  But he ſo wrought by his ſleyghty wyle,
                  And his tale ſette in ſuche a ſtyle,
                  That them all he playnly hath be iaped.
                  And fro their hande frely is eſcaped.
                  Excepte that he for all his queynt fare,
                  Of his treaſour was ymade full bare.
                  And for his paſſage was to hym vnkouth,
                  He fell agayne into the wolfes mouthe.
                  For veryly as it is ſpecyfyed,
                  Kynge Naulus men haue hym efte eſpyed,
                  Take and bounde and chayned mercyles,
                  For the murther of kynge Pallamydes.
                  ¶But the ſtorye reherſeth in certayne,
                  By his prudence he ſcaped is agayne,
                  For he was both expert wyſe and olde.
                  Although the maner be not fully tolde,
                  Of his eſcape through his buſy peyne,
                  Out of daunger of theſe kynges twayne.
                  Tyll through fortune he came fro miſchefe fre
                  To the preſence of kyng Ydume,
                  In ſymple arraye and torne apparayle.
                  Wherof the kynge greatly gan meruayle,
                  To ſe his pouert in ſo lowe manere.
                  But for all that he made hym good chere,
                  Though that tyme ye were infortunate.
                  He hym receyueth lyke to his eſtate.
                  And when they were both twayne alone,
                  
                     In complayninge Vlixes made his mone,
                  Vnto the kinge as he that was ful ſage,
                  Ceryouſly the ſorte of his paſſage,
                  With face ſad and a ſobre cheare,
                  Fro poynt to poynt anone as ye ſhall heare.
                  ¶My lorde quod he ſhortly to expreſſe,
                  Of truſte I haue in your gentylneſſe,
                  I ſhall to you my auentures all,
                  Reherſe here ryght as it is fall.
               
               
                  FIrſte when that I Troye lande forſoke,
                  And the water wyth my ſhippes toke.
                  I was anone with winde peceably blowe,
                  To an yle which was to me vnknowe,
                  ¶Called Mirma of great habundaunce,
                  And all thynge that was to my pleaſaunce.
                  That maye for ſiluer or for golde be bought,
                  I redy founde and wanted ryght nought.
                  And there abode full longe while in ioye,
                  With the treaſour that I gat at Troye.
                  My ſhyppes ſtuffed my men ſafe and ſounde,
                  And for commodyte of that ylke grounde,
                  We lyked ſo the countre enuyron.
                  That for diſporte and recreacyon,
                  Our taryinge there we thought not ful lōge,
                  For no man dyd vnto vs no wronge.
                  Tyll on a daye that the eyer was ſtyll,
                  The winde alſo fully at our wyll.
                  We ſayled for the in quyete and in peace,
                  Vnto a porte called Clauſtafages,
                  Wherwyth my meyne longe and many daye,
                  I founde all thinge accordynge to my paye,
                  The wether luſty agreable and fayre.
                  But who maye truſte other winde or ayre,
                  For vpon fayth of the ſmothe ſkye,
                  Agayne to ſhyppe faſte I gan me hye,
                  Taryed nought but toke anone the ſea,
                  Smothe and calme enduringe dayes three,
                  That in the wether founde was no lacke,
                  But ſodaynly the heauen tourneth blacke,
                  The hidous tempeſt and the wawes grene,
                  Out of hope haue me dyſpeyred clene,
                  Troubled my ſpyrite & made me ſo penſife,
                  Without refute to eſcape with the lyfe.
                  Toſſed and driuen by many ſundrye yle.
                  Tyll the laſte caſte vp at Cecyle,
                  Recuringe lande with great annoye & payne,
                  Where that tyme reygned kynges twayne.
                  And as I can remembre doubtles,
                  The tone of theim called Sorygines,
                  Whiche vnto me full contrarious was.
                  ¶And the tother named Coclopas,
                  Brethren of byrthe and in concluſion,
                  Ylike cruell of condycyon.
                  For though my ſorte had ſhape for the nones
                  ¶Both twayne fell on me attones,
                  Oppreſſinge in full great dyſtreſſe,
                  Spoyled my ſhippes of treaſour and richeſſe,
                  And for pyte liked not to ſpare,
                  Till I was lefte deſtitute and bare,
                  Of all my good alas my mortall chaunce.
                  And moſt of all was to me greuaunce,
                  Whē of my golde they may no more reſtrayne
                  They ſent downe their mighty ſones twayne
                  ¶Alipham that was ful large and longe,
                  ¶And Polipheme ye mighty gianut ſtronge,
                  Which on my mē to auenge thē wereful fame
                  That they of them haue an hundred ſlayne,
                  Diſarayed to ſtande at diffence,
                  And of malice with ſodayne violence,
                  They toke me for miſchiefe almoſt lorne.
                  ¶And Alphenor mine owne brother ſworne
                  And hatefully as they haue vs founde,
                  In chaynes caſte and in ſtockes bounde,
                  And after that ylocked in priſon.
                  And for to make platly mencyon.
                  This mighty man this great Polypheme,
                  A ſyſter had ſhortly for to deme,
                  One of the fayreſt that euer yet was borne,
                  She might in beaute ſo be ſet aforne,
                  Nature her gaue ſuche a prerogatife,
                  A cleane mayde ſothly and no wyfe,
                  Flouringe both in fayreneſſe and bounte.
                  Whom Alphenor when he did ſe,
                  Albe he was fetred in priſon.
                  For loue he loſte wit and eke reaſon,
                  And wex al mad ſo narowe ſhe did him binde
                  Saue vpon her alway was his minde,
                  And cloſed aye was his perillous wounde,
                  And ſixe monethes thus we laye bounde,
                  ¶Both he and I to ſaye the platte trouthe.
                  Til Polipheme had vpon vs routhe,
                  And through his grace and mediacion,
                  He quit vs fre out of that pryſon.
                  And ſhewed vs of mercy and pite,
                  After our ſorowe great humanite.
                  ¶But Alphenor ylike of one entente,
                  Was with the bronde of Cupide brent.
                  
                     And felte his parte with many mortall fit
                  Till he ſo wrought with his ſotyll wit.
                  That on a night who was leef or lothe,
                  He ſtale this mayde and his waye he gothe,
                  Through helpe of men with hym at that time
                  ¶But on the morowe at the houre of prime,
                  ¶Poliphemus gan vs for to ſewe,
                  Whoſe mighty hande we might not eſchewe.
                  And ſuche aſſaulte on vs they gan make,
                  That of force they haue the mayde take,
                  ¶From Alphenor mauger all his rage.
                  And Polipheme vnto my domage,
                  With his knightes ſo ſore vpon me laye,
                  That I might vnneth ſcape awaye.
                  To ſaue my ſelfe compaſſed enuyron,
                  To death purſewed of that champyon.
                  But when I ſawe there was no other gayne,
                  To fle death ſhortly for to ſayne,
                  While this giaunt moſt fierſly on me ſet,
                  With my ſworde out his eye I ſmet,
                  And vnto ſhip with my companye,
                  I fled in haſte that no man might eſpye,
                  ¶Where I became nor Alphenor my fere.
                  And when the wawes gan for to clere,
                  And gracious winde gan to vs awake,
                  That countre we haue anone forſake,
                  It was not holſome for vs to abyde.
                  But of this man like as write Ouide.
                  ¶Poliphemus the Giaunt out of dread,
                  Had an eye amid of his forhead
                  Which Vlixes ſmote out at a ſtroke,
                  And like the browes of a branched oke.
                  Was all his heyre and his longe berde,
                  On whom to loke children were aferde.
                  And when that he had loſt his ſyght,
                  Amonge the hilles he runneth daye & night,
                  In a rage to finde him ſome refuge,
                  Caſte rockes and great ſtones huge,
                  On euery parte enuyron the countre,
                  On Vlixes auenged for to be.
                  Thus ſayth Ouide in concluſion,
                  In his boke of tranſformacion,
                  Metamorphoſeos there ye maye it ſe,
                  When ſo euer that your leyſer be,
                  Ceriouſly the ſtorye for to reade.
                  And in my writinge forth I will procede,
                  How Vlixes with face dead and pale,
                  To Ydume tolde forth his tale.
                  Reherſinge thus ſuppriſed and awaked,
                  Fro Polipheme when we were eſcaped,
                  Through our vnhappe and infelicyte,
                  Into an yle middes of the ſea,
                  We were driue when it gan to night.
                  And Elidiū that litell kingedome hight,
                  Where that Circes the great enchauntreſſe,
                  Thilke time was lady and goddeſſe,
                  That could her crafte ſo wonderly ꝑfourme,
                  All ſodaynly a man for to tranſforme,
                  To haue the likneſſe and leſe his reaſon,
                  Of Horſe, of Bere, Tygre or Lyon.
                  Wolfe or For or what her liſt deuiſe,
                  Her dreadful crafte was ſhapen in ſuch wiſe.
                  So mighty were her ſtraunge pocions,
                  Her letuaries and confections.
                  And ſhe alſo ſo fayre vpon to ſe,
                  That tho her power no man might fle.
                  For by the worke of this ſorcereſſe,
                  I was ſo founced vpon her fayreneſſe,
                  That fynally thus with me it ſtode,
                  That all a yeare I with her abode,
                  And paynly had power none nor myght,
                  For to deparie neyther daye nor night.
                  So luſty was the life that I ladde,
                  In whych time by me a childe ſhe had,
                  Right inly fayre and goodly to the ſyght,
                  And Thelagonius in ſothneſſe he hight,
                  Which afterwarde I wel reherſe can,
                  By proceſſe wexe a manly man.
                  And by my ſubtyll ſecret prouidence
                  Of her crafte I had experyence,
                  That maugre her enchauntementes olde,
                  I ſtale awaye ſhe might me not holde.
                  And fynally my fate to conclude.
                  With my connynge her crafte I can delude,
                  That with my men I ſcaped fro her hande,
                  And went at large fre out of her lande.
                  But all this thinge me litell did auayle,
                  For on my waye as I gan to ſayle,
                  For all my ſleyght in a litell whyle,
                  Yblowe was vp into an yle,
                  ¶Where Calipha ſyſter to Circes,
                  Was crowned quene & held her ſceptre ī peace
                  Whoſe craftes were ſo mighty and ſo ſtrong,
                  Maugre my will ſhe held me there ful longe.
                  But ſhe in ſothe to ſpeake of womanhede,
                  Of bounte fredome and of goodlyhead,
                  Surely had ſo ſoueraygne excellence,
                  That mine abode to me was none offence,
                  
                     But who ſoeuer therat crye or clappe,
                  At the laſte I ſcaped fro her trappe,
                  And came to an yle ryght as any lyne,
                  Which ſpecyally through high power diuine,
                  Ordayned is of yore by myracle,
                  As it were a ſpirituall oracle.
                  A man to haue in a temple there,
                  Sodayne anſwere of what him liſt enquere,
                  Of queſtions and demaundes all,
                  And of ſoules what ſhall eke befall,
                  When men are dead and grauen vnder ſtone.
                  And I gan axe in the temple anone.
                  Mine auentures that ſhould after ſewe,
                  And where a man might his fate eſchewe,
                  And of all this like to mine entent,
                  I had aunſwere full conuenient.
                  Saue what befalleth when a ſoule is gone,
                  Diffinicion vnto me was none,
                  Such thinge to aſſoyle accordeth not to right
                  It is reſerued vnto goddes myght,
                  And excedeth reaſon and wyt of man.
                  And fro thenſe forth to ſayle I gan,
                  Driuen with wynde and no parte ſuccoured.
                  Where I was lyke to haue be deuoured.
                  ¶Of Karibdes with his profounde well,
                  Where Syrines Meremaydens dwell,
                  That fro the breſt with ſcales ſiluer ſhene,
                  Be of theyr ſhape fiſhes freſhe and clene.
                  And ouermore kinde doth compaſſe,
                  Them to appeare feminine of face,
                  Like virgins that were of nature,
                  Without ſpot vndefouled pure,
                  And of cuſtome in wawes as they flete,
                  The ſonge of them is ſo heauenly ſwete,
                  So aungelike and full of armonye.
                  That veryly the ſugred melodye,
                  Rauiſhe would any man alyue,
                  Of inly ioye almoſt his herte ryue,
                  Make a man of ſodayne high pleaſaunce,
                  Forget him ſelfe and leſe his remembraunce,
                  Deuoyde him clene from his owne thought,
                  Tyl vnwarely he be to miſchiefe brought.
                  And with theyr ſonge or he take kepe,
                  He ſhall be brought in a mortall ſlepe,
                  And they anone yt maye not be withdrawe,
                  Wil drenche his ſhippe lowe vnder the wawe.
                  Thus the ſweteneſſe of theyr heauenly ſowne
                  Bringeth a man to confuſyon,
                  Who ſo euer by theyr bondes paſſe.
                  ¶But with the lyfe I ſcaped by grace,
                  For mine eares with waxe and gommes clere
                  Were ſtopped ſo that I ne might heare,
                  Touche nor werble of theyr inſtrumentes,
                  Wherby the reaſon of a man blinded is.
                  And fynally through my ſubtyltee,
                  I and my men be eſcaped free,
                  Saylinge forth all mate of werineſſe.
                  Till we came vp with full great diſtreſſe,
                  ¶At Phenice and toke anone the lande,
                  Caſte anker and our ſhippes bande.
                  But ſothly there it fell vs full vnfayre,
                  ¶For the people cruell and contrayre,
                  Onely of malice fell on me anone,
                  And ſlewe my men almoſt euerychone,
                  Treaſour and good litell that I had,
                  Was me berafte & all with thē they ladde,
                  And fewe of theim that were lefte alone,
                  They toke theim and put in priſon bliue.
                  Thus hath fortune lad me on her daunce,
                  With litell ioye and plentye of miſchaunce.
                  Of whoſe daunger learned and experte,
                  I am fall in miſchiefe and pouerte,
                  And with great dole and ſorowe full my breſt
                  On ſea and land by South and not by Eaſt,
                  I am come vnto your preſence,
                  And haue declared playnly in ſentence,
                  Min auentures to your worthineſſe,
                  Of truſte onely and of faythfulneſſe,
                  That I haue to you in ſpecyall,
                  And now I haue reherſed and tolde all,
                  To your hyghneſſe and my beſt wyſe,
                  Without more to me it doth ſuffyſe.
                  And though in herte he was conſtrayned ſore
                  Thilke time Vlixes ſpake no more,
                  But helde his peace ful heuy in lokinge.
                  ¶And Ydumeus like a gentyll kinge,
                  Comforted him all that euer he might,
                  And buſy was his herte for to light,
                  And him beſought his heuineſſe lete.
                  And as longe as hym lyſt in Crete,
                  With him abide he made him ſuerte,
                  He ſhould fare alſo as wel as he,
                  And not wante of what maye do him eaſe.
                  And when his ſorowe ſome what gan apeaſe,
                  That his rage drewe vnto an ende,
                  Leue he toke and ſayde he would wende,
                  Out of that lande home to his countre.
                  ¶But fyrſt the kinge of fredome and bounte,
                  
                     Gaue vnto hym great rycheſſe and arraye,
                  And what ſoeuer was to his paye,
                  Golde treaſour and many other thinges.
                  And at partynge of theſe two kynges,
                  There were ſhippes when you liſt to ſayle,
                  Redy ſtuffed with meyne and vitayle,
                  And thus Vlixes gan him redy make.
                  And when he hath his leue fully take,
                  He haſted him and toke anone the ſea,
                  And gan to ſayle towarde his countre.
                  But fyrſte he wente to kinge Alphenon,
                  Whych paſſingly had affeccion,
                  To ſe Vlixes at his home comynge.
                  And deſyrous ouer all thynge,
                  To haue of him newly acqueyntaunce.
                  For vnto him was inly great pleſaunce,
                  To heare him talke for his eloquence,
                  For his wiſedome and his high prudence,
                  And there he was after all his ſmerte,
                  Receyued playnly with as glad an herte,
                  As euer yet was any maner man,
                  Sithen tyme that the worlde began.
                  ¶And to encreaſe of his felycyte,
                  There herde me firſt of Penolopee,
                  His trewe wife without ſpot of blame,
                  Of whom yet grene is the noble fame,
                  Which from her lorde for all his longe abſēce,
                  In thought nor dede neuer did offence.
                  But ſothly was both in chere and dede,
                  Throughout Grece example of womanhede,
                  And yet was ſhe as bokes lyſt expreſſe,
                  Throughout ye world myrrour of fayreneſſe,
                  And amonge Grekes borne of hyeſt blode,
                  Called of Auctours both fayre and good.
                  And yet ſaye bokes of her doubtles,
                  Was neuer none that had ſo great preſe:
                  But ſhe her kepte chaunginge for no newe,
                  Vnto her lorde euer ylyke trewe,
                  Of herte aye one not parted into twayne,
                  That ſhe is called quene and ſoueraygne,
                  Of wifely trouthe in this bokes olde.
                  And ofte I finde her herte would colde,
                  She tourne pale fro her lorde ſo ferre,
                  In her cloſet to heare of the werre,
                  Of dread ſhe had and for feare eke quake,
                  Of fantaſyes for her lordes ſake,
                  For his abſence both eue and morowe,
                  Was death vnto her and importable ſorowe.
                  And aye in ſothe for ioye or any game.
                  When it fell ſhe herde Hectors name,
                  In any place anone ſhe fell a ſwowne,
                  And gan her ſelfe in teares drowne,
                  Of womanhead ſo ſhe was aferde,
                  To heare the ſlaughter of his mortall ſwerde
                  Leſt her lorde of knyghtly ſurquedrye,
                  Had of fortune fall in ieopardye,
                  Of had or ſorte to a mette that worthy knight
                  That ſeld or neuer ſhe felte her herte lyght.
                  And many dreame on nightes did her gaſte,
                  All the while that the ſiege laſte.
                  And euery playe was venym in her ſyght,
                  When that ſhe was from her owne knight.
                  For in this worlde ioye had ſhe none,
                  Of high nor lowe playnly but of one,
                  For whoſe ſake all myrth ſhe refuſeth,
                  And who ſo be that in his herte muſeth,
                  Of any woman any thinge but good,
                  Of melancolye meued in his bloud,
                  Let him aduerte of wyſedome and yſee,
                  And remembre on Penolope,
                  For his deſerte leſt that he be blamed.
                  And oh Guido thou ſhouldeſt be aſhamed,
                  To ſaye of wiues any thinge but wele,
                  For in good fayth as ferre as I can fele,
                  Though one or two do amonge offence.
                  She that is good through her prouidence,
                  Is therof nothinge for to wite.
                  And though Guydo in his bokes endite.
                  ¶The varyaunce of Heleyne or Criſeyde,
                  ¶Or Medea that for ſorowe deyde,
                  Let the agayne of ryght and equyte,
                  The wifely trouth of Penolope.
                  The maydenhode of yonge Polycene,
                  And the goodneſſe of Hecuba the quene.
                  Of Caſſandra eke the ſtedfaſtneſſe,
                  And with all this take the vnkindneſſe,
                  Of Pantaſyll withoute variaunce,
                  And put all this togyther in balaunce.
                  And ye ſhal finde if ye lyſt accounte,
                  Maugre who grutcheth trouth ſhal ſurmoūt
                  I dare affirme and beare the priſe,
                  There will no man replye that is wiſe,
                  He were to feble in his opynion.
                  ¶And while Vlixes was with Alphenon,
                  It was to him made relacyon,
                  Of an hatefull conſpiratyon.
                  That certayne lordes enuyron his countre,
                  Rauiſhe would his quene Penolope.
                  
                     Maugre all tho that were there agayne.
                  Albe that ſhe was euer ylyke playne,
                  In her trouthe ſtedfaſte as a wall,
                  Yet they haue caſte platly that ſhe ſhall,
                  Be take of force it maye not be eſchewed,
                  But it ſo be in haſte ſhe be reſkued.
                  For they them caſte the time not aiourne,
                  For daye and nighte with her they ſoiourne.
                  Inly in herte for loue diſamayde,
                  But of wiſedome ſhe hath theim ſo belayde,
                  There was none ſo manly nor ſo ſage,
                  That could of her get auauntage.
                  So aduyſe s;he was in her workynge.
                  And when Vlixes conceyueth all this thinge
                  And fully knewe by open euydence,
                  And had alſo in ſpecyall credence,
                  ¶Sente vnto him fro Penolope,
                  The matter hole declarynge in ſecretee,
                  ¶His owne ſonne Thelamonius,
                  He wexe in herte wood and furyous,
                  And would make no dylacyon.
                  ¶But in all haſte beſoughte Alphenon,
                  The mighty kinge of his high bounte,
                  To releue him in his aduerſyte,
                  And that he would through his mighty hāde,
                  Of gentilleſſe conueye him to his lande.
                  He graunteth him and ſaye not ones naye,
                  And both two in ful great araye,
                  Toke the ſea when the winde was good,
                  Well fortuned for nothinge theim withſtode.
                  They be ariued and had no lettynge,
                  Where Vlixes as ye haue herde was kinge,
                  And ſecretly in a night they were conueyed,
                  To them that haue his ligaunce diſobeyed,
                  And mercyles or they might awake,
                  In theyr beddes they haue theim all take,
                  Makynge no prolongyng tyll on the morowe
                  But in all haſte for no wight durſt thē borow
                  Smet of theyr heades by iudgement fynall,
                  And ſet theim vpon the caſtell wall,
                  Eueriche by other endlonge the rowe,
                  Vpon the toure when the cocke gan crowe,
                  And thus all nyght they kept theim ſelfe cloſe,
                  Till that Phebus meryly aroſe,
                  In the Orient when the larke ſonge,
                  And tho theſe kinges wt theyr meyne ſtrōge,
                  Freſhly beſene entre the cetee,
                  Who was ſo glad but Penolope,
                  Who made ioye but this goodly quene,
                  Full deſyrous her owne lorde to ſene.
                  ¶But if I ſhould all in ordre ſette,
                  The great myrthe they made when they met,
                  Make reherſayle of complayntes olde.
                  And how they gan theyr hertes to vnfolde,
                  Eche to other and lyſt nothinge concele,
                  And the gladneſſe that they inly fele,
                  If I ſhulde put all in memorye.
                  The reioyſynge and the hertye glorye,
                  That his lyeges made at his comynge.
                  The coſte eke they had at his metynge,
                  The giftes great and preſentes ryche,
                  In all this worlde I trowe none ylyche,
                  It were to longe taryinge for my boke.
                  And how that he newe aſſuraunce toke,
                  Of his lordes and lyeges all,
                  And how that they to his grace fall,
                  The cheare he made eke to Alphenowne,
                  Of gentylneſſe through his high renowne.
                  And how the doughter inly debonayre,
                  Of Alphenon Nauſica the fayre,
                  By Vlixes medyacyon.
                  Ywedded was vnto Thelamon,
                  Borne by diſcent there may no man ſaye nay,
                  To reioyce his crowne after his daye.
                  And thus came in by his purueyaunce,
                  Of two reygnes the myghty allyaunce,
                  And how all this brought was to the knotte,
                  Men would deme playnly me to ſotte,
                  To preſume of opynyon,
                  For to delate a deſcripcyon.
                  Sythen Guydo touchinge but the chyefe,
                  In this matter of ſtile was but brefe.
                  ¶Shortly reherſynge how kinge Alphenon,
                  Repeyred is home to his regyon,
                  And Vlixes in his chiefe cyte,
                  Abode ſtyll with Penolope.
                  Where I him leue in ioye and in ſolace,
                  Till Attropos liketh to purchaſe,
                  For to fyche fynally the date,
                  The threde to vntwine of his liues fate.
               
            
            
               
               ¶How the tranſlatour wryteth the ſtocke of Pirrhus by lyneall dyſcent, and how his father hight Pelleus, and his graundmother called Thetydes. Ca. xxxviii.
               
                  
                     NOw muſt I full buſy be a while,
                  To directe the traces of my ſtile,
                  In diſcriuinge ſhortly of entente,
                  The ſtocke of Pirrhus by lyneall diſcente,
                  Myn Auctour folowe and be compendious.
                  ¶Whoſe olde father hyght Pelleus
                  His graundmother called Thetydes,
                  Of whych two came worthy Achilles,
                  That at Troye by treaſon loſt his lyfe.
                  And Dardanica called was his wife.
                  ¶Pirrhus mother and doughter as I reade
                  Vnto the kynge called Lychomede,
                  ¶Hauinge a father that Ataſtus hight,
                  Whych in ſothneſſe all that euer he myght,
                  ¶Bare heauy herte to kinge Pelleus,
                  To Achilles and alſo to Pirrhus,
                  To all the kyn playnly on that ſide,
                  And of malyce rancour and of pryde,
                  And of enuye in an hatefull rage,
                  ¶When Pelleus fall was in age,
                  He berafte him both ſceptre and crowne,
                  And from his ſee lowe alight him downe,
                  And into exyle auayle maye no ſtryfe,
                  He made him go with Thetydes his wyfe.
                  Of high diſdayne gayne maye no grace.
                  And in his herte gan daye and night cōpace,
                  The death of Pyrrhus kepe him if ye can.
                  And therupon maliciouſly began,
                  To ſhape a waye by awayte lyinge,
                  Him for to ſley at his home comynge.
                  But this Pyrrhus from his treynes free,
                  Many daunger eſcaped of the ſea,
                  Many wawe and many tempeſt wood,
                  With great loſſe both of men and good,
                  At Malaſus alderfyrſt gan londe,
                  A ſtronge Cyte a lytell from the ſtronde,
                  Where that he was refreſhed wonder wele,
                  And there he knewe grounde and euery dele,
                  Fyrſte of Thexyle lyke as men him tolde,
                  ¶Of Thetides and Pelleus the olde,
                  And how Ataſtus bare to him hatrede,
                  Vnto the death wherof he gan drede,
                  And thought he would as he yt was right wiſe
                  By ſome engyne eſchewe his malyce,
                  And therupon do his buſy payne.
                  ¶Now had Ataſtus other ſonnes twayne,
                  ¶Menalippus and Poliſtenes,
                  And a doughter ycalled Thetydes.
                  And all this whyle wofull Pelleus,
                  In a caſtell olde and ruynous,
                  With Thetydes full of ſorowe and care,
                  For dread of death daye and night gan dare,
                  Diſpeyred in his vnweldy age,
                  Recure to fynde of this mortall rage,
                  Except that he had an hope of yore,
                  That Pyrrhus ſhoulde helpe him and reſtore
                  At his repeyre when ſo that it fall.
                  After whoſe comynge often he gan call,
                  The tyme curſe that he ſo longe abode.
                  But when Pyrrhus all this vnderſtode,
                  At Malaſus by relacyowne,
                  Ful faſte he gan haſte out of the towne.
                  Toke the ſea and faſt gan him hye,
                  Towarde the lande called Theſalye.
                  Of entent to make ordynaunce,
                  On Ataſtus for to do vengeaunce.
                  But alder fyrſte this Pyrrhus ful prudent,
                  Eſpyes twayne he tofore hath ſent,
                  To Theſalye forth togyther gone.
                  ¶And Crilippus named was the tone,
                  And Adraſtus named was his fere,
                  They were expert theim nedeth not to lere.
                  In whoſe exployte to more auauntage.
                  ¶This Pyrrhus hath dyrecte his meſſage,
                  Of Theſalye to a cytezyne,
                  Called Aſſandrus a maner chamberlayne,
                  With Pelleus and whilom ful ſecree,
                  While he was flourynge in felycytee.
                  And when Pyrrhus in concluſyon,
                  Knewe all the ſothe by relacyon,
                  On ſea nor lande hym ne lyſt to tarye,
                  Albe that he founde the winde contrarye.
                  ¶But he eſcaped many dreadful ſtoundes,
                  Of Theſalye approcheth to the boundes,
                  For Eolus that his luſt obeyed,
                  And of fortune wonderlye conueyed.
                  He dryuen was as it were by grace,
                  So ariue in the ſame place,
                  Where Pelleus in a doleful caue,
                  For dread of death laye him ſelfe to ſaue.
                  Sole ſaue his wife withouten any feres,
                  Al encloſed with buſhes and with briares,
                  
                     And Pirrhus there went vp fyrſt to londe,
                  Sole by hym ſelfe walkynge on the ſtronde,
                  Penſife and triſt and his waye toke,
                  ¶Where Pelleus in a caue quoke,
                  Hauynge with him tho no other guyde,
                  Saue his ſworde hangynge by his ſyde,
                  And vnwarely with a dreadful herte,
                  ¶Pelleus out of the caue ſterte,
                  Diſmayde of his life in doubte,
                  When he behelde a knight there walke about,
                  And aſtoned abode and ſtode ful ſtyll
                  Ymagyninge that he ſawe Achille,
                  ¶By this Pirrhus ſtondynge in the place,
                  By all the ſygnes ſhewed in his face.
                  For nature without varyaunce,
                  Made them ſo like of cheare and countenaūce
                  Of fourme of ſhape and limmes euerychone,
                  That difference in effect was none.
                  ¶And Pelleus without longer ſpace,
                  Gan anone Pirrhus to enbrace,
                  And enbrayde out of his deadly thoughte,
                  And for ioye ſet all his ſorowe at nought,
                  And gan to him by and by declare,
                  Both his exyle and his euyl fare,
                  His pyteous lyfe his pouerte and miſchaūce,
                  And fortunes falſe varyaunce.
                  And of Ataſtus the feruent hoote enuye,
                  The cruelte and the tyrannye,
                  Ceriouſly he tolde Pirrhus all,
                  And he full ſobre ſtode ſtill as a wall,
                  With face pale and in herte wrothe,
                  Specheles to ſhyp agayne he goth,
                  And there he was enformed doubtles,
                  That Menalippus and Poliſtenes,
                  And Ataſtus togither all thre.
                  With huge araye and a great meyne,
                  The ſame daye ful ſurquedous of pride.
                  Hunte in a foreſt lytell there beſyde.
                  And when Pyrrhus therof toke good hede,
                  Without abode chaunge gan his wede,
                  Ful porely rent and diſmayde,
                  Like a man that were diſarayde,
                  Gyrte with his ſworde made no delaye,
                  But to the foreſt toke the right waye,
                  Sole by him ſelfe without companye,
                  So ſecretly that no man might eſpye.
                  And as he drough many diuers boundes,
                  He herde hornes vncouplinge of houndes,
                  And like a man that liſt make his mone,
                  Fro ſyght of folke he drewe him aye alone,
                  And caſually diſſeuered fro the preſe.
                  ¶Firſte he met with Poliſtenes,
                  ¶Menalippus ridinge by his ſyde,
                  And both two on Pirrhus gan abyde,
                  And boyſtouſly of him to enquere,
                  Fro whenſe he came and alſo what he were,
                  So febly cladde and of ſo pore eſtate,
                  Walkinge there as he were deſolate,
                  And lowly he of chere and countenaunce,
                  Styll and humble in his daliaunce,
                  Aunſwered agayne and ſayde how that he,
                  Fordriuen was with myſchiefe of the ſea,
                  And affirmed pale and nothinge redde,
                  His felowſhip drowned was and dead,
                  Fiue hundred the wawes were ſo rage,
                  Of olde and yonge and of mydell age,
                  And he eſcaped the tempeſt was ſo rife,
                  As he them tolde vnneth with the life.
                  And ouermore he tolde them platly eke,
                  Touchinge his birthe that he was a greke,
                  And went there deſtitute of ioye.
                  Late come fro the ſiege of Troye,
                  And beſought them towerde his liuinge,
                  To helpe him with ſome refreſhinge,
                  As him that had cattell loſt and good,
                  Like as they ſawe naked as he ſtode,
                  Prayinge alſo in hope it ſhould auayle,
                  Him to releue with clothinge and vytayle,
                  To his refute ſome what to prouide.
                  ¶And they bad him that he ſhould abide,
                  For they wyll wytte playnly what he can.
                  And that while beſide them there ran,
                  A full great harte downe by the ryuer.
                  ¶And Menalippus pricked his courſer,
                  As it ſemed it was to him dewe,
                  Through thinne and thicke onely to purſewe
                  He ſpareth not but alwaye after rode,
                  And his brother with Pirrhus ſtil abode,
                  ¶Poliſtenes and toke of it no hede,
                  But in all haſte alight fro his ſtede,
                  On the grene to reſte him there beſyde,
                  As he that was wery for to ryde,
                  Without meyne beynge him ſelfe ſole,
                  Liſting of Pirrhus ye complaynt and the dole
                  But ſodaynly or he might aduerte,
                  Cruell Pirrhus ran him to the herte,
                  And lefte him dead lyinge on the playne.
                  When Menalippus repeyred was agayne,
                  
                     Seynge his brother baſkynge in his bloud.
                  And Pirrhus efte furyous and wood,
                  With a face of coloure pale and wan,
                  To Menalippus in his yre ran:
                  And ſlewe him eke or that he toke hede.
                  And thus they laye on the grounde and blede,
                  The brethren two withe Pirrhus ſworde yſlawe.
                  And he anone aſyde gan him drawe.
                  Metinge a knight were it of ſorte, or caſe,
                  As ſayth the ſtorye called Cinaras,
                  Of whom Pirrhus gan in haſte to enquere,
                  Whoſe man he was or what he maketh there.
                  To whom he ſayde withouten tarying,
                  He ſeruaunt was with the myghty kinge,
                  Called Ataſtus lorde of that countre.
                  ¶And Pirrhus tho of deadly enmyte,
                  With cruell ſworde al freſhe & red of bloud,
                  Ran him through out as any Lyon wood,
                  And after that the foreſt he forſoke,
                  And in all haſte the ryght waye he toke,
                  To ſhippe agayne pale and blacke of hewe.
                  And gan anone to arraye him newe,
                  ¶All in purple whych as clerkes telles,
                  For kinges is and for no wyght elles.
                  And then Pirrhus freſhe and well beſeyne,
                  To the foreſt repeyred is ageyne.
                  Where ſodaynly of hap in his walkynge,
                  In ſhorte while he meteth wyth the kynge,
                  ¶Olde Ataſtus that aſked of Pirrhus,
                  What man art thou that by thy ſelfe thus,
                  Diſconſolate here walkeſt to and fro.
                  ¶Certes quod Pirrhus full of ſorowe & wo.
                  Inly ſuppryſed of hertye complaynynge,
                  One of the ſonnes to Priamus the kynge,
                  I lately was now out of memorye.
                  Sith Troyans fal that whilom was in glory
                  Now refewteles and into miſchiefe brought,
                  Thus walke I ſole full of care and thoughte,
                  Farre in exyle out of Troye towne,
                  With cruell Pirrhus to liue in priſon,
                  Bounde vnto him though me be full lothe,
                  My hande aſſured with ful many othe,
                  To ſerue his luſt aye in captyuytye,
                  Lo here is all thus ſtandeth it with me,
                  Ataſtus tho of full entencion,
                  After many an other queſtyon,
                  Enquered of him as in his daliaunce,
                  If he ought knewe of Pirrhus gouernaunce
                  Or if that he could ought vnderſtande,
                  Where he him kept ſith he came to lande.
                  Ywiſſe quod he if ye liſt him haue,
                  He kepeth him cloſe lo in yonder caue.
                  Amonge bruſſhayle with a ſhrouded face,
                  Makinge a ſigne to the ſame place.
                  And all was done for an ydellmaſe,
                  For while the king thitherwarde gan gaſe,
                  Haſty Pirrhus gan his ſworde outdrawe,
                  In purpoſe fully Ataſtus to haue ſlawe,
                  But wonderly the ſtorye can you lere,
                  ¶Quene Thetides d
                        •
                     d anone appere,
                  Albe reygned with teares on her face,
                  And gan the ſworde of Pirrhus to embrace,
                  Prayinge him his deadly hande reſtrayne.
                  Haſt thou not killed my yong brethren twayn
                  And now alas my father hore and graye,
                  Merciles fro me wilt take awaye.
                  Put vp the ſworde and no bloud ne ſhede,
                  And haue ſome pytye vpon thy kinrede,
                  And do aduerte clerely to the fyne,
                  How thou art come of the ſame line,
                  And hatefull is who ſo can loke aryght.
                  Vnkinde bloud in euery mannes ſight.
                  And Pyrrhus tho as any Tygre wrothe,
                  Afferme gan with many ſacred othe,
                  That who ſo grutche or agaynſt playne,
                  He ſhall hym ſle with his handes twayne.
                  ¶For hath not he by falſe extorſion,
                  ¶Put Pelleus out of his regyon,
                  Whyche is your lorde and ye his trewe wyfe.
                  That fynally he ſhall leſe hys lyfe,
                  And here anone of myne handes deye,
                  In this matter there is no more to ſeye,
                  And Pelleus darynge in the caue,
                  But ye of grace lyſte his lyfe ſaue,
                  All other helpe platly is for nought.
                  This Pelleus anone forthe brought.
                  Croked and olde vnweldy eke to ſe,
                  And tofore Pyrrhus fell downe on hys kne,
                  Beſechinge hym wyth a pyteous face,
                  At hys requeſt take hym to hys grace.
                  ¶And that he wolde in his manly herte,
                  Goodly beholde the deadly wo and ſmerte,
                  ¶Of Ataſtus and the mortall payne,
                  That he tho hadde for his ſonnes twaine.
                  Whiche lay dead tofore hym on the grene,
                  Slaine with your ſwerd yt is ſo ſharpe & kene
                  Which he ne may recure in no wyſe.
                  The ſorow of which ought ynough ſuffyſe.
                  
                     Though ye on hym do no more vengeaunce.
                  All this well peyſed iuſtly in balaunce,
                  Sith he is hooly ſubmytted to your myghte,
                  Taketh now him to mercy anone ryght,
                  And let your ſworde his age not conſume,
                  This my requeſt as I dare preſume.
               
               
                  ANd then Pirrhus ſhortly for to ſayne,
                  When he had put vp his ſword agayne
                  Seynge mercy myght him moſt auayle,
                  Without wordes or any reherſayle,
                  Fyrſte of all tofore theim euerychone,
                  The kynges made accorden into one.
                  By his wyſedome concludynge vp in dede,
                  That eche of theim ſhuld his right poſſede,
                  ¶In Theſalye parted into twayne.
                  That neyther had matter to complayne,
                  Eueryche to reygne in his dewe ſee,
                  And while they were togyther all thre,
                  Out of preſence of any other man,
                  ¶Ataſtus fyrſte thus his tale began.
                  ¶Syres quod he to you is not vnknowe,
                  How through my age I am now brought ſo lowe.
                  And through natures kindly mocion,
                  Am wexed feble of wyt and of reaſon.
                  Beynge vnweldy of my lymmes all.
                  So many yeares are vpon me fall.
                  And can vnneth any thinge diſcerne,
                  To feble in ſothe a kingedome to gouerne.
                  Of lyfe nor death takynge nowe no hede,
                  Sith that my ſonnes ſlayne be and dead.
                  And ſole lefte now withouten heyre,
                  Of worldly luſte fully in diſpeyre.
                  The tyme paſſed of my felycytye.
                  Fortunes tourne with mutabylytye,
                  Hathe taughte me playnlye I dare it well expreſſe,
                  In worldly ioye there is no ſykerneſſe,
                  Nor very truſte no while to abyde.
                  But I wyll now for my ſelfe prouyde,
                  And in all haſte by prudent purueaunce,
                  Me clere diſcharge from all gouernaunce,
                  Agayne my ſorte me liſt not maligne.
                  ¶But ſceptre and crowne frely I reſigne,
                  Of Theſalye the lordſhip and the lande,
                  Of my fre will hole into thy hande.
                  There ſhall no man reclayme nor ſaye naye.
                  Interrupte nor make no delaye,
                  Touchinge this thinge by no concluſyon,
                  For I the put full in poſſeſſion.
                  And hereupon of all that euer he abyde
                  Makynge full fayth his hand in his he layde.
                  Quene Thetides ſyttynge there preſent,
                  And Pelleus of the ſame entent,
                  Vnto Pirrhus for his purpartye,
                  Reſygned eke his ryght of Theſalye.
                  Fully affermynge that of yore ago,
                  His full deſyre and his ioye alſo,
                  Was euer in one his neuewe to ſuccede.
                  As ryghtfull heyre his kingdome to poſſede,
                  And vtterly without repentaunce,
                  All that belongeth vnto my lygeaunce,
                  Sceptre and ſworde crowne and dyademe,
                  So as a kynge lyfe and death to deme,
                  Into thy hande without longer date,
                  This ſame houre holy to tranſlate.
                  And when the knot of this conuencion,
                  Was fully brought to this concluſon.
                  Perfourmed vp hole the vnyte,
                  For euermore atwene theſe kinges thre.
                  Ataſtus knightes diſſeuered enuyrowne,
                  Out of the foreſt be deſcended downe.
                  And by byddynge platly of theyr lorde,
                  They were echone ſworne to this accorde,
                  And attones this luſty companye,
                  To Theſalye faſt gan theim hye.
                  And Pirrhus folke lyinge on the ſea,
                  Be ſayled forthe ſtreyght to the Cytye.
                  And Ataſtus doth ſytte a parliament,
                  Where openly he gaue commaundement.
                  That all his lieges of hygh or lowe eſtate,
                  Wythout ſtrife or any more debate,
                  Specially of gentyll bloud yborne,
                  The ſame daye to Pirrhus to be ſworne.
                  Like theyr degrees in the royall hall.
                  To perſeuer his trewe lieges all.
                  Durynge theyr lyfe for erneſt or for game.
                  And Pelleus commaūded hath the ſame,
                  For his partye without any fraude,
                  And thus with ioye and with ſolempne laude
                  Pirrhus was of euery maner age,
                  Gladly accepted to his heritage.
                  And on a daye fortunate and good,
                  With glad aſpectes when the heuen ſtode,
                  Well accordynge to ſuch maner thinge,
                  Worthy Pirrhus was ycrowned kinge,
                  Of Theſalye the riche regyon.
                  It were but vayne to make mencion,
                  Of theyr reuell nor theyr great arraye,
                  
                     Nor of the feaſt made the ſame daye,
                  Eke in the ſtory I finde it not in ſothe.
                  I wyll paſſe ouer as mine auctour dothe,
                  Saue in his booke as it is ſpecefyed,
                  That the kingdome was fer magnefyed,
                  Of Theſalye by puyſſaunce and might,
                  Of this Pyrrhus whylom ſo good a knight,
                  Where I hym leaue in his royall ſee.
                  ¶Tournynge agayne to kynge Ydumee,
                  Which in this while ygraue was vnder ſtone.
                  ¶And after hym hys ſonne Meeryone,
                  The ſtory ſaith was crowned king of Crete,
                  That but awhyle reygninge in equyte,
                  Dyed alſo it wolde be none other,
                  ¶And than in haſt Leorica hys brother,
                  As rightfull heyre by ſucceſſyon,
                  Was crowned kinge of that regyon.
                  ¶In which tyme Ataſtus out of drede,
                  By thaſſent of Pyrrhus as I rede,
                  Full buſy was to make in ſpecyal,
                  A ryche toumbe paſſyngly royall,
                  Where buryed were with full huge preſe.
                  ¶Menalyppus and Polyſtenes,
                  That both two were in the foreſt ſlawe,
                  Thorugh Pirrhus ſwerde by full cruell law.
                  ¶Of them can I none other proceſſe make,
                  But euen there fully my tale I take,
                  Of them bothe and alſo eke yfere,
                  ¶Of Ataſtus theyr owne father dere.
                  Of whome ſothly for all hys lockes hore,
                  In Troye booke rede I can no more.
                  ¶But now muſt I again to Pirrhus wende
                  To wryte of him the ſorye wofull ende,
                  Which whan he ſat higheſt in his ſee,
                  Made full blinde with vayne proſperyte,
                  Gouerning tho the lande of Theſalye.
                  ¶There hym betydde to fall in fantaſye,
                  And to ſette hys loue on Hermyon the quene,
                  ¶Horeſtes wyfe reygnynge in Methene.
                  For whome he brent hote as any fyre.
                  And in fulfyllyng of hys foule deſyre,
                  His purpoſe hole thus he brought aboute,
                  Her rauyſhyng while her lorde was oute,
                  Tho led hir home and helde her as his wyfe,
                  Seminge to hym it was a blyſfull lyfe,
                  And full releſe of his paynes ſmerte.
                  ¶Of whyche Horeſtes bare full heuy herte,
                  And caſte hym playnely auenged for to be,
                  Whan he therto hath opportunyte.
                  And for that time though he ſuſteined wrong
                  ¶He was to feble & Pyrrhus was to ſtrong,
                  ¶Whiche helde alſo in ſtorye it is tolde,
                  ¶Andromecha with hym in his houſholde.
                  ¶Hectors wyfe by whom whylom ſhe had,
                  A lytell chylde whyche with hir ſhe ladde,
                  The ſege complete and deſtructiowne,
                  Whan ſhe was brought out of Troye towne.
                  Laomedonte I fende was his name,
                  Encreaſyng after to full worthy fame.
                  ¶And by this Pyrrhus ſhe had a ſonne alſo▪
                  
                  ¶Achylleydos ſo calleth hym Guydo,
                  And theſe women for all theyr great eſtate
                  Atwene them ſelfe amonge were at debate.
                  ¶And Hermyone with yre full hote,
                  In complayning thus to her father wrote,
                  That her fere for all her hygh degree,
                  Andronomecha was cheriſhed better thā ſhe,
                  Of kynge Pyrrhus beſechynge Menelay,
                  Hym to enhaſte in al that euer he maye,
                  And come hym ſelfe, anone that it were do,
                  To ſlea this woman and her childe alſo.
                  That naught he abode but faſtgan hym hye,
                  In all heate his towardes Theſalye,
                  To be avenged with his ſwerde of ſtele,
                  On her that herein fauleth neuer adele,
                  But maugre hym in all his cruelte,
                  She was reſkewed amyd of the Cite.
                  ¶ It is a thynge which hath not be herde,
                  To a woman a kynge to draw hys ſwerde.
                  I wyll no more in thys matter dwelle,
                  In maner ſhamed it to wryte or telle.
                  But this was done while Pyrrhꝰ of courage
                  To Delos was gone was on his pilgrimage
                  Hauinge with him but a litell route,
                  ¶To Apollo there knele and to loute,
                  For the ſoule to praye of him Achylle,
                  And hys vowes alſo to fulfylle,
                  And hym to thanke with hyghe affeccyon,
                  Of good exployte he hadde at Troye towne,
                  And for the wreche alſo that was take,
                  At the Cyte for hys fathers ſake.
                  But all this thinge here yſpecified.
                  ¶Kinge Horeſtes warely hath eſpyed,
                  And to Delos haſte the full ryght,
                  Ledinge with him many a luſty knight.
                  And vnwarely there with Pirrhus mette,
                  And vengeably he vpon him ſette.
                  That fynally in that ſtraunge lande,
                  
                     ¶Horeſtes ſlewe him with his owne hande,
                  I fynde in ſothe he made no diffence,
                  So ſodayne was the mortall vyolence,
                  Of his enuye he could not aſterte,
                  For or that he his ſworde myght aduerte,
                  He was on him enuyron all beſet,
                  Thilke tyme it myght be no bet,
                  For there was nother ſocour nor declyne.
                  Thus was Pyrrhus brought to his fine,
                  ¶Late crowned kinge of Theſalye,
                  Lo here the guerdon of auoutrye,
                  Lo how the mede and rewarde is ful rife,
                  To miſuſe an other mannes wife,
                  It is no dread folowe ſhall vengeaunce,
                  Sodayne death or vnware myſchaunce,
                  Which euery man greatly ought charge,
                  And in Delos in a temple large,
                  ¶Kinge Pyrrhus was locked vnder ſtone.
                  And Horeſtes furth his waye is gone,
                  And by force gat his wyfe agayne,
                  There was no wight durſt him tho wtſayne,
                  And to Methene proudly is repeyred,
                  And Theſalye piteouſly diſpeyed,
                  Deſtitute as they that can no reade,
                  When they wiſt theyr worthy king was dead
                  And heyre was none by ſucceſſion,
                  To gouerne that noble regyon,
                  Saue Achilleydos that but litell aforne,
                  In Pirrhus abſence was in Grece borne,
                  Fully of age not a quarter cleane.
                  The youth of whom ſothly was to grene,
                  Who lyſt conſydre and to tender of myght,
                  Full many daye to reioyce his ryght,
                  And to gouerne with Sceptre in his hande,
                  The large boundes of ſo great a lande.
                  ¶And yet this childe likly and right fayre,
                  In very ſothe was borne to be heyre,
                  After Pirrhus this the trouth playne,
                  There was no man that lyſt it withſaine.
                  ¶But I finde when he came to age,
                  He reſygned hole his herytage,
                  To his brother frely and his ryght,
                  ¶Lamedowne a wonder manly knight,
                  That was deſcended of Troyaniſhe bloud,
                  Downe fro the ſtock of him that was ſo good,
                  Floure of knighthod diffence of Frygya,
                  That him begat on Andromecha,
                  Ordeyned nowe who ſo grutche or frowne,
                  Of Theſalye for to beare the crowne.
                  And whan he was made lorde of that lande,
                  And all was frely reſygned to his hande.
                  ¶He hath cōmaunded no man dare replye,
                  Through the kyngdome of all Theaſlye,
                  That all that were in captyuitye,
                  Or pryſoners of Troye the Cytye,
                  For loue or hate exceptyon was none,
                  That all ſhulde at their large gone.
                  ¶By full aſſent of Achylleydos,
                  And ſuche as were eke in pryſon cloſe,
                  Without raunſome ſhall delyuered be.
                  ¶And reioyſe the full lyberte,
                  By cuſtome vſed both in borough and towne
                  Of the lyeges of that great regyon.
                  And thus the folke yt came thralle fro Troye,
                  Reſtored be ſodaynely to ioye,
                  ¶By Lamedowne and ymade free.
                  And he eke reygneth in his royall ſea,
                  Full myghtly as I haue made mynde,
                  In Troye boke no more of hym I fynde.
                  Nor of Pyrrhus nor of his kynrede,
                  Fro henſeforth I can no proceſſe reade.
                  ¶But incydentes that beare no ſubſtaunce,
                  Whiche were but vayne to put in remēbrance
                  Except myne auctour I note to what entent,
                  Here impeth in me a littell incydent,
                  Ywrought and done of full yore agone.
                  Touchynge the death of kyng Menon.
                  Whyche by enuye of cruell Achylles,
                  Was ſlayne in ſoth amonge Myrmydones.
                  Onely for he proudely gan purſewe,
                  Vpon Achylles Troylus to reſkue.
                  ¶Whom kynge Pryam made buryed be,
                  Beſyde Troylus in Troye the cyte,
                  In a temple ybylte of marbell olde.
                  And to what fyne this tale is tolde,
                  In this Chapitle I ſhall reherſe anone.
               
               
                  THe noble quene of this kynge Menon,
                  After the tyme longe and many day,
                  That ſhe was deade and grauen vnder claye
                  At the toumbe heuenly gan appere.
                  Albe ſet with bryght ſterres clere.
                  Whoſe ſymylytude for to reken all,
                  Was lyke a thynge that were immortall.
                  That no man myght vtterly ſuſtene,
                  To beholde of loke ſhe was ſo ſhene,
                  Downe deſcendynge fro the fyrmament.
                  Full many man beynge there preſent,
                  
                     Clade in a mantell ful celeſtyall.
                  And of her porte paſſyngly royall,
                  With ſweteneſſe freſhe as any roſe,
                  Made in all haſte the tombe to vncloſe,
                  Of her lorde and taketh out the bones.
                  And in a cheſt made of golde and ſtones.
                  She couched them as faſt as euer ſhe maye.
                  Diſpeyred and went anone her waye.
                  And tofore that nor after in certayne,
                  In that place ſhe was neuer ſayne,
                  Some afferminge as by lyklyneſſe,
                  She was other aungell or goddeſſe.
                  The ſoule or fate of the ſame kynge,
                  I can not deme in ſuche heauenly thynge.
                  Nor therin holde none opinyon,
                  For it tranſcendeth ſhortly my reaſon,
                  And me lyſt not in ſuche matter diffyne,
                  But reſorte ryght as any lyne,
                  To Vlixes and a while dwell,
                  Of his ende the ſurplus for to tell,
                  And how that he myght not eſcape,
                  The parodye that was for hym ſhape,
                  For Parchas haue his laſt terme ſette,
                  And Attropos meſured out and mette,
                  His liues threde on the rocke ſponne,
                  Diffende thy ſelfe Vlixes if thou konne.
                  Shewe thy manhode and not be aferde,
                  And be welfare of thy ſonnes ſworde.
                  For I ſhall nowe like as I am wonte,
                  Sharpe my penne both rude and blonte,
                  To deſcriue the fine of thy ſoioure,
                  Vpon the boundes ſet of my laboure,
                  For almoſt wery weake and faynt ynough,
                  Be the beaſtes and oxen of my plough.
                  The longe daye agayne the hyll to wende,
                  But almoſt now at the landes ende.
                  Of Troye booke fyche I wyll a ſtake,
                  Saue I muſt ſpende a fewe lynes blake,
                  The laſte chapiter ſhortly to tranſlate.
                  Of all this worke and ympen in the date,
                  Of that daye death ſette on him areſte,
                  Full execute by him he loued beſt.
               
               
                  LOwe on my knees now muſt I loute.
                  To this god that maketh men to route,
                  And cauſeth folkes to haue glad ſwenenes,
                  Both on morowe and on luſty euenes,
                  When Morphe us with ſlepy wande,
                  Which that he holdeth alwaye in his hande,
                  Hath marked them agayne the nyght,
                  To make men both mery and lyght.
                  And ſome whyle to haue gladneſſe.
                  And ſodeynly to falle in heauyneſſe,
                  Lyke as to them he gyueth euydence,
                  By ſondry ſygnes in his apparence,
                  Vnto that lord now muſt I mekely preye,
                  At this tyme my ſtyle to conueye.
                  Of Vlyxes the dreame to diſcryue,
                  The laſte of all he had by his lyue.
                  Declarynge hym by tokens full notable,
                  And by ſygnes very demonſtrable.
                  As he ſlepte agayne the pale mone,
                  His fatall day that ſhulde folowe ſoone.
                  For it fell thus as he abedde laye,
                  After mydnyght tofore the morowe graye.
                  ¶Hym thought he ſawe appeare a creature,
                  To his ſyght celeſtyall of fygure.
                  None erthly thynge but veryly deuyne,
                  Of porte and chere wonder femynyne.
                  ¶And as hym ſempte in his fantaſye,
                  Lyke a thynge ſent out of fayrye,
                  For the beaute of her goodly face,
                  Recomforted playnely all the place.
                  Moſt ſurmountynge and moſt ſouerayne.
                  And the clereneſſe of her eyen twayne.
                  All ſodeynly or men myght aduerte,
                  Perce woulde euen to the herte,
                  Deffence none myght be deuyſed.
                  ¶And Vlyxes with her loke ſuppryſed,
                  Gan her beholde alwaye more and more,
                  And in his ſlepe for to ſyghe ſore,
                  Perſynge aye with full buſy peyne,
                  Her to enbrace in his armes twayne.
                  ¶But aye the more that he gan purſue,
                  She agaynewarde gan hym to eſchewe.
                  And aye the more he preyſed her to ſe,
                  Aye the more from hym ſhe gan to flee.
                  So contrayre to hym was fortune.
                  And whan ſhe ſawe he was importune.
                  She aſked hym ſhortly what he wolde.
                  And he to her the platte trouth tolde.
                  ¶Certes quod he my lyues Emperyſſe,
                  Where that ye be woman or goddeſſe,
                  I can not deme nor iudge halfe a ryght.
                  I am ſo derked and blynded in my ſyght.
                  ¶But I dare well affyrme in this place,
                  My lyfe, my deth ſtande hoolely in your grace
                  More of mercy requyrynge than of ryght,
                  
                     To rewe on me which am your owne knight,
                  And of your pyte and compaſſyon,
                  Goodly to ſe to my ſaluacyon,
                  For my deſyre but I maye fulfyll,
                  This ſame night to haue of you my wyll,
                  To my recure I can no remedye,
                  For lacke of routhe but nedely I muſt dye,
                  Now haue I all atwixe hope and dread,
                  My ſelfe declared to your womanhead.
                  And after that ſhe kept her cloſe a while,
                  And tho full ſadly gan on him to ſmyle,
                  And as it put is in remembraunce,
                  Sayde vnto him with ſobre countenaunce.
                  Sothly quod ſhe this thine affection,
                  Would fully tourne to the confuſion,
                  As of vs both ſo it is perellous,
                  So inly mortall and contagyous,
                  That vtterly there gayne may no reade,
                  But one of vs muſt anone be dead.
                  This is the fyne of the hateful chaunce,
                  That folowe ſhould after our pleaſaunce.
                  And as Vlixes gan to nighen nere,
                  Beholdinge aye on her the heauenly cheare,
                  Where as ſhe ſtode vp right on the grdunde,
                  He ſawe her holde a ſpere longe and rounde,
                  The head therof all of borned ſtele,
                  Forged newe and grounde wonder wele,
                  ¶And therupon in his auiſiowne,
                  He ſawe a baner blaſynge vp and downe,
                  The felde therof all of coloure ynde,
                  Full of fyſhes beaten as I fynde.
                  ¶And in ſome bokes like as it is tolde,
                  In the middes a large crowne of golde,
                  ¶And or that ſhe tourne gan her face,
                  Lykly anone to parte out of the place,
                  She ſpake to him & ſayd in wordes playne,
                  This is full token of partynge of vs twayne,
                  For euermore and efte for ſowre ne ſwete,
                  After this daye neuer agayne to mete.
                  And diſaperinge anone her leue ſhe toke.
                  And after that he ſodaynly awoke,
                  And gan to muſen in his fantaſye,
                  What maner thing this dreme might ſygnefy,
                  But where it mente other euill or good,
                  The ſecretneſſe he tho not vnderſtode,
                  For it ſurmounted ſothly his reaſon,
                  Therfore he ſente throughout his region,
                  For ſuche as were ſubtill expoſytoures,
                  Of fate or ſorte or crafty dyuinours,
                  For all the clerkes ſubeict to his crowne,
                  To aſſemble in one his ſweuen to expowne.
                  ¶And when they knewe by informacyon,
                  The maner hole of his auiſion,
                  They byn concluded according as in one.
                  The time aprocheth and ſhall come anone,
                  That one that is the next of his kinrede,
                  With a ſpere ſhulde make his herte blede
                  ¶Let ſe where he his fate gan remewe,
                  Sith it is harde deſtynye teſchewe,
                  As ſaye tho folke in theyr opinion,
                  That worke and truſt on conſtellacion.
                  And Vlixes muſynge on this tale,
                  Chaungeth coloure and gan to wexeen pale.
                  Wonder dreadfull and full of fantaſyes,
                  Gan in him ſelfe to ſeke out remedyes,
                  Awaye to voyde thinge that will not be.
                  ¶He ſtareth brode but he maye not ſe,
                  His inwarde loke was with a cloude yblent.
                  ¶But weninge he for to be prudent,
                  ¶Made call to hym his ſonne Thelamon,
                  And to be take and ſhet vp in pryſon,
                  He ſuppoſynge fully in his witte,
                  From all miſchiefe therby to go quite,
                  He not aduerteth nor ne toke none hede,
                  To the ſharpeneſſe of his ſpeares head,
                  Nor to the fiſhes in the baner beate,
                  Nor of the ſea wherin they ſwimme and flete
                  Nor of the quene that called is Circes
                  That ſignes brought of wer & not of peace,
                  Nor of the crowne token of dignyte,
                  Of one that holde ſhall his royall ſee,
                  Waltryng amid the wawes both fell & woo
                  Amonge the fyſhes in the large floud,
                  ¶And he ſhall make the ful diuiſion,
                  Tofore remembred in the auiſion,
                  Agayne his will of very ignoraunce,
                  And execute the fatall puruyaunce,
                  Vp of the dreame with his ſpere of ſtele,
                  Whych Vlixes conſydreth neuer a dele,
                  ¶Nor to no wyght hath ſuſpection,
                  ¶But to his ſonne called Thelamon,
                  That cloſed is and ſhet vp in a towre.
                  ¶And Vlixes with coſte and great laboure,
                  Fro daye to daye doth his buſyneſſe,
                  For him ſelfe to make a fortereſſe,
                  Bilte on a rocke of lime and ſquare ſtones,
                  Depe ditched about for the nones,
                  That no man maye enter on no ſyde.
                  
                     Where as he caſteth all hys lyfe to abyde.
                  With certayne men choſen in ſpecyall,
                  ¶Night and daye to watche vpon the wall.
                  That no maner wyght ſhulde haue none entree,
                  But it ſo falle that he be aye ſecree,
                  And knowen of olde & to counſayle ſworne.
               
               
                  NOw as ye ſtory reherſed hath to forne,
                  The olde foole this dotarde Vlixes,
                  A ſonne had begot on her Cyrces,
                  Freſhe and luſty yonge and coragious,
                  And he was called Thelagonyus:
                  ¶Borne in the ſee amonge the floddes rage.
                  That was alſo to reken his age,
                  Fyue and twenty yeres and there aboute.
                  ¶But of hys father he was aye in doute,
                  What man he was or who it mighte be,
                  Beynge therof in no ſecurytie.
                  Tyll on a daye he deſyrous to knowe,
                  To hys mother fell on knees lowe.
                  Beſeching her goodly and not ſpare,
                  Of hys father to him the trouthe declare.
                  What that he was or where he ſhuld dwelle,
                  He her beſought that ſhe woulde hym tell,
                  ¶But ſothly ſhe longe and many dayes,
                  Of hyghe prudence put hym in delayes,
                  Tyll that ſhe ſawe ſhe might haue no reſte,
                  So importune he was in his requeſte.
                  And whē ſhe knew ther was none other bote,
                  Fro poynt to poynt ſhe tolde him crop & rote,
                  ¶Of Vlixes and where that he was kynge.
                  And he anone made no taryinge,
                  But toke leue it may none other be,
                  And playnely ſayde he wolde hys father ſe.
                  ¶Wherof the quene gan in her herte colde,
                  But when ſhe ſaw ſhe might him not wtholde
                  She hym beſought wyth chere debonayre,
                  That he wolde ſoone agayne to her repayre.
                  And forthe he ſayleth onwarde on his way.
                  Without abode the ſelfe ſame day,
                  By many porte and many fer countre,
                  Tyll he was brought there as he would be.
                  ¶To Achaya a lande of great renowne,
                  And he gan ſerche through out the regyon,
                  After the place and paleys pryncypall,
                  Where as the kinge helde his ſee royall.
                  And he ſo longe in the countre rode,
                  Tyll he was taught where the kynge abode.
                  There Vlixes was ſhytte vp in mewe,
                  To which place in haſte he gan purſewe,
                  A great party releued of hys ſorow.
                  And on a monday erely by the morow,
                  ¶Vnto the brydge the ryghteway he toke,
                  And foūde a porter deynous of hys loke,
                  And lowely fyrſte he gan him for to praye,
                  That he voutſafe hym goodly to conueye,
                  Into the courte and make no taryinge,
                  For he a meſſage he hadde to the kynge.
                  ¶But proudely he denyed the gate,
                  And ſhortly ſayd that he came to late,
                  To entre there in any maner wyſe.
                  And eke vngoodly gan him to deſpyſe,
                  Frowarde of ſpeche and malycyous.
                  But in all haſte thys Thelagonyus,
                  As he that was in heart not a ferde,
                  The proude porter hente by the berde,
                  And with his fyſte rofe his chawe bone,
                  That he fell deade muet as a ſtone.
                  And other eke that him tho withſtode.
                  He made proudely lepe into the flode.
                  And whan mo came to maken reſiſtence,
                  He hente a ſwerde by manly vyolence,
                  And furyouſly in hys yrous tene,
                  The ſtory ſayeth he ſlewe of them fyftene,
                  Hym ſelfe almoſte wounded to death,
                  And gan for wery ſothly fayle breath.
                  And Vlixes what for noyſe and ſowne,
                  To the bridge is deſcendyd downe.
                  Fynding his men at entre of his gate,
                  Dead and ſlayne by full mortall hate.
                  And he full yrous hente anone adarte,
                  Of auenture ſtandinge tho aparte,
                  And cruelly caſte at Thelagon.
                  But yet the ſtroke as in concluſyon,
                  Domaged not for it glode aſyde.
                  And he for haſte no longer would abyde,
                  Hent vp the darte without more areſt,
                  And ſmote the king lowe vnder the breſt,
                  Through the ribbes ſhortly for to ſaye,
                  That of the wounde he muſt nedes deye.
                  Hauinge as tho no opinion,
                  That he was kinge nor ſuſpection,
                  Nor that he had his owne father ſlawe.
                  Which faſt gan to his ende drawe.
                  His wound was ſo deadly and ſo kene,
                  That he might him ſelfe not ſuſtene,
                  But pale and wan to the grounde gan glide.
                  His men about vpon euery ſyde,
                  
                     That buſy were to helpe hym and releue.
                  But his ſore gan ſo ake and greue,
                  That he well felte that he muſt be dead.
                  ¶But abrayding as he lift vp his head,
                  Hauynge as yet both perfect minde & reaſon,
                  Remembre gan of his auyſyon.
                  And how it was tolde him out of dreade,
                  That one that was next of his kinrede,
                  Deſcended downe from his owne lyne,
                  His ſweuen ſhall parfourme and to the fyne,
                  Accompliſhe it wyth a darte of ſtele,
                  And for he could naught conceyuen wele,
                  What that he was. nor who that it ſhulde be,
                  He badde anone vnto his meyne,
                  Without harme or any vyolence,
                  To do him ſette anone vnto his preſence.
                  The yonge man whych at the gate ſtode,
                  That hath that daye ſhed ſo muche bloud.
                  ¶And when he was afore Vlixes brought,
                  Of him he hath enquyred out and ſought,
                  Fyrſte of his kyn and next of his countre.
                  ¶Certes quod he I was borne in the ſea,
                  Amonge fyſhes myd the wawes grene,
                  And ſayde alſo his mother was a quene,
                  Called Circes of whom the name is kouthe,
                  Both eaſt and weſt and eke right fer by ſouth
                  And tolde alſo his father was a kynge,
                  That hym begat at his home comynge.
                  Fro Troye towne towarde this countre.
                  And as my mother Circes tolde it me,
                  Serteinly that he Vlixes hyghte.
                  Of whom deſyrous for to haue a ſyghte,
                  I entred am this myghty regyon.
                  And haue purſewed vnto this dungeon.
                  Onely in hope my father to haue ſeyne.
                  But I ſe well my laboure is in vayne,
                  And ſyth in ſothe loſt is my trauayle,
                  And that it maye in no ſyde auayle,
                  It were folly longer for to dwell,
                  Lo here is all that I can you tell.
                  Of my kynred aſke of me no more,
                  ¶With that Vlixes gan to ſyghe ſore.
                  For lacke of bloud as he that was full pale,
                  And ſayde anone when he herde his tale,
                  ¶Now wot I well my wofull deſtynye,
                  Fulfylled is it maye none other be,
                  Now wot I well that it is to late,
                  To grutche or ſtryue agayne my piteous fate
                  ¶For my ſonne as clerkes whilom tolde.
                  Hath made an ende of my dayes olde,
                  Theron exſpectant with paynes full greuous
                  ¶And with that worde Thelagonius,
                  When ſo he wiſt agayne natures lawe,
                  That he alas had his father ſlawe,
                  Which in ye land longe had borne his crowne,
                  Without abode fell anone in ſwowne,
                  ¶His clothes rente his yelowe heyre to torne
                  ¶Alas quod he that euer was I borne,
                  For curſed is my woful deſtynye,
                  And my fortune which I maye not fle,
                  Curſed my ſorte curſed min auenture,
                  And I refuſe of euery creature,
                  Forwarryed eke my diſpoſycyon,
                  And curſed is my conſtellacyon,
                  Curſed alſo and full infortunate,
                  The houre in which my father me begat.
                  So would god without longer reade,
                  To acquite him anone that I were dead,
                  To laye my life for his death to borowe.
                  ¶And when the kynge ſawe his great ſorow,
                  And wyſt he was his ſonne of Circes borne,
                  By many ſygnes reherſed heretoforne,
                  He vnto him anone forgaue his death.
                  As tho he might for lacke and want of breth,
                  So importable was his paſſyon.
                  ¶And efte his ſonne called Thelamon,
                  Whyche hath in priſon ſo many daye be ſhet,
                  To his preſence in all haſte was fet.
                  Which when he ſawe his father in ſuche poynt
                  Wpon his death ſtandynge in diſioynt.
                  And knewe alſo and the trouthe hath founde,
                  By whom he had his laſt deadly wounde,
                  A ſworde he hente and mortally yrous,
                  Woulde tho haue ronne on Thelagonius,
                  Of hygh deſpyte auenged for to be.
                  ¶But Vlixes of fatherly pytye,
                  Made his men holde and reſtrayne,
                  And amyd of all his greuous payne,
                  By his prudence and that was done anone,
                  He made his ſonnes for to be all one,
                  ¶And gaue in charge vnto Thelamon,
                  Of entereneſſe and affection,
                  And of hole herte fayned neuer adele,
                  All his life loued his brother wele,
                  To parte with him treaſour golde and good,
                  As to the next borne of all his bloud.
                  And tho in ſothe it was no longer taryed,
                  That Vlixes full royally was caryed,
                  
                     Of all Achaya to the chyefe cyte.
                  Where after that he liued dayes thre,
                  Without more and tho gaue vp the gooſt,
                  I can not ſaye playnly to what coſt.
                  After this lyfe that his ſoule is gone.
                  But in a tumbe of metall and of ſtone,
                  The body was cloſed and yſhet.
                  And after that there made was no let,
                  That Thelamon wyth great ſolempnytye,
                  Ycrowned was in his fathers ſee.
                  Sworde and Sceptre delyuered to his hand,
                  Of all Achaya a ryche and worthy lande,
                  Ryght habundaunt of treaſour and of golde
                  And Thelagon wyth hym there abode,
                  A yeare complete well cheryſhed in his ſyght,
                  And of his brother toke ordre of a knygt.
                  And for him liſt no longer there abyde,
                  The kynge for him wyſely gan prouyde,
                  That he with golde and of treaſure plente,
                  Repeyred is home to his countre.
                  ¶And his mother of age wexen ſadde,
                  Of his repeyre paſſyngly was gladde,
                  As ſhe that ſawe by her ſorcerye,
                  He ſcaped was many ieopardye,
                  Many peryll and many great dyſtreſſe.
                  And after that ſhe fell into ſyckneſſe,
                  And her dette yelde as vnto nature,
                  The whych eſcape maye no maner creature.
                  In all this worlde that is here lyuynge.
                  After whoſe death her ſon was crowned king
                  Of Aulydos the meruaylous countre,
                  As I haue tolde encloſed with a ſea,
                  Amonge rockes where many ſhippes drowne
                  And ſixtye yere there he bare his crowne.
                  This manly man this Thelagonins.
                  And his brother Thelamonius,
                  Reygned alſo in his regyon,
                  Seuentye wynter as made is mencyon.
                  And after that they made a royall ende,
                  And both two to Iubiter they wende,
                  To reygne there amonge the ſterres bryght.
               
               
                  BVt now the lanterne and the clere lyght
                  Is waſted out of Frygyus Darete:
                  Whylom of Troye wryter and Poete.
                  Guyde haue I none further for to paſſe,
                  For euen here in this ſelfe place,
                  He fytched hath the boundes of his ſtyle.
                  At the ſyege he preſent all the whyle,
                  And aye in one wyth them did abyde.
                  Dites the Greke on the tother ſyde
                  And both two as in theyr wrytynge,
                  Ne varye not but in a lytell thynge.
                  Touchynge matter as in ſpecyall.
                  That is notable or hyſtoryall,
                  I do no force of incydentes ſmale,
                  Of whych in ſothe is but lytell tale.
                  ¶Saue this Dites maketh mencyon,
                  Of the nombre ſlayne tofore the towne,
                  Laſtynge the ſyege afferminge out of dreade,
                  Eyghte hundred thouſande & ſix weren deade
                  On Grekes ſyde vp ryght in the fyelde.
                  And as Dares alſo there behelde,
                  On Troye partye in the werre kene.
                  Six hundred thouſande ſeuentye and ſyxtene,
                  Were ſlayne there in Guydo ye maye ſe,
                  With theym that came in helpe to the Citye,
                  Fro many coſte and many regyowne,
                  In diffence and reſcues of the towne.
                  ¶And full ten yere ſo as I can caſte,
                  And ſixe monthes the mighty ſyege did laſte.
                  Or it was gette Dares wryte him ſelfe.
                  And ouermore complete dayes twelue.
                  Or Grekes had full poſſeſſyon,
                  By falſe engyne of the Greke Synon,
                  Lyke as tofore reherſed was but late.
                  I haue no more of latyn to tranſlate.
                  After Dytes, Dares, nor Guydo.
                  And me to adde any more therto,
                  Than myn Auctours ſpecyfye and ſayne,
                  The occupacyon ſothly were in vayne,
                  And lyke a maner of preſumpcyon,
                  The tyme complete of this tranſlatyon,
                  By iuſte reckenynge and accountes clere,
                  Was a thouſande and foure hundred yeare
                  And twentye nere I knowe it out of dread,
                  After that chriſte receyued our manhead.
                  Of her that was empereſſe and quene,
                  Of heauen and hell and a mayde cleane.
                  The eyghte yeare by iuſte computacyon,
                  Sewynge next the coronacyon,
                  Of him that is moſt gracyous in workynge:
                  Henry the fyfthe the noble worthy kinge,
                  And protectour of brutes albyon.
                  And called is through his high renowne,
                  Through his proweſſe and his chyualrye,
                  Alſo ferre as paſſeth anye cloude or ſkye.
                  Of Normandye the mighty conquerour,
                  
                     For through his knighthod & his high labour
                  Maugre all tho that liſt him to withſayne,
                  He conquered hath his herytage agayne.
                  And by his myghty prudent gouernaunce,
                  Recured eke hys tytle vnto Fraunce.
                  ¶That who ſo lyſt loke and doe vnfolde,
                  The pee de Grewe of theſe cronicles olde,
                  And ſercheth bokes ywryt longe toforne,
                  He ſhall fynde that he is iuſtly borne,
                  To reygne in Fraunce by lineall dyſcente.
                  ¶And onwarde nowe he is ordeined regent,
                  Of thylke lande durynge his fathers lyfe,
                  Of his goodneſſe to voyden werre & ſtryfe.
                  He to reioyſe without more delay,
                  Septre and crowne after the kinges day.
                  As it is clerely in concluſion,
                  Enrolled vp in the conuencyon,
                  ¶And than I hope the tyme fortunat,
                  ¶Of the olde world called Aureat,
                  Reſorte ſhall by influence of grace,
                  That cruell Mars ſhall no more manace,
                  With his lokes furious and wodde,
                  By falſe aſpectes for to ſhede bloude,
                  Atwene the folkes of theſe realmes twayne.
                  Which euery wyght iuſtly ought complayne.
                  ¶But as I truſte in myne opynion,
                  Thys worthy kynge of wyſdome & reaſon,
                  And of knighthode ſhall ſo doe hys payne,
                  To make one that longe hathe betwayne.
                  I meane as thus that England and Fraūce,
                  May be all one withouten varyaunce.
                  Out of hertes olde rancour to enchace,
                  By influence of his mighty grace,
                  That called is of clerkes douteles,
                  The ſoueraygne lord and the prince of peace.
                  So that I hope his grace now ſhall reygne,
                  So ſet a peace atwene theſe realmes twayne
                  For in hys power ſothly ſtandeth all,
                  ¶And allyaunce of the blode royall,
                  That is knet vp by bonde of mariage,
                  Of werre ſhall voyde away the rage.
                  To make peace with bryght bemes ſhyne.
                  ¶And one that is called Katheryne.
                  And named is right good and fayre alſo,
                  Shalbe a mene atwyxt bothe two.
                  Of grace emprynted in her womanhede,
                  That to complayne we ſhal haue no nede.
                  ¶And as I hope her gracyous aryuayle,
                  Into thys lande ſhall ſo much auayle,
                  That ioye honour and proſperytye.
                  Without trouble of all aduerſytye,
                  Repeyre ſhall and all hertye pleaſaunce,
                  Plentye, welfare, and fulſome habundaunce,
                  Peace and quyet both to nigh and ferre,
                  Without ſtrife debate or any werre.
                  Myſchiefe, pouerte, nede▪ nor indigence,
                  With full ceaſſinge of death and peſtylence.
                  Sothly I hope all this ye ſhall ſene,
                  Come into lande with that noble quene.
                  That we ſhall ſaye of herte and feyne nought
                  Bleſſed be ſhe that all this hath vs broughte.
                  And he yt hath through might of his working,
                  Of his knighthod concluded all this thyng,
                  And ſuch meruayles ī armꝭ done & wrought,
                  And his purpoſe fully about brought,
                  Of high wiſedome ſet in his inwarde ſyght,
                  Inioyinge all that longeth to his ryght,
                  And higheſt ſyt of worthyneſſe in glorye,
                  With the Sceptre of conqueſt and victorye.
                  I praye god onely for bis beſte,
                  ¶When he hath al ſette in peace and reſte.
                  And is full put in clere poſſeſſyon,
                  Of all that longeth to his ſubiection.
                  To ſende him home with triumphe & honour,
                  As great as euer had any conquerour.
                  After longe in ioye and in quiete,
                  To rule and reygne in his royall ſete,
                  Thus ſhall I aye there is no more to ſaye,
                  Daye and night for his exployte praye.
                  Of faythfull herte and of hole entente.
                  That whilom gaue me in commaundemente
                  Not yore ago in his fathers tyme,
                  The ſyege of Troye on my maner to rime,
                  Moſt for his ſake to ſpeake in ſpecyall,
                  Although that I be boyſtous and rurall,
                  He gaue me charge this ſtorye to tranſlate,
                  Rude of connynge called Iohn Lydgate,
                  Monke of Burye by profeſſion,
                  Vſynge an habite of perfection.
                  Albe my lyfe accordeth not therto.
                  I feyne not I wot well it is ſo.
                  It nedeth not witneſſe for to call,
                  Recorde I take of my brethren all,
                  That will not fayle at ſo great a nede.
                  ¶And all that ſhall this noble ſtorye reade,
                  I beſeche of ſupporte and of grace,
                  Where I offende in any maner place,
                  Or wher ſoeuer that they find ſhal an errour
                  
                     Of gentylneſſe to ſhewen their fauour,
                  And benyngly for to do their payne,
                  Hyt to correcte rather then dyſdayne.
                  For wel wot I yt muche thyng ther is wronge
                  Falſely metryd both of ſhorte and longe.
                  And if they ſhoulde haue of all diſdayne,
                  It is no dreade my labour were in vayne.
                  Let ignoraunce and rudeneſſe me excuſe,
                  For if that ye platly all refuſe,
                  For certayne fautes whiche ye there ſhal finde
                  I doute not my thancke is ſette behynde,
                  For in the verſe though there be ignoraunce,
                  Yet in the ſtory ye fynde may pleaſaunce,
                  Touching ſubſtaunce of yt mine auctour writ.
                  And though ſo be that any worde miſſe ſyt,
                  Amendeth it with chere debonayre.
                  For an errour to hyndre and appayre,
                  That is not ſayde of purpoſe or malyce,
                  It is no worſhyp to hym that is wyſe.
                  And no wight gladly demeth ſo ſoone a lacke,
                  Specyally behynde at the backe,
                  As he in ſoth that can no ſkylle at all.
                  He goeth full hoole that neuer had a fall.
                  And I not fynde of newe nor of olde,
                  For to deme that is alway ſo bolde,
                  As he that is yblent with vnconnynge,
                  For blynde bayarde caſte peryll of nothynge,
                  Tyll that he ſtumblyng fall amydde the lake.
                  And none ſo redye for to vndertake,
                  Than he in ſothe nor bolder to ſaye werſe,
                  That can no ſkylle on proſe nor yet on verſe.
                  And of all ſuche that lyſten not be ſtyll,
                  I lyttell forſe where they ſaye good or yll.
                  For vnto them my booke is not directe,
                  But to all ſuche as lyſte haue in effecte,
                  On ſymple folke full compaſſyon.
                  That goodly can by their correction,
                  Amende a thynge and hyndre neuer adele,
                  Of cuſtome aye ready to ſaye wele.
               
               
                  FOr he that was groūde of well ſayinge,
                  In all his lyfe hyndred no makyng,
                  My maiſter Chaucer yt founde ful many ſpot
                  Hym liſt not pynche nor grutche at euery blot
                  Nor meue hym ſelfe to perturbe his reſte,
                  I haue herde tolde but ſayde alway the beſte.
                  Sufferynge goodly of his gentilneſſe,
                  Full many thynge embraced with rudeneſſe.
                  And if I ſhall ſhortly hym diſcriue.
                  Was neuer none to thys daye alyue,
                  To reken all bothe of yonge and olde,
                  That worthy was his ynkehorne for to holde
                  And in thys lande yf there any be,
                  In borough or towne vyllage or Cite,
                  That connyng hath his tracys for to ſewe,
                  Where he go brode or he be ſhet in mewe,
                  To hym I make a full dyreccyon,
                  Of thys boke to haue inſpeccion.
                  Beſechinge theim with theyr prudent loke,
                  To race and ſcrape through out al my boke.
                  Voyde and adde where theim ſeineth nede.
                  And though ſo be that they not ne reade,
                  In all this boke no Rethorikes newe,
                  Yet this I hope that they ſhall finde al trewe,
                  The ſtorye playne chiefly in ſubſtaunce.
                  And who ſo lyſt to ſe the varyaunce,
                  Of worldly thinge wrought by dayes olde,
                  In this boke he maye full well beholde,
                  Chaunge of fortune in her courſe mutable.
                  Selde or not faythfull other ſtable.
                  Lordes, Princes from her royalte,
                  Sodaynly brought in aduerſyte.
                  And kinges eke plounged in pouerte,
                  And for theyr dread daringe in deſerte.
                  Vnware ſlaughter compaſſed of enuye,
                  Murdre conſpyred by conſpyracye,
                  Awayte layinge falſhede and treaſon,
                  And of kingedome ſodayne reuerſyon.
                  Rauyſhinge of women for delyte
                  Roote of the werre and mortall deſpyte.
                  Falſe mayntenaunce of auoutrye,
                  Many worthy cauſynge for to dye.
                  Sinne aye concludinge who ſo taketh hede,
                  Vengeaunce vnware for his finall mede.
               
               
                  TO declare that in all worldly luſte,
                  Who loke aryght is but litell truſte,
                  As in this boke example ye maye finde.
                  If that you liſt enprinte it in your minde,
                  How all paſſeth and halt there no ſoioure,
                  Waſtinge awaye as doth a ſomer floure,
                  Riche and pore of euery maner age.
                  For here our life is but a pilgramage,
                  Meynt with laboure and with muche wo,
                  That if men would taken hede therto,
                  And eke tofore prudently aduerte.
                  Litell ioye he ſhould haue in his herte,
                  To ſette theyr truſte in any worldly thinge.
                  
                     For there is nother prince lorde nor kynge.
                  ¶By example of Troye as ye may ſee,
                  That in this lyfe maye haue full ſurete.
                  ¶Therfore to him that ſtarfe vpō the roode,
                  Suffrynge deth for our alder good.
                  Lyfte vp your hartꝭ & thinke on him amonge
                  For be ye neuer ſo myghty not ſo gronge,
                  Without hym al that may not auaile.
                  For he can gyue victorye in battayle,
                  And holde a fyelde ſhortly to conclude,
                  With a fewe agayne great multytude.
                  And by his grace he maketh prynces ſtronge,
                  And worthy kynges for to reygne longe.
                  And theſe Tyrantes ſodeynely oppreſſe,
                  Throwe thē downe for al their great richeſſe,
                  And in his hande power he reſerueth,
                  Eche to acquyte lyke as he deſerueth.
                  To whom I praye with all deuocyon,
                  With all myne herte and hole affection,
                  That he lyſte graunt longe contynuaunce,
                  Proſperytye and good perſeueraunce,
                  Helthe welfare victorye and honour,
                  Vnto that noble myghty conquerour.
                  ¶Henry the fyfthe tofore eſpecyfyed,
                  So that his name maye be magnefyed,
                  Here in this lyfe vp to the ſterres clere.
                  And afterwarde aboue the nynth ſphere,
                  Whan he is dead for to haue a place.
                  This praye I god for to ſende him grace,
                  At whoſe byddynge as I tolde late.
                  Fyrſte I began the ſyege to tranſlate,
                  ¶And now I haue holy in his honoure,
                  Full executed the fyne of my laboure,
                  Vnto all that ſhall this ſtorye ſe,
                  With humble herte and all humilyte.
                  This lyttell booke lowely I betake,
                  It to ſupporte and thus an ende I make.
               
               
                  ¶Of the moſt noble excellent Prynce kynge Henry the fyfthe.
                  
                     
                        MOſt worthy Prynce of knighthode ſoures and welle,
                     Whoſe highe renowne through the worlde doth ſhyne,
                     And that all other in manhode doeſt excelle,
                     Egall of meryt to the worthyes nyne,
                     And borne alſo by ryght diſcent of lyne,
                     As veray heyre by tytle to attayne,
                     To beare ye crowne of worthy realmes twain
                  
                  
                     ¶And alſo fer as Phebus in his ſphere,
                     Fro Eaſt to Weſt throweth out his beames bright,
                     And as Lucyna wt a ſhrouded chere▪
                     
                     Goeth compaſſe rounde with her pale light,
                     Thou art yreckened for the beſt knight,
                     To be regiſtred worthy as of name,
                     In higheſt place ſet of the houſe of fame.
                  
                  
                     ¶To holde a palme of knighthod in thy hād,
                     For worthineſſe and for hygh victorye,
                     As thou that arte drade on ſea and lande,
                     And euermore wt lande honour and glorye,
                     For iuſt conqueſt to be put in memorye,
                     With a crowne made of laurer grene,
                     Vpon thy head tofore that famous quene.
                  
                  
                     ¶Whilom ordeyned onely for conquerours,
                     Stable of herte with longe contynuaunce
                     And gaue not vp till they were victoures
                     Empriſes take for no ſodayne chaunce,
                     Whoſe name ay floureth wt newe remēbraūce
                     And fadeth not of yeares yore agone,
                     Amonges which thou mayſt be ſet for one.
                  
                  
                     ¶For through the world in many regyon,
                     Reported is with fame that flyeth wyde,
                     That naturally thy condicion,
                     On thinge begonne is knightly to abyde,
                     And for the tyme manly ſet aſyde,
                     Reſt and eaſe with coſte theron be ſpente,
                     Til thou haue wonne the fine of thin entente.
                  
                  
                     ¶Moſt circumſpect and paſſinge auiſee,
                     And al thy workes conueyed wt high prudēce,
                     Sad and demure like to Ioſuee,
                     Agayne whoſe ſwerde there gayneth no reſyſtēce,
                     And haſt alſo of heauenly influence,
                     With Salamon wiſely to diſcerne,
                     Onely by grace thy people to gouerne.
                  
                  
                     ¶Mercy eke ment with thy magnificence,
                     On all oppreſſed for to haue pyte,
                     And of rebelles by manly violence,
                     Abate thou canſt the great cruelte,
                     And ſo with Dauid haſt kingly pyte.
                     And highe proweſſe with Seſar Iulyus,
                     
                        That in his tyme was moſt victorious.
                  
                  
                     ¶And manly holdeſt in thy handes two,
                     Who can beholde by clere inſpection,
                     The ſword of knighthod, thy Sceptre alſo,
                     The tone to bringe to ſubiectyon,
                     Hertes made proude by falſe rebellyon,
                     And with the ſceptre to rule at the beſt,
                     Thy trewe people that can liue in reſt.
                  
                  
                     ¶Now yu yt haſt vertue, manhode, and grace
                     Attemperaunce fredome and bounte,
                     Lowly I praye to the with dreadfull face,
                     Diſdayne the not benignely for to ſe,
                     Vpon this boke rudely made by me,
                     To fyne onely to argue thine highneſſe,
                     And rewe of mercy vpon my ſimpleſſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶And in thy noble kingly aduertenee,
                     Conſydre the my ſoueraygne lord moſt deare
                     Of thine innate famous ſapyence,
                     That chriſt Ieſu receyued with good cheare,
                     The two minutes yeue of herte entere,
                     By the widowe which of wil and thought,
                     Gaue all her good and kepte her ſelfe ryghte nought.
                  
                  
                     By which example ſo that it not offende,
                     Thrugh mine vnconning to thy high nobleſſe
                     Let your good will my litell gifte amende,
                     And of thy mercy and renowmed goodneſſe,
                     Take no diſdayne of my bareyne rudeneſſe,
                     And in making al though I haue no muſe,
                     Let trewe meninge the ſurplus all excuſe.
                  
                  
                     More then good herte hath no maner wight,
                     For to preſent eyther to god or man,
                     And for my parte to the as it is ryght,
                     That gyue I hoole as fer forth as I can,
                     Aye to perſeuer fro tyme that I began,
                     With will and thought for thine eſtate to pray
                     Which to conſerue thus finally I ſaye,
                  
                  
                     ¶Fyrſte of almighty god ye wrathe to queme,
                     With all that maye be to his pleſaunce,
                     And to thy crowne and to thy diademe,
                     Grace and good eure with long continuaūce,
                     And of thy lyeges faythfull obeyſaunce,
                     And the vertue that man maye ſpecifye,
                     I praye god graunt vnto thy regallye.
                  
                  Explicit liber quintus et vltimus.
               
               
                  Lenuoye.
                  
                     GO litell boke & put the in the grace,
                  Of him that is ye moſt of excellence,
                  And be not hardye aye where to ſhewe thy face,
                  Without ſupporte of his magnificence,
                  And who ſo euer in the ſhall finde offence,
                  Be not to bolde for no preſumpcion,
                  Thy ſelfe tenarme aye in pacience,
                  And the ſubmitte to theyr correction.
               
               
                  Verba tranſlatoris ad librum ſuum.
                  ANd for ye arte enlimmed wt no floures,
                  Of Rethorike but all wt white & blacke,
                  Therfore thou muſt nedely abide the ſhoures
                  Of them that liſt to ſet on the alacke,
                  And when thou arte moſt likly go to wracke,
                  Agaynſt them thine errour not diffende,
                  But humbly tho withdrawe the & go abacke.
                  Requiring them that they thy amiſſe amende.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Here begynneth the table.
            
               
                  HOwe the kinge of Theſalye named Pelleus loſte all his men by dyuyne puniſhement who after by his praiers obteyned others. Ca. i.
               
               ¶Howe Eſon the kinge for that he was olde and myghte no longer welde the gouernayle cauſed to crowne his brother Pelleus. Ca. ii.
               
               ¶Howe Pelleus fearynge to be depoſed by his brothers ſonne Iaſon, a worthy and valiaunt yonge knight, counſayled him to vndertake the peryllous and almoſt inuincible conqueſt of the golden fleſe at Colchos, who by his perſwaſion vndertoke the ſame Ca. iii.
               
               ¶ Howe Iaſon in his expedicion towardes Colchos, caſually with his felowſhippe, arryued in the territoryes of Troye, meaninge onelye there for a whyle to refreſhe and reſte theym. Ca. iiii.
               
               ¶How Lamedon kyng of Troye ſent to Iaſon commaundinge him and his felowſhyppe forthwyth to departe the confynes of his coū
                  treyth and of theyr aunſwere ſente ayen to the kynge· Ca. v.
               
               ¶How Iaſon through the only helpe of Medea Oetes doughter, the kynge of Colchos enamored of him he achieued the conqueſt of the golden fleſe. Ca. vi.
               
               ¶How Iaſon after this conqueſt wyth Medea and his felowſhyppe retourned agayne into Theſalye. Ca. vii.
               
               ¶Howe Iaſon, Hercules, and all the prynces of Grece, aſſembled to aduenge the vncurteſye done to theim by Lamendon in this expedycyon towardes Colchos. Ca. viii.
               
               ¶Of the battayle betwixt the Grecians and the Troyans wherin the Troians were dyſcomfyted, theyr kinge ſlayne, and after theyr Citye taken, raſed, and deſtroyed. Ca. ix.
               
               ¶The Tranſlatour complaineth the miſfortune of the Troyans, in the loſſe of theyr Cite lyuely deſcribinge the tykle eſtate of Fortunes gouernance, beginning in the ſame chappiter his ſecounde boke, perſewynge the matter of the ſayd hiſtorye. Ca. x.
               
               ¶Howe Pryam ſonne to Lamedon and ſuccedinge his father, buylded the Citye agayne. Ca. xi.
               
               ¶How king Priā ſend Anthenor into Grece to haue reſtored ayen his ſiſter Exion. Ca. xii.
               
               ¶How Priam the kinge ſent Parys Deiphobus and others the worthyes of Troye into Grece, to aduenge the rauiſhinge of his ſiſter Exion, & how they before theyr retourne rauyſhed the faire Heleine wife to Menelaus and brought her to Troye. Ca. xiii.
               
               ¶Howe Parys was receyued in Troye at his retourne, and of his mariage to Helcyne. Capitulo. xiiii.
               
               ¶Howe the Grekes aſſembled to be aduenged of the Troyans for the rauyſhynge of Heleyne. Ca. xv.
               
               ¶The deſcripcion of Pryam, his ſonnes and doughters & of the aryual of ye Grekes tofore the temple of Diane the goddeſſe. Ca. xvi.
               
               ¶How Achilles and Patroclus were ſent to Delos to receyue anſwere of god Apollo how they ſhuld ſpede ayenſt the Troyans. Ca. xvii
               
               ¶Howe the Grekes nauye retourning from Athenes were diſtreſſed by tempeſt, and howe they toke a caſtell of the Troyans called Saranaba. Ca. xviii.
               
               ¶Howe Agamenon aſſembled counſayle of the nobles of Grece, and determined, and ſent Vlixes and Diomede in embaſſade to kynge Priam. Ca. xix.
               
               ¶Howe Agamenon ſent Achilles and Thelephus into the Ilande of Meſſa for vytayles, and how they ſlewe the kyng and after ordeyned Thelephus the kinge there. Ca. xx.
               
               ¶Howe the Grekes landed tofore Troye where they were ſtoutly fought with all. Capitulo. xxi.
               
               ¶Of the fyrſt battayl wherin Hector ſhewed him ſelfe in valyauncye tofore all other. Capitulo. xxii.
               
               ¶How the Grekes thrugh theyr ſuite obteyned of kinge Priam a trewſe for eyght wekes and of theyr battayles after the trewſe ended. Capitulo. xxiii.
               
               ¶How the Troyans toke kinge Thoas priſoner and led him captiue to Troye. Ca. xxiiii.
               
               ¶How duringe a trewſe of .iii. monthes Hector walked into the Grekes hooſt, and of the talke had betwixt Achilles & him. Ca. xxv.
               
               ¶Of theyr battayles after that trewſe, the deſcripſyon of the Palleys of ylyon, of a great

peſtylence in the Grekes hooſte, whereby they were enforced to ſeke for trewſe, whych vpon theyr ſuyte they obtayned for thirtye dayes. Capitulo. xxvi.
               
               ¶Howe Andromecha was by a dreame forwarned of the deathe of her huſbande Hector, if he the day folowyng entred the fyelde, wherof ſhe admonyſhed him, and he therto hauing no reſpect was the next day ſlayn of Achilles. Capitulo. xxvii.
               
               ¶The complaynte of Lydgate for the death of Hector. Ca. xxviii.
               
               ¶How the grekes depoſinge Agamenon ordayned Pallamydes the generall of theyr armye. Capitulo. xxix.
               
               ¶How kynge Priam in p
                     •
                  rſonne iſſued into battayle, for thaduenge of Hectors deathe, where he dyd ryght valyauntly. Ca. xxx.
               
               ¶Howe Achylles ſlewe the worthy Troylus vnknightly, & after trayled his body throughe the fyelde tyed to his horſe. Ca. xxxi.
               
               ¶Howe Parys ſlewe Achilles and Archylogus Duke Neſtors ſonne, in the temple of Apollo. Ca. xxxii.
               
               ¶Howe Parys and Thelamon Ayax, ſlewe eche other in the fyelde. Ca. xxxiii.
               
               ¶How Pantaſylla quene of Amazonis comminge in ayde of the Troyans, was ſlayne by Pirrhus Achilles ſonne. Ca. xxxiiii.
               
               ¶Howe the Grekes made an horſe of braſſe, wherin was men of armes, and vnder colour of peace brought it into Troye, by the whyche it was vtterly deſtroyed for euer. Ca. xxxv.
               
               How the Grekes retourned into Grece after the diſtruction, and howe they were peryſhed almoſt all in the ſea, and after they that eſcaped dyed miſcheuouſly. Ca. xxxvi.
               
               ¶ How the tranſlatour wryteth the ſtocke of Pirrhus by lyne all diſcente, and howe his father hight Pelleus, and his graundemother called Thetydes. xxxviii.
               
            
            The ende of the table.
         
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London, in Fleteſtrete at the ſygne of the Princes armes, by Thomas Marſhe.
            Anno. do. M.D.L.V.
         
      
   