
      
         
            
            
            A RIGHT FRVITfull admonition, concerning the order of a good Chriſtian mans life, very profitable for all maner of Eſtates, and other to beholde and looke vppon. Made by the famous Doctour Colete, ſometime deane of Paules.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London for Gabriell Cawood. 1577.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A fruitful monition, concerning the order of a good Chriſtian mans life, very profitable for all maner of Eſtates, and other to beholde and looke vppon.
            
               REmember firſt of all (vertuous reder) that it is highe wiſedome and great perfection, thy ſelfe to know, and then thy ſelfe to deſpyſe. Thou muſt knowe that thou haſte no thing that good is of thy ſelfe, but of god: For the gifts of nature, and al other temporal giftes of this world, which ben lawfully and truely obteined, wel conſidered, ben come to thee by the infinite goodnes and grace of God, & not of thy ſelfe. But in eſpecial it is neceſſary

for thee to knowe that God of his great grace hath made thee his Image, hauing regarde to thy memory, vnderſtanding, and free wil, and that God is thy maker, & thou his wretched creature, & that thou art redeemed of God by the paſſion of Chriſt Ieſu, and that God is thy helper, thy refuge, and thy deliuerer from all euyl, and to conſider and knowe the goodly order which god of his infinite wiſedome hath ordeyned thee to be ordered by. As to haue theſe temporal goodes for the neceſſitie of thy body: the body and ſenſual appetites to be ordered by thy ſoule: thy ſoule to be ordred by reaſon and grace: by reaſon and grace to knowe thy duetie to God and to thy neighbour, & by all common reaſon if thou kepe this conuenient order to god & his creatures, they ſhal kepe their order to thee:

But if thou breake thine order to them, of likelyhood they ſhal breake their order to thee. For how ſhould thy wife, children, ſeruauntes, and other creatures, with the whiche thou haſt dooings, doo their dutie, and kepe their order to thee, if thou doeſt not ſo to God and to them? And alſo thinke thou of a ſuretie, that if thy ſenſuall appetite be not ordred by reaſon & grace, thou art worſe ordred than a beaſt: for then thou liueſt out of order, and ſo doth not a beaſt, which is a great ſhame and rebuke to thee a reaſonable creature, and without the great mercy of god, it ſhalbe to thine eternal damnation. And therfore think and thanke God, and vtterly deſpiſe thy ſelfe, and thinke thy ſelfe a great wretch, in that god hath done ſo muche for thee, and thou haſt ſo oft offended his highneſſe, and alſo

done him ſo little ſeruice. Surely it is alſo great wiſedome to thinke, that if it had pleaſed god for to haue giuen to all other men (aſwel beggers as other) like grace as he hath giuen to thee, that they would haue ſerued his goodnes better than thy ſelfe haſt done: Wherfore thinke thy ſelfe a wretch of al wretches, except the mercy of God: And therfore by his infinite mercy and grace, call vnto thy remembraunce the degree or dignitie whiche almightie God of his goodnes hath called thee vnto, and according therevnto yelde thy debt, and doo thy duetie.
            ¶ Firſt and principally, honour God as thy maker, loue him as thy redeemer, feare him as thy iudge. Secondarily, thy neighbour which is thy ſuperiour, obey: Haue concorde and peace with them which be euen with thee in degree: & haue

mercy and pitie on thine inferiours. Thirdly, prouide thee to haue a cleane hart, and a good cuſtodie of thy tong. Pray and take labour, by grace to haue wiſedome & cunning to do thy duety to God and to thy neighbour. And in all thy words & dedes haue euer in minde, that god and his angels heareth and ſeeth euery thing, and that nothing is ſo priuily done, but it ſhal be made open. And in eſpecial haue in minde that thou ſhalt dye ſhortly, & howe Chriſt died for thee, the ſubtiltie and falſenes of this temporal world, the ioyes of heauen, and the paynes of hell. And euery morning, among other thy meditations and prayers, pray vnto thy Lorde God, that the day folowing, thou (according to the degree which he of his infinite goodnes and mercy hath called thee vnto) mayſt vſe this temporall

wretched world in thy thoughtes, words, and deedes, that by them and the merite of Chriſtes paſſion, thou mayſt eſchewe the paynes of hel, and come to the ioy euerlaſting. And in executing thereof kepe truth in wordes and deedes. Defende no man, nor no matter, agaynſt the trueth. In all thinges thinke and truſt in God, and he ſhal direct thy wayes. Truſt not to thine owne witte, but feare God, and he wyl keepe thee from euyl. If thou truſt more in thine owne witte than in the grace of God, thy policie ſhall be ſoone ſubuerted. Be content to heare good counſayle, though it be contrary to thy will: For he is a very foole that will heare nothing gladly, but that is according to his mind. Do thou no man harme, leaſt thou ſuffereſt the ſame. As thou wouldeſt be done vnto, ſo do

thou vnto other. Be ſuche to other, as thou deſireſt they ſhoulde be to thee. If thou be religious, remember that the due execution of true religion is not in wearing of the habite, but with a cleane mynde in very deede to execute the rules and ordinances of religion: For ſo it is, that to weare the habite and not to execute the rule and order of religion, is rather to be deemed hypocriſie, or apoſtataſie, than otherwiſe. If thou be lay and vnmaried, keepe thee cleane vnto the time thou be maried. And remember the ſore and terrible puniſhmente of Noes ſtood, and of the terrible fyre and brimſtone and ſore puniſhment of Sodome and Gomor, done to man for miſuſing of the fleſhe. And in eſpecial call to remembrance the marueylous and horrible puniſhement of yt abhominable great pocks

daylye appearing to our ſightes, growing in and vpon mans fleſhe, the which ſore puniſhment (euery thing wel remembred) can not be thought, but principally for the inordinate miſuſe of the fleſhe. And if thou intende to mary, or be maried, and haſt a good wife, thanke our Lord therefore, for ſhe is of his ſending. And remember that three thinges in eſpeciall bene pleaſaunt to the ſpirite of God, that is to ſay, concord betwene brethren, loue and charitie betwene neighbours, and a man and his wyfe wel agreeing. And if thou haue an euyl wife, take pacience, and thanke God, for all is for the beſt, well taken: Howbeit thou art bounde to doo and pray for her amendement, leaſt ſhe go to the Deuyl, from whom ſhe came. And haue in remembraunce, that the intent of mariage is not in the

beaſtly appetite or pleaſure in the thing, but the intent thereof is, to eſchewe the ſinne of the fleſhe, or els to haue children. And if thou haue children, as muche as thou mayeſt bring them vp in vertue, to be the ſeruauntes of God: for it is better for thee and them not to be borne, than to be otherwiſe. In thine aucthoritie, buſie thee rather to be beloued of thine inferiours, than to be dreaded. Let thy ſubiectes and ſeruauntes rather ſerue and obey thee for loue, than for dread or neede: With ſuche a ſoueraigne goodnes gouerne thy ſubiectes, that they may be glad to ſerue thee both in puniſhing and in cheryſhing. Keepe a manerly meane. Be not to ſtraite. Forgiue not to ſoone. Keepe a conuenient meaſure in all thy works. Go not to meate as a beaſt, but as a reaſonable man, ſay thy

grace, and then remember that mo be ſicke and dye by ſuperfluities of meates, then otherwiſe. Wherefore eate with meaſure, to liue in health▪ At thy meate haue none other but honeſt communication, and ſuche as is according to thy cunning. Backbyte no man. Be mery in honeſtie: For ſorowe and care hath killed many, and no profite therin. In no wiſe ſweare, without compulſion of the lawe: For where as is great ſwearing, from thence is neuer the plague of God. In no wiſe braule, ne chyde without an vrgent cauſe: For Salomon ſayth, better is a little with ioye, than a houſe ful of vitayle with brawling. Alſo he ſayth, An euyl perſon is euer chyding, and therefore the Angell of God ſhall be ſent agaynſt him. Be content at thy dynner, and alſo at other times, to geue part of

that which God hath ſent thee: For he that wyl not heare the cry of a poore man, he ſhal cry to God, and not be heard. After thy meat thank God of that he hath ſent thee, or els thou doſt not as a reaſonable man, but like a beaſt, which in eating remembreth nothing but his meate. With good prouidence and diſcretion ſee the time wher, when, how, why, or wherefore thou ſpeakeſt, doeſt, or byddeſt any thing to be done. When thou demeſt or iudgeſt any, be he poore or riche, behold and conſider the cauſe, and not the perſon. Be as meke in other mens cauſes and offences, as in thine owne. Sit neuer in dome and iudgement without pitie or mercy. For while thou haſt pitie, and art mercyfull to other mens offences, thou haſt mercye on thy ſelfe: For in what meaſure thou meaſureſt, it ſhal be meaſured

to thee. Yet thou muſte execute iudgment, but it muſt be with pitie or mercy: For (of a ſuretie) to do mercy and iuſtice, is more pleaſaunt to God, than to pray or to doo ſacrifice vnto him. Deeme no man by light ſuſpections. Firſt proue, and then deeme. In doubtes, reſerue the ſentence to Gods might. That thou knoweſt not, commit it to God. Haue little or none affection and loue to theſe earthly and temporall thinges: For bleſſed is the riche man that truſteth not in his money and treaſure. Remember, as a man loueth, ſo he is: For the louer is in the thing loued more properly, than in him ſelfe. Wherefore, if a man loue earthly things, he may be called, An earthly man. And if he loue principally heauenly thinges or God, he may be called, An heauenly or a godly man. And

therefore loue God and heauenly thinges, for vndoubtedly that is beſt and moſt aſſured loue, for they be, and euer ſhal be permanent, and all earthly thinges be ſoone vaniſhed and ended, and ſo the loue of them is in vayne. Alſo it is wiſedome to feare God: For as he ſayeth him ſelfe, Feare not him that may kill the body, and can not hurt the ſoule: but feare him that can kill the body and alſo the ſoule, and commit them to euerlaſting payne, Wherefore, euery euening ere thou go to bed, cal to remembraunce (as much as thou canſt) thy thoughts, words, and deedes, ſayd and done that day. And if any haue bene to thine owne profite and to the pleaſure of God, hartily thanke him, for by his grace it was done. And if any haue bene contrary to hys pleaſure, aſke hartily mercy, and

               reconcile thy ſelfe ſhortly by repentaunce, to eſchewe the euerlaſting and terrible paynes of hel, For (as Saint Auſtine ſayth) there is not a greater madnes, than for a little temporal delectation (which is ſone done) to leſe the eternall ioye, and to be bounde to euerlaſting paine: from the which the almightie Father of heauē by his infinite power and mercy, and bytter paſſion and infinite wiſedome of Ieſu Chriſte, and by the infinite goodnes and charitie of the holy Ghoſt, keepe vs. Amen. Deo gratias.
            
               
                  Vſe well temporal thinges.
                  Deſire eternal thinges.
               
            
         
      
   