
      
         
            
            
            THE HISTORIE OF PHILIP DE Commines Knight, Lord of Argenton.
            
               Jmprinted at London by Ar. Hatfield, for I. Norton. 1596
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE LORD Burghley, Lord Treaſurer of England, Knight of the honorable order of the garter, and Maſter of hir Maieſties Court of Wardes and Liueries.
            
            
               IT is now, R. Honorable, thirty yeeres ſince I preſented to your L. and the late Earle of Leiceſter my Lord and Maſter, the hiſtorie of COMMINES rudely tranſlated into our vulgar toong, the which of later times at the requeſt of the late Lord Chauncellor ſir Chriſtopher Hatton, I peruſed anew, and enlarged with ſuch notes & pedegrees as ſeemed neceſſarie, as well for explanation as (in ſome few places) for correction of the hiſtorie. Since his death, certaine gentlemen to whoſe hands the booke happened to come, tooke ſo great pleaſure and delight therein, that they determined to put it to the preſſe, ſuppoſing it a great diſhonor to our nation, that ſo woorthy an hiſtorie being extant in all languages almoſt in Chriſtendome, ſhould be ſuppreſſed in ours. Notwithſtanding their reſolution, they forbare of curteſie to put in execution till their purpoſe ſhould be made knowen to me. And albeit that I alleaged many reaſons why in my conceit bookes of this nature, treating of Princes ſecrets were vnfit to be publiſhed to the vulgare ſort, the rather bicauſe the Author in ſome places ſeemeth to be of that opinion himſelfe: yet none of my reaſons could preuaile, but they continued in their former determination: adding thereunto, that others beſides my ſelfe had taken paines in this hiſtorie, and though I of peeuiſhnes would ſuppreſſe my labors, yet they would not ſuppreſſe theirs. So that would I nould I to the preſſe the booke muſt go, being already warranted by publike authoritie thereunto. I ſeeing the matter aduaunced thus far, thought it no time to draw backe any longer, but in the end tooke the burthen vpon my ſelfe, doubting if I had done otherwiſe, both the blemiſhing of the hiſtorie, wherein I may boldly ſay, that I haue more trauelled than any man that hath entermedled therewith; and alſo that the worke ſhould

be preſented to ſome patrone that had no intereſt therein. Wherefore hauing againe examined it, and freed it from ſome faults that me thought fit to be reformed: I haue preſumed to publiſh it vnder the protection of your Lorſhips honorable name, to whom of right it appertaineth in many reſpects. Firſt, bicauſe the author thereof was a noble man, one of your owne cote, the wiſeſt, and the beſt acquainted with all matters of ſtate of any man in his time. Whereunto I adde, that he continued a Counſellor ſucceſſiuely to ſo many French Kings, that he was reputed one of the ancienteſt Counſellors in Chriſtendome at his death: wherein your Lordſhips fortune is not onely correſpondent, but hath alſo ſurmounted his. Secondarily, your Lordſhip hath the aiſne title to it, and laſtly the right of ſuruiuor caſteth it vpon you by courſe of common lawe. Wherefore all theſe circumſtances well conſidered (my particular duties alſo notforgotten) I thought it a kinde of ſacrilege to ſuffer your Lordſhip to be robbed of your right. May it therefore pleaſe you to receiue this hiſtoric into your honorable protection as your owne, as well in regard of the Author, being a man of ſuch condition as aboue is rehearſed; as alſo of the worke, treating of that ſubiect wherewith your Lordſhip at this day is better acquainted than any man liuing: and laſtly, in reſpect of your owne title thereunto. Which no whit doubting but that your Lordſhip will moſt willingly vouchſafe to do, beſeeching the Almightie long to preſerue you to the great ſtay of this flouriſhing eſtate, moſt humbly I take my leaue this firſt of Nouember 1596.
            
            
               Your L. moſt humble and obedient to commaund Thomas Danett.
            
         
         
            
            The life of Philip de Commines knight, Lord of Argenton, gathered out of diuers good authors, togither with a briefe anſwer on his behalfe to certaine accuſations, wherewith IACOBVS MEYERVS a Flemming in his Annales of Flaunders, chargeth verie vniustlie both Commines hiſtory and his life.
            
            
               PHILIP DE COMMINES author of this preſent hiſtory, was borne at Commines a towne in Flaunders, being a gentleman of a very ancient houſe, and ioined by blood and alliance to the beſt of that nation. His ſurname was Clytus, his father & vncle had been both of them vnder D. Philip of Burgundy chiefe gouernours, of Flaunders called by Meyer, Summi pretores Flandriae; and to them he giueth this title: Domini Ruſcurii, Buſcurii & VVatenenſes: whereby appeereth of how great Nobilitie and goodly reuenewes Commines was, not onely in Flaunders, but alſo in Haynault. In his youth, namely, from the nineteenth yeere of his age, and the yeere of our Lord 1464. till the 27. of his age, and the yeere 1472. he ſerued Charles Duke of Burgundie, and afterward Lewis the eleuenth of that name King of Fraunce, who emploied him in his weightieſt and ſecreteſt affaires. He was of tall ſtature, faire complexion, and goodly perſonage. The French toong he ſpake perfectly and eloquently, the Italian, Duche, and Spaniſh reaſonably well. He had read ouer verie diligently all hiſtories written in French, eſpecially of the Romaines, and bare them all in memorie. He much acquainted himſelfe with ſtrangers, thereby to increaſe his knowledge. He had great regard to the ſpending of his time, and abhorred all idlenes. He was of an excellent, yea an incredible memorie: for he often indited at one time to fower Secretaries, ſeuerall letters of waightie affaires appertaining to the ſtate, with as great facilitie and readines, as if he had had but one matter in hand. A vertue ſo rare that I haue not read the like of any but of Iulius Caeſar and him. Nothing more greeued him, than that in his youth he was not trained vp in the Latin toong, which his misfortune he often bewailed. After he was entered into the ſeruice of King Lewis, he was highly in his fauour, and during his raigne bare great ſway in the realme. The ſaid King alſo greatly aduanced him: for he made him firſt one of his priuy chamber, then of his priuy Counſell, Seneſchall of Poictu, and Lord of Argenton. He married being of good yeeres a gentlewoman of the houſe of Montſoreau vpon the borders of Aniou, named Helena. But after King Lewis his death, he fell into great troubles: for bicauſe he was a ſtranger, many enuied his proſperitie, ſo far foorth that at the length his enimies cauſed him to be impriſoned in the caſtle of Loches in the Duchie of Berry, (a place appointed onely for thoſe that are attached of high treaſon) where he was verie extremely handled, as himſelfe in his hiſtorie reporteth. Notwithſtanding his wife by earneſt and continuall ſute, in the end obtained ſo much fauour, that he was remooued thence and brought to Paris: where when he had remained a certaine ſpace, he was led to the parlament houſe to be arraigned. He had many enimies & thoſe mightie, and of ſo great authoritie at that time in Fraunce, that for feare of them no Counſellor durſt plead his cauſe: wherefore neceſſitie enforcing him to defend him

ſelfe, he pleaded there by the ſpace of two howers, being very attentiuely heard by the whole audience, and in the end ſo acquite himſelfe, that by the Iudges ſentence he was diſcharged. Among other things he rehearſed at the bar how ſundrie troubleſome and daungerous voiages he had ſuſtained for the King and the common wealth. How highly King Lewis both had fauoured him, and for his faithfull ſeruice rewarded him: for his owne part, he ſaid that he neuer had done any thing couetouſlie, ambitiouſlie, nor cruelly: and further, that if he had ſought onely to aduance and inrich himſelfe, he might haue had as goodly poſſeſſions as any man in France. He was priſoner in almoſt three yeeres. The next yeere after his deliuerie he had a daughter borne named Iane, which married with Rene Earle of Pantabria deſcended of the Dukes of Britaine, by whom among diuers other children ſhe had iſſue Iohn late Duke of Eſtampes, Lieutenant of Britain, Knight of the French Kings order, and Lord of diuers goodly Seniories. But to returne to Commines, in proſperity he gaue for his poſie this ſentence: He that will not labour let him not eate: but in aduerſitie this, I ſailed into the deepe of the ſea, and a ſudden tempest ouerwhelmed me. He died the threeſcore and fourth yeere of his age, the yeere of our Lord 1509. the 17. day of October, in his owne houſe of Argenton in the countrey of Poictu, from whence his body was conueighed to Paris, and there lieth buried in the Auguſtine Friers. I was heere purpoſed to haue ſtaied my pen, and further not to haue ſpoken either of Commines hiſtorie or his life, had I not called to minde diuers accuſations of Iacobus Meyerus, who in ſundrie places of his Annales of Flanders inueigheth verie bitterly as well againſt Commines life as his hiſtorie, whoſe accuſations I am forced to laie open to the iudgement of the world, to the end it may appeere whether they be grounded vpon iuſt proofe. Notwithſtanding before I enter into the examination of them, thus much in the commendation of Commines hiſtorie I cannot paſſe ouer in ſilence, that two of the greateſt and woorthieſt Princes that raigned in Europe theſe hundred yeeres; namely, the Emperour Charles the fift, and Francis the firſt King of Fraunce, made ſo great account of this hiſtorie, that the Emperor caried it continually about with him, as Alexander did the workes of Homer, no leſſe eſteeming it than he did them, and the King was as much diſpleaſed with the printing and publiſhing thereof, as was the ſame Alexander in times paſt for the ſetting foorth of Ariſtotles workes called Acroamatica, as rehearſeth Gellius: ſo deſirous was he to haue reſerued to himſelfe and a few of his owne ſubiects the great treaſures of wiſedome hidden in this ſmall volume. But let vs now heare what Meyer obiecteth againſt this hiſtorie. In the 17. booke of his Annales of Flaunders writing of the battell fought at Saintron betweene Charles Duke of Burgundie and the Liegeois, he hath theſe words, Pugna commiſſa caeduntur magno numero & profligantur, ad nouem millia cecidiſſe tradit qui interfuit Philippus Cominius. Sed Brabantiae ſcriptor & quidam ſcriptor Flandriae (quibus plus habeo fidei) tria tantum millia occubuiſſe memorant. For anſwere heereunto, if this place be indifferently weighed it ſhall appeere to be wholie grounded vpon malice and no colour of reaſon, much leſſe iuſt proofe: Firſt, bicauſe Meyer preferreth the credit of theſe obſcure Annaliſtes that write but vpon report, before the credit of him that was an eie witneſſe, and that no way could aduantage himſelfe by reporting a lye. Secondarily, ſir Oliuer de la Marche, who liued alſo in that time and was Steward of the Duke of Burgundies houſe, writeth that a great number of theſe Liegeois were ſlaine at this battell, and alſo at the ſiege of Saintron, but that their friends and kinsfolkes truſſed vp their dead bodies in veſſels full of lime; partly to the end the diſcomfiture might appeere the leſſe, and partlie that they might be buried among their aunceſtors, in the which feate (ſaith he) the Liegeois ſhewed a woonderfull audacitie and courage: whereby it ſhoulde

ſeeme a great number to haue been thus truſſed vp, by meanes whereof the dead appeered the fewer, and were reported accordingly, which deceiued diuers, and happilie theſe Annaliſts of Brabant and Flaunders. The like practiſe we reade of in diuers authors, & of the like writeth Meyer alſo himſelfe. Laſtly, the Annales of Burgundy agree with Commines, and report the number as he doth, ſo that this anſwer I hope ſhall ſuffice for this point. Againe, in the ſame booke fol. 364. Meyer writeth thus, Loquitur Cominius de nobili quadam foemina attrebatenſis ditionis proditrice patriae, cuius aedere non vult nomen, falſus in hoc vt in caeteris hiſtoricus. Sure if it were an vndoubted truth that a Ladie of Artois could not ſend the King ſuch aduertiſement as Commines reporteth that ſhe did: or if Meyer were Pythagoras that ipſe dixit might paſſe for proofe, the credit of Commines ſhould happilie hang in ballance: but if you reade the place in his hiſtorie, the very circumſtances will induce any indifferent man to thinke, that which is there written of this Ladie to be no lie. Againe fol. 366. Meyer hath theſe words, Hic eſt Cominius ille transfuga, gente Flandrus, qui multa de Carolo & Lodouico prouinciali lingua bene ſcripſit, ſed quaedam etiam ſcripſit plane mendaciter, multaque dicenda infideliter reticuit. This is ſo generall and vncertaine a charge that anſwer in truth it deſerueth none: notwithſtanding, I refer to the iudgement of thoſe that ſhall reade this hiſtorie, whether Commines conceale his Maſters faults therein or not (for that is Meyers meaning in this place.) True it is that he vttereth them not in ſuch railing barbarous termes as Meyer very vnſeemely vſeth of ſo great a Prince as King Lewis was, and is offended with Commines for not dooing the like, a thing which becommeth Meyer himſelfe very ill, and would haue become Commines much woorſe. But our author as he concealeth not his maſters faults, but laieth them open enough to the vnderſtanding of the wiſe and attentiue Reader: ſo deliuereth he them, ſo ſparingly, and vnder ſuch termes as truth being vttered, the Kings honor be no further impeached, than verie neceſſitie doth enforce; a matter verie commendable in a gentleman writing of a Prince, a ſeruant of his Maſter, and a ſubiect of his Soueraigne. Laſtly, Meyer fol. 365. hath theſe words, refert Cominius exercitum Caroliadeo fuiſſe extenuatum, vt exhibere illum Anglis non auderet, ſed hoc falſum eſt. But you muſt beleeue Meyer vpon his word, other diſproofe of Commines report he can bring none, neither grounded vpon any circumſtance, nor produced out of any good author that writ of thoſe times. But on the contrary ſide for the cōfirmation of that which Commines writeth in this place, firſt La Marche reporteth that the bloodie fluxe entered into the Dukes campe lying before Nuz, which it is verie like conſumed many, and impaired the health of many more. With him alſo agree the Annales of Burgundie, which report that the Duke loſt 15000. men before Nuz: which being well conſidered, and this withall, that the ſiege endured a whole yeere, and yet in the ende the Duke forced to depart fruſtrate of his purpoſe, whereby his ſoldiers had not onely their bodies tired, but alſo their mindes diſcouraged: I ſuppoſe no man of ſounde iudgement will thinke that the Dukes armie could be otherwiſe than in verie poore eſtate. Now that you haue heard all that Meyer hath or can obiect againſt the credit of this hiſtorie (which alſo how ſubſtancially he hath prooued I leaue to the iudgement of the wiſe and indifferent reader to conſider:) it is good reaſon you ſhould alſo heare what opinion other authors haue both of Commines and of his hiſtorie, and how honorable teſtimonie in their writings they giue to them both. Annales Burgundiae lib. 3. pa. 930. ſpeaking of Commines teſtifie thus of him. He was one of the wiſeſt gentlemen of his time, and the beſt acquainted with all matters of ſtate, as appeereth by his hiſtorie: whereof the Emperour Charles made ſo great account, that he neuer ſlept before he had read certaine chapters thereof, for the finiſhing of his daies worke. Which ſure this noble and ſage Emperor

would neuer haue done, if Commines had been a reporter of lies, eſpecially of the ſaid Emperours owne great grandfather, whoſe life and death are ſo amplie in this hiſtorie treated of. Paulus Aemilius giueth ſuch credit to Commines, that al that he writeth in the hiſtory of France of the raigne of Lewis the 11. is onely an abridgment of him, & wholy taken out of his writings. Ferron in his ſupply to Paulus Aemilius hiſtorie maketh in many places very honorable mention of Commines, highly commending him both for his great wiſedome and vertue and ſinceritie in his hiſtorie. Lodouico Guicciardini no French man, but an Italian, in his deſcription of the lowe Countries fol. 220. calleth Commines a writer woorthie of great commendation. And fol. 310. and 311. thus he writeth. Of the Noble houſe of Commines was Philip de Commines Lord of Argenton, who wrote the hiſtorie of his owne time verie ſincerely, he was a noble perſonage, of great enterpriſe, and of him diuers authors make honorable mention. Heere we haue the true teſtimonie of ſundrie woorthie writers (for to vouche all were too tedious) on Commines behalfe, which ioined with the approbation of the noble Emperour Charles the fift, are ſufficient, as I ſuppoſe, to maintaine his credit againſt the venemous dartes of Meyers ſclanderous accuſations. Now as touching Commines life, the onely thing that Meyer blameth therein, is his departure from the Duke of Burgundies ſeruice: for the which he inueigheth no leſſe bitterly againſt his perſon, than before he did againſt his hiſtorie, for fol. 355. where he maketh mention of the Duke of Burgundies cruelty vſed at the caſtle of Neſle, which he tooke by aſſault the yeere 1472. he hath theſe wordes. Crudelis hic viſus Corolus & animo turbato, crediturque quoſdam ex familiaribus parum habuiſſe fideles, ex quibus hand dubie er at Philippus ille Cominius or tu Flandrus, Dominus Ruſcurii, qui hoc anno transfugit adregem, quiſivir fuiſſet probus & integer, nequaquam deſerto Dominc ſuo, deſerta & abiurata patria ad talem tranſiſſet tyrannum, alioſque ad idem faciendum ſolicitaſſet, quantiſcunque muneribus inuitatus. Againe fol. 366. thus he ſaith, Cauſam cur transfugerit aliisque nonnullis author fuerit idem faciendi non lego, cum autem Cominius in ſuis ſcriptis cauſam ſuae defectionis reticeat, non dubium puto quin ob faedum aliquod patratum ſcelus more proditorum aufugerit. Whereunto ſomewhat to anſwere in Commines behalfe, I ſay that what cauſe mooued him to leaue the Duke as we certainely know not, ſo is it not like that he departed from him for any heinous offence, bicauſe he was neuer charged with any, neither is Meyer able to produce any one teſtimonie (as euen himſelfe in this place is forced to confeſſe) that he forſooke the Duke in any treacherous ſort, neither is he able to prooue that he ſollicited any to leaue the Dukes ſeruice during the Dukes life, though without all proofe moſt vniuſtly he charge him therewith. For if Commines had departed with the betraying of townes and caſtles to the enimy as de Cordes did; if for attempting to deſtroie the Dukes perſon, as Baldwine the Dukes baſe brother, and the Earle of Eſtampes his coſin did; if for both, as the Earle of Campobaſſo did, his offence could no more haue beene concealed, than the others aboue mentioned was. Wherefore as Meyer reaſoneth that bicauſe Commines no where in his writings vttereth the cauſe of his departure, it is like he departed for ſome hainous offence: ſo one the other ſide with much more reaſon it may be anſwered, that bicauſe neither Meyer nor any other Hiſtoriographer in their writings vtter the cauſe of his departure; like it is that he departed for no hainous offence, but onely for his owne aduancement or ſafetie or both, without ſeeking by traiterous practiſes to harme the Duke, as the aboue named with diuers others did. But let vs now examine what by all preſumption was the cauſe of his departure from the Duke: and ſecondarily, whether his departure from one Maſter to another being in hoſtilitie be excuſable: which two points being throughly diſcuſſed, it ſhall plainly appeere to the world, whether he be iuſtly

to be charged with any euill dealing, for leauing the Duke of Burgundie his firſt Maſter, and vnder whoſe dominion he was borne. As touching the firſt point, I am of opinion that Commines by his departure from the Duke of Burgundie, ſought both his owne aduauncement and his ſafetie, the former whereof he had iuſt cauſe to hope for at King Lewis his hands, as a thing well deſerued, at the Kings being at Peronne, where Commines wiſedome and great credit with the Duke of Burgundie (as ſay the Annales of Burgundie) ſtood the King in ſo good ſtead, that by his onely meanes he was reſtored to his realme, libertie and life, which otherwiſe had beene in great danger, as by the courſe of this hiſtorie moſt plainly doth appeere. Wherefore Commines could not but aſſure himſelfe of great aduauncement at King Lewis his hands, as well bicauſe of the Kings great liberalitie, as alſo for his owne deſert: neither did his hope faile him, as the ſequele well declared. On the other ſide at the Dukes hands no great aduauncement was to be looked for, both bicauſe the qualitie of his ſeruice to the Duke and the King was not alike, and ſo conſequently the deſert vnlike; and alſo bicauſe the Dukes liberalitie was inferior to the Kings, his attempts ſo impoueriſhing him, that he had not to be liberall of as the King had. Whereunto I adde, that he made no ſuch account of his ſeruants as the King did, but attributed all his good ſucceſſe to his owne braine, whereby their ſeruice was the leſſe eſteemed and the woorſe rewarded, or rather not at all eſteemed nor rewarded: for he neuer vſed any mans counſell but his owne, ſo that wiſe men loſt but their time with him. Yea Meyer himſelfe reporteth him to be Durum, aſperum & ingratum, à quo milites maligne admodum ſtipendia accipiebant, raro blande & liberaliter appellarentur, quanquam multis in locis extremis periculis ſe obiectarent, plurimumque algoris, inediae & aeſtus ſuſtinerent. If then the Duke were of this diſpoſition towards his ſoldiers, and ſo euill rewarded them whoſe helpe he daily and howerly vſed: what reward could any wiſe man looke for at his hands, whoſe aduice he ſeldome asked and neuer followed? Further, the Duke was of nature very cholericke and ready to offer his ſeruants iniurie, as for example, to the Earle of Campobaſſo he gaue a blowe, which in the end coſt him his life, and whether any ſuch outrage offered to our Author cauſed or furthered his departure we knowe not: but that aduauncement (which was to be looked for at the Kings hands, and not to be hoped for at the Dukes) was one cauſe, is already, as I ſuppoſe, ſufficiently prooued. The ſecond cauſe of Commines departure from the Duke in mine opinion was ſafetie; for the Duke, as Commines himſelfe reporteth, forced not to venture his ſeruants into any danger were it neuer ſo great, which all men (eſpecially deſpairing of reward of their ſeruice) will ſeeke to auoide: for as our Author himſelfe ſaith in one place of his hiſtorie, moſt men by ſeruice ſeeke to aduaunce themſelues, but all men will haue an eie to ſaue themſelues. Further, Commines being a very wiſe man foreſawe the Dukes attempts to be ſuch, as would in the end ouerthrowe both himſelfe, his ſubiects, and his dominions, wherefore he thought it beſt to diſlodge in time and to ſaue one. Theſe in mine opinion were the principall cauſes of his departure from the Duke, which being honeſt and reaſonable, and his departure likewiſe voide of al treaſon and trecherous practiſes againſt the Duke: I ſee no reaſon why for his departure he ſhould not rather be commended than condemned. The laſt point that we haue to conſider is, whether he being the Dukes ſubiect might leaue his Maſter and depart to the King, were the cauſes of his departure neuer ſo reaſonable and honeſt. Whereunto I anſwer, that Commines was not abſolutely the Dukes ſubiect: for Flaunders was held in ſoueraigntie of the crowne of Fraunce, and both the Earle and all the people ſworne to beare no armes againſt the King of Fraunce, and diuers

examples too long to rehearſe, are to be read in the hiſtories of diuers Earles of Flaunders that haue been arreſted, impriſoned, and togither with their people fined for breach of this oth. Wherefore ſeeing our author was a Flemming borne, and Flaunders held in Soueraigntie of the King of Fraunce, and the Duke of Burgundie in-hoſtilitie with the King of Fraunce, contrarie to the oth he either tooke or ought to haue taken; and further violating diuers, naie I may ſay all thoſe points whereunto by his allegeance he was bound to the French King: I ſee no reaſon why Commines might not, or rather ought not to leaue an inferior rebellious Lord, and cleaue to his ſoueraign Prince and King, to whom he ought a ſoueraign dutie both by allegeance and oth. And if after his reuolt, he gaue any aduice to the furtherance of the Kings affaires, he did therein in mine opinion the dutie of a faithfull ſeruant and true ſubiect. Thus much I haue beene forced to ſpeake in defence both of Commines life, and hiſtorie, whereof as the former appeereth to haue beene both honeſt and vertuous as well by the reaſons aboue alleaged, as alſo by the notable diſcourſes wherewith he farceth his hiſtorie, which breath nothing but vertue and ſinceritie: ſo is the latter confirmed by the conſent of diuers good hiſtories, and approoued by the iudgement of the nobleſt Princes that Europe bred theſe many hundred yeers, as I truſt is ſufficiently declared. Wherefore our authors credit ſtandeth vpright, as well for good conuerſation of life, as ſincere report in hiſtorie, both the which Meyer no leſſe falſely ſlandereth, than he doth in other places of his Annales the noble races of the Kings of England and Fraunce, which ignorantly or maliciouſlie he reporteth to be more vile and baſe than any honeſt eare can endure to heare. Thus hauing I truſt ſufficiently defended the credit of this woorthie writer, I will heere abruptly for auoiding of tediouſnes ſtaie my pen.
         
         
            
            A Table declaring the contents of all the Chapters contained in this hiſtorie.
            
               
                  The preface of the Author to the Archbiſhop of Vienna in Fraunce. page 1
                  
                  Chap. 1 The occaſion of the wars between Lewis the eleuenth, and the Earle of Charolois Duke of Burgundy. page 2
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the Earle of Charolois and diuers noble men of Fraunce leuied an army againſt King Lewis, vnder colour of the weale publike. page 6
                  
                  Chap. 4 How the Earle of Charolois encamped neere to Montl'hery, and of the battell fought there betweene the King of Fraunce and him. page 10
                  
                  Chap. 4 Of the danger the Earle of Charolois was in, and how he was reſcued. page 15
                  
                  Chap. 5 How the Duke of Berry the Kings brother, and the Duke of Britaine ioined with the Earle of Charolois againſt the King. page 19
                  
                  Chap. 6 How the Earle of Charolois and his confederates with their whole army, paſſed the riuer of Seine vpon a bridge of botes, how Iohn Duke of Calabria ioined with them, and how they all encamped before Paris. page 22
                  
                  Chap. 7 A diſcourſe vpon ambitious hunting after offices and eſtates, by the example of the Engliſh men. page 25
                  
                  Chap. 8 How King Lewis entred into Paris, while the Princes of Fraunce practiſed with the citizens. page 27
                  
                  Chap. 9 How the Earle of Charolois artillery and the Kings artillery ſhot the one againſt the other neere to Charenton, and how the Earle of Charolois cauſed another bridge to be built vpon botes ouer the riuer of Seine. page 29
                  
                  Chap. 10 A diſcourſe vpon certaine vices and vertues of King Lewis the 11. page 32
                  
                  Chap. 11 How the Burgundians lying neere to Paris, and looking for the battell, ſuppoſed great thistles to haue been launces held vpright. page 34
                  
                  Chap. 12 How the King and the Earle of Charolois met togither to treat of peace. page 36
                  
                  Chap. 13 How the towne of Roane by practiſe was put into the Duke of Bourbons hands, for the Duke of Berry, and how the treatie of Conflans was fully concluded. page 38
                  
                  Chap. 14 How the treatie of peace was concluded betweene the King and the Earle of Charolois and his confederates. page 40
                  
                  Chap. 15 How by the diuiſion that hapned betweene the Dukes of Britaine and Normandy, the King recouered the ſaid Duchie which he had giuen his brother. page 42
                  
                  Chap. 16 How the new Duke of Normandy returned into Britaine in very poore eſtate, and vtterly diſcouraged, bicauſe he had failed in his enterpriſe. page 43
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Booke.
                  Chap. 1 Of the wars betweene the Burgundians and Liegeois, and how the towne of Dinand was taken, ſacked and raſed. page 45
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the Liegeois brake the peace with the Duke of Burgundie then Earle of Charalois, and how he diſcomfited them in battell. page 48
                  
                  Chap. 3 How ſome of the Citizens of Liege agreeing to yeeld their towne and others refuſing ſo to do, the Lord of Hymbercourt found meanes to enter into it for the Duke of Burgundy. page 52
                  
                  Chap. 4 How the Duke of Burgundy made his entrie into the towne of Liege, and how the citizens of Gaunt where he had beene euill intreated before, humbled themſelues vnto him. page 55
                  
                  Chap. 5 How the King ſeeing what had happened to the Liegeois, made war in Britaine vpon the Duke of Burgundies confederats, and how they two met and communed togither at Peronne. page 57
                  
                  Chap. 6 A diſcourſe wherein is declared how greatly learning eſpecially in hiſtories profiteth Princes and Noble men. page 60
                  
                  Chap. 7 How and for what cauſe the King was ſtaied and held priſoner in the caſtle of Peronne by the D. of Burgundies commandement. page 62
                  
                  Chap. 8 A diſcourſe wherein is ſhewed, that an enteruiew betweene two great Princes for treatie of their affaires, hurteth more than profiteth. page 64
                  
                  Chap. 9 How the King to deliuer himſelfe out of the caſtle of Peronne, renounced his league with the Liegeois. page 67
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the King accompanied the Duke of Burgundie, making war vpon the Liegeois, who before were his confederates. page 69
                  
                  
                     Chap. 11 How the King arriued in perſon with the Duke of Burgundy, before the citie of Liege. page 71
                  
                  Chap. 12 How the Liegeois made a deſperate ſalie vpon the Duke of Burgundies men, where he and the King were in great danger. page 73
                  
                  Chap. 13 How the city of Liege was aſſaulted, taken, and ſpoiled, and the Churches alſo page 75
                  
                  Chap. 14 How King Lewis returned into Fraunce with the Duke of Burgundies conſent, and how the Duke proceeded in deſtroying the countries of Liege and Franchmont. page 77
                  
                  Chap. 15 How the K. by ſubtill meanes perſwaded the Lord Charles his brother to take the Duchie of Guienne for Brie and Champaigne, to the Duke of Burgundies diſcontentment. page 80
                  
               
               
                  The third Booke.
                  Chap. 1 How the King tooke occaſion to make war anew vpon the Duke of Burgundy, and how he ſent a Purſeuant of the Parlament of Gaunt to ſommon him to appeere at Paris. page 82
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the townes of Saint Quintin and Amiens were yeelded to the King: and for what cauſes the Conſtable nouriſhed the war between the K. and the Duke of Burgundy. page 84
                  
                  Chap. 3 How the Duke of Burgundy tooke Piquigni, and afterward found meanes to make truce with the King for a yeere to the Conſtables griefe. page 86
                  
                  Chap. 4 Of the wars among the Princes of England during theſe troubles betweene King Lewis and Charles Duke of Burgundy. page 89
                  
                  Chap. 5 How by King Lewis his aide, the Earle of Warwicke chaſed King Edward out of England, to the Duke of Burgundies great griefe, who receiued him into his countries. page 92
                  
                  Chap. 6 How the Earle of Warwicke tooke out of priſon King Henry of England. page 96
                  
                  Chap. 7 How king Edward returned into England, where he ſlew in battell firſt the Earle of Warwicke, and then the Prince of Wales. page 99
                  
                  Chap. 8 How the wars reuiued betweene king Lewis and Charles D. of Burgundy, by the ſollicitation of the Dukes of Guienne and Britaine. page 101
                  
                  Chap. 9 How the finall peace treated of betweene the Duke of Burgundy and the king brake off bicauſe of the Duke of Guiennes death, and how theſe two great Princes ſought to deceiue each other. page 105
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the Duke of Burgundy ſeeing that he could not take Beaunais, before the which he had laid his ſiege, went to Roan. page 108
                  
                  Chap. 11 How the king made peace with the Duke of Britaine, and truce with the Duke of Burgundy, & how the Earle of Saint Paul eſcaped for that time a conſpiracie that theſe two Princes made againſt him. page 110
                  
                  Chap. 12 A diſcourſe very fit for this place, of the wiſedome of the king and the Conſtable, with good aduertiſements to ſuch as are in credite with Princes. page 114
                  
               
               
                  The fourth Booke.
                  Chap. 1 How the Duke of Burgundie being ſeazed of the Duchie of Gueldres, ſought to encroch further vpon the Almaines, and how he laid his ſiege before Nuz. page 116
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the towne of Nuz was ſuccoured by the Emperor and the Almaines against the Duke of Burgundie, and of other enimies that the king procured the Duke. page 120
                  
                  Chap. 3 How the king wan from the Duke of Burgundie the castell of Tronquey, the townes of Montdidier, Roye, and Corby, and how he ſought to perſwade the Emperor Frederic to ſeiz vpon all that the ſaid Duke held of the Empire. page 122
                  
                  Chap. 4 How the Conſtable began to be had in ſuſpition againe, as well of the king as of the Duke of Burgundy. page 124
                  
                  Chap. 5 How the Duke of Burgundy leuied his ſiege before Nuz by compoſition, and how the king of England his confederate ſent to defie king Lewis. page 126
                  
                  Chap. 6 Of the trouble the Conſtable was in, and how he ſent letters of credit to the king of England and the Duke of Burgundy, which after were in part cauſe of his death. page 129
                  
                  Chap. 7 How the king clothed a poore ſeruant in a cote armor with a ſcutchin, and ſent him to ſpeake with the king of England in his campe, where he receiued a very good anſwere. page 131
                  
                  Chap. 8 How truce for nine yeeres was treated of betweene the kings of Fraunce and England, notwithſtanding all the lets and impediments that the Conſtable and the Duke of Burgundy made. page 133
                  
                  
                     Chap. 9 How the king feaſted the Engliſh men in Amiens, and how there was a place aſſigned for the enteruiew of the two kings. page 136
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the two kings met and ſware the treatie before concluded, and how ſome ſuppoſed that the holy Ghoſt came downe vpon the king of Englands pauilion in the likenes of a white pigeon. page 140
                  
                  Chap. 11 How the Conſtable after the truce made with the Engliſh men, ſought to excuſe himſelfe to the king: and how truce was alſo concluded for nine yeeres betweene the king and the Duke of Burgundie. page 143
                  
                  Chap. 12 How the Conſtables death was fully concluded and ſworne betweene the king and the Duke of Burgundy, and how he went into the Dukes dominions, where by his commandement he was ſtaied & deliuered to the king, and after put to death. page 147
                  
                  Chap. 13 A diſcourſe of the fault the Duke of Burgundie committed in deliuering the Conſtable to the king contrary to his ſafe conduct, and what enſued thereof. page 150
                  
               
               
                  The fift Booke.
                  Chap. 1 How the Duke of Burgundy making war vpon the Swiſſers, was ouerthrowen at the ſtraights of the mountaines neere to Granſon. page 153
                  
                  Chap. 2 How after the ouerthrow of Granſon, the Duke of Milan, king Rene of Sicilie, the Ducheſſe of Sauoy, and others, departed from their league with the Duke of Burgundy. page 156
                  
                  Chap. 3 How the Swiſſers vanquiſhed the D. of Burgundy in battell neere to the towne of Morat. page 159
                  
                  Chap. 4 How after the battell of Morat the Duke of Burgundy tooke the Ducheſſe of Sauoy, & how ſhe was deliuered and ſent home into hir countrey by the kings meanes. page 161
                  
                  Chap. 5 How the D. of Burgundy liued as it were ſolitary the ſpace of certaine weekes, during the which time the D. of Lorraine recouered his towne of Nancy. page 163
                  
                  Chap. 6 Of the Earle of Campobaches great treaſons, and how he kept the D. of Burgundy from hearing a gentleman that would haue reuealed them to him before he was put to death, and how the ſaid D. made no account of the aduertiſements the king gaue him. page 166
                  
                  Chap. 7 How the Duke of Lorraine being accompanied with good force of Almains, came to the towne of Saint Nicholas during the ſiege of Nancy, and how the king of Portugale who was in Fraunce came to ſee the Duke of Burgundy during the ſaid ſiege. page 169
                  
                  Chap. 8 How the D. of Burgundy refuſing the good counſell of diuers of his men, was diſcomfited & ſlaine in the battell fought betweene him and the D. of Lorraine, neere to Nancy. page 171
                  
                  Chap. 9 A diſcourſe vpon certaine vertues of the D. of Burgundie, and of the time his houſe floriſhed in proſperitie. page 173
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the king was aduertiſed of the Duke of Burgundies laſt ouerthrow, and how he gouerned his affaires after the ſaid Dukes death. page 175
                  
                  Chap. 11 How the king after the Duke of Burgundies death ſeazed into his hands the towne of Abbeuille, and of the anſwere they of Arras gaue him. page 177
                  
                  Chap. 12 A diſcourſe not appertaining to the principall matters of the great ioy the king was in to ſee himſelfe deliuered of ſo many enimies, and of the error he committed touching the reducing of theſe countries of Burgundy to his obedience. page 178
                  
                  Chap. 13 How Han, Bohain, Saint Quintin and Perronne were yeelded to the king, and how he ſent Maſter Oliuer his barber to practiſe with them of Gaunt. page 179
                  
                  Chap. 14 How Maſter Oliuer the kings barber failing to execute his enterpriſe at Gaunt, found meanes to put the kings forces into Tournay. page 182
                  
                  Chap. 15 Of the ambaſſadors the Lady of Burgundy daughter to the late Duke Charles ſent to the king, and how by meanes of Monſeur de Cordes the city of Arras, the townes of Hedin and Bollein, and the towne of Arras it ſelfe, were yeelded to the king. page 184
                  
                  Chap. 16 How the citizens of Gaunt hauing vſurped authority ouer their Princeſſe after hir fathers death, came in ambaſſage to the king, as from the three eſtates of their countrey. page 187
                  
                  Chap. 17 How they of Gaunt after their ambaſſadors returne, put to death the Chauncellor Hugonet, & the Lord of Himbercourt againſt their Princeſſes will, and how they and other Flemmings were diſcomfited before Tournay, and their generall the Duke of Gueldres ſlaine. page 190
                  
                  Chap. 18 A diſcourſe vpon this point that wars and diuiſions are permitted of God for the chaſtiſement 
                        ••
                      Princes and euill people, with diuers good reaſons and examples for the inſtruction of Princes, w
                        ••••
                      happened in the Authors time. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The ſixt Booke.
                  Chap. 1 How the Duchie of Burgundie was yeelded to the King. page 205
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the king entertained the Engliſh men after the death of Charles Duke of Burgundy, to the end they ſhould not hinder his conquest of the ſaid Dukes dominions. page 206
                  
                  Chap. 3 How the marriage betweene the Lady of Burgundie and Maximilian Duke of Austrich, afterward Emperor, was concluded and accompliſhed. page 209
                  
                  Chap. 4 How king Lewis by the conduct of Charles of Amboiſe his lieutenant, recouered diuers townes in Burgundy, which the Prince of Orenge had cauſed to reuolt from him. page 214
                  
                  Chap. 5 How Monſeur d'Argenton during theſe wars of the conquest of Burgundie, was ſent to Florence, and how he receiued homage of the Duke of Milan in the kings name for the Duchy of Genua. page 217
                  
                  Chap. 6 Of Monſeur d'Argentons returne out of Italie into Fraunce, and of the battell of Guinegate. page 219
                  
                  Chap. 7 How king Lewis being viſited with ſicknes, lost his wits, and lay ſpeechleſſe, ſometime recouering, and eft ſoones falling into his diſeaſe againe: and how he behaued himſelfe in the caſtell of Pleſſis les Tours. page 222
                  
                  Chap. 8 How the king cauſed the holy man of Calabria to come to Tours, thinking that he could heale him: and what ſtrange things the ſaid king did to maintaine his authoritie during his ſicknes. page 226
                  
                  Chap. 9 How the marriage betweene the Daulphine and the Lady Margaret of Flaunders was concluded, and how ſhe was brought into Fraunce: whereupon Edward king of England died for ſorrow. page 228
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the king behaued himſelfe towards his neighbors and ſubiects during the time of his ſicknes, and how diuers things were ſent him from diuers places for the recouerie of his health. page 231
                  
                  Chap. 11 How king Lewis the 11. cauſed Charles the Daulphin his ſonne to come to him a little before his death, and of the commandements and precepts he gaue both him and certaine others. page 232
                  
                  Chap. 12 A compariſon betweene the ſorrowes and troubles that king Lewis ſuffered, and thoſe he cauſed diuers others to ſuffer, with a rehearſal of all that he did, & al that was done to him til his death. page 234
                  
                  Chap. 13 A diſcourſe vpon the miſerie of mans life, by the examples of thoſe Princes that liued in the authors time, and firſt of king Lewis. page 238
                  
                  The concluſion of the Author. page 243
                  
                  A ſupplie of the historie of Philip de Commines from the death of king Lewis the eleuenth, till the beginning of the wars of Naples, to wit, from 1483. till 1493. of all the which time Commines writeth nothing. page 247
                  
                  Chap. 1 Of king Charles his comming to the crowne, of the death of Oliuer king Lewis his Barber and others, and of the reuoking of king Lewis his ſuperfluous gifts. ibid.
                  Chap. 2 Of the aſſembly of the ſtates held at Tours, of the Duke of Orleans purſute for the regencie, of the madwar raiſed by him, and of his departure into Britaine. page 248
                  
                  Chap. 3 Of the troubles that hapned in Britaine betweene the Duke and his nobles, and of Peter Landois death. page 250
                  
                  Chap. 4 Of the war the king made in Britaine, and of the Earle of Dunois ambaſſage to the king for peace. page 252
                  
                  Chap. 5 Of the battell of Saint Albin, wherein the Duke of Orleans was taken priſoner, of the treatie of peace betweene the king and the Duke of Britaine, and of the ſaid Duke of Britaines death. page 255
                  
                  Chap. 6 Of the kings marriage with the Lady Anne of Britaine, whereby Britaine was vnited to the crowne of Fraunce. page 258
                  
                  Chap. 7 Of the troubles in England, and how the king of England paſſed the ſea and beſieged Bolloin, and of the peace betweene the king and him, and of the ſurpriſing of Arras and Saint Omers by the king of Romaines men. page 259
                  
                  Chap. 8 Of the restitution of the countries of Rouſſillon and Parpignan to the king of Spaine, of the Emperor Fredericks death, of the peace betweene the king of Romaines and the king, and of the Duke of Orleans deliuery out of priſon. page 262
                  
               
               
                  The ſeuenth Booke.
                  The Progloue of the Author, containing that which he mindeth to treate of in this hiſtorie following. page 265
                  
                  Howe Rene D. of Lorraine came into Fraunce to demaund the Duchie of Bar, & the Earledome

of Prouence which king Charles held, and how he failed to enter into the realme of Naples, whereunto he pretented title as the king did, and what right both of them had thereunto. page 266
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the Prince of Salerne in the realm of Naples came into Fraunce, and how Lodouic Sforce ſurnamed the Moore and he, ſought to perſwade the king to make war vpon the king of Naples, and for what cauſe. page 268
                  
                  Chap. 3 How king Charles the 8 made peace with the king of Romaines and the Archduke of Auſtriche, reſtoring to them the Lady Margaret of Flaunders, before he made his voiage to Naples. page 274
                  
                  Chap. 4 How the king ſent to the Venetians to practiſe with them before he enterpiſed his voiage to Naples, and of the preparation that was made for the ſaid voiage. page 275
                  
                  Chap. 5 How king Charles departed from Vienna in Daulphin to conquer the realme of Naples in perſon, and what his nauie vpon the ſea did vnder the leading of the D. of Orleans. page 278
                  
                  Chap. 6 How the king remaining yet in Aſt, reſolued to paſſe foorth towards Naples at the earneſt ſute of Lodouic Sforce. How Philip de Commines was ſent ambaſſador to Venice: of the D. of Milans death; after whoſe deceaſe the ſaid Lodouic ſeized vpon the Duchy, to the preiudice of a ſonne the ſaid D. left behinde him. page 281
                  
                  Chap. 7 How Peter of Medicis yeelded fower of the Florentines ſtrongeſt places to the king, and how the king reſtored Piſa being one of them to their ancient libertie. page 284
                  
                  Chap. 8 How the king departed from Piſa to Florence, & of the flight & ruin of Peter de Medices. page 287
                  
                  Chap. 9 How the king entred into Florence, and through what other townes he paſſed till he came to Rome. page 289
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the king ſent the Cardinall Petriad Vincula to Oſtie; what the Pope did at Rome in the meane time, and how the king entred into Rome maugre all his enimies. page 291
                  
                  Chap. 11 How king Alfonſe cauſed his ſonne Ferrand to be crowned king, and then fled himſelfe into Sicilie: with a diſcourſe of the euill life that his father the old Ferrand and he had lead. page 295
                  
                  Chap. 12 How the yoong Ferrand after he was crowned king of Naples, went and encamped at Saint Germain to reſiſt the kings cōming, & of the treaty that K. Charles made with the Pope at Rome. page 297
                  
                  Chap. 13 How the King departed from Rome towards Naples, what happened in the meane time in diuers partes of the ſaid realme: and through what places he paſſed till he came to Naples. page 299
                  
                  Chap. 14 How King Charles was crowned King of Naples, of the faults he committed in the defence of the realme, and how an enterpriſe attempted on his behalfe againſt the Turke was diſcouered by the Venetians. page 301
                  
                  Chap. 15 A diſcourſe ſomwhat out of the courſe of the hiſtory, wherin Philip de Commines Author of this preſent woorke, treateth amply of the eſtate and gouernment of the Seniorie of Venice, and of thoſe things that he ſaw there, and were done there during the time of his ambaſſage to the ſaid Seniorie for the King. page 304
                  
               
               
                  The eight Booke.
                  Chap. 1 Of the order and prouiſion the King left in the realme of Naples at his returne into Fraunce. page 314
                  
                  Chap. 2 How the king departed from Naples, and paſſed againe through Rome, whereupon the Pope fled to Oruiette: of the communication the king had with Monſeur d'Argenton, at his returne from Venice: how he tooke aduiſe whether he ſhould reſtore the Florentines places to them or not: and of the ſermons woorthie of memorie of frier Ierom of Florence. page 316
                  
                  Chap. 3 How the King retained in his hands the town of Piſa, and certaine other of the Florentines places: and how in the meane time the Duke of Orleans entred on the other ſide into Nouarre, a towne of the Duchie of Milan. page 319
                  
                  Chap. 4 How King Charles paſſed diuers dangerous ſtraights in the mountaines betweene Piſa and Seriaue: how the towne of Pontreme was burned by his Almaines, and how the Duke of Orleans behaued himſelfe in the meane time at Nouarre. page 321
                  
                  Chap. 5 How the kings great artillery paſſed the mounts Appenines by the Almaines helpe, of the danger the Marſhall of Gie was in with his vaward and how the King arriued at Fornoue. page 324
                  
                  Chap. 6 Of the battell of Fornoue, wherein the enimies of Fraunce were put to flight, and how the Earle of Petillane, who the ſame day brake the Kings priſon, relied them togither againe. page 329
                  
                  Chap. 7 How the Lord of Argenton went himſelfe alone to parle with the enimies when he ſaw that thoſe that were appointed to go with him would not go: and how the King returned ſafe and ſound with his army to the towne of Aſt. page 336
                  
                  
                     Chap. 8 How the king ſent ſhips to the ſea to ſuccour the caſtles of Naples, & why the ſaid caſtles could not be ſuccoured. page 341
                  
                  Chap. 9 Of the great famine and miſerie the D. of Orleans & his men were in at Nouarre: of the Marchioneſſe of Montferrats death, & likewiſe of Monſeur de Vendoſmes: and how after long deliberation the king inclined to peace, to ſaue thoſe that were beſieged. page 343
                  
                  Chap. 10 How the D. of Orleans and his company were deliuered by compoſition out of their great miſerie in Nouarre where they were beſieged: and of the Swiſſers arriuall that came to ſuccour the king and the ſaid D. of Orleans. page 349
                  
                  Chap. 11 How the peace was concluded betweene the king and the D. of Orleans on the one ſide, and the enimies on the other: and of the conditions and articles thereof. page 351
                  
                  Chap. 12 How the king ſent the Lord of Argenton to Venice with certaine conditions of peace which they refuſed: and of the D. of Milans falſe dealings. page 353
                  
                  Chap. 13 How the king after his returne into Fraunce forgot thoſe that he left behind him in the realme of Naples: and how the Daulphin died, whoſe death the king and Queene much lamented. page 356
                  
                  Chap. 14 How the king was aduertiſed of the loſſe of the caſtell of Naples: and how the Florentines places were ſold to diuers men: of the treatie of Atelle in Pouille, to the great dammage of the French and of the death of king Ferrand of Naples. page 358
                  
                  Chap. 15 How certaine practiſes-entertained by diuers noble men of Italy on the kings behalfe, as well for the conqueſt of Naples, as of the Duchie of Milan, failed for lacke of ſending thither: and how an other enterpriſe against Genua ſped euill alſo. page 362
                  
                  Chap. 16 Of certaine controuerſies betweene king Charles and Ferrand king of Castile, and of the ambaſſadors that were ſent too and fro to pacifie them. page 366
                  
                  Chap. 17 A diſcourſe of the misfortunes that hapned to the houſe of Caſtile, in the Lord of Argentons time. page 370
                  
                  Chap. 18 Of the ſumptuous buildings K. Charles began a little before his death, of the great deſire he had to reforme the church himſelfe, to diminiſh his reuenues, & to redreſſe the proceſſes of the law: and how he died ſuddenly in this good minde in his caſtell of Amboiſe. page 373
                  
                  Chap. 19 How the holy man frier Hierom was burned at Florence by the procurement of the pope, and of diuers Florentines and Venetians his enimies. page 375
                  
                  Chap. 20 Of the obſequies and funerals of king Charles the 8. and of the coronation of king Lewis the 12. his ſucceſſor, with the genealogies of the kings of Fraunce continuing to the ſaide Lewis. page 377
                  
                  The pedegree of Charles D. of Burgundy. page 379
                  
                  How Elizabeth wife to king Edward the fourth was neece to the Constable of Fraunce. page 380
                  
                  How Brabant, Lambourg, Luxembourg & Namurs, &c. came to Charles D. of Burgundy. 381. page 382
                  
                    How Margaret of Flaunders was heire of Flaunders, &c. page 383
                  
                  How Arthois and the county of Burgundy deſcended to the ſaid Lady Margaret &c. page 384
                  
                    How the King of Portugale was coſin germaue to the D. of Burgundy. page 385
                  
                    How the D. of Cleues was the Lady of Burgundies neereſt kinſman by his mother. page 386
                  
                  How King Henry the 7. was right heire of the houſe of Lancaſter. page 387
                  
                    The title the D. of Lorraine had to the realme of Sicilie, &c. page 388
                  
                    Why the Venetians had no right to the realme of Naples. page 390
                  
                    The houſe of Medices. page 391
                  
                  How Lewis D. of Orleans pretended title to the Duchie of Milan. page 392
                  
                  The pedegree of Hercules D. of Ferrara. page 394
                  
                  The pedegree of Francis Marques of Mantua. page 395
                  
                    How Ferdinand King of Arragon had more right to the realme of Naples than the Kings of the houſe of Arragon that poſſeſſed it. page 396
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF VIENNA in Fraunce.
               
                  TO ſatisfie your requeſt ſo often mooued vnto me (right reuerend father in God) I ſend you heere a memoriall as agreeable to truth, as I can poſſibly call to minde, of all the acts and doings that I haue been priuy vnto, of king Levvis the eleuenth our maſter and benefactor, and a prince woorthy of perpetuall memory. Of his youth I can ſay nothing but by his owne report. But from the time I entred into his ſeruice, till the hower of his death whereat I was preſent, I was more continually reſident with him than any man of my eſtate that ſerued him, being euer either of his priuy chamber, or employed in his weightie affaires. I found in him as in all other princes that I haue knowne or ſerued both good and bad. For men they are as we be, & perfection is proper to God onely. But ſure that prince whoſe vertues and good parts ſurmount his vices, deſerueth great commendation, the rather bicauſe commonly noble perſonages are more prone to al kind of wantonnes than other men: partly for that in their childhood they are brought vp without due chaſtiſement & correction, & partly bicauſe when they are grown to mans eſtate, ech man ſeeketh to ſeed their humors & ſooth them in all they ſay or do. But for mine own part bicauſe I loue not to flatter nor miſreport the truth, ſomwhat may happily be found in this hiſtorie not tending altogither to the kings praiſe, but I truſt the readers will weigh the reaſons aboue alledged. Sure thus much I dare boldly ſay in his commendation, that in mine opinion he was the prince in his age (all things conſidered) leaſt ſubiect to vice. Yet haue I knowne and been conuerſant with as many great princes, both ſpirituall and temporall as any man in Fraunce of my time, as well the princes of this realme, as thoſe alſo that haue liued in Britaine, Flaunders, Almayne, Englande, Spayne, Portugall, and Italy. Diuers others alſo whom I haue not ſeene: yet haue I knowne, partly by conference with their ambaſſadors, and partly by their letters and inſtructions which are meanes ſufficient to enforme men of their natures and inclinations. Notwithſtanding I minde not by ſetting foorth his commendation in this worke, to detract from the honor and good renowne of others, but ſend you, penned in haſte all that I could call to minde, truſting that you haue required it of me to turne it into ſome worke that you purpoſe to publiſh in Latine (to the perfection of which toong you haue atteined) whereby may appeere both the woorthines of the prince I now write of, and alſo the excellencie of your owne wit. Farther ſir, if I happen to faile in any point, you haue my L. of Bouchage, and others who are better able to enforme you of theſe affaires than my ſelfe, and to couch their words in much eloquenter language. Although to ſay the truth conſidering how honorablie the king entertained me, how great familiaritie it pleaſed him to vſe towards me, and how liberally he beſtowed vpon me, neuer intermitting one of the three till the houre of his death, no man hath iuſter cauſe to remember thoſe times then my ſelfe, whereunto I alſo adde the loſſes I haue ſuſteined, and dangers I haue been in ſithence his deceaſe, which are ſufficient I thinke, to put me in minde of the great benefits I receiued at his hands during his life. Notwithſtanding that I know it to be a matter of courſe that after the death of great and mightie princes, great alterations

enſue to the loſſe of ſome, and gain of others: for riches and honors folow not alwaies their expectation that hunt after them. To conclude ſir, the better to enforme you of the time ſithence I entred into the kings familiarity (which is your deſire) I am forced firſt to rehearſe what hapned before I came to his ſeruice, and ſo orderly to proceede from the time I became his ſeruant, till the houre of his death.
            
            
               The occaſion of the wars betweene Lewis the 11. and the Earle of Charolois afterward Duke of Burgundie. Chapter 1.
               
                  AFter I was paſt my childehood and able to ride 
                     1
                   I was preſented at Liſle to Charles then Earle of Charolois, and after his fathers death D. of Burgundie, who receiued me into his ſeruice the yeere 1464. About three daies after my comming thither, arriued at the ſaide towne of Liſle, the Earle of Eu, the Chauncellor of Fraunce named Moruillier, & the Archbiſhop of Narbonne 
                     2
                   ſent thither in ambaſſage from the king, who in preſence of D. Philip of Burgundie, his ſonne the Earle of Charolois, and their whole councill in open court had their audience. Moruilliers ſpeech was very bitter, for he charged the Earle of Charolois there preſent, that at his late being in Holland he had cauſed a little French ſhip of war of Diepe to be arreſted, and therein a baſtard of Rubempre, whom alſo he had impriſoned, charging him that he was come thither to take him priſoner, and cauſing this brute euery where to be publiſhed 
                     3
                   (eſpecially at Bruges whither ſtrangers of all nations reſort) by a knight of Burgundie named ſir Oliuer de la Marche, 
                  
                     4
                   wherefore the King finding himſelfe wrongfully burdened heerewith (as he ſaid) 
                     5
                   required D. Philip to ſende this ſir Oliuer de la Marche priſoner to Paris, there to be puniſhed according as the caſe required. Whereunto D. Philip anſwered that the ſaid ſir Oliuer was ſteward of his houſe, borne in the Countie of Burgundie, 
                     6
                   and in no reſpect ſubiect to the crowne of Fraunce. Notwithſtanding if it could be duly proued that he had ſaid or done any thing preiudicial to the Kings honor, he would ſee him puniſhed according as the fault ſhould deſerue. And as touching the baſtard of Rubempre, he ſaid that true it was that he was apprehended for great cauſes of ſuſpicion giuen, and ſtrange behauior vſed by him and his men about the towne of Lahaye 
                     7
                   in Holland, where at that preſent his ſonne the Earle of Charolois remained, adding that if the ſaid Earle were ſuſpicious he tooke it not of him, for he was neuer ſo, but of his mother who had been the moſt ielous Ladie that euer liued. But notwithſtanding quoth he, that I my ſelfe neuer were ſuſpicious: yet if I had bin in my ſonnes place at the ſame time, that this baſtard of Rubempre haunted thoſe coaſts: I would ſure haue cauſed him to be apprehended as my ſonne did. Laſtly, he

promiſed that if this baſtard were not guiltie of this fact, to waite a purpoſe to haue taken his ſonne (as common report ſaid he was) he would foorthwith deliuer him out of priſon, and ſende him to the King according to his ambaſſadors demands? The D. anſwer ended: Moruillier began againe, charging with great and heinous offences, Frances D. of Britaine, and alledging that at the Earle of Charolois late being at Tours (whither he went to viſit the king) the ſaid D. and he had giuen their faith ech to other in writing to become brethren in armes, which writings he ſaid were enterchangeablie deliuered by the hands of maſter Tanneguy du Chastel, who ſince hath been gouernor of Rouſſillon, and borne ſome ſwaie in this realme: This fact Moruillier aggrauated in ſuch ſort, that nothing he omitted in ſetting foorth this offence that might tend to the diſgrace and diſhonor of a Prince. Whereunto the Earle of Charolois made offer eftſoones to anſwere, being maruellouſly out of patience to heare ſuch reprochfull ſpeeches vſed of his friend and confederate. But Moruillier euer cut him off ſaying: My Lord of Charolois, I am not come of ambaſſage to you but to my L. your Father. The ſaid Earle beſought his father diuers times to giue him leaue to anſwer, who in the end ſaid thus vnto him: I haue anſwered for thee as me thinketh, the father ſhould anſwer for the ſonne, notwithſtanding if thou haue ſo great deſire to ſpeake, bethinke thy ſelfe to day, and to morrow ſpeake and ſpare not. Then Moruillier to his former ſpeech added, that he could not imagine what had mooued the Earle to enter into this league with the D. of Britaine, vnleſſe it were bicauſe of a penſion 
                     8
                   the King had once giuen him, togither with the gouernment of Normandy, and afterward again taken from him.
               The next day in preſence of the ſelfe ſame audience, the Earle of Charolois kneeling vpon a veluetcuſhion, directed his ſpeech to his father, and began with this baſtard of Rubempre, affirming the cauſes of his impriſonment to be iuſt & lawfull, as the courſe of his arraignment ſhould well declare. Notwithſtanding I thinke nothing was euer prooued againſt him, though I confeſſe the preſumptions to haue been great. Fiue yeeres after I my ſelfe ſaw him deliuered out of priſon. This point thus anſwered, the Earle began to diſcharge the D. of Britaine and himſelfe, ſaying, that true it was that the D. and he were entred into league and amitie, & had ſworn themſelues brethren in armes, but that this league tended in no reſpect to the preiudice of the King or his realme, but rather to the ſeruice and defence thereof, if neede ſhould ſo require. Laſtly, as touching the penſion taken from him, he anſwered, that he neuer receiued but one quarters benefit thereof, to the value of nine thouſand francks 
                     9
                  , and that for his part he neuer made ſute neither for it, nor the gouernment of Normandy: for ſo long as he enioied the fauor and good will of his father, he ſhould not need to craue of any man. I thinke verily, had it not been for the reuerence he bare to his ſaid father who was there preſent, and to whom he addreſſed his ſpeech, that he would haue vſed much bitterer termes. In the end D. Philip very wiſely and humbly beſought the King lightly not to conceiue an euill opinion of him or his ſonne, but to continue his fauor towards them. Then the banquet was brought in, and the ambaſſadors tooke their leaue both of the father and the ſonne. But after the Earle of Eu, and the Chauncellor had taken their leaue of the Earle of Charolois, who ſtood a good way from his father, he ſaid thus to the Archbiſhop of Narbonne that paſſed forth the laſt of the ambaſſadors: Remember my moſt humble dutie to the King, and tell him he hath made his Chauncellor to vſe me very homely heere, but before a yeeres end he ſhall repent it: which meſſage the Archbiſhop did to the King at his returne into Fraunce as heereafter you ſhall perceiue.
               
                  
Theſe Moruilliers words aboue rehearſed, cauſed the Earle of Charolois hatred againſt the King to take deepe roote, the ſeedes whereof were before ſowne by the Kings late redeeming of the townes ſituate vpon the riuer of Somme 
                     10
                  , namely Amiens, Abbeuille, Saint Quintin, and the reſt which king Charles the 7. had engaged by the treatie of Arras to his father. D. Philip of Burgundie to haue and to holde to him and to his heires males, till they were redeemed for fower hundred thouſand crownes 
                     11
                  : How theſe matters paſſed, I know not perfectly, but true it is that in the D. old age he was ſo gouerned by the Lords of Croy and Chimay, being brethren, and others of their houſe, that he agreed to take againe his money & reſtore the ſaid territories to the King, greatly to the Earle his ſons diſcontentation: for beſides that they were the frontier townes of their dominions, they loſt in them a number of able men for the wars. The Earle of Charolois charged the houſe of Croy with this fact, ſo far foorth that after extreeme age was growne vpon his father (whereunto he euen then approched) he baniſhed all the ſaid houſe out of his dominions, and confiſcated all their lands, eſtates and offices.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Commines vvhen he came to the Earle of Charolois ſeruice vvas 19. yeers of age.
                  
                  2 Charles Earle of Eu, Peter of Moruillier, and Iohn de Harcour biſhop of Narbonne vvere the ambaſſadors heere mentioned, they arriued at Liſte the 5. of Nouember, Annales Burgundiae.
                  3 VVhether the king ment to haue taken the Earle of Charolois priſoner by this Rubempre, reade Annal. Burgund. lib. 3. pag. 880. and Meyer lib. 16. fol. 334. vvho flatly charge him vvith it.
                  
                  4 Sir Oliuer de la Marche heere named vvrote a Cronicle of theſe times.
                  
                  5 The cauſe vvhy the King ſent Rubempre into Holland vvas not (as he ſaid) to take the Earle of Charolois, but the Vicechauncellor of Britaine named in Meyer, Iohannes Rociuilla, and by our author in the 3. Chapter of this first booke Rouuille, vvhom the Duke of Britaine had ſent into England to make a league betvveene the realme of England and him, and bicauſe the King ſuppoſed this Vicechauncellor vvould viſit the Earle of Charolois in his returne: he ſent this Rubempre into Holland to take him and bring him into Fraunce. Annal. Burgund. Meyer.
                  6 For the better vnderstanding of the Dukes anſvvere, I am forced to paſſe the bounds of a note. VVherefore it is to be vnderstood that in the declination of the Romaine Empire, the Burgundians anno 408. being chaſed out of Almaine, vvhere they inhabited, the countries novv ſubiect to the Palſgraue of the Rhyne, inuaded Fraunce, and conquered the countries, novv knovvne by the names of the Countie and Duchie of Burgundy, togither vvith Sauoy, Daulphine, Prouince, and the greatest part of Svvitzerland, and anno 414. choſe them a king named Gondiachus, vvith vvhom (after diuers battels fought vvith changeable fortune) Aetius the Emperour, Honorius his lieutenant in Fraunce, at the length made peace. And Gondiachus remained King of Burgundy, and ayded the Romaines against Attila. Soone after failed the male line of Gondiachus, and, by the mariage of Clotilde daughter to Chilperic, Gondiachus his ſonne, vvith Clodoneus King of Fraunce: Burgundie fell to Clotarius ſonne to the ſaide Clotilde and Clodoneus, and ſo continued in the houſe of Fraunce till the yeere 843. vvhen the ſonnes of the Emperor Lodouicus Pius vvarring togither, Burgundy vvas deuided into Burgundiam Tranſiuranam, and Ciſiuranam. Tranſiurana containing Sauoy, Daulphine Prouince and Lyonnois, remained to Lotharius the Emperor, vvith the title of King of Burgundie. Ciſiurana conteining the Countie and Duchie
                     
                     of Burgundie, vvas alſo diſmembred, for that part novv knovvne by the name of the Countie of Burgundie, fell alſo to Lotharius ſhare: but that part novv knovvne by the name of the Dutchie of Burgundie, vvas togither vvith the Realme of Fraunce yeelded to Carolus Caluus: But after the death of the Emperor Lotharius, his tvvo ſonnes Lodouicus and Lotharius made another partition of their part of Burgundie: for the realme of Austraſia vvith the Countie of Burgundie fell to Lotharius, after vvhoſe death his vncle Carolus Caluus King of Fraunce ambitiouſly through violence conquered alſo that part of Burgundie, and ioined it to the crovvne of Fraunce, ſo that the ſaid Carolus Caluus poſſeſſed all Burgundie Ciſiurana, that is, both the Countie and Dutchie of Burgundie. Loduicus the other ſonne of the Emperor Lotharius poſſeſſed vvith the Empire all Burgundie Tranſiurana, togither vvith the title of King of Burgundie, and left behinde him one onely daughter named Hermingarde, maried to Boſon brother to Richilde, Carolus Caluus his vvife, in reſpect of vvhich mariage the ſaid Caluus gaue to Boſon all Burgundie Ciſiurana, vvhich he the ſaid Caluus then held: And thus had Boſon all the realme of Burgundie, viz. Tranſiurana in the right of his wife, and Ciſiurana, by his brother in lawes gift. Farther the ſaid Caluus being both Emperor and King of France, created the aboue named Boſon King of Burgundie anno 879. to whom ſucceeded Lodouicus his ſonne, from whom Ralph King of Fraunce (ſonne to Richard that firſt intituled himſelfe Duke of Burgundie) wan the greateſt part of Burgundy Ciſiurana. To this Lewis ſucceeded his ſonne Ralph King of Burgundie, who not being able to defend his realme gaue it to the Emperor Conradus 2. who notwithſtanding obteined the leaſt part thereof: for as touching Tranſiurana, Beralde Duke of Saxe had before this gift woon from King Ralph Sauoy and a great peece of Switzerland, Daulphine, Lyonnois, & Poruince, Guigue le gras the firſt Daulphine, had likewiſe conquered. And as touching Ciſiurana by treatie made betweene the Emperour Conradus 2. and Henry King of Fraunce, onely the County remained to the Empire, and the Dutchie to the crowne of Fraunce. This I haue written, bicauſe ſome hold opinion that the County of Burgundy ought alſo to be held of the crowne of Fraunce, whereas in deede rather the Dutchy with all Tranſiurana (the greateſt part whereof the French King at this day poſſeſſeth) ought to be held of the Empire, from whom the ſaid French Kings haue pulled ſo many prouinces, that now (as one properly ſpeaketh) the Eagle hath loſt ſo many feathers, that hardly he can flie.
                  
                  7 Lahaie in our author and in Annal. Burgund. where Rubempre ſhould haue taken the Earle of Charolois, is named in Meyer Gorkem.
                  8 The penſion the Earle of Charalois had of the King with the gouernment of Normandy was 36000. franks, Annal. Burgund. La Marche, Meyer.
                  9 A franke is two ſhillings and ſix pence ſterling, after eight ſouſe to an Engliſh ſhilling, ſo that the carles penſion after that rate amounted to fower thouſand fiue hundred pound ſterling.
                  
                  10 The townes and territories vpon the riuer of Somme engaged to Duke Philip by the treatie of Arras, which was in the yeere 1435. are named in the articles of the ſaid treatie rehearſed in Annal. Burgund. pag. 760. and 761. and in the firſt booke of La Marche, and in the 16. booke of Meyer and others.
                  
                  11 They were engaged as our author and Annal. Burgund. write for 400000. crowns, but Meyer ſaith 450000. but they were redeemed for 400000. anno 1463. La Marche, Meyer. Annal. Burgund.
               
            
            
               
               How the Earle of Charolois and diuers noble men of Fraunce leuied an army againſt king Lewis, vnder colour of the weale publique. Chap. 2.
               
                  SOone after the abouenamed Ambaſſadors departure, Iohn Duke of Bourbon that laſt died, arriued at the town of Liſle, pretending that he came to viſit his vncle Duke Philip of Burgundie, who aboue all houſes loued eſpecially this houſe of Bourbon, and no maruell: for this Duke of Bourbons mother was Duke Philips ſiſter. She had liued a widow many yeeres, and ſoiourned there at that time with hir brother, both hir ſelfe and diuers of hir children, to wit, three daughters and one ſonne, notwithſtanding this was not indeed the cauſe of the Duke of Bourbons arriuall, but his comming was to perſwade the Duke of Burgundie to ſuffer an armie to be leuied in his dominions, aſſuring him that all the Princes of Fraunce would do the like: meaning thereby to giue the King to vnderſtand how euill and vniuſt gouernment he vſed in his realme, & purpoſing to make themſelues ſo ſtrong, that they might conſtraine him by force to redreſſe this inconuenience, if praiers could not preuaile. This war was afterward called THE WEALE PVBLIQVE, bicauſe the authors thereof vſed the common wealth for colour of their enterpriſe. The ſaid good Duke Philip (for ſo is he ſurnamed ſince his death) agreed that an armie ſhould be leuied in his dominions, but the bottom of the enterpriſe was neuer diſcouered to him: for he thought not that the matter ſhoulde haue come to hand ſtrokes as after it did. Immediately began the muſters through all the Dukes dominions, and the Earle of Saint Paule afterward Conſtable of Fraunce, accompanied with the Marſhall of Burgundie, being of the houſe of Neuf-chaſtell, repaired to Cambray (where D. Philip then lay) to the Earle of Charolois, who immediatly after their arriuall aſſembled his fathers Councill, and a great number of his ſubiects in the Biſhops palace at Cambray, where he proclaimed all the houſe of Croy traitors to his father and him. And notwithſtanding that the Earle of S. Paule alleaged, that by this proclamation he ſhould be greatly indamaged, bicauſe long before this, he had giuen his daughter in mariage 
                     1
                   to the L. of Croies ſonne: yet was the ſaid houſe of Croy (al that notwithſtanding) forced to abandon the Dukes dominions 
                     2
                  , where they loſt great riches. With the which dooing, Duke Philip was much diſcontented, eſpecially bicauſe his chiefe chamberlaine (afterward Lord of Chimay) a yoong man well diſpoſed, and nephew to the Lord of Croy, was forced for feare of his life, to depart without leaue taken of his maſter, being aduertiſed that if he did otherwiſe he ſhould either be ſlaine or apprehended: but the Dukes old age cauſed him to beare this matter more patiently than otherwiſe he would. All this trouble hapned in his houſe bicauſe of the reſtitution of the territories aboue mentioned, ſituate vpon the riuer of Somme, which the Duke had reſtored to King Lewis for the ſum of 400000. crownes, by the perſwaſion of this houſe of Croy, as the Earle of Charolois laide to their charge.
               The ſaid Earle after he had pacified his father, and reconciled himſelfe to him the beſt that mought be, put his whole force incontinent into the field, being accompanied

with the Earle of S. Paule, the principall gouernor of his affaires, and he that had the greateſt charge in his armie, for he had vnder him by the Earle of Charolois commandement 300. men of armes, and 4000. archers, beſides a number of valiant knights and eſquires of Artois, Haynalt, and Flaunders. Like bands and as great were alſo vnder the leading of the L. of Rauaſtin the D. of Cleues brother, and the L. Anthony baſtard of Burgundie, other captaines for breuitie I paſſe ouer, but aboue all the reſt, two knights there were eſpecially, in great credit with the Earle of Charolois, the one named the L. of Hault-bordin an ancient knight, baſtard brother to the Earle of S. Paule, the other the L. of Contay. They had both been trained vp in the long wars betweene Fraunce and England, at the ſame time that Henry the 5. of that name King of England, raigned in Fraunce, being confederate with this Duke Philip of Burgundie. They were two valiant and wiſe knights, and had the principall charge of the whole armie of yoong gentlemen: there were a number, but one eſpecially very famous, called maſter Philip of Lalain, iſſued of a race that hath euer been ſo valiant and couragious, that they haue in maner all died in the wars in their princes ſeruice. The Earles force was great: for his men of armes were to the number of 1400. but euill armed, and vntrained, bicauſe of the long peace theſe Princes of Burgundie had liued in. For ſince the treatie of Arras by the ſpace of 36. yeeres and more, they neuer had war that indured nor almoſt taſte of war, ſaue a few broyles againſt the citie of Gaunt, which were ſoone pacified. Notwithſtanding his men of armes were well mounted, and well accompanied, for few or none ſhould you haue ſeene without fiue or ſixe great horſes of his retinue. 
                     3
                   The archers 
                     4
                   were eight or nine thouſand, and when they muſtred they were more vnwilling to depart then to giue their names, but the ableſt were choſen and the reſt diſmiſſed 
                     5
                  .
               The ſubiects of this houſe of Burgundie liued then in great proſperitie, partly bicauſe of their long peace, and partly bicauſe of their Princes goodnes, who leuied but few ſubſidies vpon them, ſo that theſe Seniors ſeemed comparable to the land of promiſe in thoſe daies: for they flowed in wealth, and had continued in great quietnes the ſpace of 23. yeeres, to wit, till the beginning of theſe wars now mentioned, which till this day endure vnended: their expenſes in apparell both of men and women were great and ſuperfluous 
                     6
                  , their feaſts and banquets more ſumptuous and prodigall than in any countrey that euer I ſawe, their bathes and other paſtimes with women wanton and diſſolute, yea ſomwhat too ſhameles, I meame of women of low eſtate. To be ſhort, the ſubiects of this houſe, thought at that time, no Prince able to withſtand them, at the leaſt none too mightie for them, but at this preſent, I know no countrey in the world in ſo great miſerie and deſolation as theirs, and I doubt me the ſins they committed in their proſperitie, cauſe them now to ſuffer this aduerſitie, bicauſe they acknowledged not all theſe gifts and benefits to proceede from God who diſpoſeth and beſtoweth them as to his heauenly wiſdome ſeemeth beſt.
               The Earles armie thus furniſhed euen in a moment, of all things neceſſarie, marched forward, 
                     7
                   the whole force being on horſeback, ſaue thoſe that conueied the artillerie, which was mighty and ſtrong for that time, and the ſtraglers appointed for the cariage, the which was ſo great, that the Earles owne cariage incloſed the greateſt part of his campe: he marched firſt towards Noyon, and beſieged a little caſtell called Neſle, which was ſoone taken, notwithſtanding the reſiſtance made by the garriſon that was within it. The Marſhall Ioachin (one of the fower Marſhals of Fraunce) iſſuing out of Peronne coaſted continually along by the Earles campe,

but could not endamage him, for his force was ſo ſmall, that when the Earle drew neare to Paris he retired thither. All the way as the Earle paſſed he made no war, but what his men took they paid for: wherfore the towns vpon the riuer of Somme & all other townes that he paſſed by, receiued his men in ſmall troupes, and ſold them for their money whatſoeuer they would buy, as men reſting in ſuſpence whether the king or the princes ſhould haue the vpper hand 
                     8
                  . So far marched the Earle that he came to S. Dennis neare to Paris, where all the Lords of the realme had promiſed to meete him but none came, notwithſtanding that the Vicechauncellor of Britaine, the D. and Ambaſſadorreſident in the Earles campe, forged newes of their comming from time to time, at his owne pleaſure vpon certaine blanks that he had, ſigned with his maſters hand: he was a Norman borne, and a very wiſe and ſufficient man, and ſo it behooued him to be, for the whole campe murmured againſt him. The Earle of Charolois ſhewed himſelfe before Paris 
                     9
                  , where was a hot skirmiſh, hard at the towne gates, but to the Citizens diſaduantage. Men of war within the towne were none, ſaue onely the Marſhall Ioachin with his companie, and the Lord of Nantoillet, afterward Lord great Maſter, who did the King as good ſeruice in theſe wars as euer did ſubiect King of Fraunce at his neede, and yet in the ende was euill recompenſed, rather by his enimies malice, than the Kings fault, though neither of both are cleerely to be excuſed. The poore people of the citie were in ſo great feare the day of the skirmiſh, that they cried often (as I was afterwards credibly enformed) that we were entred the towne, but without cauſe. Notwithſtanding the L. of Hault-bourdin aboue mentioned (who had been brought vp in the towne, when it was nothing ſo ſtrong as now it is) gaue aduiſe to aſſault it, and the ſoldiers deſired nothing more, contemning the townes men bicauſe the skirmiſhes were hard at their gates, yet the contrary opinion tooke place, whereupon the Earle retired to S. Denis. The next day in the morning he debated with his Councill whether he ſhould go to meet with the Dukes of Berry and Britaine or not, who were at hand as the Vicechauncellor of Britaine ſaid, ſhewing alſo their letters teſtifying the ſame, but he had forged them vpon his blanks, and other newes knew he none. In the end the Earle reſolued to paſſe the riuer of Seine, notwithſtanding that the moſt part of his Councill gaue aduiſe to returne home, ſeeing the reſt of the confederates had broken day, alledging it to be ſufficient to haue paſſed the riuers of Somme and Marne, and more than needed to paſſe this riuer of Seine. Some alſo put foorth great doubts, bicauſe we had no places on our backe to retire into if we ſhould be diſtreſſed. But all this notwithſtanding the Earle paſſed the riuer and encamped at Pont S. Clou 
                     10
                  , wherefore the whole army murmured much againſt the Earle of S. Paule and this Vicechauncellor, who were the principall perſwaders of him thereunto. The next day after his arriuall there, he receiued letters from a Lady of this land written with hir owne hand, wherein ſhe aduertiſed him that the King was departed out of Bourbonnois, and came downe with all ſpeede to fight with him.
               I muſt heere declare the occaſion of the Kings voyage into Bourbonnois, which was this: So ſoone as he vnderſtood that all the princes of his realme had conſpired againſt him (at the leaſt againſt his gouernment) he determined to preuent them, and before they were aſſembled, to inuade the D. of Bourbon, who was the firſt that openly diſcouered himſelfe to be of the confederacie 
                     11
                  : and bicauſe his countrey was weake he hoped ſoone to ſubdue it, as in deede diuers places he tooke, and would eaſily haue taken all, had not ſuccours come thither out of Burgundie vnder the leading of the L. Coulches, the Marqueſſe of Rottelin, the L. of Montague, and

others, with whom Maſter VVilliam of Rochefort Chauncellor of Fraunce (a man at this day of great eſtimation) was alſo in armes. This force was leuied in Burgundie by the ſollicitation of the Earle of Beauieu, and the Gardinall of Bourbon, 
                     12
                   brethren to D. Iohn of Bourbon, and by them receiued into Molines. Aide came alſo of another ſide to the D. of Bourbon, vnder the leading of the D. of Nemours, the Earle of Armignac, and the L. of Albert, being accompanied with a great band of ſoldiers, ſome of the which were good men of armes of their countries, who lately had forſaken the Kings pay, and put themſelus into their ſeruice. But the greateſt part of their men were vtterly vnfurniſhed of all things, and forced for lacke of pay to liue vpon the poore people. The King notwithſtanding theſe their great forces gaue themynough to do: wherefore in the end they fell to treate of peace, eſpecially the D. of Nemours, who ſolemnly promiſed and ſware to take part with him, and yet did afterwards the contrary: whereupon the King conceiued ſo great diſpleaſure againſt him, that afterward he could neuer brooke him, as eftſoones he hath told me. To be ſhort, the King perceiuing that he could not atchieue his enterpriſe in Bourbonnois ſo ſpeedily as at the firſt he hoped, and fearing if the Earle of Charolois forces which approched neare to Paris, and the forces of the Duke of Berry his owne brother, and of the D. of Britaine which were comming out of Britaine, ſhould ioine togither: that the Pariſians would receiue them into their towne, bicauſe they all pretended the common wealth for colour of their enterpriſe: & knowing alſo that as the towne of Paris did, ſo all the other townes in his realme would follow; for theſe cauſes I ſay, he reſolued with all ſpeed poſſible to put himſelfe into Paris, meaning to keepe theſe two great armies aſunder: but his purpoſe was not to fight, as he hath himſelfe diuers times told me in communing of theſe affaires,
               
                  The Notes.
                  1. The Earle of S. Paul had betrothed his daughter to the L. of Croys ſonne, but ſeeing the Earle of Charalois hatred againſt the ſaid Croy, he would haue broken off the mariage againe, but Croy in whoſe houſe the ſaid daughter remained, contrarie to hir fathers wil made vp the match, for the which cauſe the Earle of S. Paul hated the ſaid Croy to the death, Annal. Burgund.
                  2. The Earle of Charolois beſides this matter heere alleaged charged Iohn L. of Croy, that he had called him great diuell, threatned him, and ſought to poiſon him. Meyer.
                  3. Euery French man of armes is allowed three men to accompanie him in the wars, one to beare his headpeece, called in Latin Ferentarius, and two archers. La Marche. but the Burgundians had heere ſome 5. ſome 6.
                  4 Theſe archers were bow-men mounted on horſebacke, as harquebuſiers on horſebacke are now.
                  
                  5 He that maketh ſuch offer of himſelfe, ſecketh pray not ſeruice, wherefore this reiecting of ſo many, was done according to the rules of the art of war.
                  
                  6 Of the exceſſe of this houſe of Burgundie, Annal. Burgund. write thus, lib. 3. pa. 917. and 918. All faſhions of apparell were growne in vſe among the ſubiects of this houſe of Burgundie, and thoſe ſo indecent and diſſolute, that none could be more. The Ladies and gentle women ware vpon their head a ſtrange kinde of attire, faſhioned in pyramidal form, the top thereof halfe an ell good from the crowne of their head, and thereupon a carchef of lawne or ſome other fine linnen hanging downe to the very ground: a fond attire and vvoorthy to be derided. The men diſguiſed themſelues no leſſe than the vvomen, ſome vvare their clothes ſo ſhort, that they hardly couered thoſe parts that nature hir ſelfe ſhameth to diſcouer: their haire vvas curled and of ſuch length that it hindred their ſight:
                     
                     vpon their heads they ware felt-hats copletanked, a quarter of an ell high or more: they ſtuffed their dublets about the ſhouldens and brest maruellous full of bombast, to the end they might ſeeme ſquare and broad brested, a thing greatly diſpleaſing God: their clokes were not ſo ſhort but their gownes were as long, for they trained after them vpon the ground. To be ſhort, the whole world could not deuiſe ſtranger kinds of diſguiſing than they had, and that was woorst of all is this, that euery raſcall and euery woman in beggers estate would be apparelled princelike, and imitate the faſhion of Court, without regarde either of coſt or calling. Compare this with the exceſſe of England at theſe daies, and we ſhall ſee in a glaſſe our owne vanities, and haue iuſt cauſe to looke for the ſame miſeries that fell vpon this houſe of Burgundy after this exceſſe.
                  
                  7 The 15. of May ſaith Meyer, but the 25. Annal. Burgund. the Earle departed from his father.
                  
                  8 The Earle of Charolois as he paſſed named himſelfe the Duke of Berries lieutenant, for the which cauſe the townes heere mentioned the willinglyer receiued him. Annales Burgund.
                  9 The Earles armie ſhewed it ſelfe before Paris about the 12. or 13. of Iuly, at which time all the princes ſhould haue met him there. Meyer.
                  10 The Earle of S. Paule tooke a great bote vpon the riuer of Seine, in the which he paſſed the riuer, and tooke Pont S. Clou. Annal. Burgund.
                  11 Reade a letter written by the King to the Duke of Bourbon and his anſwere therunto. Annal. Burgund. pag. 889.
                  12 This Cardinall of Bourbon was Archbiſhop of Lyons, and brother to the Duke of Bourbon, Annal. Burgund. for the which cauſe I thinke it best in the French to reade freres for frere, bicauſe the Earle of Beauieu and this Cardinall were both brethren to the Duke of Bourbon.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Earle of Charolois encamped neere to Montl'hery, and of the battell fought there betweene the King of Fraunce and him. Chap. 3.
               
                  THe Earle of Charolois ſuppoſing that the King (being departed out of Burbonnois (as before you haue heard) came downe purpoſely to fight with him: reſolued likewiſe to ſet forward againſt the King, and then read openly the contents of the letter ſent him by the Lady aboue mentioned, (not vttering hir name) and required his ſoldiers to play the men, ſaying, that he was fullie reſolued to hazard the battell, wherefore he marched and encamped at a village neere to Paris called Longiumeau, and the Earle of S. Paule with the vawarde lodged at Montl'hery, two leagues beyond Longiumeau, from whence he ſent foreriders and ſcoutes abroad, to vnderſtand of the Kings comming, and what way he tooke: farther in the preſence of the Earle of S. Paule, the Lord of Hault-bourdin, and the Lord of Contay, Longiumeau was aſſigned for the place of the battell, and thither it was agreed that the Earle of S. Paule ſhould retire with the vawarde if the King hapned to come.
               Now you ſhall vnderſtand that the Earle of Maine with ſeuen or eight hundred men of armes lay continually in face of the Dukes of Berry and Britaine, who were accompanied with a number of wiſe and valiant knights, that King Lewis had put

out of penſion at his firſt comming to the ſtate, (notwithſtanding the great ſeruices that they had done his father, in the recouering and pacifying of the realme:) wherof afterward full often he repented him. Among theſe knights was the Earle of Dunois, a man of great experience in al matters 
                     1
                  , the marſhall of Loheac, the Earle of Dampmartin, the Lord of Bueil and diuers others, accompanied with the number of fiue hundred men of armes, who lately had forſaken the Kings paie, and retired themſelues to the Duke of Britaine, of whoſe onely ſubiects this whole force conſiſted. The Earle of Maine who lay continually in face of the two Dukes campe, (as you haue heard) finding himſelfe too weake to encounter with them, diſlodged continually before them, approching neerer and neerer to the King, in like maner the Dukes of Berrie and Britaine endeuored to ioine with the Burgundians. Some haue helde opinion that the Earle of Maine had ſecret intelligence with the Princes, but I could neuer vnderſtand any ſuch thing, neither do I beleeue it, 
                     2
                  .
               The Earle of Charolois lying in campe at Longiumeau (as you haue heard) and his vawarde at Montl'hery, was aduertiſed by a priſoner, that the Earle of Maine with his whole force, all the men of armes of the Kings ordinary retinue, being to the number of two an twenty hundreth, and the arriereban 
                     3
                  . of Daulphine togither with fortie or fiftie gentlemen of Sauoy, excellent good ſoldiers, were al ioined with the King.
               The King in the meane time conſulted with the Earle of Maine, the high Seneſchall of Normandie called De Brezey, the Admiral of Fraunce who was of the houſe of Montauban, and others, what was to be don, & in the end whatſoeuer was ſaid or aduiſed to the contrary, reſolued not to fight, neither approch neere to the Burgundians campe, but onely to enter into Paris, 
                     4
                   which in mine opinion was the beſt & ſafeſt courſe. He ſtood in great doubt of his high Seneſchall of Normandy, and therfore deſired him to tell him truely whether he had giuen his faith in writing to the Princes that came againſt him: whereunto the Seneſchall anſwered after his merrie ieaſting maner, that he had, & that the writing ſhould remaine with him, but the bodie ſhould ſerue him, which his anſwere the King tooke in good part, & gaue him the leading of his vaward, and put alſo vnder his charge, the guides whoſe help he vſed bicauſe he ment to ſhun the battle as you haue heard. But the Seneſchall being wedded to his owne will, ſaide priuily to certaine of his familiar friends, that he would that day ioine the two armies ſo nere togither, that he had need to be a good man of war that ſhould ſeuer them without battel, which his promiſe he performed, though to his owne coſt, for the firſt man that was ſlaine was himſelfe 
                     5
                  , and his band with him. Theſe his words, the King hath often ſince rehearſed to me, for I ſerued then the Earle of Charolois.
               But to proceede, the 27. of Iuly, 
                     6
                   the yeere 1465. the Kings vawarde came to Montl'hery, where the Earle of Saint Paul lodged, who incontinent aduertiſed the Earle of Charolois lying two leagues thence (namely at Longiumeau, the place aſſigned for the battel) of their arriuall, deſiring him of aide with all ſpeed, and alledging that bicauſe all his men of armes and archers were lighted on foote, and incloſed with their cariage, he could not poſſiblie retire to Longiumeau, according to the order agreed on, without ſeeming to flie, whereby he ſhould both diſcourage and endanger the whole armie. Which meſſage receiued: the Earle of Charolois ſent foorthwith the baſtard of Burgundy called Anthony with a great band of men to ioine with the Earle of S. Paule, and debated with himſelfe whether he ſhould go thither in perſon or not, and in the end marched forward with the reſt, and came to the place about ſeauen of the clocke in the morning: but before his arriuall fiue or

ſixe of the Kings enſignes were diſplaied along vpon a great ditch ſide betweene the two armies.
               The Vicechauncellor of Britaine called Rouuille was yet in the Earle of Charolois campe, and with him an ancient man of armes named Maderey, the ſelfeſame that deliuered Pont S. Maxence to the Burgundians: againſt theſe two the whole armie murmured, bicauſe the battell being now ready to be giuen: the forces they had ſo much vaunted of were yet vncome. Wherefore they were both in great feare, and fled before the two armies ioined, taking the way to the Britaines campe. The Earle of Charolois company ſet themſelues in order of battell as they marched, and at their arriuall found the Earle of S. Paul on foot, & all the archers diſmounted, ech man hauing a pale pitched before him. Farther, they beat out the heads of diuers pipes of wine to drink: & ſure for thoſe few battels I haue been in, I neuer ſaw men in my life more deſirous to fight, which me thought was a good ſigne and a great comfort. Order was giuen at the firſt that we ſhould all light on foote none excepted, but that order was afterward altered. For almoſt all the men of armes mounted againe on horſeback, ſaue certaine valiant Knights and Eſquiers appointed to fight among the footemen, namely, Monſeur de Cordes, and Maſter Philip of Lalain, with diuers others: for at that time among the Burgundians the honorableſt perſonages fought on foote among the archers, to the end the infanterie might be the better aſſured and fight the more couragiouſly, which order they learned of the Engliſh men, with whom Duke Philip (being confederate in his youth) made war vpon the realme of Fraunce the ſpace of two and thirty yeeres without truce 
                     7
                  . But the burthen of thoſe wars lay vpon the Engliſh mens ſhoulders, who were at that time rich and mightie, and had a wiſe, goodly and valiant King called Henry, accompanied with ſage, hardy, and expert captains, namely, the Earle of Salisburie, Talbot and others, whom I paſſe ouer, bicauſe thoſe wars were before my time, notwithſtanding I haue ſeene the reliques of them. For when God ment to withdraw his goodnes from the Engliſh men, this wiſe King died at Bois de Vincennes, and his ſonne who prooued but a ſimple man, was crowned King of Fraunce and England at Paris. Soone after, all was turned topſie turuie in England. For ciuill wars aroſe among them which haue endured almoſt till this preſent, by reaſon that the houſe of Yorke vſurped the crowne, or held it by good title, I wot not wel whether, for the lot of kingdomes is giuen from heauen.
               But to returne to the hiſtorie, this diſmounting and remounting of the Burgundians, cauſed both great delaie of time, and loſſe of men, for at this inſtant, that yoong valiant knight maſter Philip of Lalain, being but ſlenderly armed was ſlaine 
                     8
                  . The Kings forces marched ſcatteringly along by the forreſt of Torfou, being hardly 400. men of armes at our firſt arriuall, ſo that if we had then charged them, in mine opinion we had found no reſiſtance, for they that were behinde, could not haue aided the former, bicauſe they could not march forward vpon a front, but one by one after an other. Notwithſtanding, their number continually increaſed, which this wiſe knight Monſeigneur de Contay perceiuing, came and told his maſter the Earle of Charolois, that if he would obteine the victorie it was time to giue the charge, confirming his opinion by diuers good reaſons, and adding that if he had aſſailed his enimies at his firſt arriuall, they had already been diſcomfited, for then their number was ſmal, but now greatly increaſed as eaſie it was to be diſcerned, & ſure he ſaid true 
                     9
                  . Then was euery mans aduiſe asked, and the former order cleane altered, but in the meane time a great & hot skirmiſh was alreadie begun, at the very entrie into the village of Montl'hery, all of ſhot on both ſides, the Kings bands were lead by Poncet of Riuiere,

being all archers of his ordinary retinue, gliſtering in gilt and very well appointed. But the Earles ſhot was out of order, obedient to no man, and doing all things of their owne braine. Thus began the skirmiſhes in the which the Lord Philip of Lalain 
                     10
                  , and Iames of Mas a valiant gentleman, afterward maſter of the horſe to Duke Charles of Burgundie, fought on foote among the archers. The Burgundians being the greater number, tooke a houſe, and bare two or three doores before them, wherewith they couered themſelues in ſteede of targates, and after they were entred the ſtreete, ſet fire on a houſe, the winde was with them, and blew the flame in their enimies faces, who thereupon retired, and afterward tooke horſe and fled, with the which hue and crie, the Earle of Charolois began to march, leauing the order firſt deuiſed. For order was firſt giuen that the bands ſhould reſt twiſe by the way, bicauſe the Earles vawarde and his battle were far aſunder 
                     11
                  . The Kings army ſtood neere to the caſtle of Montl'hery, a great hedge and a ditch being betweene them and vs. The fields beyond them bare that yeere wheate, beanes, and other graine, growne maruellous high and thicke: for the ſoile there is verie good. All the Earles ſhot marched on foote before him in very euill order, notwithſtanding that in mine opinion in a battel the principall hope of victorie conſiſteth in the ſhot, I meane if the force of ſhot be great (for ſmall force ſerueth to ſmall purpoſe) and either euill mounted (to the end they be not vnwilling to forſake their horſes) or not mounted at all. Farther the day of a battle, thoſe that are ignorant of the wars will do a greater exploit, than thoſe that haue been long trained vp therein, this is the Engliſhmens opinion, who are beſt ſhot in the world: order was firſt giuen (as you haue heard) that the Earles battle ſhould reſt twiſe vpon the way, to the end the foote men mought breath them, bicauſe the vaward and it were far aſunder, and the corne high and thicke which troubled their going, yet notwithſtanding the cleane contrarie was done, as though men would purpoſely haue loſt all. Wherfore heerby, God manifeſtly declared that he is the Lord of hoſtes, and diſpoſeth of the victorie as ſeemeth beſt to him, and ſure for my part, I cannot be perſwaded that the wiſdome of one man is ſufficient to gouerne ſuch a number of men, nor that an enterpriſe can be executed in the field, as it is deuiſed in the chamber: and farther I verily beleeue, that who ſo ableth himſelfe by his own wit and capacitie to giue order in ſo waightie a matter, misbehaueth himſelfe towards God. Notwithſtanding euery man ought to do his endeuour therein, acknowledging the wars to be one of the accompliſhments of Gods iudgements, which oftentimes he beginneth vpon ſmall occaſions, to the end that by giuing victorie now to one, and now to another, ſome great realmes and ſeniories may fall to ruine and deſolation, and other ſome increaſe and floriſh with large empire and dominion, for farther proofe whereof marke this that foloweth. The Earle of Charolois marched without any breathing giuen to his ſhot and footemen vpon the way. The Kings men of armes paſſed through the hedge aboue mentioned at two ſeuerall places, and when they approched ſo neere their enimies, that they began to charge their ſtaues, the Burgundian men of armes brake their owne ſhot, and paſſed through it, not giuing them leaue to let one arrow flie, notwithſtanding that the ſhot were the principall force and onely hope of their armie, for of the men of armes (being to the number of twelue hundred) I thinke hardly fifty knew how to charge a launce, there were not foure hundred of them armed with quiracies, and of their retinue not one armed, all the which inconueniences grew partly bicauſe they had reſted ſo long in peace, and partly bicauſe this houſe of Burgundie for eaſe of their ſubiects, entertained no ſoldiers in ordinarie. But ſince that day, theſe Seniors of Burgundie haue continued in

troubles, which euen at this preſent rather increaſe than diminiſh. Thus the Burgundian men of armes (as you haue heard) brake themſelues the chiefe force and onely hope of their armie, yet notwithſtanding, ſo it pleaſed God to diſpoſe of this matter, that on the right ſide of the caſtle, where the Earle himſelfe ſtoode no reſiſtance was found. All this day I my ſelfe neuer departed from the Earle, being leſſe afraide than in any other battell that euer I was at ſince, for I was yoong and knew not what perill ment, but wondred how any man durſt reſiſt the Prince I ſerued, ſuppoſing none to be comparable to him. Such are the cogitations of men lacking experience, which cauſeth them oftentimes to maintaine fond arguments, grounded vpon ſmall reaſon. Wherefore it is good to follow his aduiſe that ſaith, A man ſeldome repenteth him of too little ſpeech, but often of too much. On the lefthand ſtood the Lord of Rauaſtin, and maſter Iames of S. Paul, with diuers others, who well perceiued their force too weake to encounter with the enimie that came to charge them, but they were now ſo neere ioined togither, that it was too late to deuiſe any new order. To be ſhort, theſe were vtterly ouerthrowne, and perſued euen hard to our carriage, where certaine of the footemen relied themſelues, but the greateſt part tooke the forreſt, being but halfe a league thence. The principall that folowed the chaſe were the gentlemen of Daulphine and Sauoy, with certeine companies of men of armes, who ſuppoſed the victorie to haue been theirs, and not without cauſe, for ſure the Burgundians flight was great on that ſide, yea and of great perſonages. The moſt part fled toward Pont S. Maxence, 
                     12
                   ſuppoſing it had held yet for the Earle. In the forreſt alſo a great number ſtaied, among whom was the Earle of S. Paul well accompanied, for he ſtood neere to the forreſt ſide, and declared afterward that he held not the battell as loſt.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Iohn Earle of Dunois was bastard to Lewis Duke of Orleans. Meyer.
                  2 Yet La Marche ſaith, that the Earle of Maine was of the Princes confederacie.
                  
                  3 The Arriereban is an edict neuer proclaimed but in caſes of great extremitie: for all as well nobles as others are thereupon bound to repaire to the King, diuers of the which before the proclamation therof are not bound by their tenure to mooue. The Arriereban of Daulphine heere named, were all thoſe of the countrie of Daulphine, that held by this tenure. Reade the edict made by King Francis anno 1543. and Girarde of the ſtate of Fraunce, lib. 2. fol. 113.
                  4 The King by the perſwaſion of the Earle of Maine and the Seneſchall Brezey reſolued at the laſt to fight. Annal. Burgund.
                  5 Brezey had changed armor with the King, which cauſed his death: for thoſe that ſlue him ſuppoſed it had been the King, Annal. Aquitan. but Meyer ſaith he was reported to be ſlaine by the Kings procurement, vvhich I knovve not vvhere he findeth.
                  
                  6 Of the day of the battell Annal. Franc. agree vvith our author, but Annal. Burg. & Annal. Aquit. ſay 17. Meyer hath 17. Cal. Auguſti, that is the 16. day of Iuly, & vvith him agreeth Gaguin La Marche, vvho vvas preſent at the battell and knighted in it.
                  
                  7 The Duke vvas ioined vvith the Engliſh men but 15. or 16. yeeres, as ſaith alſo Introduction de la Marche, for the league began anno 1419. and ended anno 1435.
                  8 The Burgundians diſmounted ſo ſuddenly, that laying dovvne their complete armor they had not leaſure to buckle their lighter armor about them, vvhich vvas the cauſe of Lalains death, Annal. Burgund.
                  9 Contay vſed another reaſon to perſvvade the Earle to aſſaile his enimies heere not expreſſed, to vvit, to preuent the Pariſians, vvho if they iſſued foorth ſhould incloſe him
                     
                     betvveene them and the King, Annal. Burgund.
                  10 This Lalain ſeemeth to be the father of him that vvas ſlaine.
                  
                  11 Betvveene Longiumeau vvhere the Earles battell lay, and Montl'hery vvhere his vavvard ledged are fovver Engliſh miles.
                  
                  12 Pont S. Clou, and Pont S. Maxence vvere yeelded by the Burgundians, bicauſe the rumor was that the Earle of Charolois was ſlaine in the battell. Meyer.
               
            
            
               Of the danger the Earle of Charolois was in, and how he was reſcued. Chap. 4.
               
                  THe Earle of Charolois purſued his enimies on that ſide himſelfe ſtood, halfe a league beyond Montl'hery, and found no reſiſtance, notwithſtanding that he were but ſlenderly accompanied and met with maine enimies, wherefore he held the victorie for his: but ſuddenly an old gentleman of Luxembourg called Anthony le Breton, came to him and aduertiſed him that the French were relied vpon the field, ſo that if he followed the chaſe any further, he ſhould caſt away himſelfe. But the Earle regarded not his ſpeech, notwithſtanding that he repeated it twiſe or thriſe. But euen in that inſtant arriued Monſeur de Contay, who told him the ſelfeſame tale the old gentleman of Luxembourg had done, and that in ſo ſtout and bold termes, that he gaue credit to his words and experience, and preſently returned. And I thinke verily if he had paſſed but two bow ſhot farther, he had been taken as diuers were that followed the chaſe before him. As he returned, hard by the village he met with a band of footemen flying, whom he purſued being accompanied hardly with an hundred horſe: none of theſe footemen made reſiſtance but one, who gaue the Earle ſuch a blowe on the breſt with a iauelin, that the marke thereof appeered at night: the greateſt part of the reſt eſcaped through the gardens, but he that ſtrake the Earle was ſlaine. And as we paſſed hard by the caſtell, we found the archers of the Kings garde before the gate, who neuer abandoned their place for our comming: whereat the Earle much maruelled, for he thought the battell had beene at an end, but he found it otherwiſe: for as he turned about to enter into the field (part of his companie being ſcattered from him) ſuddenly 15. or 16. men of armes gaue a charge vpon him, and at the very firſt ſlue his caruer named Philip D'orgues bearing a gydon of his armes. The Earle was there in great danger and receiued many hurts, eſpecially one in the throte with a ſword (the marke whereof ſtack by him as long as he liued) by reaſon that his beauer being euill faſtened in the morning was fallen away, and I my ſelfe ſaw when it fell. The enimies laid hands vpon him, ſaying, My Lord yeeld, we know you well ynough, be not wilfully ſlaine: but he manfully defended himſelfe. And at that inſtant a phyſitions ſonne of Paris that ſerued the Earle, named Iohn Cadet being a great lubberly fellow, mounted vpon a ſtrong iade like himſelfe, ran through the enimies, and brake them 
                     1
                  , wherewith they retired to the ditch ſide, (the place they had taken in the morning) the rather for that they diſcouered one of our enſignes marching in the midſt of the field, and approching neere to vs, being the baſtard of Burgundies enſigne, all to totterd and torne, to the which the Earle all embrewed in his owne blood retired, leauing at his archers enſigne not aboue fortie men, with whom we being hardly thirtie, ioined in great feare. The Earle incontinent

changed his horſe, hauing a freſh horſe brought him by Symon of Quingy then his page, and ſince a man well knowne: and rode about the field to relie his men, leauing vs that taried behinde him in ſuch feare, that by the ſpace of an houre we were all fully reſolued to flie, if but a hundred enimies had marched againſt vs: notwithſtanding our men came to vs by ten and twentie in a troupe, as well horſemen as footemen, but of the footemen many were hurt, and all very wearie, partly bicauſe of the battell, and partly bicauſe of their vnreaſonable iourney in the morning. Soone after returned the Earle himſelfe, hardly accompanied with an hundred men, but by litle and litle our number increaſed. The corne which but halfe an houre before had been ſo high, was now troden flat downe, by meanes whereof, aroſe a terrible duſt, all the fields lay ſtrawed with dead bodies of men an horſes, but bicauſe of the duſt none could be knowne.
               Immediately after this, we diſcouered the Earle of S. Paul iſſuing out of the forreſt, accompanied with fortie men of armes, and his enſigne marched ſtraight towards vs, and continually increaſed in number, but bicauſe he was far from vs, we ſent twiſe or thriſe to him deſiring him to make haſte, which notwithſtanding he did not, neither altred his pace, but cauſed his men to take vp the launces that lay vpon the ground, and came in very good order, which ſight much comforted vs. With him a great number relied themſelues, and in the end came and ioined with vs, ſo that we were then to the number of eight hundred men of armes, but footemen fewe or none, which was the onely let the Earle obteined not perfect victory, for there was a great ditch and a thicke hedge betweene his battell and the Kings.
               Of the Kings part fled the Earle of Maine with diuers others, to the number of eight hundred men of armes. Some haue helde opinion that the ſaid Earle of Maine had intelligence with the Burgundians, but for mine owne part I beleeue it not. Neuer was in any battell ſo great flight on both ſides, but the two Princes kept the field: of the Kings part there was a man of honor that fled as far as Luzignan without ſtaie, and of the Earles part a noble perſonage to Queſnoy le Comte, theſe two had no great deſire to bite one another 
                     2
                  .
               While the two armies ſtood thus in order of battell, the one in face of the other, the artillerie ſhot terribly, which ſlue men on both ſides, but neither partie deſired a new field. Notwithſtanding our band was greater then the Kings, but his preſence and the curteous language he vſed to his ſoldiers, was a great ſtay to his people, ſo far foorth, that I am throughly perſwaded both by mine owne knowledge and that I haue ſince heard, that had it not been for him alone they had all fled. Some of our company deſired a new battell, eſpecially the L. of Haultbourdin, alledging that he diſcouered a troupe of our enimies flying, and vndoubtedly if he could haue recouered but a hundred archers to haue ſhot through the hedge aboue mentioned, all had been ours.
               While this matter was in communication, and both the armies ſtanding thus in order of battell without fight, the night approched, and the King retired to Corbeil, but we thought he had encamped in the field, bicauſe fire falling by chance into a barrell of powder, and certaine carts laden with munition in the place where the King had ſtoode, tooke in the end the great hedge aboue mentioned, which we ſuppoſed to haue been the French mens fiers there encamped, whereupon the Earle of S. Paul and the Lord of Haultbourdin, who ſeemed to be the men of greateſt experience in our army, commanded our cariage to be brought to the place where we were, and our campe to be encloſed therewith, and ſo it was. And as we ſtood there relied togither in order of battell, diuers French men returnng from the chaſe, and

ſuppoſing the victory to be theirs, and our campe the Kings, paſſed through the midſt of vs, ſome of them eſcaped, but the moſt were ſlaine. The men of name that died on the Kings part were theſe, maſter Geffrey of S. Belin, the high Seneſchall of Normandy, and captaine Floquet, and of the Burgundians, maſter Philip of Lalain: of footemen and common ſoldiers we loſt more than the King, but of horſemen the King more than we: of priſoners the French tooke the beſt of thoſe that fled. There were ſlaine of both ſides two thouſand at the leaſt 
                     3
                  . The field was well fought, and there were of both parties that did their endeuor, ſome in fighting, and ſome in flybut ſure in mine opinion it was a woorthy feat of armes to relie themſelues togither vpon the field, and to ſtand three or foure houers in order of battell, the one in face of the other, and vndoubtedly both the Princes had good cauſe to make account of their ſubiects that ſtood ſo well by them at their need. But they did heerin like men not like angels, for ſome loſt their offices for flying, which were beſtowed vpon others that fled ten leagues beyond them: one of our part loſt his credit, and was commanded out of his maſters preſence, but within one month he was in greater fauor than before.
               When we were incloſed with our cariage, euery man lodged himſelfe as commodiouſly as he could, a great number of vs were hurt, and the whole armie almoſt diſcouraged, fearing that the Pariſians with two hundred men of armes that were within the citie, and the Marſhall Ioachin the Kings lieutenant there would iſſue foorth and aſſaile vs on the other ſide. After it was darke night fiftie launces were commanded to go foorth to vnderſtand where the King lodged, but hardly twenty of them went, notwithſtanding that our campe were not aboue three bowe ſhot from the place where we ſuppoſed the King had encamped. In the meane time the Earle of Charolois ate and dranke a little, as did all the reſt of the company, each man in his owne lodging, and the wound in his necke was dreſſed: but we were forced to remooue out of the place where he refreſhed himſelfe, three or fower dead bodies to make him roome, and to bring two bottles of ſtraw, vpon the which he ſat downe. And as they remooued theſe dead bodies, one of the poore naked ſoules began to call for drinke, into whoſe mouth was powred a little of the tyſan the Earle had drunke of, wherewith his ſpirits reuiued, and then he was knowen to be an archer of the Earles garde named Sauaric a valiant fellow, and he was dreſſed and healed.
               The Earle debated with his Councill what was to be done, the firſt that ſpake was the Earle of Saint Paule, who ſaid we ſtood in great danger, and gaue aduiſe by breake of day to retire homeward, to burne part of our cariage, to ſaue onely the artillerie, and to giue order that none ſhould lead backe any cariage, but ſuch as had aboue ten launces vnder their charge, adding that it was impoſſible to lie there without victuals between Paris and the King. After him ſpake Mounſeur de Haultbourdin almoſt to the ſame effect, ſaue that he aduiſed vs to ſtay till we vnderſtood what newes our ſcoutes that were abroad would bring vs, to the which purpoſe ſpake alſo three or fower others. But the laſt that ſpake was Mounſeur de Contay, who ſaid that ſo ſoone as the armie ſhould vnderſtand of this reſolution rhey would al flie, and by that means be taken and ſpoiled before they had gone twenty leagues: which his opinion he confirmed by diuers very good reaſons. Wherefore he gaue aduiſe that euery man ſhould lodge himſelfe as commodiouſly as he could that night, and the next morning by breake of day begin a new field with determination either to liue or die vpon the place, which he ſaid to be a ſafer courſe than to flie. The Earle of Charolois followed the ſaid Contaies aduiſe, and gaue euery man commandement

to take his reſt for two howers, and at the ſound of the trumpet to be in a readines: farther he willed diuers by name to ſend to comfort his ſoldiers.
               About midnight our ſcoutes that were abroad returned, and it well appeered they had not beene far: for they brought word that the King lodged at the fires aboue mentioned. Incontinent others were ſent foorth, and within an hower after euery man put himſelfe in a readines to fight, but the moſt part had rather haue fled. About breake of day our ſcoutes laſt ſent foorh met one of our Carters whom the enimies had taken priſoner that morning as he brought a pot of wine from Montl'hery. This Carter told them that the French were all fled, whereof they ſent word incontinent to the campe, and went themſelues to the place, and found the Carters report true, whereupon they returned with this newes to the great comfort of the whole armie, and then a number cried to purſue them, that made but ſmall haſte after them. Not an hower before my ſelfe had an old horſe halfe tired, who by chaunce thruſt his head into a paile of wine and drunke it off, which made him luſtier and freſher that day than euer before.
               When it was broad day euery man mounted on horſeback, and the ſquadrons made a goodly ſhew in the field, notwithſtanding all our companies were not yet come togither, but a number returned at that preſent which had lien hidden in the woods all night. The Earle of Charolois ſuborned a Frier Franciſcan, who brought worde to the campe that he came from the Britains, who would be there the ſelfeſame day, which newes comforted not a little the whole armie, but all men beleeued it not.
               Immediately after, to wit, about ten of the clocke in the morning, arriued the Vicechancellor of Britaine, called Rouuille, and Maderey aboue mentioned with him, accompanied with two archers of the D. of Britaines garde in their liuery coates, which comforted maruellouſly the whole army, and the ſaid Vicechancellor was asked where he had been, and was commended for his departure (conſidering the great murmuring that was riſen againſt him) but much more for his returne, and euery man welcomed them and made them good cheere.
               All this day the Earle of Charolois kept ſtill the field, reioicing greatly and wholy attributing the honor of the victory to himſelfe alone, which glory coſt him deere, for after this he neuer followed any mans deuiſe but his owne, and whereas before he had hated the wars, and loued nothing that appertained thereunto: his thoughts were after this ſo cleane altred that he continued in the wars till his death, in them ended his life, & by them deſolated his houſe, at the leaſt brought it maruellouſly vnderfoote, though not altogither deſtroied it. Three noble and wiſe Princes his predeceſſors had ſo highly aduanced it, that few Kings except the K. of Fraunce were mightier than he, and in rich and ſtrong townes none paſſed him: but no man, eſpecially no Prince ought to attribute too much to himſelfe, but to acknowledge all proſperitie and good ſucceſſe to proceed from God. Sure theſe two things I dare boldly ſay in his commendation, firſt that I thinke neuer man endured more trauell than he in all points of bodily labour and exerciſe, and ſecondarily that in mine opinion, I neuer knew hardier gentleman: for I neuer heard him complaine of wearines, I neuer ſaw him ſhew any countenance of feare, yet was I with him ſeuen yeeres togither in the wars: euery ſommer without faile, and ſomtime both winter and ſommer his attempts and enterpriſes were ſo high and difficult, that onely God by his abſolute power could haue atchiued them, for they paſſed far mans reach.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 De la Marche calleth him that deliuered the Earle, Robert Couterel, or Coutereau a horſeman of Bruxels, his Phiſitions ſonne, whom for that fact immediately he made knight and feudarie of Brabant. Gaghin writeth that the Earle was twice in danger, once in the hands of Geffery De S. Bealin, and againe in the hands of Gilbert Graſſaie.
                  2 For the two places heere named be aboue three hundred Engliſh miles aſunder.
                  
                  3 There were ſlaine at the battell of Montl'hery, 2000. Annal. Burgund. Meyer ſaith 3000. Gaguin 3600.
               
            
            
               How the Duke of Berry the Kings brother, and the Duke of Britaine ioined with the Earle of Charolois againſt the King. Chap. 5.
               
                  THe next day being the third after the battell, we remooued our campe and lodged at Montl'hery, out of the which the people fled, part into the Church ſteeple, and part into the Caſtell, but the Earle cauſed them to returne to their houſes, neither loſt they the value of one penie, for euery man paid his ſhot as truly as if he had been in Flaunders. The caſtell helde for the King, and was not aſſaulted by vs. The third day being paſſed, the Earle of Charalois by the Lord of Contais aduiſe departed to Eſtampes (a good and commodious lodging, and a fruitfull ſoile) meaning to preuent the Britains, who came that way, and before their ariuall to lodge his men that were ſicke and hurt in the towne, and the reſt abroad in the fields. This good lodging and the Earles long abode there ſaued many a mans life. At the ſaid town of Eſtampes arriued the Lord Charles of Fraunce then Duke of Berry, and the Kings onely brother, accompanied with the Duke of Britaine, the Earle of Dunois, the Lord of Dampmartin, the Lord of Loheac, the L. of Beueil, the Lord of Chaumount, and maſter Charles of Amboiſe his ſonne (who ſince hath caried great credit in this realme) all the which the King at his firſt comming to the crown had diſplaced and put out of office, notwithſtanding the great ſeruices they had done the King his father and the realme, both in the conqueſt of Normandie and in diuers other wars. The Earle of Charolois and all the noble men that were with him went foorth to receiue them, and lodged their perſons in the towne, where their lodgings were already made, but their forces lay abroad in the fields. They had with them eight hundred men of armes very well appointed, a great number of the which were Britons, who lately had forſaken the Kings pay, and theſe made a gallant ſhew in their campe: of archers and other ſoldiers armed with good Brigandines they had great force, ſo that I ſuppoſe they were ſix thouſand men on horſebacke, all in very good order, and ſure this army ſhewed the Duke of Britaine to be a great Prince, for they were all paid out of his coffer 
                     1
                  .
               The King being retired to Corbeil (as you haue heard) was not idle, neither forgat what he had to do, but went ſtraight into Normandy partly to leuy men, and partly bicauſe he feared rebellion in the countrey, but a great part of his forces he left about Paris in thoſe places that had moſt need of defence.
               The firſt euening that all theſe Princes met at Eſtamps, they told newes each to other, the Britons had taken priſoners certaine of the Kings part that fled, and if

they had been but a litle neerer the place of the battell, they had either taken or diſcomfited the third part of his army. They had firſt giuen order to ſende foorth certaine bands before them, to vnderſtand how neere the Kings army and the Earles were togither, but they altered their mindes. Notwithſtanding maſter Charles of Amboiſe and certiane with him ſcoured the countrey before their army, to ſee if they could meete any of their enimies, and certaine priſoners as you haue heard they tooke, and part alſo of the Kings artillerie. Theſe priſoners made report vnto them, that vndoubtedly the King was ſlaine (for ſo they ſuppoſed bicauſe they fled at the very beginning of the battell,) which newes the abouenamed maſter Charles of Amboiſe and they that were with him brought to the Britaines campe, who reioiced maruellouſly thereat, ſuppoſing it had been true, and hoping for great rewards if the Lord Charles were King. Further they debated in councell (as a man of credit there preſent, afterward aduertiſed me) how they might rid the countrey of the Burgundians, and ſend them home in the diuels name, and were in maner all agreed to cut their throtes if they could, but this their ioy ſoone ended, wherby you may perceaue what ſodaine alterations are in a realme in ſuch troubles.
               But to returne to the campe lying at Eſtampes, when euery man had ſupped and a great number being walking in the ſtreetes: The Lord Charles of Fraunce, and the Earle of Charolois withdrew themſelues to a window, where they entred into very earneſt communication. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that there was among the Britaines one that tooke great pleaſure in throwing ſquibs into the aire, which when they fall to the ground run flaming among men, his name was maſter Iohn Boutefeu, or maſter Iohn de Serpens, I wot not well whether. This mery companion being ſecretly hidden in a houſe, threw two or three ſquibs into the aire from a high place where he ſtood, one of the which by chance ſtrake againſt the bar of the window where theſe two Princes communed togither, wherewithall both of them ſtarted ſodainly vp, being aſtoniſhed at this accident, and each beholding other, ſuſpecting this to be purpoſely done to hurt them: then came the Lord of Contay to his maſter the Earle of Charolois, and after he had told him a word or two in his eare, went downe, and cauſed all the men of armes of the Earles houſe, and all the archers of his garde, and a number of other to arme themſelues. Incontinent alſo the Earle of Charolois mooued the Duke of Berry to command the archers of his garde to do the like, whereupon immediatly two or three hundred men of armes, ſtood on foote in harneis before the gate, with a great number of archers, the which ſought round about from whence this fire might come: in the end the poore fellow that had done the deed fell downe vpon his knees before them confeſſing the fact, and threw three or foure other ſquibs into the aire, whereby he put diuers out of ſuſpicion each of other, thus the matter turned to a ieſt, and euery man vnarmed himſelfe and went to bed. The next day in the morning they ſat in councell to debate what was to be done, all the Princes with their principall ſeruants being there preſent, and as they were of diuers parts and not obedient to one head: ſo were they alſo of diuers opinions as in ſuch aſſemblies it cannot be otherwiſe choſen. But among the reſt of their talke, certaine words that paſſed the Duke of Berry (who was yoong and vnacquainted with ſuch exploits) were eſpecially marked: for he ſeemed already to be weary of this enterpriſe, alledging the great number of the Earle of Charolois men that he had ſeene in the towne hurt and maimed, of whom to ſhew that he had pitie and compaſſion he brake foorth into this ſpeech and ſaid, that he had rather the matter had neuer been begun, than that ſo much miſchiefe ſhould ariſe by his occaſion and for his cauſe, which words diſpleaſed greatly the Earle of Charolois

and his men as heerafter you ſhall heare: Notwithſtanding they concluded in this aſſembly to go before Paris, to prooue whether the towne would enter into league with them for the benefit of the common wealth (which they al pretended to be the onely cauſe of their aſſembly) being fully perſwaded that all the townes in the realm would follow the example thereof. The words aboue mentioned vttered by the D. of Berry in this aſſembly, put the Earle of Charolois and his men into ſuch a dumpe, that they ſaid thus one to another, heard you this man ſpeake? he is diſcouraged for ſeuen or eight hundred hurt perſons that he ſeeth in the towne, who are none of his but meer ſtrangers to him, he would be otherwiſe troubled than if the matter ſhould touch himſelfe in any point, and eaſely be won to agree with his brother and leaue vs in the mire, and bicauſe of the long wars that haue been in times paſt betweene King Charles his father and the D. of Burgundie my father, both the parties would ſoone conſent to turne their forces againſt vs, wherefore it is good to prouide vs of friends in time. And vpon this ſuſpicion onely, VVilliam of Cluny Prenotarie, who died Biſhop of Poictiers was ſent to England to King Edward the 4. then raigning, to whom the Earle of Charolois had euer before been mortall enimie, ſupporting the houſe of Lancaſter againſt him, of the which he was iſſued by his mother 
                     2
                  . And the ſaid Clunies inſtructions were to treat with King Edward of a mariage betweene the Kings ſiſter called Margaret, and the Earle of Charolois, not to conculde the matter, but onely to put the King in hope thereof: for the Earle knowing how greatly the King deſired this mariage, ſuppoſed by this meanes to win him to take his part if he needed his helpe, at the leaſt to ſtaie him from attempting ought againſt him. And notwithſtanding that he ment nothing leſſe then the accompliſhment thereof, bicauſe as feruently as he loued the houſe of Lancaſter, as extreemly hated he the houſe of Yorke: yet was the matter ſo labored, that many yeeres after the mariage was accompliſhed 
                     3
                  , and the Earle receaued alſo the order of the Garter, and ware it till his dying day. Many a ſuch deed is often done vpon ſuſpicion onely, eſpecially among great Princes, who are much more ſuſpicious then other men, bicauſe of the doubts and reports that are daily brought vnto them oftentimes by flatterers vpon no occaſion.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Britaines army was of 10600. men Anna. Aqui. and the archers here mentioned were all mounted one horſebacke, otherwiſe the men of armes could not ariſe to ſixe thouſand.
                  
                  2 Charles D. of Burgundie was of the houſe of Lancaſter after this ſort. Iohn of Gaunt D. of Lancaſter had iſſue by Blaunche his firſt wife, daughter and heire to Henry D. of Darby and Lancaſter, Philip which married with Iohn King of Portugall baſtard of Ferraude, by whom ſhe had iſſue Iſabell married to Philip D. of Burgundie, by whom ſhe had iſſue this D. Charles.
                  3 Margaret king Edwards ſiſter, arriued in the Lowe countries, 25. Iunij Ann. 1468. Meyer.
               
            
            
               
               How the Earle of Charolois and his confederates with their whole army, paſſed the riuer of Seine vpon a bridge made of botes, how Iohn D. of Calabria ioined with them, and how they all encamped before Paris. Chap. 6.
               
                  ALl theſe Princes according to their determination departed from Eſtampes, hauing ſoiourned there certaine daies and marched to Saint Maturin of Larchant, and Moret in Gaſtinois, in the which two little townes the Lord Charles of Fraunce, and the Britaines lodged, but the Earle of Charolois encamped in a great medow vpon the riuer of Seine, and made proclamation that euery man ſhould bring a hooke with him to faſten his horſe therewith, he caried alſo with him ſeauen or eight ſmall boates in cartes, and great ſtore of pipeboorde, meaning therewith to make a bridge ouer the riuer of Seine, bicauſe theſe Princes had no paſſage there. The Earle of Dunois accompanied him riding in a litter, for bicauſe of the goute he could not ſit on horſebacke, notwithſtanding his enſigne was borne with him. When they came to the riuer they launched foorth the boates they brought with them, and tooke an Iland in the midſt of the ſtreame, where certaine of our archers landed and skirmiſhed with a companie of horſemen that defended the paſſage on the other ſide vnder the leading of the Marſhall Ioachin and Sallezard. The place was much to their diſaduantage, bicauſe it was high and in a goodly vine country, beſides that the Burgundians had great ſtore of artillerie vnder the charge of a notable gunner named Maſter Girald, whom they tooke priſoner at the battell of Montl'hery, being then in the Kings ſeruice. To be ſhort, the aboue mentioned horſemen were forced to abandon the paſſage and retire to Paris. The ſelfeſame night the bridge was made from the ſide of the riuer where we lay to the Iland, where incontinent the Earle of Charolois cauſed his pauilion to be pitched, and lodged there all night with fiftie men of armes of his houſe: by day breake a great number of Coopers were ſet on work to make casks of the pipe boord we brought with vs, who ſo beſtirred themſelues, that before noon the bridge was made from the Iland to the other ſide of the riuer. Incontinent paſſed the Earle of Charolois, and cauſed his tents whereof he was well furniſhed, to be pitched: ouer the ſame bridge paſſed alſo his whole armie and artillerie, and lodged vpon the ſide of a hill hanging towards the riuer, by means whereof his campe made a goodly ſhew to thoſe that came after.
               It was that whole daies worke to conuey ouer the Earles owne forces, but the next morning by day breake paſſed alſo the Dukes of Berry and Britaine with their whole armie, commending this bridge to be very commodiouſly and ſpeedily made, and marched when they were paſſed, a little beyond the Earle, and encamped alſo vpon the hill. When it was darke night we diſcouered a great number of fires as far from vs as we could well diſcerne, which diuers ſuppoſed to be the Kings forces, but bofore midnight we were aduertiſed that it was Iohn Duke of Calabria 
                     1
                   onely ſonne to King Rene of Sicilie 
                     2
                   with nine hundred men of armes of the Duchie and Countie of Burgundie. The ſaid Duke had with him few footmen, but was well accompanied with horſemen, and thoſe in ſo good order, that for their number I neuer ſawe a goodlier company nor a more warlike: for he had with him ſix ſcore men of armes

barded, all Italians or trained vp in the Italian wars, among whom were Iames Galiot, the Earle of Campobache, the L. of Baudricourt now gouernor of Burgundie, and diuers others: his men of armes were very expert ſoldiers, and to ſay the truth, the flower of our armie, I meane number for number. With him were alſo fower hundred croſſebow men that the Palſgraue had lent him, all very well mounted and very good ſoldiers. Beſides whom he had alſo in pay fiue hundred Switzers footemen, which were the firſt that euer came into this realme, and theſe ſo valiantly behaued themſelues in all places where they came, that they purchaſed great renowme to their whole nation, which their countreymen that haue ſerned heere ſince, haue well maintained. This companie the next morning approached neer to vs, and paſſed that day ouer our bridge, which a man may boldly ſay conuaied ouer all the power of Fraunce ſaue onely the Kings armie. And I aſſure you the force was ſo great of valiant men well appointed, and in very good order, that I wiſh all the friends and welwillers of the realme had ſeen it, and likewiſe the enimies: for by that meanes the former would haue eſteemed of the realme as it deſerueth, and the later euer after the more haue feared it. The Burgundians that accompanied the Duke of Calabria were led by the L. of Neuf-chaſtell Marſhall of Burgundie, who had with him his brother the L. of Montagu, the Marqueſſe of Rotelin, and a great number of knights and eſquiers: ſome of the which had been in Bourbonnois, as I haue made mention in the beginning of this hiſtorie 
                     3
                  , but they all ioined for their more ſafetie with the Duke of Calabria, who ſhewed himſelfe to be as noble a Prince, and as good a ſoldier as any in the companie, whereupon great loue and amitie grew betweene him and the Earle of Charolois.
               After this whole force (being as I ſuppoſe to the number of an hundred thouſand horſe good & bad) was paſſed the riuer, the Princes determined to ſhew themſelues before Paris, wherfore they put all their vawards togither. The Burgundians vaward was led by the Earle of S. Paule, and the vaward of the Dukes of Berry and Britaine by Oudet of Rie 
                     4
                   afterward Earle of Comminges, and the Marſhall Loheac as I remember, and in this order marched they, but all the Princes remained in the battell. The Earle of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria were very diligent in commanding and giuing good order in the armie, and rode very well armed, and ſhewed that they meant to do their dutie, but the Dukes of Berry and Britaine were mounted vpon ſmall ambling nags, and armed with ſlight brigandines, light and thin, yea and ſome ſaid they were not plated, but ſtudded onely with a few gilt nailes vpon the ſattin for the leſſe waight, but I will not affirme it for a truth. Thus marched this armie to Pont de Charenton two little leagues from Paris, which was taken incontinent, notwithſtanding the reſiſtance of certaine franke archers 
                     5
                   that were within it: ouer the ſaid bridge of Charenton paſſed the whole force. The Earle of Charolois lodged in his owne houſe called Conflans, ſituate vpon the riuer not far from thence, and incloſed a great peece of ground, with his cariage and artillerie, and lodged his campe within it, and with him lay the Duke of Calabria: but the Dukes of Berry and Britaine, with part of their forces lodged at S. Mor-des-foſſes, and the reſt they ſent to S. Denis being alſo two leagues from Paris, in the which places this whole companie lay eleuen weekes, during the which ſpace theſe things happened that now I will rehearſe.
               The next day in the morning began the skirmiſhes hard at Paris gates, within the towne was the Lord of Nantoillet, L. great Maſter of Fraunce (who did the King good ſeruice there as before I haue ſaid) and the Marſhal Ioachin. The poore people of the towne were in great feare, but of the better ſort ſome wiſhed the Burgundians

and the other Princes within the towne, bicauſe this enterpriſe ſeemed vnto them good and profitable for the realme: others there were borne in the ſaid Princes dominions, wherefore they furthered their affaires, hoping by their meanes to obtaine ſome good offices in the towne, which are more hunted after there than in any other place, and no maruell: for thoſe that are in office make of their offices what they can, not what they ought, which is the cauſe that ſome offices in the towne of no fee at all are ſold for eight hundred crownes, and other ſome of very ſmall fee, for more than the fee will amount to in fifteene yeeres. Seldome is any man put out of office: for the Court of parlament alloweth theſe ſales of offices as lawfull, the reaſon whereof is bicauſe it is a generall caſe. Among the Councillors are alwaies a number both of vertuous and woorthy perſonages, and alſo of lewd and euill conditioned perſons, as are alſo in all other eſtates.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 It is requiſite that I ſhould here ſet downe the particular quarrell that euery one of theſe princes had to the King, ſome are mentioned by our author, and others in other authors. The D. of Berries quarell was for a larger partage. The Earle of Charaloys demanded the reſtitution of the territories vpon the riuer of Somme. The D. of Britaine had cauſe to be offended and afearde, becauſe the King had picked a quarell to him by demanding of him three things, neuer before demanded of any D. of Britaine: The firſt, that he ſhould no more write in his ſtile Dei gratia Britanniae Dux: The ſecond, that he ſhould pay to the King a yeerly tribute: The third, that all the ſpirituall liuings in Britaine ſhould be left to the Kings diſpoſing. For theſe cauſes the D. of Britaine ioyned with the princes: the D. of Calabria had cauſe of offence, becauſe being entred into Italy to recouer the Realme of Naples, and the King hauing promiſed him aide: after the ſaid D. of Calabria was ouerthrowne at Troia in Apulia: the King refuſed to ſend him the aide promiſed, ſo that he was forced vtterly to abandon his enterpriſe. The D. of Bourbon had maried the Kings ſister, and could not get hir mariage monie: the Duke of Nemours, Earles of Dunois, Dalebret, and the rest of the noble men and gentlemen were against the King, ſome bicauſe they were put out of penſion and office, many bicauſe the King ſought to depriue them of the roialties they had in their ſeniories touching Hunting and Hawking, and ſought to draw all to himſelfe, but all in generall were offended becauſe he contemned his nobility, and entertained none but men of baſe eſtate about him. Thus much I have ſet downe bicauſe it might otherwiſe ſeeme ſtrange, that all theſe Princes ſhould thus conſpire againſt the King for zeale of the common wealth, if other particular greifes had not more mooued them than the miſgouernment of the eſtate.
                  
                  2 To the ende the reader finde it not ſtrange that Rene is here called King of Sicily, ſith the houſe of Arragon poſſeſſed the ſame Realme at that time: it is to be vnderſtood that the race of the Normans (who about the yeere 1060. ſubdued Sicily, Calabria and Apulia: and about the yeere 1102. tooke vpon them the title of Kings of Sicily,) being extinct in Roger the laſt King of Sicily of that race about the yeere 1195. the ſaid Realme fell to the iſſue of the Emperor Fridericus Barbaroſſa by the marriage of Conſtantia daughter to Roger the firſt King of Sicill, and aunt to Roger the laſt King of Sicill of this race, with Henry the ſaid Barbaroſſas ſonne, in which race it continuedtily Manfridus baſtard ſonne to Fridericus the Emperor, ſonne to the aboue named Henry obteined the crowne of Sicill & Naples by diſpoſſeſſing Conradinus his nephew the true heir therof. Againſt this Manfridus Pope Vrbanus the 4. called into Italie Charles of Amon brother to S. Lewis King of Fraunce who ſlew Manfridus in battell, and afterward executed alſo Conradinus the true heire of the crowne, being taken in battell, comming with
                     
                     an armie to conquer the ſaid realmes of Naples and Sicily as his true inheritance: and thus obteined this Charles of Aniou the crowne both of Naples and Sicily, till not long after by the comming of Peter king of Arragon, who had married Conſtantia daughter and heire to Manfridus: the Sicilians aroſe ſuddenly againſt the French, ſlew them all in one euening, and yeelded the Realme of Sicily to the ſaide Peter, whoſe poſteritie euer ſithens euen till this day haue continued in poſſeſsion thereof. Notwithſtanding the poſteritie of Charles of Aniou held ſtill the Realme of Naples with the title of the Realme of Sicily, till the time that the later Iane Queene of Naples, to fortifie hir ſelfe againſt Pope Vrbanus Sextus adopted Alfonſe of Arragon, ſonne to Ferrande King of Arragon, which Ferrandes mother named Elenor was daughter to King Peter: but after the ſaide Iane for diſpleaſure conceiued againſt the ſaide Alfonſe adopted ſecondarilie Lewis D. of Aniou, brother to Charles the 5. King of Fraunce, deſcended of the race of the firſt Charles King of Sicily, againſt whom and his ſonne Lewis Alfonſe long warred, and in the end after Queene Ianes death chaſed them both out of Italy, and left the Realmes of Arragon and Sicily to Iohn his brother: but the Realme of Naples to Ferrande his baſe ſonne, with whom Rene heere mentioned (brother to Lewis the 2. of that name D. of Aniou and king of Sicily, and by him with Ianes conſent adopted) long vvarred, but preuailed not: ſo that Rene had onely the title of Sicily and Naples by the adoption aforeſaid, but no poſſeſsion thereof: for Sicily the kings of Arragon held euer ſince the conqueſt of Peter, and the realme of Naples Ferrande the baſtard held of his fathers gift, from vvhoſe poſterity hovv in the end after many alterations it fell to the houſe of Arragon that novv poſſeſſeth it, ſhall be ſet dovvne at large in the vvars of Naples made by King Charles the 8. vvho had the houſe of Anious title, vvhereof our author treateth in the 7. and 8. booke of this hiſtorie.
                  
                  3 This force led by the Marſhall of Burgundie vvas of 4000. men. Meyer.
                  4 This Oudet is he that acquainted the Duke of Berry vvith this confederacie, and conueighed him into Britaine. Meyer. La Marche.
                  5 Franck archers were theſe: King Charles the 7. in the yeere 1449. being deſtitute of footemen, appointed that euery threeſcore houſes in his realme ſhould arme a man, vvho in time of vvar receiued paie of the King, and vvere exempt from all ſubſidies and payments: for the which cauſe they vvere all called franck, that is free, but King Lewis the 11. anno 1480. aboliſhed theſe franck archers and waged Switzers in their place.
                  
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe vpon ambitious hunting after offices and eſtates, by the example of the Engliſh men. Chap. 7.
               
                  I Speake of theſe offices and eſtates, bicauſe in changes they are ſo greedily deſired, and are alſo cauſe thereof, as appeereth by that which hath happened not onely in this our age, but alſo in the time of King Charles the ſixt, vnder whom the wars began that endured till the treatie of Arras, during the which wars the Engliſh men entred into the realme, and conquered ſo far that at the time of the ſaide treatie (which continued 
                     1
                   the ſpace of two moneths) the Duke of Bedford brother to Henry the fift King of England, being maried to Duke Philip of Burgundies ſiſter, was regent in Fraunce for the Engliſh men, whoſe monethly allowance in that office amounted to 20000. crownes at the

leaſt. At the ſaid treatie were preſent for the King of Fraunce, fower or fiue Dukes or Earles, fiue or ſixe Prelates, and ten or twelue Councellers of the Parliament. For Duke Philip likewiſe diuers Noble men 
                     2
                   in much greater number, for the Pope 2. Cardinals as mediators, and for the Engliſh men diuers noble perſonages. Duke Philip greatly deſired to acquite himſelfe honorably towards the Engliſh men before he would abandon them, bicauſe of the ancient league that had been betweene them: wherefore the Duchies of Normandie and Guien were offered to the King of England, with condition that he ſhould do homage for them to the crowne of Fraunce, as his predeceſſors had done, and reſtore all the places he held in the Realme out of the ſaid Duchies: which condition the Engliſh men bicauſe of the homage, refuſed, but to their great loſſe: for being abandoned of this houſe of Burgundie, their good ſucceſſe altered, and all their intelligences within the realme failed, whereby their power daily ſo diminiſhed, that in ſhort ſpace they loſt Paris, and by little and little all that they held in this realme. After their returne into England, none of them would diminiſh his eſtate, but the offices within the realme ſufficed not for maintenance of them all, wherupon long ciuil wars aroſe among them, in the which King Henry the ſixt, who had been crowned King of England & Fraunce at Paris, was proclaimed traitor, and impriſoned in the tower of London, where he remained the greateſt part of his life, and in the end was there murthered. The Duke of Yorke father to King Edward that laſt died, intituled himſelfe right heire to the crowne, & ſoone after was ſlaine in the battell, and had his head ſmitten off, as had alſo the Earle of Warwick 
                     3
                   that laſt died, whoſe credit was ſo great in England, and all the reſt that were ſlaine in thoſe wars. The ſaid Earle of Warwick led the Earle of Marche afterward named Edward the fourth, by ſea to Calais with a ſmall companie eſcaped out of battell 
                     4
                  , for the Earle of Warwick tooke part with the houſe of Yorke, as the Duke of Sommerſet did with the houſe of Lancaſter. To be ſhort, theſe wars indured ſo long, that all they of the houſes of Warwick and Sommerſet were either ſlaine or beheaded in them. King Edward cauſed afterward his owne brother the Duke of Clarence to be drowned in a Butt of malmeſey, charging him that he ment to make himſelfe King: but after King Edwards death, his other brother the Duke of Gloceſter murthered the ſaid Kings two ſonnes, proclaimed his daughters baſtards, and vſurped the crowne. Immediately after the which cruell deed, the Earle of Richmond now King (who had been priſoner many yeeres in Britaine) paſſed into England, and diſcomfited and ſlew in battell this bloody King Richard, late murtherer of his two nephewes. Thus haue there died in England in theſe ciuill wars ſince my remembrance, aboue fowerſcore perſons of the blood Royall, part of the which I my ſelfe knew, & part vnderſtood of by the Engliſh men reſident with the Duke of Burgundie at the ſame time that I ſerued him. Wherfore you ſee it is not at Paris onely, nor in Fraunce alone that men fall at variance for worldly goods and honors. But ſure all Kings and great Princes ought to take heed that they ſuffer not factions to ariſe in their courts: for thereof kindleth the fire that conſumeth their whole countrey in the end. Notwithſtanding ſuch alterations happen not in mine opinion, but by Gods diſpoſition, for when Princes and realmes haue long floriſhed in great wealth and proſperitie, and forget from whence all theſe benefits proceede: God raiſeth vp an enimie againſt them, whom they neuer feared nor ſtood in doubt of, as appeereth by the Kings mentioned in the Bible, and by that alſo which hath hapned and daily doth happen, not onely in England, and in theſe countries of Burgundie, but in diuers other places alſo.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 The laſt of Iuly arriued the French Kings ambaſſadors at the treaty of Arras Annal. Burg. ſo that the treaty began in the beginning of Auguſt, and the Engliſh men departed diſcontented the 6. of December. Annal. Bur. and the treatie ended the 21. of September, but De la Marche ſaith the 10. of December. Meyer. 11. Calen. Octob. which agreeth with Annal. Burg.
                  2 At the treatie vvas preſent Philip D. of Burgundie himſelfe. La Marche. Meyer.
                  3 Our Chronicles report that the Duke of Yorke vvith diuers others ſlaine in the battell, and the Earle of Salisbury father to the Earle of VVarvvick, vvho vvas taken priſoner in the battell vvere behedded, and their heds ſent to Yorke in deriſion: but I remember not that the Earle of VVarvvick vvas behedded after he vvas ſlaine, and I ſuppoſe the vnskilfull corrector hath here omitted a vvord or tvvo, and that vve must read in place of Luy & le Comte de Warwic. Luy & le pere du Comte de Warwic.
                  4 The Earles of Marche and VVarvvick vvent to Calice before the Duke of Yorke vvas ſlaine, or ouerthrowen in battell: for they fled from Ludlovv lying in campe there againſt the kings force, bicauſe they found themſelues too vveake, and their counſels betrayed by Andrew Trowlop vvho fled from them to the King.
                  
               
            
            
               How King Lewis entred into Paris, while the Princes of Fraunce practiſed with the citizens. Chap. 8.
               
                  I Haue been long in this diſcourſe, and it is now time to returne to the hiſtorie. After the Princes were come before Paris, they began to practiſe with the citizens, promiſing offices and great rewards to diuers, and omitting nothing that might further their purpoſe. At three daies end the citizens aſſembled togither in the towne hall, where when they had long debated theſe matters, and heard the Princes requeſts & demands made openly to them for the benefit of the whole realme (as they pretended:) they determined to ſend ambaſſadors to them to treate of peace, according to the which determination a great number of the beſt citizens came to Saint Mor where the Princes lay, and Maſter VVilliam Chartier then Biſhop of Paris, a notable prelate, declared the citizens embaſſage, and for the Princes the Earle of Dunois was appointed to be mouth. The Duke of Berry the Kings brother was preſident of this Councill ſitting in a chaire, and all the other Princes ſtanding about him. On the one ſide ſtood the Dukes of Britaine and Calabria, and on the other the Earle of Charolois armed at all peeces ſaue the head peece and vantbraſes, and wearing vpon his quirage a ſhort cloke maruellous rich: for he came from Conflans: and Bois-de-Vincennes being well manned was held for the King: wherefore it ſtood him vpon to come armed and well accompanied. The Princes requeſt was to enter into Paris to confer with the citizens about the reformation of the ſtate, which they ſaid was euill gouerned, charging the King with diuers diſorders. The citizens gaue them very lowly and humble language, deſiring reſpite before they could make any reſolute anſwer: yet (notwithſtanding this delay) the King was afterward diſcontented both with the Biſhop and the reſt that

accompanied him. Thus returned theſe ambaſſadors into the towne, continuing ſtill their former practiſe: for euery one of the Princes talked with them apart, and I am of opinion that ſome of them had agreed ſecretly to ſuffer the Princes in their owne perſons to enter the towne, and their men alſo (if they ſo thought good) by ſmall troupes: which practiſe if it had taken effect, had not onely been the winning of the towne, but the atchieuing of the whole enterpriſe. For the citizens would eaſily haue been brought for diuers conſiderations to reuolt to them, and ſo conſequently all the other townes in the realme. But God put wiſe counſell into the Kings head, which alſo he executed accordingly, being alreadie aduertiſed of all theſe practiſes.
               Before the ambaſſadors that were returned from the Princes had made their report, the King in perſon entred the towne of Paris, accompanied like a prince that commeth to relieue his people: for he brought with him into the towne two thouſand men of armes, all the nobles of Normandie, a great number of franke archers, and all his owne ſeruants, penſioners and others that vſe to accompanie the King in ſuch affaires. Thus this practiſe was broken off, and all the people altered their mindes, neither durſt any of them that had been with vs make farther mention of the Princes demaunds. Some of them alſo ſped but euill for that they had alreadie done, notwithſtanding the King vſed no extremitie towards them 
                     1
                  , but ſome loſt their offices, and others were ſent to dwell in other places: for the which eaſie reuenge the King vndoubtedly deſerued great commendation, conſidering that if this practiſe begun had taken effect, the beſt that could haue happened to him had been to forſake his realme, which alſo was his reſolution. For as himſelfe hath often told me, if he could not haue entred into Paris, but had found the towne reuolted, he would haue retired to the Switzers, or to Francis Duke of Milan, whom he accounted his eſpeciall friend, and ſo alſo the Duke ſhewed himſelfe, as well by the aide he ſent him being fiue hundred men of armes and three thouſand footemen vnder the leading of his eldeſt ſonne Galeas afterward Duke of Milan (who came as far as the countrey of Forreſtz in Auuergne, where he made war vpon the Duke of Bourbon, and afterward returned home bicauſe of his fathers death:) as alſo by the counſell he gaue him at the treatie of peace held at Conflans, where he ſent him word to refuſe no condition of peace, but to ſeuer his companie, and retain his owne forces ſtill about him.
               We had hardly been three daies before Paris when the King entred the towne, immediately after whoſe arriuall ſharpe war was made vpon vs, eſpecially vpon our forragers, whom we were conſtrained to garde with great forces, bicauſe they went far from our campe. Now to ſpeake ſomwhat of the towne of Paris, we muſt needes confeſſe that it is maruellous well ſituate in the Ile of Fraunce, ſeeing the countrey about it was able to victuall two ſuch huge armies: for as touching vs we neuer lacked, and they within the towne found nothing enhaunced, ſaue onely a denier 
                     2
                   vpon euery loafe of bread, the reaſon wherof was, bicauſe we held not the riuers aboue the towne, being theſe three, Marne, Yonne, and Seine, beſides diuers ſmall ſtreames that run into them. Wherefore all things conſidered this towne is ſituate in the beſt and fruitfulleſt ſoile that euer I ſawe, yea it is almoſt incredible how great the prouiſion is that commeth thither. I my ſelfe was reſident there ſince the time I now write of, halfe a yeere togither with K. Levvis being lodged at the Tournelles, and ordinarily eating and lodging in the court. Since his death alſo by the ſpace of twentie moneths, full ſore againſt my will I was held priſoner in his pallace, where I ſaw daily out of my windowe the prouiſion that came vp the ſtreame out of Normandie,

and likewiſe downe the ſtreame, which was ſo great that I would neuer haue beleeued it, had I not ſeene it.
               Diuers bands as you haue heard iſſued daily out of Paris, & the skirmiſhes were great, our watch being of fiftie launces, ſtood neere to la Grange aux Merciers, but our eſcouts rode as neere Paris as was poſſible, the which were often beaten backe to our watch, and eftſoones (the enimie on their backe) as far as our cariage, retirng ſomtime a ſoftpace, and ſomtime a faſt trot. Then vſed we to renforce them with new ſupplies, which beat backe the enimies hard to the towne gates, and this was daily and howerly done, for within the towne were aboue 2500. men of armes in verie good order, and a great number of gentlemen of Normandy, and franke archers, beſides that they ſawe daily their Ladies which encouraged them to put foorth themſelues. Our force was alſo verie great, but in horſemen we were not ſo ſtrong as they, for we had with vs onely the Burgundians being about two thouſand launces good and bad, nothing ſo well armed as they within Paris, bicauſe of the long peace wherein they had liued as before is mentioned, of the which number alſo two hundred men of armes were at Laigny with the Duke of Calabria, but of footemen we had great force, and thoſe very good. The Britains armie laie at Saint Denys, making war on that ſide the towne of Paris all the waies they could, and the other noblemen were diſparkled ſome heere ſome there, to make prouiſion of victuals. In the end the Duke of Nemours, the Earle of Armignac, & the Lord of Albret came to vs, but their forces lodged a good way from our campe bicauſe they had no pay, and ſhould haue famiſhed our armie, if they had taken ought without money. This I am ſure of, that the Earle of Charolois gaue them fiue or ſixe thouſand franckes, and tooke order that they ſhould come no neerer vs. They were at the leaſt fiue or ſixe thouſand horſe that did maruellous much harme in the countrey.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Yet Meyer vvriteth that the King aftervvard poiſoned the Biſhop, but Meyers vvords are no Goſpell.
                  
                  2 A Denier is the tvvelfth part of threehalfepence ſtarling.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Earle of Charolois artillerie and the Kings artillerie ſhot the one againſt the other neere to Charenton, and how the Earle of Charolois cauſed another bridge to be built vpon boates ouer the riuer of Seine. Chap. 9.
               
                  NOw to returne to the campe before Paris, you may be ſure that no day paſſed without loſſe on both ſides, but no great exploit was done, for the King would ſuffer no great force to iſſue out of the towne, neither ment to hazard the battel, but deſired peace, and wiſely to diſparkle this aſſemblie. Notwithſtanding, one morning very early 4000. archers came and encamped along by the riuer ſide vpon the very banke, directly ouer againſt Conflans. The gentlemen of Normandie and certaine of the Kings ordinarie men of armes laie in a village but a quarter of a league from them, and betweene

them and their footemen was onely a faire plaine. The riuer of Seine ran betweene them and vs, and they began to dig a trench hard by Charenton, which ran in length to the very end of our campe, directly ouer againſt the which, (the riuer being betweene vs and them as you haue heard) they built a bulwarke of wood and earth, and thereon mounted greatſtore of artilirie, which at the verie firſt ſhot chaſed the Duke of Calabrias men out of the village of Charenton, and forced them in great haſte to come and lodge with vs with loſſe both of men and horſes. But the Duke of Calabria himſelfe laie in a litle houſe betweene the riuer and the Earle of Charolois lodging, directly ouer againſt the enimies.
               This artilerie ſhot alſo into our campe, and put the whole armie in great feare, for the verie firſt ſhot ſlew certaine of our men, and twiſe it ſtrake through the Earle of Charolois chamber as he ſat at dinner, and ſlew a trumpetter vpon the ſtaires, bearing vp a diſh of meate. Wherefore after dinner the Earle remooued into a low parlor reſoluing not to depart thence. The next morning the Princes met at his lodging to conſult what was to be done: for they euer ſate in counſell there, and at their riſing dined alſo there togither. The Dukes of Berry and Britaine ſate next to the wall vpon the bench, and the Earle of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria ouer againſt them. The ſaid Earle placed euery one of them aboue himſelfe, as reaſon was he ſhould ſome of them, yea all of them ſeeing they were in his lodging. There they deuiſed to countermount all the artillerie in their armie againſt the Kings, wherof the Earle of Charolois had great ſtore, as had alſo the Dukes of Calabria & Britaine: for accompliſhment of which their purpoſe, they pearced the wals along the riuer ſide behinde Conflans, and there mounted all the beſt peeces of their artillery, ſaue the Bombards and the other great peeces which ſhot not: the reſt alſo they planted in other places where they might do beſt ſeruice, and by this meanes the Princes had much more artillerie on their ſide than the King on his.
               The trench that the French had made was of great length, and they wrought continually vpon it, aduancing it towards Paris, and caſting the earth towards vs, thereby to ſaue themſelues from our ſhot: for they lay all in their trench, neither durſt one of them peepe out, bicauſe the medow where they lodged was as plaine as a mans hand. To conclude I neuer heard in ſo ſhort ſpace ſuch a number of Canon ſhot, for we on our ſide ment to remooue them thence by force of artillerie, but vnto them ordinance came daily from Paris, and they plied the matter diligently and ſpared no powder. A great number in our army digged pits in the ground before their lodging, many alſo were made to their hands, for it was a place where men wrought for ſtone. Thus euery man ſhifted for himſelfe the beſt he could, and three or fower daies we paſſed in this eſtate, but the feare was greater on both ſides than the loſſe, for not one man of name was ſlaine.
               But when the Princes ſawe that their enimies diſlodged not, they accounted it a thing tending greatly to their diſhonor, and alſo very dangerous: for the Pariſians were thereby ſo greatly encouraged, that one day of truce it ſeemed all the towne was come foorth to the trenches. Wherefore the Princes concluded as they ſate in councel, to make a large bridge of great botes, the noſes whereof were coupled 
                     1
                   togither, and the reſt couered with planks, and the laſt couple neareſt to the ſhore faſtened to the ground with great anchors: beſides theſe, a number of other great botes vpon the riuer of Seine were brought thither, wherein they meant to paſſe ouer certaine bands to aſſaile the Kings forces. The charge of this worke was committed to Maſter Giralde the Maſter gunner who ſaid, that our bands that paſſed the riuer ſhould haue great aduantage ouer their enimies, bicauſe their trenches would

be far vnderneath vs, conſidering that they had throwen the earth on the ſide toward vs, alleaging farther that they durſt not iſſue foorth of their trenches, for feare of our ſhot, which reaſons much encouraged our men, and made them the willinger to paſſe ouer. Thus the bridge being finiſhed all ſaue the laſt couple of botes, which alſo were vpon the point to be faſtened to the reſt, and all the other botes appointed for conueiance ouer of our men being likewiſe in a readines: ſuddenly one of the Kings heralds arriued there, who ſaid to Monſeur de Bonillet and others there preſent, that we had broken the truce. For bicauſe that day and the day before were daies of truce, euery man that liſted came to ſee what we did, but that night the truce ended, our bridge was ſo large that three men of armes with their ſtaues readie to charge, might haue paſſed ouer it vpon a front. Farther there were fiue or ſixe great boates, euery one of the which would haue conueied ouer a thouſand men at a time, beſides a number of leſſe boates to paſſe ouer the artilerie that ſhould ſerue in this enterpriſe. The bands were alſo named, and their names enroled that ſhould go, and the Earle of S. Paul, and the Lord of Haultbourdin ordained to leade them. After midnight they that were appointed to this enterpriſe began to arme themſelues, and before day were al in a readines. Some alſo went & heard maſſe, and did as good Chriſtians ought to do in ſuch a caſe. The ſame night I was my ſelfe in a great tent in the middeſt of the armie where the watch ſtood, being alſo one of the watch: for no man was excuſed. The captaine of the watch was Monſeur de Chaſtell Guyon 
                     2
                  , ſlaine afterward at the battell of Granſon 
                     3
                  . And as we ſtood there waiting when this paſtime ſhould begin, ſuddenly we heard the French as they lodged in their trenches cry alowd: Farewell neighbors, farewell, immediately whereupon they ſet fire on their lodgings and retired their artillerie. The day began to breake, and they that were appointed to this enterpriſe were alreadie vpon the riuer, at the leaſt part of them when they ſaw the enimies afar off retiring to Paris, whereupon they returned all, and vnarmed themſelues, reioicing much bicauſe of their departure. But you ſhall vnderſtand that the King ſent them thither onely to beate our campe with artillerie, not to fight: for he would put nothing in aduenture, as before I haue ſaid, notwithſtanding that his force were ſufficient to haue encountred with all theſe Princes ioined togither, but his onely deſire was, as he well declared, to treate of peace, and to ſeuer this company without hazarding his eſtate and the ſtate of this large and noble realme of Fraunce in battell, than the which nothing can be more vncertaine nor dangerous.
               Euery day they practiſed on both ſides to with draw men ech from other, & diuers daies of truce were made, during the which Commiſſioners ſat on both ſides to treat of peace at La Grange aux Merciers hard by our campe. For the King, the Earle of Maine with diuers others came thither, and for the Princes, the Earle of S. Paul accompanied with diuers others in like maner. Theſe Commiſſioners met often, but no good was done: notwithſtanding all that time the truce endured, and a number of both the armies met and communed togither at a great ditch in the midway: the one, on the one ſide: and the others, on the other: for neither partie might paſſe the ditch. Notwitſtanding the truce, no day eſcaped by reaſon of this meeting and communication, but that ten or twelue, and ſomtime more, came and yeelded to the Princes, and another day as many went from vs to the King: wherefore this place was afterward called the market place, bicauſe ſuch marchandiſe was bought and ſold there. Now to ſhew you mine opinion in this caſe, me thinketh that ſuch meeting and communing togither at ſuch times, and in ſuch ſort is very dangerous, eſpecially for him that is likeſt to take the foile: for naturally moſt men deſire to aduance

themſelues, at the leaſt to ſaue themſelues: wherefore they will eaſilie be wonne to turne to the ſtrongeſt. Some there are I confeſſe ſo faithfull and conſtant, that none of theſe reſpects can alter them, but few ſuch are to be found. Farther this danger is then ſpecially to be feared, when we deale with a Prince that will endeuor him ſelfe to winne men: which ſure is a great grace of God in any Prince that can frame him ſelfe thereunto, for it is a token that he is not infected with the foule vice and ſinne of pride, which all men deteſt and abhor. But to conclude this diſcourſe, when a Prince mindeth to treat of peace, he ought to employ therein the faithfulleſt and truſtieſt ſeruants he hath, being men of ripe yeeres, leſt their lacke of experience cauſe them either to conclude ſome diſhonorable treaty, or put their maſter in greater feare at their returne than there is cauſe why. Farther a Prince ought to commit ſuch affaires rather to thoſe that haue receaued benefit at his hands than to ſuch as neuer were benefited by him, but eſpecially to wiſe men, for he ſhall neuer make profit by imploying a foole. Beſides this, ſuch treaties ought to be held rather far from his campe than neere vnto it, and when the Commiſſioners returne, the Prince muſt giue them audience, himſelfe alone or in preſence of verie fewe, to the end that if their newes be diſcomfortable, they may be inſtructed how to anſwer thoſe that will be inquiſitiue, for all men will deſire to vnderſtand newes of them, yea and ſome of their familiars will thinke that they wil hide nothing from them, notwithſtanding if they be ſuch men as I haue heere deſcribed, and know their maſter to be wiſe, they will reueale nothing to any man whoſoeuer.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Couperoit in the French is vndoubtedly to be read Coupleroit as I haue heere tranſlated it, for to read it Couperoit is ſenſeleſſe, for the better vnderſtanding of this place peruſe Valturius de re militari lib. 11. pag. 313. where you ſhall ſe the right deſcription of this bridge.
                  
                  2 This Chaſtel Guyon Chaſteau Guyen, and Chaſteau Guyon as our author alſo afterward nameth him was the Prince of Orenges ſonne, La Marche.
                  3 The old copie ſaith he was ſlaine at Morat but De la Marche, who was at the battell ſayeth at Granſon: but heere is to be noted that the Chaſteau Guyon mentioned by our author, lib. 5. cap. 2. and by Annal. Burgund. that went into Piemont after the battell of Granſon was not this, but ſonne or brother to this which is prooued by Commines owne vvords, for in that place he calleth him Mounſeor De Chaſteau Guyon qui eſt de preſent, and vvhether this Chaſteau Guyon vvere ſlaine at Granſon or Morat, he cold not be aliue in Charles the 8 time, vvhen our author writ. Thus much I haue ſaid leſt Commines ſhould ſeeme to vary from La Marche or rather from himſelfe.
                  
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe vpon certaine vices and vertues of King Lewis the 11. Chap. 10.
               
                  I Am entred into this diſcourſe bicauſe I haue ſeene much falſehood in the world, and many ſeruants deceaue their maſters, oftentimes through their maſters owne fault: for this I dare boldly auowe, that proud and diſdainfull Princes, and ſuch as will giue audience but to fewe, are oftner abuſed then thoſe that are curteous, and readie to giue eare to euery man: wherein ſure King Levvis our maſter ſurmounted far all the Princes of his

time, for he was the wiſeſt Prince in winding himſelfe out of trouble and aduerſitie, the humbleſt in words, the plaineſt in apparell, and the greateſt traueller to win a man that might do him ſeruice or harme that euer I knew. Neither vſed he to relinquiſh his ſute for the firſt refuſal, but labored the party continually by large promiſes and liberall gifts, as well of great ſums of money as alſo of ſuch eſtates and offices as he knew would content him. And as touching thoſe whom he had baniſhed and withdrawne his fauor from in peace and proſperitie: he bought them deerely againe when he needed them, and imploied them in his ſeruice, cleane forgetting all offences paſſed. He loued naturally men of meane eſtate, and was enimie to all ſuch as needed not to depende vpon him: neuer Prince gaue audience to ſo many men, neuer Prince was inquiſitiue of ſo many matters, nor deſirous to be acquainted with ſo many ſtrangers as he, whereby he knew aſwell all that were in authoritie and eſtimation in England, Spaine, Portugale, Italie, and the Seniories of Burgundie and Britaine, as his owne ſubiects. And by theſe vertues preſerued he his eſtate, which ſtood in great danger at his firſt comming to the crowne, bicauſe of the enimies himſelfe had procured to himſelfe. But his great liberalitie eſpecially ſerued him to good purpoſe, for as in aduerſitie he wiſely behaued himſelfe, ſo contrariwiſe in time of peace or truce, he lightlie fell out with his ſeruants, by picking trifling quarels to them, and ſuch was his diſpoſition, that he could hardly away with peace or quietnes. In his talke he ſpared no man, neither abſent nor preſent, ſaue ſuch as he feared, which were many, for naturally he was very fearfull. Farther, when his talke had either turned him to diſpleaſure, or was like ſo to do, he would endeuor himſelfe to amend the matter, by vſing theſe or ſuch like words to the partie offended: I know well that my toong hath wrought me much diſpleaſure, but it hath alſo oftentimes ſtood me in great ſtead, notwithſtanding reaſon it is that I ſhould repaire the iniurie done, and when he vſed this familiar ſpeech, he euer gaue withall ſome great preſent to the partie greeued. Sure the knowledge of good and euill is a great gift of God to a Prince, I meane when the good ſurmounteth the euill, as it did in the King our Maſter, who in mine opinion was much bettered by the trouble he ſuſtained in his youth, when he fled from his father and ſoiourned with Duke Philip of Burgundy the ſpace of ſixe yeeres 
                     1
                  : for he was conſtrained there to frame himſelfe to the humor of thoſe whom he ſtood in neede of, which ſingular vertue aduerſitie taught him. But after his fathers death, when he came firſt to the ſtate he thought onely vpon reuenge, but ſoone felt the ſmart thereof, and therefore foorthwith changed his minde, acknowledged his error, repaired the harmes done, and ſought to recouer by large benefits thoſe whom he had offended, as heerafter you ſhall perceiue. And I thinke verily he ſhould neuer haue wound himſelfe out of thoſe troubles had not his education been better than noble mens commonly is in this realme, who are brought vp altogither in wantonnes and diſſolutenes, as well in apparell as in talke, they are vtterly vnlearned, there is not one wiſe man about them: they haue gouernors that diſpoſe of all their affaires, but they themſelues do nothing: yea ſome noble men there are hardly of fower nobles rent that glorie in ſaying, Speake to my ſeruants, thinking thereby to imitate great Princes. But I haue oftentimes ſeene their ſeruants ſo make their profit of them, that their folly hath thereby appeered to the whole world. And if any of them happen at the length to looke about him, and to attend to his owne buſines, it is ſo late that it ſeemeth almoſt to no purpoſe: for all thoſe that haue been great or done great things began in their tender age, which vertue proceedeth either of their bringing vp, or of the grace of God.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 King Lewis departed from his father into Daulphin anno 1447. and there remained till the yeere 1456. at the which time bicauſe of the force his father ſent thither againſt him, he was constrained to flie to the Duke of Burgundy where he remained till the yeere of his coronation, which was in the yeere 1461. Annal. Burgund. De la Marche. Meyer.
               
            
            
               How the Burgundians lying neere to Paris, and looking for the battell, ſuppoſed great thiſtles to haue been launces held vpright. Chap. 11.
               
                  I Haue been long in this diſcourſe, but it ſerueth to ſo good purpoſe that ſooner I could not end it. Now to returne to the wars, you haue heard how theſe archers that lay in the trench along vpon the riuer of Seine, diſlodged at the very inſtant that we ſhould haue aſſailed them. The truce neuer endured paſt a day or two, and when it ended ſharpe war began againe, and the skirmiſhes continued from morning till night, but no great force iſſued foorth of the towne, notwithſtanding they beat backe our ſcoutes oftentimes whom we euer releeued with new ſupplies. There paſſed no day without ſome skirmiſh great or ſmall, and I thinke the King would haue had them greater, had it not been bicauſe he was ielous of diuers though needleſly. I haue heard him ſay that one night he found the poſterne of Saint Anthonies baſtile towards the fields wide open, which put him in ſuſpicion of Maſter Charles of Melun, whoſe father kept the place, yet ſure a faithfuller ſeruant than the ſaid Charles that yeere the King had none.
               One day they within Paris determined to iſſue foorth to fight with vs, of the which enterpriſe I ſuppoſe the King vnderſtood nothing, but it was onely his captaines reſolution, they meant to aſſaile vs three ſeuerall waies, their greateſt band ſhould haue come from Paris, another from Pont de Charenton, which two could not greatly haue endamaged vs, and the third appointed to be two hundred men of armes from Bois-de-Vincennes. Of this reſolution we were aduertiſed about midnight by a Page that told vs this newes as lowd as he could crie from the other ſide of the riuer by the commandement of the Princes friends within the towne, ſome of the which alſo he named and ſo departed. By breake of day iſſued foorth Maſter Poncet of Riuiere before Pont de Charenton, and the Lord of Lauon the other ſide from Bois-de-Vincennes euen hard to our artillerie, where they ſlue one of our gunners. The alarme was great in our campe: for we ſuppoſed this to be the enterpriſe, whereof the Page aduertiſed vs ouer night. The Earle of Charolois was ſoone armed, yet not ſo ſoone as Iohn Duke of Calabria, for at all alarmes he was the firſt man armed, and that at all points, and his horſe euer barded. Moreouer he ware ſuch a garment as the famous men of war vſe in Italy, and ſhewed himſelfe both a noble Prince, and a woorthy Captaine: he rode ſtraight to the barriars of our campe to ſtaie our men fom iſſuing foorth, where he was as well obeyed as the Earle of Charolois him ſelfe: yea the whole armie obeied him more willingly than any man in the companie, of the which honor vndoubtedly he was woorthie. Incontinent our whole force was in armes & ſtood in order of battell within our cariage, all ſaue

two hundred horſe that kept our watch abroad. To be ſhort, this day we looked aſſuredly for the battell, but neuer before nor neuer after. Soone after the Earle of Charolois and the Duke of Calabria, arriued the Dukes of Berry and Britaine, whom I neuer ſaw armed but this day onely. The Duke of Berry was armed at all points: notwithſtanding they were but weakely accompanied, in the which eſtate they paſſed through the campe, and rode foorth to the Lords of Charolois and Calabria where they communed togither. Our ſcoutes being renforced, rode as neere Paris as they could, and diſcouered a great number of our enimies ſcouts, comming to learne what noiſe this was in our army. Our artillerie ſhot terriblie when Monſeur De Lau approched ſo neere vs: the King alſo had good peeces vpon Paris wals, that ſhot into our campe which was ſtrange: for we lay two leagues from the town, but I thinke the peeces were mounted to the moſt aduantage. This thundering of the artillerie, cauſed both the parties to thinke ſome great enterpriſe to be towards: The day was very darke and cloudy, and our ſcouts approching neer to Paris, diſcouered many enimies abroad in the field, and a good way beyond them, a number of launces held vpright (as they ſuppoſed,) which they iudged to be the Kings whole force, and all the people of Paris iſſued foorth of the towne in order of battel: which imagination the darknes of the heauens put into their head. They returned foorthwith to the Princes being yet without our campe, & aduertiſed them of this news, aſſuring them of the battell. The ſcoutes that were iſſued foorth of Paris approched ſtill neerer and neerer to our campe, bicauſe they ſaw ours retire: which thing ſo much the more increaſed in our ſcoutes their former imagination. Then came the Duke of Calabria to the place where a great number of the Earle of Charolois houſhold ſeruants ſtood to accompanie his ſtandard and his banner readie to be diſplaied, and the guidon of his armes according to the cuſtome of the houſe of Burgundy, and there the ſaid Duke of Calabria ſpake thus to vs all: We haue now our deſire, for the King is iſſued foorth with his whole force, and marcheth forward as our ſcouts tell vs. Wherefore let vs determine to play the men. So ſoone as they be out of the towne we will enter, and meaſure with the long ell 
                     1
                  , and with ſuch like words rode he about encouraging the companie: our ſcouts at the length perceiuing the enimies to be but weake recouered their ſpirits, & rode againe towards Paris, where they diſcouered theſe battels in the ſelfe-ſame place they left them: whereupon they entred into a new cogitation what they might be, but when they approched neere to them (the day being broken vp and cleere) they perceiued them to be high thiſtles, whereupon they rode hard to the towne gates, and found not a man abroad, whereof incontinent they aduertiſed the Princes, who vpon this newes went to maſſe and afterward to dinner: but our ſcoutes were aſhamed of their firſt aduertiſement, notwithſtanding the darknes of the day, togither with the meſſage of the Page brought vnto vs ouernight, ſomwhat excuſed them.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 By the long ell he meaneth the pike, wherewith ſouldiers at the ſacke of a towne vſe to meaſure veluets, ſilks, and cloths.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King and the Earle of Charolois met togither to treat of peace. Chap. 12.
               
                  THe treatie of peace continued ſtill, betweene the King and the Earle of Charolois eſpecially, bicauſe the principall force of both the armies was theirs. The Princes demands were great: namely the Duke of Berries, who required all Normandy for his partage, which the King would by no means condeſcend vnto. The Earle of Charolois demanded the townes ſituate vpon the riuer of Somme: namely, Abbeuille, Amiens, Saint Quintin, Peronne, and the reſt that King Charles the 7. had engaged by the treatie of Arras to D. Philip of Burgundy, of whom King Lewis had redeemed them for the ſumme of fower hundred thouſand crownes, not paſt three moneths before: but the Earle of Charolois alleaged that during his life, the King could not redeeme them, 
                     1
                   putting him alwaies in remembrance how much he was beholding to the houſe of Burgundie, which receiued him when he fled from King Charles his father, furniſhed him of money to maintaine his eſtate, the ſpace of ſixe yeeres 
                     2
                   and accompanied him at his coronation to Reimes and Paris 
                     3
                  , wherefore the Earle of Charolois tooke the redeeming of theſe townes in very euill part. This treatie of peace was ſo followed, that one morning the King came by water directly ouer againſt our campe, leauing his horſemen that accompanied him vpon the riuer ſide, and hauing in the barge with him beſides the water men that rowed, onely fower or fiue perſons, namely Monſeur Du Lau, Monſeur De Montauban then admirall of Fraunce, and Monſeur De Nantouillet, with one or two more. The Earles of Charolois and Saint Paul ſtood on the other ſide of the riuer to receiue the King, who ſaid thus to the Earle of Charolois, Brother, do you aſſure me in the word of a Prince, (for the Earles firſt wife was the Kings ſiſter 
                     4
                  :) whereunto the Earle anſwered, Yea ſir as one brother ſhould aſſure another. Then the King & his company landed, the two Earles receiuing him honorablie according to his eſtate, and he hauing words at will, began thus & ſaid: Brother, I know you to be a gentleman & of the houſe of Fraunce: why, ſir, quoth the Earle? bicauſe ſaid the K. when I ſent of late mine Ambaſſadors to mine vncle your father, & you to Liſle, where my fooliſh chancellor Moruillier ſo much misbehaued himſelfe toward you: you ſent me word by the Archbiſhop of Narbonne (who is a gentleman as his behauiour there well declared,) that before a yeere expired I ſhould repent me of the proud language the ſaid Moruillier there vſed. You haue kept promiſe indeed, and that long before your daie: which words the King ſpake with a merrie cheerefull countenance, knowing his nature with whom he talked to be ſuch that they would pleaſe him wel, as vndoubtedly they did. Then the King proceeded further ſaying, I loue to deale with men that keepe promiſe. Afterward he diſauowed Moruilliers words, ſaying that he had ſpoken beyond his commiſſion. To be ſhort, the King walked a long time between theſe two Earles, a great number of the Earle of Charolois ſouldiers in armes ſtanding by, and marking diligently their behauiour. At this meeting the Earles required the Duchie of Normandie, and the townes ſituate vpon the riuer of Somme, with diuers other particular demands for themſelues, and certaine ouertures lately treated of for the common wealth of the realme, but vpon thoſe they ſtood leſt: for the weale publique was now turned into wealth priuate. As touching Normandie the King would hardly

heare thereof, but he granted the Earle of Charolois demaunds, and for his ſake offered the Earle of Saint Paule the office of Conſtable: which communication ended, the King tooke barge and returned to Paris, and the Earles to Conflans, departing each from other in very courteous and louing manner.
               Thus paſſed we the time, ſomtime in peace and ſomtime in war, but notwithſtanding that the treatie of peace at la Grange aux Merciers where the Commiſſioners vſed to ſit, were cleane broken off on both ſides: yet continued ſtill the communication aboue mentioned betweene the King and the Earle of Charolois, and meſſengers went betweene them notwithſtanding the war: for the Earle ſent to the King VVilliam of Biſche and Guillot Diuſie, being both his owne ſeruants, but yet beholding to the King: for when Duke Philip had baniſhed them, the King at the Earle of Charolois requeſt entertained them. Many miſliked theſe ſendings to and fro, ſo far foorth that the Princes began now to miſtruſt and abandon each other, in ſuch ſort that had not one thing happened ſoone after 
                     5
                  , they had all departed with great diſhonor. Twiſe I ſawe them hold three ſeuerall aſſemblies in one chamber where they were togither, wherewith the Earle of Charolois was maruellouſly offended: for he thought, ſeeing the greateſt force of this armie was his, that they did him wrong to ſit in counſell in his chamber, he being preſent, without calling him to it: wherefore he debated this matter with the Lord of Contay a very wiſe gentleman, who aduiſed him to take it patiently, bicauſe if he ſhould alienate their mindes from him they could better make their peace than he, adding that as he was the ſtrongeſt, ſo ought he to be the wiſeſt, and farther counſelling him to do his endeuor by all meanes poſſible for their continuance togither in friendſhip, and in no wiſe to fall at variance with them, but to digeſt and winke at all theſe diſorders. Laſtly he told him that all men woondered, yea his owne ſeruants, that ſo meane perſonages as the two aboue named were imploied in ſo weighty affaires: alleaging great danger to be therein, conſidering how liberall a Prince he was whom he had to deale with. True it is that this Contay hated VVilliam of Biſche, notwithſtanding heerin he ſpake but as others did, and I thinke verily not vpon malice but as the caſe required. The Earle of Charolois followed his aduiſe, and began to ſport & paſtime with the Princes otherwiſe than he had been accuſtomed, to ſhew them a cheerfull countenance, & to commune oftener both with them & their ſeruants, and ſure ſo was it requiſite: for they ſtood euen vpon the point to ſeuer themſelues. A wiſe man doth good ſeruice in ſuch a companie, if he may be credited, neither can he be valued too deere, but I neuer knew Prince in my life that could finde the difference betweene man and man till he ſtood in need of men: and if any happily do, yet make they no account of a wiſe man, but place in authoritie about them thoſe whom they fauor better, either bicauſe they are of equall yeeres with them, or ſeeke in all things to feede their humors, wherein they are often nuzled by the furtherers of their wanton pleaſures. But wiſe Princes will ſoone reforme themſelues when neede requireth, ſuch as were the King our maſter, the Earle of Charolois at that time, King Edward of England, and diuers others: but theſe three eſpecially I haue ſeene at ſo lowe an ebbe, that they haue ſtood in great neede of thoſe whom before they deſpiſed. Notwithſtanding as touching the Earle of Charolois, after he was Duke of Burgundie, and highlier aduaunced by fortunes fauor than euer was any of his predeceſſors, and growen ſo great that he feared no Prince of his eſtate, God ouerthrew him in all his glorie: and ſo bereaued him of his wits, that he contemned all mens counſell but his owne, wherby he miſerably ended his life, with a great number of his ſeruants and ſubiects, leauing his houſe deſolate as you ſee.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Earles meaning was, that the King could not redeeme them during the ſaid Earles life, bicauſe they were engaged to Duke Philip and his heires males.
                  
                  2 The Duke of Burgundie allowed the Dolphin being in his countries monethly 3000. florences for his entertainment. Meyer.
                  3 King Lewis was crowned anno 1461. Augusti 14.
                  4 The Kings ſister that married the Earle was named Catherine, but he had no iſſue by hir. Annal. Burgund. Meyer. His ſecond wife was Iſabell daughter to Charles Duke of Bourbon, by whom he had iſſue a daughter named Marie, which alſo was his heire. His third wife was Margaret ſister to Edward the fourth King of England, by whom alſo he had no iſſue.
                  
                  5 He meaneth the taking of Roan mentioned in the next chapter.
                  
               
            
            
               How the towne of Roan by practiſe was put into the Duke of Bourbons hands, for the D. of Berry, and how the treatie of Conflans was fully concluded. Chap. 13.
               
                  YOu ſhall now vnderſtand what mooued me to diſcourſe ſo long of the dangers depending vpon theſe treaties, and why I aduiſed Princes to be wiſe and circumſpect whom they employ in them, eſpecially him that hath the woorſe end of the ſtaffe. For while the commiſſioners ſat to treat of peace, by means wherof men met & communed togither: in ſteede of treating of peace ſome practiſed to yeeld the Duchie of Normandie to the Kings onely brother the Duke of Berry, to the end he might there take his partage, and reſtore Berry to the King, which enterpriſe was alſo executed according: for the Lady of Brezey, the late Seneſchall of Normandies widow, and certaine of hir kins folkes and ſeruants by hir perſwaſion, receiued Iohn Duke of Bourbon into the caſtell of Roan, and finally into the towne, the which willingly conſented to this mutation, as did alſo all the other townes and places in the countrey, a few excepted. For the Normans haue euer been and yet are of opinion, that it is requiſite for them (their countrie being ſo large) to haue their Prince reſident among them, neither deſire they any thing more: and ſure it is a goodly thing and a rich: for I my ſelfe haue knowen the reuenues thereof nine hundred and fiftie thouſand frankes, 
                     1
                   and ſome ſay they are greater.
               After the towne was reuolted, all the inhabitants gaue their oth to the Duke of Bourbon as the Duke of Berries lieutenant, ſaue the bailiffe of the towne named Onaste (who had been a groome of the Kings chamber in Flaunders and neere about him) and another called VVilliam Piquart, afterward generall of Normandie, and the high Seneſchall of Normandie that now is, who alſo departed to the King againſt his mothers will, who (as you haue heard) was the chiefe author of the citizens reuolt. When the King heard this newes he reſolued to make peace, ſeeing he could not vndoo that was already done. Wherefore incontinent he ſent word to the Earle of Charolois being in his campe, that he would gladly ſpeake with him, and appointed the hower when he would meete him in the fields by Conflans, neere to the ſaid campe, at which hower he came, accompanied with an hundred horſe, all in manner

Scottiſh men of his garde. The Earle of Charolois met him with a ſmall traine without any ceremonie, notwithſtanding many of his ſeruants went after him, ſo that in the end his company was greater than the Kings, but he cauſed them to ſtay a pretie way off, and when the King and he had walked togither a while, the King told him that the peace was already made, and aduertiſed him of al that was hapned at Roan (whereof the Earle as yet vnderſtood nothing) adding that notwithſtanding he would neuer willingly haue granted his brother ſo large a partage: yet now ſeeing the Normans themſelues had made this mutation, he would agree thereunto, and paſſe the treatie in maner and forme, as before at diuers meetings was deuiſed, for as touching the other articles they had to agree vpon, they were but trifles. The Earle of Charolois was glad of theſe newes, for his army lay in great diſtreſſe of vittailes, but more of money, and had not this hapned, all theſe Princes had been forced to depart with great diſhonor. Notwithſtanding to the Earle of Charolois the ſame day, or within two or three daies after came a new releefe both of men and money, ſent him by Duke Philip his father out of Burgundy, vnder the leading of the Lord of Sauenſes, being ſix ſcore men of armes, and fifteene hundred archers, and ſix ſcore thouſand crownes vpon ten ſumpter horſes, with great ſtore of bowes and arrowes, which furniſhed reaſonably well the Burgundians army, who ſtood in great doubt that the other Princes would make peace without them.
               This communication of peace pleaſed ſo well both the King and the Earle of Charolois, and ſo deſirous they were (as I haue heard the Earle himſelfe ſay,) to conclude the treatie, that they marked not which way they walked, but rode ſtraight toward Paris, ſo far foorth, that they entred into a great bulwarke of wood and earth, that the King had cauſed to be made a good way without the towne, at the end of a trench, by the which laie a way into the towne. The Earle was accompanied but with foure or fiue perſons who were much abaſed when they ſaw themſelues within the bullwarck: notwithſtanding he himſelfe ſet a good face on the matter. But when this newes came to the campe the whole army began to mutter, and the Earle of S. Paul, the marſhal of Burgundie, the Lord of Contay, the Lord of Hault-bourdin, & diuers others aſſembled togither, blaming greatly both the Earle, and thoſe that accompanied with him, of this follie, and alleadging the inconuenience that hapened to his grandfather at Montereau-faut-Yonne in the preſence of King Charles the 7. Wherefore incontinent they commanded all the ſoldiers that were walking abroad in the fields to retire into their campe. And the marſhall of Burgundie ſurnamed Neuf-chaſtel ſaid thus: though this fooliſh harebrained yoong Prince be gone to caſt awaie himſelfe: yet let vs prouide that his houſe, his fathers eſtate, and we our ſelues fall not into danger: wherefore mine aduiſe is that euerie man repaire to his lodging, and be in a readines, baniſhing al feare whatſoeuer hapen. For we are ſtrong inough if we ſeuer not, to retire to the marches of Henaut, or Picardie, or into Burgundie. When he had thus ſaid, he and the Earle of Saint Paul mounted on horſebacke, and walked out of the campe to ſee if they coulde deſcrie any body comming from Paris: where after they had ſtoode a while, they diſcouered forty or fiftie horſes being certeine of the Kings ſeruants, as well archers as others that waited backe vpon the Earle of Charolois: who ſo ſoone as he perceiued theſe two approch, cauſed the French men to return: he ſtood in awe of the marſhall, bicauſe he vſed to giue him verie ſharpe language, neither feared ſometimes to tell him that he was but lent him during his fathers life. Wherfore minding now to preuent him, he ſaid thus, Chide me not, I acknowledge my great follie, but I was hard by the bulwarke before I wiſt. But this notwithſtanding the marſhal ſaid more to his face, then

he had ſpoken behinde his backe, and ſure he was a faithfull and a truſtie knight. The Earle anſwered nothing but held downe his hed, and entred into this campe where they were all glad of his returne, and commended the Kings faith: and ſure it is to be thought that both the King and the Earle had great regard of their honor, conſidering that each of them putting himſelfe into others hands: Yet neither of them receiued harme, notwithſtanding the Earle neuer after returned vnder the Kings power.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 That is 118750. pounds ſterling.
                  
               
            
            
               How the treatie of peace was concluded betweene the the King and the Earle of Charolois and his confederates. Chap. 14.
               
                  IN the end all matters were fully concluded, and the next day as the E. of Charolois was making his muſters to know what number he had loſt: ſuddenly the King accompanied with thirty or forty horſe, came thither without warning giuen, and rid about to view all the bandes one after another, ſaue the marſhals of Burgundy who loued him not: bicauſe not long before the King hauing once giuen him Pinal in Loraine, tooke it afterward again from him to beſtow vpon Iohn Duke of Calabria greatlie to the ſaid marſhals damage. The King (acknowledging his error) by little and little reconciled him ſelfe to the wiſe and valiant knights that ſerued the King his father, whom he at his firſt comming to the crowne diſplaced, wherefore they were with the Princes in armes againſt him. Farther it was agreed that the next day the King ſhould come to the Caſtell of Vincennes, and likewiſe al the Princes that were to do him homage: for whoſe ſafety the ſaid Caſtell ſhould be put into the Earle of Charolois hands, according to which agreement the next morning thither came the King, and likewiſe all the princes none being abſent, the porche and the gate being manned with Burgundians well armed: there the treatie of peace was concluded. 
                     1
                   The Lord Charles did the King homage for the Duchie of Normandie, and the Earle of Charolois for the townes in Picardie aboue mentioned, as did alſo all the reſt that had homage to do, and the Earle of Saint Paul tooke his othe for the office of Conſtable: but according to the common prouerbe, neuer was ſo plentifull a marriage feaſt, but ſome departed vndined, for heere ſome had what them luſted, and others nothing. The King receiued into his ſeruice certaine gentlemen that were with his brother, and alſo certaine meane perſons, but the greateſt part remained ſtill with his ſaid brother the new Duke of Normandie & the D. of Britain, who went to Roan to take poſſeſſion. At their departure from the caſtell of Vincennes they tooke their leaue each of other, and returned to their lodgings: farther, all letters, pardons, and other writings ſeruing for the confirmation of the peace were made. On one day departed all theſe three Princes, the Duke of Normandy and Britaine firſt into Normandy, and the Duke of Britaine from thence into his owne countrie, and the Earle of Charolois into Flaunders. But when the Earle was ready to take horſe, the King meaning effectually to ſhew how greatly he deſired his friendſhip, came to him and

accompanied him to Villiers-le-bell a village fower leagues from Paris, where both theſe Princes lodged that night. The Kings traine was very ſmall, but he commanded two hundred men of armes to follow him to conuey him backe: whereof the Earle of Charolois being aduertiſed as he went to bed, fell into great ſuſpicion therof, and commanded a great number of his ſeruants to be in armes. Thus you ſee how impoſſible it is for two great Princes to agree, bicauſe of the ſuſpicious tales and reports that are daily and howerly beaten into their heads. Wherefore two Princes that deſire to continue in friendſhip ought neuer to come togither, but to imploy vertuous and wiſe men betweene them, who will encreaſe their amitie, and repaire all ſuch breaches as ſhall happen.
               The next morning the two Princes tooke their leaue each of other with much courteous and wiſe talke, and the King returned to Paris accompanied with the men of armes aboue mentioned, called thither for that purpoſe, whereby he remooued all ſuſpicion the Earle had conceiued of their comming. The ſaid Earle rode towards Compiengne and Noyon, being receiued by the Kings commandement into all the townes he paſſed by. From thence he marched to Amiens where they did him homage, as did alſo all the other townes vpon the riuer of Somme, & the territories in Picardy reſtored to him by this treaty, which the King not paſt nine moneths before had redeemed for the ſumme of fower hundred thouſand crownes, as before you haue heard. This done, he marched incontinent into the countrie of Liege, bicauſe they had by the ſpace of fiue or ſixe moneths made war vpon his father in his abſence, in the countries of Namur & Brabant, where alſo they had ſlain certaine of his ſubiects 
                     2
                  : but bicauſe the winter approched he could do no great exploit, notwithſtanding a number of villages were burnt, and diuers ſmall ouerthrowes giuen to the ſaid Liegeois, whereupon they made a treatie with the Duke of Burgundie, and for performance thereof ſtood bound to him in a great ſumme of mony. This done, the Earle of Charolois returned into Brabant.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The treatie was ſworne the fift of October, the conditions whereof reade in Meyer fol. 337. where he ſaith, that by this treatie Flaunders was exempt from the Kings ſoueraigntie, which ſaith Degraſſalius cap. 1. pag. 6. the King could not grant, Quia vltimus reſortus alienari aut remitti non poteſt: which alſo may well appeere to be lawe, bicauſe we reade lib. 5. cap. 17. of our author, that notwithstanding this treatie, the Chauncellor of Burgundie and Himbercourt being impriſoned and condemned by the citizens of Gaunt, appealed to the Parlament of Paris, vvhich appeale notvvithſtanding vvhether it vvere lavvfull or vnlavvfull, or vvhether they appealed to delay the time for ſafetie of their liues, hoping their friends vvould deliuer them, or the King happily, thereby to recouer his former ſoueraigntie: I leaue heere to diſcuſſe. Notvvithstanding if any ſuch condition vvere in the treatie of Conflans, as Meyer reporteth, in my ſimple iudgement theſe tvvo vviſe men vvould not haue appealed contrary to it, and thereby haue made the cauſe of their death iuſt though before vniuſt, by violating this priuilege, and ſo infringing the liberties of the ſtate of Flaunders obtained by this treatie of the King.
                  
                  2 The King perſvvaded the Liegeois to rebell in Iune 1465. vvhich vvas the ſame ſommer the Earle of Charolois vvas in Fraunce, thereby to vvithdravv the Earle of Charolois out of Fraunce home, vvhereupon the Liegeois about mid Auguſt defied the Duke of Burgundie, and hung his ſons image on a gibbet vvith vile reprochfull vvords. Reade Annal. Burgund. fol. 900. and Meyer fol. 337. pag. 2. but ſoone after, namely 19. Octob. the ſame yeere the Duke of Burgundy by the conduct of the Earle of Naſſau the
                     
                     Seneſchall of Hainault, the Lords of Grutuſe, Gaſebecque, and Rubempre gaue them an ouerthrovv at Montenac vvhere they loſt 2200 men: vvherefore ſeeing their forces broken, and the Earle of Charolois returned home, they deſired peace vvhich they obtained 22. Ianuarij anno 1466. as our author in this chapter maketh mention, and likevviſe Meyer fol. 338. and Annal. Burgund. fol. 909. vvhere alſo reade the conditions of the peace, but this peace the ſame yeere about Iune they brake againe, by aiding them of Dinand, as in the ſecond booke our author ſetteth foorth at large.
                  
               
            
            
               How by the deuiſion that hapned betweene the Dukes of Britaine and Normandie, the King recouered the ſaide Duchie which he had giuen his brother. Chap. 15.
               
                  NOw to returne to the Dukes of Normandie and Britaine, who after their departure from Bois-de-Vincennes, went togither as you haue heard to take poſſeſſion of Normandie. You ſhall vnderſtand that immediately after their entrey into Roan, they fell at variance about partition of the bootie 
                     1
                  , for the knights aboue mentioned were yet with them, who being accuſtomed vnder King Charles the ſeuenth, to liue in great authoritie, and enioy goodly offices: thought now, ſeeing this enterpriſe at an end, and themſelues vnreſtored to the Kings fauor, to be aduanced by the new Duke of Normandie, wherefore they gaped for the beſt offices in the countrey as due to them. On the otherſide the Duke of Britaine thought it reaſon that part of them ſhould be at his diſpoſition, bicauſe the greateſt burden of theſe wars had lien vpon his ſhoulders. To be ſhort, the fire ſo kindled betweene them, that the Duke of Britaine for ſafety of his perſon was forced to retire to mont S. Katherine neer to Roan, where alſo the Duke of Normandies men with the citizens of Roan were about to beſiege him, ſo that in the end he was forced to retire the high way to Britaine. Of this deuiſion the King being aducrtiſed, furthered it I warrant you to the vttermoſt of his power (for he was maſter in this Arte) and in the meane time approched with his army neere to the countrey, whereupon thoſe that held the ſtrong places began to yeeld them to him, thereby to recouer his fauor. I ſpeake of theſe matters vpon the Kings owne report, for I my ſelfe was not preſent at them. But to proceed, the King practiſed with the Duke of Britaine (who held certaine of the ſtrong places in baſe Normandie 
                     2
                  ) vtterly to abandon his brother, for concluſion whereof they were togither a certeine ſpace at Caen, where they made a treatie, by the which, the ſaid towne of Caen & diuers other places remained in the L. of Leſcuts hands, with a certaine number of ſoldiers in pay, but this treatie was ſo confuſed, that I thinke neither party vnderſtood it throughly well. Thus returned the D. of Britaine into his owne countrey, and the King bent his whole force againſt his brother the Duke of Normandie, who ſeeing himſelfe vnable to withſtand him, and that the King had already taken Pont de l'Arche and diuers other places in the countrey, determined to flie into Flaunders. The Earle of Charolois was yet at Sainctron 3, a litle towne in the countrey of Liege, where he was maruellouſly buſied, for his army was all broken and out of order, and part thereof, notwithſtanding the winter, in war againſt the Liegeois. This variance betweene the two Dukes aboue mentioned much troubled him, for he deſired nothing more than to ſee a Duke of Normandie, bicauſe thereby

the King ſhould loſe the third foote of his realme? wherfore he leuied men in Picardie to put into Dieppe, but before they were readie, he that held the towne yeelded it by compoſition to the King, who by this meanes recouered al the Dutchie of Normandie ſaue thoſe places that the Lord of Leſcut held by the treatie of Caen.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth by the bootie, the offices in Normandie.
                  
                  2 The places the Duke of Britaine helde, vvere Caen, Auaranches, Licieux, &c.
                  
                  3 Some copies haue Saint Oen, but the old copie and de la Marche Sainctron, ſome call it Centron, and Saint Truden, as ſaith Guicci. Hubertus nameth it in latin Centrones. Berlandus, fanum Trudonis, but corruptly ſaith Hubertus: the ancient name in deede is Centrones, wherefore it is to be read Centronor Sainctron, but not Saint Oen.
                  
               
            
            
               How the newe Duke of Normandie returned into Britaine in very poore eſtate, and vtterly diſcouraged, bicauſe he had failed of his enterpriſe. Chap. 16.
               
                  THe Duke of Normandie was once determined (as you haue heard) to flie into Flaunders, but at that very inſtant the Duke of Britaine and he reconciled themſelues, acknowledging both of them their errors, and well perceauing all good things by diuiſion to periſh and come to naught. And ſure in mine opinion it is almoſt impoſſible, that many Princes of equall eſtate being togither ſhould long continue in friendſhip and amitie, vnleſſe they haue a ſuperior ouer them, who alſo muſt be wiſe and well eſteemed, to the end he may hold them in due obedience. I haue my ſelfe ſeene many examples heereof, and therfore ſpeake not vpon heareſay. Beſides that, common experience prooueth that we are naturally enclined to fall at variance to our owne harme, not regarding the inconueniences that enſue thereof, which is a generall fault through the whole worlde. Wherefore in mine opinion a wiſe Prince hauing ten thouſand men at his commandement, and knowing how to gouerne them, is more to be feared and eſteemed than ſix Princes confederate togither, with each of them ten thouſand, bicauſe ſo many matters fall in queſtion betweene them, that all good occaſions are loſt, before they can reſolue vpon any thing.
               Thus returned the Duke of Normandie into Britaine in very poore eſtate, and vtterly abandoned of all the Knights aboue mentioned that had ſerued the King his father. for they made their peace with the King, and were better entertained by him than euer they had beene in his fathers time. Theſe two Dukes were wiſe after the hurt receiued (as the common prouerbe ſaith) of the Brittons, and liued togither in Britaine, being gouerned by the Lord of Leſcut their principall ſeruant. And diuers ambaſſadors ran betweene the King and them, and betweene them and the Earle of Charolois, and likewiſe between the King and the Duke of Burgundy, ſome to learne newes, ſome to corrupt one anothers ſeruants and ſubiects, and ſome for diuers other euill purpoſes, and all vnder colour of good faith. Some alſo went with good intent truſting to pacifie theſe troubles, which ſure was great ſimplicitie in them to thinke themſelues wiſe & ſufficient ynough by their preſence to appeaſe Princes ſo great, ſo ſubtill, & ſo well acquainted with all ſorts of fine practiſes as theſe were, eſpecially

neither party inclining to reaſon. But ſome there are ſo blinded with vaine glorie, that they thinke themſelues able to deale in matters that oftentimes they vnderſtand not: for their Maſters do not alwaies diſcouer to them the bottom of their thoughts. To ſuch it often happeneth that they go but to furniſh the feaſt, yea many times to their owne coſt: for euer one by-fellow or other accompanieth them, that hath ſome ſecret practiſe apart, at the leaſt thus haue I ſeene the matter ordered at all times and in all places where I haue been. Wherefore as I ſaid before, that Princes ought to be circumſpect whom they imploy in their affaires: ſo ſay I now, that thoſe that are imploied ought to take heede how they negotiate in Princes buſineſſes. And who ſo can ſhift off the charge, vnleſſe he vnderſtand it throughly well, and perceiue his Maſter to be well affected thereunto, is to be accounted wiſe: for I haue knowen many a good man in a pecke of troubles with ſuch affaires. Princes alſo I haue ſeene of two contrarie diſpoſitions, the one ſo ſubtill and ſuſpicious, that a man can neuer be acquainted with their humor, for they thinke all the world bent to deceiue them: the other truſt their ſeruants well ynough, but they themſelues are ſo groſſe and vnderſtand ſo little of their owne affaires, that they know not who doth them good ſeruice or bad, whereby they alter their mindes in a moment from loue to hatred, and from hatred to loue. And notwithſtanding that of either ſort few are good and conſtant: yet I for my part had rather liue vnder the wiſe than the fooliſh: bicauſe there are more waies to auoid their diſpleaſure, and recouer their fauour loſt: but with the ignorant a man can deuiſe no ſhift, for no man dealeth with themſelues in any matter, but altogither with their ſeruants, whom alſo they change as oft as the winde. Notwithſtanding in thoſe countries where ſuch Princes raigne, all men are of dutie bound to ſerue and obey them. Wherfore all things conſidered, our onely hope ought to be in God: for he alone is conſtant, he onely is good: but this leſſon we learne too late: yea neuer before we neede his helpe, notwithſtanding it is better late than neuer.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               Of the wars betweene the Burgundians and Liegeois, and how the towne of Dinand was taken, ſacked, and raſed. Chap. 1.
               
                  IMmediately after theſe troubles aboue mentioned, ended in France, the Duke of Burgundie yeere by yeere had war with the Liegeois, againſt whom when the King ſawe him buſied: he vſually attempted ſome enterpriſe againſt the Britons, ſending alſo ſome ſmall aide to the ſaid Liegeois: whereupon the Duke foorthwith either turned his force againſt the King to ſuccour his confederates, or they concluded ſome treatie or truce. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that in the yeere 1466. Dinand was taken by the Duke of Burgundie, 
                     1
                   being a towne in the country of Liege ſtrong and rich for the bignes thereof, by reaſon of their great trade of copper works, commonly called Dinandrie, being pots, pans, and ſuch like implements. Philip Duke of Burgundie (who died in the moneth of Iune in the yeere 1467) in his extreme age was borne thither in a litter, ſo much hated he the ſaid towne, bicauſe of their great crueltie vſed againſt his ſubiects in the countie of Namur, eſpecially againſt a little towne called Bouuines, ſituate within a quarter of a league of Dinand, and ſeuered onely with the riuer of Maze. For not long before the time I now write of, they of Dinand beſieged the ſaid towne of Bouuines (the riuer running betweene 
                     2
                  ) the ſpace of eight moneths, committed many cruell murthers in the countrie thereabout, and ſhot all that ſpace continually with two bombards, and other great peeces of artillerie into the towne: ſo that the poore people were conſtrained to ſaue themſelues in their ſellers, and there to abide. It is almoſt incredible the great hatred that was betweene theſe two towns, notwithſtanding that their children vſually married togither, bicauſe there was no other good towne neere them.
               The yeere before the deſtruction of Dinand being the ſame ſommer, the Earle of Charolois came before Paris with the Princes of Fraunce as you before haue hard: they made a treatie with the Duke of Burgundie, whereby they agreed to giue him a certaine ſumme of money to abandon their league with the citie of Liege, and to gouerne their eſtate apart, a manifeſt token of imminent deſtruction, when they that ought to continue togither in amitie, ſeuer themſelues and forſake each other, which I ſpeake as well to great Princes in league togither as to townes and commonalties. But bicauſe I ſuppoſe euerie man to haue ſeene and read a number of examples, to this purpoſe I will lightlie paſſe ouer this diſcourſe, onely noting by the way that King Lewis our Maſter was the fineſt and cunningeſt Prince in diſſoluing freindſhip betweene men that euer I knew, for he ſpared neither money, goods, nor traueill, but labored as well the ſeruants as the maſters. Now to returne to the hiſtorie, they of Dinand ſoone repented them of the treatie aboue mentioned, for they cruelly put to death foure of their beſt citizens that had beene the chiefe perſwaders of

them thereunto, and began war a newe in the countie of Namur: wherefore partlie for theſe conſiderations, & partlie bicauſe of the earneſt ſollicitation of the citizens of Bouuines, D. Philip laid the ſiege before the towne, but the charge of the whole army was committed to his ſon. Thither came alſo from his own houſe the Earle of S. Paul Counſtable of France to aide the Duke, not by the Kings commandement, nor with the men of armes that were vnder his charge, but with ſuch force onely as he had leuied in the marches of Picardie. Once they of Dinand made a proud ſallie, and were repulſed to their great loſſe: and the eight day after the towne being maruellouſlie beaten with canon was taken by aſſault, 
                     3
                   ſo that their freinds had not leiſure to bethinke them whether they ſhould aide them or not. The towne was burnt and raſed, and the priſoners being to the number of eight hundred drowned before Bouuines. 
                     4
                   Sure the reuenge was cruell vpon them, but I thinke God had ſo ordeined it bicauſe of their great wickednes.
               The next day after the towne was taken, the Liegeois came thither with great force 
                     5
                   to ſuccour it, contrary to their promiſe, for by the treatie aboue mentioned: they and the towne of Dinand had abandoned each other. Duke Philip bicauſe of his old age returned home, but his ſonne with the whole armie marched againſt the Liegeois whom we met ſooner than we looked for. For by chance our vaward miſſed the way for lacke of guides, by meanes wherof our battell met firſt with them, wherin were the principall Captaines of our armie. It was almoſt night when we arriued at the place where they lodged: yet notwithſtanding we marched againſt them, but euen at that very inſtant they ſent ambaſſadors to the Earle of Charolois, deſiring him for the honor of the virgin Mary, whoſe euen that was, to haue compaſſion vpon this poore people, excuſing their fault the beſt they could. Yet this notwithſtanding their army made ſhew as though they deſired the battell, & their behauior ſeemed cleane contrary to their ambaſſadors requeſt. But after the ſaid ambaſſadors had paſſed twiſe or thriſe betweene them and vs, they concluded to obſerue the treatie made the yeere before, and to giue the Duke a certaine ſum of money, for the performance of the which conditions, better than the former, they promiſed to deliuer to the Earle by eight of the clock the next morning three hundred hoſtages, 
                     6
                   named in a role by their Biſhop and certaine of his ſeruants being in our campe. This night our army was in great trouble and feare, for our campe was neither fortified nor incloſed, beſides that, we lay ſcattered heere and there, and in a place much for the Liegeois aduantage, who were all footemen, and knew the countrey better then we. Some of them deſired to aſſaile vs, and in mine opinion if they had ſo done, they mought eaſely haue defeated vs, but their ambaſſadors that intreated for peace brake off that enterpriſe.
               By breake of day our army was come togither, and our battailes ſtoode in very good order, our force was great. For we were three thouſand men of armes good & bad, and twelue or thirteene thouſand archers, beſides great force of footemen, of the countries thereabout. We marched ſtraight vpon our enimies with intent either to receaue the hoſtages, or giue them battell if they refuſed to deliuer them. We found them ſeuered into ſmall bands, and in great diſorder, as a people obedient to no mans commandement. None drew neere, the hoſtages being yet vndeliuered. Wherefore the Earle of Charolois asked the Marſhall of Burgundy there preſent, whether he ſhould aſſaile them: who anſwered yea, alledging that they mought now be diſcomfited without danger, and that no conſcience was to be made in the matter, ſeeing the fault was theirs. The like aduiſe gaue alſo the Lord of Contay, adding that he ſhould neuer haue them at ſuch aduantage, and ſhewing him how they

went ſcattering heere and there in ſmall bands, wherefore he councelled him without farther delay to inuade them. But the Earle of Saint Paul conſtable of Fraunce, being asked his aduiſe, was of the contrary opinion, ſaying, that if he aſſailed them, he ſhould do againſt his honor and promiſe, bicauſe ſuch a number of people could not ſo ſoone agree vpon the deliuery of ſo many hoſtages. Wherefore he held it beſt to ſende againe to them to know what they would do. The Earle of Charolois debated this matter long with himſelfe. On the one ſide he ſaw his ancient and mortall enimies defeated without all danger, but on the other he feared the ſtaying of his honor if he ſhould inuade them. In the end he ſent a trumpeter to them, who met with the hoſtages vpon the way, whereupon the wars ended, and euery man returned home, but the ſoldiers were much offended with the Conſtables aduiſe, for they ſawe a goodly booty before them. Incontinent ambaſſadors were ſent to Liege to confirme the peace 
                     7
                  : but the people being inconſtant and wauering, vaunted that the Earle durſt not fight with them, and diſcharged harquebuſes vpon his ambaſſadors, and entreated them very ill. But the Earle returned into Flaunders, and this ſommer died his father 
                     8
                  , for whom he made a great and ſolemne funeral at Burges, and aduertiſed the King of his death.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The peace made the 22. of Ianuary, ann. 1466. wherof mention is made in the 14. Chap. of the last booke, about Iune the ſame yeere, the Liegeois brake as heere is rehearſed, and againe they hung vp the image of the Duke and his ſonne, vvith the moſt barbarous inſolencie that euer vvas heard of. Read Annal. Burgund. pag. 911. and 912. and Meyer pag. 338. vvhere alſo their intollerable cruelty is deſcribed.
                  
                  2 The Dinandois durst not paſſe the riuer into the Dukes dominions, wherefore they planted their artilery on their owne ſide of the riuer, meaning onely to beate the tovvne, not to make any breach.
                  
                  3 Dinand vvas taken in Auguſt. Annal. Burgund. the 25. of August ſaith Meyer, and the Dukes army before the towne vvas thirty thouſandmen, Meyer.
                  4 The eight hundred drowned before Bouuines, vvere thoſe that hanged vp the image of the Duke and his ſonne with ſuch reproches. Annal. Burgund.
                  5 Others ſay but fiftie hoſtages.
                  
                  6 The Liegeois army vvas of forty thouſandmen. Annal. Burg. but Meyer ſaith but ſix and thirty thouſand.
                  
                  7 This peace was concluded the 1. of September an. 1466. the conditions read in Meyer fo. 339. pag. 2. and Annal. Burgund. pag. 915. Farther about the middeſt of September the next yeere being 1467. they brake this peace againe.
                  
                  8 Duke Philip died the 15. of Iune 1467. Annal. Burgund. Berlandus. De la Marche. Meyer ſaith the 16. of Iuly, Gaguin in one place ſaith Iune, and in another the 14. of Iuly, he gourned 48. yeeres, liued 71. Meyer. Farther heere is to be noted that in this place, our author beginneth the yeere 1467. for that yeere died the Duke as he ſaith before in this chapter, and theſe words, where he ſaith, And this ſommer died his father, haue not relation to the ſame ſummer Dinand was taken, and the peace made with the Liegeois: for if the Duke had died that ſummer, he could not haue beene at the taking of Dinand, for Dinand was taken in Auguſt, and then the Duke dying in Iune, muſt haue beene dead before, if he had died that ſummer: but theſe words haue relation to the Earle of Charolois returne into Flanders which was in the beginning of the ſommer anno 1467. for the peace was made 1. September 1466. and all that winter (to the end he might make all ſure at Liege:) he remained in thoſe countries, and in the beginning of the next ſommer,
                     
                     anno 1467. returned into Flanders, and in Iune after died his father. Thus much I haue beene forced to ſaie, leſt our author by ſlipping ouer that winter bicauſe nothing was done in it, ſhould ſeeme to write contrarieties.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Liegeois brake the peace with the Duke of Burgundie then Earle of Charolois, and how he diſcomfited them in battell. Chap. 2.
               
                  DVring theſe wars and euer after, many ſecret practiſes were entertained betweene theſe Princes. The King was maruellouſly offended with the Dukes of Britaine and Burgundie, by meanes whereof they could hardly heare one from another: for oftentimes their meſſengers were ſtaied, and in time of war forced to go by ſea out of Britaine into Flaunders, at the leaſt to paſſe out of Britaine into England, and ſo to trauel by land to Douer, and there to croſſe ouer to Calice: for they could not paſſe the next way through Fraunce without great danger. But during all the ſpace of twenty yeeres or more, that theſe princes were at variance, ſomtime in open war, and ſomtime in a diſſembled truce, wherein each party comprehended their confederates: God ſhewed ſo great fauor to the realme of Fraunce, that the ciuill wars in England were not yet fully ended, notwithſtanding that they began fifteene yeeres before, and had continued with cruell and bloodie battels, wherein many a good man loſt his life. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that there were in England two houſes that claimed the crowne, to wit, Lancaſter and Yorke: for the which cauſe both the parties proclaimed their enimies traitors, and the diuiſion of theſe two houſes was the preſeruation of the eſtate of Fraunce: for doubt you not but that this realme had ſuſtained great troubles if the Engliſh men had been in ſuch eſtate then as in times paſt. But to returne againe to our matter, the Kings chiefe deſire was to conquer Britaine, both bicauſe it ſeemed eaſier to be ſubdued, and of leſſe defence than this houſe of Burgundy, and alſo bicauſe the Britons receiued all his euill willers, namely his brother, and other his enimies that had intelligence in his realme. Wherefore he practiſed continually with the Duke of Burgundy, making him diuers offers if he would forſake the Britons, and namely that he would in like maner abandon the Liegeois, and all other the Dukes enimies. Whereunto the Duke of Burgundy would not agree, but made a new voiage againſt the Liegeois, bicauſe they had againe broken the peace, and taken and ſpoiled a towne called Huy 
                     1
                  , and chaſed his men out of it, notwithſtanding the hoſtages deliuered the yeere before vnder paine of death, and the great ſumme of mony they had bound themſelues to forfeit, if they brake the ſaid treatie. The Duke leuied his armie about Louuain in Brabant, and vpon the marches of Liege, whither came to him from the King the Earle of Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce (now become altogither French, and reſident continually with the King) accompanied with Cardinall Balne and others, who aduertiſed him that the Liegeois were the Kings confederates, and comprehended in the truce: wherefore the King would ſuccour them if he inuaded them. Notwithſtanding they offered if he would abandon the Dukes of Berry and Britaine to the King, that the King would then abandon the Liegeois to him. Their audience was ſhort and in open court, neither ſtaied they aboue one day. The Duke excuſed himſelfe, and charged

the Liegeois with breach of the peace, alledging that they had inuaded his dominions, wherefore he ſawe no reaſon why he ſhould not be reuenged on them without forſaking his confederates, and this was his anſwer for that time. Againe the next day after their arriuall, the Duke being ready to take horſe, tolde them that he humbly beſought the King to attempt nothing againſt the Duke of Britaine, whereunto the Conſtable replied and ſaid, ſir you chooſe not but take all, for you will make war at your pleaſure vpon your friends, and conſtraine vs to lie ſtill and not inuade our enimies as you do yours, it may not be ſo, neither will the King endure it. Then the Duke taking his leaue ſaid thus again, the Liegeois are aſſembled togither, & within three d↑ies I looke for the battell, if I be ouerthrowne, I am ſure you will do after your accuſtomed maner: but if the victory fall on my ſide, the Britaines ſhall liue quietly enough by you. Which talke ended, he mounted on horſebacke, and the ambaſſadors repaired to their lodgings, to make them ready to depart. The Duke marched in armes from Louuaine with great force, & laid his ſiege before a town called Sainctron, his power was maruellous great, for all the ſtrength of Burgundy was come to him, ſo that this army was far greater than any other that I had ſeene with him before.
               A litle before his departure, he debated with his counſell, whether he ſhould put the Liegeois hoſtages to death, or what he ſhould do with them. Some gaue aduiſe to kill them all, eſpecially the Lord of Contay ſo often aboue mentioned, whom I neuer heard ſpeake ſo cruelly as at that preſent. Wherfore it is neceſſary for a Prince to haue more than one of his counſell, for the wiſeſt erre, yea, and that often. Otherwhiles bicauſe they are partiall to the matters debated, through hatred or loue, ſomtime bicauſe they ſeeke to contrary ſome one that hath ſpoken before them, poſſible alſo their bodies may be euill diſpoſed, for it is not to be held for counſell that is giuen after dinner. But you will ſay, that men ſubiect to ſuch imperfections are vnfit to be of a Princes councill, whereunto I anſwer, that we are all men, and that who ſo will haue no councillors but ſuch as neuer faile to ſpeake wiſely, nor are more troubled at one time then another, muſt ſeeke them in heauen, for he ſhall not finde them on earth. But for redreſſe of this inconuenience, ſomtime one of the councell will ſpeake very well and wiſely, that vſeth not often ſo to do, and thus the one ſupplieth the others defects. Now to return to the matter debated in this aſſembly, two or three were of the ſaid Contais opinion, mooued thereunto by his great authority & wiſdome: for in ſuch aſſemblies a great number giue their opinion but as they haue heard ſome other ſpeake before them, not vnderſtanding the matters debated, but ſeeking onely to flatter ſome one being of credit and authority that hath already ſpoken.
               After this the Lord of Himbercourt, a gentleman borne neere to Amiens, and one of the wiſeſt knights that euer I knew, being asked his aduiſe ſaid, that to the end the Duke might haue God on his ſide, and diſcharge himſelfe of cruelty and deſire of reuenge before the world: he thought it beſt to pardon all thoſe hoſtages, conſidering they came thither with a good intent, ſuppoſing the treatie ſhould haue been obſerued, notwithſtanding he aduiſed the Duke at their departure to giue them to vnderſtand, how great grace and fauor he ſhewed them, and to deſire them to do their endeuor in perſwading their citizens to peace, which if they could not obtain, yet at the leaſt they themſelues acknowledging his goodnes towards them, ſhould neuer after beare armes neither againſt him, nor their biſhop there preſent with him. This opinion tooke place, and the hoſtages when they were deliuered promiſed to do as the Duke required. Farther this was told them at their departure, that if any

of them were herafter taken in armes againſt the Duke, he ſhould die and thus they were diſmiſſed.
               It is not amiſſe to reherſe heere how after Monſeur de Contayes cruell ſentence pronounced againſt the hoſtages: (part of them which were come thither with a good meaning and vpon verie ſimplicitie,) one of the Counſell ſaid thus to me in mine eare: Marke well this man, his bodie is healthfull ynough, though he be old: yet dare I laie a good wager he ſhall not liue a yeere to an end, bicauſe of this cruell ſentence he hath giuen, and ſure ſo it fell out, for he liued not long after. Notwithſtanding before his death he did his Maſter good ſeruice in the battell againſt the Liegeois, wherof you ſhall now heare.
               I haue made mention before how the Duke departing from Louuain, laide his ſiege before Sainctron, and bent his artillerie againſt it. Within the towne were three thouſand Liegeois vnder the charge of a valiant knight, the ſelfe ſame that was their chiefe commiſſioner for peace when we met them in order of battell the yeere before. But the third day after the Dukes arriuall before the towne, the Liegeois with great force came to leuie his ſiege about ten of the clocke in the morning, they were thirtie thouſand men 
                     2
                   and aboue good and bad, all footmen ſaue fine hundred. They were well furniſhed of artillerie, and encamped within halfe a league of vs in a ſtrong village called Breton, part whereof was enuironed with a mariſh. Farther Francois Royet, Baillif of Lions, and the Kings ambaſſador at that time to the ſaide Liegeois, was with them in their armie. 
                     3
                   Our fourragers were the firſt that aduertiſed vs of their arriuall, for we had no ſcoutes abroade, which was a foule ouerſight: I neuer was in place with the Duke of Burgundie where I ſaw him giue good order of him ſelfe but this daie onely. Incontinent he raunged all his battels in the fielde, ſaue certeine bands appointed to lie ſtill at the ſiege, among the which were fiue or ſixe hundred Engliſh men. Farther he beſet both the ſides of the village with twelue hundred men of armes, and placed him ſelfe with eight hundred men of armes directlie ouer againſt the village, ſomewhat farther off then the reſt: he cauſed alſo a great companie of gentlemen and men of armes to light on foote with the archers, & then the L. of Rauaſtain with the vaward (being all on foote, as wel men of armes, as archers) marched forward with certeine peeces of artillerie euen hard to the Liegeois trenches which were broad, deepe, & full of water: yet notwithſtanding with force of arrowes and cannot ſhot, the enimies were repulſed, and their trenches wonne, and their artillerie alſo: but when our ſhot failed vs, the Liegeois recouered their ſpirits and with their long pikes gaue a charge vpon our archers and their Captaines, of whom they ſlew in a moment foure or fiue hundred, in ſuch ſort that all our enſignes begane to wauer as men halfe diſcomfited. At which inſtant the Duke commanded the archers of his battell to march, being led by Philip of Creuecoeur, Lord of Cordes (a wiſe gentleman) and diuers other valiantmen, who ſo couragiouſly aſſailed the enimies, that with the turning of a hand they were put to flight. But neither the horſemen aboue mentioned that ſtood on both ſides of the village, neither the Duke himſelfe could follow the chaſe bicauſe of the mariſh: for they were placed there onely to this end, that if the Liegeois had broken the D. vawarde, and iſſued foorth of their trenches into the plaine, they might then haue giuen a charge vpon them. The Liegeois fled along through the mariſh, being purſued onely by our footmen, notwithſtanding the Duke ſent part of the horſemen that accompanied himſelfe to follow the chaſe, but they were forced to ride two leagues about before they could finde any paſſage, by meanes whereof they were benighted, which ſaued many a Liegeois life. The reſt of his horſemen the Duke ſent to his campe,

bicauſe they heard a great noiſe there, and doubted the enimies ſally, and indeede they had iſſued foorth thriſe, but were alwaies repulſed, eſpecially through the valiantns of the Engliſh men that the Duke left there behind him: a few of the Liegeois after they were put to flight relied themſelues togither at their cariage, but ſtaied not long there. In this battell were ſlaine 9000. men, 
                     4
                   which number I am ſure ſhal ſeeme great to all that loue truth, but I haue beene in my time in manie battels, where for one that was ſlaine men made report of a hundred, thinking thereby to pleaſe their Maſters whom often they abuſe with ſuch vntruths. Sure had we not beene benighted, there had beene ſlaine aboue fifteene thouſand: the battell being ended, 
                     5
                   the Duke when it was darke night returned with the whole armie into his campe, ſaue a thouſand or twelue hundred horſe that were gone two leagues about to follow the chaſe, for otherwiſe they could not come neere their enimies bicauſe of a litle riuer that was to paſſe. They did no great exploit bicauſe of the night: notwithſtanding ſome of their enimies they ſlew, and ſome they tooke, but the greateſt part eſcaped into the citie. The Lord of Contay did good ſeruice this day in giuing order in the battell, & died ſhortlie after in the town of Huz and made a good end: he was a wiſe & a valiant knight, but liued not long after his cruel ſentence pronounced againſt the hoſtages aboue mentioned. The D. immediatlie after he was vnarmed called one of his ſecretaries, and wrote a letter to the Conſtable and the other ambaſſadors departed from him at Louuain not aboue foure daies before, wherein he aduertiſed them of his victorie and deſired them to attempt nothing againſt the Bretons.
               Within two daies after the battell, the pride of this fooliſh people was cleane abated, though their loſſe were not great: whereby appeereth how dangerous a thing it is for any Prince to hazard his eſtate in battell, if he may by anie other means make a good end, for a ſmal loſſe in a battel changeth & altereth the minds of his ſubiects that receiueth the ouerthrow more than any man would thinke, cauſing them not only to ſtand in great feare of their enimies, but alſo to deſpiſe & contemn their Prince and thoſe that are in authority about him, yea to murmur and practiſe againſt him. They demand boldlier than they were accuſtomed, and ſtorme if ought be denied them, ſo that the Prince mought haue done more with one crowne before the battell, than with three after it. Wherefore if he that hath receaued the ouerthrowe be wiſe, he will not aduenture a ſecond battell in this eſtate with thoſe that haue fled, but onely defend his owne, and ſeeke ſome ſmall enterpriſe eaſie to be atchiued, to the end thereby his ſubiects may recouer their former courage, and remooue all feare. To conclude, the loſſe of a battell traineth with it a number of inconueniences to him that is vanquiſhed. Notwithſtanding great conquerors haue iuſt cauſe to deſire the battell to abridge their labours, as haue alſo the Engliſhmen and Switzers, both bicauſe they are better footemen then their neighbors, as appeareth by the great victories they haue obteined, (which notwithſtanding, I write not to the diſpraiſe of other nations) and alſo bicauſe their men can not keepe the fields long without dooing ſome exploit, as Frenchmen and Italians can, who alſo are more full of practiſe and eaſier to be gouerned than they. Now on the otherſide, he that obtaineth the victory, increaſeth his honor and eſtimation, his ſubiects are the more obedient, they deny him nothing that he demandeth, his ſoldiers alſo waxe thereby the hardier, and the more couragious. Notwithſtanding oftentimes the Princes themſelues after a victory obteined, are ſo puffed vp with pride and vaine glory, that commonly their good ſucceſſe turneth to their harme, all the which hapneth by Gods diſpoſition, who ſendeth alterations according to mens deſerts.
               When they within Sainctron ſaw the battell loſt, and themſelues incloſed on all

ſides, ſuppoſing alſo the diſcomfiture to be much greater then indeede it was: they laid downe their armor, yeelded the towne, and deliuered ſuch men to the Dukes mercy as he demanded, whom he incontinent cauſed to be beheaded, ſixe of them being of the hoſtages that he had diſmiſſed a few daies before, vnder ſuch conditions as you haue heard. From thence he diſlodged and marched to Tongres, which abode the ſiege: but bicauſe the towne was nothing ſtrong, they yeelded before the battery vnder the ſame conditions that their neighbors of Sainctron had accepted, and deliuered alſo ten men to the Duke, who were put to death as the former, fiue or ſixe of them being likewiſe of the hoſtages aboue mentioned.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The newe copie hath Liny, but the old and La Marche name it Huy, Guicci. Hoey, Hubertus Huyum, Meyer, Hoyum, and almoſt all other good authors.
                  
                  2 The Liegeois armie to ſuccour Sainctron was of 20000. men, (but underſtand beſides the Kings forces) lead by Meſſir Bare or Barrado as Meyer termeth him who vvas ſlaine in the battell. Meyer.
                  3 The King ſent to aide the Liegeois 400. men of armes and 6000. archers. Meyer.
                  4 There were ſlaine at this battell 6000. ſaith the old copie, 3000. Meyer. grounding himſelfe vpon certeine obſcure Annaliſts, one of Flanders, the other of Brabant, of purpoſe to contrarie our author as in my epiſtle is ſhevved more at large.
                  
                  5 This battell vvas fought vpon Alhallovve Eeuen, De la Marche, but Meyer ſaith the 27. of October.
                  
               
            
            
               How ſome of the citizens of Liege agreeing to yeeld their towne and others refuſing ſo to do, the Lord of Hymbercourt found meanes to enter into it for the Duke of Burgundie. Chap. 3.
               
                  FRom Tongres the Duke marched to the citie of Liege, where the people were in great diuiſion, for part of them gaue aduiſe to defend the towne: ſaying that they had force ſufficient within it ſo to do, the cheife of the which faction was a knight called Maſter Raz of Laitre, but others ſeeing all the countrey about burned and deſtroied, would in any wiſe haue peace, were the conditions neuer ſo vnreſonable: wherefore when the Duke approched neere to the city, diuers ouertures of peace were made by certaine meane perſons, as priſoners and ſuch like. But the principall dealers in the matter were certaine of our hoſtages, who doing cleane contrary to the others aboue mentioned, and acknowledging the great fauor the Duke had ſhewed them, brought to his campe with them three hundred of the beſt citizens in their ſhirts, bare headed, & bare legged, who preſented the keies of the city to him, and yeelded themſelues to his mercy, humbly beſeching him onely to giue them his word, that the towne ſhould neither be fired nor ſacked. And at the ſelfe ſame time that they came in this eſtate to the Duke, the Kings ambaſſadors being Monſeur de Mouy, and a ſecretary called Iohn Preuoſt were there preſent, who were come to the Duke with the ſame demandes that the Conſtable had made a few daies before. Farther the verie day of the compoſition, the Duke ſuppoſing to enter the citie, ſent the

Lord of Hymbercourt thither before him bicauſe he was well acquainted in the towne, and had beene gouernor thereof vnder Duke Philip during the yeeres they liued in peace: notwithſtanding entrie was denied him for that day, whereupon he retired and lodged in an abbey without one of the towne gates, being accompanied with fiftie men of armes, the whole number amounting to two hundred ſouldiers, and I my ſelfe being one of them. The Duke of Burgundie ſent him word if the place where he laie were ſtrong not to diſlodge, otherwiſe to retire backe to him, for he could hardlie haue ſuccoured him bicauſe all that countrey is rock and ſtone. The ſaid Hymbercourt reſolued not to mooue (for the place was very ſtrong,) but retained with him fiue or ſixe of the citizens that brought the keies to 
                     •
                  he Duke, minding to vſe their helpe to good purpoſe, as heereafter you ſhall peceiue. At nine of the clock at night we heard a bell ring, at the ſound whereof the citizens vſe to aſſemble, whereupon the ſaid Hymbercourt, doubted that this bell called companie togither to iſſue foorth to aſſaile vs, (for he was aduertiſed that Maſter Raz of Laitre and other of the citizens would not agree to peace,) and in deed his ſurmiſe was true, for that was their determination, and they were euen vpon the pointe to ſally. Then ſaid the Lord of Hymbercourt to vs, if we can dalie with them but till midnight, we are ſafe, for they will waxe wearie and deſirous of ſleepe, and then thoſe that are our enimies in the towne will flie when they ſhall ſee their enterpriſe fruſtrate: wherefore to bring his purpoſe to paſſe, he diſpatched two of the citizens that he had ſtaied with him, and deliuered them certeine freindly articles in writing, meaning only to buſie the citizens with farther talke to win time: for their maner was & yet is to aſſemble togither at the Biſhops pallace to debate of their affaires, when the bel aboue mentioned is rung. Theſe two Burgeſſes which had been of our hoſtages, when they came to the gate being hardlie two bow ſhot from the abbey where we lodged: found a great number of the citizens there in armes, ſome of the which would needs iſſue foorth to aſſaile vs, & ſome not. Then our two Burgeſſes tould the Maior of the citie aloude, that they brought certeine friendly articles in writing from the Lord of Hymbercourt the Duke of Burgundies lieutenant in thoſe countreis, willing him to returne to the pallace to read them, whereunto he agreed, and incontinent we heard the bell ring againe, wherby we vnderſtood that they were buſied about our articles. Our two Burgeſſes returned not, but about an hower after we heard a greater noiſe at the gate than before, and a much greater number came thither in armes, crying and rayling vpon vs from the wals, whereby the Lord of Hymbercourt perceiued our danger to be now rather increaſed then diminiſhed: wherefore he diſpatched the other fower hoſtages that were yet with him, by whom he wrote a letter, the contents whereof were that during the time he was gouernor of the citie, for the Duke of Burgundie, he had vſed them gentlie and louinglie, neither would for anie thing conſent to their deſtruction, eſpecially ſeeing not long before he had beene a commoner of one of their companies in the towne, namely the Goldſmithes companie: 
                     1
                   wherefore they ought ſo much the rather to credit his words. To be ſhort he ſaid if they would obteine peace, and ſaue their countrey, they moſt firſt receiue the Duke into the towne according to their promiſe, and then ſubſcribe to certeine articles written in the ſcedule he there ſent them. After he had well inſtructed theſe foure hoſtages, they went to the gate as did the former, which they found wide open. Some of the citizens welcommed them with ſharpe words, but others were content to heare their meſſage. To be ſhort in the end they returned againe to the pallace, immediatlie wherupon we heard the bell ring which much comforted vs, and by litle & litle, the noiſe that was at the gate ceaſed. They

were togither in the palace till two of the clock after midnight, and in the end concluded to keepe the compoſition they had made, & the next morning to deliuer one of the towne gates to the Lord of Hymbercourt: whereupon incontinent Maſter Raz of Laitre and his whole faction fled out of the towne.
               I would not haue ſtoode ſo long vpon this point being of ſo ſmall importance, had it not beene to declare that by ſuch fine deuiſes proceeding of deepe wiſdome, great perils, dangers, & loſſes are often eſchewed. The next morning by day breake, a number of the hoſtages came to the Lord of Hymbercourt, deſiring him to come to the palace where all the people were aſſembled, there to aſſure them by his oth of the two points they doubted of: to wit the firing and ſacking of the towne, which being done, they promiſed to put one of the gates into his hands: whereof he ſent word to the Duke, and then accompanied them to the palace, where after he had ſworne as they demanded, he returned to the gate. And the citizens commanded the ſoldiers that were vpon it to come downe, and he put into it twelue men of armes, and certaine archers, and reared vp the Duke of Burgundies enſigne. From thence hee went to another walled gate, into the which he put the baſtard of Burgundy, who lay neere at hand. Into the third he put the Marſhall of Burgundy, and into the fourth certain gentlemen that were with himſelfe, and thus were fower gates well manned with Burgundians, and the Dukes enſignes vpon them.
               Now you ſhall vnderſtand, that at that time the citie of Liege was one of the mightieſt and moſt populous townes in thoſe quarters, except fower or fiue, beſides that, a great multitude of the people of the countrey round about was retired thither, ſo that their loſſe in the battell was no whit perceaued. Farther they were well furniſhed of all things, and it was the deepe of winter when we came before the towne, the weather was maruellous foule, and the ground woonderfull ſoft and mirie. We on the other ſide were in great diſtreſſe both of vitailes and money, and our army in a maner broken. Wherefore the Duke had no purpoſe to beſiege the city, neither could he though he would, and if they had ſtaied the compoſition but two daies longer, he was fully reſolued to returne home. Wherefore I may well conclude, that the great honor he obteined in this voiage proceeded of the meere grace of God, contrary to mans expectation: for he durſt hardly haue craued at Gods hands the good ſucceſſe he gaue him, which great honor and godly victory in the iudgement of all vertuous and wiſe men hapned to him, for the fauor and mercy ſhewed to the hoſtages aboue mentioned. This I write bicauſe both Princes and others oftentimes finde fault as it were with themſelues, when they haue don a pleaſure or a good turne to a man, ſaying, that they were accurſed when they did it, & will beware heerafter how they pardon ſo lightly, how they beſtow any ſuch benefit, or ſhew any ſuch fauor to any man, which notwithſtanding, are things incident to their office. Wherefore in mine opinion this is euill ſpoken, and proceedeth of a baſe and abiect minde: for a Prince or any other man that neuer was deceaued, can be but a beaſt, bicauſe he vnderſtandeth not the difference betweene good and euill. Beſides that, all men are not of one diſpoſition, and it is no reaſon for the naughtines of one or two to ceaſe from doing good to a great number, when time and occaſion ſerueth. Notwithſtanding I wiſh Princes to make good choiſe of thoſe they benefit, for all men deſerue not alike. But me thinke it almoſt impoſſible for a wiſe man to be vnthankfull, or vnmindfull of a good turne, and if Princes beſtow vpon fooles, they are woorſe than mad, for they ſhall perceaue in the end that a fooles acquaintance can ſtand them in no ſteede. Farther in mine opinion, this is the greateſt point of wiſedome in a Prince to haue neere about him wiſe and vertuous men: for himſelfe ſhall

be iudged to be of the nature and diſpoſition of thoſe that are moſt familiar with him. Wherefore to conclude this diſcourſe, me thinke we ought neuer to be wearie of well dooing: for one man alone, yea the meaneſt of thoſe we haue pleaſured, may happily ſo requite our friendſhip, that he ſhal recompence the ingratitude of a multitude, as appeered by theſe hoſtages, the greateſt part wherof, were ingrate and vnthankfull, but ſome of them acknowledged and requited the benefit receaued: for by the onely means of fiue or ſix of them, this enterpriſe was atchiued, which turned ſo greatly to the Duke of Burgundies honor and profit.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 There were in this citie 32. companies, without whom nothing was concluded: the principall was the Goldſmithes companie, but the most ancient the Blackſmithes. Guicci.
               
            
            
               How the Duke of Burgundy made his entrie into the towne of Liege, and how the citizens of Gaunt where he had been euill intreated before, humbled themſelues vnto him. Chap. 4.
               
                  THe next day after the gates were yeelded, the Duke entred the towne in great triumph 
                     1
                  , for a breach was made in the wall for his entrie twenty fathoms long, and the towne ditch all the length of the breach filled vp euen with the ground: with him entred on foote two thouſand men of armes armed at all peeces, and two thouſand archers, yet notwithſtanding the force in his campe was maruellous great. The Duke himſelfe entred on horſebacke, accompanied with all his houſhold ſeruants, and the nobleſt men in his armie, clad and apparelled the moſt ſumptuouſly that might be: and in this eſtate rode he through the towne, and lighted at the great Church. To be ſhort, he abode there certaine daies, and put to death fiue or ſixe more of his hoſtages that had broken promiſe, and with them the towne meſſenger whom he hated extremely: he eſtabliſhed certaine new lawes and cuſtomes, and commanded a great ſumme of mony to be leuied in the citie, which he ſaid was forfeited to him for the treaties and compoſitions broken the yeeres before. Farther, he caried away all their artillerie and armour, and raſed all their gates and wals.
               This done he returned into his owne countries where he was honorably and dutifully receiued eſpecially of the citizens of Gaunt, who before his voiage to Liege had after a ſort rebelled againſt him with certaine other townes, but now they receiued him as a conqueror, with ſo great lowlines and humilitie, that certaine of the beſt citizens came on foote to him as far as Bruxels, bringing with them all the banners of their towne, which they did for this cauſe: Immediately after his fathers death he choſe the city of Gaunt for the firſt towne he would make his entrie into: for ſuppoſing that to be the towne where he was beſt beloued, and therefore looking for all dutie and obedience at their hands: he hoped alſo by that meanes to finde the like in all the other townes of his dominions, aſſuring himſelfe that they would all follow the example of this, which opinion prooued true as touching this latter point. But you ſhall vnderſtand that the next day after his entrie, they came in armes vpon the market place, bringing with them a Saint called Saint Lieuin, with whoſe ſhrine they beat downe a little houſe called La Cueillette: where a cuſtome of corne was

receiued for paiment of certaine dets the towne ought to Duke Philip by the treatie of peace called the treatie of Gaures 
                     2
                  , for two yeeres they had been in wars with him. To be ſhort, they ſaide this Saint would paſſe through this houſe without ſtouping, and in a moment beate downe the houſe, which diſorder the Duke ſeeing, went himſelfe to the market place: a great number of noble men in armes offering to waite vpon him as he paſſed through the ſtreetes, which he refuſed, commanding them to ſtay before the towne-houſe, and attende him there. Notwithſtanding, by litle and litle the throng of people forced them at length into the market place alſo, whither when the Duke came, he went vp into a houſe to ſpeake to theſe rebels, commanding them to take vp the ſhrine and beare it into the church, which ſome obediently did, but others cauſed it to be laid downe againe. Then they preſented ſupplications to him againſt certaine of the towne, touching paiments of money, wherein he promiſed to do iuſtice. But when he ſawe they would not depart, he returned to his lodging, and they abode in armes vpon the market place the ſpace of eight daies. The next morning they brought articles to him, demanding the reſtitution of all their priuiledges that Duke Philip had taken from them by the treatie of Gaures, of this one eſpecially, that euery company in the town (being threeſcore and twelue in all) might haue a banner according to their ancient cuſtom. The Duke ſeeing the danger he ſtood in, granted them all their demands, and all ſuch priuiledges as they required, which word was no ſooner paſſed him, but they reared vp all their banners vpon the market place, being all readie made, whereby appeered that they would haue had them perforce, if he had not granted them. His opinion at his firſt entry into Gaunt prooued true, that all the other townes would follow their example: for indeede diuers rebelled as the towne of Gaunt did, ſlew his officers, and committed diuers other diſorders. But if he had beleeued his fathers prouerbe, that the citizens of Gaunt loue their Princes ſonne well, but their Prince neuer, he had not been deceaued, and to ſay the truth, next to the citizens' of Liege theſe of Gaunt are the moſt inconſtant in the world. Notwithſtanding, one good property they haue among ſo many bad, that they neuer lay hands vpon their Princes perſon 
                     3
                  , beſides that, the beſt Burgeſſes of the towne are very honeſt men, and much offended with the peoples inſolency.
               The Duke was forced to digeſt and winke at all theſe rebellions, fearing to enter into a dooble war at one time with his owne ſubiects, and the Liegeois. Notwithſtanding his meaning was if he ſped well in his voiage to Liege, to teach them their duty at his returne, as alſo it hapned, for as I haue already made mention, they brought to him on foote to Bruxels, all their banners, priuiledges, and writings, as well thoſe they made him grant at his departure from Gaunt as others, all the which in a great aſſembly held in the hall of Bruxels, in the preſence of diuers ambaſſadors they preſented to him, to do with them at his pleaſure. Than the Haralts of armes by his commandement, tooke the ſaid banners from the ſtaues whereto they were faſtned, and carried them to Bullen, a hauen towne eight leagues from Calis, where the other banners yet remained that D. Philip his father tooke from them, when the wars ended, wherein he vanquiſhed and ſubdued them. Farther the Duke Chauncellor tooke all their priuiledges, and rent one of them concerning the election of their Senate: for in all the other townes of Flaunders, the Prince euerie yeere choſeth the Senate, and receiueth their accounts, but by this priuiledge he might choſe but foure in Gaunt, and the reſt being two and twenty they themſelues choſe: when the Senators of the townes are freinds and faithfull ſubiects to their Prince, he liueth that yeere in peace, and they willingly graunt him all his demands: but if

they be otherwiſe, commonly ſome rebellion happeneth. Laſtlie the citizens of Gaunt paied the Duke thirtie thouſand gildons and ſixe thouſand to his principall ſeruants, and baniſhed certeine out of their towne, but all their other priuileges were reſtored them, the reſt of the townes bought alſo their peace with money, for they had attempted no great matter againſt the Duke.
               By this example a man may perceiue how great good enſueth victorie in a battell and how many inconueniences the ouerthrow. Wherfore a Prince ought to beware how he hazard his eſtate vpon a day vnleſſe neceſſitie force him thereunto: and if that happen, then muſt he bethinke him ſelfe before the hower of all doubts and dangers that may be imagined. For thoſe that feare a matter commonly prouide well for it, and haue oftener good ſucceſſe than they that proceede with a careleſſe contempt: vnleſſe God be fully reſolued to ſtrike the ſtroke, againſt whom mans wiſedome cannot preuaile. Which point is ſufficiently prooued by the example of theſe Liegeois aboue mentioned, who had been excommunicated the ſpace of fiue yeeres for their variance with their Biſhop, whereof notwithſtanding they made no account, but continued ſtill in their folly and naughtines, mooued thereunto onely through wealth and pride. Wherefore King Lewis was wont to ſay, that when pride rideth before, ſhame and dammage follow after, (a very wiſe ſaying in mine opinion) and ſure for his part he was free from that vice.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Duke entred into Liege the 11. of Nouember 1467. Meyer.
                  2 The French corrector through vnskilfulnes had corrupted this place, & ſomtime calleth it La paix de Gand, and ſomtime nothing, but I haue heer reſtored it out of Meyer & Annal. Burgund. This peace was concluded 3. Calend. Auguſti 1453. wherof reade Annal. Burgund. lib, 3. pag. 829. Meyer lib. 16. fol. 314. and others.
                  
                  3 Yet the citizens of Gaunt anno. 1338. conſtrained Lodouicus Niuernenſis Earle of Flanders to flie for the ſafety of his life into a caſtell in Gaunt called Petra Comitis where they alſo beſieged him. Againe anno 1346. they conſtrained Lodouicus Maleanus perforce to go with them to Bergen, and againſt his will to giue his faith to Iſabell daughter to King Edward the third: they ſet a gard alſo about his perſon, but he eſcaped and fled into Fraunce. Meyer.
               
            
            
               How the King ſeeing what had happened to the Liegeois, made war in Britaine vpon the Duke of Burgundies confederates, and how they two met and communed togither at Peronne. Chap. 5.
               
                  THeſe troubles being thus ended, the Duke went to Gaunt where he was receiued with great pompe and triumph, for he entred in armes, and the citizens made a poſterne into the fields, by the which he putmen in and out at his pleaſure: manie meſſengers ran betweene him and the King, and likewiſe betweene the Duke of Britaine and him, and thus paſſed this winter. The King traueilled continually with the Duke of Burgundie to ſuffer him to inuade Britaine at his pleaſure, making him diuers offers in conſideration thereof: whereunto the Duke would not condeſcend, for the which cauſe partly, and partly

for the ouerthrow giuen to the Liegeois his confederates, the Kings diſpleaſure was ſo kindled that longer he could not forbeare, but in the very beginning of ſommer entred into Britaine, at the leaſt his forces for him, and tooke two ſmall caſtels, the one called Chantoſſe, the other Anſeny, whereof the Duke of Burgundy was incontinent aduertiſed, and earneſtly preſſed by the Dukes of Normandy and Britaine with all ſpeede to leuie his armie for their aide, whereupon he wrote to the King, humbly beſeeching him to relinquiſh his enterpriſe, ſeeing theſe two Dukes were comprehended in the truce as his confederates, but receiuing ſuch anſwer as liked him not, he encamped with great force neere to Peronne. The Kings army was ſtill in Britaine, but the Court lay at Compiegne, from whence the King ſent Cardinall Balue to the Duke within three daies after his arriuall at Peronne, who ſtaied not long with him, but made certaine ouertures of peace, aduertiſing him alſo that they in Britaine could make their compoſition welll ynough without him, for the Kings drift was to ſeuer them. The Cardinall was honorably receiued, well feaſted, and ſoone diſpatched, and returned with this anſwere, that the Duke was not come forth into the field to endammage the King in any reſpect, but onely to ſuccour his confederates: ſo the meſſages that paſſed betweene them were very courteous on both ſides.
               Immediately after the Cardinals departure a heralt called Bretaigne arriued at the Duke of Burgundies campe with letters from the Dukes of Normandie and Britain, wherin they aduertiſed him that they had made peace with the King, and renounced all leagues and confederacies, and namely their league with him, and farther that the Duke of Normandie had ſurrendred Normandie (lately giuen him for his partage) to the King, and ſhould receiue in recompence thereof, and of all other partages the yeerely reuenues of three ſcore thouſand franks, which conditions (though neuer ſo vnreaſonable) neceſſitie forced the Lord Charles of Fraunce to accept. The Duke of Burgundie was woonderfully abaſhed at theſe newes: for he had put himſelfe into the field onely to aide the ſaid Dukes. And ſure the heralt was in great danger, for bicauſe he paſſed by the Court, the Duke ſuſpected that the King had forged theſe letters, notwithſtanding he receiued immediately after, the like aduertiſement from other places. The King thought now his enterpriſe halfe woon, and that he ſhould eaſily perſwade the Duke of Burgundie to forſake theſe two Dukes, as they had him: whereupon ſecret meſſengers ran betweene them, and the King gaue the Duke ſixe ſcore thouſand crownes, whereof he paid the one halfe preſently the better to content the ſaid Duke, who had conſumed great ſummes in leuying this armie. Farther, the Duke ſent to the King a groome of his chamber very neere about him, named Iohn Vobriſſet, whereupon the King conceiued great hope of his enterpriſe, and ſeemed deſirous to commune with the Duke in perſon, truſting to obtaine of him all that he required, both bicauſe of the two foreſaid Dukes ingratitude towards him, and alſo bicauſe of the great ſumme of monie he had giuen him. Wherefore he aduertiſed the Duke of certaine matters by the ſaid Vobriſſet, and ſent backe with him Cardinall Balue and Maſter Tanneguy du Chaſtell gouernor of Rouſſillon, who gaue the Duke to vnderſtand by their words, that the King deſired greatly that they two might commune togither in perſon.
               They found the Duke at Peronne who ſeemed to haue no great deuotion to this meeting, bicauſe the Liegeois made ſhew as though they would rebell anew, being ſollicited thereunto by two ambaſſadors ſent thither by the King for that purpoſe before the truce was made which he and the Duke concluded, for certaine daies betweene them and their confederates. But Cardinall Balue and the other ambaſſadors

put this doubt out of his head, alleaging that the Liegeois durſt attempt no ſuch thing, conſidering he had vanquiſhed them, & raſed but their wals the yeer before: and farther, if they had any ſuch deſire, yet when they ſhould ſee this amitie betweene him and the King, they would ſoone alter their mindes. Thus in the end it was concluded that the King ſhould come to Peronne ſeeing it pleaſed him ſo to do, and the Duke ſent him a letter written with his owne hand, containing ſufficient ſuretie to come and go at his pleaſure. And thus departed the ambaſſadors, and returned to the King being then at Noyon. But the Duke minding to make all ſure in the countrie of Liege, ſent thither their Biſhop for whoſe quarrell all the wars aboue mentioned firſt began, and in his company the Lord of Hymbercourt (the Dukes lieutenant in thoſe parts) with certaine bands of men.
               You haue heard how it was concluded that the King ſhould come to Peronne, according to the which determination thither he came without his garde, for his pleaſure was wholy to put himſelfe vnder the garde and ſuretie of the Duke, and that Monſeur de Cordes (who then ſerued the Duke) ſhould conuay him thither with the ſaid Dukes archers which was done accordingly. The Kings traine was very ſmall, notwithſtanding he came accompanied with diuers noble perſonages, namely, the Duke of Bourbon, the Cardinall his brother, and the Earle of Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce, who had not buſied himſelfe about this meeting but much miſliked it. For he was now waxed proud and high minded, and behaued not himſelfe to the Duke of Burgundie with ſuch lowlines and humilitie as he was accuſtomed: wherefore there was no good will betweene them twaine. Thither came alſo Cardinall Balue the gouernor of Rouſſillon, and diuers others. And when the King drew neere to Peronne, the Duke with a goodly traine iſſued foorth to receiue him, and brought him into the towne, and lodged him in a goodly houſe neere to the caſtell being the receiuers, for the caſtell was a little old thing naught woorth.
               War betweene two great Princes is eaſily begun but hardly ended, bicauſe of the number of accidents depending thereupon: for each partie diſpatcheth meſſengers to and fro to hurt his enimie, which ſuddenly cannot be ſtaied nor reuoked, as appeered by theſe two Princes, who concluded this meeting vpon a ſudden not aduertiſing their ſeruants thereof, who were far from them executing the charge their Maſters had giuen them. For you ſhall vnderſtand that the Duke had ſent for his armie into Burgundie, being furniſhed at that time with a number of gentlemen, namely the Lord of Breſſe of the houſe of Sauoy, & his two brethren the Biſhop of Geneua, and the Earle of Remont: for the Sauoyans and Burgundians haue euer borne great loue one to another. In this armie were alſo certaine Almaines borderers vpon Sauoy and the county of Burgundy. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that the King in times paſt had held the Lord of Breſſe in priſon, bicauſe of two Knights he commanded to be ſlaine in Sauoy, wherefore there was no good will betweene them two. In this armie were alſo the Lord of Vrfé, Maſter of the horſe afterward to King Charles, Maſter Poncet of Riuiere, and the Lord of Lau, whom the King after ſpeciall good liking of him had alſo held long in priſon, but he eſcaped and fled into Burgundy. All this company aboue mentioned arriued neere to Peronne, euen at the very inſtant that the King came thither, and the Lord of Breſſe with the three aboue mentioned, euery one of them wearing the Saint Andrewes croſſe entred the towne, ſuppoſing they had come time ynough to accompanie the Duke when he ſhould go to receiue the King, but bicauſe they came too late they went ſtraight to the Dukes chamber to do their dutie to him, where the Lord of Breſſe humbly beſought him that the three aboue named, notwithſtanding the Kings comming, might be there

vnder his ſafegard and protection, as he had promiſed them in Burgundie at their firſt arriuall into his dominions, adding that they were ready to ſerue him againſt all men none excepted: which requeſt the Duke granted with his owne mouth, and for their good wil thanked them. The reſt of this army (led by the Marſhal of Burgundy) lodged without the towne as they were appointed. The ſaid Marſhall hated the King no leſſe than the others aboue named, bicauſe of Pinall a towne in Lorraine which the King had once giuen him, and afterward taken from him to beſtow vpon Iohn Duke of Calabria ſo often mentioned in this hiſtorie. The King being foorthwith aduertiſed of theſe noble mens arriuall, and the apparell they ware 
                     1
                   fell ſuddenly into great feare, and ſent to the Duke deſiring him that he might lodge in the caſtell, bicauſe all theſe aboue named were his enimies. The Duke reioiced to ſee him in ſuch feare, and cauſed his lodging to be made there, willing him to be of good cheere and doubt nothing.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth by apparell the Saint Andrewes croſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe wherein is declared how greatly learning eſpecially in hiſtories profiteth Princes and noble men. Chap. 6.
               
                  IT is greatfolly for one Prince to put him ſelfe vnder the power of another, eſpecially when they are in war togither, as thoſe Princes well know that haue ſtudied hiſtories in their youth, wherein they finde diuers examples of great falſhood and treaſon vſed in times paſt at ſuch enteruiewes and of diuers that haue ſtaied as priſoners, and ſlaine thoſe that haue come to them vnder their ſurety 
                     1
                  . I ſay not that all haue vſed ſo to do, but the example of one is ſufficient to teach a number wit, how to looke to themſelues. I my ſelfe for my part haue ſeene ſome experience in the world, hauing been by the ſpace of eighteene yeeres and better, emploied continually in Princes ſeruices, and priuy all that while to the waightieſt and ſecreteſt affaires that haue paſſed in this realme, or the countries bordering vpon it, and ſure in mine opinion the beſt way to learne wiſedome is to read ancient hiſtories, which will teach vs by example of our aunceſters, wiſely to behaue our ſelues, ſafely to defende our ſelues, and aduiſedly to attempt any entepriſe. For our life is ſo ſhort that experience cannot ſufficiently inſtruct vs, conſiderlng withal that our yeers are abridged, and neither our liues ſo long, nor our bodies ſo ſtrong, as were our anceſters in ages paſt: which way as we are weakned, ſo is our faith alſo each to other much diminiſhed 
                     2
                  , in ſuch ſort, that I know not how one man may aſſure himſelfe of another, eſpecially great Princes, who are commonly inclined to all wilfulnes, without any regarde of reaſon, and (which is woorſt of all) haue for the moſt part ſuch men about them, as ſtudy onely to flatter them, and ſooth them in al their dooings be they good or bad, and if ſome one endeuor himſelfe to redreſſe this inconuenience, all the reſt will ſtraight be vpon his top.
               Farther I muſt needes blame ignorant and vnlearned Princes in this reſpect alſo, they haue all commonly about them great clarkes and lawyers, as it is requiſite they ſhould if they be good, but if they be otherwiſe, they are the dangerouſeſt people in

the world to be about a Prince, for they haue euer a law or an hiſtory at their fingers ends, which be it neuer ſo good they writhe and wreſt in ſuch ſort, that they wil make blacke white, and white blacke. But thoſe Princes that be wiſe and haue read as well as they, will not ſuffer themſelues to be abuſed by them, neither dare they be ſo hardy as to report vntruths to ſuch Princes. Farther thinke you that God hath eſtabliſhed the office of a King or Prince, to be executed by ſuch beaſts as glory in ſaying: I am no ſcholer, I truſt my Councell well enough, and refer all matters to them, and ſo without farther anſwer depart to their ſports and paſtimes? No, no, if they had been well trained vp in their youth, they would vſe other language, and ſeeke to be eſteemed for their owne vertues and woorthines. I ſay not that all Princes are ſerued by euill conditioned perſons, but ſure the moſt part of thoſe that I haue ſeene haue not alwaies had their courts vnfurniſhed of ſuch, although ſome I confeſſe I haue knowne that in time of neceſſitie could make choiſe of their men, and vſe the ſeruice of the beſt and wiſeſt. Wherein ſure the King our maſter far paſſed all the Princes of his time, for neuer Prince aduanced ſo highly, nor made ſo great account of wiſe and woorthy men as he did. He was himſelfe reaſonably well learned 
                     3
                  , he was very inquiſitiue and deſirous to vnderſtand of all matters, and had an excellent wit, which paſſeth all learning attained to by ſtudie: for as reading profiteth two maner of waies, the one by acquainting vs with ages paſt, and the other by teaching vs more in a booke in three monthes, than twenty men liuing ſucceſſiuely can learne by experience: ſo if a man lack wit to put that which he readeth in practiſe, his reading ſerueth to no purpoſe. Wherfore to end this diſcourſe, me think the greateſt plague that God can lay vpon a realme, is to giue them an vnwiſe Prince, the roote and fountaine of all miſchiefe: for firſt diuiſion and ciuill wars ariſe thereof among his ſubiects, bicauſe he giueth his authority to others, which eſpecially aboue all things he ought to reſerue to himſelfe. After diuiſion enſueth famine and mortality, and all other euils that accompany the wars, wherefore heereby we may conſider how much a Princes ſubiects ought to lament, when they ſee his children wantonly brought vp and gouerned by euill conditioned perſons.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Of treaſons in treaty we haue numbers of examples. Firſt of Iugurtha taken by his father in law Boccus, and deliuered to the Romaines. Sertorius ſlaine at a banquet by Perpenna. In England we haue the treaſon of Hengiſt to Vortiger. In Scotland we reade of William Earle of Douglaſſe ſlaine by Iames King of Scots in treaty. In Germanie Albert Earle of Franconia betraied in treaty by Ottho Biſhop of Mentz. Iohn of Angieu, ſlaine by Albertus Bauarus Earle of Henault and Flanders, notwithſtanding his ſafe conduct. In Fraunce Iohn Duke of Burgundie ſlaine by Charles the 7. William Duke of Normandie by Arnulph Earle of Flanders. Lewis King of Fraunce taken priſoner by the Normans and Danes at Roan. Iohn Duke of Britaine taken at a banquet and impriſoned by Margaret Countiſſe of Pontibera. Guido Earle of Flanders twice taken priſoner vnder ſafeconduct by Philip le Bell King of Fraunce. Charles the ſimple ſlaine by the Earle of Vermandoys. VVhat ſhould I ſpeake of the treſons of Ferrande and Alfonſe Kings of Naples, or of Chriſtiern King of Denmarke, with numbers of others recorded in hiſtories as our author heere very truly reporteth.
                  
                  2 Others be of a contrarie opinion, that our life is as long as in Dauids time appeereth by the 90. Pſalme, where he ſheweth the vſuall age of man in his time to haue beene 70. and ſometime 80. yeers which men reche to at this day alſo, and if mans life be as long now as then, it is a good conſequent that his body is as ſtrong, as is to be prooued by manie
                     
                     reaſons too long to reherſe. Now that our faith is as good as theirs appeereth alſo by the ancient hiſtories, for if this be a true ſaying, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. And the Princes in times paſt were ſo euill as none could be worſe, (as who ſo list to reade without partiality ſhal be forced to confeſſe.) I ſee no reaſon that the world ſhould be worſe now then in times paſt, although it ſeeme ſo to many, bicauſe we ſee the worſt of our owne age, yea and feele too many times, but commonly the hiſtories deliuer to vs but the beſt of times paſt, and burie the worſt, and though they did, yet the euill ſeene with our eie is more liuely imprinted in minde, then the euill we conceiue by our eare, which is the cauſe men euer thinke better of the times paſt, then the preſent eſtate.
                  
                  3 Imaruell if King Lewis were learned, he would haue his ſonne to learne onely this leſſon, Qui neſcit diſſimulare, neſcit regnare.
               
            
            
               How and for what cauſe the King was ſtaied and held priſoner in the caſtell of Peronne by the Duke of Burgundies commandement. Chap. 7.
               
                  YOu haue heard how the King and this army of Burgundie arriued at Peronne both in one iſtant, for the Duke could not countermand them in time, bicauſe they were well forward vpon the way when the Kings comming was firſt communed of. Their arriuall troubled the feaſt, bicauſe of diuers doubts that ſprang thereof. Notwithſtanding theſe two Princes appointed certeine of their ſeruants to negotiate togither about their affaires, in moſt louing and freindly ſort. But after three or foure daies communication, theſe ſtrange newes came from Liege which I will now reherſe. The K. comming to Peronne had cleane forgotten the two ambaſſadors ſent to Liege to ſollicite them to rebell againſt the Duke, who ſo diligently executed their charge, that before the Kings arriuall at Peronne, the Liegeois had leuied great force and were gone to ſurpriſe the towne of Tongres, where the Biſhop of Liege and the Lord of Hymbercourt lodged accompanied with two thouſand men and better: and the ſaid Biſhop and Hymbercourt they tooke with certein other of the Biſhops familiar friends, but few they ſlew, neither was the number of the priſoners great: the reſt fled as men diſcomfited, leauing bag and bagage behinde them. This done the Liegeois returned towards their citie not far diſtant from Tongres: and vpon the way thitherward the Lord of Hymbercourt compounded for his ranſome with a knight called Maſter VVilliam de Ville, named by the French Le Sauuage, who fearing leſt this furious people ſhould kill him, ſuffered him to depart vpon his word: which notwithſtanding he neuer chalenged, for ſoon after himſelfe was ſlaine: the people reioiced much for the taking of their Biſhop. Farther you ſhall vnderſtand that they hated extremely certaine chanons of the Church taken priſoners that day: of whom for the firſt repaſt they ſlew fiue or ſixe, one of the which was named Maſter Robert the Biſhops ſpeciall friend, whom I my ſelfe haue often ſeene armed at all peeces waiting vpon his Maſter, for ſuch is the maner of the Alemaigne Prelates. 
                     1
                   The ſaid Maſter Robert they ſlew in the Biſhops preſence, and hewed him into a number of ſmall gobbets which they threw one at another in diriſion. To be ſhort, before their returne to Liege which was but eight leagues from Tongres, they ſlew ſixteen chanons and others all in maner the Biſhops ſeruants. This

done, they receiued aduertiſement that the treatie betweene the King and the Duke was alreadie begun, wherefore they diſmiſſed certaine Burgundians ſuppoſing to excuſe their fault, by ſeeming to haue attempted nothing againſt the Duke, but only againſt their Biſhop, whom they led priſoner into the citie. Thoſe that eſcaped put all the countrie in an vprore as they went, by means whereof this newes came ſoone to the Duke: ſome ſaid all were ſlaine, others the contrarie, for ſuch aduertiſements are neuer reported after one ſort. At the length certaine arriued that ſaw theſe chanons ſlaine, who ſuppoſing the Biſhop and Hymbercourt to be of the number, auowed conſtantly that all were murthered, and farther, that they ſaw the Kings ambaſſadors in the companie, whom alſo they named. All this was told the Duke, who foorthwith beleeued it, and fell into an extreme furie, ſaying that the King was come thither to abuſe him, and gaue commandement to ſhut the gates of the caſtell and the towne, ſpreading a fond rumor that he did it, bicauſe of a budget with iewels and monie that was loſt. The King ſeeing himſelfe ſhut into this little caſtell, and a number of archers before the gate: ſtood in great doubt of his perſon, the rather bicauſe he lodged hard by a great tower, in the which an Earle of Vermandois had in times paſt cauſed a King of Fraunce one of his predeceſſors to be ſlaine 
                     2
                  . I was yet in ſeruice with the Duke, and one of his priuie chamber, into the which I entred at my pleaſure, according to the vſe of this houſe of Burgundie. The Duke when the towne gates were ſhut, commanded all men to voide his chamber, and ſaid to two or three of vs that taried with him, that notwithſtanding he for his part had neuer any taſte in this meeting, but agreed to it onely to content the King: yet the King on the contrarie ſide was come thither purpoſely to abuſe him. Then rehearſed he all theſe newes of Liege, how the King had ordered the matter by his ambaſſadors and cauſed all his men to be ſlaine: and ſuch a rage he was in againſt the King, and ſo threatened him, that I thinke verily if thoſe to whom he ſpake had preſſed forward the matter, and counſelled him to worke the King ſome miſchiefe, he would haue done it, at the leaſt haue impriſoned him in the great tower aboue mentioned. None were preſent when theſe words paſſed the Duke, but my ſelfe and two groomes of his chamber, one of the which was named Charles of Viſin borne at Dyion, an honeſt gentleman and in good credit with his maſter. We mitigated this matter, and ſought to appeaſe the Duke as much as in vs lay, notwithſtanding ſoone after he vſed alſo the like ſpeech to others, by meanes whereof it was blowen all ouer the towne, and came at length into the Kings chamber, who was in maruellous feare, as vniuerſally all men were, bicauſe of the great euils they ſaw like to enſue a quarrell begun betweene two ſo great Princes, who ſure were both blame woorthie, for that they aduertiſed not their ſeruants of this meeting, who were far from them executing their commandements, whereby ſome great inconuenience was ſure to enſue.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Theſe were chanons of S. Lambert in Liege, the which were not forced to be prieſts, but might come foorth and marrie if they had not ſoong maſſe. Guicci.
                  2 This Earle of Vermandois was named Hebart or Herbau, and the King of Fraunce Charles le Simple, whom this Hebart ſlue in the towre heere mentioned anno 926. or after Annal. Burgund. 921. bicauſe the King had ſlaine in battell Robert Duke of Aquitaine, or after ſome of Aniou, who had married this Hebarts ſister. But note heere poenam talionis vpon the King, for as he was ſtaied heere notwithſtanding the Dukes ſafe conduct: ſo had he himſelfe taken and impriſoned by the ſpace of two yeeres Philip Lord
                     
                     of Breſſe, hauing called him to him vnder his ſafe conduct. Meyer. Of the Lord of Breſſes impriſonment our author maketh mention in the fift chapter of this booke.
                  
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe wherein is ſhewed, that an enteruiew betweene two great Princes for treatie of their affaires, hurteth more than profiteth. Chap. 8.
               
                  IT is great folly for two Princes being in manner of equall force and eſtate to meete togither, vnleſſe it be in their youth when their mindes are wholy ſet vpon pleaſures and paſtimes, but after they are come to mans eſtate, and growen deſirous to encroch each vpon other, ſuch enteruiewes do but increaſe their hatred and euill will, though happily their perſons might be there in ſafetie, which notwithſtanding I hold almoſt for a thing impoſſible. Wherefore it is better to pacifie all controuerſies by wiſe and diſcreete men, as before I haue ſaid: for proofe whereof I will reherſe certaine examples that haue happened in my tyme, ſome of the which I my ſelfe haue ſeene, and of the reſt haue beene credibly enformed.
               A few yeers after King Lewis his coronation before the war called the WEALE PVBLIQVE began, a ſollemne meeting was appointed between him and the King of Caſtile, 
                     1
                   which are the two neereſt confederated Princes in Chriſtendome, for their league is betweene King and King, Realme and Realme, and man and man of their ſubiects, which alſo they are both bound vnder great curſes to keepe and obſerue inuiolable. To this meeting came Henry King of Caſtile with a goodlie traine to Fontarabia, and the King our Maſter to Saint Iohn de Luz fower leagues diſtant, both of them being vpon the frontires of their dominions. I was not preſent my ſelfe at this meeting, but I haue heard both the King and the Lord of Lau make report thereof, and haue beene enformed of it alſo by certaine Lords of Caſtille there preſent with the King their Maſter, who came to this enterview accompanied with the Lord great Maſter of Saint Iames, and the Archbiſhop of Tolledo which two bare all the ſwaie in Caſtile at that time, the Earle of Lodeſme the King of Caſtils minion was there alſo in great brauerie, and all the ſaid Kings gard, being to the number of three hundred horſe, all Moores of Granado and ſome of them Negros. But K. Henry himſelfe was a man of ſo ſmall vnderſtanding, that he gaue away all his inheritance, at the leaſt ſuffered euery man that would to ſpoile him of it: our King was alſo accompanied with a goodlie traine, as you know his vſe was, but his gard eſpecially was braue & in verie good order. To this meeting came in like maner the Queene of Arragon about a controuerſie betweene hir and the King of Caſtile, for Eſtell and certaine other places in Nauarre: whereof the King was made arbitrator. But now for proofe that ſuch enterviews between great Princes are not meet nor conuenient, you ſhall vnderſtand that theſe two Kings had neuer beene at variance, there was no quarrell betweene them, neither ſaw they one another paſt once or twiſe vpon a riuer ſide that parteth both their realmes, 
                     2
                   hard by a litle caſtell called Heurtebiſe, where the King of Caſtile paſſed to the hither ſide of the riuer. At their firſt meeting they had no great liking one of another, eſpecially our King, who perceiued the King of Caſtille to be but a ſimple man doing nothing of himſelfe, but whollie gouerned by the great Maſter of Saint Iames and the Archbiſhop of Tolledo

aboue mentioned. Wherefore he made no account of their Maſter but ſought their freindſhip, whereupon they came to him to Saint Iohn de Luz where he entred into amitie with them, and had great intelligence by their meanes. The greateſt part of both theſe Princes traines lay at Bayonne, and at the verie firſt meeting fell togither by the eares, notwitſtanding their league: and no maruell. For their maners and languages differed. Afterward the Earle of Lodeſme came alſo to viſite the King, and paſſed the riuer in a boate, the ſaile whereof was cloth of gold. Farther he ware a paire of buskins embrodred thicke with ſtone, for he was a Prince of great wealth and reuenews in Caſtille, and created ſince the Duke of Albourg. In the end theſe two confederate nations began to ſcoffe and ieſt each at other, the King of Caſtile was deformed, and the French miſliked his apparell, wherefore they derided him. Our King ware his apparell very ſhort, and maruelous vncomely, and was clad ſomtime in very courſe cloth, beſides that, he ware an old hat, differing from all the reſt of his company, and an image of lead vpon it, whereat the Caſtilians ieſted, ſaying that this proceeded of miſery. Thus ended this enterview with ſuch ſcoffes and taunts, that afterward theſe two Princes neuerloued togither. Farther great diſſention aroſe among the King of Caſtiles ſeruants, which continued till his death and long after, in ſuch ſort that I haue ſeene him the pooreſt Prince that euer raigned, and abandoned of all his ſeruants and ſubiects. The Queene of Arragon departed alſo diſcontented, for the King pronounced ſentence for the King of Caſtile. Wherfore both the King of Arragon hir husband and ſhe hated him euer after. And notwithſtanding that they vſed his helpe a while in their neceſſity againſt the towne of Barcelonne, yet endured not their friendſhip, but wars aroſe betweene them, which continued aboue ſixteene yeeres, and the controuerſie remaineth yet vndecided. Now to proceed to other examples.
               Duke Charles of Burgundy ſince the time aboue mentioned, by his owne great ſute and ſollicitation, met with the Emperor Fredericke now raigning, at Treues 
                     3
                  , where the Duke made great preparation to ſhew his pompe and magnificency. The Emperor and he treated there of many matters, and among the reſt, of their childrens mariage, which was afterward accompliſhed. But when they had been togither a certaine ſpace, the Emperor to the Dukes great reproch and diſhonor, departed without leaue taking, wherefore they neuer loued after, neither themſelues nor their ſubiects. The Almains diſdained the Dukes pompe and lofty maner of ſpeech, ſaying that it proceeded of pride, the Burgundians on the contrary ſide deſpiſed the Emperors ſmall traine, and ſimple attire. To be ſhort, this iar grew ſo great that the wars of Nuz ſprang thereof.
               I was alſo at Saint Paul in Artois when the Duke of Burgundy and King Edward of England met there 
                     4
                  . The Duke had maried his ſiſter, they were companions of one order, and abode there togither two daies. The Kings ſeruants were deuided into two factions, and both the parties complained to the Duke, who enclining more to the one than the other, encreaſed their hatred, and notwithſtanding that, he aided the King for the recouery of his realme, (out of the which he was chaſed by the Earle of Warwick) and furniſhed him both of men money, and ſhips: yet after this meeting, they neuer loued togither, neither could affoord each other a good word.
               I was likewiſe at Bruxels when the Palſzgraue of the Rheine came thither to the Duke of Burgundy, where he was honorably receaued, ſumptuouſly feaſted, and lodged in a chamber richly furniſhed. The Dukes men reported the Almains to be ſlouens, and void of ciuility, alledging that they threw their mirie bootes vpon their rich and ſtately beds, wherefore they made leſſe account of them, then before they

knew them. The Almains on the contrary ſide like enuious perſons miſliked this great pompe. To conclude, after this they neuer loued togither, neither ſought to pleaſure one another.
               I ſaw alſo the meeting of the Duke of Burgundy, and D. Sigiſmunde of Auſtrich 
                     5
                  , who ſolde vnto the ſaid Duke the County of Ferret, bordering vpon the County of Burgundy for a hundred thouſand gildons, not being able to defend it againſt the Switzers. Theſe two Princes liked not greatly one another. Afterward alſo Duke Sigiſmunde made peace with the Switzers, and tooke againe the ſaid County of Ferret without paying backe the money, whereof enſued infinite harmes to the Duke of Burgundy. At the ſelfe ſame time alſo came the Earle of Warwick to the Duke, who after their meeting were mortall enimies each to other.
               I was alſo preſent at the enteruiewe betweene the King our maſter, and King Edvvard of England at Picquigny 
                     6
                  , neere to Amiens, whereof I will make mention heereafter more at large. All that they did there was but meere diſſimulation, for they performed no whit of that they promiſed. And notwithſtanding, that they were neuer after in war togither (bicauſe the ſea ſeuered them) yet perfect friendſhip was there none betweene them. Wherefore to conclude this diſcourſe, me thinke that two great Princes minding to continue in amity, ought neuer to meete togither. The occaſions of troubles that ariſe at ſuch aſſemblies are theſe, their ſeruants can not refraine from talking of matters paſt, and words will eaſely be taken in euill part. Secondarily, it is impoſſible but that the traine of the one ſhould be in better order then the other, where of ſcoffes ariſe, which they that are ſcoffed ſtomacke. Thirdly, if they be two nations, their language and apparell differ, and that that pleaſeth the one diſpleaſeth the other. Laſt of all, it commonly hapneth that the perſonage of the one Prince is comlier and better to be liked than the other, wherefore he is praiſed, and reioiceth and glorieth to heare his owne commendation, which cannot be without the diſpraiſe of the other. And notwithſtanding that three or fower daies peraduenture after the aſſembly ended, theſe matters be communed of cloſely & couertly in mens eares: yet by vſe they fall in time in open talke at dinners and ſuppers, and ſo are reported to both the parties, for fewe things in this world can be concealed, eſpecially tales and reports. Thus you haue heard the reaſons and examples that I my ſelfe haue ſeene touching this point.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The meeting of the King and the King of Caſtile was anno 1463.
                  2 The riuer where the two Kings met was named Audaye.
                  
                  3 The meeting betweene the Emperour and the Duke was ſaith Munſter anno 1469. Berlandus ſaith anno 1472. Meyer 1473. the 28. of September.
                  
                  4 VVhat yeere the meeting of King Edward and the Duke was, appeereth afterwards lib. 3. cap. 6.
                  5 Ferret was engaged to the Duke about midſommer anno 1469. for ſeuentie thouſand crownes. Annal. Burgund. but Meyer ſaith anno 1467. for fiftie thouſand gildons, and other ſay for 80. thouſand gildons.
                  
                  6 VVhen this meeting vvas at Picquigny looke lib. 4. cap. 10.
               
            
            
               
               How the King to deliuer himſelfe out of the caſtell of Peronne, renounced his league with the Liegeois. Chap. 9.
               
                  NOw to returne after my long diſcourſe, to the King who was ſtaied at Peronne, as you haue heard, the gates remained ſhut with watch and warde before them two or three daies, all the which time the Duke ſawe not the King, neither entered any French man into the caſtell but by the wicket, and but ſew after that ſort, notwithſtanding none of the Kings ſeruants were forbidden to repaire to him, but few or none of the Dukes went to commune with him, neither yet into his chamber, eſpecially of thoſe that were of any credit with the Duke. The firſt day all men were in great feare, and muttered vp and downe the towne: the ſecond the Duke was ſomewhat pacified, and ſate in counſell almoſt the whole day, and part alſo of the night. The King cauſed all thoſe to be laboured that he thought could aide him in this extremitie, making them large offers and promiſes, & commanded alſo fifteen thouſand crowns to be diuided among the Dukes ſeruants, but he to whom the charge was committed acquit himſelfe not faithfully thereof: for part of the monie he retained to his owne vſe, as the King afterward vnderſtood. The King fearing eſpecially thoſe aboue named, that came with this armie of Burgundy, who in times paſt had beene his owne ſeruants, but were now his brothers the Duke of Normandies as they ſaid. In this councell aboue mentioned this matter was diuerſly debated, ſome were of opinion that the ſafe conduct giuen the King ſhould not be broken, ſeeing he offered to ſweare the treatie as it was articled in writing: others gaue counſell rudely to impriſon him without farther ceremonie, and others to ſend for his brother the Duke of Normandie, and to conclude a peace for the aduantage of all the Princes of Fraunce. They that gaue this aduiſe thought if their opinion tooke place, that the King ſhould be reſtrained of his libertie for euer, and held continually vnder garde, bicauſe a great Prince being in the hands of his enimie, and vſed after ſuch ſort, neuer or very hardly recouereth his libertie for feare of reuenge. This laſt opinion failed not much to take effect: for the matter was ſo far forward that I ſawe a man booted, and ready to depart with a packet of letters to the Duke of Normandie being then in Britaine, and ſtaied onely for the Duke of Burgundies letter, notwithſtanding all this was daſhed againe. The King cauſed certaine ouertures to be made, offering to leaue there in hoſtage the Duke of Bourbon and the Cardinall his brother, and the Conſtable, with diuers others, vnder this condition, that the peace being concluded he might depart to Compiegne, promiſing incontinent either to cauſe the Liegeois to repaire the harmes done, or to declare himſelfe their enimie. They whom the King named for hoſtages outwardly made earneſt offer of themſelues, I know not whether they meant as they ſaid, and I doubt me they did not: for I verily beleeue if the King had left them there, they ſhould neuer haue returned into Fraunce.
               All this night being the third after the newes brought, the Duke neuer vnclothed him, but lay downe twiſe or thriſe vpon his bed, and then roſe and walked: for ſuch was his maner when he was troubled. I lay that night my ſelfe in his chamber, and

communed with him diuers times. In the morning he was farther out of patience than euer before, vſing terrible menaces, and being ready to execute ſome great matter: notwithſtanding in the end he was pacified, and reſolued to hold himſelfe contented, if the King would ſweare the treatie, and go with him to Liege to helpe to reuenge the iniuries the Liegeois had done him, and the Biſhop of Liege his coſen, with the which meſſage ſuddenly he departed into the Kings chamber, whereof the King had a priuie watch word by a friend 
                     1
                  , who aduertiſed him that nothing was to be feared if he agreed to theſe two points, otherwiſe that he ſhould put himſelfe in ſo great danger, that none could be greater. When the Duke came to the Kings preſence, his voice trembled, and euen there he was like to fall into a newe rage, ſo much was he troubled. His behauior towards the King was humble and lowly, but his countenance furious, and his language ſharpe, for he asked him in few words wherher he would obſerue the treatie concluded, and alſo ſweare it: Whereunto the King anſwered that he would. For you ſhall vnderſtand that the ſaid treaty as touching the Duke of Burgundy himſelfe was altred in no point otherwiſe than it was concluded before Paris, and as touching the Duke of Normandies partage, it was much amended for the King. For it was agreed that in ſtead of Normandy he ſhould haue Champaine and Brie, and certaine other places there about, for his partage. Then the Duke asked him againe, whether he would go with him to Liege to helpe him to reuenge the treaſon the Liegeois had wrought by his meanes, and by his comming thither, putting him alſo in minde of the neere kinred that was betweene the ſaid King and the Biſhop of Liege, being of the houſe of Bourbon, wherunto the King anſwered, that after he had ſworne the treaty (which was the thing he moſt deſired) he would accompany him to Liege, and lead thither with him, as ſmall or as great force as the Duke ſhould thinke good: at which words the D. much reioiced, and incontinent the treaty of peace was brought, and the ſelfe ſame croſſe that Charlemaigne vſuallie ware called the croſſe of victory: taken out of the Kings coffers, and there the two Princes ſware the treaty: 
                     2
                   wherupon all the bels in the town rung, and all men were glad and reioiced. It hath pleaſed the King ſince to attribute this honor to me, that I did him great ſeruice in furthering this accord. The Duke ſent theſe newes foorthwith into Britaine and the treatie with all, wherein he ſeuered not himſelfe from the ſaid two Dukes, but named them his confederats. And ſure the Lord Charles had now a good partage in reſpect of the treatie made in Britaine, whereby he ſhould haue but a penſion onely of fortie thouſand franks as before you haue heard.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 It vvas Commines himſelfe, that gaue the King aduiſe not to refuſe to go to Liege vvith the Duke. Annal. Burgund.
                  2 The peace of Peronne vvas ſvvorne the fovverteenth day of October, anno 1468. Meyer lib. 17. fol. 346. pag. 1. vvhere read alſo the conditions of the peace.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King accompanied the Duke of Burgundy, making war vpon the Liegeois, who before were his confederates. Chap. 10.
               
                  THe next day after the treaty ſworne, the King and the Duke departed from Peronne, and went to Cambray, and from thence into the countrey of Liege in the very beginning of winter, and in a maruelous foule ſeaſon. The King had with him few ſoldiers or none, others than the Scottiſh men of his garde, but gaue commandement that three hundred men of armes ſhould folow after him. The Dukes army was deuided into two bands, the one led by the Marſhall of Burgundy (ſo often already mentioned) in the which were all the Burgundians, and the noble men of Sauoye aboue named, beſides great forces of the countries of Haynault, Luxembourg, Namure, and Lamburge, the other band the Duke him ſelfe lead: when they drew neere the citie of Liege they debated in the Dukes preſence what was to be done. Some gaue aduiſe to diſmiſſe part of the army, conſidering that the gates and wals of the citie were raſed the yeer before, and the citizens in vtter deſpaire of ſuccour: the King him ſelfe being there in perſon againſt them, and offering in maner the ſelfe ſame conditions of peace on their behalfe that were demanded. The Duke alowed not of this opinion, which was a happie turne for him, for if he had, he had marred all, but his ſuſpition of the King cauſed him to take the wiſeſt courſe: & ſure his Captaines opinion in thinking themſelues too ſtrong, proceeded either of great pride or of great follie. Notwithſtanding I haue often heard diuers Captaines giue the like aduiſe, ſome bicauſe they thinke thereby to win an opinion of hardneſſe, and ſome for that they vnderſtand not the matters debated, but wiſe Princes weigh not ſuch fond opinions. As touching this point, the King our Maſter had learned his leſſon, for as he was ſlow and fearfull in attempting any thing: ſo when he tooke once an enterpriſe in hand, he ſo throughlie furniſhed him ſelfe of euery thing thereunto appertaining, that he could not but obtaine his purpoſe.
               Order was then giuen that the Marſhall of Burgundie with his band ſhould go before and lodge in the citie, and if the citizens made difficulty to receiue him, as it was thought they would not, bicauſe diuers of them were already come to the Duke to treate of peace, that then he ſhould attempt to enter by force. The ſaide Marſhall and his company went to Namur, and the next day departed thence, and the King and the D. arriued there. But when the Marſhall approched neer the city, this fooliſh people ſalied foorth to the skirmiſh and were eaſilie repulſed, and a great number ſlaine, the reſt retired into the towne, and at that verie inſtant eſcaped their Biſhop and came to vs. Within the towne was a legate ſent thither by the Pope to vnderſtand of the variance betweene the Biſhop and the people, and to pacifie the matter. For the ſentence of excommunication pronounced againſt them was yet vnreuoked, bicauſe of their offences aboue reherſed. This legate paſſing the bands of his commiſſion, fauored altogither the people in hope to obtaine the Biſhoprick for him ſelfe, and commanded them to take armes for their defence, and encouraged them to diuers other folies. Notwithſtanding now ſeeing the city in this danger, he iſſued foorth with intent to flie, but was taken and all his traine

being to the number of fiue and twentie very well mounted. The Duke hearing theſe newes ſeemed notwithſtanding to take no notice thereof, but ſent word to thoſe that tooke him that they ſhould leade him into ſome ſecret place, and make their profit of him as of ſome merchant, and in no wiſe to aduertiſe him of this accident, alleaging that if he came openly into his campe, he could not ſuffer them to keepe him, but muſt of force deliuer him, for honor of the ſea apoſtolike. Notwithſtanding they could not do as they were commanded, but fell at variance for him in ſuch ſort, that openly at diner time certaine that claimed part in the bootie, came and complained to the Duke: wherefore he ſent immediately and tooke him from them, and reſtored him all that he loſt, and entertained him very honorably.
               This vaward led by the Marſhall of Burgundie and the Lord of Hymbercourt, marched ſtraight to the citie, ſuppoſing to enter without reſiſtance, and through couetouſnes (hoping to haue the ſpoile thereof to themſelues) refuſed the compoſition that was offered, neither thought it needfull to tarrie for the King and the Duke, being ſeuen or eight leagues behinde them, but marched with ſuch ſpeede that they arriued at the towne by twilight, and entred into a certaine ſuburbs leading ſtraight to a gate that the citizens had ſomewhat repaired. There the Liegeois and they parled togither but could not agree. In the meane time they were benighted, their lodgings were vnmade, neither was the place large ynough for the ſeate of their camp, beſide that they were in great diſorder, ſome walked vp and downe, ſome called their maſters, their companions, and their captains: which folly and diſorder Maſter Iohn de Villette and other captains of the Liegeois perceiuing, tooke hart and determined to iſſue foorth, and their misfortune I meane the ruine of their wals, ſerued them to good purpoſe in this enterpriſe: for they ſalied foorth where liked them beſt by the breaches thereof, and came in order of battell to the foremoſt ranks of the Burgundians. Farther, among the vines and little hils they aſſailed the pages and ſtraglers that walked their Maſters horſes without the ſuburbs by the which our men entred. A great number of good ſoldiers were there ſlaine, but a greater number fled, for the night couereth all ſhame. To be ſhort, the Liegeois ſo couragiouſly executed their enterpriſe, that they ſlue at the leaſt eight hundred: one hundred of them being men of armes. But the hardie and valiant ſoldiers of this vaward being in maner all men of armes and gentlemen of good houſes, ioined themſelues togither, and marched with enſigne diſplaied ſtraight to the gate, fearing the citizens ſalie there. The waies were maruellous deepe, bicauſe of continuall raine, in ſuch ſort that the men of armes being all on foote ſtood in mire aboue the ankles. Once all the citizens thought to ſalie foorth at the ſaid gate with great torches and lights, but our men had mounted fower good peeces of artillerie in the very mouth thereof, the which ſhot twiſe or thriſe along the high ſtreete, and ſlew a great number, whereupon they all retired out of the ſuburbes, and ſhut their gates. But during this skirmiſh in the ſuburbes, the others that had ſalied forth to aſſaile the pages aboue mentioned, tooke certaine carts neer to the towne, in the which they lodged themſelues very vncommodiouſly, and taried without the citie from two of the clocke after midnight, till ſix in the morning, but ſo ſoone as the day brake that one might deſcry another, they were repulſed, and in their retract maſter Iohn de Villette, and one or two more of their captaines hurt, who died all within two daies after.
            
            
               
               How the King arriued in perſon with the Duke of Burgundy, before the citie of Liege. Chap. 11.
               
                  NOtwithſtanding that ſalies out of a towne be ſomtimes neceſſary, yet are they very dangerous for thoſe that defend the place, for the loſſe of ten men is more to them, than of an hundred to thoſe that beſiege them, firſt bicauſe their number is not equall, ſecondarily bicauſe they cannot put men into the towne at pleaſure, and laſtly bicauſe haply they may looſe one of their cheefe captaines, which miſhap cauſeth oftentimes the loſſe alſo of the place. Theſe diſcomfortable newes were foorthwith brought to the Duke, lying fower or fiue leagues from the towne, and the firſt report was, that his whole vaward was diſcomfited, yet that notwithſtanding he and the whole army mounted on horſebacke, commanding that no word ſhould be made to the King of this misfortune. And when he drew neere the citie on the contrary ſide to that where his vaward lay, he was aduertiſed that all was well, and the loſſe nothing ſo great as was thought, neither any man of name ſlaine but a knight of Flaunders named Monſeur de Sergine, notwithſtanding they ſent him word that the valiant gentlemen and ſoldiers of his vaward were vtterly wearied, and in great trouble and diſtreſſe, for all that night they had ſtoode vpright in the mire by the towne gate. Farther they told him that certaine of the footemen that fled were returned ſo diſcouraged, that they ſeemed vnfit for any great exploit. Wherefore they deſired him for Gods loue to make haſte, to the end the citizens might be forced to retire euery man to the defence of his owne quarter, and that it would pleaſe him to ſende them ſome vittails, for they had not one morſell of meat. The D. foorthwith commanded two or three hundred to ride thither as faſt as their horſes could gallop, to cōfort his ſoldiers, and ſent after them al the vittails he could come by, and ſo was it high time, for by the ſpace of two daies almoſt and a night, they had neither eaten nor drunke, vnleſſe it were ſome one that caried a draught of wine in a bottell. Beſides that, the weather was maruelous foule, neither could they poſſibly enter the town on that ſide they lay, vnleſſe the Duke embuſied the enimie on the other ſide. A great number of them were hurt, and among the reſt the Prince of Orenge (whom I had forgotten to name before) who behaued himſelfe that day like a couragious gentleman, for he neuer mooued foote off the place he firſt poſſeſſed. The Lords of Lau and Vrfé did alſo very valiantly, but the number of the footmen that fled the night of the skirmiſh was at the leaſt ten thouſand. It was almoſt darke night when the Duke receaued this newes, but after he had diſpatched all his buſines he returned to his enſigne and rehearſed the whole order of the skirmiſh to the King, who reioiced to heare that all was ſo wel, for the contrary might haue turned to his preiudice. When they approched neere the towne, a great number of gentlemen and men of armes lighted on foote with the archers to take the ſuburbes which were eaſely won, and there the baſtard of Burgundy (who had great charge in this army vnder the Duke,) the Lord of Rauaſtaine, the earle of Roucy, the Conſtables ſonne and diuers other gentlemen lodged, euen hard by the gate, which the enimies had alſo repaired as the former. The Duke lodged in the midſt of the ſuburbes, but the King lay that night in a great grange, a quarter of a league from the town, where was very good lodging,

being accompanied with a great number of men, as well of his owne as of ours.
               This towne is ſituate vpon mountaines and vallies, and in a maruellous fruitfull ſoile 
                     1
                  , the riuer of Maz runneth through it: it is about the greatnes of Roan, and was at that time a maruellous populous citie. From the gate where we lodged to the other where our vaward lay, the way was ſhort through the towne, but without, it was at the leaſt three leagues going, ſo crooked and foule are the waies eſpecially in winter, in the midſt whereof we came thither. Their wals were all raſed, ſo that they might ſaly foorth where beſt liked them, and their defence was onely a little rampire of earth: for the towne was neuer ditched, bicauſe the foundation is hard and ſharpe rock. The firſt night of the Dukes arriuall, our vaward was much refreſhed and eaſed: for the force within the towne was then diuided into two parts. About midnight they gaue vs a hot alarme, whereupon the Duke iſſued foorthwith into the ſtreet, and ſoone after arriued alſo the King and the Conſtable with great ſpeede, conſidering how far off they lay. Some cried they ſaly out at ſuch a gate, others ſpake diuers diſcomfortable words, the darke and rainie weather increaſed alſo their feare. The Duke lacked no courage, but failed ſomtime in good order giuing: and to ſay the truth, at this time he behaued not himſelfe ſo aduiſedly as many wiſhed, bicauſe of the Kings preſence. Wherefore the King tooke vpon him authoritie to command, and ſaid to the Conſtable, Leade your men into ſuch a quarter, for if they ſalie that is their way: and ſure both his words and behauiour ſhewed him to be a Prince of great vertue and wiſedome, and well acquainted with ſuch exploits: notwithſtanding this great alarme prooued nothing, whereupon the King and the Duke returned to their lodging.
               The next morning came the King and lodged alſo in the ſuburbs in a little houſe hard by the Dukes lodging, accompanied with an hundred Scottiſh men of his garde, and his men of armes lying in a little village hard by him, which bred great ſuſpicion in the Duke that he would either enter the citie, or eſcape before it were taken 
                     2
                  , or peraduenture worke him ſome diſpleaſure lying ſo neere him. Wherefore he put into a great grange iuſt betweene their two lodgings three hundred men of armes, being all the flower of his houſe, who brake downe the panes of the wals to ſaly foorth the more ſpeedily if neede ſo required, and theſe had their eies continually vpon the Kings lodging which was hard by them. The ſiege continued eight daies, during which ſpace neither the Duke nor any of the company vnarmed themſelues. But the euening before the towne was taken, the Duke determined to aſſault it the next morning being Sonday the 30. of October, the yeere 1468. and the token giuen to our vaward was this, that when they heard one bombard and two great ſerpentines diſcharged one incontinent after another, without more ſhot they ſhould then couragiouſly go to the aſſault, and the Duke on his ſide would do the like. Farther, the hower appointed for the enterpriſe was eight of the clocke in the morning: the ſame night the aſſault was thus concluded, the Duke vnarmed himſelfe, which ſince the beginning of the ſiege he had not done, and commanded the whole armie, eſpecially thoſe that lodged in the grange betweene his lodging and the Kings to do the like, to the end they might refreſh themſelues: but the ſelfeſame night the citizens as though they had beene aduertiſed of this determination, concluded to make a ſalie out of the towne on this ſide, as they had before on the other.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Of the ſeate of this towne read Guicci, pag. 370.
                  2 Baſinus vvriteth that the Duke for diuers conſiderations had rather haue lacked
                     
                     the Kings companie then haue had it, but that the King to blinde the Duke vvith a pretence of good vvill offered himſelfe to go vvith him, which report all the circumſtances conſidered ſeemeth vtterly repugnant to truth.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Liegeois made a deſperate ſalie vpon the Duke of Burgundies men, where he and the King were in great danger. Chap. 12.
               
                  I Will now rehearſe an example whereby you ſhall perceiue how eaſely euen a few enimies may worke a great Prince diſpleaſure, and how much it importeth Princes throughly to waie their enterpriſes before they attempt them. Within this citie there was not one man of war but of their owne territory, they had with them neither knight nor eſquire: for thoſe fewe they had were either ſlaine or hurt two or three daies before in the ſaly aboue mentioned. They were vnfurniſhed of gates, wals, trenches & artillery ought worth. To be ſhort, within the towne were none but the citizens themſelues, and ſeauen or eight hundred footemen of a litle territory beyond Liege, called Franche-mount: true it is that the people of thoſe parts haue euer beene accounted good ſoldiers. But now to the matter. Theſe Liegeois deſpairing of ſuccours, ſeeing the K. there in perſon againſt them, concluded to make a deſperate ſaly, and to put all things in aduenture, knowing themſelues to be but loſt men.
               Their enterpriſe was this, they determined that by the breaches of their wals hanging ouer the backſide of the Dukes lodging, their beſt ſoldiers being ſixe hundred men of the countrey of Franchemont ſhould ſalie foorth, leading with them for guides the hoſts of the Kings lodging and of the D. Farther there laie a priuie way through the rocks, by the which they might come vnder couert almoſt to the lodgings of both theſe Princes before they were diſcouered, prouided that they made no noiſe: and as touching our ſcoutes that laie in their way, they made account either to kill them, or to be at the Princes lodging aſſoone as they. Thus they reſolued to follow theſe two hoſts into their houſes, where the two Princes lodged, without ſtaying by the way in any place, hoping to ſteale vpon them on ſuch a ſudden, that either they would kill them, or leade them away priſoners before their forces could come to reſcue them, conſidering withall how ſhort their retrait was into the towne, and if the woorſt fell (that was to die:) they were fully reſolued in the executing of ſuch an enterpriſe to take their death in good part: for they ſaw themſelues but loſt men on all ſides. They gaue order alſo that all the people of the towne with hue and cry, ſhould iſſue foorth at the gate opening vpon the ſuburbs where we lay, truſting thereby to diſcomfite all our company that lodged there. Neither were they out of hope of a goodly victory, at the leaſt they were ſure of a glorious end. This their enterpriſe notwithſtanding it had been deſperate and dangerous, though they had been accompanied with a thouſand valiant men of armes: yet theſe fewe failed not much to atchieue it. For according to their determination, theſe ſix hundred men of Franche-mont ſalied foorth by the breaches of their wals, about ten of the clock at night, and came on a ſudden vpon our ſcouts and ſlew them, three of them being gentlemen of the Dukes houſe, and if they had gone ſtraight foorth without any noiſe to the place appointed, vndoubtedly they had ſlaine both theſe Princes in

their beds. But you ſhall vnderſtand that behind the Duke of Burgundies lodging, there was a pauilion where the Duke of Alenſon that now is, and Monſeur de Cran lodged. There theſe Liegeois ſtaied a while and thruſt their pikes through it, and ſlew a ſeruing man within it: whereupon a noiſe aroſe in the campe which cauſed ſome to arme themſelues, at the leaſt to ariſe. From this pauillion they departed towards the two Princes lodgings, whereunto adioined the graunge aboue mentioned, into the which the Duke had put three hundred men of armes. There they ſtaied a while alſo, and thruſt their pickes in at the panes of the wals which theſe men of armes had broken downe to ſalie foorth with the more ſpeed. All the gentlemen that lay there had vnarmed themſelues not paſt two houres before to refreſh them againſt the aſſault the next morning: in the which eſtate the Liegeois found them. Notwithſtanding a few of them hauing put on their quiracies bicauſe of the noiſe they heard at the Duke of Alenſons pauilion, fought with their enimies at the broken panes of the wals, and at the doore, which was the onely preſeruation of theſe two great Princes liues: for this delay gaue a great many leiſure to arme themſelues and to come foorth into the ſtreet. I lay that night in the Dukes chamber (which was very ſtraight) with two other gentlemen of his priuie chamber, and aboue him lodged twelue archers that kept the watch and ſat vp at dice, but the body of his watch ſtoode by the towne gate farre from his lodging. To be ſhort the Dukes hoſt came with a band of Ligeois, and aſſailed his owne houſe the D. being within it, vpon ſuch a ſudden that we hardly had leiſure to buckle his quirace about him and put a ſallet on his hed: for immediately as we went downe the ſtayres to iſſue foorth into the ſtreet, we found our archers buſied in defending the doore and windows againſt the Liegeois: farther there was a maruellous noiſe in the ſtreets, ſome cried God ſaue the King, others God ſaue the Duke, and others God ſaue the King, kill, kill, kill. It was two Pater noſters while before our archers and we could get foorth of the houſe, we knew not in what eſtate the King was, nor whether he were with vs or againſt vs, which much troubled vs. Incontinent after we were iſſued foorth with two or three torches, we met others in the ſtreets with lights alſo, and ſaw fighting and killing round about vs, but the conflict ſoone ended: for men came running on all ſides to the Dukes lodging. The firſt man of the enimies that was ſlaine was the Dukes hoſt, but he died not preſently, for I my ſelfe heard him ſpeake. To be ſhort all the Liegeois that accompanied him, a very few excepted were alſo ſlaine. They aſſailed in like maner the K. lodging, into the which his hoſt entred and was ſlaine by the Scottiſh men of his gard, who ſhewed themſelues talle felows: for they neuer ſtirred from their Maſters foote, but ſhot arrowes continually which hurt moe Burgundians then Liegeois. The citizens appointed to iſſue foorth at the town gate ſalied accordingly, but our watch being aſſembled togither repulſed them incontinent, neither ſhewed they themſelues ſo deſperate as theſe others. Immediately after theſe were beaten backe, the King and the Duke met, doubting bicauſe of the number they ſaw ſlaine, their owne loſſe to be great: notwithſtanding of their men few were ſlaine, but many hurt. Vndoubtedly if theſe Liegeois had not ſtaied at theſe two places aboue mentioned, eſpecially at the grange where they found reſiſtance, but had followed theſe two hoſts being their guides, they had ſlaine both the King and the Duke, and thereby peraduenture diſcomfited the whole army. Both the Princes returned to their lodgings woonderfully abaſhed at this deſperate enterpriſe, and foorth ſat in counſell to take aduiſe what ſhould be done touching the aſſault the next morning. The King ſeemed to ſtand in great doubt of the matter in reſpect of himſelfe in very deed, for knowing how greatly the Duke doubted wars

with Fraunce if he were once out of his hands: he feared if the citie could not be taken by aſſault, that his returne into his realme ſhould be delaied, and peraduenture himſelfe put in priſon for the Dukes better aſſurance. Whereby you may perceiue in how miſerable eſtate theſe two princes liued, which could by no meanes aſſure themſelues each of other: for they had concluded and ſolemnly ſworne a finall peace not paſt fifteen daies before, yet could al this put neither of them in aſſurance.
            
            
               How the citie of Liege was aſſaulted, taken, and ſpoiled, and the Churches alſo. Chap. 13.
               
                  THe King to rid himſelfe of all danger, about an hower after his returne from this ſalie aboue mentioned to his lodging, ſent for certaine of the Dukes principall ſeruants that had been in counſell about the aſſault, and inquired of them what was concluded. They told him that the reſolution was to aſſault the citie the next morning, according to the order firſt appointed. Then he very wiſely began to alleage diuers great doubts, which pleaſed well the Dukes men, for they all feared the aſſault maruellouſly both bicauſe of the great number of people within the towne, and alſo bicauſe of the deſperate ſalie made not paſt two howers before: wherefore being deſirous to ſtay the aſſault for two or three daies, and take the towne by compoſition, they went foorthwith to the Duke to make report of the Kings allegations, I my ſelfe being preſent when they came. There they rehearſed all the doubts the King alleaged, and as many as they themſelues could deuiſe, but al they fathered vpon the King, doubting that he would not take it well at their hands. The D. anſwered, that the King alleaged theſe doubts only to ſaue the citizens, & tooke it in euill part, ſaying that there could be no danger in the enterpriſe, conſidering that they within could make no counterbatterie, neither had any wals for their defence, adding alſo that the rampires they had made at the gates were already beaten down, wherfore he would vſe no further delaies, but go to the aſſault the next morning, as it was concluded. Notwithſtanding he would be contented that the King, if it ſo pleaſed him, ſhould go to Namur till the taking of the towne vnder this condition, not to depart thence till the iſſue of this enterpriſe were ſeene: which anſwer pleaſed none of them all, for euery man feared the aſſault bicauſe of this ſalie. The Dukes anſwere was reported to the King, not in ſo hard termes as he deliuered it, but in much milder language. The King vnderſtood the meaning of it well ynough, and ſaid he would not go to Namur, but be at the aſſault the next day among the reſt. In mine opinion if he had been ſo diſpoſed, he might very eaſily haue eſcaped that night, for he had with him an hundred archers of his garde, and certaine gentlemen of his houſe, beſides three hundred men of armes that lodged hard by him: but vndoubtedly where he ſtood vpon his honor he would not be ſtained with cowardize. Euery man repoſed himſelfe in his armor til morning, and ſome diſpoſed of their conſciences, bicauſe the enterpriſe ſeemed very dangerous. When it was brode day light, and that the hower appointed drew neer, which was eight of the clock, the Duke commanded the bombard and the two ſerpentines to be diſcharged, thereby to aduertiſe our vaward of the aſſault, which lay on the other ſide far from vs, if you take the way without the towne, but not far going through it, as before you haue heard. They hearing the ſhot incontinent prepared

themſelues to the aſſault. The Dukes trumpets ſounded, and his enſiegnes were anaunced towards the wals, their bands folowing them. The King ſtood in the midſt of the ſtreete very well accompanied, for all his three hundred men of armes, his garde, and certain noble men, and gentlemen of his houſe were with him. And when we approched ſo neere the wals that they and we ſhould haue ioined, no reſiſtance was founde, neither any man vpon the wals, ſaue two or three of the watch, all the reſt were gon to diner, ſuppoſing we would not giue the aſſault vpon the Sonday, ſo that we found the cloth laid in euery houſe at our entry. Small account is to be made of rude people vnleſſe they be led by ſome captaine whom they reuerence, although ſomtime in their fury they be greatly to be feared.
               Theſe Liegeois were before the aſſault maruelouſly ſpent and wearied, partly bicauſe of their two ſalies, wherein they loſt a great number of their men and all their leaders, and partly bicauſe of the great labor & trauel they had ſuſtained the ſpace of eight daies: for bicauſe they lay open to the enimy on all ſides, they were all forced to be continually vpon the wals, and I ſuppoſe they thought to repoſe themſelues this day bicauſe of the Sabaoth, but it chaunced to them contrary to their expectation. On that ſide we entred was no reſiſtance made, and leſſe yet on the other where our vawarde lay, which entred the towne before vs. Fewe were ſlaine 
                     1
                  , for all the people fled by the bridge ouer the riuer of Maze towards the countrey of Ardennes, and from thence to other places for their more ſafety. On the ſide that we entred I ſawe but two men and one woman ſlaine, neither thinke I that there died two hundred perſons in all, for the reſt fled or hid themſelues in churches and houſes. The King ſeeing no reſiſtance, and the whole army (being as I gheſſe to the number of forty thouſand) throng into the towne at two breaches, marched forward at leaſure, to whom the Duke being entred a good way into the city ſodainly returned, & accompanied him to the palace, from whence he went to the cathedrall Church of Saint Lambert 
                     2
                  , which his men were about to breake into by force to take the priſoners and ſpoile that was conueighed thither. And notwithſtanding that he had appointed certaine of his houſe to garde the ſaid church: yet could they not do it bicauſe the ſoldiers aſſaulted both the dores. Wherefore the Duke himſelfe went thither, and one man I ſawe him ſlea with his owne hand 3, whereupon all the company diſparkled, and the church was vnſpoiled. Notwithſtanding in the end, they that were within it were taken and their goods alſo. The reſt of the churches (being ſo many in number, that I haue heard the Lord of Himbercourt, who knew the towne well, report as many maſſes to be ſong there euery day as in Rome 
                     4
                  ,) were in maner all ſpoiled vnder colour of taking priſoners. For mine owne part I entred into none but the cathedral church, but thus I was aduertiſed and ſawe alſo good proofe therof: for the Pope many yeeres after excommunicated all thoſe that withheld any of theſe church goods, vnleſſe they reſtored them, and the Duke appointed certaine commiſſioners to go through his countrey, to ſee the Popes commandement executed. The city being thus taken and ſacked, about noone the Duke returned to the pallace. The King had already dined, and ſeemed greatly to reioice at the taking of the towne, and commended alſo much the Dukes courage and valiantnes, knowing that report thereof ſhould be made to him, and that theſe good words would ſomwhat further his returne into his realme, which was his ſpeciall deſire. After diner the Duke and he met and communed togither very pleaſantly: and if the King commended his valiantnes behinde his backe, I warrant you he diſpraiſed it not before his face, which the Duke tooke in very good part.
               I muſt now returne to ſpeake ſomwhat of this miſerable people that fled out of

the city, for proofe of a diſcourſe I made in the beginning of this hiſtory touching inconueniencies I haue ſeen enſue a battell loſt by a King, a D. or a meaner Prince. Theſe miſerable ſoules fled through the countrey of Ardennes with their wiues and children. But a Knight dwelling in thoſe parts who euer to fore had taken part with them, ſlew now a great number of them, and to recouer the conquerors fauor, ſent word thereof to the Duke reporting the number of thoſe that were ſlaine and taken, to be much greater then in deed it was: Notwithſtanding that it were great, whereby he made his peace with the Duke and ſaued him ſelfe. Others fled towards Meziers vpon the Maz being within the realme of Fraunce, but vpon the way two or three of their Captaines were taken, (one of the which was named Madoulet) who were lead to the Duke, and by his commandement put to death. Some of theſe people died alſo of hunger, ſome of cold, and ſome for lacke of ſleepe.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Some write that there were ſlaine in one day at Liege 100000. and Munſter writeth 40000. and 12000 women drowned in the riuer, which ſeemeth to diſagree with Commines, who reporteth not aboue 200. to haue beene ſlaine: notwithſtanding our author muſt heere not be vnderſtood ſo ſtrictlie as though there had not died aboue 200. in all, for his meaning is onely that at the entrance into the towne, there were not ſlayne aboue two hundred, othervviſe conſidering the number that vvere ſlaine in Churches, houſes, and flight it cannot be but that manie thouſands died, neither is our authors meaning othervviſe.
                  
                  2 Some copies haue Saint Lavvrence, but the old copie Saint Lambert vvhich Annal. Burgund. and Guicci. report to be the principall Church in Liege.
                  
                  3 The Duke ſlue before the Church of Saint Lambert tvvo or three archers vvith his ovvne hand. La Marche.
                  4 There vvere in Liege to the number of 32. Churches and eight Colleges of prieſts. Meyer. fovver abbies, fovver frieries, three nunneries, and vvithout and vvithin the tovvne aboue an hundred Churches. Guicci. Hubertus.
               
            
            
               How King Lewis returned into Fraunce with the Duke of Burgundies conſent, and how the Duke proceeded in deſtroying the countries of Liege and Franchmont. Chap. 14.
               
                  FOwer or fiue daies after the taking of the towne, the King began to ſollicite ſuch of the Dukes ſeruants as he held for his friends to mooue their Maſter for his departure, but he himſelfe firſt brake the matter to the Duke after a ſage and a wiſe ſort, ſaying, that if he could ſtand him in any more ſtead he ſhould not ſpare him, otherwiſe he deſired to returne to Paris to cauſe the treatie to be recorded in the Court of parlament: for the maner in Fraunce is to record all treaties there, otherwiſe they are of no force, notwithſtanding the Kings authority may do much therein. He required alſo the Duke, that the next ſommer they mought meete againe in Burgundy, and make mery a month togither, whereunto the Duke in the end agreed, mumbling ſomwhat to himſelfe. Farther the Duke commanded the treatie to be read againe before the

King to know whether ought were paſſed in it that he miſliked, putting him to his choiſe to alowe or diſalowe thereof at his pleaſure. Somwhat alſo he excuſed himſelfe for bringing him to this ſiege. Laſtly he beſought him that one article mought be added to the treaty in fauor of the Lords of Lau, and Vrfé, and Poncet of Riuiere, to wit, that they mought be reſtored to all their eſtates and offices that they enioied before the wars began, which requeſt miſliked the King, for there was no reaſon why the Duke ſhould require to haue them comprehended in the treaty, both for that they were none of his partakers in the wars aboue mentioned 
                     1
                  , and alſo bicauſe they ſerued the Lord Charles the Kings brother not the Duke. Notwithſtanding the King anſwered that he would grant his demand vpon condition that he would accord the like to the Lords of Neuers and Croy, wherunto the Duke replied nought. This was a very wiſe anſwer of the King, for the Duke hated theſe Lords by him named ſo extremely, and held ſo goodly poſſeſſions of theirs, that he would neuer haue condeſcended to reſtore them: of the other articles the King anſwered he would alter none, but confirmed the whole treaty as they two had ſworne it at Peronne. Thus was it agreed that the King ſhould returne home, and the Duke accompanied him about halfe a league. But at their leaue taking the King ſaid thus vnto him, if my brother who is now in Britaine will not accept this partage that I haue giuen him for your ſake, what will you that I do 
                     1
                  . Whereunto the D. anſwered thus ſodainly without farther deliberation, if he will not, I refer the order thereof to you two, of the which demand and anſwer ſprang a great matter as heereafter you ſhall heare. Thus returned the King in great ioy, being ſafe conducted by the Lords of Cordes and Meriens 
                     2
                   great bailife of Haynault, to the frontiers of the Dukes dominions. The Duke abode ſtill in the city of Liege, which was extremely handled I muſt needs confeſſe, but ſure they had well deſerued ſo to be delt with, bicauſe of the great cruelties they had cōtinually vſed againſt the Dukes ſubiects euer ſince his grandfathers daies. Beſides that, they neuer performed any promiſe nor kept any treaty they made, and this was the fift yeere that the Duke himſelfe had been there yeere by yeere in perſon, and concluded peace, which ordinarily the next yeere they brake. Farther they had continued excommunicated of long time, for their great cruelty againſt their biſhop, whereof notwithſtanding they made no account, neither would obey the commandements of the church on that behalfe.
               Immediately after the Kings departure, the Duke with ſmall force determined to go into Franchemont, a countrey alitle beyond Liege, lying among ſharpe rockes and thicke woods. From thence came the beſt ſoldiers the Liegeois had, and of this countrey were they that made the deſperate ſaly aboue mentioned. Before his departure a great number of poore priſoners that hid themſelues in houſes at the taking of the towne were drowned. Farther it was concluded that this citie heeretofore ſo populous, ſhould be burned at three ſeuerall times 
                     3
                  , and three or fower thouſand footmen of the countrey of Lambourg 
                     4
                  , being neighbors to the Liegeois, and almoſt of the ſame maners and language, were appointed to fire it, but to ſaue the churches. Firſt the great bridge built ouer the riuer of Maze was beaten downe, then a great number were choſen out to defend the chanons houſes about the cathedrall church, to the end they might haue lodging that ſhould ſay deuine ſeruice. In like maner alſo diuers were appointed for defence of the other Churches. This done the Duke departed into the countrey of Frachemont, and immediately after he was out of the towne we ſaw a great number of houſes on this ſide the riuer on fire: he marched forwarde and lodged fower leagues off, yet heard we the noiſe as eaſilie as if we had beene there preſent: I wot not whether it were bicauſe the winde ſat that

way, or bicauſe we lodged vpon the riuer. The next day the Duke departed thence, and thoſe that were left behind in the towne continued ſtill the fire as they were commanded, but the Churches were all ſaued afew excepted, and aboue three hundred houſes to lodge the Church men, which cauſed the towne ſo ſoone to be repleniſhed againe: for much people returned to dwell with theſe Prieſts.
               Bicauſe of extreme froſt and cold the greateſt part of the Dukes army was forced to go on foote into the countrey of Franchemont, which had neuer a walled towne in it but all villages. The Duke lodged fiue or ſixe daies in a litle valley called Polleneg, his armie was deuided into two bands the ſooner to deſtroy the countrie. All the houſes he commanded to be burned, & al the iron mils broken, which is their onely trade of liuing. Farther our men hunted the poore people out of great woods and foreſts where they lay hidden with their goods, and manie they ſlew and tooke priſoners, and there the ſoldiers got good booties. The cold was more extreme then is almoſt credible: for I ſaw a gentleman that with cold loſt the vſe of his foote and neuer recouered it, and a Page that had two of his fingers rotted from his hand, and in like maner a woman dead for cold and her childe with her, whereof ſhee was newely deliuered. Farther by the ſpace of three daies all the wine that was drunke in the Dukes lodging was cut with hatchets: for it was ſo frozen in the veſſels that we were forced to breake them, and cut the wine being a maſſe of yſe into ſmall peeces, which men bare away in hats and baskets as beſt liked them. I could reherſe diuers other ſtrange accidents of the cold too long to write. To conclude at eight daies end hunger drew vs thence in haſte, and the Duke departed to Namur, and ſo into Brabant, where he was honorably receiued.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This was the treaty of Conflans at the concluſion vvhereof theſe three heere named (as our auhor himſelfe before reherſeth,) vvere the Dukes enimies and tooke part vvith the King: vvherefore no reaſon it vvas that the Duke ſhould ſeeke to haue them comprehended in the treatie as his freinds, ſeeing at the concluſion thereof they vvere his enimies.
                  
                  2 This des Murz the old copie nameth De Meriens, La Marche d'Emeries. Annal. Burgund. d'Aymeries. The tovvnes name is Aymeries in Henault vpon the riuer of Sambre, Guicci. in the deſcription of Henault, yet the ſame author in his deſcription generall nameth the man d'Emery. Annal. Burgund. in another place nameth him d'Eſmeriez. Meyer Aymericius and Emericius, ſo that I ſuppoſe it beſt to reade it as I haue tranſlated it, but that des Murz is very corrupt I am out of doubt.
                  
                  3 This city vvas diuided into three quarters, as appeereth by Guic. deſcription, for the vvhich cauſe it vvas fired at three ſeuerall times.
                  
                  4 The old copie hath Lambourg as I haue tranſlated it, the nevv Luxembourg, as haue alſo Annal. Burgund. but not vvell in mine opinion. For Lambourg is hard by Liege, but Luxembourg farther off.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King by ſubtill meanes perſwaded the Lord Charles his brother to take the Duchie of Guienne for Brie and Champaigne, to the Duke of Burgundies diſcontentment. Chap. 15.
               
                  THe King after his departure from the Duke returned with great ioy into his realme, attempting nothing againſt the Duke for his euill vſage at Peronne and Liege, but ſeeming to take all in good part. Notwithſtanding ſharpe warre aroſe afterward between them, but not ſoon, neither was this the cheif cauſe thereof, (though happily it might in part further it:) for if this treatie had beene concluded at Paris, it had paſſed in effect as it did at Peronne. But the Duke by his officers aduiſe ſought to aduaunce the bonds of his dominions, beſides that diuers ſubtill practiſes were vſed to ſet theſe two Princes againe at variance as you ſhall heare when occaſion ſerueth. The Lord Charles of Fraunce the Kings onely brother and late Duke of Normandie, being aduertiſed of this treatie made at Peronne, and the partage aſſigned to him thereby: ſent foorthwith to the King deſiring him to accompliſh the treatie and performe his promiſe. The King ſent in like maner to him about that matter, and manie meſſengers ran to and fro betweene them. The Duke of Burgundie ſent alſo his ambaſſadors to the ſaide Lord Charles, deſiring him to accept no other partage then Champaigne and Brie, which by his meanes was granted him, ſhewing him withall how great good will he bare him, ſith notwithſtanding he had abandoned him, yet would not he do the like as the ſequell well declared, but had alſo comprehended the Duke of Britain in the treatie as his confederate. Farther he ſent him word that Champaigne and Brie lay very commodiouſly for them both, bicauſe if the King ſhould at any time attempt ought againſt him, he might within two daies warning haue ſuccours out of Burgundie: the two countries bordering on vpon another. Laſtely he aduertiſed him that his partage was very good, and that he might leuie in his countries, aides, cuſtomes, and ſubſidies, neither could the King claime any thing there but homage, reſort, and ſoueraignity. This Lord Charles was a man doing little or nothing of himſelfe, but wholy lead and gouerned by others: notwithſtanding that he were aboue fiue and twenty yeeres of age. Thus paſſed the winter which was well ſpent before the Kings departure from vs, meſſengers ran continually to and fro about this partage: for the King ment nothing leſſe then to giue his brother that he had promiſed, bicauſe he would not haue him and the Duke of Burgundie ſo neere neighbours. But he treated with his brother to take Guienne, (which is in maner all Aquitaine:) for Brie and Champaigne. The Lord Charles feared to diſpleaſe the Duke of Bourgundy, and doubted if he yeelded to the Kings requeſt, and he ſhould not keepe touch with him, that then he ſhould looſe both freend and partage, and ſo be left bare boord. But the King being the ſubtileſt prince then liuing, and the cunningeſt dealer in ſuch treaties, perceiuing that he ſhould do no good vnleſſe he wan thoſe that were in credit with his brother, fell in communication of this matter with Oudet of Rie, Lord of Leſcut afterwards Earle of Comminges (who was borne and maried in the countrey of Guienne) deſiring him to perſwade his maſter to accept this partage being much better than that he demanded, & that they mought

be friends and liue togither like brethren, adding alſo that this partage ſhould be much more beneficiall both for his brother and his ſeruants, (eſpecially for the ſaide Oudet) than the other, and farther aſſuring him that without faile he would deliuer his brother quiet poſſeſſion of the ſaid countrey. By this means was the Lord Charles won to accept this partage of Guienne to the Duke of Burgundies great diſcontentation and his ambaſſadors there preſent. And the cauſe why cardinall Balue biſhop of Angiers 
                     1
                  , and the biſhop of Verdun were impriſoned, was for that the ſaid Cardinal writ to the Lord Charles, aduiſing him to accept none other partage than that the Duke of Burgundy had procured him by the treaty of Peronne, which alſo the King had ſworne and promiſed (laying his hand within the ſaid Cardinals) to deliuer him, alledging withall ſuch reaſons to perſwade him thereunto as he thought neceſſary, wherein he did cleane contrary to the Kings purpoſe. Thus the Lord Charles was made Duke of Guienne, the yeere 1469. and the poſſeſſion of the countrey togither with the gouernment of Rochell deliuered him, and than the King and he ſawe one another, and were togither a long time.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Cardinals impriſonment was bicauſe he perſwaded the King to go to Peronne, and aduiſed the Duke of Guienne to beware of poiſon, and not to take the partage of Guienne, Meyer. and for diſcloſing the Kings ſecrets by letters to the Duke of Burgundie, Gaguin. But if the Duke of Guienne had been wiſe, he would of himſelfe without perſwaſion haue refuſed this partage. For when a mans enimie offereth him that that hath an apparance of good, let him euer refuſe it: nam latet anguis in herba, as the ſequele of this matter well declared, for the accepting of this partage, which the King alleaged and that truly to be better than the other the Duke demanded, cost the Duke of Guienne his life, as heer after ſhall appeere.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               How the King tooke occaſion to make war anew vpon the Duke of Burgundy, and how he ſent a purſeuant of the parlament of Gaunt to ſommon him to appeere at Paris. Chap. 1.
               
                  THe yeere 1470. the King determined to be reuenged of the Duke of Burgundie, ſuppoſing he had now found a time conuenient ſo to do, for he priuily ſollicited and cauſed alſo others to ſollicite the towns ſituate vpon the riuer of Somme, namely Amiens, Saint Quintine, and Abbeuille to rebell againſt the Duke, and to ſend for ſuccours into France, and to receiue them into their towns 
                     1
                  . For all great Princes (if they be wiſe) will ſeeke euer ſome collour for their doings. And to the ende you may perceiue what cunnig is vſed in Fraunce, I will ſhew you how this matter was managed, for the King and the Duke were both abuſed, whereof aroſe whot and ſharpe war, which endured thirteen or foureteen yeeres. The King deſired greatly to mooue theſe townes aboue named to rebellion, pretending (to the end he might haue the better means to practiſe with them) that the Duke aduanced his limits farther then the treatie would beare: whereupon ambaſſadors ran to and fro, who vnder colour of their ambaſſage practiſed continually as they paſſed through theſe townes, to the end aboue mentioned. In the ſaid townes were no garriſons but all was quiet both in the realme, in Burgundie, and in Britaine. And the Duke of Guien liued to all mens iudgments in great amitie with the King his brother. Notwithſtanding when the King firſt mooued this war, his meaning was not to take one or two of theſe towns onely, but ſought to ſtir all the Duke of Burgundies ſubiects to rebellion, truſting to atchieue his enterpriſe by this means. Diuers to obtaine his fauor entertained theſe practiſes, and reported their intelligence to be far greater then it was: for one promiſed to take this towne, an other that, and yet indeed all was nothing. Wherefore notwithſtanding that the King had iuſt cauſe to be diſpleaſed for his euill vſage at Peronne, yet if he had thought this enterpriſe would haue fallen none otherwiſe out then it did, he would not haue broken the treatie nor mooued war: for he had made the peace to be proclaimed at Paris three months after his returne into his realme, and began this war with ſome feare, but the great hope he had conceiued of it, pricked him forward: and marke I pray you what cunning was vſed to further it. The Earle of Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce, (a very wiſe man,) and certaine of the Duke of Guien his ſeruants, with diuers others deſired rather war then peace betweene theſe two great Princes, for two reſpects: The one they feared leaſt their great offices and penſions ſhould be diminiſhed, if peace continued. For you ſhal vnderſtand that the Conſtable had vnder his charge 4. hundred men of armes or launces paied by his owne hands euery muſter, without controuler: farther beſides the fee and profits of his office, he had a yeerely penſion of thirty thouſand frankes and better, and receiued alſo the reuenews of many goodly places that he kept.
               
                  
The other reſpect was this, they ſought to perſwade the King, and talked alſo to the like purpoſe among themſelues, that his diſpoſition was ſuch, that his head could neuer be idle, wherefore vnleſſe he were buſied with great Princes abroad he would be in hand with his ſeruants and officers at home. For theſe two reaſons therefore they ſought to intangle him with wars: whereunto the better to perſwade him the Conſtable promiſed to take Saint Quintine at all times when him liſted, bicauſe his lands lay round about it, vaunting further that he had great intelligence in Flanders and Brabant, ſo far foorth that he would make a number of townes to reuolt from the Duke. The Duke of Guienne alſo being there preſent and all their principall ſeruants, offered very earneſtly and promiſed very faithfully to ſerue the King in this quarrell, and to leade with them fower or fiue hundred men of armes that the ſaid Duke held in ordinary pay: but their drift was other than the King ſuppoſed, as heerafter you ſhall heare. The King bicauſe he would ſeeme to proceede with due aduiſe and deepe conſideration, called a Parlament of the three eſtates of his realme at Tours, in the moneths of March and Aprill in the yeere 1470. which was the firſt and laſt Parlament that euer he aſſembled. But to this Parlament came onely ſuch as were purpoſely named, and ſuch as the King knew would not gainſay him in any point. There he cauſed diuers enterpriſes to be diſcouered, that the Duke of Burgundie had attempted againſt the crowne, and made the Earle of Eu openly to complaine of him, ſaying, that the Duke detained from him contrarie to all lawe and equity Saint Valery and certaine otherlands, that he the ſaid Earle held of the Duke as parcels of the Seignorie of Abbeuille, and the county of Ponthieu, the onely cauſe whereof was, for that a little ſhip of war of Eu had taken a Flemmiſh hoy laden with marchandiſe, the loſſe whereof the Earle offered to repay: further adding, that the Duke would conſtraine him to do him homage, and giue him his faith againſt all men none excepted, which he would neuer do, bicauſe it ſhould be preiudiciall to the Kings eſtate. At this aſſemblie were diuers lawyers as well of the Parlament of Paris as other places, who concluded according to the Kings pleaſure, that the Duke ſhould be ſummoned to appeere in the Parlament at Paris. The King knew well that he would anſwere diſdainfully, or do ſomwhat preiudiciall to the authoritie of the court, wherby he ſhould haue the iuſter pretence of war againſt him. Thus the Duke being in Gaunt was ſommoned as he went to maſſe by a purſeuant of the Parlament to appeere at Paris: wherewith he was much abaſhed and diſcontented, and cauſed the purſeuant foorthwith to be apprehended and committed to warde, where he remained certaine daies, but in the end was diſmiſſed and ſent home. Thus you ſee what preparation was made to inuade the Duke of Burgundie, who being aduertiſed thereof, leuied a great band of men paid with home wages (as they termed them) which was a trifle they receiued to be in a readines in their owne houſes. Notwithſtanding they muſtered monethly in the townes where they dwelt, and receiued their pay. But at three or fower moneths end the Duke waxed wearie of the charge and diſmiſſed theſe men, baniſhing all feare bicauſe the King ſent often to him, and ſo departed into Holland. He entertained no ſoldiers in ordinarie pay for the ſafetie of his countrie, neither held any garriſons in the frontire townes, whereof enſued great inconuenience: for there was daily practiſing in Amiens, Abbeuile, and Saint Quintine to yeeld them againe to the King. The Duke being in Holland was aduertiſed by Iohn late Duke of Bourbon, that ſhortly war ſhould be made vpon him as well in Burgundie as in Picardie, and that the King had great intelligence not onely in his dominions but alſo in his houſe: with the which meſſage he was maruelouſly abaſhed: for he was vtterly vnfurniſhed of men of war, bicauſe he had diſcharged the band

aboue mentioned. Wherefore in great haſte he paſſed the ſea 
                     2
                   and went into Artois, and thence ſtraight to Hedin, where he entred into ielouſie both of ſome of his ſeruants, and alſo of thoſe practiſes that were entertained in the townes aboue mentioned: but his preparation for the wars went but ſlowly forward. For he beleeued not all that was told him. Notwithſtanding he commanded two of the chiefeſt citizens of Amiens whom he ſuſpected for theſe treaties to repaire vnto him, who ſo cunningly excuſed themſelues, that he diſmiſſed them without further inquire. Immediately after certaine of his ſeruants fled out of his houſe, namely the baſtard Baldwine 
                  
                     3
                   and others, which cauſed him to feare a greater traine to be behinde. Wherefore incontinent he made proclamation that all men ſhould be in a readines, but bicauſe winter was begun, and he but newly returned out of Holland few ſtirred.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Kings colour was this, he would not ſeeme to make war vpon the Duke, but onely to haue ſent men to theſe towns at their requeſt, who bicauſe of the Dukes cruell exactions had praied in aide of him as of their ſoueraigne.
                  
                  2 This ſea was one of the ſtreames of the riuer of Rhene that enuiron Holland.
                  
                  3 This Baldwine was the Dukes baſe brother: the cauſe of his departure was for that he had attempted with others corrupted by the King to poiſon the Duke: notwithſtanding afterward he recouered his fauor, and was taken priſoner at the battell of Nancy. Meyer.
               
            
            
               How the townes of Saint Quintin and Amiens were yeelded to the King: and for what cauſes the Conſtable nouriſhed the war between the King and the Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 2.
               
                  TWo daies after his ſeruants departure, which was in the moneth of December the yeere 1470. the Conſtable entred into Saint Quintine and ſware them to the King. Then the Duke perceiued his affaires to be in bad eſtate, for he had no force with him, but had ſent all his ſeruants abroad to muſter men in his dominions: Notwithſtanding with thoſe fewe he could leuie being foure or fiue hundred horſe he went to Dourlans, minding to keepe Amiens from reuolting. There he abode fiue or ſixe daies: all the which ſpace they in Amiens continually practiſed. The Kings army lying not farre off, ſhewed it ſelfe before the towne and was once refuſed: for part of the citizens held for the Duke: wherefore the Duke ſent thither to make his lodging, and if he had beene ſo ſtrong that the might haue aduentured to enter in perſon, the towne had neuer beene loſt, but he was afraid to go thither weakely accompanied: notwithſtanding that diuers of the towne required him ſo to do. But when they of the contrary faction ſawe his feare that he durſt not enter the towne, they executed their enterpriſe, and reioiced the Kings forces. They of Abbeuille thought to do the like, but the Lord of Cordes entred in thither for the Duke, and preuented their purpoſe. Dourlans is diſtant from Amiens but fiue ſmall leagues, wherefore the Duke was forced to depart thence, ſo ſoone as he vnderſtood of Amiens reuolt: from thence therfore he went to Arras in great haſte and feare, doubting the execution

of diuers other ſuch enterpriſes, for that he ſaw himſelfe enuironed with the Conſtables kinsfolkes & freinds: farther bicauſe the baſtard Baudouin was fled, he entred into ſuſpicion of his other brother the great baſtard of Burgundie: notwithſtanding his forces repaired to him by litle and litle. The King thought now that all had been his owne, ſuppoſing the aduertiſements to be true that the Conſtable and the reſt had giuen him of their intelligences, whereupon if he had not hoped, he would haue wiſhed this enterpriſe vnbegun.
               It is meete I ſhould heare declare what mooued the Conſtable and the Duke of Guienne conſidering the great fauor, courteſies, and benefits the Duke of Guienne had receaued at the Duke of Burgundies hands, to kindle the fire betweene theſe two Princes that lay at reſt in their dominions, and which way this war could turne to their profit. Somwhat I ſpake heerof before, ſaying, that they did it to be in the more aſſurance of their eſtates and offices. For they feared if the King liued in peace he would keepe ſome ſtir among them. Notwithſtanding this was not the onely cauſe that mooued them. But you ſhall vnderſtand that the Duke of Guienne and they had been earneſt ſuters to conclude a mariage betweene the ſaid Duke of Guienne, and the Duke of Burgundies onely daughter and heire (for ſonne he had none) which matter they had often mooued to the Duke, who in words ſhewed himſelfe not vnwilling thereunto, yet notwithſtanding would neuer conclude it, but entertained others alſo in hope thereof. Now marke how theſe men ſought to atchieue their enterpriſe by conſtraining the Duke of Burgundy to this marriage. Immediately after theſe two towns were taken, and the Duke gon to Arras to leuy forces with al ſpeed: the Duke of Guienne ſent a ſecret meſſenger to him, who brought him three lines written with the ſaid Dukes owne hand, foulded vp in a ſmall lumpe of waxe, and conteining theſe words. Endeuor your ſelfe to appeaſe your ſubiects, and you ſhall not faile of friends. Farther the Duke of Burgundy being at the firſt in exceeding great feare, ſent to the Cōſtable, deſiring him to ſhew himſelf fauorable, & not to preſſe forward this war begun without any defiance made. At the which meſſage the Conſtable greatly reioiced, ſuppoſing that he now held the Duke in ſuch feare as he deſired, which to increaſe, he ſent him a ſpeedy & diſcomfortable anſwere, the effect wherof was, that his ſtate ſtoode in maruellous danger, ſo far foorth that he ſaw no way for him to winde himſelfe out of theſe troubles but one. Namely by giuing his daughter in mariage to the D. of Guienne, which if he would do, he ſhould than be ſuccoured with great forces: for both the Duke of Guienne and diuers others Lords would declare themſelues for him againſt the King, and he alſo would reſtore him Saint Quintine and take his part, otherwiſe he ſaid he durſt do nothing, conſidering how ſtrong the K. was, hauing both his army very wel appointed, & alſo great intelligence in the Dukes dominions. This was the anſwer he ſent, with diuers other fearefull meſſages. But I neuer knew man in my life come to good end that ſought to put in feare and hold in ſubiection his maſter, or any other great Prince with whom he had to do, as in the end the Conſtables example ſhall well declare. For notwithſtanding that the King were then his maſter, and that the greateſt part of his reuenues lay, and all his children were reſident in the Duke of Burgundies dominions: yet continued he theſe practiſes againſt both theſe Princes, with intent to hold them both in feare each by other, which coſt him deere in the end, and no maruel. For notwithſtanding that euery man deſire to liue out of ſubiection and feare, and that all men naturally hate theſe that hold them in awe: yet none ſo extremely as Princes. For I neuer knew Prince that hated not mortally all thoſe that ſought to put him feare.
               After the D. of Burgundy had receaued the Conſtables anſwer, he perceaued wel

no friendſhip to be in him, & farther that he was the only author of this war. Wherupon he conceaued ſo extreme hatred againſt him, that after this he could neuer brooke him, eſpecially bicauſe by theſe fearfull meſſages he fought to conſtraine him to mary his daughter at his pleaſure: a vaine attempt. For before the returne of the Conſtables anſwer, the Duke had recouered his ſpirits, and had a great army with him. You may eaſely perceaue both by the meſſage ſent by the Duke of Guienne firſt, and the Conſtables anſwer afterwarn, that this was a compact matter between them, and the rather for that the like meſſage or a more dreadfull came ſoone after from the Duke of Britaine, who ſent alſo to the Kings ſeruice a hundred Britons, all men of armes vnder the leading of the Lord of Leſcut. Wherefore we may boldly ſay that this war was mooued onely to conſtraine the Duke of Burgundy to conclude this mariage, and that they did but abuſe the King in perſwading him to begin war: for they were all in maner lies that they told him of their intelligences in the Dukes dominions. Notwithſtanding, in this voiage the Conſtable did the King great ſeruice, and ſhewed extreme malice againſt the Duke of Burgundy, knowing that the Duke had conceaued mortal hatred againſt him. The Duke of Guienne alſo ſerued the King in theſe wars very well accompanied, ſo that the Duke of Burgundy ſtood vpon hard tearmes. But if at the firſt he would haue aſſured his daughter to the Duke of Guienne, both the ſaid Duke of Guienne, the Conſtable, and diuers other noble men with all their adherents would haue reuolted to him againſt the King, and done their endeuor to haue pulled him vpon his knees. But whatſoeuer man purpoſeth in ſuch caſes, God diſpoſeth afterward of them at his pleaſure.
            
            
               How the Duke of Burgundie tooke Piquigny, and afterward found meanes to make truce with the King for a yeere to the Conſtables great griefe. Chap. 3.
               
                  YOu haue heard at large the cauſe of this war, at the beginning whereof both the Princes were blinded, inuading each other and neither of them knowing the cauſe why, which was a maruellous cunning of the contriuers of this enterpriſe. For a man might haue pronounced the old Prouerbe of theſe two Princes: that the one part of the world was not acquainted with the others maners nor actions. All theſe affaires aboue reherſed ſince the beginning of theſe wars, chanced in very ſhort ſpace, for within leſſe then fifteene daies after the taking of Amiens, the Duke put himſelfe into the field neere to Arras, (for farther he retired not,) and from thence marched toward the riuer of Somme, and ſo ſtraight to Piquigny, but vpon the waie thither he met with a meſſenger of the Duke of Britaine on foote, who aduertiſed him from the Duke his Maſter, that the King had giuen his ſaid Maſter to vnderſtand of diuers ſecrets, and among others of intelligences he had in many great towns of his dominions: namely Andwerp, Bruges, and Bruxelles, adding alſo that the King was determined to come and beſiege him into what towne ſoeuer he ſhould retire, were it euen into Gaunt. All the which aduertiſements I ſuppoſe the Duke of Britain ſent in fauour of the Duke of Guienne, hoping thereby to further much the marriage aboue mentioned. But the Duke of Burgundie tooke this meſſage in euill part, and foorthwith diſpatched the meſſenger, willing him to tell his maſter that he was

miſinformed by ſome euill ſeruants about him, who put theſe feares and doubts into his head, to the end he ſhould not aide him as he was bound by their league. And farther that he knew not what townes Gaunt and the other cities were: in the which he ſaid the King would come to beſiege him: for they were too great to be beſieged. He bad him farther to informe his Maſter in what ſort he found him accompanied, and to aduertiſe him that the world went otherwiſe with him then he ſuppoſed, for he was determined to paſſe the riuer of Somme, and to fight with the King, if he would come to ſtop him vpon the way. Laſte of all, he willed him to deſire his Maſter on his behalfe to ioine with him againſt the King, and to ſhew himſelfe a friend to the Duke of Burgundie, as he had ſhewed himſelfe to him by the treatie of Peronne. The next day the Duke of Burgundie approched neere to a towne vpon the riuer of Somme called Piquigny, the ſeat whereof was meruellous ſtrong. There he determined to make a bridge to paſſe the ſaid riuer, but fower or fiue hundred franke archers, and certaine gentlemen, who by chance lodged at that preſent in the towne, ſeeing the Duke paſſe by, ſalied out to the skirmiſh vpon a long cauſey, and iſſued foorth ſo far from the place, that thereby they gaue the Dukes men occaſion to purſue them, who folowed them ſo ſpeedily that they ſlue a great number of them, before they could retire into the towne, and tooke the ſuburbes into the which the cauſey lead. Then fower or fiue peeces of artilery were bent againſt the towne, notwithſtāding that it were impregnable on that ſide, for that the riuer ran between the towne and the Dukes battery. But theſe franke archers fearing (bicauſe they ſaw the bridge in hand) to be beſieged alſo on the other ſide, abandoned the place and fled. The caſtle held two or three daies and than yeelded alſo by compoſition, and the ſoldiers departed in their doblets and their hoſe. The good ſucceſſe of this ſmall exploit ſo much encouraged the Duke that he led his army before Amiens, where he built two or three lodgings, ſaying that he would keepe the field, to ſee if the King durſt come to fight with him, and in the end approched with his artillerie ſo neer the towne, that it ſhot at randon ouer and into it: in the which eſtate he laie there at the leaſt ſix weeks. Within the towne was the Conſtable and al the great officers of the realme: namely the Lord great Maſter, Admirall, Marſhall, Seneſhals, and others accompanied with foureteene hundred men of armes, and foure thouſand francke archers. The King in the meane time lying at Beauuais made a great muſter, being accompanied with the Duke of Guienne his brother, and Nicolas Duke of Calabria, ſonne and heire to Iohn Duke of Calabria and Lorraine, and onely heire of the houſe of Aniou. Farther all the nobles of the realme ſubiect to the Arriereban were come thither to him, who trauelled earneſtly (as I haue beene ſince informed) to vnderſtand the bottome of this enterpriſe, for they ſaw the troubles ſo farre from pacification that the King was now more buſied with wars then euer. They within Amiens determined to aſſaile the Duke of Burgundie and his army, if the King would ſend his forces being at Beauuais to ioine with them. But the King being aduertiſed of this enterpriſe, ſent foorthwith to countermand it: for notwithſtanding that in all apparance the ſucceſſe thereof was like to be good: yet was it not altogither voide of danger, eſpecially for thoſe that ſhould haue ſalied: for conſidering that they muſt all haue iſſued foorthwith on foote, and at two gates one of the which was hard by the Dukes campe: if happily they had beene repulſed, they ſhould haue put both the towne and themſelues in great hazard. In the meane time the Duke ſent one of his Pages to the King called Simon of Quincy, afterward Bailife of Troy with a letter of ſixe lines written with his owne hand, wherein he humbled himſelfe to him, ſaying that he was very ſorie he had thus inuaded him for

other mens pleaſures, which he ſuppoſed he would not haue done, if he had beene well informed of their practiſes. The Kings army ſent into Burgundy 
                     1
                   had defeated all the force of the countrie in battell, and taken many priſoners. The number of the dead was not great, but the diſcomfiture was great, in ſuch ſort that the Kings forces had already taken ſome places, and beſieged other ſome, wherewith the Duke was ſomwhat abaſhed, notwithſtanding he made the contrary to be bruted in his campe, ſaying that his army had obtained the victorie.
               When the King had read the Dukes letter aboue mentioned, he reioiced much thereat, both bicauſe of the reaſon aboue alleaged 
                     2
                  , and alſo for that he ſoon waxed wearie of all long enterpriſes. Wherefore he gaue him a ſpeedy anſwer, and directed a commiſſion to certaine in Amiens authoriſing them thereby to treate of truce. Whereupon diuers truces were concluded one after another for fower and fiue daies: and in the end one ſo far as I remember for a yeere, to the Conſtables great diſcontentation: for vndoubtedly whatſoeuer men haue thought or can thinke to the contrarie, he was then mortal enimie to the Duke, and many hauty words paſſed betweene them in ſuch ſort, that after this they neuer were friends as the ſequele well declared. True it is that they ſent afterward one to another, but all for practiſe ſake, and each to make his profit by the other. For all that the Duke did was onely to recouer Saint Quintine, which the Conſtable euer when he ſtood in feare of the King promiſed to reſtore, and ſome of theſe treaties betweene them I haue knowen ſo far aduanced, that the Dukes men vpon the Conſtables promiſe to be receiued, haue come within two or three leagues of the towne. But when the matter ſhould be executed, he euer continued in his accuſtomed diſſimulation, and ſent a countermaund, which his double dealing coſt him deere in the end. He thought bicauſe of the ſeate of the towne, the great number of men he had vnder his charge paid out of the Kings cofers, and the variance betweene theſe two Princes (which himſelfe nouriſhed) to hold them both in feare, but his enterpriſe was too too dangerous: for they were both too great, too ſtrong, and too ſubtile.
               When theſe armies were diſmiſſed, the King returned into the countrie of Touraine, the Duke of Guienne into his owne countrie, and the Duke of Burgundy into his: in the which eſtate theſe affaires remained awhile. The ſaid Duke of Burgundy aſſembled all the eſtates of his dominions 
                     3
                  , and declared vnto them what damage he had receiued by not hauing ſoldiers in ordinarie pay as the King had: alleaging that if there had beene but fiue hundred men in a readines to defend the frontires, the King would neuer haue mooued this war, but they ſhould haue liued in peace. He ſhewed further what great dangers they were like to fall into if this inconuenience were not ſpeedily redreſſed: and preſſed them earneſtly for the paiment of eight hundred light horſe. In the end they agreed to giue him a ſubſidie of ſixe ſcore thouſand crowns 
                     4
                   ouer and aboue all other duties they yeerly paid him, in the which ſubſidie Burgundie was not comprehended. But his ſaid ſubiects for diuers reſpects feared to put themſelues into ſuch ſubiection and ſlauerie, as they ſaw the realme of Fraunce in by reaſon of theſe men of armes: which their feare was not without cauſe: for after the Duke had obtained fiue or ſixe hundred men of armes in ordinarie, he ſought continually to encreaſe the number, and began to attempt more boldly againſt his neighbors in ſuch ſort, that in the end theſe 120000. crownes grew to 500000. and the number of his men of armes augmented ſo exceſſiuely, that his ſubiects were greatly charged for their maintenance. To ſay my fanſie of theſe ordinarie men of armes, I thinke vnder a wiſe Prince they be well imploied, but if he be otherwiſe, or happily at his death leaue his children in their minoritie, the ſeruice wherein

their gouernors imploy them is not alwaies profitable neither for the King, nor for his ſubiects. The hatred betweene the King and the Duke diminiſhed not but ſtill endured. Further the Duke of Guienne being returned into his countrie, ſent often to the Duke of Burgundy, following ſtill his ſute for his daughters marriage, who fed him continually with faire words, as he did euery other man that required hir. And I thinke verily that he neither was deſirous of a ſonne 
                     5
                  , neither would haue married his daughter during his life: but haue kept hir to intertaine men, thereby to obtaine their friendſhip and aide. For he had ſo many great enterpriſes in his head, that all his life time could not ſuffice to atchieue them, and thoſe aduentures almoſt impoſſible to be compaſſed: for halfe Europe would not haue contented him. He had courage ynough to attempt any thing, his bodie was able to endure as much labour and trauell as was needfull, he was furniſhed both of men and mony, but he lacked finenes and cunning ſufficient for the managing of his affaires. And what Prince ſoeuer deſireth to be great (notwithſtanding that he be accompliſhed with all other good parts:) yet if he lacke an excellent wit all is to no purpoſe, which vndoubtedly proceedeth of the meere grace of God. To be ſhort, if part of the Dukes vertues and part of the King our maſters had been tempered togither, they would haue made a perfect Prince: for vndoubtedly in wit the King far excelled him, as it well appeered in the end.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Of this armie he ſpake ſomwhat in the Duke of Bourbons aduertiſement ſent to the Duke of Burgundie mentioned in the first chapter of this booke, it was led by the Earle Daulphin d'Auuergne ſonne to the Earle of Montpenſier. Of this diſcomfiture reade Annal. Burgund. pag. 945.
                  2 The reaſon was bicauſe he perceiued the intelligences of the Conſtable and the reſt to be vntrue.
                  
                  3 This aſſembly was held the 16. of Iune. Meyer.
                  4 But this ſubſidie of 120000. crownes was granted but for three yeeres. Meyer. pag. 348. and 367.
                  5 The Duke deſired no ſonne, bicauſe then his daughters marriage could not haue ſtood him in ſuch ſtead as now it did.
                  
               
            
            
               Of the wars among the Princes of England during theſe troubles betweene King Lewis and Charles Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 4.
               
                  I Muſt now diſcourſe of Edward King of England, bicauſe 
                     Note that from this place til the 7. Chapter, all theſe Engliſh affaires, fall into the yeeres 1469. & 1470. theſe three great Princes, namely our King, the King of England, and the Duke of Burgundy, liued all in one age: in the which diſcourſe, I will not obſerue the Hiſtoriographers vſuall order in writing, who ſet downe the certaine yeeres and daies when each thing hapned, neither will I vouch examples out of ancient hiſtories, for you know them better than my ſelfe, and in ſo dooing I ſhould but ſeeme to reaſon of Diuinitie before a Doctor. But I will rudely aduertiſe you of all that I haue ſeene, knowen or

heard, of theſe Princes of whom I write. You liue in the ſelfe ſame age that all theſe things hapned, wherefore me thinke it needleſſe ſo exactly to note the houres and ſeaſons.
               I haue before rehearſed what occaſion mooued the Duke of Burgundy to mary King Edvvards ſiſter, and ſaid it was principally to fortifie himſelfe againſt the King, otherwiſe he would neuer haue done it, for the great affection he bare to the houſe of Lancaſter, whereof he was deſcended by his mother: for ſhe was daughter to the King of Portugall, and hir mother daughter to the Duke of Lancaſter 
                     1
                  , ſo that as feruently as he loued the houſe of Lancaſter, as extremly hated he the houſe of Yorke. But you ſhall vnderſtand that at the time of this mariage, the houſe of Lancaſter was vtterly deſtroied, and the houſe of Yorke no more ſpoken of. For King Edvvard being both King and Duke of Yorke raigned peaceably. During the ciuill wars betweene theſe two houſes, were fought in England ſeauen or eight cruell battels, and in them ſlaine three or fower ſcore Princes and Lords of the blood royall, as before is rehearſed in this hiſtory. The reſt that eſcaped being all yoong Lords, whoſe fathers died in theſe battels aboue mentioned, liued as baniſhed men in the Duke of Burgundies court, who receiued them as his kinſmen of the houſe of Lancaſter, before his mariage with King Edvvards ſiſter. I haue ſeene them in ſo great miſery before they came to the Dukes knowledge, that thoſe that beg from dore to dore were not in poorer eſtate then they: for I once ſaw a Duke of Exceſter run on foote bare legged after the Duke of Burgundies traine, begging his bread for Gods ſake, but he vttered not his name. He was the neereſt of the houſe of Lancaſter, and had maried King Edvvards ſiſter 
                     2
                  , but when he was knowne, the Duke gaue him a ſmall penſion to maintaine his eſtate. They of the houſe of Somerſet and diuers others, were there in like maner, who died all afterwards in the wars. Their fathers and kinſmen had ſpoiled and deſtroied the realme of Fraunce, and poſſeſſed the greateſt part thereof many yeeres, and afterwards ſlew one another, and thoſe that remained aliue in England and their children haue died as you haue ſeene. Yet men ſay, that God puniſheth not now as he did in the children of Iſraels time, but ſuffereth euill men and euill Princes to liue vnpuniſhed. True it is that he threatneth not now by expreſſe meſſengers as he was wont: for he hath left examples inough to inſtruct vs. Notwithſtanding you may perceiue by theſe diſcourſes, ioining thereto the great knowledge you haue beſides, that of euill Princes and ſuch as haue authority in this world, and abuſe it to cruelty or tiranny, few or none eſcape vnpuniſhed though it happen not by and by after the fault committed, neither ſo ſoone happily as thoſe that are afflicted deſire. But to returne to King Edvvard, the chiefe man in England that maintained the houſe of Yorke was the Earle of Warwicke. And on the other ſide the greateſt champion of the houſe of Lancaſter was the Duke of Sommerſet. The ſaid Earle of Warwicke might iuſtly be called King Edwards father, as well for the training of him vp, as alſo for the great ſeruices he did him, for the which the King had alſo highly aduanced him, for beſides his owne inheritance which was great, he held goodly lands of the Kings gift, aſwel crowne lands, as lands forfeited by attaindor. Farther he was deputy of Calice, and had diuers other great offices, ſo that I haue heard his yeerely reuenewes valued at fower ſcore thouſand crownes, beſides his owne inheritance. But in the end he fell at variance with the King his maſter, about a yeere (as I geſſe) before the Duke of Burgundies comming before Amiens: which breach the ſaid Duke furthered to the vttermoſt of his power. For the Earles great authority in England much diſcontented him, beſides that they two were not friends, for the Earle had continuall intelligence with the

King our maſter. To be ſhort, about this preſent or not long before, the Earle of Warwickes force was ſo great, that he ſeaſed the King his maſter into his hands, and put to death diuers perſonages that he highly fauored, namely the Lord of Scales the Queenes father 
                     3
                  , and two of his ſonnes, (the third being alſo in great danger) & with them diuers other knights. He entertained the King his maſter for a ſeaſon very honorably, and placed new ſeruants about him, ſuppoſing that through ſimplicity he would ſoone forget the old. The Duke of Burgundy being not a little troubled with this aduenture, practiſed ſecretly how King Edvvard might eſcape, and they two commune togither, which enterpriſe had ſo good ſucceſſe, that the King eſcaped indeede, and leuied men, and defeated certaine of the Earles bands. He was a fortunate Prince in the field: for he wan at the leaſt nine great battels, fighting himſelfe on foote in euery one of them. The Earle of Warwicke vnable to make reſiſtance, aduertiſed his friends what they ſhould do, and embarked at leiſure, accompanied with the Duke of Clarence, who had married his daughter and tooke part with him, notwithſtanding that he were King Edwards brother. They tranſported with them both wiues and children, and a great band of men, and ſailed ſtraight towards Calais: within the which was the Earles lieutenant named the Lord of Vaucler 
                     4
                  , and diuers of the ſaid Earles houſhold ſeruants, who in ſtead of receiuing their Maſter preſented him the canon. Further you ſhall vnderſtand, that as they lay at anchor before the towne, the Ducheſſe of Clarence daughter to the Earle of Warwicke was deliuered of a ſonne, and great intreatie was made, before Vaucler and the reſt of the towne would ſuffer two flaggons of wine to be brought foorth to hir, which was great extremitie of the ſeruant towards the maſter. For it is to be ſuppoſed that the Earle thought himſelfe well aſſured of this place, which is they very key of England: and the goodlieſt captainſhip in mine opinion in the world, at the leaſt in Chriſtendome: which I dare boldly auow, bicauſe I was there diuers times during theſe wars, and heard alſo the Maior of the ſtaple report, that he would willingly farme yeerely the deputyſhip of Calais of the King of England for fifteene thouſand crownes. For the deputie receiueth the profits of all that they haue on this ſide the ſea, and of all ſafe conducts, and placeth alſo the greateſt part of the garriſon at his pleaſure.
               The King of England fauoured highly the Lord of Vaucler for this refuſall made to his Captaine, and granted him by his letters patents the office of Deputie, which the Earle his maſter before held: for he was a wiſe and an ancient knight, and one of the order of the garter. The Duke of Burgundie alſo who then lay at Saint Omer, conceiued a maruellous good opinion of him, ſo far foorth that he ſent me to him, granting him a yeerely penſion of a thouſand crownes, and deſiring him to continue a true and faithfull ſeruant to the King his Maſter as he had begun: which at my comming thither, I found him fully determined to do, ſo that he ſware in Staple Inne in Calais, (laying his hand within mine) to be faithfull and true to King Edward, and to ſerue him againſt all men. The like oth all the towne and all the garriſon ſware alſo. Farther I was by the ſpace of two months almoſt continually reſident at Calais, at the leaſt poſting daiely betweene Calais and Bullen to entertaine the ſaid Vaucler: for you ſhall vnderſtand that during theſe Engliſh troubles, the Duke of Burgundie came to Bullen where he prepared a great army by ſea againſt the Earle of Warwick, who at his departure from Calais, tooke many ſhips of the Dukes ſubiects, which aduanced forward the war betweene the King of Fraunce and vs. For the Earles men ſould the bootie in Normandie: whereupon the Duke of Burgundie arreſted all the French Marchants that came to the

Mart at Andwerp. Now bicauſe it is meete to vnderſtand as well the cunning and ſubtill, as the iuſt and vpright dealings of the world, (not to practiſe them, but to know how to avoide them,) I will rehearſe vnto you a ſleight or ſubtilitie (terme it as you liſt) that was cunningly conueighed. Farther I would that men ſhould vnderſtand the practiſes as well of our neighbors as our ſelues, to the end it may appeere that in all places are both good and bad. When the Earle of Warwick came before Calais, thinking to enter into it as his onely refuge: the Lord of Vaucler being a very wiſe gentleman, ſent him word that if he entred the towne he ſhould caſt away himſelfe: conſidering that all England, the Duke of Burgundie, the people of the towne, and a great part of the garriſon: namely the Lord of Duras Marſhall there for the King of England, and diuers others that had men in the towne were his enimies: wherefore his beſt way ſhould be to retire into Fraunce, and as touching the towne of Calais he willed him not to trouble himſelfe: for he would yeeld him good account thereof when time and occaſion ſhould ſerue. He did his Captaine good ſeruice by giuing him this aduiſe, but ſhewed himſelfe thereby a very Iudas to his Maſter. For vndoubtedly a more traiterous part was neuer plaied, conſidering both that the King of England had made him Deputie of the towne of Calais, and the Duke of Burgundy giuen him ſo large a penſion.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Philippa daughter to Iohn Duke of Lancaſter was married to Iohn King of Portugale, and had iſſue by him Iſabell mother to Duke Charles.
                  2 This was Henry Holland Duke of Exceter, whoſe wife was Anne ſister to King Edward the fourth, and his grandmother was Elizabeth daughter to Iohn Duke of Lancaster by his first wife, but he died without iſſue.
                  
                  3 Our chronicles name the Queenes father Earle of Riuers, and ſo doth afterward alſo our Author lib. 5. cap. 15.
                  4 This Vaucler was a Gaſcoine borne.
                  
               
            
            
               How by King Lewis his aide, the Earle of Warwicke chaſed King Edward out of England, to the Duke of Burgundies great greefe, who receiued him into his countries. Chap. 5.
               
                  THe Earle of Warwicke followed Vauclers aduiſe, and landed in Normandie, where the King honorably receiued him, and furniſhed him largely of mony for his mens expences, and appointed alſo the baſtard of Bourbon Admirall of Fraunce being well accompanied, to defend the Engliſhmen and their ſhips againſt the Duke of Burgundies nauie, which was ſo mighty and ſtrong that no man durſt ſtir in theſe narrow ſeas for feare of it, making war vpon the Kings ſubiects both by ſea & land, and threatening them euery where. All this happened the ſommer before the King ſurpriſed Saint Quintine and Amiens, which was (as before you haue heard) in the yeere 1470. The Duke of Burgundies nauie aboue mentioned was ſtronger than the Kings and the Earles ioined togither. For he had taken at Sluſe many great ſhips of Spaine, Portugall and Genua, and diuers hulks of Almaine. King Edward was a man of no great forecaſt, but very

valiant, and the beautifulleſt Prince that liued in his time. He tooke no care for the Earle of Warwicks landing as the Duke of Burgundie did, who perceiuing great tumults already ariſing in England in the Earles fauor, aduertiſed the King often thereof. But he made ſmall account of any danger, neither ſeemed to feare his enimy: which ſure was great follie conſidering the great preparation he ſaw made. For the King armed all the ſhips to the ſea that he could get, and manned them well, and prouided furniture alſo for the Engliſh men.
               Beſides this, he made a mariage betweene the Prince of Wales and the Earle of Warwickes ſecond daughter. The ſaid Prince was onely ſonne and heire to King Henry of England, who liued yet priſoner in the Tower of London. This was a ſtrange mariage when the Earle had depoſed and impriſoned the Princes father, to cauſe him to mary his daughter, and to entertaine alſo the Duke of Clarence, brother to the King of the other faction, who had iuſt cauſe to feare his owne eſtate, if the houſe of Lancaſter recouered the crowne. Thus we ſee that ſuch enterpriſes are not atchieued without diſſimulation. At the ſelfe ſame time that this army aboue mentioned lay in a readines to ſaile into England, I was at Calice to entertaine the Lord of Vaucler, whoſe dooble dealing till that very inſtant I neuer perceiued, notwithſtanding that it had now continued the ſpace of three months. But at that preſent, I deſired him (bicauſe of the newes we heard) to put all the Earle of Warwicks houſhold ſeruants being to the number of twenty or thirty out of the towne, alledging that I was ſure the Kings army and the Earles were ready to depart out of Normandy where they lay, and if the Earle ſhould happen ſodainly to land in England, ſome ſuch tumult might ariſe in the towne of Calice by meanes of his ſeruants, that he ſhould not be maſter thereof. Wherefore I preſſed him earneſtly in all haſte to put them out of the towne, which he alwaies heertofore promiſed me to do, but now he drew me aſide ſaying, that he would be maſter of the town well inough, and required me to do this meſſage to the Duke of Burgundy, that if he would be a friend to the realme of England he ſhould endeuor himſelfe to make peace and not war: which words he ſpake bicauſe of the nauy the Duke had on the ſea againſt the Earle of Warwick. He told me farther, that peace might eaſily be made, bicauſe that day a gentlewoman paſſed through Calice to go into Fraunce to the Duches of Clarence with certaine ouertures of peace from King Edward. And he ſaid true indeed, but as he abuſed others, euen ſo was he himſelfe deceiued by this gentlewoman: for ſhe went about a great enterpriſe, which alſo ſhe atchieued to the preiudice of the Earle of Warwick, and his whole faction. Of this fine practiſe, & all other that haue been managed on this ſide the ſea, I write the more at large bicauſe I am well aſſured that no man is able to make truer report of them then my ſelfe, at the leaſt of thoſe that haue hapned within theſe twenty yeeres.
               The ſecret deliuered to this woman was to counſell the Duke of Clarence not to cauſe the deſtruction of his owne houſe, by ſetting vp againe the houſe of Lancaſter, but to remember their ancient harred and diuiſion, adding that he might well aſſure himſelfe that the Earle of Warwick hauing maried his daughter to the Prince of Wales, and already done homage to him, would by all meanes poſſible ſeeke to make him King. This gentlewoman ſo wiſely executed the charge committed vnto hir, that ſhe wan the Duke of Clarence, who promiſed to reuolt to the King his brother immediately after his returne into England. Shee was a woman well aduiſed and of few words, and bicauſe of hir ſexe, had leaue granted hir to paſſe to hir Meiſtres eaſilier then a man ſhould, and as craftie a foxe as this Vaucler was, this woman went beyond him, and was the onely contriuer of the enterpriſe, whereby the

Earle of Warwick and his whole faction were vtterly deſtroied: wherefore it is no ſhame to be ſuſpicious, and to haue an eie vpon thoſe that paſſe to and fro, but great ſhame it is to be deceiued, and vndone through our owne follie. Notwithſtanding ſuſpicions ought to be grounded vpon ſome good preſumption, for to be too ſuſpicious is naught.
               You haue heard, already how the Earle of Warwicks army, and the Kings ſhips appointed to wafte him ouer were in a readines to take ſea, and how the Duke of Burgundies nauie being at Hancy lay prepared to fight with them. But it pleaſed God ſo to diſpoſe of this voiage, that the ſelfe ſame night ſo great a tempeſt aroſe that the Dukes nauie was forced to ſeuer: part wherofran vpon the coſt of Scotland, and part into Holland: and not long after the Earle hauing a good gale of winde, paſſed into England without all danger. The Duke of Burgundie had aduertiſed King Edward in what part rhe Earle would land, and had ſent men purpoſely to him to ſollicite him to looke to himſelfe: but he litle regarding the danger, paſſed foorth the time in hunting, hauing none ſo neere him as the Archbiſhop of Yorke, and the Marques of Montagu, the Earle of Warwicks bretheren, who had promiſed and ſolemnly ſworne to ſerue him againſt their brother and all others, wereunto he gaue credite. Immediatly after the Earles landing, great forces ioyned with him: wherewith the King being much abaſhed, began then, (but all too late) to looke about him, and ſent word to the Duke of Burgundy, deſiring him that his nauie might ſtill keepe the Sea to ſtop the Earle from retiring againe into Fraunce (for vpon the land he would match him well ynough) which meſſage pleaſed no man that heard it: for it had beene much better to haue kept him from landing, then to be conſtrained to hazard his eſtate in battell when he was landed. Fiue or ſixe daies after the Earles arriuall his power was ſo great, that he encamped within three leagues of King Edward. Notwithſtanding the Kings force was greater than his, if all his men had beene faithfull and true, and lay alſo in campe to fight with him. Further you ſhall vnderſtand that the King lodged (as himſelfe told me) in a ſtrong village, at the leaſt a ſtrong houſe into the which no man could enter but by a draw bridge, which was a happy chance for him: the reſt of his armie lay in other villages round about. But as he ſat at dinner, ſuddenly one came running in, and brought newes that the Marques of Montague the Earles brother and certaine other were mounted on horſebacke, and had cauſed all their men to crie, God ſaue King Henry. Which meſſage the King at the firſt beleeued not, but in all haſte ſent other meſſengers foorth, and armed himſelfe, and ſet men alſo at the barriers of his lodging to defend it. He was accompanied with the Lord Haſtings Lord Chamberlain of England, a wiſe Knight and of the greateſt authoritie about him, who was maried to the Earle of Warwicks ſiſter, yet notwithſtanding was true and faithfull to his Maſter, and had three hundred horſe vnder his charge in the Kings armie as himſelfe told me. With the King was alſo the Lord of Scales the Queene of Englands brother, and diuers other valiant Knights and Eſquires, who all perceiued that this buſines went not well: for the meſſengers brought word that the report was true, and that the enimies aſſembled to aſſault the King.
               But God ſo prouided for the King that he lodged hard by the ſea ſide, neer a place where a little ſhip laden with victuals that followed his armie, and two hulks of Holland fraughted with merchandiſe lay at anchor: he had no other ſhift but to run to ſaue himſelfe in one of them 
                     1
                  . The Lord Chamberlaine ſtaied awhile behinde him, and talked with the lieutenant of his band and diuers other particular men in the Kings armie, willing them to go to the enimies, but to beare true and faithfull harts

to the King and him: which talke ended, he went aboord to the reſt being ready to depart. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that the cuſtome in England is, after the victorie obtained, neither to kill nor raunſome any man, eſpecially of the vulgar ſort: knowing all men then to be ready to obey them, bicauſe of their good ſucceſſe. Wherfore theſe ſoldiers after the Kings departure receiued no harme. Notwithſtanding K. Edward himſelf told me, that in albattels that he wan, ſo ſoon as he had obtained victory he vſed to mount on horſebacke, and cry too Saue the people and kil the nobles: for of them few or none eſcaped. Thus fled King Edward the yeere 1470. with two hulks and a little bote of his owne countrie, accompanied with ſeuen or eight hundred perſons, hauing none other apparell than they ware in the wars, vtterly vnfurniſhed of mony, and hardly knowing whither they went. Strange it was to ſee this poore King (for ſo might he now well be called) to flie after this ſort purſued by his owne ſeruants, and the rather, for that he had by the ſpace of twelue or thirteene yeeres liued in greater pleaſures and delicacies than any Prince in his time: for he had wholy giuen himſelfe to dames, hunting, hawking, and banketting, in ſuch ſort that he vſed when he went a hunting in the ſommer ſeaſon, to cauſe many pauilions to be pitched to ſolace himſelfe there with the Ladies. And to ſay the truth his perſonage ſerued aſwel to make court as any mans that euer I knew: for he was yong, & as goodly a gentleman as liued in our age, I meane in this time of his aduerſitie: for afterward he grew maruellous groſſe. But behold now how he fel into the trobles & aduerſities of the world. He ſailed ſtraight towards Holland, and at that time the Eaſterlings were enimies both to the Engliſh men and the French, and had many ſhips of war vpon the ſea, wherefore they were much feared of the Engliſh men, and not without cauſe: for they were very good ſoldiers, and had done them great harme that yeere, and taken many priſes. Theſe Eaſterlings diſcried afar off the ſhips wherin the King fled, and ſeuen or eight of them began to make ſaile after him, but in vaine: for he was far before them, and fell vpon the coaſt of Holland or ſomwhat lower: for he arriued in Freezland by a little towne called Alquemare 
                     2
                  , as neere the which as was poſſible his mariners caſt anchor: for bicauſe it was ebbing water they could not enter the hauen. The Eaſterlings came in like maner and anchored hard by them, minding to boord them the next tide. Thus we ſee that one miſchiefe neuer commeth without company.
               King Edwards good ſucceſſe was now cleane altered, and his thoughts quite changed: for not paſt fifteene daies before this misfortune, he would little haue beleeued him that had told him that the Earle of Warwicke ſhould chaſe him out of England, and ſubdue the whole country in eleuen daies: for in that ſmal ſpace he brought it to due obedience. Further, he mocked the Duke of Burgundie for ſpending his treaſure in defending the ſea: and wiſhed that the Earle were already landed in England. But what excuſe could he make now for himſelfe receiuing ſo great loſſe through his owne fault, ſaue this, that ſuch a miſhap was not to be doubted: of which excuſe a Prince growen to mans eſtate ought to be aſhamed, for it will not ſerue. Wherefore let King Edwards example teach all Princes that thinke it ſhame to feare their enimies, to be wiſe in time: for notwithſtanding that the greateſt part of their ſeruants through flatterie vphold their ſayings, and that themſelues alſo by ſuch words ſuppoſe to purchaſe an opinion of great courage: yet ſure (whatſoeuer is ſaid to their face) wiſe men account ſuch language but meere folly: for it is great honor to feare that which is to be feared, and to prouide for it accordingly. Further, a wiſe man in a Princes companie is a great treaſure and iewell, if he may be beleeued and haue leaue to ſpeake the truth.
               
                  
By chance the Lord of Gruteuſe the Duke of Burgundies lieutenant in Holland was at that preſent in the place where King Edward arriued, who being aduertiſed by certaine that the King ſent to land, both of his arriuall, and of the danger he was in of the Eaſterlings, gaue commandement foorthwith to the ſaid Eaſterlings not to touch him: and went alſo himſelfe into the Kings ſhip to welcome him. And thus he landed 
                     3
                   being accompanied with his brother the Duke of Gloceſter (who afterward named himſelfe King Richard) and a traine of fifteen hundred perſons. The King had not one peny about him, but gaue the Maſter of the ſhip for his paſſage a goodly gowne furred with martins, promiſing one day to do him a good turne: and as touching his traine neuer ſo poore a company was ſeen. But the Lord of Gruteuſe dealt very honorably with them: for he gaue much apparel among them, & defraied the King to La Hay in Holland whither he himſelfe alſo waited vpon him. Afterward he aduertiſed the Duke of Burgundie of this aduenture, who was maruellouſly abaſhed at the newes, and had much rather haue heard of the Kings death: for he feared the Earle of Warwicke, who was his mortall enimie, and bare now the whole ſway in England. The ſaid Earle ſoone after he was landed, found infinite numbers of men to take his part. For the armie that King Edward left behinde him, what for loue, what for feare yeelded to him in ſuch ſort, that euery day his forces encreaſed. And in this eſtate went he to London, where a great number of Knights and Eſquires (who afterward did King Edward good ſeruice) tooke ſanctuarie, as alſo did the Queene his wife, who was there deliuered of a ſonne in very poore eſtate.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The King embarked at Lyn.
                  
                  2 Alquemare Meyer nameth Teſſela.
                  
                  3 King Edward landed in Holland the 9. of October. Meyer.
               
            
            
               How the Earle of Warwick tooke out of priſon King Henry of England. Chap. 6.
               
                  THe E. immediatly after his arriuall at London, went foorthwith to the tower & tooke K. Henry out of priſon, whom himſelfe many yeres before had lead thither crying before him, Traitor, Traitor: but now he called him his ſoueraigne Lord, and conueighed him to his palace at Weſtminſter, where he ſat him vnder the cloth of eſtate in the Duke of Clarences preſence, who litle liked that ſight. Farther he ſent foorthwith three or foure hundred men to Calais to ſpoile and forray the countrey of Boulenois, whom the Lord of Vaucler (ſo often aboue mentioned) friendly receiued, and made then open declaration of the good will he had alwaies borne the Earle his Maſter. The ſame day that the Duke receiued newes of the Kings arriuall in Holland: I was come from Calais to Bulen (where the Duke then lay,) vnderſtanding nothing of this aduenture, nor of the Kings flight. The Duke was firſt aduertiſed that he was dead, whereof he forced not greatly, for he loued the houſe of Lancaſter much better then the houſe of Yorke. Beſides that he had with him the Dukes of Exceſter and Sommerſet and diuers others of King Henries faction, by whoſe meanes he thought himſelfe aſſured of peace with the houſe of Lancaſter. But he feared the Earle of Warwicke,

neither knew he how to entertaine him that was come to him 
                     1
                  , I meane King Edward who was his brother in lawe, and of the ſame order: for the King ware the golden Fleeſe, and the Duke the Garter.
               The Duke foorthwith ſent me backe againe to Calais, accompanied with a gentleman or two of this newe King Henries faction, and gaue me inſtructions how to deale with this new world, preſſing me earneſtly to go bicauſe it ſtood him vpon to be well ſerued in this buſines. I went as far as Tournehan a caſtell neere to Guiens, and further durſt not paſſe, bicauſe I found the people flying for feare of the Engliſh men, who were abroad and ſpoiled all the countrey. But I ſent foorthwith to the Lord of Vaucler deſiring a ſafe conduct: for before I was accuſtomed to go without any, and was alwaies honorably receiued: for the Engliſh men are verie curteous and honorable in their entertainment. Al this ſeemed ſtrange to me: for I neuer had ſeen ſuch ſudden alterations in the world. I aduertiſed the Duke the ſame night of the danger I ſhould be in if I paſſed further, making no mention of the ſafe conduct I had ſent for, bicauſe I doubted what anſwer I ſhould receiue thereof. The Duke ſent me a ring from his finger bidding me go forward, and if I were taken priſoner he would redeeme me: for he cared not greatly to endanger one of his ſeruants at his neede. But I had prouided well for my ſelfe: for I receiued a ſafe conduct with very curteous letters from the Lord of Vaucler. Wherein he ſent me word that I might go and come after my woonted maner. Whereupon I went to Guiſnes, and founde the captaine at the caſtell gate, who offred me a cup of wine, without that he led me into the caſtel as he was accuſtomed, but he feaſted and entertained honorably theſe gentlemen of King Henries faction that accompanied me. From thence I went to Calais, where no man came foorth to receiue me after their woonted ſort, but al men ware the Earle of Warwicks liuery. Further, vpon the gate of my lodging they made aboue an hundred white croſſes and rimes, ſignifying that the King of Fraunce and the Earle of Warwick were all one: all the which ſeemed ſtrange to me. Soone after my comming to Calais, I ſent to Graueling, being but fiue leagues thence, commanding all Engliſh merchants and merchandiſes to be ſtaied, bicauſe the Engliſhmen had ſo ſpoiled the countrey. The Lord of Vaucler ſent for me to diner, being well accompanied, and wearing on his cap a white ragged ſtaffe of gold enamiled 
                     2
                  , being the Earles cogniſance, which all the reſt that were with him ware likewiſe, and he that could not haue it of gold, had if of cloth. It was told me there at diner, that within leſſe than a quarter of an hower after theſe newes came out of England, euery man ware the ſaid cogniſance: ſo ſpeedy and ſudden was the change. This was the firſt time that I began to conſider how vnſtable and vncertaine all worldly things are. The ſaid Vaucler gaue me very curteous language, and made certaine excuſes in the Earle his captaines behalfe, rehearſing alſo what great benefits he had receiued at his hands. But as touching the reſt that were with him, I neuer ſaw men ſo far out of frame: for thoſe that I tooke to haue bin the Kings truſtieſt ſeruants, were they that moſt threatned him: ſome I thinke for feare, but others in good earneſt. Thoſe houſehold ſeruants of the Earles, whom I had required the Lord of Vaucler heeretofore to put out of the towne, were now in great credit. Notwithſtanding they neuer vnderſtood that I had mooued the ſaid Vaucler to any ſuch purpoſe. In all communication that paſſed betweene them and me, I euer told them that King Edvvard was dead, wherof I ſaid I was well aſſured, notwithſtanding that I knew the contrary, adding further, that though it were not ſo, yet was the league betweene the Duke of Burgundy and the King and realme of England ſuch, that this accident could not infringe it: for we would account him King whom they did. I ſaid moreouer, that

bicauſe of the alterations that had hapned in times paſt, theſe words, VVith the King and the Realme, were inſerted into the league, for performance alſo whereof fower of the beſt townes in England were in pledge to the Duke. The merchants required in any wiſe to haue me ſtaied, bicauſe their goods were taken at Grauelin by my commandement as they ſaid. In the end peace was thus concluded between them & me, that they ſhould pay for al the cattell they had taken, or reſtore it again: for by agreement betweene the houſe of Burgundy & them, they might go into certain paſtures thereabout, and take cattel for the prouiſion of the towne, at a price which they now paide, and priſoners they had taken none. Thus it was agreed that the league ſhould remaine firme and vnuiolable between vs and the King and the realme of England, ſaue that for Edward we named Henry.
               
               This appointment pleaſed well the Duke of Burgundy, for the Earle of Warwick was ſending fower thouſand Engliſh men to Calice to make ſharp war vpon his dominions, neither could the D. pacifie him by any meanes. Notwithſtanding the rich merchants of London, diuers of the which were then at Calice, in the end perſwaded him to peace, bicauſe their ſtaple of wools is there, which is a far goodlier thing than a man would beleeue: for it is almoſt incredible of how great value the wooll is that is tranſported thither twiſe a yeere, and lieth there till merchants come to buy it. The chiefe vent whereof is into Flaunders and Holland, which was the principall cauſe that mooued theſe merchants to labour ſo earneſtly for peace, and for ſtay of the ſoldiers the Earle was ſending ouer: which ſure was a happy chance for the Duke of Burgundie, for it was euen at the very ſame inſtant that the King tooke Amiens and Saint Quintine: and if both the realmes had made war vpon him at once, vndoubtedly he had been vndone. He trauelled to appeaſe the Earle of Warwick by all meanes poſſible, alleging that he would attempt nothing againſt King Henry, ſeeing he was himſelfe of the houſe of Lancaſter, and vſing ſuch words as might beſt ſerue for his purpoſe.
               Now to returne to King Edward, he came to Saint Paule to the Duke of Burgundy, and preſſed him earneſtly for aide to return home, aſſuring him that he had great intelligence in England, and deſiring him for Gods loue not to abandon him, conſidering he had maried his ſiſter, and that they were brethren of one order. The Dukes of Somerſet and Exceſter labored him to the contrary, to wit, to take part with King Henry. The Duke could not tell whom to pleaſe, and either party he feared to diſpleaſe. But in the end bicauſe ſharpe war was already begun vpon him, euen at his very noſe 
                     3
                  , he inclined to the Duke of Somerſet and others aboue named, accepting their promiſes againſt the Earle of Warwick their ancient enimy. Wherwith King Edvvard there preſent was woonderfully diſquieted. But the Dukes ſeruants alleaged the beſt reaſons they could in excuſe herof, ſaying that the Duke vſed this diſſimulatiō to auoid war with both the realms at once, adding therto, that if he ſhould be ouerthrowne, he could not after aide him at his eaſe. Notwithſtanding the Duke ſeeing that he could no longer ſtay the King there, but that needs he would returne into England, and fearing for diuers conſiderations altogither to diſcontent him: pretended openly that he would not aide him, and made proclamation that no man ſhould go to his ſeruice: but couertly he deliuered him 50000. gildons of the Saint Andrewes croſſe, and cauſed three or fower great ſhips to be armed for him at La Vere in Zeland 
                     4
                  , which is a hauen where all nations are receiued. Beſides all this, he entertained for him ſecretly fowerteen ſhips of the Eaſterlings well appointed, who promiſed to ſerue him till he were landed in England and fifteen daies after, which was great aide conſidering the time.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth whether he ſhould aide the King or no.
                  
                  2 Our author reporteth this ragged ſtaffe to be blacke, but bicauſe the Earles of VVarwicke neuer gaue it blacke but the Earles of Kent, I haue tranſlated it white, no whit doubting but that either the printer hath faulted heere, or our authors memory failed him.
                  
                  3 To wit by the Engliſhmen ſent ouer by the Earle of VVarwick.
                  
                  4 La Vere, otherwiſe called Camphere is in the Ile of VValkeren in Zeland not in Holland, and is the Scottiſh ſtaple, wherefore I haue beene bold to amend the booke.
                  
               
            
            
               How King Edward returned into England, where he ſlew in battell firſt the Earle of Warwick, and then the Prince of Wales. Chap. 7.
               
                  KIng Edward departed out of Flanders the yeere 1471. at the ſelfe 
                     Heere our Engliſh affaires begin the yeere, 1471. ſame inſtant that the D. of Burgundie went to Amiens againſt the King. The ſaid Duke thought now howſoeuer the world went in England he could not ſpeede amiſſe, bicauſe he had friends on both ſides: King Edward immediatly after his landing, marched ſtraight towards London, bicauſe three or fower hundred Knights and Eſquires of his faction, togither with others of the meaner ſort, to the number of two thouſand and better had retired themſelues into the Sanctuaries of the citie, which was a happy chance for him, for if he landed with ſmall force. The Earle of Warwick being in the north parts with a great armie, hearing theſe newes made haſte to be at London before him, rather for other reſpects than for that he greatly feared the reuolt of the towne, notwithſtanding the contrarie happened. For King Edward was receiued into the citie with great ioy and triumph the tueſday before Eaſter, contrarie to the expectation of moſt men, for all the world accounted him as vtterly vndone. And vndoubtedly if they had ſhut the gates againſt him, he had been paſt all recouerie: for the Earle of Warwicke was but a daies iourney behinde him. There were three things eſpecially (as I haue heard) that cauſed the towne to reuolt. Firſt, the gentlemen that were in the ſanctuaries and the yoong Prince lately borne. The ſecond, the great debts that the King owed in the towne, in reſpect whereof the merchants to whom he was indebted thought it their beſt way to take part with him. The third, a great many women of honor and rich merchants wiues, with whom in times paſt he had been familiar, perſwaded their husbands and friends to incline to him. He ſtaied not paſt two or three daies in the towne: for vpon Eaſter euen he departed with all the force he could leuy, and marched againſt the Earle of Warwicke, whom he met the next morning being Eaſter day: and as they ſtood in order of battell, the one in face of the other, ſuddenly the D. of Clarence the Kings brother (who was reconciled to the King as before you haue heard) reuolted to the King with twelue thouſand men and better 
                     1
                  , which no leſſe aſtonied the Earle than encouraged the King, whoſe force was not great. But all this notwithſtanding the battell was cruell and blooddy. They were all footemen on both ſides, of the Kings vaward a great number were ſlaine: then his battell and the Earles met, and ioined ſo fiercely togither,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
that the King himſelfe fought in perſon more valiantly than any man of either army. The Earle of Warwick vſed neuer to fight on foote, but his maner was when he had led his men to the charge, to take horſe, and if the victory fell on his ſide to fight among his ſoldiers, otherwiſe to depart in time. But at this battel he was conſtrained by his brother the Marques of Mountacute, a valiant knight, to light on foote and ſend away his horſe. To conclude, in this battell died the Earle and his brother, with a great number of gentlemen, and the ſlaughter of the poore people was alſo great. For King Edward at his departure out of Flaunders, reſolued to cry no more to ſaue the people and kill the nobles: but he had conceiued extreeme hatred againſt the communalty of England, both for the great fauor they bare the Earle of Warwick, and for other reſpects alſo: wherefore at this battell he ſpared them not. Of the Kings ſide died about fifteene hundred, and the field was valiantly fought.
               At the time of this battell the Duke of Burgundie lay before Amiens where he receiued letters from the Duches his wife, that King Edward hir brother was not a little diſcontented with him, alleaging that the aide he gaue him, was giuen in euil ſort, and with euill will, ſo far foorth that he was almoſt vtterly forſaken of him: and to ſay the truth the King and he after this neuer loued one an other. Notwithſtanding the Duke ſuppoſing that this victory would greatly further his affaires, cauſed the newes to be publiſhed in all places.
               I had forgotten to tell you how King Edward finding King Henry at London, lead him with him into the battell aboue mentioned. This King Henry was a very ſimple man, and almoſt an innocent: and if I haue not heard a lie, incontinent after the battell the Duke of Gloceſter K. Edwards brother, (who afterward named himſelfe K. Richard) ſlue this holy man K. Henry with his own hands, or cauſed him to be ſlaine in his preſence in ſome ſecret place 
                     2
                  . The Prince of Wales was landed in England when this battell aboue mentioned was fought, hauing in his company the Dukes of Exceſter and Sommerſet, with diuers others of his kinsfolkes and ancient folowers of his houſe. His army was to the number of forty thouſand, as I haue been informed by diuers that were with him: and if the Earle of Warwicke would haue ſtaied for him, it is very like the victory would haue been theirs. But the Earle feared both the Duke of Sommerſet, whoſe father and brother he had ſlaine: and alſo Queene Margaret the Princes mother: wherefore he fought alone and would not tarie for them 
                     3
                  . Marke heere by this example how long ancient factions and partialities endure, how much they are to be feared, and what great damage enſueth thereof. So ſoone as King Edward had obteined this victory, he marched incontinent againſt the Prince of Wales, where another cruell battell was fought: for the Princes force was greater than the Kings, notwithſtanding the lot of victory fell to the King, and the Prince was ſlaine vpon the place 
                     4
                   with diuers other great Lords, and a maruellous number of common ſoldiers. The Duke of Sommerſet was taken, and the next day beheaded. In eleuen daies the Earle of Warwicke ſubdued the whole realme of England, at the leaſt brought it to obedience: and in one and twenty King Edvvard recouered it, hauing fought two great and cruell battels. Thus you ſee what ſudden mutations haue been in England. K. Edvvard cauſed many of the people to be put to death in many places, eſpecially ſuch as had made aſſemblies againſt him. And from that day forward raigned peaceably in England till his death, though not without great trouble and vexation of minde. I will heere end my diſcourſe of theſe Engliſh affaires, till time and occaſion ſerue in ſome other place, only adding this, that of all the nations in the world, the Engliſh men are moſt deſirous to try their quarrels by dint of ſword.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 Our Chronicles report that the Duke turned on the Kings ſide at Couentrie before the Kings comming to London: and they vary alſo in other circumſtances from our author.
                  
                  2 Our hiſtories report otherwiſe of King Henries death, for he was ſlain in the Tower, and not ſo ſoone after the battell.
                  
                  3 Our Chronicles report that the Duke of Sommer ſet was at Barnet field with the Earle of VVarvvicke, and repaired afterward to the Queene, and was taken in the ſecond battell, and then be he aded.
                  
                  4 Our histories write that the Prince was not ſlaine in the battell but ſoone after, hauing had communication with King Edward.
               
            
            
               How the wars reuiued betweene King Lewis and Charles Duke of Burgundy, by the ſollicitation of the Dukes of Guienne and Britaine. Chap. 8.
               
                  I Wil now return to our affairs on this ſide the ſea, wherof I haue made no mention ſince the Duke of Burgundies departure from before Amiens, the Kings returne into the country of Touraine, and the Duke of Guienne his brother into Guienne. The ſaide Duke of Guienne continued ſtill his ſute aboue mentioned for his mariage with the Duke of Burgundies daughter, whereunto the ſaid Duke in word euer ſhewed himſelfe willing, but in deede meant nothing leſſe, both bicauſe he purpoſed to vſe hir as an inſtrument whereby to entertaine all the world, and a marchandiſe to put euery man in hope of, and alſo for that he ſtomacked the euill practiſes they had contriued to conſtraine him to this mariage perforce. The Earle of Saint Paul Conſtable of Fraunce buſied himſelfe in this treaty very earneſtly, deſiring that the mariage might ſeeme to be effected by his onely meanes and procurement. On the other ſide the Duke of Britaine traueled therein, to the end the whole honor thereof might redound to him. The King was as buſie as the beſt to breake it off, though needleſly, as well for the two reaſons aboue alleaged, as alſo bicauſe the Duke of Burgundy was not deſirous of ſo great a ſonne in lawe, wherefore in vaine the King troubled himſelfe, but he could not ſee another mans thoughts. And ſure he had iuſt cauſe of feare, for if this mariage had taken effect, his brother ſhould haue beene ſo mighty, that he and the Duke of Britaine ioined togither, might haue put the Kings eſtate and his childrens in great danger. In the meane time about theſe affaires many ambaſſadors paſſed to and fro as well ſecretly as openly.
               This often paſſing to and fro of ambaſſadors is a thing very dangerous: for vnder colour thereof many times euill practiſes are ſet abroch: yet notwithſtanding ambaſſadors muſt of force both be ſent and receiued. They that ſhall reade this hiſtorie will aske peraduenture what remedie I can deuiſe againſt this inconuenience, bicauſe it ſeemeth almoſt remedileſſe. For anſwere whereunto I will ſhew mine aduiſe, notwithſtanding that I know a number far better able to diſcourſe heerof than my ſelfe. Ambaſſadors that come from perfect friends, with whom no occaſion of quarrell can ariſe, muſt be well intertained, and permitted to come often to the Princes preſence,

I meane if the Prince be wiſe and of comely perſonage, otherwiſe the leſſe he be ſeene the better. Notwithſtanding when he muſt of neceſſitie be ſeene, let him be well apparelled, and well inſtructed what to ſay, and vſe ſhort ſpeech according to Princes amitie, which vſually is but ſhort. But if ambaſſadors be ſent openly or ſecretly betweene Princes that are in continuall hatred and war, as all thoſe haue been that I haue knowen or been conuerſant with in my time, ſure there is great danger therein. Notwithſtanding mine aduiſe is, that ambaſſadors be well intertained and honorably receiued: for to ſend to meete them, to lodge them well, to appoint truſty and wiſe men to accompanie them, are not onely points of great curteſie, but alſo of great ſafetie. For thereby you ſhal both vnderſtand who they are that reſort to them, and alſo ſtay ſuch as be light headed and diſcontented with the preſent eſtate, from bringing them intelligence: for there is no Princes court wherein all haue contented mindes. Further, they muſt haue ſpeedie audience, and ſoone be diſpatched. For me thinke it a perilous matter for a man to harbor his enimie in his houſe, but to defray them, to lodge them well, and to giue them preſents is but curteſie. Further, in time of open war no practiſe nor ouerture of peace muſt be altogither broken off (bicauſe peraduenture the leſt of them may ſerue vs to good purpoſe) but all muſt be continued and intertained, and all ambaſſadors heard, vſing them as before is ſaid, and appointing ſure watch to eſpie who go to beare them intelligence, and are ſent to them either by day or night: but this muſt be done as ſecretly as may be. Further, for one ambaſſador they ſend to you, ſend you two to them: and though they be wearie of your ambaſſadors, and forbid any more to come: yet ſend ſtill when time & occaſion ſerueth. For no ſpie ſhall haue ſuch libertie to inquire and vnderſtand of all matters as they. And if you ſend two or three togither, it is impoſſible for your enimy to haue ſo good watch (I meane vſing them with good termes as ambaſſadors are to be vſed) but that ſome of them ſhall haue conference and intelligence with one or other. Laſtly, a wiſe Prince muſt alwaies endeuor himſelfe to haue ſome ſecret friend or friends about his enimie, and beware as neere as he may (for in ſuch caſes men cannot alway do as they would) that his enimie haue not the like about him. You will ſay peraduenture that by ſuch often ſending I ſhall increaſe mine enimies inſolencie and pride. But I force not thereof: for by this meanes I ſhall vnderſtand his ſecrets, and in the end all the profit and honor ſhall redound to me. And notwithſtanding that mine enimy may deale with me after the ſame ſort, yet wold I not ceaſe from ſending, but intertaine all ouertures and breake off none, to the end I may alwaies haue occaſion to ſend. For all men haue not like wiſedome, like cunning, nor like experience in theſe affaires, neither like occaſion to trauell for experience, and in theſe caſes the wiſeſt win the garland: whereof I will giue you a manifeſt example. In all treaties of peace concluded betweene the Engliſh and French nations, the French haue alwaies ſhewed more finenes, ſubtiltie, and cunning than the Engliſh, ſo far foorth that the ſaid Engliſh men haue a common prouerbe, as once they told me, when I treated with them: that in all battels fought with the French, euer or for the moſt part they haue obtained honor and victorie, but in all treaties that haue been concluded betweene them they haue euer receiued loſſe and dammage. And ſure in mine opinion I haue knowen in this realme (eſpecially of King Lewis his training vp) men as ſufficient to negotiate in a treatie of peace as any in the world. For thoſe that are imploied in theſe affaires muſt be milde men, and ſuch as can beare patiently all rude words to compas their purpoſes for their Maſters profit, and ſuch onely would King Lewis imploy. I haue beene ſomwhat long in diſcourſing how ambaſſadors actions muſt diligently be obſerued, but not without cauſe: for I haue ſeen

and knowen ſo great falſhood and treacherie vſed vnder colour thereof, that I could no ſooner end my diſcourſe.
               This mariage between the Duke of Guienne and the Duke of Burgundies daughter was ſo earneſtly laboured, that in the end ſome promiſe was made therof both by mouth and letter. But I haue knowen the like done to Nicholas Duke of Calabria and Loraine 
                     1
                   ſonne to Iohn Duke of Calabria ſo often aboue mentioned, and to Philibert Duke of Sauoy that laſt died, and to Maximilian Duke of Auſtrich now King of Romans onely ſonne of Frederike the Emperor, who alſo receiued a letter written with the damſels owne hand by hir fathers commandement, and a diamond therewith. All which promiſes were made in leſſe than three yeeres ſpace: yet am I well aſſured that during the Dukes life, none of them ſhould haue been accompliſhed, at the leaſt with his conſent. But this letter aboue mentioned furthered much Duke Maximilians ſute, as heereafter you ſhall heare. I write not this to charge thereby the Duke of Burgundie, or any of thoſe aboue mentioned, but onely to rehearſe the courſe of theſe affaires. Further, I perſwade my ſelfe that rude and ſimple men will not buſie their braines about the reading of this hiſtorie: but Princes and Courtiers ſhall finde in it good leſſons and aduertiſements in mine opinion. During this treatie of marriage diuers newe enterpriſes againſt the King were in communication. With the Duke of Burgundie was the Lord of Vrfé, Poncet of Riuiere, and certaine other meane perſonages that ran to and fro, for the D. of Guiennes affaires. In like maner the Abbot of Begarde afterward Biſhop of Leon was reſident with him, for the Duke of Britaine. Theſe aduertiſed the Duke of Burgundy that the King practiſed to corrupt the Duke of Guiens ſeruants, and to withdraw them from him, partly by loue, partly by force: adding alſo that he had already razed a certaine place belonging to the Lord of Eſtiſſac, the Duke of Guiennes ſeruant, and had begun diuers other attempts againſt his brother, ſo far foorth, that he had withdrawne from him certaine of his houſhold ſeruants: whereby appeered manifeſtly (as they ſaid) that he ment to take Guienne from him now as in times paſt he had done Normandy once granted him for his partage as before is mentioned. The Duke of Burgundy ſent diuers ambaſſadors to the King about theſe affaires, who euer excuſed himſelfe 
                     2
                  , and accuſed his brother, ſaying that for his part he minded not to touch his brothers partage: but that his brother by ſeeking to inlarge his limits, was author of all theſe troubles.
               We haue heer to conſider how troubleſom, dangerous, and far from all good end the affaires of this Realme are, when it is in diſcord and ciuill diſſention: for notwithſtanding that at the beginning of the troubles all men hope ſhortely to ſee them at an end: yet is the contrary greatly to be feared, for though the fire be kindled at the firſt, but betweene two or three Princes or men of meaner eſtate: yet before two yeeres be exſpired, all our neighbours ſhall be bidden to the banquet, as plainly may appeere by this that followeth. At this very inſtant that I now write of, the D. of Guienne at the leaſt his ſeruants, and the D. of Britaine deſired the Duke of Burgundy in no wiſe to call the Engliſhmen to his aide: for ſeeing all that they did was for the good and benefite of the realme, they would not bring the ancient enimies of the crowne into the realme: adding farther that if he would be in a readines they ſhould be ſtrong ynough of themſelues, aſwell bicauſe of their great forces as alſo of the good intelligence they had in the realme with diuers Captaines and others. And once it was my chance to be preſent when the Lord of Vrfé had communication with the Duke to this effect, and withall preſſed him earneſtly with all ſpeede to leauy his army. The Duke ſtoode at a window and called me to

him and ſaid: Heere is my Lord of Vrfé that preſſeth me earneſtly to leauy the greateſt force that poſſible I may, alleaging that it ſhall be greatly for the benefite of the realme: what thinke you of this motion if I enter into the realme with my army, ſhall I do any great good there? I anſwered him merily that I thought no: then ſaid he: I loue the realme of Fraunce better than my Lord of Vrfé weeneth, for where it hath one King I would it had ſix.
               During the treaty of mariage aboue mentioned, Edward King of England who thought verily that the mariage ſhould haue bin accompliſhed: (wherein he was deceiued, as was alſo the King) traueled earneſtly with the Duke of Burgundy to breake it off, alleaging that the K. had no iſſue male, wherfore if he hapned to die the crown ſhould deſcend to his brother, whereby (if this marriage tooke effect) the realme of England ſhuld ſtand in great danger, ſo many ſeigniories being vnited to the crown. This matter troubled maruellouſly though needleſly, not onely the King of England, but alſo his whole Councell in ſuch ſort, that they would giue no credite to the Duke of Burgundy, what promiſe ſoeuer he made to the contrary. The ſaide Duke notwithſtanding the requeſt aboue mentioned made vnto him by the Dukes of Guienne and Britaine, for not calling in ſtrangers to his aide, was very deſirous that the King of England ſhould inuade ſome part of the realme, and himſelfe would haue pleaded ignorance therein. But the Engliſhmen would not be woon therunto: for they ſo much feared the annexing of the houſe of Burgundy by this mariage to the crown of Fraunce, that they would at that time rather haue aided the King, than inuaded him. You ſee heere all theſe Princes throughly buſied and accompanied with a number of wiſe men, who (as the ſequele well declared) foreſawe a far of more by the one halfe than in their life time tooke effect: for they all through this continuall toile and trauell, in ſhort ſpace one after another ended their liues, each man reioicing at others death as of a thing moſt deſired. Soone after alſo followed their maſters, leauing their ſucceſſors troubles enow, all ſaue the King our maſter who left his realme to his ſonne, quiet both from foraine wars and ciuill diſſention, ſo that he did more for him than euer he either would or could do for himſelfe: for I neuer knew him in peace ſaue onely a litle before his death.
               The Duke of Guienne at this preſent lay ſicke and in danger of death as ſom ſaid, but others affirmed the contrary: his men preſſed earneſtly the Duke of Burgundy to put himſelfe into the field, bicauſe the time of the yeere ſerued fitly for that purpoſe, and aduertiſed him that the Kings army was abroad, and lay at Saint Iohn d' Angelie, or at Xainctes, or thereabout. To be ſhort, they labored the Duke ſo importunately, that he went to Arras, and there aſſembled his forces, and marched towards the townes of Peronne, Roye, and Montdidier: his army was maruellous great, yea the greateſt that euer he had before: for in it were twelue hundred Launces of his ordinary retinue, euery one of them accompanied with three archers well armed and well mounted: farther in euery company of theſe Launces were ten men of armes for a ſupply, beſides the lieutenant and enſine bearer. The gentlemen of the Dukes dominions were likewiſe in very good order: for they were very well paid and led by valiant knights and eſquires. And ſure at that time theſe countries were maruellous rich.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Nicolas is named in other hiſtories Marques du Pount.
                  2 The King made war vpon his brother bicauſe he had reſtored the Earle of Armignac to all his poſſeſsions in Guienne, whom the King before had baniſhed. Annal. Aquit.
               
            
            
               
               How the finall peace treated of betweene the Duke of Burgundie and the King brake off bicauſe of the Duke of Guiens death, and how theſe two great Princes ſought to deceiue each other. Chap. 9.
               
                  WHile the Duke was leuying his armie aboue mentioned, the Lord of Cran and the Chauncellor of Fraunce named Maſter Peter Doriole, came to him twiſe or thriſe from the King, and ſecretly treated with him of a final peace, which heertofore could neuer be concluded, bicauſe the Duke required the reſtitution of Amiens and Saint Quintine, whereunto the King would neuer condiſcend: but now partly bicauſe of the great preparation he ſaw made againſt him, and partly in hope to compas certaine purpoſes whereof heerafter you ſhall heare, he agreed to yeeld them. The conditions of this peace were, that the King ſhould reſtore to the Duke Amiens and Saint Quintine, and whatſoeuer elſe was in controuerſie betweene them. That he ſhould abandon the Earles of Neuers and Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce, and permit the Duke to do with them and all their poſſeſſions at his pleaſure, and ſeize them into his own hands if he could. That the Duke in like maner ſhould abandon the Dukes of Guienne and Britaine, and permit the King to do with them and their ſeigniories at his pleaſure. I was preſent when the Duke of Burgundie ſware this treatie, and likewiſe the Lord of Cran, and the Chauncellor of Fraunce in the Kings name, who alſo at their departure from the Duke aduiſed him not to diſmiſſe his armie, but to march ſtill forward, to the end the King their Maſter might make the ſpeedier deliuerie of the two places aboue named. Further Simon of Quinchy was ſent with them to ſee the King ſweare and confirme this treaty, which his ambaſſadors had concluded: but the King delaied the confirmation a certaine ſpace, and in the meane time happened his brothers death.
               The D. being readie to depart from Arras receiued two ſeuerall aduertiſements: one that Nicholas Duke of Calabria and Loraine, heire of the houſe of Aniou, and ſonne to Iohn Duke of Calabria was comming to him about his daughters marriage, whom the Duke honorably receiued, and put in great hope of his ſute. But the next day being the 15. of May 1472. (as I remember) came letters from Simon of Quinchy the Dukes ambaſſador to the King, wherein he aduertiſed his Maſter of the Duke of Guiennes death, and that the K. had alreadie recouered a great part of his countrie. The like aduertiſements receiued he alſo incontinent from others, but reporting diuerſly of the ſaid Dukes death. Soone after returned Simon of Quinchy from the King with a cold anſwer: for he refuſed to ſweare the treatie, which the Duke tooke very diſdainfully as a matter tending to his contempt and diſhonor. His men alſo in time of war as well for this as other cauſes ſpake very villanous and opprobrious words of the King, and I warrant you the French requited them with the like. The Duke of Burgundie being almoſt out of his wits bicauſe of theſe newes, by the perſwaſion of certaine no leſſe ſorie for this accident than himſelfe, writ letters to diuers townes of the realme, charging the King with his brothers death, but little it auailed, for no man ſtirred 
                     1
                  . Notwithſtanding if the Duke of Guienne had liued, vndoubtedly the King ſhould haue had ynough to do: for the Britons were in a readines to

inuade him, hauing greater intelligences in the realme than euer before: all the which failed by the Dukes death.
               The Duke of Burgundy in this fury put himſelfe into the field, and marched towards Neſle in Vermandois, making foule and cruell war, contrary to his accuſtomed maner: for he ſpoiled and burned all the countrey as he paſſed. His vaward marched before him, and beſieged the ſaid towne of Neſle being of no force: but the Duke himſelfe lodged three leagues from it. Within the towne were certaine franke archers that ſlew a herald of the Dukes comming to ſummon them. Further, their captaine came foorth to parle vnder ſurety, thinking to bring the matter to compoſition but could not, and as he returned into the towne (the truce yet continuing bicauſe of his ſaly) they within the towne (notwithſtanding that themſelues ſtood open vpon the wall no man ſeeking to hurt them) ſlew yet two other of the Dukes men, wherfore the truce was diſauowed, & word ſent to the Lady of Neſle being within the towne, to come foorth with all hir houſehold & ſtuffe, which ſhe did accordingly: and immediately after, the place was aſſaulted and taken, and the greateſt part of them that were within it ſlaine: all that were taken aliue were hanged, ſaue a few whom the ſoldiers for very pity let go, a number alſo had their hands cut off. It lotheth me to make mention of this cruelty: but bicauſe I was preſent, ſomewhat I am forced to write therof. And ſure either the Duke was maruellouſly paſſioned, in that he committed ſo cruell an act, or ſome great cauſed mooued him thereunto. He alleaged two, the one the Duke of Guiennes death, wherof he ſpake very ſtrangely vpon other mens report: the other the griefe he had conceiued for the loſſe of Amiens and Saint Quintin aboue rehearſed.
               Some that ſhall read this that foloweth, will thinke happily that there was ſmall faith in theſe two Princes, or that I miſreport them: I would be loth to miſreport either of them. And to the King our Maſter, how much I am bound all the world knoweth. But to continue my hiſtory (right reuerend father in God) in ſuch ſort as you haue required, I am forced to vtter that I know howſoeuer it paſſed. And I doubt not but theſe two, being compared with other Princes, ſhall ſeeme noble, woorthy, and honorable, and the King our Maſter wiſe aboue all the reſt, who left his realme enlarged and in peace with all his enimies. Wherefore let vs now conſider whether of theſe two Princes ſought to deceiue the other, to the end that if heereafter this hiſtory happen to fall into the hands of ſome yoong Prince that hath to negotiate in ſuch like affaires, he may by reading thereof be the better inſtructed how to looke to himſelfe. For notwithſtanding that neither Princes nor enimies be alwaies alike, nor deale alike, in like affaires: yet is it good to know the hiſtories of times paſt. To ſpeake therefore vprightly, I thinke both theſe Princes were fully bent each to deceiue other, and tended both to one end, as you ſhall heare. Both of them had their armies abroad in a readines. The King had already taken diuers places, and during the treaty made ſharpe war vpon his brother, whom the Lords of Courton, Patris, Foucart and diuers others had already relinquiſhed, & were receiued into the Kings ſeruice. Further, his army lay about Rochell, hauing great intelligence in the towne, for the citizens practiſed continually, as well bicauſe of the rumor of this treaty, as alſo bicauſe of the Dukes ſicknes. And I thinke the Kings reſolution was, if he could atchieue his enterpriſe there, or his brother hapned to die, not to ſweare the treaty: but if he found great reſiſtance, to ſweare it, and performe his promiſe, thereby to auoid all danger. And ſure he loſt no time, but vſed great diligence, delaying alſo very cunningly Simon of Quingy the ſpace of eight daies, during the which delay, his brother died: further, he knew well the Duke of Burgundy ſo greatly to deſire the

reſtitution of theſe two townes aboue named, that he durſt not flatly fall out with him. Wherefore he meant to delay him, and feed him foorth with faire words fifteen or twenty daies (as he did accordingly) to ſee in the meane time what would happen. Now that I haue ſpoken of the King, and ſhewed how he was purpoſed to deale with the Duke, it is fit I ſhould alſo declare how the Duke was minded towards him, and thought to delude him, had not the Duke of Guiennes death happened. Simon of Quinchy by the Kings requeſt had a commiſſion from the Duke his Maſter, commanding him immediately after the treatie ſworne, and writings deliuered for the confirmation thereof, to go into Britaine to informe the Duke of Britaine of the conditions of the peace, and in like maner the Duke of Guiennes ambaſſadors reſident in Britaine, to the end they might aduertiſe their Maſter thereof at Bordeaux: whereby the King meant to put the Britons into the greater feare, when they ſhould ſee themſelues abandoned of him that was their chiefe anchor hold.
               Now you ſhall vnderſtand that Simon of Quinchy had in his company a rider of the Dukes Eſcuirie called Henry a Pariſian borne, a wiſe fellow and of good experience: who had a letter of credit to the ſaid Simon written with the Dukes owne hand, but his commiſſion was not to deliuer it till the ſaid Simons departure from the King, and his arriuall to the Duke of Britaine at Nantes, where his charge was to deliuer him the letter and this meſſage withall. That he ſhould will the Duke of Britaine not to thinke that his Maſter would abandon the Duke of Guienne and him, for he would ſuccour them both with body and goods, and that he had concluded this treatie to none other end but to auoid war, and recouer the townes of Saint Quintine and Amiens: which the King in time of peace contrary to his promiſe had taken from him. And further to aduertiſe the ſaid Duke, that the Duke his Maſter would ſend an honorable ambaſſage to the King (ſo ſoone as he ſhould be ſeized of that he demanded) humbly to beſeech him to end this war, and relinquiſh his enterpriſe againſt the ſaid two Dukes, and not to giue credite to the oth he had ſworne, which he was no more determined to obſerue, than the King had obſerued the treaty 
                     •
                  ade before Paris called the treatie of Conflans: and the treatie which he had ſworne at Peronne, and long after confirmed alſo. Further deſiring him to call to remembrance, that he tooke theſe townes againſt his faith and promiſe in time of peace: wherefore he muſt hold himſelfe contented if he recouered them after the ſame ſort. And as touching the Earle of Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce, and the Earle of Neuers whom the King had permitted him to vſe at his pleaſure, he would proteſt, that notwithſtanding he hated them as he had iuſt cauſe to do: yet would he forgiue all their offences, and let them liue in quiet, deſiring the King to grant theſe two Dukes the like: and that it would pleaſe him to ſuffer all men to liue in peace and ſafetie, in ſuch maner and forme as he had ſworne at Conflans, when they were all there aſſembled togither: which if he refuſed to do, he would then ſuccour his confederates. And it was determined that the Duke ſhould be in campe when this ambaſſage ſhould be ſent to the King. But God diſpoſed otherwiſe of theſe purpoſes: for death which departeth all things, and changeth all determinations, ſet them otherwiſe a worke, as partly you haue vnderſtood already, and ſhall heerafter perceiue more at large: for the King reſtored not theſe two townes, and yet had the Duchie of Guienne by his brothers death, as reaſon was.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Duke of Guienne died the 12. of May, but Meyer ſaith the 24. Annal. Aquit. the 11. Of his death reade Annal. Burgund. lib. 3. fol. 946. Meyer. lib. 17. fol. 353. writeth

thus of it. Rex fratri venenum miſcet per Iordanum Abbatem, Diui Ioannis beenedictini nominis: where reade alſo what Thomas Baſinus Biſhop of Liſieux writeth of the Dukes death, who compareth King Lewis to Cain, Atreus, Thieſtes, Polinices, and Eteocles. Hollandiae ſcriptor ſaith thus: Rex ille, inquit idem, fecit quod Cain, qui vnicum fratrem ſuum Abel interfecit. Dedit enim Rex mortiferū Carolo fratri venenum, quo nō ſtatim extinctus eſt, ſed menſibus aliquot miſerabiliter afflictus. Gaguin a French hiſtoriographer ſaith thus: The King was aduertiſed of his brother D. Charles his death, who died at Bordeaux poiſoned by a certaine Abbot, but not without the Kings conſent as the report went. Annal. Aquit. written by a French man ſeeme to make King Lewis acceſſorie to his brothers death. The Duke was poiſoned as he ſat at the table with the Lady of Mount ſoreau whom he entertained, and who was alſo poiſoned with him. The King commanded the Abbots proceſſe to ceaſe, and the rest which were ſuſpected: whereby he plainly bewraied his owne guiltie conſcience.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Duke of Burgundy ſeeing that he could not take Beauuais, before the which he had laid his ſiege, went to Roan. Chap. 10.
               
                  NOw to returne to the war, you haue heard how certaine poore franke archers were handled at the taking of Neſle: thence the D. departed and went before Roye: within the which were 1500. franke archers and certaine men of armes of the Arriereban. The Dukes force was neuer ſo great as at that preſent. The next day after his arriuall, theſe franke archers fearing their liues, leapt downe the wals and yeelded themſelues to him: and the third day they that yet remained within rendered themſelues and the towne by compoſition, leauing behinde them both horſe and harneſſe, ſaue that euery man of armes brought foorth a trauelling nag. The Duke left men in the towne and went to Mondidier which he began to raze, meaning vtterly to deſtroy it & lay it deſolate, but bicauſe of the good wil he perceiued the people of thoſe parts 
                     1
                   to beare him, he cauſed it to be repaired, and left a garriſon in it. From thence he departed, meaning to march ſtraight into Normandie: but as he paſſed hard by Beauuais the L. of Cordes who led his vaward, rode to the towne, and at his firſt arriuall the ſuburbs before the Biſhops palace were taken by a couetous Burgundian named Maſter Iames of Montmartin: who had vnder his charge one hundred launces, and three hundred archers of the Dukes ordinarie retinue. The Lord of Cordes ſcaled the towne on the other ſide, but he lacked ladders, and thoſe few he had were too ſhort. He had two canons which ſhot twiſe at the towne gate, and brake downe a peece thereof: and if he had been furniſhed to haue continued the ſhot, vndoubtedly he had entred the towne, but he was vnprouided, bicauſe he came not for any ſuch exploite. At his firſt arriuall none were in the towne but the citizens themſelues, and the captaine of the towne called Loyſet of Bailligny, with certaine ſoldiers of the Arriereban, but not ynow to defend the place. Notwithſtanding it pleaſed God miraculouſly to preſerue it as he manifeſtly declared. For the Burgundians that were with the Lord of Cordes fought hand to hand with the French at the breach made in the gate: whereupon the ſaid Lord of Cordes ſent word diuers times to the Duke of Burgundie to make haſte thither, aſſuring him that the towne was his owne. But

in the meane time while the Duke was vpon the way, one within deuiſed to throwe flaming fagots in their faces that were about to breake downe the gate: whereof they threw ſo great plentie, that the gate and the porch tooke fire in ſuch ſort, that the Burgundians were forced to retire till the fire ceaſed. Soone after arriued the Duke himſelfe, who in like maner held the towne as taken, the fire being once quenched which was very great, for all the porch was on fire. And vndoubtedly if he had lodged part of his army on the other ſide of the towne towards Paris, no man could haue entred to releeue it. But it pleaſed God he ſhould make doubt where none was: for bicauſe of a little brooke that was to paſſe he made difficultie ſo to do then, and yet afterward when a great number of men were entred the towne he would haue done it, and was hardly diſſwaded from it: notwithſtanding that thereby he ſhould then haue endangered his whole army. All this happened the eight & twentith of Iune in the yeere 1472. The fire aboue mentioned continued all day, and in the euening ten launces onely of the Kings ordinarie retinue entred the towne, as I was afterward informed: for I ſerued yet the Duke of Burgundie, but we ſaw them not enter, both bicauſe euery man was buſied in making his lodging: and alſo bicauſe we had no force on that ſide the towne. By breake of day the Dukes battterie was bent againſt the wals: but ſoone after we ſaw two hundred men of armes enter the towne: and had it not beene for their comming, I thinke the citizens would haue treated of a compoſition: which notwithſtanding the Duke in this fury would neuer haue granted: for he deſired to take the towne by aſſault, and if he had ſo done, vndoubtedly he would haue burnt it, which had been great pitie: ſure it was preſerued by very miracle. After theſe men of armes were entred, the Dukes artillerie ſhot continually the ſpace of fifteen daies, and the place was as well beaten as euer was any, in ſuch ſort that the breach was ſaultable: but the ditch of the one ſide of the burned gate ſtood full of water, ſo that we were forced to build a bridge ouer it: but on the other ſide we might come hard to the wals without any danger, ſaue of one flanker which was ſo low that our artillerie could not beat it.
               It is great danger and folly to aſſault a towne ſo well defended as this was: for within it was the Conſtable 
                     2
                   (as I remember) or lay by it, I wot not wel whether, the Marſhall Ioachin, the Marſhall of Loheac, the Lord of Cruſſoll, VVilliam of Valleu, Mery of Croy, Sallezarde, Theuenot of Vignoles, being all ancient captaines, accompanied with an hundred men of armes of the Kings ordinary retinue: beſides a great number of footemen and others that were come thither with them. Yet the Duke contrary to the opinion of his whole army, determined to giue the aſſault. And the night before, as he lay on his field bed in his clothes, according to his accuſtomed maner, he asked certaine there preſent, whether they thought the town would abide the aſſault: who anſwered that they thought yea, ſeeing they were force ſufficient to defend it: at the which anſwer he ſcoffed, ſaying that they ſhould not finde a man there the next day. In the morning by breake of day the aſſault was giuen very couragiouſly, and the breach no leſſe valiantly defended. A great number went thronging on our new made bridge in ſuch ſort, that an ancient knight of Burgundy called Deſpiris was ſmothered there, who was the beſt man that died before the towne. On the other ſide of the gate certaine of our men got vp to the top of the wall, but ſome of them neuer returned. They fought hand to hand a great while, and the aſſault continued ſo long, that freſh bands were appointed to ſucceede, the firſt being wearied: but bicauſe the Duke ſaw his men to labor in vaine, he cauſed them to retire: yet notwithſtanding they within ſalied not, for they ſaw company ynough ready to receiue them. At this aſſault were ſlaine twelue hundred ſoldiers 
                     3
                  , and

the beſt man that died there was the aboue named Deſpiris. It was thought at the firſt that many more had been loſt: for aboue a thouſand were hurt. The next night they within ſalied foorth, but bicauſe their number was ſmall, and the moſt of them on horſebacke, and therby encombred with the cords of our tents, they did no great exploit, but loſt two or three gentlemen of their company, and hurt one of ours named Maſter Iames d'Orſon, a very honeſt gentleman, and maſter of the Dukes Ordinance, who a few daies after died of the ſaid hurt.
               Seauen or eight daies after this aſſault, the Duke would haue diuided his army into two bands, and lodged part thereof at the gate towards Paris, contrary to all mens aduiſe and to all reaſon, conſidering the great number of ſoldiers within the town. This ſhould haue been done at the beginning, but now it was too late. Wherfore ſeeing no remedy, he raiſed his campe in very good order 
                     4
                  , hoping that they within would iſſue forth to the skirmiſh, which notwithſtanding they did not. From thence he marched into Normandy, bicauſe he had promiſed the Duke of Britaine to come as far as Roan, where the ſaid Duke of Britaine had promiſed in like maner to meete him. But bicauſe of the Duke of Guiennes death, he altered his minde, and ſtirred not out of his country. The Duke of Burgundy came before Eu, which was yeelded vnto him, as was alſo Saint Valery, and he burnt all this quarter euen hard to Diepe. He tooke likewiſe Neuf-chaſtell, and burnt both it and all the country of Caux, or the greateſt part, euen hard to Roan gates: further, he preſented himſelfe in perſon before the ſaid towne of Roan: he loſt many of his foragers, whereby his army was in great diſtreſſe of victuals. In the end bicauſe winter approched he departed homeward, and his backe was no ſooner turned, but the French recouered Eu and Saint Valery, and tooke priſoners by compoſition ſeauen or eight Burgundians that were within them.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The French hath Chastellenies, which were places where certaine courts of the inferior iuriſdiction vvere held, to the which the countrey there about was bound to repaire.
                  
                  2 Annal. Franc. report that the Constable lay hard by the tovvne, but mooued not to defend it, for the vvhich cauſe it vvas thought he had intelligence vvith the Duke.
                  
                  3 Gaguin ſaith, that there vvere ſlaine at the aſſault of Beauuais 1500. men.
                  
                  4 The Duke lay before Beauuais ſixe and tvventy daies, and leuied his ſiege the 22. of Iuly. Meyer.
               
            
            
               How the King made peace with the Duke of Britaine, and truce with the Duke of Burgundy, and how the Earle of Saint Paul eſcaped for that time a conſpiracy that theſe two Princes made againſt him. Chap. 11.
               
                  ABout this time I came to the Kings ſeruice in the yeere 1472. who receiued alſo the ſelfeſame yeere, the greateſt part of his brother the Duke of Guienne his ſeruants. He lay then at Pont de See, making war vpon the Duke of Britaine: whither certaine ambaſſadors came to him out of Britaine, and from whence alſo he ſent his ambaſſadors thither. Among the reſt that came to him to the ſaid towne of Pont de See, were Philip of Eſſars,

ſeruant to the Duke, and VVilliam of Souſplenuille ſeruant to the Lord of Leſcute, the which Lord of Leſcute ſeeing his Maſter the Duke of Guienne at the point of death, tooke ſea at Bordeaux and departed into Britaine, fearing to fall into the Kings hands: he embarked in time, and carried away with him the Duke of Guiennes Confeſſor 
                     1
                  , and a rider of his ſtable, who were charged with the Dukes death, and remained priſoners in Britaine many yeeres after. When theſe runnings to and fro had indured a while, the King in the end determined to haue peace with the Duke of Britaine, and to deale ſo liberally with the Lord of Leſcute that he would thereby aſſwage the euil wil he bare him, and win him to his ſeruice. For as he knew the Duke of Britaines forces, being gouerned by ſo woorthy a man, greatly to be feared: ſo was he aſſured if he could win the Lord of Leſcute to his ſeruice, that the Britons would labor for peace, bicauſe he was their onely man of wiſdome and experience in the countrey: beſides that, generally the Britaines deſire nothing more than peace with Fraunce: bicauſe continually a great number of them haue good entertainment, and be in good eſtimation in this realme, & not vnwoorthily: for ſure in times paſt they haue done great ſeruice heere. Wherefore me thinke the King did very wiſely in concluding this treaty, notwithſtanding that ſome not conſidering ſo deepely thereof as himſelfe did, thought otherwiſe of it. He had a very good opinion of the Lord of Leſcute, & knew there was no danger in putting thoſe offices and places of charge that he did into his hands, bicauſe he was a man of honor, & would neuer during theſe diuiſions haue any intelligence with the Engliſh men, nor conſent that the townes in Normandie 
                     2
                   ſhould be yeelded to them, but had beene the onely ſtay thereof, which was the cauſe of all his preferment. When the King had well debated this matter, he commanded Souſplenuille to put in writing all that his Maſter required, as well for the Duke as himſelfe: which done, the King granted him all his demands being theſe: A penſion of 80000. franks for the Duke: for his maſter the Lord of Leſcute a penſion of 6000. franks, the gouernment of Guienne, the two Seneſchalſhips of Launes and Bordelois, the captainſhip of one of the caſtels of Bordeaux, the captainſhip of Blaye, and of the two caſtels of Bayonne, of Dax, and of Saint Seuer, 24000. crownes in ready mony, the Kings order, and the Earldome of Comminges. All the which the King granted and agreed vnto, ſaue that the Dukes penſion was diminiſhed by the one halfe, and continued but two yeeres. Further, the King gaue the ſaid Souſplenuille 6000. crownes (which with the other 24. thouſand giuen to his Maſter were to be paid in fower yeeres) a penſion of 1200. franks, the Mayraltie of Bayonne, the Bailywick of Montargis, and certaine other ſmall offices in Guienne. All the which aboue rehearſed eſtates, his Maſter and he enioied till the Kings death. Philip d'Eſſars likewiſe was made Bailife of Meaux, and lieutenant of the waters and forreſts throughout the realme of Fraunce, and had alſo a penſion granted him of 1200. franks, and 4000. crownes in ready money: all the which offices and eſtates from that day till the King our Maſter his death they quietly enioied, and the Lord of Comminges continued during his life his truſtie and faithfull ſeruant.
               The King hauing pacified all matters in Britaine marched ſtraight toward Picardie: for he and the Duke of Burgundie vſed alwaies when winter approched, to make truce for ſixe moneths, or a yeere, and ſome time more. After the which their woonted maner they made truce at this preſent, which the Chancellor of Burgundie with certaine others came to the King to conclude. There the Kings Commiſſioners read the finall peace made with the Duke of Britaine, whereby the ſaid Duke renounced the league he was entred into with the Engliſh men and the D. of Burgundie: wherfore the King required the Duke of Burgundies ambaſſadors not to comprehend the

Duke of Britaine in the truce as their confederate: whereunto they would not condiſcend, but agreed that the Duke of Britaine ſhould be at his choiſe to declare himſelfe within the time accuſtomed, either the Kings confederate or theirs: alleaging that heertofore alſo the ſaid Duke had abandoned them by writing, yet had not departed from their friendſhip. Further adding, that though he were a Prince wholy led and gouerned by others, and doing little of himſelfe: yet in the end he euer yeelded to that which was beſt and moſt neceſſary for his eſtate. All this was done in the yeere 1473.
               During this treatie they murmured on both ſides againſt the Earle of Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce: for the King and thoſe that were neereſt about him had conceiued maruellous hatred againſt him. And the Duke of Burgundy hated him woorſe than they, as he had iuſt cauſe to do: for I know the reaſons that mooued them both to beare him ill will. The Duke had not yet forgotten that he was the onely occaſion of the loſſe of Amiens and Saint Quintin, and perceiued well that he nouriſhed this war betweene the King and him. For in time of truce he ſpake him as faire as was poſſible, but ſo ſoone as the war opened, he ſhewed himſelfe his mortall foe. Further, the Earle had ſought to conſtraine him by force to marrie his daughter to the Duke of Guienne, as before 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ue heard. Beſides all this there was yet another grudge: for while the Duke lay before Amiens, the Conſtable made a road into Henault, and among other cruell exploits burned the caſtell of Seure, belonging to a Knight named Maſter Baudouin of Launay: before the which time they vſed on neither ſide to fire any place. But in reuenge thereof the Duke this laſt ſommer burned the countrie all the way his armie paſſed, as before you haue heard. Thus they began to practiſe the Conſtables deſtruction: for the accompliſhment whereof diuers of the Kings men conferred with ſuch of the Dukes ſeruants as they knew to be his mortall enimies: for the French had him in as great iealouſie as the Duke of Burgundie had, and accuſed him as the onely occaſion of the war: wherefore all his treaties and practiſes with both parties were ripped vp and diſcouered, and they both ſought his death.
               Some man may peraduenture aske heerafter, if the King alone were not of power ſufficient to put him to death: whereunto I anſwer that he was not. For his lands lay iuſt in the middeſt betweene the King and the Duke: further, he held Saint Quintin a great and ſtrong towne in Vermandois, and of his owne Han, Bohain, and other very ſtrong places neere to the ſaid Saint Quintin, the which he might man at all times with any nation at his owne pleaſure. He had charge vnder the King of fower hundred men of armes well paied, of the which companie himſelfe was controller and tooke the muſter, which was no ſmall profit to him: for his companies were not complete. Beſides all this he had a yeerely penſion of 45000. franks, and of euerie tunne of wine that paſſed through his countrie into Flaunders or Henault, he receiued a crowne for impoſt. He had alſo goodly ſeigniories and poſſeſſions of his owne inheritance, and great intelligence as well in Fraunce as in the Dukes dominions, where he had many kinsfolks and allies.
               The truce betweene the King and the Duke continued a whole yeere: all the which ſpace this practiſe endured, and the Kings men addreſſed themſelues wholie to the Lord of Hymbercourt (ſo often before named,) who of long time had beene the Conſtables enimy: beſides that, their hatred was lately increaſed. For in an aſſembly held at Roye, where the Conſtable and others were commiſſioners for the King: and the Chancellor of Burgundy and the Lord of Hymbercourt, with diuers others for the Duke: as they conferred togither of their affaires, the Conſtable

gaue the lie very ſhamefully to the ſaid Hymbercourt, who anſwered thereunto, that he would not beare this reproch at his hands, were it not in reſpect of the Kings honor, vnder whoſe ſafe conduct he was come thither as ambaſſador, and of the Duke his Maſter whoſe perſon he repreſented, and to whom he would make report of this iniurie done vnto him. This onely villanie and outrage ſo ſoone done, coſt the Conſtable both lands and life as heereafter ſhall be declared more at large. Wherefore thoſe that are in authority, yea and Princes themſelues ought to take great heed how they iniurie any man by word or deed, and whom they iniurie: for the greater they are, the greater greefe and ſorrowe is conceiued of their words, bicauſe they that are iniuried thinke that the great authority of the perſon that iniurieth them, will cauſe them the more to be marked and noted. And if he be their Maſter or Prince they vtterly diſpaire of benefite or good turne at his hands: and moſt men ſerue rather for the good they hope to haue, than for that they haue already receiued.
               But to returne to the point, the Kings men practiſed continually with Hymbercourt, and likewiſe with the Chancellor, as well bicauſe the words ſpoken at Roye touched him in part, as alſo bicauſe of the neere friendſhip that was between Hymbercourt and him. And the matter was ſo earneſtly preſſed, that an aſſembly was held about it at Bouuines a towne neere to Namur, whither the King ſent the Lord of Courton gouernor of Lymoſin, and Maſter Iohn Heberge afterward Biſhop of Eureux: and the Duke the ſaid Chancellor and Hymbercourt, being the yeere 1474.
               The Conſtable being informed that they practiſed at Bouuines to his coſt, ſent with all ſpeede to both the Princes, aduertiſing them he vnderſtood of all their doings, and ſo cunningly he wrought, that he perſwaded the King that the Duke meant nothing but deceit, onely to allure the ſaid Conſtable to his friendſhip: whereupon with all ſpeed the King ſent to his ambaſſadors at Bouuines, commanding them to conclude nothing againſt the Conſtable for certain reaſons he would declare vnto them, but to prolong the truce according to their inſtructions, for a yeere or ſixe moneths I wot not well whether. But when the meſſenger arriued, he found the treatie already concluded, and the writings ſealed and deliuered the night before. Notwithſtanding the ambaſſadors had ſo good intelligence togither, and were ſo great friends each to other, that they deliuered the writtings backe againe: the contents whereof were, that the Conſtable for the reaſons therein rehearſed, was declared enimie and traitor to both the Princes: who promiſed and ſware each to other, that whether of them could firſt lay hands on him, ſhould either put him to death within eight daies, or deliuer him to the other to do with him at his pleaſure. It was alſo therein concluded, that he ſhould be proclaimed by ſound of trumpet enimy to both the Princes, and likewiſe all that ſhould ſerue, helpe, aide, or fauour him. Further, the King promiſed to deliuer to the Duke the towne of Saint Quintin, ſo often before mentioned, and to giue him all the Conſtables treaſure and moouables that ſhould be found in the realme of Fraunce, with all ſuch ſeigniories and lordſhips as were held of the ſaid Duke, and among the reſt Han and Bohain, which are two very ſtrong places. Laſtly, a day was appointed when both the King and the Duke ſhould ſend their forces to beſiege him in Han. Notwithſtanding for the reaſons aboue rehearſed, this concluſion was cleane broken off, and a day and place aſſigned where the Conſtable ſhould come to commune with the King vnder ſafe conduct: for he ſtood in doubt of his perſon, bicauſe of the late treatie held at Bouuines. The place aſſigned was three leagues from Noyon neere to the towne of La Fere, vpon a pretie riuer which no man could paſſe, bicauſe the Conſtables men had taken vp all the

bridges. In the ſaid place was a narrow cauſey, ouerthwart the which a ſtrong grate was built, whither the Conſtable came firſt, accompanied with all his men of armes, or the greateſt part: for he had with him aboue three hundred gentlemen all men of armes: and he himſelfe ware his quirace vnder a ſhort gowne vngirt. The King came accompanied with the Earle of Dampmartine Lord great Maſter of Fraunce, the Conſtables mortall enimie, and with ſixe hundred men of armes and better, and ſent me before him to make his excuſe to the Conſtable of his long ſtay: and ſoone after arriued himſelfe, and they communed togither: at which their communication were preſent fiue or ſixe of the Kings ſeruants, and as many of the Conſtables, who excuſed his comming thither in armes, bicauſe he ſtood in feare of the Earle of Dampmartin as he ſaid. To be ſhort, in the end it was agreed that all offences paſt ſhould be forgiuen and forgotten: and the Conſtable paſſed through the grate to our ſide of the riuer, where the Earle of Dampmartin and he were made friends. That night he lodged with the King at Noyon, and the next morning returned to Saint Quintin throughly reconciled as he ſaid. But when the King had well weighed this matter, and heard the murmuring of the people, he accuſed himſelfe of great folly in going after this ſort to commune with his ſeruant, & ſtomaked not a little, that he found the grate ſhut between them, conſidering that all the Conſtables men of armes were his ſubiects and paide out of his coffers: wherfore if his hatred againſt the Conſtable were great before, ſure this meeting much increaſed it: and as touching the Conſtable, his proud ſtomack was no whit abated.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Confeſſor was the Abbot of S. Iohn d'Angely, who died priſoner at Nantes in Britaine, in the great tower du Buffoy, where he confeſſed maruellous matters, and died very ſtrangely. Annal. Aquit.
                  2 Theſe places were thoſe that remained in the Lord of Leſcuts hands by the treaty of Caen, mentioned lib. 1. cap. 15.
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe very fit for this place, of the wiſdome of the King and the Conſtable, with good aduertiſements to ſuch as are in credit with Princes. Chap. 12.
               
                  IF a man conſider well this action of the Kings, he cannot but iudge it to proceede of great wiſdome: for I am of opinion that the Duke of Burgundy to recouer Saint Quintin would eaſily haue pardoned the Conſtable all his offences, notwithſtanding any promiſe made to the King of the contrary: Further, as touching the Conſtable, though he were a gentleman of great wiſedome and vnderſtanding, yet did he very vnaduiſedly, and it appeered that God had vtterly bereft him of all good aduiſe, in that he came thus diſguiſed before the King his Maſter, whoſe ſubiects all the men of armes were that accompanied him: and to ſay the truth, his very countenance ſhewed him to be aſtoniſhed and abaſhed thereat: for when he came in perſon to the place, and found the grate ſhut betweene the King and him, he cauſed it foorthwith to be opened, and paſſed to our ſide of the riuer, where vndoubtedly he was in great danger.
               
                  
This his dooing peraduenture himſelfe and his familiar friends accounted a woorthy exploit: ſuppoſing the King to ſtand in feare of him, whom alſo they reputed a timorous Prince. And true it is that he was ſo at times when there was cauſe why: but not alwaies when the world ſo iudged of him. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that the ciuill wars with the Princes of his realme, out of the which he had wound himſelfe by large gifts and promiſes, had beaten this leſſon into his head, not to put any thing in aduenture if he could compaſſe his purpoſes by any other means: which cauſed a number of men to ſuppoſe all his dooings to proceede of feare. But diuers that vpon this imagination attempted fooliſh enterpriſes againſt him, found themſelues much deceiued, namely, the Earle of Armignack and others, whom their fond attempts coſt full deere. For the King knew when it was time to feare, and not to feare. Sure this praiſe I dare boldly giue him (which though happily I haue written before, yet deſerueth againe to be ſpoken) that he was the wiſeſt man in aduerſity that euer I knew. But to returne to my diſcourſe of the Conſtable, who deſired peraduenture to hold the King in feare, at the leaſt I ſuppoſe ſo (for I will not charge him with it, but write this onely for an aduertiſement to thoſe that are in Princes ſeruice, and vnderſtand not all alike the affaires of this world:) for mine owne part, if I had a friend, I would aduiſe him to endeuor himſelfe that his Maſter might loue him, not feare him: for I neuer knew man whoſe authority depended of the feare his Maſter had of him, that ſped not euill in the end, and that by his Maſters conſent. Examples ynow haue been ſeene heerof in our time, or not long before. In this realm of the Lord of Trimouille and others: In England of the Earle of Warwick and his faction. I could name ſome alſo in Spaine and in other countries. But thoſe that ſhal reade this diſcourſe may peraduenture be able to ſay more therin than my ſelfe. This their preſumption oftentimes proceedeth of their good ſeruice: for they thinke their experience ſo great that they cannot be ſpared, and their deſerts ſuch that their Maſters ought to beare all things at their hands. But Princes on the contrarie ſide both ſay and thinke, that men are bound to do them ſeruice, and deſire nothing more than to be rid of ſuch malapart fellowes. Touching the which point, I muſt needes ſpeake ſomewhat of the King our Maſter: for once he told me in talking of thoſe that do their Prince great ſeruice (naming withall his author from whom he receiued this opinion) that good ſeruice ſometime vndooeth men: and is recompenſed with great ingratitude, not alwaies by the Maſters forgetfulnes, but many times through the ſeruants owne fault: who preſuming vpon their good ſeruice, behaue themſelues arrogantly, either towards their Maſters or their fellowes: Further, as touching thoſe that come to preferment in Court, this was his opinion: that he is happier that receiueth a benefit of the Prince he ſerueth, without great deſert, whereby he ſtandeth bound to his Prince: than he that hath done ſo great ſeruice, that his Prince ſeemeth in debted to him: adding, that he for his part loued thoſe better that were bound to him, than thoſe to whom he was bound. Thus you ſee how hard it is to liue in this world in any eſtate: wherfore greatly are they bound to God, whom he hath indued with vnderſtanding how to gouerne thēſelues in their vocation. This enteruiew between the King & the Conſtable was in the yeere 1474.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
            
               How the Duke of Burgundy being ſeazed of the Duchie of Gueldres, ſought to encroch farther vpon the Almaines, and how he laied his ſiege before Nuz. Chap. 1.
               
                  THe ſame ſommer (as I remember) that the King and the Conſtable met, the Duke of Burgundy went to conquer the Duchy of Gueldres, vpon a title woorthy to be declared, to the end we may therby conſider the wonderfull iudgements and power of God. There was a yoong Duke of Gueldres named Adolph, who maried his wife (being of the houſe of Bourbon, and ſiſter to Peter Duke of Bourbon 
                     1
                   now liuing) in the Duke of Burgundies court, for the which cauſe he was wel fauored there. This Duke Adolph committed an horrible fact: for one euening he tooke his father named Duke Arnold priſoner as he was going to bed, and led him fiue dutch miles on foote bare legged in a maruellous colde night, and laid him in a deepe dungeon the ſpace of ſix moneths 
                     2
                  , where he ſawe no light but through a little hole. Wherfore the Duke of Cleues (whoſe ſiſter the old Duke being priſoner had maried) made ſharpe war vpon this yoong Duke Adolph. The Duke of Burgundy ſought diuers meanes to agree them, but no good could be done. Wherefore in the end the Pope and the Emperor began to ſtir in this matter ſo far foorth, that the D. of Burgundy vnder great curſes, was commanded to take the old Duke out of priſon, which he did accordingly: for the yoong Duke durſt not withſtand him, both bicauſe he ſaw ſo many good men againſt him, and alſo bicauſe of the Dukes great force. I haue often ſeene them both togither in the Duke of Burgundies chamber, pleading their cauſe before a great aſſembly, and once I ſaw the good old man preſent the combat to his ſonne. The Duke of Burgundy was very deſirous to agree them, and offered the yoong Duke (whom he fauored) the title of Gouernor 
                     3
                   of Guelderland with all the reuenues thereof, ſaue of one little towne neere to Brabant called Graue, which ſhould remaine to the father, with the reuenues of three thouſand florens, a yeerely penſion of as much, and the title of Duke, as was but reaſon. I with others wiſer than my ſelf were appointed to make report of theſe conditions to the yoong Duke, who anſwered vs, that he had rather throw his father headlong into a Well, and himſelfe after, than agree to ſuch an appointment, alleaging that his father had been Duke forty fower yeeres, and that it was now time for him to gouerne. Notwithſtanding he ſaid that he would willingly agree to giue him a yeerely penſion of three thouſand florens, with condition that he ſhould depart the countrey as a baniſhed man, neuer to return: & diuers other ſuch like lewd ſpeeches he vſed. This hapned at the very ſame inſtant, that the King wan Amiens from the Duke of Burgundy, who was then with theſe two Dukes at Dourlans, whence bicauſe of the wars he departed in haſte to Hedin, forgetting this matter. This yoong Duke put on French apparell 
                     4
                  , and departed with one onely ſeruant, to repaire home into his countrey. But as he ferried ouer a water neere to Namur, he paied a gildon for his paſſage, whereupon a Prieſt there preſent miſtruſting who he ſhould be, communed thereof with the ferry

man, and viewed well the yoong Duke and knew him. There he was taken and led to Namur, where he remained priſoner till the Duke of Burgundies death: after the which, the Citizens of Gaunt deliuered him, and would perforce haue conſtrained the Dukes daughter afterward Duches of Auſtrich to marry him. They led him alſo with them before Tournay, where being weakly accompanied in a certaine skirmiſh he was miſerably ſlaine, in full reuenge of his impiety againſt his father. The father during his ſonnes impriſonment died: the Duke of Burgundy yet liuing, whom bicauſe of his ſaid ſonnes ingratitude and vnnaturalnes he made his heire, by the which title the Duke at this preſent conquered the ſaide Duchy of Gueldres 
                     5
                  , where he found ſome reſiſtance: but bicauſe he was mighty and in truce with the King, he eaſily ſubdued it, and held it all the daies of his life, and his ofſpring poſſeſſeth it yet at this day, and ſhall do as long as it pleaſeth God. This as I ſaid at the beginning, I haue rehearſed onely to ſhew, that ſuch cruelty and impiety neuer remaineth vnpuniſhed.
               The Duke of Burgundy being returned into his countrey grew woonderfull lofty and high minded, bicauſe he had gotten this Duchy into his clawes, and began to finde great ſweetenes in this Duch enterpriſes, both for that the Emperor was a Prince of an abiect minde, enduring all things rather than he would ſpend any thing: and alſo bicauſe without aide of the Princes of the Empire his owne force was but ſmall. Wherefore the Duke prolonged the truce with the King. Some of the Kings ſeruants were of opinion, that the King did vnaduiſedly to prolong the turce, and ſuffer the Duke to grow as he did. And ſure they had ſome apparance of reaſon to leade them ſo to ſay, but bicauſe they lacked experience and had not ſeene the world abroad, they wiſt not what the matter meant. But others that vnderſtood the caſe better than they, and were able to ſay more therein, bicauſe they had trauelled thoſe countries, aduiſed the King to prolong the truce, and permit the Duke to weare and weary himſelfe againſt the country of Almaine (the greatnes and force whereof is almoſt incredible) 
                     6
                   alleaging that after he had taken one place, or atchiued one enterpriſe, he would foorthwith attempt another: for one good aduenture could not content his nature, wherein he was of diſpoſition cleane contrary to the King: for the Duke the more he was buſied, the more he ſought to buſie himſelfe. Wherefore they told the King that he could no way better be reuenged of the Duke than by ſuffering him to run himſelfe out of breath as he did, aduiſing him withall rather to ſend him ſome ſmall aide, than put him in any doubt of breach of the truce: further alleaging, that it could not otherwiſe happen but that he muſt of neceſſity vtterly conſume himſelfe againſt the greatnes & force of Almaine, bicauſe the Princes of the Empire would make reſiſtance, were the Emperor neuer ſo ſimple a man: and ſo it came to paſſe in the end.
               There was a quarrel 
                     7
                   between two pretending title to the Biſhoprick of Coulon: one of the which was the Lantzgraue of Heſſes brother, and the other the Palzgraue of the Rhene his coſen 
                     8
                  . The Duke of Burgundy tooke part with the Palzgraue, and attempted to place him in the ſea of Coulon by force, truſting thereby to ſeaze ſome places of the countrey into his owne hands, and to that end went and laid his ſiege before Nuz, a towne neere to Coulon, in the yeere 1474. He had ſo many great enterpriſes in his head, that in the end the burthen thereof preſſed him to the ground: for in the ſelfeſame ſommer he both trauelled with Edward King of England to paſſe with his army into Fraunce, being in a readines by his ſute and ſollicitation: and purpoſed alſo to atchieue his enterpriſe in Almaine which was this: If he had taken Nuz, he meant to man it well, and two or three other places

aboue Coulon 9: wherby the citie of Coulon being at his commandement 
                     10
                  , he might haue gone vp countermount againſt the riuer of Rhene into the countrey of Ferrette which he then held, and ſo all the Rhene ſhould haue been vnder his ſubiection euen downe to Holland, where it entreth the ſea: vpon the which riuer are more ſtrong townes and caſtels than any realme chriſtened except Fraunce. The truce with the King was prolonged for ſixe moneths, which time being now almoſt expired, the King trauelled to prolong it ſtill, to the ende the Duke might do his pleaſure in Almaine: whereunto the Duke would not agree bicauſe of his promiſe to the Engliſh men.
               I would gladly paſſe ouer this ſiege of Nuz, bicauſe it is out of the courſe of my hiſtorie, for I was not preſent at it: notwithſtanding ſomewhat I am forced to ſpeake thereof, bicauſe of diuers accidents depending thereupon. The ſaid towne of Nuz was maruellous ſtrong, and within it was the Lantzgraue of Heſſe 
                     11
                  , with many of his kinsfolkes and friends, to the number of 1800. horſemen as I haue beene informed (who valiantly behaued themſelues,) and of foote men ſufficient. The Lantzgraue, as I haue ſaid, was brother to the Biſhop elected, againſt him whom the Duke of Burgundy defended, who laide his ſiege before Nuz in the yeere 1474.
               His force was neuer ſo great as then, eſpecially of horſemen: for bicauſe he meant to attempt ſomewhat in Italie, he had in pay a thouſand Italian men of armes good and bad, vnder the leading of one called the Earle of Campobache a Neapolitan borne of the houſe of Anious faction, a dangerous and a traiterous fellow. In the Dukes campe ſerued alſo Iames Galeot a valiant gentleman of Naples, and diuers others, whoſe names for breuitie I paſſe ouer. Further, he had in his armie three thouſand Engliſh men excellent good ſoldiers, and of his owne ſubiects a maruellous number well armed, and who long had been trained vp in the wars, beſides great force of goodly peeces of artillerie: all the which preparation he put in a readines to ioine with the Engliſh men at their landing, who vſed as great diligence in England as they could. But it is long before an army can be leuied there, bicauſe the King may attempt no war before he haue aſſembled his court of Parlament, being the ſame in effect that the three eſtates in Fraunce, which me thinke is a very good and a laudable cuſtome. For the King by that meanes is the ſtronger and the better ſerued in all enterpriſes he taketh in hand with the conſent of his eſtates, to whom when they are aſſembled he declareth his intent, and deſireth aide of his ſubiects: for no ſubſidie is leuied in England, but for inuaſion of Fraunce or Scotland, or ſuch like enterpriſes of great charge, which then the people grant willingly and liberally, eſpecially to paſſe into Fraunce: wherefore the Kings of England vſe often when money faileth them to leuy an armie, and make ſhewe as though they would inuade Scotland or Fraunce. But after they haue receiued money for a yeere, they lie abroad in campe three moneths, and then returne home and diſmiſſe their army: which practiſe King Edward was well acquainted with and vſed often.
               It was at the leaſt a yeere before this Engliſh army could be in a readines, but when it was furniſhed of all things neceſſarie, the King of England aduertiſed the Duke of Burgundie die thereof, who in the beginning of the ſommer went before Nuz, truſting in ſhort ſpace to put his Biſhop in poſſeſſion, and to retaine certaine places, as Nuz and others in his owne hands, to what purpoſe you haue heard before.
               I thinke verily that this proceeded of God, who beheld with a pitifull eie this realme of Fraunce: which vndoubtedly the Duke might ſhrewdly haue ſhaken, conſidering that his army was mightie and all of olde ſoldiers, accuſtomed by the ſpace of many yeeres to enter and ſpoile this realme without any reſiſtance, ſaue onely

by defence of the ſtrong townes. True it is that this proceeded of the King who would hazard nothing, partly for feare of the Dukes force, and partly for doubt of rebellion in his realme if he ſhould receiue an ouerthrow: for he knew himſelfe not to be beloued of all his ſubiects, eſpecially the nobilitie. And (if I may vtter all) he hath eftſoons told me, that he knew his ſubiects well ynough, and ſhould finde them rebellious if his aſſaires happened to haue hard ſucceſſe: wherefore when the Duke of Burgundie entred into the realme, he manned the townes well by the which he paſſed: whereby in ſhort ſpace the Dukes army brake it ſelfe, and the King neuer endangered his eſtate: which vndoubtedly proceeded of great wiſedome. But all this notwithſtanding the Dukes force being ſo great as it was: if the King of Englands army had alſo entred in the beginning of ſommer, (as aſſuredly it would, had not the Duke ſo obſtinately line before Nuz,) vndoubtedly the realme had ſtood in great danger: for neuer King of England paſſed at once with ſo great force, nor ſo well diſpoſed to fight. All the great Lords of England were there none excepted. Their men of armes were 1500. at the leaſt, (which was much for the Engliſh men) all wel appointed and well accompanied, and 14000. archers on horſeback, beſides a great number of foote men that ſerued in the army, and in all their campe was not one Page. Further, the King of England had in a readines three thouſand men to land in Britaine, to ioine there with the Duke of Britaines forces. I ſaw my ſelfe two letters written with the Lord of Vrfés owne hands, (then ſeruant to the Duke of Britaine, but afterward Maſter of the horſe to King Charles:) the one addreſſed to the King of England, and the other to the Lord Haſtings Lord great Chamberlaine of England 
                     12
                  . The contents whereof among diuers other things were, that the Duke of Britaine would do more in Fraunce by intelligence in a moneth, than the King of England and the Duke of Burgundie, (notwithſtanding their great forces) in halfe a yeere: which words I thinke would haue prooued true, if the matter had come to execution. But God (who hath alwaies loued this realme) diſpoſed of theſe affaires, as heereafter you ſhall heare. Theſe letters aboue mentioned, the King bought of one of the King of Englands Secretaries, for three ſcore marks of ſiluer.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Duke Adolph maried Katherine daughter to Charles Duke of Bourbon, and Agnes ſister to Philip Duke of Burgundy. Meyer.
                  2 Duke Arnold lay in priſon ſixe yeeres, Meyer. but he miſſeth the cuſhion: for other approoued authors, and namely Guicciardin agree with Commines.
                  3 The French hath Mambourg or Membourg, which is as much as captaine or gouernor: looke more heerof in the pedegree of the Dukes of Gueldres.
                  
                  4 Least it ſeeme ſtrange that this yoong Duke, whom our author in this very Chapter reporteth to haue beene well fauored of the Duke of Burgundy ſhould be ſtaied and impriſoned in his dominions: you ſhall vnderſtand that the Duke of Burgundy vpon hope to be Duke Arnolds heire himſelfe, altered his minde, and of the yoong Dukes friend became his foe.
                  
                  5 The Emperor ſtirred not against the Duke of Burgundy, for taking by force the Duchy of Gueldres which was held of the Empire, bicauſe the Dukes of Gueldres by the ſpace of thirty yeeres had done no homage to the Empire. The Duke ſubdued Gueldres, anno 1473. Meyer.
                  6 It was our author himſelfe that gaue the King this aduiſe. Meyer.
                  7 This quarrell began anno 1473. Meyer.
                  8 The Palzgraues name was Robert, his Chapter and he were at variance in ſuch ſort,
                     
                     that they had gotten him excommunicated, & choſen Harman the Lantzgraue of Heſſes brother to gouerne the charge. Then the Duke of Burgundy tooke vpon him to place him againe in his Sea, which appertained not to him, but to the Emperor and the Pope: in the end this Robert was taken and died in priſon.
                  
                  9 The league betweene the Duke and the Biſhop was, that theſe places heere mentioned (belonging to the Church of Coulon, ſhould haue remained to the Duke for his charges. Nuz was beſieged the 28. of Iuly. 1474.
                  10 Nuz is beneath Coulon, ſo that if the Duke had held that and three or fower places aboue Coulon, the ſaid city of Coulon being on al ſides inuironed by him, muſt perforce haue been at his commandement.
                  
                  11 This Lantzgraue was Lodouicus, grandfather to Philip that last died.
                  
                  12 The Lord Haſtings was indeed but Chamberlaine of the King houſe.
                  
               
            
            
               How the towne of Nuz was ſuccoured by the Emperor and the Almains againſt the Duke of Burgundy, and of other enimies that the King procured the Duke. Chap. 2.
               
                  THe Duke of Burgundy as you haue heard, was now buſied before Nuz, and found the enterpriſe of more difficulty than he ſuppoſed. The city of Coulon ſituate vpon the riuer of Rhene, fower leagues aboue Nuz, ſpent monethly 
                     1
                   in the wars 100000. golde gildons for feare of the Duke. And they and certaine other townes aboue them had already put fifteene or ſixteene thouſand footemen into the fielde, who encamped on the other ſide of the riuer, directly ouer againſt the Duke, and planted great force of artillery vpon the banke, thinking thereby to cut off his victuals that came vp the ſtreame out of Guelderland, and to ſinke the botes by canon ſhot. Moreouer, the Emperor and the Princes Electors of the Empire aſſembled togither about this buſines, and concluded to leuy an army: wherunto the King ſent diuers meſſengers to ſollicite them, to whom alſo they ſent a Chanon of Coulon, of the houſe of Bauiere, accompanied with another ambaſſador, who brought him a roll of the army the Emperor was reſolued to leuy, if he for his part would ioine in the enterpriſe. It is not to be doubted but that they receiued a good anſwer with promiſe of all they demanded: further, the King aſſured by letters as well the Emperor as diuers Princes and townes, that ſo ſoon as the Emperor with his army ſhould be come to Coulon, he would ſend twenty thouſand men to ioin with him, vnder the leading of the Lord of Cran and Sallezarde. Thus this Dutch army prepared to march, being greater than is almoſt credible 
                     2
                  : for all the Princes of Almaine as well ſpirituall as temporall, all the Biſhops, townes, and commonalties had men there, yea, ſo great numbers euery one of them, that (as I was informed) the Biſhop of Munſter, who is none of the richeſt Biſhops, had in this army ſixe thouſand footemen, fourteene hundred horſemen, and twelue hundred waggons all couered with greene: true it is that his Biſhoprick lieth neere to Nuz 
                     3
                  . The Emperor was ſeuen moneths in leuying this army: which time expired, he came and encamped within halfe a league of the Duke of Burgundy: by diuers of whoſe men I haue beene aduertiſed, that though the King of Englands army and the Dukes had beene ioined both togither, yet ſhould they not haue beene the third part of the Emperors, neither in men nor in tents and pauilions. Beſides

the Emperors force was alſo this other army aboue mentioned, which lay directly ouer againſt the Duke on the other ſide of the riuer, and endamaged greatly his campe, and cut off much of his victuals.
               When the Emperor and the Princes of the Empire were come before Nuz, they ſent to the King a Doctor of great authoritie with them called He ſeuare, afterward a Cardinall, who came to ſollicite the King to performe his promiſe, and ſend the forces whereof he had aſſured the Emperor by letters, otherwiſe to tell him that the Almaines would conclude peace.
               The King put him in good hope that he would ſo do, and gaue him a preſent of fower hundred crownes, and ſent with him to the Emperor one called Iohn Tiercelin Lord of Broſſe: notwithſtanding the Doctor departed nothing well contented. During this ſiege maruellous practiſes were entertained. The King trauelled to conclude peace with the Duke of Burgundie, at the leaſt to prolong the truce, to the end the Engliſh men ſhould not paſſe the ſeas. The King of England on the other ſide labored to the vttermoſt of his power to perſwade the Duke to depart from Nuz, and performe his promiſe by aiding him to make war in Fraunce, alleaging that the ſommer was far ſpent. And the Lord of Scalles a curteous Knight, nephew to the Conſtable of Fraunce, with diuers others, was twiſe ſent ambaſſador to the Duke to ſollicite him thereunto: but he was obſtinate. Whereby it manifeſtly appeered, that God had troubled his wits and vnderſtanding: for all his life time he had labored the Engliſh men to paſſe into Fraunce, and now when they were in a readines, and all things prepared for the wars as well in Britaine as elſewhere, he lay obſtinately before a place impregnable. With the Emperor was a legate ſent from the Pope, who rode daily betweene the two camps to treate of peace. The King of Denmarke came alſo thither, and trauelled to pacifie this controuerſie, being lodged in a little towne hard by both the armies: ſo that the Duke might haue departed to the Engliſh men with honorable conditions. Notwithſtanding he would not, but excuſed himſelfe to the King of England vpon his honor, which he ſaid ſhould be ſtained if he leuied his ſiege, with diuers ſuch like ſlender excuſes. Heere you muſt note, that theſe were not thoſe Engliſh men that in the time of Duke Philip his father had made war ſo long in this realme, but theſe were yoong ſoldiers vtterly vnacquainted with our French affaires. Wherefore the Duke proceeded very fondly if he meant to vſe their helpe: for he ſhould the firſt ſommer haue been continually with them, leading them from place to place, and inſtructing them what was to be done.
               While the Duke lay thus obſtinately before Nuz, war aroſe againſt him on two or three ſides: for the Duke of Lorraine, who hitherto had been in peace with him, ſent to defie him before Nuz, by the Lord of Crans perſwaſion, who to further the Kings affaires allured the Duke of Lorraine thereunto, aſſuring him that it would turne greatly to his profit. Incontinent the ſaid Duke of Lorraine put himſelfe into the field, and ſpoiled all the Duchie of Luxembourg, and razed a place there called Pierre-forte, two leagues from Nancy. Further, by the Kings procurement and certaine of his ſeruants, a league was made for ten yeeres betweene the Swiſſers and certaine townes vpon the riuer of Rhene 
                     4
                   (namely, Baſill, Strasbourg, and others) which before had beene their enimies. Peace was alſo concluded betweene Duke Sigiſmond of Auſtrich and the ſaid Swiſſers, the conditions whereof were, that Duke Sigiſmond ſhould take againe the countie of Ferrette 
                     5
                  , which he had engaged to the Duke of Burgundie for a 100000. florens. But this one article remained yet in variance betweene Duke Sigiſmond and them: namely, that the Swiſſers required paſſage through fower townes of the countie of Ferrette 
                     6
                   at their pleaſure: which

controuerſie was referred to the Kings arbitrament, who pronounced ſentence for the Swiſſers. Heereby you may perceiue what enimies the King ſtirred vp couertly againſt the Duke of Burgundie.
               As the matter was concluded, ſo alſo was it executed: for in a faire moone ſhine night Peter Archambaut 
                  
                     7
                   gouernor of the countie of Ferrette for the Duke of Burgundie, was taken priſoner, accompanied with eight hundred ſoldiers, who were all diſmiſſed ſafe and ſound ſaue himſelfe alone, whom they led to Baſill 
                     8
                  , and there endited of diuers extortions and outrages committed in the ſaid countie of Ferrette, and in the end ſtrake off his head. Immediately after his death all the countie of Ferrette yeelded to Duke Sigiſmond, and the Swiſſers began to make war in Burgundie, and tooke Blaſmond a towne being the Marſhals of Burgundie, who was of the houſe of Neuf-chaſtell, and beſieged the caſtell of Hericourt, belonging alſo to the ſaid houſe of Neuf-chaſtel, whither the Burgundians went to leuie the ſiege, but were diſcomfited 
                     9
                  , and a great number ſlaine. The ſaid Swiſſers maruellouſly endamaged the countrie, and then returned home for that time.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The citie of Coulon tooke part with the Chapter againſt the D. of Burgundies Biſhop.
                  
                  2 The Emperor had in pay in this armie 80000. men.
                  
                  3 But his Biſhoprick is on the other ſide the riuer of Rhene.
                  
                  4 Theſe townes were Strasbourg, Slecstat, Baſill, Colmar, &c.
                  
                  5 Ferrette in Dutch Pfirt.
                  
                  6 The townes the Swiſſers deſired paſſage through were Reinfeld, Loufenberg, Neuſtat, and Briſſac.
                  
                  7 Others call him Peter Hagenbach, but the variance ariſeth bicauſe one nameth him by his ſurname, the other by his ſeigniorie: for he was called Peter Archambaut of Hagenbach.
                  
                  8 Others write that he was beheadded at Briſac a towne neere to Baſill.
                  
                  9 The Lord of Blaſmond led this armie, and in this battell the Burgundians loſt 2000. men. Annal. Burgund.
               
            
            
               How the King wan from the Duke of Burgundie the caſtell of Tronquoy, the townes of Montdidier, Roye, and Corbie, and how he ſought to perſwade the Emperor Frederick to ſeiz vpon all that the ſaid Duke held of the Empire. Chap. 3.
               
                  ABout this time the truce ended between the King and the Duke, to the Kings great griefe, who gladly would haue prolonged it, but ſeeing no remedie, he went and beſieged a little caſtel called Tronquoy in the yeere 1475. in the very beginning of ſommer, the pleaſanteſt time of the yeere. The caſtell in ſhort ſpace was taken by aſſault. The next day the K. ſent me to parle with them that were within Montdidier, who yeelded the place, & departed with bag & baggage. Thence I went the third day being accompanied with the Admiral of Fraunce baſtard of Bourbon, to parle with them that were within Roye, who

in like maner yeelded the piece bicauſe they were vtterly in deſpaire of ſuccors, which ſure if the Duke had been in the countrie they would not haue done. Notwithſtanding both theſe townes were burned contrarie to our promiſe. Thence the King departed, and laid his campe before Corbie which abode the ſiege. Goodly approches were made to the towne, and the Kings artillerie bet it three daies: within it was the Lord of Contay 
                     1
                   and diuers others, who yeelded the place, and departed with bag and baggage: two daies after, this poore town was alſo ſacked and burned as the two former. Then the King thought to repaire home with his armie, truſting to perſwade the Duke of Burgundie to make truce, conſidering the diſtreſſe he was in. But a certaine Lady whom I know well, yet will not name bicauſe ſhe is ſtill liuing, writ him a letter, willing him to leade his armie to Arras, and into thoſe parts: whereunto the King agreed, for ſhe was a woman of honor. I commend hir not in thus doing: for ſhe was in no reſpect bound to the King. The King ſent thither the Lord Admirall baſtard of Bourbon with a great band of men, which burned many townes in thoſe quarters, and ſpoiled all the countrie betweene Abbeuille and Arras: whereupon the citizens of Arras, who were puffed vp with pride bicauſe of their long proſperity, compelled the garriſon of the towne to iſſue foorth. But being too weake to encounter with the Kings forces they were put to flight, and purſued ſo ſpeedily that many of them were ſlaine and taken, togither with all their captaines, namely, Maſter Iames of Saint Paule 
                     2
                   the Conſtables brother, the Lord of Contay, the Lord of Carency, and diuers others: ſome of the which were neere kinſmen to the Lady hir ſelfe that cauſed this enterpriſe, ſo that ſhe receiued great dammage by the ouerthrow: but the King for hir ſake repaired all in time.
               The King ſent to the Emperor (as you haue heard) Iohn Tiercelin Lord of Broſſe, partly to ſollicite him not to make peace with the Duke of Burgundy, and partly to make his excuſe for not ſending his forces according to his promiſe: and further, to aſſure him, that he would ſhortly ſend them, and would alſo continue to ſpoile and endamage the Dukes dominions, as well in the marches of Burgundy 
                     3
                  , as alſo in Picardy. Laſtly he made him a new ouuerture, which was, that they ſhould ſweare each to other, not to make peace the one without the other, and that the Emperor ſhould ſeaze into his hands all the ſeigniories that the Duke held, and ought to hold of the Empire, and proclaime them forfaited to him, and he would do the like with all thoſe that were held of the crowne of Fraunce, namely Flaunders, Artois, Burgundy and the reſt. The Emperor though all his life time he had made ſmall ſhew of any valor, yet was he wiſe and of great experience, bicauſe of his ancient yeeres. Further, theſe practiſes between vs and him had continued ſo long that he waxed weary of the wars, notwithſtanding that they coſt him neuer a grote. For all the Princes of Almaine lay there vpon their owne charge, as their maner is when the war concerneth the ſtate of the empire. The Emperor anſwered the Kings ambaſſadors after this ſort: There was ſomtime neere to a certaine city in Germany, a great Beare that much endamaged the countrie, three good fellowes of the which city being tauerne haunters, came to a tauerne where they were indebted, deſiring their hoſt yet once more to giue them credit, promiſing him within two daies paiment of the whole debt: for they would take this Beare that did ſo much harme in the countrey, whoſe skin was woorth a great ſum of money, beſides the preſents that good folkes would giue them, whereunto their hoſt agreed: and when they had dined, foorth they went toward this beaſts caue, neere to the which when they approched, they met with the Beare vnlooked for, and being ſtricken with ſudden feare fled, one got vp into a tree, the other fled towards the towne, but the third the Beare tooke and ouerthrew,

and foiled vnder hir feete, holding hir muſſell hard to his eare. The poore ſoule lay flat vpon the ground, as though he had been dead. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that the nature of a Beare is ſuch, that whatſoeuer ſhe holdeth in hir clawes man or beaſt, ſo ſoon as ſhe ſeeth it leaue ſtirring, ſhe foorthwith forſaketh it, ſuppoſing it to be dead, as alſo this Beare left this poore fellow, not doing him any great harme, and returned to hir den. Then he ſeeing the danger paſt, aroſe and went towards the towne. But his fellow that ſtood in the tree hauing beheld all this pageant, came downe and ran crying after him to ſtay: and when he had ouertaken him, deſired him to tell him faithfully what counſell the Beare gaue him in his eare, whereto ſhe held hir muſſell ſo long: whereunto his fellow anſwered, that ſhe bad him neuer to ſell the Beares skin till the Beare were ſlaine. And with this fable paid the Emperor our King, not giuing his ambaſſadors any further anſwer, as though he ſhould haue ſaid, come hither according to your promiſe, and let vs take this Duke if we can, and then make partition of his goods.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Contay is ſucceſſor to him mentioned in the wars against the Liegeois.
                  
                  2 This Iames is named in other histories Lord of Richebourg.
                  
                  3 For in the marches of Burgundy, the Duke of Bourbon had giuen the Burgundians a great ouerthrow, as our author in the next chapter maketh mention.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Conſtable began to be had in ſuſpicion againe, as well of the King as of the Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 4.
               
                  YOu haue heard how Maſter Iames of Saint Paule and others were taken priſoners before Arras. Their captiuity was to the Conſtables great greefe: for the ſaid Maſter Iames was a louing and naturall brother to him. But this was not the onely misfortune that fell vpon him: for at this very inſtant was alſo taken the Earle of Rouſſy his ſonne, gouernor of Burgundy for the Duke 
                     1
                  , and likewiſe his wife died, which was a vertous Lady, and ſiſter to the Queene of Fraunce, ſo that for hir ſake he had found great friendſhip and fauor in our court. The practiſe begun againſt him ſtill continued, which as you haue heard was almoſt concluded at the aſſembly held thereabout at Bouuines: after the which, the Conſtable neuer thought himſelfe in aſſurance, but miſtruſted both the Princes, eſpecially the King, who ſeemed to repent the reuoking of his letters there ſealed. Further, the Earle of Dampmartin & others whom the Conſtable feared as his enimies, lay with their men of armes neere to Saint Quintins: wherefore he held himſelfe within the towne, and put into it three hundred footemen of his owne tenants, hauing but ſmall affiance in his men of armes. He liued in great trouble, for the King had often ſent to him to ſollicite him to come foorth to do him ſeruice in the marches of Henault, and to beſiege Auennes at the ſame time that the Admirall with his band went to burne the countrey of Artois as you haue heard, which commandement he obeied but with great feare: for after he had lien a certaine ſpace before the ſaid towne of Auennes with a continual garde about his perſon, he retired into his owne places, and ſent the King word by one of his ſeruants (who did his meſſage to me by the Kings commandement) that

he had raiſed his ſiege, bicauſe he was certainly enformed, that there were two in the army purpoſely hired by the King to kill him: whereof alſo he told ſo many apparant tokens, that he ſeemed indeed to haue ſome notice thereof, ſo far foorth that one of them was ſuſpected to haue diſcloſed ſomwhat to him, that he ought to haue kept ſecret: but I will name no man, neither ſpeake further heerof. The Conſtable ſent often to the Duke of Burgundies campe, I ſuppoſe to perſwade him to relinquiſh his fooliſh enterpriſe, aduertiſing the King alſo vſually at his mens returne of ſome ſuch newes as he thought would like him well, and withall what was the cauſe of his ſending thither, hoping by this means to entertaine him with faire words. Somtime alſo he gaue him to vnderſtand, that the Dukes affaires had good proceeding, thereby to put him in feare. Further, doubting greatly that the King would inuade him, he deſired the Duke to ſend vnto him his brother Maſter Iames of Saint Paul (being at Nuz before he was taken priſoner) and the Lord of Fiennes, with certaine others of his kinſmen, promiſing to put them and their bands into Saint Quintins (but without the Saint Andrews croſſe 
                     2
                  ) and to keepe the towne for the Duke, and reſtore it him ſhortly after: for performance alſo wherof he offered to giue him his faith in writing. The Duke did as he required, and when the ſaid Maſter Iames the Lord of Fiennes, and the reſt of the Conſtables kinſmen were twiſe come within a league or two of the towne ready to enter, the Conſtable thinking the ſtorme paſt, altered his minde, and ſent a countermaunde. This did he thriſe: ſo deſirous was he ſtill to liue in diſſimulation, and ſwim as it were between two ſtreams, fearing maruellouſly both theſe Princes. Of this matter I haue been enformed by diuers, but eſpecially by Maſter Iames of Saint Paul himſelfe, who thus reported the circumſtance thereof to the King, when he was brought priſoner before him, where no man was preſent but my ſelfe alone. The ſaid Maſter Iames anſwered frankly and without diſſimulation to all the Kings demands, whereby he wan greatly his fauor. Firſt, the King asked him how many men he had with him to enter the towne: whereunto he anſwered that the laſt time he had three thouſand. Then the King inquired further, if he had entred and had been Maſter of the towne, whether he would haue held it for the King or the Conſtable. Whereunto he likewiſe anſwered, that the two firſt times he came but to comfort his brother, but the laſt (ſeeing his diſſimulation to his Maſter and him) if he had entred and had been Maſter of the towne, he would haue held it for his Maſter, not offring his brother any outrage, nor doing any thing to his preiudice, ſaue onely that he would not haue departed the town at his commandement. Soone after, the King deliuered the ſaid Iames of Saint Paul out of priſon, and gaue him charge of a goodly company of men of armes, and vſed his ſeruice till his death: of which his preferment his wiſe anſwers were the onely cauſe.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This ouerthrow the Duke of Bourbon gaue the Burgundians, neere to a place called Grey or Gy, not far from Chausteauguion, and in the battell was ſlain the Lord of Conches, others ſay but taken, and there were taken priſoners the Earle of Rouſſy, being gouernor of Burgundy, the Marſhall of Burgundie, the Earle of Ioigny, the Earle of Saint Martins ſonne, Monſeur de L'Iſle, Monſeur de Longey or Longny, the bailife of Ampois, and the bailife of Auxerre. This battell was fought on tueſday the 20. of Iune. 1475. and in it two hundred men of armes Lombards were ſlaine, Meyer. About this time alſo the Prince of Orenge was taken priſoner, and by meanes thereof reuolted from the Duke to the King. Annal. Burgund.
                  
                     
2 The Saint Andrewes croſſe is the Burgundians cogniſance, and if they had entred with this croſſe vpon their cotes, the Conſtable could haue no longer temporiſed with the King of Fraunce, but ſhould foorthwith haue been proclaimed traitor.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Duke of Burgundy leuied his ſiege before Nuz by compoſition, and how the King of England his confederate ſent to defie King Lewis. Chap. 5.
               
                  I Haue diſcourſed of diuers affaires ſince I began with the ſiege of Nuz, bicauſe they all hapned in that time, for the ſiege indured a whole yeere. There were two cauſes eſpecially that mooued the Duke to leuy his ſiege: one the war the King made in Picardy, where he had burned two proper townes, and deſtoied a goodly champaine countrey in Artois and Ponthieu. The other, the mighty army the King of England leuied at his ſute and ſollicitation: whom till now he could neuer perſwade to paſſe into Fraunce, notwithſtanding that he had labored him thereunto al the daies of his life. The ſaid King of England and all his nobles were maruellouſly diſcontented with the Dukes delaies, and beſides intreaties vſed threatnings, and not without cauſe, conſidering the great charges they had ſuſtained, and all to no purpoſe, the ſommer being now almoſt ſpent. The Duke gloried much that this Dutch army being ſo great that the like hath not been ſeene in our age nor many yeeres before: and in the which were ſo many Princes, Prelates, and free cities ioined togither, was not able to raiſe his ſiege 
                     1
                  . But this glory coſt him full deere: for he that hath the profit of the war, reapeth alſo the honor thereof. Notwithſtanding the Legate aboue mentioned (who rode continually betweene the two camps) made peace in the end betweene the Emperor and the Duke 
                     2
                  : and the towne of Nuz was put into the ſaid Legats hands to do therewith according to the determination of the Sea Apoſtolike. Now conſider in how great diſtreſſe the Duke of Burgundy was, being on the one ſide vexed with war by the King, and threatned on the other by the King of England his friend, ſo that notwithſtanding he knew the towne of Nuz to be brought to ſuch extremitie, that within leſſe than fifteen daies famine would haue conſtrained them to yeeld to his mercie, yea within ten daies (as one of the captaines within the towne, who afterward ſerued the King aduertiſed me:) yet for the reaſons aboue alleaged, he was forced to leuie his ſiege 
                     3
                   in the yeere 1475.
               Let vs now returne to the K. of England, who led his armie to Douer, there to embarke to croſſe the ſeas to Calice. The force that paſſed with him at this preſent was the greateſt that euer came into France, all of them being on horſeback in very good order and well armed. All the nobles of the realme were there, a fewe excepted: they were 1500. men of armes very well mounted, and the moſt of them barded, and richly trapped after the maner of our wars, and well accompanied with horſemen of their retinue. They were at the leaſt 15000. archers all mounted, and a great number of footemen and others, aſwell to pitch their tents, (wherefore they were well furniſhed) as alſo to attende vpon their artillerie and incloſe their campe, and in all their army they had not one Page: beſides theſe there were three thouſand Engliſh men appointed to land in Britaine. This I haue written before, but rehearſe it heere againe, to the end you may perceiue that God was purpoſed to trouble the

Duke of Burgundies wits, and preſerue this realme which he hath euer more fauored than any other: otherwiſe it is to be thought that the Duke would ſo obſtinately haue lien before Nuz, a place ſo ſtrong & ſo well defended, ſeeing all his life time till now he could neuer finde the Engliſh men diſpoſed to inuade the realme of Fraunce, and knew them to be vtterly vnacquainted with our French wars till they be trained therein: for if he would haue done any good with them, he ſhould neuer haue left them the firſt ſommer, but helped them and taught them to order and leade their battels after the maner of our wars: for there is no nation ſo ignorant and rude as the Engliſh men at their firſt landing in Fraunce, but in very ſhort ſpace they becom excellent good ſoldiers, hardie and wiſe. But the Duke did cleane contrarie: for beſides theſe other his ouerſights, he made them loſe the ſommer: and as touching him ſelfe, his armie was ſo broken, ſo poore, and in ſo euill order, that he durſt not preſent it before them: for he loſt before Nuz fower thouſand ſoldiers taking pay: ſome of the which were the beſt men he had 
                     4
                  . Thus you ſee how God diſpoſed him in all points to do contrarie both to that his affaires required, and alſo to the arte of war, wherein himſelfe had been exerciſed by the ſpace of ten yeeres more than any man liuing.
               When King Edward came to Douer, the Duke of Burgundy to further his paſſage ſent fiue hundred botes of Holland and Zealand called Scuts, which are flat and low, built very commodiouſly for tranſporting of horſes. But notwithſtanding all this helpe they had from the Duke, and all the King of England could command himſelfe, he was aboue three weekes in paſſing betweene Callice and Douer, yet are they but ſeuen leagues diſtant: whereby you may perceiue with how great difficultie a King of England inuadeth Fraunce. And if the King our Maſter had been as well acquainted with the wars by ſea as by land: King Edward had neuer paſſed ouer, at the leaſt not that ſommer. But the King vnderſtood them not, and thoſe that had charge of them much leſſe. The King of England as I haue ſaid, was three weekes in paſſing: one ſhip of Eu tooke two or three of his ſmall paſſengers.
               Before King Edward embarked, he ſent from Douer to the King one herault alone called Garter a Norman borne 
                     5
                  , who brought a letter of defiance from the King of England in verie good language, and ſo excellently well penned, that I am verilie perſwaded it was neuer of Engliſh mans dooing. The contents of the letter were, that the King ſhould yeelde vnto him the realme of Fraunce being his inheritance, to the end he might reſtore the cleargie and nobilitie to their ancient libertie, eaſe them of the great charges they ſuſtained, and deliuer them from the miſeries they liued in: which if he refuſed to do, he proteſted what great miſcheefes ſhould inſue thereof, in maner and forme as in ſuch caſes is accuſtomed. The King read the letter ſoftly to himſelfe, and afterward all alone withdrew himſelfe into a wardrob, and commanded the herault to be brought to his preſence, to whom he made this anſwer: Firſt, that he knew well the King of England was not paſſed the ſeas of his owne motion, but by the perſwaſion of the Duke of Burgundie and the commonaltie of England: ſecondarily, that the ſommer was now almoſt ſpent, and that the Duke of Burgundie returned from Nuz, as a man diſcomfited and vtterly vnfurniſhed of all things: thirdly, as touching the Conſtable he knew well (he ſaid) that he had intelligence with the King of England, bicauſe he had married his neece 
                     6
                  , but would deceiue the King his maſter, as he had deceiued him: notwithſtanding all the great benefites he had receiued of him, which he there rehearſed, adding thereunto, that the ſaid Conſtable meant to liue in continuall diſſimulation and entertaine euery man to make his profite of him: laſt of all, he alleaged

to the herault diuers other reaſons to perſwade the King his Maſter to peace, and gaue him with his owne hands three hundred crownes, promiſing him a thouſand more if peace were concluded: further, openly he gaue him for a preſent a goodly peece of crimoſin veluet of thirty ells.
               The herault anſwered, that he would trauell the beſt he could for peace, and thought the King his Maſter would eaſily be woon thereunto, but that no mention muſt be made thereof till he were on this ſide the ſea: and then he willed the King our Maſter to ſend a herault to the Engliſh campe, to demand a ſafe conduct for certaine ambaſſadors that he would ſend to the King of England, and to addreſſe his letters to the Lord Hovvard or the Lord Stanley, and to himſelfe alſo to helpe to conuay his herault.
               A great number there were without in the hall while the King talked with the herault, very deſirous to heare the Kings anſwer, and to ſee his countenance at his comming foorth. When he had made an end, he called me to him, bidding me continually to entertaine the herault, till ſome were appointed to beare him companie, to the end no man might commune with him: and further, to giue him a peece of crimoſin veluet of thirtie ells, which I did accordingly. Then the King began to talke with diuers, rehearſing vnto them the contents of theſe letters of defiance: and ſeuen or eight he called apart cauſing the ſaid letters to be read, and ſhewing a good and aſſured countenance void of al feare: for he was glad of the comfort the herault had put him in.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Melancthon writeth, that the Emperor vvould not hazard a battell neither vvith Matthias King of Hungarie, nor Duke Charles: Quia ſibi ſciebat, Martem in geneſi infoeliciter poſitum eſſe. But Berlandus ſaith, that the Duke fought vvith the Emperor. Meyer ſaith, that in a skirmiſh the Duke ouerthrevv the Marqueſſe Albert of Brandenbourg, and ſlue 120. of his men, and tooke diuers priſoners: and another time ouerthrevv the Biſhop of Munster, ſlue fiftie, tooke ſixteene, and chaſed the Biſhop hard to the Emperors campe: and likevviſe another time the Biſhops of Mentz, Treues, Munſter, and Marqueſſe Albert, and ſlue a great number of their men. And laſt of all, bicauſe the Emperor and the Duke contended vvhether of them ſhould firſt depart from before Nuz, their footmen ioined, and the Duke ſlue 1500.
                  2 Peace vvas concluded betvveene the Emperor and the Duke 31. Maij. 1475.
                  3 The Emperor departed from Nuz 29. Iunij, leauing the Duke there, vvho vvould not leuie his ſiege before the Emperors departure bicauſe of his honor, but ſoone after departed alſo the Duke. Meyer.
                  4 The Duke loſt before Nuz 15000. men, Annal. Burgund. vvherefore Meyer hath ſmall reaſon to reprooue our author for ſaying, that the Dukes armie vvas in ſo poore eſtate that he durſt not let the Engliſh men ſee it.
                  
                  5 Hall in his Chronicle reproueth our author for reporting this Garter to be a Norman, ſaying that neuer Norman was King of heraults: which notwithſtandyng I Know not why we ſhould beleeue: for he him ſelfe confeſſeth, that King Edward the fourth made a Gaſcoine, namely Vaucler, Deputie of Calice: a much higher and more dangerous office to be in a ſtrangers hand than this.
                  
                  6 How the Queene of England was the Conſtables neece, the pedegree in the ende of this booke will declare.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the trouble the Conſtable was in, and how he ſent letters of credit to the King of England and the Duke of Burgundy, which after were in part cauſe of his death. Chap. 6.
               
                  I Muſt yet ſpeake a word or two more heer of the Conſtable, who was not a little troubled, as well for the lewd touch he had plaid the Duke of Burgundy about the reſtitution of Saint Quintins, as alſo bicauſe he ſaw himſelfe vtterly disfauored of the King, ſo far foorth that his cheefe ſeruants, namely the Lords of Genly and Mouy had alreadie relinquiſhed him, and were in the Kings ſeruice: notwithſtanding the ſaid de Mouy reſorted ſtill to him ſometime. Further, the King preſſed the Conſtable earneſtly to come to him, offering to make him ſuch recompence for the countie of Guiſe as he required, and the King had often promiſed him. The Conſtable was willing to go, ſo that the K. would ſweare by the croſſe of S. Lou of Angiers to do him no harme, nor conſent that any other ſhould: alleaging that he might as wel ſweare therby now as in times paſt he did to the Lord of Leſcute: whereunto the King anſwered, that he would neuer giue that oth to any man 
                     1
                  , but any other he would not refuſe to ſweare. You may eaſily geſſe how much both the King and the Conſtable were troubled: for that no day eſcaped for a certaine ſpace but one or other paſſed betweene them about this oth. Wherefore if we well weigh our eſtate, mans life is very miſerie: for we toile and trauell our ſelues to ſhorten our owne daies, ſaying and writing a number of things cleane contrarie to our thought. To conclude, if theſe two were troubled on the one ſide, I warrant you the King of England and the Duke of Burgundie were no leſſe troubled on the other.
               At one time in a maner, both the King of England landed at Callice 
                     2
                   and the Duke of Burgundie departed from before Nuz, who in great haſte rode ſtraight to Callice to the ſaid King with a very ſmall traine: for he had ſent his armie in ſuch poore eſtate, as you haue heard, to ſpoile the countrie of Barrois and Lorraine, to the end they might there make merrie and refreſh themſelues: which he did, bicauſe the Duke of Lorraine had begun war vpon him, and defied him before Nuz. But this ſending of his forces into Lorraine, among diuers other his ouerſights in his actions with the Engliſh men was not the leſt: for they thought at their landing to haue found him with 2500. men of armes well appointed, and great force of other horſemen and footemen (for ſo he had promiſed, thereby to allure them to paſſe the ſeas:) and further, that he would haue made war in Fraunce three moneths before their arriuall, to the end they might finde the King the wearier and the weaker: but God as you haue heard, diſpoſed otherwiſe of this matter. The King of England departed from Callice in companie of the Duke of Burgundie, and paſſed through Bolaine, and from thence to Peronne, where the Duke gaue the Engliſh men but cold entertainment: for he cauſed the gates to be ſtraightly garded, and would ſuffer but few to enter, ſo that the greateſt part of them lodged in the fields, as they might well do: for they were well prouided of all things neceſſarie for that purpoſe.
               After they were come to Peronne, the Conſtable ſent to the Duke of Burgundy one of his ſeruants called Levvis of Creuille, by whom he excuſed himſelfe: for the withholding of Saint Quintins, alleaging that if he had reſtored it, he could haue

ſtood him in no ſtead in the realme of Fraunce: for he ſhould vtterly haue loſt his credit and intelligence there, but now ſeeing the King of England was come ouer in perſon, he promiſed to do heerafter all that the Duke ſhould command him, whereof the better to aſſure him, he ſent him a letter of credit directed to the King of England, but referring the matter of credit to the declaration of the Duke. Further, he gaue the Duke his faith in writing, to ſerue and ſuccour him, his friends and confederates, as well the King of England as others, againſt all men none excepted. The Duke deliuered the King of England his letter, and withall the matter of credit, adding ſomwhat thereto of his own deuiſe: for he aſſured the King that the Conſtable would deliuer into his hands both Saint Quintins and all his other places: which the King eaſily beleeued, partly bicauſe he had maried the Conſtables neece, and partly bicauſe he ſaw him in ſo great feare of the King our Maſter, that he thought he durſt not faile of his promiſe made to the Duke and him, and the Duke beleeued it alſo. But the Conſtable meant nothing leſſe, for the fear he ſtood in of the King our Maſter was not ſo great that it could force him ſo far. But he vſed ſtill his woonted diſſimulation, hoping by theſe faire meſſages to content them, and ſhew them ſo apparant reaſons of his dooings, that they would not as yet conſtraine him to declare himſelfe. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that King Edvvard and his men were nothing acquainted with our affaires, but went bluntly to worke, ſo that they could not as yet ſmell out the cunning vſed heere on this ſide the ſea: for naturally the Engliſh men that neuer trauelled abroad are very colerick, as are alſo al people of cold coūtries 
                     3
                  . The realme of Fraunce as you ſee is ſituate betweene both: for it is inuironed with Italy, Spaine and Catalonia towards the eaſt 
                     4
                  , and with England, Flaunders and Holland towards the weſt 
                     5
                  , and all along the countrey of Champaigne, Almaine bordereth vpon it: ſo that our countrey taketh part both of heate and cold, wherfore the French are of two complexions: but in mine opinion I neuer ſaw countrey in my life better ſeated than the realme of Fraunce.
               The King of England who reioiced maruellouſly at this meſſage ſent by the Conſtable (although happily he had receiued ſome ſuch promiſe before, but not ſo large) departed from Peronne with the Duke of Burgundy (who had no force there, for his army was in Barrois and Lorraine) towards Saint Quintins, whereunto when they approched, a great band of Engliſhmen ran before, thinking (as I heard it reported a few daies after) that the bels ſhould haue rung at their comming, & that the citizens would haue receiued them with croſſe and holy water. But when they drew neere the town, the artillery ſhot, and the ſoldiers iſſued foorth to the skirmiſh, both on horſebacke and foote, ſo that two or three Engliſh men were ſlaine, and ſome taken. Further, it rained terribly, and in this eſtate returned they in great rage to their campe, murmuring againſt the Conſtable and calling him traitor.
               The next morning the Duke of Burgundy would haue taken his leaue of the King of England to depart to his army into Barrois, promiſing to do maruels in his fauor. But the Engliſh men who naturally are ſuſpicious, and were ſtrangers in theſe countries, maruelled much at his ſo ſudden departure, (ſeeing they had paſſed the ſeas at his requeſt) and were greatly diſcontented therwith, neither would they beleeue that his army was in a readines. Beſides that, the Duke could by no meanes repaire the Conſtables former credit with them: notwithſtanding that he affirmed all his dooings to be to a good end. The winter alſo which drew neere diſmaied them, ſo that they ſeemed by their words deſirous rather of peace than war.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 The King vvould not ſvveare by the croſſe of Saint Lou of Angiers, bicauſe vvho ſo touched that croſſe and for ſvvare himſelfe, died miſerably within a yeere after.
                  
                  2 The King of England landed at Calais the 4. of Iuly. Meyer.
                  3 The reaſon is, Propter craſſos humores quibus abundant eorum corpora, qui vehementiores excitant affectus, & innatam caloris vim quae etiam augetur per antiperiſtaſin.
                  4 By the eaſt he meaneth all ſeas to the great Ocean.
                  
                  5 By the vvest he meaneth all vveſt and north ſeas.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King clothed a poore ſeruant in a cote armor with a ſcutchin, and ſent him to ſpeake with the King of England in his Campe, where he receiued a very good anſwere. Chap. 7.
               
                  IN the meane time, euen at the very inſtant that the D. of Burgundy was taking his leaue, the Engliſh men tooke priſoner a gentlemans ſeruant of the Kings houſe named Iames of Graſſe, whom foorthwith they led to the King of England and the Duke being togither, and from them into a tent: where when they had examined him, the Duke tooke his leaue to go into Brabant, and from thence to Maizieres, where part of his army lay. The King of England commanded the ſaid ſeruant to be diſmiſſed, bicauſe he was their firſt priſoner. And at his departure the Lord Hovvard and the Lord Stanley gaue him a noble ſaying: Do our humble commendations to the K. your Maſter if you can come to his preſence. The fellow came in great haſte to the King being at Compiegne with theſe newes, who foorthwith began to ſuſpect him as a ſpie, bicauſe Gilbert of Graſſe his Maſters brother, was then very well entertained in the Duke of Britaines court, wherefore he was committed to warde, and ſtraightly kept that night. Notwithſtanding the King commanded diuers to commune with him, by whoſe report his tale ſeemed voide of all ſuſpicion and feare. Wherefore they deſired the King to vouchſafe to heare him, and according to their requeſt the next morning he himſelfe ſpake with him, and when he had heard him, his irons were knocked off, but he remained ſtill in warde. Then the King went to diner debating with himſelfe whether he ſhould ſend to the Engliſh men or not. And before he ſat downe talked three or fower words thereof with me. For you know (my Lord of Vienna) that oftentimes he communed very familiarly with thoſe that were neere about him, as I was then, and others after, & loued to talke in a mans eare: he called then to minde the herault of Englands aduiſe, which was, that he ſhould not faile to ſend to the King of England ſo ſoone as he was landed, to demaund a ſafe conduct for certaine ambaſſadors that he would ſend to him: and further, to adreſſe his herault to the aboue named Lord Hovvard and the Lord Stanley. After the King was ſet to diner, and had muſed a while, as you know his maner was (which ſeemed ſtrange to thoſe that knew him not: for vnleſſe a man had beenwel acquainted with his behauior, he would haue iudged him of no great wiſdome, notwithſtanding that his dooings ſufficiently declared the contrary) he bad me in mine eare to ariſe and dine in my chamber, and

ſend for a certaine ſeruant of the Lord of Halles, ſon to Merichon of Rochell, and to commune with him, to know whether he durſt aduenture to go to the K. of Englands campe in a heraults cote: which his commandement I executed foorthwith, maruelling much when I ſaw the ſaid ſeruant: for he ſeemed to me neither of perſonage nor behauior fit for ſuch an enterpriſe: notwithſtanding he had a good wit and a very pleaſant toong, as I afterward perceiued: the King had neuer ſpoken with him before but once. The ſaid ſeruant was maruellouſly aſtoniſhed with my meſſage, & fell downe before me on his knees, as one accounting himſelfe a dead man, but I comforted & confirmed him the beſt I could, promiſing him an office in the Ile of Ré, & a ſumme of money, & to cheere him the better, tolde him that this proceeded of the Engliſh men themſelues. Then I made him dine with me, none being preſent but we two, and one of my ſeruants, and by little and little perſwaded him to do as he was required. After I had been at diner a while, the King ſent for me, and I told him how I had wrought with this good fellow, naming diuers others, who in mine opinion ſeemed fitter for this purpoſe than he, but the King would none but him. Wherfore he came and talked with him himſelfe, and confirmed him more with one word, than I had with an hundred. None entred into the chamber with the King ſaue onely the Lord of Villiers, then Maſter of the horſe, and now bailife of Caen. When the King perceiued this good fellow to be well perſwaded to go: he ſent the ſaid Maſter of the horſe to fetch a trumpet banner, thereof to make this counterfet herault a cote armor: for the King bicauſe he was not pompous as other Princes are, had neither herault nor trumpeter with him. Thus the Maſter of the horſe and one of my men made his cote armor as well as they could: which being finiſhed, the ſaid Maſter of the horſe fetched a ſcutchin of a little herault of the Lord Admirals called Pleinchemin, which was faſtened to our counterfet herault: his bootes alſo and his cloke were brought priuily to him, and likewiſe his horſe: whereupon he mounted no man vnderſtanding any thing of his iourney. Further, a goodly budget was tied to his ſaddle bowe, into the which he put his cote armor. Thus being well inſtructed what to ſay, he rode ſtraight to the Engliſh campe: where when he arriued with his cote armor on his backe, he was ſtaied incontinent, and brought to the King of Englands pauilion. Where being demanded the cauſe of his comming, he ſaid that he came from the King to ſpeake with the King of England, and had commandement to addreſſe himſelfe to the Lord Hovvard and the Lord Stanley, whereupon they led him into a tent to diner, and made him good cheere. After the King of England was riſen from the table (for he was at diner when the herault arriued) the ſaid herault was brought before him, and the King gaue him audience. His meſſage was chiefely grounded vpon the great deſire the King had of long time to be in perfect amitie with the King of England, to the ende both the realmes might liue togither in peace and quietnes: adding further, that ſince the time he was firſt crowned King of Fraunce, he neuer had attempted any thing againſt the King of England or his realme 
                     1
                  : ſecondarily, he excuſed himſelfe for receiuing in times paſt the Earle of Warwicke into his dominions, ſaying that he did it onely againſt the Duke of Burgundie and not againſt him. Further, he declared vnto him that the ſaid Duke of Burgundie had for none other cauſe called him into Fraunce, but that by the occaſion of his comming he might conclude a better peace for himſelfe with the King. And if happily any others were furtherers thereof, it was onely to amend the broken ſtate of their owne affaires, and for their owne priuate commoditie: but as touching the King of Englands good ſucceſſe, they were altogither careleſſe thereof: he put him alſo in minde of the time of the yeere, alleaging that winter approched,

and likewiſe of the great charges he ſuſtained: laſtly he ſaid, that notwithſtanding a great number in England, as well gentlemen as merchants deſired war with France: yet if the King of England would incline to peace, the King for his part would condiſcend to ſuch conditions, as he doubted not but he and his realme would allow of: laſtly, to the ende he might the better be informed of all theſe matters, he ſaid: that if the King of England would grant a ſafe conduct for an hundred horſe, the King his Maſter would ſend ambaſſadors to him well informed of their Maſters pleaſure, or if the ſaid King of England ſhould like better to aſſigne the place of treatie in ſome village betweene both the armies, and to ſend Commiſſioners thither on both ſides, the King his Maſter would willingly agree thereunto: and ſend the like ſafe conduct for his part.
               The King of England and part of his nobles liked theſe ouuertures very well, and granted our herault as large a ſafe conduct as he demanded, & gaue him fower nobles of gold 
                     2
                   in reward. Further, an Engliſh herault was ſent backe with him to the King, to bring the like ſafe conduct from him as the King of England had granted. And the next morning in a village neere to Amiens the Commiſſioners of both Princes met, being theſe: for the King, the baſtard of Bourbon Admirall of Fraunce, the Lord of Saint Pierre, and the Biſhop of Eureux called Heberge: and for the King of England the Lord Howard, one called Chalanger 
                  
                     3
                  , and a Doctor named Morton, at this preſent Chancellor of England and Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               Some may thinke peraduenture that the King humbled himſelfe too much, but thoſe that be wiſe will eaſily perceiue by that I haue aboue rehearſed, in how great danger the realme ſtood, had not God put to his helping hand, as well in cauſing the King to take this wiſe courſe, as alſo by troubling the D. of Burgundies wits, who committed ſo many errors as you haue heard in this action, & loſt now through his owne follie that which ſo long he had wiſhed for and deſired. Many ſecret practiſes lay hidded at that time among our ſelues, as well in Britaine as elſewhere, which would ſoone haue broken foorth into great inconueniences, had not this peace beene ſpeedily concluded. Wherefore I aſſure my ſelfe by that I haue ſeene in my time, that God had then, and yet hath a ſpeciall regard of this realme.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 King Lewis had forgotten that before this time he had attempted to reſtore Queene Margaret daughter to King Rene. Annal. Burgund.
                  2 Hall reporteth, that the French herault had giuen him a gilt cup and an hundred angels.
                  
                  3 This Chalanger our chronicles name Sentleger.
               
            
            
               How truce for nine yeeres was treated of betweene the Kings of Fraunce and England, notwithſtanding all the lets and impediments that the Conſtable and the Duke of Burgundy made. Chap. 8.
               
                  THe Commiſſioners of both the Princes met (as you haue heard) the next day after our heraults returne, for we lay within fower leagues or leſſe togither. The ſaid herault was well cheered, and had his office in the Ile of Ré where he was borne, and the ſum of mony that was promiſed him. Many conditions of peace were treated of betweene our Commiſſioners. The Engliſh men after their woonted maner, firſt demanded the crowne,

at the leaſt Normandie and Guienne, but they were no more earneſtly demanded than ſtrongly denied. Notwithſtanding euen at this firſt meeting the treatie was brought to a reaſonable point: for both the parties deſired peace: whereupon our ambaſſadors returned to the King, and the others to their campe. The King heard the Engliſh mens demands and laſt reſolutions, which were theſe: That he ſhould pay to the King of England preſently before his departure out of Fraunce 72000. crownes 
                     1
                  . That the King that now is then Daulphine ſhould marrie King Edwards eldeſt daughter at this day Queene of England, and that ſhe ſhould haue the Duchy of Guienne for hir maintenance, or 50000. crownes yeerely to be paied in the Tower of London by the ſpace of nine yeeres: which terme expired, the King that now is and his wife ſhould peaceably enioy the reuenues of the whole Duchie of Guienne, and then the King our Maſter to be cleerely diſcharged of all paiments to the King of England. Diuers other trifling articles there were, touching matter of trafike, which I ouerpaſſe. Laſtlie, this truce was to endure nine yeeres betweene the two realmes: all the confederates of both parties being comprehended therin, and namely on the King of Englands behalfe, the Dukes of Burgundie and Britaine if they themſelues would. Further, the King of England made a maruellous ſtrange offer, which was, to name in writing certaine noble men, who he ſaid were traitors to the King and his crowne. The King reioiced maruellouſly at the report that his Commiſſioners made at their returne, & ſat in counſell about theſe ouertures of peace: where among others I my ſelfe was preſent. Some ſuppoſed all this treatie to be meere deceit and cunning of the Engliſh men, but the King was of a contrarie opinion: for he alleaged firſt the time of the yeere, ſaying, that winter now approched, and that they had not one place to lodge in: ſecondarily, he declared the euill turns the Duke of Burgundie had done them, who was alſo departed from them. And as touching the Conſtable he did in maner aſſure himſelfe, that he would put no places into their hands, bicauſe he ſent howerly to him to entertaine him, to aſſwage his malice, and to keepe him from doing harme: laſtly, he alleaged the King of Englands diſpoſition, whom he knew well to be a Prince wholy giuen to his pleaſures & delights. Wherfore he ſeemed to diſcourſe wiſelier than any man of the companie, and better to vnderſtand than any other the matters there debated. He concluded therefore with all ſpeed to pay this ſumme of mony, and deuiſed order how to leuie it, and in the end commanded that euery man ſhould lend a portion the ſooner to furniſh it: for the King cared not what he did to rid the King of England out of his realme, ſaue onely that he would in no wiſe conſent to put any places into the Engliſh mens hands: for rather than he would ſuffer that, he was fully determined to hazard all.
               The Conſtable who began to ſmel theſe practiſes, was ſtricken with ſudden feare, bicauſe he had offended all the three Princes. Further, he doubted much the treatie almoſt concluded againſt him at Bouuines. Wherefore he ſent often to the King, and euen at this preſent arriued at the Court one of his gentlemen named Levvis of Creuille, with one of his Secretaries called Iohn Richer who are both yet liuing. They deliuered their meſſage to the Lord of Bouchage and me before they ſpake with the King, as his pleaſure was they ſhould. The newes they brought liked the King well, bicauſe he meant to vſe them to good purpoſe as you ſhall heare. The Lord of Contay (ſeruant to the Duke of Burgundie) lately taken priſoner before Arras as you haue heard, went to and fro vpon his word betweene the Duke and the King: and the King had promiſed to releaſe him his raunſome, and to giue him a great ſumme of money if he could perſwade his Maſter to peace. By chance he returned

to the King the ſelfeſame day that theſe two ſeruants of the Conſtables arriued. Wherefore the King made him and me to ſtand in a great old preſſe in his chamber, to the end he might heare and make report to his Maſter, of the language the Conſtable and his ſeruants vſed of him. We being there placed, the King ſate downe on a forme hard by the preſſe, to the end we might the better heare Lewis of Creuilles and his companions meſſage. Who began thus, that of late being by their Maſters commandement with the Duke of Burgundie, to perſwade him to depart from the Engliſh mens friendſhip: they found him in ſuch a rage againſt the King of England, that they had almoſt woon him not onely to abandon the Engliſh men, but alſo to helpe to ſpoile and deſtroy them in their returne home. And in vttering theſe words (the better to pleaſe the King) the ſaid Lewis of Creuille counterfetting the Duke of Burgundies geſture by ſtamping vpon the ground and ſwearing Saint George, rehearſed many reprochfull ſpeeches that (as they ſaid) the Duke vſed of the King of England. To be ſhort, they vttered as many ſcofs and mocks of the D. as was poſſible. The King made great ſport with this matter, & bad the ſaid Lewis of Creuille to ſpeake alowd, faining himſelfe to be growen ſomwhat deafe, and to tel him this tale againe: which the other making no bones thereat, did with a good will.
               The ſaid Contay (who ſtood with me in the preſſe) was maruellouſly aſtoniſhed at this talke, neither would haue beleeued it vnleſſe himſelfe had heard it. The Conſtables mens concluſion was this. They counſelled the King, for auoiding of all theſe great dangers he ſawe hang ouer his head, to conclude a truce (for the which the ſaid Conſtable offered to trauell to the vttermoſt of his power:) and to put into the Engliſh mens hands (the better to content them) ſome ſmall towne or two to lodge them in this winter, ſaying, that were they neuer ſo bad, yet the Engliſh men would holde themſelues contented with them. And it ſeemed by their talke, though they named no place, that they ment Eu and Saint Valery. By this meanes the Conſtable truſted to recouer the King of Englands fauor, which he had loſt bicauſe of the refuſall made him of his places. But the King who thought it ſufficient to haue plaied his part by bringing the Lord of Contay to heare what language the Conſtable and his men vſed of the Duke his Maſter, gaue them no euill anſwer, but ſaid that he would ſend to his brother 
                     2
                  , to aduertiſe him of ſuch newes as he knew, and ſo licenſed them to depart. Notwithſtanding, one of them before his departure ſware to reueale vnto him whatſoeuer he could learne touching him or his eſtate. The King had much adoo to diſſemble any longer when he heard them counſell him to put townes into the Engliſh mens hands. Notwithſtanding, he gaue them no ſuch anſwer, whereby they might gather their counſell to be taken in euill part (bicauſe he feared that would the more increaſe the Conſtables malice:) but ſent one backe with them to their Maſter: it was not far betweene him and vs, for a man might go and come in very ſhort ſpace. When the others were departed, the L. of Contay & I came out of the preſſe: the K. laughed maruellouſly, and was very mery with this pageant. But the ſaid Contay was ſo far out of patience to heare ſuch petit companions thus flout and ſcoffe his Maſter (eſpecially the Conſtable, pretending ſo great friendſhip to his Maſter, and treating with him of ſo many matters) that he thought euery hower ten til he were on horſebacke to aduertiſe the Duke his Maſter thereof. Wherefore he was diſpatched with all ſpeede, and wrote his inſtructions himſelfe: he caried alſo with him a letter of credit, written with the Kings owne hand, and ſo departed.
               The peace with the Engliſh men was already concluded as aboue is mentioned, and all theſe practiſes were abroch in one inſtant. The Kings Commiſſioners had made report of their negotiation as you haue heard, and the King of Englands were

alſo returned to him. Further it was concluded and agreed on both ſides by the ambaſſadors that paſſed betweene them, that the two Princes ſhould meete togither, and after they had ſeene one another and ſworne the treaty, the King of England ſhould returne home into his countrey, hauing firſt receiued the ſum aboue mentioned of 720000. crownes, and leauing in hoſtage behinde him, till he were paſſed the ſeas, the Lord Hovvard, and the Maſter of his horſe called ſir Iohn Cheinie. Laſtly, a penſion of 16000. crownes was promiſed to be diuided among the King of Englands principall ſeruants, of the which ſum the Lord Hastings had two thouſand. The reſt had the Lord Howard, the Maſter of the horſe, Maſter Chalanger, Maſter Montgomerie, and others: beſides this, great ſums of money and goodly preſents of ſiluer plate were giuen to King Edvvards ſeruants.
               The Duke of Burgundy hearing theſe newes, came in great haſte from Luxembourg where he lay, to the King of England, accompanied onely with ſixteene horſe. The King being much aſtoniſhed at this his ſo ſudden arriuall, asked him what winde draue him thither, perceiuing by his countenance that he was diſpleaſed. The Duke anſwered that he was come to talke with him. The King demanded whether he would ſpeake with him priuately or publikely. Then ſaid the Duke, haue you concluded peace? I haue quoth the King made truce for nine yeeres, wherein both you and the Duke of Britaine are comprehended, and I pray you agree thereunto. But the Duke grew maruellous hot, and ſpake in Engliſh (for he could the language) rehearſing what noble acts diuers Kings of England had done in Fraunce, and what great trauell they had ſuſtained to purchaſe honor and renowme. Afterward he inueighed vehemently againſt this truce, ſaying, that he had not deſired the Engliſh men to paſſe the ſeas for any neede he had of their helpe, but to the end they might recouer their owne right. And to the intent they might perceiue that he ſtood in no need of their comming: he proteſted that he would not make truce with the King, till the King of England had been three moneths at home in his realme: which talke ended, he departed and returned from whence he came. The King of England and his Councell tooke theſe words in euill part: but they that miſliked the peace commended much the Dukes ſpeech.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Meyer ſaith thus: Quinquaginta millia aureorum pro tributo Aquitaniae Septuaginta quinque millia praeterea ſoluta prae manibus Edwardo à Gallorum Rege. Annal. Aquit. ſay 65000. our chronicles and Gaguin 75000. But the truce ſaith Gaguin vvas concluded but for ſeuen yeeres. Introduction de la Marche ſaith 60000. crovvnes the yeerely tribut, but in the ſecond booke cap. 1. the ſame author ſaith but 36000.
                  2 The King calleth the Constable brother, bicauſe the King and he had married tvvo ſisters, as our author maketh mention in this booke cap. 4.
               
            
            
               How the King feaſted the Engliſh men in Amiens, and how there was a place aſſigned for the enteruiew of the two Kings. Chap. 9.
               
                  THe King of England to the end the peace might be fully concluded, came and encamped within halfe a league of Amiens. The King was at the gate, from whence he might behold the Engliſh men a far off as they came. To ſay the truth they ſeemed but yong ſoldiers: for they rode in very euill order. The King ſent to the King of England 300.

carts laden with the beſt wines that might be gotten: the which carriage ſeemed a far off almoſt as great as the King of Englands armie. Many Engliſh men bicauſe of the truce repaired to the towne, where they behaued themſelues very vndiſcreetly, and without all regard of their Princes honor. They came all in armes, and in great troupes: and if the King our Maſter would haue dealt falſly with them, ſo great a number might neuer ſo eaſily haue beene deſtroied. Notwithſtanding he meant nothing leſſe, but ſtudied to make them good cheere, and to conclude a ſure peace with them for his time. He had cauſed to be ſet at the entrie of the towne gate two long tables, on each ſide of the ſtreet one, furniſhed with all kindes of delicate meats that prouoke drinke, and with the beſt wines that might be gotten, and men to wait vpon them: of water there was no mention. At each of theſe tables he had placed fiue or ſixe great fat gentlemen of good houſes, thereby the better to content thoſe that deſired to drinke. The gentlemens names were theſe: Monſeur de Cran, de Briqueber, de Breſmes, de Villiers, and others. So ſoone as the Engliſh men drew neere the gate, they might behold this good cheere. Beſides this, men purpoſely appointed tooke their horſes by the bridles, ſaying that they would breake a ſtaffe with them, and ſo led them to the table, where they were feaſted according to the varietie of the meats: which they tooke in very good part. After they were within the towne, what houſe ſoeuer they entred into they paid nothing. Further, nine or ten tauerns were well furniſhed at the Kings charge of all things neceſſarie: whither they went to eate and drinke, and called for what they would, but the King defraied all: and this cheere endured three or fower daies.
               You haue heard how the Duke of Burgundie miſliked the peace, which howſoeuer it diſpleaſed him, troubled the Conſtable much more, bicauſe he ſaw he had failed of his enterpriſe, and purchaſed himſelfe hatred on all ſides: wherefore he ſent his Confeſſor to the King of England with a letter of credit, deſiring him for Gods loue to haue no affiance in the Kings words and promiſes, but to accept the townes of Eu and S. Valerie, and there to lodge himſelfe part of the winter: adding, that within two moneths he would finde meanes to lodge him more commodiouſly. Other aſſurance heerof gaue he him none: for his onely meaning was to feede him foorth with theſe faire words. Laſt of all, to the end he ſhould not conclude a diſhonorable treatie for greedines of a little money, he promiſed to lend him fiftie thouſand crownes, with diuers other large offers. But the King had already cauſed the two places aboue mentioned to be burned, bicauſe he knew the King of England had intelligence that the Conſtable had perſwaded him to put them into the Engliſh mens hands. King Edwards anſwer was, that the truce was alreadie concluded, and that he would alter nothing therein, but if he had performed his promiſes, he would haue made no ſuch appointment: which anſwer draue the Conſtable into vtter deſpaire.
               You haue heard of the Engliſh mens great cheere in Amiens, but one euening Monſeur de Torcy came to the King and told him, that ſo great a number of them were in the towne, that it ſtood in ſome danger. But the King was diſpleaſed with his meſſage: wherefore euery man forbare to bring him any more ſuch newes. The next morrow was one of the daies that repreſented Childermas day that yeere 
                     1
                  , on the which the King vſed not to debate any matter, but accounted it a ſigne of ſome great misfortune towards him, if any man communed with him of his affaires, and would be maruellouſly diſpleaſed with thoſe that were neere about him and acquainted with his humor, if they troubled him with any matter whatſoeuer. Notwithſtanding the ſame morning I now ſpeake of, as he (being but newly riſen) was ſaying his praiers,

one brought me word that there were at the leaſt nine thouſand Engliſh men within the towne: which newes I hearing, determined to aduertiſe him thereof. Wherefore I entred againe into his cloſet, and ſaid vnto him: Sir, though this day repreſent vnto you Childermas day, yet neceſſity inforceth me to informe you of that I heare. Then I aduertiſed him at large of the great number of Engliſh men that were within the towne, adding that they entred continually all armed, and that no man durſt refuſe them the gate for feare of diſpleaſing them. The King was content to heare me ſpeake, and foorthwith aroſe from his praiers, ſaying, that he would not obſerue the ceremony of Innocents that day, and bad me mount on horſebacke to ſee if I could ſpeake with the Engliſh mens captaines, to cauſe them to depart the towne: further, he commanded me if I met any of his owne captaines, to bid them repaire vnto him, ſaying alſo, that he himſelfe would come to the gate immediately after me. I did as I was commanded, and ſpake to three or fower Engliſh captaines with whom I was acquainted, aduertiſing them what I thought good to be done in this caſe: but for one they put foorth of the towne, twenty came in. The King ſent immediately after me the L. of Gié now Marſhall of Fraunce, to take order for this inconuenience: we two entred togither into a tauerne, where were ſpent that morning 111. ſhots, yet was it but nine of the clocke. The houſe was full, ſome ſang, ſome ſlept, and ſome were drunke: which when I ſawe, I perceiued no danger to be of ſuch men, and ſent word thereof to the King: who came incontinent with a goodly traine to the gate, and cauſed two or three hundred ſoldiers to arme themſelues ſecretly in their captaines houſes, and placed ſome alſo vpon the gate where the Engliſh men entred. Further, he commanded his diner to be brought into the porters lodge, where he cauſed diuers Engliſh gentlemen to dine with him. The King of England being aduertiſed of this diſorder, was aſhamed thereof, and ſent to the King deſiring him to giue commandement, that no Engliſh man ſhould be ſuffered to enter the towne: whereunto the King anſwered, that he would neuer ſo do: but deſired him if it ſo pleaſed him, to ſend certaine of the yomen of his crowne to keepe the gate, and let in ſuch as they ſhould thinke good: and ſo the King of England did, whereupon a great number of Engliſh men departed the towne by his commandement.
               It was then determined that for perfect concluſion of the peace, Commiſſioners ſhould be appointed on both ſides to aſſigne a place for the enteruiew of the two Kings. For our King, the L. of Bouchage and I my ſelfe were named: and for the King of England, the L. Howard, one called Chalenger, and a herault. After we had ridden vp and downe and viewed all the riuer, we agreed in the end the pleaſanteſt, ſafeſt, and moſt commodious place to be Picquigny, a towne three leagues from Amiens, with a ſtrong caſtell, belonging to the Vidame of Amiens. Notwithſtanding that it were once burned by the Duke of Burgundy. The towne ſtandeth in a bottom, & the riuer of Som paſſeth through it, which is deeper there than a mans height, but very narrow. The country on both ſides of the riuer through the which the two Kings ſhould paſſe was very open and pleaſant, ſaue that when the King of England drew neere to the riuer ſide, there was a cauſey at the leaſt two bowe ſhot long enuironed with a marſh (a very dangerous paſſage if we had not meant good faith.) Wherefore without doubt the Engliſhmen (as before I haue ſaid) are not ſo ſubtill and circumſpect in theſe treaties and aſſemblies as the French. For (whatſoeuer men ſay of them) they go bluntly to worke, but a man muſt haue patience with them and giue them no croſſe language.
               After the place was aſſigned, we determined to build a ſtrong large bridge ouer the riuer, the worke men and ſtuffe we furniſhed. In the midſt of this bridge a woodden

grate was made like to a lions cage, the ſpace betweene each bar being no greater than that a man with eaſe might thruſt in his arme: ouer the head it was boorded to keepe off the raine, ſo brode that ten or twelue might ſtand couered vnder it on each ſide: ouer the bridge no man could paſſe: for the grate was framed cleane ouerthwart it, and vpon the riuer was but one bote with two men in it, to ferry ouer ſuch as paſſed from the one ſide to the other.
               I will tell you what mooued the King to make this grate in ſuch ſort that no man could paſſe through it, bicauſe it may peraduenture ſtand ſome man in ſtead that ſhall haue occaſion to make the like. In King Charles the 7. youth, this realme was greeuouſly plagued by the Engliſh men. For King Henry the 5. held the ſiege before Roan, and had brought the towne to great extremity: the moſt part of the inhabitants being either ſubiects to Iohn Duke of Burgundy then liuing, or of his faction.
               Betweene the ſaid Duke Iohn of Burgundy and the Duke of Orleans great variance had beene of long time, ſo far foorth, that the whole realme or the greateſt part was rent into two factions, whereby the Kings eſtate was much weakened: for partiality neuer ariſeth in any realme, but in the end the fire thereof is dangerous and hard to be quenched. This variance grew ſo hot, that the Duke of Orleans was ſlaine at Paris about eleuen yeeres before 
                     2
                  . The Duke of Burgundy led a great army, with the which he marched towards Normandy, minding to leuy the ſiege before Roan 
                     3
                  , but to the end he might be the ſtronger, and the better aſſured of the King, it was agreed that the King and he ſhould meet at Montereau faut Yonne, where a bridge was made and a grate ouerthwart it, with a little wicket in the middeſt boulted on both ſides, ſo that a man might paſſe through with conſent of both parties. The King 
                     4
                   came on the one ſide of the bridge, and the Duke on the other: being both accompanied with a great number of men of armes, eſpecially the Duke. They fell in communication togither vpon the bridge: at the which were preſent on the Dukes ſide onely three or fower 
                     5
                  . But after they had talked a while, the Duke either through earneſt ſollicitation of thoſe that were with the King, or of a deſire he had to humble himſelfe before him, vnboulted the wicket on his ſide, and the others on theirs. Three of the Dukes men went through before him, and then himſelfe paſſed being the fourth and was immediately ſlaine 
                     6
                  , and they alſo that accompanied him: wherefore enſued great miſeries and calamities to this realme 
                     7
                  , as all the world can witnes. This hiſtorie was before my time, wherefore I forbeare further to ſpeake therof: but thus the King rehearſed it to me word for word at the ſame time that this enteruiew with King Edvvard was appointed: ſaying, that if there had beene no wicket, no occaſion had beene to deſire the Duke to paſſe through the grate, and then that great misfortune had not happened. The authors whereof were certaine of the Duke of Orleans ſeruants that was ſlaine, who were then in great credit with King Charles.
               
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The King vpon a ſuper ſlition kept holy twelue daies in the yeere, viz. euerie moneth one, in remembrance of the Innocents day: and the day heere mentioned was one of them.
                  
                  2 Theſe eleuen yeeres was in the text but one yeere: the Printer for onze ans auoit hauing printed vn an auoit. For the Duke of Orleans was ſlaine ann. 1407. the 22. of Nouember, and the King of England laid his ſiege before Roan 1418. the last of Iuly. but Meyer ſaith in Iune, and it was yeelded to him the 19. or 16. as ſome write of Ianuarie 1419. which was eleuen yeeres and ſomwhat more after the Duke of Orleans death.
                  
                  3 All authors report, that not onely Roan but tall Normandie was taken before D. Iohn

                     of Burgundie was ſlaine: for Roan was yeelded to the Engliſh 1419. the 19. of Ianuarie, and the Duke ſlaine the ſame yeere in Nouember, September, or Auguſt (for authors ſo diuerſly report the time) but Commines maner (as himſelfe writeth) is not to ſtand ſo exactly vpon times. Further, authors agree not among themſelues about this matter. Laſtly, this place may be vnderſtood, that when Duke Iohn leuied his armie, his meaning was to raiſe the ſiege before Roan, though he could not come time ynongh to execute his enterpriſe. Of the Dukes death reade Meyer lib. 15. fol. 255. & 256. Chron. Fland. fol. 281. Annal. Burgund. &c.
                  
                  4 Note that this notwithſtanding, he was not King yet but Daulphin.
                  
                  5 The French writers ſay each of them hauing ten Knights.
                  
                  6 The French to excuſe the Daulphin ſay, that Tanneguy du Chaſtell (ſomtime ſeruant to the Duke of Orleans that was ſlaine) ſlue Duke Iohn with one blowe of a battell axe, bicauſe of certaine arrogant words vſed at that time to the Daulphin: wheras Commines and Meyer report that too great humilitie was cauſe of his death. Tanneguy du Chaſtell, Oliuer Layet, Peter Frotier, and William Batilier ſlue Duke Iohn and the Lord of Nouaille with him, who drew his ſword in the Dukes defence. Annal. Burgund. Introduct. de la Marche. Meyer.
                  7 For Duke Philip of Burgundie to reuenge his fathers death, entred into league with the Engliſh men.
                  
               
            
            
               How the two Kings met and ſware the treatie before concluded, and how ſome ſuppoſed that the holy Ghoſt came downe vpon the King of Englands pauilion in the likenes of a white pigeon. Chap. 10.
               
                  OVr grate being finiſhed as you haue heard, the next day the two Kings came thither in the yeeere 1475. the 29. of Auguſt 
                     1
                  . The K. had with him about eight hundred men of armes, and arriued firſt at the grate: on the King of Englands ſide ſtood all his armie in order of battell, which vndoubtedly was great both of horſemen and footemen: yet could not we diſcouer his whole force. We on our ſide ſeemed but a handfull to them, and no maruell: for the fourth part of the Kings armie was not there. It was appointed that each of the Kings ſhould be accompanied at the grate with twelue perſons, which were alreadie named, of the nobleſt perſonages and ſuch as were neereſt about them. Moreouer, on our ſide were fower of the King of Englands ſeruants to view what we did, and as many of ours on their ſide. The King as I told you, arriued firſt at the grate, and twelue of vs waited vpon him, among whom were the late Duke Iohn of Bourbon and the Cardinall his brother. It pleaſed him that I ſhould weare that day a ſute of apparell like his owne: for he had vſed of long time, and that verie often, to command one or other to be apparelled like himſelfe. The King of England came along vpon the cauſey aboue mentioned with a maruellous goodly traine, as was conuenient for the maieſtie of a Prince: he was accompanied with the Duke of Clarence his brother, the Earle of Northumberland, and diuers other noble men, namely the Lord Haſtings his Chamberlaine, his Chauncellor, and others. But there were not paſt three or fower beſides himſelfe apparelled in cloth of golde. Further, he ware on his head a black veluet cap with a maruellous rich iewell, being a Flower

de luce ſet with ſtones. He was a goodly tall Prince, but inclined now to be ſomewhat groſſe, & I had ſeene him before much beautifuller than at this preſent: for ſure when the Earle of Warwicke chaſed him out of England, he was the goodlieſt gentleman that euer I ſet mine eie on. When he came within fiue foote of the grate, he tooke off his cap, and bowed downe within halfe a foote of the ground: the King in like maner who was leaning vpon the grate, vſed great reuerence towards him: & when they came to embrace each other through the grate, the King of England againe made low obeiſance. Then the King began the talke and ſaid: Coſin, you are moſt hartily welcom, there is no man in the world whom I haue ſo much deſired to ſee as you, and praiſed be God that we are met heere to ſo good a purpoſe: heereunto the King of England anſwered in good French. This talke ended, the Chancellor of England, who was a Prelate and Biſhop of Elie, began his oration with a propheſie (whereof the Engliſh men are neuer vnfurniſhed 
                     2
                  :) which ſaid that in this place of Picquigny an honorable peace ſhould be concluded betweene the realmes of Fraunce and England. The Biſhops oration being ended, the letters were opened that the King had deliuered to the King of England touching the concluſion of the treatie: and the ſaid Chancellor asked the King whether they were written by his commandement, and whether he auowed them: whereunto the King anſwered yea. Then the Biſhop asked him againe, if he held himſelfe contented in like maner with thoſe letters and writings that were deliuered him on the King of Englands behalfe: whereunto the King anſwered as before. Then was the miſſall brought foorth and opened: vpon the which each of the Kings laide one of their hands, and the other vpon the true holie croſſe, and ſware both of them to keepe and obſerue the articles concluded betweene them, namely the truce for nine yeeres, wherein the confederats of both parties were comprehended, and the marriage of their children to be accompliſhed in maner and forme as was comprehended in the treatie. After they had both ſworne, the King (who had his words at commandement) began to enter into pleaſant talke with the K. of England: ſaying that he ſhould come to Paris to ſolace himſelfe there with the Ladies, and that he would giue him the Cardinall of Bourbon for his confeſſor, who would eaſilie aſſoile him of that ſinne, if any were committed. The King of England tooke great pleaſure in this talke, and anſwered with a merry countenanee: for he knew the Cardinall to be a good fellow. After ſome ſuch like ſpeeches paſſed betweene them, the King to ſhew that he had authority among his men, commanded thoſe that were with him to withdraw themſelues, ſaying that he would commune with the King of England in ſecret: which they that accompanied the King of England ſeeing, retired without commandement. After the two Kings had communed awhile togither, the King called me to him, and asked the King of England if he knew me, who anſwered, that he knew me well, and named the places where he had ſeene me, adding, that in times paſt I had taken paines to do him ſeruice in Calais during the time I was with the Duke of Burgundy. Then the King inquired of him, if the Duke of Burgundy would not be comprehended in the truce (as it was to be preſumed bicauſe of his froward anſwer, that he would not) what it would pleaſe him that he ſhould do? The King of England ſaid, that he would offer it him yet once more, and if he refuſed to accept it, that then they two ſhould do as they thought good. Afterward the King fell in talke of the Duke of Britaine (which was the onely end why he mooued this queſtion) & asked him in like maner of him. The King of England deſired him earneſtly to attempt nothing againſt the D. of Britain, ſaying that in his neceſſity he neuer found ſo faithfull a friend: whereupon the King ended this communication: and then calling

the company togither againe, with the moſt curteous and gratious language that might be, tooke his leaue of the King of England, giuing very good words in like maner to euery one of his ſeruants. And ſo the two Princes in a maner both at one inſtant departed from the grate and tooke horſe. The King returned to Amiens, and the King of England to his campe, whither we ſent from the court all kinde of prouiſion neceſſary for him, ſo far foorth, that torches and lights were not forgotten. At this enteruiewe the Duke of Gloceſter King Edwards brother, and certaine others were not preſent, bicauſe they miſliked the peace. Notwithſtanding, afterward they were well ynough perſwaded to allow of it, ſo far foorth that the ſaid Duke of Gloceſter came to Amiens to the King, who gaue him many goodly preſents of ſiluer plate, and horſes with all kinde of furniture.
               After the King was returned from this meeting, vpon the way he debated two points with me: the one, he found the King of England ſo willing to come to Paris that it liked him neuer a whit. For he is, quoth he, a goodly Prince, and much giuen to loue: he may peraduenture meete with ſome dainty dame at Paris, that will entertaine him with ſo many ſugred words, that ſhe may happily make him deſirous to returne thither againe. But his predeceſſors haue ſoiourned too long both at Paris and in Normandy. I like not his company on this ſide the ſea, but ſo long as he keepeth home, I wiſh to haue him my good friend and louing brother. The other point was this, he was ſory that he found the King of England ſomwhat hard when he made mention of the D. of Britaine: for the King was ſo deſirous to perſwade him to ſuffer war to be made in Britaine, that afterward he ſollicited this matter anew by the Lords of Bouchage and Saint Pierre. But the King of England ſeeing himſelfe thus earneſtly preſſed, anſwered in fewe words, that who ſo ſhould make war vpon the Duke of Britaine, he would paſſe the ſeas yet once againe in his defence: which anſwer being heard, the matter was no further mentioned. After the K. was returned to Amiens, euen as he was going to ſupper, arriued three or fower noble men of England ſuch as had furthered the peace, and the Lord Hovvard (who was one of them) began to talke with the King in his eare, ſaying, that if it pleaſed him, he would finde meanes to bring his Maſter to Amiens, and peraduenture to Paris, to make merry with him, which offer though the King liked neuer a whit, yet made he ſhew of great good liking thereof, and began to waſh, not anſwering much to that point, but tolde me ſoftly in mine eare, that the thing he moſt feared was hapned, meaning this offer. After ſupper they fell againe in communication of the ſelfeſame matter, but with wiſe words the enterpriſe was broken off: for the King ſaid, that with all ſpeede he muſt depart to go againſt the Duke of Burgundy. Although theſe affaires were of great importance and ſagely ordered on both ſides: yet you ſee merry toies hapned alſo among them which are not to be forgotten. But as touching the K. who will maruell (conſidering the great harmes the Engliſh men haue done in Fraunce but of late yeeres) if he trauelled his body, and ſpent his money to rid them friendly out of the realme, to the intent heereafter he might keepe them his friends, at the leaſt not haue them his foes.
               The next day after this meeting, a great number of Engliſh men repaired to Amiens, ſome of them affirming that the holy Ghoſt had made this peace (for they grounded all on propheſies.) The reaſon that mooued them ſo to ſay was, for that a white pigeon ſate vpon the King of Englands pauilion the day of the enteruiew, and would not remooue thence notwithſtanding any noiſe made in the camp. The cauſe whereof as ſome men iudged, was, for that it had rained a little, and afterward the ſunne ſhining very hot, the pigeon lighted vpon this pauilion (being higher than

the reſt) to drie hir ſelfe: which reaſon was giuen by a gentleman of Gaſcoine ſeruant to the King of England, named Lewis of Bretailles, who was not a little offended with the peace. And bicauſe he and I were of old acquaintance, he talked familiarly with me: ſaying that we would deride the King of England for this treatie. I asked him how many battels the ſaid King had woon: he told me nine, in the which himſelfe had beene in perſon. Then I demanded of him againe, how many he had loſt: and he anſwered neuer but one, which was this we now bereaued him of: adding, that he receiued greater diſhonor by returning home after this ſort, than he had obtained honor in winning the other nine. Of this communication I aduertiſed the King, who ſaid he was a dangerous knaue, and that ſome meanes muſt be found to ſtop his mouth: whereupon he ſent for him, and made him dine at his owne table, offering him verie large offers and goodly offices if he would tarry in Fraunce. But ſeeing he would by no meanes be woon thereunto, he gaue him a thouſand crownes in money, promiſing alſo a good turne to his brethren that were on this ſide the ſea, and I gaue him a watchword in his eare, to employ his credit to continue the friendſhip and amity begun betweene the two Princes.
               The King feared eſpecially aboue all things leaſt ſome word ſhould eſcape him at vnawares, whereby the Engliſh men might gather that he derided them. And by chaunce the next morning after this meeting, as he was in his cloſet, and not paſt three or fower of vs with him, he ſpake a merrie word touching the wines and preſents ſent to the Engliſh campe: and as he turned about eſpied a merchant of Gaſcoine that dwelt in England, who was come to mooue a ſute to him for a licence to ſhip certaine Gaſcoine wines into England without impoſt, which was a ſute that might much benefit the ſaid merchant if he could obtaine it. The King woondered when he ſaw him how he was gotten in thither, and asked him of what towne he was in Guienne, and whether he were a merchant and married in England. The merchant anſwered yea, but that his wealth was not great. Incontinent before his departure thence, the K. appointed one to accompanie him to Bordeaux, and I communed with him by his commandement. Further, a good office in the towne where he was borne was giuen him: the licence for the wines which he demanded was granted him, and beſides this 1000. franks were deliuered him for his wiues charges vpon the way, and he ſent a brother of his into England for hir, but went not himſelfe. Thus the King condemned himſelfe in this penaltie for his ouer large ſpeech.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The old copie ſaith the 19. day, Meyer the 31. day, Gaguin the 28. of October.
                  
                  2 The like reparteth Iouius of the French.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Conſtable after the truce made with the Engliſh men, ſought to excuſe himſelfe to the King: and how truce was alſo concluded for nine yeeres betweene the King and the Duke of Burgundie. Chap. 11.
               
                  THe ſelfeſame day aboue mentioned, being the next day after the enteruiew, the Conſtable ſent letters to the King by a ſeruant of his named Rapine (who was a truſtie ſeruant to his Maſter, and whom alſo the King preferred afterwarde) Monſeur de Lude and my ſelfe were commanded to heare his meſſage. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that

Monſeur de Contay was already returned from the Duke of Burgundie to the Court, about the practiſe aboue mentioned deuiſed againſt the Conſtable: ſo that the ſaid Conſtable knew not to what Saint he ſhould vow himſelf, but remained in vtter deſpaire. Rapines meſſage was very humble, tending to excuſe his Maſter of the ſundry euill reports that he knew had been made of him to the King, for that the end ſufficiently declared, that he neuer meant to do otherwiſe than dutie required. And to the intent he might the better aſſure the King of his true dealing, he promiſed ſo to practiſe with the Duke of Burgundy, that he would perſwade him to helpe to deſtroy the King of England and his whole army, if it ſo pleaſed the King. And it ſeemed by his ſpeech that his Maſter was in vtter deſpaire. We told him that we were in perfect amity with the Engliſh men, and would no war. But Monſeur de Lude who was with me, aduentured to aske him if he knew where his Maſters treaſure lay. I maruelled to heare ſuch a word paſſe him: for ſeeing this Rapine was a very truſtie ſeruant to his Maſter, this ſpeech was ſufficient to haue cauſed the Conſtable to flie, and to vnderſtand in what eſtate he was, and what was a brewing for him, eſpecially ſeeing the danger he had been in not paſt a yeere before. But I neuer knew man in my life neither heere nor elſewhere, that could diſlodge in time and ſhun the danger hanging ouer his head: ſome bicauſe they thinke they ſhall not be receiued nor be in ſafetie in ſtrange countries, and other ſome bicauſe they are too much affectionate to their goods, wiues and children: which two reaſons haue been the cauſe of many a good mans vndooing.
               After we had made report to the King of Rapines meſſage, he called for one of his Secretaries, none being with him but the Lord Hovvard the King of Englands ſeruant, (who vnderſtood nothing of this practiſe againſt the Conſtable,) the Lord of Contay who was returned from the Duke of Burgundy, and we two that had talked with the ſaid Rapine. Then he indited a letter to the Conſtable, wherein he aduertiſed him of all that was done the day before, namely, the treaty of peace. Further, he ſen
                     ••••
                   word that he was buſied with diuers affaires of great importance, and had neede of ſuch a head as his: which word was no ſooner vttered, but he turned to the Engliſhmen and the Lord of Contay, ſaying ſoftly to them, I meane not that we ſhould haue the body, but the head without the body. This letter was deliuered to Rapine, who liked it maruellous well, eſpecially thoſe words that the King had need of ſuch a head as his Maſters, but he vnderſtood not the myſtery thereof. The King of England alſo ſent the King the two letters of credit that the Conſtable had written to him, and diſcloſed all the meſſages that he had ſent him, whereby you may perceiue how the Conſtable had behaued himſelfe towards theſe three great Princes, and in what eſtate he was: euery one of the three deſiring his death.
               The King of England vpon the receit of his money departed, and marched in great haſte towards Callice, fearing the D. of Burgundies malice & his ſubiects, and not without cauſe: for whenſoeuer his men ſcattered & ſingled themſelues, ſome of them came ſhort home. At his departure he left for hoſtages with the King, till his returne into England according to his promiſe, the Lord Hovvard, and the Maſter of his horſe called Sir Iohn Cheiny.
               
               You haue heard before at the entrance into theſe Engliſh affaires, that K. Edward had no great deuotion to this voyage into Fraunce: for being come to Douer, before he embarked he began to practiſe with vs. But there were two cauſes that mooued him to paſſe the ſeas: one, the deſire his whole realme had according, to their natural humor, to make war in Fraunce, and the rather at this preſent, bicauſe the Duke of Burgundy preſſed the war ſo earneſtly: the other, the hope he had to reſerue to

himſelfe a great part of the ſubſidie leuied in England for this voiage: for as before I haue ſaid, the Kings of England receiue onely the bare reuenues of their lands, ſaue when they leuie money to make war in Fraunce. Further, K. Edward had deuiſed this ſubtiltie to appeaſe his ſubiects: he had brought with him ten or 12. great fat paunches, as well of the citie of London, as of other townes in England, who were the wealthieſtmen of the commonaltie, and had been the chiefeſt inſtruments both in perſwading the King to paſſe into Fraunce, and alſo in leuying this mightie army. The King cauſed them to be lodged in good tents, but that was not the life they were accuſtomed to lead: wherefore they ſoone waxed wearie of it. At their firſt arriuall they looked for the battell within three daies after their landing. But the King of England alleaged many doubts vnto them, and endeuored to put them in feare of the battell, and to perſwade them to allow of the peace, to the ende they might aide him at their returne into England to pacifie the murmuring and grudging of the people that happily might ariſe bicauſe of his returne: for neuer King of England ſince King Arthur, paſſed at one time with ſo great force, and ſo many noble perſonages into Fraunce. But after the peace was concluded, the King of England repaired homeward with ſpeed, reſeruing to himſelfe a great ſumme of monie leuied in England for the paiment of his ſoldiers; ſo that he obtained in effect all his purpoſes. His bodie could not away with ſuch labor as a King of England muſt endure that mindeth to atchieue any great enterpriſe in Fraunce. Further, the King our Maſter had made great preparation for reſiſtance, though to ſay the truth he could not well haue prouided defence ſufficient againſt all his enimies: for he had too manie. Laſtly, the King of England had a maruellous great deſire to accompliſh the marriage of his daughter with King Charles the 8. now raigning, which cauſed him to winke at a number of inconueniences, that turned after to the King our Maſters great profit.
               After all the Engliſh men were returned home ſauing the hoſtages: the King tooke his iourney towards Laon, and lodged in a little towne vpon the ma
                     •••
                  es of Henault called Veruins, and to Auennes in Henault came the Chauncello
                     •
                   o
                     •
                   Burgundie with the Lord of Contay and other ambaſſadors from the Duke. The King was very deſirous at this time to conclude a finall peace: for this mightie Engliſh armie had put him in feare, and no maruell: for he had ſeene in his time of their doings in this realme, and would in no wiſe their returne. The ſaid Chauncellor writ to the King, deſiring that it would pleaſe him to ſend his Commiſſioners for the peace to a certaine bridge in the midway betweene Auennes and Veruins, ſaying, that he and his colleagues would meet them there. The King ſent him anſwer, that he would come thither himſelfe; and notwithſtanding that diuers, whoſe aduiſe he asked in this matter, perſwaded him to the contrarie: yet thither he went, leading alſo with him the Engliſh hoſtages, who were preſent when he receiued the Dukes ambaſſadors, the which came very well accompanied with archers and men of war. At this firſt meeting they did but ſalute the King, & then went to dinner. One of the Engliſh men began to repent him that the treatie was concluded, and ſaid to me at a window, that if they had ſeene many ſuch men with the Duke of Burgundie, peraduenture they would not haue made peace. Which words the Vicount of Narbonne 
                     1
                   (now Lord of Fouez) hearing, ſaid: Were you ſo ſimple to thinke, that the Duke of Burgundie had not great force of ſuch men? he had ſent them onely to refreſh themſelues: but you were ſo deſirous to returne home, that ſixe hundred pipes of wine, and a penſion the King giueth you, blew you quickly backe into England. The Engliſh man in a great furie anſwered; I perceiue now their ſayings to prooue

true, that told vs you would deride vs for making peace. Call you the money the King giueth vs, a penſion? it is tribute, and by Saint George you may babble ſo much that you may ſoone make vs to returne. But I brake off their talke and turned it to a ieſt: notwithſtanding the Engliſhman was diſcontented and caſt out a word thereof to the King, who was maruellouſly offended with the Lord of Narbonne for his ſpeech.
               The King communed not long at this firſt meeting with the Chancellor and the other ambaſſadors: for it was agreed that they ſhould go with him to Veruines, where when they arriued he cōmanded M. Tanneguy du Chaſtell, and M. Peter Doriole Chancellor of Fraunce, and others to negotiate with them: much ado there was betweene them, many reaſons alleaged, and many demands made on each ſide. The Kings Commiſſioners made report to him that the Burgundians vſed fierce and ſtout language, but that they had paid them with the like, and withall tolde him what their anſwers were. Which he much miſliked, ſaying, that the like anſwers had been made diuers times before, and that they treated not of a finall peace, but onely of truce; wherefore he would haue no more ſuch language vſed, but would himſelfe commune with them: and thereupon cauſed the ſaid Chauncellor and the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  
                  baſſadors to come into his chamber, out of the which all men were commanded to auoid, ſaue the late L. Admirall called the baſtard of Burbon, Monſeur de Bouchage, and my ſelfe. There the King concluded truce for nine yeeres, wherein it was agreed, that euery man ſhuld be reſtored to his former eſtate. But the ambaſſadors beſought the King that the truce might not yet be proclaimed, to ſaue the D. their Maſters oth, who had ſworne not to make truce before the King of England had been a certaine ſpace in his realme, leaſt he ſhould thinke their Maſter had accepted his truce.
               But the King of England (who thought great ſcorne that the Duke would not be comprehended in his truce) being aduertiſed that he treated with the King of an other, ſent ouer into Fraunce a knight neere about him called Sir Thomas Montgomery, who came to Veruins at the very ſame inſtant that the King treated with the Duke of Burgundies ambaſſadors of this truce aboue mentioned. The ſaid Sir Thomas required the King in the King his Maſters name, to make no other truce with the Duke of Burgundy, than that which was already concluded betweene them two. Further deſiring him not to deliuer Saint Quintins into the Dukes hands, & offering that if he would continue war with the Duke, his Maſter would be content the next ſommer to paſſe the ſeas againe for him, and in his aide, with theſe conditions. Firſt, that the King ſhould recompence the loſſe the King of England ſhould ſuſtaine by the wooll cuſtome of Calice, amounting yeerely to 50000. crownes: which if the war opened with Flaunders were cleerely loſt. And ſecondarily, that the King ſhould pay the one halfe of the Engliſh army, and the King of England the other. The King yeelded great thanks to the King of England for this curteous meſſage, and gaue a goodly preſent of ſiluer plate to the ſaid Sir Thomas. Notwithſtanſting, as touching the war he excuſed himſelfe, ſaying, that the truce was already concluded, being the very ſame that the King of England and he had made for the terme of nine yeeres, ſaue that the Duke would haue his letters apart. Thus to content the ambaſſador he excuſed the matter the beſt he could, and the ſaid Sir Thomas returned into England, and the hoſtages with him. The King maruelled much at the King of Englands offers, at the report whereof I onely was preſent. But it ſeemed to him a dangerous thing, to cauſe the King of England to paſſe the ſeas againe, both bicauſe euery trifle would breede quarrels betweene the French and Engliſh being in campe togither; and alſo bicauſe it was to be feared that the Burgundians and they would eaſily

concile themſelues: wherefore he was ſo much the more deſirous to conclude the truce with the Duke of Burgundy.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The French hauing onely Monſeur de Narbonne, made Sleidan tranſlate it the Biſhop of Narbonne, whereas in deed he was Vicount of Narbonne not Biſhop, as other authors affirme; and theſe words, (Qui an iourd'huy ſ'appele Monſeur de Fouez) plainly prooue: wherefore for auoiding of Sleidans error, I haue put this word (Vicount) into the text, though it be not in the French.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Conſtables death was fully concluded and ſworne betweene the King and the Duke of Burgundie, and how he went into the Dukes dominions, where by his commandement he was ſtaied and deliuered to the King, and after put to death. Chap. 12.
               
                  THe truce being concluded, the old practiſe againſt the Conſtable was reuiued: and to the end the proceſſe thereof ſhould be ſhort; they ratified all that was done before at Bouuines, and the writings there made (as before you haue heard) were againe interchangablie deliuered. In the ſaid writings the King promiſed the Duke Saint Quintins, Han, Bohain, and all the lands that the Conſtable held of the Duke, and all his moouables whereſoeuer they were found 
                     1
                  . Further, the maner how to beſiege him in Han (where he lay) was deuiſed. It was alſo agreed that whether of the two Princes could firſt take him, ſhould either put him to death within eight daies, or deliuer him to the other. All men incontinent began to feare this confederacie, ſo far foorth that the Conſtables principall ſeruants forſooke him, namely Monſeur de Genly and diuers others. Further, he being aduertiſed that King Edward had deliuered his letters to the King and diſcouered all that he knew of him; and ſeeing alſo that his enimies had made truce, fell into great feare, and ſent to the Duke of Burgundie, humbly beſeeching him to giue him a ſafe conduct to come and ſpeake with him about certaine affaires that greatly imported him. The Duke at the firſt made dainty to grant a ſafe conduct, but in the end ſent him one. This mighty noble man had oft debated, whither he ſhould flie to ſaue himſelfe: for he was informed of all that was done, and had ſeene the writings deuiſed againſt him at Bouuines. Sometime he conſulted with certaine of his ſeruants, being Lorrains, determining to flie with them into Almain, carying a great ſum of money with him (for the way was very ſafe) therewith to buy ſom place vpon the riuer of Rhene to remaine in, till he were reconciled to one of the two Princes. Somtime he reſolued to put himſelfe into his ſtrong caſtel of Han, which had coſt him ſo much money, and which he had fortified to ſerue him at ſuch a pinch, and furniſhed of al things as well as any caſtell that euer I knew. But he could not finde men to his minde to put into the place, bicauſe all his ſeruants were borne vnder the Dominions of one of the two Princes. And peraduenture his feare was ſo great, that he durſt not wholy diſcouer himſelfe and his eſtate to them; for I thinke a great many of them would not haue forſaken him: neither was it ſo dangerous for him to be beſieged of both the Princes as of one, for it had been

impoſſible for the two armies to agree.
               But in the end he concluded to go to the Duke of Burgundy vnder this ſafe conduct, being accompanied onely with fifteene or twenty horſe, and rode to Montz in Hainault, where the Lord Deſmeriez great bailife of Hainault and his eſpecial friend lay. With him he ſoiourned a certaine ſpace, attending newes from the Duke of Burgundy, who had lately begun war vpon the Duke of Lorraine, bicauſe he had defied him when he lay at the ſiege before Nuz, and done much harme in the countrey of Luxembourg.
               The King being aduertiſed of the Conſtables departure, purpoſed ſo to order the matter, that he ſhould neuer recouer the Duke of Burgundies fauor: for he leuied ſeauen or eight hundred men of armes, and rode with them in all haſte to Saint Quintins, knowing well what force was within the towne; neere to the which when he approched, certaine of the Citizens came foorth to receiue him. The King commanded me to enter the towne, and appoint euery captaine to his quarter, and ſo I did. Firſt the ſoldiers entred, and then the King, who was very honorably receiued of the townes men: whereupon certaine of the Conſtables ſeruants retired into Hainault. The King immediately aduertiſed the Duke by a letter of his own hand, of the taking of Saint Quintins; thereby to put him vtterly out of hope to recouer it by the Conſtables meanes. Which newes when the Duke vnderſtood, he ſent word to the Lord Deſmeriez great bailife of Hainault, to garde the towne of Montz in ſuch ſort, that the Conſtable could not depart, and farther to commaund him to keepe his lodging: which commandement the bailife executed accordingly, for he durſt do no leſſe. Notwithſtanding, the garde was not ſtrong enough for ſuch a perſonage, if he had been diſpoſed to eſcape. What ſhall we ſay heere of Fortune? This noble man dwelt vpon the frontiers of both theſe Princes dominions being enimies, hauing ſtrong townes in his hands, and fower hundred men of armes well paied, of the which he was Comptroller himſelfe, and placed whom it pleaſed him, and had been their Captain the ſpace of twelue yeeres. He was a wiſe and a valiant knight, and of great experience, and had great treaſure in ready coine: yet notwithſtanding at this laſt pinch his courage ſo failed him, that he wiſt not what ſhift to make. We may well ſay, that fickle Fortune behelde him with a frowning countenance: or rather (if we will ſpeake like good Chriſtians) we muſt ſay, that ſuch great miſeries depend not vpon Fortune: for Fortune is bu
                     ••
                   phantaſticall fiction of Poetrie. Wherefore we muſt thinke if we will well weigh both the reaſons aboue alleaged, and diuers others heere vnrehearſed, that God had vtterly forſaken him and giuen him ouer. And if it were lawfull for man to iudge, as I know it is not (eſpecially for me) I would ſay that in mine opinion all this miſery fell vpon him, bicauſe he trauelled continually to the vttermoſt of his power to nouriſh the war betweene the King and the Duke of Burgundy, knowing his great authority and eſtate to depend therupon: although to ſay the truth, the matter needed no great labor, for there was a naturall antipathy between them. Who is ſo rude or ignorant to thinke that Fortune or any other like chance was able to caſt ſo wiſe a man into the diſgrace of both theſe Princes at once, (who in their liues neuer agreed in any thing ſaue onely this,) eſpecially into the King of Englands diſgrace, who had maried his neece, and loued entirely all his wiues kinſmen, eſpecially thoſe of this houſe of Saint Paul. It is like therefore, yea it is moſt certaine, that God had withdrawne his grace from him, in that he had purchaſed himſelfe ſuch hatred of all theſe three Princes, and had not one friend in the world that durſt giue him a nights lodging. Neither was it fained Fortune that ſtrake this ſtroke, but God alone. The like whereof hath hapned, and ſhall happen to diuers

others, who after great and long proſperity fall into great aduerſity and trouble. After the Conſtable was arreſted in Hainault by the Duke of Burgundies commandement, the King ſent word to the Duke either to deliuer him into his hands, or execute him according to the tenure of the writings aboue mentioned. The Duke anſwered that he would ſo do, and commanded the Conſtable to be led to Peronne, and there ſtraightly kept. Further you ſhall vnderſtand that the Duke had already taken diuers places in Lorraine and Barrois, and at this preſent helde the ſiege before Nancy, which was valiantly defended. The King had great force of men of armes in Champaigne, which held the Duke in feare: for the King was not bound by the truce to ſuffer him to deſtroy the Duke of Lorraine, who was retired into Fraunce. The Lord of Bouchage and diuers other ambaſſadors ſent by the King, preſſed the Duke earneſtly, to performe his promiſe & oth; and he anſwered euer that he would ſo do; but yet delaid it more than a moneth ouer and aboue the eight daies wherin he ſhould either haue deliuered the Conſtable, or put him to death. Notwithſtanding in the end ſeeing the matter ſo earneſtly preſſed, and fearing that the King would hinder his enterpriſe in Lorraine, which he ſo much deſired to atchieue, to the end he might haue the paſſage open from Luxembourg into Burgundy, and ioine all theſe Seniories togither: for this little Duchy of Lorraine being his, he might come vpon his owne dominions from Holland, almoſt as far as Lions 
                     2
                  . For theſe conſiderations I ſay, he wrote to his Chancellor and the Lord of Himbercourt ſo often already mentioned, (which two had abſolute authority in his abſence, and were both of them the Conſtables enimies, and euill willers) to go to Peronne and deliuer the Conſtable at a day by him prefixed, to thoſe that the King ſhould there appoint to receiue him, ſending word withall to the Lord Deſmeriez to deliuer him to the ſaid Chancellor and Himbercourt.
               
               The Duke of Burgundy in the meane time beat continually the towne of Nancy: but there were good ſoldiers within it which valiantly defended it. Further, one of the Dukes owne Captaines, called the Earle of Campobache, a Neapolitane born, but baniſhed thence for the houſe of Anious faction, was lately entred into intelligence with the Duke of Lorraine, heire apparant of the houſe of Aniou after the death of King Rene his mothers father. This Earle of Campobache promiſed to prolong the ſiege, and finde meanes that ſuch things ſhould be lacking as were neceſſary for the taking of the towne 
                     3
                  . Which his promiſe, he was very well able to performe, being then the greateſt man in the Dukes army; but a falſe traitor to his Maſter, as heerafter you ſhall heare more at large. This was a preparatiue as it were of all thoſe euils and miſeries that fell afterward vpon the Duke of Burgundy. The ſaid Duke meant as I ſuppoſe, if he had taken the towne before the day appointed for the Conſtables deliuery, not to deliuer him at all. And on the otherſide I thinke, if the King had had him, he would haue done more in the Duke of Lorraines fauor than he did: for he was aduertiſed of the Earle of Campobaches traiterous practiſes, but medled not with them: yet was he not bound to let the Duke of Burgundy do what him liſted in Lorraine, (notwithſtanding for diuers reſpects he thought it beſt ſo to do:) beſides this he had great forces vpon the frontiers of the ſaid countrey of Lorraine.
               The Duke could not take Nancy before the day appointed for the Conſtables deliuery 
                     4
                  , which being come, the two aboue mentioned executed willingly their Maſters commandement 
                     5
                  , and deliuered him at the gate of Peronne to the baſtard of Bourbon Admirall of Fraunce, and to Monſeur de Saint Pierre, who led him to Paris. Diuers haue told me, that within three howers after his departure, meſſengers

came in poſte from the Duke with a countermaund, to wit, that he ſhould not be deliuered before Nancy were taken, but it was too late. At Paris the Conſtables proces was made, and the Duke deliuered all his letters that were in his hands, and all ſuch euidence as ſerued for the proces. The King preſſed the Court earneſtly, and Iuſtices were appointed for the hearing of his cauſe, who ſeeing the euidence that both the King of England and the Duke gaue againſt him, condemned him to die 
                     6
                  , and confiſcated all his goods.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Vnderſtand this as wel of the moouables he had in the Kings dominions, as vnder the Duke.
                  
                  2 The Duke deſired Lorraine, not onely for the cauſe heere alleaged by our author, but alſo to proclaime himſelfe vnder that colour King of Sicile and Hieruſalem.
                  
                  3 This Campobache (as ſome report) wrought this treaſon, for that the Duke had once in his rage giuen him a blow. Meyer.
                  4 He tooke Nancy about the 19. of Nouember, but la Marche ſaith in the ende of Nouember. Meyer. 28. Nouemb. 1475. and the Conſtable was deliuered the 30. of Nouember.
                  
                  5 The Chancellor and Hymbercourt deliuered him with ſuch ſpeede through euill will, whereas they ought to haue ſtaide till the ſecond meſſage had come from the Duke: for as ſaith Meyer. Ferebat conſuetudo exiure militari ciuilique deſumpta, vt in talibus grauibus rebus ſecundam ſemper praetores miniſtrique expectarent iuſſionem; at hoc iſti duo odio grauiſſimo deflagrantes in comitem ſtabuli, gratúmque volentes facere regi mirum in modum ſanguinem illius ſitienti, non obſeruauerunt. Si obſeruaſſent vt debeant, fortaſſis & virum ipſum, & ducem Dominum ſuum ſeque ipſos planè ſeruaſſent. Siquidem ſtatim poſt Caroli interitum ambo apud Gandauum accepêre talionem.
                  6 The Conſtable died the 19. of December 1475. Annal. Franc. Gaguin. Meyer. in whom read the cauſes of his death fol. 368.
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe of the fault the Duke of Burgundie committed in deliuering the Conſtable to the King contrarie to his ſafe conduct, and what enſued thereof. Chap. 13.
               
                  THis deliuerie of the Conſtable was maruellous ſtrange; notwithſtanding I ſpeake it not to excuſe his faults, neither to accuſe the Duke, for ſure he had iuſt cauſe to ſeeke his death. But me thinke that he being ſo great a Prince and of ſo noble and honorable an houſe, ſhould not haue giuen him a ſafe conduct, and then arreſt him. And vndoubtedly it was great crueltie to deliuer him where he was ſure to die, eſpecially for couetouſnes. But ſoone after he had thus diſhonored himſelfe by this deede, he receiued great loſſes and began to fall to ruine. So that if we well conſider the workes that God hath done in theſe our daies, and daily doth, we ſhal eaſily perceiue that he will leaue no fault vnpuniſhed, and that theſe ſtrange puniſhments are inflicted onely by him, bicauſe they ſurmount far the works of nature. For his puniſhments are ſudden, eſpecially vpon thoſe that vſe violence and cruelty: who can not be meane perſons, but mighty men, either in ſeniories or authority. This houſe of Burgundy had long

floriſhed, for by the ſpace of a hundred yeeres or thereabout, (during the which time raigned fower of this houſe) it was more eſteemed than any other houſe in Chriſtendome. For all thoſe that were mightier then it, had ſuffered great afflictions and aduerſities, but it liued continually in perpetual felicity & honor. The firſt great Prince of this houſe was Philip ſurnamed the Hardy, brother to Charles the fift King of Fraunce, who maried the daughter and heire of the Earle of Flaunders; being Counteſſe not onely of that countrey, but alſo of Artois, Burgundy 
                     1
                  , Neuers and Rethell. The ſecond was Iohn: the third was the good Duke Philip, who ioined to his houſe the Duchies of Brabant, Luxembourg, Lambourg, and the Counties of Holland, Zeland, Hainault, and Namur. The fourth was this Duke Charles, who after his fathers death was one of the richeſt and moſt redoubted Princes of Chriſtendome; and had in moueables, namely iewels, plate, tapeſtry, bookes, and naprie, more than three of the greateſt Princes in Chriſtendome. Of treaſure in coine I haue ſeene greater abundance in other Princes Courts: for Duke Philip by the ſpace of many yeeres leuied neither ſubſidies nor taskes: yet notwithſtanding at his death, he left his ſonne aboue three hundred thouſand crowns in ready money, and in peace with all his neighbors, which long indured not: notwithſtanding I will not impute the whole occaſion of the wars to him, for others were as buſie as he. His ſubiects immediately after his fathers death, vpon a ſmall requeſt graunted him very willingly a ſubſidie (euerie countrey apart) for the terme of ten yeeres, amounting yeerly to the ſumme of 350000. crownes: Burgundy not being comprehended therein. Yea and at the time he deliuered the Conſtable, he leuied yeerely ouer and aboue the former ſumme more then 300000. crownes, and had aboue 300000. crownes in coine; and all the Conſtables goods that came to his hands, amounted hardly to the value of 80000. crownes, for he had but 76000. in coine. So that the Duke committed this foule fault for ſmall gaine, yet was the puniſhment thereof great: for God raiſed vp an enimie againſt him of ſmall force, of yoong yeeres, and of little experience in all things, and cauſed his ſeruant whom he then moſt truſted, to become falſe and traiterous. He made alſo the Duke himſelfe to miſtruſt his owne ſubiects & faithfull ſeruants. Are not theſe ſuch manifeſt tokens and preparatiues as God vſed in the old Teſtament, againſt thoſe whoſe good fortune and proſperitie he meant to chang into miſery and aduerſitie? Yet he neuer humbled himſelfe before God, but euen till the hower of death attributed all his good ſucceſſe to his owne wiſedome and proweſſe: before his death he was mightier than any of his predeceſſors, and more eſteemed through the whole world.
               Before the Conſtables deliuerie he was fallen into a maruellous miſtruſt or great diſdaine of his owne ſubiects: for he had ſent into Italie for a thouſand men of armes Italians. Before Nuz alſo he had great forces of Italians in his campe: for the Earle of Campobache had vnder his charge fower hundred men of armes and better. This Earle had no poſſeſſions for his maintenance, for bicauſe of the wars the houſe of Aniou had made in the realme of Naples (which houſe he ſerued,) he was baniſhed his countrey and loſt all his landes, and ſerued euer ſince his departure out of Italie in Prouence or Lorraine vnder King Rene of Sicile, or Duke Nicholas ſonne to Duke Iohn of Calabria. After whoſe death the Duke of Burgundie gaue entertainment to moſt of his ſeruants, eſpecially all his Italians: namely this Earle of Campobache, Iames Galeot a valiant honorable and faithfull gentleman, and diuers others. The ſaid Earle of Campobache when he went into Italie to leuie his men, receiued of the Duke of Burgundie 40000. duckets in preſt for his companie. But as he paſſed through Lions, he fell in acquaintance with a Phiſition named Maſter

                  Simon of Pauy, by whom he aduertiſed the King that if he would grant him certaine demands, he would promiſe him at his returne to deliuer the Duke of Burgundy into his hands: the like offer made he alſo to Monſeur de Saint Pray, then ambaſſador in Premont for the King. Againe, at his returne hauing his men of armes lying in the County of Marle, he offered the King that ſo ſoone as he ſhould be in campe with his Maſter, he would not faile either to kill him, or take him priſoner; ſhewing withall the maner how he would do it, which was this. The Duke rode often about his campe to viewe it, mounted vpon a little nagge, and very ſlenderly accompanied, at ſome ſuch time this Earle ſaid he would aſſault him, and execute his enterpriſe. He made yet alſo another offer to the King, namely, if the King and the Duke met togither in battell, to turne with his men of armes on the Kings ſide, vnder condition that the King would grant him certaine demands. The King deteſted much the treaſon of this man, and of a noble courage aduertiſed the Duke of his practiſes by the Lord of Contay aboue mentioned. Notwithſtanding the Duke would not credit the meſſage, (ſuppoſing that the King ſent him this aduertiſement to ſome other end) but loued the Earle all the better. Wherefore you may ſee how God had troubled his wits, in that he would giue no credit to thoſe manifeſt demonſtrations the King ſhewed him. Well, this Earle of Campobache was not ſo falſe and traiterous: but Iames Galeot was as true and truſty, who liued many yeers, and died with great honor and renowme.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Vnderſtand this of the County of Burgundy, not of the Duchy.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFT BOOKE.
            
               How the Duke of Burgundie making war vpon the Swiſſers, was ouerthrowen at the ſtraights of the mountaines neere to Granſon. Chap. 1.
               
                  THe Duke of Burgundie hauing conquered the Duchie of Lorraine, and receiued Saint Quintins, Han and Bohain, with all the Conſtables goods of the King, treated with him of a finall peace: for accompliſhment whereof they two reſolued to meete vpon a bridge built ouer a riuer, like to that made at Piquigny, at the enteruiew of the Kings of England and Fraunce. About the which meeting meſſengers paſſed to and fro, ſo far foorth that the Duke was once purpoſed to diſmiſſe the greateſt part of his armie, to the end his men (being in very euill order, as well bicauſe of the ſiege of Nuz, as alſo of this ſmall war in Lorraine) might refreſh themſelues: and the reſt to put in garriſon into certaine of the Earle of Romonts places, neere to the townes of Berne and Fribourg; vpon the which he was fully reſolued to make war, bicauſe they had inuaded his dominions while he was before Nuz, had holpen to take the countie of Ferrette from him (as you haue heard) and had alſo conquered from the Earle of Romont part of his countrie. The King earneſtly preſſed him to come to the meeting appointed, to leaue theſe poore Swiſſers in peace, and to refreſh his armie. The Swiſſers alſo ſeeing him approch ſo neere them, ſent their ambaſſadors to him, offering to reſtore all that they had taken from the Earle of Romont, who on the other ſide preſſed him earneſtly to ſuccour him in perſon: whereupon the Duke altered his minde, and determined to march againſt them, leauing that courſe which in all mens opinions ſeemed beſt, conſidering both the time of the yeere, and the ſtate of his armie. Further, it was agreed betweene the King and him, that for the Duchie of Lorraine they ſhould not fall at variance.
               The Duke departed out of Lorraine with this poore, wearie, and defeated armie, and entred into Burgundie, where the ambaſſadors of theſe ancient confederates of Almaine commonly called Swiſſers, repaired againe to him, making larger offers than before: for beſides the reſtitution of the Earle of Romonts places, they offered to depart from all leagues that he ſhould not allow of, eſpecially their league with the King, and to enter into confederacie with him, and to ſerue him againſt the King with ſixe thouſand men well armed (and that for very ſmal pay) as often as he ſhould require: which offers he refuſed; for God was fully purpoſed to bring him to deſtruction. In thoſe countries are certaine townes called the new confederates, namely, Baſill, Strasbourg, and diuers other imperial cities 
                     1
                   ſituate neer the riuer of Rhene, which in times paſt had beene enimies to the Swiſſers in fauour of Sigiſmond Duke of Auſtrich, whoſe confederates they were during the wars betweene the ſaid Swiſſers and him. But now all theſe townes ioined with the Swiſſers, and a league was made betweene them for ten yeeres, and peace alſo betweene Duke Sigiſmond and them: which league (as before you haue heard) was concluded by the Kings procurement, earneſt ſute, and great expences, at the ſame time that the countie of Ferrette

was taken from the Duke of Burgundie, and his lieutenant there called Peter Archambault beheaded at Baſill. The onely cauſe of which inconuenience proceeded of this Archambault himſelf, which ſure was a ſhrewd check to the Duke of Burgundy, being the very fountaine of all his other miſeries. Wherefore a Prince that hath lately ioined a ſtrange countrie to his dominions, ought to be circumſpect what gouernors he placeth there. For whereas ſubiects newly conquered ought to be curteouſly intreated, to haue Iuſtice truly adminiſtred, and to be better vſed than vnder their former gouernment: this Archambault did the cleane contrary, for he vſed great violence and extortion; whereupon enſued vtter deſtruction to himſelfe, his Maſter, and many a good man beſides.
               This league aboue mentioned made by the Kings onely procurement, turned afterward to his great benefit, yea greater than the world weeneth, ſo far foorth that for my part, I account it one of the wiſeſt deeds that euer he did, and moſt to the domage of his enimies. For the Duke of Burgundy once deſtroied, the King of Fraunce neuer found man afterward of his owne ſubiects that durſt lift vp his finger againſt him: for they ſailed all with his winde. Wherefore it was a woorthy exploit to ioine Duke Sigiſmunde of Auſtrich and theſe newe confederates in league with the Swiſſers, whoſe ancient enimies they had beene: and I warrant you it was neuer brought to paſſe without great expenſes and many voiages.
               After the Duke of Burgundy had put the Swiſſers from all hope of peace, they returned to aduertiſe their confederates therof, and to make preparations for defence. The Duke led his army into the countrey of Vaulx in Sauoye, which the Swiſſers (as you haue heard) had taken from the Lord of Romont. There he wan three or fower places belonging to Monſeur de Chaſteauguion, which the Swiſſers held, and negligently defended. From thence he remooued, and laid his ſiege before a towne called Granſon 
                     2
                  , belonging alſo to the ſaid Lord of Chaſteauguion, within the which were eight or nine hundred Swiſſers 
                     3
                   choice men: for bicauſe the place was neere their countrey they had manned it well. The Dukes force was reaſonable great, for diuers bands came daily to him out of Lombardy, and the ſubiects alſo of this houſe of Sauoy were in pay with him. He loued ſtrangers better than his owne ſubiects, notwithſtanding that he might haue leuied in his owne dominions great force of good ſoldiers: but the Conſtables death togither with certaine other conceits he had in his head, cauſed him to miſtruſt his owne people. His artillery was maruellous ſtrong, and he lay in great pompe and triumph in his campe, to ſhew his magnificence to the ambaſſadors that came to him out of Italy and Almaine: for the which purpoſe alſo he had brought with him all his beſt iewels and plate, and great aboundance of all kinde of furniture. Moreouer he had many phanſies in his head touching the Duchy of Milan, where he truſted ſhortly to haue great intelligence. After he had beſieged this towne of Granſon, and battered it with the canon certaine daies, they yeelded to his mercy 
                     4
                  , and he put them all cruelly to death. The Swiſſers were aſſembled, but in ſmall number, as diuers of them haue told me: for they are not able to leuy ſo great force in their countrey as the world ſuppoſeth, and at that time much leſſe than now, bicauſe ſithence moſt part of them haue forſaken their huſbandry and giuen themſelues to armes. Further, of their confederates fewe were with them, bicauſe they were forced to ſuccor the place in haſte; but ſo ſoone as they were abroad in campe, they heard of their companions death. The Duke contrary to their opinion whoſe aduiſe he asked, determined to meete them at the entrie of the mountaines where they yet lay, greatly to his owne diſaduantage: for he was encamped in a place very wel ſeated for the battel, being fortified on the one ſide with his artillery,

and on the other with a lake; ſo that by all preſumption they could not haue endomaged him. He had ſent a hundred archers before him to keepe a ſtrait directly ouer againſt the mountaine where the Swiſſers lay, and marched forward himſelfe, and his enimies encountred him, the greateſt part of his army being yet in the plaine. The firſt rankes of his men thought to retire to ioine with the reſt; but thoſe that were behinde, ſuppoſing theſe to flie, began to turne their backs, and by little and little the Dukes army retired towards his campe; ſome of them valiantly behauing themſelues. But to be ſhort, whē they drew neere to their campe, they neuer ſtood to defence, but fled all 
                     5
                  . So that the Almaines wan the Dukes campe, his artillery, al his tents and pauilions and his mens alſo, (whereof there was great abundance) and other riches and treaſures infinite 
                     6
                  : for nothing was ſaued but the men onely. Moreouer the Duke loſt heere all his goodly iewels, notwithſtanding in this battell were ſlaine onely ſeauen men of armes; all the reſt fled, and himſelfe alſo. A man may iuſtlier ſay of him that he loſt this day honor and reputation, than of King Iohn of Fraunce, who valiantly defending himſelfe, was taken priſoner by the Engliſh men at the battell of Poictiers.
               This is the firſt misfortune that euer happened to this Duke: for all his other enterpriſes turned him either to honor or profit. But what a deadly wound receiued he this day by following his owne braine, and deſpiſing good aduiſe? what damage receiued his houſe heerby? in how miſerable eſtate is it yet, and ſhall be we knowe not how long? how many men became his enimies, and declared themſelues againſt him that the day before ſpake him faire, and temporized with him? And for what quarrell began this war? forſooth for a lode of ſheepes skins taken by the Earle of Romont from a Swiſſer paſſing through his countrie. Sure if God had not vtterly abandoned the Duke of Burgundie, it is not to be thought he would haue put himſelfe into ſo great danger for ſo ſmall a trifle, conſidering both the offers made him, and the men he had to do with, by vanquiſhing whom he could obtaine neither riches nor honor. For at that time the Swiſſers as touching their valor were not eſteemed as they be now, and their pouertie was ſo great, that a Knight of their countrie, who was one of their firſt ambaſſadors to the Duke, told me, that among diuers other reaſons he vſed to diſſwade him from this war, this was one: that by conquering them he could gaine nothing, bicauſe their countrie was barren and poore, and void of all good priſoners, ſo far foorth that he thought verily if all their countrie men were taken, they ſhould not be able to pay a raunſome to the value of the ſpurres and bridle bits in his campe.
               But to returne to the battell: the King being immediately aduertiſed of all that was happened, by the ſundrie ſpies and meſſengers he had abrode in the countrie, moſt of them were ſtrangers; reioiced much at theſe newes, and ſorrowed onely that ſo few were ſlaine. Further, bicauſe of theſe affaires he lay at Lyons, to the end he might the ſooner be aduertiſed of all that happened, and the better countermine all ſuch enterpriſes as the Duke had in his head. For the King being a wiſe Prince feared leaſt he ſhould ioine the Swiſſers to him by force. As touching the houſe of Sauoy, the Duke diſpoſed thereof as of his owne: the Duke of Milan was in league with him: King Rene of Sicilie was fully bent to haue put the countrie of Prouence into his hands. So that if his affaires had receiued good ſucceſſe, he ſhould haue held vnder his dominion all that lieth betweene the weſt and eaſt ſeas, and haue ſo brideled the ſubiects of this realme, that they could haue ſtirred no way out of Fraunce but by ſea without his permiſſion: Sauoy, Prouence, and Lorraine being vnder his ſubiection. To euerie one of theſe Princes the King ſent ambaſſadors. The one, namely

the Duches of Sauoy was his ſiſter, but friend to the Duke of Burgundie to the vttermoſt of hir power. The other, to wit, King Rene of Sicilie was his vnkle, who hardly gaue his ambaſſadors audience, but referred all matters to the Duke of Burgundie. The King ſent alſo to theſe confederates of Almaine, but with great difficultie; for bicauſe the paſſages were ſtopped, he was forced to ſend beggers, pilgrims, and ſuch kinde of men. The ſaid confederates gaue him a proud anſwer, that vnleſſe he would declare himſelfe for them, they would make peace with the Duke, and ioine with the Burgundians againſt him: which notwithſtanding that he greatly feared, yet thought he it not time as yet to diſcouer himſelfe the Dukes enimie, doubting alſo leaſt ſome of his meſſengers whom he ſent about the countrie ſhould be taken, and ſo all his practiſes diſcouered.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Theſe townes were Baſill, Strasburg, Slecſtat, Colmar, Sunggau, and Briſgau.
                  
                  2 He laide his ſiege before Granſon the 12. of February 1476. beginning the yeere at New yeeres tide with 50000. men, and 500. peeces of artillery. Annal. Burgund.
                  3 Others write but 400.
                  4 Others write that they would not yeelde, vnleſſe the Duke would receiue them to his mercie which he did, and yet after put them cruelly to death.
                  
                  5 This battell was fought on Saterday the ſecond of Aprill or of March as ſome ſay, the Swiſſers at this battell were not aboue 5000. and the moſt harquebuſiers. Annal. Burg.
                  6 All that the Duke loſt that day was valued at three millions of crownes. Annal. Burgund.
               
            
            
               How after the ouerthrow at Granſon, the Duke of Milan, King Rene of Sicilie, the Duches of Sauoy and others, departed from their league with the Duke of Burgundy. Chap. 2.
               
                  LEt vs now ſee how the world changed after the battell, and how the courage of the Duke of Burgundy and his confederates altered, and withall how wiſely the King gouerned his affaires. For this ſhall be a goodly example for yoong Princes that attempt fooliſh enterpriſes, not conſidering what may enſue therof: and deſpiſe the counſell of thoſe whoſe aduiſe they ought to vſe, notwithſtanding that themſelues be vtterly void of all experience. Firſt, the Duke himſelfe ſent the Lord of Contay to the King with a lowly and humble meſſage, contrarie both to his accuſtomed maner and to his nature. Marke heere how ſuddenly he was changed euen in a moment: he deſired the King faithfully to keepe the truce, and excuſed himſelfe for not comming to the meeting appointed at Auxerre, promiſing ſhortly to meete him there or elſe where at his pleaſure. The King receiued the ſaid Contay very honorably, aſſuring him of all his demands: for as yet he thought it not time to declare himſelfe, bicauſe he knew well the loyalty of the Dukes ſubiects to be ſuch to their Prince, that he ſhould ſoone be aflote againe. Wherefore he was deſirous to ſee the end of this war, without giuing occaſion to either partie to make peace. But notwithſtanding the good entertainment the King gaue the ſaid Contay, yet heard he many ſcoffes and taunts in

the towne: for ballads were openly ſung in the commendation of the vanquiſhers, and reproch of his follie that was vanquiſhed.
               So ſoone as Galeas Duke of Milan (then liuing) vnderſtood of this aduenture, he reioiced not a little thereat, notwithſtanding that he were the D. of Burgundies confederate: for he was entred into league with him for feare onely, ſeeing the Duke ſo highly fauored in Italie. Wherfore the ſaid D. of Milan ſent in all haſte to the King a citizen of Milan, a man of ſmall apparance, who by mediation of others was directed to me, and brought me a letter from the Duke: whereof when I had aduertiſed the King, he commanded me to heare his meſſage. For he would not giue him audience himſelfe, bicauſe he was diſpleaſed with the Duke of Milan for abandoning his league with him, to enter into confederacie with the Duke of Burgundie, and the rather for that his wife was the Queenes ſiſter. The ſaid ambaſſadors meſſage was, that his Maſter the Duke of Milan was aduertiſed that the King and the Duke of Burgundie ſhould meete to conclude a finall peace and a league greatly to his Maſters diſcontentation, & diuers ſlender reaſons he alleaged to diſſwade the K. from the concluſion thereof. But his laſt perſwaſion was, that if the K. would be bound to make neither peace nor truce with the D. of Burgundie, his M. would preſently giue him 100000. ducats. When the K. heard the ſubſtance of his ambaſſage, he cauſed him to come to his preſence, my ſelfe only being with him, and ſaid thus briefly vnto him: Heere is Monſeur d'Argenton that aduertiſeth me thus and thus: tell your M. I will none of his monie; for I leauie once in a yeere thriſe as much as he. And as touching peace or war, I will diſpoſe thereof at my pleaſure: but if your Maſter repent him that he hath forſaken his league with me, to enter into confederacie with the Duke of Burgundie, tell him I am contented that the league betweene vs ſhall continue as it was firſt concluded. The ambaſſador gaue him moſt humble thanks, perceiuing him by his anſwer to be no couetous Prince, and deſired that it would pleaſe him to cauſe the ſaid league betweene him and his Maſter to be proclaimed in maner and forme as it was firſt concluded, ſaying that he had power to binde his Maſter to agree thereunto. The K. was contented, and after dinner it was proclaimed, & an ambaſſador foorthwith diſpatched to Milan, where the league was againe proclaimed with great ſolemnitie. This is one blowe aduerſitie gaue the Duke of Burgundie: for heere is one mightie Prince ſuddenly fallen from him; who had ſent a great and ſolemne ambaſſage to enter into league with him but three weekes before.
               King Rene of Sicilie was purpoſed to make the Duke of Burgundy his heire, and to put Prouence into his hands, ſo far forth that Monſeur de Chaſteauguion that now is, and diuers others were already gone into Piemont with 20000. crownes to leuy men to take poſſeſſion of the ſaid countrey for the Duke of Burgundy: but vpon the newes of this ouerthrow they fled, and hardly ſaued themſelues; and as touching their money, the Lord of Breſſe being then in thoſe parts tooke it. The Duches of Sauoy hearing theſe newes ſent word thereof immediately to King Rene of Sicilie, extenuating the ouerthrow, and willing him to be of good cheere, notwithſtanding this ſmall loſſe: but hir meſſengers being Prouincials were intercepted, and thereby King Renes practiſe with the Duke of Burgundy diſcouered. Whereupon the King ſent forces to the frontiers of Prouence 
                     1
                  , and ambaſſadors to the King of Sicilie, deſiring him to come to him and aſſuring him of good entertainment, which if he refuſed to do, he threatned by force to preuent this inconuenience. Wherefore in the end the King of Sicilie agreed to repaire to Lions to the King, where he was honorably receiued and well feaſted. I was with the King and heard the words that paſſed betweene them at their firſt meeting: which being ended, Iohn Coſſe Seneſchal

of Prouence, a woorthy gentleman and of a good houſe in the realme of Naples, ſaid thus to the King. Sir, you muſt not maruell if the King my Maſter your Vncle offered to make the Duke of Burgundy his heire: for he was counſelled thereunto by his ſeruants, eſpecially by my ſelfe, bicauſe you being his ſiſters ſonne & his nephew, haue done him ſo great wrong in taking from him the caſtels of Bar and Angiers, and handled him ſo ill in all his other affaires. Wherefore we meant to enter into this practiſe with the Duke of Burgundy, to the end that you hearing this newes might indeuor your ſelfe to repaire the iniuries you haue done vs, and acknowledge in the end the King our Maſter to be your Vncle: but we neuer minded to bring this treaty to a full concluſion. The King being a wiſe Prince tooke this practiſe in good part, which the ſaid Iohn Coſſe vttered indeed ſimply as it was meant; for he himſelfe was the onely contriuer thereof. In ſhort ſpace all controuerſies between them were ended, and money was giuen to the King of Sicilie and his ſeruants. Further, the King feaſted him with the Ladies, and vſed him in all points according to his owne humor as neere as he could; and of the Duke of Burgundy no more mention was made, but he was vtterly abandoned of King Rene. This is another miſhap that enſued this ſmall aduerſity.
               The Duches alſo of Sauoye who of long time was thought great enimy to the King hir brother, ſent one Monſeur de Montaigny (who was addreſſed to me) with a ſecret meſſage to reconcile hir ſelfe to the King, alleaging diuers reaſons why ſhee was fallen out with him, and wherein ſhe ſtood in feare of him. Notwithſtanding ſhe was a verie wiſe Ladie and the Kings ſiſter indeed: for it appeered that ſhe meant to temporize as he did, to ſee what would happen further to the Duke before ſhe would abandon him. The King gaue hir better words than he was accuſtomed, and ſent the meſſenger very good anſwers by me, willing him to deſire his Miſtres to come into Fraunce; and thus hir man was diſpatched. See heere an other of the Duke of Burgundies confederats practiſing to forſake him. Beſides this, through the whole countrey of Almaine enimies began to declare themſelues againſt him, and all the Imperiall townes, as Nuremberg, Francfort and diuers others, ioined themſelues with theſe old and new confederates of Swiſſerland: ſo that all the world ſeemed to be perſwaded the doing of him harme to be good ſeruice to God.
               The ſpoiles of his campe enriched maruellouſly theſe poore Swiſſers, who at the firſt knew not what treaſures were fallen into their hands, eſpecially thoſe of the ruder ſort: one of the goodlieſt & richeſt pauilions in the world was torne al to peeces. There were that ſold a number of ſiluer plates and diſhes for two ſouſe a peece, ſuppoſing them to be pewter. The Dukes great diamond being the goodlieſt iewell in Chriſtendome, at the which hung a great orient pearle, was taken vp by a Swiſſer, who put it againe into the boxe where it was kept and threw it vnder a cart; but after returned to ſeeke it, and ſold it to a Prieſt for a guldon, who ſent it to the Lords of their countrey, of whom he receiued three franks for it. They wan alſo three goodly ballais rubies, called the three brethren, bicauſe they were in all points like, and another great ballais rubie called La hotte, with a goodly ſtone called the round ball of Flaunders, the greateſt and faireſt ſtones in the world. Other infinite treaſures they gained alſo; which ſince hath taught them to know what is money woorth. Further, the victories they obtained, the account the King made of them euer after, and the ſummes of money he beſtowed vpon them, haue maruellouſly enriched them. Euery ambaſſador of theirs that came to him at the beginning of theſe wars, receiued goodly preſents of him either in money or plate, wherby he aſſwaged the diſpleaſure they had conceiued againſt him for not declaring himſelfe the Duke of Burgundies

enimy: for he ſent them home well contented, with full purſes and clothed in ſilkes and veluets. Then began he alſo to promiſe them a yeerely penſion of 40000. guldons, which afterward he truly paied, but the ſecond battell was paſt firſt. Of this penſion twenty thouſand guldons were for the townes, and the other twenty thouſand for the gouernors of the townes. And I thinke verily I ſhould not lie, if I ſaid that betweene the firſt battell of Granſon and the King our Maſters death, theſe townes and gouernors of the Swiſſers receiued out of Fraunce aboue a million of florens. When I name townes I meane but theſe fower: Berne, Lucerne, Friburge, and Zurich, togither with their cantons ſituate in the mountaines. Swiſſe alſo is one of their cantons though but a village. Yet haue I ſeene an ambaſſador of that village clothed in very ſimple apparell giue his aduiſe in euery matter as well as any of the reſt. The other two cantons are called Soleurre and Vnderwalde.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1. For Prouence was held of the crowne of Fraunce, and therefore the King would not ſuffer his enimie the Duke of Burgundy to poſſeſſe it.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Swiſſers vanquiſhed the Duke of Burgundy in battell neere to the towne of Morat. Chap. 3.
               
                  NOw to returne to the Duke of Burgundie, he leuied men on all ſides, ſo that within three weeks he had aſſembled a mighty armie: for a great number of his ſoldiers that fled the day of the battell, repaired againe to his campe. He lay at Loſanna 
                     1
                   in Sauoy, (where you my Lord of Vienna) aſſiſted him with your counſell in a dangerous ſicknes he was fallen into, for ſorow and griefe of the diſhonor he had receiued, which ſo much altered him that I thinke after this battell of Granſon, his wits were neuer ſo freſh nor ſo good as before 
                     2
                  . Of this new army he now leuied I ſpeake vpon the Prince of Tarentes report, who made relation thereof to the King in my preſence. For you ſhall vnderſtand that the ſaid Prince about a yeere before the battell, was come to the Duke of Burgundy with a goodly traine in hope to marrie his daughter and heir. And notwithſtanding that his behauiour, apparell and traine ſhewed him indeed to be a Kings ſonne, and his father the King of Naples to haue ſpared no coſt in ſetting him foorth: yet did the Duke but diſſemble with him, and fed at the ſelfe ſame time with faire promiſes the Duches of Sauoye putting her in hope of this marriage for hir ſonne. Wherefore the Prince of Tarente called Don Frederick of Arragon and his Counſell miſliking theſe delaies, ſent to the King our Maſter a herault of armes a wiſe fellow, who humbly beſought him to grant the Prince his ſafe conduct to paſſe through his realme to the King his father who had ſent for him, which he eaſily obtained of the King, bicauſe it ſeemed to tende to the Duke of Burgundies diſhonor and diſcredit. Notwithſtanding before the Princes meſſenger was returned to his Maſter, a great number of theſe confederated townes were aſſembled and encamped hard by the Duke of Burgundie. The ſaid Prince obeying the King his fathers commandement tooke his leaue of the Duke the night before the ſecond battell was fought, for at the firſt he was preſent, and behaued himſelfe like a valiant gentleman. Some ſay (my Lord of Vienna) that he vſed your aduiſe heerein: for when he was heere with the King I haue heard both him and the

Duke of Aſcoly commonly called the Earle Iulio, and diuers others affirme, that you wrote in Italy of the firſt and ſecond battell, and told what ſhould enſue therof, long before they were fought.
               At the Princes departure, great forces of theſe confederate townes were incamped (as I haue ſaid) hard by the Duke of Burgundy, and came to giue him battell, meaning to leuie the ſiege he held before Morat 
                     3
                   a little towne neere to Berne, belonging to the Earle of Romont. The ſaid townes had in their army (as ſome that were at the battell haue informed me) 35000. men, whereof fower thouſand were horſemen, the reſt footemen well choſen and well armed; that is to ſay, 11000. pikes, 10000. halberds, and ten thouſand harquebuſiers. Their whole force was not yet aſſembled, and theſe onely fought the battell, neither needed any more helpe. The Duke of Lorraine arriued at their campe a little before the battell, with a very ſmall traine, which his comming turned afterward to his great profit: for the Duke of Burgundy helde then all his countrey, and a happy turne it was for him that they waxed weary of him in our Court, as al thoſe that maintaine a noble man ouerthrowen vſually do; notwithſtanding he neuer vnderſtood thus much. The King gaue him a ſmal ſumme of money, and ſent a good troupe of men of armes to conueigh him ſafe through Lorraine; who brought him to the frontiers of Almaine, and then returned home. This Duke of Lorraine had not onely loſt his Duchy of Lorraine, the County of Vaudemont, and the greateſt part of Barrois (the reſt being withheld from him by the King, ſo that he had nothing left:) but his ſubiects alſo, yea his houſehold ſeruants had voluntarie done homage to the Duke of Burgundy: ſo that his eſtate ſeemed almoſt irrecouerable. Notwithſtanding God remaineth alwaies iudge to determine ſuch cauſes at his pleaſure.
               After the Duke of Lorraine was paſſed through Lorraine into Almaine, and had iourneied a few daies, he arriued at the Almaines campe with ſmall force three or fower howers before the battell began: which voiage (as before I haue ſaid) turned to his great honor and profit; for if his ſucceſſe had beene bad, I thinke he ſhould haue found but cold entertainment in any place. At the very inſtant that he arriued, the battels marched on both ſides. For the confederates had lien in campe three daies or more in a ſtrong place hard by the Duke of Burgundie, who was at the very firſt diſcomfited and put to flight 
                     4
                  : neither had he ſo good lucke heere as in the former battell, wherein he loſt but ſeuen men of armes; which happened bicauſe the Swiſſers had then no horſemen: but at this battell neere to Morat (whereof I now ſpeake) they had fower thouſand horſemen well mounted, the which purſued fiercely the Burgundians that fled. Further, their battell of footemen ioined alſo with the Dukes battell, which was mightie and ſtrong: for beſides great force of his own ſubiects, and certaine Engliſh men that ſerued him; diuers bands were newly come to him out of Piemont and the Duchie of Milan. So that the Prince of Tarente at his being heere with the King told me, that he neuer ſaw in his life ſo goodly an armie: for he himſelfe and diuers others by his commandement numbring the force as it paſſed ouer a bridge, had told to the number of 23000. ſoldiers taking pay, beſides thoſe that followed the armie and were appointed to ſerue at the artillerie; which force me thinke was great, notwithſtanding that many talke of millions, and report they wot not what, making armies fiue times greater than they are. The Lord of Contay who came to the King immediately after the battell, confeſſed in my hearing, that the Duke his Maſter loſt there 8000. ſoldiers taking pay, beſides the ſtraglers: ſo that the wholenūber of the dead (for ought I could euer learne to the contrarie) amounted to 18000. 
                     5
                   which is not incredible, cōſidering both the great force of

horſemen that diuers Princes of Almaine had there; and alſo the great number of men that were ſlaine in the Dukes campe, lying ſtill at the ſiege before Morat 
                     6
                  . The Duke fled into Burgundie vtterly diſcomforted, and not without cauſe; and held himſelfe cloſe in a towne called La Riuiere, where he aſſembled all the forces he could. The Swiſſers followed the chaſe but that night, and then retired without further purſute of their enimies.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Duke after the battell of Granſon retired first to Ioingne, from thence to Noſeret, and then to Loſanna. La Marche.
                  2 This prooueth both Vitia animi ſcatere ad corpus, & animam ſequi temperaturam corporis, which proceedeth of the great ſympathie between the minde and bodie. Liuie lib. 1. decad. 1. writeth thus; Longinquus morbus, Tulli mores prorſus immutauit.
                  3 The Duke laid his ſiege before Morat (called in Dutch Murten) the 9. of Iune 1476. with 40000. men. Annal. Burgund. and ſo had the Swiſſers alſo, Idem. Meyer ſaith the Duke had but 24000. and the Swiſſers 30000.
                  4 This battell was fought 22. day of Iune. 1476. Annal. Burgund. Meyer.
                  5 Others write 17000. others 22700. others 26000. and of the Swiſſers but 50. Meyer ſaith the Duke loſt 14000.
                  6 For better vnderstanding of this place, we muſt know that after the Dukes vaward was ouerthrowen, they within Morat iſſued foorth and ioined with the Duke of Lorraine, and entred perforce the Duke of Burgundies campe lying before the ſaid towne of Morat, where they made a great ſlaughter, as our author heere maketh mention.
                  
               
            
            
               How after the battell of Morat the Duke of Burgundie tooke the Ducheſſe of Sauoy, and how ſhe was deliuered and ſent home into hir countrie by the Kings meanes. Chap. 4.
               
                  THis misfortune draue the Duke into vtter deſpaire: for he well perceiued by the ſequele of the firſt battell at Granſon (between the which and this ſecond there was but three weekes ſpace 
                     1
                  ) that all his friends would abandon him. Wherefore by the aduiſe of thoſe that were about him, he made the Ducheſſe of Sauoy and one of hir children now Duke of Sauoy, to be led by force into Burgundie: but hir eldeſt ſonne was conueied away by certaine of hir ſeruants; for thoſe that committed this outrage did it in great feare and vpon a ſudden. The cauſe that mooued the Duke heerunto was partly feare, leaſt the Ducheſſe ſhould retire to the King hir brother; and partly bicauſe all theſe miſfortunes were happened to him (as he ſaid) for ſuccouring this houſe of Sauoy. Thus was the Ducheſſe led to the caſtell of Rouure neere to Dyion, where a ſmall garde was appointed ouer hir. Notwithſtanding euery body that would, went to viſite hir, and among others the Lord of Chaſteauguion, and the Marqueſſe of Rotelin that now are, betweene the which two and two of the Ducheſſes daughters the Duke of Burgundie endeuored to make two marriages, which afterward were accompliſhed. Hir eldeſt ſonne called Philibert then Duke of Sauoy, was led by thoſe that ſtole him away to Chambery, where the Biſhop of Geneua lay, who was alſo of the houſe of

Sauoy. This Biſhop was altogither giuen to ſloth and wantonnes, and gouerned wholy by a Knight of the Rhodes 
                     2
                  : but the King ſo practiſed with him, and the Knight his gouernor, that they put into his hands the ſaid Duke of Sauoy, and a little brother of his called Le Prothonoſtaire, togither with the caſtels of Chambery and Montmelian, and held alſo to the Kings vſe another caſtell where all the Ducheſſes iewels lay. When the Ducheſſe was come to Rouure accompanied with all hir women, and a great number of hir ſeruants; ſhe perceiuing the Duke of Burgundie to be buſied in leuying men, and thoſe that garded hir not to ſtand in ſuch feare of their Maſter as they were accuſtomed: determined to ſend to the King hir brother to reconcile hir ſelfe to him, and to deſire him to deliuer hir out of this thraldome. For notwithſtanding that ſhe feared much to fall into his hands, bicauſe of the great and long hatred that had been betweene them: yet the miſerie wherein ſhe was, forced hir in the end thereunto. Wherefore ſhe ſent to him a gentleman of Piemont called Riuerol being ſteward of hir houſe, who was directed to me. When I had heard his meſſage, and aduertiſed the King thereof, he commanded him to come to his preſence: and after he had giuen him audience, anſwered, that he would not forſake his ſiſter in this extremitie notwithſtanding their former variance: and that if ſhe would enter into league with him, he would ſend for hir by the gouernor of Champaigne, called Maſter Charles of Amboiſe Lord of Chaumont. The ſaid Riuerol tooke his leaue of the King, and returned with ſpeede to his Miſtres, who reioiced much at this newes. Notwithſtanding ſhe ſent yet againe to the King vpon the returne of the firſt meſſage, to deſire a ſafe conduct and aſſurance therein, that ſhe ſhould depart out of Fraunce into Sauoy, and that the Duke hir ſonne and his little brother, togither with the places which the King held, ſhould be reſtored to hir: and further that he would helpe to maintaine hir authoritie in Sauoy; and ſhe for hir part would forſake all confederacies, and enter into league with him. All the which hir requeſts the King granted, and immediately ſent a man purpoſely to the ſaid Lord of Chaumont about this enterpriſe: the which was well deuiſed and executed accordingly. For the ſaid Lord of Chaumont went himſelfe peaceably through the country with a good band of men to Rouure, from whence he led the Ducheſſe of Sauoy and all hir traine to the next place of the Kings dominions. Before the diſpatch of the Ducheſſes laſt meſſenger, the King was departed from Lyons, where he had lien halfe a yeere to ouerthrow couertly the Duke of Burgundies enterpriſes without breaking the truce. But if a man conſider well the Dukes eſtate, the King made ſharper war vpon him by letting him run himſelfe out of breth, and priuily ſtirring vp enimies againſt him, than if he had openly proclaimed war. For immediately vpon the proclamation, the Duke would haue relinquiſhed his enterpriſe, and then all theſe miſhaps had neuer fallen vpon him.
               The King being departed from Lions continued ſtill his iourney, and from Rouuenne went downe the riuer of Loire to Tours, where at his arriuall he receiued newes of his ſiſters liberty; whereat he reioiced not a little, and ſent for hir with all ſpeed to come to him, and gaue order for hir charges vpon the way. Moreouer, when ſhe drew neere, he ſent a great company of gentlemen to wait vpon hir, and went himſelfe to receiue hir as far as the gate of Pleſſis du Parc; where at their firſt meeting with a mery countenaunce he ſaid vnto hir: Lady of Burgundy you are hartely welcome. Then ſhe knowing by his countenance that he did but ſport, made him a wiſe anſwer ſaying. Sir, I am a true French woman, and ready to obey you in all you ſhall command. The King led hir to hir chamber, where ſhe was very honorably entertained. True it is that he deſired to ſend hir home as ſpeedily as might be,

whereof ſhe was no leſſe deſirous than he: for ſhe was a very wiſe woman, and they were well acquainted the one with the others conditions. The whole charge of this matter was committed to me, firſt to prouide money to defray hir in hir returne: ſecondarily to ſeeke ſilkes and veluets for hir: and laſtly to put in writing the articles of their new league and amity. Moreouer, the King indeuored to diſſwade hir from the mariage of hir two daughters aboue mentioned; but ſhe made hir excuſe by the daughters themſelues, who were obſtinate therein: which when the King perceiued he yeelded vnto them, and in mine opinion they were well beſtowed. After the Duches had ſoiourned at Pleſſis ſeauen or eight daies, the King and ſhe ſware thence foorth to be friends each to other, and writings touching their amitie were interchangably deliuered betweene them: which done, the Duches tooke hir leaue of the King, who cauſed hir ſafely to be conueighed into hir owne countrey, and reſtored vnto hir, hir children, all the places that were in his hands, all hir iewels, and all that belonged to hir. They were both glad of their departure, and liued euer after as brother and ſiſter euen till their death.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 I ſuppoſe, yea I aſſure my ſelf that the Printer hath heere made a great fault, and that theſe three weekes, muſt be read three moneths. For the battell of Granſon was fought the 2. of March or Aprill, and this battell the 22. of Iune; which is much more then three weekes, and agreeth well with three moneths, and ſo alſo Annales Burgundiae report the time.
                  
                  2 The French hath Vn Commandeur de Rhodes, what this Commandeur is looke in the notes of the 9. Chapter of the 7. booke.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Duke of Burgundie liued as it were ſolitarilie the ſpace of certaine weekes, during the which time the Duke of Lorraine recouered his towne of Nancy. Chap. 5.
               
                  BVt to proceed in this hiſtory, I muſt now returne to the Duke of Burgundy, who after the battel of Morat, which was in the yeer 1476. fled to the frontiers of Burgundy and kept himſelfe cloſe in a towne called La Riuiere; where he lay more than ſix weeks with intent to leuy yet another army, wherein notwithſtanding he proceeded but ſlowly: for he liued as it were ſolitarily, in ſuch ſort that all his dooings ſeemed (as you ſhall heereafter perceiue) rather to proceed of obſtinacy than any reaſon. For the greefe he had conceiued of the firſt ouerthrow at Granſon ſo inwardly vexed him, that he fell into a dangerous ſicknes; which ſo altered his complexion, that whereas before his choler and naturall heate was ſo great that he dranke no wine, but Tyſan euery morning ordinarily, and ate conſerue of roſes to refreſh him: now this ſorow and greefe had ſo much weakned his ſpirits, that he was forced to drinke the ſtrongeſt wine without water, that could be gotten. And further, to reduce the blood to the hart, his Phiſitions were faine to put burning flaxe into boxing glaſſes, and ſo to ſet them on his breſt neere to the hart. Of this his ſicknes (my Lord of Vienna) you can better write than my ſelfe, bicauſe all the time thereof you were continually with him to aſſiſt him with your aduiſe, & cauſed him alſo to ſhaue his beard,

which before he ware long. But in mine opinion after this ſicknes his wits were neuer ſo freſh as before, but much weakned and decaied. Such are the paſſions of thoſe that being fallen into great misfortunes ſeeke not the true remedies, eſpecially of proud and diſdainfull Princes. For in ſuch a caſe the beſt and ſoueraigneſt remedy is to haue recourſe to God, to bethinke our ſelues if we haue in any point offended him, to humble our ſelues before him, and to acknowledge our faults: for he it is that determineth theſe cauſes, and to him no man may impute any error. The ſecond remedy in ſuch a caſe is to conferre with ſome familiar friend, to reueale boldly vnto him all our paſſions, and not to be aſhamed to vtter our greefe to our deere friend: for that eaſeth and comforteth the minde, and by talking thus in counſell with a faithfull friend, the ſpirits recouer their former vertue and ſtrength. The third remedy in ſuch a caſe is to fall to ſome exerciſe & bodily labor: for ſeeing we are men ſuch penſiuenes & greefe can not be paſſed ouer without great paſſions either publike or priuate 
                     1
                  . But the Duke tooke the cleane contrary courſe, for he hid himſelfe & kept himſelfe ſolitary; wheras he ſhould haue put to flight al ſuch melancholike auſterity. Further, bicauſe he was a terrible Prince to his ſeruants, none durſt preſume to giue him counſell or comfort, but ſuffered him to follow his owne ſenſe, fearing if they had gone about to perſwade with him, it might haue turned them to diſpleaſure.
               During this ſixe weekes ſpace or thereabout that he ſoiorned at La Riuiere with ſmall force, (which was no maruell hauing loſt two ſo great battels) many new enimies aroſe againſt him, his friends fell from him, his ſubiects being defeated and diſcomfited began to murmur and deſpiſe him, which is a thing vſuall (as before I haue ſaid) in ſuch aduerſities. Further, many places in Lorraine were either razed or woon from him, namely Vaudemont, Eſpinall, and diuers others, and on euery ſide enimies prepared to inuade him, and the miſerableſt ſlaues were the hardieſt. In this hurliburly the Duke of Lorraine aſſembled a ſmall force & came before Nancy: of the little townes thereabout he held the greateſt part; notwithſtanding the Burgundians kept ſtill Pont-à-mouſſon being fower leagues diſtant from Nancy.
               Among thoſe that were beſieged within the ſaid towne of Nancy, was a worſhipfull knight called Monſeur de Beures of the houſe of Croy, who had vnder him certaine harquebuſiers; within the towne was alſo an Engliſh captaine though but of meane parentage, yet very valiant called Colpin 
                  
                     2
                  , whom I my ſelfe preferred with certaine others of the garriſon of Guiſnes to the Dukes ſeruice. This Colpin had within the towne vnder his charge a band of three hundred Engliſh men, the which grew wearie of the ſiege (though they were troubled neither with batterie nor approches) bicauſe the Duke made no more haſte to ſuccour them. And to ſay the truth, he committed a foule ouerſight in that he approched no neere to Lorraine, but lay thus in a place far off & where he could do no ſeruice: ſith it ſtood him more vpon to defend that he had already gotten, than to inuade the Swiſſers in hope to reuenge his loſſes. But his obſtinacie turned him to great inconuenience, in that he would aske no mans aduiſe, but truſted wholy to his owne braine: for notwithſtanding that they that were beſieged continually, and earneſtly ſollicited him to ſuccour the place; yet lay he ſtill vpon no neceſſitie, at the ſaid towne of Riuiere ſixe weekes or thereabout; whereas if he had done otherwiſe, he might eaſily haue releeued the towne. For the Duke of Lorraine had no force before it, and by defending the countrie of Lorraine the paſſage from his other ſeniories into Burgundy ſhould euer haue been open through Luxembourg and Lorraine. Wherefore if his wits had been ſuch then as before time I had knowen them, he would ſure haue vſed greater diligence.
               
                  
During the time that they within Nancy looked daily for ſuccours, Colpin aboue mentioned, Captaine of the Engliſh band within the towne, was ſlaine with a canon ſhot greatly to the Duke of Burgundies loſſe. For the preſence of one man alone endued with vertue and wiſedome, though but of baſe race and parentage, oftentimes deliuereth his Maſter from great incoueniences. As touching the which point I commend aboue all others the wiſedome of the King our Maſter: for neuer Prince feared ſo much the Loſſe of his men as he did. Colpin being thus ſlaine, the Engliſh men within the towne began to mutine and deſpaire of ſuccours: for neither knew they of how ſmall power the Duke of Lorraine was, nor what goodly meanes the Duke of Burgundie had to leuie new forces. Further, bicauſe of long time the Engliſh men had made no wars out of their owne realme, they vnderſtood not what the ſiege of a towne meant. Wherefore they reſolued in the end to parlament, and told Monſeur de Beures captaine of the towne, that if he would not fall to compoſition with the Duke of Lorraine, they would compound without him. He notwithſtanding that he were a truſtie Knight lacked courage, and fell to intreaties and perſwaſions; whereas in mine opinion ſtouter language would better haue preuailed: but God had already diſpoſed heerof. If the towne had been held but three daies longer, it had been releeued. To conclude, the ſaid de Beures agreed to the Engliſh men, and yeelded the place to the Duke of Lorraine 
                     3
                  : and ſo departed he and all that were within it with bag and baggage.
               The next day or at the furtheſt within two daies after the towne was yeelded, the Duke of Burgundie arriued there well accompanied conſidering his eſtate: for certaine bands were come to him from Luxembourg, which had beene leuied in his other ſeniories. Before Nancy the Duke of Lorraine and he met; but no great exploit was done, bicauſe the Duke of Lorrains force was ſmall. The ſaid Duke of Burgundie continuing ſtill his former enterpriſe, determined to lay his ſiege againe before Nancy: wherefore better it had beene for him not to haue delaide ſo long vpon ſelfewill the ſuccouring of the towne. But God giueth ſuch extraordinarie mindes to Princes when he is purpoſed to alter their good ſucceſſe. If the Duke would haue followed good aduiſe, and manned well the ſmall places about the towne, he might eaſily in ſhort ſpace haue recouered it: for it was vnfurniſhed of victuals, and he had men ynow, yea too many to haue held it in greater diſtreſſe. In the meane time he might commodiouſly haue refreſhed and repaired his army, but he tooke the contrary courſe.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Cardanus giueth three natural remedies or purgations of ſorrow: fasting, weeping, ſighing.
                  
                  2 This Colpin the new copy calleth throughout Cohin, but the old Colpin, and La Marche, Iehannin Collepin, wherefore I haue been bould to amend it according to the old copie.
                  
                  3 Nancy vvas yeelded the 6. of October. Meyer.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Earle of Campobaches great treaſons, and how he kept the Duke of Burgundy from hearing a gentleman that would haue reuealed them to him before he was put to death, and how the ſaid Duke made no account of the aduertiſement the King ſent him. Chap. 6.
               
                  DVring the time the Duke of Burgundy held before Nancy this ſiege, vnfortunate to himſelfe, to all his ſubiects, and to many others whom this quarrell in no wiſe concerned: diuers of his men began to practiſe his deſtruction. For (as you haue heard) many enimies were now riſen againſt him on all ſides, and among others Nicholas Earle of Campobache in the realm of Naples, whence he was baniſhed for the houſe of Anious faction. This Earle after the death of Nicholas Duke of Calabria whom he ſerued, hauing as I ſaid before neither lands nor liuing; was receiued with diuers others of the ſaid Duke of Calabrias ſeruants into the Duke of Burgundies houſe, who at his firſt comming deliuered him 40000. ducats in preſt to go into Italy to leuy therewith fower hundred launces that were vnder the ſaid Earles charge and paied by himſelfe. From the which day forward euen till this preſent he euer ſought his Maſters deſtruction, and now ſeeing him in this aduerſitie began to practiſe a freſh againſt him, both with the Duke of Lorraine and alſo with certaine of the Kings captaines and ſeruants that lay in Champaigne neere to the Dukes campe. To the Duke of Lorraine he promiſed ſo to order the matter, that this ſiege ſhould take no effect. For he would finde meanes that ſuch things as were neceſſary both for the ſiege and battery ſhould be lacking; which promiſe he was well able to performe, for the principall charge thereof was committed to him; neither had any man ſo great authority in the army vnder the Duke of Burgundy as he. But his practiſes with the Kings captaines touched the quick neerer: for he continually promiſed them either to kill his Maſter or take him priſoner, demaunding for recompence thereof the charge of theſe fower hundred launces, twenty thouſand crowns to be deliuered him in ready money, and ſome good Earledome in Fraunce.
               While this Earle was practiſing theſe treaſons, certaine of the Duke of Lorraines gentlemen attempted to enter the towne of Nancy. Some of the which entred, and ſome were taken, among whom was one Cifron a gentleman born in Prouence, who was the onely man that entertained theſe practiſes betweene the Earle of Campobache and the ſaid Duke of Lorraine. The D. of Burgundy preſently commanded this Cifron to be hanged, alleaging that by the law of armes after a Prince hath laid his ſiege before a place and made his battery, if any man attempt to enter to comfort thoſe that are beſieged he ought to die. Yet is this law not practiſed in our wars which are much crueller then the wars of Italy or Spaine where it is put in vſe. But law or no law, the D. would that in any wiſe this gentleman ſhould die, who ſeeing no remedy, ſent word to the D. that if it would pleaſe him to giue him audience he would reueale a ſecret to him that touched his life; whereof certaine gentlemen to whom he vttered this ſpeech went to aduertiſe the Duke: with whom at their arriuall they found the Earle of Campobache, come thither either by chance or of purpoſe to be alwais at hand, fearing leaſt Cifron whom he knew to be taken ſhould

reueale all his conſpiracies: for he was priuy to them all; and that was indeed the ſecret he would haue diſcouered. The Duke made anſwer to theſe gentlemen that brought him this meſſage, that he vſed this delay onely to ſaue his life, commanding him to open the matter to them: vpon the which word the Earle of Campobache laid hold, perſwading the Duke that ſo it ſhould be beſt. For you ſhall vnderſtand that none of the Dukes counſell, neither any other perſons were preſent with him at the debating of this matter, but this Earle onely who had charge of the whole army, and a Secretary that was writing. The priſoner anſwered that he would vtter it to no man but to the Duke onely: whereupon the Duke commanded him againe to be led to execution, and ſo he was. But vpon the way thitherward, he deſired diuers gentlemen to intreat the Duke their Maſter for him; affirming this to be ſuch a ſecret as the Duke would not for a Duchy but know. Many that were acquainted with him pitied him, & went to deſire the Duke to vouchſafe him the hearing. But this traiterous Earle, who kept the Dukes chamber (being of timber) ſo ſtraightly that no man might enter in: refuſed the doore to theſe gentlemen, ſaying that the Duke had commanded him to be hanged with ſpeed; and further ſent diuers meſſengers to the Prouoſt to haſten the execution. Thus was this Cifron hanged to the Duke of Burgundies great preiudice, and better had it been for him to haue vſed leſſe cruelty, and gently to haue heard this gentleman; which if he had done, peraduenture he had been yet liuing, his houſe floriſhing, his dominions in ſafety, yea and much inlarged, conſidering the broiles that haue hapned ſince in this realme.
               But it is to be thought that God had otherwiſe diſpoſed heereof, bicauſe of the diſhonorable part the Duke had plaide the Earle of Saint Paule Conſtable of Fraunce not long before. For you haue already heard in this hiſtorie how notwithſtanding his ſafe conduct, he took him priſoner, deliuered him to the King to put him to death, and ſent alſo all the letters and writings he had of the ſaid Conſtables ſeruing for his proceſſe. And although the Duke had iuſt cauſe to hate him euen to the death, and to procure his death for diuers conſiderations too long to rehearſe, (ſo that he might haue done it without ſtayning his honor:) yet all the reaſons that may be alleaged on his behalfe, cannot excuſe his fault in that contrarie to his promiſe & honor, hauing giuen him a ſufficient ſafe conduct; he tooke him and ſold him for couetouſnes, partly to recouer the towne of S. Quintin with other the ſaid Conſtables places, lands and goods; and partlie to ſtay the King from hindering his enterpriſe at Nancy when he firſt beſieged it. For lying at that ſiege, after many delaies he deliuered the Conſtable, fearing leaſt the Kings army being in Champaigne would haue hindered his ſaid enterpriſe if he had done otherwiſe. For the King threatened him by his ambaſſadors, bicauſe it was agreed betweene them, that whether of them could firſt lay hands vpon him, ſhould deliuer him to the other within eight daies, or put him to death. But the Duke had paſſed the terme of the Conſtables deliuerie many daies as you haue heard; ſo that the onely feare of loſing Nancy, and the greedie deſire of hauing it cauſed the Duke to deliuer him to the King. But euen as in this place of Nancy he committed this foule fault, and afterward alſo in the ſame place at the ſecond ſiege put Cifron to death, refuſing to heare him ſpeake, as one hauing his eares ſtopped and wits troubled: euen ſo in the ſelfeſame place was he himſelfe deceiued, and betraied by him whom he moſt truſted, and peraduenture iuſtly puniſhed for his falſe dealing with the Conſtable, in deliuering him for couetouſnes to haue the ſaid towne. But the iudgement heerof appertaineth to God alone, neither ſpeake I it to any other end but to declare this matter at large, and to ſhew how much a good Prince ought to eſchew ſuch falſe and faithleſſe dealing,

what counſell ſoeuer be giuen him thereunto. For oftentimes thoſe that giue a Prince ſuch aduiſe; do it either to flatter him, or bicauſe they dare not gainſay him: and yet when the fault is committed, they are ſorrie for it, knowing the puniſhment both of God and man that is like to enſue. But ſuch councellors are better far from a Prince than neere about him.
               You haue heard how God appointed this Earle of Campobache his deputie in this world, to take reuenge of the Conſtables death committed by the Duke of Burgundie, in the ſelfeſame place, and after the ſame manner, or rather a crueller. For euen as the Duke contrarie to his ſafe conduct and the truſt the Conſtable had repoſed in him, deliuered him to death: euen ſo was himſelfe betraied by the truſtieſt man in his armie (I meane by him whom he moſt truſted) and whom he had receiued into his ſeruice being old, poore, and deſtitute of liuing, and whom he yeerely entertained with an hundred thouſand ducats, wherewith this Earle himſelfe paied his men of armes, beſides diuers other great benefits that he had receiued at the Dukes hands. And when he firſt began to conſpire his death he was going into Italie with 40000. ducats, which (as you haue heard) he had receiued in preſt of the Duke to leuie therewith his men of armes. Moreouer, the better to execute his traiterous enterpriſe, he practiſed in two places, firſt with a phyſition dwelling in Lyons called Maſter Simon of Pauia; & afterward with the Kings ambaſſador in Sauoy, as before I haue rehearſed. Againe at his returne out of Italie, his men of armes lying in certaine ſmall towns in the countie of Marle which is in Lannois, he began anew to practiſe againſt his Maſter, offering either to deliuer into the Kings hands all the places he held: or when the King ſhould be in battell againſt his Maſter, a priuie token to be between them; vpon the ſight whereof he would turne with all his companie to the King againſt the Duke his Maſter. But this laſt ouerture pleaſed not the King. He offered yet further, ſo ſoone as his Maſter ſhould be abrode with his armie, either to take him priſoner or to kill him, as he went to view the ſeate of his campe; which laſt enterpriſe vndoubtedly he would haue executed. For the Dukes manner was when he alighted from his horſe at the place where he encamped, to diſarme himſelfe all ſauing his quirace, and to mount vpon a little nagge, accompanied onely with eight or ten archers on foote, or ſomtime two or three gentlemen of his chamber; in the which eſtate he vſed to ride about his campe, to ſee if it were well incloſed: ſo that the ſaid Earle might with ten horſes eaſily haue executed his enterpriſe. But the King deteſting the continuall treaſons of this man againſt his Maſter, eſpecially this laſt being attempted in time of truce; and further not knowing throughly to what purpoſe he made theſe offers: determined of a noble courage to diſcouer them to the Duke of Burgundie; and accordingly aduertiſed him at large of them all by the Lord of Contay (ſo often before named) I my ſelfe being preſent when he declared them to the ſaid Contay, who I am ſure like a faithfull ſeruant reuealed them to his Maſter. But the Duke taking all in euill part, ſaid that if it were ſo, the King would neuer haue aduertiſed him thereof. This was long afore he laid his ſiege before Nancy; yet think I that he neuer ſpake word thereof to the ſaid Earle: for he loued him euer after rather better than woorſe.
            
            
               
               How the Duke of Lorraine being accompanied with good force of Almains, came to the towne of Saint Nicholas during the ſiege of Nancy, and how the King of Portugale who was in Fraunce, came to ſee the D. of Burgundie during the ſaid ſiege. Chap. 7.
               
                  LEt vs now returne to our principall matter, I meane the ſiege the Duke held before Nancy, which he began in the middeſt of winter with ſmall force, euill armed, euill paide, and the moſt part ſicke. The mightieſt in his campe practiſed againſt him as you haue heard, and generally they murmured all, and deſpiſed all his dooings, as in aduerſitie commonly it happeneth: but none attempted ought againſt his perſon or eſtate, ſaue this Earle of Campobache onely; for in his ſubiects no diſloialtie was found. While he lay there in this poore eſtate, the Duke of Lorraine treated with the confederated townes before named, to leuie men in their territories to fight with the Duke of Burgundie lying before Nancy, whereunto all the townes eaſily agreed, but the Duke of Lorraine lacked monie: wherefore the King ſent ambaſſadors to the Swiſſers in his fauor, and lent him alſo 40000. franks towards the paiment of his Almains. Further, the Lord of Cran who was then the Kings lieutenant in Champaigne, lay in Barrois with ſeuen or eight hundred launces and certaine franke archers led by very expert captaines. The Duke of Lorraine by meanes of the Kings fauor and monie, drew vnto his ſeruice great force of Almains as well horſemen as footemen, beſides the which the townes alſo furniſhed a great number of their owne charge. Moreouer, with the ſaid Duke were many gentlemen of this realme, and the Kings armie as I ſaid before lay in Barrois, which made no war, but waited to ſee to whether part the victorie would incline. The Duke of Lorraine being accompanied with theſe Almaines aboue mentioned, came and lodged at Saint Nicholas two leagues from Nancy.
               The King of Portugale had beene in this realme at that preſent the ſpace of nine moneths: for the King our Maſter was entred into league with him againſt the King of Spaine that now is. Whereupon the ſaid King of Portugale came into Fraunce, hoping that the King would lend him a great armie to inuade Caſtile by the frontires of Biſcay or Nauarre. For the ſaid King of Portugale held certaine places in Caſtile bordering vpon Portugale, and certaine alſo vpon the confines of Fraunce; namely, the caſtell of Bourgues, and diuers others: ſo that if the King had aided him as once he was purpoſed, it is like his enterpriſe had taken effect: but the King altered his minde, and foded him foorth with faire words the ſpace of a yeer or more. During the which time his affaires in Caſtile daily impaired: for at his comming into France all the nobles in maner of the realme of Caſtile tooke part with him, but bicauſe of his long abſence, by little and little they altered their minds, and made peace with King Ferrande and Queene Iſabell now raigning. The King our Maſter excuſed his not aiding him according to his promiſe by the wars in Lorraine, alleaging that he feared that the Duke of Burgundie (if he recouered his loſſes) would foorthwith inuade him. This poore King of Portugale being a good and a iuſt Prince 
                     1
                  , reſolued to go to the Duke of Burgundie his coſin german 
                     2
                   to treate of peace betweene

the King and him, to the end that then the King might aide him: for he was aſhamed to returne into Caſtile or Portugale in this eſtate hauing done no good heere in Fraunce; and the rather bicauſe he had taken this iourney vpon him verie raſhly, and contrarie to the aduiſe of the moſt of his counſell. Wherefore he put himſelfe vpon the way in the middeſt of winter to go to the Duke of Burgundy his coſin lying before Nancy: where at his arriuall he began to treat with him according to the Kings inſtructions. But perceiuing it an impoſſibilitie to agree them bicauſe their demands were contrarie in all points; after he had remained there two daies he tooke his leaue of the Duke of Burgundie his coſin, and returned to Paris from whence he came. The Duke deſired him to ſtaie a while, and to go to Pont-à-muſſon fower leagues from Nancy to defend that paſſage: for the Duke was already aduertiſed that the Almains army lay at Saint Nicholas. But the King of Portugale excuſed himſelfe, ſaying: that he was neither armed nor accompanied for ſuch an enterpriſe; and ſo returned to Paris, where he remained a long time, till in the ende he entered into ielouſie, that the King meant to take him priſoner and deliuer him to his enimie the King of Caſtile. Wherupon he and two of his ſeruants diſguiſed themſelues, purpoſing to go to Rome there to enter into religion. But as he iourneied in this diſguiſed attire, he was taken by a Norman called Robinet le Beuf. Of this his departure the King our Maſter was both ſorie and aſhamed: and thereupon armed diuers ſhips vpon the coaſt of Normandie to conuey him into Portugale; of the which fleete George Leger was appointed Admirall.
               The occaſion of his war vpon the King of Caſtile was for his ſiſters daughter. For you ſhall vnderſtand that his ſiſter had been wife to Don Henry King of Caſtile that laſt died; and had iſſue a goodly daughter which liueth yet in Portugale vnmaried. This daughter Queene Iſabell ſiſter to the ſaid King Henry 
                  
                     3
                  , held from the crowne of Caſtile, ſaying that ſhe was illegitimate; of the which opinion were alſo many others, alleaging that King Henry was impotent to generation, for a certaine impediment that I ouerpaſſe. But whether it were ſo or no; notwithſtanding that the ſaid daughter were borne vnder the vaile of mariage: yet remained the crowne of Caſtile to Queene Iſabell and hir husband the King of Arragon and Sicilie 
                     4
                   now raigning.
               This King of Portugale aboue mentioned, labored to make a mariage betweene the ſaid daughter his neece and King Charles the eight now raigning, which was the cauſe of this his voiage into Fraunce, that turned ſo greatly to his damage and greefe. For ſoone after his returne into Portugale he died. Wherefore (as I ſaid in the beginning of this hiſtory) a Prince ought to beware what ambaſſadors he ſendeth into a ſtrange countrey. For if they had been wiſe that came from the King of Portugale into Fraunce to conclude the league aboue mentioned (whereat I my ſelfe was preſent, as one in commiſſion for the King) they would haue informed themſelues better of our affaires in theſe parts before they had counſelled their Maſter to enter into this voiage, which turned ſo much to his loſſe and damage.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth a ſimple Prince of wit.
                  
                  2 How the King of Portugale and the Duke of Burgundy were coſin germans, the Pedegree in the end of the worke will declare.
                  
                  3 The Pedegree in the end of the worke will make this plaine.
                  
                  4 Before he calleth Rene King of Sicilie, but King Rene had but the title not the poſſeſsion.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the Duke of Burgundy refuſing the good counſell of diuers of his men, was diſcomfited and ſlaine in the battell fought betweene him and the Duke of Lorraine, neere to Nancy. Chap. 8.
               
                  I Would haue paſſed ouer this diſcourſe of the King of Portugale, had it not been to ſhew that a Prince ought to beware how he put himſelfe into another Princes hands, or go in perſon to demaund aide. But now to returne to the principall matter. Within a day after the King of Portugales departure from the Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Lorraine and the Almains that ſerued him, diſlodged from Saint Nicholas, and marched to fight with the ſaid Duke; and the ſelfe ſame day the Earle of Campobache to accompliſh his enterpriſe departed from the Dukes campe 
                     1
                  , and reuolted to his enimies with eight ſcore men of armes, ſorowing onely that he could do his Maſter no more harme. They within Nancy had intelligence of this Earles practiſes, which incouraged them to endure the ſiege. Further, one that leaped downe the ditches entered the towne and aſſured them of ſuccors, otherwiſe they were vpon the point to haue yeelded it. And to ſay the truth had it not been for the ſaid Earles treaſons, they could neuer haue held it ſo long; but God was fully determined to bring the Duke to his end.
               The Duke of Burgundy being aduertiſed of the Duke of Lorrains arriuall, aſſembled his counſell contrary to his accuſtomed maner; for he was neuer woont to aske any mans aduiſe, but in all matters to follow his own ſenſe. Moſt of them counſelled him to retire to Pont-à-muſſon, being but fower leagues thence, & to man the places well which he held about Nancy, alleaging that the Almains would depart ſo ſoone as they had victualed the towne, and the Duke of Lorrains mony faile him; ſo that he ſhould not be able in long time to aſſemble the like force. They ſaid further, that his enimies could not victuall the towne ſo well, but that before winter were halfe expired it ſhould be in as great diſtreſſe as at that preſent, and in the meane time, he might leuy men: for I haue been informed by thoſe that perfectly vnderſtood it that he had not in all his army aboue fower thouſand ſoldiers, of the which hardly twelue hundred were able to fight. Money he lacked not, for in the caſtell of Luxembourg being not far thence, were at the leaſt 450000. crownes, and men ynough he might haue recouered. But God would not giue him grace to follow this wiſe aduiſe, nor perceiue how many enimies lodged round about him on euery ſide: ſo that he tooke the woorſt courſe, and by the aduiſe of certaine harebrained fooles determined to hazard the battell with theſe few terrified and hartleſſe men; notwithſtanding all the reaſons alleaged to him, both of the great force of Almains the Duke of Lorraine had, and alſo of the Kings army that lay hard by his campe. When the Earle of Campobache was come to the Duke of Lorraine, the Almains commanded him to depart, ſaying, that they would haue no traitor among them. Wherefore he retired to Condé a caſtell and paſſage neere at hand 
                     2
                  , which he fortified with carts and other prouiſions the beſt he could, truſting that when the Duke of Burgundy and his men fled, ſome of them would fall into his hands, as indeed a great many did. But this practiſe with the Duke of Lorraine was not his greateſt treaſon; for a little

before his departure he conſpired with diuers in the Dukes army, reſoluing with them (bicauſe he ſawe no hope of killing or taking his Maſter priſoner) to reuolt to the enimies at the very inſtant that the two battels ſhould ioine; but ſooner not to depart, to the end their ſudden reuolt might the more aſtoniſh and terrify the Dukes whole army. Further, he promiſed aſſuredly, if the Duke fled that he ſhould neuer eſcape aliue; for he would leaue thirteene or fowerteene truſty fellows behinde him, ſome to begin to flie at the very inſtant that the Almains ſhould march: and other ſome to haue an eie on the Duke to kill him if he fled, which enterpriſe he made full account to execute; and two or three I knew afterwards my ſelfe of thoſe that were left behinde for that purpoſe. After he had conſpired theſe abhominable treaſons, he returned againe to the Dukes campe, and then reuolted from him (as you haue heard) when he ſaw the Almains march, of whom being refuſed, he retired as I ſaid before to this caſtell of Condy. The ſaid Almains marched forward, being accompanied with great force of French horſe men that had leaue giuen them to be at the battell. Diuers alſo there were that lay in ambuſhes neere to the place, to the end if the D. were diſcomfited they might get ſom good priſoner or booty▪ Thus you ſee the miſerable eſtate this poore Duke of Burgundy was fallen into, by refuſing good aduiſe. When the two armies ioined, the Dukes hauing been already twiſe diſcomfited, and being but ſmall and in very euill order, was incontinent broken and put to flight; a great number eſcaped, the reſt were either ſlaine 
                     3
                   or taken, and namely the Duke himſelfe died vpon the place. Of the maner of his death 
                     4
                  , I will not ſpeake bicauſe I was not there preſent: but I haue communed with ſome that were there, who told me that they ſaw him ſtriken to the ground, & could not ſuccor him bicauſe they were priſoners. Notwithſtanding to their iudgement he was not then ſlaine, but after theſe came a great troupe which ſlew him in the midſt of them, ſtripped him, and left him among the dead bodies, not knowing who he was 
                     5
                  . This battell 
                     6
                   was fought the fift of Ianuary 
                     7
                  , 1476. vpon Twelfth euen. 1477. begining the yeere as Newe yeeres tide.
                  
               
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He departed vpon wenſday with 180. Meyer ſaith almoſt 200. men of armes, that is 800. horſe, and on ſaturday departed the Lords of Dauge or Augy as Meyer nameth him, and Montfort with 120. men of armes, that is 480. horſe, and vpon ſunday was the battel. Annal. Aquit. Meyer. Annal. Burgund.
                  2 The caſtell of Condy was the paſſage vpon the bridge of the riuer of Moſelle. Meyer.
                  3 The Duke loſt in the battell of Nancy 3000. men. Annal. Burgund.
                  4 He had three wounds, one with a halberd in the ſide of his head, which claue his head downe to the teeth, another with a pike through the haunches, and the third a puſh alſo with a pike by the fundament. Annal. Burg. He was born the 11. of Nouember 1433. and was 34. yeeres old when he began to gouerne: he liued 43. yeeres, one moneth, and 26. daies: and gouerned nine yeeres, ſixe moneths, and twenty daies. Meyer.
                  5 The name of him that ſlue Duke Charles was Claude of Bauſmont, captaine of the caſtell of Saint Dier in Lorraine. The Duke was mounted vpon a blacke courſer, and ſeeing his battels ouerthrowen, tooke a little riuer ſuppoſing to haue ſaued himſelfe, but in the riuer his horſe fell and ouerthrevv him: and then this gentleman not knowing him, and by reaſon he vvas deafe not hearing the Duke, vvho cried to him for the ſafetie of his life, ran vpon him, ſlue him, ſtripped him, and left him lying ſtarke naked in the ditch. VVhere the next day after the battell, his bodie vvas found ſo faſt froſen in the ice, that vvhen it vvas dravven foorth a peece of his cheeke tarried there behinde. The Duke of Lorraine to his great honor ſolemnly buried him, himſelfe and al his nobles accompanying
                     
                     the corps in mourning attire. The place vvhere the Duke vvas ſlaine vvas hard by S. Iohns Church vvithout Nancy, vvhere the Duke of Lorraine erected a croſſe for a memoriall thereof. The gentleman that ſlue him died ſoone after of melancholie, vvhen he vnderſtood that he had ſlaine ſo vvoorthie and couragious a Prince. Champier. Annales Burgund.
                  6 The battell at Nancy Meyer nameth the battell of Iaruilla.
                  
                  7 Being ſunday, and as others vvrite ann. 1477. but the variance both in this place and diuers others betvveene Commines and them is, bicauſe they end the yeere at Nevv yeeres tide, and he not before our Lady day, as by the courſe of his hiſtorie is moſt plaine.
                  
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe vpon certaine vertues of the Duke of Burgundie, and of the time his houſe flouriſhed in proſperitie. Chap. 9.
               
                  I Saw at Milan ſince his death a ſignet that I haue often ſeene him weare at his breſt, which was a ring ſet with a camée, hauing very curiouſly cut into it an iron to ſtrike fire 
                     1
                  , wherein his armes were grauen. This ring was ſold at Milan for two ducats, and he that ſtole it from him was a falſe knaue, that had beene a groome of his chamber. Many a time haue I ſeene him made ready and vnready with great reuerence and ſolemnitie, and that by great perſonages. But now when death came, all theſe honors fleeted away, and both he and his houſe were deſtroied as you haue heard, in the ſelfeſame place where a little before he had conſented for couetouſnes to deliuer the Conſtable to death. I had knowen him in times paſt a mightie and honorable Prince; as much yea more eſteemed and ſought to of his neighbours, than any Prince in Chriſtendome. Further, in mine opinion the greateſt cauſe of Gods indignation againſt him, was for that he attributed all his good ſucceſſe, and all the great victories he obtained in this world, to his owne wiſedome and vertue; and not to God, as he ought to haue done. And vndoubtedly he was endued with many goodly vertues: for neuer was Prince more deſirous to entertaine noble men, and keepe them in good order than he. His liberalitie ſeemed not great 
                     2
                  , bicauſe he made all men partakers thereof. Neuer Prince gaue audience more willingly to his ſeruants and ſubiects than he 
                     3
                  . While I ſerued him he was not cruell, but grew maruellous cruel towards his end: which was a ſigne of ſhort life. In his apparell and all other kinde of furniture he was woonderfull pompous, yea ſomwhat too exceſſiue. He receiued very honorably all ambaſſadors and ſtrangers, feaſting them ſumptuouſly, and entertaining them with great ſolemnitie. Couetous he was of glorie, which was the chiefe cauſe that made him mooue ſo many wars: for he deſired to imitate thoſe ancient Princes, whoſe fame continueth till this preſent. Laſtly, hardie he was and valiant, as any man that liued in his time: but all his great enterpriſes and attempts ended with himſelfe, and turned to his owne loſſe and diſhonor; for the honor goeth euer with the victorie. Yet to ſay the truth, I wot not well whether God powred out greater indignation vpon him, or vpon his ſubiects: for he died in battell without any long griefe; but they ſithence his death neuer liued in peace, but in continual war; againſt the which they haue not been able to make reſiſtance, bicauſe of their owne ciuill troubles and diuiſions. Yea and another thing that moſt greeueth them is, that they that now defend

them are ſtrangers, who not long ſince were their enimies, namely the Almaines. To conclude, ſince the Dukes death neuer man bare them good will, no not they that defend them. Further, if a man conſider well their actions, it ſeemeth that their wits were as much troubled, as their Princes before his death: for they deſpiſed all good counſell, and ſought all meanes to hurt themſelues. In the which vale of miſery they are ſtill like to continue; or if happily they wade out of it for a ſeaſon, like they are to fall into it againe.
               Wherefore I am of a certaine wiſe mans opinion of my acquaintance, that God giueth to ſubiects Princes, according as he will puniſh or chaſtiſe them; and likewiſe towards the Prince diſpoſeth the ſubiects harts, according as he will aduaunce or abaſe him: and euen ſo dealt he with the ſubiects of this houſe of Burgundie. For after three great, good and ſage Princes, who gouerned them the ſpace of 120. yeers or more, with great wiſedome and vertue, he gaue them in the end this D. Charles, who held them in continuall wars, trauell and charges, almoſt as much in winter as ſommer: ſo that a great number of rich wealthy men were either ſlaine in theſe wars, or ſtarued in priſon. Their great miſeries began before Nuz, and continued with the loſſe of three or fower battels, till the hower of the Dukes death; who in this laſt battell waſted and conſumed the whole force of his countrie, and loſt all his ſeruants that could or would haue defended the eſtate and honor of his houſe. It ſeemeth therefore (as before I ſaid) that this aduerſity hath counteruailed all the time of their felicitie. For as I ſay, that I haue ſeene him a great, mighty and honorable Prince: ſo may I ſay alſo of his ſubiects: for I haue trauelled the beſt part of Europe in mine opinion, yet ſaw I neuer countrey in my life of the like greatnes, no nor far greater, abound with ſuch wealth, riches, ſumptuous buildings, large expences, feaſts, bankets and all kinde of prodigality, as theſe countries of Burgundy did, during the time that I was there. And if thoſe that knew them not during the time that I ſpeake of, thinke my report too large: I am ſure others that knew them then as well as my ſelfe, will thinke it too little. But God with one blowe hath laid flat on the ground this ſumptuous building, I meane this mighty houſe that bred and maintained ſo many woorthy men; that was ſo greatly eſteemed both far and neere, and obtained greater victories, and liued in greater honor during the time it floriſhed than any other: which great felicity and grace of God towards them continued the ſpace of a hundred and twenty yeeres. During the which time all their neighbors ſuffered great afflictions, namely, Fraunce, England and Spaine, ſo far foorth that all theſe at one time or other haue come to craue helpe and ſuccor of this houſe of Burgundy, as you haue ſeene by experience, of the King our Maſter, who in his youth while his father King Charles the ſeuenth raigned, liued in Burgundy the ſpace of ſixe yeeres, with good Duke Philip, who louingly receiued him. As touching the Princes of England, I haue ſeene in the Duke of Burgundies court King Edvvards two brethren the Dukes of Clarence, and Gloceſter who afterward named himſelfe King Richard the third: and on the contrary ſide of the houſe of Lancaſter that tooke part with King Henry, I haue ſeene in maner all the noble men ſuing to this houſe of Burgundy for aide. To be ſhort, as I haue knowen this houſe honored of all men: ſo haue I alſo ſeene it at one inſtant fall downe topſie turuy, and become the moſt deſolate and miſerable houſe in the world, both in reſpect of the Prince and alſo of the ſubiects. Such like works hath God brought to paſſe before we were borne, and wil alſo when we are dead. For this we ought certainly to beleeue, that the good or euill ſucceſſe of Princes dependeth wholy vpon his diuine ordinance.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 Of the deuiſe of the Fuzill read the chronicles of Flanders pag. 345. Claude Paradin in his deuiſes heroiques pag. 46. and Annal. Burgund. lib. 3. pag. 711. who ſaith that he gaue the ſtriking iron, bicauſe it is made in the forme of B. which is the firſt letter of Burgundie. Further, he giueth the ſaid iron ſtriking againſt a ſtone with infinite ſparkles flying from them, to ſignifie that the cruell wars betweene the Duke of Burgundie and the realme of Fraunce had ſet all their neighbours on fire.
                  
                  2 His meaning is that bicauſe he beſtowed vpon euerie man, he could not beſtow much vpon any one, whereby his liberalitie was the leſſe apparant.
                  
                  3 He meaneth in hearing their ſutes; for as touching matters of counſell he hath ſaid before in diuers places that he would neuer vſe any mans aduiſe.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King was aduertiſed of the Duke of Burgundies laſt ouerthrow, and how he gouerned his affaires after the ſaid Dukes death. Chap. 10.
               
                  BVt to proceede in our hiſtorie, the King who had now laid poſts in his realme (for before were neuer any) looked howerly for the certaine newes of this battell of Nancy, bicauſe of the occurrents he had alreadie receiued of the Almains arriuall, and of all the other circumſtances aboue rehearſed: and was foorthwith aduertiſed of the Dukes ouerthrowe. Diuers there were that waited diligently to beare him the firſt newes heerof; for alwaies he gaue ſomwhat to him that firſt brought him tidings of any good newes, withall not forgetting the meſſengers. Further, his delight was to talke of them before they came, and to promiſe rewarde to him that could bring him ſome good newes. Monſeur de Bouchage and my ſelfe being togither, receiued the firſt word of the battell of Morat, whereof both of vs iointly aduertiſed the King, who gaue to each of vs two hundred marks of ſiluer. Monſeur de Lude who lodged without Pleſſis, was the firſt man that knew of the Courriers arriuall with the letters of this battell of Nancy, and commanded the ſaid Courrier to deliuer him his packet, who durſt not denie it him, bicauſe of the Kings great fauour towards him. The next morning by breake of day the ſaid de Lude came rapping at the doore next to the Kings chamber, which foorthwith was opened to him; and in he went and deliuered theſe letters ſent from the Lord of Cran and diuers others; notwithſtanding none of them writ any certaintie of the Dukes death: but ſome reported that he was ſeene flie, and was eſcaped. This newes at the firſt ſo rauiſhed the King with ioy, that he wiſt not what countenance to ſhew: notwithſtanding two doubts there were that troubled him; the one, leaſt the Almaines, if the Duke were taken, for greedines of monie (whereof the Duke had plentie) would not onely raunſome him, but alſo conclude ſome treatie with him, and of his foes become his friends. The other, if the Duke were eſcaped thus thriſe diſcomfited, whether he ſhould ſeaze into his hands his ſeniories of Burgundy or no, knowing them eaſie to be taken, bicauſe in manner all the force of the countrie was ſlaine in theſe three battels. Touching the which point, his reſolution (whereunto few I thinke but my ſelfe were priuy) was, if the Duke were eſcaped aliue, to command his army that lay in Champaigne and Barrois

to enter incontinent into Burgundie during this great feare and aſtoniſhment of the people; and hauing ſeazed all the countrie into his hands, he meant to aduertiſe the Duke, that he did it onely to ſaue it for him, and defend it from the Almaines. For bicauſe the ſaid Duchie was held of the crowne, he would for no good that it ſhould be a pray for them: but whatſoeuer he had taken, he would faithfully reſtore; as vndoubtedly he would, though many happily will not credite it. And no maruell; for they know not the reaſons that would haue mooued him thereunto: but he altered this determination when he vnderſtood of the Dukes death. Immediately after the King (being at Tours) had receiued the letters aboue mentioned, which reported nothing of the Dukes death; he ſent into the towne for all his captaines, and diuers noble men, to whom he read theſe letters; whereat they ſeemed in apparance greatly to reioice: but thoſe that looked narrowlier into their behauiour, perceiued that a great many of them forced their mirth, and wiſhed with all their harts, notwithſtanding their outward ſhew, that the world had gone otherwiſe with the Duke. The reaſon wherof peraduenture was, bicauſe the K. heretofore had liued in great feare; but now they doubted, ſeeing him deliuered of ſo many enimies, that he would alter many things, eſpecially offices and penſions. For there were a great number in the companie, that had borne armes againſt him both in the war called THE WEALE PVELIKE (whereof you haue heard in the beginning of this hiſtorie) and in diuers other broiles betweene him and the Duke of Guienne his brother. After he had communed a while with theſe noble men and captaines, he went to maſſe; which being ended, he cauſed the table to be couered in his chamber, and made them all dine with him; the Lord Chauncellor, and certaine others of his counſell being alſo preſent. All dinner-while he talked of theſe affaires: but I and diuers others marked with what appetite thoſe that ſate at the table dined. And vndoubtedly there was not one of them (I wot not whether for ioy or ſorrow) that ate halfe a meales meate; yet were they not aſhamed to eate in the Kings preſence, for euery one of them had often before dined at his table. When the King was riſen from dinner, he withdrew himſelfe, and gaue to diuers, certaine of the Duke of Burgundies lands if he were dead, and ſoone after diſpatched the Admirall of Fraunce, called the baſtard of Bourbon and my ſelfe, giuing vs commiſſion to receiue into his allegeance as many as would become his ſubiects; and further: commanding vs to depart incontinent, and to open all courriers packets that we ſhould meet with, to the end we might be certainly informed whether the Duke were dead or aliue. We departed in great haſte, though in the extreameſt colde weather that euer I felt: and when we had ridden about halfe a daies iourney, we met with a Poſte, whom we commanded to deliuer vs his letters; the contents whereof were, that the Duke was found among the dead bodies 
                     1
                  , and knowne by an Italian Page that ſerued him, and by his Phiſition called Maſter Louppe a Portugale borne, who ſent word to Monſeur de Cran of the Duke his Maſters death, who incontinent aduertiſed the King thereof.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 By what markes the Dukes body was knuwne, read Annal. Burgund.
               
            
            
               
               How the King after the Duke of Burgundies death ſeazed into his hands the towne of Abbeuille, and of the anſwer they of Arras gaue him. Chap. 11.
               
                  WHen we vnderſtood theſe newes, we rid foorthwith to the ſubburbs of Abbeuille, and were the firſt that brought word of the Dukes death into thoſe parts. At our arriual we foūd the towns men in treaty with Monſeur de Torcy, whom they had loued of long time. But the ſoldiers and thoſe that had been the Dukes officers, treated with vs about the deliuery of the towne by a meſſenger whom we ſent thither before vs, ſo far foorth that vpon our promiſes they cauſed fower hundred launces to depart the towne, which the townes men ſeeing, immediately opened the gates to Monſeur de Torcy, greatly to the hinderance of the captaines and the other officers of the towne; to ſeauen or eight of the which we had promiſed both money and penſions (for we had commiſſion from the Kïng ſo to do) wherof nothing was performed bicauſe the towne was not yeelded by their meanes. This towne of Abbeuille was parcell of thoſe lands that King Charles the ſeauenth engaged to Duke Philip of Burgundy at the treaty of Arras, vnder this condition, that for default of heire male they ſhould returne to the crowne. Wherefore it is not to be maruelled if ſo lightly they opened to vs their gates. From Abbeuille we rid to Dourlans, and ſent to ſommon Arras the chiefe towne of Artois, the ancient inheritance of the Earles of Flaunders, which hath alwaies deſcended as wel to the heires females as males. Monſeur de Rauaſtain and Monſeur de Cordes, who were within the towne condeſcended to come & treat with vs at an abbey neere the towne called Mont Saint Eloy, bringing with them certaine of the towne. To the which treaty we agreed that I ſhould go and certain with me, for bicauſe we ſuppoſed they would not yeeld to our requeſts: it was thought good that the Admirall ſhould not go. Immediately after my arriuall at the place aſſigned, the Lords of Rauaſtaine and Cordes being accompanied with diuers gentlemen, and certaine alſo of the towne repaired thither. Among thoſe that came to negotiate with vs for the towne, was their Recorder, called Maſter Iohn de la Vaquerie, ſince that time chiefe preſident in the court Parlament at Paris. We required them at this meeting to open vs the gates and to receiue vs into the towne for the King, ſaying that he claimed both towne and countrey as his by way of confiſcation; adding that if they refuſed ſo to do they were like to be forced thereunto, ſeeing both their Prince was ſlaine and their countrey vtterly vnfurniſhed of men of war, bicauſe of theſe three battels they had loſt. The Lords aboue named made vs anſwer by the ſaid Maſter Iohn de la Vaquerie, that this countie of Artois appertained of right to the Lady of Burgundie, daughter and heire to Duke Charles, and deſcended to hir by inheritance from the Lady Margaret ſomtime Counteſſe of Flaunders, Artois, Burgundie, Neuers, and Retell, the which married with Philip the firſt, Duke of Burgundie, ſonne to King Iohn of Fraunce 
                     1
                  , and yoongeſt brother to King Charles the fift: wherefore they humbly beſought the King to keepe the truce concluded betweene him and the late Duke Charles. Our communication was but ſhort; for we ſuppoſed before our meeting, that this ſhould be our anſwer. But the chiefe cauſe of my going into thoſe parts, was to commune with certaine of mine acquaintance

there, and to draw them to the Kings ſeruice: with ſome of the which I ſpake, who ſoone after became his faithfull ſeruants accordingly. Theſe countries were in marruellous feare and aſtoniſhment, and not without cauſe; for I thinke that in eight daies they could not haue leuied eight men of armes. Further, in all thoſe quarters were not aboue 1500. ſoldiers, horſemen and footmen, which lay towards Namur & in Henault, & were of thoſe that eſcaped out of the battel where the Duke was ſlain. Their woonted termes and maner of ſpeech were now cleane altered; for they ſpake lowly and humbly: which I write not to accuſe them, as though in times paſt their words had been more arrogant than became them; but the truth is when I was there they thought ſo well of themſelues, that they vſed not ſuch reuerent language, neither to the King, nor of the King, as they haue done ſithence. Wherefore if men were wiſe, they would vſe ſuch faire ſpeech in time of proſperitie, that in aduerſitie they ſhould not neede to change their termes. I returned to the Admirall, to make report of my negotiation: immediately whereupon we were aduertiſed that the King was at hand; for he ſet foorth ſoone after vs, and commanded letters to be written both in his owne name, and diuers of his ſeruants names, to cauſe certaine to repaire to him; by whoſe meanes he truſted to bring all theſe ſeniories vnder his obedience.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The pedegree in the end of this worke will ſhew, how all theſe titles deſcended to this Lady Margaret.
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe not appertaining to the principall matters of the greatioie the King was in to ſee himſelfe deliuered of ſo many enimies, and of the error he committed touching the reducing of theſe countries of Burgundy to his obedience. Chap. 12.
               
                  THe King reioiced not a little to ſee himſelfe thus deliuered of all thoſe whom he hated and were his principall enimies: of ſome of the which he had taken the reuenge himſelfe; namely the Conſtable of Fraunce, the Duke of Nemours, and diuers others, his brother the Duke of Guyenne was dead whoſe inheritance was fallen to him. In like maner all they of the houſe of Aniou were dead, namely King Rene of Sicilie, the Dukes of Calabria Iohn and Nicholas, and their coſin the Earle of Maine, and afterward of Prouence: the Earle of Armignac was ſlaine at Leſtore, and all their lands and goods fallen to the King. But bicauſe this houſe of Burgundie was greater and mightier than the reſt, and had made ſharpe war with the Engliſh mens aide vpon his father K. Charles the ſeuenth, thirtie two yeers without truce, and had their dominions bordring vpon his, and their ſubiects alwaies deſirous to make war vpon him and his realme: therefore he reioiced more at their Princes death, than at the death of all the reſt. Further, he now fully perſwaded himſelfe, that during his life, no man neither within his realme, nor in the countries bordering vpon it, would once lift vp his finger againſt him. For he was in peace (as you haue heard) with the Engliſh men, the which he trauelled to the vttermoſt of his power to continue. But although he were thus void of all feare: yet did not God permit him to take the wiſeſt courſe for the atchieuing

of this his enterpriſe being of ſo great importance. And ſure it appeereth both by that God ſhewed then and hath ſhewed ſince, that he meant ſharply to puniſh this houſe of Burgundy, as wel in the perſon of the Prince, as of the ſubiects, and of thoſe that liued amongſt them. For if the King our Maſter had taken the beſt courſe, the wars that haue conſumed them ſince had neuer hapned. For if he had done as he ought to haue done, he ſhould haue ſought to ioine to the crowne all thoſe great Seniories whereunto he could pretend no title, either by mariage or by courteous dealing with the ſubiects; which thing he might then eaſily haue accompliſhed, ſeeing the great feare, miſerie, and diſtreſſe theſe countries were in at that time. And if he had thus done, he ſhould both haue rid them of many troubles, & inlarged and enriched his owne realme through long peace, which by this meanes had beene eaſily obtained. He might alſo heereby haue eaſed his realme diuers waies, eſpecially of the charge of men of armes, who continually rode vp and down from one corner of the realme to another, oftentimes vpon ſmall occaſion. While the Duke of Burgundy yet liued, he eftſoones debated with me what were beſt to be done if the ſaid Duke hapned to die. And then he diſcourſed maruellous wiſely thereof, ſaying, that he would trauell to make a mariage betweene the King his ſonne now raigning, and the Dukes daughter, afterward Duches of Auſtrich, which if ſhe refuſed bicauſe of the Daulphin his ſons yoong age; then he would attempt to win hir to mary ſome yoong Lord of this realme, to obtaine thereby hir friendſhip and hir ſubiects, and recouer without blowes that he claimed to be his: in the which minde he continued till eight daies before he vnderſtood of the Dukes death. But this wiſe deliberation he began ſomwhat to alter the ſelfe ſame day he receiued newes therof, and the very inſtant that he diſpatched the Admirall and me. Notwithſtanding he diſcouered not his purpoſe therein, but made promiſe to diuers of lands and lordſhips that had been in the Dukes poſſeſſion.
            
            
               How Han, Bohain, Saint Quintin and Peronne were yeelded to the King, and how he ſent Maſter Oliuer his barber to practiſe with them of Gaunt. Chap. 13.
               
                  THe King being on the way comming after vs, receiued good newes from all parts: for the caſtels of Han and Bohain were yeelded vnto him, and the citizens of Saint Quintins of their own accord receiued Monſeur de Mouy their neighbor into the towne for him. Further he aſſured himſelfe of Peronne, which VVilliam of Biſche held, and was put in hope both by vs and others, that Monſeur de Cordes would reuolt to him. Further he had ſent his barber called Maſter Oliuer to Gaunt, in a village neere to the which he was borne, and had diſpatched diuers others into other places, being in great hope of them all; but the moſt part of them ſerued him rather with words then deedes. When he drew neer to Peronne I went to meet him, and found him in a village, whither M. VVilliam of Biſche and certain others came & preſented him the keies of the town, wherof he was right glad. The King abode there that day, and I dined with him after mine accuſtomed maner: for his pleaſure was that ſeuen or eight at the leaſt & ſomtimes more ſhould ordinarily ſit at his owne table. But after dinner he withdrew himſelfe, and ſeemed to be diſcontented with the ſmall exploit the Admirall and I

had done, ſaying: that he had ſent Maſter Oliuer his barber to Gaunt to bring that towne to his obedience, and Robinet Dodenfort to Saint Omers, who was well friended there: and thoſe he commended as fit men to receiue the keies of a towne, and put his forces into it. Diuers others alſo he named, whom he had ſent to other great townes: and this matter he made Monſeur de Lude, and two or three others to debate with me. It became not me to reaſon againſt him, nor gainſay his pleaſure; but I told him that I feared Maſter Oliuer and the others whom he named, would not ſo eaſily take theſe great townes, as they ſuppoſed. The King vſed this communication with me, bicauſe he had altered his minde, and hoped by reaſon of his good ſucceſſe in the beginning, that all the countrie would yeeld vnto him. Moreouer, he was counſelled by diuers (and was alſo of himſelfe inclined thereunto) vtterly to deſtroy this houſe of Burgundie, and to diſperſe the ſeniories therof among diuers men; ſome of the which he named, vpon whom he was purpoſed to beſtow the Earldoms, namely, Henault and Namur that border vpon Fraunce: with the greater ſeniories, as Brabant, Holland, and the reſt, he meant to win certaine Princes of Almaine to his friendſhip, to the end they might aide him in the atchieuing of his enterpriſe. All the which matters it pleaſed him to acquaint me with, bicauſe I had counſelled him before to take the other courſe aboue rehearſed: wherefore he would that I ſhould vnderſtand the reaſons, why he followed not mine aduiſe. Further he alleaged, that this courſe ſhould be moſt beneficiall for his realme, the which had ſuſtained infinite troubles, bicauſe of the greatnes of this houſe of Burgundie, and the mightie ſeniories that it poſſeſſed. And ſure as touching the world, his reaſons carried great ſhew (though in conſcience me thought otherwiſe:) notwithſtanding ſuch was his wiſedome, that neither I nor any of his ſeruants could ſee ſo far into his affaires as himſelfe did; for vndoubtedly he was one of the wiſeſt and ſubtileſt Princes that liued in his time. But in ſuch waightie affaires God diſpoſeth the harts of Kings and great Princes, which he holdeth in his hands, and directeth them into thoſe waies that beſt ſerue for the executing of his determinations: for vndoubtedly if it had pleaſed him, that the King ſhould ſtill haue continued in that courſe, which he of himſelfe had deuiſed before the Dukes death; the wars that haue been ſince, and yet are, had neuer happened. But we were vnwoorthie on both ſides to enioy that quiet peace that was then offered vs, which ſure was the onely cauſe of the Kings error, not want of wit: for, as you haue heard, in wit no man excelled him. I write of theſe affaires at large, to ſhew that when a man attempteth any great enterpriſe, he ought at the firſt thoroughly to debate it, to the end he may chooſe the wiſeſt way; but eſpecially to ſubmit himſelfe to God, and humbly to beſeech him to direct him into the beſt courſe, which is the principall point, as appeereth both by the ſcriptures and by experience. I minde not heere to blame the King, nor ſay that he erred in this behalfe: for peraduenture diuers which knew and vnderſtood more than my ſelfe, were then and yet are of his opinion; notwithſtanding the matter was not debated there nor elſewhere. Further, thoſe that write Chronicles, frame their ſtile commonly to their commendation of whom they ſpeake, omitting diuers points, ſomtimes bicauſe they know not the truth of them. But as touching my ſelfe, I minde to write nothing but that is true, and which I my ſelfe either haue ſeen or learned of ſuch parties as are woorthie of credite, not regarding any mans commendation. For no Prince is to be thought ſo wiſe, but that he erreth ſomtime, yea oftentimes if he liue long, as ſhould well appeere by their actions, if they were alwaies truly reported. The greateſt Senates and Conſuls that be or euer haue beene, haue erred and do erre, as we may reade and daily ſee.
               
                  
When the King had repoſed himſelfe one day in this village neere to Peronne, he determined the next morning to make his entry into the towne; for it was yeelded him as you haue heard. And at his departure he drew me aſide, and commanded me to go into the countrey of Poictou and the frontiers of Britaine, telling me in mine eare that if neither Maſter Oliuers enterpriſe tooke effect, nor Monſeur de Cordes reuolted to him; he would cauſe all the countrey of Artois called La Leuée lying vpon the riuer of Lis, to be burned; and that done returne againe into Touraine. I deſired him to be good to certaine who by my means were become his ſeruants, and to whom I had promiſed in his name penſions and great rewards: whereupon he tooke their names of me in writing, and performed all that I had promiſed. Thus I tooke my leaue of him for that time. But euen as I was taking horſe, Monſeur de Lude came to me, whom the King for certaine conſiderations fauored greatly. He was a man much giuen to his owne priuate gaine, and as he cared not to deceiue and abuſe any man: ſo was he alſo very light of beliefe, and often beguiled himſelfe. He had been brought vp with the King from his childhood, & knew which way to feed his humor, and had a very pleaſant head. He came and ſaid thus to me (wiſely after a ieſting maner) what depart you now when you ſhould be made or neuer, ſeeing the great things that fall daily into the Kings hands, wherewith he may enrich thoſe that he loueth? For my part I looke to be gouernor of Flaunders, and to make my ſelfe all of golde, in vttering the which words, he brake foorth into great laughter: but I had no luſt to laugh bicauſe I feared that this proceeded of the King. Mine anſwer was, that I would be right glad if his fortune might be ſuch, and that I truſted the King would not forget me.
               A certaine knight of Hainault was come to me not paſt halfe an hower before my departure, who brought me newes of diuers with whom I had peſwaded by letters to put themſelues into the Kings ſeruice. The ſaid knight and I are kinſemen, and he is yet liuing, wherfore neither wil I name him, nor thoſe of whom he brought me this aduertiſement. His offer in few words was to yeeld vnto the King the chiefe places and townes in Hainault. Whereof I aduertiſed the King euen as I was taking my leaue; who after he had talked with the ſaid knight, told me that neither he nor thoſe others whom I named were ſuch as he had need of. He miſliked one for this point, and another for that, and their offer ſeemed vnto him nothing: for he thought to obtaine all that he deſired without them. Againe, after my departure the King made Monſeur de Lude to commune with the ſame knight, who was much diſcontented with the ſaid de Ludes words, and departed incontinent without entring into farther treaty, bicauſe the ſaid de Lude and he would neuer haue agreed in any point. For whereas this knight was come out of Hainault to get ſomwhat at the Kings hands whereby to inrich himſelfe: the ſaid de Lude at the firſt meeting asked him what the townes would giue him to commend their cauſe to the King. I thinke verily that this refuſall the King made to theſe knights proceeded alſo of God; for ſince that time he would haue made good account of them if he could haue drawne them to his ſeruice. But peraduenture God would not accompliſh his deſire in all points either bicauſe of the reaſons aboue alleaged, or for that he would not ſuffer him to vſurpe this countrey of Hainault (which is held of the Empire) both bicauſe he had no title thereunto, and alſo bicauſe of the ancient league betweene the Emperors and the Kings of Fraunce, whereof the King himſelfe alſo ſeemed afterward to take notice. For he held Cambray, le Queſnoy, and Boiſſi 
                     1
                   in Hainault, whereof Boiſſi he yeelded againe, and reſtored Cambray being an Imperiall towne to neutralitie as it was before. Athough I my ſelfe were not preſent at theſe actions, yet was I

informed how they paſſed: for I had good meanes to vnderſtand of them bicauſe I was acquainted, and had been brought vp in both theſe Princes dominions, and haue ſince alſo communed with diuers that were the principall managers of theſe affaires on both ſides.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Boiſſi libr. 6. cap. 3. he calleth Bouchain: and ſo out of doubt it ſhould be read heere.
                  
               
            
            
               How Maſter Oliuer the Kings barber failing to execute his enterpriſe at Gaunt, found meanes to put the Kings forces into Tournay. Chap. 14.
               
                  MAſter Oliuer (as you haue heard) was gone to Gaunt, and carried letters of credit to the Ladie of Burgundie Duke Charles his daughter, hauing alſo commiſſion to perſwade with hir apart, to put hir ſelfe into the Kings gouernment 
                     1
                  . But this was not his principall charge: for he doubted that he ſhould not obtaine leaue to commune with hir apart; and though he did, yet ſuppoſed he that he ſhould not frame hir to his requeſt. But his hope was to raiſe ſome great tumult in this towne of Gaunt, which hath euer been inclined to rebellion, and was the eaſier to be mooued thereunto at this preſent, bicauſe vnder Duke Philip and Duke Charles they had liued in great awe, and loſt diuers priuileges by the treatie made with the ſaid Duke Philip, after their wars with him ended. Duke Charles alſo had taken one priuilege from them, concerning the election of their Senate, for an offence made the firſt day he entred into the towne as Duke: whereof bicauſe I haue made mention before, I will heere write no further. All theſe reaſons encouraged Maſter Oliuer the Kings barber to proceede in his enterpriſe, ſo far foorth that he diſcouered his purpoſe to ſome ſuch of the citizens, as he thought would giue eare vnto him, offering (beſides diuers other promiſes) to cauſe the King to reſtore them their priuileges that they had loſt. But notwithſtanding that he were not in their Towne-houſe to ſpeake publikely to their Senate, bicauſe he meant firſt to aſſay if he could do any good with this yoong Princeſſe; yet was his enterpriſe ſmelt out: wherefore after he had ſoiourned a few daies in Gaunt, he was ſent for to declare his meſſage; whereupon he repaired to the Princes preſence, being apparrelled much more ſumptuouſly than became one of his calling, and deliuered his letters. The ſaid Lady ſate in hir chaire of eſtate, hauing about hir the Duke of Cleues, and the biſhop of Liege, with diuers other noble men, and a great number of hir ſubiects. When ſhe had read hir letter, ſhe commanded him to declare his meſſage. But he anſwered that he had nothing to ſay but to hir ſelfe alone. Whereupon it was told him, that this was not the maner of their countrie, eſpecially to commune in ſecret with this yoong Lady being vnmarried. But he ſtill continued his former anſwer, that he had nothing to ſay but to hir ſelfe apart. Whereupon they threatened to make him ſay ſomwhat elſe: which words put him in feare. And I thinke verily, that when he came to deliuer his letter, he had not bethought him what to ſay: for this was not his principal charge, as you haue heard. Thus Maſter Oliuer departed for this time without further ſpeech. Some of the

Councell began to ſcorne him, as well bicauſe of his baſe eſtate, as of his fooliſh ſpeech and behauiour, but eſpecially they of Gaunt (in a little village neere whereunto he was borne) ſcoffed and derided him, ſo far foorth that ſuddenly he fled thence, being aduertiſed if he ſtaide there any longer, that he ſhould be throwen into the riuer; which I thinke would haue prooued true. The ſaid Maſter Oliuer named himſelfe Earle of Melun, a little towne neere to Paris whereof he was captaine. From Gaunt he fled to Tournay, a towne in that countrie ſubiect to neither Prince, but maruellouſly affectioned to the King: for it is his after a ſort, and paieth him yeerely ſixe thouſand franks; but in all other reſpects liueth in libertie, and receiueth all ſorts of men: it is a goodly towne and a ſtrong, as all the inhabitants thereabout can teſtifie. The churchmen and citizens haue al their poſſeſſions and reuenues in Henault and Flaunders, in both the which countries it is ſituate. Wherefore they vſed alwaies during the long wars betweene King Charles the ſeuenth and Philip Duke of Burgundie, to pay yeerely vnto the ſaid Duke ten thouſand franks; the which ſumme I haue ſeene them pay alſo to Duke Charles: but at the time that Maſter Oliuer came thither, they were quit of all paiments, and liued in great wealth and quietnes. Although Maſter Oliuers charge aboue mentioned were too waightie for him to deale in, yet was not he ſo much to be blamed, as they that committed it to him: for notwithſtanding that his enterpriſe had ſuch ſucceſſe, as it was euer like to haue; yet ſhewed he himſelfe wiſe in that he afterward did. For perceiuing the ſaid towne of Tournay to be ſituate vpon the frontiers of both the countries aboue named, and very commodious to endammage them both, if he could put the Kings forces that lay in thoſe parts into it; and knowing further, that the townes men would neuer conſent thereunto, bicauſe they neuer tooke part with either Prince, but ſhewed themſelues friends indifferently to both: he ſent word ſecretly to Monſeur de Mouy (whoſe ſonne was bailife of the town, but not reſident there) that he ſhould bring his companie which he had within S. Quintins, and certaine other bands that lay in thoſe quarters, to the towne of Tournay; who at the hower appointed came to the gate, where he found Maſter Oliuer accompanied with thirtie or fortie perſons, who partly by fauor, and partly by force cauſed the gate to be opened, and receiued the Kings men; wherewith the people of the towne were well ynough contented, but not the gouernors: of whom Maſter Oliuer ſent ſeuen or eight to Paris, whence they departed not during the Kings life. After theſe men of armes, entred alſo diuers other ſoldiers, who did great harme afterward in the two countries aboue named: for they ſpoiled and burned many goodly villages and faire farms, more to the dammage of the inhabitants of Tournay, than of any other for the reaſons aboue alleaged. To be ſhort, ſo long they ſpoiled that the Flemmings aroſe, and tooke out of priſon the Duke of Guelderland (whom Duke Charles had held priſoner) and made him their captaine: and in this eſtate came before the towne of Tournay, where they lay not long, but fled in great diſorder; and loſt many of their men, and among the reſt the Duke of Gueldres, who had put himſelfe behinde to maintaine the skirmiſh (being euill followed) was there ſlaine, as afterward you ſhall heare more at large. Wherefore this honor and good ſucceſſe that happened to the King, and the great loſſe his enimies receiued, proceeded of the ſaid Maſter Oliuers wiſedome and iudgement: ſo that peraduenture a wiſer man, and a greater perſonage than he, might haue failed to atchieue the like enterpriſe. I haue ſpoken ynough of the great charge this ſage Prince committed to this meane perſon, vnfit to manage ſo waightie a cauſe; onely adding, that it ſeemed that God had troubled the Kings wits in this behalfe. For, as I ſaid before, if he had not thought this enterpriſe far eaſier than indeede it

was; but had appeaſed his wrath, and laid downe his greedy deſire of reuenge vpon this houſe of Burgundy, vndoubtedly he had held at this day all thoſe Seniories vnder his ſubiection.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The King claimed this Lady as his vvarde, bicauſe diuers of hir dominions, namely Flaunders, Artois, &c. were held of the crowne of Fraunce: beſides that, he was hir godfather, which vvas the cauſe vvhy he commanded this Oliuer to mooue this request.
                  
               
            
            
               Of the ambaſſadors the Lady of Burgundy daughter to the late Duke Charles ſent to the King, and how by meanes of Monſeur de Cordes the citie of Arras, the townes of Hedin and Bollein, and the towne of Arras itſelfe, were yeelded to the King. Chap. 15.
               
                  YOu haue heard how Maſter VVilliam Biſche yeelded Peronne to the King. The ſaid Biſche was a man of baſe parentage, borne at Molins-Engibers in Niuernois; but inriched and greatly aduanced by Duke Charles of Burgundy, who made him captaine of Peronne, bicauſe his houſe called Clery (being a ſtrong and goodly caſtell that the ſaid Biſche had purchaſed) was neere vnto it. But to proceede, after the King had made his entry into the towne, certaine ambaſſadors came to him from the Lady of Burgundy, being all the greateſt and nobleſt perſonages that were able to do hir any ſeruice: which was vnaduiſedly done to ſend ſo many togither; but ſuch was their deſolation and feare, that they wiſt not well what to ſay or do. The aboue named ambaſſadors were theſe; the Chauncellor of Burgundy called Maſter VVilliam Hugonet, a notable wiſe man, who had been in great credit with Duke Charles, and was highly adaunced by him. The Lord of Himbercourt (ſo often before mentioned in this hiſtory) was there alſo, (who was as wiſe a gentleman, and as able to manage a waighty cauſe as euer I knew any) togither with the Lord of la Vere, a great Lord in Zeland, and the Lord of Grutuſe, and diuers others as well noble men as church men, and burgeſſes of good townes. The King before he gaue them audience, trauelled both generally with them all, and apart with euery one of them to draw them to his ſeruice. They all gaue him humble and lowly words, as men in great feare. Notwithſtanding, thoſe that had their poſſeſſions far from his dominions in ſuch countries as they thought to be out of his reach, would not binde themſelues to him in any reſpect, vnleſſe the mariage betweene his ſonne the Daulphin and the ſaid Lady their Miſtres tooke effect. But the Chauncellor and the Lord of Himbercourt, who had liued long in great authority, wherein they ſtill deſired to continue; and had their lands lying neere to the Kings dominions; the one in the Duchy of Burgundy, the other in Picardy neere to Amiens: gaue eare to his offers, and promiſed both to ſerue him in furthering this mariage, and alſo wholy to become his the mariage being accompliſhed: which courſe he liked not (though it were ſimply the beſt) but was diſpleaſed with them, for that they would not then abſolutely enter into his ſeruice. Notwithſtanding he ſhewed them no countenance of diſpleaſure bicauſe he would vſe their helpe as he might. Moreouer, the King hauing now good

intelligence with Monſeur de Cordes captaine and gouernor of Arras, by his counſel and aduiſe required theſe ambaſſadors to cauſe the ſaid de Cordes to receiue his men into the city of Arras 
                     1
                  : for at that time there were wals and trenches betweene the towne and the city, but the towne was then fortified againſt the city 
                     2
                  ; and now contrariwiſe the citie is fortified againſt the towne. After diuers perſwaſions vſed to the ſaid ambaſſadors, that this ſhould be the beſt and readieſt way to obtaine peace in ſhewing ſuch obedience to the King, they agreed to his demaund, eſpecially the Chauncellor and Himbercourt, and ſent a letter of diſcharge to the ſaid de Cordes, wherein they aduertiſed him of their conſent to the deliuerie of the citie of Arras. Into the which ſo ſoone as the King was entred, he raiſed bulworks of earth againſt the gates of the towne, and in diuers other places neere to the towne. Further, bicauſe of this diſcharge, Monſeur de Cordes and the men of war that were with him, departed out of the towne 
                     3
                  , and went whither them liſted, and ſerued where them beſt liked. And as touching the ſaid de Cordes, he now accounting himſelfe diſcharged of his Miſtres ſeruice, by the ambaſſadors letters aboue mentioned; determined to do homage to the King, and to enter into his ſeruice; both bicauſe his houſe, name, and armes were on this ſide the riuer of Somme (for he was called Maſter Philip of Creuecoeur, ſecond brother to the Lord of Creuecoeur:) and alſo bicauſe the territories ſo often aboue mentioned, which the houſe of Burgundie had poſſeſſed vpon the ſaid riuer of Somme, during the liues of Duke Philip and Duke Charles, returned now without all controuerſie to the crowne. For by the conditions of the treatie of Arras, they were giuen to Duke Philip, and his heires males onely. Wherefore ſeeing Duke Charles left no iſſue but his daughter, the ſaid Maſter Philip of Creuecoeur became without all doubt the Kings ſubiect: ſo that he could commit no fault by entering into the Kings ſeruice, and reſtoring to him that which he held of him, vnleſſe he had done homage anew to the Lady of Burgundie. Notwithſtanding men haue reported, and will report diuerſly of him for this fact: wherefore I leaue the matter to other mens iudgements. True it is that he had beene brought vp, enriched, and aduaunced to great honor by Duke Charles, and that his mother for a certaine ſpace was gouerneſſe of the Lady of Burgundie in hir childhood: and further, when the Duke of Burgundie died, he was gouernor of Picardie, Seneſchall of Ponthieu, Captaine of Contray, gouernor of Peronne, Montdidier and Roye, and Captaine of Bolloin and Hedin. All the which offices he holdeth yet at this preſent of the King; in ſuch maner and forme, as after the Dukes death the King our Maſter confirmed them vnto him.
               After the King had fortified the citie of Arras (as you haue heard) he departed thence to beſiege Hedin, leading thither with him the ſaid de Cordes, who had beene captaine of the place not paſt three daies before, and his men were yet within it, and made ſhew as though they would defend it for the Lady of Burgundie, ſaying; that they had ſworne to be true vnto hir: but after the artillerie had beaten it two or three daies they fell to parlament with the ſaid de Cordes their late captaine, and yeelded the towne to the King. But this was indeede a compact matter betweene the King and them. From thence the King went before Bolloin, where the like was alſo done: but they held, as I remember, a day longer than the others. This was a very dangerous enterpriſe if there had been ſoldiers in the countrie; and that the King knew well ynough, as he afterward told me: for diuers in Bolloin, perceiuing this to be a meere colluſion between the ſoldiers and him, trauelled to put men into the towne, if they could haue leuied them in time, and to haue defended it in good earneſt. During the ſpace of fiue or ſixe daies that the King lay before Bolloin, they of Arras

perceiuing how they had beene abuſed, and conſidering in what danger they ſtood, being enuironed on euery ſide with a great number of ſoldiers, and great force of artillery: trauelled to leuy men to put into their town, and write thereabout to their neighbors of Liſle and Douay. At the ſaid towne of Douay was Monſeur de Vergy, and diuers others whoſe names I remember not, with a fewe horſemen eſcaped out of the battell of Nancy. Theſe determined to enter the towne of Arras, and leuied all the force they could, being to the number of two or three hundred horſe good and bad, and fiue or ſixe hundred footemen. But they of Douay (whoſe pecockes feathers were not yet all pulled) conſtrained them ſpite of their teeths to depart the towne at noone day, which was great folly, and ſo came of it. For the countrey beyond Arras is as plaine as a mans hand, and betweene Douay and Arras are about ſiue leagues. If they had taried till night (as they would if they might haue been ſuffered) they had ſure accompliſhed their enterpriſe. But when they were vpon the way, they whom the King left in the city of Arras, namely Monſeur de Lude, Iohn de Fou, and the Marſhall of Loheacs companie being aduertiſed of their comming, determined with all ſpeed to iſſue foorth and encounter them, and to put all in hazard rather then to ſuffer them to enter the towne: for they well perceiued that if they entered the towne, the city could not be defended. Their enterpriſe was verie dangerous, yet they executed it valiantly, and put to flight this band iſſued out of Douay; the which alſo they ſo ſpeedily purſued, that they were all in a maner either ſlaine or taken, and amongſt the priſoners was Monſeur de Vergy himſelfe. The next day the King arriued there in perſon, reioicing much becauſe of this diſcomfiture, and cauſed all the priſoners to be brought before him, and of the footemen commanded a great number to be ſlaine, to put thereby thoſe few men of war yet remaining in thoſe quarters, into the greater feare. Moreouer, Monſeur de Vergy he kept long in priſon, bicauſe he would by no meanes be brought to do him homage; notwithſtanding that he lay in cloſe priſon & in irons: But in the end hauing been priſoner a yeere and more, by his mothers perſwaſion he yeelded to the Kings pleaſure; wherein he did wiſely. For the King reſtored him to all his lands, and al thoſe he was in ſute for. He gaue him farther ten thouſand franks of yeerely reuenewes, and diuers other goodly offices. They which eſcaped out of this diſcomfiture, being verie fewe in number entred the towne, before the which the King brought his artillerie and laide his batterie. The artillery was goodly and great, and the batterie terrible; but the towne wall and the ditch nothing ſtrong: wherefore they within were in great feare, the rather bicauſe the town was vtterly vnfurniſhed of ſoldiers. Furher, Monſeur de Cordes had intelligence within it; & to ſay the truth, the citie being in the Kings hands the towne could not be defended: wherefore they fell to parlament and yeelded it by compoſition, which notwithſtanding was euil obſerued; wherof Monſeur de Lude was partly to blame. For diuers burgeſſes and honeſt men were ſlaine in the preſence of him and Maſter VVilliam de Ceriſay, who maruellouſly inriched themſelues there: for the ſaid de Lude told me that he got during the time of his being there twenty thouſand crownes, and two timbers of Marterns. Moreouer, they of the towne lent the King 60000. crownes, which ſumme was much too great for their abilitie; but I thinke it was repaied them, for they of Cambray lent 40000. which I am ſure were reſtored, as I thinke were theſe alſo.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This requeſt the King made as Tutor and Godfather to the yoong Ladie, in which reſpect alſo the ſaid ambaſſadors did as he required.
                  
                  
                     
2 Arras was cut in two, to wit into the towne and the citie; the towne vnder the Dukes of Burgundie was fortified and the dravve bridge was drawen into the towne: but the King beat downe the fortification of the towne, and fortified the citie, and altered alſo the drawe bridge, and drew it vp into the ccitie, whereas before it was drawen vp into the towne.
                  
                  3 If the King had demanded the towne of Arras, the ambaſſadors would neuer haue granted it, bicauſe it was the whole ſtrength of the countrey: but by obtaining the citie (at that time not greatly accompted of bicauſe it was vtterly vnfortified,) he got the ſaid de Cordes diſcharge, who ſoone after procured him both the towne of Arras, and the greateſt part of the countrey of Artois.
                  
                  4 For they vvere vvilling to yeeld it, but bicauſe they vvould depart like ſouldiers, and vvithout ſuſpicion of treaſon they deſired to haue the cannon brought before it.
                  
               
            
            
               How the citizens of Gaunt hauing vſurped authority ouer their Princeſſe after hir fathers death, came in ambaſſage to the King, as from the three eſtates of their countrey. Chap. 16.
               
                  THe ſame time the ſiege lay before Arras, the Ladie of Burgundie was at Gaunt in the hands of hir mutinous ſubiects greatly to hir loſſe; but to the Kings profit: for alwaies ones loſſe is an others gaine. Theſe citizens of Gaunt ſo ſoone as they vnderſtood of Duke Charles his death, thinking themſelues thereby cleerely deliuered out of captiuitie: apprehended their Senators being to the number of ſixe and twenty, and put them all or the greateſt part to death; pretending that they did it bicauſe the ſaid Senators the day before had commanded one to be beheaded, though not without deſert, yet without authority (as they ſaid,) their commiſſion being determined with the Dukes death, by whom they were choſen into that office. They ſlew alſo diuers honeſt men of the towne that had beene the Dukes freinds; amongſt whom were ſome, that when I ſerued him diſſwaded him in my preſence from deſtroying a great parte of the towne of Gaunt, which he was fullie reſolued to haue done. Further, they conſtrained their Princes to confirm al their ancient priuileges, both thoſe they loſt in the time of Duke Philip by the treatie of Gauures, & thoſe alſo that Duke Charles tooke from them. The ſaid priuileges ſerued them onely for firebrands of rebellion againſt their Princes, whom aboue all things they deſire to ſee weake and feeble. Moreouer during their Princes minoritie, and before they begin to gouerne, they are maruellous tender ouer them; but when they are come to the gouernment they cannot away with them, as appeereth by this Ladie whom they loued deerely and much tendered before hir comming to the ſtate. Further, you ſhall vnderſtand that if after the Dukes death theſe men of Gaunt had raiſed no troubles, but had ſought to defend the countrey: they might eaſily haue put men into Arras, and peraduenture into Peronne; but they minded onely theſe domeſticall broiles. Notwithſtanding while the King laie before the towne of Arras, certaine ambaſſadors came to him from the three eſtates of the ſaid Ladies countries. For at Gaunt were certaine deputies for the three eſtates, but they of the towne ordered all at their pleaſure, bicauſe they held their Princeſſe in their hands. The King gaue theſe ambaſſadors audience, who among other things, ſaid: that they made no ouerture of peace;

but with conſent of their Princeſſe; who was determined in all matters to follow the aduiſe and counſell of the three eſtates of hir countrie. Further, they required the King to end his war in Burgundie and Artois, and to appoint a day when they might meete to treate friendly togither of peace; and in the meane time that he would cauſe a ſurceaſe of armes. The King had now in a maner obtained all he deſired, and hoped well of the reſt. For he was certainly informed, that moſt of the men of war in the countrie were dead and ſlaine, and knew well that a great manie others had forſaken the ſaid Ladies ſeruice, eſpeciallie Monſeur de Cordes, of whom he made great reckoning, and not without cauſe; for he could not haue taken by force in long time, that which by his intelligence he obtained in few daies, as before you haue heard: wherefore he made ſmall account of theſe ambaſſadors demaunds. Further, he perceiued theſe men of Gaunt to be ſuch ſeditious perſons, and ſo inclined to trouble the ſtate of their countrie, that his enimies by meanes thereof ſhould not be able to aduiſe, nor giue order how to reſiſt him. For of thoſe that were wiſe, and had been in credit with their former Princes, none were called to the debating of any matter of ſtate, but perſecuted, and in danger of death: eſpecially the Burgundians whom they hated extremely, bicauſe of their great authoritie in times paſt. Moreouer, the King (who ſawe further into theſe affaires than any man in his realme) knew well what affection the citizens of Gaunt had euer borne to their Princes, and how much they deſired to ſee them affeebled; ſo that they in their countrie felt no ſmart thereof. Wherefore he thought it beſt to nouriſh their domeſticall contentions, and to ſet them further by the eares togither; which was ſoone done: for theſe whom he had to do with, were but beaſts; moſt part of them townes men vnacquainted with thoſe ſubtill practiſes, wherein he had been trained vp, and could vſe for his purpoſe, better than any man liuing.
               The King laide hold vpon theſe words of the ambaſſadors, that their Princeſſe would do nothing without the conſent and aduiſe of the three eſtates of their countrie, and anſwered that they were euill informed of hir pleaſure, and of certaine particular men about hir: for he knew very perfectly, that ſhe meant to gouerne all hir affaires by the aduiſe of certaine particular perſons, who deſired nothing leſſe than peace: and as touching them and their actions, he was well aſſured they ſhould be diſaduowed. Whereunto the ambaſſadors (being not a little mooued, as men vnacquainted with great affaires) made a hot anſwer, that they were well aſſured of that they ſaid, and would ſhew their inſtructions, if neede ſo required. Whereunto anſwer was made, that they ſhould ſee a letter, if it ſo pleaſed the King, written by parties woorthie of credit, wherein the King was aduertiſed, that the ſaid Lady would gouerne hir affaires by fower perſons onely. Whereunto the others replied, that they were ſure of the contrarie. Then the King commanded a letter to be brought foorth, which the Chauncellor of Burgundie, and the Lord of Himbercourt deliuered him at their laſt being with him at Peronne. The ſaid letter was written partly with the yoong Ladies owne hand; partly by the Dowager of Burgundie Duke Charles his widow, and ſiſter to King Edward of England; and partly by the Lord of Rauaſtain brother to the Duke of Cleues, and the ſaid yoong Ladies neereſt kinſman: ſo that it was written with three ſeuerall hands, but ſigned with the name of the yoong Lady alone; for the other twaine ſet to their hands onely to giue it the greater credit. The contents of the letter were, to deſire the King to giue credit to thoſe things, whereof the Chauncellor and Himbercourt ſhould aduertiſe him. And further, it was therein ſignified vnto him, that ſhe was reſolued to gouerne all hir affaires by fower perſons; namely, the Dowager hir mother in law, the Lord of Rauaſtain, & the aboue named

Chauncellor and Himbercourt, by whom onely and none others, ſhe humbly beſought him to negotiate with hir; bicauſe vpon them ſhe would repoſe the whole gouernment of hir affaires.
               When theſe citizens of Gaunt, and the other ambaſſadors had ſeene this letter, it heated them throughly; and I warrant you thoſe that negotiated with them, failed not to blowe the fire. In the end the letter was deliuered them, and no other diſpatch of importance had they, neither paſſed they greatly of any other: for they thought onely vpon their domeſticall diuiſions, and how to make a new world, neuer looking further into this buſines; notwithſtanding that the loſſe of Arras ought to haue greeued them much more than this letter: but they were townes men (as I ſaid before) vnacquainted with theſe affaires. They returned ſtraight to Gaunt where they found their Princeſſe accompanied with the Duke of Cleues, hir neereſt kinſman, and of hir blood by his mother 
                     1
                  : he was an ancient man, brought vp continually in this houſe of Burgundy, where he receiued a yeerely penſion of ſixe thouſand guildons; wherefore beſides that he was their kinſman, he reſorted thither ofttimes as a penſioner to do his dutie. The Biſhop of Liege and diuers noble men were there alſo, partly to wait vpon this yoong Lady, and partly for their owne particular affaires. For the ſaid Biſhop entertained a ſute there to diſcharge his countrey of a paiment of thirtie thouſand guildons or thereabout, which they gaue yeerly to Duke Charles by the treatie they made with him, when the wars aboue mentioned ended. All the which wars began for the ſaid Biſhops quarrell, ſo that there was no cauſe why he ſhould mooue this ſute; but rather ſeeke to keepe them ſtill in pouertie; for he receiued no benefit there more than of his ſpirituall iuriſdiction and of his demaines, (which alſo were but ſmall 
                     2
                   in reſpect of the wealth of his countrey, and the greatnes of his dioces.) The ſaid Biſhop (brother to the Dukes of Bourbon Iohn, and Peter now liuing) being a man wholie giuen to pleaſures and good cheere, and little knowing what was profitable or vnprofitable for himſelfe: receiued into his ſeruice Maſter VVilliam de la Marche 
                  
                     3
                  , a goodly valiant knight, but cruell and of naughtie conditions; who had been enimy of long time both to the ſaid Biſhop and alſo to the houſe of Burgundie for the Liegeois cauſe. To this de la Marche the Ladie of Burgundie gaue fifteene thouſand guildons, partly in fauor of the Biſhop, and partly to haue him hir friend: but he ſoone after reuolted both from hir and from the ſaid Biſhop his Maſter, and attempted by force through the Kings fauor to make his owne ſonne Biſhop. Afterward alſo he diſcomfited the ſaid Biſhop in battell, ſlewe him with his owne hands, and threw him into the riuer, where his dead corps floted vp and down three daies. But the Duke of Cleues was come thither in hope to make a mariage betweene his eldeſt ſonne and the ſaid Lady, which ſeemed to him a verie fit match for diuers reſpects; and ſure I thinke it had taken effect if his ſonnes conditions had liked the yoong Ladie and his ſeruants: for he was deſcended of this houſe of Burgundie, and held his Duchie of it, and had been brought vp in it; but peraduenture it did him harme that his behauior was ſo well knowen there.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Duke of Cleues vvas called Iohn, vvhoſe father Adolph had married Marie ſiſter to Duke Philip of Burgundie. Meyer lib. 17. pag. 257. but Annal. Burgund. ſaie that Adolph was ſonne to one of Duke Philips ſiſters, but corruptly, as the pedegree in the end of this vvorke vvill declare.
                  
                  2 The Biſhop of Liegeois reuenevves are nine thouſand pound ſtarling. Guicchiar.
                  
                     
3 This de la Marche vvas named Aremberg, hovv he died after this murther reade Berlandus, fol. 77.
               
            
            
               How they of Gaunt after their ambaſſadors returne, put to death the Chauncellor Hugonet, and the Lord of Himbercourt againſt their Princeſſes will, and how they and other Flemmings were diſcomfited before Tournay, and their generall the Duke of Gueldres ſlaine. Chap. 17.
               
                  NOw to proceede in the hiſtorie. After theſe ambaſſadors were returned to Gaunt, the councel was aſſembled, and the Princeſſe ſate in hir chaire of eſtate, accompanied with all hir noble men, to giue them audience. Then the ambaſſadors made rehearſall of the commiſſion ſhe gaue them, touching principally that point that ſerued for their purpoſe, and ſaying that when they aduertiſed the King, that ſhe was determined to followe in all points the aduiſe and counſell of the three eſtates of hir countrey: he foorthwith anſwered that he was ſure of the contrarie, and bicauſe they auowed their ſaying, offered to ſhew the ſaid Ladies letters in that behalfe. The Princeſſe being therewith mooued, ſuddenly anſwered in the preſence of them all that it was not ſo, aſſuring hirſelfe that the King had not ſhewed hir letter. Then he that ſpake being Recorder of Gaunt or Brucels, drew the letter out of his boſome before the whole aſſemblie and deliuered it hir. Wherein he ſhewed himſelfe a lewde fellow and an vnciuill in diſhonoring openly after ſuch a ſort this yoong Ladie, who ought not ſo rudely to haue been delt with: for though ſhe had committed an error; yet was it not publikely to be reformed. It is no maruell if ſhe were greatly aſhamed thereof; for ſhe had proteſted the contrarie to the whole worlde. The Dowager of Burgundie, the Lord of Rauaſtain, the Chauncellor, and the Lord of Himbercourt were all fower there preſent alſo.
               The Duke of Cleues and diuers others who had beene put in hope of this yoong Ladies marriage, ſtormed maruellouſly at this letter, & then began their factions to breake foorth. The ſaid Duke was euer perſwaded heeretofore that Hymbercourt would further his ſute for his ſonne: but now perceiuing by this letter his hope to be fruſtrate, he became his mortall foe 
                     1
                  . The Biſhop of Liege, and his minion Maſter VVilliam de la Marche who was there with him, loued him not for the things done at Liege, whereof the ſaid Hymbercourt had beene the chiefe inſtrument. The Earle of Saint Paule ſonne to the Conſtable of Fraunce, hated both him and the Chancellor; bicauſe they two deliuered his father at Peronne to the Kings ſeruants, as before you haue heard at large. They of Gaunt alſo hated them both, not for any offence made, but bicauſe of the great authoritie they had borne: whereof vndoubtedly they were as woorthie as any man that liued in their time, either heere or there; for they were euer true and faithfull ſeruants to their Maſter.
               To be ſhort, the ſame day at night that this letter was ſhewed, the aboue named Chancellor and Hymbercourt through the furtherance as I am perſwaded of their enimies aboue named, were apprehended by the citizens of Gaunt, which danger

notwithſtanding that they were forewarned of by their friends; yet had they not power to auoid, as it hath often happened to diuers others. With them was alſo apprehended M. VVilliam of Clugny then Biſhop of Therouenne, & ſince of Poictiers; and all three impriſoned in one place. They of Gaunt proceeded againſt them by colour of proceſſe (contrarie to their accuſtomed maner in their reuenge) and appointed certaine of their Senate to heare their cauſe: with whom they ioined in commiſſion one of this houſe of La Marche, deadly enimie to the ſaid Himbercourt. Firſt they demaunded of them, why they cauſed Monſeur de Cordes to deliuer the citie of Arras to the King, but thereupon they ſtood not long; notwithſtanding that they had nothing elſe iuſtly to charge them with. But this was not it that grieued them: for neither cared they to ſee their Prince affeebled by the loſſe of ſuch a towne; neither had they the wit to conſider what great damage might enſue thereof to themſelues in tract of time. Wherefore they reſted chiefly vpon two points 
                     2
                  ; the firſt, they charged them that they had receiued bribes of the towne of Gaunt, namely for a ſute in law, which of late the ſaid towne had obtained by their ſentence pronounced by the ſaid Chauncellor, againſt a particular man whom they had in ſute. But of all this matter of briberie, they acquited themſelues very honorably; and as concerning that particular point where they of Gaunt charged them, that they had ſold iuſtice, and taken monie of them to pronounce ſentence on their behalfe: they anſwered, that the towne of Gaunt obtained their ſute, bicauſe their cauſe was good; and as touching the monie they tooke, they neuer demanded it, nor cauſed it to be demanded, but receiued it being offered. The ſecond point was, that during the time they were with the late Duke Charles their Maſter, and alſo being his lieutenants in his abſence, they had done diuers things againſt the priuileges and ſtate of their towne, and that whoſoeuer doth againſt the priuileges of Gaunt, ought to die. But this point touched them no whit: for they were neither their ſubiects nor citizens, neither able to infringe their priuileges; and if the Duke or his father tooke any of their priuileges from them, they did it by the treatie made betweene them, after their long wars and diuiſions: but the others that were left them (being more than was requiſite for their profit) were neuer broken, but kept and obſerued. Well, notwithſtanding the anſwers theſe two notable men made to theſe two points (for of the principall matter firſt obiected againſt them, no word was ſpoken) yet the Senate of the towne condemned them to die as they ſtood at the barre, bicauſe (as they ſaid) they had broken their priuileges, and receiued bribes after iudgement giuen vpon the matter in law aboue mentioned. Theſe two woorthie perſonages hearing this cruell ſentence, were not a little aſtoniſhed, and no maruell: for they ſaw no way how to eſcape, being in their enimies hands: notwithſtanding they appealed to the King and his court of Parlament, truſting by this meanes to delay their death, to the end their friends in the meane time might deuiſe ſome way to ſaue them. Before their arrainment, they racked them extremely againſt all order of law. Their proceſſe endured but ſixe daies, and (notwithſtanding their appeale) after ſentence pronounced, they gaue them but three howers reſpite to confeſſe them, and bethinke them of their ſoules health. Which time expired, they led them into their market place, and ſet them vpon a ſcaffold. The Ladie of Burgundie (afterward Ducheſſe of Auſtrich) being aduertiſed of their condemnation, went to the townehouſe to make requeſt and ſupplication for their liues: but perceiuing that ſhe could do no good there, ſhe went to the market place, where all the people were aſſembled togither in armes, and there ſaw the two noble men aboue named, ſtanding vpon the ſcaffold. The ſaid Lady was in hir mourning apparell, hauing nothing on hir head but a

kerchiefe, which was an humble and ſimple attire) and ought of right to haue mooued them to pitie. There ſhe deſired the people with weeping eies, and hir haire looſe about hir ſhoulders, to haue pitie vpon theſe hir two ſeruants, and to reſtore them vnto hir. A great part of the people were willing that hir pleaſure ſhould be done, and that they ſhould not die; but others would in no wiſe giue eare vnto hir: whereupon they bent their pikes the one againſt the other. But thoſe that deſired their death were the ſtronger, and cried to them that ſtood vpon the ſcaffold to diſpatch them; immediately whereupon both their heads were ſtriken off: and in this eſtate returned this poore Lady to hir court ſorrowfull and comfortleſſe; for theſe two were the principall perſons, in whom ſhe had repoſed hir whole confidence. After they of Gaunt had done this exploit, they remooued from about the ſaid Lady, the Lord of Rauaſtain, and the Dowager Duke Charles widow hir mother in law, bicauſe they had alſo written part of the letter aboue mentioned, which Himbercourt and the Chauncellor deliuered to the King, and they of Gaunt redeliuered to their Princeſſe after their returne, as before you haue heard. Further, they vſurped all power and authoritie ouer this poore yoong Lady: for ſo might ſhe now well be called, both bicauſe of the great dammage ſhe had already receiued by the loſſe of ſo many notable townes, irrecouerable by force, conſidering his power in whoſe hands they were, although by fauor, friendſhip, or compoſition ſome hope yet remained; and alſo bicauſe ſhe was in the hands of the ancient enimies and perſecutors of hir houſe, which was a great misfortune to hir. Notwithſtanding theſe citizens of Gaunt in all their publike actions haue euer ſhewed more groſſe folly than cunning, and no maruell: for they that carrie credit and authoritie among them, are for the moſt part, wealthie men of occupation, vnacquainted with waightie affaires, and little vnderſtanding what belongeth to the gouernment of a ſtate. Their cunning conſiſteth but in two points; the one, that they ſtudie by all meanes poſſible how to weaken and impoueriſh their Prince: the other, that when they haue made a fault, and finde the partie offended too ſtrong for them, they craue pardon with greater humilitie, and buie peace with larger gifts than any people in the world; yea and know what inſtruments to worke by, and what perſons to labour for obtaining of peace, better than any towne that euer I knew.
               After they of Gaunt had taken by force the gouernment of their Princeſſe, put the two aboue mentioned to death, and remooued from about hir thoſe that miſliked them; they began euery where to place and diſplace officers at their pleaſure, and to baniſh and ſpoile all thoſe that had beſt ſerued this houſe of Burgundy, not regarding their good or euill deſert: but aboue all other men they hated the Burgundians, eſpecially ſo far foorth that they baniſhed them all, and trauelled to make them the Kings ſeruants and ſubiects as much as the King himſelfe did, who ſollicited them thereunto by faire words, wiſe perſwaſions, large gifts and promiſes, and ſought alſo to conſtraine them by great force which he had in their countrey. Moreouer theſe men of Gaunt meaning to begin their gouernment with ſome caſe of noueltie, tooke out of priſon (as alreadie is mentioned) the Duke of Gueldres, who of long time by Duke Charles his commandement had been held priſoner for the cauſes aboue rehearſed, and him they made generall of an army which they among themſelues, namely the townes of Bruges, Gaunt, and Ypre, leuied and ſent to Tournay to ſet fire on the ſubburbes thereof, which was little for their Princeſſe profit. For 200. ſoldiers ſent in time to Arras or ten thouſand franks to haue entertained men to put into it, when the ſiege came before it; would haue done both hir and them much more ſeruice than ten ſuch armies as this. For this army could do no

good but fire a fewe houſes in a place, whereof the King made ſmall account: for he leuied neither taskes nor ſubſidies there, but their wit was not able to reach thus far. After the Duke of Gueldres was come before Tournay with this armie being to the number of twelue or fifteene thouſand men, verie well paid by the townes abouementioned, he ſet fire on the ſuburbs. But within the towne were three or fower hundred men of armes which ſallied out and charged his men on the backe as they retired, & incontinent put them to flight. But the D. himſelfe being a valiant Prince, turned againſt his enimies meaning to maintaine the skirmiſh, to the end his men might haue leaſure to retire: but being euil followed he was ouerthrowne and ſlaine, and a good number alſo of this people; yet was the Kings force that did this exploit verie ſmall. The Flemmings armie retired with this loſſe, for there was but one band of them defeated. The Ladie of Burgundy (as I haue heard) and hir friends reioiſed much at this newes; for the brute ran for a certaintie that they of Gaunt were determined to compell hir by force to marrie this Duke of Gueldres, which willingly ſhe would neuer haue done for diuers reaſons aboue rehearſed.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 VVith the letter the King had alſo vttered the meſſage, that the Chauncellor and Him
                           ••
                        rcourt brought, vvhich vvas to treat of a mariage betweene the Daulphin and this Lady, which alſo they offered the King to further; and this vvas the cauſe vvhy the Duke of Cleues became Himbercourts enimie.
                  
                  2 The cauſes of the Chauncellors and Himbercourts death, read in Berlandus fol. 69.
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe vpon this point that wars and diuiſions are permitted of God for the chaſtiſment of Princes and euill people, with diuers good reaſons and examples for the inſtruction of Princes, which happened in the authors time. Chap. 18.
               
                  I Cannot imagine for what cauſe God hath ſo long preſerued this towne of Gaunt, the fountaine of ſo many miſchiefes, and of ſo ſmall importance for the benefit of the countrey where it is ſituate. For it yeeldeth no commoditie to the common wealth, much leſſe to the Prince: neither is it comparable to Bruges, which is a place where there is greater trafficke of merchandiſe and reſort of ſtrangers in my opinion, than in any towne in Europe; ſo that the deſtruction thereof ſhould be an irrecouerable loſſe. But it ſeemeth that God hath created nothing in this world neither man nor beaſt, without an enimie to hold it in feare and humilitie; and for that purpoſe ſerueth this towne of Gaunt very well 
                     1
                  . For there is no countrie in Chriſtendome more inclined to all wanton pleaſures, pomps and delicacies than this countrie of Flaunders, notwithſtanding they are good Chriſtians there, and ſerue and honor God well. But it is not this nation onely, to whom God hath giuen as it were a continuall pricke, to put them in minde of their dutie: For to Fraunce he hath giuen the Engliſh men for enimies; to the Engliſh men the Scots; to the realme of Spaine Portugale, I will not ſay Granado: for they are enimies of the faith; notwithſtanding hitherto the ſaid countrie of Granado hath much troubled and endammaged the realme of Caſtile. Againſt the Princes of Italie, the greateſt part of the which hold their lands by no

title, vnles it be giuen them in heauen (whereof we can but diuine) and who rule cruelly and violently ouer their ſubiects by extreme exactions and leuies of monie: God hath raiſed vp the free ſtates of the ſaid countrie, namely Venice, Florence, Genua, and ſomtime Bononia, Senes, Piſa, Luques, and others, which in diuers points are contrarie to the Princes, and the Princes to them, each of them hauing an eie vpon other, that none grow too great. But to ſpeake more particularly of the ſtate of Italie; againſt the houſe of Arragon God hath raiſed the houſe of Aniou; againſt the Sforces (which vſurpe the place of the Vicounts in the Duchie of Milan) the houſe of Orleans; againſt the Venetians, the Princes of Italie, as before I haue ſaid, and beſides them the Florentines; againſt the Florentines their neighbors of Senes, Piſa, and the Genuois; and againſt the ſaid Genuois their owne euill gouernment, and want of faith each to other, which is ſo vniuerſally knowen, that euery man can tell thereof: for their factions are in league the one againſt the other, as appeereth by the Fourgouze 
                     2
                  , Adorni, d'Orie, and others. Now to ſpeake of Almaine; you haue alwaies the houſe of Auſtriche and Bauiere at variance, and particularly them of Bauiere diuided among themſelues. In like maner the houſe of Auſtriche hath particularly oppoſite to it the Swiſſers; the beginning of which their variance aroſe but about a little village called Swiſſe 
                     3
                  , vnable to arme ſixe hundred men, whereof the other Swiſſers beare their name; who are now ſo increaſed, that two of the Duke of Auſtriches beſt towns, namely Zurich and Fribourg be of their cantons. Moreouer, they haue obtained great victories, and ſlaine of the Dukes of Auſtrich in the field 
                     4
                  . Diuers other quarrels alſo there are in Almaine, as the Duke of Cleues againſt the Duke of Gueldres; the Dukes of Gueldres againſt the Dukes of Iulliers: the Eaſterlings who inhabite ſo far northward, againſt the Kings of Denmarke. And to ſpeake generally of Almaine, there are ſo many ſtrong places there, ſo many men inclined to miſchiefe, to ſpoile, to rob, and that vſe force & violence one againſt another vpon ſmall occaſions, that it is woonder to ſee: for a man that is able to maintaine but himſelfe and his ſeruant, will proclaime war againſt a great citie or a Duke, that vnder colour thereof he may the better rob and ſpoile: for he will haue ſome ſmall caſtell ſituate vpon a rocke to retire into, where he entertaineth twentie or thirtie horſemen, which run downe to rob and ſpoile the countrie at his commandement. Theſe men are very ſeldome puniſhed by the Princes of Almaine, bicauſe they vſe their helpe when they neede their ſeruice: but the townes, if they take any of them, puniſh them cruelly, and often beſiege and deſtroy their caſtels. Further, the ſaid townes haue ſoldiers alwaies in pay for their defence. Wherefore it ſeemeth that theſe Princes and townes of Almaine are preſerued, the one to force the other to that is right and good. And it is neceſſarie that ſuch diuiſions ſhould be not onely there, but through the whole world. I haue hitherto ſpoken but of Europe; for I am not well informed of Aſia and Affrike: yet we heare that they are diuided and make war one vpon another as we do, yea after a much beaſtlier ſort. For I know in this part of Afrike bordering vpon vs, diuers places where they ſell one another to the Chriſtians, as alſo well appeereth by the Portugales, who haue bought and daily do buie of them manie ſlaues. But I doubt how well we may vpbraid this to the Sarracens, ſith in ſome part of Chriſtendome they do the like: notwithſtanding thoſe countries are either vnder the Turks dominion, or next neighbors to him; as for example ſome part of Greece.
               It ſeemeth then that ſuch diuiſions are requiſite through the whole world, and that theſe pricks and ſtings before ſpoken of which God hath giuen euery eſtate, and in a maner euery particular perſon, are neceſſarie. And ſurely for mine owne opinion

(ſpeaking as a man vnlearned, and one that will maintaine no opinion not to be maintained) I thinke they are neceſſarie indeed, eſpecially bicauſe of the beaſtlines of ſome Princes, and the wickednes of otherſome, who hauing wit and experience ſufficient, do notwithſtanding abuſe it. For a Prince or any other man of what eſtate or condition ſoeuer he be, hauing power and authoritie where he dwelleth ouer the reſt, if he be learned & haue ſeen and read much, is thereby either much amended or empaired, for much learning maketh the euill woorſe, and bettereth the good 
                     5
                  : Notwithſtanding, it is to be preſumed that learning rather amendeth a man than empaireth him: for if men be but aſhamed of themſelues when they know they do euill, it ſufficeth either to keepe them altogither from doing euill 
                     6
                  , or at the leaſt from doing ſo much euill as otherwiſe they would. For although they be not good indeed, yet ſhame wil cauſe thē to make a ſhew of goodnes: wherof I haue ſeen diuers examples of great perſonages, whom learning oftentimes hath withdrawen from doing euil, ioined with the fear of Gods puniſhments, wherof they haue more vnderſtanding than ignorant men which neuer ſawe nor read any thing. Wherfore thoſe Princes that know not themſelues, but lacke wit, either bicauſe they haue been euill brought vp, or bicauſe nature hath graffed follie in them, can neuer vnderſtand how far the power and authoritie extendeth that God hath giuen them ouer their ſubiects. For they neuer read it themſelues, neither are informed by them that know it; nay few that vnderſtand it are admitted to their preſence; and if ſome one be, yet dare he not inſtruct them in it for feare of diſpleaſure; or if happily at any time he put them in minde thereof no man will abide him, at the leaſt he ſhall be accounted but a foole, paraduenture alſo it may be taken in euill part, and ſo turne him to diſpleaſure. But to proceede, it is manifeſt that neither naturall reaſon, neither knowledge, neither feare of God, neither loue towards our neighbor, is ſufficient to keepe vs from vſing violence againſt others, from withholding other mens goods, nor from rauiſhing by all meanes poſſible that which appartaineth to others. For if great Princes withhold townes and caſtels from their kinsfolkes or neighbors, none of theſe reaſons can mooue them to reſtore them: and after they haue giuen foorth ſome colour or forged ſome pretence to withhold them, all their ſubiects commend their proceedings, at the leaſt ſuch as are neere about them, and hunt after their fauor. Of meane perſons that be at variance I ſpeake not, for they haue a ſuperior who ſomtimes doth iuſtice to the parties, at the leaſt he that hath a good cauſe, and followeth it earneſtly, and defendeth it ſtoutly, and ſpendeth frankly, ſhall in proceſſe of time haue right, vnleſſe the Court, that is to ſay, the Princes authoritie vnder whom he liueth, be againſt him. Wherefore it appeereth moſt manifeſtly, that God is conſtrained and forced as it were of neceſſitie to ſhew many examples among vs, and to beate vs with many rods, bicauſe of our negligence, or rather wickednes: but in Princes eſpecially negligence and ignorance is very dangerous, and much to be lamented, bicauſe the good or euill gouernment of their Seniories dependeth wholy vpon them. For if a Prince being mighty and hauing a number of ſoldiers in ordinarie, by whoſe meanes he leuieth great ſums of money at his pleaſure, as well to pay them, as to ſpend in all kinde of wantonnes not neceſſary, will diminiſh none of this fooliſh and exceſſiue expences; further if all men ſeeke to flatter him, and no man dare ſhewe him what is good, either for feare of diſpleaſure, or bicauſe he knoweth it will not preuaile: who can redreſſe this inconuenience but God alone? True it is, that God talketh not to men now as in times paſt, neither are there Prophets now a daies by whoſe mouth he ſpeaketh: but his word is diſperſed through the whole world, and well inough knowne to all thoſe that will vnderſtand and know it; ſo that

no man can excuſe himſelfe by ignorance, at the leaſt none that haue had ſpace and time to liue & are indued with natural wit. How ſhall thoſe Princes then eſcape that gouerne their Seniories after ſuch ſort, that by force they leuy what they liſt, and by tyrannie maintaine their authoritie, and hold their ſubiects in ſo great thraldome, that the leaſt commandement they giue toucheth life? Some puniſh vnder colour of iuſtice, and haue lawyers euer at hand ready in all points to execute their commandements, and to make a deadly ſinne of a veniall. If they haue not matter inough againſt a man, they finde meanes to delay the hearing of the cauſe, or the taking of the depoſitions to hold the partie ſtill in priſon, or to vndoo him by charges, waiting continually if any man will come to accuſe him that is thus held in priſon, and to whom they wiſh euill. If this way be not colourable inough, nor ſpeedy inough for their purpoſe, they deuiſe other readier waies alleaging that it was neceſſarie to do thus and thus for examples ſake, and make the caſe as hainous as pleaſeth them: with others that hold of them and be of ſome power, they go more plainly to worke, ſaying, thou doſt againſt thine allegeance thou oweſt me, thou diſobeieſt me, and ſo proceede by force to take from him that is his if they can, (if they do not, it is no thanke to them) cauſing him to liue in great trouble and vnquietnes. Their neighbors that be ſtrong and mighty they meddle not with; but if any be weake, he can reſt no where for them: for either they ſay that he hath aided their enimies, or they make their men of armes to liue in his countries, or buie quarrels to haue colour to aſſault him, or finde ſome occaſion to deſtroy him by aiding his neighbor againſt him, and lending him forces to inuade him. Such of their ſubiects as haue beene in authoritie, and ſerued well their predeceſſors, they put out of office bicauſe they liue too long, and place newe men in their roomes. The Church men they encomber and trouble about their benefices, to the ende they may thereby wring ſome thing from them to enrich ſome one of their darlings, at the ſute eftſoones of thoſe that haue not deſerued it, and at the requeſt of ſuch men and women as at times can preuaile much with them. The nobilitie they hold in continuall trauell and charge vnder colour of their wilfull wars, which they take in hand without the counſell or aduiſe of their eſtates, and of ſuch as they ought to make priuie thereunto before they attempt them: for theſe they be that ſpend both goods and liues in the wars: wherefore it is reaſon they ſhould vnderſtand the cauſe of them before they begun. Their ſubiects they poule in ſuch ſort that they leaue them nothing; for notwithſtanding that they pay them taskes and ſubſidies aboue their abilitie: yet ſeeke they not to redreſſe the diſorder of their men of armes, which liue continually vpon their people without paiement, dooing beſides infinite miſchiefes and iniuries as all the world knoweth. For they are not contented with ſuch cheere as they finde in the husband mans houſe and is ſet before them; but beat alſo the poore men, and conſtraine them to go foorth to buie them wine, bread, and victuals: and if the good man haue a faire wife or a daughter, he ſhall do wiſely to keepe hir out of their ſight. Notwithſtanding, ſeeing theſe men of armes are duly paied, this inconuenience might eaſily be redreſſed, and order giuen that their paie ſhould be made at euery two moneths ende at the furtheſt; ſo ſhould they not be able to alleage any pretence of their miſchieuous dooings vnder colour that they want paie: for the money is leuied, and at the yeeres ende there is not one penie owing them. I ſpeake this for our realme which is more afflicted and plagued with theſe men of armes than any other countrey that I knowe. But none can redreſſe this matter but a wiſe Prince: other realmes bordering vpon vs haue other ſcourges. Wherefore to continue this diſcourſe, is there any King or Prince that hath

power to leuy one penie vpon his ſubiects beſides his demaines, without leaue and conſent of thoſe that muſt paie it, vnleſſe it be by tyrannie and violence? A man will ſay that ſomtime the Prince can not tarie to aſſemble his eſtates, bicauſe it would require too long time. Whereunto I anſwer, that if he mooue a war offenſiue, there needeth no ſuch haſte: for he may haue leaſure inough at his owne pleaſure to make preparation. And further, he ſhall be much ſtronger and much more feared of his enimies, when he mooueth war with the conſent of his ſubiects than otherwiſe. Now as touching a war defenſiue, that cloud is ſeene long before the tempeſt fall, eſpecially when it is forraine war; and in this caſe good ſubiects ought not to complaine, nor refuſe any thing that is laid vpon them. Notwithſtanding ſuch inuaſion cannot happen ſo ſuddenly, but that the Prince may haue leaſure at the leaſt to call togither certaine wiſe perſonages, to whom he may open the cauſes of the war, vſing no colluſion therein, neither ſeeking to maintaine a trifling war vpon no neceſſitie, thereby to haue ſome colour to leuy money. Money is alſo neceſſarie in time of peace to fortifie the frontiers for defence of thoſe that dwell vpon them, leaſt they be taken vnprouided; but this muſt be done meaſurably. In all theſe matters the wiſedome of a ſage King ſufficeth; for if he be a iuſt Prince, he knoweth what he may do, and not do, both by Gods law and mans. To be ſhort, in mine opinion of all Seniories in the world that I know; the realme of England is the countrey where the common wealth is beſt gouerned, the people leaſt oppreſſed, and the feweſt buildings and houſes deſtroied in ciuill wars, and alwaies the lot of misfortune falleth vpon them that be authors of the war.
               Our King is the Prince in the whole world that hath leaſt cauſe to alleage that he hath priuileges to leuy what him liſteth vpon his ſubiects, conſidering that neither he nor any other Prince hath power ſo to do. And thoſe that ſay he hath, do him no honor, neither make him to be eſteemed any whit the mightier Prince thereby; but cauſe him to be hated and feared of his neighbors, who for nothing woulde liue vnder ſuch a gouernment. But if our King or thoſe that ſeeke to magnifie and extol him ſhould ſay, I haue ſo faithfull and obedient ſubiects that they deny me nothing I demand, and I am more feared, better obeied, and better ſerued of my ſubiects than any other Prince liuing, they endure patiently whatſoeuer I lay vpō them, and ſooneſt forget all charges paſt: This me thinke (yea I am ſure) were greater honor to the King than to ſay; I leuy what me liſteth, and haue priuileges ſo to do, which I will ſtoutly maintaine. King Charles the fift vſed no ſuch termes, neither did I euer heare ſuch language proceede from any King, but from diuers of their ſeruants, who thought they did their Maſters great ſeruice in vttring ſuch ſpeeches: but in mine opinion they misbehaued themſelues towards their Prince, and vſed ſuch language partly bicauſe they would ſeeme to be good ſeruants, and partly bicauſe they knew not what they ſaid. But for a manifeſt proofe of the French mens loialty and obedience to their Prince, we neede alleage none other example than that we our ſelues haue ſeene of late by experience; when the three eſtates were aſſembled at Tours, after the death of our Maſter King Lewis the eleuenth, which was in the yeere of our Lord 1483. A man might then haue thought that this good aſſembly was dangerous for the Kings eſtate; yea, and diuers there were of meane calling, and leſſe honeſty, that ſaid then and haue often ſaid ſince, that it is treaſon to make mention of aſſembling the eſtates, and a thing tending to the diminiſhing of the Kings authority: but they themſelues are thoſe that worke treaſon againſt God, the King, and the common wealth; neither do any vſe theſe ſpeeches but either ſuch as are in authority without deſert and vnwoorthy thereof; or ſuch

as are common tale-carriers, and accuſtomed to talke of trifling matters; or ſuch as feare great aſſemblies, leaſt their doings ſhould there be ripped vp and reprehended. At this aſſembly I now ſpeake of, all men of what eſtate ſoeuer they were, thought the realme much weakned and impoueriſhed, bicauſe it had paied by the ſpace of 20. yeeres or more great and exceſſiue ſubſidies; yea ſo great, that they ſurmounted yeerely by the ſumme almoſt of three millions of francks all ſubſidies that euer were leuied in Fraunce. For King Charles the ſeuenth leuied yeerely but eighteene hundred thouſand franks 
                     7
                  : but King Levvis his ſonne leuied at his death ſeauen and fortie hundred thouſand 
                     8
                  , beſides the charges of the artillerie and ſuch like expences. And ſure it was a pitifull thing to behold the miſerable eſtate of the poore people. But one good propertie had the King our Maſter, that he hoorded vp no treaſure, he tooke all and ſpent all, and beſtowed more vpon fortification of towns and places for the defence of his realme, than all his predeceſſors ioined togither. He gaue alſo much to churches, but in ſome reſpects he had done better to haue giuen leſſe: for he tooke from the poore to giue to them that had no need. But there is no man perfect in the whole world.
               Well to proceed. Notwithſtanding that this realme were ſo impoueriſhed and oppreſſed diuers waies: did the people yet after the King our Maſters death raiſe any ſedition againſt the K. that now is? the nobilitie and commons tooke they armes againſt their yoong King? went they about to chuſe an other? ſought they to diminiſhe his authoritie, or to bridle him that he ſhould not vſe the authoritie of a King? I thinke no, and to ſay the truth how could they? though diuers glorious fooles ſaid they might. But his ſubiects did cleane contrarie; for they all repaired to him, as well the Princes, as the gentlemen and Burgeſſes of good townes: they all acknowledged him for their King, and did him homage and fealtie, and the Princes and nobilitie preſented their requeſts in writing, humbly kneeling vpon their keenes. Further, they choſe among themſelues a counſell of twelue men, and the King being but thirteen yeeres of age commanded vpon report of the ſaid counſell. Moreouer at this aſſemblie certaine ſupplications were made, and bils exhibited in the preſence of the King and his Counſell in great humilitie for the common wealth of the realme, referring all to the King and his Counſels pleaſure. They granted the King without any deniall all that was demanded, and all that was ſhewed in writing to be neceſſarie for the maintenance of his eſtate. The ſumme the King demanded was two millions and a halfe of franks, 
                     9
                   which was ynough and ynough againe, yea rather too much than too little without ſome extraordinarie accident. Further, the ſaid eſtates humbly required, that at two yeeres end they might aſſemble againe: ſaying, that if the King had not money ynough, they would giue him more at his pleaſure. They promiſed moreouer if he had wars, or that any enimie ſhould inuade him, to aduenture their bodies, to ſpend their goods, & not to refuſe any thing for his ſeruice. Are ſubiects that giue thus liberally to be choked with priuileges whereby the Prince may take what him liſteth? ſhall not the King do iuſtlier both before God and the world to leuie after this ſort, rather than by extraordinarie will? ſeeing no Prince, as I haue ſaid before, hath authoritie to command money but by grant; vnleſſe he will vſe tyrannie and incurre the danger of excommunication. But a number of Princes are verie beaſts, not knowing what is lawfull or vnlawfull for them to do in this behalfe. Subiects there are alſo that offend their Prince and refuſe to obeie him, and ſuccour him in time of neede: yea in ſtead of aiding him when he hath great affaires in hand contemne him and ſtir vp rebellion and ſedition againſt him, contrarie to the allegeance that they owe him. When I ſay Kings or Princes, I meane

either themſelues or ſuch as gouerne vnder them: & when I ſay ſubiects, I mean ſuch ſubiects as haue preheminence & beare ſwaie in the common wealth. The greateſt miſchiefes are wrought commonly by thoſe that are mightie, for the weake deſire peace & quietnes. When I ſay mighty, I meane aſwell women as men, ſomtime & in ſome places where they haue rule and authoritie, either bicauſe of their husbands affection towards them, or bicauſe they gouerne their affaires, or for that their Seniories are their wiues inheritance.
               If I ſhould write of men of meane calling in this world, my diſcourſe would be too tedious. Wherefore it ſhall ſuffice to ſpeake of great eſtates, bicauſe in them the power and iuſtice of God is moſt apparant. For although two hundred thouſand miſhaps chaunce to a poore man, no man regardeth them: but attributeth them either to pouertie or euill looking to; as for example, if he be drowned or breake his necke, they ſay this chaunced bicauſe he was alone, ſo that hardly men will giue eare to it. But if ſome misfortune fall vpon a great citie it is otherwiſe talked of, yet not ſo much as when it chanceth to a Prince. What is the reaſon then that God ſheweth his iuſtice rather vpon Princes and great men, than vpon men of low degree? bicauſe meane and poore men finde ynowe in this world to puniſh them when they offend; yea oftentimes they are puniſhed without deſert, either for examples ſake, or for their goods, or peraduenture through the iudges fault: ſometime alſo they deſerue puniſhment, and then it is reaſon that iuſtice be done. But as touching great Princes or Princeſſes and their gouernors and counſellors: againe, as touching prouinces and townes, rebellious and diſobedient to their Princes and gouernors, who wil ſearch out their liues? Who wil informe the Iuſtice of their actions? What Iuſtice will take notice thereof? or who will puniſh their faults? I ſpeake of the euill not of the good, but few there are of thoſe. What is the cauſe then that mooueth both them and all others to commit theſe faults aboue rehearſed, and many mo (which for breuitie I ouerpaſſe) not regarding the power and iuſtice of God? I anſwer, that it is lacke of faith, and in thoſe that are ignorant lacke of wit and faith togither, but eſpecially of faith, which in mine opinion is the onely fountaine of all miſchiefes. I meane ſuch miſchiefes as fall vpon thoſe that complaine, that they are troden vnder foote, & oppreſſed by thoſe that are mightier than they. For if men were fully perſwaded the paines of hell to be ſuch as indeede they are, and beleeued firmely (as we ought all to beleeue) that who ſo hath taken ought by violence, or poſſeſſeth ought that his father or grandfather tooke wrongfully: ſhall neuer enter into the ioies of paradiſe, vnles he make full ſatisfaction and reſtitution of all that he withholdeth from his neighbor; (whether it be Duchies, Earldoms, townes, caſtels, mooueables, medowes, ponds, or mils, euery man according to his eſtate) there is no man liuing, be he poore or rich, or of what eſtate and condition ſoeuer he be, that would withhold ought that is not his owne. No, if all men beleeued this firmely, it is not to be thought, that there is either Prince, Princeſſe, or any other man through the whole world, what eſtate or condition ſoeuer he be of, be he high or low, ſpirituall or temporall, man or woman, that would wittingly withhold any thing from his ſubiect or neighbor, wrongfully put any man to death, hold him in priſon, take from one to giue to enrich another, or ſeeke to procure diſhoneſty to his kinsfolks and ſeruants for his wanton pleaſures, as for women, and ſuch like, which is the filthieſt attempt that may be made. No vndoubtedly we would neuer do as we do, if we had a ſtedfaſt faith, and beleeued that which God and his Church commandeth vs to beleeue, vnder paine of damnation: knowing our daies to be ſhort, and the paines of hell horrible and endleſſe. Wherefore we

may conclude, that all miſchiefes proceede of want of faith. For example whereof, when a King or Prince is taken priſoner, and feareth to die in priſon, is there any thing in the world, be it neuer ſo deere vnto him, that he will refuſe to giue for his deliuerance? as appeereth by King Iohn, who being taken priſoner by the Prince of Wales at the battell of Poictiers, paied for his raunſome three millions of franks, and yeelded to the Engliſh men all Aquitaine (at the leaſt all that he held in his hands) with a number of other cities, townes and places; yea in a maner the thirde foote of his realme: whereby he brought his realme into ſuch pouertie, that manie yeeres after they vſed leather monie, with a little ſtud or naile of ſiluer in the middeſt thereof. And all this gaue he and his ſonne King Charles ſurnamed the VViſe, for his raunſome. And if they would haue giuen nothing, yet would not the Engliſh men haue put him to death, but his greateſt paine had beene impriſonment. But admit they had put him to death, yet had not that pain been ſo great by the hundred thouſandth part, as the leaſt paine in hell. Why gaue he then all this great raunſome aboue rehearſed, deſtroying his children and ſubiects? but onely bicauſe he beleeued that which he ſaw and perceiued well, that he could not otherwiſe be deliuered. But peraduenture when he committed the fault, for the which this puniſhment fell vpon him, his children, and ſubiects: he beleeued not firmely, that the offence he made againſt God and his commandements, ſhould be puniſhed. Now to conclude, there is no Prince, or very few, that will reſtore one towne they withhold from their neighbor, for the loue of God, or to eſchew the paines of hell; and yet King Iohn gaue all this to deliuer his bodie out of priſon.
               I asked a queſtion before, who will ſearch out great mens faults, who will informe the Iuſtice of them, and who will be the Iuſtice to puniſh them? Whereunto I now anſwer, that the information ſhall be the lamentable crie and plaint of their ſubiects, whom they tyrannize and oppreſſe ſo many waies without any compaſſion, the ſorrowfull lamentation of widowes and orphans, whoſe husbands and fathers they haue wrongfully put to death; by meanes whereof their wiues and children haue euer after liued in affliction and miſerie; and generally the complaints of all thoſe whom they haue perſecuted either in their perſons or goods. Theſe, I ſay, ſhall giue information againſt them by their great mourning, wailing, and pitious teares, and ſhall accuſe them before the Lord God, who will be the iuſt iudge thereof, and peraduenture will not delay the puniſhment till the world to come; but will alſo puniſh them in this world: which puniſhment proceedeth of lacke of faith, bicauſe they had not a firme and ſtedfaſt beleefe in Gods commandements.
               We muſt therefore of neceſſitie confeſſe, that God is forced to ſhew ſuch tokens and examples, to the end both Princes themſelues and all the world may beleeue, that theſe puniſhments fall vpon them for their misbeleefe and ſinnes, and that God ſheweth his mightie power and iuſtice vpon them, bicauſe none other in this world but he, hath power ouer them. At the firſt happily they amend not their liues for Gods ſcourges, be they neuer ſo great and long. But no misfortune falleth vpon a Prince, vpon thoſe that gouerne his affaires, or vpon thoſe that rule great commonalties, but the iſſue is hurtfull and dangerous to the ſubiects. When I ſay misfortunes, I meane none but ſuch as cauſe the ſubiects to ſmart; for to fall from a horſe, to breake a leg, to be puniſhed with a ſharpe ague, are no misfortunes to a Prince, bicauſe he may be cured of them, and peraduenture they may do him good, and teach him wit: but I call theſe misfortunes, when God is ſo diſpleaſed with a Prince, that he will no longer ſuffer him to raigne, but ſhew his power and iuſtice vpon him. For then firſt he weakeneth his wits, which is a ſhrewd blowe for all thoſe that haue

to do with him, he troubleth his houſe, and ſuffereth it to fall into diuiſion and diſquietnes: and the Prince himſelfe is ſo far in Gods diſgrace, that he flieth the counſell and companie of the wiſe, and aduaunceth none but yoong fooles, voide of wit, oppreſſors, flatterers, and ſuch as ſoothe him in all his ſayings. If he take one penie, they bid him take two; if he threaten a man, they bid hang him, and after that ſort in all other actions. Further, they giue him counſell in any wiſe to cauſe himſelfe to be feared, and they alſo behaue themſelues cruelly and proudly, truſting by this meanes to hold men in awe of them, as though authoritie were their inheritance. Thoſe whom ſuch Princes, by the aduiſe of theſe new Counſellors haue baniſhed and diſplaced, hauing ſerued many yeeres, and being well acquainted and friended in their countrie, will ſtorme at this vſage, and for their ſakes their friends and well willers alſo; and peraduenture ſuch iniurie ſhall be offered them, that they ſhall be forced either to defend themſelues, or to flie to ſome Prince their neighbor, who perchance is enimy to him that baniſheth and chaſeth them, and ſo by inward diuiſion ſtangers ſhall enter into the land. Is any plague or miſerie ſo great, as wars betwixt friends and acquaintance? Is any malice ſo ranke and deadly? As touching forren enimies, when the ſubiects are linked togither they may eaſily make reſiſtance, bicauſe their enimies haue no intelligence nor acquaintance in the realme. Thinke you that an vnwiſe Prince being accompanied with fooles, can ſmell a far off how great a miſchiefe diuiſion among his ſubiects is? or beleeue that it can hurt him? or proceedeth of God? he eateth and ſleepeth no whit the woorſe for it; he hath neither fewer horſes in his ſtable, nor fewerrobes in his wardrobe, but many mo companions. For he allureth men vnto him by promiſes, and by parting among them the ſpoiles and offices of thoſe whom he hath baniſhed; he giueth alſo of his owne to win thereby fame and renowme: but when he ſhall leaſt thinke of it, God will raiſe vp an enimie againſt him whom peraduenture he neuer miſtruſted. Then will he waxe penſiue, and ſuſpect thoſe whom he hath iniuried, yea he will feare ſuch as indeede owe him no euill will: yet notwithſtanding he will not haue his refuge to God in this extremitie, but ſeeke to redreſſe this inconuenience by force. Haue we not ſeene in our daies examples heerof euen among our next neighbors? Haue we not ſeene the late King of England Edward the fourth of that name, heire of the houſe of Yorke, vtterly deſtroy the houſe of Lancaſter, vnder the which both his father and he had liued many yeeres? Further, the ſaid King Edward hauing done homage to King Henry the 6. being of the houſe of Lancaſter, did he not afterward hold him priſoner many yeeres in the tower of London, the chiefe citie of the realme, where in the end he was put to death?
               Haue we not alſo ſeene the Earle of Warwicke principall gouernor of all the ſaid King Edwards affaires, (after he had put to death all his enimies, eſpecially the Duke of Sommerſet) in the end become deadly enimy to his Maſter, giue his daughter in mariage to the Prince of Wales ſonne to King Henry, attempt to ſet vp againe the houſe of Lancaſter, paſſe with the ſaid Prince into England, diſcomfited in the field, and ſlaine both he, his brethren and kinsfolks, and diuers other noble men of England, who in times paſt had done the like to their enimies? After all this, the children of theſe when the world turned, reuenged themſelues; and cauſed in like maner the others to die, which plagues we may be aſſured hapned not but by the wrath of God. But (as before I ſaid) the realme of England hath this ſpeciall grace aboue all other realmes and dominions, that in ciuill wars the people is not deſtroied, the towns be not burned nor razed, but the lot of fortune falleth vpon the ſoldiers, eſpecially the gentlemen whom the people enuy to too beyond reaſon: for nothing is perfect in

this world. After King Edvvard was quiet in his realme and receiued yeerely out of Fraunce fifty thouſand crownes paid him in the tower of London, and was growen ſo rich, that richer he could not be, he died ſuddenly as it were of melancholy, bicauſe of our Kings mariage that now raigneth, with the Lady Margaret the Duke of Auſtriches daughter. For ſo ſoone as he was aduertiſed thereof he fell ſicke, and began then to perceiue how he had been abuſed touching the mariage of his daughter, whom he made to be named the Lady Daulphineſſe. Then alſo was the penſion which he receiued out of Fraunce taken from him, which he called tribute, although indeed it were neither the one nor the other, as before I haue declared 
                     10
                  . K. Edward left by his wife two goodly ſonnes, one Prince of Wales, the other D. of Yorke, and two daughters. The D. of Gloceſter his brother tooke vpon him the gouernment of his nephew the Prince of Wales, being about ten yeeres of age, and did homage to him as to his ſoueraigne Lord, and lead him to London pretending that he would there crowne him King, hoping by that meanes to get the other brother out of the Sanctuary at London, where he was with his mother, who began already to be iealous of his proceedings. To be ſhort, by meanes of the Biſhop of Bathe (who hauing been ſomtime of K. Edwards Councell, fell afterward into his diſgrace, and was put in priſon, and made to fine for his deliuerance,) the D. of Gloceſter executed this exploit, which you ſhall now heare. This Biſhop aduertiſed the Duke that K. Edvvard being in loue with a certaine Lady, promiſed hir mariage vpon condition that he might lie with hir, wherunto ſhe conſented, ſo far foorth that the ſaid Biſhop maried them togither, none being preſent but they two and he himſelfe. Which matter this Biſhop being a iolly courtier neuer diſcloſed during K. Edvvards life, but cauſed alſo the ſaid Lady to conceale it, ſo that it was kept ſecret. After this the ſaid King falling againe in loue, maried the daughter of an Engliſh knight, called the Lord Riuers, being a widow, and mother of two ſonnes. But after K. Edvvards death, this Biſhop of Bathe reuealed this matter to the D. of Gloceſter, whereby he egged him forward not a little to the executing of his miſchieuous pretended enterpriſe. For the ſaid D. murthered his two nephewes, crowned himſelfe King by the name of Richard the third, proclaimed his brothers two daughters baſtards in open parlament, tooke from them their armes, and put to death all the faithull ſeruants of the late King his brother, at the leaſt as many as he could lay hands on. But this cruelty remained not long vnpuniſhed: for when the ſaid King Richard thought himſelfe ſafeſt, and liued in greater pride than any King of England did theſe hundred yeeres (hauing put to death the Duke of Buckingham, and hauing a great army in a readines) God raiſed vp an enimy againſt him of no force, I meane the Earle of Richmond then priſoner in Britaine, but now King of England, of the houſe of Lancaſter, though not 
                     This error of Commines touching K. Henry the 7. you ſhall finde controuled by the pe
                           •
                        egree in the end of this booke.
                   the neereſt to the crowne 
                     11
                  , whatſoeuer men ſay, at the leaſt ſo far as I can learne. The ſaid Earle told me a little before his departure out of this realme, that from the fift yeere of his age he had liued continually like a priſoner & a baniſhed man. And indeed he had been fifteene yeeres or therabout priſoner in Britaine to Duke Frances that laſt died, into whoſe hands he fell by tempeſt of the ſea as he fled into Fraunce, accompanied with the Earle of Pembroke his vncle. I my ſelfe ſaw them when they arriued, for I was come of a meſſage to the D. at the ſame time. The Duke entreated them gently for priſoners, & after King Edwards death lent the ſaid Earle great force of men, & a great nauie; with the which he ſent him hauing intelligence with the Duke of Buckingham, (who for this cauſe was afterward put to death) to lande in England: but the winde was againſt him, and the ſeas ſo rough, that he was forced to returne to Diepe, and from thence by land into Britaine. From whence ſoone

after he departed with his band into Fraunce without taking leaue of the Duke, partly bicauſe he feared to ouercharge the Duke; (for he had with him fiue hundred Engliſh men,) and partly bicauſe he doubted leſt the Duke would agree with King Richard to his preiudice: for he knew that King Richard practiſed with him to that ende. Soone after, the King that now is appointed three or fower thouſand men to waft him ouer onely, and deliuered thoſe that accompanied him a good ſumme of money and certaine peeces of artillerie: and thus paſſed he ouer in a ſhip of Normandie to land in Wales where he was borne. King Richard foorthwith marched againſt him; but a kinght of England called the Lord Stanley, who was married to the Earles mother, ioined himſelfe with the Earle, and brought vnto him at the leaſt 26000. men 
                     12
                  . The battell was giuen, King Richard ſlaine, and the Earle crowned King in the field with the ſaid Richards crowne. Will you ſaie that this was fortune? No, no, it was the iudgement of God: and for further proofe thereof marke this alſo. Immediately after the King had murthered his two nephews, he loſt his wife, whom ſome ſay he murthered alſo. Further, he had but one onely ſonne, who died in like maner incontinent after this murther. This example would haue ſerued better heereafter when I ſhall ſpeake of King Edwards death; for he was yet liuing at the time my former Chapter treateth of: but I haue rehearſed it heere to continue my diſcourſe which I am fallen into. In like maner we haue ſeene of late the crowne of Spaine altered after the death of Dom Henry that laſt died. For the ſaid Dom Henry had to wife the King of Portugales ſiſter laſt deceaſed, by whom he had iſſue a goodly daughter, which notwithſtanding ſucceeded not hir father, but was put from the crowne vnder colour of adulterie committed by hir mother. But the matter ended not without great contention and war: for the King of Portugale tooke part with his neece, and diuers great Lords of Caſtile ioined with him: yet notwithſtanding the ſaid Dom Henries ſiſter, wife to the ſon of Dom Iohn King of Arragon, obtained the crowne and poſſeſſeth it yet at this day: and thus this partage was made in heauen as diuers others are. Further, you haue ſeene of late daies the King of Scotland and his ſonne being thirteene yeeres of age in battell, the one againſt the other: the ſonne and his faction preuailed, and the King was ſlaine vpon the place 
                     13
                  . This King murthered his owne brother, and was charged with diuers other crimes, namely the death of his ſiſter and ſuch like. You ſee alſo the Duchy of Gueldres out of the right line, and haue heard what impietie the Duke laſt deceaſed vſed againſt his father. Diuers other examples I could rehearſe which ſhould manifeſtly appeere to be puniſhments and ſcourges of God, which ſcourges are the principall cauſe of wars, whereof inſue mortality and famine, all the which euils proceede of lacke of faith. Wherefore I conclude, conſidering the wickednes of men eſpecially of great men, who know not themſelues, neither beleeue that there is a God: that it is neceſſarie for euery Prince and gouernor, to haue an aduerſary to keepe him in feare and humilitie, otherwiſe no man ſhould be able to liue vnder them or neere them.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth that this towne of Gaunt is ſituate where it is for a plague to the whole countrey of Flaunders, which otherwiſe bicauſe of the great abundance thereof, would ſoone forget God.
                  
                  2 Fregoſi and Fregoſini in other hiſtories.
                  
                  3 This diuiſion began anno 1309. betweene the Abbot of Einſidlen and the village of Suitz, and the ſaid Abbot demanded aide of Leopolde Duke of Auſtrich.
                  
                  
                     
4 As for example, Leopolde Duke of Austrich brothers ſonne to the former that began this diuiſion, whom they ſlue at the battell of Sempache 9. Iulij. ann. 1386.
                  5 The reaſon heerof reade in Ariſtot. Politic. lib. 1. cap. 2. & Problem. Anthonii Zimarae 12.
                  6 Shame commeth of knowledge, ſo that if a man do a fault, and for lacke of learning know not that it is a fault, he can neuer be aſhamed of it, nor ſeeke to amend it.
                  
                  7 1800000. franks are 225000. pound ſtarling after eight ſouſe to the Engliſh ſhilling, and the French liuer at two ſhillings ſixe pence ſtarling.
                  
                  8 4700000. franks are 587500. pound ſtarling.
                  
                  9 That is 2500000. franks, which amounteth to 312500. pound ſtarling.
                  
                  10 For it was due by the conditions of the treatie.
                  
                  11 How King Henry the ſeuenth was next▪ heire of the houſe of Lancaster, the pedegree in the end of the worke will declare, where alſo Philip de Commines error is controlled.
                  
                  12 Our Chronicles ſay but 3000. and ſome 5000.
                  13 This King that ſlue his father in battell was Iames the 4. who married Margaret ſister to King Henry the 8.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXT BOOKE.
            
               How the Duchie of Burgundie was yeelded to the King. Chap. 1.
               
                  NOw to returne to the principal matter, and to proceede in this hiſtorie, written at your requeſt, my Lorde of Vienna: while the King brought vnder his ſubiection the places and townes aboue named in the marches of Picardie, his armie lay in Burgundie, the generall wherof in apparance, was the Prince of Orenge 
                     1
                   that now is, who was borne in the countie of Burgundie, and a ſubiect thereof; but lately reuolted the ſecond time from Duke Charles: wherefore the King vſed his helpe; for he was a great Lord, well friended, and well beloued both in the ſaid countie, and alſo in the Duchie of Burgundie. But the Lord of Cran was the Kings lieutenant, and he it was in truth that had the charge of the whole armie, and in whom the King repoſed his principall truſt, and ſure he was a wiſe man and faithfull to his Maſter, but ſomwhat too greedie of his owne gaine. The ſaid Lord of Cran when he drew neere the countrie of Burgundie, ſent the Prince of Orenge before him with certaine others to Digeon, to perſwade with the citizens to become the Kings ſubiects: which enterpriſe ſo well they atchieued by the ſaid Princes meanes, that the towne of Digeon, and all the other places of the Duchie of Burgundie yeelded to the King, Auſſonne and certaine caſtels excepted, which held yet for the Ladie of Burgundie. The King had promiſed the Prince of Orenge many goodly eſtates, and to reſtore him to all his grandfathers inheritance in the countie of Burgundie: for the which he was in ſute with the Lords of Chauuerguion his vncles 
                     2
                  , whom (as he ſaid) Duke Charles had fauored to his preiudice. For this cauſe had been often pleaded before him with great ſolemnitie, and once the Duke being accompanied with a number of lawyers, gaue iudgement againſt the Prince, at the leaſt thus he reported: wherefore he forſooke the Dukes ſeruice, and went to the King. But Monſeur de Cran after he was entred into all theſe townes aboue mentioned, and had gotten into his hands all the beſt places that ſhould deſcend to the ſaid Prince by right of inheritance: refuſed to yeeld them to him, notwithſtanding both the Kings promiſe, and the ſaid Princes requeſt. The King alſo wrote often to him about this matter without all colluſion, knowing that he much miſuſed the Prince: notwithſtanding he feared to diſpleaſe the ſaid de Cran, bicauſe he had the charge of the whole countrie, neither thought he that the Prince either would or could haue cauſed the countrie of Burgundie to rebel, as afterward he did, at the leſt the greateſt part therof. But I will heere leaue theſe Burgundies affaires, till another conuenient place ſhall ſerue to ſpeake further thereof.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Prince of Orenge was Iohn de Chaſlons: the Prince of Orenge that now is, is of the houſe of Naſſaw.
                  
                  
                     
2 The olde copie hath Chaſteauguion. Annal. Burgund. Chaumergnon. Annal. Franc. Chauuerguion, and ſo vndoubtedly it is to be read: for Chaſteauguion was brother to this Prince of Orenge. Gaguin.
               
            
            
               How the King entertained the Engliſh men after the death of Charles Duke of Burgundie, to the end they ſhould not hinder his conqueſt of the ſaid Dukes dominions. Chap. 2.
               
                  THoſe that heerafter ſhall reade this hiſtorie, and happily vnderſtand the affaires both of this realme and the countries bordering vpon it better than my ſelfe, will maruell that ſince the death of Duke Charles, I haue hitherto by the ſpace almoſt of one whole yeere made no mention of the Engliſh men, and will woonder that they ſuffered the King to take the townes bordering ſo neere vpon them, namely Arras, Bolloin, Ardres, and Hedin, with diuers other caſtels, and to lie ſo long with his campe before Saint Omer 
                     1
                  . But you ſhall vnderſtand that the reaſon thereof was, for that our King in wiſedome and ſenſe ſurmounted far Edward King of England then raigning: for notwithſtanding that the ſaid King Edward were a moſt valiant Prince, and had woon in England eight or nine battels, wherein he fought alwaies himſelfe on foote greatly to his renowme; yet were theſe troubles but by fits, ſo that his head was not continually buſied in matters of ſtate: for immediately after the victorie obtained, he returned to his former ſports and pleaſures, till another ſtorme aroſe. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that when war beginneth in England, in ten daies or leſſe the one or the other getteth the garland. But our affaires in Fraunce paſſed not after that ſort, for beſides the war it ſelfe, the K. was forced to haue an eie continually vpon diuers places as well of his owne realme as of his neighbors, but eſpecially by all means poſſible to content the King of England, and to entertain him by ambaſſadors, preſents, and ſmooth words, to the end he ſhould not entermeddle with our affaires. For the K. knew well the Engliſh men as well Nobles and Commons as the Cleargie, to be naturally inclined to make war vpon this realme, aſwell vnder colour of the title they pretende thereunto; as alſo in hope of gaine. For they truſt to haue euer ſuch ſucceſſe heere as their predeceſſors haue had, whom God permitted to obtaine in this realme many great victories, and large dominion both in Normandie and in Guienne, the which they had poſſeſſed by the ſpace of three hundred and fiftie yeeres 
                     2
                  , when King Charles the ſeuenth firſt recouered it. During the which time they inriched the realme of England with great ſpoiles and much treaſure, that they got aſwell of the Princes and noble men of Fraunce, a great number of whom they tooke priſoners; as alſo of the townes and places which they ſubdued. Notwithſtanding they ſhould hardly haue had ſuch ſucceſſe in the King our Maſters time: for he would neuer haue indangered his eſtate in battell as King Charles the ſixt did at Agincourt, where all the nobility of Fraunce lighted on foote to fight with the Engliſh men; but would haue proceeded more warily if the matter had come to execution, as you may perceiue by the courſe he held in ſending King Edvvard home. Wherefore the King well perceiued that he muſt in any wiſe keepe the King of England and his principall ſeruants his friends, whom he ſawe altogither inclined

to quietnes and very greedy of his money: for the which cauſe he paid duly at London the penſion of fiftie thouſand crownes, which they called tribute. And further gaue yeerely ſixteene thouſand crownes to the ſaid Kings principall ſeruants, whoſe names were theſe: the Lord Chauncellor; the Maſter of the Rols who now is Chauncellor; the Lord Hastings Lord great Chamberlaine, a man of ſingular wiſdome and vertue, and in great authority with his Maſter, and not without cauſe, for he euer ſerued him faithfully; Sir Thomas Montgomery; the Lord Hovvard, afterward Duke of Norfolke & partaker with the wicked King Richard; the Maſter of the Horſe called Maſter Cheiny; Maſter Challenger, and the Marques Dorſet the Queene of Englands ſonne by hir firſt husband. Further, he gaue goodly preſents to all the ambaſſadors that came to him, were their meſſages neuer ſo ſharpe and bitter, and ſent them home with ſuch goodly words & Princely rewards, that they returned well contented. And notwithſtanding that ſome of them vnderſtood that he did all this onely to win time, the better to atchieue his enterpriſe in the conqueſt of the Duke of Burgundies dominions: yet winked they at it bicauſe of the great riches they receiued at his hands. To all theſe aboue named he gaue beſides their penſions many goodly preſents, ſo largely that the Lord Hovvard ouer and aboue his penſion receiued of him in leſſe then two yeeres ſpace in money and plate fower and twentie thouſand crownes. To the Lord Haſtings alſo L. great Chamberlaine of England, he gaue at one time a preſent of plate to the value of ten thouſand marks. The acquittances of all which great perſonages are yet to be ſeene in the chamber of accounts at Paris, ſaue of the Lord Haſtings Lord great Chamberlaine of England, which is an high office, for there is neuer but one alone in it. This L. Chamberlaine was long labored before he would become the Kings penſioner, my ſelfe being the onely man that perſwaded him thereunto. For I wan him firſt to Charles Duke of Burgundies friendſhip during the time I ſerued him, who gaue him yeerly a penſion of a thouſand crownes; whereof when I had aduertiſed the King, he would in like maner that I ſhould be a meanes to make him his friend and penſioner: for in times paſt during Duke Charles his life, and after his death alſo in fauor of the Lady of Burgundy, he had alwaies beene the Kings extreme enimy, and trauelled once to perſwade the King of England to aide the ſaid Lady againſt the King our Maſter. I began this friendſhip by letters, and the King gaue him a penſion of two thouſand crownes, which was double the ſumme he receiued of the Duke. Further, the King ſent to him one of the ſtewards of his houſe called Peter Cleret, charging him to bring with him the ſaid Lord Chamberlains acquittance, to the end heereafter it might appeere that the great Chamberlaine, Chauncellor, Admirall, and Maſter of the Horſe of England, beſides diuers others, had beene the French Kings penſioners. The ſaid Peter Cleret was a wiſe fellow, and communed priuily alone with the Lord Chamberlaine at his lodging in London; where, after he had declared his meſſage from the King: he preſented him his two thouſand crownes in golde (for the King neuer gaue but gold to ſtrangers) which money when the Lord Chamberlaine had receiued, Peter Cleret humbly beſought him for his diſcharge, to giue him an acquittance; wherein the ſaid Lord Chamberlaine made difficultie. Then Cleret deſired him to giue him onely a letter of three lines to the King to teſtifie the receit of the money, leaſt the King being a ſuſpitious Prince ſhould thinke that he had conuerted it to his owne vſe. Which reaſonable demand the Lord Chamberlaine hearing, anſwered thus: Sir, you require but reaſon, but this gift proceedeth of the King your Maſters liberality not of my requeſt; if it pleaſe you that I ſhall receiue it put it heere into my ſleeue, and other letter or teſtimoniall get you none of me. For I

will not for my part that any man ſhall ſay that the Lord great Chamberlaine of England hath beene penſioner to the French King; nor that my acquittances be found in his chamber of accounts. Whereunto the ſaid Cleret replied not, but departed leauing the money behinde him; and at his returne made report thereof to the King, who was not a little diſpleaſed with him for that he brought no acquittance: but as touching the ſaid Chamberlaine, he commended and eſteemed him more than all the King of Englands other ſeruants, and his penſion was euer after paied without acquittance.
               After this ſort liued the King with the Engliſh men. Notwithſtanding the King of England was oftentimes earneſtly preſſed by this yoong Princes for aide, and therefore ſent ambaſſadors often to negotiate with the King our Maſter about theſe affaires, deſiring him to grant hir either peace or truce. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that thoſe that were at the debating of theſe matters in England, eſpecially in their parlament, (which is an aſſembly of the three eſtates, where diuers wiſe men were preſent that ſmelt our diſſimulation a far off, and receiued no penſion of the King as the others did) were verie deſirous; and yet the commons of the realme more deſirous, that the King of England ſhould ſend aide without further delay to the ſaide Ladie: ſaying, that we heere did but abuſe them, and that the marriage ſhould neuer be accompliſhed: alleaging that at the treatie made at Picquigny betweene the two Kings, we had faithfully ſworne and promiſed that the King of Englands daughter whom they had already called the Ladie Daulphineſſe, ſhould be ſent for into Fraunce within a yeere; which terme was now long expired. But what reaſons ſoeuer the ſubiects made, the King would giue no eare thereunto, but alleaged diuers excuſes to the contrarie. And to ſay the truth, he was a verie corpulent man and much giuen to pleaſures, neither could his body endure the toile of the wars. Further, he had wound himſelfe out of great troubles and was loth to enter into them againe. The couetouſnes alſo of the 50000. crownes yeerly paid him in the tower of London qualified his minde. Beſides all this, his ambaſſadors that came hither were ſo courteouſly entertained and ſo well rewarded, that they departed euer well contented; but they neuer receiued any reſolute anſwere: for the King ſought onely to protract the time euer ſaying, that ere it were long he would ſend to the King their Maſter certain noble men with ſuch aſſurance of thoſe matters he ſtood in doubt of, as he knew well would content him. According to the which promiſe, within three weekes or a moneth after theſe ambaſſadors departure, ſometime more, ſometime leſſe, (which was no ſmall delaie in ſuch a caſe) he vſed to ſend ambaſſadors to the K. of England: but at euery voiage ſundrie men, to the end that if the former had made any ouerture not performed, the latter might plaid ignorance therin. They alſo that were ſent, perſwaded ſo well the King of England that we meant nothing but good faith, that he lay ſtill, and neuer ſtirred: for both he and the Queen his wife ſo much deſired this marriage, that partly for this cauſe, and partly for the other reaſons aboue alleaged; he was content to winke at this war, which ſome of his Counſell tould him plainely to be verie preiudiciall to his realme. But he feared the breach of this marriage, bicauſe men began alreadie to ſcoffe at it in England, eſpecially ſuch as deſired rebellion and ciuill war. Now to diſcourſe a little vpon this point. You ſhall vnderſtand that the King our Maſter neuer meant to accompliſh this mariage, bicauſe there was no equalitie betweene the age of the two parties: for King Edwards daughter at this preſent Queene of England, was much elder than the Daulphin now raigning. But by theſe diſſimulations a moneth or two was gayned in running to and fro, by which meanes the King foded foorth his enimie one whole

ſommer, wherein he might haue done him harme. For vndoubtedly if the King of England had not hoped vpon this marriage, he would neuer haue ſuffered the King to take the places bordering ſo neere vpon the Engliſh dominions, but haue ſought to defend them: and if at the beginning he had declared himſelfe for the Ladie of Burgundie, the King who was by nature timorous, and would put nothing in aduenture, had neuer weakened this houſe of Burgundie as he hath. Thus much I write chiefly to ſhew how theſe affaires paſſed; and ſecondarily, to the end that if heerafter thoſe that haue to manage great affaires happen to reade this hiſtorie, they may thereby learne how to helpe themſelues in the like caſe: for be their wiſedome neuer ſo great, yet a ſmall aduertiſement doth good many times. True it is, that if this Lady of Burgundy would haue conſented to marrie the Lord Riuers the Queene of Englands brother, ſhe ſhould haue beene aided with great force: but this had been an vnequall match; for he was but a poore Earle, and ſhe one of the greateſt inheritors in hir time. Many practiſes were entertained betweene the Kings of Fraunce and England; and amongſt others the King offered him, that if he would ioine with him, and paſſe ouer in perſon into the Lady of Burgundies countries, he would be contented that the King of England ſhould hold the countrie of Flaunders without homage, and alſo the Duchie of Brabant: offering further, to conquer for him at his proper coſts and charges fower of the greateſt townes in Brabant, and to put them into the King of Englands hands, to wage him 10000. Engliſh men for fower moneths, to the end he might the better ſuſtaine the charge of the wars, and to lend him great ſtore of artillerie, and men and carriage to conuey it, and attend vpon it, with this condition, that the King of England ſhould conquer the countrie of Flaunders, during the time the King our Maſter inuaded on the other ſide. Whereunto the King of England made anſwer that the townes of Flaunders were ſtrong and great; and both that countrey, and alſo the countrey of Brabant hard to be kept if they were conquered: adding further, that this war liked not the Engliſh men bicauſe of their entercourſe with thoſe countries. But ſeeing it pleaſed the King to make him partaker of his conqueſt, if he would giue him certaine townes he had alreadie conquered in Picardie, as Bolloin and diuers other which he named; he would then be contented to declare himſelfe for him, and ſend men to ſerue him if he would pay them, which was a verie wiſe anſwer.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The King could not take Saint Omer, for the Lord of Chanteraine valiantly defended it. Reade De la Marche lib. 2. cap. 9. pag. 410.
                  2 Others write but 295. others 296. and others 299.
               
            
            
               How the marriage betweene the Ladie of Burgundie and Maximilian Duke of Auſtrich, afterwards Emperor, was concluded and accompliſhed. Chap. 3.
               
                  DIuers practiſes were entertained (as before you haue heard) betweene theſe two Kings to delay time; but in the meane while the Ladie of Burgundies force ſtill diminiſhed: for of thoſe few men that remained aliue after hir fathers death, diuers reuolted from hir to the King, eſpecially after Monſeur de Cordes was entred into his ſeruice; for he led

away a great troupe with him. Others neceſſitie forced to ſhrinke from hir, bicauſe they dwelt either within the townes the King had already conquered, or neere vnto them. Some alſo put themſelues into his ſeruice to be enriched; for no Prince dealt ſo liberally with his men, as the King our Maſter did. Moreouer, ciuill diſſentions and factions among themſelues encreaſed daily in the great townes, eſpecially in Gaunt, which bare the greateſt ſway in the countrie, as you haue heard. For the Lady of Burgundie diuers marriages were mentioned; for all men were of opinion, that either ſhe muſt get hir a husband to defend that ſhe yet held, or marrie the Daulphin, thereby quietly to poſſeſſe all. Some deſired greatly that this marriage with the Daulphin might take effect, ſhe hir ſelfe eſpecially, before the King deliuered the letters aboue mentioned, ſent vnto him by hir Chauncellor and the Lord of Himbercourt: but others diſallowed of this marriage, both bicauſe of the ſaid Daulphins yoong age (for he was but nine yeeres olde) and alſo bicauſe of the marriage promiſed in England: and theſe labored for the Duke of Cleues ſonne. Others there were that trauelled for the Emperors ſonne Maximilian now King of Romans. The ſaid Lady had conceiued extreme hatred againſt the King for the deliuerie of the letters aboue mentioned, which was the onely cauſe of the two noble mens death, and of the diſhonor ſhe receiued when hir letters were openly redeliuered hir before the aſſemblie, whereof you haue heard. Further, the deliuerie of the ſaid letters ſeemed alſo to be the onely occaſion that mooued them of Gaunt to baniſh ſo many of hir ſeruants from hir, to remooue from about hir, hir mother in lawe and the Lord of Rauaſtaine, and to put hir women in ſuch feare, that they durſt not open a letter before they of Gaunt had ſeene it, nor commune with their Miſtres in hir eare. Wherefore ſhe began now to remooue from about hir the Biſhop of Liege, who was of the houſe of Bourbon, and an earneſt ſuter for hir marriage with the Daulphin, which ſure had been a very honorable match for hir, had not the ſaid Daulphin been ſo yoong, notwithſtanding the Biſhop had no regarde thereof. To be ſhort, the ſaid Biſhop departed to Liege, whereupon euery man gaue ouer that ſute. It had been hard to deale in this buſines to the contentation of all parties, and I thinke who ſo ſhould haue intermedled in it, ſhould haue had but ſmall thanke for his labour in the end: wherfore euery man forbare to ſpeake therin. Notwithſtanding before hir marriage was fully concluded, there was an aſſemblie held about it, wherat the Lady of Halleuin the Princeſſe of Burgundies principall woman was preſent, who ſaid (as I haue heard reported) that they had neede of a man not a child, and that hir Miſtres was a woman growen and able to beare children, which ſhould be the onely ſtay of the countrey. This opinion tooke place, notwithſtanding ſome blamed this Lady for ſpeaking thus frankly; but others commended hir, ſaying, that ſhe had ſpoken but of ſuch mariage as was moſt neceſſary for the eſtate of the countrey. There was now no more to do but to finde a fit man. And I thinke verily if it had ſo pleaſed the K. ſhe would willingly haue married the Lord of Angouleſme that now is 
                     1
                  ; ſo much deſired ſhe to continue hir alliance with the houſe of France. But God was minded to make another match wherof peraduenture the ſequel is yet vnknown. Notwithſtanding this, we are able to ſay by that is already paſt, that of the ſaid marriage many great wars haue ariſen both heere and there, which perchance had neuer happened if ſhe had married the Lord of Angouleſme: wheras by reaſon of this other match both the countries of Flaunders and Brabant haue ſuffered great afflictions. The Duke of Cleues was at Gaunt with the ſaid Lady, making friends there in hope to conclude a marriage betweene hir and his ſon: but ſhe had no fanſie therunto; for both ſhe & thoſe that were about hir, miſliked much his ſons conditions. Wherfore

ſome began to motion a marriage betweene hir and the Emperors ſonne now King of Romans, the which in times paſt had been ſo far foorth treated of betweene the Emperor and Duke Charles, that it was concluded betweene them two. Further, the Emperor had a letter written with the Ladies owne hand by hir fathers commandement, and a ring ſet with a diamond. The contents of the which letter were, that according to the pleaſure of hir Lord and father, ſhe promiſed to the ſaid Duke of Auſtrich the Emperors ſonne, to accompliſh the marriage concluded betweene both their parents, in ſuch manner and forme as hir ſaid Lord and father ſhould appoint.
               From the Emperor came certaine ambaſſadors to the ſaid Lady being at Gaunt, who receiued letters at Bruxels commanding them to ſtay there, bicauſe Commſſioners ſhould be ſent thither to treat with them, which was the Duke of Cleues doing, who was loth of their comming, and ſought to ſend them home diſcontented. But the ſaid ambaſſadors paſſed foorth that notwithſtanding, for they had good intelligence in the Ladies court, eſpecially with the Dowager of Burgundy, who was remooued from the ſaid Lady, as you haue heard, bicauſe of the letter aboue mentioned. She aduertiſed them (as it was reported) that they ſhould not ſtay at Bruxels notwithſtanding theſe letters, inſtructing them further what they ſhould do at their comming to Gaunt, and aſſuring them that the ſaid Lady and diuers about hir were well diſpoſed to their ſute. The Emperors ambaſſadors followed hir aduiſe, and rid ſtraight to Gaunt, notwithſtanding the meſſage aboue mentioned. Wherewith the Duke of Cleues was not a little diſcontented, but he was not acquainted with the diſpoſition of the ſaid Lady and hir women. The Councell concluded that theſe ambaſſadors ſhould haue audience, & their meſſage being heard: the Princeſſe ſhould bid them hartily welcome, & tell them that ſhe would take aduiſe with hir Councel, which words being vttered, ſhe ſhould withdraw hirſelfe without farther communication. Whereunto ſhe agreed. The ambaſſadors when audience was giuen them, preſented their letters and declared their meſſage, which was, that hir mariage had been concluded betweene the Emperour and the Duke of Burgundy hir father with hir conſent; as appeered both by hir letters written with hir owne hand which they there ſhewed, and alſo by the diamond which they ſaid ſhe had ſent and giuen in token of marriage. Moreouer, the ſaid ambaſſadors required hir on their Maſters behalfe, that it would pleaſe hir to accompliſh the ſaid marriage according to the will and promiſe both of hir ſaid Lord and father, and alſo of hirſelfe. Further, deſiring hir to declare before the aſſembly there preſent, whether ſhe had written the ſaid letter or not, and whether ſhe minded to performe hir promiſe. Whereunto the ſaid Ladie without further deliberation anſwered, that ſhe had ſent the ſaide diamond, and written the letter by the commandement of hir Lord and father, and would performe all that was conteined therein. Then the ambaſſadors gaue hir humble thanks, and returned with ioifull minds to their lodging. But the Duke of Cleues was highly diſpleaſed with this anſwer, being cleane contrary to hir councels reſolution, and told hir that ſhe had done vnaduiſedly. Whereunto ſhe anſwered that ſhe could do no otherwiſe bicauſe hir promiſe was paſt, which ſhe would not breake. Which words the Duke hearing, and knowing diuers about hir to be of the ſame opinion: determined ſoone after to returne home into his owne countrey and relinquiſh his ſute. Thus was this marriage concluded, for the accompliſhment whereof Duke Maximilian came to Colen, where certaine of the Ladies ſeruants met him, and brought him money, whereof I thinke they found him bare inough: for his father was the hardeſt man either Prince or priuate man that liued in his

time. The ſaid Emperors ſon being accompanied with ſeuen or eight hundred horſe was conueied to Gaunt, where the marriage was accompliſhed, which at the firſt was more vnprofitable than profitable to the Ladies ſubiects; for the Almains in ſteed of bringing money with them, had money giuen them. Their number was not ſufficient to withſtand the Kings forces, and their conditions agreed not with hir ſubiects maners: for they had liued vnder rich Princes which gaue goodly offices, kept honorable and pompous houſes both in furniture and fare, and had ſumptuous apparell, both for themſelues and their ſeruants: but the Almains are of a cleane contrary diſpoſition, for they are rude fellowes and liue groſſely.
               I doubt not but that by ſage and wiſe aduiſe and by the ſpeciall grace of God, the law Salicke was ordained in Fraunce which barreth women from the crowne, to the end the realme fall not into the hands of a ſtrange Prince & nation. For neither the French men nor any other people can eaſily digeſt the gouernment of a ſtranger. And to ſaie the truth there is no great ſeniorie but in the end the dominion thereof remaineth to the naturall countrey men, as appeereth by the realme of Fraunce, a great part whereof the Engliſh men poſſeſſed the ſpace of fower hundred yeeres; and yet now hold nothing therein but Calice, and two little caſtels, the defence whereof coſteth them yeerely a great ſumme of monie: the reſt they loſt much ſooner than they wan; for they loſt more in a day, than they got in a yeere. The ſelfeſame appeereth alſo by the realme of Naples, the yle of Sicilie, and the other prouinces poſſeſſed by the French men many yeeres, where now is no memoriall of their being there, ſaue onely their anceſtors graues. For notwithſtanding that men may away with a ſtrange Prince being wiſe, & accompanied with a ſmall traine well diſpoſed; yet can they hardly digeſt a great number of ſtrangers: for if the Prince bring with him a great multitude, or ſend for great forces vpon occaſion of wars, quarrels will ariſe betweene them and the ſubiects of the countrie, bicauſe of the diuerſitie of their maners and conditions, and bicauſe they will not forbeare to offer the ſubiects wrong, and are not beloued as the naturall countrie men be: which inconuenience then happeneth eſpecially, when ſtrangers ſeeke to haue the higheſt offices and eſtates, and the gouernment of the affaires in the commonwelth. Wherfore a Prince that goeth into a ſtrange countrie, had neede to be wiſe and carefull in ſetting all things in good order: for if he lacke this vertue of prudence, which proceedeth eſpecially of the grace of God, whatſoeuer other good parts be in him, all is but loſt; and if he liue a mans age both he and thoſe that liue vnder him ſhall taſte of great troubles, eſpecially in his old age when his ſubiects and ſeruants deſpaire of amendment.
               After this marriage aboue rehearſed was accompliſhed, their affaires amended not, for the Princes were both very yoong, and Duke Maximilian for his part ſimple and of ſmall vnderſtanding, aſwell bicauſe of his yoong yeeres 
                     2
                  , as alſo for that he was in a ſtrange countrey, and vtterly vnacquainted in his education with any matter of ſtate. Laſtly, he wanted force ſufficient for any great exploit, ſo that for theſe cauſes theſe countries fell into great miſeries, wherein they yet remaine and are like to remaine. Sure it is a greeuous plague when a Prouince is forced to ſeeke a ſtrange Prince to gouerne it. Wherefore God hath ſhewed great grace to the realme of Fraunce by the lawe aboue mentioned, which barreth women from the crowne: for by ſuch marriages with ſtrangers a priuate houſe (I confeſſe) may be inriched, but to a great realme ſuch as this, many inconueniences ſhould therof inſue. Soone after this marriage accompliſhed, or while they were treating thereof: the King wan the countrey of Artois. It ſufficeth me to rehearſe the ſubſtance of theſe

affaires, and if I faile otherwiſe in the exact computation of the time a moneth or two, I truſt the Readers will hold me excuſed. The Kings good ſucceſſe daily increaſed; for no man withſtood him, by meanes whereof he wan euery day ſome place or other, vnleſſe truce or ſome ouuerture of peace were made: which notwithſtanding could neuer be brought to concluſion bicauſe both the parties were vnreaſonable. Wherefore the war continued ſtill. Duke Maximilian and the Lady of Burgundy had iſſue the firſt yeere Archduke Philip now liuing 
                     3
                  . The ſecond yeere they had a daughter called Margaret now our Queene 
                     4
                  . The third yeere they had a ſonne named Francis of Francis Duke of Britaine 
                     5
                  , who chriſtned him. The fourth yeere ſhe died 
                     6
                   with a fall from hir horſe 
                     7
                   or of an ague: but true it is that ſhe fell, & ſome ſaid ſhe was with childe. Hir death was a great loſſe to hir ſubiects, for ſhe was a vertuous and liberall Lady, welbeloued of hir people, & more reuerenced and feared of them than hir husband; and no maruell, for ſhe was Lady of the land. She loued hir husband entirely well, and was well reported of all men. She died in the yeere 1482. The King held in Hainault the townes of Queſnoi-le Counte, and Bouchain, the which he reſtored againe, wherat diuers woondered, conſidering that he ſeamed not deſirous of peace, but rather to take all and leaue this houſe of Burgundy nothing. And ſure I thinke if he could eaſily haue diſperſed and giuen away all the Seniories therof, he would vtterly haue deſtroied it indeed. But two cauſes there were, as he afterwards told me, that mooued him to render theſe places: the one, he ſaid that a King ought to make more account of places of force and defence within his owne realme where he is annointed and ſacred, than of thoſe that are out of his realme, as theſe two were. The other was bicauſe of the ſolemne oth and league that is between the Kings of Fraunce and the Emperors, that they ſhall not incroche the one vpon the other, and theſe places aboue mentioned were ſituate in the Empire, and were reſtored the yeere 1477. The ſame cauſe mooued him to leaue Cambray alſo, and to reſtore it to neutrality, and to ſay the truth, they receiued him into the towne vnder that condition.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This was Charles Duke of Angouleſme father to King Frauncis the firſt.
                  
                  2 Maximilian was borne the 22. of March 1459. and this mariage was accompliſhed in Auguſt 1477. Introduct. de la Marche, ſo that he was eighteen yeeres old and ſixe moneths when he was married.
                  
                  3 This is Philip father to the Emperors Charles the fift and Ferdinande, he was borne the 23. of Iune 1478. and died the 25. of September 1506.
                  4 This Margaret is ſhe whom they of Gaunt againſt hir fathers will betrothed to King Charles the 8. as Commines writeth in this booke cap. 9. The ſaid King Charles neuer accompliſhed the mariage with hir, but being growen to mans eſtate, ſent hir home to hir father, as Commines writeth, lib. 7. cap. 3. Afterward ſhe married the Prince of Caſtile as is mentioned lib. 8. cap. 17. and laſtly Philibert Duke of Sauoy. She was borne anno 1480. de la Marche.
                  5 This Frauncis was borne anno 1481. Introduct. de la Marche, he died a childe, and another ſonne alſo, as other hiſtoriographers report, named George.
                  6 Or rather the fift, for ſhe was married anno 1477. and died 1482. as our author in the 7. chapter of this booke reporteth. She was borne anno 1457. and King Lewis chriſtened hir. Meyer. Annal. Burgund.
                  7 She died 2. of March an. 1482. by reaſon that through womanly baſhfulnes ſhe would
                     
                     not ſuffer hir thigh vvhich vvas broken vvith the fall from hir horſe to be cured, but choſe rather to die.
                  
               
            
            
               How King Lewis by the conduct of Charles of Amboiſe his lieutenant, recouered diuers townes in Burgundie, which the Prince of Orenge had cauſed to reuolt from him. Chap. 4.
               
                  THe war endured ſtill in Burgundy, where the King could not atchieue his enterpriſe, bicauſe the Prince of Orenge being reuolted from him was made lieutenant of the Burgundians, and had ſome aide of the Almaines for his money, but not in fauor of Duke Maximilian: for as touching him, there neuer came man into the countrey for his ſeruice, at the leaſt during the time I now write of. But theſe Almains were certaine bands of Swiſſers that ſerued the Prince of Orenge as aduenturers, but not as Maximilians waged ſoldiers: for the Swiſſers are not friends nor well willers of the houſe of Auſtrich: other aide this countrey of Burgundy had little; notwithſtanding inough it might haue had if their paiment had been good. And as touching aide, no man might better haue giuen it than Duke Sigiſmunde of Auſtriche, Duke Maximilians vncle 
                     1
                  , whoſe dominions bordered vpon theſe countries of Burgundy, eſpecially the County of Ferrette, which a fewe yeeres before 
                     2
                   he ſould for 100000. gildons, to Charles Duke of Burgundy, and tooke it afterwards againe without paying backe the money 
                     3
                  , by the which title he yet poſſeſſeth it. He was a man of ſmall wiſdome, and little regarding his honor, and in ſuch friends men finde ſmall helpe. Further, he was one of thoſe Princes aboue mentioned that vnderſtand nothing of their owne affaires, further then it pleaſeth their ſeruants to acquaint them with, who are euer plagued for their beaſtlines in their age as this Duke Sigiſmunde was. For his ſeruants during theſe wars, made him take part with whom them liſted; ſo that for the moſt part he ioined with the King our Maſter againſt his nephew, and would haue giuen his inheritance being very large from his owne kindred to a ſtrange houſe: for he neuer had childe, notwithſtanding that he were twiſe married. But now within theſe three moneths by the perſwaſion of another faction of his ſeruants, he hath conueied a preſent eſtate of his whole patrimony to the ſaid Maximiliam his nephew King of Romaines, reſeruing to himſelf a penſion onely amounting to the third part of his reuenues, without any further power or authority in the countrey. But (as I haue heard) he hath often repented him thereof; and if I haue heard a lie, yet it is like inough to be true. Such is the end of all Princes that liue like beaſts, againſt whom I inueigh thus vehemently, bicauſe of the great office and charge that God hath giuen them in this world. Notwithſtanding thoſe that are bereft of their wits ought to be free from all reproch; but ſure thoſe that haue good wits and healthfull bodies, and yet employ their time in nothing but folly and idlenes; are not to be moaned when any misfortune falleth vpon them: as on the other ſide thoſe that ſpend their time according to their age, ſomtime in wiſdome and councell, and ſomtime in honeſt' recreation, are greatly to be commended, and happie be the ſubiects that liue vnder ſuch a Prince.
               This war in Burgundie endured long, bicauſe of the Swiſſers ſmall aide aboue mentioned; notwithſtanding the Kings force was much too ſtrong for them: beſides

that the Burgundians lacked monie; for the which cauſe the garriſons that were in the ſtrong places turned by intelligence. Monſeur de Cran the Kings lieutenant there, laide the ſiege before Dolle the chiefe citie of the countie of Burgundie, the force within it being ſo ſmall that he deſpiſed it, which turned to his loſſe: for they ſalied foorth and aſſaulted him on a ſudden, and tooke part of his artillerie, and ſlue certaine of his men, which was a great diſhonor to him, and put him alſo into the Kings diſgrace; who being troubled with this accident determined to ſend a new gouernor into Burgundie, partly bicauſe of this misfortune, and partly bicauſe of the great pillings and pollings the ſaid de Cran had vſed in the countrie, which were in deede too exceſſiue. Notwithſtanding before his departure he ouerthrew a band of Almains and Burgundians, and tooke priſoner Monſeur de Chaſteauguion 
                  
                     4
                  , the greateſt Lord in Burgundie. Other exploit none was done that I haue heard of, notwithſtanding the report went, that the ſaid de Cran behaued himſelfe there very valiantly as touching his owne perſon. The King; as before I ſaid, determined for the reaſons aboue alleaged, to place a new gouernor in Burgundie, not diminiſhing any whit of the ſaid de Crans profits, offices, or eſtates, ſaue onely that he tooke from him all his men of armes, except halfe a doſen or a doſen archers, left to accompanie him home. This Monſeur de Cran was a very groſſe man, and willingly departed to his owne houſe, where he liued at eaſe. The King placed in his roome Maſter Charles of Amboiſe Lord of Chaumont a valiant, wiſe, and diligent gentleman. Moreouer, he practiſed to win all the Almaines that made war againſt him in Burgundie, to his ſeruice, not ſo much to vſe their helpe, as thereby to conquer the eaſilier the reſt of the countrie. The King ſent alſo to the Swiſſers, whom he called the Lords of theſe Almaine leagues, making them many goodly offers; for he promiſed a yeerely penſion of 20000. franks 
                     5
                   to their townes, which be fower, Berne, Lucerne, Zurich, and I think Fribourg was the fourth. Their Cantons alſo, as I ſuppoſe, receiued part of this penſion, which be three villages ſituate in the mountains, namely Swiſſe, whereof the whole countrie is named; Soleurre, and Ondreual: other 20000. franks he promiſed yeerely to the ſaid Swiſſers gouernors, and to certaine particular men that ſhould further his affaires. Moreouer, he enrolled himſelfe one of their Burgeſſes, & deſired to be their principall confederate, and to haue writings thereof; wherein though they made ſome difficultie at the firſt, bicauſe the Duke of Sauoy had euer been their chiefe confederate: yet in the end they granted him his demaunds, and promiſed to ſend continually to his ſeruice 6000. men vnder this condition, that their entertainment ſhould be monethly fower gildons and a halfe, which band continued in pay till the Kings death 
                     6
                  . A poore Prince had not been able to do this, but ſure it turned greatly to the Kings profit, though in the end I thinke it will be their deſtruction. For now they flowe ſo with monie, eſpecially with gold (wherewith before they were vnacquainted) that they are readie to fall at variance among themſelues, otherwiſe no man ſhould be able to annoy them. For their countrie is ſo poore, and ſo full of mountaines, and themſelues ſo good ſoldiers, that few woulde ſeeke to inuade them. After theſe treaties were ended, and all the Almaines in Burgundie woon to the Kings ſeruice, the Burgundians force was cleane broken. To be ſhort, after diuers new enterpriſes atchieued by the gouernor the Lord of Chaumont, he beſieged Rochfort a caſtell neere to Dolle, defended by Maſter Claude de Vauldray, and yeelded by compoſition. Afterward he beſieged the towne of Dolle, from the ſiege whereof his predeceſſor in this office was raiſed (as before you haue heard) and tooke it by aſſault. The report was that ſome of theſe Almaines lately receiued into the Kings ſeruice, thought to haue entered the towne to defend it; but

ſo many franke archers thronged in with them, not vnderſtanding their treaſon, but onely for deſire of gaine, that after they were once entred, they fell all to the ſpoile, and burned and deſtroied the towne. A few daies after the taking whereof, the gouernor beſieged Auſſonne a very ſtrong town, but he had good intelligence within it. And before he brought the ſiege thither, he writ to the King, deſiring that the offices of the towne might be beſtowed vpon certaine whom he named: which requeſt was foorthwith granted. Although I were not preſent at theſe actions, yet vnderſtood I of them, both by the reports made thereof to the King, and alſo by the letters written to him; the which oftentimes I my ſelfe peruſed to make anſwer therunto by his commandement. The force within Auſſonne was but ſmall, and the captaines had intelligence with the gouernor, by meanes whereof within fiue or ſixe daies the place was yeelded. Thus was all Burgundie conquered, ſaue three or fower caſtels ſituate vpon mountaines, namely Ieu, and certaine others, and the towne of Bezanſon which is imperiall, not ſubiect to the countie of Burgundie, but enuironed therewith; and therefore at the commandement of the Prince thereof. The gouernor entred into it for the King, and came foorth againe; they of the towne doing vnto him all ſuch ſeruices as they were accuſtomed in times paſt to do to the Princes of Burgundie. Thus was all Burgundie ſubdued by the gouernors great diligence, whereunto the King earneſtly preſſed him, doubting that he would leaue ſome place vnconquered, to the end his helpe might be needed there ſtill, and he not be called from thence to ſerue the King in ſome other place. For Burgundie is a fruitfull countrie, whereof he diſpoſed as of his owne; ſo that both the Lord of Cran before named, and this gouernor alſo, filled their bags wel there. The countrie remained quiet awhile vnder the gouernment of the ſaid Lord of Chaumont: notwithſtanding certaine places, namely Beaune, Verdun, and others 
                     7
                   rebelled ſoone after: at the which time I my ſelfe was there, ſent thither by the King, with the penſioners of his houſe, who neuer had captaine ouer them before, but ſithence continually. The ſaid places aboue rehearſed were ſoone recouered by the wiſedome and conduct of the gouernor, and by his enimies lacke of conduct and good order. Whereby you may perceiue, what difference God of his goodnes hath ſet betweene man and man: for to that part which he meaneth to protect and defend, he giueth the wiſeſt men, and likewiſe wiſedome to thoſe that are in authoritie to imploy the wiſeſt. Further, he hath alwaies ſhewed and doth daily ſhew himſelfe in all things a defender and protector of our Kings, not onely of our Maſter that dead is, but of the King likewiſe now raigning, notwithſtanding that ſomtime they taſte alſo of his ſcourges. They that loſt againe theſe townes thus reuolted, were force ſufficient to haue defended them, if they had with ſpeede put themſelues into them: but through their negligence they gaue the gouernor leiſure to leuie men, which was great follie; for they knew well ynough his eſtate, conſidering the great fauor all the countrie bare them. Wherefore they ought to haue entred with ſpeed into Beaune, being a ſtrong towne, and of defence, as the others were not. The ſelfeſame day that the gouernor went to beſiege a little beggerly towne called Verdun, being well informed of the ſtate thereof: theſe Burgundians entered there, minding to put themſelues into Beaune. They were ſixe hundred choiſe men horſemen and footmen, partly Almaines, and partly of the countie of Ferrette, led by certaine expert gentlemen of Burgundie, of the which Simon of Quinchy was one. But they ſpent time at Verdun while they might haue entred into Beaune, which the gouernor could neuer haue recouered, if they had once been within it. But for lack of good counſell, they ſtaied a night too long in Verdun, where they were beſieged and taken by aſſault. Afterward

Beaune was alſo beſieged, and all that was loſt recouered, ſince the which time our enimies were neuer of any force in Burgundie. I was at this preſent in the countrie with the Kings penſioners (as you haue heard) from whence the King reuoked me, bicauſe of a certaine letter written to him, wherein he was aduertiſed that I forbare to lodge our men of armes in certaine Burgeſſes houſes of Dyion. This with another ſmall ſuſpicion conceiued of me, cauſed him ſuddenly to ſend me to Florence: to which his commandement I obeied as reaſon was, and departed ſo ſoone as I had my diſpatch.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Sigiſmund was not vncle to Maximilian, as other hiſtories report, but coſin germane to his father; for Erneſtus father to the Emperor Friderick, and Fridericus Seinor this Duke Sigiſmunds father were brethren, ſonnes to Leopold Duke of Auſtriche, ſlaine in battell by the Swiſſers anno 1386.
                  2 He ſold it ann. 1469.
                  3 Others write that the monie was paied to a merchant of Baſill to the Duke of Burgundies vſe, and the paiement ſignified to the ſaid Duke, who would not accept it vnles it were paied at Bezanſon.
                  
                  4 This vvas the Prince of Orenges brother vvho came to leuie the ſiege that Monſeur de Cran held before Gy, vvhere he had beſieged the ſaid Prince of Orenge, vvith him vvere ſlaine 14. or 15. hundred.
                  
                  5 Before lib. 5. cap. 2. he reporteth theſe 40000. franks to be florens, and ſo in mine opinion it ſhould be read heere.
                  
                  6 VVhen theſe Swiſſers began firſt to be entertained, then were the franck archers caſſed, which was anno 1480.
                  7 The old copie raſeth Verdun and hath Semur, which the Annales of Fraunce call Sennier: ſaying, that both this and Verdun alſo rebelled.
                  
               
            
            
               How Monſeur d'Argenton during theſe wars of the conqueſt of Burgundie, was ſent to Florence, and how he receiued homage of the Duke of Milan in the Kings name for the Duchie of Genua. Chap. 5.
               
                  MY voiage into Italy was about a quarrell that aroſe between two great houſes, very famous in thoſe daies, the one the houſe of Medicis, the other the houſe of Pacis; the which Pacis by the ſupportation of the Pope and Ferrande King of Naples, thought to haue ſlaine Laurence of Medicis & al his adherents: notwithſtanding of him they failed; but his brother Iulian they ſlew in the great church of Florence, and with him one called Francis Noly, a ſeruant of this houſe of Medicis, who ſtepped foorth before the ſaid Iulian to ſaue him. Laurence de Medicis being ſore hurt retired into the veſtrie of the church, the doores whereof are of copper, & were made by his fathers commandement. A ſeruant whom he deliuered out of priſon but two daies before, did him good ſeruice that day, and receiued many wounds for him. This murther was committed while hie maſſe was ſung: for the time agreed vpon for the execution was when the Prieſt that ſung maſſe began Sanctus. But the

ſucceſſe of the enterpriſe anſwered not their expectation. For ſuppoſing all to haue been fully accompliſhed: certaine of them went vp to the pallace, minding there to haue ſlaine all the Lords of the towne being to the number of nine, which haue the whole gouernment of the citie, and change at euery three moneths end. But they that attempted this enterpriſe were euill followed by their companions, by meanes whereof when they came to the top of the palace ſtaires, one ſhut a doore after them: whereupon they ſeeing themſelues not paſt fower or fiue were aſtoniſhed and wiſt not what to ſay, which the Lordes of the towne that were aboue and their ſeruants perceiuing, looked out at the windowes, and ſaw all the towne in an vprore and hard Maſter Iames of Pacis with his companions cry in the midſt of the market place before the pallace, Liberta Liberta, and Popolo Popolo: which were words wherby they thought to allure the people to take part with them, which notwithſtanding the people did not, but held themſelues quiet. Whereupon Maſter Iames de Pacis and his companions ſeeing the euill ſucceſſe of their enterpriſe, fled out of the place as men aſtoniſhed. Which when the Lords and gouernors of the towne being within the pallace perceiued: they tooke immediately thoſe fiue or ſixe that were come vp euill accompanied, and euill followed, with intent to haue ſlaine them and taken the gouernment into their hands; and commanded them preſently to be hanged at the bars of the pallace windowes, the archbiſhop of Piſe 
                     1
                   being one of them. Further, the ſaid gouernors perceiuing al the city to take part with them & the houſe of Medicis: gaue commandement foorthwith, that all found men flying ſhould be ſtaied at the paſſages and brought backe to the towne; at the which inſtant Maſter Iames of Pacis was taken, and with him one ſent thither by Pope Sixtus, being a captaine of certaine bands vnder the Earle Hieronimo, which Earle was alſo of the conſpiracie. The ſaid Pacis with his companions was in like maner immediately hanged at the bars of the pallace windowes: the Popes ſeruant was beheaded; and beſides theſe diuers were taken in the towne, who were al hanged in this heate, of the which Francis de Pacis was one. There were as I geſſe hanged in all fowerteene great perſonages, beſides certaine ſeruants ſlaine in the towne. A few daies after this vprore, I arriued at Florence from the King, hauing vſed great diligence after my departure out of Burgundy, for I ſtaied no where but two or three daies with the Ducheſſe of Sauoye the Kings ſiſter, who entertained me very honorably. From thence I went to Milan, where I ſoiorned alſo two or three daies, and demanded aide of them to ſuccor the Florentines, with whom at that time they were in league, which my requeſt they willingly graunted, both bicauſe of the Kings demand, & alſo for their leagues ſake: wherefore they ſent foorth at that preſent three hundred men of armes, and ſoone after other bands. But to proceede, the Pope excommunicated the Florentines immediately after this fact committed, and cauſed foorthwith his owne forces and the King of Naples forces to marche. Their army was ſtrong and great, and they had in pay a number of good ſoldiers. They beſieged firſt a little forte neere to Senes called the Chaſtellennie, which they tooke with diuers other places ſo that the Florentines were in great diſtreſſe: for bicauſe they had liued long in peace, they were vnacquainted with the warres, neither vnderſtoode the danger they were in. Laurence de Medicis their chiefe gouernor in the towne was but yoong, and ruled altogither by yoong men, yet the whole citie reſted vpon his opinion. Moreouer, they had but few Captaines, and their force was very ſmall: but the generall of the Popes and King Ferrand of Naples army was the Duke of Vrbin, a valiant and wiſe Prince, and a good captaine. In their campe were alſo the Lord Robert of Arimini, who ſince hath been a man of great eſtimation, the Lord

                  Conſtantine of Peſaro, and diuers others that accompanied the King of Naples two ſonnes, the Duke of Calabria, and the Lord Dom Frederic, (who are al yet aliue;) beſides a great number of other valiant ſoldiers. Thus they tooke all the places that they beſieged; but not ſo ſpeedily as we would haue done in Fraunce, bicauſe they vnderſtood not what appertained neither to the ſiege nor defence of a towne ſo well as we: but ſure as touching the leading of an army, & giuing order both for victuals & al other things neceſſary for a campe, they paſſe vs far. The fauor the King ſhewed the Florentines ſtood them in ſome ſtead, though not ſo much as I wiſhed; but I had no forces there to aide them with, ſaue onely my traine. I ſtaied at Florence and in their dominions about a yeere, altogither vpon their charge: they vſed me very honorably, and till the laſt day my entertainment rather amended then impaired. Then the King called me home, and as I paſſed through Milan, I receiued homage for the Duchy of Genua of the Duke of Milan, called Iohn Galeas, at the leaſt of the Ducheſſe his mother, who did homage to me as the Kings deputie in hir ſonnes name. From thence I returned to the King our Maſter, who receiued me gratiouſly and acquainted me with his affaires more than euer before, and appointed me alſo to be his bedfellow, notwithſtanding that I were vnwoorthy of that honor, and that diuers others were fitter for that place than my ſelfe: but he was ſo wiſe that no man could faile to pleaſe him if he executed his commandements, without adding ought thereto of his owne braine.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Archbiſhops name was Francis Saluiat, and this vprore was the 27. of Aprill anno 1478.
               
            
            
               Of Monſeur d'Argentons returne out of Italie into Fraunce, and of the battell of Guinegate. Chap. 6.
               
                  AT my returne the King our Maſter looked ſomwhat aged, and his body was diſpoſed to ſicknes, but his diſeaſe brake not foorth as yet. His affaires he gouerned with great wiſedome, and the war endured ſtill in Picardie, wherewith he was not a little diſcontented, as were his enimies alſo in the ſaid countrie: but they could not remedie it. The Duke of Auſtriche now King of Romans hauing the Flemmings this yeere at his deuotion, laid the ſiege before Therouenne: but Monſeur de Cordes the Kings lieutenant in Picardie, leuied all the forces the King had in that countrie, and the frontiers thereabout, to the number of eight thouſand franke archers, and went to ſuccour the place. Whom when the Duke of Auſtriche perceiued to approch, he leuied his ſiege, and marched againſt him: the two armies met at a place called Guinegate. The Duke had of Flemmings to the number of twenty thouſand or better, and certaine Almaines togither with three hundred Engliſh men, led by an Engliſh Knight that had ſerued Charles Duke of Burgundie, called ſir Thomas Abrigan. The Kings horſemen being much ſtronger than their enimies, brake the Dukes horſemen, and purſued them and Maſter Philip of Rauaſtain their captaine as far as Ayre, whereupon the Duke ioined himſelfe with his footemen. The King had in this armie at the leaſt 1100. men of armes of his ordinarie retinue 
                     1
                  : all the which followed not the chaſe; but Monſeur

                  de Cordes who was generall did, and Monſeur de Torcy with him, which was a valiant deede, but againſt the law of armes; for the captaines of the vaward and rereward ought not to follow the chaſe. Some of the Dukes horſemen retired, vnder colour of defending the ſtrong places; but others fled in good earneſt. The Dukes footmen fled not, yet were they vpon the point ſo to do; but they had with them on foote two hundred valiant gentlemen their leaders, among whom were the Lord of Romont of the houſe of Sauoye, the Earle of Naſſaw, and diuers others yet liuing. The courage of theſe gentlemen ſtaied the footemen, which was a woonder, conſidering they ſaw their horſemen broken. The Kings franke archers fell to ſpoile the Dukes carriage, and the ſtraglers that followed it, as victuallers, and ſuch like: but certaine of the Dukes footmen ſet vpon them, diſcomfited them, and ſlue ſome of them. The Dukes loſſe was greater than ours; for more of his men were taken, and more ſlaine 
                     2
                  : but the honor of the field was his. And I thinke verily if he had returned to Therouenne, he had not found a man neither in it, nor in Arras; and it was greatly to his loſſe, that he durſt not attempt ſo to do. But in ſuch caſes men are not alwaies informed of the beſt: and to ſay the truth, great cauſe he had to feare that enterpriſe. I ſpeake of this battell but by hearſay; for I was not preſent at it: notwithſtanding to continue the order of my hiſtorie, ſomwhat I was forced to write thereof. I was with the King when theſe newes were brought him, which vndoubtedly nipped him at the verie hart; for he was not accuſtomed to loſe, but had ſuch ſucceſſe in all his attempts, that fortune ſeemed to be at his commandement, which vndoubtedly his wiſedome greatly furthered. For he would hazard nothing, neither feared any thing more than a battel; and as touching this now mentioned, it was fought without his knowledge. His armies he made ſo ſtrong, that few Princes were able to encounter them; he was better furniſhed of artillerie, than any King that euer raigned in Fraunce: he attempted alwaies to take places vpon a ſudden, eſpecially ſuch as he perceiued to be euill fortified; which after he had once gotten, he furniſhed ſo well both of men and artillerie, that it was impoſſible for his enimies to recouer them. Further, if the captain of any ſtrong place, or any other within it, would practiſe to yeeld it for monie, he was ſure of a copes mate, neither would he ſhrinke were the ſumme neuer ſo great that was demanded, but liberally giue it. He was afeard at the firſt when newes was brought him of this battell, ſuppoſing the truth had not been told him, but that his whole force had beene ouerthrowen, knowing, if it were ſo, all to be loſt that he had conquered ouer this houſe of Burgundie in thoſe parts, and the reſt in great danger: but when he vnderſtood the truth, he tooke the matter patiently, and was well ynough contented with Monſeur de Cordes. Notwithſtanding he purpoſed to giue order, that no more ſuch enterpriſes ſhould be attempted without his knowledge. From this day forward he reſolued to treate of peace with the Duke of Auſtriche, ſo that it might be wholy to his owne aduantage, and that he might thereby ſo bridle the ſaid Duke, by meanes of his owne proper ſubiects (whom he knew to be inclined to practiſe againſt their Prince) that he ſhould neuer be able to do him harme. Moreouer, he was very deſirous to redreſſe all diſorders in his realme, eſpecially the long delaies of proceſſes and ſutes in law: which thing the better to compas, he minded to bridle the Court of parlament, not by diminiſhing their number or authoritie, but many things were done there againſt his minde, for the which he hated it. He was alſo deſirous to reduce his whole realme to one cuſtome, and one kinde of waight and meaſure: and further, that all the lawes and cuſtoms ſhould be written in the French toong, in a faire booke to auoid the pillings and pollings of the Counſellors in law, which are more exceſſiue in this realme than in any other, as the nobilitie

hath good cauſe to knowe. And vndoubtedly if God had ſpared him life and health fiue or ſixe yeeres longer, he would haue done much good in the realme, as great cauſe he had to do; for he had more oppreſſed it than euer had any of his predeceſſors: but neither authoritie nor perſwaſions could haue woon him to vnburden his people till it had come of himſelfe, as in his latter daies ſure it would if God had preſerued him from ſicknes. Wherefore it is requiſite to do good while a man hath leiſure, health, and vnderſtanding. The treatie the King deſired to make with the Duke and Ducheſſe of Auſtrich, and their dominions, was this: he meant by meanes of the citizens of Gaunt to treate of a marriage betweene the Daulphin his ſonne now our King, and the daughter of the ſaid Duke and Ducheſſe, vnder theſe conditions, that if the marriage were accompliſhed, they ſhould permit him quietly to enioy the counties of Burgundie, Auxerrois, Maſconnois, and Charolois; and he for his part would reſtore vnto them Artois, reſeruing onely to himſelfe the citie of Arras, in ſuch ſort as he had fortified it: for the towne was now nothing woorth, conſidering the fortification of the citie. For before the King tooke Arras, the towne was fortified with ditch and rampire againſt the citie; but now the citie was fortified againſt the towne, and held for the King by the Biſhop: wherein the King did contrarie to the Princes of this houſe of Burgundie. For they alwaies at the leaſt by the ſpace of theſe hundred yeeres, made Biſhop whom they liſted, and placed a captaine in the towne beſides: but the King to increaſe his authoritie did cleane contrarie, and cauſed alſo the towne wals to be beaten downe, and the citie to be fortified: ſo that now the citie ſhutteth vpon the towne, a great ditch being betweene both. Wherefore the King indeed offered nothing; for whoſo hath the citie, hath the towne at commandement. Of the Duchie of Burgundie, the countie of Bolloin, the townes ſituate vpon the riuer of Somme, the territories of Peronne, Roye, & Montdidier no mention was made. After theſe ouuertures were once ſet on foot, they of Gaunt furthered them to the vttermoſt of their power, and vſed very rudely the Duke and Ducheſſe his wife, as did alſo diuers other great townes of Flaunders and Brabant, which were fully bent to follow the proceedings of them of Gaunt, eſpecially Brucelles, which was growen ſo wealthie, bicauſe of the continuall reſidence that Duke Philip and Duke Charles of Burgundie had made there: (as did alſo at this preſent the Duke and Ducheſſe of Auſtriche) that the wealth 
                     •
                  nd quietnes wherein they had liued vnder theſe two Dukes aboue named, made them forget God and their dutie to their Prince: ſo that they procured themſelues that misfortune, which afterward, as you haue ſeene, fell vpon them.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The old copie ſaith but 500. men of armes.
                  
                  2 There were ſlaine at the battell of Guinegate 11000. Burgundians, and 5000. French men. Gaguin.
               
            
            
               
               How King Lewis being viſited with ſicknes, loſt his wits, and lay ſpeechleſſe, ſomtime recouering, and eftſoones falling into his diſeaſe againe: and how he behaued himſelfe in his caſtell of Pleſſis les Tours. Chap. 7.
               
                  ABout this time in the yeere 1479. in the moneth of March truce was made betweene theſe two Princes. The King was verie deſirous of peace eſpecially in thoſe parts, ſo that it might be altogither for his aduentage. For he began now to waxe old and ſickely; ſo far foorth that once being at dinner at Forges neere to Chinon, he was ſuddenly taken in all parts of his bodie and loſt his ſpeech: he was taken vp from the table and held to the fire, and the windowes ſhut; to the which notwithſtanding that he deſired to go, yet ſome of his freiends held him and would not ſuffer him ſo to do, meaning all for the beſt. This diſeaſe tooke him in the yeere of our Lord 1480. in the moneth of March: he laie altogither ſpeechleſſe, he knew no man, and his memorie was wholly taken away. At the which inſtant you (my Lord of Vienna) came thither, and ſerued him at that time in ſteed of a Phiſition: for you gaue him a gliſter, and cauſed the windowes to be opened, and the aire to be let in; whereupon immediately he recouered his ſpeech and his memorie after a ſort, and tooke horſe and returned to Forges: for this diſeaſe tooke him in a village a quarter of a league thence whither he went to heare maſſe. He was diligently tended & made ſignes what he would haue done: among other things he deſired that the officiall of Tours might be called to ſhriue him, and made ſignes alſo that I ſhould be ſent for, for I was gone to Argenton being ten leagues thence: when I came, I found him at the table with Maſter Adam Fumee, (who ſometime had beene King Charles the ſeauenths Phiſition, and was at that preſent Maſter of the requeſts,) and another Phiſition called Maſter Claude: he vnderſtood little what any man ſaide, notwithſtanding griefe he felt none, he ſpake plainely almoſt neuer a word, but made ſignes that I ſhould be in his chamber. I waited vpon him the ſpace of 15. daies 
                     1
                   at his table, & about his perſon as one of the groomes of his chamber, which I accounted great honor to me, and thought my ſelf in dutie bound ſo to do. After two daies he recouered his ſpeech & his memorie after a ſort: and bicauſe he thought that no man vnderſtood him ſo well as my ſelfe, his pleaſure was that I ſhould alwaies be by him, and he confeſſed himſelfe to the officiall in my preſence, otherwiſe they would neuer haue vnderſtood one an other. He had not much to ſay, for he was ſhriuen not long before, bicauſe the Kings of Fraunce vſe alwaies to confeſſe themſelues when they touch thoſe that be ſicke of the Kings euill, which he neuer failed to do once a weeke. If other Princes do not the like, they are to blame, for continually a great number are troubled with that diſeaſe. After he was ſomewhat recouered, he began to enquire who they were that held him by force from going to the windowes, whoſe names when he heard, foorthwith he baniſhed them the Court; ſo that they neuer came afterward to his preſence, & ſome of them alſo he put out of office. From others, namely the Lord of Segre and Gilbert de Graſſe Lord of Champeroux he tooke nothing, but commanded them to depart. Many woondered at this toie, blaming him for ſo vſing

them, conſidering that all that they did was for the beſt, and they ſaid truth: but Princes imaginations are ſtrange, and a number are bold to prattle of them that vnderſtand them not. The King feared nothing ſo much as the diminiſhing of his authoritie being maruellous great, for the which cauſe he would not be diſobeied in any point. Further, he remembred that when King Charles his father fell into the diſeaſe whereof he died, he entred into ſuſpition that his ſeruants ſought to poiſon him at his ſonnes requeſt 
                     2
                  : which phanſie ſanke ſo deepely into his head that he refuſed his meate. Wherefore it was concluded by the aduiſe of his Phiſitions, and of his chiefeſt and truſtieſt ſeruants, that he ſhould be forced to eate: the which was executed verie orderly and aduiſedly by thoſe that ſerued him, for cooliz was powred into his mouth, but ſoone after this force he died. The King our Maſter who had euer miſliked this ordering of his father, ſtomacked maruellouſly that he had been held thus perforce; but yet made ſhew of much greater diſpleaſure than indeed he had conceiued therof. The chiefe cauſe that mooued him ſo to do was feare, leaſt they ſhould Maſter him in all other things, eſpecially in the expedition of his waightie affaires, vnder colour of the imperfection of his wits.
               After he had dealt thus roughly with theſe aboue named, he inquired what his Councell had done during the time of his ſicknes, and what diſpatches they had made, whereof the Biſhop of Alby, his brother the gouernor of Burgundy, the Marſhall of Gié, and the Lord of Lude had the whole charge: for theſe were preſent when his ſicknes tooke him, and lodged all in two little chambers vnderneath him. Further, he would needs ſee the letters and packets that had been brought and came howerly. The principall whereof were ſhewed him, and I read them before him: he made a countenance as though he vnderſtood them, and tooke them into his hands, faining that he read them, notwithſtanding that indeed he vnderſtood neuer a word. Somtime alſo he ſpake a word or two, or made ſignes what ſhould be the anſwer to theſe letters; but little or no thing was diſpatched, for we expected an end of his diſeaſe, bicauſe he was a Maſter with whom it ſtood vs vpon to deale circumſpectly. This ſicknes held him about fifteene daies, and then his wits and ſpeech he recouered perfectly, but his body was maruellous weake; for the which cauſe we feared greatly a relapſe, the rather bicauſe naturally he was inclined to giue but ſmal credit to Phiſitions. Immediately after he was well recouered, he reſtored Cardinall Ballue (whom he had held in priſon fowerteene yeeres) to liberty. Whereunto notwithſtanding that he had been required oftentimes before, both by the Sea Apoſtolike and others, and all in vaine: yet now he purchaſed the abſolution of that fault himſelfe, by a bull ſent from our holy father the Pope by his owne procurement. When his diſeaſe firſt tooke him, they that at that preſent were about him held him for dead, and ſent foorth diuers commandements for the reuoking of an exceſſiue and cruell ſubſidie lately laid vpon his ſubiects, by the aduiſe of the Lord of Cordes his lieutenant in Picardy, wherewith were waged ten thouſand footemen, to be alwaies in a readines, & 2500. pioners, the which were called the Soldiers of the campe. Moreouer, he appointed fifteene hundred of his ordinary men of armes to accompany them, and to fight on foote when need ſo required. He cauſed alſo a great number of cartes to be made to incloſe them, and tents and pauilions, imitating therein the D. of Burgundies campe. The charge of this army amounted yeerly to 1500000. franks 
                     3
                  . When theſe ſoldiers were in a readines, and furniſhed of all things neceſſarie, he went to ſee them muſter in a valley neere to Pont de l'Arche in Normandy, where the band of the ſixe thouſand Swiſſers aboue mentioned muſtered alſo, the which neuer ſawe the King but at this time onely. After all was ended, the King remooued

to Tours, where he fell againe into his former diſeaſe, and loſt his ſpeech as before, and was by the ſpace of two houres in ſuch caſe that all men held him for dead. He lay in a gallery vpon a mattreſſe of ſtraw, diuers ſtanding about him. Monſeur de Bouchage and I vowed him to Saint Claude, and all the reſt that were preſent vowed him alſo. Immediately whereupon he recouered his ſpeech, and ſoone after aroſe and walked vp and downe the houſe, but his body was maruellous feeble. The ſecond fit of ſicknes tooke him in the yeere 1481. notwithſtanding he rode vp and downe the countrie as before, and went to Argenton to my houſe, where he lay a moneth maruellous ſicke. From thence he went to Tours, where (notwithſtanding that he ſtill remained ſicke) he tooke vpon him his voiage to Saint Claude, to whom as you haue heard he was vowed, and at his departure thence commanded me to go into Sauoye againſt the Lords of Chambre, Miolant, and Breſſe, bicauſe they had taken priſoner the Lord of Lins in Daulphine, whom he had appointed gouernor of Duke Philibert his nephew. Yet notwithſtanding couertly he aided theſe Lords againſt whom I went. He ſent alſo a great band of ſoldiers after me, whom I led to Maſcon againſt the Lord of Breſſe, but he and I agreed well ynough ſecretly. Further, the Lord of Chambre made a compoſition with the Duke of Sauoye at Thurin in Piedmont where he lay, whereof he aduertiſed me; and immediately thereupon I cauſed my forces to retire. He led the ſaid Duke to Grenoble, whither the Marſhall of Burgundie, the Marqueſſe of Rothelin, and my ſelfe went to receiue him. The King commanded me to returne home, and to meete him at Beauieu in Beauiolois, where when I arriued, I woondered to ſee him ſo leane and bare, much more to ride vp and downe the countrie, but his noble hart carried him. At Beauieu he receiued letters, that the Ducheſſe of Auſtriche was dead of a fall from hir horſe; for ſhe rid a fierce hobby that threw hir vpon a blocke, notwithſtanding ſome ſay ſhe died not of the fall, but of an ague: but howſoeuer it were, ſhe died ſoone after the fall, to the great dammage of hir ſubiects & friends, who ſince hir death neuer had quietnes nor good ſucceſſe. For this people of Gaunt and the other towns bare much more reuerence to hir than to hir husband, bicauſe ſhe was Lady of the country. She died in the yeer 1482. The K. told me theſe newes in great ioy, adding, that the two childrē remained in the citizens of Gaunts cuſtodie, whom he knew to be inclined to ſedition & rebellion againſt this houſe of Burgundie. Further, he thought the time now come when he might do ſome great exploit, ſeeing the D. of Auſtriche was but yoong, his father yet liuing, his countries troubled on euerie ſide with wars, and himſelfe a ſtranger and weakly accompanied. For the Emperor his father was too extremely couetous, for the which cauſe his ſonne found the leſſe fauour. The King immediately after the Ducheſſe death, began to practiſe with the gouernors of Gaunt, by meanes of Monſeur de Cordes, and to treate of a marriage betweene the Daulphin his ſonne, and the ſaid Dukes daughter called Margaret, at this preſent our Queene. The ſaid de Cordes addreſſed himſelfe wholy to two men, the one a penſioner of the towne called VVilliam Riue, a ſubtill craftie fellow; the other the clarke of their Senate named Coupe Nole, who was a hoſier, but in great credit with the people: for ſuch men of occupation, when they are moſt vnruly, are there beſt eſteemed. The King returned to Tours, and kept himſelfe very cloſe, ſo that few ſaw him: for he waxed iealous of all men, ſearing that they would take the gouernment from him, or diminiſh his authoritie; for the which cauſe he remooued all thoſe from him, that he had moſt fauoured, and had been neereſt about him, not diminiſhing their eſtates in any reſpect: but he ſent them away ſome to their offices and charges, and ſome to their houſes, but this endured not long, for ſoone after he died. He did diuers ſtrange things which cauſed

as many as ſaw them to thinke him out of his wits; but they were not throughly acquainted with his conditions. As touching ſuſpicious, all great Princes are ſuſpicious, eſpecially thoſe that be wiſe, and haue had many enimies, and haue offended many as the King our Maſter had. Further, he knew himſelfe not to be beloued of the nobilitie of his realme, nor of a great number of the commonalty. Beſides this, he had more charged his people than euer had any of his predeceſſors: notwithſtanding he was deſirous now in his latter daies (as before I ſaid) to haue eaſed them, but he ſhould haue begun ſooner. King Charles the ſeuenth by the perſwaſion of diuers wiſe and valiant Knights that had ſerued him in the conqueſt of Normandie and Guyenne (which the Engliſhmen held,) was the firſt that began to leuy ſubſidies at his pleaſure, without the conſent of the States of his realme; and to ſay the truth, cauſe there was then ſo to do: for the charges were maruellous great, as well for the manning of the countries newly conquered, as alſo for the defeating of the companies of robbers, which went about ſpoiling the realme. For the which cauſe the nobility of Fraunce conſented to the King, and had certaine penſions promiſed them in conſideration of the ſummes of money that ſhould be leuied vpon their lands. If this King had alwaies liued and thoſe of his councel that were about him, he would ſure greatly haue enlarged his realme. But conſidering what hapned after his death, & is like further to happen, he charged maruellouſly his ſoule, and the ſoules of his ſucceſſors by this fact: for he gaue his realme a cruell wound, which will bleed this many a yeere, by entertaining in continuall pay a terrible band of men of armes, after the maner of the Italian Princes. The ſaid King Charles leuied in his realme at the hower of his death but 1800000. franks all maner of waies, and had in ordinary about ſeuenteene hundred men of armes, the which he kept in good order, and ſo placed in diuers prouinces for the defence of his realme, that many yeeres before his death they rid not ſpoiling vp and downe the countrey, to the great quietnes & comfort of his people. But the King our Maſter leuied at his death 4700000. franks, he had in pay fower or fiue thouſand men of armes, and of footemen for the campe and in garriſon, aboue fiue and twenty thouſand: wherefore it is not to be maruelled if he had many phanſies and imaginations in his head, and thought himſelfe not welbeloued. But ſure as theſe matters cauſed him greatly to feare ſome; ſo had he a ſure confidence in many of thoſe whom he had brought vp and highly aduanced, of the which I thinke there were a number, whom death it ſelfe could neuer haue withdrawen from dooing their duty. There came into Pleſſis du Parc, (which was the place where he lay) very few beſides his houſehold ſeruants, and the archers of his guarde being fower hundred, of whom a great number all the day long kept watch and warde at the gate, walking vp and downe the place. No noble man or great perſonage lodged within the caſtell, neither might be ſuffered to enter in, ſaue onely the Lord of Beauieu Duke of Bourbon his ſonne in law. The ſaid ſtell of Pleſſis he had made to be enuironed with a grate of great iron bars, & at the entrie into the ditches thereof had cauſed ſharpe ſpeares of iron, euery one of them hauing many heads, to be maſoned into the wall. He cauſed alſo fower ſtrong watch houſes of iron to be built, and a place to be made in them where men might ſtande and ſhoote at eaſe, which was a ſumptuous thing to behold, and coſt aboue 20000. franks. In the end he put into theſe houſes fortie croſſebowe men, which were day and night in the ditches, & had commiſſion to ſhoote at euery man that approched neere the caſtell after the ſhutting of the gates, til they opened in the morning. Further, he had an imagination that his ſubiects would be very ready to take the gouernment into their owne hands when they ſhould ſee conuenient time. And ſure

ſome there were that conſulted to enter into Pleſſis and diſpatch the affaires at their pleaſure, bicauſe nothing was diſpatched; but they durſt not attempt it, wherein they did wiſely, for the K. had giuen good order for that matter. He changed often both the groomes of his chamber and al his other ſeruants, ſaying, that nature delighteth in varietie; and he had with him to beare him company one or two very meane men and of euill report, who might well haue thought if they had been wiſe, that immediately after his death they ſhould at the leaſt be put out of office and ſpoiled of all they had, as alſo it hapned. Theſe informed him of no meſſage that was ſent him, not of any matter that was written to him, were it neuer ſo important, vnleſſe it touched the preſeruation of the State, or the defence of his realme: for that was his onely care to be in truce and peace with all men. He gaue to his Phiſition ordinarily euery moneth ten thouſand crownes, and in fiue moneths he receiued of him 54000. He gaue alſo goodly lands to churches; but this gift was made voide, and not without cauſe, for the clergie men had too much.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 It was fortie daies: but bicauſe the old copie hath 15. daies, and that himſelfe alſo afterward in this very chapter ſaith thus; This ſicknes held him about fifteene daies, I haue been bold to amend it.
                  
                  2 King Lewis was ſuſpected to haue poiſoned his father by Adam Fumée his fathers phyſition, who was impriſoned by King Charles, but ſoone after aduaunced to honor by King Lewis, who ſo maruellouſly reioiced at the first newes of his fathers death (being the ſelfe ſame day that his father died, which was ſtrange, King Lewis being then at Genappe in Brabant) that in the ſelfe ſame place he built a chappell to our Lady.
                  
                  3 It was 15000. but the olde copie had 1500000. and ſo vndoubtedly it is to be read: for for 15000. franks will hardly maintaine 100. ſoldiers a yeere.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King cauſed the holy man of Calabria to come to Tours, thinking that he could heale him: and what ſtrange things the ſaid King did to maintaine his authoritie during his ſicknes. Chap. 8.
               
                  AMong men famous for deuotion, he ſent into Calabria for one Frier Robert, whom he called the holy man, bicauſe of his holy life, and in whoſe honor the King that now is, cauſed a Church to be built at Pleſſis du Parc, in place of the chappell neere to Pleſſis at the bridge foote. This heremite being twelue yeeres of age entred into a rocke, where he remained till he was fortie three yeeres old, or there about, to wit, euen till this preſent that the King ſent for him by one of the ſtewards of his houſe, whom the Prince of Tarente the King of Naples ſonne accompanied thither. For the ſaid heremite would not depart thence, without permiſſion both of the Pope and of his Prince; which was great wiſedome in ſo ſimple a man. He builded in the place where he liued two Churches, and neuer ate ſince the time he entred into this ſtrait kinde of life, either fiſh, fleſh, egs, any kinde of whitmeate, or of fat. I neuer ſaw in my time a man of ſo holy life, nor by whoſe mouth the holy Ghoſt ſeemed rather to ſpeake; for he neuer had been ſcholler, but was vtterly vnlearned: true it is that his Italian toong cauſed

ſomwhat the greater admiration of him. This heremite paſſed through Naples, being honored and receiued, as if he had been a great Legate ſent from the Sea Apoſtolike; both by the King and by his children, with whom he communed of the affaires of the Court, as if he had beene a Courtier all the daies of his life. From thence he went to Rome, where he was viſited by al the Cardinals, and had audience giuen him thriſe of the Pope, communing with him alone, and ſitting each time hard by him in a goodly chaire three or fower howers togither; which was great honor to ſo ſimple a perſon. His anſwers were ſo wiſe, that all men woondered at them; ſo far foorth that our holy Father gaue him leaue to erect a new order, called the heremites of Saint Francis. From thence he came to the King, who honored him as if he had been the Pope himſelfe, falling downe before him, and deſiring him to prolong his life: whereunto he anſwered as a wiſe man ſhould. I haue often heard him talke with the King that now is, in preſence of all the nobilitie of the realme, and that within theſe two moneths, and ſure he ſeemed by his words, to be inſpired with the holy Ghoſt, otherwiſe he could neuer haue communed of ſuch matters as he did. He is yet liuing, and may change either to better or woorſe: wherefore I will ſpeake no further of him. Some mocked at this heremites comming, whom they called the holy man; but they knew not the deepe cogitations of this wiſe King, neither had ſeene the occaſions that mooued him to ſend for him.
               The King lay in his caſtle of Pleſſis accompanied with few beſides the archers of his gard, and troubled with theſe ſuſpitions aboue rehearſed. Notwithſtanding he had giuen good order for this inconuenience, for he left none of thoſe whom he ſuſpected either in towne or countrey, but made his archers to cauſe them to depart and to conueigh them away. No man debated any matter with him, vnleſſe it were of ſome great importance that concerned himſelfe: he ſeemed rather a dead corps then a liuing creature, for he was leaner then a man would beleeue: he appare lled himſelfe ſumptuouſly, yea more ſumptuouſly then in all his life before; for he ware no gowne but of crimſin ſattin furred with good marterns: he gaue gifts to whom it pleaſed him without any ſute; for no man durſt mooue any ſute to him, nor debate any matter with him: he puniſhed faults ſharpely to the end he might be feared, and not loſe his authoritie as himſelfe tould me: he changed officers, caſſed companies of men of armes, diminiſhed penſions, or tooke them cleane away, and told me but a few daies before his death that he paſſed away the time in making & vndoing of men. To be ſhort, he cauſed himſelfe to be more ſpoken of within his realme then euer was any King, and all for feare leſt men ſhould thinke him dead. For as I ſaid, few ſaw him but when they hard of his doings; all men ſtood in feare of him, ſo far foorth that they hardly beleeued him to be ſicke. Out of the realme he had men in all places, as for example in England he had ſome to feede K. Edward ſtill with hope of his daughters marriage, & he paied truely both him and his ſeruants all that was due vnto them. Out of Spaine he receiued goodly words and faire promiſes of perfect freindſhip and amitie, and great preſents from all places: he made a good horſe or a good mule to be bought for him whatſoeuer it coſt; but this he did not in this realme, but in ſome ſtrange countrey to perſwade men that he was in health. Dogs he ſent for round about, into Spaine for a kinde of Spaniſh greyhound, called in French Allans; into Britaine for little beagles, greyhounds and ſpaniels, which he paied deere for; into Valence for little rugged dogs, which he made to be bought aboue the owners own price; into Sicily he ſēt for good mules, eſpecially to ſome officer of the countrey, for the which he paied double the value; to Naples for horſes, & for diuers ſtrange beaſts into diuers countries, as into

Barbarie for a kind of little lions, no greater then litle foxes, which he called Adites; into Denmarke and Sweden for two kinde of ſtrange beaſts, one of the which were called Helles 
                     1
                  , being of ſhape like a Hart, and of the greatnes of a buffe, with horns ſhort and thicke; the other Rengiers 
                     2
                  , being of the bignes and colour of a bucke, ſaue that their hornes be much greater: for each of the which two beaſts he gaue to the merchants that ſolde them 4500. guildons. But when all theſe ſtrange things were brought him he made no account of them, no, very ſeldome ſpake with thoſe that brought them. To be ſhort, he did ſo many ſuch like ſtrange things that he was more feared now both of his neighbors and ſubiects than euer before, which was his onely deſire, for to that end did he all this.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Geſnerus de Quadrupedibus lib. 1. fol. 1. and Munſter in the third booke of his Coſmographie in his treatiſe of Pruſſia (where this beast is found) name this beaſt in Greeke 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in Latine Alces, in Dutch Elch, Ellend, Hellend, and Ellent: which is not far from the name heere giuen. The Moſcouites name it Lozzos.
                  2 This beaſt, ſaith Munſter Coſmog. lib. 4. is found in Lapponia or Lappenland, a countrie in Sweden. The Lapponians call it Reen, as he writeth in the ſame place, and Geſner alſo de Quadrup. lib. 1. fol. 950. The Romans, ſaith Geſner, name it Rangiferus, the Germans Rein (and Reinen, ſaith Munſter) Reiner, Rainger, Renſchieron: the French men Rangier (as he is heere named) or Ranglier.
               
            
            
               How the marriage betweene the Daulphin and the Lady Margaret of Flaunders was concluded, and how ſhe was brought into Fraunce: whereupon Edward King of England died for ſorrow. Chap. 9.
               
                  BVt to returne to the principall matter, namely, the perfect concluſion of this our hiſtorie of King Lewis, and of the affaires of all thoſe great Princes that liued in his time: we muſt ſhew how the treatie of marriage was concluded betweene the King that now is, then Daulphin, and the daughter of the Duke and Ducheſſe of Auſtriche, by meanes of the citizens of Gaunt, to the King of Englands great greefe, who then well perceiued the hope to be fruſtrate, which he had conceiued of the marriage betweene his daughter and the ſaid Daulphin now King of Fraunce: which he and the Queene his wife had ſo greatly deſired, that they would neuer credit any man that aduertiſed them to the contrarie, were he Engliſh man or ſtranger. For the Councell of England had debated this matter with him, at the ſame time that the King conquered that part of Picardie that ioineth to Calice, alleaging, that after he had ſubdued that, he might eaſily attempt to take Calice and Guiſnes. The like was alſo told him, by the ambaſſadors reſident in England for the Duke and Ducheſſe of Auſtriche, and by the Britons, and diuers others: but he beleeued no whit of all this, which incredulitie turned much to his loſſe. Notwithſtanding I ſuppoſe, it proceeded rather of couetouſnes than ignorance: for he feared the loſſe of the fiftie thouſand crownes the King paid him: beſides that, he was loth to leaue his eaſe and pleaſures, whereunto he was maruellouſly addicted. About the concluſion of this

marriage, an aſſembly was held at Halots in Flaunders, whereat the Duke of Auſtriche now King of Romans, was preſent, togither with certaine deputies for the three eſtates of Flaunders, Brabant, and the other countries belonging to the ſaide Duke and his children. The citizens of Gaunt did many things there contrarie to the Dukes minde; for ſome they baniſhed, and ſome they remooued from about his ſonne: in the end they told him how great deſire they had to ſee this marriage accompliſhed, therby to obtaine peace, & forced him to conſent therunto. The Duke was very yoong, and accompanied with few noble men: for all the ſubiects of this houſe of Burgundie (very few excepted, I meane of great perſonages, that could haue giuen him counſell or aide in theſe affaires) were, as you haue heard, either dead, or reuolted to the King. As touching himſelfe, he was come thither very ſlenderly accompanied, and now hauing loſt his wife, being Lady of the countrie, he durſt not giue them ſo ſtout language, as before he was accuſtomed. To be ſhort, the King being aduertiſed of all theſe actions by Monſeur de Cordes, reioiced much thereat, and a day was appointed when this Lady ſhould be brought to Hedin.
               Not long before the concluſion of this marriage, to wit, in the yeere 1481. the towne of Ayre was yeelded for a ſumme of monie to Monſeur de Cordes, by the Lord of Croy of the countrie of Artois, who held it for the Duke of Auſtriche, and the Lord of Beures his captaine. The towne is very ſtrong, ſituate in the countrie of Artois, and the deliuerie thereof increaſed the Flemmings deſire to further this marriage, bicauſe it ſtandeth vpon the very entrance into Flaunders. For notwithſtanding that they wiſhed the weakening of their Prince, yet were they not willing to haue the King ſo neere a neighbor to their frontiers. After theſe matters aboue mentioned were fully concluded, ambaſſadors came to the King out of Flaunders and Brabant, but all depended vpon them of Gaunt; both bicauſe of their force, bicauſe the children were in their hands, and for that they were alwaies the ringleaders of all tumults. There came alſo from the King of Romanes for the pacifying of his dominions certaine Knights, yoong men like himſelfe, and of ſmall experience, whoſe names were Maſter Iohn de Bergues and Maſter Baudouin de Launoy, and certaine Secretaries. The King was brought maruellous low with ſicknes, ſo that hardly he ſuffered himſelfe to be ſeene, and made great difficultie to ſweare the treatie, bicauſe he was loth to come abrode in ſight: notwithſtanding in the end he ſware it. It was very auantageous for him; for in all aſſemblies that had beene held heeretofore about this marriage, he neuer required but the countie of Artois or Burgundie, one of the two: but now the Lords of Gaunt (as he termed them) cauſed them both to be yeelded vnto him, togither with the counties of Maſconnois, Charolois, and Auxerrois; yea and if it had lien in them to haue put into his hands, Hainault and Namur, and all the ſeniories of this houſe of Burgundie, being of the French language, they would willingly haue done it, thereby to affeeble their Prince. The King our Maſter being a wiſe Prince vnderſtood well, that no account was to be made of Flaunders, nor the Earle thereof, without he had the countrie of Artois, which lying betweene the King of Fraunce and the Flemmings, is as it were a bridle to them. For in the countrie of Artois are leuied very good ſoldiers, to ſcourge the Flemmings when they play the fooles. Wherefore by taking away from the Earle of Flaunders the countrie of Artois, he left him the pooreſt Prince in the world, and without all obedience of his ſubiects, ſaue onely at the pleaſure of them of Gaunt. After this ambaſſage was returned home, the ſaid Lady was led to Hedin, and deliuered into the hands of Monſeur de Cordes in the yeere 1483. She was conueied thither by the Lady of Rauaſtain, baſtard daughter to Duke Philip of Burgundie, and

was receiued there by the Duke and Ducheſſe of Bourbon that now are, and by the Lord of Albret, and diuers others ſent thither by the King; who led hir to Amboiſe where the Daulphin lay. If the Duke of Auſtriche could haue reſcued hir before ſhe was paſſed out of his dominions from them that conueied hir, he would willingly haue done it: but they of Gaunt had ſent hir well accompanied. And as touching the ſaid Duke, all his ſubiects began to diſobey him, ſo far foorth that a great number tooke part with them of Gaunt, bicauſe they had his ſonne in their hands, and remooued from him, and placed about him ſuch as pleaſed them: and among the reſt that were reſident at Gaunt, was the Lord of Rauaſtain brother to the Duke of Cleues, principall gouernor of the ſaid yoong infant called Duke Philip, who is yet liuing, and like to be a great Prince, if God ſpare him life. Whoſoeuer reioiced at this marriage, the King of England was highly diſpleaſed therewith; for he accounted it great reproch and diſhonor to be thus deluded, and feared both the loſſe of the penſion the King paid him, which the Engliſh men called Tribute; and alſo that the contempt heereof would ſtir his ſubiects to rebellion againſt him, bicauſe he would giue no eare to good aduice. Further, he ſaw the King with great force neere to his dominions: for the which cauſes he conceiued ſuch inward griefe when he heard theſe newes, that ſoone after he ended his life, ſome ſay of a catarrhe. But whatſoeuer his diſeaſe were, the report goeth, that the ſorrow conceiued of this marriage cauſed the diſeaſe, whereof he died ſoone after in the moneth of Aprill, anno 1483. It is a foule fault in a Prince, to truſt more to his owne braine, than to the aduice of a great number: for it cauſeth oftentimes both great ſorrow, and alſo loſſe irrecouerable.
               Immediately after King Edvvards death, the King our Maſter was aduertiſed therof, and ſeemed nothing ioifull of the newes: but ſoone after receiued letters from the D. of Gloceſter, who had vſurped the crowne of England (ſigning his letters by the name of Richard,) & cruelly murthered the King his brothers two children. This King Richard ſought the Kings friendſhip, & was deſirous, as I ſuppoſe, to haue this penſion paid alſo vnto him. But the K. would make no anſwer to his letters, neither giue his meſſenger audience, but eſteemed him a wicked & cruell tyrant. For after K. Edvvards death, the ſaid Duke of Gloceſter had done homage to his nephew as to his ſoueraigne Lord and King, and yet immediately thereupon committed this murther, and cauſed in open parlament the ſaid King Edvvards two daughters to be degraded & proclaimed baſtards, vnder colour of a certaine matter which he prooued by the teſtimonie of a biſhop of Bathe, who ſomtime had been in great credit with King Edvvard, but afterward fell into his diſgrace, and was laid in priſon, and made to fine for his deliuerance. This Biſhop affirmed that King Edvvard being in loue with a certaine gentlewoman in England (whom he named) promiſed hir marriage to haue his pleaſure of hir, which promiſe he ſaid was made in his preſence, and thereupon the King lay with hir, minding onely to abuſe hir. Such paſtimes are very dangerous, eſpecially when ſuch poofe may be brought foorth: But I haue knowne many a courtier that would not haue loſt a good aduenture that liked him in ſuch a caſe for want of promiſe. This wicked Biſhop buried reuenge in his hart the ſpace of twenty yeeres. But God plagued him for his wickednes: for he had a ſonne whom he loued entirely, and whom King Richard ſo much fauored, that he meant to giue him to wife one of theſe two daughters, degraded from their dignitie, at this preſent Queene of England and mother of two goodly children. The ſaid ſonne being in a ſhip of war by King Richard his Maſters commandement, was taken vpon the coaſt of Normandie, and bicauſe of the contention that fell betweene thoſe that tooke

him: led to the court parlament of Paris, and there put in priſon in the petit Chaſtellet, where in the end he ſtarued for hunger and pouertie. As touching King Richard he liued not long vnpuniſhed: for God raiſed vp an enimy againſt him euen at This error you are admoniſhed of before. that very inſtant being poore, hauing no right to the crowne of England, as I ſuppoſe, and of no eſtimation, ſaue that as touching his owne perſon he was well conditioned, and had endured many troubles. For the greateſt part of his life he had been priſoner in Britaine to Duke Francis, who entertained him well for a priſoner from the eighteenth yeere of his age. This Earle of Richmond being furniſhed by the King with a ſmall ſumme of money, and three thouſand men leuied in Normandie, of the vnthriftieſt perſons in the countrey: paſſed ouer into Wales, where his father in lawe the Lord Stanley met him with ſixe and twenty thouſand men at the leaſt. And within three or fower daies after he encountred this cruell King Richard, who was ſlaine in the field, and the Earle crowned King, and raigneth yet at this day in England. Of this matter I haue made mention before, but it was not amiſſe to rehearſe it heere againe, to ſhew thereby how God hath plagued in our time ſuch crueltie almoſt immediately after the fault committed. Diuers other ſuch like puniſhments hath he ſhewed alſo in this our age, if a man would ſtand to rehearſe them all.
            
            
               How the King behaued himſelfe towards his neighbors and ſubiects during the time of his ſicknes, and how diuers things were ſent him from diuers places for the recouerie of his health. Chap. 10.
               
                  THis mariage of Flaunders ſo much deſired by the King was thus accompliſhed, as you haue heard, by meanes wherof he had the Flemmings at his commandement. Britaine which he ſo much hated was in peace with him, but liued in continuall ielouſie bicauſe of the great number of ſoldiers he had in garriſon vpon their frontiers. Spaine was quiet, and the King and Queene thereof deſired nothing more then his amity and friendſhip: for he kept them in feare and continuall charge, bicauſe of the countrey of Rouſſillon which he held from the houſe of Arragon, being engaged to him by Iohn King of Arragon, father to the King of Caſtile now raigning, vnder certaine conditions yet vnperformed. As touching the Princes & Seniories of Italy, they deſired to haue him their friend, and were in league with him, and ſent often their ambaſſadors to him. In Almaine he had the Swiſſers as obedient to him as his owne ſubiects. The King of Scotland and Portugale were his confederates: part of the realme of Nauarre was wholie at his deuotion: his ſubiects trembled before him, and his commandements were executed incontinent without delay or excuſe. As touching thoſe things that were thought neceſſarie for his health, they were ſent him out of all parts of the world. Pope Sixtus that laſt died, being informed that the King of deuotion deſired to haue the corporall vpon the which Saint Peter ſong maſſe, ſent it him incontinent, with diuers other relickes, which were conueied backe againe to Rome. The holie viole which is at Reims and neuer had been remooued thence, was brought into his chamber to Pleſſis, and ſtood vpon his cupboord at the hower of his death: he was determined to be annointed therwith as at his coronation. But many ſuppoſed that he wold haue anointed all his body with it, which is vnlikely, for

the ſaid holy viole is very ſmall, and containeth not much oile. I ſaw it both at the time I now ſpeake of, and alſo when the King was buried at Noſtre-dame-de-Clery. The Turke that now raigneth ſent an ambaſſador to him, who came as far as Rhiue in Prouence 
                     1
                  : but the King would not heare his meſſage, neither permit him to paſſe any further. The ſaid ambaſſador brought him a great role of relickes remaining yet at Conſtantinople in the Turks hands, all the which he offered him togither with a great ſumme of money, if he would keepe in ſafe cuſtodie the ſaid Turks brother, who was then in this realme in the hands of the knights of the Rhodes, and is now at Rome in the Popes keeping. By all this aboue rehearſed a man may perceiue how great the King our Maſters wiſdome and authority was, how he was eſteemed through the whole world, and how all things 
                     2
                   as well ſpirituall of deuotion and religion; as alſo temporall, were imploied for the prolonging of his life. But all would not helpe, there was no remedy, needes he muſt go the way his predeceſſors went before him, one great grace God ſhewed him, that as he created him wiſer, liberaller, and more vertuous in all things than the Princes that raigned in his time, being his enimies and neighbors; and as he ſurmounted them in all good things: ſo did he alſo paſſe them in long life though not much. For Duke Charles of Burgundy, the Ducheſſe his daughter, King Edvvard, Duke Galeas of Milan, King Iohn of Arragon, were all dead a fewe yeeres before him: but betweene the death of the ſaid Duches of Auſtrich, of King Edvvard, and of him, there was no ſpace to ſpeake of. In all theſe Princes there was both good and euill, for they were all men; but to ſpeake vprightly, there were in him many mo vertues & ornaments appertaining to the office of a King, than in any of the reſt. I haue ſeene them in maner all, and knew what was in them, and therefore I ſpeake not at randon.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 It was Reims in the French, but that vndoubtedly was falſe: the old copie hath Rhine or Rhine: others Rins: the Italian Ries.
                  2 King Lewis dranke childrens blood to recouer his health. Gaguin.
               
            
            
               How King Lewis the 11. cauſed Charles the Daulphin his ſonne to come to him a little before his death, and of the commandements and precepts he gaue both him and certaine others. Chap. 11.
               
                  IN this yeere 1483. the King deſired to ſee the Daulphine his ſonne, whom he had not ſeene of long time; for he kept him cloſe and permitted no man to come to him, both bicauſe of the childes health, and alſo for feare leaſt he ſhould be taken from the place where he remained, and vnder colour of him ſome rebellion ariſe in the realme. For ſo had certaine noble men in times paſt by meanes of himſelfe made an aſſembly againſt King Charles the ſeuenth his father, he being then but eleuen yeeres of age 
                     1
                  : which war was called la Praguerie, but it ſoone ended, for it was rather a broile of court than a warre.
               Aboue all things, he recommended vnto his ſaid ſonne the Daulphine certaine of his ſeruants, and commanded him expreſſely not to change certaine officers:

rehearſing to him how after King Charles his fathers death, he comming to the State, put out of office all the valiant and woorthie knights of this realme that had ſerued his father in the conqueſt of Normandy and Guienne, in chaſing the Engliſh men out of Fraunce, and reſtoring the realme to peace and quietnes, (for himſelfe found it both quiet and rich:) which his hard dealing with the ſaid knights, turned greatly to his preiudice, for thereof ſprang the war called THE WEALE PVBLIKE in this ſtorie aboue mentioned, which had almoſt ſet him beſides his crowne. Soone after his communication with the Daulphine his ſonne, and the accompliſhment of this marriage aboue mentioned; he fell vpon a monday into the diſeaſe whereof he died: his ſicknes endured til the ſaturday after being the 30. of Auguſt, in the yeer 1483. And bicauſe I was preſent at his death, I minde to ſpeake ſomwhat thereof. When this diſeaſe tooke him he loſt his ſpeech as before, which being recouered he felt his body weaker than euer it was, notwithſtanding that he were ſo lowe brought before that he could hardly lift his hand to his mouth, and looked ſo poorely and miſerably, that it pitied euery mans hart that ſawe him: he accounted himſelfe now as dead. Wherefore he ſent incontinent for the Lord of Beauieu now Duke of Bourbon his ſonne in law, commanding him to go to Amboiſe to the King his ſon, (for ſo he termed him:) he recommended alſo vnto him diuers of his ſeruants, and gaue him the whole charge and gouernment of the yoong King, and commanded expreſſely that certaine whom he named ſhould not come neere his ſonne, alleaging diuers good reaſons on that behalfe. And if the ſaid Lord of Beauieu had obſerued his commandements, at the leaſt part of them (for ſome were vnreaſonable and not to be obſerued) I thinke he ſhould thereby haue benefited both the realme and himſelfe, conſidering what hath hapned ſince in Fraunce. Soone after he ſent alſo the Chauncellor, and all the officers of the law to the ſaid King his ſonne, and in like maner part of the archers of his guarde, and his Captaines, and all his haukes and hounds with all that appertained thereunto. Further, as many as came to viſit him, he commanded to go to Amboiſe to the King (for ſo he termed him) deſiring them to ſerue him faithfully, and by euery one of them he ſent him ſome meſſage or other; but eſpecially by Steuen de Vers, who brought vp the ſaid yoong King, and was the firſt groome of his chamber, and already aduanced to the bailiwicke of Meaux, by the King our Maſter. His ſpeech neuer failed him after he recouered it, neither were his wits ſo freſh at any time as then: for he purged continually, by meanes whereof all fumes voided that troubled his head. In all the time of his ſickneſſe he neuer complained as other men do when they feele paine: at the leaſt I my ſelfe am of that nature, and ſo haue I knowne diuers others, and men ſay, that complaining aſſwageth greefe.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Others write that he was 16. yeeres olde: this was was anno 1439. and King Lewis was borne anno 1423. ſo that he was 16. yeeres old when the Praguerie began, and ſo vndoubtedly it ſhould be read heere.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A compariſon betweene the ſorrowes and troubles that King Lewis ſuffered, and thoſe he cauſed diuers others to ſuffer: with a rehearſall of all that he did, and all that was done to him, till his death. Chap. 12.
               
                  HE diſcourſed continually of ſome matter or other, and that very grauely, and his diſeaſe endured from monday till ſaturday night. Wherefore I will now make compariſon betweene the troubles and ſorrowes he cauſed others to ſuffer, and thoſe he ſuffered himſelfe before his death, bicauſe I truſt they haue caried him into paradiſe, and been part of his purgatorie. For notwithſtanding that they were not ſo grieuous, neither endured ſo long, as thoſe which he cauſed diuers others to ſuffer; yet bicauſe his vocation in this world was higher then theirs, by meanes whereof he had neuer beene contraried, but ſo well obeied that he ſeemed a Prince able to haue gouerned all Europe: this little trouble that he endured contrarie to his accoſtomed nature, was to him a great torment. He hoped euer in this good heremite that was at Pleſſis whom he had cauſed to come to him out of Calabria, and continually ſent to him: ſaying, that if it pleaſed him he could prolong his life. For notwithſtanding all theſe commandements giuen to thoſe whom he ſent to the Daulphine his ſonne, yet came his ſpirits againe to him, in ſuch ſort that he was in hope to recouer: and if it had ſo happened, he would eaſily haue diſparckled the aſſembly ſent to this new King. But bicauſe of the vaine hope he had in this heremite, a Doctor of diuinitie and certaine others thought good to aduertiſe him that his onely hope muſt be in the mercie of God: and they deuiſed that Maſter Iames Cothier his Phiſition, in whom he had repoſed his whole confidence, and to whom he gaue monethly ten thouſand crownes in hope he would prolong his life: ſhould be preſent when this ſpeech ſhould be vſed to him. This was Maſter Oliuer his barbars deuiſe, to the end he might wholie thinke vpon his conſcience, and leaue all his other imaginations conceiued of this holie man, and of the ſaid Maſter Iames his Phiſition. But euen like as he had aduanced the ſaid Maſter Oliuer and others too ſuddenly without any deſert, to a higher eſtate than was fit for them: euen ſo they tooke vpon them boldlie to do ſuch a meſſage to ſo great a Prince otherwiſe than became them, not vſing that reuerence and humilitie that was to be vſed in ſuch a caſe, and ſuch as they would haue vſed whom he had brought vp of long time, and lately commanded out of his preſence for the ſuſpicions conceiued of them. And againe, like as vnto two great perſonages whom he had put to death in his time, (to wit the Duke of Nemours, and the Earle of Saint Paule: for one of the which he repented him at his death, and for the other not;) he had ſent a ſharpe meſſage of death by Commiſſioners appointed thereunto; the which briefly pronounced their ſentence vnto them, and foorthwith gaue them confeſſors and but a verie ſhort ſpace to diſpoſe of their conſciences: euen ſo the aboue named ſignified his death vnto him rudely and in fewe words ſaying; Sir it is reaſon we do our duties, hope no more in this holie man, nor any other thing, for ſure you are but dead: therefore thinke vpon your conſcience, for your hower is come, and euery one of them ſaid ſomwhat briefly to him to that effect. But he anſwered, I truſt God will helpe me, and peraduenture I am

not ſo ſicke as you ſuppoſe. What a ſharpe coroſife was it to him to heare theſe newes and this cruell ſentence? for neuer man feared death more than he, nor ſought ſo many waies to auoide it as he did. Moreouer, in all his life time he had giuen commandement to all his ſeruants, as well my ſelfe as others, that when we ſhould ſee him in danger of death, we ſhould onely mooue him to confeſſe himſelfe & diſpoſe of his conſcience, not ſounding in his eares this dreadfull word Death, knowing that he ſhould not be able patiently to heare that cruel ſentence: notwithſtanding he endured both that and diuers other puniſhments till the verie hower of death more patiently than euer I ſawe any man. To his ſonne whom he called King, he ſent many meſſages and confeſſed himſelfe verie deuoutly, and ſaid diuers praiers anſwerable to the Sacraments he receiued, which alſo he himſelfe demanded. He ſpake as hartily as if he had not beene ſicke, and talked of all matters touching the King his ſonnes eſtate; and among other things gaue commandement that the Lord of Cordes ſhould not depart from his ſonne by the ſpace of halfe a yeere after his death: and further, that he ſhould be entreated to attempt nothing againſt Calice nor elſewhere; ſaying, that notwithſtanding he had deuiſed theſe enterpriſes for the Kings profit, and the benefit of the realme: yet were they verie dangerous, eſpecially that of Calice, for feare of moouing the Engliſh men thereby to war Further, he willed eſpecially that after his death the realme ſhould reſt in peace the ſpace of fiue or ſixe yeeres, a matter which he would neuer yeeld vnto during his life though verie needfull: for notwithſtanding that it were great and large, yet was it in poore & miſerable eſtate, eſpecially bicauſe of the paſſing to and fro of the men of armes, who continually remooued from one countrey to an other. He gaue order alſo that no quarrell ſhould be picked in Britaine, but that Duke Francis ſhould be ſuffered to liue in quiet, and not be put in any doubt or feare of warre, neither yet any other neighbour bordering vpon the realme, to the end the King and the realme might reſt in peace till the King were of yeeres to diſpoſe thereof at his owne pleaſure.
               Thus you ſee how vndiſcreetly his death was ſignified to him, which I haue rehearſed bicauſe I began to make a compariſon betweene thoſe euils which he had cauſed diuers of his ſubiects to ſuffer, and thoſe he himſelfe ſuffered before his death, to the end you may perceiue that notwithſtanding they were not ſo greeuous, nor ſo long (as I haue ſaid:) yet were they greeuous to him conſidering his nature, which demanded obedience, & had been better obeied than any Prince in his time; ſo that one halfe word contrarying his minde was to him a greeuous puniſhment. Fiue or ſixe daies before his death he had al men in ſuſpition, eſpecially all that were woorthie of credit and authoritie, yea, he grew iealous of his owne ſonne, and cauſed him to be ſtraightly guarded, neither did any man ſee him or ſpeake with him but by his commandement: at the length he began to ſtand in doubt alſo of his daughter, and of his ſonne in law now Duke of Bourbon, and would needs know what men entred into Pleſſis with them, and in the end brake off an aſſembly that the Duke of Bourbon his ſonne in law held there by his commandement. Moreouer, at the ſame time that his ſaid ſonne in law and the Earle of Dunois (returning from the conuoie of the ambaſſage that came to Amboiſe to the marriage of the King his ſonne and the Queene) entred into the caſtle of Pleſſis, with a great bande of men: the King who cauſed the gates to be ſtraightly kept, being in the gallerie that looketh into the court of the ſaid caſtle; cauſed one of the captaines of his guard to come to him, whom he commanded to feele as he talked with the ſaid noble mens ſeruants whether they wore any brigandines vnder their cloakes, not making ſhewe as though he came purpoſely for that intent. Heereby you may perceiue if he cauſed diuers

others to liue in feare and ſuſpicion vnder him: whether he were paid now with the like himſelfe; for of whom could he be aſſured, miſtruſting his ſonne, his daughter, and his ſonne in lawe? Wherefore thus much I will ſay not onely of him, but of all other Princes that deſire to be feared: that they neuer feele the reuenge thereof till their age, and then their penance is to feare all men. What great greefe thinke you was it to this poore King to be troubled with theſe paſſions? He had a Phiſition called Maſter Iames Cothier, to whom he gaue in fiue moneths 54000. crownes, after the rate of 10000. the moneth, and 4000. ouer, beſides the Biſhopricke of Amiens for his nephew, and other offices and lands for him and his friends. The ſaid Phiſition vſed him ſo roughly, that a man would not giue his ſeruant ſo ſharpe language as he gaue the King; and yet the King ſo much feared him, that he durſt not command him out of his preſence: for notwithſtanding that he complained to diuers of him, yet durſt he not change him as he did all his other ſeruants, bicauſe this Phiſition once ſaid thus boldly vnto him; I know that one day you will commaund me away as you do all your other ſeruants, but you ſhall not liue eight daies after, binding it with a great oath. Which words put the King in ſuch feare, that euer after he flattered him, and beſtowed gifts vpon him, which was a maruellous purgatorie to him in this world, conſidering of how many noble men and gentlemen he had been obeied.
               Moreouer, he had cauſed diuers cruell priſons to be made, as for example, cages being eight foote ſquare, and one foote more than a mans height, ſome of iron, and ſome of wood, plated with iron both within and without with horrible iron works. He that firſt deuiſed them was the Biſhop of Verdun, who incontinent was himſelfe put into the firſt that was made, where he remained fowerteene yeeres. Many haue curſed him for his deuiſe, and among others my ſelfe, for I lay in one of them vnder the King that now reigneth the ſpace of eight moneths. He had alſo cauſed certaine Almains to make terrible heauie irons to lay men in, among the which there was a fetter to put on their feete very hard to be opened like to a carquan, with a waightie chaine, and a great iron ball at the end thereof, heauy beyong all meaſure. Theſe irons were called the Kings nets. Notwithſtanding I haue ſeene diuers gentlemen lie in them as priſoners, who came foorth afterward with great honor, and were aduanced by him to great eſtates: as for example, a ſonne of the Lord of Grutuze of Flaunders taken priſoner in the wars, whom the King afterward richely maried, and made one of his chamber, & Seneſchall of Aniou, and gaue him charge of a hundred launces; and in like maner the Lord of Piennes and the Lord of Vergy taken priſoners alſo in the wars, who both had charge of men of armes vnder the King and other goodly offices, and were of the priuie chamber either to him or his ſonne. The like happened alſo to the Lord of Richbourg the Conſtables brother, and to one Roquebertin of the country of Cathelonie being likewiſe taken priſoners in the wars, whom he afterward highly aduanced with diuers others of diuers countries too long to reherſe. But now to returne to the matter. As in his time theſe diuers and ſundrie cruell priſons were deuiſed: euen ſo he before his death laie in the like, yea in a much crueller priſon than any of them, and was in greater feare than they that ſtood in feare of him, which I account as a great grace towards him, and as part of his purgatorie, and rehearſe it onely to ſhew that euery man of what eſtate or condition ſoeuer he be, is puniſhed either ſecretly or openly, eſpecially thoſe that puniſh others. Further, the King a little before his death encloſed his caſtel of Pleſſis with a grate of iron bars, and at the fower corners of the ſaid caſtell cauſed fower ſtrong-watch houſes of iron to be built. The ſaid grate was made directly ouer

againſt the caſtell wall round about the caſtell on the outer ſide of the ditch, which was very ſteepe. He cauſed alſo to be maſoned into the wall a great number of iron ſpeares, each of them hauing diuers heads ſet cloſe togither. Moreouer, he appointed ten croſſebowe men to be continually in the ſaid ditches, and to lie in the fower iron houſes built in the bottome of the ſaid ditches, and gaue them commandement to ſhoote at euery man that approched neere to the grate, before the gate opened. He knew well that this fortification was to no purpoſe againſt a great force or an armie, but that he doubted not: his onely feare was, that certaine noble men of his realme hauing intelligence in the caſtell, would attempt to enter into it in the night, partly by loue and partly by force, and take the gouernment vpon them, and make him liue as a man bereft of his wits, and vnwoorthie to rule. The caſtell gate neuer opened before eight of the clocke in the morning, neither was the drawe bridge let downe till that hower, and then entred his officers, and the captaines of his garde placed the ordinarie warders, and appointed archers to the watch both at the gate and within the court, as if it had beene a frontire towne ſtraightly kept: neither entred any man without the Kings commandement but by the wicket, ſaue the ſtewards of his houſe, and ſuch like officers that went not to him. Is it poſſible then to hold a King (I meane vſing him like a Prince) in a ſtraiter priſon than he held himſelfe? The cages wherein he held others were about eight foote ſquare, and he being ſo great a Prince had but a little court in the caſtell to walke in, yea and ſeldome came he into that: for vſually he kept himſelfe in the gallerie, from whence he neuer ſtirred but when he went to maſſe, at which time he paſſed through the chambers, and not through the Court. Thinke you that he was not in feare as well as others, ſeeing he locked himſelfe in after this ſort, kept himſelfe thus cloſe, ſtood in ſuch feare of his children and neereſt kinſmen, and changed and remooued his ſeruants from day to day, whom he had brought vp and whoſe good eſtate depended wholy vpon him, in ſuch ſort that he durſt truſt none of them, but bound himſelfe in theſe ſtrange chaines and bands? The place I confeſſe was larger than a common priſon, ſo was his eſtate greater than a common priſoners. But a man will ſay peraduenture, that other Princes haue been more ſuſpicious than he, whereunto I agree: but none ſure in our time, neither any ſo wiſe as he, nor that had ſo good ſubiects as he had: & as touching them, peraduenture they were cruell tyrants, but he neuer puniſhed any without deſert. All this aboue written I haue rehearſed, not ſo much to publiſh the ſuſpicions of the King our Maſter: as partly to prooue that the patient enduring of theſe paſſions, being equall with thoſe he had cauſed others to endure; and of this ſicknes being ſharpe and troubleſome to him, and the which he feared greatly before he fell into it; is to be accounted as a puniſhment God gaue him in this world, to eaſe him in the world to come: and partly to giue an example to thoſe that ſhall come after him, to haue ſome more compaſſion on their people than he had, and to be leſſe rigorous in puniſhing than he was. Notwithſtanding for my part I am not able to accuſe him, neither ſaw I euer a better Prince; for though himſelfe preſſed his ſubiects, yet would he ſuffer none other ſo to do friend or foe.
               After all theſe feares, ſorrowes, and ſuſpicions, God (according to his accuſtomed goodnes) wrought a miracle vpon him, healing him both in ſoule and bodie: for he tooke him out of this miſerable world, being perfect of ſenſe, vnderſtanding, and memorie, hauing receiued all his ſacraments without all griefe to mans iudgement, and talking continually euen within a Pater noſter while of his death; ſo that he gaue order for his funerall, and named thoſe that ſhould accompanie his bodie to the graue; ſaying euer, that he truſted to die on no day but ſaturday, and that our

Lady, in whom he had euer put his confidence, and alwaies deuoutly ſerued, had purchaſed him this grace, and ſure ſo it happened: for he ended his life vpon ſaturday the 30. of Auguſt in the yeere 1483. at eight of the clocke at night, in the ſaid caſtell of Pleſſis, where he fell ſicke the monday before. His ſoule, I truſt, is with God, and reſteth in his bleſſed realme of paradiſe.
            
            
               A diſcourſe vpon the miſerie of mans life, by the examples of thoſe Princes that liued in the authors time, and firſt of King Lewis. Chap. 13.
               
                  SMall hope may meane and poore men haue in worldly honors, ſeeing this mightie King, after ſo long trouble and trauell about them, forſooke them al, & could not prolong his life one hower for all that he could do. I knew him & ſerued him in the flower of his age, & in his great proſperitie; yet neuer ſaw I himfree from toile of body and trouble of minde. Aboue al paſtimes he loued hunting & hauking in their ſeaſons, hunting eſpecially. As touching women, he was free from that vice all the time that I ſerued him: for a little before my comming to him, he loſt one of his ſonnes, whoſe death he much lamented; and ſoone after made a ſolemne vow to God in my preſence, neuer to accompanie with any woman but the Queene his wife. Whereunto notwithſtanding that he were bound by the lawes of marriage; yet was it much that he had ſuch ſtay of himſelfe, eſpecially the Queene being none of thoſe in whoſe beautie a man could take great delight, but otherwiſe a very vertuous Lady. In this paſtime of hunting he tooke almoſt as much paine as pleaſure; for the toile was great, bicauſe he ran the Hart to death by force. Beſides that, he aroſe very early in the morning, and oftentimes went far, neither could any weather make him leaue his ſport. Somtime alſo he returned very wearie and in maner euer diſpleaſed with one or other: for this game is not alwaies made as they wiſh that haue the ordering thereof: notwithſtanding in all mens opinions, he for his part vnderſtood it better than any man in his time. In this paſtime he exerciſed himſelfe continually, lodging about in the villages till wars began. For almoſt euery ſommer there was ſomewhat to do betweene Duke Charles of Burgundie and him: but when winter approched they vſed to make truce. He had great wars alſo for the countie of Rouſſillion with King Iohn of Arragon, the King of Spaines father that now liueth. For notwithſtanding that they were very poore, and in war with their ſubiects, namely them of Barſelonne and others, and that the ſonne were of no force: (for he expected the inheritance of King Friderike 
                  
                     1
                   of Caſtile his wiues brother, which afterward fell to him) yet bicauſe they had the harts of the ſubiects of the ſaide countrie of Rouſſillion, they made great reſiſtance againſt him, which coſt the King and his realme full deere: for many a good man died and was ſlaine there, and infinite treaſure was conſumed in thoſe wars; for they endured long.
               Thus you ſee that the pleaſure the King had was but one ſmall time in the yeere, and that ioined with great toile and trauell of his perſon: when his body was at reſt, his minde was occupied, for he had to do in many places, and buſied himſelfe as much with his neighbors affaires as with his own, ſeeking to place men in their houſes 
                     2
                  , and to beſtow the offices therin at his pleaſure. When he was in war he deſired

peace or truce, which notwithſtanding when he had obtained, he could not long away with. He medled with many trifling matters in his realme, which he might well haue paſſed ouer: but ſuch was his diſpoſition and life. And to ſay the truth, his memory was ſo excellent that he forgat nothing, but knew all the world, all countries, and all men of eſtimation round about him; ſo that he ſeemed a Prince woorthier to gouern the whole world than one realm alone. Of his youth I am able to ſay nothing, for I was not with him at that time; notwithſtanding what I haue heard, that I will report. Being but eleuen yeeres of age he was buſied by certaine Princes and others of the realme, in a war againſt K. Charles his father, called la Praguerie, which endured not long. And when he was growen to mans eſtate he married the King of Scotlands daughter 
                     3
                  , and during hir life neuer ioied with hir 
                     4
                  : after hir death bicauſe of the factions and troubles that were in the King his fathers court, he retired into his owne countrey of Daulphine, whither a great number of gentlemen accompanied him, yea many mo than he was able to maintaine. While he was in Daulphine he married the Duke of Sauoies daughter, and ſoone after fel at variance with his father in law, ſo that ſharpe war aroſe betweene them. King Charles ſeeing his ſonne ſo well accompanied with gentlemen and men of armes, determined to go againſt him in perſon with great force, and to chaſe him out of the countrey by ſtrong hand: wherefore he put himſelfe vpon the way, and endeuored to withdraw his ſonnes men from him, commanding them as his ſubiects vnder paine of his diſpleaſure to repaire vnto him. Whereunto diuers obeied, to the King our Maſters great griefe; who ſeeing his fathers indignation againſt him, determined (notwithſtanding that his force were great) to depart thence, and leaue the countrey to his fathers diſpoſing. And in this eſtate trauelled he through Burgundy with a ſmall traine to Duke Philip, who receiued him very honorably, furniſhed him with money to maintaine his eſtate, and gaue yeerely penſions to his principall ſeruants, namely to the Earle of Cominges, the Lord of Montauban & others, and beſtowed alſo during his being there diuers large gifts vpon his other ſeruants. Notwithſtanding, bicauſe he entertained ſuch a number, his mony failed often to his great griefe, ſo that he was forced to borow ſom where or other, otherwiſe his men would haue forſaken him; which vndoubtedly is a great trouble to a Prince vnaccuſtomed thereunto. Thus you ſee that he was not without vexation and anguiſh of minde during his abode in this houſe of Burgundy: for he was forced to faune both vpon the Duke and his principall ſeruants, leaſt they ſhould waxe weary of him, for he was there a long time, to wit, the ſpace of ſixe yeeres. Beſides that, his father ſent ambaſſadors continually to the Duke, requiring him either to put him foorth of his dominions or ſend him backe to him. Wherefore it is to be thought that he was not idle nor without great vexation of minde. All theſe things conſidered: when may a man ſay that he liued in ioy and pleaſure? Sure in mine opinion from his childhood till his death he was in continuall toile and trouble, ſo that if all his pleaſant and ioyfull daies were numbred, I thinke they ſhould be found but fewe: yea I am fully perſwaded, that for one pleaſant there ſhould be found twenty diſpleaſant. He liued about threeſcore and one yeeres; notwithſtanding that he had conceiued an imagination that he ſhould neuer paſſe threeſcore, ſaying, that no King of Fraunce of long time paſſed that age, ſome ſaie none ſince Charles the great. Notwithſtanding the King our Maſter when he died was well forward in the threeſcore and one yeere.
               Duke Charles of Burgundie what reſt or quietnes had he more than the King our Maſter? True it is that in his youth he was not much troubled, for he attempted nothing til the two & twenty yeere of his age, but liued till that time in helth and at his

eaſe. But then he began to buſie himſelfe with his fathers officers, whom his father maintained againſt him: for the which cauſe he abſented himſelfe and went into Holland, where he was well receiued and had intelligence with them of Gaunt, and ſometime alſo went thither himſelfe. He had not one peny of his father, but this countrey of Holland was maruellous rich and gaue him goodly preſents, as did alſo diuers great townes of his other Seniories, hoping thereby to winne his fauour in time to come. For it is a common thing, eſpecially among the vulgare ſort, to loue better, and ſeeke rather to him whoſe power is growing, than to him who is already ſo great that he can be no greater 
                     5
                  . For the which cauſe Duke Philip, when men told him that they of Gaunt loued his ſonne maruellous wel, & that he could skill of their humor: was woont to anſwer, that their Prince in expectation they euer loued deerly; but their Prince in poſſeſſion they hated euer extremely, which ſaying prooued true. For after D. Charles began to reigne ouer them they neuer loued him, and that they well declared as before I haue rehearſed: he alſo for his part bare them as little good will, notwithſtanding they did his poſteritie more harme than they could do him. But proceed, after the time that Duke Charles mooued war for the townes in Picardie, which the King our Maſter had redeemed of Duke Philip his father, and ioined himſelfe with the Princes of this realme, in the war called THE WEALE PVBLIKE: he neuer was quiet, but in continuall trauell both of bodie and minde. For his hart was ſo inflamed with deſire of glorie, that he attempted to conquer all that lay about him. All ſommer he kept the field with great danger of his perſon, and tooke vpon himſelfe the charge and care of the whole armie: all which trouble ſeemed yet not ſufficient to him. He was the firſt vp and the laſt downe, as if he had beene the pooreſt ſoldier in his campe. If he reſted from wars at any time in winter, yet was he buſied all day long from ſixe of the clocke in the morning, either in leuying of money, or receiuing ambaſſadors, or giuing them audience. In this trauell and miſerie ended he his daies, and was ſlaine of the Swiſſers before Nancy, as you haue heard; ſo that a man may iuſtly ſay, that he neuer had good day from the time that ambition firſt entred into his minde, till the hower of his death. And what got he by all this trauell? what needed he thus to haue toiled himſelfe, being ſo rich a Prince, and hauing ſo many goodly townes and ſeniories vnder his ſubiection, where he might haue liued in great ioy and proſperitie, if it had ſo pleaſed him? I muſt now ſpeake of Edward K. of England, who was ſo great & mighty a Prince. In his youth he ſawe the Duke of Yorke his father diſcomfited and ſlaine in battell, & with him the Earle of Warwicks father 
                     6
                  , the which Earle of Warwicke gouerned King Edward in his youth, and all his affaires; yea to ſay the truth made him King, and was the onely man that defeated his enimie King Henry, who had raigned many yeeres in England, and was lawfull King both in mine opinion, and in the iudgement of the whole world. But as touching great realmes and ſeniories God holdeth them in his hand, and diſpoſeth of them at his pleaſure; for all proceedeth of him. The cauſe that mooued the Earle of Warwick to ſerue the houſe of Yorke againſt King Henry, who was of the houſe of Lancaſter, was this. The Earle of Warwicke and the Duke of Sommerſet fell at variance in King Henries court, who was a very ſimple man: the Queene his wife being of the houſe of Aniou, daughter to Rene King of Sicilie, tooke part with the Duke of Sommerſet againſt the Earle. But conſidering that they had all acknowledged both King Henry and his father and grandfather for their lawfull Princes: the ſaid Lady ſhould haue done much better to haue taken vpon hir the office of Iudge or mediator betweene them, than to take part with either of them, as the ſequele well declared. For heereupon aroſe war, which

continued nine and twenty yeeres: during the which ſpace many bloodie battels were fought, and in the end, all in maner both of the one partie and the other ſlaine. Now to ſpeake a word or two of factions: ſurely they are maruellous dangerous, eſpecially among great men, who are naturally inclined to nouriſh and maintaine them. But you will ſay peraduenture, that by this meanes the Prince ſhall haue intelligence of all things that paſſe, and thereby hold both the parties in the greater feare. In truth I can well agree that a yoong Prince vſe this order among Ladies: for by this meanes he ſhall haue pleaſure and ſport ynough, and vnderſtand of all their newes: but to nouriſh factions among men, yea among Princes and men of vertue and courage, nothing can be more dangerous, bicauſe by that meanes he ſhall kindle an vnquenchable fire in his houſe: for foorthwith one of the parties will ſuppoſe the King to be againſt them, and then to fortifie themſelues take intelligence with his enimies. The factions of Orleans and Burgundie prooue this point ſufficiently; for the wars that ſprang therof continued threeſcore and twelue yeeres, the Engliſh men being parties in them, who thought to haue conquered the whole realme. But to returne to King Edward, he was very yoong when his father was ſlaine, and the beautifulleſt Prince in the world: but after he had vanquiſhed all his enimies, he gaue himſelfe wholy to pleaſures, as to dames, feaſting, banketting, and hunting; in the which delicacies he continued about ſixteene yeeres 
                     7
                  , to wit, till the Earle of Warwicke and he fell at variance, in the which wars notwithſtanding that the King were chaſed out of his realme; yet continued he not long in that eſtate: for he ſoone returned, and hauing obtained the victorie, more abandoned himſelfe to all pleaſures than before. He feared no man, but fed himſelfe maruellous fat, by meanes whereof in the flower of his age diſeaſes grew vpon him, ſo that he died in a maner ſuddenly, of an Apoplexie, and his heires males loſt the crowne, as before you haue heard.
               In this our age raigned alſo two valiant and wiſe Princes, namely Mathias King of Hungarie, and Mahomet Ottoman Emperor of Turkie. This King Mathias was ſonne to a valiant knight called the white knight of Vallachie 
                     8
                  , a gentleman of great wiſdome and vertue, who gouerned long the realme of Hungarie, and obtained many goodly victories againſt the Turks 
                     9
                  , who border vpon the ſaid realme, by reaſon of the Seniories they haue vſurped in Greece and Slauonie 
                     10
                  . Soone after his death King Lancelot came to mans eſtate 
                     11
                  , who was right heire not onely of the realme of Hungary, but alſo of Bohemia and Polonia. He by the counſell of certaine cauſed the white knights two ſonnes to be apprehended, alleaging that their father had vſurped too great rule and authoritie in the realme, and that the ſonnes being gentlemen of great courage might peraduenture attempt the like. Wherefore the ſaid King Launcelot reſolued to lay them both in priſon, and incontinent put the elder to death 
                     12
                  , and ſent the ſaid Mathias priſoner to Bude the chiefe towne of Hungary, where he remained not long. And I ſuppoſe that God tooke in good part the great ſeruices his father had done. For ſoone after King Launcelot was poiſoned at Prage in Bohemia 
                     13
                  , by a gentlewoman of a good houſe (whoſe brother my ſelfe haue ſeene) of whom he was enamored, & ſhe likewiſe of him; ſo far foorth that ſhe being diſpleaſed with his mariage with the daughter of Charles the ſeuenth King of Fraunce now called Princeſſe of Vienna (againſt his promiſe made to hir) poiſoned him in a bathe, as ſhe gaue him a peece of apple to eate, hauing conueighed the poiſon into the haft of hir knife. Incontinently after King Lancelots death, the Barons and Nobles of the realme aſſembled to chooſe a new King: for the cuſtome of the countrey is, when the King dieth without iſſue, that the Nobles

may proceed to an election. And while they were there in great diuiſion about their choſe; the white Knights widow mother to Mathias came into the towne with a goodly traine: for bicauſe ſhe had great treaſure left hir by hir husband; ſhe was ſoone able to leuie great forces: and further, I thinke ſhe had good intelligence both in the towne and alſo among the Nobilitie, bicauſe of the great ſway hir husband had borne in the realme. She rode ſtraight to the priſon and tooke hir ſonne out of it 
                     14
                  . Whereupon part of the Barons and Prelats there aſſembled for the election, fled for feare, the reſt choſe the ſaid Mathias King, who raigned in the realme with as great proſperitie as any King theſe many yeeres, and hath been as highly praiſed and commended, yea more in ſome points than any of his predeceſſors. He was one of the valianteſt men that liued in his time, and obtained great victories againſt the Turks, without all damage to his owne realme, the which he inlarged on all ſides, aſwell towards Bohemia the greateſt part whereof he held, as alſo towards Valachie where he was borne, and towards Sclauonie. In like maner vpon the frontiers of Almaine he wan the greateſt part of Auſtrich from the Emperor Frederic now raigning, and poſſeſſed it till his death, which hapned in the yeere 1491. in Vienna the chiefe towne of Auſtrich. This King gouerned his affaires with great wiſdome, aſwell in peace as war: but a little before his death perceiuing himſelfe to be feared of his enimies, he grew maruellous pompous and ſumptuous in his Court, and amaſſed an infinite quantitie of goodly ſtuffe, iewels and plate, for the furniture of his houſe. All his affaires were diſpatched by himſelfe or by his direction. Before his death his ſubiects ſtood in great feare of him, for he waxed cruell, and ſoone after fell into a greeuous and vncurable diſeaſe being but yoong, to wit, eight and twenty yeeres of age 
                     15
                  , or thereabout. He died hauing ſpent his life in much more labor and trauell than pleaſure. The Turke aboue mentioned 
                     16
                   was a wiſe and noble Prince, but vſing wiles and ſubtiltie more than courage and valor. True it is that his father left him great, for he had been a hardy Prince, and wan Adrianople 
                     17
                  , which is as much to ſay, as the citie of Adrian. This Turke that I now write of, tooke in the three and twentith yeere of his age the citie of Conſtantinople 
                     18
                  . I haue ſeene his pourtraiture when he was of thoſe yeeres, the lineaments whereof made ſhew of an excellent wit. It was a ſhame for all Chriſtendome to ſuffer the towne ſo to be loſt: for he tooke it by aſſault, and the Emperor of the Eaſt whom we call Emperor of Conſtantinople, was ſlaine himſelfe at the breach 
                     19
                  , with a number of valiant men, & diuers women of great eſtate and noble houſes rauiſhed: to be ſhort, no crueltie was omitted. This was his firſt exploit, but not his laſt, for he continued till his death in atchieuing great enterpriſes: ſo that I heard once an ambaſſador of Venice tell Duke Charles of Burgundy that he had conquered two Empires, fower realmes, and two hundred cities. He meant the Empires of Conſtantinople & Trapezonde 
                     20
                  ; the realmes of Boſne 
                     21
                  , Syria, Armenia, and I thinke Morea 
                     22
                   was the fowerth, in the which the Venetians held two places. He conquered alſo diuers goodly Iles in the ſea, called Archipell 
                     23
                  , neere to the ſaid Morea, with the Iles of Nigrepont 
                     24
                   and Mitilene: he ſubdued in like maner the greateſt part of Albanie and Sclauonie. And as his conqueſts were great againſt the Chriſtians, ſo were they alſo againſt them of his owne law, of whom he deſtroied many a great Prince, as the Caraman 
                     25
                   and diuers others. The greateſt part of his affaires he gouerned by his owne wiſdome, as did our King and the King of Hungarie alſo: who were three of the greateſt Princes that raigned theſe hundred yeers. But the curteſie and courſe of life of the King our Maſter, and his good vſage both of his owne ſeruants and ſtrangers, far paſſed both the others; and no maruell, for he was the moſt Chriſtian King.

As touching worldly pleaſures this Turke had his fill; for he ſpent the greateſt part of his life in them, and had he not been ſo much addicted to them, vndoubtedly he would haue done much more miſchiefe. There was no fleſhly vice that he was free from, but in gluttony he paſſed, and according to his diet, diſeaſes fell vpon him: for euery ſpring (as I haue heard thoſe report that haue ſeene him) his legs ſwelled as big as a mans body, notwithſtanding they brake not, but the ſwelling aſſwaged of it ſelf. No ſurgeon could tell the cauſe of this diſeaſe ſaue onely that it proceeded of gluttonie, and it may be that it was ſome ſpeciall puniſhment of God. His ſaid diſeaſe was the cauſe he came ſo ſeldome abroad, and kept himſelfe ſo cloſe in his chariot, fearing that the miſerable eſtate he was in, would cauſe his ſubiects to deſpiſe him. He died being two and fifty yeeres of age 
                     26
                   or there about, in maner ſuddenly: notwithſtanding, he made his Teſtament, which I my ſelfe haue ſeene, wherin he made conſcience of a ſubſidie lately leuied vpon his ſubiects, if the ſaid Teſtament be true. Let Chriſtian Princes then weigh well what they ought to do, conſidering that they haue no authoritie in right and reaſon to leuy any thing vpon their ſubiects without their permiſſion and conſent.
               
                  The concluſion of the Author.
                  
                     YOw ſee heere a great number of great perſonages dead in ſhort ſpace, who trauelled ſo mightily, and indured ſo many anguiſhes and ſorrowes to purchaſe honor and renoume, whereby they abridged their liues, yea and peraduenture charged their ſoules. I ſpeake not this of the Turke, for I make account he is lodged with his predeceſſors; but our King and the reſt, I truſt, God hath taken to his mercy. Now to ſpeake of this point as a man vnlearned, but hauing ſome experience: had it not been better both for theſe great Princes themſelues and all their ſubiects that liued vnder them, and ſhall liue vnder their ſucceſſors, to haue held a meane in all things, that is to ſay, to haue attempted fewer enterpriſes, to haue feared more to offend God, and perſecute their ſubiects and neighbors ſo many ſundry waies aboue rehearſed, and to haue vſed honeſt pleaſures and recreation? Yes ſure. For by that meanes their liues ſhould haue been prolonged, diſeaſes ſhould not ſo ſoone haue aſſailed them, their death ſhould haue been more lamented, and leſſe deſired; yea, and they ſhould haue had leſſe cauſe to feare death. What goodlier examples can we finde to teach vs that man is but a ſhadowe, that our life is miſerable and ſhort, and that we are nothing, neither great nor ſmall? For immediately after our death, all men abhorre and loath our bodies, and ſo ſoone as the ſoule is ſeuered from the body, it goeth to receiue iudgement; yea vndoubtedly at the very inſtant that the ſoule and body part, the iudgement of God is giuen according to our merits and deſerts, which is the particular iudgement of God.
               
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 For ought I can reade in any hiſtorie, this Frederike ſhould be Henry, and ſo appeereth by our author himſelfe, lib. 5. cap. 7. & cap. 18.
                  2 Asin Britaine, Sauoye, and Prouence vnder King Rene.
                  3 Others write that he was but 14. yeeres olde when he married hir; which was in the yeere 1437. and ſhe died ann. 1445.
                  4 This Ladies name was Margaret, ſhe was ſister to Iames the ſecond King of Scotland:

ſhe was of a lothſome complexion, and had an vnſauorie breth; wherefore the King loued hir not.
                  
                  5 This is agreeable with Pompeies ſaying to Sylla, that the Romanes did Orientem potius quàm occidentem ſolem venerari.
                  6 The Earle of VVarwicks father was Richard Neuill Earle of Salisburie, who was not ſlaine at the battell of VVakefield with Richard Duke of Yorke, but taken, and within a day or two after beheaded, and his head ſent to Yorke, as the ſaid Dukes had beene.
                  
                  7 Commines ſaith heere, that King Edward had liued ſixteene yeeres in delicacies when the Earle of VVarwicke chaſed him out of his realme: yet before lib. 3. he ſaith twelue or thirteene yeeres, ſomwhat neerer to the truth; for indeede he was chaſed the 10. yeere of his raigne.
                  
                  8 This white knight is named Iohannes Huniades Coruinus, his fathers name was Buth, of the countrie of Valachie, corruptly printed in the French Vallagine.
                  9 To wit, 20. and fought in one day againſt Amurathes and his Baſhaes ſixe great battels, and obtained victorie in them all.
                  
                  10 Sclauonie is the countrie of Illyria.
                  
                  11 Some write that this Launcelot called in Latin ſtories Ladiſlaus came to full yeeres before Huniades death, and gaue him in recompence of his ſeruice the Earledome of Bristrich, and yet afterward ſought to kill him by the perſwaſion of Vlrich Earle of Cilie the ſaid Ladiſlaus vncle: but Huniades valiantly defended himſelfe, and ſoone after died. But indeede the truth is, that Ladiſlaus was borne the 21. of February 1440. and Huniades died the 10. of September 1456. ſo that at Huniades death Ladiſlaus was almoſt 17. yeeres of age, and by the perſwaſion of this Earle Vlrich had taken the gouernment vpon himſelfe.
                  
                  12 The elder brothers name was Ladiſlaus. The cauſe of his death was, for that in defence of himſelfe he had ſlaine the Earle Vlrich, who aſſaulted him, as before he had done his father, and continually ſought both his blood and his brothers. VVherefore the King cauſed both the brethren deceitfully to be taken, and beheaded the elder being fiue or ſixe and twenty yeeres of age. It is written, that the hangman gaue him three ſtrokes with the ſword, before he could pearſe his skin.
                  
                  13 King Ladiſlaus died of poiſon the 21. of Nouember 1457.
                  14 Other histories varie much in this point from Commines: for they make no mention of Mathias deliuerie by his mothers meanes, but ſay that King Ladiſlaus being hated in Hungarie for Huniades elder ſonnes death, departedinto Bohemia, leading Mathias with him as priſoner, where ſoone after this Ladiſlaus died of poiſon, as heere befo
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        ention is made. After his death George Boiebrac vſurped the realme of Bohemia, this Mathias being ſtill priſoner at Prague: but the nobles of Hungarie, bicauſe of his fathers great ſeruices, choſe him their King, and ſent to the ſaid Boiebrac requiring his deliuerie: who not onely accompliſhed their requeſt on that behalfe, but alſo gaue the ſaid Mathias his daughter in mariage, and ſent him into Hungarie nobly accompanied.
                  
                  15 This place is maruellouſly corrupted; for King Mathias was borne the 24. of Februarie 1443. and died the fift of Aprill at Vienna of an Apoplexie the yeere 1490. or as our author ſaith 1491. ſo that by this computation he liued about 48. yeeres, and ſo vndoubtedly this 28. muſt be read 48.
                  16 This Turke is Mahomet the ſecond.
                  
                  17 Others write that Amurathes the third Emperor of Turkie wan Adrianople, and it may be that the name deceiued our author: for this Turks fathers name was alſo Amurathes; but this was Amurathes the ſecond, and he that wan Adrianople Amurathes the firſt.
                  
                  
                     
18 Conſtantinople vvas taken ann. 1453. the 29. of May.
                  
                  19 This Emperor vvas named Conſtantinus Paleologus: but as others vvrite he vvas not ſlaine at the breach, but thronged to death in the gate as he would haue fled.
                  
                  20 Hovv he conquered Trapezonde, Syria, Armenia, appeereth after in the figure 
                     25.
                  21 It is corruptly in the French Breſſanne. This realme of Boſne he conquered ouer Stephen King of that countrie ann. 1463. but Mathias King of Hungarie ſoone after recouered it againe.
                  
                  22 Morea vvas in times paſt Peloponneſus.
                  
                  23 This Archipell is Mare Aegeum, in the vvhich the yles called Cyclades lie.
                  
                  24 Nigrepont in times paſt vvas Euboea.
                  25 The French bookes haue ſome of them the Carnian, ſome the Carmanian, and ſome (bicauſe they vvill be ſure not to erre) nothing. But vndoubtedly it is to be read as I haue heere tranſlated it. For further declaration vvhereof vve muſt vnderſtand, that about the yeere 1250. fovver noble houſes came out of Perſia vvith their captaines and armies, the Otthomans, Aſſembecs, Scandelors or Candelors, and the Caramans. All theſe fovver houſes ſubdued euery one of them ſome region: the Otthomans vvan Bithynia, Phrygia, Galatia. The Aſſembecs Syria, Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia. The Scandelors held the greateſt part of Pontus: and the Caramans Cilicia, Lycia, Lycaonia, Pamphylia. But the houſe of Otthoman in the end deuoured all the other three. The Aſſembecs vvere vanquiſhed by this Mahomet ann. 1459. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that Vſumcaſſanes King of the Aſſembecs fought three great battels vvith this Mahomet. In the tvvo firſt he ouerthrevv him, but in the third he vvas vtterly ouerthrovven, by reaſon that Mahomet had great artillerie in his campe, vvhich noueltie (vnknovven before to the eaſterly nations) diſcomfited Vſumcaſſanes armie, vvho in this battell loſt alſo his ſonne Zeinalde. After this battell Mahomet vvan all Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, and tooke Trapezonde the ſeate of the Aſſembecs empire, vvith the greateſt part of Armenia and Syria, as mention is heere made. Further, after this battell Mahomet tooke from Pyramitus Prince of the Caramans, the greateſt part of Cilicia: and after this Mahomets death Baiazet his ſonne ſlue in battell Abraham the last Prince of the Caramans, and vtterly deſtroied that houſe. As touching the Scandelors, after the Aſſembecs and Caramans vvere deſtroied, the Prince of the Scandelors yeelded his countrie to Baiazet, and in exchange thereof had certaine reuenues giuen him in Natolia. And thus vvere all the three houſes ſubdued by the houſe of Otthoman: vvhich diſcourſe for the better vnderſtanding of this place, I haue been forced to vvrite ſomvvhat at large.
                  
                  26 Others vvrite 58. and others 56. but ſure our author reporteth his age truli
                           •••
                        : for he vvas borne ann. 1430. the 24. of March, and died of the collicke 1481. the thirde of May, ſo that he vvas entred into his tvvo and fiftith yeere.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
               A SVPPLY OF THE HISTORIE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES FROM THE death of King LEWIS the II. till the beginning of the wars of Naples, to wit, from 1483. till 1493. of all the vvhich time Commines vvriteth nothing.
               
               
                  Of King Charles his comming to the crowne, of the death of Oliuer King Lewis his Barber and others, and of the reuoking of King Lewis his ſuperfluous gifts. Chap. 1.
                  
                     AFter the death of Lewis the eleuenth, Charles the 8. his onely ſonne being 13. yeeres of age and two moneths, ſucceeded to the crowne: notwithſtanding his coronation was deferred till the moneth of Iune in the next yeere, to the end he might be full fowerteen when he ſhould be crowned. The King his father had brought him vp at Amboiſe in ſuch ſolitarines, that none beſides his ordinarie ſeruants could haue acceſſe vnto him; neither permitted he him to learne any more Latine than this one ſentence: He that cannot diſſemble cannot raigne: which he did not for that he hated learning, but bicauſe he feared that ſtudie would hurt the tender and delicate complexion of the childe. Notwithſtanding King Charles after he was come to the crowne, grew verie ſtudious of learning, aod gaue himſeife to the reading of ſtories and bookes of humanitie written in the French toong, and attempted to vnderſtand Latine.
                  Before the Kings coronation, the Princes of the blood and the nobles of the realme, who ſo often had beene iniuried in the late King Levvis his time by Oliuer le Dain his barber, by Daniell a Flemming the ſaid Oliuers ſeruant, and by Iohn D'oyac; (which three had wholie gouerned the ſaid King Levvis,) cauſed informations ſecretly to be exhibited againſt them for diuers murthers, rapines, and other heinous crimes that they had committed in King Levvis his time, yea and ſome of them by his commandement: the which informations being ſeene by the court Parlament, they were foorthwith apprehended, their proceſſe made, and in the end all three condemned: and the next yeere being 1484. the ſaid Oliuer and Daniell his man were hanged at Paris, and D'oyac had his eares cut off, and his toong bored through with a hot iron. One of the crimes committed by Oliuer and Daniell, for the which they were executed was this: A gentleman was committed to priſon by King Levvis his commandement, whoſe wife being yoong and beutifull, was contented to abandon hir ſelfe to the luſt of this Oliuer, vpon promiſe that he ſhould deliuer hir huſband out of priſon to hir; but the next day he cauſed Daniell his man to put him into a ſacke, and to throwe him into the riuer, where he was miſerably drowned. This Oliuer was a Flemming borne, and had been barber to King Levvis, and of greater credit with him than any man in all Fraunce, which his credit grew by vile and ſlauiſh offices that he did about the King, ſo far foorth that he ordinarily ſucked the

Kings hemorrhoides; wherewith he was often troubled, which baſe ſeruice he did, not for good will that he bare the King, but onely for couetouſnes and to maintaine his credit, which ended ſoone after the King his Maſters death as you haue heard: notwithſtanding the great charge that the King vpon his death-bed had giuen his ſonne to loue the ſaid Oliuer, and not to ſuffer him to be ſpoiled of that which he had beſtowed vpon him, bicauſe his ſeruice had long preſerued his life. But howſoeuer Princes maintaine ſuch lewd miniſters in their liues, and how ready ſoeuer ſuch ſeruants be to execute their Maſters vnlawfull and wilfull commandements, ſuppoſing that they ſhall neuer be called to account therefore: yet in the end they finde that credit in Court is no inheritance, and that God who leaueth nothing vnpuniſhed, findeth a time to reward them according to their deſerts. Further, ſoone after King Lewis his death, conſultation was had of the ſuperfluous & ſuperſtitious gifts made by him in his life, all the which were reuoked, and all that was giuen reunited to the crowne.
               
               
                  Of the aſſemblie of the States held at Touars, of the Duke of Orleance purſute for the regencie, of the mad war raiſed by him, and of his departure into Britaine. Chap. 2.
                  
                     THe King in the moneth of Iuly after his coronation, being the yeere 1484. held a generall and free aſſembly of the States of 1484 his realme at Touars, far otherwiſe than had beene vſed in his fathers daies: for none came to theſe generall aſſemblies in his time, but ſuch as were of his owne denomination, neither durſt any man ſpeake his minde freely, but was forced in all matters to yeeld to the Kings will, which was for the moſt part vnreaſonable and violent. But at this aſſemblie the preſence was great, the voices free, the complaints lamentable: the Nobilitie, Commons and Clergie, euery one of them preſented their griefes, complaining of the burdens that the late King (contrary to the lawes of the realme, and cuſtomes of their anceſtors) had laid vpon them. In this aſſembly it was enacted that there ſhould be no Regent in Fraunce; but that Anne Lady of Beauieu the Kings eldeſt ſiſter ſhould haue the gouernment of his roiall perſon, according to the teſtament of King Levvis the 11. that the priuy Councell ſhould conſiſt of twelue choſen out of the body of the Nobility, by whoſe aduiſe all matters ſhould be gouerned and diſpatched; but all in the Kings name, and vnder the ſignature of his hand. Further, Iohn Duke of Bourbon was created Conſtable. But by little and little the whole gouernment was deriued to the ſaid Lady of Beauieu, bicauſe the King hir brothers perſon was in hir hands.
                  But Levvis Duke of Orleance being the neereſt Prince of the blood royall, by the perſwaſion of thoſe that were about him, who gaped for great preferment if the gouernment were committed to his charge, and eſpecially by the inſtigation of the Earle of Dunois named Francis, ſonne to Iohn commonly called the Baſtard of Orleance, (a man of a ſubtile ſpirit, and of great enterpriſe) abode ſtill at Paris, and entered daily into the councell, (notwithſtanding the decree of the three eſtates,) as one that would vnderſtand of all that was done there. Wherewith the Lady of Beauieu was not a little diſcontented: which when the Prince of Orenge, the Marſhall of Rieux, and the reſt of the Barons of Britaine that were at that time fugitiues

in Fraunce (as heerafter ſhall be declared) vnderſtood; they came to the ſaid Lady of Beauieu, and offered hir and the King their ſeruice, which the Duke of Orleance greatly ſtomached. Further, the ſaid Duke ſought by all meanes poſſible to diſcredit the womaniſh gouernment of the ſaid Lady; but his perſwaſions little preuailed, bicauſe the Duke himſelfe being not as yet fower and twenty yeeres old, was vnder the gouernment of his mother, and it ſeemed no reaſon to commit the managing of the common wealth to him that was vnable to gouerne his owne priuate eſtate: ſo that the ſame reaſon barred him from the gouernment now, that excluded his grandfather in times paſt, during the phrenſie of King Charles the ſixt. But this reaſon ſatisfied not the Duke nor his friends. Wherefore the Lady of Beauieu ſeeing that the Duke of Orleance remaining in Paris, wan daily thoſe that were in authoritie to his ſide: ſeeking by that meanes to obtaine the regencie of the realme: ſent by the reſolution of the Kings councell, certaine to Paris to arreſt the body of the ſaid Duke. Who being aduertiſed therof as he was at tenice, withdrew himſelfe, and (pretending that he went to his lodging) departed in the company of Guyot Pot, and Iohn of Louen (one of the gentlemen of his chamber whom he greatly fauoured) & lodged that night at Pontoiſe. The next day he went to Vernueil, and from thence to Alençon, where he remained a certaine ſpace: during the which, he practiſed to draw to his partie the Earle of Angouleſme, the Duke of Bourbon, and the Lord of Alebret, who in the end declared themſelues to be his friends and aſſiſtants in this enterpriſe. But all theſe bicauſe of this their confederacie with him, were foorthwith remooued from all their offices and eſtates, and loſt al their penſions, and their charge of men of armes: yet notwithſtanding, they leuied a great army of the people of their countries, and found meanes to win to their ſide the Duke of Lorraine, the Prince of Orenge, and the Earle of Foix. Vnder the aſſurance of all the which Princes, the D. of Orleance aſſembled his army at Blois, to marche therewith to Orleance: but the citizens of the towne perceiuing that their Duke came thither with a purpoſe to ſuppriſe it, and to make it the ſeate of the wars, ſhut their gates vpon him, and would not ſuffer him to enter in. Wherefore with an army of fower hundred launces, and a great number of footemen, he went to Bougencie, accompanied with the Earles of Dunois and Foix, an with Carqueleuant, and other French captaines, where they remained a certaine ſpace, and thither the King ſent to beſiege them. But bicauſe they ſawe the place not to be of defence; and further, that the Malcontents of the realme flocked not to them as they ſuppoſed they would: they made a ſudden peace with the King, whereby it was agreed, that the Duke of Orleance ſhould repaire to the King, and ſo he did, and that the Earle of Dunois the contriuer of all this enterpriſe ſhould depart the realme, which alſo he did and retired himſelfe to Aſt. But this notwithſtanding, the Duke of Bourbon and the Earle of Angouleſme, who had leuied their armies to ſuccor the Duke of Orleance, marched toward Bourges, whither the King went with a great army, accompanied with the Duke of Orleance, who was conſtrained to arme himſelfe againſt his allies and confederates. Notwithſtanding by the wiſedome of the Marſhall of Gie and the Lord of Grauille (which two had great authoritie in the Court vnder the Lady of Beauieu,) peace was concluded betweene the King and his nobles, wherein the Lord of Albret was alſo comprehended; and thus departed all theſe armies without any bloodſhed, and the K. went to Amboiſe; the Duke of Orleance to Orleance; and the Earle of Foix and the Cardinall his brother to Nantes to the Duke of Britaine who had married their ſiſter. This tumult was called the mad war, and hapned in the yeere 1485. 1485.
                  
                  
                     
After al this, the Earle of Dunois returned from Aſt, and went to his owne towne of Partenay in Poitou, which was then a ſtrong towne with a double ditch, and a triple wall. Heerof the King being aduertiſed, and withall that he fortified himſelfe in the ſaid towne, and knowing the ſaid Earle of Dunois to be full of practiſe, and a man of great enterpriſe: he ſent to the Duke of Orleans (who was at Orleans holding ſolemne iuſts and turneies) to come to him to Amboiſe. And after three or fower meſſengers, the laſt whereof was the Marſhall of Gié, the Duke of Orleans went to Blois, and the next day being twelfe euen in the ſaid yeere 1485. he departed out of Blois early in the morning with his haukes, faining that he went to flie in the 
                        If you begin the yeere at Newyeeres day, it was 1486. field, and without any bait rode that night to Fronteraulx, whereof his ſiſter was then Abbeſſe: from thence he went to Cliſſon, and from Cliſſon to Nantes, where he was very honorably receiued of the Duke. This was the Duke of Orleans ſecond comming into Britaine, as by that which followeth heerafter ſhall more plainly appeere. The King being aduertiſed of his departure, determined to beſiege the Earle of Dunois in his towne of Partenay, and found meanes (before any brute was made thereof) to drawe to his ſeruice the Marſhall of Rieux, and the other Barons of Britaine that were then retired to Chaſteaubrian to the Lady of Laual, who was Lady thereof, bicauſe the Duke of Britaine by aide of the Duke of Orleans and the Earle of Dunois ſought to auenge himſelfe of the ſaid Barons, for the death of Peter Landois Treaſurer of Britaine, whereof I will now begin to ſpeake.
               
               
                  Of the troubles that happened in Britaine betweene the Duke and his Nobles, and of Peter Landois death. Chap. 3.
                  
                     ABout the ſame time, or ſomewhat before, that the mad tumult aboue mentioned happened in Fraunce: a like ſtur chanced alſo in Britaine, though not with the like euent; the ſeedes of the which were priuily ſowen in the life of Levvis the 11. but ſprang not vp for feare of forren war (with the which the ſaide King Lewis continually threatened the Britaines) till after his death. But then all forren feare, which had hitherto preſerued their peace, being remooued: the fire flamed out, which vpon this occaſion was firſt kindled. Chauuin Chauncellor of Britaine (a very woorthy man) died miſerably in p
                        •
                     iſon in the caſtell of L'hermite, where the Duke had impriſoned him at the requeſt of his Treaſurer Peter Landois a hoſiers ſonne of Touars, who after the ſaid Chauuins death wholy poſſeſſed the Duke. But the nobilitie, namely the Prince of Orenge, and the Marſhall of Rieux (who were then at Nantes, and hated this Landois, as author of the others death) conſpired togither to his deſtruction: for the executing of which their purpoſe, they watched a time when they thought to ſurpriſe him either in the caſtell of Nantes with the Duke, or in a houſe of his owne called Pabotiere a mile from the towne. Wherefore they diuided their companie, and part they ſent to beſiege the ſaid houſe, and with the reſt entred into the caſtell: and to the end he ſhould by no meanes eſcape, they ſhut vp the caſtell gates, they ſearched euery corner of the caſtell, yea they ruſhed into the Dukes chamber, ſuppoſing that the ſaide Landois might happily haue retired himſelfe thither, in hope to make the D. preſence the buckler of his defence. But he being a mile from Nantes in his own houſe aboue

mentioned, eſcaped at a backe gate before the houſe was thoroughly beſet, and ſo ſaued himſelfe. But preſently a great vprore began in the towne: for one of the Dukes ſeruants, at the noble mens firſt entrie into the caſtell, being let downe the caſtell wall by a rope, made a great outcrie in the towne, aggrauating the hainouſnes of the fact, and affirming that the caſtell was forced, the Duke aſſaulted, and his life in great danger vnles he were ſpeedily ſuccoured. The citizens (ignorant that this attempt was made onely for the ſurpriſing of Peter Landois) armed themſelues, and ran to the caſtell threatning all the nobilitie with death, of whom not one durſt ſhew himſelfe vpon the wall to ſpeake to the furious multitude, bicauſe the people had planted ſhot againſt the caſtell, meaning to ſpare no man ſo ſoone as he ſhould appeere, but the Duke alone. The Duke being in the hands of his nobles, ſhewed himſelfe vnto his people, who preſently kneeled downe before him, congratulating with him for his ſafetie, and ſo the tumult ceaſed.
                  But the nobilitie for this bold attempt were baniſhed, though their liues were pardoned, who preſently retired themſelues into Fraunce to King Charles, as before you haue heard. Then Peter recouered his former credit with the Duke, and cauſed him to write to the Duke of Orleans his coſin germaine, that it would pleaſe him to come to him into Britaine; which the Duke of Orleans did by the perſwaſion of the Earle of Dunois, who ſought to diuorce him from the Kings ſiſter, and to marrie him with Anne the Duke of Britaines eldeſt daughter and heire, which alſo happened after the ſaid Duke of Orleans was King, though it were not now accompliſhed. The Duke of Orleans accompanied with the Duke of Alençon arriued at Nantes, in the moneth of Aprill after this tumult, being the yeere 1484. where they were honorably receiued of the Duke of Britaine, who complained to them of the outrage done vnto him by the Prince of Orenge and the Marſhall of Rieux, for the reuenge whereof he deſired their aide, which they promiſed him in generall termes, and then departed to go to Reimes to the coronation of King Charles. After the which the Duke of Orleans fell at variance with the King, and yet in the end peace was concluded betweene them in the yeere 1485. as before you haue heard.
                  Then Peter Landois ſeeing the Duke his Maſter in league with the Duke of Orleans, 
                        This hapned 1485. and the ſaid Duke of Orleans and his faction in peace with the King: determined to be reuenged of his enimies: wherefore the Duke of Britaine, by his perſwaſion made an edict, that all the noble mens houſes that had beene of the conſpiracie aboue mentioned, ſhould be raſed. For the execution whereof an armie was leuied in the Dukes name to raſe Ancenix, where the Prince of Orenge and the Earle of Comminges then remained, who being aduertiſed therof, by the aide of their friends and of the baniſhed Barons that were returned out of exile to defend their patrimonies, leuied likewiſe an armie to withſtand Landois attempts: but when thoſe two armies were come the one in face of the other, the remembrance and loue to their common countrie altered their mindes in ſuch ſort, that they diſarmed themſelues, and each imbraced other as friends. Then went the Prince of Orenge and the Earle of Comminges to the Duke, and recouered his fauour and the gouernment: by meanes whereof all the ſtorme fell vpon Peter Landois alone, whom when the nobles knew to be within the caſtell, with one conſent they went thither, being fully reſolued to ſeize vpon him, though he were in the Dukes armes. Then one whom both the nobilitie and commons had by common conſent choſen their new Chauncellor, by their conſtraint ſpake to the Duke, and aduertiſed him that without the deliuerie of Peter the tumult could not be appeaſed, againſt whom they would proceede onely by order of lawe, without executing any thing vpon him before his cauſe were

heard and throughly examined. Thus was he yeelded into their hands, and preſently impriſoned, and for faſhions ſake examined: many hainous crimes were obiected againſt him. To conclude, he was condemned and hanged before the Duke knew his cauſe to be tried, who was purpoſed to haue granted him his pardon, howſoeuer law proceeded againſt him: for the preuenting whereof the execution was haſtened. But this fact of the nobilitie (which the Duke accounted as a moſt hainous iniurie done to himſelfe) made them ten times more odious to the Duke than they were before. The Duke created a new Chauncellor, and to make head againſt his nobles receiued very curteouſly the Duke of Orleans, who about this preſent fled to him out of Fraunce with a great company of his partakers: which when the ſaid nobles of Britaine ſawe, they were greatly aſtonied, and fled for feare the ſecond time into Fraunce, where the King (meaning to make war vpon the Duke of Britaine, for receiuing the Duke of Orleans being fled from him) welcommed them, and entred into league with them, as in the end of the laſt chapter you haue heard. The report went that the Duke of Orleans had a plot in his head to diuorce himſelfe from the Ladie Iane the Kings ſiſter, as forced vpon him againſt his will by King Levvis the 11. and to marrie with Anne the Duke of Britains eldeſt daughter and heire, the hope wherof was the cauſe of this his voiage into Britaine: but the ſelfeſame hope entertained alſo Monſeur d' Alebret, and drew him to the Duke of Britains part, the rather bicauſe he had receiued aſſurance of the marriage in writing, vnder the hands of all the noble men that were about the ſaid D. of Britaine, ſaue of the D. of Orleans alone.
               
               
                  Of the war the King made in Britaine, and of the Earle of Dunois ambaſſage to the King for peace. Chap. 4.
                  
                     THe onely care of the baniſhed nobles of Britaine was to returne and remaine in ſafetie in their countrie, and the Kings onely deſire was to be reuenged of the Duke of Britaine for receiuing the Duke of Orleans. Wherefore the King, as before is ſaid, entred into league with theſe nobles, and in their fauour leuied an armie, and began war vpon the Duke of Britaine in the yeere 1486. This armie inuaded Britaine three ſeuerall waies; for the 1486 Lord of Saint André with fower hundred launces, and fiue or ſixe thouſand footemen entred on one ſide; the Earle of Montpenſier with a great band vpon another ſide, and Lewis of Trimouille Vicount of Touars, (who had married Gabriell of Bourbon the ſaid Earle of Montpenſiers ſiſter) vpon the third, in ſuch ſort that the countrie of Britaine was couered with French ſoldiers, with whom alſo the barons of Britaine aboue mentioned, were ioined, who cauſed diuers caſtels in Britaine to be yeelded to the Kings armie by thoſe that were of their faction: whereat the Duke of Britaine was greatly aſtonied. But the Duke of Orleans, the Earle of Dunois, and the Earle of Comminges being with him, comforted him, and vnder colour of a marriage to be made betweene the Lady Anne the Duke of Britaines eldeſt daughter and the Lord of Alebret, who had a hundred launces vnder his charge, and was able to leuie great forces of footemen in Gaſcoine and Guienne, where he was mightie and of goodly reuenues, the Earle of Dunois wan the ſaid Lord of Alebret to ioine with them: who preſently forſooke the Kings ſeruice, and tooke part with them accordingly:

yet that notwithſtanding the Duke of Britaine leauing Nantes in the hands of his coſin the Prince of Orenge, retired himſelfe to the caſtell of Maleſtroit, being a ſtrong place, where he leuied an armie of ſixe hundred launces, and 16000. footemen to ſuccour Ploermel (diſtant three or fower leagues from Maleſtroit) which the Kings armie then beſieged. But as this Britaine armie marched thitherward, one of the company brake foorth into theſe ſpeeches, and asked what this war meant, and what was the end thereof, alleaging that their Duke was wholy gouerned by the French, and that the French made the Britaines at their pleaſure to reuenge French quarrels vpon the French: wherefore he perſwaded them to returne home to their wiues and children, and not to ſpend their liues for other mens quarrels. Whereupon all the armie diſparkled, and returned home: by meanes whereof Ploermel ſeeing no hope of ſuccours yeelded by compoſition, and yet notwithſtanding was ſpoiled, and the rich men taken priſoners, and put to raunſome. The Dukes of Britaine and Orleans, and the other Lords that were with them at Maleſtroit, being aduertiſed of the departure of their armie, and of the taking of Ploermel, went to Vennes vpon Whitſon euen being the yeere 1487. whither the Kings armie ſo ſpeedily followed them, that hardly they eſcaped by ſea, and went to Croiſick, and from thence by the riuer of Loire to Nantes, being conſtrained to leaue part of their carriage 1487 in the ſaid towne of Vennes, which preſently after their departure yeelded without any reſiſtance. Further, not long after the taking of this towne, the French in a skirmiſh at a place called Ioue betweene Chaſteaubrian and Nantes, defeated a great band of Britaines, led by Amaulry of la Moſſay towards Nantes, at the which time the King in perſon lay at Ancenix. After the taking of Vennes the Kings armie marched to Nantes, and laid the ſiege before the towne the 19. day of Iune in the ſaid yeere 1487. Within the towne were the Duke of Britaine and his two daughters Anne and Iſabell, the Duke of Orleans, the Prince of Orenge, the Lady of Lauall and of Chaſteaubrian, the Biſhop of Nantes called du Chaffault, a man of holy life, the Earle of Comminges, and diuers other Lords: all the which diſlodged out of the caſtell, and lodged in the towne. And bicauſe the companie had ſome ielouſie of the ſaid biſhop of Nantes, and the Lady of Lauall that they were not thoroughly to be truſted: they were put in garde into certaine of the townes mens hands. At this ſiege were ten thouſand French men, and great ſtore of artillerie, wherewith the wals, towers, and vaumures of the caſtell and towne were throughly battered; but they without were as well plied by them within, both with ſhot and with ſalies of valiant men, where many a goodly feate of armes was done, both on the one ſide and the other. Further, you ſhall vnderſtand, that the Earle of Dunois being in baſe Britaine there to embarke towards England to haue aide from thence, and perceiuing that the winde would not ſuffer him ſo to do, brought with him to ſuccour the towne of Nantes aboue fiftie thouſand of the commons of Britaine, which the French ſuffered to paſſe, ſuppoſing them not to be men of ſeruice. But the King ſeeing the extreme heate of the weather, and perceiuing that he could do no good before the towne, leuied his ſiege the ſixt day of Auguſt, and departed. Then marched the Kings armie before the towne of Dolle, which they tooke without reſiſtance and ſpoiled, and all the Britaines and ſoldiers that were within it were taken priſoners. Further, the Kings armie ſpoiled all the countrie, ſlue the people, and draue away their cattell. But the Marſhall of Rieux and the greateſt part of the baniſhed nobles of Britaine that were in the Kings ſeruice, lamenting the miſerable eſtate of their country, waxed wearie of the wars, and alleaged that their league with the King was onely to this end, that they might recouer their countrie, and the French that liued

in Britaine be conſtrained to returne home into theirs. Wherfore ſeeing the French nobles being in Britaine proteſted, that they would willingly returne home if the King would pardon their departure to the Duke; and that the Duke on the other ſide, with the conſent of all his ſubiects, had offered theſe baniſhed nobles of Britaine pardon, and reſtitution to all their goods and lands, they ſawe no cauſe why the wars ſhould endure, but that each partie ſhould returne home in peace: but the French, and diuers alſo of the Britaines themſelues were little mooued with theſe allegations. Wherefore the ſaid Marſhal being Lord of Ancenix, a towne very commodious for the maintenance of the Kings wars, and the which (notwithſtanding that he held it for the King) he had manned with his owne tenants and ſeruants: yeelded the place to the Duke of Britaine, and ſware the townes men to be true to him. And further, before the fame of his reuolt was ſpred abrode, he went with a great companie to Chaſteaubrian, which was alſo held for the King, and being receiued into the towne as a friend, he placed a garriſon of his owne ſoldiers in it, and baniſhed all that refuſed to returne to the obedience of the Duke. From thence he went and laid the ſiege before Vennes the 25. day of Februarie, which was held by 
                        If you begin the yeere at Neweyeeres day heere beginneth 1488. the French vnder the gouernment of Gilbert of Graſſay, and Philip of Moulins valiant captaines, who yeelded the place by compoſition the third day of March following.
                  On the other ſide the Kings army ſlept not: for Ancenix they tooke by aſſault, and raſed the wals, towers, and houſes by the Kings commandement, ſo that one ſtone was not left vpon another, which the King did in ſpite of the Marſhall of Rieux, whoſe the towne was, and who was newly reuolted from him as you haue heard. Chaſteaubrian was alſo recouered by the Kings forces, and the caſtell raſed. From thence the Kings army marched to Frougiers, being a frontier towne ſtronge and of good reſiſtance, and laid the ſiege before the place, whereupon the Duke of Britaine being ſtroken with a new feare, determined to ſend the Earle of Dunois in ambaſſage to the King, whereof heereafter you ſhall heare.
                  About this time being the beginning of the yeere 1488. the Lord of Albret who long had been reſident in the Court of Spaine, came by ſea and landed in baſe Britaine with fower thouſand men of war: his men went to Rennes, but himſelfe to Nantes to the Duke of Britaine, where at his firſt comming he demanded to haue the marriage between him and the Lady Anne the Dukes eldeſt daughter accompliſhed. But the ſaid Lady would not conſent thereunto, greatly to hir fathers diſcontentation, who knew nothing that ſhe had caſt hir phanſie vpon the Duke of Orleans, by the practiſe and perſwaſion of the Earle of Dunois. For the which cauſe the ſaid Earle of Dunois (to ſaue his honor) endeuored to withdraw his ſeale giuen for the accompliſhment of the ſaid marriage, being in the hands of the Lady Lauall ſiſter to the ſaid Alebert, among the ſeales of all the other Britaine Lords: which alſo in the end very cunningly he brought to paſſe. For he gaue the ſaid Lady to vnderſtand that this marriage could neuer be accompliſhed without the Duke of Britaines ſeale could be obtained, wherunto he (as he ſaid) had mooued the Duke, whoſe anſwer was that he would willingly giue his ſeale, prouided that the inſtrument that he ſhould ſeale, were written word for word by that which the Earle of Dunois had alreadie ſealed: wherefore if ſhe would cauſe his writing to be deliuered to him, he would make his ſecretarie to write that which ſhould be preſented to the Duke, word for word by his, and ſo get the Dukes ſeale to it. The Lady of Lauall ſuppoſing that he had ment good faith, deliuered him the writing, which afterward he neuer reſtored: for preſently after (as you ſhall now heare) he was ſent with certaine lawyers in ambaſſage

to Angiers to the King, to vnderſtand what the King demanded in the Duchy of Britaine, and why he deſtroied the caſtels and townes thereof.
                  The Duke of Britaine as aboue is mentioned, being in great feare when he ſawe the Kings army before Fougieres, ſent the Earle of Dunois with the conſent of his nobles in ambaſſage to Angiers to the K. The ſaid Earle in his iourney thitherward, ſo preached in all places the great commodities that concord and peace bring with them, that all mens eies were fixed vpon him. When he came to the K. being then eighteene yeeres of age, he very eloquently pleaded the cauſe of the Duke of Britaine, and of the other French noble men that were retired to him, alleaging that the Duke being worne with yeeres, conſumed with diſeaſes, hauing buried his wife, being deſtitute of iſſue male, his eldeſt daughter being hardly twelue yeeres of age, and his yoonger leſſe; and laſtly, being forſaken of his nobilitie for the hatred they bare to Peter Landois, and not for any euill deſert of his owne, began to languiſh in ſorow and griefe: for the which cauſe the noble men of Fraunce that were of kin & alied to him, being mooued with very naturall affection, were retired to him to comfort him in this diſtreſſe. Among whom, none were neerer to him (his owne children excepted) than the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Orenge, the one being his vncles ſonne, the other his ſiſters, and that theſe and others his neere kinſemen were yet with him, onely to this end; adding that the Duke was not to be accuſed bicauſe he forbad them not his countries, when they came to comfort him in his miſeries, or they for comming to relieue him in his diſtreſſe. But quoth he, it will be obiected that there are beſides theſe, diuers others with him of the nobilitie of Fraunce, that haue leuied war againſt the King: but what war? Forſooth, as the Britaines marched with force to leuy the ſiege of Ploermel, being aduertiſed that they could not ſo do without a battell with the French: the reuerence they bare to the Kings Maieſtie was ſuch, that willingly they gaue place, and forbare to fight, and rather ſuffered their townes to be taken and ſpoiled, than they would encounter with the Kings troupes. Further ſo ſoone as the D. vnderſtood the K. deſire to be, that the baniſhed Nobles of Britain ſhould return home, he foorthwith receiued them into his fauor, and reſtored them to their former eſtate. What offence then (ſaid he) hath the Duke made? What cauſe of war againſt him? Truly none. But on the contrary ſide many cauſes of commiſeration, and many cauſes why the King ſhould grant the Duke of Britaine peace. This was the effect of the ſpeech he was commanded (as he ſaid) to deliuer to the K. which charge he would not haue taken vpon him, but that he knew the D. of Britaine to carie a minde ſingularly well affected to the Kings Maieſtie, and the French nobles that were in Britaine to be the Kings deuout ſeruants & ſubiects, and ready to ſhed their blood for the defence of him and his eſtate. This the Earles ſpeech mooued the King to incline to peace, whereof the treatie was already begun, when the ſudden report of a batel wherof you ſhal now heare as ſuddenly brak it off.
               
               
                  Of the battell of S. Albin, wherein the Duke of Orleance was taken priſoner, of the treatie of peace betweene the King and the Duke of Britaine, and of the ſaid Duke of Britaines death. Chap. 5.
                  YOu haue heard of the ſiege of Fougieres, which endured ſtill, notwithſtanding the Earle of Dunois ambaſſage in ſuch ſort, that the towne began to be greatly diſtreſſed: wherefore the Duke of Orleans and the reſt of the

noble men of Britaine fearing the loſſe of the towne, departed from Nantes and went to Rennes, where they aſſembled their forces to leuy the ſiege. Their men of armes were fower hundred, and their footemen of their owne countries twelue thouſande, as ſome write; as others, but eight thouſand, beſides three hundred Engliſh men, and eight hundred Swiſſers, and of artillerie they had great plentie. Then in very good order they encamped abroad in the fields. The names of the noble men of the armie were theſe: the D. of Orleans, the Lord of Alebret, the Marſhall of Rieux, the Lord of Chaſteaubrian, the Lord of Scales an Engliſhman, the Lord of Leon, the Lord of Rohans eldeſt ſonne, the Lord of Crenettes, the Lord of Pont l'Abbe, the Lord of Pleſſis, the Lord of Balynes, the Lord of Montigny, the Lord of Montuet: all the which Lords with their companies & whole forces encamped at a village called Andouille, the wedneſday being the 23. of Iuly, the yeere 1488. aboue mentioned: in the night there was an alarme among the Gaſcoins, whereof it was feared ſome quarrell would haue growen betweene the Duke of Orleans and the Lord of Alebret, but the matter was ſoone pacified. In the mean time came newes to theſe Lords at the ſaid village of Andouille the ſaterday the ſixe and twenty of the ſaid moneth of Iuly, that the French had taken Fongieres by compoſition, with theſe conditions, that the ſoldiers ſhould depart in ſafety with bag and baggage: vpon which newes the Britains army determined to march to Saint Albin, hoping eaſily to take the towne bicauſe the French garriſon within it was but ſmall, and that in the meane time the ſoldiers that were departed out of Fongieres, ſhould ioine with them and increaſe their forces. On the other ſide the French army marched alſo towards Saint Albin meaning to be there before the Britains; but it ſo fell out that neither of them entered the towne, bicauſe before they came thither they met & fought. For you ſhall vnderſtand that the ſame ſaterday that the Britains receiued newes of the taking of Fongieres, they marched to a village called Orenge two leagues from Saint Albin, where they were aduertiſed that the Kings army marched againſt them with a ful reſolution to fight with them.
                  The ſunday morning the Britaines conſulted of the order of their battell, and bicauſe the footemen were iealous of the French horſemen that were in their campe, and namely of the Duke of Orleans himſelfe: it was thought good that he and the Prince of Orenge ſhould leaue their horſes, and put themſelues on foote in the battell among the Swiſſers, and ſo they did. The vaward was lead by the Marſhall of Rieux, the battel by the Lord of Alebret, and the rereward by the Lord of Chaſteaubrian: vpon one of their wings was placed their artillerie and their carriage. And the more to terrifie the French with the great number of Engliſh men, whereas there were in truth but three hundred Engliſh men lead by the Lord Talbot, ſeauenteen hundred Britain footemen were ioined to them, armed with iacks and red croſſ
                        •
                     s Engliſh like: and the monday morning they raunged themſelues in battell in this order aboue rehearſed, hard by a groue of wood attending the French army. The Kings army (whereof Maſter Lewis of Trimouille Vicount of Touars, being fiue or ſixe and twenty yeeres of age, was generall,) departed out of Fongieres with a full reſolution to fight with the Britains. The vaward was lead by Adrian de l'hoſpitall, and Gabriell of Montfalzoys: before the which, ten or twelue valiant French knights aduanced themſelues to diſcouer the Britains actions, whoſe good order when they had viewed, they retired to their company, & thē being in troupe al cloſe ioined togither approched the Britaines army, the artillerie in the meane time playing on both ſides, and greatly endammaging both the parties. The French marched very couragiouſly, and charged the Britaines vawarde, where the Marſhall of Rieux

valiantly receiued them, and acquit himſelfe ſo well both he and his companie, that the French left the vaward, & marched ſtraight vpon the Britaines battell, where the Britaine horſemen recoiled, by meanes whereof their rereward being diſcouraged fled. Then the French purſued them, and ſlue all the footemen they could ouertake: which diſorder when the Britaine vaward perceiued, they alſo diſparkled and ſought to ſaue themſelues. To conclude, the French obtained the victorie, and ſlue all thoſe that bare the red croſſe, ſuppoſing they had beene all Engliſh men, togither with twelue or thirteene hundred Britaines as well horſemen as footemen. The Duke of Orleans was taken by the footemen, and likewiſe the Prince of Orenge, who had pulled away his blacke croſſe from him, and had laid himſelfe flat vpon the ground among the dead bodies, faining himſelfe to be ſlaine; but he was knowen by a French archer, and both he and the Duke of Orleans led priſoners to Saint Albin vnder ſure garde. The Lord of Alebret ſeeing all ouerthrowen, fled away and eſcaped. The Marſhall of Rieux alſo ſaued himſelfe, and retired to Dinan. The Lord of Leon, the Lord du Pont l'Abbe, the Lord of Montfort, and diuers other noble men of Britaine were ſlaine; and of other ſoldiers to the number of ſixe thouſand: of the Kings part was ſlaine Iames Galeot a valiant and a renowmed captaine, and to the number of a thouſand or twelue hundred common ſoldiers. This battell was fought vpon monday the 28. of Iuly the yeere 1488. Soone after the Duke of Orleans was led to the caſtell of Luzignen, and from thence to Poictiers, where he remained a certaine ſpace, and laſtly to the great tower of Bourges.
                  The ſecond day after the battell, the Lord of Trimouille ſent certaine heraults to Reims to ſummon the towne to yeeld to the King: who after conſultation had anſwered the ſaid heraults, that the King had no right to the towne, and that wrongfully and without cauſe he made war vpon the countrie of Britaine, and that notwithſtanding his great armie, he could not ouerrun the countrie as he hoped: for God who defended the Britaines right, was able to do as much to him as he did to King Iohn before Poictiers, and to King Philip of Valois at Crecy: adding further, that they would not yeeld the towne, and that if Monſeur de la Trimouille came thither, he ſhould finde fortie thouſand men in the towne, whereof twenty thouſand were men of defence. This anſwer was reported to the ſaid Trimouille, who ſtaied a long time without replying one word thereunto, and afterwards by the ſame heraults aduertiſed the King thereof being at Angiers. Whereupon the King aſſembled his Councell to determine what was to be done in this caſe. Some, yea almoſt all were of opinion that the towne ſhould be beſieged: but Maſter VVilliam of Rochfort Chauncellor of Fraunce held the contrarie opinion, grounding himſelfe vpon the Kings title to the ſaid Duchie of Britaine, which was ſaid to grow by means of a certaine conueiance that Maſter Iohn of Broſſe Lord of Bouſſac husband to dame Nicole of Britaine, daughter and heire to Charles of Blois Earle of Ponthieure, had made to the Kings anceſtors, togither with diuers other titles, which were not yet prooued good: adding; that if the King had no right thereunto, it ſhould be a damnable and a tyrannous act to vſurpe another mans countrie that appertained not to him. Wherefore his aduice was, that according to the requeſt of the ambaſſadors of Britaine being at Angiers, certaine graue and learned men ſhould be appointed to examine the right of both ſides. This opinion tooke place, and according thereunto the King agreed with the ambaſſadors of Britaine, that both he and the Duke would appoint ſome graue men of their Councell, who ſhould meete in ſome indifferent towne, with the charters and writings of both ſides, to determine in conſcience to whom the ſaid Duchie did appertaine; and that in the meane time the King ſhould

hold all the places in the ſaid Duchie that alreadie he poſſeſſed. The Duke of Britaine liked this agreement well, and bicauſe the plague was vehement at Nantes, he departed thence with his two daughters, the Ladie of Laval, the Lord of Alebret, the Earle of Dunoys, the Marſhall of Rieux, the Earle of Comminges, and diuers other Lords, to Coiron vpon the riuer of Loyer three leagues beneath Nantes; where ſoone after namely vpon wedneſday the ſeauenth of September in the ſame yeere 1488. he ended his life thorow a ſicknes which he got by a fall, leauing the gouernment both of his Duchie of Britaine, and of his two daughters to the Marſhall of Rieux, to whom he appointed the Earle of Comminges for aſſiſtant. His body was carried to Nantes and buried in the Church of the Carmelites.
               
               
                  Of the Kings mariage with the Ladie Anne of Britaine, whereby Britaine was vnited to the crowne of Fraunce. Chap. 6.
                  
                     Soone after the Duke of Britaines death, died alſo Iſabell his 1489. yoonger daughter, by reaſon whereof the Ladie Anne remained his ſole heire: about whoſe mariage the nobles of Britaine fell at great variance, for part of them inclined to the Lord of Alebret a great Lord in Guienne, who alſo as it was reported, (but falſely) was contracted to this yoong Princes with the Duke hir fathers conſent, but the daie before the Duke died; but this faction was ſoone daunted, bicauſe the yoong Ladie hir ſelfe vtterly refuſed this match: part openly fauored & furthered Maximilian the Emperor Fridericks ſonne, alleaging that he would not onely be a protector of the libertie of their countrey, but alſo a ſtrong rampier againſt all French attempts. Neither was the King of Fraunce ignorant of this treatie, but knew right well that ambaſſadors had paſſed to and fro betweene Maximilian and them, ſo far foorth that the ſaid Maximilian ſuppoſing al matters to be throughly concluded and agreed on, began to imbrace al Britaine in his minde, and thought no enterpriſe too high for him if to his low countries obtained by his firſt marriage, he could now ioine the Duchy of Britaine by his ſecond. Great conſultation was had in Fraunce how to repulſe this terrible ſtorme, but Maximilians owne ſlacknes moſt furthered their deuiſes. The K. councell in the end reſolued that the King ſhould refuſe his wife being Maximilians daughter, and ſeeke with all expedition the marriage of the Lady Anne of Britaine, alleaging that the neighborhood of ſo mightie a Prince as Maximilian was, could not be but dangerous to his eſtate, of whom he could hope for nothing but diſſembled friendſhip preſently, and aſſured war in time to come, conſidering that the ſaid Maximilian forgetting already his league and affinitie with the King, ſtirred vp continually one war after another againſt him, and by that meanes profeſſed himſelfe an open enimy to him and his realme. Wherefore ambaſſadors were preſently ſent to treate of this marriage with the Lady Anne. She at the firſt woondered at the matter, and alleaged that ſhe had giuen hir faith to Maximilian, which ſhe might not breake: and further, that ſhe had beene ſolemnly married to him (according to the accuſtomed maner of Princes) by VVolfgangus Poleme of Auſtrich his proctor, purpoſely ſent by him into Britaine to that end. But the Lady of Lauat and other noble women of Britaine, whoſe company and familiarity this yoong Princes vſed and

greatly delighted in, being corrupted with French rewards and promiſes, perſwaded hir that this French match ſhould be moſt for hir ſafety and auancement; alleaging that if ſhe married with Maximilian he ſhould hardly be able to defend Britaine, whereof already they had good proofe, conſidering that he had euer diſappointed them of the ſuccors he had promiſed to ſend them. And as touching hir ſcruple of conſcience, they ſaid that the Pope who had power ouer all lawes Eccleſiaſticall, would eaſily be brought to diſpence therwith, the rather bicauſe this match ſhould be beſt for hir ſafety, and for the preſeruation of hir eſtate. The yoong Princeſſe though ſhe were of a ſingular wit and rare vertues, yet being vanquiſhed by theſe perſwaſions, yeelded to their requeſt, and deliuered both hirſelfe and hir countrey into the Kings hands, and ſoone after was the marriage ſolemnly accompliſhed to the great reioicing of the French. And thus receiued Britaine the French yoake, to the great griefe of all the ſubiects, who deſired to be gouerned by a particular Duke of their owne, as they had euer been in times paſt.
                  Not long after this marriage, the Earle of Dunois who had been the principall inſtrument of the peace, & a great furtherer of the mariage, & therby throughly reconciled to the K. ſuddenly died as he was on horſebacke for want of meat as it was ſaid. When the K. had ſet all things in good order in Britaine, he returned into Fraunce and appointed that the Ladie Margaret of Flanders ſhould remaine, accompanied with the Princes of Tarent in the caſtell of Melun vpon the riuer of Seine.
                  
                     Maximilian was forewarned of al theſe French practiſes, and ſeemed to make no account of them; but when he perceiued this marriage to be accompliſhed, it doubled his hatred againſt the King, ſo far foorth, that he openly railed vpon him and vowed himſelfe to deſtroy France with fire and ſword, and preſently inuaded Picardie. But the Lord of Cordes gouernor thereof, made head againſt him, and valiantly defended the countrey, to his owne honor and the profit of Fraunce. Further, Maximilian meaning a thorow reuenge vpon this realme, ſtirred vp the Engliſh men the ancient enimies of the crowne to paſſe into Fraunce, promiſing them great aide both of men and money out of his dominions. Wherefore I wil heere ſpeake a word or two of the affaires of England, bicauſe the Engliſhmen are our next neighbors, and both in peace and war haue euer to do with vs, and we with them.
               
               
                  Of the troubles in England, and how the King of England paſſed the ſea and beſieged Bolloin, and of the peace betweene the King and him, and of the ſurpriſing of Arras and Saint Omers by the King of Romains men. Chap. 7.
                  
                     KIng Edvvard the fourth, the ſame that met with King Levvis the eleuenth at Picquigny dying in the yeere 1483, left behinde him two ſonnes being very yoong, and diuers daughters, the gouernment of the which ſonnes togither with the realme was committed to the Duke of Gloceſter King Edvvaras brother: but he moſt 
                        •
                     nnaturally murthered his two nephewes, ſlewe thoſe of the nobilitie that he thought would impugne his proceeding, and vſurped the crowne. In the end the Duke of Buckingham (who had takerpart with the Duke of Gloceſter, who intituled himſelfe King Richard) in all his actions, fell at variance with him, and ſollicited Henry Earle

of Richmond that had liued many yeeres in Britaine as a baniſhed man; to paſſe ouer into England, promiſing him a great armie to ioine with him ſo ſoone as he ſhould be landed. The Earle communicated this matter with Peter Landois, who wholie at that time gouerned the Duke of Britaine. The ſaid Landois hoping that the Earle if by his meanes he obtained the realme of England, would giue him aide to reuenge him of his enimies; perſwaded the Duke of Britaine to ſuccour him in his enterpriſe, who furniſhed him of three great ſhips well manned with ſoldiers, which tooke ſea and ſailed towards England: but when they were readie to land, the Earle was aduertiſed that the Duke of Buckingham was beheaded, his army defeated, and all his faction ouerthrowen, and that King Richard lay with a great army vpon the ſea coaſt attending his landing. Vpon which news the Earle of Richmond returned, thinking to recouer the coaſt of Britaine from whence he was departed, but tempeſt draue him vpon the coaſt of Normandy, where he was forced to take land. The Ladie of Beauieu being aduertiſed thereof, ſent vnto him, deſiring him to come to ſpeake with the King, and ſo he did. The King curteouſly receiued him, and entertained him well. Afterward he returned to Vannes in Britaine there to remaine as before, attending ſome better opportunitie. But Peter Laudois ſeeing himſelfe diſappointed of his purpoſe, altered his minde, and practiſed with King Richard to deliuer the Earle of Richmond into his hands: who being aduertiſed thereof, vnder colour of going a hauking one morning with ten or twelue horſes fled into France to King Charles, who not long after furniſhed the Earle of ſhips, and a good number of ſoldiers to accompany him into England, where by the helpe of the French and of diuers of his owne kinſmen, who had called him into England and tooke part with him, he ſlew King Richard in the field, & was himſelfe crowned King in his place. This good turne of King Charles, togither with the deſire the King of England had to liue quietly at home in his countrey, and to gather wealth, was the cauſe that King Henry during al the wars and troubles in Britain aboue mentioned, had not paſſed his forces into Fraunce: notwithſtanding that he had been often earneſtly ſollicited thereunto, both by the Duke of Britaine, and the Earle of Dunois and others of that faction. For ordinarily when any troubles ariſe in Fraunce, our neighbors, eſpecially the Engliſhmen, within a yeere are bidden to the banquet, and ſo was King Henry inuited, and had come long ago, if the reaſons aboue rehearſed togither with ſome other reſpects, namely feare of domeſticall troubles had not ſtaied him at home.
                  But notwithſtanding the K. of Englāds backwardnes heertofore to inuade France: yet in the yeere 1490. partly by the earneſt ſollicitation of Maximilian, who promiſed 1490. him great aide in his wars, and yet performed nothing: partly to content his owne people, who began to account him as too much affectionate to the French in that he had ſuffered them to the great preiudice of the realme of England, to vnite to the crowne of Fraunce the Duchie of Britaine: he paſſed ouer his armie to Calice, and from thence marched and laide his ſiege before Boloyne, whither the Lord of Cordes and the baſtard of Cardonne Captaine of Arras, with a ſmall army went to make reſiſtance. Further, the King leuied his forces to ſuccour the place, but bicauſe his armie proceeded but ſlowlie forward: the ſaide de Cordes and Cardonne tooke vpon them the defence of the tovne. The ſiege was nothing whot, for the which cauſe a heraultſent into the Engliſh came to treat of peace; from the which King Henry ſeemed nothing ſtrange as well for the affection that he bare to the King, who had aided him to obtaine the realme of England; as alſo for that he feared ſedition at home, & durſt not long be abſent out of his r
                        •
                     alme, bicauſe Maximilian had broken promiſe with him, and laſtly bicauſe he hoped by this peace to receiue of

the King a great ſumme of money, which he loued as well as any Prince in his time. De Cordes finding the King of Englands inclination to peace, went and communed with him in his campe: his demands were, firſt a great ſumme of money that he ſaid he had lent the late Duke of Britaine: and ſecondarily, that the King ſhould deſraie al the charges that he had been at in theſe wars. All the which the King yeelded vnto, and order was giuen that the King of England ſhould yeerely receiue a certaine ſumme of money, till all the ſummes by him demanded were cleerely paid and diſcharged, and thus returned the King of England home.
                  In the meane time while de Cordes and Cardonne were at Bolloin treating with the K. of England: the citizens of Arras knowing the garriſon within the town to be but weake, practiſed to yeeld it into Maximilians hands, who ſent certaine bands thither, the which in great diligence approched neere to the towne. When all things were in a readines, and the gates being ſo negligently guarded, that the traitors with their counterfaited keies had opened them, they began a ſong, whereby they willed the enimies to make haſte, who preſently repaired to the gates, and were receiued into the towne. Paul Carqueleuant a Briton, gouernor of the townein the abſence of the baſtard of Cardonne, at the enimies firſt entrie retired himſelfe with his ſoldiers into the caſtel; but fearing leaſt it ſhould be taken by aſſault, he ſoone abandoned it, greatly to his reproch: for if he had held it but till the next day, diuers French bands had come thither to his reliefe. The towne was ſpoiled, and many ſlaine, neither were the churches ſpared nor the traitors houſes. The author of this treaſon was a poore ſmith that dwelled vpon the towne wall, and had beene the onely man that was ſuffered to remaine in the towne by Levvis the eleuenth, when he tranſported the townes men as a colonie into Fraunce. Carqueleuant the gouernor, when the towne was ſurpriſed lay faſt a ſleepe, drowned in drinke and good cheere as it is ſaid. The towne was ſpoiled by the ſoldiers bicauſe Maximilian was behinde with them for certaine moneths paie. Saint Omers was alſo taken at the ſame time, though ſome refer it to an other time, but whenſoeuer it was taken, this is moſt certaine that the negligence of the watch was the loſſe thereof. For the enimies being led by George Deberfin made ſhew at their firſt comming before the towne, as though they would haue ſcaled it, at which time the French ſoldiers were ready to withſtand them vpon the wals, being ſtrong and very defenſible both by nature and by Arte: whereupon the enimies vnder pretence of feare, retired into their campe; yea and further, when the French iſſued foorth to skirmiſh with them, they euer retired faining the like feare, which diſſimulation they vſed by the ſpace of eight daies, and by this their pollicie, cauſed the French to remit much of their accuſtomed induſtry and diligence: which when the Burgundians and Almaines perceiued, they with great expedition reared ladders againſt the wals and bulwarks of the town, which they eaſily entered, the watch being faſt a ſleepe, and in ſome place no watch at all. Then brake they open the gates, ſlew the French ſoldiers and the citizens, and ſo became Maſters of the towne.
                  At the ſame time was Amiens alſo attempted by the Burgundians in the night, and like to haue been ſurpriſed by the like negligence of the watch: but Katherine de Liques (a woman of a manlike courage) awaked the watch out of their dead ſleepe, by meanes whereof the alarme was ſounded, and all the towne aroſe in armes, and part went to defend the wals, and the reſt iſſued foorth and skirmiſhed, and put to flight Maximilians bands, who plainly confeſſed that the diligence and induſtrie of one woman had wrong the victory out of their hands.
               
               
                  
                  Of the reſtitution of the Counties of Rouſſillon & Parpignan to the King of Spaine, of the Emperor Fridericks death, of the peace between the King of Romaines and the King, and of the Duke of Orleans deliuery out of priſon. Chap. 8.
                  
                     
                        FErdinand King of Arragon deſired nothing more than to recouer 1492 out of the Kings hands the counties of Rouſſillon and Parpignan, engaged by him (as he ſaid) to King Lewis the eleuenth for fiftie thouſand crownes. But the nobles of Fraunce would not condeſcend to this reſtitution, bicauſe the two Counties were a rampier for the realme on that ſide towards Spaine: adding that they were not engaged to King Lewis, but abſoulutely ſolde. And notwithſtanding that the King of Spaine alleaged that King Lewis by his laſt will and Teſtament had commanded the ſaid Counties to be reſtored, knowing that they were wrongfully withheld: yet his perſwaſions and allegations little auailed. Wherefore he perceiuing that this way no good would be done, fell to practiſe with men of religion, hoping by their preaching of conſcience to King Charles to win that of him that otherwiſe he ſaw no meanes to obtaine. Wherefore he corrupted with a great ſumme of mony Oliuer Maillard, or as others write Iohn de Mauleon, a frier Franciſcane, confeſſor to the Lady of Beauieu the Kings ſiſter, who vnder his coule of religion cloking his hypocriſie and couetouſnes, perſwaded hir, that except reſtitution were made of theſe territories to the King of Spaine, the King hir brothers gouerment could not proſper nor pleaſe God. She being mooued in conſcience by this friers perſwaſions, brake this matter to Lewis of Amboiſe biſhop of Alby, the Kings ſchoolmaſter, who togither with hir ſo terrified the Kings conſcience, that he did not onely make reſtitution of the ſaid territories by the hands of the ſaid biſhop, whom he ſent thither to deliuer them: but alſo freely releaſed to the King of Arragon all the money that King Levvis his father had paid for them; with theſe conditions, that the ſaid King of Arragon and his ſucceſſors, ſhould euer after loue and honor the realme of Fraunce, that he ſhould make no war againſt it, nor aide with money, victuals, or councell any of the enimies thereof, nor permit them to haue paſſage through his dominions. And thus were theſe countries reſtored, greatly to the French mens griefe and dammage; but in truth the King the rather inclined to reſtore them, bicauſe hee began already by the perſwaſion of thoſe that were about him to phanſie a voiage into Italie, for the recouerie of the realme of Naples, which afterward tooke effect, though the King both now & long after this, kept his purpoſe ſecret to himſelfe, and one or two more, which voiage I thinke was the principall cauſe that induced him to reſtore the foreſaid countries, thereby to tie the King of Spaine to him, that he ſhould not trouble him in his enterpriſe; but he miſreckoned himſelfe, for he was no ſooner paſt the mountaines, but the King of Spaine forgot all his kindnes, and fell to practiſe a league with his enimies.
                  While theſe matters paſſed thus in Fraunce, Friderick the Emperor died, to 
                        The Emperor Frederick died 19. of August 1493. whom his ſonne Maximilian ſucceeded, who notwithſtanding was neuer crowned neither greatly deſired ſo to be, although with a ſmall requeſt he might haue obtaied

it. The Emperor Maximilian purpoſing to quiet the ſtate of the Empire troubled by his fathers death, ſeemed more enclined to peace with the King than heertofore he had beene, which happened verie fortunately for the Kings affaires: for without Maximilian were pacified, his voiage into Italie muſt of force haue ſtaide; but both the parties by this meanes inclining to concord, the peace was ſoone concluded: the Emperors daughter was reſtored vnto him, and the countie of Artois togither with all the townes he quarrelled. And thus the King being in peace with all his neighbours: namely, with the Emperor and the Kings of England and Spaine, and poſſeſſing the Duchie of Britaine quietly by his mariage, and by that meanes hauing no body to feare, began wholie to diſpoſe himſelfe to his voiage into Italie, whereupon his minde was altogither fixed.
                  Further, about this verie time the King at the earneſt ſute and continuall teares of his ſiſter Iane a Ladie of ſingular pietie and chaſtitie, reſtored not onely to liberty, but alſo to his fauor and familiaritie, Lewis Duke of Orleans (husband to the ſaide Ladie,) taken priſoner at the battell of Saint Albin in Britaine, as before you haue heard: whereby as the King deſerued great commendations for his clemencie in preſeruing his enimie taken in battell and reſtoring him to his former dignitie and honor: ſo did he alſo thereby prouide that no diſcontented ſubiect at home ſhould trouble his eſtate in his abſence in his voiage to Naples: whereunto the hiſtorie of Commines now calleth vs, which from the death of King Lewis the eleuenth till this preſent, I haue ſupplied out of other good authors, bicauſe the ſaid Commines being impriſoned, or in diſgrace almoſt euer ſithence King Lewis his death till the ſaide voiage of Naples, (whereat he was preſent) was ſilent and left nothing in writing to the poſteritie of all thoſe yeeres.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF PHILIP DE COMMINES, TREATING OF THE PRINCIPALL ACTES OF KING CHARLES THE EIGHT, SONNE TO LEWIS THE ELEVENTH.
            
               THE PROLOGVE OF THE AVTHOR, containing that which he mindeth to treate of in this hiſtorie following.
               
                  TO continue the Hiſtorie written by me Philip de Commines of the reigne of King Lewis the eleuenth (whom God aſſoile,) I wil now declare the occaſion that mooued King Charles the eight his ſonne to make his voiage into Italie, wherat my ſelfe was preſent. The ſaid King departed from Vienna in Daulphine the 23. of Auguſt, the yeere 1494. and returned into his realme about October, the yeere 1495. Before the enterpriſe was fully reſolued on; the matter was often debated whether he ſhould go or not: for the voiage ſeemed very dangerous to all men of wiſdome and experience, neither did any allow therof, but the King himſelfe, and one Stephen de Vers borne in Languedoc, a man of meane parentage, and vtterly vnacquainted with the wars, and all things thereunto appertaining. One other alſo being of the receit was a furtherer thereof till his hart failed him, namely the generall Briſſonnet, who afterward by occaſion of this voiage, was preferred to many goodly dignities and ſpirituall promotions, and created a Cardinall. The former had already gotten goodly poſſeſſions, for he was Seneſchall of Beaucaire, and preſident of the Comptes at Paris: he had ſerued the King in his youth very faithfully, being a groome of his chamber, and by his meanes the generall was woon to fauor this voiage; ſo that they two were the onely authors thereof; for the which, fewe commended, but many blamed them: for all things neceſſarie for ſo great an enterpriſe were wanting. The King was yoong, a weake body, wedded to his owne will, ſlenderly accompanied with wiſe men or good captaines, and ſo vtterly vnfurniſhed of money: that before his departure, he borrowed of the banke of Soly at Genua a hundred thouſand franks vpon great entereſt, from Mart to Marte 
                     1
                  . In diuers other places alſo he borrowed money as heereafter you ſhall heare. His army was vnprouided of tents and pauillions, and winter was begun when he entred into Lombardy. One onely good thing he had, to wit, a couragious company of yoong gentlemen: yet not in ſuch obedience as was requiſite. Wherefore we muſt of neceſſitie conclude that this voiage was gouerned by God alone, both at our going foorth, and our returne home; for the wiſdome of the authors thereof aboue mentioned, ſerued to no great purpoſe: notwithſtanding they might iuſtly vaunt themſelues to be the occaſion of the great honor and renowme their Maſter wan thereby.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 The intereſt of this money, as he ſaith in the end of the fourth Chapter, amounted in fovver moneths to fovverteene thouſand franks. Further, there are at Genua certaine Marts in the yeere, from the one of the vvhich to the other, they let out their money: it is betvveene euery Marte fovver moneths.
                  
               
            
            
               How René Duke of Lorrain came into Fraunce to demaund the Duchie of Bar, and the Earledome of Prouence which King Charles held, and how he failed to enter into the realme of Naples, whereunto he pretended title as the King did, and what right both of them had thereunto. Chap. 1.
               
                  THe yeere of the Kings coronation 
                     1
                   being the 14. or 15. of his age, the Duke of Lorraine came into Fraunce, to demaund the Duchy of Bar which King Levvis the eleuenth had withholden from him, and likewiſe the Earledome of Prouence, left to the ſaid King Levvis by the laſt will and Teſtament of King Charles of Aniou his coſen germaine 
                     2
                  ; who died without iſſue. The Duke of Lorraine pretended title to it, as ſonne and heire to the daughter of Rene King of Sicilie, Duke of Aniou, and Earle of Prouence, alleaging that the ſaid King Rene had done him wrong 
                     3
                  , in preferring King Charles of Aniou being but his brother the Earle of Maines ſonne, before him being his daughters ſonne 
                     4
                  . The other anſwered, that by their anceſtors teſtaments Prouence could not deſcend to the female. In the end Bar was yeelded to him, for the which the King demanded onely a ſumme of money. Further, bicauſe the ſaid Duke of Lorrain was highly fauored, and friended by diuers of great authoritie in Fraunce, (eſpecially by Iohn Duke of Bourbon, who was old, and deſirous to marrie his ſiſter) it was agreed that during the ſpace of fower yeeres, in the which his title to the Earledome of Prouence ſhould be examined, his eſtate ſhould be wholy defraied by the King, and that he ſhould haue charge of an hundred launces, togither with a yeerely penſion of ſixe and thirtie thouſand franks during the ſaid fower yeeres. I my ſelfe was preſent at the debating and ending of all theſe controuerſies, being one of the commiſſioners purpoſely choſen for the determination thereof, both by the Kings neereſt kinſmen, and by the three eſtates of his realme: ſo was alſo Stephen de Vers aboue mentioned, who bicauſe he had gotten certaine poſſeſſions in Prouence, cauſed the King (as yoong as he was) in the preſence of his ſiſter the Ducheſſe of Bourbon, to ſay to Monſeur de Comminges, and to Monſeur de Lau, (who were both alſo in the commiſſion) and to my ſelfe, that we ſhould do our endeuor, that he might not loſe the Earledome of Prouence; which words he vttered before the agreement aboue mentioned was made.
               Before the fower yeeres expired, certaine Lawyeres of Prouence brought foorth the teſtaments of King Charles the firſt, brother to Saint Levvis, and of other Kings of Sicilie 
                     5
                   of the houſe of Fraunce. Theſe Lawyeres (among other proofes) alleaged that not onely the Earledome of Prouence; but alſo the realme of Sicilie, with

all the houſe of Anious other poſſeſſions, appertained of right to the King, and that the Duke of Lorrain had no right thereto (notwithſtanding) others maintained the contrary. All theſe Lawyers depended wholy vpon Stephen de Vers, who nouriſhed his Maſter in this language, that King Charles Earle of Prouence laſt deceaſed, ſonne to Charles of Aniou Earle of Maine, and nephew 
                     6
                   to King Rene: left Prouence to King Lewis by his laſt will and Teſtament, and that King Rene before his death made the ſaid Charles his heire, preferring him before the Duke of Lorraine his daughters ſonne, bicauſe of the teſtaments of King Charles the firſt and his wife Counteſſe of Prouence: wherein they had willed that the realme 
                     7
                   and the countie of Prouence ſhould not be ſeuered nor deſcend to the heire female, ſo long as there was iſſue male remaining. The like Teſtaments they alleaged alſo to haue beene made, by their next ſucceſſors in the ſaid realme, namely by Charles the ſecond. During theſe fower yeeres ſpace, thoſe that gouerned the King, that is to ſaie, the Duke and Dutcheſſe of Bourbon, and certaine of the Kings chamber, namely Monſeur de Grauille 
                  
                     8
                   and others, who at that time bare great ſway in Fraunce; called to the Court to high authoritie and eſtimation, the ſaid Duke of Lorraine to haue him for their ſupport and aide: (for he was a hardie gentleman & more than a courtier,) not doubting but eaſily to rid their hands of him at their pleaſure, as alſo they did when they found themſelues ſtrong ynough, and the force of the Duke of Orleans 
                     9
                   and others (whom I neede not name) ſo weakned, that it was no more to be feared. But after the fower yeeres expired they could no longer hold the Duke of Lorraine, vnleſſe they would put him in poſſeſſion of the countie of Prouence, or aſſure him of it by writing at a daie, and continue ſtill his penſion of ſixe and thirtie thouſand franks: wherunto bicauſe they would not condeſcend, he departed the Court greatly diſcontented.
               Fower or fiue moneths before his departure, a good ouerture was made vnto him if he would haue embraced it: for the whole realme of Naples rebelled againſt King Ferrande, bicauſe of his great tyrannie and his childrens, ſo far foorth that all the nobles and the third part of the realme yeelded themſelues to the Church. Notwithſtanding King Ferrande being aided by the Florentines preſſed them ſore: for the which cauſe the Pope and the ſaide Nobles of the realme that had rebelled, ſent for the Duke of Lorraine purpoſing to crowne him King, and ſo forward the enterpriſe was, that the Gallies and the Cardinall Saint Peter ad Vincula (who ſhould haue conueighed him thither,) ſtaied for him a long time at Genua: during the which ſpace he was buſied with theſe broiles in Court, and delaied his departure, notwithſtanding that he had meſſengers with him from all the Nobles of the ſaid realme, earneſtly preſſing him to come with ſpeede. To be ſhort, the King and his Councell ſhewed themſelues willing by all meanes they could to aide and ſuccour him, and gaue him ſixtie thouſand franks, (whereof he receiued twentie thouſand but loſt the reſt,) and agreed alſo that he ſhould leade with him the hundred launces that were vnder his charge, promiſing further to ſend ambaſſadors round about in his fauoure. Notwithſtanding the King was now nineteen yeeres of age or more, and gouerned by thoſe aboue named, who daily beat into his head, that the realme of Naples of right appertained to himſelfe, which I write bicauſe diuers of meane eſtate raiſed great contention about this matter: as I vnderſtood both by certaine of the ambaſſadors, ſent to Rome, Florence, Genua, and other places in the Duke of Lorraines fauor; and alſo by the Duke himſelfe, when he paſſed through Moulins where I then lay with Iohn Duke of Bourbon, bicauſe of the troubles in court. But his enterpriſe was now halfe loſt through his long delaie. I went foorthwith to recieue

him, notwithſtanding that he had deſerued no ſuch curteſie at my hands: for he was one of thoſe that chaſed me from the Court 
                     10
                   with rough and diſcourteous words: yet now he made the moſt of me that might be, lamenting much the gouernment of the eſtate. He abode at Moulins two daies with Iohn Duke of Bourbon, and then tooke his iourney towards Lyons.
               To conclude, his friends were ſo wearied and weakned bicauſe of his long delay, that the Pope made peace, and the nobles of the realme alſo, who vnder ſuretie thereof went to Naples where they were all taken priſoners: notwithſtanding that both the Pope, the Venetians, the King of Spaine, and the Florentines had vndertaken to ſee the treatie kept and obſerued, and had ſworne and promiſed the Nobles ſafetie. The Prince of Salerne eſcaped and came into Fraunce, refuſing to be comprehended in the treatie as one well acquainted with King Ferrands humor: but the Duke of Lorraine returned into his countrey with diſhonor, and loſt his credit with the King, loſt his men of armes, and loſt alſo the penſion of ſixe and thirtie thouſand franks which he receiued for Prouence: and euen at this preſent being the yeere 1497. he liueth yet in this eſtate.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 King Charles was crowned ann. 1484. in Iune.
                  
                  2 This coſin german muſt be referred to King Lewis.
                  3 For King Rene made Charles his brothers ſonne his heire, omitting this Duke of Lorraine his daughters ſonne.
                  
                  4 The pedegree in the end of the worke will make this title plaine.
                  
                  5 The author vnder the name of Sicilie comprehendeth the realme of Naples alſo, bicauſe both the realmes bare the name of Sicilie, the one beyond, the other on this ſide the far.
                  
                  6 By nephew he meaneth brothers ſonne.
                  
                  7 Vnderſtand this of the realme of Sicilie and Naples.
                  
                  8 This de Grauille was after Admirall of Fraunce.
                  
                  9 Madam de Beauieu Ducheſſe of Bourbon was appointed by King Lewis and the three eſtates gouernor of King Charles hir brother; but the Duke of Orleans, called after Lewis the 12. withſtood the decree, and was in armes with diuers noble men, demanding the gouenrment as the firſt Prince of blood, as in my Supply is mentioned at large, againſt theſe they heere named, called the Duke of Lorraine.
                  
                  10 For Philip de Commines was a follower of the Duke of Orleans, as himſelfe writeth in the laſt chapter of the laſt booke.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Prince of Salerne in the realme of Naples came into Fraunce, and how Lodouic Sforce ſurnamed the Moore and he, ſought to perſwade the King to make war vpon the King of Naples, and for what cauſe. Chap. 2.
               
                  THe Prince of Salerne fled to Venice (where he was well friended) accompanied with three of his nephewes, ſonnes to the Prince of Biſignan 
                     1
                  . There they asked counſell of the Seniorie, (as the Prince himſelfe told me) whether it would pleaſe them that they ſhould retire to the Duke of Lorraine, the King of Fraunce, or the King of Spaine. They anſwered, that the Duke of Lorraine was a dead man vnable to do them good, and that

the King of Spaine ſhould be too ſtrong, if to the yle of Sicilie and the other places which he held in the Venetian gulfe he ſhould ioine the realme of Naples; adding, that he was alreadie mightie vpon the ſea: wherefore they aduiſed him to go into Fraunce, ſaying that with the Kings of Fraunce 
                     2
                   that had held the ſaid realme, they had euer liued in perfect amitie and friendſhip, and found them alwaies good neighbors. But I ſupoſe, they thought not the enterpriſe would haue fallen out as afterward it did. Thus theſe noble men aboue named came into Fraunce, where they were curteouſly receiued, but their entertainment was ſmall. They followed their ſute earneſtly the ſpace of two yeeres, addreſſing themſelues wholy to Stephan de Vers then Seneſchall of Beaucaire and of the Kings priuie chamber.
               One day they liued in hope, another in deſpaire; but their friends vſed great diligence in Italie, ſpecially at Milan, whereof Iohn Galeas was Duke, not the great Iohn Galeas that lieth buried in the Charterhouſe of Pauia, but he that was ſonne to Duke Galeas and the Ducheſſe Bonne daughter to the Duke of Sauoy, a man of no great ſenſe. The ſaid Ducheſſe had the wardſhip of hir children, and my ſelfe haue ſeen hir there in great authoritie, being a widow, and gouerned by one Cico a Secretarie, and an ancient ſeruant of that houſe. This Cico had baniſhed all Duke Galeas brethren for the ſaid Ladies ſafetie and hir childrens; and among the reſt the Lord Lodouic (afterward Duke of Milan) whom ſhe reuoked being hir enimie, and in war againſt hir, togither with the Lord Robert of Saint Seuerine a valiant captaine, whom ſhe had alſo baniſhed by the ſaid Cicos perſwaſion. To be ſhort, at the requeſt of a yoong man that carued before hir called Anthony Theſin, being a Ferrarian of very meane parentage, ſhe called them all home through great ſimplicitie, ſuppoſing they would do the ſaid Cico no harme, and the truth is that ſo they had ſworne and promiſed. But the third day after their returne, they tooke him notwithſtanding their oth, and caried him in an emptie caske through the town of Milan: he was allied by mariage to one of the Viſcomtes 
                     3
                  , and if the ſaid Vicomt had been in the citie at that preſent, ſome ſay they durſt not haue taken him. Moreouer the Lord Lodcuic cauſed this matter ſo to be ordered, that the ſaid Robert of S. Seuerin comming that way, ſhould meete with this Cico as he paſſed through the towne in this eſtate, bicauſe he hated him extremely. Thus was he led priſoner to the caſtle of Pauie where he died.
               They vſed this Lady very honorably in hir iudgement, ſeeking to content hir humor in all things; but all matters of importance they two diſpatched, making hir priuie but to what pleaſed them, and no greater pleaſure could they do hir, than to communicate nothing with hir.
               They permitted hir to giue this Anthony Theſin what ſhe would, they lodged him hard by hir chamber, he carried hir on horſebacke behinde him in the towne, and in hir houſe was nothing but feaſting and dauncing; but this iollitie endured but halfe a yeere. She gaue many goodly things to this Theſin, and the couriers packets were adreſſed to him, which bred great diſdaine in many, wherein the L. Lodouic, vncle to the two children (aſpiring to the Duchie, which afterward alſo he obteined) nouriſhed them as much as in him lay. One morning they tooke hir two ſonnes from hir, and lodged them in a great tower within the caſtell called the rocke, wherunto conſented the ſaid Lodouic, the Lord Robert of Saint Seuerin, one called de Palleuoiſin gouernor of the yoong Dukes perſon, and the captaine of the rocke 
                     4
                  , who ſince Duke Galeas death had neuer departed out of the place, neither did many yeeres after this, till he was taken priſoner by the Lord Lodouickes ſubtletie, and his maſters folly, being of his mothers diſpoſition. After the aboue named had lodged theſe children in the rocke, they ſeized vpon the treaſure being at that time the richeſt in Chriſtendome,

and made hir yeeld account thereof. Moreouer, they cauſed three keies therof to be made, one of the which ſhe kept, but the treaſure after that day ſhe neuer touched. They made hir alſo to ſurrender the wardſhip of hir children, and the ſaid Lodouic was choſen their guardian. Further, they ſent letters into diuers countries eſpecially into Fraunce (which my ſelfe ſawe) written to hir great diſhonor: for they charged hir with this Anthonie Theſin, whom notwithſtanding they ſent away vnharmed, for the Lord Robert ſaued both his life and goods. Theſe two great men entred not into the rocke at their pleaſure, for the captaine had his brother in it with a garriſon of a hundred and fiftie ſoldiers or better, & when they entred, the gate was ſtraightly kept, neither entred they accompanied at any time with more than a man or two, and this endured a long ſpace.
               In the meane time great variance aroſe between the Lord Lodouic and Robert of S. Seuerin, (for vſually two great men can not long agree:) but Lodouic wan the garland, & the other departed to the Venetians ſeruice. Notwithſtanding, afterwards two of his ſonnes returned to the ſeruice of the ſaid Lodouic, and the ſtate of Milan, (namely Maſter Galeas, and the Earle of Caiazze) ſome ſay with their fathers conſent, others ſay no: but howſoeuer it were, the ſaid Lodouic highly fauored them, and both hath been and yet is very faithfully ſerued by them. You ſhall vnderſtand that their father the Lord Robert of Saint Seuerin was iſſued of a baſe daughter of the houſe of Saint Seuerin, but in Italie they make no difference betweene a baſtard and childe legitimate. This I write bicauſe they furthered our enterpriſe in Italy, aſwell in fauour of the Prince of Salerne chiefe of the ſaid houſe of Saint Seuerin, as alſo for diuers other reſpects, whereof heereafter you ſhall heare.
               The Lord Lodouic declared immediately that he would by all meanes poſſible maintaine his authoritie, for he cauſed money to be coined, on the one ſide wherof the Dukes image was ſtamped, and on the other his own, whereat many murmured. This Duke was married to the daughter of Alfonſe Duke of Calabria, and King of Naples after his father King Ferrandes death. His ſaid wife was a Lady of a great courage, and would gladly haue increaſed hir husbands authority if ſhe could, but hir husband lacked wit, and diſcloſed all hir actions. The captaine alſo of the rocke of Milan continued long in great authoritie, and neuer departed out of the place; for many iealouſies were now ariſen, ſo far foorth that when one of the children went abroad, the other abode within. To be ſhort, a yeere or two before we entred into Italy, the Lord Lodouic hauing been abroad with the Duke, and purpoſing ſome miſchiefe, waited vpon him at his returne home to the caſtle, according to his accuſtomed maner. The captaine came vpon the drawe bridge with his men about him, to kiſſe the Dukes hand as their maner is. The Duke at this time was ſomewhat without the bridge, in ſuch ſort that the captain was forced to ſtep foorth a pace or two, where theſe two ſonnes of Saint Seuerin, and others that were about them laid hold vpon him. They within drew vp the bridge, but the Lord Lodouic cauſed an end of a waxe candle to be lighted, & ſware that he would ſmite off their heads 
                     5
                   if they yeelded not the place before the candle were burned out; whereupon they deliuered it, and then he furniſhed it wel and ſurely for himſelfe, but all in the Dukes name. Further, he endited the captaine of high treaſon, laying to his charge that he would haue put the place into the Emperors hands: and ſtaied certaine Almains, charging them as practiſers with the captaine about this enterpriſe, yet afterward diſmiſſed them without farther harme. He beheaded alſo one of his owne ſecretaries, charging him in like maner as a dealer in the matter, and yet one other who he ſaid had been a meſſenger 
                     6
                   between them. The captaine he kept long in priſon, yet in the

end deliuered him, pretending that Ducheſſe Bonne had once hired a brother of the captains to kill the ſaid Lodouic as he entred into the caſtel, whom the captaine withheld frō executing the fact, for the which cauſe he now ſaued his life. Notwithſtanding if he had been giltie of ſo heinous a crime as a purpoſe to yeeld the place to the Emperor, who might haue laid claim to it, both as Emperor & Duke of Auſtrich (for that houſe pretendeth ſome title thereunto:) I thinke he would not haue pardoned him; for it would haue made a great alteration in Italie, and the whole eſtate of Milain would haue reuolted in one day. For when they liued vnder the Emperors, euerie houſehold paid but halfe a ducat for tribute: but now they are cruelly and tyrannouſlie gouerned, both the Spiritualtie, Nobilitie and Commons.
               The Lord Lodouic ſeeing himſelfe ſeized of the caſtell, and all the force of the countrie at his commandement, determined to attempt further; for he that poſſeſſeth Milan poſſeſſeth the whole eſtate, both bicauſe the chiefe of the countrie be reſident there, and alſo bicauſe thoſe that haue the charge and gouernment of the other places be all Milanois borne. Sure for the quantitie of this Duchie, I neuer ſaw a pleaſanter nor plentifuller peece of ground. For if the Prince would content himſelfe with the yeerely reuenues of fiue hundred thouſand ducats; his ſubiects ſhould be but too rich, and the Prince liue in ſuretie: but he leuieth yeerely ſixe hundred and fiftie thouſand or ſeuen hundred thouſand, which is great tyrannie: and therefore the people deſire nothing more than change of their Prince. Which the L. Lodouic conſidering, togither with the other reaſons aboue rehearſed, and being already married to the Duke of Ferraraes daughter, by whom he had many children, determined to accompliſh his intent, and endeuored to win friends not onely in the ſaid Duchie, but alſo abrode in Italie. Wherefore firſt he entred into league with the Venetians for the preſeruation of their eſtate, whereunto he was great friend to his father in lawes preiudice, from whom the ſaid Venetians not long before had taken a little territorie called the Poleſan, enuironed with water, and maruellouſly abounding with all kinde of wealth. This country being diſtant but halfe a league from Ferrara, the Venetians poſſeſſe yet at this day. There are in it two prety townes, which I haue been in my ſelfe, the one named Rouigue, the other Labadie. The Duke of Ferrara loſt it in the war that himſelfe firſt mooued againſt the Venetians: for notwithſtanding that before the end of thoſe wars, Alphonſe Duke of Calabria (his father King Ferrande yet liuing) the Lord Lodouic with the force of Milan, the Florentines, the Pope, and the towne of Bolonia came to his aide: by meanes whereof the Venetians were brought altogither vnder foote, or at the leaſt to great extremitie, being vtterly vnfurniſhed of monie, and hauing loſt diuers places: yet the ſaid Lodouic concluded a treatie to their honor and profit; for euery man was reſtored to his owne ſaue the poore Duke of Ferrara, who was forced to leaue vnto them the Poleſan (which they yet hold:) notwithſtanding that he had mooued this war at the requeſt of the Lord Lodouic, and of King Ferrande whoſe daughter he had married. The report went that Lodouic receiued threeſcore thouſand ducats of the Venetians for making this treatie. Whether it were ſo or no, I know not, but ſure I am that the Duke of Ferrara was once perſwaded that it was ſo: for at that time the ſaid Lodouic was not married to his daughter. From that day forward amitie euer continued betweene the Venetians and the ſaid Lodouic. No ſeruant nor kinſman of Iohn Galeas Duke of Milan ſought to impeach and ſtop the Lord Lodouic from ſeizing the Duchie into his own hands, ſaue onely the Ducheſſe his wife, who was yoong, but a very wiſe Lady. She was daughter to Alfonſe Duke of Calabria before mentioned, ſonne and heire to Ferrande King of Naples. In the yeere 1493. the ſaid Lodouic ſent to King

                  Charles the 8. now raigning, to perſwade him to come into Italie to conquer the realme of Naples, and to vanquiſh and ſubdue thoſe that poſſeſſed it: for ſo long as they floriſhed and were of force, he durſt neuer attempt that which afterward he accompliſhed. At that time the ſaid Ferrande King of Naples and Alphonſe his ſonne were puiſſant, rich, of great experience in the wars, and accounted Princes of hautie courages, though afterward their actions declared the contrarie. The ſaid Lodouic was alſo a very wiſe man, but maruellous timorous, and humble when he ſtood in feare, and void of all faith, if the breach thereof might turne to his profit. I ſpeake as one that knew him throughly well, bicauſe I haue dealt with him in many matters. But to proceede, in the yeere 1493. (as before I ſaid) the Lord Lodouic began to tickle this yoong King Charles, being but two and twenty yeeres of age, with the ambition and vaineglorie of Italie, ſhewing him what right he had to this goodly realme of Naples, which I warrant you he skilfully blazed and painted foorth. In all theſe negotiations he addreſſed himſelfe to Stephan de Vers, then newly made Seneſchall of Beaucaire, and maruellouſly enriched though not ſatisfied, and to the Generall Briſſonet, a rich man, skilfull in matters of the receit, and great friend at that time to the ſaid Seneſchall, by whoſe meanes the Lord Lodouic perſwaded the ſaid Briſſonet to become a prieſt, promiſing to make him a Cardinall, but the Seneſchall himſelfe he promiſed to make a Duke. And to ſet all theſe practiſes on foote, the ſaid Lodouic ſent in the ſame yeere to Paris a goodly ambaſſage to the King, the chiefe whereof was the Earle of Caiazze ſonne and heire to the aboue named Robert of Saint Seuerin, who found there the Prince of Salerne his coſin: for the ſaid Prince was chiefe of the houſe of Saint Seuerin (as I haue alreadie made mention) and liued in Fraunce, being baniſhed by King Ferrande of Naples, as before you haue heard, and therfore trauelled earneſtly that this voiage to Naples might go forward. With the ſaid Earle of Caiazze came alſo Charles Earle of Belleioyeuſe, and Maſter Galeas Viſcount of Milan, who were both in very good order and well accompanied, but openly they vſed ſalutations onely and generall ſpeeches. This was the firſt great ambaſſage that came from the Lord Lodouic to the King. True it is that he had ſent before this, one of his Secretaries to negotiate with the King, to ſend his deputie into Italie to receiue homage of his coſin the Duke of Milan for Genua, which was granted him againſt all reaſon 
                     8
                  : notwithſtanding I will not denie, but that the King of eſpeciall fauor might aſſigne one to receiue it of him; for when this Duke Galeas was warde to his mother, I being then ambaſſador for King Lewis the 11. receiued his homage in the caſtell of Milan, hauing an expreſſe commiſſion from the King ſo to do. But Genua was then out of the Duke of Milans hands, and held by Maſter Baptiſt de Campefourgouſe; but at this preſent the Lord Lodouic had recouered it, and gaue to certaine of the Kings chamber eight thouſand ducats for the inueſture thereof, who by receiuing the monie greatly preiudiced the King. For before the graunt of the ſaid inueſture, they might haue ſeized Genua to the Kings owne vſe, if they had would 
                     9
                  : but ſeeing they meant to take monie for it, they ought to haue demanded more: for Duke Galeas paide at one time for it to King Lewis my Maſter fiftie thouſand ducats, whereof the King (whoſe ſoule God pardon) gaue me thirtie thouſand crownes in reward. Notwithſtanding they ſaid they receiued theſe eight thouſand ducats with the Kings conſent, and Stephan de Vers Seneſchall of Beaucaire was one of thoſe that tooke the monie, happily to entertaine the better the Lord Lodouic for this enterpriſe, which he ſo much both fauored and furthered. After audience giuen openly at Paris to the ambaſſadors aboue mentioned, the Earle of Caiazze had ſecret communication with the King. The ſaid Earle was in great credit at Milan, but his brother

Maſter Galeas of Saint Seuerin in greater, eſpecially in martiall affaires. His Maſter could now diſpoſe of the eſtate of Milan as of his owne: for the which cauſe he offered the King great ſeruices and aide as well of men as mony, affirming the enterpriſe to be of no difficultie. This done, he and Maſter Galeas Viſcount tooke their leaue and departed, leauing behinde them the Earle Charles of Belleioyeuſe to entertaine the ſute, who incontinent put himſelfe into French apparell, and trauelled ſo earneſtly in this buſines, that many began to like of the enterpriſe. The King ſent into Italie to Pope Innocentius, to the Venetians, and to the Florentines one named Peron of Baſche, who had been brought vp in the houſe of Aniou vnder Duke Iohn of Calabria, and was maruellouſly affectioned to this voiage. Theſe practiſes and runnings to and fro continued the ſpace of ſeuen or eight moneths, and thoſe that vnderſtood of this enterpriſe, communed among themſelues diuerſly of it, but none thought that the King would go in perſon into Italie.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Antonel of Saint Seuerin Prince of Salerne, and Bernardin Prince of Beſignan, were brethren. Guicciar.
                  2 He meaneth by Kings of Fraunce thoſe Kings of the houſe of Fraunce, that had held the realme of Naples, to wit, the Dukes of Aniou.
                  
                  3 Viſcomte in both theſe places, and diuers others, is a proper name, not a name of honor, and ſignifieth as much as Biſcomte, that is, tvviſe Earle, bicauſe the Viſcomti were Lords of Angiera and Milan.
                  
                  4 This captaine meant no treaſon to the children as the others did, but conſented to this deede, bicauſe he thought the children in more ſafetie vvith him than vvith their fooliſh mother.
                  
                  5 The ſenſe in mine opinion were better to read it qu'il luy feroit, then qu'il leur feroit, that is, that he vvould ſmite off the captaines head, if the place vvere not yeelded, for they vvithin vvere out of Lodouics povver.
                  
                  6 The French had it in this ſenſe. And another vvho ſaid that he had been a meſſenger betvveene them: but vndoubtedly the place is corrupted and to be read as I haue amended it.
                  
                  7 The Duke of Ferrara had married King Ferrandes daughter named Elenor.
                  8 Duke Galeas ought to haue come into Fraunce to haue done homage to the King in perſon, but bicauſe Lodouic vvould not let him depart out of his cuſtodie, he found means that it ſhould be done to one ſent thither by the King as his deputie for that purpoſe.
                  
                  9 Genua vvas forfeited, and vnder colour thereof, the Lord Lodouic had recouered it, but bicauſe it vvas held of the King (for the Genuois had giuen themſelues to Charles the ſixt, anno 1394. vvho ſent thither for gouernor Iohn de Maingre, and aftervvard to Charles the ſeuenth, anno 1446.) it could be forfeited to none but to the King, but by giuing avvay this inueſture, he gaue avvay his right.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How King Charles the eight made peace with the King of Romanes and the Archduke of Auſtrich, reſtoring to them the Lady Margaret of Flaunders, before he made his voiage to Naples. Chap. 3.
               
                  DVring this delaie aboue mentioned, peace was treated of at Senlis betweene the King and the Archduke of Auſtriche, heire of the houſe of Burgundie: for notwithſtanding that they were in truce, yet a breach happened betweene them, bicauſe the King refuſed the King of Romaines daughter ſiſter to the ſaid Archduke (being verie yoong,) and married the daughter of Frauncis Duke of Britaine, to enioie peaceablie thereby the Duchie of Britaine: all the which at the time of this treatie he held, ſaue the towne of Renes and the ſaid daughter being within in it; the which was gouerned by the Prince of Orenge hir vncle, who had made a marriage betweene hir and the King of Romaines 
                     1
                   and openly ſolemniſed it in the church by a Practor. All the which happened in the yeere 1492. To this treatie aboue mentioned came a great ambaſſage in fauoure of the Duke of Auſtriche from the Emperor Frederick, who offered to be a mediator for the peace: the King of Romains ſent thither alſo, 
                     2
                   and ſo did the Palzgraue, and the Swiſſers to pacifie this controuerſie, being all of opinion that it would kindle a great fire: for the King of Romains ſeemed aboue all meaſure to be iniuried, hauing at one time hir taken from him whom he accounted his wife, and his daughter ſent backe to him which many yeeres had beene Queene of Fraunce: but in the end the matter was quietly ſhut vp, and peace concluded. For all parties were wearie of war, eſpecially Duke Philips ſubiects, who had ſuſtained ſo many troubles, partly bicauſe of wars with this realme, and partly through their owne priuate diuiſions, that they could no more. The peace was concluded but for fower yeeres, whereunto the King of Romaines agreed, to the end he might repoſe his ſubiects, and receiue againe his daughter: whom ſome that were about the King and the ſaid daughter, made difficultie to reſtore. At this treatie I was preſent my ſelfe with the reſt of the Kings Commiſſioners being theſe, Peter Duke of Bourbon, the Prince of Orenge, the Lord of Cordes, and diuers other noble perſonages, and promiſe was there made to reſtore to the ſaid Duke Philip all that the King held in Artois: for ſo was it agreed when this mariage was treated of in the yeere 1482. that if it were not accompliſhed, all the landes that were giuen with this Ladie in maraige ſhould returne againe with hir, or be reſtored to Duke Philip. But the ſaid Archdukes men had alreadie ſurpriſed Arras and Saint Omer, ſo that onely Hedin, Aire, and Betune remained to be reſtored: the poſſeſſion and ſeniorie whereof were preſently deliuered them, and they put officers into them: but the King held ſtill the caſtels, and might place garriſons in them till the fower yeeres were expired, which ended at the feaſt of Saint Iohn Baptiſt in the yeere 1498. at which time he was bound to reſtore them alſo to the ſaid Archduke, and ſo he promiſed and ſware to do.
               Whether the alteration of theſe mariages agreed with the lawes of holy Church or no, let others iudge: for many Doctors of diuinitie ſaid yea, and many nay: but were theſe lawfull or vnlawfull; ſure all theſe Ladies were vnfortunate in their iſſue.

Our Queene had three ſonnes ſucceſſiuely one after another in fower yeeres: one of them 
                     3
                   liued almoſt three yeeres and then died, and the other two be dead alſo. The Lady Margaret of Auſtriche was afterward married to the Prince of Caſtile onely ſonne to the King and Queene of Caſtile, and heire both of Caſtile and diuers other realmes. The ſaid Prince died the firſt yeere of his marriage in the yeere of our Lord 1497. leauing his wife great bellied 
                     4
                  , who immediately after hir husbands death fell in trauel before hir time, and was deliuered of a dead borne childe; which misfortune the King and Queene of Caſtile and their whole realme lamented a long time. The King of Romanes immediately after this change aboue mentioned, married the daughter of Galeas Duke of Milan, ſiſter to Duke Iohn Galeas before named, the which marriage was made by the Lord Lodouics onely procurement: but it diſpleaſed greatly both the Princes of the Empire, and many alſo of the King of Romanes friends, bicauſe ſhe was not of a houſe noble ynough in their opinion to match with their Emperor. For as touching the Viſcounts of whom the Dukes of Milan are deſcended, ſmall nobilitie is in them, and leſſe yet in the Sforces; for the firſt of that houſe was Francis Sforce Duke of Milan, whoſe father was a ſhoomaker 
                     5
                   dwelling in a little towne called Cotignoles, but a very valiant man, though not ſo valiant as his ſonne, who by meanes of the great fauour the people of Milan bare his wife, being baſtard daughter to Duke Philip Marie, made himſelfe Duke, and conquered and gouerned the whole countrie not as a tyrant, but as a good and iuſt Prince: ſo that in woorthines and vertue, he was comparable to the nobleſt Princes that liued in his daies. Thus much I haue written to ſhew what followed the change of theſe marriages, neither know I what may yet heerafter enſue further thereof.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Annal. Burgund. vvrite, vvith Philip the King of Romaines ſonne, but the best vvriters agree vvith our author.
                  
                  2 Maximilian vvas choſen King of Romaines, anno 1486. Funccius.
                  3 Of this childes death he vvriteth, lib. 8. cap. 13.
                  4 Of this Princes death he vvriteth at large, lib. 8. cap. 17.
                  5 Francis Sforces father (as ſome write) vvas first a cooke in the campe, after he became a ſoldier, and lastly for his valor vvas made a captaine and a knight.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King ſent to the Venetians to practiſe with them before he enterpriſed his voiage to Naples, and of the preparation that was made for the ſaid voiage. Chap. 4.
               
                  NOw to returne to the principall matter: you haue heard of the Earle of Caiazzes & the other ambaſſadors departure from the King at Paris, and of diuers practiſes entertained in Italy, and how the King as yoong as he was, greatly affected this voiage, notwithſtanding that as yet he diſcouered his meaning but to the Seneſchall and generall onely. Further, he required the Venetians to giue him aide and counſell in this enterpriſe, who anſwered him that he ſhould be welcome into Italy: but that aide him they could not, bicauſe they ſtood in doubt of the Turke, (yet were they in peace with him:) and as touching counſell, it ſhould be too great preſumption in

them to giue counſell to ſo wiſe a Prince, hauing ſo graue a counſell about him; but they promiſed rather to helpe him than hinder him. This they tooke to be a wiſe anſwer, and ſo was it I confeſſe. But notwithſtanding that, they gouerne their affaires more circumſpectly than any Prince or commonaltie in the world; yet God will alwaies haue vs to know that wiſedome and forecaſt of man auaile nought, when he is purpoſed to ſtrike the ſtroke. For he diſpoſed of this enterpriſe far otherwiſe than they imagined, for they thought not that the King would haue come in perſon into Italy, neither ſtoode they in any feare of the Turke, notwithſtanding their forged excuſe: for the Turke then raigning was a man of no valor 
                     1
                  : but they hoped by this meanes to be reuenged of the houſe of Arragon, which they hated extremely, both the father and the ſonne, bicauſe by their perſwaſion (as they ſaid) the Turke came to Scutary 
                     2
                  . I meane the father of this Turke, called Mahumet Ottoman, who tooke Conſtantinople, and greatly endammaged the ſaid Venetians. But apart to Alphonſe D. of Calabria they had many other quarrels, for they charged him, firſt, as the onely author of the war the D. of Ferrara mooued againſt them, wherin they conſumed ſuch infinit treaſure, that it had well neere cleane vndone them (of the which war a word or two hath been ſpoken before.) Secondarily, that he had ſent a man purpoſely to Venice to poiſon their ceſterns, at the leaſt, as many as might be come vnto, for diuers of them be encloſed and locked. They vſe there none other water, for they are inuironed with the ſea, and ſure that water is very good 
                     3
                  , as my ſelfe can witnes: for twice I haue been at Venice, and in my laſt voiage dranke of it eight moneths togither. But the chiefe cauſe of their hatred againſt this houſe of Arragon was none of theſe aboue reherſed; but for that the ſaid houſe kept them frō growing great as well in Italy as Greece, on both the which countries they had their eies fixed: notwithſtanding they had lately conquered the Ile of Cyprus vpon no title in the world 
                     4
                  . For all theſe conſiderations the Venetians thought it their profit, that war ſhould ariſe betweene the King and the houſe of Arragon: but they ſuppoſed that it could not haue ended ſo ſoon as it did, & that it ſhuld but weaken their enimies, not vtterly deſtroy them: and further, that if the woorſt fell, either the one partie or the other to haue their helpe, would giue them certaine townes in Pouille, lying vpon their ſea coaſt: as alſo in the end it hapned, but they had well neere miſreckoned themſelues. Laſtly, as touching the calling of the King into Italy, they thought it could not be laid to their charge, ſeeing they had giuen him neither counſell nor aide, as appeered by their anſwer to Peron of Baſche.
               In the yeere 1494. the King went to Lyons to attend to his affaires, but no man 1494. thought he would paſſe the mountaines. Thither came to him the aboue named Maſter Galeas of Saint Seuerin, brother to the Earle of Caiazze with a goodly traine, ſent from the Lord Lodouic, whoſe lieutenant and principall ſeruant he was. He brought with him a great number of braue horſes and armours to run in, and ran himſelfe, and that very well, for he was a yoong and a gallant knight. The King entertained him very honorably, feaſted him ſumptuouſly, and gaue him his order. This done, he returned into Italy. But the Earle of Belleioyeuſe remained ſtill with the King to haſten the voiage. At Genua they began to arme a great nauie, whither the King ſent the Lord of Vrfé Maſter of his horſe, with diuers others. In the end he remooued to Vienna in Daulphine, about the beginning of Auguſt in the ſame yeere, whither the nobles of Genua reſorted daily to him: wherefore to Genua he ſent Lewis Duke of Orleans, now King of this realme, a yoong gentleman of goodly perſonage, but much giuen to his pleaſures, of whom in this hiſtory ample mention ſhal be made. It was then thought that the ſaid Duke of Orleans ſhould haue led this

armie by ſea to land in the realme of Naples, by the conduct and direction of the aboue named baniſhed Princes of Salerne & Biſignan. The whole nauie was fowerteene ſhips of Genua, beſides a great number of gallies and galleons, and the King was as well obeied there in this caſe, as he ſhould haue been at Paris: for Genua was vnder the ſtate of Milan, where the Lord Lodouic gouerned all, hauing none to gainſay him, ſaue onely the Ducheſſe his nephewes wife, daughter to King Alphonſe, (for about this preſent his father King Ferrande died.) But the ſaid Lady preuailed little or nothing, both bicauſe men ſawe the King in a readines either to paſſe into Italy himſelfe, or to ſend his forces, and alſo bicauſe hir husband was a very ſimple man, and diſcloſed all hir dooings to the Lord Lodouic his vncle, who had already cauſed a meſſenger to be drowned ſent by hir, to hir father.
               This nauie did no ſeruice, notwithſtanding that the charges thereof amounted to three hūdred thouſand franks, for all the treaſure that the K. could leuy was imploied that way, by means whereof he was vnfurniſhed as before I ſaid, both of good counſell, of money, and of al things neceſſary for ſuch an enterpriſe: yet God of his meere grace (as manifeſtly he declared) gaue it good ſucceſſe. I meane not that the King was not wiſe of his age, but he was but two and twenty yeeres old, newly crept out of the ſhell. The two aboue named that gouerned him in all this voiage, to wit Stephen de Vers Seneſchall of Beaucaire, and the generall Briſſonnet, now Cardinall of Saint Malo, were men of meane eſtate, and of no experience, whereby ſo much the more appeered the woonderfull worke of God: our enimies on the other ſide, were accounted wiſe, of great experience in the wars, rich, accompanied with wiſe men and good captaines, and in poſſeſſion of the realme. I meane King Alphonſe (lately crowned by Pope Alexander a Spaniard, borne in the realme of Arragon) who had the Florentines ioined with him, and great intelligence with the Turke. He had alſo a ſon bearing armes, called Dom Ferrande, a courteous yoong gentleman, of the age of two or three and twenty yeeres, who was welbeloued in the realme, and a brother alſo named Dom Frederic, who ſucceeded the ſaid Ferrande in this our age, and was a very wiſe man, and led their army vpon the ſea. He had been long trained vp on this ſide the mountaines, and of him you had often aſſured me my Lord of Vienna by your knowledge in Aſtrologie, that he ſhould be King, ſo that he once promiſed me fower thouſand franks of yeerely reuenewes in the ſaid realme, when that came to paſſe, which promiſe was made twenty yeeres before the propheſie tooke effect.
               Now to proceede, the King altered his minde 
                     5
                   through the Duke of Milans earneſt ſollicitation made both by letters by the Earle Charles of Belleioyeuſe his ambaſſador, and by the two aboue named. Notwithſtanding the Generall in the end began to draw backe, ſeeing all men of wiſedome and vnderſtanding to miſlike this voiage for many reſpects, and eſpecially bicauſe the Kings forces lay abrode in camp in Auguſt, vnfurniſhed of monie, and all other things neceſſarie: but the Seneſchall alone carried the credit from them all, ſo far foorth that the King ſhewed a countenance of diſpleaſure to the Generall three or fower daies, but he ſoone recouered his fauour againe. At this preſent died one of the Seneſchals ſeruants of the plague, as men ſaid; for the which cauſe he durſt not repaire to the Kings preſence to his great griefe, for no man ſollicited the voiage: but on the contrarie ſide the D. & Ducheſſe of Bourbon were there, laboring all that in them lay to ouerthrow it, whereunto alſo the ſaid Generall encouraged them, by means whereof one day the voiage was daſhed, and another reuiued. In the end the King reſolued to go, and I my ſelfe mounted on horſebacke with the foremoſt, hoping to paſſe the mountains the more commodiouſly with ſmall companie: but I receiued a countermand, whereby I was

aduertiſed that all was altered againe. The ſelfeſame day were borrowed fiftie thouſand ducats of a merchant of Milan; but the Lord Lodouic deliuered the money vpon aſſurance made to the ſaid merchant for the repaiment: my ſelfe ſtood bound for ſix thouſand, and others for the reſt; but this monie was lent without intereſt. The King had borrowed before of the banke of Soly at Genua a hundred thouſand franks, the intereſt wherof amounted in fower moneths to 14. thouſand franks 
                     6
                  . But ſome ſaid that the two aboue named had part both in the principall, and alſo in the intereſt.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Turke was Baiazet the ſecond.
                  
                  2 Scodra in Latin a towne in that part of Dalmatia, now called Albania.
                  3 This is rainewater he meaneth.
                  
                  4 VVhy they had no title appeereth by the Pedegree in the end of the worke.
                  
                  5 For he was not minded at the firſt to haue gone in perſon.
                  
                  6 That is after the rate of ſtarling money, 14. pound in the hundred for fower moneths.
                  
               
            
            
               How King Charles departed from Vienna in Daulphin to conquer the realme of Naples in perſon, and what his nauie vpon the ſea did vnder the leading of the Duke of Orleans. Chap. 5.
               
                  TO be ſhort, the King departed from Vienna the 23. of Auguſt in the yeere 1494. and marched ſtraight towards Aſt 
                     1
                  . At Suze Maſter Galeas of S. Seuerin came to him in poſte, from whence the King remooued to Thurin, where he borrowed all the Ducheſſe of Sauoyes iewels, who was daughter to the late Lorde VVilliam Marques of Montferrat, and Duke Charles of Sauoyes widowe, the which he engaged for twelue thouſand ducats. A few daies after, he went to Caſall to the Marques of Montferrats widow, being a wiſe yoong Lady, daughter to the King of Seruia. The Turke had conquered hir countrie, and the Emperor, whoſe kinſwoman ſhe was (hauing as I ſuppoſe, taken hir into his protection) had beſtowed hir in this houſe of Montferrat. She lent alſo hir iewels, the which were in like maner engaged for twelue thouſand ducats. Heereby you may perceiue what ſucceſſe this voiage was like to haue had, if God alone had not guided the enterpriſe. The King abode at Aſt a certaine ſpace 
                     2
                  . That yeere all the wines of Italie were ſower, which our men much miſliked, neither could they away with the great heate of the aire. To Aſt came the Lord Lodouic and his wife with a goodly traine to viſite the King, where they abode two daies: and then the ſaid Lodouic departed to a caſtell of the Duchie of Milan, a league from Aſt called Nom, whither the Kings Councell repaired daily to him. King Alphonſe had two armies abrode in the countrie, the one in Romaine 
                     3
                   towards Ferrara, vnder the leading of his ſonne, accompanied with the Lord Virgill Vrſin, the Earle of Petilhane, and the Lord Iohn Iames of Trenoul, who is now become French. Againſt theſe the King ſent the Lord d'Aubigny 
                  
                     4
                   a valiant and wiſe Knight, with two hundred men of armes French, and fiue hundred men of armes Italians, being in the Kings ſeruice, vnder the leading of the Earle of Caiazze ſo often before mentioned, who was there as the Lord Lodouics lieutenant, and feared greatly the diſcomfiture of theſe forces:

which if it had happened, we had repaired homewards incontinent, and he ſhould haue had his enimies vpon his necke, whoſe intelligence was great in the Duchie of Milan.
               The other armie was vpon the ſea, vnder the leading of Dom Frederike King Alphonſes brother, and lay at Ligorne and at Piſe; for the Florentines tooke part as yet with the houſe of Arragon, and furniſhed them of certaine gallies. Moreouer, with the ſaid Dom Frederike was Breto de Fliſco, and certaine other Genuois, by whoſe intelligence he hoped to cauſe Genua to reuolt 
                     5
                  . And ſure they had almoſt obtained their purpoſe at Specie and Rapalo neere to Genua, where they landed a thouſand of their faction, by meanes whereof they had vndoubtedly atchieued their enterpriſe, if they had not been very ſpeedily aſſailed. But the ſelfeſame day or the next day, Lewis Duke of Orleance arriued there with certaine ſhips, and a good number of gallies, and one great galliaſſe being mine, the patrone whereof was one Maſter Albert Mely, and it caried the ſaid Duke and the principall of the armie, and manie goodly peeces of artillerie; for it was very ſtrong, and approched ſo neere the ſhore, that the very artillery almoſt diſcomfited the enimies, who before had neuer ſeene the like: for artillerie was at that time ſtrange and new to the Italian nation. The ſoldiers landed alſo that were in the other ſhips: and from Genua where the whole armie laie, came a band of Swiſſers by land led by the Bailife of Digeon, who had ioined with him certaine of the Duke of Milans forces (vnder the leading of Maſter Iohn Lewis de Fliſco brother to the forenamed Breto, and of Maſter Iohn Adorne:) the which (notwithſtanding that they were not at the skirmiſh) ſhewed themſelues valiant ſoldiers in defending a ſtraight againſt the enimies. To be ſhort, bicauſe our men came to hand-ſtrokes with the enimies, they were diſcomfited and put to flight, and a hundred or ſixſcore ſlaine, and eight or ten taken priſoners: among the which was one Fourgouſin ſonne to the Cardinall of Genua. Thoſe priſoners that were diſmiſſed, were all ſtripped to their ſhirts by the Duke of Milans bands, and other harme had they none, for ſuch is the law of armes in Italie. I ſaw all the letters that were ſent both to the King and to the Duke of Milan making report of this skirmiſh. Thus was the enimies Nauie repulſed, which afterward approched no more ſo neer. At our mens returne, the Genuois thought to haue raiſed a tumult and ſlew certaine Almaines in the towne, certaine alſo of them were ſlaine, but the matter was ſoone pacified.
               I muſt heere ſpeake a word or two of the Florentines, who had ſent twiſe to the King before his departure out of Fraunce meaning onely to diſſemble with him, with their firſt ambaſſadors (being the Biſhop of Areſe 
                     6
                  , and one named Peter Sonderin) the King commanded me, the Seneſchall, and the Generall to negotiate. Our demands were onely theſe: Firſt, to giue the King paſſage through their countrie: and ſecondarily, to ſerue him with a hundred men of armes, paying them after the Italian intertainment, which was but ten thouſand ducats the yeere 
                     7
                  . Theſe ambaſſadors depended wholie vpon Peter of Medicis a yoong man of ſmall wiſedome, ſonne to Laurence of Medicis who was dead, and had beene one of the wiſeſt men in his time, and had gouerned this citie almoſt as prince, as did alſo at this preſent his ſonne: for their houſe had continued thus already two mens ages, namely Laurence the father of this Peter, and Coſme of Medicis the firſt roote and founder of this houſe, a man woorthie among the woorthieſt. And ſure of their trade (being merchandiſe,) I thinke it hath beene the greateſt houſe that euer was in the world: for their ſeruants and factors haue had ſo great credit vnder their name that it is woonderfull. I my ſelfe haue ſeene the proofe thereof both in Flaunders

and England. For I knew one called Gerard Quanueſe by whoſe onely helpe (in a maner) King Edward the fowerth kept the crowne on his head when ciuill wars were in the realme of England: for he lent him at times more then ſixſcore thouſand crownes, little for his Maſters profite, notwithſtanding he recouered his principall in the end. Another alſo I knew named Thomas Portunay, who was pledge at one time betweene the ſaid King Edward and Duke Charles of Burgundie for fiftie thouſand crownes, and at an other time in another place for forwerſcore thouſand. I commend not the wiſedome of merchants in thus doing, but I commend Princes that vſe merchants well and keepe daie with them, for they know not when they ſhall need their helpe, and ſometime a little money doth great ſeruice.
               It ſeemeth that this houſe of the Medicis fel to ruine as mighty houſes do in realms and Empires, for the great authoritie of this Peter of Medicis predeceſſors did him harme: notwithſtanding the gouernment of Coſme the firſt of this houſe was milde and gentle, ſuch as was agreeable with a free ſtate. But Lavvrence this Peters father (whom we now preſently write of) bicauſe of the great variance before mentioned in this hiſtorie, that was betweene him and them of Piſa and others (diuers of the 
                     Lib. 6. cap. 5. which at that time were hanged;) tooke a garde of 20. men for the defence of his perſon, by the commandement and leaue of the Seniory, who commanded nothing, but at his pleaſure: notwithſtanding he behaued himſelfe in this great authoritie very diſcreetly and ſoberly, for (as I before ſaid) he was one of the wiſeſt men in his time. But this Peter who ſucceeded his father (ſuppoſing the like authority to be due to him of right) became terrible by meanes of this guard, and vſed great violence in the night, beating men as they went in the ſtreetes, and abuſing their common treaſure, ſo had his father done alſo, but ſo wiſely, that they held themſelues in maner contented therewith.
               In the ſecond ambaſſage the ſaid Peter ſent to Lions, one called Peter Capon with diuers others, by whom he excuſed himſelfe, as before he had done, for not accompliſhing the Kings requeſts, ſaying that King Levvis the eleuenth had commanded the towne of Florence, to enter into league with King Ferrande in the time of Duke Iohn of Aniou, and to depart from their league with the ſaid Duke: wherefore ſeeing by the Kings commandement they were entred into this league, which endured yet certaine yeeres; they could not abandon nor forſake the houſe of Arragon. But if the King hapned to come into their countrey, they promiſed to do him great ſeruices, which offer they made bicauſe they thought (as the Venetians did) that the King would not come into Italy. In both theſe ambaſſages there was ſome one enimy to the ſaid de Medicis, eſpecially in the latter this Capon, who oftē aduertiſed vs by what meanes the citie of Florence might be brought to rebell againſt the ſaid Peter, and deliuered alſo his meſſage in far woorſe termes than indeed it was ſent; and further, gaue aduiſe to baniſh all the Florentines out of Fraunce, and ſo were they 
                     8
                  . Thus much haue I written, to the end you may the better vnderſtand that which afterward enſued: for the King became mortall enimy to the ſaid Peter, and the Seneſchall and generall had great intelligence with his enimies in the citie, eſpecially with this Capon, yea and with two alſo of the ſaid Peters coſin germaines being both of his owne name.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The King came to Aſt the 9. of September 1494. Guicciar.
                  2 The King abode at Aſt till the 6. of October. Annal. Franc. & Aquit.
                  3 Alphonſe in perſon leuied men in Abruzzo to haue fought with Duke Aubigny, but
                     
                     in an aſſembly held between him and the Pope at Vicouare the third of Iuly, it was agreed that he ſhould paſſe no further, but giue the charge of the armie to his ſonne. Guicciar.
                  4 This Duke Aubigny was a Scottiſh man and a Steward, and of him the now King of Scots is by his father lineally deſcended.
                  
                  5 Genua was euer diuided into the factions of Fregoſi (called here in many places Fourgouſi) Adorni, Dorei, and Spinoli.
                  6 The Italians haue Aretio, which is a towne betweene Florence and Perouſe, but Guazzo de Regio which is a little towne neere to Parma.
                  
                  7 That was after the rate of one hundred ducats for euery man of armes: for the Italian men of armes haue not their archers as the French, and therefore their wages is leſſe by the halfe.
                  
                  8 They gaue this counſell, to the end the Florentines being barred their trafficke in Fraunce, might murmur againſt Peter of Medicis: for what misfortune ſoeuer happeneth, the Prince is alwaies blamed as cauſe thereof.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King remaining yet in Aſt, reſolued to paſſe foorth towards Naples at the earneſt ſute of Lodouic Sforce. How Philip de Commines was ſent ambaſſador to Venice: of the Duke of Milans death; after whoſe deceaſe the ſaid Lodouic ſeized vpon the Duchie, to the preiudice of a ſonne the ſaid D. left behinde him. Chap. 6.
               
                  I Haue told you alreadie what happened vpon the ſea at Rapalo. Dom Frederike retired to Piſa and Ligorne, leauing his footemen behinde him whom he had landed. The Florentines waxed maruellous wearie of him; for they be and euer haue been better affected to the houſe of Fraunce, than to that of Arragon. Our armie that was in Romaine (notwithſtanding that it were the weaker) furthered greatly our affaires; for it made Dom Ferrande D. of Calabria by little & little to retire: which when the K. perceiued, he reſolued to paſſe forward, being earneſtly ſollicited therunto by the Lord Lodouic, and the others aboue named. The ſaid Lodouic at his firſt meeting with the King ſpake thus vnto him: Sir, feare not this enterpriſe, there are in Italie but three mightie eſtates, one of the which taketh part with you which is Milan; another mooueth not, to wit, the Venetians, ſo that you haue onely to do with the force of Naples. But diuers of your anceſtors haue ouerthrowen vs all three being ioined togither. Sir, if you will credit me, I will helpe to make you greater than euer was Charleman: for we will eaſily chaſe the Turke out of the Empire of Conſtantinople, hauing ſubdued the realme of Naples. And ſure he ſaid true of the Turke that now raigneth 
                     1
                  , if all things had been well ordered on our ſide. Then the King began to gouerne all his affaires by the order and direction of the ſaid Lodouic, wherewith certaine of our men, I meane ſome of the Kings chamber, and ſuch like, were not a little diſcontented, which was great folly; for without him we could do nothing: and this that they did, was onely to flatter the Duke of Orleance, who pretended title to the Duchie of Milan 
                     2
                  . But the Generall eſpecially was highly offended therewith; for now he

thought himſelfe a great man, and ſome breach was happened betweene the Seneſchall and him: for the which cauſe the L. Lodouic mooued both the K. and the ſaide Seneſchall that the Generall might be ſent home, which his words cauſed the ſaide Generall openly to babble againſt him, and to ſay that he would deceiue the whole companie: but ſilence would better haue becommed him. Notwithſtanding as touching him, neuer wiſe man made account of him in matter of eſtate, both bicauſe he vnderſtood not what it meant, and alſo bicauſe he was light of talke: but ſure he was well affected to his Maſter. They concluded in the end to ſend abrode diuers ambaſſadors, and my ſelfe among the reſt was appointed to go to Venice, but my diſpatch was delaied awhile, bicauſe the King was ſicke of the ſmall pocks, and in danger of death: for an ague was ioined with his diſeaſe, but it endured not paſt ſixe or ſeuen daies. Then I departed leauing the King in Aſt, and verily beleeuing that he would paſſe no further: in ſixe daies I went to Venice with my mules and carriage; for the way was maruellous faire. But I departed from the ſaid towne of Aſt in great feare, doubting the Kings returne home: notwithſtanding God had otherwiſe diſpoſed of this enterpriſe, for he went ſtraight to Pauie, and paſſed through Caſall, where the Marchioneſſe of Montferrat lay, which was a good Lady, and great friend to vs, but deadly enimie to the Lord Lodouic, and he alſo to hir. When the King arriued at Pauie, ſome ſmall ielouſie began to ariſe; for they would haue lodged him in the towne and not in the caſtell, but he would not lodge but in the caſtell, and ſo he did. Thoſe that were neere about him haue told me, that he was there in ſome danger. Wherefore the ſelfeſame night the watch was r'enforced, whereat the Lord Lodouic maruelled greatly, ſo far foorth that he communed thereof with the King, demanding if he had conceiued any ſuſpicion of him. To be ſhort, their behauiour was ſuch on both ſides, that their amitie could not long endure: but we babbled much more than they, not the King himſelfe, but certaine of his neereſt kinſmen 
                     3
                  . In this caſtell of Pauie was Iohn Galeas Duke of Milan, and his wife daughter to King Alphonſe in very pitious eſtate: for hir husband being ſicke, was held in this caſtell as vnder garde, and hir ſonne who is yet liuing, with a daughter or two. The childe was then about fiue yeeres old, and him euery man might ſee, but no man might ſee the Duke: for my ſelfe paſſed that way three daies before the King, and could by no meanes be ſuffered to come to him. Euery body ſaid he was extreme ſicke: notwithſtanding the King ſpake with him; for he was his coſin germane 
                     4
                  , and he hath told me that their communication was onely generall talke, bicauſe he would in no wiſe offend the Lord Lodouic; notwithſtanding that he were very deſirous to haue aduertiſed his ſaid coſin of diuers matters. At the ſame time the Ducheſſe fell vpon hir knees before the ſaid Lodouic, deſiring him to haue pitie vpon hir father and brother. He anſwered that it could not be. But to ſay the truth, ſhe might better haue intreated for hir huſband and hir ſelfe, being at that time a goodly yoong Lady.
               From thence the King remooued to Plaiſance, where the ſaid Lodouic receiued letters that his nephewe the Duke Milan lay at the point of death, wherefore he tooke his leaue of the King to go to him. The King deſired him to returne, and ſo he promiſed to do. Before he came to Pauie the Duke died, whereupon he rid incontinent, as it were in poſte to Milan. Al theſe newes I vnderſtood by a letter that the Venetian ambaſſador reſident with the ſaid Lodouic ſent to Venice, wherein alſo he aduertiſed the Seniorie that he meant to make himſelfe Duke, whichboth the Duke of Venice and the Seniorie vtterly miſliked, ſo far foorth that they asked me whether the King would not defend the childe; which though reaſon required that he ſhould: yet I made the matter doubtfull, conſidering how neceſſary an inſtrument the ſaid

Lord Lodouic was at that time for the Kings affaires.
               To be ſhort, he made himſelfe to be receiued at Milan as Duke, which was the onely end (as ſome ſaid) why he had cauſed vs to paſſe the mountaines. Manie alſo charged him with his nephewes death, whoſe kinsfolkes and friends in Italy were in armes to haue taken the gouernment from him, which they would eaſily haue done, had not the Kings comming ſtopped them. For they were already in Romaine (as you haue heard.) But the Earle of Caiazze and the Lord of Aubigny made them to retire. For the ſaid Lord of Aubigny had with him a company of a hundred & fifty or two hundred men of armes French, and a good band of Swiſſers. Dom Ferrande and his forces retired towards their friends, diſlodging euer halfe a daies iourney before our men, and marched towards Furly 
                     5
                  , which belonged to a Lady being a baſtard of Milan, and widow of the Earle Hieronime, nephew to Pope Sixtus 
                  
                     6
                  . This Lady fauored them as the report went; notwithſtanding after our men had taken by aſſault a little towne of hirs, being firſt beaten halfe a day with the canon: ſhe reuolted to vs, being indeed well affected to vs before. Further, the people of Italy began in all places to take hart and to deſire change and alteration: for they ſawe that which before they had neuer ſeene, I meane the feate of artillerie, which they were vnacquainted with, & which in Fraunce was neuer more practiſed than at that time. The ſaid Dom Ferrande approched ſtill neerer and neerer to his realme, and went to Seſenne, a faire citie of the Popes in the Marque of Anconne; but the people ſpoiled his carriage & ſtuffe whenſoeuer they tooke his men at aduantage. And through all Italy they would haue rebelled, if the wars had been ordered on our ſide without ſpoile: but all was done cleane contrary, to my great griefe, bicauſe of the honor and renowme the French nation might haue obtained by this voiage. For at our firſt arriuall the people honored vs as ſaints, ſuppoſing all faith and vertue to be in vs: but their opinion endured not long, partly bicauſe of the diſorder and ſpoile our men vſed; and partly bicauſe of the ſlanderous reports our enimies made of vs in all places, charging vs that we forced women, and robbed and carried away money, and whatſoeuer we could lay hands on, of heinouſer crimes they could not haue accuſed vs in Italy, for no nation is ſo ielous and couetous as the Italian. As touching women they belied vs, but the reſt was not altogither vntrue.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth bicauſe he vvas a man of no vertue, as before is ſaid.
                  
                  2 VVhat right the Duke of Orleans had to it, the petegree in the end of the booke will declare.
                  
                  3 He meaneth the Earle of Ligny, the King and vvho vvere ſiſters children.
                  
                  4 King Charles his mother vvas Charlotte, and this Dukes mother Bonne, both daughters to the Duke of Sauoy.
                  
                  5 It vvas corruptly in the French Sorly for Furly, vvhich the old Romaines called Forum liuii.
                  6 Octauian ſonne to Hieronime of Riare, vvas Lord of Furly and Imola, vvith title of Vicar of the Church, but he vvas vnder the gouernment of Katherin Sforce his mother heere mentioned. Guicciar.
               
            
            
               
               How Peter of Medices yeelded fower of the Florentines ſtrongeſt places to the King, and how the King reſtored Piſa being one of them to their ancient liberty. Chap. 7.
               
                  THe King (as before you haue heard) was at Plaiſance, where he cauſed a ſolemne funerall to be made for his coſin germaine the Duke of Milan; for other thing wiſt he not what to do, the new Duke of Milan being departed from him. They that beſt vnderſtood the courſe of theſe affaires, haue told me that the whole cōpany deſired to returne home, aſwel for that they were vnprouided of all things neceſſarie, as alſo bicauſe of diuers doubts that were ariſen: for certaine that at the firſt ſeemed to haue great good liking of this voiage, began now vtterly to diſallow thereof, namely the Lord of Vrfé Maſter of the horſe, who was not with the King, but lay ſicke at Genua: whence he wrote him a letter, giuing him therein to vnderſtand of diuers doubts and iealouſies whereof he was aduertiſed. But (as before I haue ſaid in diuers places) God manifeſtly declared that he himſelfe gouerned this enterpriſe. For ſuddenly in the necke of this letter, newes came to the King that the Duke of Milan would ſhortly return, and that the Florentines began to fauor vs in hatred of Peter de Medicis, who gouerned them as if he had been their Prince, to the great diſcontentation both of many of his owne neere kinſmen, and of diuers alſo the beſt citizens, namely the Capons, the Sonderini 
                  
                     1
                  , the Nerly, and in maner the whole citie. Wherefore the King departed from Plaiſance and marched towards the Florentines territories, meaning either to cauſe them to declare themſelues for him, or to take their townes being vnfortified, and lodge his men in them all the winter, which was already begun. Diuers ſmall places yeelded vnto him, ſo did alſo the citie of Luques enimie to the Florentines, ſhewing him all pleaſure and ſeruice that in them lay. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that the Duke of Milan had two purpoſes in his head; firſt he ſought by all meanes poſſible to ſtaie the King from paſſing further that ſommer 
                     2
                  . Secondarily, he hoped to obtaine of him Piſa (a great and a faire citie) togither with Serzane, and Petreſancte, which two places had been ſubiect to the Geneuois not long before, and were woon from them by the Florentines in Laurence de Medicis time.
               The King paſſed through Pontreme one of the D. of Milans townes, and went to beſiege Serzane the ſtrongeſt and the beſt caſtle the Florentines had, but vnfurniſhed bicauſe of their great diuiſion. To ſay the truth the Florentines neuer beare armes willingly againſt the houſe of Fraunce: for they haue euer faithfully ſerued it & taken part with it, both bicauſe of their great traficke in Fraunce, & alſo bicauſe they haue euer been of the Guelphes faction 
                     3
                  . If this place had been well furniſhed the King muſt of neceſſitie haue broken his armie: for the countrie is verie barren & ful of hils, & victuals there were none to be gotten: beſides that the ſnow lay maruellous deepe vpon the ground. After the Kings ſiege had lien before it three daies, the Duke of Milan came thither no compoſition being yet made betweene the Florentines and the King 
                     4
                  , and paſſed through Pontreme, where the towneſmen and the ſoldiers of the garriſon fell at ſuch variance with our Almaines (led by one Buſer) that certaine of the ſaide Almaines were ſtaine: of the which braule ſprang a great inconuenience, as heereafter you ſhall heare. For although I were not my ſelfe preſent

at the doing of theſe things: yet vnderſtood I of them both by the King, the Duke, and diuers others. The Florentines began now to practiſe, and appointed fifteene or ſixteene to go to the King, ſaying, that they would no longer continue in this great danger, nor ſuſtaine the diſpleaſure of the King and the Duke of Milan, who had continually an ambaſſador reſident at Florence. And Peter of Medices conſented to the ſending of this ambaſſage; for to ſay the truth, he could not remedie it, conſidering vpon what termes they ſtood: for if they had done otherwiſe, they had been vndone, being vnprouided of all things, and vtterly vnacquainted with the wars. When theſe ambaſſadors came to the Kings preſence, they offered to receiue him into Florence and their other places, neither cared the greater part of them how the world went, ſo that we would come to Florence to chaſe away Peter of Medices; which matter they earneſtly preſſed, bicauſe they had good intelligence with the aboue named that gouerned then the Kings affaires.
               On the other ſide Peter of Medices practiſed by a ſeruant of his owne named Laurence Spinelly, who was his factor at Lyons, and an honeſt man in his vocation, and had liued long in Fraunce: but of the ſtate of our Court he could vnderſtand nothing, no hardly they that had beene Courtiers all their liues, bicauſe of the often changes and alterations. This Spinelly negotiated with thoſe that heeretofore had borne all the ſway, namely, the Lord of Breſſe afterward Duke of Sauoye, and the Lord of Miolans chamberlaine to the King. Soone after the aboue named ambaſſadors were returned to Florence, Peter of Medices accompanied with certaine of the citie, came himſelfe to the King to make anſwer to our requeſts: for they within the citie ſawe vtter deſtruction before their eies, vnleſſe they yeelded to all the Kings demaunds; whoſe fauour they hoped to obtaine, by offering him ſome greater ſeruice than any of the other townes that had already receiued him. At his arriuall Monſeur de Piennes a Flemming borne, and Chamberlaine to the King, and the generall Briſſonnet were ſent to treate with him, who required him to yeeld vnto the King the caſtell of Serzane, which preſently he did. They required him further to lend the King Piſa, Ligorne, Petreſanct, and Librefacto: whereunto he alſo agreed incontinent, neuer communicating the matter with his collegues, who ſuppoſed that the King ſhould onely haue lodged in Piſa, and theſe other places to refreſh himſelfe, but not haue held them ſtill: well, by this meanes they yeelded their whole eſtate and force into our hands. Thoſe that negotiated with the ſaid Peter haue told both me and others ſince, ſcoffing and ieſting at him, that they woondred to ſee him ſo lightly condeſcend to ſo waightie a matter, granting more than they looked for. To conclude, the King entred into Piſa, and the aboue named ambaſſadors returned to Florence, where the ſaid Peter cauſed the Kings lodging to be made in his owne houſe, which was the goodlieſt of a citizens or merchants houſe that euer I ſaw, and better furniſhed than any mans houſe in the world of his eſtate.
               I muſt heere ſpeake a word or two of the Duke of Milan, who now wiſhed the King with all his hart out of Italy, notwithſtanding that both already he had made his profit by him, and ſought alſo ſtill ſo to do: for he was in hope to obtaine of him, the places yeelded by the Florentines, and preſſed him earneſtly for Serzane, and Petreſancte, which he ſaid appertained to the Genuois: he lent him alſo at that preſent 30. thouſand ducats, and he hath ſince told both me and others, that theſe places were promiſed him. But when he ſawe that he could not obtaine them, he departed in great diſpleaſure from the King, pretending that earneſt buſines called him home, which was the laſt time the King ſaw him: notwithſtanding, he left Maſter Galeas of Saint Seuerin behind him, whom he ioined in commiſſion in all matters with the

Earle Charles of Belleioyeuſe. The ſaid Maſter Galeas while the King lay in Piſa, ſent (by his Maſters aduiſe) for the chiefe citizens of the towne to his lodging, where he perſwaded them to rebell againſt the Florentines, and to deſire the King to reſtore them to their ancient liberty, truſting by this meanes that Piſa would fall into the Duke of Milans clawes, vnder whoſe obedience it had been 
                     5
                   in the time of Iohn Galeas the firſt Duke of Milan of that name, (a great and wicked tyrant though very honorable) whoſe body lieth buried in the charterhouſe of Pauia by the parke 
                     6
                  , ſo high aboue the high altar, that men go vp to it by a ladder: certain of the monkes ſhewed me it, at the leaſt his bones, which ſmelt, as naturally they ſhould. Further, one of the ſaid monkes who was borne at Bourges, called him Saint, as he talked with me; and I asked him in his eare why he called him Saint, conſidering he might behold painted round about him the armes of many cities which he had wrongfully vſurped 
                     7
                  , and ſeeing the image of him and his horſe being of fine marble ſtood higher than the altar, and yet his body lay vnder his horſe feete. He anſwered me ſoftly, Sir, in this countrey we call all thoſe Saints that haue done vs any good, and he built this goodly charterhouſe church, which in very deed is the faireſt that euer I ſaw, for it is all of fine marble. But to proceede, the ſaid Maſter Galeas ſought to make himſelfe great, and ſo I thinke did the Duke of Milan alſo, bicauſe he had married his baſe daughter: for he manifeſtly declared that he would aduance him, as his owne ſonne, bicauſe at that time his owne children were all very yoong. The ſaid Piſans were I confeſſe cruelly handled by the Florentines, for they vſed them like ſlaues. They had ſubdued them about a hundred yeeres before, euen in the ſelfe ſame yeere that the Venetians conquered Padua, which was the firſt victory that they obtained vpon the firme land. And the fortune of theſe two cities was almoſt alike, for they had been ancient enimies to thoſe whom now they ſerued, many yeeres before they were conquered, and almoſt of equall force with them. Theſe Piſans conſulted togither about this motion, and ſeeing themſelues counſelled by ſo great a perſonage, and being alſo of themſelues deſirous of libertie: a great number of them both men and women, came crying to the King as he went to maſſe, Libertie, libertie, deſiring him with weeping eies to graunt it them. One of the Maſters of the requeſts (who was a counſellor of the parliament in Daulphine named Robot) going before the King, or executing his office ſaid vnto him, (were it bicauſe he had promiſed the Piſans ſo to do: or bicauſe he vnderſtood not what they demanded) that it was a lamemtable caſe, and that of right he ought to graunt them their petition, adding, that neuer men were ſo cruelly handled. The King not vnderſtanding well what this word meant, but bewailing in his minde the miſerable eſtate of the Italian nation, and the cruelty that both Princes & commonalties vſe towards their ſubiects (notwithſtanding that in reaſon he could not graunt them their liberty, ſeeing the towne was none of his, but lent him vpon friendſhip at his great need:) anſwered that he was contented to grant their requeſt, & ſo the counſellor aboue named declared vnto them: wherupon the people incontinent began to proclaim holiday in token of ioy, and went to their bridge which is a very goodly one built ouer the riuer of Arne, & threw down to the ground, & afterward into the riuer a great lion ſtanding vpon a ſtrong pillar of marble called maior, repreſenting the Seniorie of Florence: vpon the which pillar they cauſed to be erected the image of a K. of Fraunce holding a naked ſword in his hand, & treading the maior or lion vnder his horſe feet. But after, when the K. of Romains entred the town, they did with the Kings image as now with the lion: for ſuch is the nature of the Italian nation, to turne euer with the ſtrongeſt. Notwithſtanding theſe Piſans were then & yet are ſo cruelly handled that they are to be holden for excuſed.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 It was Fodormi in the French, but corruptly.
                  
                  2 He meaneth that the Duke of Milan found delaies to cauſe the King to ſtay all the winter in the Florentines territories, hoping that their townes would yeeld vnto him (as indeede they did) and that then he might obtaine of the King ſuch as he would.
                  
                  3 The factions of the Guelphes and Gibellines began in Italie vnder the Emperor Frederike the ſecond anno 1240. The Gibellines held for the Emperor, the Guelphes for the Pope.
                  
                  4 This compoſition he ſpeaketh of afterward in this chapter.
                  
                  5 It was ſold to this Iohn Galeas, and he ſold it ouer to the Florentines.
                  
                  6 This parke was made by the ſaid Iohn Galeas after he had conquered Pauia: it was twenty miles in circuit, walled round about, and ſtored with all kinde of beaſts, but now by meanes of the wars it is deſtroied: by this parke he built alſo the caſtell. In this parke was Francis the French King taken priſoner.
                  
                  7 This Duke conquered in Italy 29. cities, among the which were Pauie, Bolonia, Verona, Senes, Perouſe, Luques, Verceil, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King departed from Piſa to Florence, and of the flight and ruine of Peter de Medices. Chap. 8.
               
                  AFter the King had ſoiourned at Piſa certaine daies, he departed to Florence, where they declared vnto him the great wrong he had done their eſtate, by reſtoring the Piſans to libertie againſt his promiſe. Thoſe that were appointed to make anſwer heereunto excuſed the fact: ſaying, that the King had not well vnderſtood with what conditions Piſa was deliuered vnto him, neither vnderſtood he another treatie he made with the Florentines 
                     1
                  : whereof you ſhall heare after I haue ſpoken ſomewhat of Peter de Medicis ruine, and ſhewed how the King entered into Florence, leauing a garriſon in Piſa, and the other places lent him. The ſaid Peter after he had yeelded to the King the places aboue mentioned with the conſent of certaine of the towne, returned to the citie, ſuppoſing that the King would not hold them ſtill, but reſtore them at his departute from Piſa, where he would but repoſe himſelfe three or fower daies. Yet am I of opinion that if it had pleaſed him to winter there, they would willingly haue agreed thereunto, notwithſtanding that Piſa be of greater importance to them than Florence it ſelfe, ſaue that their perſons and goods be reſident in Florence 
                     2
                  . At the ſaid Peters returne to Florence, euery man frowned vpon him, and not without cauſe: for he had diſpoſſeſſed them of their whole force, and of all that they had conquered in a hundred yeeres, ſo that their mindes ſeemed already to foretell them the euils that afterward fell vpon them. Wherefore partly for this cauſe (which I ſuppoſe to be the principall, though they neuer vttered it) partly for the great hatred before rehearſed, which they bare him, and partly alſo to recouer their libertie, wherof they thought themſelues bereaued by him: they determined to baniſh him the towne, forgetting all the benefits of Coſmus and Laurence de Medicis his anceſtors. The ſaid Peter hauing no certaine intelligence of this their determination, yet doubting

it, went to the palace with his ordinarie garde to aduertiſe them of the Kings comming, who was about three miles from the towne: but when he came to the palace gate and knocked, one of the houſe of Nerly (being the father and many ſonnes whom my ſelfe knew well, all of great wealth) refuſed to let him in, ſaying, that if he would enter alone he ſhould, otherwiſe not; and he that made him this refuſall was armed. The ſaid Peter returned incontinent to his houſe, and armed both himſelfe and his ſeruants, determining to make reſiſtance againſt his enimies in the towne. Whereof he alſo aduertiſed one Paule Vrſin, who was in pay with the Florentines (for the ſaid Peter was by his mother of the houſe of Vrſins, and both his father and he had euer giuen entertainment to certaine of them) but immediately after, they heard the people crie, Libertie, libertie, and ſawe them come towards his houſe in armes. Whereupon (following good aduice) by the helpe of Paule Vrſin he departed the towne, which was a miſerable departure to him: for in power and wealth both he and his anceſtors, ſince the time of Coſmus de Medicis the firſt of that houſe, had been in maner equall with great Princes: and this day fortune began to frowne vpon him, ſo that he loſt both honor and riches. At this preſent my ſelfe was at Venice, and by the ambaſſador of Florence there reſident, vnderſtood of all theſe newes, which greatly diſpleaſed me; for I had loued his father well. If the ſaid Peter had followed mine aduice, all this had neuer happened: for immediately after my arriuall at Venice I wrote vnto him, offering to make his peace with the King; for I had commiſſion by mouth both from the Seneſchall of Beaucaire and the Generall ſo to do: and I am well aſſured the King would haue held himſelfe contented with paſſage through their countrie, at the moſt with Ligorne, and (that being obtained) haue agreed to all the ſaid Peters demaunds. But he by the perſwaſion of the aboue named Peter Capon, anſwered me in maner with ſcoffes. The ſaid ambaſſador the next day deliuered a letter to the Senate of Venice, the contents whereof were, that the ſaid Peter was baniſhed the towne, bicauſe he ſought to make himſelfe Lord thereof by aide of the houſe of Arragon and the Vrſins, and diuers other matters they charged him with that were vntrue. But ſuch be the chaunces and changes of this world, that he that is in aduerſitie, hath not onely his enimies to purſue him, but his friends alſo become his foes, as appeered by this ambaſſador named Paule Anthony Sonderin, (one of the wiſeſt men in Italie) who but the day before talked with me of this Peter as if he had been his ſoueraigne Lord, yet now declared himſelfe his enimie. True it is that it was by the Seniories commandement; for of himſelfe particularly he made no declaration. The next day I was aduertiſed that the ſaid Peter came to Venice, and that the King in great triumph was entred into Florence. Moreouer, the Senate of Florence commanded their ambaſſador to take his leaue of the Seniorie of Venice, and returne home with all ſpeede. The letter himſelfe ſhewed me, and then departed. Two daies after his departure arriued Peter de Medicis in his doublet and his hoſe, or in one of his ſeruants clokes. The Venetians ſtood in great doubt to receiue him; ſo much feared they the Kings diſpleaſure. And notwithſtanding that they could not of their honor refuſe him, yet made they him ſtay two daies without the towne, being very deſirous to vnderſtand of me, how the King would take it, if they receiued him. I for my part deſired to do him good, and the King had written nothing to me againſt him: wherefore I anſwered them, that I thought he was fled for feare of the people, not of the King. Whereupon he entred the towne, and the next day after he had been with the Seniorie, I went to viſit him. They lodged him well, and permitted both himſelfe and fifteene or twenty of his ſeruants that accompanied him, to weare their weapons in the towne 
                     3
                  . And notwithſtanding that Coſmus
                  
aboue mentioned had ſtopped them in times paſt from taking of Milan, yet vſed they him very well, and reuerenced him for the honor of his houſe, which had beene of ſo great eſtimation and renowme through all Chriſtendome. When I ſawe him me thought he ſeemed a man of no great ſtuffe, he diſcourſed to me at large of all his misfortunes, and I, as well as I could, comforted him. Among other things, he told me that he had loſt all, and that aboue all his other miſhaps this moſt grieued him, that a factor of his in the towne had refuſed to giue him credit for cloth but to the value of 100. ducats to apparell his brother and himſelfe, which was a ſtrange thing, conſidering his eſtate and authoritie: for by the ſpace of threeſcore yeeres the eſtimation of his houſe had been ſo great, that greater it could not be. Soone after, by meanes of the Lord of Breſſe afterward Duke of Sauoye, the ſaid Peter receiued good newes; for the King wrote vnto him, willing him to repaire to his preſence. Notwithſtanding the King was firſt departed from Florence, as now you ſhall heare, but somwhat I was forced by the way to ſpeake of this Peter de Medicis.
               
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This is ironicè ſpoken, bicauſe the King brake this ſecond treatie alſo, mentioned in the very next chapter, notwithſtanding that he vnderſtood it well ynough.
                  
                  2 It ſtood them in ſuch ſteede, bicauſe it was ſtrong, and the key of their countrie, and ſtandeth neere the ſea very commodiouſly for their traffick.
                  
                  3 For through the Venetians dominions no man may weare his weapon without leaue.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King entred into Florence, and through what other townes he paſſed till he came to Rome. Chap. 9.
               
                  THe next daie the King entered into Florence where the ſaid Peter had prepared his owne houſe to receiue him, but the Lord of Ballaſſat who was ſent thither before to make the Kings lodging, vnderſtanding of the ſaide Peters departure: fell to ſpoile all that he found in his houſe, pretending that his banke at Lyons ought him a great ſumme of money. Among other things he tooke one whole Vnicornes horne, valued at ſixe or ſeauen thouſand ducats, and two great peeces of another, with a number of other goodly things, which others ſeeing did the like. Into another houſe in the towne the ſaid Peter had conueied all his goodlieſt ſtuffe, but the people ſpoiled that alſo. The Seniorie had part of his richeſt iewels, twenty thouſand ducats in coine that lay in his banke in the towne, diuers faire pots of Agate, and ſuch a number of goodly Camayeux excellently well cut, (all the which my ſelfe once ſaw) as is woonderfull, togither with three thouſand medales of gold & ſiluer weying 40. pound weight, the number and goodnes wherof I thinke all Italy could not match. All that he loſt that day in the citie, amounted to a hundred thouſand crownes and better. The King being in Florence (as you haue heard) made a treatie with the citizens to their great good liking as I ſuppoſe. The conditions were theſe: They gaue him ſixe ſcore thouſand ducats, whereof they paied him fiftie thouſand preſently, and the reſt at two paiments very ſhortly after, they lent him all the places aboue mentioned, they changed their armes being the red flower deluce, and gaue the Kings armes. And he

for his part receiued them into his ſafegarde and protection, and promiſed & ſware vpon the altar of Saint Iohn to reſtore their places vnto them within fower moneths after he ſhould be entred into Naples, or ſooner, if ſooner he returned into Fraunce. But the matter fell otherwiſe out, as heereafter you ſhall heare.
               The King ſtaied not long at Florence, but went to Senes, where he was honorably receiued; and from thence to Viterbe, where Dom Ferrand (who as you haue heard retired towards Rome) was once minded to haue lodged & fortified his campe, and to haue fought if he had ſeene his aduantage, as I was aduertiſed both by King Alphonſes ambaſſador, and alſo by the Popes legate being at Venice. And ſure I looked euer when King Alphonſe being accounted a valiant Prince, ſhould haue come thither in perſon, leauing his ſonne in his realme: for in mine opinion the place had beene greatly for his aduantage, conſidering he ſhould haue had his owne realme, the dition of the church, and the places and territories of the Vrſins on his backe. Wherefore I was maruellouſly aſtoniſhed when I receiued letters from the King that he was entred the towne of Viterbe, and likewiſe the caſtle, which ſoone after his entrie into the towne a commander yeelded vnto him 
                     1
                  , by meanes of the Cardinall Petri ad Vincula (who was gouernor thereof) and of the Colonnois. And then began I to my ſelfe that God was fully purpoſed to accompliſh this enterpriſe, ſo far foorth that I repented me that in my letters I had aduiſed the King not to refuſe an honorable compoſition, for they offered him ynough. But to proceede, Aquependant, Monteflaſcon, and all the places round about yeelded before Viterbe, as I was aduertiſed both by the Kings and alſo the Seniories letters (who were daily informed by their ambaſſadors of all that hapned) diuers of the which they ſhewed me, or cauſed one of their ſecretaries to report vnto me. From thence the K. marched to Rome, through the Vrſins territories, which were all yeelded to him by the Lord Charles Vrſin, who ſaid that he had commandement from his father 
                     2
                   (notwithſtanding that he were then in K. Alphonſes ſeruice) ſo to do, & that ſo long as Dom Ferrand ſhould haue paſſage granted him through the dominions of the Church, and ſhould be in the ſaid dominions; ſo long he would accompanie him and no longer. Thus liue they in Italy both Princes and captaines in continuall practiſe with their enimies, and turning euer as they ſee fortune encline. Further, the King was receiued into Brachane, the ſaid Virgile Vrſins principall caſtle, which was faire, ſtrong, and ſo well furniſhed of victuals, that I haue heard the King oftentimes commend both the place and the good entertainment he found there. For his army was in ſuch extremity and penurie of victuals that in greater it could not be. To be ſhort, who ſo ſhall conſider how often this army was vpon the point to returne home ſince the time it firſt arriued at Vienna in Daulphine, and by what means and ouuertures the iourney was ſtill continued: I thinke he will confeſſe that God was the leader thereof.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Vn commandeur, is one that hauing Eccleſiaſticall liuings may not marrie, and yet is not compelled to be a priest, as the Grandeprior in Fraunce, and all the Knights of Saint Iohns of Ieruſalem.
                  
                  2 His father vvas Virgile Vrſine, of vvhom heerafter more mention is made.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King ſent the Cardinall Petri ad Vincula to Oſtie; what the Pope did at Rome in the meane time, and how the King entred into Rome maugre all his enimies. Chap. 10.
               
                  FRom Brachane the King ſent the Cardinall Saint Peter ad Vincula to Oſtie, wherof he was Biſhop: the place was of great importance, and held by the Colonnois, who lately had recouered it from the Pope, whoſe forces not long before had taken it from the ſaid Cardinall. It was of no defence, notwithſtanding it hath ſince held Rome in great ſubiection a long time by the ſaid Cardinals aide 
                     1
                  , being great friend to the Colonnois, who ioined at that time with vs, partly by meanes of the Cardinall Aſcanio brother to the D. of Milan and Vicechancellor, and partly in hatred of the Vrſins whoſe enimies they be and euer haue been. Theſe two factions breed great troubles in the Church dominions, as do in Fraunce the factions of Luce and Grandmont, and in Holland of Houc and Caballan 
                     2
                  : but were it not for this diuiſion, the ſaid dominions were the beſt countrie for the ſubiects in the world, for they pay no ſubſidies, and other duties but few. Further, they are alwaies well gouerned, for the Popes are euer wiſe themſelues, and haue wiſe men about them: but bicauſe of theſe factions many great and cruell murthers are often committed, as within theſe fower yeeres we haue ſeene a number on both ſides. For ſince the time I now write of, the Coulonnois became our enimies, though to their great diſhonor: for they poſſeſſed of the Kings gift in the realme of Naples, namely in the Earledome of Taillecouſe, and other places which the Vrſins had held before, 20000. ducats and better of yeerely reuenues 
                     3
                  . Further, all their other demands were granted them, as well charge of men of armes as penſions. Wherefore they fell from vs very traiterouſlie, and vpon no occaſion. But you ſhall vnderſtand that they had euer been partakers with the houſe of Arragon & other enimies of Fraunce, bicauſe they were Gibelins, and the Vrſins had euer been friends to Fraunce bicauſe they were Guelphes. To Oſtie the King ſent with Cardinall Saint Peter ad Vincula, Peron de la Baſche ſteward of his houſe, who landed but three daies before at Plombin, and brought with him by ſea twentie thouſand ducats, parcell of that money the Duke of Milan lent the King. Vpon the ſea with the Kings army (being very ſmall) remained the Prince of Salerne, and one called the Lord of Sernon in Prouence whom tempeſt draue into Corſique 
                     4
                  , with their nauie all to rent and torne, where they ſtaied ſo long in repairing it, that it did no ſeruice, notwithſtanding the great treaſure emploied thereon, for before it arriued at Naples, the King was entred the towne.
               At Oſtie with the ſaid Cardinall were fiue hundred men of armes, and two thouſand Swiſſers led by the Earle of Ligny (the Kings coſin germaine by the mother,) the Lord of Alegre, and diuers others, who thought to haue paſſed the riuer of Tybre there, & to haue incloſed Dom Ferrand within Rome by aide of the Coulonnois, the principall of the which houſe were at that time Proſpere and Fabrice Coulonne, and the Cardinall Coulonne, accompanied with two thouſand footemen, whom the King paied by the hands of the aboue named Baſche. The ſaid footemen they had leuied at their owne pleaſure, and muſtred at Sanneſonne, a towne of their owne.
               You ſhall vnderſtand, that many matters concur heere, and of euery one ſomwhat

is to be ſaid. Before the King entred into Viterbe, he had ſent to Rome Monſeur de la Trimoille his chamberlaine, the preſident Ganay keeper of the ſeale, and the generall Bidaut, to enter into intelligence with the Pope, who practiſed continually after the manner of Italy. They being in Rome, the Pope in the night receiued Dom Ferrand with his whole forces into the towne, whereupon our ambaſſadors and ſome fewe of their ſeruants were ſtaied: but the ſelfe ſame day the Pope diſmiſſed them. Notwithſtanding he held ſtill in priſon the Cardinall Aſcaigne his vicechauncellor, and brother to the Duke of Milan, and Proſpere Coulonne, ſome ſaid by their owne accord. Of all theſe accidents I was aduertiſed incontinent by the Kings letters, but the Seniorie more amplie by their ambaſſadors. All this hapned before the King entred into Viterbe, for neither party ſtaied aboue two daies in a place. But as touching our affaires they proſpered better than we could wiſh, and no maruell: for the Lord of Lords gaue them ſucceſſe, as all men might manifeſtly perceiue.
               This army that lay in Oſtie could do no ſeruice bicauſe of the foule weather; further, you ſhall vnderſtand that the force which the Lord of Aubigny led, was returned to the King, and himſelfe alſo, neither had he further charge thereof. The Italians were alſo diſmiſſed that had been with him in Romaine, vnder the leading of the Lord Rodolph of Mantua, the Lord Galeot of Mirandula, and of Fracaſſe brother to the L. Galeas of Saint Seuerin, the which with their ſaid company being to the number of fiue hundred men of armes, were well paied by the King, for they ſerued him as before you haue heard. The King after his departure from Viterbe, remooued to Naples 
                     5
                  , which the Cardinall Aſcaigne held. Further, it is moſt certaine that while our men lay in Oſtie, aboue twenty fathomes of Rome wals fell to the ground on the ſame ſide they ſhould haue entred. The Pope ſeeing this yoong King come thus ſuddenly with ſuch ſucceſſe, agreed that he ſhould enter the citie, (for to ſaie the truth he could not otherwiſe chooſe) and deſired a ſafe conduct 
                     6
                  , (which the King willingly granted) for Dom Ferrand Duke of Calabria, and onely ſon of K. Alphonſe, who in the night retired to Naples, the Cardinall Aſcaigne conueying him to the gate 
                     7
                  . Then the King entred the citie in armes, as a Prince hauing power to diſpoſe of all things at his pleaſure, and diuers Cardinals with the gouernors and Senators of the towne came foorth to receiue him. He lodged in Saint Markes pallace, which is the Culonnois quarter, who were his friends and ſeruants at that time. But the Pope retired into the caſtle of Saint Ange.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Cardinall was afterwards Pope Iulius the ſecond, and prooued a deadly enimie to the French. Further, this towne of Oſtie diſtreſſed Rome, by meanes that being the very entrie into the riuer of Tyber, it kept all victuals from comming to Rome by vvater, for the vvhich cauſe the olde Romanes called the towne Oſtia, bicauſe it vvas the very doore or mouth as it vvere of the riuer.
                  
                  2 The factions of Houc and Caballan began in Holland 1444. Berlandus. Reade Meyer lib. 16. fol. 300. pag. 2.
                  3 The King gaue to Fabrice Colonne the countrie of Albe and Taillecouſſe, vvhich vvere before Virginio Vrſins, and to Proſper the Duchie of Tracette, and the citie of Fondi.
                  
                  4 This Corſique being corrupted in the French, vve haue reſtored according to Panlus Iouius. Guicciar. hath Corſe.
                  5 This is not the citie of Naples, but a little tovvne called in the Annales of Fraunce Neple, in Latin Nepeſum, of the Italians Nepi.
                  
                     
6 Ferdinande Duke of Calabria refuſed the paſport. Guicciar.
                  7 Ferdinande vvas ſonne to Hypolitie ſiſter to Duke Galeas of Milan, to the Lorde Lodouic, and to this Cardinall.
                  
               
            
            
               How King Alphonſe cauſed his ſonne Ferrande to be crowned King, and then fled himſelfe into Sicilie: with a diſcourſe of the euill life that his father the olde Ferrande and he had led. Chap. 11.
               
                  WHo would haue thought that this proude King Alphonſe (hauing beene trained vp all the daies of his life in martiall affaires) that his ſon and al theſe Vrſins, whoſe faction was ſo great in Rome, would thus haue abandoned the citie through cowardiſe, eſpecially ſeeing they knew and vnderſtood perfectly, that the Duke of Milan began to wauer, and the Venetians to ſtir and to treate of a league, which had then been concluded (as I was certainly informed) if they had made any reſiſtance at Viterbe or Rome, to ſtay the King but a few daies: but God meant to ſhew that all theſe proceedings, paſſed far the reach and compaſſe of mans braine. And heere note by the way, that as the citie wall fell downe, ſo did fifteene fathoms alſo of the vaumure of the caſtell of Saint Ange, as I haue beene aduertiſed by diuers, eſpecially by two Cardinals there preſent. Now I muſt returne to ſpeake a word or two of King Alphonſe.
               
               So ſoone as the Duke of Calabria called the yoong Ferrande, was returned to Naples, his father King Alphonſe iudged himſelfe vnwoorthie longer to raigne, bicauſe of the euils he had committed, and the manifold cruelties he had vſed againſt diuers barons and Princes of his realme. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that whereas his father King Ferrande and he had taken (notwithſtanding their ſafe conduct) to the number of 24. of them, and had held them in priſon from the time of their rebellion againſt the ſaid Ferrande 
                  
                     1
                   till the hower of his death: this Alphonſe immediately after his fathers deceaſe for a ſurpluſage of all crueltie, cauſed them miſerably to be murthered, and with them two other whom his father had alſo taken vnder ſafe conduct, the one Duke of Seſſe 
                     2
                   a man of great authoritie, and the other Prince of Roſane, who had married the ſaid Ferrandes ſiſter, and had iſſue by hir a ſonne, a very goodly gentleman. True it is that the ſaid Prince had wrought great treaſon againſt him, for the which he had well deſerued death, if he had not been taken vnder ſafe conduct: but King Ferrande to rid himſelfe of all feare, tooke him (that notwithſtanding) being come to him by his commandement, and laide him in a maruellous ſtinking priſon, and afterward his ſaid ſonne alſo being betweene fifteene and ſixteene yeeres of age. Thus had the Prince of Roſane liued a priſoner when King Alphonſe came to the ſtate, about fower and thirty yeeres. But the ſaid Alphonſe immediately after his coronation, commanded theſe priſoners to be led into an Iland neere to Naples called Iſcle 
                     3
                   (whereof heereafter more mention ſhall be made) and there villanouſly to be ſlaine, all ſaue one or two whom he held ſtill in the caſtell of Naples, namely, the ſaid Prince of Roſans ſonne, and the noble Earle of Popoli. I haue diligently inquired after what ſort he cauſed them thus cruelly to be murthered; (for many ſuppoſed they had been yet liuing, when the King entred into the good towne and citie of Naples) and diuers of their principall ſeruants haue informed me, that

he cauſed them villanouſly and horribly to be ſlaine by a Moore of Afrike, not ſparing theſe ancient Princes: ſome of the which had beene priſoners about fower or fiue and thirtie yeeres. Further, the ſaid Moore immediately after the execution done, departed into Barbarie, to the end no man ſhould know what was become of them. To be ſhort, neuer was man more cruell than this King Alphonſe, more wicked, more vicious, more filthie, nor a greater glutton. Notwithſtanding his father had been the more dangerous: for no man could be acquainted with his humor, nor know when he was pleaſed or diſpleaſed; ſo that at feaſts and bankets he tooke and betraied men: as for example, the Earle Iames ſonne to Nicholas Picinio, whom after that ſort he tooke and murthered villanouſly, being ambaſſador to him from Duke Francis of Milan, whoſe baſe daughter he had married. True it is that the ſaid Francis was conſenting to the murther (notwithſtanding he were his father in law) for they both feared the ſaid Earle Iames, bicauſe the Braciques 
                     4
                   in Italie were wholy at his deuotion. After the like maner alſo tooke this Ferrande the Princes of his realme aboue mentioned, and as touching pardon or mercie neuer was any to be obtained at his hands, as diuers of his neereſt kinſmen and friends haue often told me; neither had he at any time pitie or compaſſion vpon his poore people, to eaſe them of paiments and ſubſidies. Moreouer, he vſed within his realme all trade of merchandiſe himſelfe, ſo far foorth that he deliuered ſwine to his people to feede, which they were conſtrained to fat to further their ſale: and if any of them happened to die, they were forced to make them good. In thoſe places where the oile oliue groweth (namely in Pouille) he and his ſonne bought it all vp at their owne price: and in like maner the corne yet greene vpon the ground, which they ſold againe as deere as was poſſible; and if the price thereof happened to fall, they conſtrained their ſubiects to buie it: beſides that, during the time of their ſale, all other were forbidden to ſell. If any of their noblemen were a good husband, and thought to ſpare ſome good thing for himſelfe, they would foorthwith deſire to borrow it; and if he made refuſall, he was conſtrained to deliuer it perforce: ſo that they vſed to take from them the races of their horſes (wherewith that countrie aboundeth) and to cauſe them to be broken & kept to their own vſe: yea and that ſuch numbers as well of horſes as of mares and colts, that they were eſteemed many thouſands, which alſo they ſent to feede in diuers places in the paſtures of their noble men and other their ſubiects to their great loſſe and dammage. Both of them had forced many women; and as touching the Church, they had it in no reuerence, neither would obey the lawes thereof, ſo far foorth that they ſold Biſhoprikes for monie; as for example, the Biſhoprike of Tarente ſold to a Iew by King Ferrande for thirteene thouſand ducats, to beſtow vpon his ſonne, who (he ſaid) was a Chriſtian. Abbeies they gaue to faulconers and others, to beſtow vpon their children, with this condition, that ſome of them ſhould enter them a certaine number of hauks, and keepe them flying to their vſe, and other ſome entertaine a number of ſoldiers, at their owne proper coſts and charges. The ſonne neuer obſerued Lent, neither ſeemed to thinke there was any, and many yeeres togither neuer confeſſed himſelfe, neither receiued the holy ſacrament. To conclude, it was impoſſible for any man to commit more hainous crimes than both they had done; yet ſome reported the yoong Ferrande to be woorſe than them both, notwithſtanding that he were humble and curteous at his death; and no maruell, for he was then in great diſtreſſe.
               The readers may happily thinke that I vtter all this of ſome priuate hatred againſt them, which in good ſooth I do not, but rehearſe it onely to continue my hiſtorie, in the verie beginning whereof I haue declared, that this enterpriſe could neuer haue

been atchieued by thoſe that were the chiefe managers thereof, had not God alone gouerned it, and giuen it good ſucceſſe, to the end he might make this good yoong King being ſo ſlenderly prouided both of good counſell and all other things neceſſarie: his deputie to chaſtiſe theſe Princes ſo wiſe, ſo rich, of ſo great experience, ſo well accompanied with wiſe and noble perſonages whom the defence of the realme touched as neere as themſelues, ſo allied and friended; yea and the which ſaw the ſtorme a far off, and yet neuer could prouide for it, nor make reſiſtance in any place. For out of the caſtle of Naples there was not one man that ſtaied the King a daie and a night: whereupon Pope Alexander now liuing ſaide, that the French men came thither with wooden ſpurs, and chalke in their harbingers hands to make their lodgings without further trouble: which ſimilitude of wooden ſpurs he vſed, bicauſe yet at this daie, when the yoong gentlemen of this realme rid about the ſtreets on horſebacke, their Pages thruſt little ſticks into their ſhowes or pantofles, wherewith they prick forward their mules. And to confeſſe the truth, this was ſo eaſie a conqueſt, that our men very ſeldom armed themſelues in all this voiage. Beſides that, from the Kings departure out of Aſt, till his entrie into Naples, it was but fower moneths and ninteene daies. An ambaſſador would almoſt haue been as long in iourneying thither. I conclude therfore agreeably to the opinion of diuers holie religious men, and others, and to the voice of the people (which is Gods voice) that God ment to puniſh theſe Princes ſo viſibly that euery man might behold it, to warne thereby all other Princes to liue well, and according to his commandements. For theſe Princes of Arragon loſt both honor and realme, with great riches & goodly furniture of diuers and ſundry ſorts, the which is ſo diſperſed heere and there, that a man can hardly tell what is become thereof: beſides that, they ended their liues three in a yeeres ſpace or little more (but I truſt their ſoules be in Paradiſe.) For you ſhall vnderſtand that this old Ferrande (baſtard to King Alphonſe, a wiſe, vertuous and honorable Prince) was maruellouſly diſquieted when he ſaw this French war firſt mooued againſt him, which he could finde no meanes to pacifie. For he was wiſe and knew that he and his ſonne had liued ill, and were maruellouſly hated in their realme: diuers alſo of thoſe that were neereſt about him haue informed me, that as he raced a certain chappell, he found a booke whereon theſe words were written; Truth vvith hir ſecret counſell 
                  
                     5
                  ; the which contained all the euils that afterward fell vpon him. There were but three that ſawe the booke, for immediately after he had read it, he threw it into the fire. Another thing that greatly troubled him was this, his ſonne Alphonſe and Ferrand his ſonnes ſonne, could neuer be perſwaded that the King would come into Italy. Wherefore they vſed proude and threatning words againſt him, and ſpake very contemptuouſly of him, ſaying, they would go as far as the mountaines to meete him. But one that ſtood by, wiſhed that neuer King of Fraunce might come into Italy, for he had ſeene a poore man of the houſe of Aniou ſcourge it ſhrewdly, meaning Duke Iohn ſonne to King René. King Ferrand had trauelled very earneſtly the yeere before, by his ambaſſador called Camillo Pendolfo, to ſtay the King in Fraunce, offering to pay him yeerely a tribute of fiftie thouſand ducats, and to holde the realme of him by homage and fealty. But when he ſaw that he could by no meanes obtaine peace, nor pacifie the eſtate of Milan, he fell into the diſeaſe whereof he died: notwithſtanding in the midſt of his pangues he confeſſed himſelfe, and as I truſt repented him of his ſinnes. His ſonne Alphonſe who had been ſo terrible a Prince, ſo cruell, and ſo long trained vp in the wars, before the King departed from Rome, reſigned his crowne, and was ſtroken with ſuch feare, that in the night he neuer ceaſed to crie, That he heard the French

men comming, and that the trees and ſtones ſounded Fraunce. He neuer was ſo hardie as once to iſſue foorth of Naples, but vpon his ſonnes returne from Rome, put him in poſſeſſion of the realme, and cauſed him to be crowned, and to ride about the ſtreets of the citie accompanied with the noblieſt perſonages that were there, namely, with Dom Frederick his brother, and the Cardinall of Genua (between whom the new K. rode) and with the ambaſſadors there reſident. He cauſed alſo all other ſolemnities belonging to the coronation to be accompliſhed, & then fled himſelfe & ſailed into Sicily with his mother in law (ſiſter to K. Ferrand of caſtile now raigning, to whom the ſaid realm of Sicily was in ſubiection) to a houſe that ſhe had there: which was ſtrang news through the whole world, eſpecially at Venice where I then was. Some ſaid he went to the Turke; others thought his departure to be, to the end his ſon who was not hated in the realme, might the better win the harts of the people. But mine opiniō was euer that he fled for very cowardiſe: for a cruel man was neuer hardy, as appeereth in hiſtories by Nero & others, who before their death fel into great feare and deſperation. To be ſhort, this Alphonſe made ſuch haſte to be gone, that he ſaid to his mother in law the ſelfe ſame daie that they departed (as diuers of his ſeruants haue told me,) that vnleſſe ſhe would depart with ſpeede, he would leaue hir behinde him. And when ſhe deſired him to ſtaie but three daies onely, to the end ſhe 
                     6
                   might be a whole yeere in his realme: he anſwered that rather than he would tarie any longer he would throw himſelfe headlong out at the windowes, asking hir if ſhe heard not how euery man cried Fraunce. Thus he embarked in his Gallies with his ſaid mother in law and departed, carieng with him all ſorts of wines, (whereunto he was maruellouſly giuen,) and of all kinds of ſeeds for gardens. But as touching his mooueables and goods he left no order for them, but the greateſt part remained in the caſtle of Naples: notwithſtanding certaine iewels he carried alſo with him, and a little money. And in this eſtate ſailed he and his mother in lawe to hir ſaid houſe in Sicilie, whence he departed and went to Meſſine, whither he called and led with him diuers religious men, vowing himſelfe to be no more of this world. Aboue all other orders of religion he loued eſpecially thoſe of the Mount Oliuet (who are clad in white) as they themſelues told me at Venice, where the body of Saint Heleine lieth in their cloiſter. Moreouer, he began to lead a maruellous holie life, & to ſerue God howerly both daie & night with the ſaid religious men as they do in their couents. He vſed alſo great feaſting, abſtinence, and almes, and ſoone after fell into a ſharpe ſicknes of excoriation and the ſtone, in ſuch ſort that the ſaid religious men reported that they neuer ſaw man ſo tormented. Notwithſtanding he endured patiently all theſe pangues, being fully reſolued to haue ſpent the reſt of his life in an Abbey at Valence the great in Spaine, & there to haue regiſtred himſelfe a religious man. But he was ſo tormented with this diſeaſe, that he died ſoone after: and it is to be hoped bicauſe of his great repentance, that his ſoule is ioifull in Paradiſe: his ſonne alſo died ſoone after him of an ague ioyned with a fluxe, and I truſt they are both in better caſe then they were in this world. But marke heere by the waie that in leſſe than two yeeres ſpace, fiue wore the crowne of Naples, to with the three aboue named, Charles the 8. King of Fraunce, and Dom Frederick (brother to the ſaid Alphonſe) now raigning.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 That is ſince the time that they rebelled, vvhen they ſent for the Duke of Lorraine, vvhereof mention is made in the first chapter of this ſeuenth booke.
                  
                  2 Iouian Pontan in the vvars betvvene Duke Iohn of Aniou, and this old Ferrand,

                     maketh the Duke of Seſſe and prince of Roſane but one.
                  
                  3 The Italians haue Iſchia, vvhereof Plinie vvriteth thus, lib. 3. cap. 7. Iſchia inſula eſt è Regione Veliae alio nomine aenotris dicta: others vvrite that it vvas firſt named Aenaria. Iouius vvriteth that the Ile is named Aenacia, and that Iſchle is the name of the caſtle in the Ile: it is thirty miles from Naples, Guicciar. Sabellicus ſaith Procyta alias Iſchla, but Plinie maketh Procyta and Iſchia tvvaine.
                  
                  4 Theſe were ſoldiers ſo named of Bracio de Fortibraci, a great captaine in his time.
                  
                  5 Hovv this booke vvas ſtrangely reuealed by a viſion of one Cataldus (who had been biſhop of Tarente more than a thouſand yeeres before) to a yoong childe, vvho thereof enformed the King, read Alexander in diebus genialibus, lib. 3. cap. 15. 
                  5 This ſhe, Guicciar. vnderſtandeth he, meaning that ſhe deſired Alphonſe to tary three or fovver daies, to the end he might haue been King a vvhole yeere.
                  
               
            
            
               How the yoong Ferrand after he was crowned King of Naples, went and encamped at Saint Germain, to reſiſt the Kings comming, and of the treatie that King Charles made with the Pope at Rome. Chap. 12.
               
                  NOw to the end all theſe things may be plaine and euident: you ſhall vnderſtand that K. Ferrand being crowned, became as it were a newe man, ſuppoſing all old iniuries and offences to be forgotten by his fathers flight: wherefore he leuied all the force he could, aſwell horſemen as footemen, and came to Saint Germain, which is the very entry into his realme, and a ſtrong place, and of great defence, through the which the Frenchmen had paſſed twiſe before 
                     1
                  . There he encamped and manned the towne, and then his friends began ſomwhat to recouer their ſpirits. The towne is ſtrong, both bicauſe of a little riuer 
                     2
                   which ſomtime is paſſable on foote, ſomtime not, and alſo bicauſe of the hill hanging ouer it.
               The King was yet at Rome, where he remained about twenty daies buſied with a number of matters. He had with him at the leaſt eighteene Cardinals, beſides diuers others that repaired to the citie from all parts. The names of theſe Cardinals were the Cardinall Aſcaigne, the Popes vicechauncellor, and brother to the Duke of Milan, the Cardinall Petri-ad-Vincula (the which two were deadly enimies to the Pope, and great friends each to other) the Cardinals of Gueſe 
                     3
                  , Saint Denis, Saint Seuerin, Sauelli, Coulonne, and diuers others, all the which would needs haue proceeded to a new election, and depoſed the Pope, being within the caſtle of Saint Ange, againſt the which the artillery was twiſe bent, as I haue heard the nobleſt perſonages there preſent report, but the King of his goodnes euer withſtood it. The place was not of defence, for the ſeate thereof is vpon a little hill made by force of man: beſides that, theſe Cardinals alleaged that the wals thereof were fallen down by miracle, and charged the Pope that he had obtained this holy dignitie by ſimonie, and they ſaid true; but Cardinall Aſcaigne himſelfe was the chiefe merchaunt that ſolde it, and receiued a great ſumme of money for his part, togither with the Popes houſe where he lodged before he was Pope, being then Vicechauncellor, and all the furniture thereof, and his ſaid office of Vicechauncellor, with diuers places of the patrimonie of the Church. For there had been great controuerſie between them

two for the ſaid dignitie 
                     4
                  . Notwithſtanding I thinke they would both willingly haue agreede to chuſe a newe Pope of the Kings naming, yea and a French man; ſo that I know not whether the King did well or euill in concluding peace, though all things conſidered I ſuppoſe he tooke the beſt courſe: for himſelfe was yoong, and vnprouided of men ſufficient to manage ſo waightie a matter as the reformation of the Church, though I confeſſe his power to haue been ſufficient thereunto. Sure if he could haue reformed it, I thinke al men of wiſedome and vnderſtanding would haue accounted it a good, a woorthie, and a holie worke. But there were too many things requiſite to ſo high an enterpriſe, notwithſtanding the Kings will was good, and yet is if he had good aſſiſtance.
               The King being in Rome made a treatie with the Pope, which could not long endure, for it was vnreaſonable in ſome points, and ſerued for the chiefe colour of the league, whereof heereafter you ſhall heare. By the ſaid treatie peace was concluded betweene the Pope and his Cardinals, and all other their adherents and partakers. And it was agreed that the Cardinals ſhould receiue all rights and duties belonging to their Cardinals hat as well abſent as preſent: and that the Pope ſhould lend the King fower places, to wit, Terracine, Ciuita-vechia, Viterbe (which the King already held) and Spolete, but this laſt he neuer deliuered notwithſtanding his promiſe. All the which places the King ſware to reſtore at his returne from Naples, as alſo he did notwithſtanding that the Pope had abuſed him. By this treatie he deliuered alſo into the Kings hands the Truks brother: for the ſafe keeping of whom he receiued yeerely of the Turke ſixtie thouſand ducats, and held him alſo by meanes of his ſaid brother in great feare 
                     5
                  . He promiſed further to put no Legate into any fortified place or towne of the Church without the Kings conſent. Certaine other articles there were touching the conſiſtorie or college of Cardinals which I ouerpaſſe. For the performance of all theſe conditions, the Pope deliuered his ſonne the Cardinall of Valence in hoſtage to the King, who accompanied him as his Legate, and the King did vnto the Pope the dutie of a ſonne, with all humilitie and obedience. Further, the Pope created two Cardinals at his requeſt, the one the generall Briſſonnet, ſo often before named, lately made biſhop of Saint Malo, and the other the biſhop of Mans, of the houſe of Luxembourg, who was heere in Fraunce.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth in their voiages to Naples vnder the houſe of Aniou.
                  
                  2 This riuer is called Liris or Gariliano.
                  
                  3 Gurcenſe Gazzo, and I ſuppoſe our author write it Gurſe, but the letters of the ancient copie being defaced, the vnskilfull corrector at the first Printing geſsing but at the vvord, changed R into E. Guicciar. hath Gurce.
                  
                  4 The Pope before his papacie had been Vicechauncellor. Aſcanio and he ſtroue for the dignitie, but in the end Aſcanio relented, being recompenſed as heere is mentioned. Notvvithſtanding, ſeeing an occaſion againſt the Pope offered by the Kings comming, his rancor brake foorth a newe.
                  
                  5 Gemes or Gemin Ottoman heere mentioned, brother to Baiazet the ſecond, rebelling againſt his brother fled to the Soldan of Aegypt for aide, but being vanquiſhed he fled to Rhodes, from whence he was ſent into Fraunce to King Lewis the eleuenth, to the end he might not eſcape; for the Turke for his ſafe keeping paid yeerely to the knights of the Rhodes, 40000. crownes. K. Lewis gaue him to Pope Innocent the 8. So her remained till this preſent, that he was deliuered to K. Charles, at Rome in the Popes hands.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King departed from Rome towards Naples, what hapned in the meane time in diuers parts of the ſaid realme: and through what places he paſſed till he came to Naples. Chap. 13.
               
                  THeſe matters being thus ended, the King remooued from Rome, in great amity & friendſhip with the Pope in apparance, at which time eight Cardinals departed alſo out of the citie highly diſpleaſed with this treatie, namely the ſaid Vicechauncellor Aſcaigne, and the Cardinall S. Peter-ad-Vincula, with ſixe of their faction. But many thought that Aſcaigne did but diſſemble, and that in deed he was in good amitie with the Pope; notwithſtanding I am able to affirme nothing thereof, for his brother had not as yet declared himſelfe our enimie. From Rome the King remooued to Ianneſanne, and from thence to Beliſtre, where the Cardinall of Valence eſcaped away.
               The next daie the King tooke Chaſtelfortin by aſſault and put all that were with in it to the ſword, bicauſe the place belonged to Iames Comte who was reuolted from the King, notwithſtanding that he had taken his pay: for the Comtes haue euer been partakers with the Vrſins. From thence he marched to Valmonton a town of the Colonnois, and from thence remooued and lodged about fower miles from mont Saint Iehan, which is a towne held of the Church, but belonging to the Marques of Peſcaire and very well fortified: notwithſtanding after it had beene beaten ſeauen or eight howers with the cannon; it was taken by aſſault, and all that were within it or the greateſt partſlaine, and there the Kings whole force ioyned togither 
                     1
                  . Then he marched towards Saint Germain ſixteen miles thence, where this newe King Ferrande (as you haue heard) laie in campe with all the force he could leuy. And indeed this was his onely refuge, and the place where he muſt fight or neuer, bicauſe it was the verie keie as it were of his realme, and a place much for his aduantage as well bicauſe of the riuer as of the mountaine. Further, he had ſent men to defend the ſtraight of Cancello, lying among the mountaines ſixe miles from Saint Germain: yet notwithſtanding all this preparation before the Kings arriuall at S. Germain, he raiſed his campe and departed in great diſorder abandoning both the towne and the paſſage.
               Our vaward was led that day by the L. of Guiſe, the L. of Rieux was ſent to this ſtrait of Cancello againſt the Arragonnois, but they alſo before his comming abandoned the place: and then entered the King into S. Germain. K. Ferrande rid ſtraight to Capoua, where they refuſed to giue his ſoldiers entrance, but receiued his perſon with a fewe that attended vpon him; he ſtaied not there, but deſired them to continue true and faithfull ſubiects to him, promiſing the next daie to returne, and ſo departed towards Naples fearing the rebellion that afterwards happened. All his force or the greateſt part ſhould haue tarried him at Capoua: but the next daie when he returned he found them all departed. The Lord Virgile Vrſin with his coſin the Earle of Petillane, went to Nola, where they and all their company were taken priſoners by our men. They alleaged that they had a ſafe conduct and that we did them wrong, ſo had they indeed, but their ſafe conduct was not yet in their hands: notwithſtanding they paied no ranſome, but much they loſt when they were

taken, and ſure in mine opinion they had wrong done them.
               From Saint Germain the King remooued to Mingamer, and to Triague, and lodged at Calui, two miles from Capoua, whither they of Capoua came and yeelded themſelues by compoſition, and the King entered into the towne with his whole army. From Capoua the next daie he marched to Auerſa, being in the midway between Capoua and Naples, and fiue miles diſtant from each of them. Thither came they of Naples and yeelded themſelues in like maner by compoſition, hauing receiued aſſurance of the King that their ancient liberties ſhould not be infringed nor empaired. The King ſent thither before him the Marſhall Gié, the Seneſchall of Beaucaire, the preſident Ganay keeper of the Seale, and certaine Secretaries: whereof King Ferrande being aduertiſed, and ſeeing the people and Nobles of his realme in armes againſt him (who alſo at his firſt arriuall thither had ſpoiled his ſtable being maruellous great) tooke ſea and ſailed into Iſcle, an Iland eighteen miles from Naples 
                     2
                  : then the King was receiued into the towne with great ioy and triumph. For all the people came foorth to meete him, yea, and thoſe firſt that were moſt bound to the houſe of Arragon, namely all the Carraffes, who held of the ſaide houſe of Arragon to the value of forty thouſand ducats of yeerely reuenues, partly of inheritance, and partly of gift from the Prince; for the Kings of Naples may giue away their crowne lands, ſo do they alſo other mens, and I thinke there are not three in the realme whoſe lands be not crowne lands or other mens.
               Neuer people ſhewed ſo great affection to Prince or nation as they ſhewed to the King: the reaſon whereof was, bicauſe now they thought themſelues deliuered from all tyranny, ſo that they voluntarily yeelded vnto vs. For al Calabria became French incontinent, whither Monſeur d'Aubigny and Peron of Baſche were ſent themſelues alone without any force. All the countrey of Abrouſſo 
                     3
                   yeelded likewiſe, the town of Aquila (which hath euer been great friend to the French) being the firſt beginner. In like maner all Pouille turned ſauing the caſtle of Brandis, which was ſtrong and well manned, and Gallipoli which had a garriſon in it, otherwiſe the people would haue turned alſo. In Calabria three places held for King Ferrand, two of them were Mantie and Turpie (ancient partakers with the houſe of Aniou) the which at the firſt had ſet vp the armes of Fraunce, but bicauſe the K. gaue them to the L. of Perſi, and would not receiue them as percell of the demaines of his crowne 
                     4
                  , they reared vp againe the armes of Arragon. The third was the caſtle of Reges, which held alſo for King Ferrande. But it was our owne fault that ought held, for we ſent no forces thither: no, I am well aſſured that into Pouille and Calabria, there went not men ſufficient to haue defended one caſtell for the King. Tarente yeeded both caſtle & towne, ſo did alſo Otrante 
                     5
                  , Monopoli, Trani, Manfredonne, Barle, & all the other places, the aboue named onely excepted. Moreouer the people came from their cities three daies iourney to meet our men and to yeeld themſelues. To be ſhort, the whole realme ſent to Naples, and all the Princes and noble men repaired thither to do homage to the King, ſauing the Marques of Peſcaire 
                     6
                   whoſe brethren and nephewes came notwithſtanding. The Earle of Acri, and the Marques of Squillazo, fled into Sicilie bicauſe the King had giuen their lands to the Lord of Aubigny. At Naples alſo arriued the Prince of Salerne newely come from the ſea, but hauing done no ſeruice. Thither came alſo his brother the Prince of Biſignan and his ſonnes, being accompanied with the Dukes of Melfe, of Grauine, and the olde Duke of Sora, who not long before had ſolde his Duchie to the Cardinall Petriad Vincula, whoſe brother yet at this day poſſeſſeth it 
                     7
                  . To Naples alſo repaired the Earles of Montorio, of Fondi, of Tripalda and of Celano (who had long been

baniſhed out of the realme, and was now newely returned with the King.) The Earle of Troy was there in like maner (who was a yoong gentleman of Scotland, brought vp in Fraunce) and the Earle of Popoli whom we found priſoner at Naples. The yoong Prince of Roſane before mentioned, after his long impriſonment with his father (who had lien in priſon fower and thirtie yeeres) was at the length deliuered and went with King Ferrand, whether willingly or by conſtraine I know not. To Naples came alſo beſides theſe aboue named, the Marques of Guefron with all the Caldoreſques, and the Earles of Matalon and Merillano, the which had, both they and their anceſtors, euer gouerned the houſe of Arragon. To conclude, thither repaired all the nobles of the realme, the three aboue named onely excepted.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 For the Coulonnois and certaine of the Kings captaines had been ſent about to come vpon King Ferrandes backe. Theſe tooke the tovvne of Aquila, and all thoſe parts, and heere ioyned againe vvith the King, bicauſe they looked for the battell.
                  
                  2 Guicciar. ſaith thirtie miles.
                  
                  3 Samnium or Samnites.
                  
                  4 Theſe vvere lands held in Capite of the King of Naples.
                  
                  5 Hydruntum firſt yeelded to the French, then reuolted againe. Guicciar.
                  6 Alphonſe Daualo, Marques of Peſcare. Guicciar.
                  7 Iohn de Rouuere prefect of Rome vvas the cardinals brother, and he it vvas that held this Duchie.
                  
               
            
            
               How King Charles was crowned King of Naples, of the faults he committed in the defence of the realme, and how an enterpriſe attempted on his behalfe againſt the Turke, was diſcouered by the Venetians. Chap. 14.
               
                  KIng Ferrand at his departure from Naples, left the Marques of Peſcare with certaine Almains to defend the caſtle 
                     1
                  , and ſailed himſelfe for aide into Sicilie to his father. Dom Frederic lay ſtill vpon the ſea with a few gallies, and came twiſe to parle with the King vnder ſafe conduct. His demands were that ſome part of the realme might remain to his nephew with the title of King 
                     2
                  , and that he himſelfe might enioy all his owne lands and his wiues. His requeſt in reſpect of himſelfe was not great, for his partage was ſmall. The King offered him poſſeſſions in Fraunce both for him and his nephew, and I thinke would willingly haue giuen them a good and a great Duchie: but they would not accept this offer, neither would he grant their demands. For what treatie ſoeuer had been made, they would haue broken it, when they had ſeen their aduantage, being ſtill reſident in the realme. The Kings artillerie was bent and ſhot againſt the caſtle of Naples, within the which were onely the Almaines, for the Marques of Peſcare was departed thence. And if we had ſent but fower cannons to the Ile of Iſcle 
                     3
                   we had taken it, & then al had been ours: for from thence returned al the miſchiefe 
                     4
                  ; but if that had been once woon, all the other places they held, being not paſt fower or fiue, would haue yeelded. But our men fell to feaſting, to iuſts and banketing, & were ſo puffed vp with pride, that they accountcd the Italians no men.

Moreouer, the King was crowned and lodged in Capouane, and went ſometime to Mont Imperial 
                     5
                  . True it is that he ſhewed great grace and fauor to the ſubiects of the realme, for he abated their charges. And I thinke verily the people of themſelues would not haue reuolted from vs (notwithſtanding their great inconſtancie) if we had contented a fewe of the nobles: but them no man regarded; beſides that they were very roughly vſed at the gates. Thoſe that were beſt dealt with, were the Carraffes the houſe of Arragons greateſt friends, for their eſtates were but ſomwhat diminiſhed: but the offices and penſions of the reſt cleane taken away; yea the partakers with the houſe of Aniou woorſe handled than the Arragonois. Further, into the county of Merillano a commandement was ſent, for the which the preſident Ganaye, and the Seneſchall newly created Duke of Nola, and Lord great cchamberlaine of the realme, were burthened to haue taken money. By the ſaid commandement euerie man was confirmed in his poſſeſſion, and the partakers with the houſe of Aniou barred from their lands, vnleſſe they could recouer them by proces. Further, as touching ſuch as had made entries vpon their own head, (as for example the Earle of Celano) aide was giuen to the parties greeued, to diſpoſſeſſe them againe by force. All eſtates and offices were beſtowed vpon two or three Frenchmen, and all the prouiſion of victuales within the caſtell of Naples 
                     6
                  , when it yeelded (being maruellous great) giuen to euery man that demanded it, at the leaſt all that the King knew of.
               In the meane time the Almaines by practiſe yeelded the caſtle 
                     7
                  , in the which they obtained infinit riches, the caſtle of Oeuf 
                     8
                   was alſo taken by battery. By theſe faults aboue rehearſed a man may manifeſtly perceiue that this great conqueſt was atchieued by the meere grace of God, and not by their wiſdome that gouerned the enterpriſe: but theſe foule faults were the works of men puffed vp with pride and vainglorie, and not vnderſtanding from whence all this their honor and good ſucceſſe ſprang. Wherefore they proceeded according to their nature and experience, by meanes whereof their good fortune changed as ſuddenly and as viſibly, as men may ſee the day ſpring in Iſland or Norway 
                     9
                  , where the daies in ſommer are of greater length than in any other place, in ſuch ſort, that within a quarter of an hower after the one daies ſhutting in, the next day light beginneth to appeere. Euen ſo in as ſhort ſpace did euery wiſe man perceiue the alteration of our good and proſperous ſucceſſe, whereof all Chriſtendome ſhould haue reaped great profit and honor if we had acknowledged it to proceed from him, who was indeed the giuer thereof. For the Turke then raigning (and yet liuing) might as eaſily haue been chaſed out of Europe, as King Alphonſe was out of his realme, both for that he was a man of no valor, and alſo bicauſe the King had with him the ſaid Turkes brother, whom he feared aboue all men liuing. But his ſaid brother died ſoone after the Cardinall of Valences eſcape: whereupon the report went that he was poiſoned when the Pope deliuered him to the King. Further, there were ſo many thouſand Chriſtians in Greece readie to rebell, as a man would hardly beleeue, for from Otrante to Valonne 
                     10
                   are but 60. miles 
                     11
                  , and from Valonne to Conſtantinople but eighteene reaſonable daies iourneies, as diuers that haue trauelled the way haue enformed me. Betweene them are no ſtrong places, at the moſt not aboue two or three, for all the reſt be razed. Thoſe countries are maruellous populous, and they that inhabite them be Albanois, Sclauons and Greekes, who vnderſtood of our Kings good ſucceſſe by their friends that were at Venice and in Pouille, vnto whom alſo they ſent letters, and looked daily, but for meſſengers to mooue them to rebell. Whereupon the King ſent thither the Archbiſhop of Duras 
                     12
                   an Albanois borne, who found a maruellous number ready to reuolt, being ſonnes or nephewes of many noble and valiant men of thoſe

parts, namely the ſonnes of Scanderbeg, the nephewes of the Emperor of Conſtantinople, and the nephewes of the Lord Conſtantine, (now gouernor of Montferrat) who were alſo Nephewes or coſins to the King of Seruia. In Theſſalia more than fiue thouſand would haue rebelled, yea and Scutary ſhould haue been ſurpriſed by intelligence that the Lord Conſtantine had within it, as himſelfe aduertiſed me at Venice, where he lay hidden many daies in my lodging. And ſure he would eaſily haue atchieued his enterpriſe: for Macedonie and Theſſaly were his inheritance 
                     13
                  , which was the patrimony of Alexander the great, Valonne alſo is part thereof, and vpon his dominions Scutary and Croye 
                     14
                   border, the which in his youth his father 
                     15
                   or vncle engaged to the Venetians, who loſt Croye, and yeelded Scutary to the Turke by treatie. The ſaid Lord Conſtantine lay himſelfe within three leagues of Scutarie, and the enterpriſe had been executed, had not the ſaid Archbiſhop of Duras ſtaied at Venice too long after the Lord Conſtantines departure. I daily preſſed him very earneſtly to depart, for he was a man light of talke, and vaunted in all places, that he would do ſome feate woorthie of immortall fame and renowme. But as the deuill would, the ſelfe ſame day that the Venetians were aduertiſed of the Turkes brothers death, whom the Pope had deliuered to the King: they determined to ſend word thereof to the Turke by one of their Secretaries. And bicauſe they knew well that he ſhould be highly rewarded that firſt brought this newes to the Turke: they commanded that no ſhip ſhould paſſe that night betweene the two caſtles, which make the very entrie into the gulfe of Venice 
                     16
                  , where alſo they cauſed watch and ward to be kept, bicauſe they feared the departure of ſome of the ſmall boates, as gripes and ſuch like, whereof there were a great number of the ports of Albany, and of their Iles adioining to Greece. But the ſelfe ſame night this poore Archbiſhop would needes depart to this enterpriſe of the Lord Conſtantine, (who taried his comming) conueighing with him great ſtore of ſwords, bucklers, and iauelins, to furniſh thoſe with whom he had intelligence (for they are not permitted to haue weapons in thoſe countries:) but as he paſſed betweene the two caſtels aboue mentioned, he was taken and put into one of them, both he and his men: notwithſtanding the ſhip that caried him was ſuffred to paſſe. Letters were found about him which diſcouered the enterpriſe, & the L. Conſtantine hath told me ſince, that the Venetians aduertiſed thereof both the Turkes garriſons that lay in thoſe parts, & the Turke himſelfe alſo, & had it not been for the gripe that was permitted to paſſe (the patron wherof was an Albanois, who informed him of all that was hapned) he had himſelfe been taken, but he eſcaped by ſea, and fled into Pouille.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He meaneth Caſtelnouo: for there are in Naples fower caſtels. The caſtell of Capoana where the King lodged: Caſtel nouo ſituate partly in the ſea, partly on the land with a citadelle by it: Caſtel del ouo ſituate on a rock in the ſea with a great tower called of the French Prince faulay, and betweene the caſtels Nouo and Del ouo is a fort vpon a rocke in the ſea with a ſtrong tower. The fourth is caſtel S. Ermo, and aboue Naples is an abbey that looketh into the towne called S. Martin, in maner of a caſtell.
                  
                  2 Guicciar. ſaith he deſired Calabria for his nephew without title of King.
                  
                  3 The King ſent to Iſcle, but the Frenchmen finding the towne deſolate through negligence neuer aſſaulted the caſtell.
                  
                  4 He meaneth bicauſe all Ferrandes partie was retired thither.
                  
                  5 The French Corrector ſuppoſeth that this ſhould be en mantean Imperial, bicauſe ſome write that he was crowned Emperor of Conſtantinople at Rome: but I thinke rather
                     
                     he meaneth Mont de la Crote, or the hill Veſuuius, whither the King often walked for recreation, and per aduenture bicauſe of the ſingularities which he ſawe there, named one of theſe hils Mont Imperial.
                  6 He meaneth Caſtel nouo.
                  7 The Almaines yeelded the caſtell vnder condition, that they might haue King Ferrandes mooueables that were within it.
                  
                  8 This caſtell was ſo named, bicauſe it was built in forme of an egge.
                  
                  9 For Iſland and Norway, the vnskilfull corrector had chopped in Holland and Auuergne, making the author report a meere vntruth.
                  
                  10 Oricum in Latine as ſome write, as others Apollonia.
                  11 Others write but 55.
                  12 Dyrrachium.
                  13 But the Turke held them from him.
                  
                  14 Troy in times paſt the ſtrongeſt towne in Epirus.
                  15 His fathers name was Commenus.
                  16 He meaneth two caſtels ſtanding at the entrie into the calme ſea, which is within the naturall banke that defendeth the towne from the rage of the ſea without the banke, the ſaid caſtels be hard by Venice.
                  
               
            
            
               A diſcourſe ſomewhat out of the courſe of the hiſtorie, wherein Philip de Commines author of this preſent worke, treateth amply of the eſtate and gouernment of the Seniorie of Venice, and of thoſe things that he ſaw there, and were done there during the time of his ambaſſage to the ſaid Seniorie for the King. Chap. 15.
               
                  I Will now leaue the King in Naples, hauing atchieued his enterpriſe, and will ſpeake ſomewhat of the Venetians, and the cauſe of mine ambaſſage thither. My departure from Aſt to Venice was, partly to thanke them for the good anſwers they had made to two of the Kings ambaſſadors ſent thither, and partly to keepe them ſtill his friends, if it were poſſible by any meanes: for bicauſe of their great forces, wiſedome, and good gouernment, they might eaſily haue mated his enterpriſe in Italie; but they being his friends, none in the countrie were to be feared. The Duke of Milan helped to diſpatch me, and wrote to his ambaſſador there reſident (for he hath one there continually) to accompanie me, and to giue me inſtructions to whom I ſhould addreſſe my ſelfe. His ſaid ambaſſador receiued monethly of the Seniorie an hundred ducats, and had his houſe well furniſhed, and three barges (at their charge) to conuay him vp and downe the towne. Their ambaſſador hath the like allowance at Milan, ſaue that he hath no barge; for at Milan men ride altogither on horſebacke, but at Venice they are caried by bote. In my iournie thitherward, I paſſed through their cities, namely Breſſe, Veronne, Vincenſe, and Padua, with diuers others; at euery one of the which I was very honorably entertained, bicauſe of the perſonage I repreſented: for alwaies either the poteſtate or the captaine came to receiue me, accompanied with a goodly traine: but they both iſſued neuer foorth of the towne; for the captaine vſed to come

no further than the gate. After I was entred the towne, they conuaied me to my lodging, commanding the hoſt that I ſhould be plentifully ſerued, and all my charges they defraied, entertaining me with very honorable words. But if a man conſider what he muſt beſtowe vpon drums and trumpets, he ſaueth not much though he lie vpon free coſt, notwithſtanding the entertainment is very honorable. The ſame day I entred into Venice, they ſent as far as Chafouſine 
                     1
                   to receiue me, which is a place fiue miles from the towne, where men leaue the botes that conuay them downe the riuer from Padua 
                     2
                  , and enter into other little botes very proper and neate, couered with tapeſtrie, and furniſhed within, with goodly hangings and veluet cuſhions to ſit vpon. Thus far the ſea floweth, and this is the neereſt paſſage from the firme land to Venice: but their ſea is maruellous calme (vnles a tempeſt happen to ariſe) which is the cauſe that ſo great plenty of all kinde of fiſh is taken there. I woondred to behold the ſeate of this citie, ſo many ſteeples, ſo many religious houſes, and ſo much building, and all in the water; but eſpecially that the people had none other paſſage to & fro in the town but by botes, wherof I thinke there are to the number of 30000. but they be very ſmall. Further, about the citie (I meane within the compas round about of leſſe than halfe a French league) are 70. houſes of religion, as well of men as women, all in Ilands ſumptuouſly built, richly furniſhed within, and hauing goodly gardens belonging to them. Thoſe within the citie I comprehend not in this number; for within, there are, beſides theſe, the fower orders of friers, and threeſcore and twelue pariſhes, beſides a number of chappels of the companies of occupations, commonly called Confrairies 
                  
                     3
                  . And ſure it is a ſtrange ſight to behold ſo many great and goodly churches built in the ſea. To the ſaid place of Chafouſine came fiue and twenty gentlemen to receiue me, ſumptuouſly apparelled in ſilke and ſcarlet, the which welcommed me with an oration, & conuaied me to the church of Saint Andrew neere to the towne, where as many other gentlemen met me, being accompanied with the ambaſſadors of Milan and Ferrara: and heere alſo they receiued me with an oratiō, & afterwards led me into other botes which they call flat, being much greater than the former, two of them were couered with crimoſin ſattin, and decked within with arras, ech of them being large inough to haue receiued 40. perſons. They placed me between theſe two ambaſſadors, (for the midſt in Italy is the honorableſt place) and conuaied me along through the great ſtreete called the great chanell 
                     4
                  , which is ſo large that the gallies paſſe to & fro through it, yea I haue ſeen hard by the houſes ſhips of foure hundred tun and aboue. Sure in mine opinion it is the goodlieſt ſtreet in the world and the beſt built, and reacheth in length from the one end of the towne to the other. Their buildings are high and ſtately, and all of fine ſtone 
                     5
                  . The ancient houſes be all painted; but the reſt that haue been built within theſe hundred yeeres, haue their front all of white marble, brought thither out of Iſtria an hundred miles thence, and are beautified with many great peeces of Porphire 
                     6
                   and Sarpentine 
                     7
                  . In the moſt part of them are at the leaſt two chambers, the ſeeling whereof is gilded, the mantletrees of the chimneies very rich, to wit, of grauen marble, the bedſteds gilded, the preſſes painted and vermiled with golde, and maruellous well furniſhed with ſtuffe. To be ſhort, it is the moſt triumphant citie that euer I ſawe, and where ambaſſadors and ſtrangers are moſt honorably entertained, the commonwealth beſt gouerned, and God moſt deuoutly ſerued; ſo far foorth, that notwithſtanding they haue diuers imperfections, yet thinke I verily that God proſpereth them, bicauſe of the reuerence they beare to the ſeruice of the Church. In the companie of theſe fiftie gentlemen I paſſed to Saint Georges, which is an abbey of reformed blacke monks where I lodged. The next day they returned againe to me, and

led me to the Seniorie, where I deliuered my letters to the Duke, who preſideth in all their aſſemblies, being honored as a King 
                     8
                  , and all letters are directed to him, but of himſelfe he cannot do much. Notwithanding this Duke is of great authoritie, yea greater than euer was any of his predeceſſors 
                     9
                  ; and no maruell, for he hath beene Duke theſe twelue yeeres 
                     10
                  : and for my part I euer found him a vertuous and a wiſe man, of great experience in the affaires of Italie, and a courteous and gentle perſon. This was all that I did the firſt day, ſaue that they led me into the palace, and ſhewed me three or fower chambers, the feelings whereof were richly gilded, and likewiſe the beds and preſſes: and ſure it is a very ſtately and ſumptuous building for the greatnes thereof: for it is all of ſquare marble, and all the front vermiled with gold, and likewiſe the edges and borders of the angles, about the bredth of an inch. There are moreouer fower goodly hals within it richly gilded, and a number of faire lodgings, but the court is very ſmall. The Duke out of his chamber may heare maſſe at the high altar of the chappell of Saint Marke 
                     11
                  , which is the goodlieſt and richeſt church in the world, bearing but the name of a chappell: for it is built throughout of the curious worke called Muſaique, or Marqueterie 
                     12
                  ; the art alſo whereof they vaunt themſelues to be authors of: and ſure they haue diuers workmen thereof, as I my ſelfe can teſtifie. In this chappell is their treaſure ſo famous through the world, being onely things appointed for the furniture of the church; among the which are twelue or fowerteene Rubie ballais, the greateſt that euer I ſaw: for two of them waigh the one aboue ſeuen hundred, and the other aboue eight hundred carrets, but they are vnpoliſhed. There are twelue other ſtones like to little pillers ſet in gold, and garniſhed and bordred with excellent good ſtone. Moreouer, twelue crownes there are of golde, wherewith in times paſt at certaine feaſts in the yeere twelue women decked themſelues (whom they called Queenes) the which went about theſe ylands and churches: but the ſaid Queenes, and the greateſt part of the women of the citie, were ſtolen and caried away perforce by theeues that came out of Iſtria or Friole 
                     13
                  , being borderers vpon the Venetians, the which lurked priuily behinde theſe yles: but their husbands purſued theſe theeues, and recouered their women, and offered all theſe crownes to Saint Marke, and built alſo a chappell vpon the place, whither the Seniorie reſorteth yeerely the ſame day they obtained this victorie. Sure this is a goodly furniture for the church: for beſides theſe things aboue rehearſed, there are diuers other iewels of gold, and a ſute of Amethiſts and Agates, & a few Emeraulds. But this is no ſuch treaſure to make account of as ready monie; and yet of monie they haue no treaſure: for the Duke himſelfe told me before the Seniorie, that it is among them a capitall crime to make mention of treaſure in coine. And ſure in mine opinion they do therein very wiſely, for feare of diuiſion that thereby might ariſe among them. Afterward they ſhewed me their treaſure, namely their Arſenal 
                     14
                  , where they arme their gallies, and prepare all other furniture neceſſary for their nauie, which vndoubtedly is the goodlieſt thing at this day in the world, and the beſt in order for that purpoſe.
               To be ſhort, I abode there eight moneths vpon their charge, as did all the other ambaſſadors there reſident. And ſure thus much I dare boldly ſay of them, that they are men of ſuch wiſdome, and ſo inclined to inlarge their dominions, that vnleſſe they be looked to in time, all their neighbors ſhall repent it too late: for the Kings comming into Italy, and the wars that haue been betweene him and them ſince that time (which yet endure) haue made them much skilfuller in fortification and defence of places euer they were before. Beſides that, they haue of late enlarged their Seniorie, for they haue ſeuen or eight cities engaged to them in Pouille, which I

doubt me they will neuer reſtore. At the Kings firſt comming into Italy they could not be perſwaded that places might be taken ſo eaſily, and in ſo ſhort ſpace: for they made not war with ſuch expedition 
                     15
                  ; but both they and diuers others haue fortified ſince, and do daily fortifie many places in Italy. They cannot grow mightie vpon a ſudden as the Romaines did, for their bodies cannot endure ſuch labor and trauell as theirs could, bicauſe they are vnaccuſtomed therunto, by reaſon that none of them go into their wars vpon the firme land 
                     16
                   (as the Romaines did) ſaue their prouiſors and paimaſters which accompanied their generall 
                     17
                  ; aſſiſt him with their counſell, and prouide all things neceſſary for their armie. True it is that their armies vpon the ſea are led 
                     18
                   by their gentlemen, who are captaines of their gallies and ſhips; and conſiſt wholy of their owne ſubiects. Moreouer, another good order haue they as touching theſe prouiſors whom they ſend in perſon with their armies vpon the land, whichis, that they imploie in that ſeruice no man of ſuch courage and vertue as may ſeeme woorthy to be their Prince (as the Romaines did) whereby they auoid all factions in the citie, which ſure is a great point of wiſedome. And vndoubtedly againſt ciuill contention they haue maruellouſly well prouided diuers and ſundry other waies, for they haue no Tribunes of the people, as they had in Rome, which partly were cauſe of their ruine. But the people at Venice beare no ſwaie, neither are called to counſell in any matter 
                     19
                  : for all their officers 
                     20
                   be gentlemen, ſaue their ſecretaries 
                     21
                  . And the greateſt part of their people be ſtrangers. Moreouer, they vnderſtand by T. Liuius what imperfections were in the ſtate of Rome; for they haue his hiſtorie, and his body lieth buried in their palace at Padua. For theſe reaſons and diuers others which I could alleage, I ſay yet once againe, that they are in the way to be great Lords in time to come.
               I muſt now declare the cauſe of mine ambaſſage to them, which was, to thanke them for the good anſwers they had made to two ambaſſadors ſent thither by the King: and for the good comfort they had giuen him, in willing him vpon their word to proceede with his enterpriſe. All the which was done before he departed out of Aſt. At my arriuall I diſcourſed vnto them of the ancient league that had beene betweene the Kings of Fraunce and them. And further, I offered them Brandis and the towne of Orante, vnder this condition, that when we deliuered them better townes in Greece, they ſhould be bound to reſtore theſe. They vſed very honorable termes both of the King and his affaires, ſuppoſing that he could not enter far into Italie. And as touching the offer I made, they anſwered that they were his friends and ſeruants, and would not ſell him their friendſhip, (and in deede as yet we had not the places offered.) Further they ſaid, that they had force ſufficient in a readines to moue war againſt him, if they were ſo diſpoſed, but they would not ſo do; notwithſtanding that the ambaſſador of Naples daily ſollicited them thereunto, and offered them in conſideration thereof, whatſoeuer they would demaund. Moreouer, King Alphonſe (who then raigned) confeſſed that he had many waies misbehaued himſelfe towards them, and declared vnto them the great danger themſelues ſhould be in, if the King obtained his purpoſe. The Turke on the other ſide ſent an ambaſſador to them with all ſpeede, (whom I my ſelfe ſaw diuers times) the which at the Popes requeſt threatened them, vnleſſe they declared themſelues the Kings enimies. They gaue euery one of theſe good anſwers, notwithſtanding at the firſt they ſtood in no feare of vs, but laughed at our voiage: and the rather bicauſe the Duke of Milan ſent them word by his ambaſſador, that they ſhould not trouble themſelues about this enterpriſe: for he would finde meanes to ſend the King home with emptie hands. The like meſſage ſent he alſo to Peter of Medicis, as himſelfe told me. But when both

they and the Duke of Milan ſawe all the Florentines places, eſpecially Piſa in the Kings hands, they began to feare & to conſult how to ſtop him from paſſing further: but their matters were long in debating, and in the meane time while ambaſſadors paſſed to and fro betweene them, the King marched forward. The King of Spaine in like maner began to feare, bicauſe of the yles of Sicilie and Sardinia. And the King of Romaines enuied our Kings good ſucceſſe: for diuers there were that put him in doubt of the crowne imperiall, ſaying, that the King would take it, and had required the Pope to giue him leaue ſo to do, but this was moſt vntrue. Notwithſtanding for theſe doubts, theſe two Kings ſent honorable ambaſſages to Venice, I being there, as you haue heard. The King of Romaines, bicauſe he was their neighbor, ſent firſt: the principall of his ambaſſage was the Biſhop of Trente, accompanied with two knights and a doctor of the law: they were very honorably and ſolemnly receiued, and their lodgings made and furniſhed as mine. Moreouer, they had ten ducats a day allowed them for their diet, and their horſes which they had left behinde them at Treuis, were kept vpon the Seniories charge. Soone after arriued alſo a worſhipfull knight of Spaine 
                     22
                   well accompanied and well apparelled, who was in like maner honorably receiued, and his charges defraied. The Duke of Milan, beſides his ambaſſador there reſident, ſent thither the biſhop of Come, and Maſter Francis Bernardin Viſcount, all the which began at the firſt to negotiate togither couertly and in the night by their Secretaries: for they durſt not as yet openly diſcouer themſelues againſt the King, eſpecially the Duke of Milan and the Venetians, bicauſe they doubted what ſucceſſe the league which was in communication ſhould haue. Theſe ambaſſadors of Milan came to viſite me, and brought me letters from their Maſter, pretending that they were come, bicauſe the Venetians had ſent two ambaſſadors to Milan, whereas they were woont to haue but one reſident there: no more had they in the end; and this was but a colour of their lying, deceit, and falſe dealing: for they were all aſſembled togither to conclude a league againſt the good King, but ſo many ſtrings could not be tuned on a ſudden. They deſired me afterward (if I could) to informe them what the cauſe was of the King of Spaines and the King of Romanes ambaſſadors arriuall, to the end they might aduertiſe their Maſter thereof. But I had intelligence already from diuers places, both by the ſaid ambaſſadors ſeruants and others, that the ambaſſador of Spaine had paſſed through Milan diſguiſed, that the Almaines gouerned their affaires wholy by the Duke of Milans counſell and aduice, and that the ambaſſador of Naples deliuered howerly packets of letters from his Maſter. For you muſt vnderſtand, that the treatie of their league was begun before the King departed from Florence, and I ſpent monie largely to haue intelligence of all their doings, and wrought by good inſtruments, ſo that I knew already all their articles, which were propounded but not agreed vpon: for the Venetians are very long in their reſolutions. For theſe cauſes I ſeeing the league in ſuch forwardnes, would no longer pretend ignorance therein, but anſwered theſe ambaſſadors of Milan, that ſith they vſed ſuch ſtrange termes to me, I thought good to ſay thus much vnto them, that the King would not loſe the D. of Milans friendſhip if by any meanes it might be kept, and that I as his ſeruant would do my dutie to my Maſter, and excuſe him of the euil reports which peraduenture had been made of him to the Duke their Maſter, who I thought was miſinformed: ſaying further, that he ought well to bethinke himſelfe, before he loſt the recompence of the great ſeruice he had done the King: for the Kings of Fraunce were neuer ingrate; adding alſo, that the ſpeaking of a fooliſh word ought not to diſſolue their friendſhip, the continuance whereof was ſo neceſſarie for them both. Wherefore I deſired them to

open vnto me their griefes, that I might aduertiſe the King thereof before they proceeded further: they ſware all vnto me and proteſted, that there was no ſuch matter as I imagined; but they lied, for they were come thither to treat of the ſaid league.
               The next day I went to the Seniorie to commune with them about their league, and to tell them my opinion thereof. Among other things I alleaged, that by the league concluded betweene the King and them, and the late King Lewis his father and them, they might not maintaine the one the others enimies: wherefore they could not conclude the league now treated of without breach of their promiſe. Then they cauſed me to withdraw my ſelfe a little, and at my returne the Duke ſaide vnto me, that I muſt not beleeue all that I heard in the towne: for all men liued there in libertie, and might ſpeake what them liſted; and that as touching them they neuer meant to enter into league againſt the King, neither heard euer of any ſuch matter: but on the contrarie ſide they ſought to conclude a league betweene the King, and theſe two other Kings and all Italy, againſt the Turke, at the common charges of them all, and that if any in Italy refuſed to pay that he ſhould be rated at, the King and they would conſtraine him thereunto by force. Moreouer, they ſaid that they trauelled to conclude a good peace for the King, to wit, that he ſhould receiue of Dom Ferrand preſently a ſumme of money, which they offered to lend, ſo that they might haue engaged for it, thoſe places in Pouille which now they poſſeſſe, and that the realme ſhould be held of the King by the Popes conſent 
                     23
                  , and pay him yeerely a certaine tribute. And further, that he ſhould hold in it three places, and I would to God the King would then haue giuen eare to this offer: but I anſwered them that I durſt not deale therein, bicauſe I had no commiſſion nor authoritie ſo to do. Moreouer, I deſired them not to be haſtie in concluding this league, bicauſe I would aduertiſe the King of theſe their ouertures. I required them alſo (as I had done the others) to open vnto me their griefes, and not to diſſemble them as they of Milan had done. Then they told me plainly that they were greeued bicauſe the King held certaine of the Popes townes, but much more bicauſe of the Florentines places, eſpecially Piſa, ſaying, that the King himſelfe had written both vnto them and diuers others, that he would take nothing in Italy, but the realme of Naples onely, and afterward go againſt the Turke: but now it plainly appeered that he would conquere all that he could in Italy, and leaue the Turke in peace. They ſaid further, that the Duke of Orleans (whom the King had left behinde him in Aſt) put the D. of Milan in great doubt and feare, and that his ſeruants vſed maruellous threatning words againſt him. Notwithſtanding they promiſed to conclude nothing before they receiued anſwer from the King, at the leaſt not before a conuenient time to receiue anſwer were expired, and they dealt more honorably with me than they of Milan had done 
                     24
                  . Of all theſe matters I aduertiſed the King, and receiued a cold anſwer from him: from that daie forward they began daily to aſſemble togither, bicauſe they knew their enterpriſe to be diſcouered. The King was yet at Florence, and if he had found any reſiſtance at Viterbe (as they thought he ſhould) they would haue ſent men to defend Rome: yea or if King Ferrand had not abandoned Rome, as they thought vndoubtedly he would neuer haue done: but when they heard of his departure thence they began to feare. Notwithſtanding the ambaſſadors of theſe two Kings preſſed them earneſtly to conclude, ſaying, that otherwiſe they would depart, for they had been there fower moneths daily negotiating with the Seniorie. In the meane time I labored all that might be to ouerthrow their league.
               But when the Venetians ſaw all theſe places yeelded, and were alſo aduertiſed, that the King was entred into Naples, they ſent for me, and told me theſe newes,

ſeeming greatly to reioice thereat: notwithſtanding they ſaid that the caſtell was very wel furniſhed, and I perceiued by them, that they hoped aſſuredly it would haue held good. Moreouer, they licenſed the ambaſſador of Naples to leuie men at Venice to ſend to Brandis; and they were euen vpon the point to haue concluded their league, when ſuddenly they receiued letters from their ambaſſadors, that the caſtell was yeelded alſo to the King. Then they ſent for me againe in a morning, and I found fiftie or ſixtie of them aſſembled togither in the Dukes chamber, who lay ſick of the collicke. He told me theſe newes with a cheerfull countenance, but none of the reſt could diſſemble ſo cunningly as himſelfe: for ſome of them ſate vpon a lowe bench leaning vpon their elbowes, other ſome after one ſort, and others after another; their outward countenances bewraying their inward griefe. And I thinke verily when word came to Rome of the battell loſt at Cannas againſt Hannibal, that the Senators which remained in the citie, were not more aſtoniſhed nor troubled than theſe: for none of them once looked vpon me, none of them gaue me one word but the Duke alone; ſo that I woondred to behold them. The Duke asked me if the King would performe that which he had alwaies promiſed both by his letters and by me: I aſſured him that he would, and opened certaine ouertures of peace, and offered my ſelfe to trauell therein, truſting to put them out of all doubt, and ſo departed.
               Their league was as yet neither fully concluded, nor fully broken off; for the which cauſe the Almaines would needes haue departed in great heate. The Duke of Milan would not yet condeſcend I wot not to which of their articles: notwithſtanding in the end he ſent word to his ambaſſadors to ſeale with ſpeede to all; and thus at the length was their league concluded. During the ſpace that theſe practiſes were thus entertained among them, I had from time to time aduertiſed the King of them all, preſſing him earneſtly to reſolue either to tarrie in the realme, and to make prouiſion of greater forces of footemen and money; or in time to retire homeward before his enimies were all aſſembled, leauing the principall places well manned. I aduertiſed alſo the D. of Orleans (who lay in Aſt with his houſhold ſeruants onely, for his companie was with the King) of all that was done, willing him to put men into the towne, and aſſuring him that they would incontinent aſſaile him. I wrote alſo to the Duke of Bourbon (whom the King had left regent in Fraunce) to ſend men to Aſt with all ſpeede poſſible to defend the towne, bicauſe that place being loſt, no aide could come to the King. In like maner I aduertiſed the Marchioneſſe of Montferrat of all theſe proceedings (who was a great friend to vs, and deadly enimy to the Duke of Milan) to the end ſhe might aide the Duke of Orleans with men, if neede ſo required: for Aſt being loſt, the Marquiſats of Montferrat and Saluces were alſo loſt.
               Their league was concluded one night very late 
                     25
                  . The next morning the Seniorie ſent for me earlier then they were accuſtomed. And when I was come and ſet downe, the Duke told me, that in the honor of the holy Trinitie, there was a league concluded betweene our holy father the Pope, the Kings of Romaines and Caſtile, them, and the Duke of Milan, for three purpoſes. The firſt, for the defence of the eſtate of Chriſtendome againſt the Turke; the ſecond, for the defence of Italy; and the third for the preſeruation of their own eſtates, whereof he willed me to aduertiſe the King. They were aſſembled to the number of a hundred or more, and looked vp with cheerfull countenances, and ſate not as they did the day they aduertiſed me of the taking of the caſtle of Naples. The Duke tolde me moreouer that they had written to their ambaſſadors that were with the King, to take their leaue and to returne home, their names were Maſter Dominic Loredan, and Maſter Dominic Treuiſan. I was maruellouſly troubled with this newes, for I ſtood in doubt both of the Kings

perſon, and of all his companie, ſuppoſing their armie to haue been readier than in deed it was, as did themſelues alſo. I feared further leaſt the Almaines had been at hand; and not without cauſe; for if they had, vndoubtedly the King had neuer departed out of Italy. I was reſolued not to ſpeake much in this heate; but they ſo prouoked me that I was forced to change my minde; and then I ſaid vnto them, that both the night before and diuers other times, I had aduertiſed the King of their league, and that he alſo had ſent me word that he had intelligence thereof both from Rome and from Milan. They looked all maruellous ſtrangely vpon me, when I ſaid that I had aduertiſed the King thereof the night before: for there is no nation vnder the ſunne ſo ſuſpicious as they, nor ſo ſecret in their affaires, ſo that oftentimes they baniſh men vpon ſuſpicion onely, for the which cauſe I ſaid thus much vnto them. I told them moreouer that I had ſent word thereof both to the Duke of Orleans and to the Duke of Bourbon, to the end they might put men into Aſt: which words I vttered hoping to delay their going thither. For if they had indeed been as ready as they vaunted and ſuppoſed themſelues to haue been: they muſt needs haue taken the towne, for it was vnmanned both then and long after. Then they told me that they meant not to attempt ought againſt the King, but onely to defend themſelues, adding that they would not haue him thus to abuſe the world with words, in ſaying that he would nothing but the realme of Naples, and afterward go againſt the Turk: and yet do cleane contrary, and ſeeke to deſtroy the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines, and hold alſo the places of the Church. Wherunto I anſwered that the Kings of Fraunce had euer inlarged & augmented the dition of the church, and defended it, and that the King my Maſter would rather do the like than the contrarie. Wherfore theſe (I ſaid) were not the reaſons that mooued them to enter into this war, but that they deſired to trouble the eſtate of Italy, thereby to make their owne profit, as in the end I thought they would; which words they tooke in euill part as afterward I was aduertiſed: notwithſtanding it appeereth by thoſe townes in Pouile which they haue in gage of King Ferrand to aide him againſt vs, that I ſaid true. At this inſtant I would haue riſen to depart, but they cauſed me to ſit downe again, and then the Duke asked me if I would make any ouerture of peace, bicauſe the day before I had offered ſo to do, but that was vnder condition that they ſhould haue ſtaid the concluſion of their league fifteene daies, to the end I might aduertiſe the King thereof, and receiue his anſwer thereunto. Our communication being ended, I returned to my lodging, & then they ſent for the ambaſſadors of the league one after another, and as I came foorth from them I met with the ambaſſador of Naples, who ware a faire new gowne and ſhewed a cheerefull countenance, ſo had he great cauſe to do, for theſe were good newes for him. After dinner all the ambaſſadors of the league accompanied with their ſeruants met togither, at the charges of the Seniory, vpon the water (which is all the paſtime of Venice) I thinke they were in all fortie boates, euery ambaſſador hauing his boate garniſhed with a flagge of his Maſters armes. I ſaw all this company paſſe vnderneath my window with goodly melodie. And the ambaſſadors of Milan (at the leaſt one of them) who had been woont verie often before to beare me companie; made a countenance now as though he knew me no more. By the ſpace of three daies I neuer ſtirred out of my lodging, neither any of my ſeruants: notwithſtanding that, not one man in the towne gaue me or any of mine a foule word at any time. The ſame night they made great paſtime with ſquibs, which were ſet on fire a high in the ſteeples and turrets of the towne, and a number of torches were lighted in the top of theſe ambaſſadors houſes, and diuers peeces of artillery diſcharged. I was in a couered barge vpon the water to behold

all this triumph, about ten of the clocke at night, eſpecially before theſe ambaſſadors lodgings, where was banketting and great cheere: notwithſtanding this was not the greate feſtiuall day, on the which their league was proclaimed: for the Pope had giuen commandement that the proclamation thereof ſhould be deferred till Palmſunday, and that euery one of the confederated Princes when it ſhould be proclaimed, and the ambaſſadors that ſhould be preſent thereat, ſhould beare in their hands an oliue branch in token of peace and confederacie as he ſaid. He commanded further, that vpon that day it ſhould be proclaimed both in Spaine and in Almaine. Moreouer, at Venice they made a ſcaffold of wood, which they raiſed a great height from the ground, as they vſe to do vpō Corpus Chriſti day, & it was richly hanged, and reached from the palace to the end of the market place of Saint Marke. Vpon this ſcaffold (after the Popes ambaſſador had ſoong maſſe, and giuen full abſolution to all men that ſhould be preſent at the ſaid proclamation) they went on proceſſion, the Senators and the ambaſſadors being all very well apparelled: for vnto diuers of the ſaid ambaſſadors the ſeniorie had giuen crimoſin veluet gowns, eſpecially to the Almaines, and new gownes alſo to all their ſeruants, but they were very ſhort. After their returne from proceſſion, a great number of pageants and deuiſes were ſhewed, repreſenting firſt Italy, and then all theſe Kings and Princes, and the Queene of Spaine. And as they returned from beholding the ſaid pageants, at a Porphire ſtone where all their proclamations are made, they proclaimed the ſaid league, and the Turks ambaſſador hard it, ſtanding cloſe at a window, and hauing his diſpatch, ſaue that they ſtaied him to behold this triumph. At night he came to talke with me by meanes of a certaine Greeke, and was with me fower howers in my chamber, being very deſirous that his Prince and the King my Maſter might enter togither into amitie. I was twiſe inuited to this feaſt, but I excuſed my ſelfe. I remained in the towne about a moneth after this proclamation, being aſwell entertained as at my firſt arriuall. Afterward the King ſent for me, and I tooke my leaue and departed, being ſafely conueied by them, and vpon their charges to Ferrara, where the Duke came foorth and receiued me, and feaſted me two daies, and defraied me. The like did Maſter Iohn de Bentiuole at Bolonia, whither the Florentines ſent for me. Wherfore I departed thence and went to Florence there to abide the Kings comming, of whom I will now returne to ſpeake.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Liccia or Lizafuſina Italians.
                  
                  2 The riuer is called Brenta.
                  3 I thinke he meaneth not the Confrairiez des Sainctz which be but fiue, as Contaren. writeth lib. 5. but rather I ſuppoſe, bicauſe our author ſaith many Confrairies, that euery companie in Venice hath a chappell, as in London they haue hals.
                  
                  4 I ſuppoſe it to be that which they call Riuo alto.
                  5 There are in Venice 200. palaces able to lodge Kings.
                  
                  6 A kinde of red marble full of white ſpots called Leucoſticos or Porphyrites: it is knowen to euery man.
                  
                  7 A greene ſtone, I ſuppoſe it to be alſo a kinde of marble, which is greene as Porphire is, red and ſpotted alſo with white for the moſt part as that is: it is called Ophytes.
                  8 Of the Dukes office reade Contaren. lib. 2.
                  9 This Dukes name was Auguſtinus Barbaricus or Barbadicus, he was choſen anno 1486. and was after ſome the 77. after others the 74. Duke.
                  
                  10 Reckon theſe twelue yeeres not at the time that the author was at Venice, but at the
                     
                     time that he wrote this hiſtorie: for at his being there, he had beene Duke but eight yeeres.
                  
                  11 Saint Marks church is deſcribed by Contaren in the very end of the fourth booke.
                  
                  12 Mouſaique or Marqueterie, Muſaea, Muſaica, or Muſina in Latine, works wrought of ſtones of diuers colours and diuers mettels into knots and deuiſes ſo curiouſly, that they ſeeme all one, and not to be wrought in togither by art.
                  
                  13 Forum Iulii.
                  14 This Arſenall is deſcribed by Contaren lib. 4.
                  15 He meaneth, bicauſe they vnderſtood not the feate of artillerie.
                  
                  16 The Venetians armies vpon the land are all ſtrangers. Contaren. lib. 5.
                  17 Their Generall vpon the land is alſo a ſtranger.
                  
                  18 Contaren. ibidem.
                  19 Vnderſtand any matter of waight.
                  
                  20 Vnderſtand their principall officers.
                  
                  21 Their Chauncellor alſo is no gentleman, neither may a gentleman be Chauncellor or Secretarie. Contaren. lib. 5.
                  22 The King of Spaine vſed this colour for breach of his league with King Charles, bicauſe there vvas a clauſe that they ſhould not be bound to any thing preiudiciall to the Church, and the realme of Naples vvas held of the Church. Further, another clauſe there vvas, that he ſhould not reſist King Charles his conqueſt, if it appeered by law the crowne of Naples to appertaine to him, vvhich he ſought not to prooue, but proceeded by force.
                  
                  23 This is added, bicauſe the realme of Naples vvas held of the Church.
                  
                  24 He meaneth, bicauſe they dealt plainly vvith him, but they of Milan had diſſembled. Notvvithſtanding the French had it thus: They ſhewed greater honor to me than to them of Milan: but in mine opinion it vvas the Printers fault, vvho for que ceulx de Milan, had put qu'a ceulx de Milan: for ſure the ſence is much better thus.
                  
                  25 Their league vvas concluded in Aprill. Guicciar.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT BOOKE CONTINVING THE DISCOVRSE OF THE PRINCIPALL ACTS OF KING CHARLES THE EIGHT.
            
               Of the order and prouiſion the King left in the realme of Naples at his returne into Fraunce. Chap. 1.
               
                  TO continue the better this my hiſtorie, and to informe you of all that happened, I muſt now returne to ſpeake of the King, who from the time he entred into Naples till his departure thence, thought onely vpon ſports and pleaſures, & thoſe that were about him vpon their owne priuate profit and gain: notwithſtanding his yong yeers excuſed him; but on their behalfe, no iuſt excuſe can be made: for he committed all his affaires to their gouernment. And if they had aduiſed him to leaue well furniſhed in the countrie at his departure but three or fower caſtels onely, namely that of Caietta, and one or two more; yea but the caſtell of Naples alone (the prouiſion whereof he had giuen away as already you haue heard) the realme had neuer been loſt: for if the caſtell of Naples had been kept, the towne had neuer reuolted. So ſoone as he vnderſtood the league aboue mentioned to be concluded, he commanded his whole forces to repaire to him, and appointed fiue hundred men of armes French and 2500. Swiſſers 
                     1
                  , and a few French footemen for the defence of the realme, determining with the reſt to returne home the ſame way he came; but the confederates made preparation to ſtop his paſſage. The King of Spaine had ſent and daily did ſend certaine Carauels 
                     2
                   into Sicilie, the which notwithſtanding that they were but ſlenderly manned, had before the Kings departure, put men into Reges in Calabria neere to Sicilie. I had eftſoones aduertiſed the King that there they would land; for the ambaſſador of Naples had ſo informed me himſelfe, ſuppoſing they had already been landed: but if the King had ſent thither in time, he had taken the caſtell; for the towne held for him. Out of Sicilie came certaine bands alſo to Mantia and to Turpia, all through our owne fault, bicauſe we had ſent no forces thither. In like maner the towne of Otrante in Pouille (which had once ſet vp the armes of Fraunce) ſeeing the league concluded, and themſelues ſeated neere to Brandis and Gallipoli, and no meanes poſſible to leuie men to put into their towne, reared vp againe the armes of Arragon; and Dom Frederick being at Brandis, ſent a garriſon thither. To be ſhort, fortune began now to frowne vpon vs, which but two moneths before ſo highly had fauored vs, in ſuch ſort, that through the whole realme they began to reuolt, as well bicauſe of the league, as alſo of the Kings departure, and the ſmall forces he left behinde him, which was nothing in reſpect of the number of ſoldiers, though diuers of the captaines were of great valor. He appointed for his lieutenant generall in the ſaid

realme, the Lord of Montpenſier of the houſe of Bourbon, a valiant and a hardy knight, but of no great ſenſe, and ſo careles, that he kept his bed euery day til noone. In Calabria he left the Lord of Aubigny a Scottiſh man borne, a vertuous, wiſe, honorable, & a valiant knight, him he created high Conſtable of the realme, and gaue him (as before you haue heard) the Earldome of Acri, and the Marquiſat of Squillazzo. He had made Lord great Chamberlaine of the realme at his firſt comming thither, the Seneſchall of Beaucaire, called Stephan de Vers, who was alſo captaine of Caietta, Duke of Nola, and Lord of diuers other ſeniories. Further, all the treaſure of the realme paſſed through his hands, ſo that his charge was much too waightie for him; but ſure he was well affected to the defence of the realme. He created the Lord Don Iulian Lorrain a Duke, and left him in the towne of Saint Angelo, where he behaued himſelfe paſſing well. He left in Manfredonia Maſter Gabriell of Montfaulcon, a man of whom he made great account; and to all theſe he gaue goodly poſſeſſions: but this Gabriell behaued himſelfe very childiſhly; for at fower daies end he yeelded the towne for lacke of victuals: notwithſtanding that at his entrie into it he found it very well furniſhed; beſides that it was ſeated in a countrie abounding with all kinde of graine. Diuers ſold all the prouiſion they found in the caſtels, and the report went that this Gabriell fled himſelfe, and left VVilliam of Vilneufue for defence of the towne, whom his owne ſeruants ſold to Dom Frederick, who put him into the gallies, where he remained a long time. At Tarente the King left George of Suilly, who carried himſelfe there very gallantly, and died of the plague: and this citie held for the King, till famine forced it to yeeld. In Aquila he left the bailife of Vitry, where he did great ſeruice: and in Abruzzo maſter Gracian des guerres, who likewiſe made good proofe of his valor there. They were all left vnfurniſhed of monie: for order was giuen that they ſhould receiue their pay there, of the reuenues of the crowne, but all was too little. Notwithſtanding the K. left the Princes of Salerne and Biſignan very well appointed, who did him good ſeruice as long as they were able. He delt alſo very bountifully with the Coulonnois: for he granted them al their demaunds, & put aboue thirty places into their hands & their friends, which if they would haue defended for him, as both by dutie & oth they were bound, they had don him great ſeruice, and purchaſed to themſelues both honor and profit. For I thinke they were not ſo highly aduanced theſe hundred yeeres, as by the King at that time: yet notwithſtanding before his departure they began to practiſe with his enimies. True it is that they ſerued him in fauour onely of the Duke of Milan, bicauſe they haue euer been of the faction Gibilin, but they ought not in reſpect thereof, to haue dealt faithleſly with him, who ſo highly had aduanced and pleaſured them, not only this way but diuers others. For in their fauor he had priſoners with him vnder garde, the Lord Virgill Vrſin, and the Earle of Petillane 
                     3
                  , with diuers others of the Vrſines their enimies, yea and that againſt all right and reaſon: for notwithſtanding that they were taken priſoners, yet knew the King right well that they had a ſafe conduct, the benefit alſo whereof he meant they ſhould enioy, as himſelfe well declared: for he was determined to leade them no further than Aſt, and there to releaſe them. All this did he at the Coulonnois requeſt, and yet before his returne to Aſt they ſhrunke from him, yea they were the very firſt that reuolted, though they could alleage no cauſe that mooued them thereunto.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Guicciar. ſaith, the King left behinde him halfe his Swiſſers, part of his French footmen, 800. French launces, and 500. Italian men of armes.
                  
                  
                     
2 Theſe are certaine ſhips hauing both ſaile and ore, the which are very much vſed in the meridionall ſeas.
                  
                  3 Virginio Vrſin and the Earle of Petillane followed the King onely vpon their word not to depart without leaue.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King departed from Naples, and paſſed againe through Rome, whereupon the Pope fled to Oruiette: of the communication the King had with Monſeur D'Argenton at his returne from Venice: how he tooke aduiſe whether he ſhould reſtore the Florentines places to them or not: and of the Sermons woorthie of memorie of Frier Ierom of Florence. Chap. 2.
               
                  THe King hauing giuen order for his affaires, as he thought good, put himſelfe vpon the way homeward with the reſt of his forces, 
                     1
                   being (as I ſuppoſe) nine hundred men of armes at the leaſt (comprehending therein the ordinarie retinue of his houſe) two thouſand and fiue hundred Swiſſers, ſo that I thinke the whole armie contained ſeuen thouſand men taking paie, beſides the traine of the Court being to the number of fifteen hundred able to do ſeruice 
                     2
                  . The Earle of Petillane who tooke the iuſt muſter of them, told me after the battell (whereof you ſhall heare) that the whole force was nine thouſand men. The King marched ſtraight to Rome, where the Pope would not tarie his comming, but was firſt determined to haue gone to Padua into the Venetians dominions, ſo far foorth that his lodging was made there. But afterward he altered his minde: for both the Venetians and the Duke of Milan ſent him certaine bands of men to Rome, where (though they arriued in time) yet durſt he not abide; notwithſtanding that the King meant him no harme, but would haue done him all honor and ſeruice, and had alſo ſent an ambaſſador thither purpoſely to deſire him to ſtaie. But he retired to Oruiette, and thence to Perouſe, leauing the Cardinals at Rome to receiue the King, who ſtaide not there 
                     3
                   neither harmed any man. The K. wrote vnto me that I ſhould meet him at Sene, whither I repaired accordingly, he receiued me of his goodnes verie graciouſly, and asked me (ſomewhat merily) whether the Venetians would ſend to ſtop him vpon the waie: for his army conſiſted altogither of yoong men who thought none in the world comparable to them. I anſwered, that the ſeniorie told me at my departure in the preſence of one of his ſecretaries named Lourdin, that they and the Duke of Milan would put forty thouſand men into the field, not to offend him, but to defend themſelues: adding further that they aduertiſed me the day I departed from Padua by one of their prouiſors, who came with their army that they ſent againſt vs, that their force ſhould not paſſe a certaine riuer in their dominions neere to Parma 
                     4
                   called (as I remember) Olye, vnleſſe he inuaded the Duke of Milan. The ſaid Prouiſor and I gaue ſecret tokens each to other, by the which meſſengers might paſſe to and fro betweene vs, if need ſhould ſo require to treat of ſome good end: for I would breake off no ouuerture of peace, bicauſe I knew not what might happen to the King my Maſter. At this our communication was preſent one Maſter Lewis Marcell, who by the ſeniories appointment accompained me out of their dominions, and gouerned for that

yeere the Motz viere 
                     5
                  , which is a certaine treaſure they haue: in like maner certaine of the Marques of Mantuas men, who caried money to their Maſter, were alſo preſent at it, but they heard not our talk. From theſe or frō ſom others I brought the K. in writing the number of their horſemen, footmen, and Eſtradiots 
                     6
                  , and the names of their captaines: but few of thoſe that were neereſt about him credited my words.
               After the King had repoſed himſelfe two daies at Sene, and well refreſhed his horſes and his company, I earneſtly preſſed him to depart: for his enimies were not yet aſſembled, and I feared onely the Almaines arriuall, of whom the King of Romaines muſtered great force, and leuied great ſummes of money for their paiement. But notwithſtanding all my ſolicitation, the King put foorth two matters to his councell which were ſoone debated: the one, whether he ſhould reſtore the Florentines places to them and accept the offers they made for the reſtitution of them, being theſe, to pay him the thirtie thouſand ducats remaining yet vnpaide of the ſumme they gaue him 
                     7
                  ; to lend him beſides, ſeauen tie thouſand, and to ſerue him as he paſſed out of Italie with three hundred men of armes, and two thouſand footemen vnder the leading of Maſter Frauncis Secco, a valiant knight and in good credit with the King. My ſelfe and diuers others were of opinion that he ſhould accept theſe conditions, retaining onely Ligorne in his hands till his returne to Aſt. And if he had ſo done, he might haue paied his ſoldiers, and reſerued money ynough to haue withdrawen part of his enimies forces, and then haue fought with them. But this reſolution tooke no place; for Monſeur de Ligny a yoong man coſin german to the King ouerthrew it, not alleaging any reaſon to the contrarie, but onely for pitie of the Piſans. The other point debated was a matter that Monſeur de Ligny himſelfe cauſed to be propounded by Gaucher of Tinteuille, & by one of the factions of the Senois, the which deſired the ſaid Monſeur de Ligny for their captain. For you ſhall vnderſtand that theſe Senois are euer in diuiſion, and gouerne their common wealth more fondly than anie other towne in Italie 
                     8
                  . I being firſt asked mine aduiſe ſaid, that I thought it beſt for the King to march forward, & not to buſie himſelf with theſe fooliſh offers which could not ſtand him in ſteed one week to an end: alleaging further that bicauſe this was an imperiall towne, we ſhould by this meanes prouoke the whole Empire againſt vs. All the reſt were of the ſame opinion, yet was the cleane contrarie done: for the Senois receiued Monſeur de Ligny for their Captaine, and promiſed him yeerely a certaine ſumme of money, whereof he neuer receiued peny. This fooliſh matter ſtaied the King there ſixe or ſeauen daies, during the which ſpace he ſolaced himſelfe with the Dames. Further, he left there three hundred of his men diminiſhing his force by ſo much, and then remooued to Piſa paſſing by Poggibonzia a caſtle of the Florentines. But they whom he left at Sene were chaſed thence within a moneth after.
               I had forgotten to tell you how I being at Florence iourneying towards the King, went with one of the ſtewards of his houſe named Iohn Francois a wiſe and diſcreet perſon, to viſite a Frier Iacobin called Frier Hieronime 
                     9
                  , a man of holie life (as all men reported) abiding in a reformed couent where he had remained fifteen yeeres. The cauſe why I went to commune with him was, for that he had euer preached very fauorablie on the Kings behalfe, ſo far foorth that his words had ſtaide the Florentines from reuolting from vs, for neuer preacher caried ſo great credit in any citie: he had euer aſſured them of the Kings comming, whatſoeuer was ſaid or written to the contrarie; affirming that he was ſent of God to chaſtice the tyrants of Italie, and that no force ſhould be able to withſtand him. He preached further that the King ſhould come to Piſa and enter into the towne, and that the ſelfe ſame daie the

eſtate of Florence ſhould be altered as alſo it happened: for the ſame daie was Peter of Medicis baniſhed the towne. Diuers other things alſo foretold he long before they happened, namely, the death of Laurence of Medicis: all the which he ſaide he vnderſtood by reuelation. He preached yet further that the eſtate of the church ſhould be reformed by the ſword. This is not yet come to paſſe, but was very neer, and he auoweth ſtill that it ſhall be. Many found great fault with him bicauſe he ſaide that God reuealed theſe things to him, but ſome beleeued him: ſure I for my part take him for a holie man. I asked him whether the K. ſhould paſſe out of Italie without danger of his perſon, ſeeing the great preparatiō the Venetiās made againſt him, whereof he diſcourſed perfectlier than my ſelfe that came from thence. He anſwered me that the K. ſhould haue ſom troble vpon the way, but that the honor therof ſhould be his, though he were accompanied but with an hundred men, and that God who had guided him at his comming, would alſo protect him at his returne. Adding notwithſtanding that bicauſe he had not done his dutie in the reformation of the Church, but had ſuffered his men to ſpoile and rob the people, as well thoſe that tooke his part, voluntarily receiued him into their cities, as his enimies: God had pronounced ſentence againſt him, and would ſhortly ſcourge him. Neuertheleſſe he bad me tell him that if he would haue compaſſion one the poore people, and endeuour himſelfe to keepe his men from doing euill, and puniſh the offenders (as he was bound by his office to do,) that then God would reuoke his ſentence, at the leaſt mittigate it: adding thereunto that he ought not to thinke it a ſufficient excuſe, that he in his owne perſon did no harme. He ſaid moreouer that himſelfe would go and tel the King thus much, and ſo indeed he did, and perſwaded with him to reſtore the Florentines places to them. When he ſpake thus of Gods ſentence, the death of my Lord the Daulphin came ſuddenly to my minde, for I ſaw no other thing that could greatly trouble the King. Thus much I haue written to the end it may yet more manifeſtly appeere, that this voiage was in deed a meere miracle of God.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 He departed from Naples the 20. of May. Annal. Franc. Guicciar.
                  2 The King departed Naples with 800. French launces, two hundred gentlemen of his garde, a hundred launces vnder Triuulce, three thouſand footmen Swiſſers, a thouſand French, and a thouſand Gaſcoines. Guicciar.
                  3 He arriued at Rome the firſt of Iune, and a bode there two daies. Annal. Franc.
                  4 For Parma it is better to reade Creme or Bergame: for the Venetians dominions lay not neere to Parma; beſides that the riuer Olio is not neere Parma: for the Pau runneth betweene Parma and it, ſo that the Venetians muſt haue paſſed the Pau after they had paſſed Olie, before they could haue come to Parma.
                  5 The French Corrector readeth it Montvieil, called in Italian Monte Vechio, which is a certaine treaſure the Venetians haue to pay the intereſts due vnto the ancienteſt creditors of their commonwealth, as appeereth in the booke of Donato Giannotti.
                  6 VVhat theſe Eſtradiottes were looke after Cap. 5.
                  7 They had giuen the King 120000. ducats, as mention is made Cap. 9. lib. 7.
                  8 The people of Sene were diuided againſt the order of Montenoue, which held a gard of ſoldiers in the palace. The citizens promiſed de Ligny 20000. ducats a yeere, to protect them againſt the ſaid Montenoue, but foorthwith after the Kings departure the faction of Montenoue chaſed Ligny and his men out of the towne. Guicciar.
                  9 This Friers ſurname was Sauanarola, who hath written many goodly homilies and ſermons: he was borne at Ferrara.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King retained in his hands the towne of Piſa, and certaine other of the Florentines places: and how in the meane time the Duke of Orleans entred on the other ſide into Nouarre, a towne of the Duchie of Milan. Chap. 3.
               
                  AFter the King was entred into Piſa, (as you haue heard) all the Piſans both men and women beſought their gueſts for Gods loue to make interceſſion to the King, that they might no more returne vnder the Florentines tyrannie, who in truth handled them extremely; but diuers cities in Italy that be in ſubiection to others, are as euill intreated as they: beſides that, the Piſans and Florentines had been in wars togither the ſpace of three hundred yeeres before the Florentines ſubdued them. Theſe lamentable words before mentioned ioined with teares mooued our men to pitie, and cauſed them ſo far foorth to forget the Kings promiſe and oth made vpon the aultar of Saint Iohn at Florence, that all ſorts of men buſied themſelues in this matter, euen the poore archers and the Swiſſers, who alſo threatned thoſe that they thought perſwaded the King to performe his promiſe, namely the Cardinall Saint Malo, ſo often before named generall of Languedoc, whom I my ſelfe heard an archer threaten. There were in like maner that gaue very rough language to the Marſhall of Gié. The preſident Gannay by the ſpace of three daies and more, durſt not lie in his lodging. But the Earle of Ligny aboue all the reſt fauored the Piſans cauſe, who came in troupes weeping and lamenting to the King, in ſuch ſort, that we all pitied them, and would willingly haue releeued them, if it had lien in vs ſo to do. One day after dinner, fortie or fiftic gentlemen of the Kings houſe aſſembled themſelues togither, and went with their partiſans into the Kings chamber, where he was playing at tables with Monſeur de Pienncs, accompanied onely with two groomes of his chamber. One of theſe gentlemen ſonne to Sallezard the elder, ſpake as mouth of the reſt to the King, deſiring him to be gratious Lord to the Piſans, and accuſing certaine of thoſe lately named as traitors to him. But the King with ſo ſtout language commanded them to depart, that after, the like neuer hapned. The King ſpent ſixe or ſeuen daies needleſly in the towne of Piſa, and then changed the garriſon, and made captaine of the Citadelle one Entragues, a man of lewd conditions, ſeruant to the D. of Orleans, whom he thus preferred by Monſeur de Lignis ſute, and left with him in the ſaid Citadelle certaine footemen of the Duchie of Berrie. Further, the ſaid Entragues procured ſuch friendſhip (I ſuppoſe by his money) that he was alſo made captaine of Petroſancte, and of another place neere to it called Mortron 
                     1
                  , and in like maner of Librefacto, which is neere to Lugues. The caſtle of Serzane being very ſtrong, was put at the requeſt of the ſaid Earle of Ligny, into the hands of a baſtard of Rouſſi, and an other place called Serzanelle, into the hands of another, being both his owne ſeruants. In theſe places the King left a great part of his forces: notwithſtanding that he ſhall neuer haue ſuch need of men, as he had at that time. Moreouer, he refuſed the Florentines aid and offers aboue mentioned, and draue them into vtter deſpaire. Yet was he aduertiſed before his departure from Sene, that the Duke of Orleans (whom he had left behind him in Aſt) 
                     2
                   had taken the city of Nauarre in the Duchie

of Milan, and therefore was well aſſured that the Venetians would declare themſelues his enimies: for they ſent him word that if he inuaded the Duke of Milan, they would aide the Duke with their whole force, according to their league lately made, and their force was great and in a readines. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that preſently vpon the concluſion of their league, the Duke of Milan thought to haue ſurpriſed Aſt, ſuppoſing to finde it vtterly vnmanned: but my letters had haſtened the forces that the Duke of Bourbon ſent thither, and the firſt that arriued were about fortie launces of the Marſhall of Gies companie, which had tarried behinde in Fraunce, and came thither in good time. Soone after them arriued alſo fiue hundred footmen, ſent thither by the Marques of Saluce. The comming of the which ſtaied the Duke of Milans forces led by Maſter Galeas of Saint Seuerin, who hearing theſe newes retired to Nom, a caſtle of the Duchie of Milan, two miles from Aſt. In the necke of theſe arriued alſo three hundred and fiftie men of armes, and certaine gentlemen of Daulphine, and two thouſand Swiſſers, with certain franke archers of the ſaid countrey of Daulphine, ſo that their whole number was 7500. men taking paie. But they lingred ſo long vpon the way that they ſerued not to the purpoſe they were ſent for. For the K. ſent for them to come & ſuccor him, but inſtead of aiding him he was forced to aid them. The K. had alſo giuen commandement to the D. of Orleans & his captaines not to attempte any thing againſt the Duke of Milan, but onely to defend the towne of Aſt, & to meete him at the riuer of Theſin to helpe to conuey him ouer it, for that was the onely riuer to trouble him. But notwithſtanding all that the King writ to the Duke of Orleans, this enterpriſe of Nouarre (which is but ten leagues from Milan) liked him ſo wel, that he was contented to giue eare thereunto, and was receiued into the citie in great triumph both of the Guelphes and Gibelines, which his exploit the Marchioneſſe of Monferrat greatly furthered. The caſtle held two or three daies and then yeelded alſo. But if in the meane time, the Duke had gone or ſent to Milan (where he had good intelligence) he had been receiued into the towne with greater ioy, than euer he was into his caſtle of Blois, as diuers of the nobleſt men of the countrey haue enformed me. And the three firſt daies he might haue gone thither in ſafetie, for when Nouarre was taken, the Duke of Milans whole force lay yet at Nom neere to Aſt, and returned not to Milan till the fourth day after. But I ſuppoſe the Duke beleeued not all the intelligence he receiued thence.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The French corrector ſuppoſeth it ſhould be Motron, but the author himſelfe aftervvard chap. 14. calleth it againe Mortron. Guicciar. hath it Mutron.
                  
                  2 The Duke of Orleans immediately after the skirmiſh vpon the ſea at Rapalo, fell ſicke of an ague, and returned to Aſt: and paſſed no further vvith the King, tvvo gentlemen called Opizins brought the Duke of Orleans into Nouarre. Guicci.
               
            
            
               
               How King Charles paſſed diuers dangerous ſtraights in the mountains between Piſa and Serzane: how the towne of Pontreme was burned by his Almaines, and how the Duke of Orleans behaued himſelfe in the meane time at Nouarre. Chap. 4.
               
                  YOu haue heard already of the Kings departure from Sene to Piſa, and of al that he did at Piſa. Thence he remoued to Luques where the citizens honorably receiued him, and there he abode two daies. Afterward he marched to Petroſancte (which Entragues held) making no account of his enimies, neither himſelfe nor thoſe that carried all the credit with him. He paſſed maruellous ſtraights in the mountaines betweene Luques and Petroſancte, which a handfull of footemen might eaſily haue defended againſt him: but our enimies were not yet aſſembled. Neere to the ſaid Petroſancte is the ſtraight of Seire on the one ſide, and the ſtraight of Roctaille on the other, being great deepe ſalt marſhes, where we were forced to paſſe ouer a narrow way, like to a cauſey in a ſtanding poole: and this was the ſtraight that betweene Piſa and Pontreme I moſt feared, and which was reported to be moſt dangerous: for one cart ſet ouerthwart the way with two good peeces of artillerie, and but a handfull of men, might haue ſtopped our paſſage, had our force beene neuer ſo great. From Petroſancte the King remooued to Serzane, where the Cardinall Saint Peter ad vincula offered to make Genua reuolt, and deſired to haue ſome part of the Kings forces ſent thither. The matter was debated by the Kings Councell, my ſelfe being preſent at it in the companie of a great many wiſe men and good captaines: all the which concluded, that no eare ſhould be giuen to this enterpriſe, bicauſe if the King obtained the victorie, Genua would yeeld of it ſelfe; and if he were ouerthrowen, it could do him no ſeruice: and this was the firſt time that I perceiued any of them to doubt the battell. Report was made to the King of our reſolution; yet notwithſtanding thither he ſent the Lord of Breſſe afterward Duke of Sauoy, the Lord of Beaumont, the Lord of Polignac my brother in lawe, and the Lord of Ambeiou of the houſe of Amboiſe, with ſixe ſcore men of armes, and fiue hundred croſſebowe men newly come out of Fraunce by ſea. But I woondred that ſo yoong a Prince had no truſtie ſeruants about him, that durſt boldly tell him into how great danger he put himſelfe by diminiſhing his force after this ſort: for as touching me, me thought he beleeued not all that I ſaid.
               We had a ſmall armie vpon the ſea returning from Naples, vnder the leading of the Lord of Myolens gouernor of Daulphin, and one Stephan de Neues of Montpellier. They were in all about eight gallies, and ſailed to Specie and Repalo, where at this preſent they were all defeated and led priſoners to Genua, in the ſelfeſame place where we had vanquiſhed King Alphonſes forces at the beginning of this voiage, and by the ſelfeſame men that tooke part with vs at that battell, namely Maſter Iohn Lewis de Fliſco, and Maſter Iohn Adorne: but if the matter had been well ordred, they ſhould haue been with the King, and all little ynough. The Lord of Breſſe and the Cardinall aboue mentioned went and lodged in the ſuburbes of Genua, thinking that their faction within the towne would haue riſen in their fauor. But the Duke of

Milan and the Adornes that gouerned the towne, and Maſter Iohn Lewis de Fliſco (a wiſe knight) had giuen ſo good order to preuent this miſchiefe, that our men were in great danger to be defeated heere alſo, as the others were before vpon the ſea: for their number was ſmall, and had it not been bicauſe the faction that ruled at Genua durſt not iſſue foorth of the towne, for feare leaſt the Fourgouſes ſhould rebell and ſhut the gates vpon them, vndoubtedly they had all been ſlaine; for this notwithſtanding they were in great diſtreſſe vpon the way as they retired to Aſt: beſides that, they were not at the battel with the King, where their ſeruice might haue ſtood him in good ſtead. From Serzane the King marched to Pontreme, through the which he was forced to paſſe, bicauſe it is the very entrie into the mountaines. The towne and caſtell were well fortified, and the ſeate of them maruellous ſtrong, but within them were not paſt three or fower hundred footemen; for if they had beene well manned, they had beene impregnable. Wherefore Frier Ieroms propheſie prooued true, which was, that God would leade the King by the hand, till he were out of danger: for it ſeemed that his enimies were blinded and bereft of their wits, in that they defended not this ſtraight. To the ſaid place of Pontreme the King ſent his vaward led by the Marſhall Gie, accompanied with Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoul, whom the King had receiued into his ſeruice at Naples after King Ferrandes departure thence, with whom he was them in pay: he was a gentleman of Milan of a good houſe, a good captaine, a very valiant man, and a great enimie to the Duke of Milan: for he was baniſhed by him when King Ferrande receiued him into his ſeruice. By the ſaid Maſter Iohn Iames his meanes, the place yeelded immediately without batterie, and the garriſon that was within it departed. But a great inconuenience happened there: for (as before is mentioned) when the Duke of Milan paſſed laſt that way, they of the towne and certaine of our Swiſſers fell at variance (of whom about forty at that time were ſlaine) for reuenge whereof, the ſaid Swiſſers at this preſent (notwithſtanding the compoſition) ſlue all the men they found in the towne, ſpoiled it and burnt both victuals and all that was within it, and aboue ten alſo of themſelues being drunke, neither could the Marſhall Gie by any meanes make them to retire. They beſieged the caſtel alſo, meaning to haue done the like to thoſe that were within it, being the ſaid Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoules ſeruants, whom he had put into it when the garriſon of the enimies yeelded it, neither would the ſaid Almaines depart thence till the King himſelfe ſent to them. It was great pitie that the towne was thus deſtroied, both bicauſe of the diſhonor we receiued thereby, and alſo bicauſe there was great plentie of victuals within it, whereof we were already in great diſtreſſe 
                     1
                  , notwithſtanding that the people were no where againſt vs, ſaue onely the people of the countrie neere to Pontreme, bicauſe of the harmes we did there. Now to proceede, if the King would haue followed the ſaid Maſter Iohn Iames his aduiſe, diuers places of the Duchie of Milan would haue yeelded, and diuers gentlemen of the countrie haue reuolted to him: for he gaue him counſell to reare vp in euery place the yoong Dukes armes, whom the Lord Lodouic held in his hands, being ſonne to Iohn Galeas the Duke that laſt died at Pauia, as before you haue heard. But the King refuſed ſo to do, for the fauor he bare to the Duke of Orleans, who pretended and doth yet pretend title to the ſaid Duchie. Thus marched the King beyond Pontreme, and lodged in a little valley neere to a village that had not ten houſes in it; the name whereof I know not. There he abode fiue daies vpon no occaſion, his armie being almoſt famiſhed, and his battell lying thirty miles behinde his vaward in the middeſt of huge and ſharpe mountaines, ouer the which ſuch great cannons and culuerins paſſed then, as neuer had paſſed before. For Duke Galeas in his time conueied

ouer but fower faulcons, waying not paſt fiue hundred pound a peece, which was a great woonder in thoſe daies.
               I muſt now returne to the Duke of Orleans, who after he had taken the caſtell of Nouarre, ſtaid there a few daies to no purpoſe, and then went to Vigeſue, neere to the which were two little townes that ſent vnto him, offering to receiue him, but by wiſe aduiſe he refuſed their offer. They of Pauia ſent alſo twiſe to him to the ſame end, and them he ſhould not haue refuſed. Moreouer, he marched in order of battell before the ſaid towne of Vigeſne, where the Duke of Milans whole force lay, being led by the two brethren of Saint Seuerin, ſo often aboue named. The town is hardly ſo good as Saint Martin-de-Candé, which is not woorth ſixe pence. I my ſelfe arriued there not long after, at which time the Duke of Milan being there with certaine of his captaines, ſhewed me the place where both the armies had ſtood in order of battell hard by the towne and within the towne. And if the Duke of Orleans had marched but an hundred paces further, they had retired beyond the riuer of Theſin, for they ſtood hard by the riuer ſide, and had built a great bridge of boates ouer it. Moreouer, I ſaw them at my being there, beat downe a great bulwark of earth which they had made on the other ſide of the riuer to defend the paſſage; whereby it appeered that they were fully minded if the Duke had marched forward, to abandon both the towne and caſtle, which had been much to their diſaduantage. This is the place where the Duke of Milan vſeth moſt to be reſident, and ſure it is ſcituate in the pleaſanteſt countrey for all kinde of paſtimes, eſpecially hauking and hunting, that euer I ſawe. But peraduenture the Duke of Orleans thought the place ſtrong where his enimies lodged, and himſelfe to haue paſſed far ynough: wherefore he retired to Trecas, the Lord whereof (who had charge vnder the Duke of Milan) and my ſelfe communed togither of theſe affaires a fewe daies after. To the ſaid towne of Trecas certaine of the principal of Milan ſent to the Duke of Orleans, promiſing to receiue him into the towne, and offering for performance thereof, to deliuer their children in hoſtage. Which their enterpriſe they might eaſily haue executed, as diuers of great authority being then within the towne and acquainted with all their practiſes haue aduertiſed me: ſaying that the Duke of Milan could not haue found men ynow to haue defended the caſtell of Milan for him, bicauſe both nobles & people deſired the deſtruction of this houſe of Sforce. The Duke of Orleans alſo and his men haue enformed me of theſe practiſes aboue mentioned, but they had no great affiance in thoſe that negotiated with them, and they lacked a man that vnderſtood theſe affaires better than themſelues: whereunto I alſo adde, that the ſaid Dukes captaines were not all of one opinion as touching this enterpriſe. With the Duke of Milans forces ioined two thouſand Almains, whom the King of Romanes ſent thither, and a thouſand Dutch horſemen vnder the leading of maſter Frederic Capelare, borne in the countie of Ferrette. Their arriuall ſo much encouraged Maſter Galeas and his companie, that they went before Trecas to preſent the battell to the Duke of Orleans, who refuſed it (notwithſtanding that his force were greater then theirs,) bicauſe his captaines as I ſuppoſe would not hazard the battell, fearing leaſt the loſſe therof ſhould be the Kings deſtruction, of whom they could heare no newes, bicauſe the paſſages were all ſtopped: wherefore they retired to Nouarre, giuing no order for their prouiſion of victuals, no not for the preſeruation of the ſtore they had within the towne already, much leſſe for any new ſupplie, whereof notwithſtanding they might plentifully haue been furniſhed at that time in the countrey about without money, whereas afterward they were greatly diſtreſſed through their owne follie. To conclude, their enimies came and lodged within halfe a league of them.
               
                  
                  The Notes.
                  1 The cauſe of their lacke vvas the barrennes of the countrey.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Kings great artillerie paſſed the mounts Appenines by the Almains helpe, of the danger the Marſhall of Gie was in with his vaward, and how the King arriued at Fornoue. Chap. 5.
               
                  YOu haue heard how the King vpon no occaſion laie in a valley on this ſide Pontreme fiue daies togither, in great diſtreſſe of victuals. Our Almains did there one great peece of ſeruice: for thoſe that committed this foule fault at Pontreme, fearing that they had thereby procured themſelues the Kings indignation for euer; came and offered to paſſe the artillerie ouer theſe monſtrous waies in the mountaines, for ſo may I well terme them, bicauſe they were ſo high and ſteepe that there lay no beaten way ouer them. I haue ſeene all the higheſt mountaines both of Italy and Spaine, which vndoubtedly are not comparable to theſe. The Almains made this offer vpon condition that the K would pardon their fault, which he promiſed to do. We had fowerteene great and maſſy peeces of artillery, and immediately after we were out of the valley, we mounted vp ſuch a maruellous ſteepe and vpright hill, that our mules could hardly clime vp to it. But theſe Almaines coupled themſelues two and two togither with ſtronge cordes, and drew a hundred or two at a time, and when one companie was wearied, a freſh ſucceeded. Beſides this, all the horſes appointed for conueiance of the artillery helped them, and euery man of the Kings houſe that had any train, lent a horſe to conueigh it ouer with the more ſpeed: but had it not been for the Almaines, the horſes would neuer haue paſſed it ouer. To ſay the truth they conueighed ouer not the artillerie onely, but the whole army, for had it not been for them there could not a man haue paſſed. But it is no maruell if they drew with good courages, bicauſe thereby they paſſed as well themſelues as vs, whereof they were no leſſe deſirous than we. They did much harme I confeſſe, but their good ſeruice far ſurmounted their euill deeds. The greateſt difficultie was not to draw vp the artillerie, for when they were at the top of the mountaine, they might behold a great deepe valley vnderneath, for the way is ſuch as nature hath made, and by Arte it was neuer holpen. Wherefore vndoubtedly the difficultie was much greater in conueighing the artillerie downe than in drawing it vp; for both horſes and men were forced to draw countermount at the taile of euery peece: beſides that, carpenters or ſmiths were continually working vpon them, for when a peece fell, great trouble it was to hoiſe it vp againe. Many gaue aduiſe to breake all the great artillerie, but the King would in no wiſe agree thereunto.
               The Marſhal of Gie who lay with our vaward thirtie miles before vs, preſſed the King to make haſte: but it was three daies before we could ioine with him. The enimies campe lay directly in his face within halfe a league of him, who in mine opinion ſhould haue had a good bootie if they had aſſailed him. Afterward he lodged in the village of Fornoue to keepe them from aſſailing vs in the mountaines, for the which purpoſe the village ſerued well, bicauſe it is at the foote of the mountains, and the very entry into the plaine. Notwithſtanding we had a better protector than him,

I meane God, who put an other conceit into our enimies heads: for ſo great was their couetouſnes that they reſolued to tarie vs in the plaine, to the end none of vs ſhould eſcape, ſuppoſing if they had aſſailed vs in the mountaines, that we would retire to Piſa and the Florentines places that we held. But therein they were much deceiued, for we were too far from thoſe places; beſides that, if our force and theirs had ioyned and fought, they might haue purſued as faſt as we could haue fled, eſpecially knowing the countrie better then we did: hither to in all this voiage we had no war 
                     1
                  , but now it began. For the Marſhall of Gie aduertiſed the King that he was paſt the mountaines, and had ſent fortie light horſe to giue an alarme to the enimies campe thereby to diſcouer their actions, who were incontinent encountered by the Eſtradiots 
                     2
                  , the which ſlew a gentleman of ours named le Beuf, and cut off his head and hung it at one of their launces, and caried it to their prouiſors to receiue a ducat for it. Theſe Eſtradiots are ſoldiers like to the Turkes Ianizaries, and attired both on foote and horſebacke like to the Turks, ſaue that they weare not vpon their head ſuch a great roule of linnen as the Turkes do called Tolliban. They are rough ſoldiers, for both they and their horſes keepe the fields winter and ſommer. They were all Greekes come from the places that the Venetians hold there, ſome from Naples 
                     3
                   in the countrie of Morea, ſome out of Albain, and ſome from Duras. Their horſes are excellent good, for they are all Turkiſh. The Venetians vſe their ſeruice much and truſt them well. I ſaw them all when they landed at Venice, and muſtered in an Ile wherein the Abbey of Saint Nicholas ſtandeth: they were to the number of fifteen hundred, and are valiant men, and trouble an army exceedingly with their alarmes when they are ſo diſpoſed to do. Theſe Eſtradiots followed the chaſe euen to the Marſhals lodging, and entered into our Almaines campe, of whom they ſlew three or fower, and caried their heads away with them, for ſuch is their maner. Bicauſe when the Venetians were in war with the Turke Mahomet Otthoman this Turkes father that now raigneth: he commanded his men to take no priſoners, but gaue them a ducat for euery head, and the Venetians did the like, which maner I thinke they now vſed, the more to terrifie vs, as indeed they did. But the ſaid Eſtradiots were no leſſe daunted themſelues with our artillerie: for one faulken ſhot ſlew one of their horſes, whereupon they retired incontinent, for they vnderſtood not the feat of artillerie: but in their retract, they tooke a Captaine of our Almaines priſoner, who was mounted on horſebacke to ſee if they retired. He was ſtricken through the body with a launce, for he was vnarmed. He was a wiſe fellow, and they led him to the Marques of Mantua Generall of the Venetians armie, being then accompanied with his vncle the Lord Rodolphe of Mantua, and the Earle of Caiazze Captaine of the Duke of Milans forces, who knew this Captaine that was taken very well. Now you ſhall vnderſtand that our enimies whole force was abrode in order of battell 
                     4
                  , at the leaſt all that was aſſembled: for all their forces were not yet come togither, notwithſtanding that they had lien there eight daies making their muſters, ſo that the King had leaſure ynough to haue returned into Fraunce without all danger, had it not been for the long abode he made to no purpoſe in the places aboue rehearſed. But God had otherwiſe diſpoſed of this buſines.
               The ſaid Marſhall fearing to be aſſailed, encamped vpon the mountaine, hauing with him onely eight ſcore men of armes and eight hundred Almaines as he told me himſelfe: and as touching vs we could not haue ſuccoured him, for it was a daie and a halfe after before we could ioine with him bicauſe of our artillerie 
                     5
                  . The King lodged by the way at two yoong Marqueſſes houſes. Our vaward laie vpon the hill in great feare waiting howerly when their enimies (who ſtood in order of battell,

a pretie way from them in the plaine) would aſſaile them. But God who alwaies manifeſtly declared that he would preſerue the company, tooke away our enimies ſenſes from them▪ for the Earle of Caiazze asked our Almaine who it was that led this vaward, and how great the force was, for he knew our number as well as our ſelues, bicauſe he had been with vs all the ſommer. The Almaine made the force great, and reported them to be three hundred men of armes, and fifteen hundred Swiſſers: whereunto the Earle anſwered that he lied, alleaging that in the whole armie were but three thouſand Swiſſers, and that it was vnlike we would ſend the halfe before with the vaward. Then this Almaine was ſent priſoner to the Marques of Mantuas pauilion, and they conſulted whether they ſhould aſſaile the Marſhall or no. But the Marques crediting the Almaines report, alleaged that their footemen were not able to match our Almaines, and that part of their force was yet vncome, without the which they ſhould do wrong to fight. And further, that if they ſhould happen to be diſcomfited, the ſeniorie might iuſtly be diſpleaſed: wherefore he liked better to tarie vs in the plaine, ſeeing we could paſſe no way but iuſt before them: of which opinion were alſo the two prouiſors, againſt whoſe aduiſe they durſt not fight: but others ſaid that if this vaward were defeated, the King muſt of neceſſitie be taken: notwithſtanding in the end they agreed all to tarie vs in the plaine, truſting that not one of vs ſhould eſcape. All this I vnderſtood by the parties themſelues aboue named: for after the battell we and they met togither, and the Marſhal of Gie and my ſelfe had great communication with them about theſe affaires. Thus they retired into their campe, being well aſſured that within a daie or two the King would paſſe the mountaines and lodge in the village of Fornoue. In the meane time al the reſt of their forces arriued, and we could not paſſe but hard before them: ſo ſtraight and narrow was the way. When we came downe the mountaines we beheld the champaigne countrey of Lombardy, which is the pleaſanteſt, beſt, and fruitfulleſt ſoile in the world. But notwithſtanding I call it champaigne; yet is it verie troubleſome for horſemen, bicauſe it is full of ditches like to Flaunders, yea fuller I thinke: but withall it is much pleaſanter and plentifuller both of good corne, good wines, and fruits, for their grounds beare euery yeere. We were right glad to behold it, bicauſe of the great famine and penurie we had ſuſtained in our iourney euer ſince our departure from Luques. But our artillerie tired vs exceedingly as we came downe the hill, ſo ſteepe and painfull was the way. Our enimies campe was well furniſhed of tents and pauilions, which made it ſhew maruellous great, and ſure ſo was it: for the Venetians had performed their promiſe made to the King by me, which was that they and the Duke of Milan would put fortie thouſand men into the field, at the leaſt if they performed it not fullie, they failed not much thereof: for in this army were fiue and thirtie thouſand taking pay, fower parts of fiue being of Saint Marke 
                     6
                  .
               They were at the leaſt two thouſand men of armes barded, euery one of them accompanied with fower men on horſe back, bearing croſſe bowes or ſome other weapons 
                     7
                  , their Eſtradiots and light horſe men, were to the number of fiue thouſand, the reſt were footemen, and they lodged in a ſtrong place well fortified, and wel furniſhed with artillerie.
               The King came downe the mountaine about noone, and lodged in the village of Fornoue, vpon ſunday being the fift of Iuly, the yeere 1495. We found in the village great plenty of meale, wine, and prouender for horſes, brought thither by the people 1495. of the countrey, who receiued vs friendly euery where (for no honeſt man did them harme) & victualed vs with bread & wine & ſome fruit, wherby they ſomwhat

eaſed the armie: but their bread was little and blacke, and they ſold it deere, and three parts of their wine was water. I my ſelfe cauſed ſome of their victuals to be bought for me, which notwithſtanding I durſt not taſte of, bicauſe we ſuſpected they meant to poiſon vs, ſo that at the firſt no man durſt aduenture to eate of them; and the ſuſpition increaſed, bicauſe two Swiſſers were found dead in a ſeller, hauing drunke themſelues to death, or taken cold after they had drunke. But before midnight the horſes began firſt to feede, and afterward the men, and then we refreſhed our ſelues well. I muſt heere ſpeake ſomwhat in the honor of the Italian nation, bicauſe we neuer found in all this voiage that they ſought by poiſon to do vs harme, yet if they would we could hardly haue auoided it. We arriued at Fornoue (as you haue heard) vpon ſunday at noone: the King lighted & ate and dranke, a little to refreſh himſelfe, but a number of gentlemen there were that hardly could get a morſell of bread, for there was ſmall ſtore of other victuals than ſuch as we found in the place, whereof till midnight (as before you haue heard) none of vs durſt taſte.
               Immediately after dinner, certaine of their Eſtradiots came and gaue vs a hot alarme euen within our camp. Our men were as yet vnacquainted with them, for the which cauſe all our armie came foorth into the field in very good order, and in three battels, vaward, battell, and rereward, the one being not aboue a bowles caſt from the other, ſo that ech of them might with ſpeed haue ſuccoured other: but in the end this hot alarme prooued nothing, wherefore we returned to our lodging. We had a few tents and pauilions, and our campe lay in length auauncing it ſelf towards theirs: beſides that, there was a wood through the which the enimies might come vnder couert almoſt to vs 
                     8
                  , by meanes whereof twentie of their Eſtradiots might eaſily giue vs an alarme at all times, and ſo I warrant you they did, for they lay continually at the end of our campe. We encamped in a valley, betweene two little hils 
                     9
                  , through the which ran a riuer, that a man may eaſily paſſe ouer on foote, vnleſſe it happen to ariſe, as it doth often vpon the ſudden in that countrey, but the waters tarrie not long, the riuers name is Tarro. Al the ſaid valley is grauell and great ſtone, very troubleſome for horſemen, and not aboue a quarter of a league broade. Vpon the hill on the right hand lay our enimies (hardly halfe a league from vs) ſo that we were forced to paſſe iuſt before them, the riuer running betweene vs: for notwithſtanding that on the backe ſide of the hill on the left hand (vnderneath the which we encamped) there lay another way that we might haue taken; yet would we not ſo do, leaſt we ſhould ſeeme to flie, but encamped in the valley at the foote of the ſaid hill, in the face of our enimies. Thoſe in our campe that were of the wiſer ſort began now to feare, in ſuch ſort, that about two daies before, they had deſired me to go and parle with the enimies, taking one with me to view them, and to number how great their force was. I was loth to take this iourny vpon me, bicauſe without ſafe conduct I could not go in ſafetie. Wherefore I anſwered that both at my departure from Venice, and the ſame night alſo that I arriued at Padua, I was entred into good intelligence with their prouiſors, ſo that I thought they would not refuſe to commune with me in the midway betweene both the armies: but if I ſhould offer my ſelfe to go to them I ſhould thereby too much encourage them; adding further, that this matter was mooued too late. Notwithſtanding, the ſelfe ſame ſunday that the King arriued at Fornoue, I writ to their prouiſors (one of the which was named Maſter Luques Piſan, and the other Maſter Melchior Treuiſan) deſiring them that vnder ſafe conduct, one of them would come and parle with me, according to their offer made at our departure from Padua, (as before you haue heard.) They anſwered that they would willingly haue ſatisfied my requeſt, if the war had not been begun vpon the

Duke of Milan: notwithſtanding, they promiſed that one of them (whether of the twaine ſhould be appointed) would come into ſome place in the midway to commune with me if we ſo thought good; which anſwer I receiued the ſame ſunday at night: but thoſe that had all the credit with the King, made no account thereof. As touching my ſelfe, I durſt not take too much vpon me, nor preſſe the matter too earneſtly, leaſt they ſhould charge me with cowardiſe: wherefore I waded no further in it that night; notwithſtanding, that I would with all my hart haue helped the King and his army out of that ſtraight, if I might haue done it without danger.
               About midnight the Cardinall of Saint Malo, whoſe pauilion was hard by mine, told me as he came from the King, that we ſhould depart the next morning by break of day, & that the King would command a cannon to be ſhot into the enimies camp as we paſſed along by them, to ſignifie that he was there ready to preſent them battell, and ſo march forward without any more adoe. And I ſuppoſe that this aduiſe proceeded from the Cardinall himſelfe, as a man vnable to talke of the wars, neither vnderſtanding what they meant. But it had been requiſite that the King ſhould haue aſſembled the wiſeſt men and beſt captaines in his armie, to debate ſo weighty a matter as this was. And yet perhaps that ſhould haue beene but to ſmall purpoſe neither; for I ſawe many matters debated in this voiage, the which were executed cleane contrary to the reſolution. I anſwered the Cardinal that if we approched ſo neere them, as to ſhoote into their campe, vndoubtedly men would iſſue foorth on both ſides to the skirmiſh, the which could neuer be retired without battell: alleaging further, that this was cleane contrarie to that I had already begun with their prouiſors, and it greeued me, that we ſhould take this courſe: but ſuch had mine eſtate been euer ſince the beginning of the Kings raigne, that I durſt not wade too far in any matter, leaſt I ſhould haue procured my ſelfe the diſpleaſure of them that were in authoritie about him, which was ſo great where he liked, that it was but too great.
               The ſelfeſame night we had two other great alarmes all through our owne fault, bicauſe we had giuen no order againſt their Eſtradiots as we ought to haue done, and the vſe is to do in the wars againſt light horſemen: for twenty of our men of armes with their archers would haue matched two hundred of them; but they were as yet ſtrange to vs. There fell alſo this night a terrible raine, and ſuch lightening & thundering as was neuer ſince the world began; ſo that heauen and earth ſeemed to go togither, or that this foreſhewed ſome great inconuenience to enſue. For notwithſtanding that we knew well, that the reuerberation of theſe great mountaines (at the foote of the which we lay) made this thunder ſeeme greater than indeede it was; and further, that thunder and lightening be naturall in a hot countrie, eſpecially in ſommer: yet ſeemed they at that preſent the more dreadfull and terrible to vs, bicauſe we ſawe ſo many enimies encamped before vs, we hauing none other meanes to paſſe through them but by battell, our force being ſo ſmall as it was; for we were not aboue nine thouſand able men good and bad: of the which two thouſand were noble mens ſeruants of the campe; but I comprehend not in this number pages nor ſtraglers, nor ſuch kinde or people.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 For you heard before how eaſily without blowes they entred into Naples.
                  
                  2 It ſeemeth that this word is deriued of the Greeke, for 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     in Greeke ſignifieth a ſoldior.
                  
                  3 This Naples is a towne in Morea or Peloponneſus vnder the Venetians gouernment,
                     
                     called in times paſt Nauplia, and now Neapolis Romanie.
                  4 For they were come foorth of their campe with intent to haue aſſailed the Marſhall.
                  
                  5 Vnderſtand this day and a halfe after he lodged vpon the mountaine, not after his firſt arriuall there: for from his firſt comming, it was three daies before the King ioined with him, as he ſaid a little before.
                  
                  6 That is to ſay, of the Seniorie of Venice, which haue Saint Marke for their patrone.
                  
                  7 He ſaid Lib. 7. cap. 5. and ſaith alſo againe in this booke cap. 15. that the Italian men of armes were allowed no archers: but note that this that the Venetians did heere, was contrarie to the ancient maner of Italie, and that they did it to imitate the French.
                  
                  8 The Kings campe lay among ſallowes and willowes. Annal. Franc. & Aquit.
                  9 Of the ſeate of both the camps reade Guicciar. fol. 38. pag. 2.
               
            
            
               Of the battell of Fornoue, wherein the enimies of Fraunce were put to flight, and how the Earle of Petillane, who the ſame day brake the Kings priſon, relied them togither againe. Chap. 6.
               
                  THe monday morning about ſeuen of the clocke, being the ſixt day of Iuly, the yeere of our Lord 1495. the noble King mounted on horſebacke calling often for me. At my comming to him I found him armed at all peeces, and mounted vpon the braueſt horſe that euer I ſaw, called Sauoy, which ſome ſaid was a horſe of Breſſe. Duke Charles of Sauoy gaue him to the King: he was blacke, and had but one eie, and of a meane ſtature, but tall ynough for him he carried. This yoong Prince ſeemed that day altogither another man than either his nature, perſon, or complexion would beare: for naturally he was, and yet is very fearfull in ſpeech, bicauſe he had euer been brought vp in great awe, and with men of meane eſtate: but this horſe made him ſeeme great, and he had a good countenance and a good colour, and his talke was ſtout and wiſe: whereby appeered (as I then called to minde) that Frier Ierom told me truth, when he ſaid that God would leade him by the hand, and that he ſhould haue ſomewhat to do vpon the way, but that the honor thereof ſhould be his. His words to me were theſe; if theſe men will parlament, go and commune with them, and bicauſe the Cardinall was there preſent, he named him to accompanie me, and the Marſhall of Gie, who was out of patience bicauſe of a broile that had happened betweene the Earles 
                     1
                   of Narbonne and Guiſe, the which Guiſe ſomtime had led certaine bands, and ought of right to haue led the vaward 
                     2
                  , as all men ſaid. I anſwered the King, that I would do his commandement, but that I neuer ſaw two ſo great forces ſo neere togither, depart without battell.
               Our whole armie marched foorth vpon the plaine in good order, the one battell neere to the other as the day before: but as touching the force, it ſeemed but a handfull to that I had ſeene with Duke Charles of Burgundie, and King Lewis this Kings father. Vpon the ſaid plaine the Cardinall and I withdrew our ſelues aſide, and endited a letter to the two Prouiſors aboue named, the which was written by one Maſter Robertet a Secretarie of the Kings, and in good credit. The contents of our letter were, that it appertained to the eſtate and office of the Cardinall to procure peace, and vnto me alſo hauing ſo lately been ambaſſador at Venice; for the which cauſe I

might as yet take vpon me the office of mediator betweene the King and them. We ſignified further to them on the Kings behalfe, that he would but paſſe foorth his way without doing harme to any man: wherefore if they minded to parlament, according to the order taken the day before, we for our parts were willing thereunto, and would imploy our ſelues to do all the good we could. The skirmiſhes were already begun round about vs, and after our armie had marched awhile, ſoftly paſſing along before them, the riuer running betweene them and vs (as you haue heard) we approched ſo neer to them, that we came within a quarter of a league of their camp, within the which they ſtood all in martiall aray: for their maner is to make their campe ſo large, that they may all ſtand in order of battell within it.
               They ſent foorth incontinent part of their Eſtradiots and croſſebowe men on horſebacke, and certaine men of armes, the which came along vpon the way almoſt vnder couert, towards the village of Fornoue (out of the which we were departed) meaning there to paſſe this little riuer, and to aſſaile our carriage, which was ſo great, that I thinke it laded aboue 6000. mules, horſes, and aſſes. They had ſet their battels in ſuch order many daies before they fought, that better they could not be ordered: for they were ſo placed, that their great number halfe aſſured them of the victory, bicauſe they aſſailed the K. & his army on euery ſide, in ſuch ſort that not one of vs could haue eſcaped if we had been broken, conſidering the ſtraight we were in. Thoſe aboue mentioned came and aſſailed our carriage, and on the left hand came the Marqueſſe of Mantua, the Lord Rodolph his vncle, and the Earle Bernardin of Dalmouton, with all the flower of their armie, being to the number of ſixe hundred men of armes, as they themſelues afterward confeſſed, all the which entred into the plaine directly behinde vs. Their men of armes were all barded, and furniſhed with braue plumes and goodly bourdonaſſes 
                     3
                  , and well accompanied with croſſebowe men on horſebacke, Eſtradiots, and footemen. Againſt the Marſhall of Gie and our vaward, marched the Earle of Caiazze with fower hundred men of armes (accompanied as the others aboue mentioned) and with a great band of footemen: with him alſo was another companie of two hundred men of armes, led by Maſter Iohn de Bentiuoille of Bolonia his ſonne, a yoong man, who before had neuer ſeen the wars, for they were as ſlenderly prouided of good captaines as we. This yoong Bentiuoille was placed there, to giue a new charge vpon our vaward immediately after the Earle of Caiazze. With the Marqueſſe of Mantua was alſo a like companie of men of armes for the ſame purpoſe, vnder the leading of Maſter Anthony of Vrbin baſtard to the late Duke of Vrbin. Beſides theſe there remained yet in their campe two great troupes of men of armes, as I vnderſtood the next day by themſelues when they and I communed togither, and I ſaw them alſo with mine eies. And this they did bicauſe the Ven
                     •
                  tians would not hazard all at once, nor vnfurniſh their campe. Notwithwanding in mine opinion it had beene better for them to haue aduentured their whole force, ſeeing they meant to fight.
               I will now tell you what became of the letter, the Cardinall and I ſent to their campe by a trumpeter. The Prouiſors receiued it, and immediately after they had read it, braſt foorth the firſt peece of our artillerie, then ſhot theirs which was not ſo good as ours. The ſaid Prouiſors incontinent ſent backe our trumpeter, accompanied with a trumpeter of the Marqueſſes, who brought word that they were content to parlament, if we would cauſe our artillerie to ceaſe, ſaying, that they on their ſide would do the like. I was then a great way from the King, who rid about heere and there, and ſent backe theſe two trumpeters with anſwere, that he would make the artillerie to ceaſe, and gaue commandement to the Maſter of the ordinance to ſtay

the ſhot, and ſo all ceaſed awhile on both ſides. But ſoone after vpon a ſudden they diſcharged one of their peeces, and then ſhot ours againe freſhlier than before, and we approched three of our peeces neerer to them. After the two trumpeters were arriued at their campe, they tooke ours and ſent him to the Marqueſſes pauilion, reſoluing to fight. For the Earle of Caiazze (as thoſe that were preſent haue informed me) ſaid that it was now no time to parlament, ſeeing that we were halfe vanquiſhed already; and one of their Prouiſors was of his opinion, and agreed to fight (as I haue heard himſelfe report) but the other would not conſent thereunto. The Marqueſſe in like maner deſired the battell, but his vncle, who was a vertuous and a wiſe gentleman, and loued vs well, and bare armes againſt vs with an euill will, withſtood it to the vttermoſt of his power; but in the end they agreed all to fight.
               Now you ſhal vnderſtand, that the King had put his whole force into his vaward, in the which were three hundred and fiftie men of armes, and three thouſand Swiſſers (the onely hope of our army) with whom he commanded three hundred archers of his garde to ioine themſelues on foote, and likewiſe certaine croſſebowe men on horſebacke of the two hundreth that were alſo of his garde, which was a great diminiſhing of the ſafety of his perſon. In our army were but few footemen beſides theſe, for all that we had were placed in the vaward. On foote with our Almaines were the Lord Engelbert brother to the Duke of Cleues, Lornay, and the bailife of Digeon, the ſaid Almains captain, and before them marched our artillerie. Heere they whom we left in the Florentines places, and thoſe that were ſent to Genua would haue don good ſeruice, contrary to the opinion of all men. Our vaward had now marched almoſt as far as their campe, ſo that all men thought they ſhould haue begun the battell: but our two other battels were not ſo neere it, nor ſo well placed to haue ſuccoured it as the day before. Further, bicauſe the Marques of Mantua (who was entred into the plaine and paſt the riuer) was directly vpon our backe, about a quarter of a league behinde our rereward, marching with his force ſoftly and cloſe togither, which was a maruellous pleaſant ſight to behold; the King was forced to turne his backe to his vawarde, and his face towards his enimies, and ſo to approch neerer to his rereward, and retire from his vaward. I was then with the Cardinall attending an anſwer of our letter, but I told him I perceiued it was no time to ſtaie any longer there; wherfore I departed being hard by the Swiſſers, and went to the King. But before I could come to him, I loſt a page who was my coſin germaine, and a groome of my chamber, and a lackey which followed a prety way behinde me, ſo that I ſaw not when they were ſlaine.
               I had not riden aboue a hundred paces, when ſuddenly a cry began to ariſe in the ſelfe ſame place from whence I was departed, or but little beyond. For you ſhall vnderſtand that their Eſtradiots at this very inſtant came to our carriage, an
                     •
                   entred into the Kings lodging where were three or fower houſes, in the which they ſlew or hurt fower or fiue ſoldiers, but the reſt eſcaped, they ſlew alſo about an hundred of our ſtraglers, and put our carriage in great diſorder. When I came to the King, I found him dubbing of knights, but bicauſe the enimies were at hand, we cauſed him to ceaſe, and then I hard the baſtard of Bourbon named Mathew (who was in good credit with the King) and one Philip de Moulin (a poore gentleman but very valiant) call the King, ſaying, paſſe foorth ſir, paſſe foorth: whereupon he went into the forefront of his battell, and placed himſelfe before his ſtandard, ſo that (the baſtard of Bourbon excepted) I ſawe none neerer the enimies then himſelfe. Our enimies marched luſtely forward, in ſuch ſort that within leſſe than a quarter of an hower after my arriuall, they were come within a hundred paces of the King, who was as euill

garded & as euil waited on, as euer was Prince or noble mā; but mauger the deuil, he is wel defended whom God defends. And ſure the propheſie of the reuerend father frier Hierom prooued true, who told me (as before you haue heard) that God led him by the hand. His rereward ſtood vpon his right hand, being recoiled ſomwhat from him; & the neereſt companie to him on that ſide was the D. of Orleans companie, being to the number of 80. launces led by Robinet of Frainezelles, and Monſeur de la Trimoilles company, being about forty launces, and the hundred Scottiſh archers of his garde, who thruſt themſelues into the preſſe as men of armes. I my ſelfe ſtood vpon the left hand with the gentlemen, penſioners, and ſeruants of the Kings houſe. This rereward was led by the Earle of Foix: but as touching the names of the other captaines, I paſſe them ouer for breuitie.
               Within a quarter of an hower after my arriuall, the enimies being ſo neere the King, as you haue heard, charged their ſtaues, and began a ſoft gallop. They were diuided into two troupes; one of the which charged the two companies of our horſemen, and the Scottiſh archers ſtanding on the Kings right hand; and the other, the King himſelfe; ſo that both they and the King were charged almoſt at one inſtant: we that ſtood vpon the left hand charged them vpon the flanke greatly to our aduantage; and vndoubtedly it is impoſſible for men to meete roughlier than we met. But the Eſtradiots that accompanied them, ſeeing our mules and carriage flie towards our vaward, and their companions 
                     4
                   get all the bootie, turned their horſes that way, and forſooke their men of armes, who by meanes thereof were vnfollowed; whereby it manifeſtly appeered, that God meant to preſerue vs: for if theſe fifteene hundred light horſemen had broken in amongſt vs with their Cimeterres (which are terrible ſwords like to the Turks) vndoubtedly we had beene defeated, our number being ſo ſmall. The Italian men of armes, immediately after they had broken their ſtaues fled, and their footemen or the greateſt part ſhrunke aſide, and fled alſo. At the ſelfeſame time that they charged vs, the Earle of Caiazze gaue a charge alſo vpon our vaward, but they met not ſo roughly as we: for at the very inſtant that they ſhould haue couched their ſtaues, they began to faint, and diſordered themſelues in ſuch ſort, that fifteene or twenty of them being ſcattered amongſt our bands, were taken and ſlaine by our Almaines; the reſt were but eaſily purſued: for the Marſhall of Gie endeuored to keepe his forces togither, bicauſe he ſaw yet a great troupe of enimies not far from him. Notwithſtanding part of his men followed the chaſe, and part of the Earle of Caiazzes men that fled, paſſed ouer the place where the Marques & we had fought, with their ſwords in their hands; for they had throwne awaie their ſtaues. But they that aſſailed the King fled immediately after they had charged, and were maruellous ſwiftly purſued, for we all followed the chaſe: part of them tooke 
                     •
                  way to the village from whence we were departed, the reſt fled the next way to their campe, we all purſuing them, ſaue the King who ſtaid behinde with a few men, and put himſelfe in great danger, bicauſe he followed not after them with vs. One of the firſt that was ſlaine of their ſide, was the Lord Rodolph of Mantua, vnckle to the Marques, who ſhould haue ſent word to the aboue named Maſter Anthonie of Vrbin, when he ſhould march; for they thought that this battell would haue endured as their battels in Italie do; which their error ſerued the ſaid Maſter Anthonie for a good excuſe: but to ſay the truth, I thinke he ſaw ynough to ſtay him from marching. We had a great number of ſtraglers and ſeruants following vs, all the which flocked about the Italian men of armes being ouerthrowen, and ſlue the moſt of them. For the greateſt part of the ſaid ſtraglers had their hatchets in their hands, wherewith they vſed to cut wood to make our lodgings, with the which

hatchets they brake the viſards of their head peeces, and then claue their heads, for otherwiſe they could hardly haue beene ſlaine, they were ſo ſurely armed; ſo that there were euer three or fower about one of them. Moreouer, the long ſwords that our archers and ſeruants had, did that day a great execution. The King tarried vpon the place where the charge was giuen, accompanied with ſeuen or eight yoong gentlemen, whom he had appointed to attend vpon him, for neither would he follow the chaſe, neither retire to his vaward bicauſe it was ſomwhat farre off. He eſcaped wel at the firſt encounter, cōſidering that he was one of the foremoſt, for the baſtard of Bourbon was taken within leſſe then twenty paces of him 
                     5
                  , and led priſoner to the enimies campe.
               The King abode in the ſaid place maruellous weakely accompanied: for he had with him not a man more than one groome of his chamber called Anthonie des Ambus, a little fellow and euill armed: the reſt were ſcattered heere and there, as himſelfe told me at night euen in the preſence of thoſe that were appointed to waite vpon him, who deſerued great reproche for leauing their Prince in ſuch eſtate. Notwithſtanding they arriued in time, for a certaine ſmall broken troupe of Italian men of armes paſſing along vpon the plaine (where they ſaw no man ſtirring) came and aſſailed the King and this groome of his chamber: but the King being mounted vpon the braueſt horſe in the world for a man of his ſtature, remooued to and fro, and deſended himſelfe valiantly: and at that very inſtant certaine of the reſt of his men being not far from him arriued, whereupon the Italians fled, and then the King followed good aduiſe and retired to his vaward, which had neuer mooued out of their firſt place. Thus the King with his battell had good ſucceſſe: and if his vaward had marched but one hundred paces farther, our enimies whole armie had fled. Some ſaid they ought ſo to haue done, but others held opinion that they did beſt to ſtaie.
               Our company that followed the chaſe purſued the enimies hard to their campe, which lay in length almoſt as far as Fornoue, and not one of vs receiued a blow ſaue Iulien Bourgneuf, whom I ſaw fall dead to the ground with a ſtroke that an Italian gaue him as he paſſed by (for he was euill armed:) whereupon certaine of vs ſtaied, ſayieng, let vs returne to the King, and with that word all the whole troupe ſtood ſtill to giue their horſes breath, which were very wearie bicauſe they had chaſed a great way, and all vpon ſharpe ſtones. Hard by vs fled a troupe of thirty men of armes, whom we let paſſe quietly fearing to aſſaile them. When we had brethed our horſes, we rid foorth a faſt trot towards the King, not knowing what was become of him, but after a while we deſcried him a far off. Then cauſed we our ſeruants to light on foote, and gather vp the launces wherewith the place lay ſtrawed, eſpecially with Bourdonaſſes, which were not much woorth, for they were hollow and hardly ſo waightie as a iauelin, but trimly painted, and by this meanes we were better furniſhed of launces than in the morning. Thus as we rid towards the King, by the way we met a broken band of the enimies footemen croſſing ouer the fielde, being of thoſe that had lien hid among the hils, and had led the Marques of Mantua vpon the King backe: many of them were ſlaine, and the reſt eſcaped, and waded through the riuer, and we ſtaied not long about them. Diuers of our men cried often during the whole conflict, remember Guynegate, which was a battel loſt in Picardie in the time of K. Levvis the eleuenth, againſt the K. of Romanies 
                     6
                  , through the folly of our men, who fell to ſpoile the enimies carriage: notwithſtanding in that battell no whit of their carriage was taken nor ſpoiled: but in this, their Eſtradiots tooke all our carriage horſes, of which notwithſtanding they led away but fiue and fifty being

the beſt and beſt couered, namely al the Kings, and all his chamberlains. They tooke alſo a groome of the Kings chamber called Gabriell, who had about him the ancient iewels of the Kings of Fraunce, which he then caried with him, bicauſe the King was there in perſon. True it is that a number of coffers were alſo loſt, but they were ouerthrowne and ſpoiled by our owne men, for we had in our campe a great many varlets and harlots that ſtripped the dead bodies, and ſpoiled all that they could come by, but as touching the enimies they tooke onely thoſe aboue rehearſed. There were ſlaine on both ſides (as I haue been credibly enformed both by them and certaine of our owne men) to this number. We loſt Iulian Bourgneuf, the ſergeant porter of the Kings houſe, a gentleman of the Kings houſe, and nine Scottiſh archers, of horſemen of our vaward to the number of twenty, and about our cariage three or fower ſcore horſe-keepers. And they loſt three hundred and fiftie men of armes, ſlaine vpon the place: but not one of them was taken priſoner, which chance I thinke neuer hapned before in any battel. Of their Eſtradiots few were ſlaine, for they turned al to the ſpoile as you haue heard. There died of them in all three thouſand and fiue hundred men, as diuers of the beſt of their army haue enformed me: others haue told me more, but ſure they loſt many gentlemen: for I ſawe my ſelfe a role wherein were the names of eighteene gentlemen of good houſes, and among them fower or fiue of the Marques owne name which was Gonzague, beſides the which, the Marques loſt alſo at the leaſt three ſcore gentlemen of his owne dominions, all the which were horſemen, and not one footeman among them. It is ſtrange that ſo many were ſlaine with hand ſtrokes; for as touching the artillerie, I thinke it ſlew not ten on both ſides. The fight endured not a quarter of an hower, for ſo ſoone as they had broken or throwne away their launces they fled all: the chaſe continued about three quarters of an hower. Their battels in Italy are not fought after this ſort, for they fight ſquadron after ſquadron, ſo that a battell endureth there ſomtime a whole day, neither party obteining victorie.
               The flight on their ſide was great, for three hundred of their men of armes and the greateſt part of their Eſtradiots fled, ſome to Rege 
                     7
                   (being far thence) and others to Parma, being about eight leagues off 
                     8
                  . In the morning the very ſame hower that the two armies ioined, the Earle of Petillane & the Lord Virgile Vrſin eſcaped from vs. The ſaid Virgile went but to a gentlemans houſe thereby, where he remained vpon his word, but the Earle fled ſtraight to our enimies, and to ſay the truth, we did them both great wrong to leade them with vs after this ſort. The Earle being a man well knowne among the ſoldiers (for he had alwaies had charge both vnder the Florentines and vnder King Ferrand) began to crie Petillane Petillane, and ran after them that fled aboue three leagues, ſaying that al was theirs, and calling them to the ſpoile, by the which meanes he brought backe the greateſt part of them, and put them out of all feare, aſſuring them vpon his word that there was no danger, ſo that had it not been for him alone, their whole armie had fled: for the word of ſuch a man newly departed from vs was no ſmall ſtaie to them. The ſaid Earle (as himſelfe hath ſince told me) gaue aduiſe to aſſaile vs again the ſame night, but they would not harken thereunto. The Marques hath alſo ſince communed with me of theſe affaires chalenging this aduiſe as his: but to ſay the truth had it not been for the Earle alone they had all fled the ſame night.
               When we were come to the King, we diſcouered a great number of men of armes and footemen ſtanding yet in order of battell without their campe, whoſe heads and launces onely we could deſcrie. They had ſtood there all the day, and neuer mooued from that place, notwithſtanding they were further from vs than they ſeemed: for

they and we could not haue ioined without paſſing the riuer, which was riſen and aroſe howerly, bicauſe all the day it had thundered, lightened, and rained terribly, eſpecially during the battell and the chaſe. The K. debated with his captaines whether we ſhould aſſaile theſe new diſcouered enimies or not: with him were three Italian knights, one named Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoul, who is yet liuing, and behaued himſelfe that day like a woorthy gentleman; another Maſter Francis Secco a valiant knight, in pay with his Florentines, and of the age of 72. yeeres; and the third Maſter Camillo Vitelly, who with his three brethren was in ſeruice with the King, and came vnſent for from Ciuita de Caſtello, as far as Serzane (which is a great iourney) to be at this battell: but perceiuing that he could not ouertake the King with his companie, he came himſelfe alone. Theſe two latter gaue aduice to march againſt theſe enimies newly diſcouered: but the Frenchmen were of a contrarie opinion, ſaying, that they had done ynough, and that it was late, and time to make their lodgings. But the ſaid Maſter Francis Secco maintained ſtoutly his opinion, ſhewing people that paſſed to and fro vpon the high way that leadeth to Parma (the neereſt towne that the enimies could retire into) whom he affirmed to be enimies flying thither or returning thence, and indeede he ſaid true, as we vnderſtood afterward; and ſure both his words and countenance ſhewed him to be a hardy and a wiſe knight. For all their captaines confeſſed to me (yea ſome of them before the Duke of Milan himſelfe) that if we had marched forward, they had all fled; by meanes wherof we ſhould haue obtained the goodlieſt, honorableſt, and profitableſt victorie that happened in ten yeeres before: for if a man could haue vſed it well, haue made his profit of it, haue behaued himſelfe wiſely, and entreated the people gently; the Duke of Milan by the ſpace of eight daies after, ſhould not haue had any one place to hold for him in his countrie, except the caſtell of Milan, yea and I doubt of that too: ſo deſirous were his ſubiects to rebell. The like would alſo haue happened to the Venetians, ſo that the King ſhould not haue needed to take care for Naples: for the Venetians ſhould not haue been able to leuie a man out of Venice, Breſſa, and Cremone, which is but a ſmall towne, bicauſe all the reſt that they held in Italie would haue reuolted. But God had performed that which Frier Ierom promiſed, to wit, that the honor of the field ſhould be ours; for conſidering our ſmall experience and euill gouernment, we were vnwoorthie of this good ſucceſſe that God gaue vs, bicauſe we could not then tell how to vſe it: but I thinke if at this preſent, which is the yeere of our Lord 1497. the like victorie ſhould happen to the King; he could tell better how to make his profit thereof.
               While we ſtood debating this matter, the night approched, and the band of our enimies, which we ſaw before vs, retired into their campe, and we for our part went and lodged about a quarter of a league from the place of the battell. The King himſelfe lay in a farme houſe, being an old beggerly thing; notwithſtanding the barnes about it were full of corne vnthreſhed, which I warrant you our army quickly found. Certaine other old houſes there were alſo, which ſtood vs but in ſmall ſtead: euery man lodged himſelfe as commodiouſly as he could; for we had no lodgings made. As touching my ſelfe I lay vpon the bare ground vnder a vine, in a very ſtraight roome, hauing nothing vnder me, no not my cloke: for the K. had borrowed mine in the morning, and my carriage was far off, and it was too late to ſeeke it. He that had meate ate it, but few there were that had any, vnleſſe it were a morſell of bread, ſnatched out of ſome of their ſeruants boſoms: I waited vpon the King to his chamber, where he found certaine that were hurt, namely the Seneſchall of Lyons and others, whom he cauſed to be dreſſed. Himſelfe was merrie and made good cheere,

and each man thought himſelfe happy that he was ſo well eſcaped: neither were we puffed vp with pride and vaineglorie, as before the battell, bicauſe we ſawe our enimies encamped ſo neere vs. The ſame night all our Almaines kept the watch, and the King gaue them three hundred crownes; whereupon they kept the watch very diligently, and ſtrake vp their drums brauely.
               
                  The Notes.
                  2 Vicount of Narbonne. Ferron.
                  2 Rereward after the French corrector, the leading whereof Iouius giueth to two that ſtraue for it. Ferron and our author to Narbonne (otherwiſe called Earle of Foix) alone. Annal. Franc. to Monſeur de la Trimoille Vicount de Touars and to Monſeur de Guiſe: but it appeereth lib. 7. cap. 13. when the K. thought to haue fought with Dom Ferrand at Saint Germain that Monſeur de Guiſe led the vaward, ſo that I know not how it is beſt heere to be read.
                  
                  3 Bourdonaſſes were holow horſemens ſtaues vſed in Italy, cunningly painted: our author himſelfe in this Chapter deſcribeth them at large.
                  
                  4 By their companions he meaneth the Eſtradiots that had aſſailed the Kings corriage at the first.
                  
                  5 Annal. Franc. write that this baſtard Mathew, Monſeur de Ligny and Monſeur de Piennes were armed like to the King and continually about him.
                  
                  6 Of this battell he writeth lib. 6. cap. 6.
                  7 Vnderſtand not Rege in Calabria, but Rege neere to Parma called in Latin Regium Lepedi, and I doubt me the vnskilfull corrector at the firſt printing of the worke chopped in this parentheſis, ſuppoſing the author to meane Rege in Calabria, wherefore I had rather leaue the parentheſis out.
                  
                  8 The French corrector ſuppoſeth this number to be alſo corrupted.
                  
               
            
            
               How the Lord of Argenton went himſelfe alone to parle with the enimies when he ſaw that thoſe that were appointed to go with him would not go: and how the King returned ſafe and ſound with his army to the towne of Aſt. Chap. 7.
               
                  THe next morning I determined to continue our treatie of peace, deſiring nothing more than the Kings ſafe paſſage. But I could get neuer a Trumpeter to go to the enimies campe, partly bicauſe nine of theirs were ſlaine in the battell being vnknowen, & partly bicauſe they had taken one of ours, and ſlaine another, whom the King (as you haue hard) ſent to them a little before the battell began: notwithſtanding in the end one went and caried the Kings ſafe conduct with him, and brought me one from them to commune in the midway between both the armies, which me thought was a hard matter to be brought to paſſe, but I would not ſeeme to draw backe nor make difficultie therin. The King named the Cardinall of Saint Malo, the Lord of Gie Marſhall of Fraunce, and the Lord of Piennes his Chamberlaine to accompany me: and they named for them, the Marques of Mantua Generall of the Venetians army, the Earle of Caiazze (who not long before had taken part with vs, and was captaine of the

forces the Duke of Milan had there) and Maſter Luques Piſan, and Maſter Melchior Treuiſan prouiſors of the ſeniorie of Venice. We approched ſo neere them, that we might eaſily deſcry them fower vpon the plaine. The riuer ran between vs and them, which was riſen exceedingly ſince the day before: on their ſide there was not one man without their campe but themſelues onely, neither any on ours, but onely we & our watch which ſtood ouer againſt them. We ſent a herault to them to know whether they would paſſe the riuer, whereunto me thought it a hard matter to perſwade either partie, for I ſuppoſed both parties would make difficulty therein as well appeered by them: for they anſwered that the place of communication was appointed in the midway betweene both the armies, and that they were come already more than the halfe way: wherefore they would not paſſe the riuer, nor put themſelues in ſuch danger being all the principall of their armie. They alſo of our ſide alleaged the like doubts, making no leſſe account of their perſons than the others. Wherfore they willed me to go to them, giuing me no inſtructions for my direction: I anſwered that I would not go alone, but would haue ſome body with me to teſtifie of all that ſhould be done. Wherfore being accompanied with one Maſter Robertet the Kings Secretarie, and a ſeruant of mine owne, and an herault, I paſſed the riuer: for notwithſtanding that I wel perceiued I ſhould do no good, yet thought I by this means to acquite my ſelfe towards them, being come thither by my procurement. When I came to them, I told them they were not come halfe the way according to their promiſe, wherefore I deſired them, at the leaſt to come to the riuers ſide, aſſuring my ſelfe that if we were once ſo high togither, we ſhould not depart without communication. They anſwered, that the riuer was ſo brode, and ran with ſo great violence and noiſe, that no talke could be heard from the one ſide to the other; wherefore they would go no neerer to parlament, neither could I by any meanes bring them one foote further: but they willed me to make ſome ouerture, which I had no commiſſion to do. Wherefore I anſwered, that alone I could do nothing; but if they would propound any conditions of peace, I would make report thereof to the King. While we were in this communication, one of our heraults arriued, who brought me word that the Lords aboue named that had accompanied me, were ready to depart, and willed me to make what ouerture I thought good; which I refuſed to do, bicauſe they vnderſtood further of the Kings pleaſure than I did: for they were neerer him than I was, and had alſo talked with him in his eare at our departure: notwithſtanding as touching theſe affaires which I now ſpeake of, I vnderſtood what was to be done in them as well as the beſt of them. The Marqueſſe of Mantua entred into great communication with me of the battell, & asked me (if he had been taken) whether the King would haue ſlaine him. I anſwered, no; but haue entertained him well, alleaging that he had good cauſe to loue him, ſeeing the honor he had woon by his aſſailing him. Then he recommended vnto me the priſoners we had, eſpecially his vncle the Lord Rodolph, whom he ſuppoſed to be yet liuing: but I knew well the contrarie; notwithſtanding I anſwered, that all the priſoners ſhould be well intreated, and recommended in like maner to him the baſtard of Bourbon whom they had taken. Small entertainment would ſerue all the priſoners we had; for we had none, which I ſuppoſe neuer happened before in any battell. But the ſaid Marqueſſe loſt there of his kinſmen to the number of ſeuen or eight, and of his owne companie at the leaſt ſixſcore men of armes. This talke being ended, I tooke my leaue of them, ſaying, that before night I would returne againe; whereupon we made truce till night.
               At my returne to the King with the ſaid Secretarie, they asked me what newes, and

the King ſate in counſel in a poore chamber where nothing was concluded, but each man beheld other. The King talked with the Cardinall in his eare, and afterward bad me returne againe to the enimies to ſee what they would ſay. But bicauſe this communication of peace proceeded of me, the enimies looked that I ſhould make ſome ouerture and not they. Afterward the Cardinall bad me conclude nothing, but that ſpeech was needleſſe, for I was not like to conclude any thing, bicauſe they gaue me no direction: notwithſtanding I would not replie to the Kings commandement, nor breake off my iourney; for beſides that I was ſure to do no harme, I was in ſome hope to gather ſomwhat by our enimies countenances, who vndoubtedly were more afraid than we, and happily might paſſe ſome ſpeeches that would turne both the parties to good. Wherefore I tooke my iorney thitherward, and came to the riuers ſide almoſt at night, where one of their trumpeters met me, and aduertiſed me that the fower aboue named ſent me word to paſſe no further that night, bicauſe their watch was already ſet, being altogither of Eſtradiots, who knew not one man from another, wherefore I might happily endanger my ſelfe, if I paſſed further: notwithſtanding the trumpeter offered to tarry with me all night, to the end he might conuey me thither the next morning: but I ſent him backe againe, ſaying that the next morning I would returne to the riuers ſide where I willed him to tarie me, or if the K. ſhould otherwiſe determine, I promiſed to ſend thither a herald to aduertiſe them therof; for I would not bring this trumpeter into our campe, partly bicauſe I would not haue him priuy to our actions there that night: and partly bicauſe I knew not what the King meant to do, for I ſawe whiſpering in his eare, which put me in ſome doubt, wherefore I returned to aduertiſe the King what I had done.
               Euery man ſupped with that he could get, and ſlept vpon the ground. Soone after midnight I repaired to the Kings chamber, where I found his chamberlaines readie to mount on horſebacke, who told me that the King would depart with all ſpeed towards Aſt, and the Marchioneſſe of Montferrates territories, willing me to ſtay behinde, to hold the Parlament according to my promiſe: but I made my excuſe, ſaying, that I would not willingly kill my ſelfe, but be on horſebacke with the foremoſt. Soone after the King aroſe and heard maſſe, and mounted on horſebacke. Not paſt an hower before day, a trumpeter ſounded Bon guet, but at our diſlodging nothing was ſounded, neither needed it, for euery man was in a readines. Notwithſtanding this was ſufficient to haue put the whole army in feare, at the leaſt thoſe that were acquainted with the wars: for beſides this we turned our backes to our enimies, ſeeking wholie our owne ſaftety, which is a dangerous matter in an armie. Further, the waies at our departure from our lodging were very cumberſome, in ſuch ſort that we were forced to march ouer mountaines, and through woods, and by-waies, for we had no guides to lead vs: my ſelfe heard the ſoldiers aske the enſigne bearers, and him that executed the office of Maſter of the horſe, where the guides were, who anſwered that there were none. To ſay the truth we needed none, for as God alone had guided the armie at our going foorth: euen ſo (according to Frier Hieromes propheſie) meant he to do at our returne: otherwiſe it is not to be thought that ſuch a prince would haue ridden in the night without a guide, in a place where ynow might haue been had. But God ſhewed yet a manifeſter token that he meant to preſerue vs, for our enimies vnderſtood nothing of our departure till the afternoone, but waited for this parlamenting I had begun: beſides that, the riuer was riſen ſo high, that it was fower of the clocke at after noone before any man durſt aduenture ouer to follow vs, and then paſſed the Earle of Caiazze with two hundred Italian light horſe, in ſuch danger bicauſe of the force of the water, that one or two

of his men were drowned, as himſelfe afterward confeſſed. We trauelled ouer hils and through woods, and were conſtrained by the ſpace of ſixe miles to marche one by one after another in the narrow waies, and then came we to a goodly large plain, where our vaward, artillerie, and carriage lay, which ſeemed ſo great a band a far off, that at the firſt we ſtood in feare of them, bicauſe Maſter Iohn Iames of Trenoules enſigne was ſquare and white, like to the Marques of Mantuas the day of the battel. The ſaid vaward was in like maner afeard of our rereward, which they ſaw a farre off forſake the high way to come the next way to them, whereupon both they and we ſet our ſelues in order of battell: but this feare ſoone ended, for the ſcoutes iſſued foorth on both ſides, and diſcried one an other incontinent. From thence we went to refreſh vs at Bourg Saint Denis, where we our ſelues made an alarme of purpoſe to retire our Almains out of the towne, leaſt they ſhould haue ſpoiled it. Thence we remooued and lodged all night at Florenſole, the ſecond night we encamped neere to Plaiſance, and paſſed the riuer of Trebia, leauing on the other ſide of the riuer two hundred launces, all our Swiſſers, and all the artillerie except ſixe peeces, which the King paſſed ouer with him. For he had giuen this order, to the end he might be the better and more commodiouſly lodged, thinking to command them to paſſe at his pleaſure, bicauſe the riuer is commonly very ſhallow, eſpecially at that time of the yeere: notwithſtanding about ten of the clocke at night, it aroſe ſo high that no man could paſſe ouer it, neither on horſebacke nor on foote, neither could the one company haue ſuccoured the other, which was a great danger, conſidering how neer our enimies were to vs. Al that night both they and we ſought to remedy this miſchiefe, but no helpe could be found till the water fell of it ſelfe, which was about fiue of the clocke in the morning, and then we ſtretched coardes from the one ſide to the other to helpe ouer the footemen, who waded in the water vp to their necks: immediately after them paſſed alſo our horſemen and our artillerie. This was a ſudden and dangerous aduenture, conſidering the place where we were, for our enimies lay hard by vs, I meane the garriſon of Plaiſance, & the Earle of Caiazze, who was entred in thither, bicauſe certaine of the citizens practiſed to put the town into the Kings hands, vnder the title of the yoong Duke ſonne to Iohn Galeas, Duke of Milan that laſt died, as before you haue heard. And vndoubtedly if the King would haue giuen eare to this practiſe, a great number of townes and noble men would haue reuolted by Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoules meanes: but he refuſed ſo to do, bicauſe of the fauour he bare the D. of Orleans his coſin, who was already entred into Nouarre, although to ſay the truth on the other ſide he deſired not greatly to ſee his ſaid coſin ſo mightie, wherefore he was well content to let this matter paſſe as it came. The third daie after our departure from the place of the battell the K. dined at the caſtle S. Iohn & lodged all night in a wood. The fourth day he dined at Voghera, & laie that night at Pontcuron. The fift day he lodged neere to Tortone and paſſed the riuer of Scriuia which Fracaſſe defended with the garriſon of Tortone, being vnder his charge for the D. of Milan. But when he vnderſtood by thoſe that made the K. lodging that he would onely paſſe without doing harme to any man, he retired again into the town, and ſent vs word that we ſhould haue as great plenty of victuals as we would; which promiſe he alſo performed: for all our armie paſſed hard by the gate of Tortone, where the ſaid Fracaſſe came forth to welcom the King, being armed, but accompanied onely with two men: he excuſed himſelfe very humbly to the King, that he lodged him not in the towne, & ſent out great ſtore of victuals, which refreſhed well our army, & at night came alſo himſelfe to the Kings lodging. For you ſhal vnderſtand, that he was of the houſe of S. Seuerin, brother to the Earle of Caiazze and Maſter

                  Galeas, and had not long before been in the Kings ſeruice in Romania, as you haue heard. From thence the King remooued to Nice de la Paille in the Marquiſat of Montferrat, whereof we were right glad, bicauſe we were then in ſafetie, and in our friends countrie. For theſe light horſemen that the Earle of Caiazze led, were continually at our backe, and traueiled vs maruellouſly the three or fower firſt daies, bicauſe our horſemen would not put themſelues behinde to make reſiſtance: for the neerer we approched to the place of ſafetie, the more vnwilling were our men to fight; and ſome ſay, ſuch is the nature of vs French men. Wherefore the Italians write in their hiſtories, that the French men at their arriuall are better than men; but at their returne woorſe than women. The firſt point vndoubtedly is true: for they are the rougheſt men to encounter with in the world, I meane the horſemen: but all men at their returne from an enterpriſe are leſſe couragious than at their departure from their houſes. Now to proceede, our backs were defended by three hundred Almaines, hauing among them a great band of harquebuſiers on foote, with whom alſo a number of harquebuſiers on horſebacke were ioined: theſe made their Eſtradiots, being but few in number, to retire. Further, notwithſtanding that their whole armie which had fought with vs, marched after vs as faſt as they might, yet could they not ouertake vs, both bicauſe they were departed from the place of the battell a day after vs; and alſo bicauſe of their barded horſes, ſo that we loſt not one man vpon the way. The ſaid armie neuer came within a mile of vs; wherefore ſeeing they could not ouertake vs, and peraduenture not greatly deſirous ſo to do, they marched ſtraight towards Nouarre, whither both the Duke of Milan and the Venetians had already ſent certaine bands, as before you haue heard. But if they could haue ouertaken vs neere to the places of our retrait, peraduenture they might haue ſped better than in the valley of Fornoue.
               I haue ſhewed before ſufficiently in diuers places how God guided this enterpriſe, but yet for further proofe thereof, a word or two more. You ſhall vnderſtand therefore, that notwithſtanding that from the day of the battell till our arriuall at the ſaid place of Nice de la Paille, the lodgings were vnorderly and vnequally made; yet euery man lodged with patience as commodiouſly as he could, without ſtrife or contention. Of victuals we had great lacke: notwithſtanding they of the countrey brought vs ſome, who might eaſily haue poiſoned vs if they would, both in their meates and wines, and alſo in their wels and waters, which were dried vp ſometimes in a moment, bicauſe they were but ſmall ſprings. If they had minded to haue poiſoned them, they would ſure haue done it; but bicauſe they did it not, it is to be thought that our Sauiour and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt tooke from them all deſire to do it. I ſaw ſuch thirſt in our armie, that a number of footemen dranke of ſtinking puddles in the villages through the which we paſſed. Our iourneies were long, and our drinke foule ſtanding water, which notwithſtanding our men were ſo greedy of, that they ran into the pooles vp to the girdleſtead to drinke. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that a number of people followed vs, being no men of war, bicauſe our carriage was maruellous great. The King departed from his lodging euery morning before day, and I remember not that euer he had guide. Moreouer, he rode till noone before he baited; and euery man made prouiſion for himſelfe, and looked to his owne horſe, and was forced to prouide prouender for him, and to beare it to him in his armes, as my ſelfe did twiſe; and two daies I ate nothing but naughty blacke bread: yet was I none of thoſe that ſtood in moſt neede. Sure one thing was eſpecially to be commended in this armie, to wit, that neuer man complained of neceſſitie, yet was this the miſerableſt voiage that euer I ſaw; notwithſtanding that I haue been in diuers ſharp & hard

voiages with Charles Duke of Burgundie. We marched no faſter than the great artillerie, the mending whereof often troubled vs: beſides that, we lacked horſes to draw it; but at all times when we ſtood in neede, we borrowed of the gentlemen in our armie, who willingly lent theirs; ſo that there was not one peece nor one pound of powder loſt. And I thinke neuer man ſaw artillerie of ſuch greatnes paſſe ſo ſpeedily ouer ſuch places as this did. All this diſorder both in our lodgings and all other things, happened not for lacke of wiſe and expert men in the campe, but it was their chaunce to haue leaſt credit at that time; for the King was yoong and wedded to his owne will, as before you haue heard. To conclude therefore, it ſeemed that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt would, that the honor of this voiage ſhould be attributed wholy to him. The ſeuenth day after our departure from the place of the battell, we marched from Nice de la Paille, and encamped all togither hard by Alexandria; our watch that night being very ſtrong. The next morning before day we departed and went to Aſt: the King and his houſhold lodged in the towne, but the ſoldiers encamped without: we found the ſaid towne of Aſt furniſhed of all kinde of victuals, wherwith the whole armie was well refreſhed, which vndoubtedly ſtood in great neede thereof, bicauſe they had indured great hunger, thirſt and heate, and lacked ſleepe; beſides that, their apparell was all tottered and torne. Immediately after the Kings arriuall thither, before I ſlept, I ſent a gentleman called Philip de la Coudre (who ſomtime had been my ſeruant, and ſerued then the Duke of Orleans) to Nouarre, where the ſaid Duke was beſieged by his enimies, as you may vnderſtand by that which is aboue rehearſed: but the ſiege was not yet ſo ſtraight but that men might paſſe in and out, bicauſe the enimies onely endeuor was to famiſh the towne. I aduertiſed the Duke by this gentleman, of diuers treaties that were entertained betweene the King and the Duke of Milan, in one of the which my ſelfe negotiated by the Duke of Ferraraes meanes; wherefore I aduiſed him to repaire to the King, hauing firſt aſſured his men whom he ſhould leaue behinde him, either ſhortly to returne, or bring force to leuie the ſiege. Within the ſaid towne were with him to the number of 7500. ſoldiers both French and Swiſſers, being as goodly a band, ſo many for ſo many, as euer was ſeene. The King the next day after his arriuall, was aduertiſed both by the ſaid Duke of Orleans and others, that the two armies were ioined togither before Nouarre: wherefore the ſaid Duke deſired aide, bicauſe his victuals daily diminiſhed; for the which they had giuen no order at their firſt entrie into the towne. For they might then haue recouered ynow in the townes about, eſpecially corne; and if their prouiſion had been made in time, and well looked to, they ſhould neuer haue been forced to yeeld the towne: for if they could haue held it but one moneth longer, they had come foorth with honor, and their enimies departed with ſhame.
            
            
               How the King ſent ſhips to the ſea to ſuccour the caſtels of Naples, and why the ſaid caſtels could not be ſuccoured. Chap. 8.
               
                  AFter the King had repoſed himſelfe a fewe daies in Aſt, he remooued to Thurin, diſpatching at his departure from Aſt one of the ſtewards of his houſe called Peron de Bache with a commiſſion to arme certaine ſhips to the ſea 
                     1
                  , to ſuccour the caſtels of Naples which held yet for vs. The ſaid Peron did as he was commanded, and appointed monſeur d'Arban Admirall of the Fleet, which ſailed as far as the citie of Pruce: 
                     2
                   where (our

men being within the view of our enimies:) a ſudden tempeſt aroſe which would not ſuffer the two armies to ioine, by meanes whereof this Nauie did no ſeruice: for the ſaid d' Arban returned to Ligorne 
                     3
                  , where the moſt part of his men fled to land and abandoned their ſhips. But the enimies many came to the hauen of Bougen 
                     4
                   neere to Plambin, whence it departed not the ſpace of two moneths, ſo that our men might without all danger haue ſuccoured the ſaid caſtels: for the nature of this hauen of Bougen is ſuch, that a ſhip cannot come foorth of it but with one winde which bloweth ſeldome in winter. The ſaid Arban was a valiant ſoldier and a very good ſea man 
                     5
                  .
               While the King lay at Thurin, diuers treaties were entertained between him and the Duke of Milan: in one of the which the Duches of Sauoy was a dealer, ſhe was daughter to the Marques of Montferratte, and a widow, and mother to the yoong Duke of Sauoy then liuing. Others negotiated alſo as well as ſhe: and among the reſt my ſelfe laboured for concluſion of the peace as before I haue made mention; and the confederats, that is to ſay, the captaines that were in the enimies campe before Nouarre, deſired to deale with me, and ſent me a ſafe conduct. But enuie euer raigneth in Princes courts; for the Cardinall ſo often aboue named, ouerthrew all that I did, and would that the Duches of Sauois negotiation ſhould go forward, which was committed to the ſaid Cardinals hoſte, who was Treaſurer of Sauoy, a wiſe man and a faithfull ſeruant to his Miſtres. This treatie endured ſo long without effect that in the end all hope of peace ceaſing, the Bailife of Digeon was ſent ambaſſador into Swiſſerland to leuy there fiue thouſand men.
               I haue made mention already how the Kings Nauie that departed from Nice in prouence to ſuccour the caſtels of Naples, could not ſuccour them for the reaſons there rehearſed. Wherefore the Lord of Montpenſier and the other gentlemen that were with him in the caſtels vnderſtanding of this misfortune, eſpied a conuenient time when the army that the King left behinde him in diuers parts of the realme lay neere to the ſaid caſtles, and by helpe therof ſalied foorth (leauing within force ſufficient for their defence according to the proportion of their victuals which was very ſmal) and departed themſelues with two thouſand and fiue hundred ſoldiers, appointing Ognas and two other gentlemen captaines of the caſtles. The ſaid L. of Montpenſier, the Prince of Salerne, the Seneſchall of Beaucaire, and the reſt that were with them departed to Salerne, for the which cauſe King Ferrand ſaid, that he might lawfully put to death the hoſtages deliuered to him a few daies before, whoſe names were theſe, the Lord of Alegre, one called de la Marche-d' Ardaine, the Lord de la Chapelle d'Aniou, one named Roquebertin Catelin, and one Genly: for you ſhall vnderſtand that not paſt three moneths before, the ſaid King Ferrand was entred into Naples by intelligence, or rather through the negligence of our men, who vnderſtood of all their practiſes in the towne, and yet neuer ſought to countermine them. But heereof I will write no farther, bicauſe I ſpeake but vpon report: for notwithſtanding that I had mine intelligence from the principall of thoſe that were there, yet do I not willingly diſcourſe long of any matter, that I haue not been preſent at my ſelfe. The ſaid K. Ferrand being in Naples, was aduertiſed that the King was ſlaine at the battell of Fornoue, as were our men alſo within the caſtle by the Duke of Milans letters, to the which credit was giuen: notwithſtanding that they reported no thing but lies. And thereupon the Coulonnois (whoſe maner is, alwaies to turne with the ſtrongeſt) reuolted incontinent from vs, though ſundry waies bound to the King, as before you haue heard. Wherefore our men (partlie through theſe vntrue reports, but eſpecially bicauſe a great number of them were retired into the caſtell, being vtterly

vnfurniſhed of victuals, and partly alſo bicauſe they had loſt their horſes, and all their goods within the towne:) made a compoſition, the ſixt day of October in the yeere 1495. after they had been beſieged three moneths & fowerteen daies, promiſing if they were not ſuccoured within a certaine ſpace, to depart into Prouence, and yeeld the caſtels without making further war, either by ſea or land vpon the realme of Naples; for the performance of which conditions they deliuered theſe hoſtages aboue named; and yet within twentie daies after the compoſition, departed as you haue heard: for the which cauſe King Ferrand ſaid that they had broken the compoſition in that they departed without leaue: and notwithſtanding that our men maintained the contrary, yet were the hoſtages in great danger and not without cauſe. For although I will not denie but that our men did wiſely to depart notwithſtanding the compoſition; yet had they done much better if the day of their departure they had yeelded the caſtles for their hoſtages ſafetie, and receiued again the ſaid hoſtages. For the caſtels held but twenty daies after they were departed, partly for lacke of victuals; and partly bicauſe they deſpaired of ſuccours. To conclude, the loſſe of the caſtell of Naples, was the loſſe of the whole realme.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This Peron vvas ſent to Nice, being a hauen tovvne in Prouence to prepare this nauie.
                  
                  2 I ſuppoſe this to be ſome hauen tovvne not far from Naples, or rather thinke it ſhould be read the Ile of Pruſſe, vvhereof mention is made cap. 14. vvhich Guicciar. calleth the Ile of Poreze.
                  
                  3 To the Ile of Elbe, Guicciar.
                  4 The place is corrupted, for this hauen is aftervvard called Bengon: vvherefore the French Corrector readeth it (as Blondus and the deſcription of Italy lead him) Porto Barato pres Piombino.
                  5 Guicciar. ſaith, Arban vvas vnskilfull on the ſea, and I doubt this place be corrupted heere.
                  
               
            
            
               Of the great famine and miſerie the Duke of Orleans and his men were in at Nouarre: of the Marchiones of Montferrats death, and likewiſe of Monſeur de Vendoſmes: and how after long deliberation the King enclined to peace, to ſaue thoſe that were beſieged. Chap. 9.
               
                  THe King being at Thurin (as you haue heard) and at Quiers, (whither he went ſometime to ſolace himſelfe) attended daily for newes of the Almains whom he had ſent for, and trauelled to recouer the Duke of Milan, whoſe freindſhip he much deſired, neither cared he greatly for the Duke of Orleans ſucceſſe, who began now to be ſore diſtreſſed for victuals, and wrote daily for ſuccours bicauſe the enimies were approched neerer the towne. Beſides that their force was increaſed with a thouſand Almain horſemen, and eleuen thouſand footemen called launce Knights, leuied in the King of Romaines dominions: the horſemen being led by Maſter Frederic Capelare of the countie of Ferrette (a valiant knight who long had been trained vp both in Fraunce and Italy,) and

the footemen by a couragious knight of Auſtriche called Maſter George d'Abecfin 
                  
                     1
                  , the ſelfe ſame that tooke Saint Omer for the King of Romaines. The King therefore ſeeing his enimies forces daily to increaſe, and that no honorable end could be made, was aduiſed to remooue to Verceil, there to deuiſe ſome way to ſaue the Duke of Orleans and his company, who (as before you haue heard) had giuen no order at all for their victuals at their firſt entrie into Nouarre. And ſure the Duke ſhould haue done much better, in following the aduiſe I gaue him at the Kings returne to Aſt, as before is mentioned; which was to depart out of Nouarre, putting all that were vnable to do ſeruice out of the towne, and to repaire himſelfe to the King: for his preſence would much haue furthered his affaires, at the leaſt thoſe that he had left behinde him, ſhould not haue ſuffered ſuch extreme famine as they did: for he would haue made a compoſition ſooner, when he had ſeene no remedie. But the Archbiſhop of Rouen, who had been with him in Nouarre from the very beginning; and for the furtherance of his affaires was come to the King, and preſent at the debating of all matters; ſent him word daily not to depart, bicauſe ſhortly he ſhould be ſuccoured, grounding himſelfe wholy vpon the Cardinall of Saint Malos promiſe, who had all the credit with the King. Good affection cauſed him to write thus, but I was well aſſured of the contrarie. For no man would returne to the battell, vnleſſe the King went in perſon; and as touching him he deſired nothing leſſe: for this was but a priuate quarrell for one towne which the Duke of Orleans would needes retaine, and the Duke of Milan needes haue reſtored, bicauſe it is but ten leagues from Milan; ſo that of neceſſitie one of them muſt haue had all. For there are in the Duchie of Milan nine or ten great cities, the one neere to the other. Further, the Duke of Milan ſaid, that in reſtoring Nouarre, and not demanding Genua, he would do any thing for the King. We ſent meale oftentimes to Nouarre, whereof the halfe was euer loſt vpon the way; and once ſixtie men of armes were defeated going thither, being led by a yoong gentleman of the Kings houſe, named Chaſtillon: ſome of them were taken, ſome entred the towne, and the reſt hardly eſcaped. It is impoſſible to expreſſe the great miſerie of our men within Nouarre; for euery day ſome died of famine, and two parts of them were ſicke, ſo that pitious letters came from thence in cipher, though with great difficultie. They receiued euer faire promiſes, and all was but abuſe. But thoſe that gouerned the Kings affaires deſired the battell, not conſidering that no man was of that opinion but themſelues: for all the beſt men of war in the armie, namely, the Prince of Orenge lately arriued, and to whom the K. gaue great credit in martiall affairs, and all the other captains, deſired to make a good end by treatie. For winter approched, we were vnfurniſhed of monie, the number of the French was ſmall, and many of them ſicke; ſo that they departed daily, ſome with the Kings leaue, and ſome without leaue: but notwithſtanding all theſe inconueniences, all the wiſe men in the campe could not diſſwade thoſe aboue mentioned, from ſending word to the Duke of Orleans not to depart the towne; whereby vndoubtedly they greatly endangered him. And this they did, bicauſe they truſted vpon the great force of Almaines, whereof the Bailife of Digeon aſſured them; to whom alſo certaine of them ſent word to bring as many as he could leuie. To be ſhort, their companie was diuided, and euery man ſaid and writ what him liſted.
               Thoſe that would haue no peace, nor meeting to treate thereof, alleaged that the enimies ought to make the firſt ouuerture, and not the K. but they on the other ſide ſaid, that they would not firſt begin: in the meane time the miſery of our men in Nouarre daily increaſed, in ſuch ſort, that now their letters made mention only of thoſe

that died daily for hunger, and that they could hold the towne but ten daies, and afterward eight daies, yea and once they came to three daies, but they had firſt paſſed their day before prefixed. To be ſhort, ſo great extremitie hath not been ſeene of long time, no I am ſure that a hundred yeeres before we were borne, neuer men ſuſtained ſo great famine as they.
               In the meane time died the Marchioneſſe of Montferrat (a great friend to the French,) wherupon ſome ſtrife aroſe in that countrey for the gouernment, the which on the one ſide the Marques of Saluce demanded, and on the other the Lord Conſtantine vnckle to the ſaid Marchioneſſe, who was a Greeke, and ſhe a Greekeſſe, daughter to the King of Seruia, but the Turke had deſtroied them both. The ſaid Lord Constantine had fortified himſelfe in the caſtell of Caſal, and had in his hands the late Marques his two ſonnes, begotten of this wiſe and beautiful Lady, the which died the 29. yeere of hir age, hir eldeſt ſonne being but nine yeeres old. Other particular men alſo aſpired to the gouernment, ſo that great part taking aroſe about that matter in our campe. The King commanded me to to thither, and determine the controuerſie for the childrens ſafetie, and to the contentation of the greateſt part of the people. For he feared that this variance would make them call the Duke of Milan into their countrey, greatly to our diſcontentment: for the friendſhip of this houſe of Montferrat ſtood vs in great ſtead. I was loth to depart before I had brought into better tune thoſe that contraried the peace: for I conſidered both the inconueniences aboue rehearſed, and alſo that winter approched, and feared leaſt theſe Prelats ſhould perſwade the King to aduenture another battell, whoſe power was ſmall, vnleſſe great force of Swiſſers hapned to come, and though ſo many came as they vaunted of, yet ſeemed it to me a dangerous caſe to put the King and his eſtate into their hands. Further, our enimies were mightie, and lodged in a ſtrong place, and well fortified. Wherefore all theſe points being well weighed, I aduentured to perſwade the King not to hazard his perſon and eſtate for a trifle. I deſired him to remember the great danger he was in at Fornoue, which could not then be auoided bicauſe neceſſitie forced him to fight: but now (I ſaid) there was no ſuch neceſſitie. I aduiſed him further, not to refuſe a good end, bicauſe of this fond obiection, that he ought not firſt to breake the ice, for if it ſo pleaſed him, I would finde meanes that ouuertures ſhould be made in ſuch ſort, that the honor of both parties ſhould be ſaued. He bad me repaire to the Cardinall; and ſo I did: but the Cardinall gaue me ſtrange anſwers, and deſired the battell, aſſuring himſelfe of the victorie: and further alleaging that the Duke of Orleans had promiſed him ten thouſand ducats of yeerly reuenues for one of his ſonnes, if he obtained the Duchie of Milan. The next day, as I went to take my leaue of the King to depart to Caſal (being diſtant from thence about a daies iourney and a halfe) I met with Monſeur de la Trimoille by the waie, whom I aduertiſed of my communication had with the King: and bicauſe he was neere about him, I asked his aduiſe whether I ſhould preſſe forward the matter, whereunto he earneſtly perſwaded me, for al men deſired to repaire home. The King was in a garden, and when I came to him, I began to perſwade with him (as the daie before) in preſence of the Cardinall, who anſwered me that it appertained to him being a church man, to be the firſt moouer of the King to peace: whereunto I replied that if he would not, I would. For I perceiued well that both the King and thoſe that were neereſt about him deſired to returne home. Then I tooke my leaue, and at my departure told the Prince of Orenge (who had the principall charge of the army) that if I entred into any communication of peace, I would addreſſe my ſelfe wholy to him. This being done I tooke my iourney towards Caſall, where I was well

receiued by the whole kinred of this houſe of Montferrat, and found the greateſt part of them inclined to the Lord Conſtantine, whoſe gouernment was thought by them all moſt conuenient for the childrens ſafetie, bicauſe he could pretend no title to the ſucceſſion as the Marques of Saluce did. I aſſembled by the ſpace of certaine daies both the Nobles of the countrey, the Spirituall men, and the Burgeſſes of the good townes, and at the requeſt of them, at the leaſt the greateſt part of them, declared the Kings pleaſure to be, that the Lord Constantine ſhould remaine gouernor. For I was ſure they would not withſtande the Kings commandement, both bicauſe of the force he had then on that ſide the mountaines, and alſo bicauſe of the good affection the whole countrey beareth to the houſe of Fraunce.
               About three daies after my arriuall at Caſal, the Marqueſſe of Mantua the Venetians Generall, ſent the ſteward of his houſe thither to condole the late deceaſed Marchioneſſe death: for the ſaid Marqueſſe was of kin to this houſe of Montferrat. The ſame Steward and I entered into communication how we might agree theſe two armies without battell: for both the parties diſpoſed themſelues to fight, and the King lay in campe neere to Verceil, but to ſay the truth he did but paſſe the riuer onely 
                     2
                   and lodge his campe, which was vtterly vnprouided of tents and pauilions: for our men had brought foorth but few with them, and thoſe few alſo were loſt. Moreouer the ground was wet, both bicauſe winter approched, and bicauſe the countrey lieth low. The King lodged in his campe but one night, and the next day returned to the towne: but the Prince of Orenge abode ſtill with the army, ſo did alſo the Earle of Foix, and the Earle of Vendoſme, who fell into a fluxe there whereof he died, which ſure was great pitie: for he was a goodly gentleman, yoong, and wiſe, and was come thither in poſte, bicauſe the brute ran that there we ſhould fight. For you ſhall vnderſtand that he had not beene with the King in this voiage into Italy. Beſides theſe the Marſhall of Gie abode alſo in the campe and diuers other captaines, but the greateſt force were the Almaines that had beene with the King in this voiage: for the French men would by no meanes lodge abrode, the towne being ſo neere; beſides that, diuers of them were ſicke, and many returned home ſome with leaue, & ſome without leaue. Nouarre was diſtant from our campe ten great Italian miles, containing ſix French leagues at the leſt, the way is cumberſome: for the ground is tough and ſoft as in Flaunders, bicauſe of ditches that are on both ſides of the way, much deeper than the ditches of Flaunders. In winter the waies there are very foule, and in ſommer maruellous duſtie. Moreouer, betweene our campe and Nouarre, there was a little place which we held, called Bourg, about a league from vs, and another that they held about a league from their campe, called Camarian. But the waters were riſen ſo high, that a man could hardly paſſe between vs and them.
               The Marqueſſe of Mantuas ſteward aboue mentioned that was come to Caſall and I, continued ſtill our communication of peace, and diuers reaſons I alleaged to him to perſwade his Maſter to ſhun the battell. Firſt, I put him in minde of the great danger he had beene in at Fornoue: ſecondarily, I told him that he fought for them that neuer had aduaunced him, notwithſtanding the great ſeruices he had done them: wherefore his beſt way ſhould be to incline to peace, which I for my part promiſed to further on our ſide as much as in me lay. He anſwered, that his Maſter deſired nothing more than peace, but that we muſt make the firſt motion thereof, as word had been ſent me heertofore, conſidering that their league, that is to ſay, the Pope, the Kings of Romanes and Spaine, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan were more woorthie than the King alone. I anſwered, that to make ſuch a ceremonie

about ſo ſmall a trifle, was meere follie: notwithſtanding if any ceremonie were to be obſerued, that the King ought to haue the preheminence and honor thereof, conſidering that himſelfe was there in perſon, and the others had but their lieutenants there. But to auoid all ſuch fond cauillation, I offered that he and I iointly as mediators (if he ſo thought good) would breake the yce, ſo that I were ſure his Maſter the Marqueſſe of Mantua would agree therunto, and proceeded accordingly. Whereupon we concluded, that the next day I ſhould ſend a trumpeter to their campe, by whom I ſhould write to Maſter Lucas Piſan, and Maſter Melchior Treuiſan the two Venetian Prouiſors, the which are officers appointed to conſult with their captains, and to prouide things neceſſarie for their armie. According to the which reſolution, the next morning I writ vnto them the effect of that I had ſaid before to the ſteward: for I had good colour to continue ſtill a mediator, bicauſe I had promiſed ſo to do at my departure from Venice. Beſides that, I was ſure the King deſired peace, and me thought that alſo our affaires required it. Laſtly, there are euer men ynow to breake off a good appointmēt, but few that haue skil & wil withal to trauel for the pacifying of ſo great a controuerſie, nor that will endure ſo many hard ſpeeches as are vſed of them that deale in ſuch affaires; for in great armies all are not of one humor. The ſaid Prouiſors were glad of theſe newes, and promiſed that I ſhould ſhortly haue anſwer of my letter: whereof foorthwith they ſent word to Venice in poſt, and receiued anſwere with great expedition from the Seniorie, and not long after, ſent an Earle that ſerued the Duke of Ferrara, to our campe. The ſaid Duke had men in their armie; for his eldeſt ſonne was in pay with the Duke of Milan 
                     3
                  , but another of his ſonnes with the King our Maſter. This Earles name was Albertin, and he pretended openly, that the occaſion of his arriuall was to viſite Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoul, with whom he had a ſonne in ſeruice 
                     4
                  . He addreſſed himſelfe to the Prince of Orenge, according to the ſtewards agreement and mine at our departure from Caſal, and aduertiſed him that he had a commiſſion from the Marqueſſe of Mantua, the Prouiſors, and the other captaines of their armie, to demaund a ſafe conduct for the ſaid Marqueſſe and others, to the number of fiftie horſes, to come and treate with ſuch as it ſhould pleaſe the King to appoint; for they acknowledged that it was reaſon they ſhould firſt come to the King and his Commiſſioners, and declared alſo that they would do him that honor. Afterward the ſaid Earle deſired to commune with the King apart: which his requeſt being granted; he then counſelled him not to make peace, reporting our enimies armie to be in ſo great feare, that ſhortly they would raiſe their ſiege & depart: by which words he ſeemed rather deſirous to break off the treatie than to further it; notwithſtanding that his commiſſion openly were ſuch as you haue heard. At this communication M. Iohn Iames of Treuoul was preſent, who bicauſe he was great enimie to the Duke of Milan, would alſo gladly haue broken off the treatie. But aboue all others, the Duke of Ferrara the ſaid Earle Albertins Maſter (being newly arriued at the Duke of Milans campe, who had married his daughter) deſired war; for he was great enimie to the Venetians, bicauſe they withheld from him diuers countries, namely, the Poleſan and others. After the King had communed with this Earle, he ſent for me, and debated with his Counſell, whether he ſhould grant this ſafe conduct or not. Thoſe that would gladly haue broken off the treatie, as Maſter Iohn Iames, and others (who ſpake in fauor of the Duke of Orleans, as they pretended) deſired the battell, ſaying, that they were ſure the enimies would ſhortly diſlodge bicauſe they ſtarued for hunger: but the greateſt part of thoſe that gaue this aduiſe were clergie men, who would not haue been at the battell themſelues. Diuers others, and my ſelfe among the reſt, were of the contrarie

opinion, ſaying, that we ſhould ſooner ſtarue for hunger than they, being in their owne countrie. And as touching their diſlodging we anſwered, that their force was too great to flie for feare of vs, & by that means to caſt themſelues away. Wherfore theſe words (we ſaid) proceeded of men that would haue vs fight & hazard our liues for their particular quarrels. To be ſhort, the ſafe conduct was granted and ſent, and promiſe made, that the next day by two of the clocke at after noone, the Prince of Orenge, the Marſhall of Gie, the Lord of Piennes, and my ſelfe ſhould meete the ſaid Marqueſſe and his collegues betweene Bourg and Camarian, neere to a towne where they kept their watch, to the end we might there commune togither. According to the which appointment the next day thither we went, accompanied with a good band of ſoldiers: and there the ſaid Marqueſſe of Mantua and a Venetian that had the charge of their Eſtradiots met vs 
                     5
                  , and gaue vs very courteous language, ſaying, that for their parts they deſired peace. Further, we there concluded, that to the end we might the more conueniently commune togither, they ſhould ſend certaine Commiſſioners to our campe, and afterward the King certaine of his to them: whereunto they agreed, and ſent vnto vs the next day on the Duke of Milans behalfe Maſter Franciſco Bernardin Viſcomte, and with him one of the Marqueſſe of Mantuas Secretaries; with whom we aboue named, and the Cardinall of S. Malo began to negotiate. They demanded Nouarre where the Duke of Orleans was beſieged, and we Genua, ſaying, that it was held of the King by homage, and that the Duke of Milan had taken it by confiſcation 
                     6
                  . Then they made their excuſes, ſaying, that they had attempted nothing againſt the King, but onely in their owne defence, that the Duke of Orleans had taken the ſaid citie of Nouarre with the Kings forces, and had firſt mooued this war: and further, that they thought their Maſters would neuer agree to ſuch conditions, but willingly do any other thing to content the King. They were with vs two daies and afterward returned againe to their campe, whither the Marſhall of Gie, Monſeur de Piennes and I, were ſent after them, to demand the ſaid citie of Genua; and as touching Nouarre, we offered to deliuer it to the King of Romans men that were in their campe, vnder the leading of Maſter George de Pietreplane, and Maſter Frederick Capelare, and one named Maſter Haunce. For we could not ſuccour it but by battell, and that we deſired not: wherefore this offer we made to diſcharge our ſelues of it with honor; for the Duchie of Milan is held by homage of the Emperor. Diuers meſſengers ran to and fro betweene our campe and theirs, but nothing was concluded. Notwithſtanding I lodged euery night in their campe; for the Kings pleaſure was that I ſhould ſo do, bicauſe he would breake off no ouerture. In the end all we aboue named returned againe to them, being accompanied with the Preſident of Gannay, and Moruillier Bailife of Amiens, which two went with vs to pen the articles in Latin; for hitherto I had negotiated with them in ſuch bad Italian as I had. Our order of proceeding was this. When we arriued at the Dukes lodging, he and the Ducheſſe came foorth to receiue vs at the end of a gallerie, and then we entred all before him into his chamber, where we found two long ranks of chaires, ſet neere togither the one before the other; in the one of the which they ſate downe, and we in the other. They ſate in this order; firſt one for the King of Romanes, then the ambaſſador of Spaine, then the Marqueſſe of Mantua, and the two Prouiſors of Venice, and an ambaſſador of Venice, then the Duke of Milan and his wife, and laſt of all the ambaſſador of Ferrara: of their ſide none ſpake but the Duke alone, and of our ſide but one. But our maner is not to proceede ſo calmly nor ſo orderly as they: for we ſpake ſomtimes two or three togither; but then the Duke vſed to reclaime vs, ſaying ho, one to one. When we came to pen our articles, all that

was agreed vpon, was written by one of our Secretaries, and likewiſe by one of theirs, which alſo at our departure the two Secretaries read, the one in Italian and the other in French, and likewiſe at our next meeting, as wel to the end that nothing ſhould be altered, as alſo for the more expedition: and ſure it is a good maner of proceeding in great and waightie affaires. This treatie endured about fifteen daies or more: but it was agreed the firſt day, that the Duke of Orleans might depart out of the towne, and the ſelfeſame day we made truce, which continued from day to day till the peace was concluded. Moreouer, the Marqueſſe of Mantua put himſelfe in hoſtage into the Earle of Foix his hands, rather for his owne pleaſure, than for any doubt we had of the Duke of Orleans perſon. But they made vs firſt ſweare that we would proceed in the treatie of peace vprightly and ſincerely without diſſimulation, onely to deliuer the ſaid Duke.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 All the Italians name him Georgio di Pietrapiana. The author himſelfe alſo afterward nameth him Petreplane, which variance ariſeth, bicauſe the one is his ſurname, the other the name of his ſeniorie.
                  
                  2 This riuer is called Seruo, Guicciar. nameth it Steſie.
                  3 His eldeſt ſonnes name was Alfonſe. Guicciar.
                  4 He vſed this colour openly, bicauſe the Venetians would not ſeeme firſt to ſeeke peace.
                  
                  5 This Venetians name was Bernarde Contaren. Guicciar.
                  6 Seeing it was forfeited, it ought of right to haue been forfeited into the Kings hands, of whom it was held, but not to the Duke of Milan.
                  
                  7 The Marqueſſe of Mantua put himſelfe in hoſtage, bicauſe the Duke of Orleans was to paſſe through the Italians campe. Guicciar.
               
            
            
               How the Duke of Orleans and his company were deliuered by compoſition out of their great miſerie in Nouarre where they were beſieged: and of the Swiſſers arriuall that came to ſuccour the King and the ſaid Duke of Orleans. Chap. 10.
               
                  THe Marſhall of Gie accompanied with certaine of the Duke of Milans ſeruants, went to Nouarre, and cauſed the Duke of Orleans with a ſmall traine to come foorth of the towne, whereof he was right glad. They within the towne were ſo miſerably perſecuted with famine and ſicknes, that the ſaid Marſhall was forced to leaue his nephew called Monſeur de Romefort in hoſtage with them, promiſing that within three daies they ſhould all come foorth. You haue heard already how the Bailife of Digeon was ſent into Swiſſerland to leauy fiue thouſand men among their Cantons, the which were not yet arriued when the D. of Orleans came forth of Nouarre: for if they had, vndoubtedly in mine opinion we had fought. But notwithſtanding that we were certainly aduertiſed that there came a much greater number than we ſent for: yet could we not tarie their comming bicauſe of our mens great diſtreſſe in Nouarre, where there died at the leaſt two thouſand of famine and ſicknes: the reſt alſo being ſo poore and miſerable that they ſeemed rather dead carcaſſes than liuing creatures. And I

thinke verily (ſetting the ſiege of Hieruſalem aſide) that neuer men ſuſtained ſuch hunger as they did. But if at their firſt entrie into the towne they had made good prouiſion of Corne, (whereof the might haue recouered plentie in the villages there about) they ſhould neuer haue beene brought to ſuch extremitie: but on the other ſide, their enimies haue been forced to depart with great diſhonor.
               Three or fower daies after the Duke of Orleans departure out of Nouarre, it was agreed by both the parties that all the ſouldiers ſhould likewiſe be permitted to come foorth, and the Marques of Mantua, and Maſter Galeas of Saint Seuerin, Captaines, the one of the Venetians, the other of the Duke of Milans forces, were appointed to conueigh them in ſafetie, and ſo they did. Further, as touching the towne of Nouarre it was put into the citizens hands, who were ſworne to receiue into it neither French nor Italian, before the treatie of peace were fully concluded. Moreouer, thirtie of our men remained ſtill in the caſtell, whom the Duke of Milan permitted to haue victuals for their money from day to day. Vndoubtedly a man would neuer beleeue the great miſerie they were in that came foorth of the towne, vnleſſe he had ſeene them. Horſes they brought foorth but fewe, for they were in maner all eaten, and there were hardly ſixe hundred men among them able to do ſeruice, notwithſtanding that there came foorth 5500. A great number lay by the waies whom the enimies themſelues releeued. I for my part for the value of a crowne ſaued fiftie of them, as they lay ſuccourleſſe in a garden neere to a little caſtle that the enimies held called Camarian, where I cauſed porrige to be giuen them, which ſo well refreſhed them that in the ſaid garden there died but one, and afterward vpon the way about fower, for it was ten miles from Nouarre to Verceil; whither when they arriued, the King beſtowed his charity vpon them, and commanded eight hundred francks to be deuided among them, and paide them alſo their wages, as well the dead as the liuing, and the Swiſſers in like maner, of whom about fower hundred died in Nouarre: but notwithſtanding all this their good cheeriſhing three hundred of them died at Verceil after their returne, ſome by feeding too greedily after their long famine, and ſome by ſicknes, ſo that a great number lay dead vpon the dunghils of the towne. About this preſent, after all our men were come foorth of the towne, except thirty that remained in the caſtle: (ſome of the which alſo daily ſallied foorth) arriued the Swiſſers, eight or ten thouſand of the which came and lodged with vs in our campe, where were already two thouſand that had beene with the King in this voiage of Naples: the reſt of their company being to the number of ten thouſand encamped neere to Verceil. The King was aduiſed not to ſuffer theſe two bands to ioine togither, in the which were to the number of twentie and two thouſand men: ſo that I thinke ſo many ſoldiers of their countrey were neuer togither before. For the opinion of all thoſe that knew their countrey was, that they left but few able men behinde them, & ſure the greateſt part of theſe came whether we would or not, in ſuch ſort that their wiues and children would haue come with them, had not the ſtraights at the entrie into Piemont been defended to ſtop them. A man may doubt whether this their comming proceeded of good affection or no, bicauſe the late King Lewis had beſtowed great benefits vpon them, and was the cauſe of the great honor and renowne they haue won in the world. True it is that there were ſome old men among them, that had borne great good will to King Lewis: for there came a number of Captaines aboue ſeauentie two yeeres of age, the which had ſerued againſt Duke Charles of Burgundy: but the chiefe cauſe of their comming was couuetouſnes and pouertie. To ſay the truth all the able men that they could leuie came, and ſuch a number of tall

fellowes they were, and ſo goodly a bande, that me thought it impoſſible to diſcomfite them, otherwiſe than by famine or cold, or ſome ſuch diſtreſſe.
               Let vs now returne to the principall matter, to wit the treatie. The Duke of Orleans (after he had well refreſhed himſelfe eight or ten daies, being accompanied with men of all ſorts) ſuppoſing his honor to be ſtained, bicauſe ſuch a number of men as were with him in Nouarre, had ſuffered themſelues through meere folly to be brought to ſo great extremitie, began to wiſh that we might fight, and talked verie ſtoutly of the battell, and one or two more of his followers. Further, Monſeur de Ligny, and the Archbiſhop of Rouen (who gouerned the ſaid Dukes affaires) and two or three other meane perſonages, ſuborned certaine Swiſſers to come and offer themſelues to fight. But no reaſon could be alleaged why we ſhould ſo do: for the Duke of Orleans had no men in the towne more than the thirty remaining in the caſtle, ſo that there was no cauſe why we ſhould aduenture the battell; for the King had no quarrell, neither meant to fight but onely for ſauing the ſaid Dukes perſon and his ſeruants. Beſides this, our enimies were mightie, and it was impoſſible to aſſaile them in their campe, as well bicauſe they were entrenched round about, and their trenches full of water, as alſo bicauſe of the ſtrong ſeat thereof. Moreouer, they had no enimies to inuade them but vs onely, for they ſtood now in no more feare of the towne. They were aboue 2800. men of armes barded, and fiue thouſand light horſemen, and 11500. Almaines led by good captaines, to wit, Maſter George of Pietreplane, Maſter Frederick Capelare, and Maſter Haunce, beſides great force of footemen of their owne countries; ſo that they ſeemed to ſpeake but vpon a brauery, that ſaid we might take them in their campe, or that they would flie. Beſides all this, another thing there was greatly to be feared, to wit, leaſt theſe Swiſſers if they ioined all togither, ſhould take the King and the noble men of the armie, being but a handfull in reſpect of them, and leade them priſoners into their countrie; for ſome apparance there was that they meant ſo to do, as you ſhall heare at the concluſion of the peace.
            
            
               How the peace was concluded betweene the King and the Duke of Orleans on the one ſide, and the enimies on the other: and of the conditions and articles thereof. Chap. 11.
               
                  WHile theſe matters were thus debated to and fro among vs, in ſuch heate that the Duke of Orleans and the Prince of Orenge fell at variance about them, ſo far foorth that the Duke gaue him the lie: the Marſhall of Gie, the Lord of Piennes, the Preſident Gannay, the Lord Moruillier, the Vidaſme of Chartres, and my ſelfe returned to the enimies campe and concluded peace 
                     1
                  : which notwithſtanding that we perceiued by manifeſt tokens to be vnlike long to endure; yet neceſſitie forced vs to conclude it, both bicauſe of diuers reaſons aboue alleaged, bicauſe the winter conſtrained vs thereunto, bicauſe we lacked monie: and alſo to the end we might depart with an honorable peace, the which ſhould be ſent abrode into the world in writing, as the King had concluded with his Councell, the Duke of Orleans being there preſent. The articles of the peace were theſe. That the Duke of Milan ſhould beare the King his faith for Genua

againſt all men: and that in reſpect thereof, he ſhould arme two ſhips to the ſea at his owne proper coſts and charges, to ſuccour the caſtels of Naples which held yet for the King. And further, that the next yeere he ſhould furniſh the King of three ſhips, and ſerue him in perſon in the conqueſt of the ſaid realme, if the King himſelfe happened to returne to conquer it againe. That he ſhould giue paſſage to the Kings forces. And if the Venetians would not accept the peace within two moneths, but continue to defend the houſe of Arragon; that then he ſhould take part with the King againſt them, and imploy his perſon and ſubiects for the Kings ſeruice, vnder this condition, that all that ſhould be conquered of their dominions ſhould be his. That he ſhould releaſe to the King fowerſcore thouſand ducats of the hundred and fower and twenty thouſand that he had lent him in this voiage. That for performance of theſe conditions, he ſhould deliuer to the King two hoſtages of Genua. That the caſtell of Genua ſhould be put into the Duke of Ferraraes hands, as neuter for two yeeres, and that the Duke of Milan ſhould pay the one halfe of the garriſon within it, and the King the other: and further, if the ſaid Duke of Milan ſhould refuſe to do ſuch ſeruices to the King for Genua, as he was bound to do by this treatie; that then it ſhould be lawfull for the Duke of Ferrara to put the ſaid caſtell into the Kings hands. Laſt of all, that the ſaid Duke of Milan ſhould deliuer to the King two other hoſtages of Milan. Theſe he deliuered, and ſo would he alſo the others of Genua, if the King had not departed ſo ſuddenly; but ſo ſoone as he ſawe him gone, he made delaies.
               After we were returned from the enimies campe, and had aduertiſed the King that the Duke of Milan had ſworne the treatie, and the Venetians taken two moneths reſpit to accept or refuſe it (for more they would not condeſcend vnto) the King ſware it alſo, and the ſecond day after determined to depart, being very deſirous both he and all the companie to returne into Fraunce: but the ſelfeſame night the Swiſſers that were in our campe aſſembled togither each Canton apart, and ſtrake vp their drums, ſtanding in order of battell by their enſignes, as their maner is in their conſultations. All the which I write vpon the report of Lornay, who was then, and long time before had been one of their captaines, and vnderſtandeth well their language, and lodged that night in their campe, and came and aduertiſed the King of all theſe their actions.
               Some of theſe Swiſſers gaue aduiſe to take the King and all his companie, that is to ſay, the principall of the armie; others would not agree thereunto, but gaue counſell to demaund paiment for three moneths, ſaying, that the King his father had promiſed them this paiment as often as they ſhould depart out of their countrie with enſigne diſplaied: others were of opinion to take the principall of the armie, not touching the Kings perſon. This laſt opinion tooke place, ſo far foorth that they began to diſpoſe themſelues to execute it, a great number of their men being already within the towne: but before they had fully concluded, the King departed and went to Trin, a towne in the Marquiſat of Montferrat. Sure they did vs great wrong, to demaund three months paiment (wheras K. Lewis had promiſed them but one;) eſpecially hauing done no ſeruice. To be ſhort, in the end we made an agreement with them, but they that had been with vs at Naples, had firſt taken the Bailife of Digeon & Lornay (who had euer been their captaines) demaunding paiment of 15. daies for their departure. But the others had three moneths pay, amounting to fiue hundred thouſand franks; for the which ſumme, they were contented to take pledges and hoſtages. All this diſorder happened by practiſe of certaine of our owne men, who mooued them thus to do, bicauſe they miſliked the peace, as one of their captaines

came and told the Prince of Orenge, who aduertiſed the King therof.
               When the King arriued at Trin, he ſent the Marſhall of Gie, the Preſident Gannay and me, to the Duke of Milan, to deſire him to come and ſpeake with him. We alleaged many reaſons to perſwade him thereunto, ſaying, that by this meanes the peace ſhould be fully confirmed: but he gaue foorth diuers reaſons to the contrarie, and refuſed ſo to do; excuſing himſelfe vpon certaine ſpeeches vttered by Monſeur de Ligny (who had aduiſed to take him priſoner when he was with the King at Pauia) and likewiſe by the Cardinall, who had all the credit with the King. But notwithſtanding that many fooliſh words were indeede ſpoken, I know not by whom; yet ſure I am that at this preſent the King greatly deſired his friendſhip. He was in a place called Bolie, and agreed to ſpeake with the King, ſo that a grate might be betweene them built vpon a bridge ouer a riuer. Vpon receipt of which anſwer the King departed to Quiers, where he ſtaied but a night or two, and then tooke his iourney to paſſe ouer the mountaines, and ſent me againe to Venice, and others to Genua to cauſe the two ſhips to be manned 
                     2
                  , which the Duke of Milan was bound to lende him: but he performed no whit of that he promiſed; for after the King had beene at great charges in arming of men to the ſaid ſhips, the Duke would not let them depart; but on the contrarie ſide ſent two to our enimies.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This treatie of Verceil was concluded the 9. of October.
                  
                  2 The Duke was bound to arme theſe ſhips, but the King would haue manned them with his owne men.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King ſent the Lord of Argenton to Venice with certaine conditions of peace which they refuſed: and of the Duke of Milans falſe dealings. Chap. 12.
               
                  MY ambaſſage to the Venetians was to know whether they would accept the peace, and agree to theſe three articles. Firſt, to reſtore Monopoly to the King, which they had lately woon from vs 
                     1
                  . Secondarily, to reuoke the Marqueſſe of Mantua, and the forces they had in the realme of Naples, from King Ferrandes ſeruice. Laſtly, to declare King Ferrande to be none of their confederates, bicauſe none were comprehended in their league but the Pope, the King of Romans, the King of Spaine, and the Duke of Milan. When I arriued at Venice, they receiued me very honorably, though not ſo honorably as at my former being there, and no maruell; for then we were in peace, but now in hoſtilitie. I did my meſſage to the Duke, who welcommed me, and told me that ſhortly I ſhould receiue mine anſwer, but that he would firſt conſult with the Senate. Three daies they commanded generall proceſſions and publike ſermons, and dealt great almes, deſiring God of his grace to direct them into the wiſeſt courſe; which maner of proceeding (as I was there informed) they vſe ordinarily in ſuch like caſes. Wherefore I muſt needes confeſſe, that this citie ſeemed to me the moſt deuout, as touching matters of religion, that euer I came in, and their Churches the beſt decked and trimmed; ſo that heerin I account them equall with the ancient Romanes, and amfully perſwaded, that thereof ſpringeth the greatnes of their Seniorie:

which ſure is woorthie rather to increaſe than diminiſh. But to returne to mine ambaſſage, I abode there fifteene daies before I was diſpatched. The anſwer I receiued was a refuſall of all my demaunds, with this excuſe that they were not in war with the King, neither had done any thing but in defence of their confederate the Duke of Milan, whom the King ſought to deſtroy. Afterward they cauſed the Duke to commune with me apart, who offered me a good compoſition, to wit, that King Ferrande by the Popes conſent ſhould hold the realme of Naples of the King by homage, and pay him yeerely fiftie thouſand ducats for tribute, and a certaine ſumme of monie preſently, the which they offered to lend, meaning to haue in gage for it the places which they now hold in Pouille, namely Brandis, Otrante, Trani, and the reſt. And further, that for performance of theſe conditions, the ſaid Dom Ferrande ſhould deliuer to the King, or leaue in his hands certaine towns in Pouille, they meant Tarente which the King yet held, and one or two more that the ſaid Ferrande ſhould haue deliuered, which townes they offered vs on that ſide of Italie, bicauſe it was the furtheſt from vs, notwithſtanding that they pretended the offer to be, bicauſe they ſtood commodiouſly to inuade the Turke: whereof the King had put men in great hope at his firſt entrie into Italie, ſaying, that he attempted this conqueſt of Naples, to the end he might with the more expedition tranſport his forces againſt the ſaid Turke, which was a wicked deuice, and a meere lie; for he meant nothing leſſe, but from God no man can hide his thoughts. Moreouer, the Duke of Venice offered me, that if the King would attempt any thing againſt the Turke, he ſhould haue free acceſſe to theſe places aboue named, that all Italy ſhould be contributors to the wars; that the King of Romanes ſhould inuade alſo on the other ſide, and that the King and they would gouerne Italie in ſuch ſort, that no man ſhould refuſe to pay that he ſhould be rated at; and further, that they for their part would aide him vpon their owne proper coſts and charges with an hundred gallies vpon the ſea, and fiue thouſand horſes vpon the land.
               I tooke my leaue of the Duke and the Seniorie, ſaying, that I would make report of their anſwer to the King. Then returned I to Milan, and found the Duke at Vigeſue, and the Kings ambaſſador with him, who was one of the Stewards of his houſe named Rigaut Dorelles. The Duke came foorth himſelfe to meete me, vnder colour of going a hunting: for they vſe there to receiue ambaſſadors with great reuerence, and lodged me in his caſtle very honorably. I deſired to commune with him apart, and he promiſed that I ſhould ſo do, though halfe againſt his will as it ſeemed. The caſtle of Naples held yet for the King: wherefore I meant earneſtly to preſſe him for the two ſhips promiſed vs by the treatie of Verceil, the which were readie to depart, he in outward apparance ſeeming-willing thereunto: But Peron of Baſche Steward of the Kings houſe, and Stephen de Neues (who were at Genua for the King) ſo ſoone as they vnderſtood of my arriuall at Vigeſue, wrote vnto me, complaining of the Duke of Milans falſhood, who would not ſuffer the two ſhips to depart which he had promiſed vs, but on the contrary ſide had ſent two to aide our enimies. They aduertiſed me further, that one day the gouernor of Genua made them anſwere that he would not ſuffer the ſaide ſhips to be manned with any French men, and another day that he would put into each of them but fiue and twentie at the moſt, with diuers ſuch like diſſimulations, dalliyng and delaying the time till the caſtle of Naples were yeelded, which the Duke knew well to be victualled but for a moneth or little more. And as touching the armie that the King leuied in Prouence, it was not able to ſuccour the caſtle without theſe two ſhips: for the enimies lay before it with a great Nauie, as well of their owne, as of the

Venetians, and the King of Spaines. Three daies I abode with the Duke, and one day he ſate in counſell with me, ſeeming to be diſcōtented that I miſliked his anſwer touching the ſaid ſhips, and alleaged that by the treatie of Verceil he had promiſed to ſerue the King with two ſhips, but not that they ſhould be manned with French men. Whereunto I anſwered that this ſeemed to me a verie ſlender excuſe: for if he ſhould lend me a good mule to paſſe the mountaines withall, and afterward make me lead hir in my hand and not to ride vpon hir, but looke vpon hir onely, what pleaſure did he me? After much debating, he and I withdrew our ſelues into a gallery, where I declared vnto him what great paines, both I and others had taken to conclude this treatie of Verceil, and into how great danger he brought vs by contrariyng thus his promiſe, and cauſing the King by that meanes to loſe theſe caſtles, and conſequently the whole realme, whereby he ſhould alſo ingender perpetuall hatred between the King and him. Further, I offered him the Princedome of Tarente and the Duchie of Bary, the which Duchie he held already. Laſtly, I ſhewed him the danger he put both himſelfe and the whole eſtate of Italy into, by ſuffering the Venetians to hold theſe places in Pouille 
                     2
                  . And he confeſſed I ſaid true, eſpecially touching the Venetians: but his laſt reſolution was that he could finde no faith nor aſſurance with the King.
               After this communication I tooke my leaue of him, he accompaning me vpon the way about a league. But euen at our very departure he deuiſed yet a cunningerly than all the reſt (if a man may vſe ſuch termes of a Prince,) for bicauſe I ſeemed to depart ſad and Melancholick: he ſaid vnto me (as a man ſuddenly altered) that he would do me a friendly turne to the end the King might haue good cauſe to welcom me: for the next day he would ſend Maſter Galeas to Genua (more I could not wiſh when he named him to me) to cauſe the two ſhips to depart, and ioine with our armie, by meanes whereof he would ſaue the King the caſtle of Naples, and conſequently the whole realme, as he ſhould indeed if he had done as he promiſed. He ſaid further, that immediately after their departure he would aduertiſe me thereof with his owne hand, to the end I might be the firſt man that ſhould bring newes to the King, of this great ſeruice that I had done him, adding alſo that the Courrier ſhould ouertake me with his letters before my arriuall at Lyons. In this good hope departed I and tooke my iourney to paſſe the mountaines, thinking euerie Poſte that came after me to be the ſame that ſhould haue brought me theſe letters. Notwithſtanding I doubted ſomewhat thereof, knowing the nature of the man ſo well as I did. But to proceed in my voiage, I came to Chambery where I found the Duke of Sauoy who honorably entreated me, and ſtaied me with him a day. Afterward I arriued at Lyons (without my Courrier) to make report to the King of all that I had done, whom I found banketting and iuſting, and wholy giuen to ſport and paſtime. Thoſe that had miſliked this treatie of Verceil were glad that the Duke of Milan had thus deluded vs: for their credit increaſed thereby, but me they potted at, as in ſuch caſes is vſuall in Princes courts, greatly to my griefe and diſcontentment.
               I made report to the King by mouth, and ſhewed him alſo in writing the Venetians offers aboue rehearſed, whereof he made ſmall account, and the Cardinall who gouerned all, much leſſe. But that notwithſtanding I mooued it to him afterward againe: for me thought it better to accept this offer then to loſe all. Beſides that, the King had no men about him able to deale in ſo waightie an enterpriſe 
                     3
                  : for thoſe that were able and of experience, they that had all the credit neuer or very ſeldome called to counſell in any matter. The King would gladly they ſhould oftner haue beene called, but he feared to diſpleaſe thoſe that were of authority about

him, eſpecially thoſe that gouerned his treaſure, namely the ſaid Cardinall and his brethren and kinſmen. Wherefore let all other Princes learne by the example of this, how fit and conuenient it is for themſelues to take paines in the gouerning of their owne affaires; at the leaſt ſometimes, how requiſite it is to call more than one or two to counſell, according to the varietie of the matters that are debated; and how neceſſarie it is to hold their counſellors almoſt in equall authority: for if one of them be ſo great, that the reſt feare him (as one was both then and euer ſince about King Charles) he is King and Lord in effect, and the Prince himſelfe is euill ſerued, as this King was by his gouernors, who ſought onely their owne profit and little regarded his, whereby himſelfe was the leſſe eſteemed and the worſe thought of.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 The Venetians hauing ſent aide to King Ferrand had won Monopoly and Pulignane. Guicciar.
                  2 For King Ferrand ſince King Charles his departure had in ingaged to the Venetians 6. townes in Pouille vnder certaine conditions which are rehearſed heerafter. cap. 14.
                  3 He meaneth the enterpriſe of ſuccouring the caſtle of Naples.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King after his returne into Fraunce forgot thoſe that he left behinde him in the realme of Naples: and how the Daulphin died, whoſe death the King and Queen much lamented. Chap. 13.
               
                  I Returned to Lyons the yeere 1495. the twelfe of December, where the King was already arriued with his army a yeere and two moneths after his departure out of his realme. The caſtles of Naples held yet for him as before you haue heard, and Monſeur de Montpenſier his lieutenant there, was yet at Salerne in the realme of Naples with the Prince of Salerne: likewiſe Monſeur de Aubigny was yet in Calabria where he had done great ſeruice: notwithſtanding that he had been ſicke almoſt euer ſince the Kings departure. Maſter Gracien des Guerres was yet alſo in l' Abruzzo, Dom Iulian at Montſaint-Ange, and George of Suly at Tarente: but they were all ſo diſtreſſed as a man would not beleeue. Beſides that, they could hardly receiue any newes or letters out of Fraunce, and thoſe few they did receiue, were but lies and faire promiſes without effect. For the K. as you haue heard they diſpatched nothing himſelfe: and if it had beene furniſhed in time but of the ſixte part of the money that was ſpent afterward, they had neuer loſt the realme. But in the end when all was yeelded, they receiued forty thouſand ducats onely, for part of a yeeres pay already paſſed: and yet if this ſmall ſumme had come but a moneth ſooner, the miſeries and diuiſions they afterward fell into, and the diſhonor they receiued, had neuer chanced. All the which inconueniences hapned bicauſe the King diſpatched nothing himſelfe, neither would giue the meſſengers audience that came from them. And as touching his ſeruants to whom he committed the gouernment of his affaires: they were men of ſmall experience, idle, and negligent, and ſome of them I thinke had intelligence with the Pope, whereby it manifeſtly appeered, that God had now altogither withdrawen his grace from the King, which at his going to Naples he had poured down ſo plentifully vpon him.
               
                  
After the King had ſoiourned at Lyons about two monethes, word was brought him that the Daulphin his ſonne lay at the point of death, and within three daies after that he was dead, which newes he tooke heauily as nature would: notwithſtanding his ſorrow ſoone ended. But the Queene of Fraunce and Ducheſſe of Britaine called Anne, lamented the death of hir ſonne, and that a long time, as much as was poſſible for a woman to do. And I thinke verily that beſides the naturall griefe that women vſe to conceiue in ſuch caſes, hir minde gaue hir that ſome greater euill hung ouer hir head. The King hir husband (as I haue ſaid) mourned not long, but ſought to comfort hir, by cauſing certaine yoong gentlemen to daunce before hir, of the which the Duke of Orleans was one, being of the age of fower and thirty yeeres, who ſeemed to reioice at the Daulphins death, bicauſe he was heire apparant to the crowne next after the King: for the which cauſe the K. and he ſaw not one another in a long time after. The Daulphin was about three yeeres olde, a goodly childe, bold in ſpeech, and no whit fearing thoſe things that commonly children vſe to feare. Wherefore (to be plaine with you) his fathers ſorrow ſoone ended: for he began already to doubt if this childe grew to yeeres, and continued in his noble conditions, that happily he might diminiſh his eſtimation and authoritie: for the King himſelfe was a man of very ſmall ſtature and no great ſenſe, but of ſo good a nature, that it was impoſſible to finde a gentler creature.
               Heerby you may perceiue in how miſerable eſtate Kings and Princes liue, who ſtand in feare of their owne children. King Lewis the eleuenth who was ſo wiſe and vertuous a Prince, ſtood in feare of this King Charles his ſonne, but he prouided well for it, and afterward died, leauing his ſaid ſonne King, being but fowerteene yeeres of age. The ſaid King Lewis alſo had put King Charles the ſeuen his father in feare of him: for being but thirteene yeeres of age, he mooued war againſt him with certaine noble men and gentlemen of the realme, that miſliked thoſe that bare the ſway in Court, & gouerned the eſtate, as K. Lewis himſelfe hath eftſoones told me: but this broile ſoone ended. Afterward alſo being come to mans eſtate, he fell at great variance with his father, and retired himſelfe into Daulphine, and from thence into Flaunders, leauing the countrie of Daulphin to the ſaid King his father, as I haue made mention about the beginning of this hiſtorie written of King Lewis the 11. Wherefore it is manifeſt that no creature is exempt from trouble, but that all men eate their bread in trauell and ſorrow, as God promiſed vs that we ſhould ſoone after he had created man, the which promiſe he hath truly performed to all ſorts of men. But great diuerſitie there is of troubles and ſorrowes: for thoſe of the bodie are the leſſe, and thoſe of the minde the greater: the ſorrowes of wiſe men are of one ſort, and the ſorrowes of fooles of another; but much greater griefe and paſſion endureth the foole than the wiſe man, and leſſe comfort receiueth he in his ſorrowes, though many ſuppoſe otherwiſe. The poore man that trauelleth and toileth his body to get foode to ſuſtaine himſelfe and his children, and paieth cuſtoms and ſubſidies to his Prince, ſhould liue in too great deſcomfort and deſpaire, if Princes and great men had nothing but pleaſure in this world, and he nothing on the contrarie ſide but trauell and miſerie. But God hath otherwiſe diſpoſed thereof; for if I ſhould take vpon me to rehearſe the ſundrie griefes, ſorrowes, and paſſions that I haue ſeene diuers great perſonages ſuſtaine, as well men as women within theſe thirty yeeres onely, a great volume would hardly containe them. I meane not ſuch great perſoſonages as Bocace writeth of in his booke 
                     1
                  , but ſuch as we ſee abound with wealth, & liue in health and proſperitie; yea ſuch as thoſe that haue not beene conuerſant with them as I haue been, would account in all reſpects happie: b
                     ••
                   I haue often ſ
                     ••
                  ne

their ſorrowes and griefes ariſe of ſo ſmall occaſions, that they that were vnacquainted with them would hardly beleeue it, the moſt part being grounded vpon ielouſies and reports, which is a diſeaſe that lurketh ſecretly in great Princes Courts, and traineth with it infinite miſchiefs both to their owne perſons, their ſeruants, and all their ſubiects, and ſo much ſhorteneth their liues, that hardly any King of Fraunce ſince Charles the great hath paſſed the age of ſixtie yeeres. For the which cauſe, when King Lewis the eleuenth approched neere to that age (being ſicke of this diſeaſe) he accounted himſelfe a dead man. His father King Charles the ſeuenth, who had done ſo many noble acts in Fraunce, conceiued an imagination in his ſicknes, that his ſeruants went about to poiſon him, and therefore refuſed to receiue ſuſtenance. Likewiſe his father King Charles the ſixt was troubled with ſo many ſuſpicions, that he loſt his wits, and all by reports. And ſure this is a fault greatly to be blamed in Princes, that in theſe caſes they cauſe not ſuch matters as concerne themſelues (be they of neuer ſo ſmall importance) to be ripped vp: which if they did, they ſhould not ſo often be troubled with falſe tales. For if they would examine the parties the one before the other, I meane the accuſer, and him that is accuſed, no man durſt report any thing to them that were vntrue. But ſome Princes there are of ſo doltiſh diſpoſition, that they will promiſe and ſweare to the accuſers neuer to diſcloſe their reports, whereby they are often troubled with theſe anguiſhes before mentioned, and hate and iniurie their truſtieſt and faithfulleſt ſeruants and ſubiects, at the pleaſure and vpon the complaint many times of lewd and naughtie perſons.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Of vnfortunate noble men.
                  
               
            
            
               How the King was aduertiſed of the loſſe of the caſtle of Naples: and how the Florentines places were ſold to diuers men: of the treatie of Atelle in Pouille, to the great dammage of the French: and of the death of King Ferrande of Naples. Chap. 14.
               
                  THe Daulphin the Kings onely ſonne died about the beginning of the yeere 1496. which was the greateſt misfortune that euer happened or could happen to the King: for he neuer had childe after, that liued. But this miſcheife came not without company, for at the very ſame time receiued he newes that the caſtle of Naples was yeelded by thoſe that the Lord of Montpenſier left within it, who were forced thereunto, partly by famine, and partly to recouer the hoſtages deliuered by the ſaid Montpenſier to King Ferrande, whoſe names were Monſeur d'Alegre, one of the houſe de la Marche-d'Ardaine, one called de la Capelle de Loudonnois 
                  
                     1
                  , & one named Iohn Roquebertin, Catelan. They that were within the caſtle returned by ſea into Fraunce. Another great diſhonor and loſſe receiued the King alſo at the ſame time which was this. Entragues, who held the Citadelle of Piſa (being the fort that keepeth the towne in ſubiection,) deliuered the ſaid Citadelle to the Piſans contrarie to the Kings oth 
                     2
                  , who had twice ſworne to the Florentines to reſtore vnto them the ſaid Citadelle and their other places, namely Serzane, Serzanelle, Pietreſancte, Librefacto, and Mortron, which

they had lent him in his great neceſſitie at his firſt comming into Italy: at which time they gaue him alſo ſixeſcore thouſand ducats, whereof there remained vnpaid to vs but thirty thouſand at our returne home, as before you haue heard. To be ſhort, all theſe the Florentines places aboue named were ſolde: the Genuois bought Serzane and Serzanelle of a baſtard of Saint Paul 
                     3
                  , Pietreſancte Entragues ſolde to the Luquois 
                     4
                  , and Librefacto to the Venetians 
                     5
                  , to the great diſhonor both of the King and all his ſubiects, and to the vtter loſſe of the realme of Naples. The firſt othe the King ſware for the reſtitution of theſe places (as before you haue heard) was at Florence vpon the high aultar of the cathedrall Church of Saint Iohn: the ſecond in Aſt at his returne, at which time the Florentines lent him thirty thouſand ducats (in his great neede) vnder condition that if Piſa were reſtored to them, he ſhould repaie no part nor parcell of this ſumme: but they would make reſtitution of the iewels engaged to them for it, and lend him 60000. ducats more, which they promiſed to cauſe to be paid then preſently in the realme of Naples, to the Kings forces there. They offered further, to entertaine continually in the ſaide realme at their proper coſts and charges, three hundred men of armes to do the King ſeruice till the ſaid conqueſt were fully atchieued, of the which conditions none were performed, bicauſe of this euill dealing aboue mentioned. Beſides that, we were forced to reſtore the thirty thouſand ducats that they lent vs, all the which inconueniences happened through diſobedience and priuy whiſpering in the Kings eare, for ſome of thoſe that were neereſt about him, encouraged Entragues to ſell theſe places.
               At the ſelfe ſame time within two moneths ouer or vnder, in the beginning of this yeere 1496. the Lord of Montpenſier, the Lord Virgill Vrſin 
                  
                     6
                  , M. Camille Vitelly, and the reſt of the French captaines, ſeeing all thus loſt: put themſelues into the field, and tooke certaine ſmall places. But King Ferrande ſonne of King Alphonſe, who was entred into religion (as before you haue heard) accompanied with the Marqueſſe of Mantua, brother to the ſaid Montpenſiers wife, and Generall of the Venetians, marched againſt them. They found the ſaide Montpenſier lodged in a towne called Atelle, a place very commodious for their prouiſion of victuals, and ſeated on a hill, vpon the which our enimies fortified their campe as men fearing the battell, bicauſe the ſaid King Ferrand and his forces had been diſcomfited in all places, as was alſo the Marques of Mantua at Fornoua where we fought with him. The ſaid Marques the Venetians had lent to K. Ferrand with a certaine ſumme of money, but of ſmall value in reſpect of the places they had in gage for it, which were theſe ſixe townes in Pouille of great importance, Brandis, Trani, Galipoli, Crana, Otrante, and Monopoly, the laſt of the which ſince the Kings departure they had woon from vs. Moreouer in the ſaid ſumme of money they comprehended the wages of their ſoldiers that ſerued the ſaid Ferrand, ſo that they hold theſe places for two hundred thouſand ducats; yea, and now they require the charges they haue been at in the fortification and defence of them, ſo that I am fully perſwaded they minde neuer to reſtore them: for they vſe not ſo to do, when towns lie commodiouſly for them, as theſe do, being ſcituate vpon the Adriatike gulfe, ſo that by meanes of them they are Lords of the ſaid gulfe, which is one of the things they chiefely deſire; and no maruell, for it is from Otrante (which is the verie point of the ſaid gulfe) to Venice at the leaſt nine hundred miles. And notwithſtanding that the Pope held certaine places alſo vpon the ſaid gulfe intermingled among theſe Venetian townes: yet were all paſſengers forced to paie cuſtome to Venice: wherefore the poſſeſſion of theſe places is more beneficiall to them than the world weeneth: for they receiue

yeerely from thence great plenty of corne and oile, which are two neceſſarie things for their prouiſion.
               At the ſaid place of Atelle aboue mentioned, our men fell at variance as well for their victuals which began now to diminiſh, as alſo for their paie, the ſoldiers were vnpaid for eighteene moneths and more, by meanes wherof they had liued in great miſerie. To the Almains alſo much was due, but not ſo much: for all the money that Monſeur de Montpenſier could leuy in the realme was paied to them, yet notwithſtanding they were vnpaid for a yeere and more, but they had ſpoiled diuers ſmall townes whereby they were maruellouſly enriched. If the fortie thouſand ducats promiſed them had been ſent in time, or if they had knowne they ſhould haue receiued them at Florence, this variance had neuer hapned, but now they remained altogither in deſpaire: diuers of our captaines haue enformed me that if our men would haue agreed to fight, they were like enough to haue obteined the victory: and if they had been diſcomfited, yet ſhould not their loſſe haue been ſo great, as by the ſhamefull compoſition they made. Montpenſier and Virgile Vrſin, who were the beſt men of war among them would haue fought, and euill hap it was to them that they did not: for King Ferrand brake the compoſition, and put them both in priſon, where they miſerablie ended their liues. They laid the blame that they fought not vpon Monſeur de Perſi a yoong gentleman of Auuergne, whom they accuſed as a mutinous knight, and diſobedient to his captaine. You ſhall vnderſtand that in this armie were two ſorts of Almaines, the firſt were Swiſſers to the number of fifteene hundred, whom the King left there at his departure from Naples, the which ſerued faithfully euen til the hower of death, ſo that it was impoſſible for men to ſerue more valiantly than they did. The other ſort were thoſe whom we call commonly Launce knights (that is to ſay, ſeruants of the countrie) the which hate naturally the Swiſſers. They are of all parts of Germanie, as for example, of the countries lying vpon the Rhine, and of Swobland, ſome there were alſo of the countrie of Vaulx in Senonie 
                     7
                  , and ſome of Gelderland. Theſe were to the number of eight hundred newly ſent thither with two moneths pay, the which being ſpent before they came thither, and at their arriuall there no new pay being found: they ſeeing themſelues in this diſtreſſe, declared that they bare vs no ſuch good will as the Swiſſers do; for they practiſed with our enimies, and turned to King Ferrande, for the which cauſe partly, and partly for the diuiſion that was among our captaines, our men made a ſhamefull appointment with their enimies, the which King Ferrande ſware to keepe and obſerue, being forced ſo to do by the Marqueſſe of Mantua, who thought thereby to aſſure the perſon of his brother in lawe Monſeur de Montpenſier, yet notwithſtanding the ſaid Ferrande brake the treatie, as afterward mention ſhall be made more at large.
               By the ſaid compoſition they yeelded both themſelues and all the Kings artillerie to their enimies, promiſing further, to cauſe to be rendred all the places that the King held in the realme, as well in Calabria where Monſeur d'Aubigny was, as in L'Abruzzo where Maſter Gracian des Guerres was togither, with the townes of Caietta and Tarente; vnder this condition, that King Ferrande ſhould ſend them by ſea into Prouence with bag and baggage, which was not much woorth: but notwithſtanding the compoſition King Ferrande commanded them all to be led to Naples, being to the number of fiue or ſixe thouſand perſons or more. So ſhamefull a compoſition hath not beene made in our time, neither do I remember that euer I read of the like, ſaue that which the two conſuls of Rome made (as rehearſeth Titus Liuius 
                  
                     8
                  ) with the Samnites (whom I ſuppoſe to be thoſe of Beneuent) at a place called then

                  Furculae Caudinae, which is a certaine ſtraight in the mountaines: notwithſtanding the Romanes would not agree to the compoſition, but ſent the two Conſuls priſoners to their enimies.
               If our force had fought and beene diſcomfited, yet ſhould not their loſſe haue been ſo great; as by this compoſition: for two parts of them died either of famine, or of the plague in their ſhips in the yle of Pruſſe 
                     9
                  , whither they were ſent from Naples by King Ferrande: and namely, there died Monſeur de Montpenſier himſelfe, ſome ſay of poyſon, others of an ague, which I rather beleeue. And I thinke verily that of all this companie neuer returned fifteene hundred: for of the Swiſſers which were thirteene hundred, returned but three hundred and fifty all extreme ſicke. Their faith and loyaltie was greatly to be commended: for they all choſe rather to die than to ſerue King Ferrande, and ſo a number of them died in the ſaid yle of Pruſſe, ſome of heate, ſome of ſicknes, and ſome of famine: for they were held there a long time in their ſhips, in ſuch penurie and lacke of victuals, as is almoſt incredible. I ſaw them all that returned, eſpecially the Swiſſers, who brought backe with the
                     •
                   all their enſignes: and ſure it well appeered that they had endured great miſerie; for they were all ſo extreme ſicke, that when they came foorth of their ſhips to take the aire, they were faine to be ſtaied vp from falling. It was alſo agreed by the ſaid compoſition, that the Lord Virgill Vrſin ſhould returne home to his countrie in ſafetie, and his ſon, & all the Italians that ſerued the King: yet notwithſtanding the enimies detained him ſtill, and his ſaid legitimate ſonne alſo; for he had but one: and as touching his baſe ſonne called the Lord Charles (who was a very valiant gentleman) certaine Italians of their companie ſpoiled him as he repaired homeward. If this miſerie had fallen but vpon them onely that made this compoſition, they had notbeen greatly to be moned. Immediately after King Ferrande had receiued this honor aboue mentioned, and married King Ferrande his grandfathers daughter, being a yoong maide of thirteene or fowerteene yeeres of age, begotten of the King of Caſtiles ſiſter that now raigneth (ſo that his wife was ſiſter to his owne father King Alfonſe) he fell into a continuall ague, whereof ſoone after he died, and the crowne of the realme deſcended to King Frederick (the ſaid King Ferrandes vncle) now preſently raigning. It abhorreth me to write of ſuch a marriage as this, notwithſtanding diuers ſuch haue beene contracted in this houſe of Arragon within theſe thirtie yeeres. King Ferrande died immediately after the compoſition aboue mentioned made in the towne of Ate
                     ••
                  e, the yeere of our Lord 1496. The ſaid Ferrande during his life, and Dom Frederick alſo after he came to the crowne, excuſed the breach of this compoſition, bicauſe Monſeur de Montpenſier had not performed the conditions thereof, nor rendred the places promiſed, which he could not to ſay the truth, Caietta and diuers others being out of his power. For notwithſtanding that he were the Kings lieutenant, yet were not they that held theſe places for the King, bound to yeeld them at his commandement. Although all things well conſidered, the King ſhould haue ſuſtained no great loſſe, if they had then beene yeelded; for he ſpent afterward great treaſure in defending and victualling them, and yet loſt them in the end. I my ſelfe was preſent three or fower times at the diſpatch of thoſe that were ſent to victuall and ſuccour, firſt the caſtels of Naples, and thriſe after the towne of Caietta. And I thinke I ſhould not lie, if I ſaid that theſe fower voiages coſt the King aboue three hundred thouſand franks: and yet all to no purpoſe.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Before cap. 8. he named him de la Chappelle d'Aniou, but if Loudonnois be in
                     
Aniou the places be reconciled.
                  
                  2 The Venetians paid the monie, for the Piſans were not able to redeeme it: but after the Citadelle deliuered, the Piſans put themſelues into the Venetians protection, who razed the Citadelle. Guicciar.
                  3 This baſtards name was de Bienne. Guicciar.
                  4 Mutron was alſo ſold to the Luquois. Guicciar.
                  5 Librefacto was ſold to the Piſans, but the Venetians paid the monie. Guicciar.
                  6 This Virgill Vrſin is he aboue mentioned, who after the Coulonnois reuolt from King Charles, turned to him, and of his foe became his friend and ſeruant.
                  
                  7 The French corrector readeth it Sionnie, meaning the countrie called in Latin Valeſia Seduſiorum, whereof Sedunum called in French Sion, is the chiefe towne: or elſe he ſuppoſeth it ſhould be Vaulx in Sauoy, whereof our author maketh mention lib. 5. cap. 1.
                  8 Decad. 1. lib. 9.
                  9 Procida it is named by Colleuntius, other Italians name it Ponze. I ſuppoſe it to be that, which Plinie lib. 3. cap. 6. calleth Proclita or Prochita, ſaying that it lieth in Sinu Puteolano not far from Naples, nor from the yle of Iſchia. Boccace alſo Decame 2, nouell. 6. reporteth both Procida and Ponze to be neere to Naples. Guicciar. hath Pozzuole.
               
            
            
               How certaine practiſes entertained by diuers noble men of Italy on the Kings behalfe, as well for the conqueſt of Naples, as of the Duchie of Milan, failed for lacke of ſending thither: and how another enterpriſe againſt Genua ſped euill alſo. Chap. 15.
               
                  THe King after his returne from Naples abode at Lyons a long time (as before you haue heard) holding iuſts & turneies. It greeued him to loſe the places in Italy aboue mentioned which he yet held, neither cared he what treaſure he ſpent in defence of them, but he would take no paines himſelfe in gouerning his owne affaires. Moreouer, he was aduertiſed daily of diuers practiſes entertained on his behalfe in Italy, which notwithſtanding that they were both dangerous and chargeable: yet was he of power ſufficient to haue atchieued them bicauſe his realme is populous, & plentifull of graine in Prouence and Languedoc, and hath alſo a number of other wealthie countries, where money might haue been leuied. But if any other Prince beſides the King of Fraunce ſhould attend to theſe Italian practiſes and aduenture to entermebdle in their enterpriſes, he ſhould but vndoe himſelfe, ſpend his treaſure, and bring nothing to effect. For the Italians neither do nor can ſerue but for money, except it be a Duke of Milan, or one of the greateſt Seniories: but a poore captaine be he neuer ſo well affectioned to the ſeruice of a King of Fraunce pretending title to the realme of Naples, or the Duchie of Milan, be he neuer ſo faithfull and truſtie, yet ſhal he not be able to do him ſeruice any long time after his paiment faileth, bicauſe his men will forſake him, and the poore captaine ſhall be vtterly vndone: for the greateſt part of them liue onely vpon the credit they win by the ſeruice of their ſoldiors, who are paied by their captaine, and he of him whom he ſerueth, which is the cauſe why they deſire in Italy nothing but factions and ciuile wars. But as touching the practiſes aboue mentioned, you ſhall vnderſtand that they began before the

towne of Caietta was loſt, to wit, immediately after the King perceiued that the Duke of Milan would not performe the conditions of the treatie of Verceil, and continued after the loſſe of the ſaid towne, the whole ſpace of two yeeres after the Kings returne home. As touching the ſaid Duke of Milan, he brake not his promiſe altogither vpon malice and trecherie, but partly for feare: for he doubted that the King would deſtroy him if he obteined the realme of Naples: beſides that, he accounted the King to be a Prince in whom was no conſtancie nor aſſurance. But to proceede, one of theſe enterpriſes aboue mentioned was to inuade the Duchie of Milan after this ſort. Order was giuen that the Duke of Orleans ſhould go to Aſt to enter with a good band of men on that ſide, whom I ſawe once ſo neere his departure, that his train was already gone. We were ſure of the Duke of Ferrareas friendſhip, for he had promiſed to aide vs (notwithſtanding that he were the Duke of Milans father in lawe) with fiue hundred men of armes, and two thouſand footemen, which his promiſe vndoubtedly he would haue performed, to the end he might haue rid himſelfe of the danger he was in, lying iuſt in the midſt betweene the Venetians and the ſaid Duke: for not long before (as I haue already made mention) the Venetians had taken from him the Poleſan, and ſought wholy his deſtruction: wherefore he would haue preferred his owne ſafetie and his childrens, before his ſonne in lawes friendſhip; yea, and peraduenture he thought that the Duke of Milan ſeeing himſelfe in this extremitie would make ſome appointment with the King 
                     1
                  . Moreouer, by the ſaid D. of Ferraraes meanes, the Marques of Mantua was become our friend, who lately had been and yet was generall of the Venetians, but in great ielouſie with them, and he likewiſe being diſcontented with them, ſoiourned with three hundred men of armes with his father in law the Duke of Ferrare: for you ſhall vnderſtand that he then had, and yet hath to wife the Duches of Milans ſiſter, daughter to the ſaid Duke of Ferrara. Maſter Iohn Bentiuoille who gouerneth Bolonia, and is as it were Lord thereof, promiſed to aide vs with a hundred and fiftie men of armes, and a good band of footemen, and to ſend to the Kings ſeruice two of his ſon
                     ••
                  s, who were captaines of certaine companies of horſemen, and ſuch was the ſeat 
                     〈◊〉
                   countrey that he might haue done great ſeruice againſt the Duke of Milan. The 
                     ••
                  orentines who ſawe themſelues vtterly vndone (vnleſſe by large expences they recouered their loſſes) fearing to be diſſeaſed of Piſa and the other places aboue mentioned 
                     2
                  ; would haue furniſhed eight hundred men of armes, and fiue thouſand footemen vpon their owne proper coſtes and charges, and had already prouided their paiments for ſixe moneths. The Vrſins and the Prefect of Rome brother to the Cardinall Saint Peter ad Vincula (ſo often before named,) being in paie with the King, would haue furniſhed a thouſand men of armes: but you ſhall vnderſtand that their men of armes are not accompanied with archers as ours be, but their wages and ours are much a like: for a yeeres pay of one of their men of armes amounteth to a hundreth ducats, and the wages of one of ours is double as much bicauſe of his archers. Theſe mercenary ſoldiers the King ſhould haue paid, but as touching the Florentines they ſhould haue paid their forces themſelues. The Duke of Ferrara alſo, the Marques of Mantua and Bentiuoille, offered this aide vpon their owne charge, for they hoped to conquer in the Duchie of Milan as much as ſhould counteruaile their coſte. And if the Duke of Milan had been ſuddenly inuaded by the Duke of Orleans, and all theſe aboue rehearſed at one inſtant, his confederates (namely the Venetians) could not haue ſuccoured him (though they would haue ſpent all their treaſure in his defence) before he muſt haue been forced to reuolt to the K, who would haue kept theſe Italians in the field a long time. And the Duchy of Milan being

once woon, the realme of Naples would haue yeelded of it ſelfe.
               The ſtay of this goodly enterpriſe proceeded of the Duke of Orleans, who ſuddenly altered his minde the night before he ſhould haue departed: for he had already ſent before him all things neceſſarie for his perſon, and none remained to depart but himſelfe onely: for the army was in a readines, their wages paid them, & they all gone before to Aſt, being to the number of eight hundred men of armes French, and ſixe thouſand footemen: among the which were fower hundred Swiſſers. But the ſaid Duke of Orleans being thus ſuddenly altered, beſought the King twice to propound this matter againe to his counſell, and ſo he did, I my ſelfe was preſent at the debating of it both the times, and the whole Counſell concluded that he ſhould go, not one man ſpeaking to the contrarie: notwithſtanding that there were preſent at each time ten or twelue Counſellors at the leaſt. And ſure ſo had it beene moſt conuenient, conſidering that we had therof aſſured our friends in Italy aboue named: all the which had beene at great charges, and were in a readines. But the Duke of Orleans being preſent at the debating of this matter himſelfe, made anſwer (either by the aduiſe of ſome one, or for that he ſhunned this enterpriſe bicauſe he ſaw the King euill diſpoſed of his body, whoſe heire he ſhould be if he died) that he would neuer take vpon him this voiage for his owne particular quarrell, but willingly by the Kings commandement as his lieutenant, with the which anſwere the counſell aroſe. The next day and many daies after, the ambaſſadors of Florence and diuers others, preſſed the King earneſtly to command the Duke to depart. Whereunto the King anſwered, that he would neuer force him to the wars againſt his will. Thus was this voiage daſhed to the Kings great greefe, both bicauſe of the great charges he had ſuſteined; and alſo bicauſe he was in good hope (if it had proceeded) to haue been reuenged of the Duke of Milan, conſidering what intelligences he had already, and what other intelligences he might haue had at that time; by meanes of Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoul, lieutenant generall for him and the D. of Orleans in theſe Italian wars, who was a Milanois borne, and very well beloued and friended in his countrie, where he had good intelligence with many both of his kinſemen and others. This enterpriſe thus failing, another ſucceeded, yea two or three at a clap againſt Genua: where the people are euer inclined to diuiſion; one of theſe enterpriſes was managed by Maſter Baptiſte de Campefourgouſe, who was chiefe of one of the factions in the towne, but baniſhed, and his faction of no authoritie at that time, neither yet the houſe of Orie, who are gentlemen, and they of Fourgouſi none. The ſaid D'Ories take part with the Fourgouſes, but none of them may be Duke, bicauſe they are gentlemen, for no gentlemen may be Duke of Genua: but this Baptiste had been Duke not long before, and loſt the gouernment by the trecherie of his vnckle the Cardinall of Genua, who of late yeeres put the Seniorie of Genua into the Duke of Milans hands. So that at this preſent the Adornes gouerned Genua, who in like maner are not gentlemen, but haue often been Dukes by helpe of the Spinoles who are gentlemen; ſo that the gentlemen make the Duke of Genua, but cannot be Dukes themſelues. This Baptista truſted that his faction would ariſe in his fauor, both in the towne and countrey, and that the towne being recouered, the ſoueraigntie thereof ſhould remaine to the King, but he and his faction gouerne and baniſh their enimies. The other enterpriſe was this, diuers of Sauonne addreſſed themſelues to the Cardinall Saint Peter ad Vincula 
                  
                     3
                  , and promiſed to yeeld the towne to him, hoping thereby to recouer their libertie; for they are vnder the Genuois gouernment, and pay tribute to them. If we had entred into this place, Genua ſhould haue been greatly diſtreſſed, the countrey of Prouence being in ſubiection to

the King, and Sauoy wholy at his deuotion. Wherefore the King being aduertiſed of all theſe enterpriſes, wrote to Maſter Iohn Iames of Treuoul to aide Maſter Baptiſt de Campefourgouſe with force to conueigh him to the gates of Genua, to ſee whether his faction would ariſe in his fauor. And on the other ſide he was ſo earneſtlie preſſed by the Cardinal S. Peter ad Vincula, that he ſent other letters at the ſelfe ſame time to the ſaid M. Iohn Iames, comanding him to lend the ſaid Cardinal men to conueie him to Sauonne: and the like commandement ſent he him alſo by mouth by the Lord of Sernon in Prouence, who was great friend to the ſaid Cardinall and a ſtout talker. Beſides theſe two commandements, came yet a thirde, which was, that the ſaid Maſter Iohn Iames ſhould retire into ſome place where he might conueniently aide both theſe parties aboue mentioned, & yet attempt nothing againſt the Duke of Milan, nor the treatie of peace made the ſummer before with him, which commandement was cleane contrary to the two former.
               Thus you ſee how great Princes affaires are gouerned when they vnderſtand them not themſelues, but command letters and diſpatch men vpon a ſudden before they heare matters well debated. For as touching the demaunds of Maſter Baptiſt de Campeforgouſe and the ſaid Cardinal, it was impoſſible to ſatisfie them both at once, for Baptiſt durſt not go to the wals of Genua without great force, bicauſe the towne is very populous, and the people well armed, and hardy and valiant ſoldiers: wherefore if Maſter Iohn Iames ſhould at the ſame time haue lent men alſo to the Cardinall, his armie had been diuided into three companies; for part of the force muſt haue remained with himſelfe. In the meane time diuers bands arriued at Genua and at Sauonne, ſent thither by the Duke of Milan and the Venetians, who both feared greatly the reuolt of Genua, as did alſo Dom Frederick and the Pope.
               Beſides theſe two enterpriſes, the ſaid Maſter Iohn Iames had yet a third in his head, deuiſed of his owne braine, which was this, he would haue broken off both theſe other enterpriſes, and haue marched with the whole force ſtraight againſt the Duke of Milan, and vndoubtedly if he had not beene countermaunded, he would haue done ſome great exploit. His enterpriſe he was already entred into, and had aduertiſed the King thereof, pretending that he could not otherwiſe aide them that ſhould go to Genua or Sauonne to the enterpriſes aboue mentioned. Wherefore vnder colour thereof, he led his armie into the high way betweene Alexandria and Genua (which was the onely way the Duke of Milan could ſend to inuade our bands that ſhould go to Genua and Sauonne) and three or fower ſmall townes he tooke, which voluntarily receiued him, aduertiſing the King that this notwithſtanding, he made no war vpon the Duke of Milan, ſeeing he was forced of neceſſitie (for the ſafetie of thoſe that ſhould go to the other enterpriſes) to do as he did: adding, that the King could not be ſaid to make war vpon the Duke of Milan, for ſeeking to conquer Genua or Sauonne, bicauſe they were held of him and forfaited to him; but this enterpriſe was daſhed by the Kings commandement. Further, to ſatisfie the Cardinall, the ſaid Maſter Iohn Iames lent him part of the armie to conuey him to Sauonne, but he found the place manned, and thereupon gaue ouer his enterpriſe and returned. He lent men alſo to Maſter Baptiſt to conuey him to Genua, who aſſured him that his enterpriſe ſhould take effect: but when he was three or fower leagues vpon the way, they that accompanied him began to be ielous of him, as well the Almaines as the French, wherein notwithſtanding that they did him wrong, yet ſure their companie being but ſmall, ſhould haue put themſelues in great danger, if they had gone to Genua, and his faction had not happened to ariſe. Thus all theſe enterpriſes ſped euill, and the Duke of Milan, who had been greatly diſtreſſed, if Maſter Iohn Iames
                  
had beene ſuffered to inuade him with the whole force, was now ſtrong; for the Venetians had ſent diuers bands to his aide. Whereupon our armie retired, our footemen were diſmiſſed, and theſe little townes that were taken abandoned: and thus ended theſe wars, finally to the Kings profit, who conſumed infinite treaſure in them.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 Vnderſtand againſt the Venetians, by the which meanes he might haue recouered the Poleſan, and the reſt that they withheld from him.
                  
                  2 For you muſt vnderſtand that theſe practiſes began before their places were ſold.
                  
                  3 This Cardinall was borne at Sauonne.
                  
               
            
            
               Of certaine controuerſies betweene King Charles and Ferrande King of Caſtile, and of the ambaſſadors that were ſent to and fro to pacifie them. Chap. 16.
               
                  WHat happened from the Kings returne out of Italie (which was about 3. or 4. moneths before the end of the yeer 1495.) till the beginning of the yeere 1498. I haue already rehearſed: for all that ſpace I was reſident in the Court, and preſent at the diſpatch of moſt part of thoſe affaires. The King rode about from Lyons to Moulins, and from Moulins to Tours, holding tourneies and iuſts in all places, and minding nothing elſe. Thoſe that were of the greateſt authoritie about him, were ſo diuided, that more they could not be; for ſome of them would that the conqueſt of Naples ſhould ſtill continue, bicauſe their profit and credit depended thereupon, namely, the Cardinall 1, and the Seneſchall 2, who gouerned all the Kings affaires: on the otherſide the Admirall, who before this voiage had borne all the ſway with the yoong King, would in any wiſe that theſe Italian enterpriſes ſhould ceaſe, and trauelled to ouerthrowe them, knowing that the quailing of them would turne greatly to his profite, and be a meanes whereby he might recouer his former credit and authoritie, and the others fall into diſgrace.
               Thus paſſed the Kings affaires about a yeere and a halfe, during the which ſpace he ſent ambaſſadors to the King and Queene of Caſtile, who were in war with him, and whoſe friendſhip he greatly deſired, bicauſe they were mightie both by ſea and land. And notwithſtanding that they did no great exploit vpon the land, yet had they ſent great aide by ſea to King Ferrande and King Frederick of Naples: for the yle of Sicilie is diſtant from Reges in Calabria but a league and a halfe, ſo that ſome hold opinion it was once firme land with Italie 3, and that the ſea breaking in, made this ſtraight 4 now named the Far 5 of Meſſine. The ſaid yle of Sicilie was then and yet is, in ſubiection to the King and Queene of Caſtile, who ſent from thence great aide to Naples, as well of great ſhips called Carauels that came out of Spaine, as alſo of men. Moreouer, in the yle of Sicilie itſelfe a companie of men of armes was leuied, the which paſſed into Calabria with a certaine number of genetarios 6, and made war vpon the Kings forces there. Beſides this, their ſhips were continually with the confederates nauie, by means whereof, when all their forces were togither, the King was much too weake for his enimies vpon the ſea, but otherwiſe the King of Caſtile endammaged him not much. True it is that once a great companie of

horſemen entred into Languedock, and ſpoiled the countrie, and lodged in it three or fower daies; but other exploit did they none. Then the Lord of Saint André in Bourbonnois, who defended thoſe frontiers for the Duke of Bourbon the Kings lieutenant in Languedock, attempted to take Sauſſes a little towne in the countrie of Rouſſillon, bicauſe on that ſide they had inuaded the Kings dominions about two yeeres before. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that the King had reſtored vnto them the ſaid countrie of Rouſſillon 7, whereof the territorie of Parpignan is parcell, in the which this little towne of Sauſſes is ſituate. His enterpriſe was great and dangerous; for the towne was well manned though it were but ſmall, and a great number of gentlemen of the King of Caſtiles houſe were within it; beſides that, their armie being ſtronger than ours lay abrode in the fields encamped within a league of the place: yet notwithſtanding the ſaid Lord of Saint André ſo wiſely and cloſely guided his enterpriſe that within ten howers he tooke the towne by aſſault, as my ſelfe can witnes, and at the breach were ſlaine thirtie or fortie Spaniſh gentlemen of marke, among whom was the Archbiſhop of Saint Iames his ſonne, beſides three or fower hundred common ſoldiers. They thought not that the towne could haue been taken ſo ſuddenly; for they vnderſtood not the feate of our artillerie, which vndoubtedly is the beſt in the world.
               This is all the exploit that was done between theſe two Princes, whereof though the effects were but ſmall yet great was the ſhame and diſhonor the King of Caſtile receiued thereby, his armie being ſo ſtrong as it was: but where God is diſpoſed to puniſh, commonly ſuch ſmall ſcoruges run before. For the ſaid King and Queen of Caſtile were ſhortly after otherwiſe puniſhed, and ſo were we alſo. But ſure as touching them they much ſtained their honor in violating their othe giuen to the King, who had dealt ſo bountifully with them, by reſtoring them the countrey of Rouſillon, the fortification and defence whereof had beene ſo chargeable to his father, who had it in pawne for three hundred thouſand crownes, which ſumme alſo the King forgaue them, all to the end they ſhould not impeach nor hinder his voiage to Naples. Moreouer, they renued the ancient league betweene Fraunce and Caſtile, which is between King and King, realme and realme, and man and man of their ſubiects, and promiſed not to hinder his ſaid conqueſt, nor marie any of their daughters into Naples, England or Flanders, which ſtraight offer of mariage proceeded of themſelues: for a Frier Franciſcan called Frier Iohn de Mauleon made this ounerture on the Queene of Caſtiles behalfe. Yet all this notwithſtanding ſo ſoone as they ſaw the war begun, and heard that the King was at Rome, they ſent ambaſſadors round about to enter into league againſt him, and namely to Venice, I being there preſent, where the league aboue mentioned was concluded betweene the Pope, the King of Romans, them, the Seniore of Venice, and the Duke of Milan: immediately whereupon they inuaded the Kings dominions, alleaging that ſuch a promiſe was not to be performed, meaning the marriage of their children (being fower daughters and one ſonne) into the houſes aboue mentioned, which ouuerture notwithſtanding proceeded of themſelues, as before you haue heard.
               But to returne to the matter. After theſe wars in Italy were ended, and all loſt in the realm of Naples ſaue Caietta, which the K. yet held when theſe treaties of peace began betweene him and the King and Queene of Caſtile: but ſoone after loſt alſo, and the wars in the countrey of Rouſſillon being in like maner ended, ſo that none ſought to endammage other, but each partie to defend their own. They ſent to King Charles a gentleman accompanied with certaine Monks of Montferrat, for all their affaires they gouerned by ſuch men, either to ſaue charges thereby, or to diſſemble

by ſuch inſtruments with the leſſe ſuſpition, as for example they did by Iohn de Mauleon the Frier Franciſcan aboue named, who perſwaded the King to reſtore vnto them the countrey of Rouſſillon. Theſe ambaſſadors at their firſt audience, beſought the King to forget the great wrong the King and the Queene had done him. I name alwaies the Queene bicauſe the crowne of Caſtile mooued by hir, and bicauſe hir authority was greater there than hir husbands: and vndoubtedly this was a very honorable mariage betweene the King hir husband and hir. Then theſe ambaſſadors began to treat of truce, deſiring to haue all their league comprehended therein. The ouuertures they made were theſe: that the King ſhould keepe the poſſeſſion of Caietta, and the other places he yet held in the realme of Naples, and that during the truce he might victuall them at his pleaſure. Further, that there ſhould be a place aſſigned whither all the Princes of the league ſhould ſend their ambaſſadors (at the leaſt, as many as would) to treat of peace, the which being concluded: the ſaid King and Queene meant to continue their conqueſt or enterpriſe againſt the Moores, and to paſſe the ſea out of Granado into Africk, there to inuade the King of Feſſa who was their next neighbour on that ſide. Notwithſtanding ſome were of opinion that they meant rather to hold themſelues contented with that they had already conquered, I meane the realme of Granado, which vndoubtedly was the greateſt and honorableſt conqueſt that hath been obteined in our time 8; yea ſuch as their predeceſſors were neuer able to atchieue. And I wiſh with all my hart for the honor I beare them, that they had neuer mooued other war than this, but had faithfully performed their promiſe to the King. The King ſent the Lord of Clerieux in Daulphine backe into Caſtile with their ambaſſadors, and ſought to conclude a peace or truce wherein their confederates ſhould not be comprehended: notwithſtanding if he had accepted their offer made by theſe their ambaſſadors, he had ſaued Caietta, which had been ſufficient for the recouerie of the whole realme of Naples, conſidering the great fauour he had there. The ſaid de Clerieux at his returne brought a new ouuerture (for Caietta was loſt before he entred into Caſtile) which was, that the King and they ſhould renew their former ancient league, and attempt betweene them at equall charges the conqueſt of all Italie, wherat the two Kings ſhould be togither in perſon: but they ſaid they would firſt conclude a generall truce, wherein all their league ſhould be comprehended, and then aſſigne a diet at ſome place in Piemont, whither euery of their confederates ſhould ſend their ambaſſadors, to the end they might honorably depart from their ſaid league. All this ouuerture as we ſuſpected then and vnderſtood perfectly afterward, was but meere diſſimulation to win time, to the end King Ferrand while he liued, and afterward Dom Frederic newly crowned King might repoſe themſelues: notwithſtanding I thinke they wiſhed with all their harts the ſaid realme of Naples to be their owne, and ſure they had better title to it, than they that poſſeſſed it 9. But vndoubtedly the houſe of Anious right which the King had was the beſt, although to ſay the truth conſidering both the ſeate of the countrey, and the diſpoſition of the people that inhabite it, me thinke he hath beſt right to it that can get it, for they deſire nothing but alteration. The King afterward ſent the aboue named de Clericux back againe into Caſtile & one Michaell of Grammont with him, with certaine other ouertures. This de Clerieux bare ſome affection to theſe Princes of Arragon, and hoped to obtaine of them the Marquiſat of Cotron in Calabria, which the King of Spaine conquered in the laſt voiage that his men made thither. The ſaid de Clerieux pretended title to it, and he is a good plaine dealing man, and one that will eaſily giue credit, eſpecially to ſuch perſonages as theſe were. At his ſecond returne

he brought with him an ambaſſador from the King and Queene, and made his report to the King, which was, that they would hold themſelues contented with that part of the realme of Naples that lies next to Sicilie (to wit, Calabria) for the right that they pretended to the ſaid realme, and that the King ſhould hold the reſt: and farther that the ſaid King of Caſtile would be in perſon at this conqueſt, and beare equall charges in all things with the King, and indeed he held then and yet holdeth fower or fiue ſtrong places in Calabria, whereof Cotron is one, which is a good and a well fortified citie. I was preſent at this report, which ſeemed vnto moſt of vs but meere abuſe and diſſimulation. Wherefore it was determined that ſome wiſe man ſhould be ſent to them to ſound the bottom of this ouuerture, and thereupon the Lord of Bouchage was ioined in commiſſion with the former ambaſſadors: he was a man of deepe iudgement, and one that had been in great credit with King Levvis, and ſo is he alſo at this preſent with King Charles his ſonne. The Spaniſh ambaſſador that came with de Clerieux would neuer auow his report, but anſwered that he thought the ſaid de Clerieux would not make the report, if the King his Maſter and the Queene had not willed him ſo to do; which anſwer cauſed vs ſo much the more to ſuſpect their diſſimulation: beſides that, no man would beleeue that the King of Caſtile would go in perſon into Italy, or that he either would or could beare equall charges with the King.
               After the ſaid Lords of Bouchage, Clerieux, and Michaell of Grammont with the reſt of their collegues were come to the K. and Queene of Caſtiles court, they lodged them in a place where no man could com to commune with them, for the which purpoſe alſo certaine were appointed to watch their lodgings. But they themſelues ſpake thriſe with them: & when the ſaid du Bouchage aduertiſed them of the report aboue mentioned made to the King by de Clerieux and Michaell of Grammont: they anſwered that they would willingly endeuor themſelues to conclude a peace for the Kings honor and profit. And as touching the ſaid report, they confeſſed that indeed ſuch ſpeech had paſſed them by way of communication but not otherwiſe, with the which anſwer de Clerieux being diſcontented and not without cauſe, aduowed his report to be true before them both, in the preſence of the ſaid Lord of Bouchage, who with the reſt of his companions concluded a truce, (the King hauing two moneths reſpit to accept it or refuſe it) wherin their confederates were not comprehended, but their ſonnes in lawe, and the fathers of their ſonnes in lawe, namely the Kings of Romanes and England 10 (for the Prince of Wales was at that time very yoong) were comprehended therein, they had fower daughters, the eldeſt of the which was a widow, and had been married to the King of Portugales ſonne that laſt died, who brake his necke before hir as he paſſed a carrier vpon a ginnet within three moneths after their marriage. The ſecond and the third were married the one in Flaunders, and the other in England, and the fourth is yet to marrie. After the Lord of Bouchage was returned, and had made his report, the King perceiued that de Clerieux had beene too credulous, and that he had done wiſely in ſending du Bouchage thither, bicauſe he was now aſſured of that which before he ſtood in doubt of. The ſaid de Bouchage aduertiſed him further, that he could effect nothing but the concluſion of the truce, the which he had libertie either to accept or refuſe at his pleaſure. The King accepted it, and ſure it ſerued him to good purpoſe: for it was the breach of their league which ſo much had troubled his affaires, and which hitherto he could by no means diſſolue, notwithſtanding that he had attempted all waies poſſible. Thirdly, the ſaid de Bouchage informed the King, that the King and Queene of Caſtile had promiſed him at his departure to ſend ambaſſadors immediately after him

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               cauſe of their attainture was for that they had attempted to make him King of Portugale that now raigneth. Theſe Lords therefore and gentlemen were by meanes of this marriage recompenſed in Caſtile by the King and Queene, and their lands which they had forfaited in Portugale by attainture, aſſigned to the Queene of Portugale (now mentioned) daughter to the ſaid K. and Queene of Caſtile. But notwithſtanding all theſe conſiderations, the ſaid K. & Queene repented them of this marriage: for you ſhall vnderſtand that there is no nation in the world that the Spaniards hate more than the Portugales, ſo far foorth that they diſdaine & ſcorne them: wherfore the ſaid King & Queene lamented much that they had beſtowed their daughter vpon a man that ſhould not be beloued in the realm of Caſtile & their other dominions: & if the marriage had been then vnmade, they would neuer haue made it, which vndoubtedly was a great corroſiue to them, yet nothing ſo great as this, that ſhe ſhould depart from them. Notwithſtanding, after all their ſorrowes ended, they led their ſaid daughter and ſonne in law through all the chiefe cities of their realme, and made the ſaid King of Portugale to be receiued for Prince, and their daughter for Princeſſe, and proclaimed them their ſucceſſors after their death. Some comfort they receiued after all theſe ſorrowes, for they were aduertiſed that the ſaid Lady Princeſſe of Caſtile and Queene of Portugale, was great with childe; but this ioy prooued in the end double greefe, ſo that I thinke they wiſhed themſelues out of the world: for this Lady whom they ſo tenderly loued and ſo much eſteemed, died in trauell of the ſaid childe, not paſt a moneth agone, and we are now in October in the yeere 1498. but the childe liueth 
                     4
                   and is called Emanuell after his fathers name. All theſe greatmisfortunes hapned to them in the ſpace of three moneths.
               Now to returne to the eſtate of Fraunce. You ſhall vnderſtand that about fower or fiue moneths before the ſaid Ladies death, a great misfortune happened alſo in this realme: I meane the death of King Charles the eight whereof heereafter you ſhall heare at large. It ſeemed therefore that God beheld both theſe houſes with an angrie countenance, and would not that the one realme ſhould ſcorne the other. For although the death of a Prince ſeeme but a trifle to many, yet is it ſure far otherwiſe: for change of the Prince neuer happeneth in any realme, but it traineth with it great ſorrowes and troubles; and notwithſtanding that ſome gaine by it, yet an hundred fold more loſe, bicauſe at an alteration men are forced to change their maner and forme of liuing: for that that pleaſeth one Prince, diſpleaſeth another. Wherefore (as before I haue ſaid) if a man well conſider the ſharpe and ſudden puniſhments that God hath laide vpon great Princes within theſe thirty yeeres, in Fraunce, Caſtile, Portugale, England, Naples, Flaunders, and Britaine, he ſhall finde that they haue beene heauier and greeuouſer than happened in two hundred yeeres before: and whoſoeuer would take in hand to diſcourſe vpon all the particular misfortunes that I my ſelfe haue ſeene, and in a maner knowen all the perſons as well men as women to whom they happened, ſhould make thereof a huge volume and that of great admiration, yea though it contained onely ſuch as haue chanced within theſe ten yeeres. By theſe puniſhments, the power of God ought to be the better knowen, for the plagues he powreth downe vpon great perſonages are ſharper, grieuouſer, and endure longer than thoſe he ſendeth to the poorer ſort. To conclude therefore, me thinke all things well waied, that Princes are in no better eſtate in this world than other men, if they conſider by the miſeries they ſee happen to their neighbours what may happen to themſelues. For as touching them they chaſtice their ſubiects at their pleaſures, and God diſpoſeth of them at his pleaſure, bicauſe other than him they haue none ouer them: but happie is the realme that is

gouerned by a Prince that is wiſe and feareth God and his commandements.
               I haue briefly rehearſed the misfortunes that happened in three moneths ſpace to theſe two great and mightie realmes, which not long before were ſo inflamed the one againſt the other, ſo buſied in enlarging their dominions, and ſo little contented with that they already poſſeſſed. And notwithſtanding that alwaies ſome (as before I ſaid) reioice at changes, and gaine by them: yet at the firſt (euen to them) the death, eſpecially the ſudden death of their Prince is very dreadfull and dangerous.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This he ſeemeth to adde, bicauſe the empire was greater, but it was not the Emperors inheritance.
                  
                  2 Vnderſtand the two firſt murthers, of his wiues father and brother: for his ſonne was dead before he ſlue his owne brother.
                  
                  3 Vnderſtand hir dowrie for hir firſt marriage.
                  
                  4 But the childe died alſo afterward, and the crowne of Spaine deſcended to Iane the ſecond daughter wife to Philip Duke of Auſtrich, and mother to the Emperor Charles the fift. Further, you ſhall vnderſtand that our authors memorie failed him heere: for this Princes name was not Emanuel as Commines heere writeth, but Michael, according to all good authors and pedegrees both of Spaine and Portugale.
                  
               
            
            
               Of the ſumptuous building King Charles began a little before his death, of the great deſire he had to reforme the Church and himſelfe, to diminiſh his reuenues, and to redreſſe the proceſſes of the law: and how he died ſuddenly in this good minde in his caſtel of Amboiſe. Chap. 18.
               
                  I Will heere ceaſe further to diſcourſe of the affaires of Italie and Caſtile, and returne to our owne particular ſorrowes and troubles in Fraunce, which notwithſtanding were pleaſant newes happily to thoſe that gained by them. I will write of the ſudden death of King Charles the 8. who being in his caſtel of Amboiſe, had begun the ſumptuouſeſt building, both in the caſtell and the towne, that any King tooke in hand theſe hundred yeeres, as appeereth by the towers, vp to the which men ride on horſebacke, and by the foundātion laid in the towne, the platformes whereof were drawen of ſuch exquiſitenes, that they well declared it to be a worke of maruellous charge, and that could not haue beene finiſhed in long time. For you ſhall vnderſtand, that the King had brought with him from Naples, many excellent workmen in all kinde of arts, eſpecially grauers and painters, and ſure it ſeemed by the foundation, an enterpriſe of a yoong King that thought not to die, but hoped of long life: for he ioined, togither all the goodly things that were commended to him, were they in Fraunce Italie, or Flaunders. Further, he continued ſtill deſirous to returne into Italie, and confeſſed that he had committed many errors in his voiage thither, and oftentimes rehearſed them, determining if his fortune were to returne againe and recouer his loſſes; to giue better order for the defence of the countrie. The recouerie alſo wherof

(bicauſe he had great intelligence in all places) he purpoſed to attempt, and to ſend thither fifteene hundred men of armes, Italians, vnder the leading of the Marqueſſe of Mantua, the Vrſins, the Vitellies, and the Prefect of Rome brother to the Cardinall Saint Peter ad Vincula. Moreouer, Monſeur d' Aubigny who had done him ſo great ſeruice in Calabria, was ready to take his iourney towards Florence; for the Florentines offered to beare the halfe of theſe charges for ſixe moneths, to the end the King with theſe forces aboue mentioned, might firſt take Piſa 
                     1
                  , at the leaſt the ſmall places about it, and then all togither enter into the realme of Naples, from whence meſſengers came daily to him. Alexander the Pope that now is, practiſed with him, and offered to become his perfect friend; for there was a breach betweene him and the Venetians, ſo far foorth that he ſent a ſecret meſſenger into Fraunce, whom myſelfe conueied into the Kings chamber a little before his death. The Venetians were ready to practiſe againſt Milan: as touching Spaine, you haue heard how it was affected to him. The King of Romanes deſired nothing ſo much as his friendſhip, and that they two might ioine their forces togither, to recouer that which appertained to them in Italie: for the ſaid Maximilian was great enimie to the Venetians, bicauſe they withhold diuers things both from the houſe of Auſtrich (whereof he is heire) and alſo from the empire 
                     2
                  .
               Moreouer, the King was wel diſpoſed a little before his death to lead his life according to the commandements of God, to reforme al abuſes in the law & the Church, and to diminiſh his receits & reuenues, purpoſing to leuy of his people onely twelue hundred thouſand franks ouer and aboue his demains, which ſum the three eſtates granted him by way of ſubſidie at Towers at his firſt comming to the crowne, and this money he meant to employ vpon the defence of the realme. But as touching himſelfe he would haue liued vpon his demaines, according to the maner of the ancient Kings of Fraunce, and ſo might he well haue done: for the demaines are great, yea ſo great, if they were well ordered, that they ſurmount a million of franks, certaine cuſtomes and ſubſidies being annexed to them. If this his determination had taken effect, he ſhould thereby much haue eaſed his people, who pay at this preſent aboue two millions and a halfe of franks by way of ſubſidie. Moreouer, he tooke great pains in reforming the abuſes of the order of Saint Benet, and other orders of religion: he called neere about him holy religious men, and often heard them preach: he would willingly haue brought to paſſe if he could, that a Biſhop ſhould haue had but one biſhopricke, and a Cardinall but two, and that the clergie ſhould haue beene reſident vpon their benefices: but it had been a hard matter to reforme the church men. He gaue great almes to poore people a little before his death, as his confeſſor the Biſhop of Angers (who was a woorthie prelate) enformed me. Laſtly, he had built a publike audience where himſelfe heard the ſutes of all men, eſpecially of the poore, and diſpatched many matters: I my ſelfe ſawe him in this place two houres togither but eight daies before his death, which was the laſt time that euer I ſawe him: no matters of great importance were diſpatched there, but by this meanes he held men in feare, eſpecially his officers, ſome alſo of the which he diſplaced for extortion and briberie.
               But the eight day of Aprill, the yeere 1498. vpon Palme ſunday euen, the King being in this glory as touching the world, and in this good minde towards God: departed out of the chamber of Queene Anne Duches of Britaine his wife, leading hir with him to ſee the tennice plaiers in the trenches of the caſtle, whither he had neuer led hir before, and they two entred togither into a gallery, called Haquelebacs gallerie, bicauſe the ſaid Haquelebac had in times paſt held watch and warde in it.

It was the vncleaneſt place about the caſtell, for euery man made water there, and the entrie into it was broken downe: moreouer, the King as he entred, knocked his browe againſt the doore; notwithſtanding that he were of very ſmall ſtature. Afterward he beheld a great while the tennice playing, talking familiarly with al men. I my ſelfe was not preſent there, but his ſaid confeſſor the Biſhop of Angers, and thoſe of his chamber that were neereſt about him, haue enformed me of this I write: for as touching my ſelfe, I was gone home eight daies before to my houſe. The laſt word he ſpake being in health was, that he hoped neuer after to commit deadly ſin, nor veniall if he could: in vttering the which words he fell backeward and loſt his ſpeech, about two of the clocke at afternoone, and abode in this gallerie till eleuen of the clock at night. Thriſe he recouered his ſpeech, but it continued not with him, as the ſaid confeſſor told me, who had ſhriuen him twiſe that weeke, once of ordinarie, and once for thoſe that came to be cured of the Kings euill. Euery man that liſted entred into the gallerie, where he laie vpon an old mattreſſe of ſtrawe, from the which he neuer aroſe till he gaue vp the ghoſt, ſo that nine howers he continued vppon it. The ſaid confeſſor who was continually by him tolde me, that all the three times he recouered his ſpeech he cried; My God, and the glorious virgin Marie, Saint Claude, and Saint Blaſe helpe me. Thus departed out of this world this mightie puiſſant Prince in this miſerable place, not being able to recouer one poore chamber to die in: notwithſtanding that he had ſo many goodly houſes, and built one ſo ſumptuous at that preſent. Theſe two examples aboue rehearſed declare the greatnes of Gods power, and the ſhortnes and miſerie of mans life, which traineth with it great cares, for the purchaſing of worldly goods and honors, and ſhew withall that death is common to all men, the which a Prince can no more auoid than a poore plowman.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1. Vnderſtand, to the end he might deliuer it to the Florentines.
                  
                  2 They withhold from the houſe of Auſtrich a part of Iſtria and Furly, and from the empire Padoa and Veronne.
                  
               
            
            
               How the holy man Frier Hierom was burned at Florence by the procurement of the Pope, and of diuers Florentines and Venetians his enimies. Chap. 19.
               
                  I Haue told you before in this diſcourſe of our voiage to Naples, that there was at Florence a Frier Iacobin called Hierome, who had been reſident there the ſpace of fifteen yeeres, being a man famous for his holy life, and whom my ſelfe ſaw and communed with in the yeere of our Lord 1495. The ſaid Frier as aboue is mentioned foretolde diuers things, and affirmed alwaies that the King ſhould paſſe ouer the mountaines into Italie, and preached ſo openly, ſaying, that he vnderſtood both this and all the other things whereof he ſpake by reuelation. He ſaid further, that the King was choſen of God to reforme the eſtate of the Church with the ſword, and to chaſtice Tyrants. But bicauſe he affirmed that he vnderſtood theſe things by reuelation, many murmured againſt him, and he procured himſelfe the diſpleaſure

of the Pope and of diuers others in the towne of Florence. He led the holieſt life that any man could leade, as appeered both by his conuerſation, and alſo by his ſermons, wherein he preached againſt all kinde of vice, ſo that he reformed the looſe liues of many in the ſaid citie. But in this yeere 1498. about the ſelfe ſame time that King Charles ended his life, died alſo this Frier Hierom, within fower or fiue daies the one of the other. The cauſe why I write this vnto you, is for that he preached alwaies openly that the K. ſhould return again into Italy, to execute the commiſſion that God had giuen him, which was to reforme the Church by the ſword, and to chaſe tyrants out of the countrie; and that in caſe he did it not, God would puniſh him cruelly; and all his former ſermons, and all that he made at this preſent he put foorth in print, and are to be ſold. This threatning that he vſed againſt the King, ſaying that God would puniſh him cruelly vnleſſe he returned: the ſaid Frier writ alſo diuers times to him before his death, and the like told he me with his owne mouth, when I ſpake with him at our returne out of Italie, ſaying that God had pronounced ſentence againſt the King in heauen, vnleſſe he executed that which he had commanded him, and reſtrained his men from ſpoile. Now you ſhall vnderſtand, that about the time of the Kings death, the Florentines were at great variance within the citie: ſome deſired the Kings returne, and waited daily for it, bicauſe of the great hope Frier Hierom gaue them thereof: but in the meane time they conſumed themſelues and waxed maruellous poore, by reaſon of the great charges they ſuſtained in hope to recouer Piſa, and the other places that they had put into the K. hands, whereof the Venetians held Piſa. But other ſome gaue aduice to take part with the league, and vtterly to abandon the King, ſaying that they were abuſed, that it was folly to looke for his returne, and that Frier Hierom was an heretike, and a whoormaſter, and that it were almes to put him into a ſacke, and throwe him into the riuer; but he was ſo friended in the towne, that they durſt not attempt it. The Pope alſo and the Duke of Milan writ often againſt this Frier, offering the Florentines to cauſe Piſa and their other places to be reſtored them, if they would depart from their league with the King, and take Frier Hierom and puniſh him. And by chance at that preſent a new Seniorie was choſen in Florence, whereof many were enimies to this Frier. For you ſhall vnderſtand that the ſaid Seniorie changeth at euery two moneths end. Wherefore the ſaid Hieroms enimies ſuborned a Frier Franciſcan to picke a quarrell to him and call him heretike, affirming that he abuſed the people, in ſaying he vnderſtood any thing by reuelation: for proofe whereof he offered himſelfe to the fire, and theſe words he ſpake before the Seniorie. Frier Hierom would not preſent himſelfe to the fire, but a companion of his ſaid, that he would enter into the fire for him: and then another companion of the Frier Franciſcans preſented himſelfe on the other ſide: whereupon a day was aſſigned when they ſhould enter into the fire. Vpon the which they both came accordingly, accompanied each of them with his couent; but the Iacobine brought the ſacrament in his hand, which the Frier Franciſcans and the Seniorie alſo commanded him to lay downe, which he refuſed to do: wherfore they returned againe to their couents. Then the people mooued by the ſaid Frier Hieroms enimies, went with the Seniories commiſſion and tooke him, with two others of his companions in his conuent, and at the very firſt racked him cruelly; they ſlue alſo the chiefeſt citizen in the towne called Francis Vallorie, bicauſe he was the ſaid Friers great friend. Moreouer, the Pope ſent his commiſſion, whereby he authorized them to make their proceſſe; and in the end they burned them all three. They charged him with theſe two points onely; firſt, that he raiſed diſcord in the towne: and ſecondarily, that he vnderſtood

by his friends of the councell, all that he vaunted to know by reuelation. For my part I will neither accuſe them, nor excuſe them for this deed; neither know I whether they did well or euill, in putting him to death: but ſure he told many things that prooued true, which he could not receiue from the councel of Florence. And as touching the King, and the euils he ſaid ſhould happen to him, they came to paſſe as he propheſied: for firſt he tolde him, of the Doulphin his ſonnes death, and after of his owne, as my ſelfe can witneſſe, for I haue ſeene the letters he writ thereof to the King.
            
            
               Of the obſequies and funerals of King Charles the eight, and of the coronation of King Lewis the 12. his ſucceſſor, with the genealogies of the Kings of Fraunce continuing to the ſaid Lewis. Chap. 20.
               
                  THe Kings diſeaſe was a Catarre or an Apoplexie: his Phiſitions hoped it would haue fallen down into one of his armes, the loſſe whereof they ſomwhat doubted, but feared no whit any danger of death: notwithſtanding the contrarie to their expectation hapned. He had fower Phiſitions, but gaue credit onely to the woorſt of them, and that ſo great, that the others durſt not vtter their minds: for they would gladly haue purged him fower daies before he died, bicauſe they ſawe in his bodie the occaſions of his death. Euery man ran to the Duke of Orleans, who was to ſucceede him as next heire to the crowne. But King Charles his chamberlains cauſed him to be richlie buried, and immediately after his death began ſolemne ſeruice for him, which continued both day and night: for when the canons ended, the friers Franciſcans began; and when they ended the Bons-hommes 
                  
                     1
                  , which was an order founded by himſelfe: his body remained at Amboiſe eight daies, partly in his chamber, which was richly hanged, and partly in the church. All ſolemnities belonging to his funerals, were more ſumptuous than euer were any K. of Fraunce: for his chamberlains, officers, & thoſe that were neere about him, neuer departed from his body till it was laid in the ground, which was about a moneth after his death, al the which ſpace this ſolemne ſeruice continued; ſo that the charges of his funerals amounted to fiue and fortie thouſand franks, as diuers of the receit haue informed me. I arriued at Amboiſe two daies after his death, and went to ſay my praiers ouer his body, where I abode fiue or ſixe howers. And to ſaie the truth, I neuer ſaw ſo great mourning, and lamentation, nor that continued ſo long for any Prince as for him: and no maruel; for he had beſtowed vpon thoſe that were neere about him, namely his chamberlaines, and ten or twelue gentlemen of his priuie chamber, greater offices and gifts than euer did King of Fraunce, yea, too great to ſaie the truth. Beſides that, he was the mildeſt and courteouſeſt Prince that euer liued; for I thinke he neuer gaue foule word to any man: wherefore in better hower could he not die, both to leaue his fame behinde him in hiſtories, and to be bewailed of thoſe that ſerued him. And I thinke verily, that my ſelfe am the man whom of all other he vſed roughlieſt, but bicauſe I knew it to be the fault of his youth and not to proceede of himſelfe, I could neuer loue him the woorſe for it.
               After I had ſtaied one night at Amboiſe, I went to the newe King, with whom I had been more familiar than any man: and further, for his ſake had ſuſteined all my

troubles and loſſes, which now he ſeemed little to remember: notwithſtanding with great wiſdome he tooke poſſeſſion of the crowne, for he changed no penſions that yeere, though halfe the yeere were yet to come, neither diſplaced many officers, but ſaid that he would maintaine euery man in his eſtate; whereby he wan great honor. Moreouer, with all ſpeede poſſible he went to his coronation, whereat my ſelfe was preſent. And theſe that follow repreſented the peeres of Fraunce. The firſt was the Duke of Alençon, who repreſented the Duke of Burgundie; the ſecond the Duke of Bourbon, who repreſented the Duke of Normandie; the third the Duke of Lorraine, who repreſented the D, of Guienne. The firſt Earle was Philip L. of Rauaſtaine, who repreſented the Earle of Flaunders; the ſecond Engilbert of Cleues, who repreſented the Earle of Champaigne; the third the Earle of Foix, who repreſented the Earle of Tholouze. And the ſaid King Levvis the twelfth now raigning, was crowned at Reims the 27. of Maie, the yeere 1498. and is the fourth that hath come to the crowne by collaterall line. The two firſt were Charles Martell, or Pepin his ſonne, and Hugh Capet, who were both of them Maſters of the pallace or gouernors of thoſe Kings, whom they depoſed from the crowne, which afterwarde themſelues vſurped; the thirde was King Philip of Valois; and the fourth the King that now raigneth: but theſe two latter came to the crowne by iuſt and lawfull title. The firſt genealogie of the Kings of Fraunce beginneth at Meronee: two Kings had raigned in Fraunce before the ſaid Meronee, namely Pharamond, who was firſt choſen King of Fraunce (for his predeceſſors were called Dukes or Kings of Gaule) and his ſonne Claudio. The ſaid Pharamond was choſen King the yeere of grace 420. and raigned ten yeeres, and his ſonne Claudio eighteene, ſo that theſe two Kings raigned eight and twentie yeeres: and Meronee who ſucceeded next after, was not ſonne, but coſen to the ſaid Claudio. Wherefore it ſeemeth that the right line of the Kings of Fraunce hath failed fiue times: notwithſtanding (as before I ſaid) men begin the firſt line at Meronee, who was crowned King in the yeere of our Lord 448. from the which time to the coronation of King Levvis the twelfth are numbred 1050. yeeres. But if you reckon from Pharamond, you muſt adde eight and twentie more, which make 1078. yeeres ſince there was firſt King of Fraunce. From Meronee to the raigne of Pepin (when the line of the ſaid Meronee failed) are numbred 333. yeeres. From Pepin to Hugh Capet raigned the true line of the ſaid Pepin, and Charlemaine his ſon, the ſpace of 237. yeeres. The right line of Hugh Capet raigned 339. yeeres, and ended in King Philip of Valois: and the right line of the ſaid King Philip of Valois continued till the death of King Charles the eight, which hapned in the yeere of our Lord 1498. The ſaid King Charles was the laſt of this line, the which had continued 169. yeeres, during the which ſpace, theſe ſeuen Kings raigned in Fraunce, Philip of Valois, King Iohn, Charles the fift, Charles the ſixt, Charles the ſeuenth, Levvis the 11. and Charles the eight, in whom the right line of Philip of Valois ended.
               
                  The Notes.
                  1 This vvas an order of religion deuiſed by the King.
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Charles Duke of Burgundie was of the houſe of Lancaster as Commines mentioneth lib. 1. cap. 5. and in other places.
               
                  
                     
                        Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter.
       
                           
                              —m. 
                              Blaunch daughter and heire
       of Henry Duke of Lancaſter and Darby.
       
                                 
                                    Philippa. 
                                    
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Iohn the tenth
             King of Portugale, baſtard to King Ferrande
             of Portugale.
             
                                             
                                                Isabella. 
                                                
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Philip
                   Duke of Burgundie.
                   
                                                         
                                                            Charles Duke of Burgundie, of whose
                         wars and death this hiſtory treateth.
                   
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Elizabeth wife to King Edward the fourth, was neece to the Conſtable of Fraunce, as mentioneth Commines lib. 4. cap. 5.
               
                  
                     
                        Peter of Luxembourg. 
                           
                              —m. 
                              Margaret
       Counteſſe of Saint Paul, Conuerſane, Briane, Lignac,
       &c.
       
                                 
                                    Petrus Earle of Saint Paul, &c. 
                                       
                                          —m.
                                          Margaret daughter to William D. of
             Andre in Prouence.
             
                                             
                                                Iaquelna, or Iaquette.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Iohn Duke of
                         Bedford.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Richard Wooduile
                         Earle of Riuers.
                         
                                                         
                                                            Elizabeth.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  —m. Sir Iohn
                                     Gray.
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        Thomas Marques
                                           Dorſet.
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Edward
                                     the fourth King of England.
                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Edwardus quintus
                                           R. Ang.
                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Lewis of Luxembourg, Earle of Saint Paul,
                   Conſtable of Fraūce.
                   
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Iane daughter &
                         heire to Robert Earle of Marle,
                         &c.
                         
                                                         
                                                            Anthonie Earle of Rouſſv
                               mentioned by Commines lib.
                               2. cap. 11. & lib. 4. ca. 4.
                                                         
                                                            Iohn Earle of Marle ſlaine
                               at the battell of Morat.
                                                         
                                                            Peter Earle of Saint Paul and
                               Brienne. 
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Margaret
                               daughter to Lewis D.
                               of Sauoye.
                               
                                                                     
                                                                        Marie.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Francis.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Marie daughter to
                         Lewis Duke of Sauoye.
                         
                                                         
                                                            Lewis Ea
                                                               ••
                                                             of Ligny.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Brabant, Lambourg, Luxembourg and Namurs came to Philip Duke of Burgundie, as mentioneth Commines lib. 4. cap. 13.
               
                  Brabant. Lambourg.
                  
                     
                        Iohn the firſt of that name Duke of Brabant and Lambourg. 
                           Lambourg was erected into a Duchie 1172. and Henrie the laſt Duke thereof (who died without iſſue 1293.) ſolde it to Iohn the firſt of that name Duke of Brabant. But Henrie Earle of Luxembourg father to Henrie the Emperor, the Biſhop of Colyn, and one called the Earle Ghelric inuaded the Duchie of Lambourg, with them Duke Iohn fought neere to the caſtell of Voronc, and tooke the Earle Ghelric (who pretended title to Lambourg) and the Biſhop of Colin priſoners: the Earle of Luxembourg with two of his brethren was ſlaine, the caſtell of Voronc razed, ſince the which time, Lambourg hath remained quiet vnder the Dukes of Brabant.
                        
                           
                              —m. 
                              Margaret daughter to Guy Earle of Flaunders.
                                 
                                    Iohn Duke of Brabant and Lambourg.
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Margaret daughter to Edward the firſt King of England.
                                             
                                                Iohn Duke of Brabant and Lambourg.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Marie daughter to Philip of Valois King of Fraunce.
                                                         
                                                            Iane the eldest daughter died 1397.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Wenceſlaus ſon to Iohn King of Boheme 
                                                                     Wenceſlaus ſucceeded Iohn Duke of Brabant, but he died 1383. without iſſue, and after his wife dying anno 1393. left Brabant and Lambourg to Anthonie ſecond ſonne to Philip the Hardie, the ſaid Ianes grand nephew by Margaret hir yoonger ſiſter, after whoſe death and his two ſonnes Iohn and Philip, Brabant and Lambourg deſcended to Philip Duke of Burgundie, as mentioneth Commines in the place aboue rehearſed. died 1383.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            Margaret.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Lewis Malea
                                                                     
                                                                        •••
                                                                     
                                                                   Earle of Flaundres.
                                                                     
                                                                        Margaret.
                                                                        
                                                                           
                                                                              —m. 
                                                                              Philip the hardy.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    Margaret wife to William Earl of Haynault.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    Anthony ſlaine in the battel of Agincourt.
                                                                                       
                                                                                          —m. 
                                                                                          Iane daughter to Walleran Earle of Saint Paul & Ligny, the firſt wife.
                                                                                             
                                                                                                Iohn ſucceeded his father in Brabant and Lambourg.
                                                                                             
                                                                                                Philip ſucceeded his brother.
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                          —m. 
                                                                                          
                                                                                             Elizabeth ſecond wife to Anthonie Duke of Brabant, was daughter to Iohn Duke of Gorlic, brother to the Emperours Wenceſlaus and Sigiſmundus, who partly in reſpect of this marriage, partly for money gaue to Duke Anthonie the Duchie of Luxembourg, but after his death, they and VVilliam Duke of Saxonie, who had married Sigiſmundus daughters daughter, ſought to diſpoſſeſſe hir of it: but Duke Philip of Burgundie euer defended hir, and after hir death ſucceeded hir as well by hir gift as alſo as heire to Duke Anthonie, (his two ſonnes being dead) who had paid money to VVenceſlaus and Sigiſmundus for it: afterward alſo Charles Duke of Burgundie bought the title of Iſabella (wife to Caſſimirus King of Polonia, and neece to the Emperor Sigiſmund) to the Duchie of Luxembourg to hold it without quarrell.
                                                                                          Elizabeth the ſecond wife.
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    Luxembourg.
                                                                                    Iohn Duke of Burgundie.
                                                                                       
                                                                                          —m. 
                                                                                          Margaret ſiſte
                                                                                             •
                                                                                           to William Earl of Haynault & Holland.
                                                                                             
                                                                                                Namurs. 
                                                                                                Philip Duke of Burgundie. As touching Namurs Duke Philip bought it for his money of diuers that pretended title to it, eſpecially of Iohn Earle of Namur, who ſold it to Duke Philip vnder condition to hold it during his life, which happened anno 1428.
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Holland, Hainault, and Zeland came to Duke Philip, as mentioneth Commines lib. 4. cap. 13. where alſo the Queenes Maieſties title to the ſaid countries is ſomwhat touched.
               
                  Holland, Hainault, Zeland. 
                  
                     
                        William Earle of Holland, Hainault, and Zeland.
                           
                              —m. 
                              Iane ſiſter to Philip of Valois after K. of Fraunce.
                                 
                                    Philippa the eldeſt daughter, wife to Edward the third King of England.
                                 
                                    William declared by the Emperor ann. 1337. Earle of Holland, Zeland, Hainault, and Lord of Friſeland, ſlaine by the Frizons 1345.
                                       
                                          Margaret, daughter as ſome write, to William, 
                                          This Margaret Guicchiardin writeth to haue been daughter to VVilliam the yoonger Earle of Hainault, Holland and Zeland, but Annales Genealogiques Franciae ſay that ſhe was ſiſter not daughter to VVilliam, as do alſo other moſt approoued Authors. And if ſhe were but ſiſter, then the Queenes Maieſtie being deſcended of Philippa the ſaid VVilliams eldeſt ſiſter, is right heire of all theſe countries. Meyerus lib, 12. fol. 140. pag. 2. and fol. 147. pag. 1. ſaith, that Margaret was ſiſter not daughter to Duke VVilliam, which alſo is the more manifeſtly prooued, bicauſe the wife of this VVilliam was Iane the eldeſt daughter to Iohn Duke of Brabant, who ouerliued hir husband, and after married VVenceſlaus brother to the Emperor Charles the fourth: which woman neuer had iſſue, yet finde we no mention of any other wife that VVilliam the yoonger Earle of Hainault had. as others, ſiſter.
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Lewis of Bauier
                                                   •
                                                 Emperor.
                                                   
                                                      William the eldeſt brother died without iſſue.
                                                   
                                                      Albert ſucceeded his brother.
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Margaret daughter to the Duke of Brida.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  William ſucceeded his father.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Margaret daughter to Philip the Hardy.
                                                                           
                                                                              Iaqueline daughter and heire had fower husbands, but died without iſſue, and to hir ſucceeded Philip D. of Burgundie.
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  Margaret.
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Iohn Duke of Burgundy ſonne to Philip the Hardy.
                                                                           
                                                                              Philip Duke of Burgundy ſucceeded Iaqueline in all theſe Seniories, as heere mentioneth Commines.
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 A daughter married to the Duke of Iuliers.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Margaret of Flaunders was heire of Flaunders, Neuers and Rethel, as mentioneth Commines lib. 4. cap. 13. & lib. 5. cap. 11. the which Margaret married with Philip the Hardy, yoongeſt ſonne to Iohn King of Fraunce.
               
                  
                     
                        Ottho yoonger ſonne to Hugh the fourth of that name Duke of Burgundy.
                           
                              —m. 
                              Iſabella daughter & heire of Arnulfe Earle of Neuers, which Arnulfe died anno 1243.
                                 
                                    Neuers.
                                    Yolande.
                                    
                                       
                                          Flaunders.
                                          —m. 
                                          Robert of Bethune the 22. Earle of Flaunders died 1323.
                                             
                                                Lewis Earle of Neuers, Baron of Douzy, died before his father ann. 1322.
                                                   
                                                      Rethel.
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Mary daughter and heire of Iames 
                                                         •
                                                       of Rethel.
                                                         
                                                            Lewis Earle of Flaunders, Neuers, Rethel, ſlain at the battell of Crecy 1346.
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Margaret yoongeſt daughter to Philip le Longue, King of Fraunce.
                                                               
                                                                  Lewis Earle of Flaū
                                                                  ders, ſurnamed of Malain, ſlain by Iohn Duke of Berry brother to Charles the fift anno 1383.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Margaret daughter to Iohn the 3. Duke of Brabant.
                                                                           
                                                                              Margaret daughter and heire heere mentioned married two Dukes of Burgundie, as in the next leafe more at large shall appeere.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    —m. 
                                                                                    Philip Duke and Earle of Burgundy the firſt husband.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    —m. 
                                                                                    Philip the Hardy yoongeſt ſonne to Iohn K. of Fraunce.
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Arthois and the County of Burgundy deſcended to the ſaid Lady Margaret aboue mentioned, and how ſhe married two Dukes of Burgundy, and how Philip the Hardy hir ſecond husband obtained the Duchy of Burgundie after the death of Philip Duke of Burgundie hir firſt husband.
               
                  
                     
                        Burgundie Duchie. 
                        Robert Duke of Burgundy died 1308.
                           
                              —m. 
                              Agnes daughter to King Saint Lewis.
                              
                                 
                                    Margaret the eldeſt daughter.
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Lewis Huttin King of Fraunce.
                                             
                                                Iane wife to Phillip Earle of Eureux.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Iane.
                                    
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Philip of Valois King of Fraunce.
                                             
                                                Iohn King of Fraunce. Touching the Duchie of Burgundie, note that after the death of Philip Duke of Burgundie, nephew to Ottho the 16. Duke of Burgundie, King Iohn of Fraunce being ſonne to Iane the ſaid Otthos yoonger ſiſter, ſeazed the Duchie of Burgundie into his hands, excluding Iane daughter to Margaret the elder ſiſter as ſuſpected of baſtardie, and after gaue the ſaid Duchie to his yoongeſt ſonne Philip the hardie for his aduancement in marriage with the Ladie Margaret of Flaunders.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Philip the hardie ſecond husband to the Ladie Margaret.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Ottho the 16. Duke of Burgundie.
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Iane the eldeſt daughter.
                                             
                                                Philip died afore his father anno 1346.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Iane daughter to William Earl of Boloin and Auuergne.
                                                         
                                                            Philip Duke and Earle of Burgundie ſucceeded his grandfather, died 1361.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Margaret daughter and heire, hir ſecond husband was Philip the hardie.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Burgundie Countie.
                        Othelin Earle of Burgundie died 1303.
                           
                              Arthois.
                              —m. 
                              Maude daughter to Robert Earle of Arthois. Touching the title of Arthois this is to be obſerued, that Robert Earle of Arthois father to Maude, had a ſonne named Philip, who died before his father, and left behinde him a ſonne named Robert Earle of Beumont, who after his grandfathers death demanded the Countrey of Arthois: but this Maude by fauor of the French King obtained it, bicauſe ſhe was adiudged neerer heire to the Earle Robert being his daughter, than the Earle of Beumont being his ſonnes ſonne: for ſpite whereof, the Earle of Beumont reuolted to the King of England, of him are deſcended the Earles of Eu.
                              
                                 
                                    Iane ſucceeded hir mother in hir widowhood, and was poiſoned immediately after hir mothers death.
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Philip the long King of Fraunce
                                             
                                                Iane the eldest daughter.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Ottho the 16. Duke of Burgundie.
                                                         
                                                            Philip died afore his father anno 1346.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Iane daughter to William Earl of Boloin and Auuergne.
                                                                     
                                                                        Philip Duke and Earle of Burgundie ſucceeded his grandfather, died 1361.
                                                                           
                                                                              —m. 
                                                                              Margaret daughter and heire, hir ſecond husband was Philip the hardie.
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Margaret.
                                                This Margaret being in hir widdowhood, ſucceeded in Arthois and the Countie of Burgundie of Philip hir ſiſter Ianes ſonnes ſonne, and husband to Margaret hir ſonnes daughter, to whom after hir death the ſaid Seigniories deſcended.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Lewis Earle of Flaunders
                                                         
                                                            Lewis of Malain Earle of Flaunders.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Margaret daughter to Iohn D. of Brabant.
                                                                     
                                                                        Margaret daughter and heire, hir ſecond husband was Philip the hardie.
                                                                           
                                                                              —m. 
                                                                              Philip Duke and Earle of Burgundie ſucceeded his grandfather, died 1361.
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Blaunch.
                                    
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Charles le bel K. of Fraunce.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the King of Portugale was coſin germane to the Duke of Burgundy, as is mentioned Lib. 5. cap. 7.
               
                  
                     
                        Ferdinand the ninth King of Portugale.
                           
                              Iohn a baſtard, but King of Portugale.
                                 
                                    —m. 
                                    Philippa daughter to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter
                                       
                                          Iſabella.
                                          
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Philip Duke of Burgundie.
                                                   
                                                      Charles Duke of Burgundy.
                                                         
                                                            Mary daughter and heire to D. Charles.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Maximilian Emperor.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Edward King of Portugale.
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Iane ſiſter to Alfonſe King of Arragon, Naples, and Sicile.
                                                   
                                                      Leonora.
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Frideric the third Emperor.
                                                               
                                                                  Maximilian Emperor.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Mary daughter and heire to D. Charles.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Alfonſus King of Portugale, the ſame that came into Fraunce for ſuccours.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How the Duke of Cleues was the Lady of Burgundies neereſt kinſman by his mother, as is mentioned Lib. 5. cap. 16.
               
                  
                     
                        Iohn Duke of Burgundy.
                           
                              —m. 
                              Margaret ſiſter to William Earle of Hainault and Holland.
                                 
                                    Mary.
                                    
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Adolf the firſt D. of Cleues.
                                             
                                                Adolfe Lord of Rauaſtain.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Betrice daughter to Iohn Duke of Cuymbria in Portugale.
                                                         
                                                            Philip Lord of Rauaſtain mentioned in many places of this hiſtorie.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Mary baſe daughter to Philip Duke of Burgundy.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Iohn Duke of Cleues the D. heere mentioned.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Iſabella daughter to Iohn E. of Neuers.
                                                         
                                                            Iohn duke of Cleues the Dukes ſonne, for whom the marriage with the Lady Mary ſhould haue beene made.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Philip Duke of Burgundy.
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Iſabella daughter to Iohn K. of Portugale.
                                             
                                                Charles Duke of Burgundy.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Iſabella daughter to Charles Duke of Bourbon.
                                                         
                                                            Mary Ducheſſe of Auſtrich, ſo often mentioeed in this hiſtorie.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Maximilian Emperor.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How King Henry the 7. was right heire of the houſe of Lancaſter, contrary to Commines who affirmeth the contrary Lib. 5. cap. 18. togither with the excuſe of Commines error.
               
                  
                     
                        Edward the third King of England.
                           
                              Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter.
                                 
                                    —m. 
                                    Blaunch daughter and heire to Henry D. of Lancaſter.
                                       
                                          Iohn Duke of Bedford
                                       
                                          Henry the 4. Rex Angliae.
                                             
                                                Henry the 5. Rex Angliae.
                                                   
                                                      Henry the 6. Rex Angliae.
                                                         
                                                            Edward Prince of Wales.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Thomas D. of Clarēce
                                       
                                          Humfrey Duke of Gloceſter.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    —m. 
                                    Katharine the third wife.
                                       
                                          Iohn Earle of Sommerſet.
                                             
                                                Iohn Duke of Sommerſet the eldeſt ſonne.
                                                   
                                                      Margaret counteſſe of Richmond.
                                                         
                                                            Henry the 7
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Edmund made D of Sommerſet, bicauſe his brother died without iſſue male.
                                                   
                                                      Henry Duke of Sommerſet beheaded by K Edward the fourth.
                                                   
                                                      Edmund Duke of Sommerſet beheaded alſo by K. Edward the fourth.
                                                         A daughter maried Humfrey Duke of Buckingham
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Iohn ſlaine at the battell of Teukesbury.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The excuſe of Commines error.
                  The line of Henry the fourth being failed in Prince Edward, the right of the houſe of Lancaſter came to the houſe of Sommerſet, as heere is ſet foorth: but after the d
                        ••
                     th of Iohn Duke of Sommerſet, who died without heire male, Edmund his brother was made Duke of Sommerſet. Wherefore Commines knowing Henry the 7. to claime the right of the houſe of Lancaſter as heire of the houſe of Sommerſet, and ſeeing others to be Dukes of Sommerſet and not him: ſuppoſed them to be of the elder houſe to him; yet notwithſtanding was Henry the 7. neerer heire than they, being by his mother deſcended of the elder brother, though they being of the male line obtained the title of Sommerſet before him. But this in my fanſie bred Commines error, and thus much in his excuſe.
               
            
            
               
               The title the Duke of Lorraine had to the realme of Sicilie, countie of Prouence, and Duchy of Bar, mentioned by Commines Lib. 7. cap. 1. and the Kings title thereto: togither with the whole quarrell betweene the houſe of Arragon and Aniou: and why the houſe of Aniou had the beſt title, as mentioneth Commines Lib. 8. Cap. 16.
               
                  
                     Naples
                     Charles Earle of Aniou and Main brother to King S. Lewis, King of Naples and Sicilie.
                        
                           Prouence.
                           —m. 
                           Betrice heire of Prouence.
                              
                                 2
                                 Charles ſurnamed the Boiteux, King of Naples.
                                    
                                       Hungarie.
                                       —m. 
                                       Mary daughter & heire to Stephen King of Hungary.
                                          
                                             Charles Martell King of Hungarie the eldeſt brother.
                                                
                                                   Cornumbert King of Hungarie.
                                                      
                                                         Lewis King of Hungarie.
                                                      
                                                         Andrew ſtrangled by Queen Iane his wife.
                                                            
                                                               4
                                                               —m. 
                                                               Iane ſucceeded Robert hir grandfather.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             3
                                             Robert King of Naples the yoonger brother.
                                                
                                                   Charles ſans terre died before his father.
                                                      
                                                         4
                                                         Iane ſucceeded Robert hir grandfather.
                                                            
                                                               —m. 
                                                               Andrew ſtrangled by Queen Iane his wife.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         Mary. Boccace his Conc.
                                                      
                                                         Margaret
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               5
                                                               —m. 
                                                               Charles King of Naples and Hungarie.
                                                                  
                                                                     7
                                                                     Iane ſucceeded Ladiſlaus hir brother, died anno 1433.
                                                                  
                                                                     6
                                                                     Ladiſlaus King of Naples died 1414.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             Lewis D. of Durazzo.
                                                
                                                   Charles of Durazzo executed by Lewis King of Hungarie.
                                                      
                                                         5
                                                         Charles King of Naples and Hungarie.
                                                            
                                                               —m. 
                                                               Margaret
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     7
                                                                     Iane ſucceeded Ladiſlaus hir brother, died anno 1433.
                                                                  
                                                                     6
                                                                     Ladiſlaus King of Naples died 1414.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             Clementia.
                                             
                                                
                                                   —m. 
                                                   Charles Earle of Valois.
                                                      
                                                         Philip of Valois King of Fraunce.
                                                            
                                                               Iohn King of Fraunce.
                                                                  
                                                                     Lewis of Aniou adopted by Q. Iane the firſt, ſlaine an. 1385.
                                                                        
                                                                           Lewis of Aniou troubled K. Ladiſlaus, died anno 1417.
                                                                              
                                                                                 Bar. 
                                                                                 Yoland heire of Bar by Yoland hir mother.
                                                                                    
                                                                                       Marie.
                                                                                       
                                                                                          
                                                                                             —m. 
                                                                                             Charles the 7 K. of France.
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   Lewis the 11 K. of France
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         Charles the 8. K. of Fraunce
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                       Reue ſo often mē
                                                                                       tioned in this hiſtorie, adopted by the laſt Qu. Iane, after Lewis his brothers death.
                                                                                          
                                                                                             Lorraine.
                                                                                             —m. 
                                                                                             Iſabella daughter and heire to Charles D. of Lorraine.
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   Iohn Duke of Calabria died before his father.
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         Nicholas died before his grandfather.
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                                                                                   Yoland wife to Frederic of Vandemonne.
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                         Rene. This is hee that claimed Prouence and Bar of K. Charles.
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                       Charles Earle, of Maine mentioned Lib. 1. cap. 3.
                                                                                          
                                                                                             Charles, whom king Rene made his heire of Naples, Prouence, and Bar, and he after made King Lewis his heire lib. 7. c. 1.
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                       Lewis the third of Aniou Duke, adopted by Iane the ſecond, died anno 1433.
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
Heereby appeereth that the Duke of Lorraine had the beſt title to Prouence, as heire to Lewis the firſt of that name Duke of Aniou, to whom Queene Iane gaue it: to Naples likewiſe as heire to the houſe of Aniou, by being daughters ſonne to Rene, to whom Queene Iane the ſecond left it by hir laſt will and teſtament, of Bar he was heire as heire to Yolande his great grandmother: and as touching the teſtaments of the two firſt Charles kings of Naples, who, as it is alleaged, ſo vnited Prouence, that it could not be ſeuered from the realme of Naples, nor deſcend to the heire female as long as a male was liuing. Firſt, the example of Queene Iane who ſucceeded Robert hir grandfather diuers males liuing, prooueth there was neuer any ſuch teſtament: beſides that, king Charles was no more heire male to thoſe kings than the Duke of Lorraine, for they both deſcended of them by a woman, namely Clementia, wife to Charles of Valois. So that the King had no colour to Naples or Prouence, but at this da
                     •
                  e the whole title of the houſe of Aniou thereto, reſteth in the now Duke of Lorraine, who is lineally deſcended of king Rene. Laſtly, the reaſon whereupon Commines groundeth the houſe of Anious title to the realme of Naples to be beſt: is onely bicauſe Lewis of Aniou was made heire thereof by Queene Ianes laſt teſtament, which reuoketh all former teſtaments.
               
                  The ſtorie of this pedegree of Naples and Sicilie.
                  
                  1. Charles brother to Saint Lewis King of Fraunce obtained Prouence by marriage of Betrice daughter to Raymond, or Robert, or Berengarius Earle of Prouence, who made hir his heire, though ſhe were his yoonger daughter, after Vrbanus the fourth Pope of Rome called him into Italie againſt Manfredus King of Naples and Sicilie, whom Charles ſlew in battell, and after beheaded Conradinus alſo, who quarreled the realmes of Naples & Sicilie: but ſoone after Peter King of Arragon, who had married King Manſridus daughter, reuolted Sicilie from him, flew all the French men in an euening, and poſſeſſed Sicilie, as his poſteritie namely King Philip doth yet at this day. Charles was crowned King of Naples by Vrbane the fourth, anno 1255. and after confirmed by Clement the fourth, and died anno 1274.
                  2. Charles his ſonne in his fathers time ſeeking to recouer Sicilie, was taken priſoner by King Peters forces. and caried into Arragon, where he ſhould haue been executed in reuenge of Conradinus death (as 200. gentlemen and nobles taken with him were) had not Conſtance king Peters wife ſaued his life: after he was reſtored to Naples, paying for his raunſome 30000. marks, and married the daughter and heire of Stephen king of Hungarie, by whom he had nine ſonnes and fiue daughters, whoſe ofspring looke in Onufrius pag. 309. he died anno 1319. Theſe two kings are they that our author mentioneth lib. 7. cap. 1. that were ſaid to haue made teſtaments that Prouence could not be ſeuered from the realme of Naples, nor deſcend to the female as long as there was an heire male liuing, which appeereth to be falſe in the example of Queene Iane.
                  
                  3. Robert king of N
                        •
                     ples crowned by Clement the fift, died without iſſue male anno 1342. and left his realme to Iane his ſonnes daughter, vnder condition that ſhe ſhould marrie Andrew yoonger ſonne to Cornumbere king of Hungarie hir coſin germain remooued: heere is to be obſerued that this Robert was yoonger ſonne to king Charles, but the ſaid king gaue to Charles his eldeſt ſonne his realme of Hungarie, and Naples to this Robert. In his time liued Petrarcha and Boccace.
                  
                  4. Iane daughter to Charles ſans terre ſucceeded hir grandfather Robert, and married Andrew ſonne to the king of Hungarie as hir ſaid grandfather had appointed, whom within three yeeres ſhe ſtrangled: whereupon Lewis king of Hungarie his brother came into Italy, chaſed Q. Iane out of Naples, executed Charles of Durazzo as conſenting to his brothers death, and carried Charles his ſonne with him into Hungarie; after whoſe departure, Iane by helpe of Pope Clement returned and recouered Naples, but after ſhe fell out with Pope Vrbanus the ſixt, who chaſed hir into Prouence, where ſhe adopted Lewis of Aniou ſonne to King Iohn of Fraunce, and ſo returned to Naples, againſt whom the Pope called out of Hungarie Charles ſonne to Charles of Durazzo, who recouered Naples, but Prouence Lewis enioied: ſhe was hanged ann. 1381.
                  5. Charles (ſonne to Charles of Durazzo beheaded) was led priſoner into Hungarie by king Lewis, as before is mentioned, after whoſe death, he ſucceeded him in Hungarie as his next heire male: he was inueſted King of Naples by Vrbane the ſixt againſt Queene Iane, whom he tooke priſoner anno 1381. and hung at the ſame window ſhe had hung hir husband, and beheaded alſo Marie Queene Ianes ſiſter (whom Boccace was enamored of) as conſenting to hir ſiſters husbands death: he ſlew in battell anno 1385. Lewis of Aniou, adopted by Queene Iane, after he fell at variance with Pope Vrbane. He was ſlaine in Hungarie by the treaſon of the old Queene king Lewis his wife and hir daughter at a feaſt, anno 1386 his wife was Margaret Queene Ianes ſiſter.
                  6 Ladiſlaus loſt Hungarie by his fathers murther, but was at length receiued and crowned king of Naples by Pope Boneface the ninth, anno 1, 90. and then he chaſed Lewis the ſecond out of Italie, who after his fathers death was come thither and had got ſome part of the realme. After Ladiſlaus fell out with Alexander the fift, and tooke Rome, whereupon the Pope gaue the realme of Naples to Lewis of Aniou, who returned and vanquiſhed Ladiſlaus and recouered Rome, but not knowing how to vſe the victorie, Ladiſlaus recouered himſelfe, forced Lewis to retire into Fraunce, and then againe tooke Rome, and died anno 14
                        •
                     4.
                  7. Iane the ſecond ſucceeded hir brother Ladiſlaus, after ſhe fell out with the Pope, who called Lewis of Aniou the third of that name againſt hir, then ſhe adopted Alfonſe of Arragon, who chaſed Lewis out of Italie, but Alfonſe and ſhe falling at variance, ſhe adopted Lewis of Aniou hir enimie, who recouered Naples, anno 1424. and raigned with hir till anno 1432. or 1433. when they both died: and then ſhe made Rene brother to Lewis hir heire: but he being then priſoner with Philip Duke of Burgundie, could not come to Naples, and then Alfonſe being diſmiſſed out of priſon by Philip Maria Duke of Milan, where he was alſo priſoner at the ſame time, preuailed and conquered Naples, and was inueſted by Pope Eugenius. Since the which time the Aniouins haue but quarelled Naples, and as for the ſucceſſion of this Alfonſe, you ſhall ſee it in the laſt pedegree in the end of this worke.
               
            
            
               
               Why the Venetians had no right to the realme of Cyprus, as Commines writeth Lib. 7. cap. 4.
               
                  
                     
                        1
                        Peter taken priſoner by the Genuois, but deliuered vnder condition to pay them a yeerely tribute.
                           
                              2
                              Ianus ſo named, bicause he was born at Genua, which was founded by Ianus.
                              
                                 
                                    Anne married Lewis Duke of Sauoy.
                                       
                                          Iohn.
                                       
                                       
                                          Amadis Duke of Sauoy right heire of Cyprus by his mother after Charlotte was dead.
                                       
                                          Philip Duke of Sauoy.
                                             
                                                Charles Duke of Sauoy.
                                                   
                                                      Phibbert Duke of Sauoy.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          4
                                          Lewis married Charlotte: he was crowned King, but was chaſed away by Iames the baſtard. He died ſans iſſue
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Charlotte maried firſt Iohn King of Portugale, who was poiſoned, & then this Lewis. She died ſans iſſue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    3
                                    Iohn liued like Sardanapalus.
                                    
                                       
                                          Charlotte maried firſt Iohn King of Portugale, who was poiſoned, & then this Lewis. She died ſans iſſue.
                                             
                                                4
                                                —m. 
                                                Lewis married Charlotte: he was crowned King, but was chaſed away by Iames the baſtard. He died ſans iſſue
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          5
                                          Iames a baſtard, by the Soldan of Aegypts helpe chaſed Lewis his ſiſters huſband out of Cyprus, and made himſelfe King.
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Katharine daughter to Marke Comaire Senator of Venice: the Venetians adopted hir, and vnder that colour conquered Cyprus, hir husband and ſonne being dead.
                                                   
                                                      6A ſonne borne after his fathers death, of whom the Venetians were tutors, but was poiſoned, as ſome write, by them as his father had beene. After his death the Venetians conquered Cyprus, vnder colour of adoption ann. 1473. or as Meyer ſaith fol. 349. anno 1470.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Heereby appeereth that the Duke of Sauoy hath the right to Cyprus, not the Venetians: for Iames husband to their adopted daughter was a baſtarde and an vſurper: and their adopted daughter a ſtranger to the crowne, and could pretend no title to it, Sed malè parta, malè dilabuntur.
               
            
            
               
               The houſe of Medices, whereof ſo ample mention is made Lib. 7. Cap. 5.
               
                  
                     
                        Iohn of Medices.
                           
                              Coſmus mentioned Lib. 7. cap. 5. died anno 1464. the 
                                 •
                              8. yeere of his age.
                                 
                                    Counteſſin
                                          •
                                       
                                     of Bardy.
                                       
                                          Peter. Commines ſeemeth to ouerpaſſe this man.
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Lucretia Tornaboni
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Julian ſlaine in Florence, Commines Lib. 6. c. 5.
                                                         
                                                            Iulius called Pope Clement the ſeuenth.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Laurence ſo often mentioned in Commines.
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Clarice Ʋrſine.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  Iohn called Pope Leo the tenth.
                                                               
                                                                  Peter fled out of Florence when K. Charles came thither.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Alfonſine Vrſine.
                                                                        
                                                                           
                                                                              Clarice married Philip S
                                                                                    •
                                                                                 rozzi.
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                              Laurence made Duke of Vrbin by Pope Leo the tenth.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    —m. 
                                                                                    Maudeleine daughter and heire to the Earle of Boloine.
                                                                                       
                                                                                          Alexander D. of Florence ſlaine by his coſin Laurence of Medices.
                                                                                             
                                                                                                —m. 
                                                                                                Margaret baſe daughter to Charles the Emperor.
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      —m. 
                                                                                                      Octauio Farneſe Pope Paulus nephew, ſecōd husbande to Margaret.
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                             Theſe were both baſtards.
                                                                                             
                                                                                                Iulia married Restagno Canteline a gentleman in L'Abruzzo.
                                                                                             
                                                                                                Iulius married a Lady of the county of Piombi.
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      Alexander.
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      Iulian.
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                          Katharine Q. mother of Fraunce.
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  Iulian Duke of Nemours married Philibert ſiſter to Louyſe King Francis mother Duches of Nemours.
                                                                     
                                                                        Hippolitus a Cardinal but a baſtard.
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Laurence.
                              
                                 
                                    Peter Francis.
                                    
                                       
                                          Iohn.
                                          
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Katharine Sforce.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Iohn the valiant ſoldier.
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Maria Salu
                                                                  ••
                                                               ti.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  Coſmus choſen Duke of Florence after Alexanders death, and confirmed by Charles the Emperor.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Leonor of Toledo daughter to Peter Duke of Alua.
                                                                           
                                                                              Iſabella Duches of Ferrara, and two other daughters.
                                                                           
                                                                              Francis D. of Florēce died 1584.
                                                                           
                                                                              Ferdinand.
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                              Iohn a Cardinal
                                                                           
                                                                              Gracian.
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                              Peter
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
               How Lewis Duke of Orleans, called after King Lewis the 12. pretended title to the Duchie of Milan, as Commines mentioneth Lib. 7. cap. 6. and in diuers other places.
               
               
                  
                     
                        1
                        Iohn Galeas made firſt Duke of Milan by the Emperor Wenceſlaus. This is he that lieth buried at Pauia, Commines Lib. 7. cap. 7 died anno 1402.
                        
                           
                              —m. 
                              Elizabeth daughter to the King of Boheme the firſt wife.
                                 
                                    Valentine.
                                    
                                       
                                          —m. 
                                          Lewis Duke of Orleans brother to Charles the ſixth.
                                             
                                                Ian
                                                      ••
                                                   .
                                             
                                             
                                                Iohn Duke of Angouleſme.
                                                   
                                                      Charles Duke of Angouleſme
                                                         
                                                            Francis King of Fraunce 
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Claude the eldeſt daughter.
                                                                     
                                                                        Francis died before his father.
                                                                     
                                                                        Henry the ſecond King of Fraunce, &c.
                                                                     
                                                                        Charles died before his father.
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Orleans.
                                                Charles Duke of Orleans.
                                                   
                                                      Lewis the 12. K. of Fraunce.
                                                         
                                                            Claude the eldeſt daughter.
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Francis King of Fraunce 
                                                                     
                                                                        Francis died before his father.
                                                                     
                                                                        Henry the ſecond King of Fraunce, &c.
                                                                     
                                                                        Charles died before his father.
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            Reneé married Hercules Duke of Ferrara.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Philip Earle of Vertu.
                                             
                                                Margaret wife to Richarde Earle of Eſtampes.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              —m. 
                              Katharine Viſconti the ſecond wife.
                                 
                                    2
                                    Iohn Maria ſucceeded his father: died ſans iſſue, he was ſlaine by his people.
                                 
                                    3
                                    Philip Maria ſucceeded his brother: died without lawfull iſſue. Appointed by Testament King Alfonſe of Naples his heire.
                                       
                                          Blaunche a baſtard
                                             
                                                Sforce. 4
                                                —m. 
                                                Francis Sforce, notwithſtanding Philips Teſtament vſurped the Duchie by fauor of the people.
                                                   
                                                      Hyppolita married Alfonſe King of Naples.
                                                   
                                                      5
                                                      Galeas ſlaine in the Church of Milan.
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Bo
                                                                  •••
                                                               
                                                             daught
                                                               ••
                                                             to the Duke of Sauoy.
                                                               
                                                                  Blaunche married Maximilian the Emperor.
                                                               
                                                                  6
                                                                  Iohn Galeas died when K. Charles came into Italie.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Iſabella daughter to Alfonſo King of Naples.
                                                                           
                                                                              Francis led into Fraunce by Lewis the 12.
                                                                           
                                                                              Bonne maried Sigiſmund K. of Poland.
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  Katharine married Iohn de Medices.
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        Iohn the valiant ſoldier in Charles the fifts time.
                                                                           
                                                                              Coſmus Duke of Florence.
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Aſcanio a Cardinall.
                                                   
                                                      7 
                                                      Lodouic called King Charles into Italie. Died priſoner in France vnder Lewis the twelfth.
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Betrice daughter to Hercules Duke of Ferrara.
                                                               
                                                                  8
                                                                  Maximilian recouered the Duchie from Lewis the 12. after carried away priſoner by King Francis.
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  9
                                                                  Francis reſtored by Charles the Emperor: died ſans iſſue.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Philip.
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Octauian.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               The French King claimeth from Valentine, who ought to haue ſucceeded hir brother Philip Maria, before Blaunche being his baſe daughter.
               After this Duke Francis death, the Emperor Charles ſeaſed the Duchie, partly by compoſition with Duke Francis at his reſtitution, which was to make the Emperor his heire if he died without iſſue, and partly by gift from Philip Maria, who by his 
                     •
                  eſtament gaue it to Alfonſe king of Naples, whoſe heire the Emperor was: and partly in right of the houſe of Auſtrich, which pretended title to it, as writeth Commines Lib. 7. cap. 2.
            
            
               
               The pedegree of Hercules Duke of Ferrara, of whom ſo often mention is made in this hiſtorie.
               
               The familie of Eſte anceſtors of this Nicholas gouerned Ferrara from the yeere 1202. or not long after, it is held of the Pope.
               
                  
                     
                        Nicholas Lord or Marques as ſome call him of Ferrara.
                           
                              Obizone was made generall of the church, and had therefore a penſion of ten thouſand ducats.
                                 
                                    Nicholas vanquiſhed Bernabo Viſconti. Succeeded his father.
                                 
                                    Albertus ſucceeded his brother.
                                       
                                          Nicholas a baſtard, vnder him was a councell at Ferrara, whereat the Emperour of Greece was preſent.
                                             
                                                Lionello a baſtard ſucceeded his father.
                                                   
                                                      —m. Daughter to Iohn Franceſco Gonzaga.
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            2 
                                                            Nicholas ſucceeded Borſo, but his vncle Hercules right heire expelled him, and ſeeking to recouer the ſtate, he was taken and beheaded by Sigiſmundus his other vncle.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                1
                                                Borſo a baſtard ſucceeded his brother, bicauſe his brothers ſon was yoong, he was created the firſt Duke of Ferrara by the Emperor Frederic.
                                             
                                             
                                                3
                                                Hercules expelled Nicholas his nephew he was generall to the Florentines, Venetians, and Milanois. This is he ſo often mentioned in this hiſtorie.
                                                   
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Leonora daughter to Ferdinand King of Naples.
                                                         
                                                            Betrice married Lodouic Sforce Duke of Milan.
                                                         
                                                            Alfonſe.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Lucretia daughter to Alexander the 6. Bi
                                                                     ••
                                                                  op of Rome.
                                                                     
                                                                        Franciſcus.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Hippolitus a Cardinall.
                                                                     
                                                                        5
                                                                        Hercules.
                                                                        
                                                                           
                                                                              —m. 
                                                                              Renee daughter to Lewis the 12. King of Fraunce.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    6
                                                                                    Alfonſus D. of Ferrara.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    Luigi Cardinall of Eſte.
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                               
                                                                  —m. 
                                                                  Laura.
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        Alfonſus.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                        Alfonſinus.
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  •
                                                                Elizabeth married Francis Gonzaga the Marqueſſe of Mantua mentioned in this ſtorie.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                Sigiſmundus.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The pedegree of Francis Marques of Mantua, ſo often mentioned in this historie.
               
               The familie of Gonzagua had gouerned Mantua before this Francis, from the yeer 1328. vnder this Francis Iohn Galliazzo beſieged Mantua a yeere, but preuailed not: this Francis ſerued the Duke of Milan and the Venetians.
               
                  
                     
                        Francis died anno 1407.
                           
                              Iohn Francis firſt Marques of Mātua made by the Emperor Sigiſmundus, was thrice generall to the Venetians, died anno 1443.
                                 
                                    —m. 
                                    Paola daughter to Malateſta, Lord of Rimini.
                                       
                                          Luigi liued in the time of Frederick the third.
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Barbara daughter to the Marques of Brandenburg.
                                                   
                                                      Luigi.
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Francis a cardinall.
                                                   
                                                      Frederick was generall to the Duke of Milan and the Venetians.
                                                         
                                                            —m. 
                                                            Margarita Tedeſca.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  Francis in the age of 38. yeeres fought with Charles the 8. at Laro, died 1520.
                                                                     
                                                                        —m. 
                                                                        Elizabeth daughter to Hercules Duke of Ferrara.
                                                                           
                                                                              Hercules a Cardinall.
                                                                           
                                                                              Frederick made general of the Church by Pope Leo, and ſo confirmed by his ſucceſſors, made D. by Charles the fift, he died 1539.
                                                                                 
                                                                                    Montferrat.
                                                                                    —m. 
                                                                                    Margaret daughter and heire of William Paleologus, marques of Montferrat.
                                                                                       
                                                                                          William.
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                          Francis.
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                          Lewis.
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                          Frederick.
                                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                              Ferdinandus generall of Milan to the Emperor Charles the fift.
                                                                        
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Iohn Francis.
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      Rodolfe.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                —m. 
                                                Margaret daughter to the Duke of Bauiera.
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Charles troubled his brother, but was chaſed away by him, & died in very poore eſtate.
                                       
                                          Lucedus was miſhapen.
                                       
                                          Alexander croked backed was a monke.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               How Ferdinand King of Arragon had more right to the realme of Naples than the Kings of the houſe of Arragon that poſſeſſed it, as writeth Commines Lib. 8. cap. 17.
               
                  
                     
                        1
                        Iohn the firſt of that name, King of Caſtile.
                           
                              —m. Daughter to Ferdinand the firſt, King of Portugale.
                                 
                                    Caſtile. 2
                                    Henry the third, King of Caſtile and Leon.
                                       
                                          Mary wife to Alfonſe King of Arragon and Naples.
                                       
                                          3
                                          Iohn the ſecond.
                                             
                                                4
                                                Henry the fourth married a daughter of the King of Portugale.
                                                   
                                                      Elizabeth put frō the crowne by hir aunt, Commin. Lib. 5. cap. 7.
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                5
                                                Elizabeth ſucceeded hir brother, putting hir neece from the crowne as a baſtard.
                                                   
                                                      Caſtile and Arragon vnited. 4
                                                      —m. 
                                                      Ferrand King of Arragon, and Caſtile by his wife, ſo often mentioned in theſe Italian wars.
                                                         
                                                            Katharine wife to Henry the eight, King of England.
                                                         
                                                            Iane married Philip Archduke of Auſtrich.
                                                               
                                                                  6
                                                                  Charles the fift Emperor.
                                                            
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            Iohn married Margaret daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, died before his father.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              —m. 
                              Elenor daughter to Peter King of Arragon.
                                 
                                    Arragon. 1.
                                    Ferrand Earle of Medina del Campo K. of Arragon.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Ferrande obtained the realme of Arragon anno 1407. bicauſe his mother was daughter to king Peter, whoſe heire male failed in Martin his nephew, and notwithſtanding that Martin had a daughter, yet Ferrande obtained the crowne to hir preiudice.
               
                  
                     
                        3
                        Iohn ſucceeded his brother in Arragon, but in Naples Ferrand his brothers baſtard ſucceeded.
                           
                              Ferrand King of Arragon, and Caſtile by his wife, ſo often mentioned in theſe Italian wars.
                                 
                                    Caſtile and Arragon vnited. 4
                                    —m. 
                                    5
                                    Elizabeth ſucceeded hir brother, putting hir neece from the crowne as a baſtard.
                                       
                                          Katharine wife to Henry the eight, King of England.
                                       
                                          Iane married Philip Archduke of Auſtrich.
                                             
                                                6
                                                Charles the fift Emperor.
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Iohn married Margaret daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, died before his father.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Charles King of Nauarre ſans iſſue.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iane Queene of Portugale.
                     
                        Mary married Iohn the ſecōd K. of Caſtile.
                     
                        2 1 Naples
                        Alfonſe adopted by Iane Queene of Naples, who after adopted Lewis Duke of Aniou.
                           
                              2
                              Ferrande the baſtard ſucceeded his father in the realme of Naples, died a little before King Charles came into Italy.
                                 
                                    5
                                    Frederick ſucceeded his nephew Ferdinand, led after into Fraunce by Lewis the 12.
                                       
                                          Ferdinand married Germain widow to King Ferdinand of Arragon.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    3
                                    Alfonſe fled when K. Charles came into Italy.
                                       
                                          4
                                          Ferdinand chaſed from Naples by King Charles, but after recouered the realme, died ſans iſſue.
                                       
                                          Iſabella wife to Iohn Galeas, Duke of Milan.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Elizabeth wife to Hercules Duke of Ferrara.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               The King of Spaine had better right to Naples, than Alfonſe that poſſeſſed it when King Charles came into Italie, bicauſe Alfonſes father was a baſtard, & King Ferrands father being the firſt Alfonſes brother, ought to haue ſucceeded him before his baſe ſonne. Further, you ſhall vnderſtand, that after Frederick was led into Fraunce by Lewis the 12. the ſaid K▪ 
                  Lewis enioied Naples, but within fower yeeres Ferrande King of Arragon by the great captaine Conſaluo chaſed King Lewis out of the realme, and left it to his nephew Charles the Emperor, from whom the French K. could neuer recouer it: but at this day it is in the poſſeſſion of the King of Spaine ſonne to the ſaid Emperor Charles.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            Faults eſcaped.
            
               
                  Page 3. line 1. reade to wit, a
                  
                  pag. 7. lin. 13. r. armie. Of ead. lin. dele: lin. 28. r. Seniories
                  
                  pag. 8. l. 9. dele and ead. p. l. vlt. r. of Coulches,
                  
                  p. 11. l. 28. r. with them,
                  
                  p. 13. l. 22. r. the beſt ead. p. l. vlt. r. Seniories
                  
                  p. 14. l. 41. r. and La Marche,
                  
                  p. 17. l. 8. r. flying:
                  
                  p. 18. l. 12. r. them not ead. p. l. 13. r. before. My ead. p. l. 32. r. aduiſe
                  
                  p. 19. l. 21. r. and in a
                  
                  p. 24. l. 46. r. of Aniou
                  
                  p. 27. l. 4. r. 6. of September. ead. p. l. 38. r. quirace
                  
                  p. 28. l. 32. r. this companie,
                  
                  p. 29. l. 5. r. ſcouts
                  
                  p. 31. l. 43. r. ditch, notwithſtanding the truce. No
                  
                  p. 38. l. 5. r. florens ead. p. l. 26. r. cordingly:
                  
                  p. 39. l. 31. dele with
                  
                  p. 40. l. 2. r. his campe
                  
                  p. 46. l. 9. r. the canon ead. p. l. 44. r. Noone drew
                  
                  p. 47. l. 8. r. ſtayning ead. p. l. 31. r. 6 ead. p. l. 32. r. 5
                  
                  p. 49. l. 7. r. vpon our ead. p. l. 38. r. After theſe
                  
                  p. 50. l. 4. r. of the which
                  
                  p. 54. l. 32. r. goodly
                  
                  p. 59. l. 2. r. raſed their wals but ead. p. l. 35. r. Romont:
                  
                  p. 61. l. 36. r. Angien,
                  
                  p. 63. l. 42. r. or Herbart,
                  
                  p. 64. l. 38. r. Eſtelle
                  
                  p. 66. l. 5. r. Ferrette,
                  
                  p. 68. l. 34. r. haue had but ead. lin. r. ſixtie thouſand
                  
                  p. 69. l. 25. r. hardineſſe, ead. p. l. 43. r. bounds of
                  
                  p. 74. l. 47. r. foorthwith
                  
                  p. 77. l. 1. r. touching the
                  
                  p. 78. l. 23. r. and Deſmeries
                  
                  p. 79. l. 9. r. Polence,
                  
                  p. 80. l. 13. r. bounds
                  
                  p. 82. l. 4. r. to Gaunt
                  
                  p. 83. l. 9. r. his principall ead. p. l. 24. r. to repaire:
                  
                  p. 84. l. 41. r. and receiued
                  
                  p. 85. l. 48. r. in feare.
                  
                  p. 87. l. 44. r. foorth on foote,
                  
                  p. 91. l. 24. r. the very
                  
                  p. 94. l. 13. r. what port the ead. p. l. 38. r. three thouſand
                  
                  p. 98. l. 35. r. the others
                  
                  p. 106. l. 20. r. cauſe
                  
                  p. 107. l. 2. r. foade
                  
                  p. 109. l. vlt. r. ſix ſcore ſoldiers
                  
                  p. 111. l. 12. r. the onely
                  
                  p. 117. l. 17. r. theſe Dutch
                  
                  p. 118. l. 5. r. than in any
                  
                  p. 120. l. 2. r. church. Then ead. p. l. 7. r. 1474. Meyer.
                  
                  p. 127. l. 2 r. is it
                  
                  p. 134. l. 2. r. ſtoutly denied.
                  
                  p. 138. l. 43. r. a marriſh
                  
                  p. 139. l. 32. r. whereof
                  
                  p. 150. l. 23. r. debebant,
                  
                  p. 154. l. 21. r. preparation
                  
                  p. 155. l. 38. r. moſt of the which
                  
                  p. 16
                           •
                        . 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  p. 164. 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  p. 165. l. 32. r. great
                  
                  p. 176. l. vlt. r. Burgund. pa. 988.
                  
                  p. 179. l. 13. r. ride
                  
                  p. 186. l. 36. r. had good
                  
                  p. 196. l. 33. r. begin.
                  
                  p. 201. l. 39. r. to the king his
                  
                  p. 205. l. 40. r. Burgundiſh
                  
                  p. 208. l. 21. dele had
                  
                  p. 224 l. 6. r. This ſecond
                  
                  p. 227. l. 23. r. in the towne
                  
                  p. 240. l. 16. r. to proceed,
                  
                  p. 243. l. 18. r. a number ead. p. l. 37. r. which is called
                  
                  p. 253. l. 33. r. vantmures
                  
                  p. 254. l. 25. r. Fougieres,
                  
                  p. 260. l. 45. r. was ſent
                  
                  p. 261. l. 30. r. Dabecſin
                  
                  p. 263. l. 16. r. commendation
                  
                  p. 267. l. vlt. r. foorth to
                  
                  p. 274. l. 17. r. Proctor. ead. p. l. vlt. r. they lawfull
                  
                  p. 276. l. 21. r. firſt voiage
                  
                  p. 278. l. 41. r. Treu
                           •
                        ul,
                  
                  p. 280. l. vlt. dele Duke
                  
                  p. 281. l. 3. dele Duke
                  
                  p. 284. l. 21. r. alſo of the
                  
                  p. 291. l. 16. r. Caballiau
                  
                  p. 292 l. 40. r. Caballiau
                  
                  p. 293. l. 19. r. vantmure ead. p. l. 43. r. Roſanes
                  
                  p. 294. l. 9. r. Picinino,
                  
                  p. 295. l. 12. r. ride about
                  
                  p. 296. l. 14. r. for cruell
                  
                  p. 297. l. 4. r. Aenaria,
                  
                  p 306. l 38. r. their other ead. p. l. 48. r. places than they
                  
                  p. 307. l. 8. r. accompanie ead. p. l 31. r. Otrante,
                  
                  p. 313. l. 4. r. or Muſiua
                  
                  p. 316. l. 17. r. and two
                  
                  p. 318. l. 16 r. and voluntarily
                  
                  p. 319. l. 39. r. Luques.
                  
                  p. 325. l. 18 r. Albanie,
                  
                  p. 335. l. 7. r. the Florentines,
                  
                  p. 342. l. 4. r. enimies nauie
                  
                  p. 350. l. 3. r. they might
                  
                  p. 380. r. Iane daughter & heire to Robart of Bar E. of Marle,
                  
                  p. 391. r. Coſmus died the 80. yeere of his age.
                  
               
            
            We muſt intreate the Readers patience for theſe faults eſcaped, and that he will amend the booke according to this table, before he enter into the reading thereof.
         
      
   