
      
         
            
            THE
GHOST OF
the Marqueſſe d' Ancre, with his
Spirits attending him.
OR
The Fiction of a Dialogue betweene Galligaia, Conchini
by name, or Marqueſſe d' Ancre his wife, and Miſoquin a
deluding Spirit, by whom her Husband was miſſe-lead.
Together with the ſame Spirits meeting the good Genius to Monſieur
the Prince of CONDE:
Faithfully tranſlated out of the French Copie printed at ROAN.

            
            Printed at LONDON for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be ſould at
the South-entrance of the Royall-Exchange. 1617.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE FICTION
OF A DIALOGVE,
betweene Galligaia, Wife to Conchini,
and Miſoquin, the falſe and deluding
Spirit that tranſported her
Husband with vaine hopes.
            Together with a meeting of the ſaid Spirit with
the Genius of Monſieur the Prince of CONDE.
            
               SVCH diſpoſitions, as haue but
once contracted with Gods enemy,
can very hardly euer be clean
freed out of his fowle clowches:
For we haue an euident example
hereof in Conchini, and his Wife,
who being both of them ſo many
times admoniſhed by Gods
wrath poured vpon them, yet would they not retyre,
nor giue ouer their wicked life: no, not when they
euidently ſaw, how both God and all the people were
incenſed againſt them; being afflicted by ſickneſſe,

and the death of one of their children; as alſo one of
their houſes rifled and pillaged by the iuſt rage of the
people; two of their domeſticall friends hanged, and a
thouſand other manifeſt tokens, intimating to them,
how all the Princes bare them a moſt worthy and deſerued
hatred. Oh, what inexplicable miſeries doth
affectation of power and greatneſſe bring vnto men!
O how our diſordinate appetites, to amaſſe, and purchaſe
worldly honours, doth heape and augment our
misfortunes! Thou now feeleſt it, now that a ſodaine
death hath violently carryed thee out of the world,
(and as may be inferred by all pregnant probabilities)
in the height of thy ſinnes and tranſgreſſions. Now
thou feeleſt it; thou, who after ſo many worldly delights,
ſo many flatteries of honours, of contentments,
art now more miſerable peraduenture then the moſt
wretched creature in all France: Thou I ſay, who in
ſtead of a Royall Palace ſtately adorned, haſt for thy
habitation an obſcure and hideous dungeon: Thou
art hee who now findeſt it; for in ſtead of a thouſand
Gentlemen well borne, that were wont to doe thee all
kinde of honour, ſtand before thee vncouered, adoring
thee, and making ſhew, as if they breath'd and liued
for no other end but to offer thee their humbleſt ſeruices;
thou haſt now it may be, ſome rigorous Iaylor,
that contemnes thee, and in ſtead of any conſolation,
flowts and laughes at thy precipice and downefall:
Thou I ſay, who wert wont to giue life and death to
all thoſe whom thou wouldeſt thy ſelfe, haſt now need
to implore and cry out for mercy of all the world:
Thy greatneſſe and riches wherin thou didſt put ſuch
confidence, what auaile they? Where is now that

ſame troope of Nobilitie which were accuſtomed to
follow and attend thee? Queſtionleſſe thou wert but
deceiued: for theſe people followed not thy ſelfe, but
meerely thy preſent fortunes and high fauours. And
now thou truely knoweſt how vnhappy all they are,
who relying vpon Fortune, thinke that ſhe can make
them maſters of the whole world, whereas ſhee makes
them but ſlaues and infamous vaſſals, not only to her
ſelfe, but to their owne diſordinate appetites & deſires.
Thou, I ſay againe, Conchini, now feeleſt it, thou that
wert ſprung from a baſe Sire, and yet wouldeſt haue
exalted thy ſelfe not onely aboue the French Nobilitie,
but euen aboue all Princes of the French ſtocke and
race. Thou I ſay, that moſt infatiable Seianus, whoſe
furious rage could neuer be appeaſed by the maſſacre
of ſo many good French-men, by the impriſonment,
not onely of many of the Nobilitie, but euen of the
Princes of the bloud; whoſe wrath and reuenge could
not be fully ſatisfied with the dolefull baniſhment of
ſo many Princes, and whoſe auarice was neuer contented
with ſo many millions of gold and ſiluer: Now
thou haſt a bitter experience, thou which gouernedſt
all France at thine owne pleaſure; who after thine own
miſerable death wert not onely preuented from being
the food and nouriſhment of wormes, but moreouer,
thou wert the Butt whereat all the arrowes of the peoples
rage and fury were ſhot. Thou that hadſt ſo many
houſes, Palaces and Caſtles, and could not be ſuffered
to repoſe within the earth in peace, for the ſpace
onely of foure and twenty houres? and whom the
Earth her ſelfe indeed diſgorged, impatient to retaine
ſuch a letiferous poyſon within her wombe: the Ayre

could not endure thy infections: the Water thy putrifaction:
neyther would the Fire conſume thy body,
reſeruing it for a prey to Sea-monſters: And now
thou knoweſt apparantly what difference there is betwixt
the beginnings and ends of Fortune, how variable
and mutable ſhee is; who being huffed vp to ſuch
eminent place, didſt fooliſhly giue credit to a prediction
and propheſie made of thee; and that when thou
didſt paſſe along the ſtreetes, euery one ſhould put off
his hat, and cry out, Viue le Roy. But now thou ſeeſt,
that Fortune inuerting quite this prediction, it
yet comes to be moſt true, but thankes be to God,
cleane contrary to thine owne expectation: for in
ſtead of thy beds of ſtate, of Gold, ſiluer, and ſilke,
thou wert laid within a ſtinking puddle of a foule and
vncleane water, and for trapped and rich harniſhed
horſes, thou wert trailed along the ſtreetes by raſcally
and contemptible people.
            Oh, whoſoeuer thou art, on whom Fortune at this
preſent, peraduenture may ſmile, learne to be wiſe by
other mens harmes, and remember Gods Iuſtice,
which neuer failes to puniſh the wicked ſoone or late;
Behold here one, that was called the Marſhalleſſe of
France, who was poſſeſſed of the Queenes greateſt fauours,
and diſpoſed wholy of her will, that now foaming
with fury and madneſſe, and being incloſed
within a priſon, ſpits for anger, cryes and howles out
like a ſhee-wolfe that had beene robbed of her whelps.
I ſaw her by chance the other day in the Baſtille, ſhee
lookes moſt hideouſly, and ſtroke feare into all thoſe
that did behold her; and her ſtaring eyes, gaſtly countenance,
with her feareful viſage and diſtracted ſpeech,

plainely ſhew that ſhee is conducted by ſome other
ſpirit beſides her owne: her hayre all full of skirfe and
filth, hanging looſe and confuſed vpon her ſhoulders,
tearing her owne face and boſome, ſo as I neuer was
touched with ſuch an affrightment before. Wherefore
I went and hid my ſelfe in a corner, to ſee the
iſſue and further euent of this buſineſſe, when incontinently
I heard her vomit and belch out theſe or the
like words:
            
               What I? who lately could the Furies moue,
               To practiſe murder and confuſion;
               Shall I endure? no, no, I will not ſure:
               Rather both heauen and earth I will confound,
               The Elements, and all this lower round
               Ile make a Chaos, mixing waues and fire,
               The ayre, the earth, the heauens, and heate and cold,
               What is beneath ſhall ſoone mount vp aloft,
               I will my Husbands cynders ſummon vp.
               
                  Phoebus by Verſes hath beene made deſcend
               From th' higheſt Firmament, and Riuers quite reuerſe,
               To flye the vaſte and ſpacious Ocean.
               Nothing I feare: my force I muſt extend:
               So loud Ile yelpe, that all ſhall vnderſtand;
               If I the Gods immortall cannot moue,
               Yet will I Diuels infernall proue.
               Aſsiſt me therefore Pluto, hideous Megara,
               
               With treſſes of a thouſand Vipers hanging downe,
               Come ſuccour me; and all you dreadfull Fiends
               In hels deepe dungeon, fearing nor men nor Gods.
               What? ſhall our enemies vs thus deface?
               Permit it not or thou neglect'ſt our caſe.
               
                  
Shall we before our time be thus ſubdude
               By this ſame Prince? nay, rather cut his thread,
               O daughter of the night, that ſo his deſtinie
               May no wayes curbe our Fame and Dignitie.
               Heauens fauour, I ſee plaine, this mortall wight:
               The Gods in counſell, all, ſuccour him with might.
               Thou that canſt pleaſure or annoy each one,
               And cauſe a ſonne his fathers bloud to ſhed,
               By diſcord alſo thou canſt ſoone deuiſe
               Firmeſt accords and houſes to diſſolue:
               In briefe, thou canſt hurt men by ſundry meanes,
               Out of thy boſome foule ſome poyſons belch,
               Now breake this peace, and ſowe both warre and ſtrife,
               That ſo by millions they may fall and dye.
               Come hither Miſoquin, who didſt alway
               Protect my husband; come, make no delay.
            
            When ſhe had finiſhed this diſcourſe, I ſaw a Spirit
of ſtrange ſhape and forme to appeare, with ſtaring
eyes, a huge mouth, or rather indeed a gulfe, without
a noſe, but hauing a body like a Caterpiller, and wings,
but without legs or armes, and I beleeue it was one of
thoſe that are called watry Spirits.
            So ſhee drew neare to this Spirit, and then they had
this communication together. Gall. Well ſir, where's
now the performance of all your friuolous promiſes?
that you ſhould haue preſerued and protected my
huſband for ſo long time? that you would confound,
ſpoyle, and ruine all his enemies? Miſoquin. Why I
pray, did I deceiue him? Did I not tell both him and
you oftentimes, that the Prince of Conde was his fatall
oppoſite, and how he muſt endeuour to extirpate the

Princes of the bloud. Gall. T'is true: but on the other
ſide it was foretold vs, that our greatnes depended on
a warre; but if they were once dead, againſt whom
ſhould we haue made warre? Miſoq. Why, againſt
the Flyes: a good workman neuer wants matter nor
tooles. But to ſpeake truely thy huſband was but a
cowardly coiſtrell, for had hee beene in the Army, hee
had neuer beene ſlaine at Paris. Alas, hee neuer had
no valour in his life, and further hee ſpent his time in
pleaſures and luxuries: but thinke you if it had lyen
in my power, I would not haue preuented it? What
tribute doe you imagine paid he to Pluto euery yeare?
I aſſure you more then a million of ſoules. Gall. Well
I called thee not now to checke thee for any misfortune
paſt, but to take order with thee for ſome thing
that is to come; for I am inwardly enraged, and reduced
in a manner to vtter deſpaire: my Iugineere
and plotting Spirit, and who haſt ayded mee in many
things, canſt thou not for my ſake, conferre ſome miſerable
diſaſter vpon the French? Remaines there no
Art, nor no policie, to compaſſe and atchieue our
wicked enterpriſes? Miſoquin. Your words are but
meere winde: There's other matters in hand, woman,
thy huſband contary to all other men, makes his repentance
in another world: for hee is now turn'd
Moncke. Gall. And how ſo I pray? Miſoq. Why,
had hee not good cauſe to doe ſo, when all his virile
parts were ſo ſhamefully cut away. Gall. Why thou
wretched impe, wilt thou euer be mocking vs? Well,
couldſt thou but be ſenſible of the miſeries which
ouer-whelme me, thou wouldeſt not thus laugh, and
make thy ſelfe merry. Miſoquin. You are in the right:

I pray doe Diuels vſe to weepe? But there's other
newes beſides this. Gall. Euen from the Cocke to the
Bull: But what I pray? Miſoquin. Why yeſterday I
met with your neighbours Genius. Gall. Why, who
was that? Miſoquin The Angell of the grand Maſter,
and wee had almoſt gone together by the eares about
my comming hither. Gall. How came that to paſſe?
Miſoquin. I was no ſooner come in, but he knew mee,
by reaſon I was ſomewhat of a different forme: and
thus hee ſaid; I coniure thee to tell mee whither thou
goeſt. Then I went ſtill onward, and he began againe
to ſay; In the name of God tell mee who thou art, and
whither thou goeſt: vpon this iniunction I was enforc'd
to anſwere. I am, then replyed I, Miſoquin,
ſometimes his Demon or euill Angell, that was called
Marſhall d' Ancre: and you ſir, Who may you be?
When in great choler, hee returned me this anſwere;
It concernes not you to be herein very inquiſitiue:
But come you hither to ſeduce or corrupt any body?
No, ſaid I, for ſhee I come to, is corrupt enough already.
Accurſed wretch as thou art; for, ſaid hee,
thou alwayes delighteſt in doing euill: Come hither,
ſaid hee, thou curſed Caytife; Art not thou hee, that
didſt aduiſe this ſilly woman to practiſe ſuch miſchiefe
againſt France? Art not thou the cauſe, this
Prince hath endur'd ſo much diſgrace? But all thy
time and labour is herein but loſt: for the good, and
Almighty God hath made him take all his misfortunes
patiently: and herein hee hath highly deſerued.
And the ſame God will deliuer him from the impriſonment
hee ſuffers, confounding all the enemies of
truth; and vnhappineſſe ſhall befall them that perſecute

him: for God himſelfe is prouoked, and ſtirred
vp againſt them. Tuſh, replyed I, theſe be goodly
reaſons you alledge; but at concluſion I preuaile in
my cauſe, for you could not preſerue your Prince ſo
well as I did my Marqueſſe: for thine endur'd more
miſerie ſince he came in here, then mine did in all his
life: And ſo on the other ſide, thou knoweſt not how
hee ſhall dye, but I know well enough how mine did:
and howſoeuer, hee dyed like a braue man, with his
ſword in his hand, ſwearing like a gallant Captaine, and
blaſpheming God thy Maſter. And be aſſured that
they who killed him, augmented greatly herein his
renowne: for had hee not beene ſurprized there, hee
might peraduenture haue dyed in the chimney corner.
Then growing into great choler, See this miſcreant
villaine, ſaid hee, how after hee hath betrayed
them, how hee derides and laughes at men. This is
hee (meaning it by mee) ſaid hee, that was the cauſe
of all his diſaſter, by tickling him daily in the head
with ambitions and extrauagant deſires of Rule and
Gouernment: God in him hath expreſly manifeſted,
how hee euer abandons thoſe that leaue and forſake
him, for he dyed miſerably, giuing them cauſe who
iuſtly hated him, to mocke and laugh both at him and
his deſignes. But as for you ſir, I command you to retyre:
Beleeue mee, if wee then had had any bodies, I
thinke wee ſhould haue deuoured one another; but
ſo I left him, and came ſtraight to you: and therefore
ſuppoſe you whether hee was not deepely moued
and angry or no. Gall. I finde that ſoundly, poore
wretch as I am. Miſoquin. What, doe you repent your
ſelfe? You ſhall ſee your Huſband preſently, and if

poſſible, you ſhall enioy your liberty. Gall. How
know you that? Miſoquin. I was very lately with
two ſpeciall Gentlemen of Paris that ſpake of you.
Gall. And what ſaid they? Miſoquin. Faith no great
matter: for they wiſht you at the Diuell, with whom
you are already: they ſaid you ſhould be made ſo
great, as you ſhould be all cut, ſhauen, and trimde,
without coſting you one penny. Gall. But what
ſhall I doe to thoſe wicked fellowes that clapt me vp
here? Miſoquin. Wotſt thou what, why for their
greater deſpight, eyther let them alone, or goe hang
thy ſelfe, and ſo thou maiſt preuent them of the honour
of putting thee to death: for beleeue it, if they
of Paris euer lay hold on thee, they'll handle yee in
your true kinde. And a certaine woman, hath already
ſould your noſe to one of her neighbours, to rooſt
her Chickens vpon: others haue bought your eyes,
that ſo they may haue foure to ſee you withall, when
you are led to hanging: another your eares, the better
to heare your tryall and ſentence: others ſay, your
skinne will ſerue them fitly to make gloues of, by
reaſon they will coſt nothing the perfuming, it being
of it ſelfe ſo ordurous, and ſtinking, that no perfume
can be caſt vpon it. Gall. Imagine when thou haſt
ſaid what thou wilt, wee will talke ſomewhat of our
buſineſſe. Miſoquin. And why of them? Thou haſt
nothing nearer to thee then thy Huſband: matters
are ſo plainely reported and diuulged of him, as they
are openly cryed vp and downe through the ſtreetes
of Paris; but they are but fooles that buy them, becauſe
they are but meere fopperies to that which will
come out. Gall. And what can they ſay of him?

               Miſoquin. Marry, all kinde of reproachfull and ignominious
matters, but onely that they tearme him
not a Cuckold, by reaſon that (for thus theſe wicked
fellowes alledge) his wife is ſo ougly and odious, as
none but the Diuell himſelfe would be his Cuckoldmaker.
They expreſſe him making of his laſt Will
and Teſtament: they ſay he hath left thee his beauty,
becauſe thou wert thereof ſo ill furniſhed; his vnderſtanding
hee gaue to his brother, becauſe hee had not
enough to diſcharge a Cardinals place: for the parts
inferiour of his body, hee hath now neyther feete,
nor hands; his feete commended ouer to his brother
Gouernour of the Baſtile, to further his flight, and
his hands to thoſe that after him ſhall haue the managing
of the Kings treaſure. And to enrich you, he
hath himſelfe forſaken the world, but hee was ſo
long a time in paſſing Acharon, by reaſon of a tempeſt,
that hee is growne all ſcaly ouer like a fiſh. And
there below, which is the beſt leaſt of all, hee laughes
at them which made him giue ſo much money for
his releaſe when hee ſhould be in Purgatorie; for in
paſſing along hee had not ſo much as a ſight of it.
Gall. Well, well, I ſee now a dayes you can doe nothing
but cogge and flout: I pray let vs talke of reuenging
my huſbands death. Miſoquin. What telſt thou
mee of thy huſband? Behold, Conchini, by the power
which thou haſt giuen me ouer thy ſelfe, I command
thee to appeare here preſently.
            
               Conchini. Wilt thou neuer leaue tormenting of my
ſoule, which hath beene miſerably afflicted for ſo long
time? Ah, forlorne and wretched caytife that I am!
Miſoquin. What aylſt thou? doeſt thou repent thee?

nothing worſe can come to thee. Conchini. Ah moſt
accurſed creature, art not thou ſhee who wert the
cauſe of all my misfortunes? Gall. Who I? Conch. I
you: for otherwiſe we might haue liued contentedly
vpon ſome poore humble calling, exempted from all
ambition and auarice. Gall. But come hither a little:
why are you in this garbe and faſhion? Conch. I performe
penance. Gall. Why haue you no hands?
Conch. Pluto tooke them from mee, for prodigally
waſting and conſuming his riches and wealth. Gall.
And why no feete? Conch. Becauſe I vſed to imploy
them in baſe flight when my Regiment was diſcomfited.
Gall. Why me thinkes yee are in the habite of a
ſtrange Moncke. Canch. Oh would I had beene ſo
all dayes of my life, and had perpetually obſerued chaſtitie.
Gall. Wee neuer dreamt of thy death. Conch.
No, but wee ſhall dreame fairely when wee are both
together once: wherefore vnderſtand and vſe meanes
to preſerue thine owne life; for mee thinkes I ſee how
thou art rent and torne a pieces by the cruell and inhumane
multitude. And what doe our creatures and
fauourites now? Gall. Some are like to be burnt,
others ſent backe againe from whence they came,
others haue turned their proud coats into penitentiall
roabes, like Bell-founders. Conch. Why, are they
not yet ſatisfied with the diſgrace and opprobry they
laid vpon mee? Gall. No, they ſay, wee deſerued
much more. Miſoquin. Well, you haue leaſure enough
to rip vp all your miſeries and calamities together, 'tis
time now for mee to returne, dinner is almoſt paſt.
            As ſoone as this little Diuell had thus ſpoken, a
thicke vaporous cloud obſcur'd and darkned all the

chamber: this was it wherewith the ſeaſon was ſo
chang'd, and ſo amidſt this darkneſſe, I eſcaped away
well and ſafe, but not without ſome feare.
            
               After ſo faire a time, thick ſhowers of rain come downe;
               And ſhall not yet our miſeries haue end?
               Hath Fortune yet reſeru'd ſome other frowne?
               And yet will God ſome further ſcourge vs ſend:
               No: but the husbands bloud cryes for his wiues, and yet
               The roote of all our Woads is not cut vp,
               On ground while this vile wretch her foote doth ſet,
               Till ſhee drinke deeply of Reuenges cup.
            
            It is further reported that vpon Wedneſday, the
laſt of Aprill, 1617. Stila Anglia, at foure a clocke in
the after-noone, the generall ceſſation of Armes was
proclaymed at Deepe in Normandy, and all the Souldiers
whatſoeuer to depart vpon paine of death: particularly
the 5500. Strangers, that the Marqueſſe d' Ancre
had cauſed to be leuied for his ſeruice in Normandy
in the Wallone Countries, and the Land of Lake,
alias, Les Liege
                     •
                  yr, et Wallons.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   