
      
         
            
            
            THE DEFENCE OF
Conny catching.
OR
A CONFVTATION OF THOSE
two iniurious Pamphlets published by R. G. against
the practitioners of many Nimble-witted
and mysticall Sciences.
            By Cuthbert Cunny-catcher, Licenciate in Whittington
Colledge.
            Qui bene latuit bene vixit, dominatur enim
fraus in omnibus.
            
            Printed at London by A. I. for Thomas Gubbins
and are to be sold by Iohn Busbie, 1592.
         
         
            
            
            To all my good frends
health.
            
               AS Plato (my good friendes)
trauelled from Athens to
Aegypt, and from thence
through sundry clymes to
increase his knowledge: so
I as desirous as hee to search
the deapth of those liberall
Artes wherein I was a professour,
lefte my studie in
Whittington Colledge,
               Newgate builded by one Wittington & traced
the country to grow famous in my facultie, so that
I was so expert in the Art of Cony-catching by my continuall
practise, that that learned Philosopher Iacke
Cuttes, whose deepe insight into this science had drawn
him thrise through euery gaole in England, meeting of
mee at Maidstone, gaue mee the bucklers, as the subtlelest
that euer he sawe in that quaint and mysticall forme
of Foolosophie: for if euer I brought my Conny but
to crush a potte of ale with mee, I was as sure of all the
crownes in his purse, as if hee had conueyed them into
my proper possession by a deede of gifte with his owne
hande.
            At Dequor,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Mumchaunce, Catch-dolt, Oure le bourse,
Non est possible, Dutch Noddie, or Irish one and thirtie,
none durst euer make compare with me for excellence:
but as so many heades so many wits, so some that would

not stoope a farthing at cardes,Al the monie in their purse. would venter all the
byte in their boung at dice. Therefore had I cheates for
the very sise, of the squariers, langrets, gourds, stoppedice,
high-men, low-men, and dice barde for all aduauntages:
that if I fetcht in anie nouyce eyther at tables,
or anie other game of hazard, I would bee sure
to strippe him of all that his purse had in Esse, or his
credyt in Posse, ere the simple Connie and I parted.
            When neyther of these would serue, I had consorts
that could verse, nippe, and foyst, so that I had a superficiall
sight into euery profitable facultie. Insomuch
that my principles grew authenticall, and I so famous,
that had I not beene crost by those two pe
                  •
               uish Pamphlets,
I might at the nexte Midsommer haue worne
Doctor Stories cappe for a fauor. For I trauelled almost
throughout all England, admired for my ingenious capacitie:
till comming about Exceter, I began to exercise
my art, and drawing in a Tanner for a tame Conie,
assoone as he had lost two shillings he made this replie.
Sirha,So
                     •
                  e Conicatchers dare weare noblemens liueryes, as W. Bickerton and others. although you haue a liuery on your backe, and a
cognisance to countenance you withall, and beare the
port of a Gentleman, yet I see you are a false knaue and
a Conny-catcher, and this your companion your setter,
and that before you and I part Ile proue.
            At these wordes Conny-catcher and Setter, I was
driuen into as great a maze, as if one had dropt out of
the clowds, to heare a pesant cant the wordes of art belōging
to our trade: yet I set a good face on the matter
and asked him what he ment by Cony-catching. Marry
(q. he) althogh it is your practise, yet I haue for 3. pence
bought a litle Pamphlet, that hath taught me to smoke
such a couple of knaues as you be. When I heard him
talke of smoaking, my heart waxed cold, and I began to
gather into him gently. No no sir (q. he) you cānot verse
vpon me, this booke hath taught me to beware of crosbiting:

And so to be breefe he vsed me curteously, and
that night causd the Constable to lodge mee in prison,
& the nexte morning I was carried before the Iustice,
where likewise he had this cursed book of Cony catching,
so that hee could tel the secretes of mine art better
then my selfe: whereupon after strict examination I was
sent to the gaole, & at the Sessions by good hap & some
friend that my money procured mee, I was deliuered.
Assoone as I was at liberty, I got one of these bookes,
& began to tosse it ouer very deuoutly, wherin I found
one art so perfectly anotomized, as if he had bene practitioner
in our facultie forty winters before: then with
a deepe sigh I began to curse this R. G. that had made a
publike spoyle of so noble a science, and to exclaime against
that palpable asse whosoeuer, that would make
any pe
                  •
               -man priuy to our secret sciences. But see the
sequel, I smoothered my sorrowe in silence, and away I
trudged out of Deuonshire, & went towards Cornwal,
& comming to a simple Ale-house to lodge, I found at
a square table hard by the fire halfe a doozen countrie
Farmars at cardes. The sight of these penny-fathers at
play, draue me straight into a pleasant p
                  •
               ssion, to blesse
fortune that had offred such sweet opportunity to exercise
my wits, & fil my purse with crowns: for I coūted
all the mony they had, mine by proper interest. As thus
I stood looking on them playing at cros-ruffe, one was
taken reuoking, whereat the other said; what neighbour
wil you play the cony-catcher with vs? no no, wee haue
read the booke as wel as you. Neuer went a cup of small
beare so sorowfully down an Ale-knights belly in a frosty
morning, as that word stroke to my hart, so that for
feare of trouble I was fain to 
                  •
               ry my good hap a
                  •
                square
play, at which fortune fauoring mee▪ I wan twenty 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
and yet doe as simply as I could, I was not onelie
suspected, but called Conny-catcher and crosse-biter.
            
               
But away I went with the money, and came presently
to London, where I no sooner arriued amongst
the crue, but I heard of a second parte worse then the
first, which draue mee into such a great choller, that I
began to enquire what this R. G. should bee. At last I
learned that hee was a scholler, and a Maister of Artes,
and a Conny-catcher in his kinde, though not at cards,
and one that fauoured good fellowes, so they were not
palpable offendors in such desperate lawes: wherevppon
reading his bookes, and surueying euery line with
deepe iudgement, I began to note folly in the man, that
would straine a Gnat, and lette passe an Elephant: that
would touch small scapes, and lette grosse faultes passe
without any reprehension. Insomuch that I resolued
to make an Apologie, and to aunswere his libellous inuectiues,
and to proue that we Conny-catchers are like
little flies in the grasse, which liue: or little leaues and
doe no more harme: whereas there bee in Englande
other professions that bee great Conny-catchers and
caterpillers, that make barraine the field wherein they
baite.
            Therfore all my good friends vouch of my paines,
and pray for my proceedings, for I meane to haue about
with this R. G. and to giue him such a veny, that he shalbe
afrayd heereafter to disparage that mysticall science of
Conny-catching: if not, and that I proue too weake for
him in sophistrie, I meane to borrowe Wili Bickertons
blade, of as good a temper as Mo
                     •
                  glay King Arthures
sword was, and so ch
                  •
               llenge him to the single combat:
But desirous to ende the quarrell with the penne if it
be possible, heare what I haue learned in Whittington
Colledge,
            
               Yours in cardes and dice
Cuthbert cony-catcher.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE DEFENCE OF
Conny-catching.
            
               I Cannot but wonder maister R. G. what
Poeticall fury made you so fantasticke,
to wryte against Conny-catchers? Was
your braine so barraine that you had no
other subiect? or your wittes so dried
with dreaming of loue Pamphlettes,
that you had no other humour left, but
satirically with Diogenes, to snarle at
all mens manners? You neuer founde in Tully nor Aristotle,
what a setter or a verser was.
            It had been the part of a Scholler, to haue written seri
                  •
               usly
of some graue subiect, either Philosophically to haue shewen how
you were proficient in Cambridge, or diuinely to haue manifested
your religion to the world. Such trunall trinkets and threedbare

                  •
               rash, had better seemed T. D. whose braines beaten to the yarking
vp of Ballades, might more lawfully haue glaunst at the
quaint conceites of conny-catching and crosse-biting.
            But to this my obiection, mee thinkes I heare your maship
learnedly reply, Nascimur pro patria: Euery man is not vorne
for himselfe, but for his country: and that the ende of all studious
indeuours ought to tende to the aduancing of vertue, or suppressing
of vice in the common-wealth. So that you haue herein do
                  •
               e
the part of a good subiect, and a good scholler, to anotomize such
secret villa
                  ••
               es as are practised by cosoning companions, to the
ouerthrow of the simple people: for by the discouery of such pernitious
lawes, you seeke to roote out of the common-wealth, such

                  •
               ll and licentious liuing persons▪ as do Ex alieno succo viuere, liue
of the sweat of other mens browes,
                and vnder su
                  •
               til shif
                  •
               es of
witte abused, seeke to ruine the flourishing estate of Englande.
These you call vipers, moathes of the common-wealth, caterpillers
worse then 
                  •
               od rayned downe on Egypt, rotte
                  •
                flesh which

must be diuided from the whole.
            Ense resecandum est ne pars sincera trahatur.
            This maister R. G. I know will be your answere, as it is the
pretended cause of your iniurious Pamphlets. And indeede it is
very well done, but greater had your praise been, if you had entered
into the nature of more grosse abuses, and set downe the particular
enormities that growe from suche palpable villanies. For
truth it is, that his is the Iron age, wherein iniquitie hath the vpper
hande, and all conditions and estates of men seeke to liue by
their wittes, and he is counted wisest, that hath the deepest insight
into the getting of games: euery thing now that is found profitable,
is counted honest and lawfull: and men are valued by theyr
wealth, not by their vertues. Hee that cannot dissemble cannot
liue, and men put their sonnes now a dayes Apprentises, not to
learne trades and occupations, but craftes and mysteries.
            If then witte in this age be counted a great patrimony, and
subtletie an inseparable accident to all estates, why should you bee
so spitefull maister R. G. to poore Conny-catchers aboue all the
rest, sith they are the simplest soules of all in shifting to liue in this
ouer wise world?
            But you play like the Spider that makes her webbe to intrap
and snare litle flyes, but weaues it so slenderly, that the great ones
breake through without any dammage. You straine Gnats, and
passe 
                  •
               uer Elephants: you scoure the ponde of a fewe croakyng
Frogges, and leaue behinde an infinite number of most venemous
Scorpions. You decypher poore Conny-catchers, that perhaps
with a t
                  ••
               cke at cardes, winne fortie shillings from a churle that
can spare it, and neuer talke of those Caterpillers that vndoo the
poore, ruine whole Lorships, infect the common-wealth, and
delight in nothing but in wrong
                  •
               ull extorting and purloyning of
pelte, when as such be the greatest Conny-catchers of all, as by
your leaue maister. R G. I wil make manifest.
            Sir reuerence on your worship, had you such a moate in your
eye, that you could not see those Fox-
                  •
               urd Gentlemen that hyde
vnder their gownes faced with foynes, more falshood then all the
Conny-catchers in England beside, those miserable Usurers (I
meane) that like Uultures pray vppon the spoyle of the poore,

sleeping with his neighbors pledges all night in his bosome, and
feeding vpon forfaits and penalties, as the rauens doe vppon carren?
If his poore neighbor want to supply his need, eyther for his
houshold necessa
                  •
               ies, or his rent at the day, he wil not lende a peny
for charitie, all his money is abroad: but if he offer him either co
                  •
               
or sow, mare or horse, or the very corne scarse sprowted out of the
ground to sel, so the bargaine may be cheape, though to the beggery
of the poore man, hee choppes with him straight, and makes the
poore Conny fare the worse all the yeare after. Why write you
not of these Connycatchers Maister R. G.?
            
            Besides if pawnes come, as the lease of a house, or the fee simple
in morgage, hee can out of his furd cassocke draw money to
lend: but the olde Cole hath such quirkes and quiddities in the
conueyance, such prouisoes, such dayes, howers, nay minutes of
payments, that if his neighbor breake bnt a moment, he takes the
forfayt, and like a pinke-eyed Ferret so clawes the poore Cony in
the burrow, that he leaues no haire on his breach nor on his backe
ere he partes with him. Are not these vipers of the commonwelth,
and to be exclaimde against, not in smal Pamphlets, but in great
volumes?
            You set downe how there bee requisite Setters and Uersers
in Conny-catching, and be there not so I pray you in Usury? for
when a yoong youthful Gentleman, giuen a little to lash out liberalley,
wanteth money, makes hee not his moane first to the
Broker, as subtil a knaue to induce him to his ouerthrowe, as
the wyliest Set
                  •
               er or Uerser in England? and he must be feede
to speake to the Usurer, and haue so much in the pound for his labour:
then he shal haue graunt of money and c
                  •
               mmodities together,
so that if he borrow a hundred pound, he shal haue fortie in

                  〈◊〉
               , and threescore in wares, dead stuffe God wot: as Lute
strings, Hobby horses, or (if he be greatly fauored) browne paper
or cloath, a
                  •
               d that shootes out in the lash. Then his lande is
turnde ouer in 
                  •
               tatute or recognizance for sixe moneths and sixe
moneths, so that he payes some thirty in the hundred to the Usurer,
beside the Scriuener he hath a blind share: but when he comes
to sel his threescore pound commodities, tis wel if he get fiue and
t
                  ••
               rtie.
            
               
Thus is the poore gentleman made a 
                  •
               e
                  •
               re and simple Conny,
and verst vpon to the vttermost, and yet if he breake his day, loseth
as much land as cost his father a thousand markes.
            Is not this coossenage and Conny-catching Maister R G. and
more daily practised in England, and more hurtful then our poore
shifting at Cardes, and yet your mashippe can winke at the cause?
they be wealthy, but Cuthbert Conny-catcher cares for none of
them no more then they care for him, and therfore wil reueale all.
And because Maister R. G. you were pleasant in examples, Ile tel
you a tale of an Usurer, done within a mile of a knaues head, and
since the Cuckow sung last, and it fellout thus.
            
               A pleasant tale of an Vsurer.
               IT fortuned that a yoong gentleman not farre off from Cockermouth,
was somewhat sl
                     •
                  pt behind hand, and growne in debt, so
that he durst hardly shew his head for feare of his creditors, and
hauing wife and children to mai
                     •
                  taine, although he had a pr
                     •
                  per
land, yet wanting money to s
                     •
                  ocke his ground, he liued very bare:
whereupon he determined with himselfe to goe to an olde penny-father
that dwelt hard by him, and so borrow some money of him,
and so to lay his land in morgage for the repayment of it.
               He no sooner made the motion but it was accepted, for it was a
goodly Lorship, worth in rent of assise seuen score pound by the
yeare, and did ab
                     •
                  ut vpon the Usurers ground, which drew the old
churle to be maruellous willing to di
                     •
                  burse money, so that he was
content to lende him two hundred markes for three yeare according
to the statute, so that he might haue the land for assurance of
his money.
               The ge
                     •
                  tleman agreed to that, and promised to acknowledge
a statute staple to him, with letters of defeysance. The Usurer (although
he lik
                     •
                   this wel, and s
                     •
                  w the yong man offere
                     •
                   more than
reason required) yet had a further setch to haue the land his whatsoeuer
should chaunce, and therefore he began to verse vppon the
poore Conny thus.
               Sir (quoth he) if I did not pittie your estate, I would not lende
you my money at such a 
                     •
                  ate: for whereas you haue it after ten

pounds in the hundred▪ I can make it worth thirtie. But seeing the
distresse you your wife and children are in, and considering all
growes through your owne liberall nature, I compassionate you
the more, and would do for you as for mine owne sonne: therefore
if you shal thinke good to follow it, I wil giue you fatherly aduise,
I knowe you are greatly inde
                     •
                  ted, and haue many vnmercifull
creditors, and they haue you in suit, and I doubt ere long wil haue
some ex
                     •
                  ent against your lands, so shal you be vtterly vndone, and
I greatly incumbred. Therefore to auoyd all this, in my iudgement
it were best for you to make a deed of gift of all your landes,
without condition or promise, to some one faythful friend or other,
in whom you may repose credite, so shal your enemies haue no
aduauntage against you: and seeing they shall haue nothing but
your bare body lyable to their executions, they wil take the more
easie and speedy composition. I thinke this the surest way, and if
you durst repose your selfe in me, God is my witnesse, I would be
to you as your father if he liued. How say you to this compendious
tale Maister R. G. 
                  
                     ••
                  uld the proudest setter or verser in the
world haue drawne on a Conny more cunningly?
               Wel, againe to our yoong gentleman, who simply (with teares
in his eyes to heare the kindnes of the Usurer) thankt him hartily,
and deferred not to put in practise his counsell, for he made an absolute
deed of gift from wife and children to this Usurer of all his
Lordshippe, and so had the two hundred markes vpon the playne
forfait of a 
                     •
                  and.
               To be short, the money made him and his merry, and yet he did
hus
                     •
                  and it so wel, that he not onely duly paid the interest, but stockt
his grounds, and began to grow out of debt, so that his creditors
were willing to beare with him. Against the three yeares were expired,
he made shift by the helpe of his friends for the money, and
carryed it home to the Usurer, thanking him greatly, and crauing
a returne of his deed of gift. Nay soft sir (sayth the olde Churle)
that bargaine is yet to make, the land is mine to mee and mine
heyres for euer, by a deed of gift from your owne hand, and what
can be more sure: take the money if you please, and there is your
band, but for the Lordship I wil enter on it to morrow: yet if you
wil be 
                     •
                  y tenant, you shall haue it before another, aud that is all

the fauour you shal haue of me.
               At this the Gentleman was amazed, and began to plead conscience
with him, but in vaine: whereuppon he went sorrowfully
home and told his wife, who as a woman halfe lunatike ran with
hir little children to his house, and cryed out, but bootlesse: For
although they called him before the chiefe of the country, yet 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the law had graunted him the fee simple thereof he would not part
withal: so that this distressed gentleman was faine to become tenant
to this Usurer, and for two hundred marks to lofe a Lordship
worth six or seuen thousand pounds. I pray you was not this an
old Conycatcher M. R. G. that could lurtch a poore Conny of so
many thousands at one time? whether is our cros
                     •
                  ing at cardes
more perillous to the commonwelth than this cossenage for land?
you winke at it, but I wil tel all, yet heare out the end of my tale,
for as fortune fel out, the Usurer was made a Cony himselfe.
               The gentleman and his wife smothering this with patience,
she that had a reaching wit, & ha
                     ••
                   brain reuenge in hir head, counseld
hir husband to make a voyage from home, & to stay a weeke or
two: and (q. she) before you come againe you shal see mee venter
faire for the land. The gentleman willing to let his wife practise
hir wits, went his way, and left al to his wiues discretion. She after
hir husband was foure or fiue dayes from home, was visited
by the Usurer, who vsed hir very kindly, and sent victuals to hir
house, promising to sup with hir that night, and that she should not
want any thing in hir husbands absence. The gentl
                     •
                  woman with
gratious acceptance thankt him, and bad diuers of hir neighbors
to beare him company, hauing a further reatch in hir heade then he
suspected. For the olde Churle comming an hower before Supper
time, euen as she hir selfe would wish, after an amorous wehe
or two, as olde Iades wynnie when they cannot wagge the tayle,
began to be very pleasant with his tenant, and desired her to shew
him al the roomes in hir house, and happily (saith he) if I die without
issue, I may giue it to your children, for my conscience bids me
be fauorable to you.
               The gentlewoman lead him through euery part, and at last
brought him into a backe roome much like a backhouse, where she

                     •
                  aid thus vnto him.
               
                  
Sir, this roome is the most vnhandsomest in all the house, but if
there were a dormar built to it, and these shut windows made bay
windows and glazd, it would make the properest parlour in al the
house: for (saith she) put your head out at this window, and looke
what a sweet prospect belongs vnto it.
               The Usurer mistrusting nothing, thrust out his craftie sconce,
and the Gentlewoman shut to the windowe, and called her maids
to helpe, where they bound and pinyond the caterpillers armes
fast, and then stood he with his head into a backeyard, as if he had
beene on a pillory, and struggle he durst not for stifling himselfe.
When she had him thus at the vauntage, she got a couple of sixe
peny nayles and a hammer, and went into the yard, hauing her
children attending vpon her, euery one with a sharpe knife in theyr
handes, and then comming to him with a sterne countenance, shee
looked as Medea did when she attempted reuenge against Iason.
The Usurer seeing this tragedie, was afraid of his life, and cryed
out, but in vaine, for her maydes made such a noyse, that his 
                     •
                  hr
                     •
                  
                  king
could not be heard, whilest she nayled one ea
                     •
                  e fast to the windowe,
and the other to the stanshel, then began she to vse these
words vnto him.
               Ah vile and iniurious caterpiller, God hath sent thee to seeke
thine owne reuenge, and now I and my children wil performe it.
For sith thy wealth doth so couutenance thee, that we cannot haue
thee punisht for thy coossenage, I my selfe wil bee Iustice, Iudge,
and Executioner: for as the Pillory belongs to such a villaine, so
haue I nayled thy eares and they shal be cut off to the perpetuall
example of such purloining reprobates, and the executers shal bee
these little infants, whose right without conscience or mercie
thou so wrongfully deteinest. Looke on this old Churle litle babes.
this is he that with his coossenage wil driue you to beg and want
in your age, and at this instant brings your Father to all this present
miserie, haue no pittie vppon him, but you two cut off his
eares, and thou (quoth she to the eldest) cut off his nose, and so be
reuenged on the villaine whatsoeuer fortune me for my labour. At
this the Usurer cryed out, and bad her stay her children, and hee
would restore the house & land again to hir husband. I cannot beleeue
thee base churle q. she, for thou that wouldst periure thy selfe

against so honest a Gentleman as my husband, wil not sticke to forsweare
thy selfe were thou at liberty and therefore I wil mangle
thee to the vttermost. As thus she was ready to haue her children
fal vpon him, one of hir maydes came running in, and told her, her
neighbors were came to supper: bid them come in, quoth she, and
behold this spectacle. Although the Usurer was passing loath to
haue his neighbors see him thus tyranously vsed, yet in they came,
and when they saw him thus mannerly in a new made pillory, and
his eares fast nayled, some wondred, some laught, and all stood amazed,
till the Gentlewoman discourst to them all the coosenage,
and how she meant to be reuenged: some of them perswaded her
to let him go, others were silent, and some bad him confesse: he hearing
them debate the matter, and not to offer to helpe him, cryed
out: why, and stand you staring on me neighbors, and wil not you
saue my life? No quoth the Gentlewoman, he or she that stirs to
helpe thee shal pay dearely for it, and therefore my boyes, off with
his eares: then he cryed out, but stay, and he would confesse all,
when from point to point he rehearst how he had coossened hir husband
by a deed of gift only made to him in trust, and there was content
to giue him the two hundreth markes freely for amends, and
to yeeld vp before any men of worship the land againe into his possession,
and vpon that he bad them all beare witnes. Then the gentlewoman
let loose his eares, and let slip his head, and away went
he home with his bloody lugges, and tarryed not to take part of
the meat he had sent, but the gentlewoman & her neighbors made
merry therwith, and laught hartily at the vsage of the vsurer. The
next day it was bruted abroad, and came to the eares of the worshipful
of the country, who sate in commission vppon it, and found
out the coossenage of the Usurer, so they praised the witte of the
Gentlewoman, restored her husband to the land, and the old churle
remained in discredit, and was a laughing stocke to all the country
all his life after.
               I pray you what say you to Mounser the Miller with the gilden
thumbe, whether thinke you him a Conny catcher or no? that
rob
                     •
                   euery poore man of his meale and corne, and takes towle at
his owne pleasure, how many Conyes doth hee take vp in a yeare?
for when he brings them wheat to the Mill, he sels them meale of

their owne corne in the market. Iomi
                     •
                   
                  Miles the Millers coossenage
for wenching affaires, as no doubt in these causes they bee
mighty Cony-catchers, and meane to speake of their pollicie in

                     ••
                  ltching and stealing of meale. For you must note, that our iolly
M
                     •
                  ller doth not only verse vpon the poore and rich for their towle,
but hath false hoppers conueyed vnder the fal of his Mill, where al
the best of the meale runs by, this is, if the partie be by that bringeth
the corne: but because many men haue many eyes, the Miller
will driue them off for their griest for a day or two, and then he
playes his pranks at his owne pleasure. I need not tel that stale

                     •
                  east of the Gentlemans Miller that kept Court and Leet once euery
weeke, and vsed to set in euery sacke a candle, 
                     •
                  nd so summon
the owners 
                     •
                  o appeare by their names, if they came not, as they
were farre inough from that place, then he amerced them, and so
tooke treple towle of euery sacke. One night amongst the rest, the
Gentleman his maister was vnder the Mill, and heard all his
knau
                     •
                  ry, how euery one was called, and paid his amerciament, at
last he heard his owne name called, and then stepping vp the Ladder,
he had stay, for he was there to make his appearance. I do imagine
that the Miller was blanke, and perhaps his Maister called
him knaue, but the For the more he is curst the better he fares,
and the oftener the Miller is called theefe, the richer the waxeth:
and therefore doe men rightly by a by word did the Miller put out,
and if he asketh what, they say a theeues head and a theeues paire
of eares: for such graund Cony-catchers are these Millers, that
he that cannot verse vpon a poore mans lacke, is said to be borne
with a golden thumbe. But that you may see more plainly theyr
knauery, Ile tel you a pleasant tale, performed not many yeares
since by a Miller in Enfield Mil, ten miles from London, and an
Alewiues boy of Edmondton, but because they are al at this present
aliue, I wil conceale their names, but thus it fel out.
            
            
               A pleasant Tale of a Miller and an Alewiues Boy
of Edmondton.
               AN Alewife of Edmondton, who had a great vent for spiced
Cakes, sent her sonne often to Endfield Mill for to haue her

wheat ground, so that the Boy who was of a quicke spirit & rype
wit, grew very familiar both with the Miller and his man, and
his man, and could get his corne sooner put in the Mil then any
Boy in the country beside. It fortuned on a time, that this good
wife wanting meale, bad her Boy hie to the Mil, and be at home
that night without faile, for she had not a pint of floure in the house.
Iacke her sonne, for so we wil cal his name, layes his sacke on his
mares backe, and away he rides singing towardes Endfield: as
he rode, he mette at the washes with the Miller, and gaue him the
time of the day, Godfather quoth he, whither ride you? to London
Iacke quoth the Miller: Oh good Godfather quoth the boy,
tel mee what store of griest is at the Mil? marry great store quoth
the Miller: but Iacke if thou wilt do me an arrant to my man, ile
send thee by a token that thou shalt haue thy coru cast on & ground
assoone as thou commest, Ile say and doe what you wil to be dispatcht,
for my mother hath neyther Cakes nor floure at home:
then Iacke saith the Miller, bid my man grind thy corne next, by
that token he looke to my Bitch and feed her wel. I wil Godfather
saith the Boy, and rides his way, and marueiled with himself
what Bitch it was that he bad his man feede, considering for two
or three yeares he had vsde to the Mil, and neuer saw a Dog nor
Bitch, but a little prickeard Shault that kept the Mil doore. Riding
thus musing with himselfe, at last he came to Endfield, and
there he had his corne wound vp: assoon as he came vp the stairs,
the Millers man being somewhat sleepy began to aske Iack drowsily
what newes, Marry quoth the Boy, the newes is this, that I
must haue my corne laide on next: soft Iacke quoth the Millers
man, your turne wil not rowe afore midnight, but ye are alwayes
in hast, soft fire makes sweet mault, your betters shal be serued afore
you this time. Not so quoth the Boy, for I met my Godfather
at the washes-riding to London, and tolde him what hast I
had, and so he bids my griest shal be layde on next, by that token
you must looke to his Bitch and feed her wel. At that the Millers
man smilde, and said he should be the next, and so rose vp and turned
a pinne behind the Hopper. Iacke markt al this, and beeing a
wily and a witty Boy, mused where this Bitch should be, and seeing
none began to suspect some knauery, and therefore being very

familiar, was bold to looke about in euery corner, while the man was
busie about the Hopper, at last Iacke turning vp a cloath that hung
before the Trough, spied vnder the Hopper belowe, where a great
P
                     •
                  ake was tyed with a cord almost ful of fine floure, that ranne at a
false hole vnderneath, and could not be spyed by any meanes. Iacke
seeing this, beganne to suspect this was the Millers Bitch that hee
commanded his man to feede, and so s
                     ••
                  led and let it alone: at last
when the corne was ground off that was in the Hopper, Iacke layde
on his, and was very bus
                     •
                  e about it himselfe, so that the Millers man
set him downe and tooke a nap, knowing the Boye could looke to the
m
                     •
                  ll almost as wel as himselfe, Iacke all this while had an eye to the
Bitch, and determined at last to slip her haul
                     •
                  er, which he warily performed,
for when his corne was ground and he had put vp his meale,
he whipst asunder the cord with his knife that held the Poake, & thrust
it into the mouth of his sacke, now there was in the Poake a bushell
and more of passing fine floure, that the Millers Bitch had eaten that
day, assoone as Iacke had tyed vp his sacke, there was str
                     •••
                  ng who
should laye on corne next, so that the Millers man wakte, and Iacke
desiring one to helpe him vp with his corne, tooke his leaue and went
his way, ryding merely homeward, smiling to thinke how he had cousoned
the Miller, as he roade, at that same place where hee mette the
Miller outward▪ he met him homeward, How now Ia
                     •
                  ke quoth the
Miller hast ground, I, I thanke you Godfather quoth the Boy, but
didst remember my arrant to my man sayes he, didst bid him looke to
my Bitch wel, Oh Godfather quoth the Boy, take no care for your
Bitch she is wel, for I haue her here in my sacke whelpes and all, away
rydes Iacke at this laughing, and the Miller grieuing, but when
he found it true, I leaue you to gesse how hee and his man dealt togither,
but how the Alewife sported at the knauery of her sonne when
he told her all the ieast, that imagine, but how soeuer for all that, Iack
was euer welcome to the Mill and ground before any, and whose soeuer
sacke fedde the Bitch, Iackes scapte euer towle-free, that hee
might conceale the Millers subtiltie.
               Was not this Miller a Conny-catcher maister R. G? What
should I talke of the baser sort of men, whose occupation cannot bee
vpholden without craft, there is no mysterie nor science almost, wherin
a man may thriue, without it be lincked to this famous Art of Conny-catching.
The Alewife vales she 
                     ••
                  cke her P
                     •
                  ts and Conny-catch

her gue
                     •
                  tes with stone Pottes and petty Cannes, can hardly paye her
Brewer, nay and yet that wil not serue, the chalke must walke to set
vp now & then a shilling or two too much, or else the rent wil not bee
answered at the quarter day, besides ostrey, faggots, and faire chambring,
and pretty wenches that haue no wages, but what they get by
making of beddes. I know some Taphouses about the Subberbes,
where they buy a shoulder of mutton for two groats, and sel it to their
ghuest for two shillings, and yet haue no female friends to sup withall,
let such take heed, least my fathers white Horse loose saddle & bridle
& they go on foote to the diuel on pilgrimage. Tush maister R. G.
God is my witnesse, I haue seene Chaunlers about London, haue
two paire of waites, and when the searchers come, they shew
                     •
                   them
those that are sealed, but when their poore neighbors buy ware, they
vse them that lack weight, I condemne not all, but let such amend as
are toucht at the quick. And is not this flat Conny-catching, yes, if it
please your maship & worser. Why the base sort of Ostlers haue their
shifts, & the crue of S▪ Patrickes Costerdmongers, can sell a simple
man a crab for a pipping. And but that I haue loued wine wel, I wold
touch both the Uintner and his bush, for they haue such brewing and
tunning, such chopping and changing, such mingling & mixing. what
of wine with water in the quart pot, and tempering one wine with an
other in the vessel, that it is hard to get a neate cup of wine and simple
of it selfe, in most of our ordinary Tauerus, & do not t
                     •
                  ey make poore
men connies, that for their currant mony giue them counterfeit wine.
               What say you to the Butcher with his prickes, that hath pollicies
to puffe vp his meate to please the eye, is not al his craft vsed to draw
the poore Conny to ryd him of his ware. Hath not the Draper his
darke shop to shadow the dye and wooll of his cloth, and all to make
the country Gentleman or Farmer a conny. What trade can maintaine
his traffique? what science vphold it self? what man liue, vnles
he growe into the nature of a Cony-catcher? Doo not the Lawyers
make long Pleaes, stand vpon their demurres, and haue their quirks
and quiddities to make his poore Client a Cony? I speake not generally,
for so they be the ministers of iustice, and the Patrons of the
poo
                     •
                  e mens right, but particularly of such as hold gaines their G
                     •
                  d,
and esteeme more of coyne then of conscience. I remember by the way
a merry iest performed by a Foole, yet wittily hit home at hazard, as
blinde men shoote the Crow.
            
            
               
               A pleasant Tale of Will Sommers.
               KIng Henry the eight of famous memory, walking one day in his
priuy Garde
                     •
                  , with Will Sommers his Foole, it fortuned that
two Lawyers had a sui
                     •
                  e vnto his maiestie for one piece of grounde
that was almost out of lease and in the Kinges gift, and at time put
vp their Supplication to his highnesse, and at that instant one of the
Pantry that had been a long seruiture, had spyed out the same land,
and exhibited his petition for the same gift, so that in one houre, all the
three Supplications were giuen to the King, which his highnesse noting,
and being as then pleasantly disposed, he reuealed it to them that
were by him, how there were three Fishes at one b
                     •
                  yte, and all gapte
for a benefice, and hee stood in doubt on whome to bestowe it, and s
                     •
                  
shewed them the Supplications, the Courtiers spoke for their felow,
except two that were feed by the Lawyers, and they 
                     •
                  articularly
pleaded for their friendes, yelding many reasons to the King on both
sides. At last his maiestie sayd, hee would referre the matter to Will
Sommers, which of them his Foole thought most worthy of it should
haue the lande. Will was glad of this, and loued him of the Pan
                     •
                  rie
wel, and resolued he should haue the ground, but the Foole brought it
about with pretty iest, Marry quoth he, what are these two Lawiers?
I Will saide the King, then quoth the Foole, I wil vse them as they
vse their poore clients. Looke here quoth he, I haue a Walnut in my
hand, and I wil diuide it among the three, so Will crackt it, and gaue
to one Lawyer one shel, and to an other the other shel, and to him of
the Pantry the meat, so shal thy gift be Harry, quoth he, this Lawyer
shal haue good Bookes, and this faire promises, but my felow of the
Pantry shal haue the land. For thus deale they with their clyents, two
men goe to two, and spende all that they haue vpon the Lawe, and at
last, haue nothing but bare shales for their labour. At this, the King
and his Noble men laught: the Yeoman of the Pantry had the gift,
and the Lawyers went home with fleas in their eares, by a Fooles
verdite. I rehearst this Act to shew how men of Lawe, feede on poore
mens purses, and makes their country clyents, oftentimes simple
connyes. But leauing these common courses and trinial examples, I
wil shew you maister R. G. of a kinde or Conny-catchers, that as
yet passeth al these.
               There bee in Englande, but especially about London, certayne
quar
                     •
                  t, pickt, and neate com
                     •
                  anions, attyred in their apparel, eyther

                  alla mode de Fraunce, with a side Cloake, and a hat of a high blocke
and a broad brimme, as if hee could with his head cosmographise the
world in a moment, or else Allespanyole, with a straight bombast
                     •
                  
fleeue like a quaile pipe, his short Cloake, and his Rapier hanging as
if he were entering the List to a desperate Combate: his beard squared
with such Art, eyther with his mustachies after the lash of Lions,
standing as stiffe as if he wore a Ruler in his mouth, or else nickt off
with the Italian cut, as if he ment to professe one faith with the vpper
lippe, and an other with his nether lippe, and then hee must be Marquisad
                     •
                  d,
with a side peake pendent, eyther sharpe lyke the single of
a Deere, or curtold lyke the broad ende of a Moule spade. This Gentleman
forsooth, hanteth Tabling houses, Tauerns, and such places,
where yong nouices resort, & can fit his humor to all companies, and
openly shadoweth his disguise with the name of a Traueller, so that
he wil haue a superficiall insight into certaine phrases of euerie language,
and pronounce them in such a grace, as if almost hee were that
Countryman borne: then shal you heare him vaunt of his trauels, and
tel what wonders he hath seene in strange countries: how be hath bin
at Saint Iames of Gompostella in Spaine, at Madril in the Kings
Court: and then drawing out his blade, hee claps it on the boord, and
and sweares he bought that in Toledo: then wil he roue to Venice,
and with a sigh, discouer the situation of the citie, how it is seated two
Leagues from Terra frenia, in the Sea, and speake of Rialto Treuiso
and Murano, where they make Glasses: and to set the young
gētlemans teeth an edge, he wil make a long tale of La Strado Courtizano,
wher the beautiful Curtizans dwel▪ discribing their excellency,
and what angellical creatures they be and how amorously they wil
entertaine strangers. Tush, he wil discourse the state of Barbary, and
there to Esc
                        ••
                     tes and Alcaires, and from thence leape to Fraunce,
Denmarke, and Germany, After all concluding thus.
               What is a Gentleman (saith he) without trauaile? euen as a man
without one eye. The sight of sundry c
                     •
                  untries made V
                        •
                     isses so famous:
bought witte is the sweetest, and experience goeth beyond all
Patrymon
                     •
                  es. Did young Gentlemen, as wel as I, know the pleasure
& profit of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , they would not keep them at home within their

                     〈…〉
                  : but visit the world, & win more wisedome in trauelling
two or three yeeres, then all the wealth their Ancestors left them
to poss
                     •
                  sse. Ah the sweet sight of ladies, the strange wonders in cities,

and the diuers manners of men and theyr conditions, were able to rauish
a yong Gentlemans sences with the sur
                     •
                  et of content, and what
is a thousand pound spent to the obtaining of those pleasures.
               All these Nouelties doth this pip
                     •
                  ed Bragout boast on, when
his only trauaile hath been to look on a faire day, from Douer Clifts
to Callis, neuer hauing stept a foot out of England, but surueyed the
Maps, and heard others talke what they knew 
                     〈◊〉
                   experience. Thus
decking himselfe like the Daw with the faire feathers of other birds,
and discoursing what he heard other men report, hee grew so plausible
among yoong Gentlemen, that he got his ordinary at the least, and
some gratious thanks for his labour. But happily some amongst many,
tickled with the desire to see strange countries, and 
                     •
                  rawne on by
his alluring words, would ioyne with him, and questi
                     •
                  n if he meant
euer to trauaile againe. He straight after he hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   his peake by
the end, Alla Neopoli
                        •
                     ano begins thus to reply.
               Sir, although a man of my 
                     〈…〉
                   experienc
                     •
                   might be satisfied
in the sight of countries, yet so 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the desire of trauailing,
that if perhaps a yong Gentleman of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   and courteous nature,
were desirous to see Ierusalem or Constantinople, would he wel
acquit my paines and followe my counfaile, I would bestow a yeare
or two with him out of England. To be breefe, if the Gentleman

                     •
                  umpe with him, then doth he cause him to sel some Lordship, and put
some thousand or tw
                     •
                   thousand pound in the banke to be receyued by
letters of exchange: and because the gentleman is ignorant, my yong
Maister his guide must haue the disposing of it: which he so wel sets
out, that the poore gentleman neuer sees any returne of his mony after.
Then must store of suites of apparel he bought and furnisht euery
way: at last, he names a ship wherein they should passe, and so downe
to Grauesend they go, and there he leaues the yoong nouice, fleest of
his money and wo begone, as farre from trauaile as Miles the merry
Cobler of Shorditch, that swore he w
                     •
                  uld neuer trauaile further,
than from his shop to the Alehouse. I pray you cal you not these fine
witted fellowes Conny-catchers Maister R. G.?
               
               But now Sir by your leaue a little, what if I should proue you a
Conny-catcher Maister R. G. would it not make you blush at the
matter? Ile go as neare to it as the Frye
                     •
                   did to his Hostesse mayde,
when the Clarke of the parish tooke him at Leuatem at midnight.
Aske the Queens P
                     •
                  ayers, if you sold them not Orlando Furio so
                  
for twenty Nobles, and when they were in the country, sold the same
Play to the Lord Admirals als men for as much more. Was not this
plaine Conny-catching Maister R. G?
               
               But I heare when this was obiected, that you made this excuse:
that there was no more faith to be held with Plaiers, than with them
that valued faith at the price of a feather: for as they were Comaedians
to act▪ so the actions of their liues were Cameleon like, that they
were vncertaine, variable, time pleasers, men that measured honestie
by profite, and that regarded their Authors not by desart, but by necessitie
of time. If this may serue you for a shadow, let mee vse it for
an excuse of our Car
                     •
                   
                  Conny-catching: for when we meet a country
Farmar with a fulpurse, a miserable 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that eyther rockes his
Tenants rents, or selles his graine in the market at an vnreasonable
rate: we hold it a deuotion to make him a Conny, in that he is a Caterpiller
to others, and gets that by pilling and polling of the poore,
that we strip him of by 
                     ••
                  eight and agilitie of wit.
               Is there not heere resident about London, 
                     〈◊〉
                   crew of terryble
Hacksters in the habite of Gentlemen, wel 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and yet some
wear
                     •
                   bootes for want of stockings, with a locke worne at theyr lefte
eare for their mistrisse fauour, his Rapyer Alla reuoloto, his Poynado
pendent ready for the sta
                     •
                  , and cauileuarst like a warlike Magnifico:
yet for all this outward shew of pride, inwardly they be humble
in minde, and despise worldly welth, for you 
                     •
                  hal neuer take them with
a pen
                     •
                  y in theyr purse. These Souldados, for vnder that profession
most of them wander, haue a pollicie to scourge Alehouses, for where
they 
                     •
                  ight in, they neuer leape out, till they haue shewed theyr Arithmatike
with chalke on euery post in the house, figured in Cyphers
like round Os, till they make the goodman cry O, O, O, as if hee
should cal an O yes at Size or Sessions. Now sir, they haue sundry
shifts to maintaine them in this versing, for eyther they creep in with
the goodwife, and so vndoo the goodman, or els they beare it out with
great brags if the Host be simple, or els they trip him in some wordes
when he is tipsy, that he hath spoken against some Iustice of peace or
other, or some other great man: and then they hold him at a bay with
that, til his b
                     •
                  cke almost breake. Thus shift they from house to house,
hauing this prouerbe amongst them: Such must eate as are hungry
and they must p
                        •
                     y that haue money. Call you not these Conny-catchers
Maister R. G.?
               
               
                  
It were an endlesse peece of work, to discouer the abhominable 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of brokers, whose shops are the very temples of the deuil, themselues
his priests, and their books of account more damnable, th
                     •
                  n the Al
                     
                        •
                     or
                        •
                     n
set out by Mahomet: for as they induce yoong gentlemen to
pawne their lands, as I said before: so they are ready (the more is the
pitty that it is suffered) to receiue any goods, howsoeuer it bee came
by, hauing their shoppes, (as they say) a lawful market to buy and sel
in, so that whence growes to mony Lifts about London, but in that
they haue Brokers their friends, to 
                     •
                  uy whatsoeuer they purloyne &
fleale? And yet is the Picklocke, Lift, or Hooker, that brings y• stolne
goods, made a 
                     〈◊〉
                   Conny, and vsed as an Instrument onely of theyr
villany: for suppose he hath lifted a gowne or a cloake, or so many parcels
as are worth tenne pounds, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   his life in hazard for the
obtaining of it: the miserable Caterpiller the Broker, wil thinke hee
dealeth liberaily with him if he giue him forty shillings, so doth he not
onely maintaine fellony, but like a theefe 
                     •••
                  ssens the th
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  e. And ar
                     •
                  
not these graund Conny-catchers 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  R. G.?
               
               I knew not farre from Fleetbridge a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , it were a good
deed to take Paine.
                  Paine. to tel his name, that tooke of a boy of seuen yeere
old a Rapier worth forty shillinges, and a stitcht taffata Hat woorth
ten, and all for fiue shilling
                     ••
                   the Gentleman, father to the child, was
sicke when necessitie dro
                     ••
                   him thus nigh, to lay his weapon and his
Bonnet to pawne, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   as he recouered, which was within
sixe weeks after, sent the money and twelue pence for the lone, to haue
the parcels againe. But this Cutthrotes answer was, the Boy had
made him a bil of sa
                     •
                  e of his hand for a moneth, and the day was broken,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
and he had made the best of the Rapier and Hat. Was not this a
Iewe and a notable Conny-catcher Maister R. G.
               
               It had beene wel if you had rould out your Rhetorike against such
a rakehel. But come to theyr honest kinde of life, and you shal see how
they stand vpon circumstances: if you borrow but two shillings, there
must be a groat for the money, and a groat for the Bil of sale, and this
must bee renewed euery moneth: so that they resemble the Boxe 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
which beeing wel payd all night, will in the morning be the greatest
winner.
               Wert not a merry ieast to haue about againe Maister R. G. with
your poetical Brethren: amongst the which, one learned Hypocrite,
that could brooke no abuses in the Commonwealth, was so zealous,

that he began to put an English she Saint in the Legend, for the holinesse
of her life: and forgot not so much as her dogge, as Tobies
was remembred, that wagged his tayle at the sight of his olde Mistresse.
This pure Martinist (if he were not worse) had a combat betweene
the flesh and the spirite, that he must needes haue a Wife,
which he cunningly conny-catcht in this manner.
            
            
               A pleasant Tale how a holy brother Conny-catcht
for a Wife.
               FIrst you must vnderstand, that he was a kind of Scholastical panyon,
nourst vp onely at Grammer schoole, least going to the Uniuersitie,
through his nimble witte, too much learning should make
him mad. So he had past As in praesenti, and was gone a proficient
as farre as Carmen Heroicum: for he pronounst his wordes like a

                     •
                  ragout, and helde vp his head like a Malt-horse, and could talke against
Bishops, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   very mannerly the discipline of the Primitiue
Church were restored. Now sir, this Gentleman had espyed (I
dare not say about Fleetstreet) a proper mayd, who had giuen hir by
the decease of her Father foure hundred pound in money, besides certaine
faire houses in the Cittie: to this girle goeth this proper Greek
a wooing, naming himselfe to be a Gentleman of Cheshire, and only
sonne and heyre to his Father, who was a man of great reuenewes:
and to make the matter more plausible, he had attyred his owne brother
very orderly in a blew coat, and made him his seruingman, who,
though he were eldest, yet to aduaunce his yonger brother to so good
a marriage, was content to lie, cog, and flatter, and to take any seruile
paines, to sooth vp the matter: insomuch that when her Father in
law (for hir mother was marryed againe, to an honest, vertuous, and
substantial man in Fleetstreet or thereabouts) heard how this yoong
Gentleman was a Suiter to his daughter in law, careful she shoulde
doe wel, calde the Seruing man aside, which by his outward behauiour
seemed to be an honest and discreet m
                     •
                  n, and began to question
with him what his Maister was, of what par
                     ••
                  tage, of what possibilitie
of liuing after his Fathers decease, and how many children he
had beside him.
               This fellow wel instructed by his holy Brother, without distrust
to the man, simply as he thought, said, that he was the sonne and heire

of one Maister &c. dwelling in Cheshire, at the Manor of &c. and that
he had a yoonger brother, but this was hey
                     •
                  e to all, and rehearst a proper
liuing of some fiue hundred markes a yeare. The honest man,
knowing diuers Cheshire Gentlemen of that name, g
                     •
                  ue credyte to
the fellowe, and made no further inquiry, but gaue countenaunce to
my yoong Maister, who by his flattering speeches had wonne, rot
onely the Maydes fauour vnto the full, but also the good wil of her
Mother, so that the match shortly was made vp, and marryed they
shoulde bee forsooth, and then should she, her Father and her Mother,
ryde home to his Father in Cheshire, to haue su
                     ••
                  icient dowry
appointed.
               To bee breefe, wedded they were, and bedded they had been three
or foure nights, and yet for all this fayre shew the Father was a little
iealous, and smoakt him, but durst say nothing. But at last, after the
marriage had beene past ouer three or foure dayes, it chaunced that
her Father and this Seruingman went abroad, and past through S.
Paules Churchyard amongst the Stationers, a Prentise amongst
the rest, that was a Cheshire man, and knew this counterfayte Seruingman
and his brother, as being borne in the same Parish where
his Father dwelt, called to him, and sayde: What I. how doth your
Brother P. how doth your Father, liues he stil? The fellow aunswered
him all were wel, and loth his brothers wiues father should heare
any thing, made no stay but departed.
               This acquaintance naming the fellow by his name and asking for
his brother, droue the honest Cittizen into a great maze, and doubted
he, his wife & h
                     •
                  s d
                     •
                  ughter were made Connyes. Wel, he smoothed
all 
                     •
                  p, 
                     •
                  s if he had heard nothing, and let it passe til he had sent the man
about necessary businesse, and then secretly returned againe vnto the

                     〈◊〉
                   shop, and began to question with the Boy, if he knew the

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  an wel, that he cald to him of lat
                     •
                  . I marry doe I sir quoth

                     〈…〉
                   and his brothe
                     •
                   
                  P. I can tel you they haue an 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
at the boordes end but my yoong Maister, and he very coyly, badde
them all welcome to his fathers house, they all gaue him reuerent
thankes, esteeming him to be a man of worship and worth. Assoone as
all were set, and the meate serued in, and the Gentlemans Seruing-man
stood mannerly wayting on his brothers trencher at last the good
man of the house smiling said: Sonne P. I pray you let your man sit
downe, and eate such part with vs as God hath sent vs. Marry quoth
Maister P. that were wel to make my man my companion, he is wel
inough, let him suppe with his fellowes. Why sir sayth he, in fayth
he plaine, cal him brother, and bid him sitte downe. Come coossen I.
quoth he, make not straunge, I am sure your brother P. wil giue you
leaue. At this Maister P. blusht, and askt his Father in lawe what he
meant by those wordes? and whether he thought his man his brother
or no? I by my faith doe I sonne quoth he, and account thee no honest
man that wilt deny thine owne brother and thy father: For sir know
I haue learnd your pettegree. Alas daughter quoth he, you are wel
marryed, for his Father liues of the almes of the Parish, and this
poore Fellowe which he hath made his slaue, is his eldest Brother.
At this his wife began to weepe, all was dasht, and what she thought
G
                     •
                  d knowes. Her mother cryed out, but all was bootlesse, Maister
P. confest the trueth, and his brother sate downe at supper, and for al
that he had the wench. I pray you was not this a Conny-catcher
Maister R. G.?
               
               But now to be a little pleasant with you, let me haue your opinion
what you deeme of those Amarosos here in England, & about London,
that (because the old prouerbe saith, change of pasture makes fat
calues, wil haue in euery shire in England a sundry wife, as for an instance
your countryman R. B. are not they right Conny-catchers?
enter into the nature of them, and see whether your pen had been better
imployed in discouering their vill
                     •
                  inies, thā a simple legerdemain
at cards. For suppose a man hath but one daughter, and hath no other
dowrie but her beautie and honestie, what a spoile is it for hir to light
in the hands of such an adulterous and incestuous rascal? had not hir
father beene better to haue lost forty shillings at cardes, then to haue
his daughter so conny catcht and spoyld for euer after? These youths
are proper fellows, neuer without good apparel and store of crowns,
wel horst, and of so quaint & fine behauior, & so eloquent, that they are
able to induce a yong girle to folly, especially since they shadow the
                     •
                  r

villainy with the honest pretence of marriage: for theyr custome is
this. When they come into the Cittie or other place of credit, or somtime
i
                     •
                   a country village, as the fortune of theyr villany leads them,
they make inquiry what good marriages are abroad, & on the sunday
make suruey what faire and beautiful mayds or widowes are in the
Parish: then as their licentious lust leades them, whether the eye for
fauour, or the eare for riches, so they set downe theyr rest, & soiourne
eyther there or thereabouts, hauing money at wil, and their companions
to sooth vp whatsoeuer damnably they shal protest, courting
the maid or widow with such faire words, & sweet promises, that shee
is often so set on fire, that neither the report of others, nor the admonition
of their frends, can draw them from the loue of the Poligamoi
or bel-swaggers of the country. And when the wretches haue by the
space of a moneth or two satisfied their lust, they waxe weary, & either
faine some great iourney for a while to be absent, & so go & visit some
other of his wiues, or els if he meane to giue her the bagge, he selleth
whatsoeuer he can, and so leaues hir spoild both of hir wealth and honestie,
then which there is nothing more pre
                     •
                  ious to an honest woman.
And because you shal see an instance, I wil tel you a pleasant tale performd
by our villaines in Wiltshire not long since, I wil conceale the
parties names, because I thinke the woman is yet aliue.
            
            
               A pleasaunt Tale of a man that was marryed to sixteene Wiues,
and how courteously his last wife intreated him.
               IN Wiltshire there dwelt a Farm
                     •
                  r of indifferent wealth, that had
but o
                     •
                  ely one childe, and that was a daughter, a mayd of excellent
beauty and good behauior, and so honest in h
                     •
                  r conuersation, that the
good r
                     •
                  port of hir ver
                     •
                  ues was wel spoken of in al
                     •
                   the cuntry, so that
what for hir good quali
                     •
                  ies, & sufficient dowry that was like to fal to
her▪ she h
                     •
                  d many suters, mens sons of good welth and honest conuersation
But whether this mayd had no minde to wed, or she likte none
that made loue to her, or she was afrayde to match in haste least shee
might repent at leysure, I know not: but she refused all, & kept her
stil a virgin. But as we see oftentimes, the coyest maydes happen on
the coldest mariages, playing like the beetle that makes scorne al day
of the dai
                     •
                  tiest slowers, and at night takes vp his lodging in a cowsh
                     •
                  rd▪
So this maid, whom we wil cal Marian, refused many honest

and wealthy Farmars sonnes, and at last lighted on a match, that for
euer after 
                     •
                  ard her market: for it fel out thus. One of these notable
roges, by occupation a taylor, and a fine workman, a reprobate giuen
ouer to the spoyle of honest maids, & to the deflowring of virgins, hearing
as he trauelled abroad of this Marian, did meane to haue a fling
at her, and there
                     ••
                  re came into the towne where hir father dwelt and
asked worke. A very 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  est man of that trade, seeing him a passing
proper man, and of a very good and honest countenance, and not simply
app
                     •
                  relled, sayd he would make trial of him for a garment or two,
and so 
                     •
                  ooke him into seruice: assoone as hee saw him vse his needle,
he wondered not onely at his workemanshippe, but at the swiftnes of
his hand. At last the fello
                     •
                   (whom we wil name William) desired his
Maister that he might vse his sheeres but once for the cutting out of
a dublet, which his Maister graunted, and he vsed so excellently wel,
that although his Maister was counted the best taylor in Wiltshire,
yet he found himself a botcher in respect of his new intertained iourneyman,
so that from that time forward he was m
                     •
                  de forema
                     •
                   of the
shop, & so pleased the gentlemen of that shire, that who but William
talkt on for a good taylor in that shire. Wel, as yong men and maydes
meet on sondayes & holydaies, so this taylor was passing braue, & began
to frolike it amongst the maydes, & to be very li
                     •
                  eral, being ful of
siluer and gold, & for his personage a properer man than any was in
all the Parish, and made a far off a kind of loue to this Marian, who
seeing this William to be a very hand some man, began somewhat is
affect him, so that in short time she thought wel of his fauors, & there
grew some loue betweene them, insomuch that it came to hir fathers
eares, who began to schoole his daughter for such foolish affectiō towards
one she knew not what he was, nor whither he would: but in
vaine, Marian could not but thinke wel of him, so that her father one
d
                     •
                  y sent for his Maister▪ and began to qu
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  ion of the disposi
                     ••
                  on of his
m
                     •
                  n. The Maister told the Farmar friendly that what he was hee

                     •
                  new not, as being a me
                     •
                  re strang
                     •
                  r vnto him: but for his workmans
                     •
                  ip,
he was one of t
                     •
                  e most excellent b
                     •
                  th for needle and sheeres in
England: for his behauior since he came into his house, he had behaued
himself very honestly and 
                     〈◊〉
                  : wel apparelled he was, and well
mo
                     •
                  ied, & might for his good qualiti
                     •
                  s s
                     •
                  eme to be a good w
                     •
                  mans
f
                     •
                  llow. Although this somewhat satisfied the father, yet he was loth a
tail
                     •
                  r should 
                     〈◊〉
                   away his daughter, & that she should be driuē to liue

of a bar
                     •
                   occupation, whereas she might haue landed men to her husbandes,
so that hee and her friendes called her 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and perswaded
her from him, but she flatly told them 
                     •
                  he neuer loued any but him, and
sith it was her first loue, she would not now be turned from it, whatsoeuer
hap did afterward befal vnto her. Her father that loued her dearly,
seeing no perswasions could draw her from the taylor, left her to
her owne libertie, and so shee and William agreed togither, that in
short time they were married, and had a good portion, and set vp shop,
and liued togither by the space of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   of a yeare very orderly.
At satisfied with the lust of his new wife, he thought it good to visit
some other of his wiues (for at that instant hee had sixteene aliue)
and made a scuse to his wife and his wiues father to go into Yorkshire
(which was his natiue country) and visit his friends, and craue somwhat
of his father towards houshold. Although his wife was loth to
part from her sweet Wil. yet she must be content, and so welhorst and
prouided, away hee rydes for a moneth or two, that was his furthest
day, and downe goes he into some other country to solace himself with
some other of his wiues. In this meane while one of his wiues that
he married in or about Tanton in Sommersetshire, had learnd of his
villany, and how many wiues he had, and by long traueyle had got a
note of their names and dwelling, and the hands and seales of euerie
parish where he was marries, and now by fortune shee heard that hee
had married a wife in Wilshire, not farre from Malborough; thither
hies shee with warrants from the Bishop and diuers Iustices to apprehend
him, and comming to the Towne where he dwelt, vere subtilly
inquired at her host of his estate, who told her that be had married
a rich Farmers daughter, but now was gone downe to his friendes
in Yorkshire, and would be at home againe within a weeke, for hee
had been eight weekes alreadie from home. The woman inquired no
further for that time, but the next morning went home to the Farmers
house, and desired him to sende for his daughter, for she
                     •
                   would
speake with her from her husband: the man straight did so, and shee
hearing she should haue newes from her William, came very hastily.
Then the woman said, shee was sory for her, in that their misfortunes
were alyke, in being married to such a ru
                     ••
                  agate as this Taylor: for
(quoth shee) it is not yet a yeare and a halfe since hee was married to
me in Somersetshire. As this went colde to the olde mans heart, so
stroke it deadly into the mind of Marian, who desiring her to tell the

truth, she out with her testimony, and shewed them how he had at that
instant sixteene wiues aliue. When they read the certificate, and sawe
th
                     •
                   handes and seales of euery parish, the old man fel a weeping: but
such was the griefe of Marian, that her sorrow stopt her teares, and
she 
                     •
                  at as a woman in a trance, til at last fetching a great sigh, she called
God to witnes she would be reuenged on him for al his wiues, and
w
                     •
                  uld make him a general example of al such gracelesse runnagates.
So she conceald the matter, and placed this her fellow in misfortune
in a kinswomans house of hers, so secretly as might be, at tending the
comming of hir trecherous husband, who returned within a fortnight,
hauing in the space hee was absent visited three or foure of his wiues,
and now ment to make a short cut of the matter, & sel al that his new
wife had, and to trauel into some other shire, for hee had heard how
his Somersetshire wife had made inquiry after him in diuers places.
Being come home he was wonderfully welcome to Marian, who entertained
him with such curtesies as a kind wife could any waies affoord
him, only y• vse of her body she denied, saying her natural disease
was vpon her. Wel to be briefe, a great supper was made, and al her
friends was bidden, & he euery way so welcome as if it had bin the day
of his bridal, yea al things was smoothed vp so cunningly, y• he suspected
nothing lesse then yt reuenge intēded against him. Assoone as supper
was ended, & al had taken their leaue, our taylor would to bed, and
his wife with her own hands helpt to vndresse him very louingly, and
being laid down she kist him, & said she would go to hir fathers & come
again straight, bidding him fal a sleep the whilest: hee y• was drowsie
with trauel & drinking at supper, had no need of great intreaty, for he
straight fel into a sound slumber, the whilest she had sent for his other
wife, & other her neighbors disguised, & comming softly into the parlour
where he lay, she turnd vp his clothes at his feete, & tyed his legs
fast togither with a rope, then waking him, she asked him what reason
he had to sleep so soundly. He new wakte out his sleep began to stretch
himselfe, and gald his legs with the cord, whereat he wondring sayd;
How now wife? whats that hurts my legs? what are my feet bound
togither? Marian looking on him with lookes ful of death, made him
this answer: I villaine, thy legs are bound, but hadst thou thy iust desart,
thy necke had long since been stretcht at the gallowes, but before
thou and I part, I wil make thee a iust spectacle vnto the world, for
thy abhominable trechery: and with that she clapt her hand fast on the

haire of his head, and held him down to the pillow. William driuen into
a wondrous amaze at these words, said trembling: Sweete wife,
what sodain altera
                     •
                  ion is this? what meane these words wife? Traytor
(q. shee) I am none of thy wife, neither is this thy wife, & with that
she brought her forth that he was maried in Somersetshire, although
thou art maried to her as wel as to me, and hast like a villaine sought
the spo
                     •
                  le of fifteene women beside my selfe, & that thou shalt heare by
iust certificat, & with y• there was read the bedrol of his wiues, where
hee married them, and where they dwelt. At this hee lay mute as in a
traunce, & only for answer held vp his hands, and desired them both to
be merciful vnto him, for he confest al was truth, that he had bin a 
                     •
                  ainous
offender, and deserued death. Tush saith Marian, but how canst
thou make any one of vs amends? If a man kil the father, he may satisfie
the blood in the sonne: if a man steale, he may make restitution:
but he that robs a woman of her honesty & 
                     •
                  ir g
                     •
                  nitie, can neuer make
any satis
                     •
                  action: and therfore for al the rest I wil be reuenged. With
that his other wife and the women clapt hold on him, & held him fast,
while Marian with a sharpe rasor cut off his stones, and made him a
gelding. I thinke shee had litle respect where the signe was, or obserued

                     •
                  itle art for the string, but off they went, & then she cast them in his
face, & said, Now lustful whoremaister, go I deceiue other women as
thou hast done vs, if thou canst, so they sent in a surgion to him y• they
had prouided, & away they went. The man lying in great paine of body,
& agony of mind, the surgion looking to his wound, had much ado
to stanch the blood, & alwaies he laught hartily when hee thought on
the reuenge, and bad a vengeance on such sow-gelders as made such
large slits: but at last be laid a blood-plaister to him, & stopt his bleeding,
and to be briefe in time heald him, but with much paine. Assoone
as he was whole, and might go abroad without danger, he was committed
to the gaole, and after some other punishment, banished out
of Wilshire and Somersetshire for euer after. Thus was this lustie
cocke of the game made a capon, and as I heard, had litle lust to marry
any more wiues to his dying day.
               How like you of this conny-catching M. R. G? But because now
we haue entred talke of Taylors, let mee haue about with them, for
they bee mightie Conny-catchers in sundry kindes. I pray you what
Poet hath so many fictions, what Painter so many fancies, as a Taylor
hath fashions, to shew the varietie of his 
                     〈◊〉
                   euery week

the shape of his apparrel into new forms, or els he is counted a meere
botcher. The venetian and the gallogascaine is s
                     •
                  ale, and trunke slop
out of vse, the rounde hose bumbasted close to the breech, and 
                     •
                  uft aboue
the necke with a curle, is now common to euery cullion in the
country, & dublets be they neuer so quaintly quilted, yet forsooth the
swaine at plough must haue his belly as side as the courtier, that hee
may pisse out at a button hole at the least. And al these strange deuises
doth the Taylor inuent to make poore gentlemen connies: for if they
were tyed to one fashion, they stil might they know how much veluet
to send to the Taylor, and then would his filching abate. But to preuent
them, if he haue a french belly, he wil haue a Spanish skirt, and
an Italian wing, seamed and quartered at the elbows, as if he were a
souldado readye to put on an armour of proofe to fight in Mile-ende
vnder the bloudy ens
                     •
                  gne of the Duke of Shorditch. Thus wil the
fantasticke Taylor make poore gentlemen Conies, & euer aske more
veluet by a yarde and a haffe then the doublet in conscience requires.
But therein lies the least part of their cony-catching: for those graund
Taylors that haue al the right properties of the mysterie, which is to
be knaui
                     ••
                  , theeuish, and proude, take this course with courtiers and
courtly gentlemen, they flade outside, inside, lace, drawing out, and
making, and then set downe their parcels in a bil, which they so ouerprise,
that some of them with very pricking vp of dublets, haue fleest
yong gentlemen of whole Lordships, & cal you not this cony-catching
M. R. G? To vse the figure Pleonasmos, Hisce
                           •
                        culis,
                   with these eies
I haue seene Taylors prentises sel as much vales in a weeke in cloth
of golde, veluet, satten, taffat
                     •
                  , and lace, as hath beene woorth thir
                     ••
                  e
shillinges, and these eares hath heard them scorne when their vales
came but to ten shillinges, and yet there were foure prentises in the
shop. If the prentises could lurch so mightily, then what did the maister?
But you must imagine this was a womans taylor, that could i
                     •
                  
a gowne put seuenteene yards of ell broad taffata, blest be the French
sleeues & breech verdingales, that grants them liberty to connycate
so mightily. But this I talke if ou
                     •
                   London and courtly Taylors
but euen the poore pricklouse the country taylor, that hath scarse 
                     〈◊〉
                  
more wealth then his thimble, his needle, his pressing yron, and hisheers,
wil filtch as wel as the proudest of that trade in England, they
wil to snip and snap, that al the reuersion goes into hel. Now sir, th
                     •
                  s
helis a place that the tailors haue vnder their shopboord, wher al their

stolne shreds is thrust, and I pray you cal you not this pilling & polling,
and flat Conny-catching Maister R. G? B
                     •
                  t because you may
see whether I speake truth or no, Ile tel you a merry iest of a Taylor
in Yorke not 
                     •
                  arre from Petergate, done about fourteene yeare ago,
and thus it fel out.
            
            
               A pleasant Tale of a Taylor, how he conny-catcht a Gentlewoman,
and was made himselfe a Gonny afterwardes
by his man.
               IN Yorkeshire there dwelt a womans Taylor famous for his Art,
but noted for his filching, which although hee was light fingerd, yet
for the excellency of his workmanship hee was much sought too, and
kept more Iournymen, then any fiue in that citie did: and albeit hee
would haue his share of veluet, satten, or cloth of golde, yet they must
find no fault with him, least he half spoyld their garment in y• making.
Bes
                     ••
                  es, he was passing proud, and had as haughtie alooke, as if his
father had with the diuel look
                     •
                  e ouer Lyncolne: his ordinary dublets
were 
                     〈◊〉
                   cut in the sommer vpon a wrought shirt, and his cloake
faced with veluet, his stockinges of the purest granado silke, with a
French painde hoase of the richest billiment lace, a beauer hatte turft
with 
                     〈◊〉
                  , so quaintly as if he ha
                     •
                   been some Espagnolo trickt vp to
goe court some quaint curtesine, insomuch that a plaine seruingman
once meeting him in this attire, going through 
                     〈◊〉
                   to take aire
in the field, thought him at the least same Esquire, and of with his Hat
and gaue his worship 
                     •
                  he time of the day, this clawed this Glorioso
by the elbow, so that if a Tauerne had been by, a pottle of wine should
haue been the lea
                     ••
                   reward for a largesse to the simple seruing man:
but this bowical huffs, sauffe, not content to passe away with oue worship,
began to hold the fellow in prate, and to question whose man hee
was. The f
                     •
                  low curteously making a low cringe saide, may it please
your woorship, I serue such a Gentleman dwelling in such a place, as
thus he answered him, he spied in the gentlemans bo
                     •
                  ome a needle and
a threed, whereupon the felow simply sayd to him, 
                     •
                  e your woordships
man in looking this morning to your doublet, hath left a needle and a
threede on your worships brest, you had best take it off, least some
thinke your worship to bee a Taylour. The Taylour not thinkyng
the felow had spoken simply, but frumpt him, made this reply: what

sawty knaue doest thou mocke mee? what if I bee a taylour, whats
that to thee, wert not for shame I would lende thee a boxe on the eare
or two, the felow being plaine, but peeuish and an olde knaue, gathering
by his owne words that he was a taylour sayd, fye so God helpe
me I mocke you not, but are you a taylour, I marry am I quoth he,
why then sayes the seruyng man, all my cappes, knees, and worships,
I did to thy apparrel, and therefore maister thanke mee, for it 
                     〈◊〉
                  
agaynst my wil, but now I knowe thee farewel good honest prickelouce,
and looke not behynde you, for if you doo, ile swindge 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
my scabbe
                     •
                  d of my sword til I can stand ouer thee, away went Monsier
Magnifico 
                  
                     •
                  rowning, and the seruyng man went into the C
                     •
                  tie
laughing▪ but all this is but to describe the nature of the man, now to
the secretes of his Art, all the Gentlewomen of the Countrey cryde
out vpon him, yet could they not part from him, because he so quaintly
fitted their h
                     •
                  mors, at last it so fel out, that a Gentlewoman not
farre from Feroy Brigges, had a taffata gowne to make, and hee
would haue no lesse at those dayes then el
                     •
                  uen els of 
                     •
                  lbroad taffato,
so shee bought so much and readie to send it, shee sayd to her husband
in hearing of al her seru
                     ••
                  g
                     ••
                  m
                     •
                  n, what a spight is this, seeing that I
must send alwayes to yonder knaue taylor two yards more then is necessary,
but how can we amend vs, all the rest are but botchers in respect
of him, and yet nothing gri
                     •
                  ues mee but we can neuer take him
with it, & yet I and mine haue flood by while hee hath cut my g
                     ••
                  ne
out, a pleasant fellowe that was new come to serue her husband, one
that was his Clarke and a pre
                     •
                  y scholer, answered good mistris giue
me leaue to carry your taffata and see it cut out, and if I spy not out
his knauery laugh 
                     •
                  t me when I come home, marry I prithy do q. his
M. and mistris, but whatsoeuer thou seest say nothing least he be angry
and spolie my gown, let me alone mistris q. he, and so away he goes to
York, & coming to this taylor found him in his shop, & deliuered him
the taffata with this message, that his mistris had charged him to set it
cut out, not yt she suspected him, but yt els he wold let it ly lōg by him
and take other worke in hand, yt taylor scornfully sayd he should, & asked
him if he had any spectacles about him, n
                     •
                   q. the felow my sight is
yoong inough I need no glasses, if you do put them quoth he, and see
if you can see me steale a yard of taffata out of your miscresse gowne,
and so taking his sheeres in hand▪ he cut it out so nimbly that hee cut
three foreparts to the gown, and four side pieces▪ that by computation

the fellow gest he had stolne two els & a half, but say nothing he durst.
Assoone as he had done, there came in more gentlemens men with
worke, that the taylor was very busie & regarded not, the seruingmā
who seeing the taylors cloke lying lose, lifted it away & caried it home
with him to his mistris house, where he discourst to his maister & his
mistris what he had seen, & how he had stole the tailors cloake, not to
that intent to filtch, but to try an experiment vpon him, for maister q.
he, when he brings home my mistris gown, he wil complain of ye losse
of his cloake, & then see, doe you but tel him that I am experienced in
Magike, & can cast a figure, and wil tel him where his cloke is without
faile, say but this sir, and let me alone: they al agreed, & resolued
to try the w
                     •
                  t of their yong man. But leauing him, againe to our taylor:
who when he had dispatcht his customers, was ready to walke
with one of them to the tauern, & then mist his cloke, searcht al about,
but find it he could not, neither knew he w
                     ••
                  ō to suspect: so with much
griefe he past it ouer, & when he had ended the gentlewomans gown
(because she was a good customer of his) he himself tooke his nag &
rid home withal: welcome he was to the gentlewoman and hir husband,
and the gown was passing fit, so that it could not be amended,
insomuch that the gentlewoman praisd it, and highly thankt him. Oh
mistris (quoth he) thought it is a good gown to you, tis an infortunate
gowne to me, for that day your man brought the taffata, I had a cloke
stoln that stood me but one fortnight before in foure pound, and neuer
since could I heare any word of it. Truly said the Gentleman, I am
passing sorry for your losse, but that same man that was at your house
is passing skilful in Negromancy, and if any man in England can tel
you where your cloke is, my man can: marry q. he, and I wil giue him
a brace of angels for his labour: so the fellow was cald and talkt with
all, and at his mistris request was content to do it, but he would haue
his twenty shillings in hand, and promised if he told him not where it
was, who had it, and caused it to be deliuered to him again, for his two
angels he would giue him ten pounds: vpon this the taylor willingly
gaue him the money, and vp went he into a closet like a learned clark,
and there was three or foure houres laughing at the taylor, he thinking
he had bin al this while at Caurake. At last downe comes the fellow
with a figure drawn 
                     〈◊〉
                   a paper in his hand, & smiling cald for a
bible, and told the taylor he would tel him who had his cloke, where it
was, & helpe him to it againe, so that he would be sworne on a bible to

answer to all questious that he demanded of him faithfully: the taylor
granted and swore on a bible, then hee cōmanded al should go out but
his maister, his mistres, the taylor and himself. Then he began thus:
wel, you haue taken your oth on the holy bible, tel me q. he, did you not
cut three foreparts for my mistris gowne? At this the t
                     •
                  ylor blusht, &
began to be in a chafe, and would haue flung out of the doore, but the
seruingman said, nay neuer start man, for before thou goest out of this
parlour▪ if thou de
                     •
                  iest it. I wil bring the taffata thou flolest into this
place, wrapt in thine own cloake: & therfore answere directly to my
question, least to your discredit I shew you the 
                     ••
                  ick of a scholler: the
taylor halfe afraid, said he did so indeed: and q he, did you not cut foure
side peeces wher you haue cut but two? yes a
                     •
                  is true q. the taylor why
then as true it is, that to deceiue the deceiuer is no deceit: for as truly
as you stole my mistrist affata, so truly did I steale your cloake, and
here it is. At this the taylor was am
                     •
                  zed▪ 
                  
                     •
                  he gentleman and his wife
laught hartily, & so al was turned to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , the taylor had his
cloake again, the gentlewoman hir taffata, and the seruingman twenty
shillings, was not this 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Conny-catching M. R. G.
               
               Thus haue I proued 
                     〈…〉
                  , how there is no estate, 
                     •
                  rade,
occupation, nor mistery, 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Conny-catching, 
                  
                     •
                  nd that our
shift at cards compared to the rest, is the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of al, & y
                     •
                  t forsooth,
you could bestow the pa
                     ••
                  es to write two who
                     •
                  e 
                     〈◊〉
                   against
vs poore conycatchers: think M R. G it shal not be put vp except you
graunt vs our request. It is informed vs that you are in hand with a
booke named The repentance of a Conny-catcher, w
                     •
                  th a discouery
of secret villainies, wherein you meane to discourse at ful the nature
of the stripping Law, which is the abuse offered by the Keepers
of Newgate to poore prisoners, and some that belong to the Marshalsea.
If you doe so, ye shal do not onely a charitable, but a meritorious
deed: for the occasion of most mischiefe, of greatest nipp
                     •
                  ng and foysting,
and of al vilanies, comes through the extorting bribery of some
coossening and counterfaite keepers and companions that carry vnlawful
warrants about them to take vp men Wil your worship therfore
stand to your worde, and set out the discouery of that, al wee of
Whittington Colledge wil rest your beadmen. Otherwise looke
that I wil haue the crue of Cony-catchers sweare themselues your
professed enemies for euer. Farewel.
               
                  Cuthbert Conny-catcher.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   