
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE HOMIly, wherein the moſt comfortable and right vſe of the Lords Supper, is very plainly opened and deliuered, euen to the vnderſtanding of the vnlearned and ignorant.
            Made to be vſed throughout the Dioceſſe of Lincolne, before euerie celebration of the Lordes Supper, in all ſuch Churches and Pariſhes as haue not a ſufficient hable Preacher allowed vnder the hand and authentike ſeale of the Biſhop there, and to be read by the Miniſter of each ſuch place, ſo diſtinctly and in ſuch ſorte, that all which ſhalbe then aſſembled, may well heare and marke the ſame.
            IMPRINTED AT London for Ralph Newberie, dwelling in Fleetſtreete a little aboue the Conduit.
            An. Dom. 1580.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE HOMILY, wherein the moſte comfortable and right vſe of the Lordes Supper, is very plainely opened and deliuered, euen to the vnderſtanding of the vnlearned and ignorant.
            
               THat wee doe not come negligently to the Lordes table, wherevnto we nowe prepare our ſelues, let vs call theſe thinges following to our remembrance. This Sacrament vſed according to the inſtitution of Chriſt, conſiſteth of two parts, that is, the outwarde ſignes, which are Bread and Wine: and the inwarde thing, whiche is the body and bloud of our Sauiour Chriſte, the true foode of our ſoules, which onely nouriſheth vs to eternall life. Now as man conſiſteth of two partes, body, and ſoule: ſo the body feedeth vpon the outward elements of Breade and Wine, but the ſoule feedeth in deede, and truly, vpon Ieſus Chriſt crucified. The outwarde eating by the inſtrumentes of the bodie, cauſeth all our ſenſes, our hearing, our ſeeing, our feeling, our taſting, to helpe our inward eating by faith, and by the ſame quickeneth, ſtirreth, ſtrengtheneth, and increaſeth our faith, that we may eate the

bodie and bloud of Chriſte more effectually and fruitefully. For when the faithfull Chriſtian heareth the wordes of Chriſtes inſtitution ſound in his eares.
                  Matth. 26.26. Mar. 14, 22. Luk. 22.19. Rom. 10.17 
               This is my body that is giuen for you, &c. This is my bloud that is ſhed for the remiſsion of your ſinnes. It ſtirreth vp his faith (for faith is by hearing) to lay ſtrong holdfaſt vpon this promiſe, and in his heart, doeth aſſure himſelfe, that Chriſte died and ſhed his bloud not onely for the redemption of the whole world generally, but for his alſo perticularly, and that he vndoubtedly, is partaker of that bleſſed worke of our redemption.1. Cor. 11.24 When we heare theſe wordes. Doe this in remembraunce of me. Our faith is aſſured that it is Chriſtes commandement, that we ſhould vſe this Sacrament, to cal to our remembrance, the benefit of our ſaluation by the death of Chriſte, and in heart and minde, at all times, but then eſpecially, to ſhewe our ſelues truely thankefull to him, for the ſame. When our ſight beholdeth on the Table, the Breade and Wine by Chriſtes ordinaunce broken, and powred out, for vs to vſe, our faith is moued thus to thinke: as ſurely and truely, as my bodily eyes beholde vpon the table of the Lord, the creatures of Breade and Wine, as the outward parte of his Sacrament, and ſee the ſame broken and powred out for me: ſo aſſuredly doe I with the eye of my faith, beholde the body and bloud of Chriſte broken and

ſhedde for me vpon the altar of the croſſe, and the ſame my ſauiour ſitting now on the right hand of God the father, with the ſame bodie and bloud, now glorified: wherewith vpon the croſſe, he paide the price of my redemption. When we ſee the Miniſter offering to vs the bread and the cup, and we receiue the ſame in our hand, and by our ſenſe feele them inwardly in our heartes, our faith is moued to haue this cogitation. As truly as our Sauiour Chriſte vpon the Croſſe, by his bodie broken and his bloud ſhedde, wrought our redemption, and offered the benefite thereof, to all that would beleeue generally: ſo truely am I aſſured, that now in the vſe of this holy ſacrament by his miniſter, he offereth the ſame to me particularly, to be applied to my ſelfe. And as ſurely as my hande receiueth the outwarde creatures: ſo ſurely, by my faith, doe I receiue Chriſte himſelfe, and in my heart feele him, and with my ſpirituall armes imbrace him, as the onely price, and meanes of my ſaluation. When we eate of the holy bread, and drinke of the reuerende Cuppe, and by our taſte haue ſenſe of the ſweeteneſſe of them, and feele them paſſe downe into our ſtomacke there to reſt, that they may be according to their nature, meanes to nouriſhe and ſtrengthen our bodie, and to continewe it in life, our faith is ſtirred vppe by theſe ſenſes thus to thinke. Euen as

certainely, as my taſte feeleth, the ſweeteneſſe of Bread and Wine, and thereby perceiueth in deede, that their operation, is to nouriſhe and ſtrengthen my body, and to quicken my natural ſpirites, which without ſuch nouriſhment, would periſh: euen ſo the taſte of my faith and ſenſe of my heart, doeth feele the ſweetnes of Chriſt his bodie & bloud broken and ſhedde for mee and all mankinde vpon the croſſe, and perceiueth it thereby to be the only foode of my ſoule, without which, ſhould periſh both ſoule and bodie, eternally. And as certainly as I feele with bodily ſenſe that the bread and wine paſſeth into my ſtomacke, and there according to their proportion feede, ſtrengthen and quicken my naturall bodie and ſpirites: ſo aſſuredly doe I with my inward and ſpiritual ſenſe, perceiue the bodie and bloud of Chriſt, and the whole benefite of his death and paſſion to paſſe into the ſtomack of my ſoule, and boſome of my heart, there through the ſtrength of a true Chriſtian faith, to be laide vp, wrought, and digeſted, as that onely nouriſhment that kepeth the life of the ſoule, and preſerueth me, both ſoule and body to eternal life. They that will Chriſtianly & charitably, and in the feare of God, weigh and conſider theſe thinges, I truſt, will not thinke, either that we make light account of the externall ſacrament, or in our doctrine teach a ſingle and ſleight maner of eating of Chriſt by faith, as the fauourers

of ye Church of Rome do charge vs. And I appeale to the conſciences of all them that folow their doctrine, whether euer they were taught to take ſuch ſweete inſtruction and comfort, in the vſe of that bleſſed ſacrament, or no? Theſe good fruites of that ſacrament are much furthered and increaſed by ſundrie other godly cogitations, which the Scriptures teach true Chriſtians to vſe in the adminiſtration of it.1. Cor. 11. ver. 24, 25, 26. The word of God teacheth that the vſe of the externall Sacraments, is a maner of confeſſion, wherby men acknowledge them ſelues before God and the world, that they are Chriſtians. Therfore the faithfull receiuer, when he commeth to the ſacrament, thinketh this with himſelfe: I by comming to this place, proteſt before God and his Angels, and before all the creatures of heauen and earth, that in my heart, I deteſt the religion of Iewes, Turks, Infidels, Heretiques, and all other that denie ſaluation to come by the death of Chriſt, & I acknowledge my ſelfe vnfaignedly, to be of the nomber of them, that hope to haue the fauour of God, and to be ſaued by the mercie and paſſion of Chriſt onely. The worde of God teacheth that ſacraments,
                  Gen. 6. ver. 18. & 9. ver. 9. & 19. ver. 9, 11, 12. Rom. 4. ver. 11. are as it were ſeales to confirme the truth of Gods promiſes, and to ſtrengthē our faith. Therfore by this ſeale of the Lords ſupper, we aſſure our ſelues, that we are partakers of all ye legacie, which Chriſt our ſauiour in his laſt wil bequeathed

to vs, that is, that his bodie was broken vpon the croſſe for our redemption, & his bloud ſhed for the remiſſiō of our ſinnes. The ſcriptures teach,
                  Gal. 3. ver. 26, 27, 28. 1. Cor. 12. ver. 12.13.27. & Io. 6. ver. 57. 1. Cor. 11. ver 18, 21, 22. Ephe. 3. ver. 17. that in the vſe of the ſacramēts, through faith we be vnited vnto Chriſt, and ingraffed into his myſticall bodie, ſo that we liue now onely by him, & whatſoeuer is his, by the truth of his promiſe, is ours alſo. The word of God teacheth that the ſacrament of the Lordes ſupper is a linke of vnitie, that knitteth vs together, as members of one miſticall bodie, and therefore that we ought to be ioyned in mutuall loue, & charitie among our ſelues, and that it is a foule reproch both to Chriſt our head, and to the whole bodie, if we hate, hurte, or hinder one another. For by the vſe thereof, we confeſſe that we are all members of one bodie, all ſeruants of one Maiſter, all children of one Father, all ſubiectes vnder one Lord and king, & all partakers of one redemption, all heires of one heritage, and gift of eternall life. And in ſo many linkes of vnitie, to be at diſcorde among our ſelues, is in Gods iudgement, an heauie teſtimonie againſt vs, in the day of his wrath.
                  Io. 1. ver. 29. Heb. 9. v. 14 Io. 6. ver. 47 & Ephe. 3. ver. 17. Finally, the word of God, teacheth vs, that the Sacrament of the Lordes ſupper, is our heauenly feaſt, in which the lambe of God that taketh away the ſinnes of the world, is offered vnto vs, ſpiritually to feede vpon in our faith, that by him (as I haue before declared) we may be nouriſhed, ſtrengthened,

and preſerued to eternall life. And therfore, that we ought to be very careful, ſo to prepare our ſelues, that we may be worthie gueſts for that bleſſed table. Wherefore I thinke it neceſſarie, in a word or two, to teache you, howe Chriſtians ſhould prepare themſelues, as worthy gueſtes, to come to the Lordes Supper. And how that may be done, S. Paul in generall wordes, briefely ſheweth.1. Cor. 11.28. 
               Let euerie man (ſaith he) proue himſelfe, and ſo let him eate of this Bread, and drinke of this Cup. The meanes therefore, to come worthily to it, is to proue, and trie our ſelues, whether thoſe thinges be in vs, which the worthie gueſtes of that table, ſhould haue. Firſt therefore, we muſt looke vnfaignedly into our ſelues, whether we haue an appetite, or deſire to eate of that bleſſed foode, for a loathing ſtomach, neuer perfectly digeſteth any meate that it receiueth, but turneth it to the hurt of the bodie. This appetite or deſire cannot be in vs, vnleſſe it be wrought by the ſharpe ſauce of ſeuere repentance for our ſinnes, which we ſhall the better prepare, if we examine our ſelues by the perfect rule of Gods iuſtice in his lawe, and conſider how farre we are from the ſame, & what daunger hangeth ouer our heads for the want thereof. God ſaith in his lawe:
                  Deut. 6. ver. 5. & Leuit. 19. ver. 18. Matth. 22 ver. 37, 39. 
               Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God, with al thy hart, with all thy ſoule, with all thy minde, with all thy ſtrength, and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe: that is, we ſhould loue, we ſhould hate, we ſhould feare, we ſhould hope, for nothing but in God, and to his

glorie: we ſhould think and muſe vpon nothing in our minde & vnderſtanding, but that which may make to the honour and glorie of God: we ſhould imploy all the powers of our bodie and all our worldly gifts to the ſame end: we ſhould do nothing to any other man, which we would not willingly, be content ſhould be done vnto vs. If we examine our ſelues by this rule, we ſhall ſee we be ſo farre from that we ſhould be, that almoſte we haue not one braunch thereof in vs, whiche will more euidently appeare, if we wil trie our ſelues by euery particular commandement rightly and truely vnderſtanded. Seeing then we be ſo farre from the iuſtice of Gods lawe, the curſe thereof muſt needes be due vnto vs.
                  Deut. 27. ver. 26. Gal. 3. v. 10. For God ſaith, Curſed is he whoſoeuer keepeth not all thinges written in the Booke of his law. In this maner if we examine our ſelues ſincerely, we ſhall throughly knowe, what we are in the ſight of God, as well by the corruption of our nature, as by the courſe of our euill and naughtie life: we ſhall haue ſenſe of our owne ſinne: we ſhall hate and deteſt it: we ſhal from the bottome of our heartes be ſorie for it: with trembling mindes, we ſhal feare the heauie iudgement of God againſt vs, and ſo will be ſtirred vp in vs, that godly appetite, & greedy deſire to eate of that ſpirituall meate, whiche onely can ſatiſfie our troubled conſcience, & cure our repentant, and broken heartes. But though the appetite, & deſire be neuer ſo great, in vaine he commeth to any table, that hath no mouth

to eate, nor ſtrength of ſtomacke to digeſt.
                  Iohn. 6. ver. 47, 53, 54. A true and ſtrong Chriſtian faith, is the mouth of the ſoule, and the power wherewith we doe receiue and digeſt Chriſte Ieſus crucified, as the foode of our ſaluation. We muſt looke therfore to our ſelues, firſt whether we knowe and vnderſtand the miſtery of our redemption: that is, that the vnſpeakeable mercie of God,
                  Iohn. 3. ver. 16. ſent downe the ſeconde perſon in Trinitie, to take fleſhe of the bleſſed virgin, to liue in the ſhape of a moſt contemptible man in this world, and in the end to ſuffer cruel death for the redemption of mankinde. Secondly, whether we feele in our heartes a ſtrong perſwaſion that we alſo through the merciful promiſes of God are partakers of the ſame worke of our redemption.
                  Marke. 1. ver. 24. & 3. ver. 11. For a true Chriſtian muſt not onely haue a generall knowledge, but alſo by a firme faith, he muſt haue a particular application of the ſame to him ſelfe. Furthermore, as it is neceſſarie to haue, both a deſire to eate ſtirred by a ſenſe and feeling of true repentance, and alſo an aſſured faith to receiue and digeſt this wholeſome and comfortable medicine of our ſoule:
                  Rom. 6. ver. 1, 2, 3, &c.
                ſo becauſe God beſtoweth not his mercie by his Sonne Chriſt in vaine, or to the end we ſhould ſtil continew in ſinne: we muſt further trie our ſelues, whether we feele an vnfained deſire to riſe to a newneſſe of life, and in earneſt ſtudie, hereafter to amend our former faultes, and to frame our ſelues to a godly and honeſt conuerſation, that God in vs may be glorified, and the mouthes

of the enemies ſtopped. Laſtly we muſt examine our conſciences, whether we haue a feruent & great deſire to call to our remembrance the vneſtimable benefite of our redemption,1. Cor. 1. ver 24, 25, 26. made by the price of his body and bloud, and to acknowledge and confeſſe the ſame vnfainedly, before God, and the worlde, and to yeelde vnto him, moſt heartie thankes for the ſame, and the reſidue of his benefites, not at this preſent time onely, but euer hereafter, vntill the time of his comming. This is the godly and Chriſtian trial of our ſelues, which if we do vſe, by the grace of Gods ſpirite working in vs, we ſhall become, either worthie gueſtes, or much more fit then otherwiſe we ſhould be without ſuch triall. Happily ſome will thinke that this admonition, is a terrour and torment to their conſciences, to feare men from comming to this bleſſed Sacrament, rather then an exhortation or incouragement vnto it. For if the danger, be in it ſelfe ſo great,1. Cor. 1. ver. 27. as the vnworthie receiuer eateth dampnation to himſelfe, and the preparation and triall ſo ſtraight, as you haue made it, it were better neuer to come to it. For what one is there among a thouſand that doeth in this manner trie his conſcience? or if he doe, he muſt needes feele ſo great want and imperfection, either in ſorrowe for his ſinnes, or in ſenſe of Gods wrath, or in weakeneſſe of his faith, or in the ſtudy of new life, or in the coldneſſe of his charitie, or in his febleneſſe to giue thanks, & to ſet forth the glorie of God, or in al theſe things,

that he muſt needes be ouerwhelmed in conſcience, and feared to make himſelfe partaker of theſe holy miſteries. But (dearely beloued) Let not this feare ſhake our conſciences, nor driue you backe from this bleſſed table.
                  Pſal. 78. ver 39. This examination and triall muſt be within the bounds of humane frailtie, and God in this, as in all other doinges, for Chriſt his ſake, will vſe his mercie and clemencie, for he knoweth our corruptions and imperfections, and will haue regard of our infirmities. Onely let vs not be ſecure, ſlack and negligent, but feeling by this triall great want in our ſelues, let vs with lowly, humble, & confeſſing heartes, acknowledge the ſame, and ſay vnto God. I am ſorie (O Lord) for my ſinnes, but not as the grieuouſneſſe of them requireth, augment (O Lorde) by thy ſpirite, the ſenſe of thy wrath in mee. I beleeue and knowe with other Chriſtians, that thy ſonne hath ſhedde his bloud for me, but increaſe my faith, (O God,) & helpe mine vnbeleefe. I deſire to liue according to the calling of a Chriſtian, but the fleſhe and the world maketh this ſtudy colde in me: therefore doe thou ſtrengthen me with thy bleſſed ſpirite. I knowe it is my bounden duetie to yeeld vnto thee immortall thankes, aſwell for all other thy benefites, as principally for the whole worke of our redemption by the death of thy dearely beloued ſonne. But I feele this zeale to be ſo faint and feeble, that it is nothing according to my duetie, and for that cauſe, I lift vp mine eyes to the throne of thy mercie, &

humbly deſire thee, to pardon al my imperfections, and to heale all mine infirmities. The ſenſe and knowledge of my weaknes, may not feare me, frō this holy table. For this heauenly feaſt, is a medicine for them that be ſick, a comfort to them that be penitent ſinners, a free and liberall gift, to ſuch as be poore and haue nothing of them ſelues.
                  Iohn. 6. ver. 36. Chriſt in this feaſt is giuen as meat, without which, we know, we muſt of neceſſitie periſh. And he is giuen as life vnto vs, & therefore without him, we can haue nothing but death. The beſt worthineſſe, that we can bring to theſe reuerend and holy miſteries, is, that we confeſſe our owne vnworthines, that thy mercie may make vs worthy: that we deſpaire in our ſelues, that thy grace may comfort vs: that we humble our ſelues, to the end thy goodneſſe may raiſe vs vp: that we accuſe our ſelues, to the end thy ſonne by his merite may iuſtifie vs. For though of our ſelues we are hable to do nothing: yet by him, we ſhalbe hable to do all thinges. Theſe or like cogitations if we haue in preparing our ſelues, to that bleſſed nouriſhment of our ſoules: he that breaketh not a bruiſed reede, nor putteth out ſmoking flaxe, will not caſt aſide our infirmitie, but wil mercifully receiue vs. The ſorrowfull Father, which with care for his ſonne cried vnto Chriſt. I beleeue Lord,
               
                  Marke. 9. ver. 24. 
               but helpe mine vnbeleefe, Though his faith, as it might appeare, was very weake yet obtained he his purpoſe at Chriſt his hand to haue his ſonne by miracle healed. If our

faith be but as a graine of muſtard ſeede,
                  Matth. 17. ver. 20. yet it wil much preuail with Gods mercie. The Apoſtles of Chriſt which were admitted to his laſt ſupper, were notwithſtanding weak, & touched with many infirmities, although thei were not altogether wicked & faithleſſe, as Iudas was: they beleeued in Chriſt, they loued Chriſt, & they loued one another, & yet at the very table of the Lord, they ſhewed their weaknes. Peter not wt
               out ſome reproch of ye reſidue, preferred himſelf before thē al,
                  Matth. 26. ver. 33. 
               Though al other (ſaith he) be offēded by thee, yet wil not I be offended by thee. They ambitiouſly contended among themſelues, which of them ſhold be the greater. I wil not mentiō, that immediately after Supper, they through timerouſnes fled from Chriſt, & for the time forſoke him, which was an euident token, of the weaknes of their faith, after the knowledge of his doctrine, & experience of many & wonderfull miracles. Yet it pleaſed the great mercie of our ſauiour, fauourably to accept them, and to admit them as ſingular inſtrumēts of his grace. We may not therefore, for our weakenes, & imperfection deſpaire or refuſe the comfort of that heauenly table, but rather let vs in all dutifull ſort, approch thervnto, & pray moſt hartily (euerie one of vs al) that we may be fit and worthy gueſtes for the ſame, which God our Father grant vs for his ſonnes ſake, Chriſt Ieſu our ſauiour, by the working of his moſte holy, & comfortable ſpirite, to whom be all honour, prayſe, and glorie, for euer and euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   