
      
         
            
            
            THE
CHVRCHES
DELIVERANCE,
Contayning
Meditations and ſhort notes vppon
The booke of HESTER.
            In remembrance of the wonderfull deliuerance
from the Gunpoulder-Treaſon.
            
            BY
THOMAS COOPER.
            AT LONDON.
Imprinted by G. Eld for T. Adams, and are to be ſold
at the white Lyon in Paules Church-yard.
1609.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the right worſhipfull, and
truly religious Ladies, the mother and
the daughter, The Lady Katherine Rotheram, and
the Lady Elizabeth Wakerings my very good Aunt,
and Couſine; Beloued in the LORD, grace
and peace in GOD the Father
through IESVS CHRIST
our common Sauiour.
            
               
                  RIght Chriſtian Ladies, whome I loue in the
truth, till IESVS CHRIST be perfited in
you. It hath pleaſed the LORD of glory, by
a long, yet mild and fatherly viſitation, of
late to ſummon me, his vnprofitable ſeruant to make ready
my Account: In the caſting vp whereof finding my ſelfe
indebted vnto your Ladyſhips, for many chriſtian and extraordinary
kindneſſes conferred vpon me, a diſpiſed brāch
and out-caſt in the world: I haue indeauoured in theſe my
poore laboures to make acknowledgement of my debt, not
with any purpoſe to clear the ſcore (for how ſhould true mē
               bers
of Chriſts body not be euer bound to each other) but rather
with intent to prouoke to a further debt: becauſe the
debt of loue, as it ought alwaies to be payd, ſo it muſt alwaies
be due, and the more it is paid the more the debt is increaſed.
Til it be at length perfited, and ſo fully recompenced in
heauen. Whether ſeeing it pleaſeth my god very mercifully
to haſten me by keeping me through many tedious and linggring
infirmities; in an earneſt hungring and fainting after
my deliuerance; therfore haue I rather haſtened to performe
this duty vnto your Ladyſhips, as to whom in regard
of your places ſuch mementos, from a withered branche

cannot be vnſeaſonable: and moſt ſeaſonable on his part, to
bee preformed, who while hee hath tyme, and can doe
no other good, yet hath obtained mercy of the LORD,
to pu
                  •
                his ſeruants in mind of his wonderfull mercies towards
them; that the memoriall thereof may hold them in due
thankefulneſſe vnto ſo gratious a father, that ſo their happineſſe
in this life may be a pledge vnto them of that glorious
crowne which remaines for the Saintes in that bleſsed
Kingdome: Theſe are my heartes deſire vnto our gratious
GOD for you. And that you may be happily furthered therto,
and haue a true and liuely glaſſe to behold the bounty of
our GOD, I haue bin bold to committe to your remembrāce
that wonderful deliuerance of our Church and State,
from that horrible plot of poulder-Treaſon; Wherin euery
true hearted Chriſtian and Subiect may take a full view
of al GODS former mercies towards him, and if he do beleeue,
may ſee in the ſame a ful aſſurance of whatſoeuer
bleſſings of GOD are yet laid vp in ſtore for him. The
greatneſſe whereof, howſoeuer I haue heretofore endeauored
once and againe to meaſure, and ſo commend my ſcantling
therof, to the due conſideration of a thankeful heart
yet ſeeing the meaſure of that bleſſing is like the waters of
the ſanctuary, which the more they were meaſured, the more
vnmeaſurable they did appeare, till at length they became a
deepe, that could not be paſſed ouer. Therfore I haue bin glad
to take this oportunity of my dayes yet lengthned out, once
againe to meaſure this great deepe: And by an hiſtory of
a like wonderful deliuerance, to reuiue the dead memory
therof in the cares of a ſecure and vnthankefull world. That
ſo I might both pay my vowes vnto my GOD for my life
of late renued me as a prey, and as neere as I may
haue my conuerſation in heauen, imploying the ſmall reſidue of my
wretched life in meditations of GODS wonderful mercies

which is the onely ſeruice that the ſaints performe in heauen.
Oh what a glorious thing it is to be thankfull, when by
dooing this duty we come neareſt to the Saints in glory! And
how wil this wonderful deliuerance teach vs to be thankefull?
How is this deliuerance of the Iewes from Hamans
malice a moſt liuely glaſſe to behold our deliuerance from
the bloody Papiſts. And may not the LORD lengthen out
my threed vntill I ha
                  •
               e finiſhed this ſtory. This that I now
tender you is but onely the gate into the cittie, if it pleaſe
GOD that I may go through the Citty (as Ionas did) who
knoweth whether by that time Niniue may repent and
turne, and ſo the LORD may repent him of the euil, and
reuiue the good that is ready to dye. The patient abiding
of the righteous is ioy, and he that beleeueth maketh
not haſte: yet If we beleeue, we ſhall ſee greater thinges
then theſe, and bleſſed are wee if we ſee a farre off. A
leſſon which for a farewell I do heartily commend vnto
your Ladyſhips, not onely to ſee into the preſent, but to behold
a farre off, to looke vp to Moſes to the recompence
of the reward, and not to eſteeme to be accounted the ſonne
of Pharoahs daughter, if we ſee not the preſent bleſſings
how can we ſee a farre off? And yet we may ſo doate on the
preſent, as not to deſire to ſee a far off, and if we deſire not,
is not the Lord iuſt to giue vs our preſent deſire, and ſend
leaneſſe into our ſoules. Behold therefore your preſent
happineſſe in that wonderfull deliuerance, yet looke vp with
Moſes, and ſee therein alſo your future happineſſe. And ſo
I heartily commend your Ladyſhips to the view of this
glaſſe, and therein alſo to the mercy of the almighty, who
giue you wiſdome to redeeme the time by ſeeing your faces
often herein, and hauing viewed, not to forget what Iacob
did gratiouſly remembr,Geneſ. 32, Luke, 17. 12. and what our Sauiour wiſhed to

be remembred of his Diſciples: So ſhall you preuaile with
GOD, and find fauour with men: your age ſhall bee a
crowne of glory, and your poſterity ſhall be bleſſed: They ſhal
be of you which ſhal build the old waſte places & ſhal be
called the repairers of the breach: the ſtōes of the field
ſhal be in league with you & the beaſts of the field ſhal
be at peace with you: you ſhal laugh at deſtruction &
death and ſhal not be affraid of the beaſts of the earth.
GOD hath and ſhall deliuer you from all aduerſity, and you
ſhall ſee the felicity of the choſen: theſe bleſſings the
LORD of glory increaſe vpon your Ladyſhips, to your full
perfection in IESVS CHRIST. To whoſe bleſſed protection
I moſt heartily commend both you and yours.
            
               From my houſe at Couentry
Ianuary 
                  1609.
               
               Your poore kinſman, moſt
bounden in the Lord Ieſus.
THOMAS COOPER.
            
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian and diſcerning
Reader, wiſdome to ſee the plague, and
grace to hide himſelfe.
            
               WHen great bleſſings breed ſecurity,
and prophaneſſe, wee muſt looke for
ſodaine iudgements. Theſe are begun
and haue increaſed in the land, ſo much
the more fearefull, becauſe they are eſpecially
ſpiritual and the rather dangerous,
becauſe they are leſſe diſcerned, or,
diſcerned onely with a carnall eye, which
conceiuing them natural and ordinary,
yeeld them onely carnall and ordinary reſpect: 
                  •
               uery man prouides
for his owne, but the houſe of the Lord, lyeth waſte: And
ſo we flatter our ſelues that all is well, when nothing can bee
well, it going ill wit
                  •
                the principall, we may ſowe much but reape
little, and what wee gather is put into a broken bagge, becauſe the
Lords houſe lyeth waſte, and euery man lookes to his owne. Our
great deliuerance from that diueliſh plot of the poulder treaſon,
as it was wonderfull, ſo it hath paſſed as a dreame, or as a nine
daies wonder. And behold now we are awoke, we are a hungery,
pinched with famine both of body and ſoule: The bird was in
the ſnare, but we haue let her looſe. A bleſſing was offered, but
the meſſe of pottage hath bene preferred: Benaydad findes fauour,
and is become a broken reed to Iſraell: and may not our hands bee
pierced therwith? Yea the whole heart is ſick and the head is heauy:
& from the crown of the head vnto the ſole of the foot, there is nothing
whole therin: & which is the greateſt miſery, though there
be bakon in Gilead yet the hurt of the Virgine Iſrael is not healed.
Becauſe the dead flyes doe corrupt the pretious oyntment
of the Apothecary, and the hurt of the daughters of Gods people,
is healed with ſweete words, crying peace peace ſo that we, looked
for peace, but behold trouble, becauſe the Arme of fleſh hath deceiued
vs, and we haue not reſted vppon the ſtrong Tower: yet the

               liueth and is good vnto Iſrael, euen vnto thoſe that are true of
heart. The wiſe man ſeeth the vally of Achor, and entereth therin
as into the doore of hope: And though the plague deuoure but
the hindermoſt part of the hoaſt, yet he ſees the plague with
the eyes of faith, and feare, and ſo hides him-ſelfe, by departing
from euill: that ſo not being partaker in the ſinne, hee may not
ſhare in the iudgement: yet muſt iudgement begin at the
houſe of God, that ſo the faithfull being tryed may find reſt,
while the pit is digged for the wicked. And whoſoeuer ſeekes
vnto the Lord God of Iſrael in his affliction, hee is found of
him: The more Iſrael is oppreſſed, the more it increaſeth, and by
this we know that the Lord fauoureth vs, becauſe he ſuffreth
not our enemies to triumph ouer vs: Oh that wee could tryumph
ouer them in the remembrance of that wonderfull deliuerance,
that our God hath wrought for vs! How might we by
this haue triumphed, if we had purſued that victory and rooted
out Ameleck, that would haue rooted out vs: but al for the beſt.
Ameleck muſt remaine as a pricke in our ſides, to let out our corrupt
and prophane blood; our enemies muſt yet be further meanes
of our purging and preparing: that when the ſtones are throughly
ſquared, Gods houſe may bee perfectly aduanced: And the
ſetting vp of the Arke will be the finall ouerthrow of Dagon.
In patience therefore (deere bretheren) committee wee our
ſelues into the handes of our faithfull Creator. That his hand
is not ſhortned, we may ſee in that wonderfull deliuerance. In
memoriall whereof, I haue now the third time, tendred thoſe
meditations, that I might pay my vowes vnto the Lord, for the
ſanctifing of that generall deliuerance by a ſpeciall deliuerance
vnto me: & the rather, becauſe the Lord hath euen now of late
deliuered me out of the horrible pit, and reſtored vnto me the Ioy
of his ſaluation, that I might declare the wonders of the Lord in
the land of the liuing: The Lord hath renued me as an example
vnto them which ſhall in time to come beleeue this wonderfull
worke. And yet, (bleſſed be our faithfull God) this is a day of
good tidings. The buſh is not conſumed the ſcepter of Antichriſt
is broken, his ſinne repenteth, and the Lord raigneth, and hell is inlarged.
And why ſhould I hold my peace? Surely if my ſight

fayle me not, I ſee in that deliuerance, Amelecks vtter ouerthrow:
Oh that Moſes handes may be held vp ſtill, that Ameleck
may be deſtroyed from vnder heauen, for the better ſtrengthning
of my weake knees and feeble hands to the due meditation
of that wonderful deliuerance! I haue ſpared ſome few houres
from my publicke ſtudie, and ſpent them in the meditation
of a like wonderfull deliuerance of the Church of God in former
times. Very malitious was the enemie when nothing would ſatisfie
him but the vtter rooting out of the Church of God. And
ſurely much more malitious our enemies, that had plotted the
extreame ouerthrow both of Church and common-wealth. 2.
Very patient and wiſe was the Lord in giuing the aduerſary ſo
far his deſire, as euen to haue brought his miſchiefe to the
poynt of execution; to make his confuſion the greater, and the
Churches deliuerance more admirable & comfortable. And ſurely
that our Aduerſaries had brought their plotte within leſſe
then eight houres execution after two yeares ſecure contriuing,
and ripening thereof: This as it magnified the admirable
prouidence of the Lord in ordering the actions of the wicked,
ſo it tended tò the greater aſtoniſhment and confuſion of Gods
enemies, and, notwithſtanding the careleſſe ſecurity of the
Atheiſt, yet hath, and ſhall make, to the eternal comfort of the
true beleeuer. 3. Wonderfull was the Lord in diſapoynting the
practize of Haman and deliuering of his Church: but that the
enemie was caſt in the pit, which he had digged for others. Oh!
how did this magnifie the iuſtice of God, how did it confirme
the faith of the afflicted? And ſurely did not the Lord ſhew himſelfe
much more wonderfull in our deliuerance? Was it a ſmall
matter to deliuer vs as a prey out of the ſnare of the Fowler, vnleſſe
alſo our aduerſaries were conſumed with the poulder
which they had prepared to blow vs vp, by an ouer-ruling hand
of the Almighty?
            
               This was the Lords dooing, and it ought to be maruailous in thy
eyes: And marke what I tell thee? Neuer looke to ſee the face of
God in glory for thy final releaſe out of all thy troubles, vnleſſe thou
doſt ſee the eſpeciall loue of thy God in this deliuerance: and ſo ſtill
deſireſt to ſee further; to the increaſe of thy moſt holy faith; that ſo

beleeuing thou maiſt ſee greater things then theſe: yea beſt able to
ſee a farre off, euen the finall deliuerance of the Church out of all
her troubles. For thy further direction and prouoking therefore
to this Chriſtian duty, In the feare of God make vſe of this
hiſtory which I doe tender thee as a glaſſe, wherein thou maiſt
dayly view that wonderfull deliuerance. I haue as the Lord
hath inabled me, conſidered thy weakeneſſe, and prouided accordingly:
That thy edge may be ſtill ſharpened, and the dulneſſe
thereof preuented. I haue deuided the ſtory in it parts:
tendering thee onely for a taſte, ſome briefe obſruations on
the two firſt Chapters: which containe onely the preface and
the preparation to the hiſtory: yet furniſhed and eſpecially concluded,
dy the diuine diſpenſation, with ſuch fit variety of matter,
as may ſerue thee well for a full enterview of Gods prouidence
in the deliuerance of Princes and Kingdomes from treaſons
and conſpiracies. Here for the time I make my firſt pauſe:
ſtudying breuity, becauſe this wanton age cannot indure long
diſcourſes, and my health will not indure long ſtudies: if thy appetite
be ſharpned, pray for health, and liberty of the Goſpell:
and (ſo thou luſt not after quailes) thou maiſt ſhortly by Gods
mercy haue more variety. For the preſent conſider my weakeneſſe,
and magnifie Gods power: let the Printer beare his owne
burthen, and yet as he hath prouided, ſo eaſe thy ſelfe, and him,
and me: Read with prayer, appetite, and humility: So maiſt thou
attaine the kernell: And for the ſhell neglect it 
                  〈◊〉
                it ſpeake
the language of Canaan: let it guide thee to our common Citty
which is above: whether I am haſting: and to this end, tender
thee this light, that wee may happily meere there. The
Lord haſten his worke, confound Antichriſt, perfect
the gathering in of the firſt borne, ſet vp his ſtanderd
and glorifie his ſonne, in all his Sayntes.
So be it.
            
               Thyne in our common Sauiour,
THOMAS COOPER.
            
         
         
            
            
               Obſeruations out of the firſt
CHAPTER.
               
                  1. When the wicked are in proſperity
then is the Church of God neere great danger.
                  2. The Chronology of the hiſtory
examined and determined.
                  3. Of the truth of the Scripture.
                  4. The wicked inioy the greateſt bleſſings in this life.
                  5. God is the Author of gouernement.
                  6. The benefit of gouernement.
                  7. The wicked do abuſe their proſperity to the maintenance of the fleſh.
                  8. Proſperity of the wicked breedeth ſecurity.
                  9. God tranſlates Kingdomes, and remoueth the ſeates therof,
                  10. That Feaſting is lawfull.
                  11. The conditions thereof: who may Feaſt.
                  12. What cauſes may further it.
                  13. The manner thereof, and matter.
                  14. The end of Feaſting.
                  15. The vertues of the heathen
how to be iudged off.
                  16. Courtly ſtate, and life,
                  17. pollicy of worldlings confounded.
                  18. Princes not vnneceſſarily to burthen their ſubiects.
                  19. They are eſpecially to labour
for inward glory.
                  20. Like Prince like people.
                  21. Wicked Princes ſent for
the ſines of the people.
                  22. Princes not to ſhew their
magnificence in belly-cheere.
                  23. Dauncing of men and women
together vnlawfull.
                  24. God puniſheth ſin with ſin.
                  25. Drunkenneſſe the effect of Feaſting.
                  26. The uſe of holy Ironies in the word.
                  27. Ma
                        •
                     ke of drunkenneſſe.
                  28. Prophane perſons abuſe their wines to bee eſpecially baites of luſt.
                  29. Wiues how to be choſen.
                  30. How to be vſed.
                  31. The wicked abuſe Gods
bleſſings to their further condemnation.
                  32. Gods bleſſings to the wicked proue ſcourges in this life.
                  33. Courtiers ſlaues to their
Princes lusts.
                  34. The Courtly life how to bee
accepted and vſed.
                  35. Rules for behauiour in the Court.
                  36. The wicked diſtracted and

confounded in all the
                        •
                     r buſineſſe.
                  37. Huſbands duties to their
wiues, and wiues to their huſbands:
Wicked Princes keepe
ſtate by anger.
                  38. Of anger and the occaſions.
                  39. The lawfulneſſe thereof &
circūſtances required therin.
Cauſeleſſe anger how to be repreſſed
and reformed.
                  40. Cloakes of ſinne are meanes
of increaſe therof.
                  41. Worldly Councellors how
vainely imployed.
                  42. Courtiers Vſually brokers
for ſinne and contriuers of
each others puniſhment.
                  43. Councellors to bee choſen
out of the Nobility.
                  43. 44. Qualities of good councellors
eſpecially they muſt be
religious.
                  45. How to diſce
                        •
                     ne them.
                  45. Princes muſt not be ſtrange
to their ſubiects but be affable.
                  46. Tyrants their markes and
puniſhment.
                  47. Wicked pretend law for the
ſatisf
                        •
                     ing of their miſchiefes.
                  48. Whether a man may be his
owne iudge?
                  49. How a man may be witnes
in his owne cauſe
                  50. How a man ſhould be approued
when he ſtands vppon
the teſtimony of his innocency
to the world.
                  51. Wherein a man may bee
iudge in his owne caſe.
                  52. Princes are to referre thē
                     ſelues
to the iudgement of
their lawes.
                  53. Wicked Princes imploy
their ſeruants in baſe purpoſes
and they are willingly ſlaues
thereto.
                  54. Sinnes of great ones exemplary.
                  55. Polititians in ſatisfiing of
the luſts of wicked Princes
prouide for their owne.
                  55. Flatterers and malitious
perſons abuſe Princes with
whiſperings, and ſurmiſes.
                  56. Euidence muſt bee of things
knowne not ſurmiſed, and of
ſuch as know the party.
                  57. Mallice and flattery vnfit
accuſers.
                  58. Puniſhment muſt not exceed
the nature of ſinne.
                  59. Iudges muſt not accept perſons
in iudgement.
                  60. Worldling preferre the priuate
before the publick goood.
                  61. Wicked haue glorious clokes
for their end and purpoſes.
                  62. Of exemplary iuſtice when
to be vſed.
                  63. Terror no breeder of true
loue, where how to reclaime a
froward wife &c.
                  64. Wicked Princes eaſily yeeld

to bad counſell.
                  65. Wicked inſtrumēts of the fulfilling
of Gods righteous will in
their puniſhments for his glory
and the good of the Church.
                  66. God is the author of promotion.
                  67. The proſperity of the wic
                     
                        •
                     ked
ſhort and dangerous.
                  68. Wicked in perſecuting their
luſts ſerue Gods righteous wil.
                  69. Huſbands are to rule ouer
their wiues.
                  70. And how far.
                  71. Wicked muſt free their ſin by
making it common to others.
                  72. Lawes to be publiſhed in the
vulgar tongue.
               
            
            
               Obſeruations out of the ſecond
CHAPTER.
               
                  1. Sin how it ceaſeth in the wicked.
                  2. Gods prouidence diſcouered
herein.
                  3. Occaſions of the ceaſing of ſin
in the wicked.
                  4. How ſin is brideled in the
wicked by Gods ſpirit, & how
by other meanes.
                  5. Impoſſible for the wicked to
forſake ſinne.
                  6. The rage of the wicked ſhall
ceaſe for the good of the
Church.
                  7. Anger muſt bee renownced,
and how.
                  8. The conſcience cals the wicked
to an account in this life.
                  9. The vſe of it in them.
                  10. The particular euidence of
conſcience.
                  11. The accuſation of the conſcience
in the wicked, an hindrance to repentance.
                  12. Credit in the wicked oppoſed
to conſcience, whereby repentance
is hindered.
                  13. Gode iuſtice herein.
                  14. The wicked how choſers
hereof.
                  15. The conſcience Gods executioner
in the condemnation of
the wicked.
                  16. Falſe rules whereby the wicked
iuſtifie their actions.
                  17. How they dul and dead the
conſcience.
                  18. Conſcience and credit in
the godly go together.
                  19. Lawes what perpetuall, and
how to bee antiquated.
                  20. Worldlings why earneſt for
the eternizing of their lawes.
                  21. Vowes and promiſes what,
and how to be kept, how to bee
ordered.
                  22. The ſoueraignty of conſciēce.
                  23. The wickedn i the troubles
of conſcience runne to the
world, and carnal helps.
                  24. Courtiers drowne their princes
in pleaſure.
                  
                     
25. Wounded conſcience how
truly to be releeued.
                  26. Second marriage not vnlawful.
                  27. Beauty warily to be propoſed
in the choyce of a wife.
                  28. Godly auoyd ſuch occaſions
as haue 
                        •
                     tyced them vnto ſin.
                  29. Prophane Courtiers ready to
ſatisfie the luſt of their Prince.
                  30. The beſt gifts of the wicked.
                  31. Matters of ſtate to be carried
with complement.
                  32. Wherhe a wife to be choſen,
whether abroad in an other
country, or at home.
                  33. Tyrants prey and ryot, on
the goods and bodies of their
people.
                  34. Miſery of ſuch as liue vnder
Tyrants.
                  35. Princes how farre to command
their ſubiects.
                  36. The confuſion of Idolatry
and carnal wiſdome.
                  37. Natures infirmities to bee
cleanſed and abſtinency to bee
uſed therein.
                  38. Outlandiſh faſhions vnlawfull.
                  39. Painting of women vnlawfull.
                  40. Young heads fit to give councel
to tyrants.
                  41. Sinne in patient of delay.
                  42. Sinne how to bee preuented.
                  43. Motiōs of Gods ſpirit how to
be entertayned.
                  44. The prophane guiſe of effeminate
Princes.
                  45. That Mordecal was not
carryed away in the Captiuity.
                  46. Scripture not to bee ſtrayned.
                  47. Gods prouidence in planting
his children fitly, and for
his glory and their good.
                  48. As alſo in planting the godly
among the wicked.
                  49. Gods children remoued out
of their habitation and why.
                  50. Gods children kept vndefiled
among the wicked.
                  51. The Godly beſt company.
                  52. Why we may conuerſe with
the wicked and how.
                  53. GOD giues his children
fauour in the eyes of the wicked.
                  54. God no accepter of perſons.
                  55. The continuance of the
Church and condition therof,
to the worlds end.
                  56. The lot thereof to be ſcattered
vppon the face of the
earth.
                  57. Gods faithfulneſſe in preſeruing
the Church for
euer.
                  58. The names to bee giuen to
children.
                  59. Genealogies how recorded in
the word
                  60. Children ſhall not bee puniſhed for the fathers offence.
                  
                     
62. God continueth and bleſſeth
the poſterity of the righteous.
                  63. Poſterity how to be preſerued.
                  64. The lot of Gods children to
go into Captiuity.
                  65. Church how prepared to captiuity.
                  66. Gods iudgements are to bee
recorded and meditated.
                  67. Benefits of Gods iudgements.
                  68. God often changeth the outward
porſperity & viſibility of
his C
                        •
                     urch.
                  69. Changes of the Church tend
to the exceeding good therof.
                  70. The world confounded by the
changes of the Church.
                  71. Vſes of the afflictions of the
Church.
                  72. Great ones drinke deepe of
the cuppe of vengeance.
                  73. God vſeth great & mighty
enemies for the chaſtning of
his Church—as
                  74. Standing with his iuſtice & alſo-
                  75. With his mercy.
                  76. How to make fleſh our
friend.
                  77. God often chaſtieeth his
children with the ſame
rodde.
                  78. God chaſticeth his children
in meaſure and by degrees.
                  79. Gods children are to comfort
and relieue each others in
their troubles.
                  80. The bounty of Gods children
is no ſnare, but eſpecially
laboures, the good of the
ſoule.
                  81. God prouides for his children
in trouble with the ſafety
of a good conſcience.
                  82. Whether lawfull for Chriſtians
now to change their
names?
                  82. Thoſe which are raized to vp
greateſt dignities, are vſually
in moſt deſperate, and low eſtate.
                  83. Kindred to bereleeued.
                  84. Gods children left orphanes
in the world.
                  85. The more excellent gifts of
nature, need the ſtraighter
bridles.
                  86. The gifts of nature beeing
ſanctified are good meanes of
preferment.
                  87. How to vſe natures gifte.
aright.
                  88. Adoption lawful though—
                  89. A thing not commanded, but
left arbitrary
                  90. Who eſpecially to be adopted.
                  91.
                        •
                     Einds of adoption.
                  92. Orphanes to bee prouided
for.
                  93. God aduanceth his children
by fayre and likely
meanes.
                  94. Gods children to yeeld to
preſent neceſſity keeping
them-ſelues, from apparant

euill, and depending on Gods
protection.
                  95. Gods children the neerer
preferment the greater extremities
                  96. God prepares his Church
by afflictions to great bleſſings.
                  97. God breaketh the force of
tentations, and prouideth preſeruatiues
againſt them.
                  98. Gods children find fauour in
the eyes of strangers.
                  99. Wicked haue the ſhadowes of
many excellent vertues.
                  100. Markes of true liberality.
                  101. Officers are to be faithfull
in diſtributing according
to their charge.
                  102. God raiſeth his to preferment
by degrees.
                  103. What attendance fit for
each ſex.
                  104. Gods giues ſignes of his fauor
to his children.
                  105. The beſt is due and bestowed
on Gods Childrē in this life.
                  106. Truth may bee concealed,
and how.
                  107. Cautions to be obſerued in
concealing truth.
                  108. Religion when and how to
be giuen accoumpt for.
                  109. GOD diſpoſeth the
weakneſſe of his children,
in the accompliſhment of his
mercy towards them.
                  110. Gods children ſeaſon each
other with graue councell and
wholeſome inſtructions.
                  111. Silence a ſpeciall leſſon for
Courtiers.
                  112. The ſafety of Gods church
ought to be our ſpeciall care
                  113. Obedience to lawfull authority,
a true marke of the
child of God.
                  114. Sincere obedience rather
reſpecteth the power of the
Commaunder, then the
worth of the thing commanded.
                  115. True obedience is performed
as well in abſence as in
preſence.
                  116. Parents how farre to
extend their care for their
children.
                  117. Care how it may ſtand
with the prouidence of
God.
                  118. A marke of the wicked to
riot out time.
                  119. Tyme how to be redeemed.
                  120. Another badge of the
wicked to riot out Gods good
creatures.
                  121. How to preuent the abuſe
of the creatures.
                  122. The wicked haue pretences
for their greateſt abuſes.
                  123. Rules for moderation in
the Creatures.
                  124. Wicked most eagerly
bent vppon their luſts and
ſpare no coſt, for the ſatiſfiing
thereof.
                  
                     
125. Wicked Magiſtrates giue
the bridle vnto ſin, and countenance
wickedneſſe.
                  126. Princes how to ſecure
their eſtates.
                  127. Pleaſures of the wicked
ſhort and ſlippery.
                  128. Variety in ſinne greateſt
ſnare thereto.
                  129. Wicked fall deeper and
deeper into ſinne.
                  130. The v
                        •
                     ſatiableneſſe of the
wicked in ſinne hath this puniſhment
attending on it in
this life that it ſhall not be ſatiſfied.
                  131. Vnſatiablneſſe in ſin how
to be preuented.
                  132. Wicked winners or looſers,
fare the worſe by ſinne.
                  133. God hath a fit time to aduance
his children in.
                  134. The appoyinted time of deliuerance
is not obſcurely to be
gathered out of the word.
                  135. Tokens therof in reſpect.
                  136. Of God.
                  137. Of his Church.
                  138. As alſo of the enemies
thereof.
                  139. Gods children in this life,
aduāced to the higheſt dignity.
                  140. The good deedes of Gods
children, are not forgotten of
the Lord.
                  141. The preferment of the
righteous in faith.
                  142. Notes of faith.
                  143. Gods children gratious
with all men.
                  144. Wicked why they hate godly
being forced to approue
them.
                  145. Princes are to be gratious
in the eyes of their people, and
by what meanes.
                  146. Gods children are not alwayes
vnder the rod but at
length find deliuerance.
                  147. Great bleſſings of GOD
are to be had in remembrance
by ſpeciall times appoynted
thereto.
                  148. God makes his children
gratious, when it may ſerue
for his glory and their good.
                  149. God prouides a deliuerer
for his Church before it bee
caſt into the extremity of
danger.
                  150. Mercies of God to his, paſt
finding out.
                  151. Whether great proſperity
be a bleſſing in mercy to gods
children?
                  152. Whether we may pray for
aboundance?
                  153. Whether it be lawfull to
receiue great bleſſings offred?
                  154. Whether the miniſter may
receiue wages for his paines?
                  155. Whether Heſters marriage
lawfull or no?
                  156. Whether lawful to marry

with an Infidell?
                  157. Feaſting lawfull at marriages.
                  158. Dedication of Feaſts to
the memory of particular perſons.
                  159. When the righteous are
aduanced the people reioyce.
                  160. Princes are not to oppreſſe
their ſubiects to the inioying
of their pleaſures, but to giue
ſome relaxation vnto them,
                  161. Princes honour conſiſts in
eaſing their ſubiects of their
continual taxes.
                  162. VVicked brideled, and furniſhed
with good gifts for the
good of the Church.
                  163. Princes are to be bountifull
to their ſubiects.
                  164. Gods children are to bee
liberal with all their power,
according to their ability.
                  165. Gods prouidence in vnequall
ſocieties and matches.
                  166. The Lord faithful in accompliſhing
his word.
                  167. The Lord accompliſheth
his will by contrary meanes.
                  168. The greateſt afflictiōs profitable
to the godly, for the obtaining
of greateſt bleſſings.
                  169. The luſts of the wicked vnſatiable.
                  170. Gods children contented
with their callings & walke
faithfully therein.
                  171. Callings how to be left and
changed.
                  172. Rules how to walke conſcinably
in our callings.
                  173. Gods childrē not ambitious
nor greedy of preferment.
                  174. Aequiuocation damnable.
                  175. Honour doth not quench
loue in the faithfull.
                  176. Marriage takes not away
obedience from parents.
                  177. Marriage a neerer bond
then that of nature.
                  178. Proſperity of ye wicked ſlippery
& ſubiect to great dāgers.
                  179. God recompenceth the diligence
and honeſt care of his
children with good ſucceſſe.
                  180. God recompenceth our loue
to others aboundantly in our
ſelues.
                  181. Gods childrē in ſeeking the
beſt bleſſings, obtaine al the reſt.
                  182. Gods children the onely
faithful ſubiects.
                  184. Gods children ſkilfull in
diſcouery of ſecrets.
                  185. Treaſós not to be concealed.
                  186. Treaſon to be reuealed in
wiſdome.
                  187. Particulars of wiſdome
herein.
                  188. A gratious wife ought to
watch ouer hir husband, and to
inform him of ſuch dangers, as
are intended againſt him.
                  189. Gods children ought to

approue and promote each or
ther in their weldoing.
                  190. Gods prouidence and wiſdome
moſt eminent in the diſcouery
of treaſons.
                  191. Traytors vſe to band thē
                     ſelues
together for the accompliſhment
of their miſchiefes.
                  192. Great ones vſually Actors
in Treaſons.
                  193. God makes inſtruments in
ſin rods to puniſh the ſame.
                  194. In greateſt truſt greateſt
Treaſon.
                  195. Princes by what meanes
they may preuent treachery.
                  196. Anger the complement of
Courtiers.
                  197. The occaſions of outragious
ſinnes and particularly of
treaſon.
                  198. Princes marks of treaſon
and rebellion.
                  199. Sin not to be puniſhed, before
it be conuinced, and how.
                  200. Traitors are to be executed
for their outragious offēces.
                  201. The intent of treaſon diſcouered
is to be puniſhed and
why?
                  202. Gods children not vnthākful
for whatſoeuer kindneſſe
they receiue.
                  203. God vſually meeteth with
traytors in this life.
                  204. God puniſheth euill ſeruāts.
                  205. The Lord taketh notice of
the right
                        •
                     ouſneſſe of his ſeruants,
and cauſeth the ſame to
be recorded to poſterity,
                  206. Records & outward monuments
neceſſary for the me
                        •••
                     riall
& vſe of Gods bleſſings.
                  207. The bleſſings of God, are to
be recorded to poſteri
                        •
                     .
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            FAVLTS ESCAPED, MAY BE THVS
Corrected.
            Page, 1. lin. 23. r. ouer. p. 4. l 30. r. beſt, p 5 l, 27. r ſeeing as, p, 6. l, 20. r, and
be we, and l, 26 r, gratifie, & 1, 27 r, victory as alſo, p, 9. l, 1. r, mercenaries, &
l, 9 r, as the manner, & l, 30. r, glorious ſhewes, p, 10. l, 5. r, for ſuperſtition, p,
11. l, 22. r, of Statists, and l, 29. r, and fayned, p, 16. l, 1. r, not vnvſual, and l,
27. r, Ironicall
                  •
                conceſſions, and l, 23. r, marke of reproofe, P, 18. l, 22. r, being
now. p, 27 l, 12. r, to the ſin, p, 29. l, 20. r, as cont
                  ••
               ue, p, 40. l, 6. r, & them alſo
p, 41 l. 1 r. ſay that. p. 43. l, 17. r, by their Princes, p, 49 l, 7 r. to other, and l,
8. r, not only hereby, and l, 
                  •
               3 r, to each in, p. 57 l, 16. r, for the ſame, p, 61. l,
31 r, ſuch as by the. p. 63. l, 21. r, a
                  •
                last the, p 68. l, 19 r. there though, p. 71. l,
21. r, supplyed in faithfull, p, 72. l, 71. loue inioying, serve the country: and l,
10, 11. r, and their daughters his ha
                  •
               lors. yea their precious lives and that,
vvich is dearer then live, their liberty yea the, p 73. l. 
                  •
               . r, therefore searching &
l, 21. r both certaine, p, 75 l. 6. r, wel let our court, p, 77. l, 5. r, beeing an
orphane, p, 77, l, 9. r. become her tutor, p, 78 l, 2. r, conceits 
                  •
                palle, and l, 12.
r, we ſtretch the Scriptures vpon the tenters, l, 33 r. miſery gratious, p, 80, l,
12. read, may inioy. page, 87. l, 
                  •
               . read, are remoued. page. 89 lyne, 1 r by
declyning, and lyne 4. read, to become the repayrer, and lyne 31. it
condemneth, page, 90 lyne, 15 r, to fit them, and l, 25 r, to the fath
                  •
               r of
p. 92. l, 35. faithfull vvith God, and l, 36. r, and bound Kinges, and l, 1. r, bee
mercyful, & l. 14. r. of his vvil, l. 37. r. gratiously to. p. 97. l. 28. r drank one in.
and l. 30. r. his true repentance p, 99. l, 25. r, as it maynly, p, 102, l, 30, r, a
                  ••
               o,
ciations, p, 105. l. 24 r, notable conuiction p. 110. l, 
                  •
               . r, more homely, and l,
19. r. who both knoweth, and l, 21. r, of their st
                  •
               ps, and l. 26. r, ab
                  •
               ect defacing
of natures, p. iii. l. 2. r, great Monarch, & l. 30. r may reuiue p, 112 l 18.
r, without, p, 113. l 3 r, preferred to p▪ 115. l, 1. r, ſtrong cryes, and l. 6 lette
this ſtrength appeare. l, 15. r, in deſolate, p 117. l, 10. r. inioyned. their relie
                  •
               e,
p. 119. l. 4. r, her kinſman, & l, 24 r, ſhe ſtaies not, & l. 28. r, can gi
                  •
               e no other
p. 120. l, 28. r, the vvicked vvors, p. 122 l, 23. r. extraordinary instinct;, & l, 27.
r, out of the, p. 124. l, 34 r, in circumstances. p, 126 l. 20. r, hauing ſ
                  •
               e povver,
p, 127. l, 4. r, giuen change of, & l, 35 r we inioy the, p, 133. l, 23. r, this diſcouery
might, p, 136. l, 5. r, to eat of, p, 139. l, 14. r, by impatiency and, p, 141. l,
25. r, time yet cryes in, p, 144. l, 23. r, let expediency, p, 146. l, 1 r, to much for
and l, 3. r, that anointe him, p, 147. l, 13. r, by drovvning him, p, 150 l, 30, r, ſecurity,
and p, 151. l, 30. r, he ſeale vp vnto, p, 152. l, 14 r, be denyed the, and
l, 15. r, oh learne therefore, p. 153 l. 19. r, ſin gets ground. p, 159. l, 26. r, ſhe
aprehends the, p, 160. l, 5. r, by executing of, p, 165. l, 12 r. obſerue the bounty.
and l, 30. r, by davvbing vvith, pag, 270 l. 27. r, to raiſe light, p, 190. l, 10.
r, when the fleſh, p, 192. l, 27. read and prelation.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Churches Deliuerance.
            
               CHAPTER. 1.
               Argument and parts.
               
                  KIng Ahazueroth maketh a great banquet
to his Nobles and Captaines: ſo
doth the Queene to her Ladies and
followers, to the 10. verse. 2. The King
cauſeth Vaſhti the Queene to be ſent
for into his preſence, who refuſing, is by
the aduice of his Princes and Councel
put from all regall ſocietie, to the end of the Chapter.
               
                  Verſ. 1. In thoſe dayes,] that is, in the peaceable and
proſperous raigne of Xerxes, then fell out this danger of the
Church, then did the Lord performe this deliuerance; as if
the ſpirit could declare vnto vs that
               When the wicked are in greatest ſecurity,
                     Obſer. I1. The vvickeds proſ
                        •
                     erity is the meanes of their greater affliction and proſperitie,
then is the Church of God ſubiect, and neere greatest
danger,
               1. So doth the Lord hereby make way for the greater
confuſion of the wicked, in giuing them vp to ſuch a reprobate
ſenſe, that whereas they ſhould vſe their proſperitie
to the glory of God, and good of others, it turnes on the
contrary to the ſpeciall hurt of thoſe, for whole ſakes ſpecially
they do enjioy it.
               2. And the vvicked in this ſtate, haue more power, and
leiſure to doe miſchiefe.
               3. As for the Church of God, it is more ſubiect to contagion,
by ſmelling of the wickeds proſperity, yea happily eſcapes
not defiling thereby, and therefore had need of ſuch
preſeruatiues, and purgation to preuent, or purge out her
droſſe.
               
                  Vſe. 1. And is it then good wiſdome to ſhroud the
Church vnder there proſperity, by making leagues with

them, who are the likelieſt rods to correct the
ſame? May we not ſee herein the folly of Gods children,
 who many times proue ſtirrops to raiſe ſuch to promotion
who when they are aloft, will proue their greateſt ſcourges?
ought we not to mourne for the Proſperity of the wicked,pro. 29.
and then to prepare our ſelues to ſome great trials preſaged
 thereby? Let vs wiſely looke our owne faces in this glaſſe
 and and ſee whether our daunger, was not neereſt, when
we were moſt ſecure, reioycing our ſelues in the hight of
our proſperity, and let vs keepe downe thoſe Canaanites
that they may not proſper vnder vs.
               
                  Of Ah
                           •
                        ſhueroth. That is, the Hereditary Prince.
               
               
                  Obſe. 1. Whereby (me thinks) that great controuerſie among
the Interpreters, what King is here ment, whither
Cambiſes Darius, or Xerxes, may eaſily be reſolued. That it
cannot be Darius. i. becauſe he was not the hereditary
Prince, in that he was choſen by an accident, and therefore
it muſt needs be Xerxes, who not only was hereditary from
his father, in that he was the naturall ſonne of Darius▪
                   but
further alſo by the mothers ſide may be truly called the
Hereditary Prince, as being borne of Atoſſa, the daughter
of Cyrus his great grand-father. Secondly, it may be plainely
reſolued from India to Ethiopia, or a hundreth and ſeauen
and twenty Prouinces: which cannot be vnderſtood, neither
of Cambiſes becauſe hee had not ſo large a dominion,
neither rained ful 8. years, wheras this Ahaſhueroth is afterward
recorded to haue raigned 12: neither of Darius becauſe
ſo large a kingdom is not aſcribed to him by any memorial,
& therfore it muſt need decifer Xerxes vnto vs And
ſurely how fitly did the Lord diſpoſe the trial of his Church
in his time, who as by his baſenes and intemperancy▪ 
                  
                     •
                  e was
made an inſtrument to bring the Church of God to the
pits brinke: ſo was he, after the deliuerance of the Church.
made a memorable ſpectacle of Gods wrath, in the ouerthrow
of that his huge army by a ſmall hand-full of the
Grecians, according to that of the ſpirit of God. The rightious
eſcape out of trouble,
                  Pro. 11. 8 
                  and the wicked come in their

ſtead. It followeth.
               
                  This is A
                        •
                     asueroth) by this repeating of the name
in this Parentheſis with an adition of diſtinction,
                     Obſer. 1. Auoucheth the truth of the Scripture. we may
obſerue the care of the ſpirit of God to iuſtifie the truth of
the ſtory by a circumſtance of Cronology, and thereby are
taught; That whereas this name Aſhachueroſh ſignifieth
an Heriditary Prince, and was giuen vſually to the Kings of
Perſia as an enſigne of honor (as Pharaoh and Ptolomy was
to the Egiptians) 1. that our ſpeciall triall of the truth of
the Scripture; is from ye exact agreement in the computation
of time, 2. That ciuill titles of honor are to be giuen euen
to prophane magiſtrats.
               
                  That raigned from India euen to Ethyopia]
               
               Here the holy Ghoſt ſets out vnto us the large bounds of
this Perſian Monarchy, when it drew neere to it diſſolution,
out of which we are taught many notable obſeruations.Doctr. The vvicked enioy great proſperity. As.
               That euen wicked and reprobate Princes haue attained
very large & fruitfull dominions: the reaſon is 1. becauſe the
Lord hath free power to giue the earth to whome it pleaſeth
him. 2. becauſe the Lord vſeth them as ſcourges to the
wicked that ſo his iuſtice might appeare more gloriouſly.
3. He ſhewes his great bounty and long ſuffring to the wicked
in giuing them herein more then their hearts can deſire
to make them without excuſe. 4. he makes way for the breathing
and increaſe of his Church, which hath both ſome
ſhelter in theſe large dominions and hath wonne ſome
hereby to God, and laſtly hereby hee prepares the wicked
to their greater deſtruction,Luke. 12. who the more they receaue
ſhall haue more required at their hands, and the mighty
ſhall be mightely tormented:Pſal. 37. Hence we learne not to marueaile
or fret at ye great proſperity of Gods enemies,Pſal. 72. neither
to enuy them therin, nor deſire to be like them, aſſuring our
ſelues that all there proſperity ſhall ſerue the Churches
turne,Mat. 5. and if they ye knew not God are thus recompenced on
earth, how great then may we imagine our reward to be in
Heauen. Raigned] in that the holy Ghoſt implies a peaceable
ſubiection of ſo many diuers Prouinces and

different nations both in language and nature vnder one
Monarch,God is the author of gouernment. we learne here alſo by a conſequent, that gouernment
is of the Lord. Pro. 8. by him Kings raigne, it is the
Lord that ſets vp and pulleth downe,5. Doctr. Pſa. 75. for he onely makes to
be of one mind in an houſe, he only knits the hearts in ſuch
vnity, he only can bridle the different natures and conditions
 of the moſt barbarous; and therefore as our Chriſtian
liberty muſt not take away ciuill obedience,Rom. 12. 2. ſo muſt our
 ciuill obedience be alſo for conſcience, not with Popiſh reſeruations,
 or Anabaptisticall preſumptions, but we muſt
euen pray for the life of Nebuchadnezzar and in the peace 
of his citty we ſhall haue peace,Iere. 27. 19. remembring that ſeeing
God appoints gouernment, therefore he is aboue it that ſo
we may giue vnto Caeſar the body and goods with a good
conſcience,Math. 22. which are due vnto him, and reſerue vnto our
God the rule of the conſcience, which is his immediate peculiar
aboue Caeſars.
               
               
                  Ouer an hundred and twenty Prouinces.
               
               See wee here the great benefit of gouernment that
vnites together ſo many and different nations,
                     Obſer. 6. The benefit of gouernment. and that in
ſuch peace and outward ſafety that now they are one helpfull
to the other and all obey one head. And learne we to
be thankefull for gouernment, though it altogether ſute
not with our deſires, knowing that it is better to haue a
Saule to defend vs from the Philiſtins then that there
ſhould bee no King in Iſraell that euery one may do
what he liſteth,1. Sam. 12. Iudg. 17. 1 Tim. 2. and what is wanting in gouernment, learne
we to ſupply by prayer to our God, and more free and conscionable
obedience: And ſeeing policy is no better a band
to bind diuers natures together, but at the laſt they are no
better then brethren in euill, embrace we the bond of perfection
which proceeds from the feare of God, that ſo the
Lyon and the Lambe may dwell together, yea the Lyon
may be ſo changed into the Lambe that there may be the
vnity of the ſpirit in the bond of peace.
               
                  Verſ. 2. In thoſe daies]. i. when Ahaſhueroth had obtained
victory ouer his enemies, and therevpon ſat in his throne. i.

that is inioyed outward peace and was drowned in ſecurity,7 Obſ. Wicked do abuſe their proſperity to the maintenance of the fleſh.
then gaue he his mind to feaſting, and ſo made way for
new troubles. As if the ſpirit would hereby ſhew vnto vs
how the wicked doe vſe their proſperitie: namely they
paſſe and ſpend it all in exceſſe and abuſe of Gods bleſſings.
A thing they muſt needes fall into,7. Doctr. if wee conſider either
the end why God beſtowes proſperitie vpon them,
namely to fat them vp to the day of ſlaughter,Ierem. 12. 13. or their deſire
of proſperitie, which is onely for the maintenance of 
the fleſh,Pſal. 
                        •
                     3. or laſtly their ſecret feare that doth aſſault them
for the change therof, and therefore they will take their
full of it while it laſteth, wherby they become executioners
of Gods purpoſe againſt them-ſelues. Hereby we learne, as
not to meaſure mens happineſſe by proſperitie, but by the
right vſe of it; ſo ſeeing it is ſo apt to be abuſed, feare wee 
rather this condition then greedily deſire it, and ſeeing 
there is beauty in heauen which cannot bee corrupted nor 
taken away; looke we with Moyſes to the recompence of
that reward,Heb. 11. and ſo chooſe we rather to ſuffer afflictions
with the people of God, then to inioy the pleaſures of ſin 
for a ſeaſon.
               [When King Ahaſhueraſh ſate] i.8. Obſ, Proſperitie breeds ſecurity in the vvicked. was quiet and ſecure
&c. Behold how the fruite and peace of proſperitie in
the wicked,Zach Lud,: 18. namely they 
                     •
                  itte at eaſe & are drowned in ſecurity,
ſo was the world when the church was in affliction,
ſo was Laiſh when euill was neere them: And ſurely no
maruaile if the proſperitig of the wicked make them ſecure,
ſeeing their hearts are ſet on it, ſo they dreame of no other
happyneſſe▪ and ſo by Gods iuſtice are hereby prepared to
their deſtruction.1 Theſſ, 5 3. Hee that is wiſe ſhall vnderſtand thoſe
thinges, and to whome the Arme of the Lord ſhall reueale 
them, hee will not fette his heart on ſuch ſhadowes which
may ſo groſſely bewitch him, but rather feare him-ſelfe 
in proſperitie to preuent ſecuritie:Prouer, 22. Iudg, 2. 17. he will ſee in the ſecuritie
of a ſtate the iminent charge of its proſperitie.
And ſo ſeeing the plague will hide him-ſelfe: and ſeeing 
all earthly happyneſſe carryes it bane with it. Hee 
                  
will ſecure himſelfe of heauen by beeing a ſtranger on
 the earth and content himſelfe with Baruch that hee
 hath his life for a prey.1 Pet. 2. 12
               
               
                  Which was at Suſan] 1. Loe here the Perſian hauing
ſpoyled and brought to ruine the Aſſyrian Monarchie,
tranſlates the Imperiall ſtate from Babilon,
                  Ierem. 45. to Suſis,
                  
                     Obſer. God tra
                        •
                     ſlats Kindomes and remoueth their neſt: in Perſia.
Which whether he did it for his greater ſecurity, as truſting
his owne nation rather then ſtrangers, or becauſe hee
would haue all the glorie and profit redoun'd to his
owne cnuntrimen. Yet here wee ſee both the power of
God in changing of Kingdomes, as alſo the truth of Gods
threatning againſt Babell,
                  Eſa. 47 that it ſhould bee deſolated,
and Laſtly the viciſſitude of proſperity, euen in the moſt happieſt;
Babilon was, and Suſan is, now Suſan was and what
is permanent.
               
               
                  
                  Vſe 1. And therefore who would ſet his heart vpon that
 which hath wings, and flieth away to ſwiftly, rather reſt
                   wee on Gods word, that the glory of fleſh is but as
the flower of the field,Eſay 4. 5 and wee daylie changed by
it from glorie to glorie,1 Pet. I that ſo wee may liue for euer in
glory.2 Cor. 3.
               
               3. Verſ. The third yeare hee made a Feaſt.] i. The third
yeare of his raigne after in the the former yeare hee had
reclaimed the Aegiptians,
                  Why this feaſt vvas ordained, which had reuolted now beeing
in peace, both to glorifie his armie for the former
 victory, alſo to enflame his wariors, to a new expedition;
hee ſolemnizeth this royall feaſt.
               
                  A thing in it ſelfe indifferent,
                  
                     Obſer. 10. Feaſting lavvfull.] and in the right vſe,
lawfull: that as ſouldiers after long trauaile ſhould haue
ſome refreſhing, and that by the bounty of the Prince
they ſhould bee fraſted together in a more liberall vſe
of the creatures of GOD:
                     Reaſons. Exod. 23. Leui. 23. ſo euen Chriſtians alſo may
bee enlarged herein: As beeing both the ordinance of
 GOD himſelfe in the ceremoniall law, the equity whereof
 continueth to the worlds end: Hauing cauſes and occaſions
fauling out in the whole courſe of life: as
thanſgiuing, ſociety &c. Hauing an appointed time ſet

downe by the ſpirit of GOD,Eccleſi. 3. 3 1 Cor. 3. 23 
                  and laſtlie warrrnted by that
Chriſtian liberty, which is reſtored v
                     •
                  to vs in Chriſt Ieſus,
and by vertue thereof practized by the Saints, both before,
and ſince the comming of our Lord Ieſus.Gene. 21 Ioh. 2
               
               Vſe. And therefore as wee may not either preciſely with
the Anabaptiſt, deny our ſelues wholy this liberty, or 
with the ſuperſtitious Papiſt, deminiſh and depraue the 
ſame;Gal. 5. 13 by making difference of meates: ſo we muſt bee carefull,
that libertine like, we abuſe not this holie libertie as an 
occaſion to the fleſh; but herein ſerue one another in a moſt
holie loue.
               This wee ſhall doe if wee keepe our ſelues within theſe
bounds in the vſe of this liberty: whereby wee ſhall truely
examine, this feaſt of Ah
                        •
                     ſhueroſh.
               
               Firſt wee muſt conſider the perſons that may feaſt,
                     Obſer. 11. Conditions of holy feaſting. not
euery one, becauſe euery one hath not where-with-all, no
not euery one that hath: becauſe many haue which haue
no right therein,Who may feaſt neither know how to vſe the bleſſings
of GOD.I Tit, Luk. 16. 12 1 Tim. 4. 5 Pſalm 14. 8 But hee onely may lawfully feaſt, vnto
whom as the LORD hath beſtowed a larger portion in
his generall prouidence, that ſo hee may haue wherewith
to take his libertie, ſo hee finds this portion ſanctified
vnto him by the ſpeciall prouidence and loue of GOD
in Chriſt Ieſus, that ſo hee may vſe this liberty aright.
               
                  Vſe. And this as it condemneth all Popiſh and Heatheniſh-feaſting,1 Tit. 
                        •
                     
                  
vnto whom beeing impure, all things are impure:
ſo alſo by the ſame rule is this feaſt of Ahaſhueroſh
in the place 1. condemned.
               2. Wee are to way the fit cauſes of feaſting,Cauſes of feaſting. which the
ſpirit of God ſets downe to be theſe.
               1. The 1. is the approouing or externall efficient cauſe,
                  Efficient Magiſtrate.
vnder GOD which is the Magiſtrate, who onely hath
power to authorize theſe publique feaſts,Nehem. 8. and from whom
the true juſtification thereof doth proceed.
               2. Is the materiall cauſe,
                  Materiall cauſe. namely the plentifull prouiſion
to ſupply the ſame, Wherein theſe rules are to bee
obſerued.
               
                  
                  The prouiſion muſt be ſuch as muſt bee whole-ſome for
noriſhment 2.Prouiſion. 
                  eaſie of priſe 3. not farre fet, when it may
bee had neerer hand, as if nothing were good which
were not outlandiſh, and the more coſt more worſhippe,
4. prepared alſo frugally, rather to further ſobriety, then intice
to gluttony.
               
                  For the forme and manner of the feaſt, here muſt be conſidered
1. the time,
                  Formall cauſe. 
                        •
                     . Time. Luk. 16. Eſay. 58 4. Rom. 2. 15. Eſa. 5. which is not euery day but ſeldome:
2. not the Saboth, but on ſome weeke day. 3. not when the
Church of God is in troubles, for then we muſt weepe with
them that weepe: 4. nether many daies together, as here it
was, but onely ſome ſeaſonable part of one day, ſo that wee
may withall, follow both our generall and particular callings
By which circumſtances this feaſt of Ahaſhueraſh is
condemned,Verſe. 4. in that it is ſaid to be An hundred and twenty
daies.
               
               
                  Obſerue the fit guests to a feaſt,Gueſts. wherein as we are to vſe
an holy indifferency,Eſay. 5. 8. in regard that all are of our fleſh; ſo in
this differency wee are ſpecially to reſpect thoſe, that
excell in grace and ſo to haue our tables furniſhed, with
the houſe-hold of faith: not the rich onely, but the poore
aſwell as they,Gal 6. 10. Mat. 5. Mat. 11. and the poore not ſimply, becauſe they
are poore; but becauſe they are poore in ſpirit, and receiue
the Goſpell.
               
               
                  See we prouide good ſauce to our feaſts:
                  Sauce. not idle talking,
and fooliſh iesting, not ſlaundering and reuiling, nor amorous
daliance, but our ſpeech muſt be ſeaſoned with ſault,
that ſo it may ſeaſon our feaſting. To this end as it is fit
to ſanctifie the feaſt by prayer and the word, ſo to preuent
vaine ſpeeches,1 Tim 4. 5. Mat. 14. 15. 
                  intermediate holy conference is moſt fit and
neceſſary, or elſe ſome quick and ſauory queſtions; and laſtly
the ſtrength thereof is to be returned vnto GOD, in
thankeſgiuing:Iudg. 14, Muſicke hovv lavvful at feaſts If any thinke that muſicke is not an vnſeemely
companion of ſtate feaſts, ſurely as I gaine-ſay
it not altogether in them; ſo would I wiſh great wiſdome
to be vſed therein both 1. for the makers of the muſicke,

that they be not of the ordinary mummeries, in that kind
and 2 for the manner of the muſicke; that it be graue and
reuerent: as alſo for the vſe, that it bee rather onely to
ſhew that I haue liberty therein, then to venter on a
more liberall vſe thereof,Stevvard and Attendants. leſt it tend to the ſatiſfying of the fleſh.
               
                  Better attendance without exception, are frugality,
and ſobriety:
                  Frugality Sobriety the former teacheth vs not to make ſpoyle
or riot (as the minde is) but to husband well the feaſt,
and to gather vp the reſidue that none be loſt: the latter,
inſtructeth vs to Keepe our right in the creature, not to make
them our maiſters, by ſurfeting and drunkenneſſe, but
ſo to riſe from feaſting as that we may be fit for prayer,
or any other duty of our callings whatſoeuer, neither
of which becauſe they were kept in this Kingly
feaſt,Ciui
                        •
                     ity but all to the contrary; therefore is this feaſt alſo
condemned from the mannner thereof. Onely one thing
is here ſpecially obſerued by the holy ghoſt. Namely
that the drinking was by an order none might compell,
                  verſe 8
but euery one was left to his liberty, to take what hee
pleaſed, which though it be no ſimple approbation of
the feaſt, becauſe it was rather a qualifying of that euill
cuſtome in ciuilty which then it ſeemes was in vſe, namely
to compell men to drinke by meaſure, then an holy rule
to prouide for ſobriety: whereas indeed their ſhould
rather haue beene an order to haue ſtinted that liberty,
to which euery one was left, whereby they were apt
enough to exceed, though they were not compelled by
others, (ſuch glorious ſonnes are the vertues of the wicked)
yet ſhall this ſhadow of vertue proceeding either
from the light of nature or from common ciuility, be a
ſwift witneſſe againſt our abhominable cuſtome in this
kind: where the grace of our feaſting, is thus to be compelled,
where not to lie vnder the table, is counted diſloialtie;
and cruelty againſt a mans ſoule, is eſteemed the
greateſt curteſie.
               
                  
                  Now touching alſo the end of feaſting,Finall cauſes and ends of feaſting. they are theſe. i
the glory of God, not the ſetting out of our owne magnificencie,
our oſtentation of, Our riches and glorie as is the-manner
of rich mens feaſts,1 Cor, 10. 31. for which alſo this feaſt vndergoes
the cenſure: neither for ſuſpition, as if there were
more holyneſſe in theſe feſtiuities. A fearefull brand vppon
Popiſh feaſts.
               
                  
                  A ſecond end is thankefulneſſe vnto God for his mercies,
which we doe vſually expreſſe by the more liberall
vſe of the creatures, there-by intending to ſhew our mercy
towards others: and herein this feaſt was faultie.
               
                  
                  A third end, is continuance of loue and amitie among
Chriſtians, not that our tables ſhould be ſnares to intrap
our brother,Abac, 2. that wee may ſee his nakedneſſe, or ſtrippe
him of his clothes; not by inflamation of the creature, to
bee inraged one againſt another as here it fell out in this
prophane feaſt.
               
               
                   A Fourth end, is to ſhew our Chriſtian libertie, in the
bountifull vſe of Gods bleſſing,Eſay, 25. and ſo to reſemble vnto
 vs that feaſt of ſatisfying, in the Kingdome of heauen.
               
                  
                  And laſtly the releeuing of the poore hath heere its place:
for whome wee are eſpecially ſtewards in what is ouerplus.
A ſhadow whereof though wee finde in this
feaſt; in that it is ſaide: The King made a feaſt to the
people; yet was this no true charitie, becauſe without
faith, and in-deed rather to ſhew his pompe, and gratefie
the people, that they might bee more willing afterward
to drudge for him, then of any conſcience to comfort
and refreſh them: Eſpecially if wee conſider, that as
the people generally pay for this exceſſe, and ſo were requited
but with a feather for a gooſe (as we ſay in the prouerb)
ſo only the people of Suſis were feaſted by the King,
whereas thoſe of the Prouinces had their teeth cleane ynough:
wherto if we ſhal adde, that to Cittizens, feaſting is
not dainty, wt is rare among ye country people becauſe neither
their leiſure, nor meanes will afford the ſame we ſhall

find ye this feaſting of the Suſians was rather a iuſtifying of
that wherin they were too much faultie alreadie, then any
true reliefe of their wants or gratification of their paines.
               Whence we may obſerue .i▪ how to determine of their
actions,
                     Obſ 12 Virtues of the Heathen. who are without God in Chriſt Ieſus: Namely
that they (as them-ſelues acknowledge) are but ſhadowes of
vertues▪ and deceiptfull ſinnes,
                  Splendida pecca
                        •
                     a ſim
                        •
                     lachra virtutii. vnder pretence of libertie,
ſatisfying our inordinate luſts. Whereby wee become
ſlaues vnto Gods bleſſings, when wee would ſhew our
power ouer them.
               1 Vſe. Wherby wee are taught, as to condemne nature,
and the glorious ſhewes therof, becauſe it greateſt liberty
is the moſt dangerous ſnare: So to ſeeke for our moſt glorious 
libertie in Chriſt;
                  1 Cor, 3. who beeing once ours, all is ours alſo;
wherby hauing a right in theſe bleſſings, we ſhal haue
alſo grace to vſe them well, that ſo we may lay vp a good
foundation againſt the day of account.
                  1 Tim, 6.
               
               
                  We haue heere a liuely Image of the prophane courtly life,
                  13 Obſ, State of the court & vvorld.
and ſo consequently of the world it ſelfe. All for the luſt
of the eye, the luſt of the fleſh and the pride of life: nothing
for the ſoule or for the happineſſe of the ſame.
               I Vſe.
                  1 Iohn, 2. 16. 
                  Wherein we may ſee the notable pollicy of Satiſts,
that as they are in place aboue other;
                     Obſ. 14 Pollicy of worldly greatnes confounded. ſo wanting indeed
true vertue, wherby they may be manifeſted to the harts
of their people, and to procure and hold them in loue
and obedience; Yet in theſe outward thinges at leaſt
they will be ſinguler and exceed; which being that which
moſt do hunt after and admire; therefore by theſe they rather
deſire to obtaine an outward admiration and fayre
reuerence of the moſt, then by true vertue to be loued
of the beſt: Which as it is a deepe miſtery of their higheſt
wiſdome, to coulor their inward villanies, ſo may we herein
obſerue the admirable iuſtice of God, in taking theſe wiſemen
in their craftineſſe, and thereby making way for their
deſtruction, that their cxceſſiue pompe, breeding ſecret enuy,
while it is flattered with outward applauſe, and fayned
deuotions, doth therby nouriſh diſcontent, and ſo diſlike of

their perſons: and this diſcontent being inraged, by impoſing
new burthens (which are vſually the effects of princes
vaine expences) breake out often into treaſons, and ſubuerſions
of their greatneſſe.
               Which though it bee no iuſt cauſe for ſuch outrage in
ſubiects,Rom, 12. becauſe vengeance is mine (ſaith the Lord) and
they are not their owne,15 Princes are not vnneceſſarily to burthen their ſubiects. Vſe.
                   yet may great Potentates heere
learne not vnprofitably this leſſon, Not vnneceſſarily to oppreſſe
their ſubiects by ſuch ſuperfluous pompe and vanitie:
Becauſe howſoeuer the ſubiect may and muſt beare,
yea till his backe cracke againe, Yet his patient bearing
ſhall moue the Lord to iealouſie,prouer, 22▪
                   who being a helper of
the oppreſſed and abaſer of the mightieſt, will heare the
cry of the poore that are thus wilfully oppreſſed, and vnlooſe
euen the choller of Kinges to the deliuerance of his
ſeruants.
               And ſeeing that earthly greatneſſe is an image of the
heauenly,16 Princes to labour ſpecially for inward glory. as proceeding from thence, and a gratious
meanes therto: therfore are earthly Princes taught heer
                     •
                  
another leſſon, Namely to labour eſpecially for inward glory:
Whereby as they ſhall ſanctifie, and ſo quallefie, all
their outward greatneſſe, to ſecure it from danger, and
make it leſſe burthenſome; ſo, for the ſauor of their good
oyntments ſhall their ſubiects truly loue them: By which
coniunction of ſpirits, all things ſhall be eaſie, ſuſpitions
ſhall ceaſe from ſuperior; and greeuances from beneath: and
both Prince and people, ſhall happily goe vp together
to builde the houſe of GOD, when the Magiſtrate
by example ſhall lead them the way: Thus by
this ſweete harmony ſhall heauen bee vppon earth in an
heauenly conuerſation, that earth may reſt in heauen for
euermore.
               The contrary whereof is moſt apparant in this preſident:17 Like prince like people.
                  Here is a prophane and luxurious King: and here are
 like ſubiects .i. becauſe we are both apt rather to liue by examples
then by lawes, and indeed it is not ſafe to croſſe
 euen bad examples: As beeing the maine ſtreame of

the worlde to maintaine ſinne, and who ſhall without danger
ſtriue againſt the ſtreame.
               
               1 Vſe. By how much ought Princes to be more carefull
of an holy conuerſation, as beeing not onely vnder God,
vnto whome they fall (and it is a fearefull thing to fall into
the handes of the liuing God) how-ſoeuer they may
ſtand and beare it out before men: but in this alſo that they 
are ſette ouer men; beeing examples of their vices, they
thereby are markes of their mallice: ſo that brethren in euil,
ſhall be brethren in puniſhment. Yea the greater ſinner the
greater torments.
               
                  And ſeeing God ſends wicked Princes for the ſinnes of a 
people: Let men be angry with their ſinnes,
                  Wicked Princes ſent for the ſins of the people. and not with
God or his ordinance, by their cheereful obedience, witneſſing
their true repentance: ſo ſhal they either be able to beare
the yoake; though it be as heauy as Rehobohams ſcorpions,
or according to their abilitie, the yoake ſhall be bridled, or
in due time, taken of their ſhoulders.
               
               
                  As for thoſe that inioy the bleſſing of good gouernment:
                  
Let them be thankefull vnto God, in acknowledging their
owne vnworthyneſſe, and let them vſe this great bleſſing
in feare and reuerence:Nehemi. 2. 4. 
                  taking this oportunitie to build vp
Gods houſe, and mourning with thoſe that are making of
brickes; and toyling in the mines: not ſetting vp their reſt,
as if this were all their happyneſſe; nor flattering ſuch golden
times, as that there may not be better: but ſtill forgetting
that which is behinde, in ſteed of that which is before.
Yea eſteeming all as dung, in compariſon of Chriſt Iefus; refuſing
with Moſes to bee counted the ſonne of Pharoes daughter,
                  Heb. 11. v▪ 25.
                  as hauing reſpect to the recompence of the reward,
               
               Thus may we truly iudge of feaſting: And hereby alſo
iudge this feaſt of Ahaſhuerus,
                  Verſe, 5. to bee prophane and ſuperſtitious.
               Some-what may here be pretended iuſtifiable in ciuilitie,
as fit for the ſtate and magnificence of ſo mighty a Monarch:
in that it is ſaid,Verſe, 7. 
                  it was done according to the power of
the King. Wherein howſoeuer the ſpirit of God doth

graunt a proportion of the feaſt to the power of the King,19 Princes not 10 ſhew their magnificence in bel
                        •
                     y cheer.
yet doth he not at all iuſtifie this ſuperfluous proportion
as if it were fit for Princes to ſhew their power to the vtmoſt in
ſuch vaine and exceſſiue expences, but rather Ironically
taxeth this oſtentation of power in ſuch vnneceſſary occaſions,
which rather ſhould haue bene extended in more neceſſary
matter for the glory of God, and publike good of
the common-wealth: and yet if any commendation be picked
out here,Luke, 16. it is only ſuch as the Lord commended the vniuſt
ſteward, which being only good after the opinion of ye
world, for a miſconceiued wiſdome, was thereby a greater
condemnation of folly in the court of conſcience.
               This the ſpirit doth liuely ſet out vnto vs, by the euent
thereof. Namely the breach betweene the King and his
wife: then which their could be no more fearefull euent,
both to declare the vnlawfulneſſe of the feaſt▪ as alſo to puniſh
the King for his intemperancy therein.
               The occaſion to this breach is ſet downe in the ninth
Verſe.
                  Verſe, 9. The Queene Vaſh
                        
                           •••
                        
                      made a feaſt alſo for women. Namely a ſhewe of modeſtie, in the Queene, who
refrained from the company of the King, and his Princes,
at this great ſollemnitie. Which whether it were of pride,
becauſe ſhe would keep ſtate by her ſelfe: or of neceſſitie, becauſe
either the cuſtome of the country, or the Kings Iealouſie
would not allow her preſēce among ſo many of ye other
ſex:20 Dauncing of men and women vnlawull. Yet ſurely this may condomne our moſt laſciuious
mingling of both ſexes together in dancing and ſuch like meetings,
howſoeuer it cannot excuſe her for her after diſobedience.
               
                  And now behold the iuſtice of God,
                  21 God puniſheth ſinnes with ſinne. in beating the wicked
with their owne rod, King Ahaſhueroſh makes a feaſt and
while hee ſinnes with exceſſe,
                  Verſe, 9. 
                  he is puniſhed by the ſame, hee
lookes vpon the wine in the cuppe,1 Iam, 25. and tarries long at it,
and loe ſaith the ſpirit vppon the ſeauenth day hee is merry
with wine (that is according to the phraſe,Prou. 23. he is bitten with
it.)3 Phil, 20. A moſt righteous hand of God vpon vain-glorious perſons,
that as they make their belly their God,
                  22 Drunkennes the effect of feaſting. Prouer, 21. 
                  ſo their glorie
ſhould be their ſhame: The King is diſgraced by his feaſt

which he made ſo much for his honour. His wine became
a mocker, and ſtrong drnike rageth.
               
               
                  A moſt vſuall effect of prophane feaſtings to bite with
drunkenneſſe, whereby we are often prouoked to bite and
deuoure each other.
               And not vnlikely to fall out if we conſider, that oportunity 
and meanes are (to the beſt) inticements to allure; but to
the wicked cart-ropes, to hale on ſinne. If we obſerue the policie 
of Sathan, who hath ſo peruerted the naturall iudgement,
as in all things, ſo eſpecially in indifferent, that the abuſe
goes currant for the right vſe thereof, and not to bee
drunke at feaſtings▪ is not to feaſt aright.
               
                  Eſpecially,
                  Eſay. 28. 
                  if we obſerue the iuſtice of God, in puniſhing ſin
with ſinne, prophane feaſting, with filthy vomitings: And 
herein moſt eminent, that wheras ſuch feaſting is intended 
for the ſhew of our greatneſſe, and glory of our magnificence,
our wiſdome is herein mightily confounded, in that our
glory becomes our ſhame.
               
                  Wherin we may learne, as, to condemne this ſinne in other,
                  
eſpecially at ſuch times when it hath ſuch fauourable conſtruction,
and allowance, as being the time to ſhew our
greater zeale and courage againſt the ſame: ſo when we are 
feaſt-makers, to giue wholeſome lawes of temperance, not remouing
only the apparant abuſe, that men ſhould be compelled:
                  But rather ſtinting men,
                  Polidor. as King Edger did, that
they exceede not health and ſobrietie: Whereby wee
ſhall not onely keepe peace in the conſcience, and of
the table to; but cutte of all hope, to bee inſnared in
this ſin (a matter eſpecially aimed at by the drunkerds at
theſe times, to bring other-into ye ſame exceſſe with them)
                  And further alſo, putting drunkards to confuſion, in y• wee
will not exceed with them, we ſhal happily (by Gods mercy)
bring them to repentance; and ſo in time, both caſe the 
Land of this crying ſin, & likewiſe of the iudgments due
therto; and alſo continue ye wine and oile and ſuch other
good bleſſings, wt for our abuſe of them in this exceſſe are 
begun,Ioel, 1. and further threatned to be taken away from vs.
               
                  
Thus you ſee the occaſion of drunkenneſſe, the beſt vſe
likely that prophane men make of all feaſtings. Now let
vs further conſider the ſinne it ſelfe, it is here ſaid: He was
merry with wine.
               
               In which phraſe of ſpecch, the Spirit of God, as he doth
ſet out an effect of large drinking, namely to make men
merry, ſo withall he doth ironically diſcouer the cloake,
which the world caſts ouer this ſinne, to couer its ſhame:
Namely,23. The vſe of holy Ironi
                           •
                        s in the word. (to call drunkenneſſe mirth) becauſe ſome mirth is
lawfull; therefore the worlde concludes it is good to bee
merry, and ſo conſequently not euill to be drunke.
               A thing not vſuall to the holy Ghoſt to ſpeake Ironically
after the opinion of the fleſh,Reuel. 22. 
                  both to diſcouer the deſperate
blindneſſe of the wicked,Eſay. 9. 11. in cloaking vices with the
 ſhewes of vertue: as alſo prophetically to publiſh Gods
 righteous ſentence againſt rebellious ſinners, namely that
 they ſhall be giuen vp to this reprobate fence, as to further
and approue very groſſe impieties,Prouer, 23 that ſo not feeling the
ſinne, they may follow it ſtill: and ſo hauing made vp the
meaſure or their ſinne, that now laſtly they may be prepared
to their finall condemnation; the ſpirit of God in theſe

                  Ironicall confeſſions, proceedes ſpiritually to execute this
vengeance:note. hereby ſetting-ſuch a marke of proofe vppon
them as ſhall make them vtterly without excuſe, as implying
thereby that they hate to be reformed,Oſe. 4. and yet thereby
alſo harden them in their ſinne:Eſay. 5. 
                  And therefore let no man
reproue,
                  Eccle. 11. but let drunkenneſſe be counted mirth, and euill be
taken far good.
                  Reuel. 22. 
                  Reioyce oh young-man, and take thy pleaſure:
Let him that is filthy be filthy ſtill.
                  2 Theſſ 2. 12. Wherby not onely the
word becomes a ſtumbling blocke to harden them in their
ſinne;2 Mich. But, becauſe they will not obey the truth, therefore
ſhall the Lord giue them vp to beleeue lies: Behold ſaith the
Lord there ſhal be like Prieſt, like people, to preach of wine
and ſtrong drinke vnto them, deluding vnſtable ſoules, that
drunkenneſſe is mirth, and to be merry is good: And I the
Lord haue ſent ſuch Prophets.
                  Ezech. 14. Yea I haue ſent him, and hee
ſhall preuaile,Prou. 11. 
                  the foole ſhall make a ſport of ſinne, and they

ſhall thinke they doe God good ſeruice,
                  Ioh. 16. 2 that performe vileſt
parts againſt his deereſt ſeruants.
               
                  Vſes. And doth the world count good euill, and euill 
good? doth the word to this purpoſe ſpeake often in the
worlds language? Oh then what meruaile is it if the 
                  word b
                        •
                     e a ſtumbling block to the world? what need had
wee of eye-ſalue, to diſcerne this difference. When the
ſpirit ſpeaketh according to it one verity, and when hee 
expreſſeth out vanitie, how ought wee to maintaine the 
true light of conſcien
                        •
                     e? Certainly howſoeuer the ſpirit
may ſpeake fairely of ſinne, as therein cxpreſſing what the
world would haue deemed, Yet the conſcience hereby will 
not excuſe for ſinne. And though falſe teachers may cunningly
dawbe vp the ſame, yet the g
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     e-ſaying conſcience 
will diſcouer the vntempered morter. The beſt approbation
of him, ſhall be that he is a flatterer, and the beſt comfort
to the conſcience, that hee is but a miſerable comforter:
Nay to adde further the ſhame of this dawbing: euen the
world it ſelfe ſhall diſcouer it owne blindneſſe, and though all 
ſhould bee ſilent, euen the ſinne it ſelfe will ſpeake, that
ſuch mirth is drunkenneſſe, and ſuch good is euill.
               Hearken I pray you to the circumſtances of the Text:Obſ. 24. Markes of drunkeneſſe▪ Eſay 5
                  Vpon the ſeauenth day. The King (it appeares) ſat well by
it, and therefore, if they that tarie but one day, will bee enflamed
with the wine, we muſt not imagine, but the King
had his burden:Obiect. 
                        
                           •
                        ſay 5 Anſ. You will ſay, hee was of a ſtrong conſtitution,
and being alſo accuſtomed thereto, was better able to
beare it: Yet there is a woe to them, that are ſtrong to
drinke wine, and the more ſtrength herein, the greater
ſinne:Obiect. becauſe it is an occaſion to draw others into the ſame
exceſſe with vs. 
                     
                        •
                     ut you will ſay, this 
                     •
                  King was carefull to
preuent this ſinne, in others, becauſe hee made an order,
that none ſhould bee compelled,Anſ. and therefore not likely
to be guilty thereof. As if ſo bee prophane Kings are not
exempted from their lawes, and by their examples allow
that,Obiect. which their law condemneth. If you ſay, he might be
merry with wine,Anſ. and yet not bee drunke. I would thinke

ſo to, if I knew not there were degrees in drunkenneſſe,
among the which though ſome may extenuate the ſame in
the eye of the world, yet they do truly agrauate the ſame
by the effects thereof. For had it not beene better for this
Wine-bibber to haue bin beaſtly or dead-drunke (as we ſay)
not able to haue ſpoken▪ or known any thing, then ſo to be
merry-drunke as to be mad with reaſon. For what greater
madneſſe could there bee, then to call for his Queene to
make ſhew of her beauty to ſuch a whitled cōpan
                     •
                  , whoſe
heads being ful of wine their eyes muſt needs be ful of adulterie,
and ſo for the ſatiſfying of their luſts, might haue had
their hands ful of blood, and not vnlikely to haue indangered
the life of ye King him-ſelfe? And was not wine a mocker &
ſtrong drink raging? When for ſo ſmal an offence, as not to
come at ſuch an vnſeaſonable an occaſion, this beautifull
ſpouſe was vtterly repudiate, and ſo his merry draughts depriues
him of the chiefe meanes of his contentment:Obiect. 
                  if you
ſay this was done, not without reſpect of his eſtate, becauſe
he ſent (ſeauen of his chiefe Princes) for the Queenes more
honourable conuoy: and therfore it may ſeeme hee knew
what he did,Anſ. and kept decorum herein; Surely (I take it) this
rather bewraies the ſtrength of his intemperancie, who being
not inflamed with wine, was therby ſo impotently inraged
with luſts,Obſ. 25. Prophane perſons abuſe their wiues to be onely baites 
                        •
                      luſt. V. 11. that he muſt needs (preſently) feed his eie
at leaſt with the obiect therof. Out of we we may obſerue,
the beſt vſe that prophāe great ones, abuſe their wiues, which
is to pranke them vp that they maybe baits of luſts to others,
(the people and Princes muſt ſee her beauty) to vſe them at
their pleaſure for the ſatiſfying of their luſts, heres no ſeperation
with conſent,1 Cor. 7. to the contentmēt of both; for ye king
hath his change, & the poore Queene muſt be defrauded,
ſhe muſt ſtand at reuerſion & come when he ſends for hir,
and he wil not ſend but to ſatiſfie his luſt, her deſire muſt
be ſubiect to his luſt; but he wil not giue hir due beneuolēce,
ſhe muſt come to be ſeen to feed ye eie with luſt, when
happily ther was no ſtrength to yeeld nature his due, or if
there were ſtrength, yet ye ſtrange woman ſhould haue it.

Thus wiues are kept faſting to be lookt vppon as babies,
when harlots depriue them of the crown of marriage: Thus
marriage is diſhonoured, and ſin hereby ripened, and the
wicked many times beaten by their owne rod: their babies
oftentimes, make them beaſts, and ſo paie their debts.
Theſe ordinary harmes may proue excellent inſtructions
both in the choyce of our wiues,
                  
                     Obſ. 26. of the choyce of wiues how. and in the vſe of them.
               
               That wee chooſe not onely for beauty, as being a broker
to luſt, and haruinger to ſhame, and at the beſt cannot 
laſt out our loues; Neither make ritches our marke, which 
is in this caſe no better then fuell to ſinne, but that our
principall aime in the choyce of a wife be the feare of God,
                  
baited with the other meanes, Not matching with Poperie,
in hope to conuert, but fearing rather, that it will peruert
vs, neither refuſing religion, ſimply without the other
complements: but reſpecting wiſely ſome equallitie of age,
leaſt wee bee vnfitte for marriage duties, when they are
moſt required at our handes, and eſpecially propoſing the
inward beuty, togither with it not reiecting the outward.
               Thoſe hauing choſē aright,How to be well vſed. wee muſt further learn how to
vſe them: y• ſo they may be truly helpers vnto vs: and this is
performed 1. by performing our duty to thē
                   and 2. by teaching
them, and exacting of them the performance of their duties.
               The point of our duty, is to gouerne them in the Lord, as
to dwell with them louingly, and ſo to auoid all vnncceſſary
occaſion of abſence, either from bed or boord. (A thing wt 
the Law very gratiouſly prouided for, that at the leaſt the
firſt yeare there ſhould not be ſeperation, though the affaires
of the common-wealth did neceſſarily require it) that
the gadding of the wife, may bee alſo preuented: a thing that
may bring her within danger of catching, & ſo hereby loue
might be happily confirmed by wiſe experience in each others
natures.
               He is to giue good example, to preuent much ſchooling:
and he muſt ſtrengthen his example, with wiſe counſell out of
the word, leaſt he bee counted ſinguler, and ſhe more confirmed,
not only to auoid the euill, which ſhe is ſubiect vnto

but to lead her forward in the waies of grace, vſing counſell
freely but reproouing warilie, (and commending wiſely) not
for euery light matter, vnleſſe it bee iuſtified, neither before
company, vnleſſe they giue ſtrength to ſinne, but in much
wiſedome, and meekeneſſe, by the euidence of the ſpirit.
               3 Due beneuolence, muſt alſo bee afforded, the husband,
muſt bring in, and prouide cheerefully, for her maintenance;
but within his cauling, and to further in grace, allowing,
recreation, but what may further repentance, and imploying
her wiſely wherevnto ſhe is moſt fitted, by the gifts
of minde, and ability of her bodie: ſo as to keepe her from
Idleneſſe, and yet not to diſcourage her: eaſing him-ſelfe
thereby of ſuch laboures: that ſo hee may more freely follow
his owne calling, and honouring his wife by that confidence
in her.
               
                  The duties that wee muſt treach and exact of our wiues
is, that ſhe reuerence vs in heart, and ſtand in an holy aw of
the husband, as being her head vnder Ieſus Chriſt. This
ſhe ſhall ſhew 1. By meeckeneſſe in behauiour, and 2. Lowlineſſe
in ſpeech 3. auoyding both groſſe and ſowre words 4. And
yet not ſparing, to aduiſe; yea, meekly to reproue, quieting her
ſelfe, in mutuall loue, yea reioycing her ſoule, that ſhe hath
ſo good a ſteward and protector.
               2. We muſt procure obedience from them, euen as Chriſt
was obaied of his Church in all things, that is in all lawfull
for Chriſt would command no other, and that willingly, and
cheerefully, though it croſſe priuate corruption. Thus may
we rightly vſe wiues. But as for Ahaſhueroſh his vſe is for
luſt; and luſt is impatient.
               
                  And therefore, that we may ſee ſinne wants not wit, for
the ſpeedy effecting thereof, behold he ſends an effectuall
meſſage,
                     Obſ. 27. The wicked abuſe Gods bleſſings to their condemnation. that in his opinion could receiue no repulſe, ſo hot
was he vpon it, ſo wiſe to do euill.
               And had hee no better imployment for his counſellors,
then to ſend them on ſuch a meſſage; which neither beeſeemed
his wiſedome, nor their grauity? could all his fulneſſe,
and attendance ſerue him for no better vſe.

Oh how like is hee to all thoſe happy children by nature
who thinke the bleſſings of GOD are giuen them
to ſatisfie their luſtes,1 Vſe. and ſo to be furtherances to their
condemnation. i. But I would the children of the Kingdome,
were not guiltie of this ſinne, vnto whome GOD
giues theſe bleſſinges to prouoke and further them in
his ſeruice? That they were not hindered in the ſeruice of
GOD by them? That they were not occaſions to plunge
them deeper in the worlde? that Demas did not imbrace
the world, and Diotrephes loue preferment? Surely if Natures
fooles, ſhall not teach wiſdome by their experience;
yet our profeſſion might leſſon vs to imbrace the time of
viſitation, and to vſe our aduantages for our beſt furtherance
to heauen: To whome much is giuen, much ſhall bee
required at their handes; and the greater bleſſings abuſed
the greater torments; not onely ſtored vp againſt the day
of vengeance, but many times in this life inflicted
vppon them: As may appeare in the caſe of the
Queene, whoſe beauty is the occaſion of her ſo great
miſery.
               
                  Wherein we may behold the vſe and end of Gods bleſſings
in the wicked,
                     Obſ. 28 The bleſſings of the wicked proue their ſcourges in this life. as they are giuen of GOD to fatten
vp the wicked: ſo for the execution thereof, they are abuſed
to ſinne, and thereby worke out ſhame. Their tables are their
ſnares,
                  Pſal, 69. and their riches a pitte to drowne them in, their wiſdome
is their halter,
                  2 Sam, 1
                        •
                     . and their honour turnes them forth as
beaſts;
                  
                     
                        •
                      Tim, 6. their craftineſſe intrappes them, and their, friendes
confound them,
                  Dan, 4. Yea the wife that lies in the boſome, ſhall
pronounce ſentence againſt them.1 Cor, 3. Heſt, 6.
               
               
                  By which wee may learne: As not to enuy their proſperitie,
                  
ſo, not to deſire their full cuppes, but rather to feare this 
exceeding, and be contented with a meane eſtate. But if the 
Lord ſhall caſt a larger portion vppon vs, wee muſt not 
                  ſette our heartes vppon it, neither be puffed vp with the 
ſame, neither abuſe them to ſinne, but to make them weapons 
againſt the ſame. And that, by ſanctifying them vnto 
vs by the word and prayer, and that reuiuing this ſanctification,
                  
                  
                   vppon their particuler vſe, onely to imploy them
 holylie to GODS glory, ſoberly for our owne vſe, and

                  cheerefully for the benefit of our poore neighbours, that
ſo we may lay vp a good foundation by them againſt the
day of Ieſus Chriſt.
               But would theſe Counſellors and cheefe Princes, bee
ſent ſo vnſeaſonably on ſuch a meſſage? Ought they not rather,
to haue aduiſed, their Lord, of the vnfitneſſe and
danger thereof; and ſo haue ſaued them-ſelues that labour,
and their Maiſter that ſhame? Surely whatſoeuer might
bee the cauſe of this their ſpeed,29 Obſ. Courtiers ſl
                        •
                     ues to their Princes luſts. whether they enuied the
Queene, and ſo ſought occaſion againſt her, or, were in
the Kings predicament, and therefore deſired fuell to their
fire.
               
               Yet here wee may truly obſerue the fearefull condition
of Godleſſe Courtiers: Slaues they muſt bee if they will liue
there, and ſlaues they will be, to chooſe, ſo they may dance
in golden fetters: So corrupt are ſuch Courts to admit no
other ſeruants, ſo baſe is our nature, to make choyce of
no better Maiſters: ſo strong a thing is loue, that refuſeth
no abiect paynes, ſo iuſt is the Lord, in fitting wicked Princes
thus according to their deſires; that ſo they may bee
fitted for his purpoſe for their iuſt confuſions.
               1 Vſe. O pray therefore for good Princes that they may
commaund in GOD: that ſo glory bee giuen vnto him:
 there may bee peace among men. And pray againe I ſay
for conſtancy, and holy reſolution, that ſo thou maiſt obey
GOD rather then man: ſeeing hee, that, thus looſeth his
life ſhall ſaue it, and hee that ſaueth it ſhall looſe it.
               There is no ſeruice to the ſeruice of a King, if ſtill wee
preferre the King of Kinges: winning or looſing we ſhall
be Kings.
               
                  Concerning the prophane Courtly life,
                  30 Obſ. The Courtly life as how to be accepted & vſed. Ioſeph. Geneſ. 41. as thou ſeeſt hereby,
thou haſt little cauſe to deſire it, ſo if thou beeſt called
refuſe it not.
               
                  Ioſeph was a Courtier, and yet remained the childe
of God:Dan. 4. 5. 
                  Daniell a States-man, and yet faithfull with his

God:Attendants on the Court. onely remember thou which wouldſt ſerue the
Prince, what ſuiters and ſeruants will now haunt thee?
Looke to bee enuied, if thou doſt excell, and prepare thy
ſelfe to ſlaunders, though thou doſt neuer ſo well; Nay
looke for ſecret trechery, to hoyſe thee on the ſuddaine;
and make account of groſſe flattery, to make thee ſecure;
here ambition will not faile to breed in thee diſcontent: and
luſt will bee importunate to diſcouer the ſame, pompe will
here intice thee to forget thy God, and ſhewes will inueagle
thee to looſe the ſubſtance, examples wil allure thee to
committe ſinne with credite; and priuiledge will warrant
ſecuritie therein: Gluttony will aſſault thee, to make thy
belly thy God; and drunkenneſſe will requite thee; thy
glory ſhall be thy ſhame; Idleneſſe will wooe thee, to bring
thee out of fauor: and company will preſſe thee to frame
thy ſelfe to cuſtome: pride will exhalt thee, that thy fall
may bee the greater, And Prophaneſſe, will make
ſure, that thou ſhalt not riſe agayne: In a worde as
the Courte is a true Epitome of the worlde, ſo in
this little worlde looke for a worlde of daungers:
And therefore thou hadſt neede to ſtand vppon thy
Gard.
               Keepe thy heart therefore faſt lockt with the feare
of GOD;31 Obſ. Rules for behauiour in Court. ſo ſhalt thou not feare what man can doe
againſt thee: And open it dayly, by hearty prayer that 
God may more inlarge it: Lette thy carriage bee humble,
                  
without baſe aſſentation, and yet ſecure to preuent allurements:
                  Bee dilligent in thine affaires, that thou maiſt 
ſtand before Princes, and yet patient of preferment, leaſt 
thou ſhew thy ſelfe an hyreling. Thinke no euill of thy 
Prince, in thy heart▪ leaſte thy GOD condemne 
thee, and ſette a watch before thy tongue, that it betraye 
thee not: Make a couenant with thine eyes, that 
beautie doe not deceiue thee, and put thy knife to thy 
throate leaſt thou ſurfeit of exceſſe: Heare no tales 
willingly, much leſſe beleeue them, and bee not prying 
into the eſtates of others, leaſt thou be quitted with vſury.

                  
                  Conſort with thy equalls yet ſuch as are of the better ſort,
 but be familiar with few, how ſoeuer curteous to all, Backe
 thee with ſome great one, ſo his greatnes be in goodnes, and

                  ſport thee with ſuch exerciſes, as are Martiall and profitable,

                  walke ſtill in feare, to keepe thee from falling, And for
 thy apparrell, fit thy ſelfe ſo to the preſent faſhion, as may
 rather condemne it by careleſſe frugality, then iuſtifie
 the ſame with fooliſh affection, And to giue thee in fine
two ſummary rules for all. Faſhion thy whole actions by the
word, and not by examples: and prepare for remouall, for
here is no biding place for thee: Thus being armed thou
maiſt ſafely be a courtiar, and that with ſuch ſucceſſe, that
at leaſt, thou ſhalt bridle ſinne in others, if thou canſt not reforme
it;Ierem. 13. if thou canſt doe neither, yet thou maist weepe in
ſecret for it, ſo though thou make others worſe, yet thou
ſhalt be the better, becauſe the more thou feeſt ſinne raingning,
the more thou ſhalt hate it, and ſeeing the plague
thou ſhalt not onely hide thy ſelfe: but either with good
Heſter, thou ſhalt be a meanes for the generall good, or at
leaſt if the decree be gone forth,Ieremy. 39. with Ebodmelech thou ſhalt
haue thy life for a prey.
               
               Thus you ſee out of euill manners, proced good lawes,
theſe bad courtiers haue taught vs how ſome may bee
good.
               Well, theſe Eunuches haue done their meſſage, what anſwer haue they?
               The holy Ghoſt reſolueth this in the 12. verſe.ver. 12. 
                  But the
Queene Vaſty refuſed to come] being ſent for by the King,
in this time of feaſting, from her fit company of women,
to an vnruly company of men, and that to no other end
then the ſhew of her beauty, which was like to haue
proued a ſnare to all (The ſpirit ſaith ſhee refuſed to come,
at the Kings word). And why did ſhee refuſe to come
or was it lawfull for her to refuſe?
               Surely how ſoeuer, it might bee pretended that it was
not ſeemely, yet hereof, ſhee was not now, but her

huſband the Iudge, (the thing in it ſelfe being not ſimple
euill) though ſhee were not ignorant that the King was
diſtempered) yet this would haue made obedience more
commendable;Ioſeph. lib 11. Antiq. cap 6. and her Lord without excuſe, if ſhe had
conceiued that this had beene againſt the Law, yet ſhee
might know the Kings commaund, was a priueledge
aboue the Law, and though ſhee might plead 
                     •
                  eare
of giuing offence to the King, who by this her comming
might noriſh iealouſie, Yet this being but ſuppoſed,
and onely like to follow, was not to hinder a thing
to be done. If it ſhall be graunted, that it was his ſinne thus
to command her: yet it cannot bee denied, but it was her
ſinne not to be commanded,
                     Obſ. 3
                        •
                     . The 
                        ••
                     ſtruction and confu
                        •
                     ion of the wicked in their actions. Laſtly if it ſhall be alledged
that ſhe had ſinned in comming, yet it muſt be alſo graunted,
that ſhe ſinned in ſtaying. Thus comming and ſtaying
commaunding and not obeying (actions in them-ſelues
contrary) yet proceeding from an euill hart, they all do
tend to the ſame end, namely the maintenance of corruption,
and diſhonor of GOD, ſo corrupt is nature that it
yeelds no good fruit, ſo deceitfull is ſinne to intrappe on all
ſides ſo vnſearchable our corruption to be diſcerned, ſo impoſſible
a thing it is to wind out the ſame.
               Againe wee may here learne a duty for huſbands towards
their wiues: they muſt walke as men of knowledge in the
midſt of their families,
                     Obſer. 33. Husband dueties to their Wiues. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                      et
                        •
                     . 2. 7. not controuling imperiouſly, but
by good example leading them forward, both, prouiding
for them things honeſt and conuenjent as alſo giuing them
due beneuolence, ſo handling them tenderly as the weaker 
veſſells.
               
               
                  Thirdly here is a duty of wiues towards their huſbands that
they diſobey not their lawfull commands as being ſubiect
vnto them in the Lord.
                     Oberſer. Wiues duties towards huſbands.
               
               Well the Queene will not come,P. Pet. 3. 6. Col. 3. 1. what followeth herevpon.
The text ſaith. The King is very angry, and his
wroth kindled within him. And no maruile, for as it is
counted a part of generoſity thus to fret and fume: ſo prophane
Princes do hereby eſpecially keepe ſtate and their

variety of bleſſings giues heat vnto their ſpirits and are
as ſo many bellows to blow the coales, and if 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
were more vehemently kindled, the cauſe is apparent, his
wine had enraged him: and his luſt vnſatiſfied did caſt oyle
into this fire, and ſeeing his commandement was alſo diſpiſed,
and that by her who of all ſhould haue obeyed, this
muſt needs ſet him all on fire, in that his Authority and
greatneſſe was thus contemned, yea he did well to be angry
to iuſtifie his command.
               Obſerue we here wiſely the occaſions of anger,
                  
                     Obſer. 36. Anger and occaſions. that ſo
we may not fall into the like diſtemper: and ſmother we
it happily in the firſt ſparkling, leſt it breake out into a fire
that cannot be quenched, and ſee the occaſion be iuſt and
weighty that may moue vs thereto: For did the King well
to be angry at ſo ſlight an ocaſion? Hee had cauſe to be
angry with him-ſelfe, for his abuſe of Gods bleſſings,
and horrible prophaneſſe: but to be ſo angry with his
Queene, that ſhe would not come at his call, this rather
 ſhewed, that anger was his maiſter, then that he recouered
therein the contempt of his authority.Exod, 32. 
                  Moſes did wel to
be angry, when the people had committed idolatry, ſo did
not, Ahaſhueroſh, becauſe his wife would not make an Idoll
of him: God did well to be angry, for the neglect of his
ordinaunce: ſo did not Ahaſhueroſh, for the contempt of
 his, Christ did wel to be angry becauſe the cauſe was waighty,
and he tempered his anger againſt ſinne,Exod. 14. Matth. 3. with compaſſon
 towards the perſon, ſo did not this King, the cauſe
was ſmale, and the meaſure immoderate: no place left
for compaſſion, no hope of reconciliation. Let not the ſonne
go downe vpon our wrath:
                  Ephe. 4. 26. Sampſon did well to be angry, to
 whet his couradge againſt Gods enemies, ſo did not our
hot-ſpurre to enflame him-ſelfe againſt a ſilly woman and
ſo to depriue him-ſelfe of his deereſt friend.
                     Obſer, 37. Iudg. 14. 19. The lawfulnes of anger and it bounds. Exod. 16. 1 Cauſe. 
                  In a
word to be angry is Lawfull, ſo we conſider. 1. the cauſe it
muſt not be at good, but at things onely euill, and that
properly an euill of ſinne, (neither naturall defects, nor neceſſary
burthens, muſt be cauſe of anger,) but onely ſinne

and that committed with an high hand.
               
               2 Obſerue the manner of anger, though their be waighty
cauſe,Gal. 6. 1. 2 manner yet we muſt not ſodenly giue the bridle to this
paſſion (for it is the part of a foole to be of an haſty ſpirit)
but conſider our ſelues,Iea. 1. 10. Math. 5. 22. whether wee be now fit for anger
or no, and ſo accordingly giue way to this paſſion, and then
it muſt be tempered both with loue,
                  Mar. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 21. and commiſeration of
the party,1 Sam. 20. 3 Meaſure. and accompanied with patience, and bounded within
our callings leaſt we breake out into reuenge.
               3. We muſt obſerue a meaſure in our anger, it muſt both
ſort with our perſons, as leſt guilty of that we are offended
in others, and be tempered alſo according to the ſigne of tbe
perſon, whom hereby we do humble, and it muſt not onely
end with the occaſion, but euen preuent the ſame to the
better reforming thereof, becauſe where it resteth, it is in
the boſome of a foole.
                  Ecle. 7. 11.
               
               4 We muſt be ſure to leuell our anger at a right marke,
                  4 Obiect.
the ſinne we muſt ayme at, and ſpare the perſon, and it muſt
not be the wrong done to vs, but that which concernes
God that we muſt be angry at.
               5. And laſtly the end of our anger muſt be wiſely conſidered.
1. not our credit or reuenge,
                  5 End. but the glory of God.
2. not the hardning of a ſinner, but his breaking, and conuerſion:
Thus if we willbe angry we ſhall not ſinne.
                  Ephe. 4. 25. And herein
ſinned this King becauſe he was not thus angry.
               And therefore it had beene good for him, to haue repreſſed
this cauſeleſſe anger,
                     Obſer. 38. Anger cauſeleſſe how to be repreſſed. 
                  by not giuing way vnto it, or turning
the matter into a ieſt, by ſeeing a forehand into the euent,
and conſidering in what caſe he was; he might haue wiſely
wayed that his wife was no fit obiect of anger, and that ſhe
might haue had cauſe rather to haue beene commended, he
might haue not beleeued what report the Eunuchs brought,
or if he did beleeue them, loue and wiſdome would have
taught him to haue let it in at one eare and out at the other.
Thus maiſt thou preuent vnſeaſonable anger; Onely
one thing the Holy Ghoſt addeth, which may ſeeme

to quallifie this ſinne. Namely that vpon his anger, hee fell
not preſently to reuenge, hauing power in his hands, as
furious husbands haue done vpon ſuch occaſions:Verſe, 13. but,
Hee ſaide vnto his wiſe-men which knew the times) That is
hee takes great aduiſe, in this ſmall occaſion, as if the
ſtate of his Kingdome were now in queſtion, wherein (as
I take it) he doth increaſe his ſinne, not only by this deliberation,
giuing way to his anger, which being now ſilent,
was thereby more ſetled; and ſo like to doe more hurt:
But in that hee calls a Councell, to determine of ſo light
a matter, which might haue beene better decided within
the curtaines, mee thinkes vnto his anger hee added extreame
follie, diſenabling his wiſdome, and abaſing his ſtate.
               Behold here the wiſdome of carnall men,Rom, 1. 1 King, 13. Ioh, 11. 48. 
                  when they
ſeeme to bee wiſe,
                  
                     Obſ 39. The cloakes of ſin are occaſions to increaſe the ſame. 
                  they become fooles, the fairer cloake they
haue for their actions, the deeper thereby are they plunged in
iniquitie, and ſo prepare them to their greater diſtruction:
becauſe the ciuill forbearing, and bridling of ſinne doth
both ſecretly iuſtifie the ſame to their deceiued conſcience:

                  and ſo furthers the committing thereof with greedineſſe;
 and ſecurely increaſing, and ripening the ſame,
 makes way thereby to ſuddaine deſtruction: Whereby wee
may learne aboue al things to take heed of being wiſe to do
euill,
                     Vſe 1. Ierem, 4. 22. either bleſſing our ſoules in the outward bridling of ſin,
or contenting our ſelues with the ſhewes of vertues, but rather
                   to become fooles in the full diſcouery of ſinne, that ſo
being caſt out of our ſelues, we may be caſt vpon Chriſt, in
whome of fooles, we ſhall be made wiſe to God.
               See wee heere the vaine imployments of the greate
Councellors of the world:40 Ob. Worldly councellors how vainly imployed. The beſt that they do is to ſatiſfie
the luſts of their Princes, as whom only they count happy,
and by whom only they are happpy, and the worſt they
do is to bandy againſt God and his Chriſt,1 Cor, 2 8. pſal. 2. 1. 2. 3. whom as they
know not, ſo his yoak they will not indure: vain men y• are
here ſaid to know the times and ſeaſons, and yet were ignorant
of the time of their viſitation:Luke, 12. 56. 
                  Whereby the

truly wiſe may learne their leſſon, that as they muſt bee skilfull,
which ſhall ſee the Kings face, and bee principall in
his kingdome; ſo to imploy their ſpeciall skill for the aduancing
of Chriſts kingdome, leaſt hee count them his enemies
that will not let him raigne ouer them; and hauing firſt
ſought the kingdome of heauen, and the righteouſneſſe
thereof, as hereby they ſhall beſt prouide for the ſafety of 
the Prince, whoſe crowne ſits moſt ſure when it is caſt at 
the feete of Chriſt; ſo they ſhall finde godlineſſe to bee
profitable for this life, yea the people hereby ſhall fare the
better; poore and rich ſhall dwell in ſafetie; there ſhall
bee no complaining nor leading into captiuitie in our
ſtreetes, yea which is the greateſt wiſedome, they ſhall bee 
wiſe to themſelues, in ſetling their ſlipperie ſtate, and eterniſing
their happineſſe. Happy are the people that are in ſuch
a caſe, yea bleſſed are the people which haue the Lord for their
God.
               
               3. Obſerue we here one marke of the miſerie of Courtiers,
                     Obſer. 41. The miſery of courti
                        •
                     rs that they are contriuers of e
                        •
                     ch others miſery, that as they are brokers to one another in ſinne, ſo
they are vſually ſuch as containe each others puniſhments.
               Queene Vaſhty no doubt and theſe had beene bretheren
in euill, and ſo it is their lottes to become her iudges.
It being moſt righteous with God, to make the inſtruments
of ſinne the author of it puniſhment,Reaſons 1. that ſo it might receeiue
the greater confuſion.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Whereb
                        •
                      wee are taught, as not fooliſhly to flatter
our ſelues in impunitie, becauſe wee are many partners in 
ſinne: ſo wiſely to auoide fellowship in ſinne, and to expect
theſe as our rods, who haue beene our brethren in euill; 
                  comforting our ſelues, with this gratious iſſue,Iſay 10. that though 
                  Aſhur ſhall be Iſraels rod, becauſe Iſraell committed fornication
with him. Yet when Iſraell ſhall bee purged, the
rod ſhall be caſt into the fire.Ezech. 23.
               
               Theſe councellors are here deſcribed vnto vs, i. by their 
eſtate, and outward quality, they were not taken out of the
meaneſt; but from the Princes of the people, ſo (ſaith the
ſpirit) They were the ſeauen Princes of Perſia) men beſide

their wiſdome, of greateſt birth and ability
               
                  A thing very fit,
                  
                     Obſer. 42. Choyce of Councellors out of the Nobility. that ſuch ſhould be Counſellors; both. i.
becauſe vſually as they haue the beſt education, and ſo are
likelieſt to haue moſt meanes of wiſdome, ſo i
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     hat they
haue power to countenance, and execute their councells, aswell
 mighty to defend the Kingdome by their purſe and
 meanes, as to direct by their wiſdome; therefore hauing
two ſtrings to their bow, they are moſt fitteſt for this Office,

                  eſpeciallie in the choice of theſe, if here we conſider
that three daungerous enemies to Kingdomes are happily
ſuppreſſed. Not onely Enuy which cannot faſten on
theſe, as hauing no benefit, but rather trouble by this calling,
but couetouſneſſe alſo, which here is needleſſe, where
generous greatneſſe comes from inheritance: and laſtly
diſcontentment is happilie preuented, if meaner ſhould bee
 aduanced and theſe Princes reiected; Wherevnto if we ſhall
ad the practize of Tyrants, which is to roote out vſually
the true Nobility, and to aduance in their ſteed vp-ſtartes
and vile perſons, wee ſhall find the practize of the good
Princes hereby to be more Iuſtifiable.
               
                  Vſe 1. By which, as that Machiuillian pollicy is vtterly condemned,
which aduiſes Princes to let none grow great vnder
them, much leſſe to admit greatneſſe about them; ſo
 Chriſtian Princes, are not reſtrained here their prerogatiue;
to aduance euen meane ones for their gifts and deſerts:

                  the beſt wiſdome, is to mingle theſe, with others, if there
be correſpondency of gifts, that ſo both may be humbled,
and better fitted to giue aduiſe, that vertue beeing aduanced
may be more thankefull and profitable, and greatneſſe
being imploied, may bee more faithfull, and leſſe dangerous:
that the experience of the one, may keepe the others
in breath, and the generouſneſſe of the other may preuent
oppreſſion and couetouſneſſe, that ſo in the multitude
of Councellors there may be ſtedfaſtneſſe,Pro. 15. 22. and in variety of
Iudgements more wiſe deliberations.
               A ſecond deſcription of theſe counſellors is from their
inward quality: It is ſaid,
               
                  
                  They knew the times,
                  Verſe 14. 
                  and the Law and iudgement. i. that
is,
                     Obſ. 43. Councellors ought to be siklful in the Lawes and cuſtomes. they had experience how to order things fitly to the
times, and that iuſtly according to law &c. as beeing acquainted
with the iudged caſes thereof. Qualities very
neceſſary in thoſe that ſhalbe Counſellors. As being both
the makers, and Iudges of the lawes, and vpon whoſe direction
the whole ſtate dependeth, which cannot be vpholden
but by righteouſneſſe and iudgment.
               And ſurely very profitable would thoſe haue proued to
the aduancement of Gods glory, if they had beene truely
ſeaſoned with the word of God, for want whereof as they
were no better then weapons of the vnrighteous, ſo they
prooue as golden halters to hang ſuch Achitophels withall:
               
                  A notable leſſon to Chriſtian Princes,
                  
                     Obſ. 44. Counſellors ſuch as feare God. that as they are not
to neglect other complements in the choice of their councellors
to be about them, as wiſe experience, and ciuill
knowledge, and ſo eſpecially they would ſingle out ſuch as
feare the Lord, & aboue al things make conſcience of promoting
his glory.How to diſlcerne. Which they ſhal know by the gouernment
of their families, according to Gods words, by the promoting
of religion, in the countries where they dwell: by their conſcionable vſage, and gouernment ouer their Tennants, and
generally by their care to eaſe the ſubiect of oppreſſion, and to
giue contentment to their power vnto them: hereby ſhall
they attaine to perfit wiſdome, which without Gods feare
is carnall and diueliſh,Pro. 29. and ſuch wiſe men ſhall defend the
Kingdome, and deliuer the ſame from all imminent daungers.
               
                  Vſe 1. Which as it condemneth, that deuiliſh poſition,
which would haue ſtate-men, only to ſeeme, and not to be religions,
thereby inſteed of religion ſetting vp Hipocriſie, &
Atheiſme. So, in that the prouidence of the LORD worketh
by meanes, and their can be no religion without learning,
and the meanes thereof. Therefore in the ſecond place
this condemneth, their opinion, that thinke learning 
is not neceſſary for the gouernment of Kingdomes, as
making men to know their ſtrength, and ſo prouoking

them to ſeditions and ſuch like, as if mother wit or experience,
or traditions onely, would ſerue the turne: the verie
 ground of Atheiſme, (broker to tyranny)Whereby Chriſtian
 Princes are aduized, to encourage learning, that their
cheifeſt affaires may be wiſely directed thence. And ſeeing
by this meanes God raiſeth vp out of the duſt: and ſetteth the
poore vpon the ſeat of Princes: Why ſhould we now bee
diſcouraged to imploy our Chrildren herein? Why do we
rather put them to trades,Ioell 2. and ſo empty the vniuerſities;
Nay the Churches of GOD? Is the hand of the LORD
ſhortened? Nay is not his ſpirit enlarged in theſe latter
daies? doth not Satans greater rage againſt it iuſtifie this
calling? And is not our GOD ſtronger to maintaine.
Where the oppoſitions are the greater? certainly how ſoeuer
our learning may not aduance vs to be Councellors to
earthly Kings yet beeing ſanctified by grace, it ſhall promote
vs to Heauen, where in ſteed of Councellors, we ſhal
raigne as Kings with Ieſus Chriſt for euermore.
               It followeth, yet concerning theſe Councellors, that
(They ſaw the Kings face). Nothing therein an extraordinary
fauor, that was graunted to theſe Councellors. Namely
that whereas theſe Perſian Monarkes were ſeldome ſeene
of any, vnleſſe they held out the golden ſcepter; yet theſe
had free acceſſe into the Kings preſence, they might come
into the preſence (as we ſay) and ſee the Kings face.
               A very fit thing that Councellors ſhould haue more
free acceſſe to Princes then ordinary men,
                     Obſ. 45. Princes muſt not bee ſtrang to their ſubiects. becauſe they
are perſons of more truſt and imployment: And yet, not fit for
Kings to be ſtrange unto their ſubiects, and to count it a matter
of ſtate to be rarely ſeene of them; Wherein, may a King
 better ſhew his humility, then in being affable, and courteous,
 euen to the meaneſt? may not his wiſdome, bee greatly
ſeene herein, that to giue contentment to his ſubiects, that
 deſire to ſee his face, he in this reſpect ſhew himſelfe more
open and often, among them? and ſhould it not be as great
ioy for Kings, to behold ye faces of their ſubiects, in whom
 conſiſts their glory and their ſafety too? And would it not

quit coſt, for Princes thus to be acquainted with their ſubiects,
to heare ſome-times their cauſes in their own perſōs,
and ſo determine of them? do they not hereby diſcharge
their callings faithfully, and preuent wiſely much iniuſtice,
which otherwiſe falles out. Did not Salomon and other
vertuous Princes heare cauſes themſelues?Samuell. Edger. Did they not
ride circuit to do iuſtice, haue they not had ſet daies to
ſuch neceſſary end: and haue they hereby expoſed themſelues
rather to daunger? Haue they taken more vpon
them then they could well diſcharge? Haue they abaſed
their authority, and depriued themſelues of their lawfull
pleaſures? Nay rather haue they not, hereby wonne
the hearts of their ſubiects; and ſo their owne ſecurity?
hath not their honour beene increaſed, by faithfull diſcharge
of their calling? And their authority iuſtified, in
beeing examples to their owne lawes? Is not Idleneſſe
hereby preuented, the very bane of Kingdomes, and true
contentment gained, inſtabliſhing ſound peace and equitie?
And ought not this to be the chiefeſt pleaſure of Princes,
to procure their true content, in giuing glory to God
by faithfull execution of their callings? Neither let them
feare to be oppreſſed with the waight of this burthen, and therefore it muſt follow they muſt put it off altogither.
Moiſes his preſident wil be a middle rule in this caſe,Exod. 18. that
ſo the burthen may be a pleaſure vnto them. Not to make
diſtinction of perſons, as if the inferior were to baſe to
come in triall before them, but onely the ritch who may
corrupt the law, (for this may ſmell of Papall pride and couetouſneſſe,
who reſerues caſes of ſuch perſons to his proper
cenſure, becauſe thereby he may picke their purſes,)
but onely of Cauſes reſeruing the waightieſt, and moſt intricate
to himſelfe (which may aſwell be incident to poore
as ritch) as hauing a more ripeneſſe of iudgment to diſcerne
thereof, and in wiſdome better able then other to determine
of the ſame. Thus will Godly Princes procure their
eaſe, in performing their duties, and ſanctifie their honour
in vnder-going the burthen thereof.
               
                  
But what ſhall we ſay of this Perſian Monarch? Surely
as he knew not GOD,
                     Obſer. 46. Tyrants their note, and puniſhment. ſo he knew not himſelfe, neither
any thing that truely belonged to his calling. The

                  ſword was his ſcepter and luſt was his law, pride was his

                  glorie and feare was his protector, his ſubiects weare his
ſlaues, and his Princes were his bauds; And therefore no
maruaile though he loued to be rarely ſeene, eſpecially of
the ſubiect, whoſe ſpoile he daily entended: if happily of
Princes, but to be his fowlers for the prey.
               
               
                  Vſe 1. A iuſt hand of GOD vpon tyrannicall Princes,
by their pride and cruelty to make them hatefull to their
ſubiects, that what they feare may come vpon them, and
 ſo they may be ſent to the King of feare. And an excellent
leſſon to Chriſtian Princes, to keepe ſtate by loue; and
ſeeke glory in the diſcharge of their callings, that obeying
GOD they may preuaile with men: and ſo eſtabliſh
their Kingdomes in this mortall life as to make them ſteps
to the crowne of glory, It followeth. What ſhall wee doe according to the Law.
                  Verſ. 15.
               
               Here we may ſee a ſhew of equity in this Godleſſe
                     Obſer. 47. Wicked pretend law for the ſatisfying of their miſchiefes.
Prince, though the diſobedience of the Queene had much
enraged him, yet neither in his rage doth he aueng
himſelfe of her, neither doth hee claime a priuiledge
to do it contrary to his lawes (which happily he might
haue done becauſe the matter immediately concerned
himſelfe) neither doth he take vpon him to be iudge
in his owne cauſe; but referres the matter to the iudgment
of the law, and that to be ſcanned by the wiſdome
of his Councellors, wherein that he would not be his
owne Iudge in his owne cauſe, but referres himſelfe
for ſatisfaction to the right cenſure of his lawes, herein
if we iudge him by the outward action he did not
amiſſe, his baſeneſſe appeares in that, that whereas though
he had referred himſelfe to the ſentence of his lawes, yet
he ſhould haue reſerued both the expoſition and iudgemen
of the Law vnto himſelfe, as being a part of his
royall prerogatiue; theſe his proper rights he leaues to

their luſts who happily geſſing his minde might hereby
ſatisfie both their owne and his vnlawfull purpoſe, concerning
the point that a man may not be Iudge in his own
caſe.
               The equity hereof appeareth in this,
                     Obſ. 48. Whether a man may be his owne Iudge. that as men
are blinde in their Iudgements and ſo cannot know
themſelues, ſo they wilbe likely partiall in their owne
matters, as louing themſelues to well: And therefore
we muſt auoide all occaſions of euill. And ſeeing we
muſt auoide all appearance of euill, therefore howſoeuer
it may bee, that a man may herein Iudge righteouſly,
yet ſeeing to the world it will appeare otherwiſe, therefore
for the approouing of his good name in the eye of
the world, he is not in my opynion to be iudge in his
owne caſe.
                     Obſer. 49. How a man may be a witneſſe in his owne cauſe.
               
               If it ſhalbe here demaunded how then may a man be
produced in his owne caſe to the ſatisfiyng of the world?
the anſwere is plaine: he is not produced as a Iudge but
as a witneſſe thereto, and not ſo as a witneſſe as if the
Iudgement depended vpon himſelfe therein: but ſeeing
his allegations are confirmed by an oath, as being
the meanes which the Lord hath appointed to end controuerſies,
whereby as he calls the Lord to be witneſſe to
the truth, ſo he conuinceth the conſcience of the Iudge to
aſſent thereto,
                     Obſe. 50. How a man ſhould be approued, when he ſtands vpon the teſtimony of innocency: contrary to the verdite, or report of the world. therefore it is not the bare witneſſe that
caries the matter, but God & that Iudge they approue the
ſame.
               
                  Vſe 1. This vtterly conuinceth all popiſh religion and
proceedings, if they may not be their owne Iudges, but
ſtand to the Iudgement of the world, and it condemneth alſo
the ground, of that groſſe opynion, that we may be ſo
perfit, as not to erre in our iudgements. It caſteth to
ground all pleas for ſinne, whereof few can hold, but
from this aſſumpſit, that wee may and muſt be iudges in
our owne caſes (whatſoeuer you ſay) I know it is otherwiſe,
you know not my caſe, and if you were in my ſteed, you would
thinke otherwiſe.
                  
All which, proceed from this only ground, that their is no
competent iudge of my eſtate, but my ſelfe.
               A notable fallacy, whereby Satan deceiues ſinners; that
becauſe others many times iudge wrongfully of them,
therefore they conclude that they beſt know themſelues,
and beſt may be their owne Iudges concerning their
ſinnes.
               A priueledge which how-ſoeuer they ſtand vpon, principally
for this end, that their iniquity may be hidden from
the eye of the world, ſeeing this is an eſpeciall meanes
not onely to ripen the ſinne, but further alſo to
harden the heart of the ſinner. Therefore behold the
admirable iuſtice of GOD, in taking the wicked in
their owne ſnares, that hardneſſe of heart, continuing
impenitency, and ſo in the end working deſpaire: hereby
it comes to paſſe, that they which would haue the iudgment
deuolued to themſelues; that ſo they may not diſcerne
the true iudgment of ſinne, it ſhalbe vnto them
as they do deſire, they ſhall haue iudging enough,
euen to ſinke them to hell, they ſhall truely iudge of
their damnable eſtate, and many times pronounce ſentence
againſt themſelues, and therein miſ-iudge of the
mercies of GOD. And this is a third point condemned
herein.
               If therefore,
                     Obſer. 51. Wherein a man may be Iudge in his owne caſe. we wil be ſafely Iudges in our cauſe, let
vs iudge our ſelues for ſinne, that wee bee not iudged
of the LORD: And that we may thus iudge our ſelues, let
vs bee iudged by others, ſubmit we our ſelues wiſely to
the iudgement of the word: and let vs not neglect the
Iudgement of the world, if it iudge wrongfully we haue
wherein to reioyce: If it iudge aright, be we the more
confounded that our righteouſneſſe is cracked in the
worlds opynion; only beware we here of deſperat iudgement,
whereby we may exclude our ſelues, from hope of
mercy, ſo iudging ourſelues by the law, that we alſo ſeeke
pardon in the Goſpell, that ſo wee may be eaſed of our
heauy burthen.Math. 11 Thus being iudged we ſhall come to

true repentance, and recouering againe the fauour of God,
we ſhall alſo recouer the vprightneſſe of our conſcience,
and ſo we ſhalbe able to iuſtifie our owne innocency.1 Cor. 4. 4. And
thē we may ſafely not eſteeme to be iudged of mans iudgment,
and yet not eſteeme our ſelues iuſtified thereby, ſeeing,
as what the law condemnes for, is in our ſelues, ſo
that for which we are acquitted is ours onely in Ieſus
Chriſt;2 Cor. 1. 12. and though our reioycing, bee the teſtimony of our
good conſcience, which we may lawfully cleaue to, and
thereby acquite; yet ſeeing that GOD is greater then
the conſcience;Iob. 9. and wee know not our owne ſoules,
and alſo that vprightneſſe which wee know, proceedes
from the righteouſneſſe of our Sauiour, therefore as by
the imputacion of his righteouſneſſe, we are onely happy:
ſo to the ſame only we muſt aſcribe euen the power
of that iuſtification before men, that not withſtanding proceeds
from inherent righteouſneſſe,
                     Obſer. 52. Princes are to refer themſelues to the iudgment of their lawes. that ſo Chriſt may be
all in all.Verſ. 22.
               
               Well, the King will not be his owne iudge, whom then
will hee bee iudged by? The holy Ghoſt anſwereth; by the
lawes of his Kingdome: which generally no doubt did
determine of the dutie of Mariage: though perticulerly
for this caſe the Law was made afterward. Now ſeeing
this was practized among the heathen, how much
more righteous & wiſe a courſe is it, that euen, yet Chriſtian
Princes (though in caſes concerning themſelues)
ſhould refer themſelues to the iudgment of their owne
lawes.
               Becauſe, as they are of their owne making, and therefore 
it ſtands with their honor to iuſtifie the ſame, ſo it is in their
power to expound their owne lawes, and therefore may
lawfully make fauorable conſtructions for themſelues,
according to the equity of the law: Yea beeing alſo Iudges
of the law themſelues, and therefore may in diſcretion mitigate 
the ſame.
               
                  Vſe 1. Which as it condemneth the groſſe flattery and iggnorance
of thoſe that exempt the Prince from ye gouernement

                   of his owne lawes, making him thereby not onely
a groſſe hipocrite, but a very Tyrant: ſo it iuſtifieth that
lawfull prerogatiue of Princes, which is to bee makers
and interpreters, yea Iudges of their owne lawes.
               
               Againe, this alſo reprooueth the abuſe of lawes which
 great ones breake thorough, and onely ſmall flies are
caught in. As alſo, that man of ſinne is here condemned,
who hath reiected the law of GOD, and wil be
 gouerned onely by his owne filthy luſts. Laſtly, whoſoeuer
meaſure their righteouſneſſe by example, or opinion,
ſtand vpon cuſtome or any ſuch like, reiecting the law of
God, for the rule of their life, they are alſo condemned in
this place.
               
                   Sixtly we are here taught to bleſſe GOD for good
lawes, and to pray vnto him for the executing thereof;
that great ones may lead, and the reſt may follow, and
that (euery man may do as he lift) may not bee heard
of in our ſtreetes.
               Well, thus hath the King referred the matter to the
Iudgment of the law, and ſurely herein he did not amiſſe.
onely in this may he be iuſtly charged of folly, that he
kept not the ſword of expounding, and approouing the
law in his owne hand; but vnwiſely puts it ouer to
the determining of his Councellors. The reaſon whereof
although we may partlie geſſe, becauſe he would not
be rid of his wife, but with ſome colour, and other muſt
do that which he would not be ſeene in.
                     Obſer. 53. Wicked Princes im
                        •
                     loy their ſeruants in baſe purpoſes.
               
               A matter vſuall in wicked Princes to deuolue the enuie2 Samu. 12.
of their vile courſes vpon their Miniſters of ſtate, by
putting for a time the ſword in their hands, as Dauid did
into the hands of Ioab: yet that this was not done without
great inconuenience, may appeare liuely by their
handling thereof. See what it is to put a ſword into a madmans
hand; harke how Memucan the Eunuch, laies about
him. And Memucan ſaid before the King and the
Princes.
                  Verſ. 16. 17. & 18.
               
               The Queene Vaſhty hath not onely ſinned againſt the

King but againſt al the Princes and people which are in all
the Prouinces of the King Ahaſhueroſh &c.
               
               Thus, inſteed of a Iudge he becomes an accuſer; and
the Summe of his exaggeration, or rather indeed accuſation
(contained in theſe three verſes) is this, that Queene
Vaſhties ſinne is herein exemplary, ſuch as ſhall prouoke
like contempt throughout the Land, among all ſortes,
as pleading herein the example of the Queene and
thereby taking occaſion to diſobey their husbandes.
Wherevpon will enſue much deſpitfullneſſe, and
wrath.
               And ſurely,
                     Obſ. 54. S
                        ••
                     nes of great ones exemplary. in that he apprehends the ſinne to bee exemplarie,
herein hee iudged not amiſſe. For indeed
the ſinnes of great ones they are both patternes, and
priuelidges to the inferior, for the like: Who liue by
examples, and take heart thereby, ſeeing the greate ones
ſinne vſually, without controulement.
               
                  Vſe 1. And therefore of all ſortes, great men are to
take leaſt liberty in ſinne, becauſe the eye of the world is 
fixed on them, and they ſhall anſwere deepely for the ſinnes
of others, in that by their example they giue warrant 
thereto.
               And inferiours alſo may here learne their leſſon, not 
to pleade example, but to liue by the Lawes, ſeeing
how-ſoeuer examples may hinder obedience to the
law, yet the Law ſhall preuaile to the punniſhment of
thoſe, that by the example of great ones breake the
ſame.
                     Obſer. 55. 
                        •
                     o
                        ••
                     ticians in ſat
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     ying the luſt of wicked Princes provide for their owne.
               
               But that he falles to accuſe, where rather he ſhould haue
excuſed, and in ſteed of healing the wound makes it farre
wider: this howſoeuer it may be good for an orator, yet
it cannot ſtand with the wiſdome of a graue Councellor.
But ſome-what was in the winde: hee muſt needes
ſpeake thus becauſe he had his fee: the King was angry,
and hee ment to ſet him going: the Queene was an
eye-ſoare, and ſhee muſt bee remooued. Such ſlaues
are ambitious ſtatiſtes to their owne and their Princes

luſts,2 Reg, 13. but eſpecially when their owne plow is driuen forward
withall.2 Reg, 11. Then the honour of the King,Ioh, 18. and good of
the land muſt be pretended,Luke, 23. when indeed they wil eſpecially
ſerve their owne turne therein.
               1 Vſe. This may teach Princes how they put ſuch, to much
 in truſt; and therein alſo to vſe the fauor of their Princes
 more moderately, not exaſperating them againſt other leaſt
the ſoame light vppon them-ſelues, and their owne ſtroke
returne vppon their owne pates: Their owne iniuſtice deſerues
 no leſſe, and the iuſtice of God ſhall finde them out
in their ſinne, Hamans gallowes in the end catcheth himſelf.
               But let vs a little further examine the truth of this accuſation.
                     Obſ. 56. Flatterers & malitious perſons abuſe Princes with whiſperings and ſurmiſes.
Muſt all the Land know of this fact of Vaſhty? doth
the country know alwaies whats done at Court? ſee here
what a ſandie foundation mallice groundes vpon, how flatterers
abuſe Princes, with ſurmizes, & ſcarce likely-hoods?
Was this a ſound argument to vnlooſe the marriage knot?
Shall the ſtate of a Queene depend vppon ſuch dalliance?
Shall a King be abuſed by if and peraduentures? Well wee
ſee here that a friend in Court is better then a good cauſe;
and it is an eaſie matter to finde a ſtaffe to beat a dogge withal,
                     Obſ. 57. Euidence muſt be of thinges knowne not ſurmiſed and ſuch as know the pa
                        •
                     ty delinquent Light out of darkneſſe.
(as we ſay in the prouerbe) Poore Vaſhty muſt be condemned
without repriuall: and therfore the countrie muſt come
in to giue in euidence againſt her, that happily neuer ſaw
her by the face, nor euer had to doe with her. And yet the
Lord had a righteous worke herein; both to puniſh her pride,
which likely the country paid for, and to puniſh the King,
who abuſed her pride, yea moſt cſpecially to puniſh theſe
Counſellors, euen in this their wrong collection, as hereby
bringing this ſhame vppon them, that they were not
maiſters of their owne wiues. This was all they gotte by it.
euen reproach and ignominy, & let all vnrighteous Iudges
looke for no better; that in ſteed of quallifying ſmall offences
will ſet them on the tenters, to ſatisfie the luſts of prophane
Princes.
               But conſider (I pray you) a li
                     ••
                  le further the inconſequence

of the accuſation, ſo that all the women of the
Land ſhould heare of it, yet muſt euery wife here-vppon of
neceſſitie rebell againſt their husband? might not priuate
loue ouer-rule a publike example, and wiſe gouernment of
the husband preuent the like diſobedience? probable happyly
it might bee, that ſome might thus reſiſt, which without
this example would haue bene forward ynough thereto,
but that all of neceſſitie muſt follow, this may diſcouer
the Accuſers blind mallice, but was no reaſon to inforce
the poore Queenes puniſhment.
               But here you may ſee when flattery and mallice giues
information,Mallice and flattery vnfit accuſers. ſhadowes are made ſubſtances, & improbabilties
neceſſities, ſo deceiptfull is flattery, mallice ſo vnreaſonable:
and yet herein alſo the Lord is exceeding righteous,
who meets hereby with other ſins of this inſolent Queene,
that wheras no doubt ſhe was an example of pride and vanitie
more generally to other women, then ſhee was likely
to be in this point; therefore is ſhee heerby found out in
her ſinne, and by this vnlikely accuſation condemned of a
true fault.
               Well thus wee haue heard this Perſian play the Accuſer,
now let vs heare how he plaies the Iudge. Thus hee ſhooteth
his bolt.
               If it pleaſe the King let a royall decree proceed from him,Verſe. 19.
and let it be written among the Statutes of Media and Perſia.
(And let it not be tranſgreſſed) that Vaſhty come no more before
the King Ahaſhueroſh, and let her eſtate royall be giuen
vnto her companion that is better then ſhe.
               
                  Behold here the ſentence of this vnrighteous Iudge,Puniſhment muſt needes exceed the nature of the ſin▪
                   diſcouering
moſt apparantly his folly and crueltie: was it not
ynough for him to aggrauate a ſmall fault by ſurmizes and
improbabilities therby to incenſe and ſo wrong the King,
but now hee muſt ſentence the ſinne with ſo extreame a
Iudgement, as had beene proportionable to the greateſt
offence? Indeed had hee onely aggrauated the matter to
haue ſatisfied the King; and that the Queene might haue
beene brought to acknowledge her fault, that ſo the King

beeing ſatiſfied might bee inclyned to mercie, and the
Queene heereby alſo fitted to mercy: Hee had ſhewed
the part of a faithfull Counſellor, and performed the
dutie of a wiſe Iudge: But thus to adde drunkenneſſe
to thirſt in condemning ſo extremely, when hee accuſed
falſely, ſhewed his treachery in councell and
corruption in iudgement.
               Only heerein wee may ſomewhat excuſe him,Iudges ought to be impartiall in iudgement, not to reſpect perſons. and in
this may hee be a patterne of righteous iudgement; that
hee ſeemes to bee impartiall in pronouncing of his ſentence,
hee ſpareth not the Queene, ſeeing ſhee hath offended:
and doth hee therefore well to pronounce ſo ſeuerely
againſt her? For admit we the fault deſerued ſome puniſhment?
is their therefore no meaſure, but euen extremity?
could hee haue deuiſed a greater? could the poore
Queen haue vndergone an extremer? Is this to kill the ſinne
for the good of the offender, and not to ſtrenghthen the
ſinne by driuing the guilty to diſpare? What then doth this
Iudge plead for him-ſelfe to iuſtifie the equity of this his
extreame ſentence? doth he plead as Diuines do, that ſinne
was committed againſt the greateſt perſon, and the thing
commaunded being very indifferent, therefore by theſe
circumſtances the offence was more haynous, and ſo did
deſerue ſo haynous a puniſhment? or doth hee rather like
a Polititian heereby iuſtifie the Kinges anger; by inflicting
ſo extreame a puniſhment for the prouoking
thereof? Doth hee as a bawde heereby make
way for change, as happily ſmelling the Kinges purpurpoſe
heerein? Surely though happily in pollicy hee
intended both the one and the other, becauſe rather then
Princes muſt erre the ſubiect ſhal deeply ſmart for it, and
Courtiers many times are glad to be ſuch cooks that they
may alſo licke their owne fingers: Yet in pollicie he hides
all theſe and makes a faire gloſe vpon it, he implies that one
muſt be made an example for the procuring of peace to many,
better one periſh then that vnitie bee deſtroyed: For
ſaith hee.
               
                  
When the decree of the King which ſhall bee made ſhall
bee publiſhed throughout all his Kingdome (though it bee
great) all the women ſhall giue their husbands honour both
great and ſmall.Verſ, 20.
               
               Heere wee may ſee the height of his wiſdome,Worldlinge prefer the priuate before the publike good. hee prouides
for him-ſelfe and his like, that they may haue honour
of their wiues. But for his Lord and maiſter hee muſt
haue no honour from his, but rather he muſt be diſhonoured,
In putting her off vppon ſo ſlight a cauſe, and the miſerable
Queene muſt bee diſhonoured alſo, and that with
apparant wrong and eternall contumely. So cunning are
Polliticians to ſecure them-ſelues with the diſhonour
of their princes: So fooliſh are ſuch Princes thus to
bee ledde by the noſe by them, ſo righteous is the
Lord to make the one here by a rodde vnto the other, that
Polititians hereby growing inſolent and great, are catcht
in their month and ſo emptied in their Princes, as beeing
ſpunges to fill them-ſelues with the ſpoyles of others,
that they may afterwards wring them out at their pleaſure.
               Thus you ſee the depth of his councell,Wicked haue glorious clokes for eeuill purpoſes. and yet behold
what a goodly vaile he hath to caſt ouer it: The woman
ſhall giue honour. As if hee had ſaid that they being made
wiſe by the Queenes puniſhment would hereafter not
dare but honour their huſbandes, leaſt they alſo bee
ſubiect to the like cenſure. Doe you not ſee what
a maſke heere is to couer his crueltie? It is good ſaith
hee that ſome ſhould bee made examples to keepe
other in awe, and therefore let Vaſhty ſmart ſoundly
for it, that all wee may liue more peaceably.
               A moſt righteous thing:Exemplary Iuſtice when to be vſed. that ſome ſhould bee made
examples, and yet the Queene might well haue beene
ſpared out of the number of thoſe ſome, if her fault would
not, yet her ſtate at leaſt ſhould haue priuiledged her,
euery ſmall fault muſt not make an example, though
exemplarie Iuſtice bee profitable for others. But
ſhall it bee graunted that this example would bee

profitable?Terror to breeder of true loue. will terror breed true loue and can their be honour
without loue. Well therefore might this Perſian
hereby dominere ouer his wife bouldly, well might ſhee
crouch for feare and play the hipocrite with him, well
might ſhe flatter him in his ſinne and further him to
hell, as being all the honour that carnall men looke for
of their wiues, but true honour will neuer bee yeelded
by terror, flattery is not loue, nor ſoothing true ſubmiſſion:
So that howſoeuer, in other caſes this
courſe might haue had ſucceſſe, yet in this caſe betweene
man and wife a farre better might haue beene taken.
Namely to haue laboured with the King to bee reconciled
to his wife. Oh this example of mercy had beene more vndoubtedly
profitable.
               
                   Vſe 1. So let vs make vp the breach, and not ſet it
more open. Let our cenſures ayme at the ſinne for the
recouery of the partie, and let charity couer eſpecially
 ſmall offences, build we not vpon ſurmizes to caſt away
 life, leaſt we exalt our ſelues by the fall of others.
Aboue all things keepe we holy and inuiolable the
 marriage bed, and let onely the defiling thereof be the
 cauſe of perpetuall ſeperation: as for ſuch ordinary breaches
as are betwixt man and wife,Math. 19. let vs compoſe them
wiſely among our ſelues. Is their none wiſer then other,
that we muſt beray our owne neſts, and diſcouer
our weakneſſe abroad that wee may be ſnared with
our owne infermities? Had Ahaſhueroſh beene wiſe the
matter needed not to haue gone any further, and then
his Princes had ſpared that labour and he had eſcaped
this diſhonor: yea the miſerable Queene had not thus
wickedly beene diuorſed: But as it ſeemed the King
was ſet vpon it, and therefore no ſooner had Menucan
pronounced the ſentence without demurre on the matter,
or delay of the execution:Verſe 21. Wicked Princes eaſily yeelde to bad councell. but the holie Ghoſt addeth
that. The ſaying pleaſed the King and the Princes.
               
               So hard are wicked Princes to be pleaſed with good
Councell: and ſo eaſily doe they embrace euen that

which is pernicious. But how ſhall it appeare the
Kinge was pleaſed here-with: It followeth becauſe hee
ratifies the ſentence pronounced: Hee did (ſayth the ſpirit)
According to the word of Menuchan, and to ſhew
his willingneſſe therein,Verſ. 22. leaſt after-witte might croſſe
it, hee ſendes his lawes throughout all the Prouinces to
this effect, That euery man ſhould beare rule in his owne
houſe: And that the law concerning all, each might
take notice of it. It muſt bee publiſhed in the Language
of that ſame people. That ſo the lawe beeing publiſhed
might not afterward (euen for his credite) be abrogated.
               But what might bee the cauſe of all this haſte?
Surely lette vs heere looke vp to GOD and the matter
will bee cleared. The Church of GOD was like
to bee in extremitie, and delaie was dangerous. Heſter
was to bee aduanced that ſhee might be meanes
of deliuerance, and therefore Vaſhty muſt bee depriued
of her Regall dignitie, that ſo according to
the ſentence,Wicked inſtruments of fulfilling of gods righteous wil in their puniſhments for his glory and the good of the Church. her royall eſtate might be giuen to
her companion that was better then ſhee. So doe
the wicked therein fulfill the will of GOD wherein
they doe agaynſt his will, and in their wickedneſſe
are his righteous inſtruments that hee may haue the
glorie in bringing light out of darkeneſſe, and they
might confounded in their owne mallitiouſneſſe:
Whereby wee may learne in all ſuch Accidentes, as 
principally to looke vp to GOD in the vſe of ſuch 
inſtruments, ſo not to iuſtefie the inſtrument though 
well vſed of the LORD, nor to condemne the 
LORD for the obliquitie of the inſtrument, but
wiſely here to diſcerne betweene thinges that differ,
giuing God the prerogatiue of his prouidence, euen
to vſe euill wiſely, and humbling man in his
pride that hee ſerues GODS turne heerein
wickedly.
               
                  
And therefore let not Memucan bragge that he had caſt
out Vaſhty. Nor let Ahaſhueroſh boſt that he hath done
his will.
               No they did no more herein then God had appointed,Acts. 4.
it was the Lord that aduanced Vaſhty,
                  Pſal. 75. and it was he alone
that did caſt downe the proud from their ſeate.Luk. 1. It is the
Lord that ſeteth vp,Promotion from God. and hee onely caſts downe, hee
 onely will haue the glory, neither will hee giue it to any
 other.
               And therefore let noe mans heart faile him becauſe with
 God nothing is impoſſible,Eſay. 42. If he caſt downe who then
 can lift vp, if he do aduaunce who then ſhall caſt downe,
 aboue all things therefore make we ſure of him, that vp or
 downe we may ſtand or fall vnto him.
               
                  And is Vaſhty ſo ſuddenly downe that was ſo late aloft?Iob. 12.
is the proſperity of the wicked ſo flitting and momentany,Proſperity of the wicked momentany.
that ſo GOD may be more exalted and they much
more confounded,Athalia. Iezabel. Achab. ſhall the wicked be abaſed that the
Godly may come in their ſtead? and euen in this life will
the Lord make ſome of them examples of his power and
 prouidence to condeme their Atheisme and confound their
 ſecurity. Oh then let iuſtice here learne to haue no reſpect
 of perſons, let great ones know that the law is aboue
 them, and let the inferior feare ſeeing the greateſt are
 ſmitten, let no man promiſe ſetled happineſſe, vnto himſelfe
 in this life, nay let no wiſe man ſet his heart vpon
this preſent happineſſe,Pſa. 125. Let the falls of the wicked teach
vs to get ſure footing in faith where we ſhall neuer be
remoued but be euer had in remembrance, and ſeeing
we haue here no abiding Citty, ſeeke we diligently after
that which is aboue, that ſo wee may be receiued
into euerlaſting habitations.
               Laſtly conſider wee wiſely the Tenor of the decree:
Namely, That euery man ſhould beare rule in his
houſe.
               
               Here then you ſee the ſcope and drift of the law, namely
to eſtabliſh a comely order in the Oeconomical gouernment

that the head may rule and the reſt may obey.
               
                  Thus euell examples are the occaſions of good lawes
and euen the wicked when they ſatiſfie their luſts,Wicked in their ſinnes ſerue Gods righteous will. ſubſcribe
vnto the righteous law of God, For howſoeuer
no doubt the law proceeded from luſt, and could not
chuſe but redound to the ſhame of the lawgiuers who were
not lawes to them-ſelues neither could rule their familes
and therefore they muſt haue a law to force this obedience
and it is a miſerable obedience which is onely forced by
the law,1. Sam. yea if we conſider the nature of this prophane
people to apt of it ſelfe to Lord it ouer the weaker,Num. 24. and
therefore needed rather a bridle to curbe their tirany, then
any warrant to make good their imperiouſneſſe, therefore
to them the law was not ſeaſonable,Husbands are to rule ouer their wiues. (ſo wiſely ought
lawes to be fitted to the ſtate and conditions of the people)
yet if we ſhal conſider the matter of the law in it ſelfe,1. Vſe.
as it hath it ground out of the law of nature ſo is it warranted
alſo by the word of God. For doth not the law
of nature inforce no leſſe, then that they which are beſt able
by reaſon of their different ſtrength; they which deſerue
beſt, as being the prouiders for the family, they which
muſt defend all and ſo ſhall anſwer for all, that they I
ſay ſhould haue the preheminence. And doth not the
word of GOD iuſtifie this law of nature which giues
vnto man the ſuperiority ouer the wife, and that not
onley in the time of mans fall,Gen. 2 as if before they were
one fleſh, and therefore no difference of ſuperiority
betweene them (as if this ſuperiority were only a part of
his or the wiues puniſhment:)Gen. 3. but alſo in the time of his
reſtitution by Chriſt; thereby iuſtifying the holy right
thereof,Ephe. 5. and approuing the ſame to be a ſpeciall bleſſing:
Wherein we may behold an admirable prouidence of God,Col. 3. 1.
that how-ſoeuer this law of ſuperioritie concerned euen the
ſtate of innocencie,Tim 2. becauſe euen to that happy condition
this holy ſubiection was neceſſary:1. Cor. 11. Yet is not this law giuen
till ye fal of man, becauſe then there was neceſſary vſe therof

in regard of ſin that now had taken footing, which though
it giue no way to proud inſulting & imperious behauiour,
much leſſe allow power of bitter ſpeaking, cruel correction,
or iudiciall proceeding in the caſe of life, becauſe though
the husband bee a King in his familie, yet his kingdome is
but ſpirituall, and for temporall reformations ſubiect to the
Temporall ſword: no otherwiſe to take the ſame into his
hand then by ſpeciall warrant from the ciuill Magiſtrate:
yet it eſtabliſheth ſuch a power ouer the wife as Chriſt
hath ouer his Church,And how far if to cal Peter Sathan when he ſinnes
of ignorance, then much more to reproue ſharpely preſumtious
ſinnes, that God may be iuſtified and ſinne aſhamed,
& repentance being renued may be the renuing of loue: as
treading loue vnder foote in regard of Gods glory in the
aduancing thereof, confirming our affections, which as yet
condemne the baſnes of ſuch carpet Knights that proſtitute
their dignitie as a baud to luſt, and become ſlaues to
their wiues for a little dalliance:Math. 16. ſo hereby wee may learne
alſo for concluſion in this point, to giue God his right and
ſuperioritie ouer vs in a happy conqueſt of our rebellious
affections, that ſo wee may retayne our dignitie ouer our
wiues. Had theſe prophane men learned this leſſon they
had not needed a law to haue procured this dignitie. But
for want hereof euen their law they thinke ſcarce ſtrong
ynough, and therefore they indeauour to ſtrengthen it with
a further pollicy. Namely, 1 They cauſe it to be publiſhed in
the ſeuerall language of each Nation, that ſo being particularly
vnderſtood, it might appeare more authenticall, and
being hereby intēded as waighty, & in good erneſt it might
both more eaſily procure obedience and ſo take away the
hatred from the law-giuers. For ſeeing no doubt the
repudiating of the Queene for ſo ſmall a matter, muſt needs
heare odious in the eares of the ſubiects,Wicked iuſtifie their ſin by making it common to others. therefore to quallifie
this hatred the people muſt bee gratified, and (wherein
thinke theſe wiſe-men) ſhall wee gratifie them better
then by giuing them power to domineere ouer their
wiues; ſo that now though they vſe them neuer ſo contemtuouſly

yet this law ſhall ſtop their mouthes, and ſo tyranny
ſhall increaſe from the higheſt to the loweſt, wronging
and repudiating what ſhall not now be lawfull. So
politicke are great ones to cloake their owne ſinnes, by making
them common, and ſo iuſtifiable in others: So wiſely
doth the Lord confound them in this their pollicie yt while
by this communicating of the law to either, they prouide
for their credits, they doe not hereby diſcouer their ſhame
but by this meanes alſo ripening ſinne generally they prepare
the way to Gods generall iudgements.
               
                  Vſe. Well howſoeuer the drift of theſe politickes might
herein be wicked in publiſhing theſe lawes thus to catch in
their mother tongue, yet is there an equitie in this point yt
may teach vs many good leſſons.
               Namely ſeeing lawes are publiſhed in ſuch a language
that they may be knowne to all;Lawes to be publiſhed in the vulgar tongues. therefore as no man may
clayme priuiledge beyond the law, ſo we are hereby taught
to be acquainted with the lawes, not to intrap others or defend
our ſelues from wrong onely, but that ſo we may performe
conſcionably obedience to the ſame. And if ſo bee
we are to take notice of mens ordinances, that ſo wee may
obey them, how ought then our delight to be in the law
of the Lord that ſo we may meditate therein day and night,Pſal. 1. 2.
And by the direction of the ſame reforme our waies? Which
as it condemneth that man of ſinne who lockes vp ye law
of libertie in an vnknowne tongue, that ſo not knowing the
will of God wee might not care to performe it, ſo it may
cauſe vs to lament the ignorance of the world euen in ſuch
places where the Goſpell is receiued, and to feare for the
fruit of this ignorance (euen deſperate wickedneſſe) that the
iudgements of God are not far from vs.
            
            
               
               Argument and parts.
CHAPTER. 2.
               THe remorſe of the King with the power of it. Ver. 1.
The corrupt meanes is vſed for the contentment of
him: Yet very holily diſpoſed and wiſely vſed by the
Lord for deliuerance of his Church. From the 2. verſe to
the 7. The intertainment of the meanes together with the
preparation and approbation thereof, as alſo the conſummation,
in the marriage of Heſter. From the 8. vnto the
22.
               Laſtly the confuſion of all this Iollitie by a conſequent
danger, which notwithſtanding is diſcryed, and preuented
by the Church, for the good of the Church to the end of
the Chapter.
               
                  After theſe thinges .i. (after the wine was out and the
ſentence paſt and executed againſt the Queene) when the
wrath of King Ahaſhueroſh was appeaſed .i. (That is when ye
Wine beeing out, and the obiect of his wrath remoued, the
paſſion ceaſed for the time) hee remembred Vaſhty and what
ſhee had done and what was decreed againſt her.
               
               He conſidered both the benefit of a wiſe which hee was
now depriued off, as alſo the ſmall cauſe that had robd him
of ſo great a comfort, & alſo hee could not forget the baſeneſſe
of his Councellors and the wrong ſentence that was
pronounced againſt her.
               
                  After theſe things, 1. Afer that the feaſt was paſt, and the
wine and Ahaſhueroſh was parted, and by the decree of his
wiſe-men his wife was departed; and ſo both the fuell of
his anger ſpent, and the luſt therof ſatisfied: After theſe things
ſaith the word of truth, was the wrath of the King appeaſed.
And ſo this mad fit (you ſee) is ended: the ſpirit doth not ſay
that he repented of his anger or that he laboured to make
amends for the ſame but onely this, that his anger was appeaſed,
that is, not forſaken as a ſin, but only quallified, and

for a time laid a ſleep to be raked vp againe vppon as ſlight
an occaſion.1 Ob. How the wicked leaue ſinne. Wherein the holy Ghoſt doth notably ſette
downe vnto vs the manner how the wicked leaue their ſin
or rather how ſinne indeed leaues the wicked; not to cleare
them of the guilt of it, no nor for the corruption of the ſame,
but onely for a time leaues them in regard of the rage or the
temptation, that ſo ſlattering themſelues with the imputation
of great maiſteries ouer them-ſelues, as if heereby they
were great conuerts, and beeing puffed vp heereby they
may be drowned in ſecurite, that ſo the ſinne returning
in a ſeauen times worſe manner it may repoſſeſſe them
more fully, and ſo their latter end may be worſe then their
beginning.
               Wherein wee may behold the Admirable prouidence
of GOD,
                     Sect. 1. Gods prouidence d
                        •
                     ſcouered herein. who giuing the wicked their deſire that they
ſhall haue their fill of ſinne, doth by this eſpeciall meanes
diſpoſe the ſame, euen by brideling ſome-times the rage
of ſinne, and giuing intermiſſion to the force of the
temptation.
               For as by this reſtraining them, he makes them
more fitte for humaine ſociety, which (if they ſhould
continew in their outrage) would not indure them, and
ſo thereby keepes them from many legall puniſhments
which happyly though they meete with the body might
bee a meanes to ſaue the ſoule; whereby hauing occaſions
offered to purſue their iniquities, as they forſlow
them not, yet ſtill either for feare or credit they are ſomewhat
brideled: ſo the more the fire is ſuppreſſed the more
it inwardly rageth, and thereby takes deeper roote in the
vnbeleeuing heart: ſo yt to the wicked the outward ceaſing
of the ſtreame, tends to the inward increaſe of the corrupt
fountaine, which afterwards vpon occaſion wil breake out
with greater violence: And ſo much the rather is ſin hereby
ſtrengthned, becauſe by this ſtay of our ſin, not only ye heart
is flattered with ſhew of vertue & ſo therby hardned, but as
the falling of one waue is the raizing of an other,Eſay. 4. 8. ſo the
wicked are as the raging Sea foaming at their owne

ſhame, the intermiſſion of one ſinne is the prouocation
to another: That ſo by this meanes being plunged in
all kindes of wickedneſſe, they might bee giuen vp to
a reprobate ſence, & ſo make vp the meaſure of our vnauoydable
deſtruction.
               A matter which will yet appeare more manifeſt vnto
vs if wee obſerue the occaſion of the wicked in leauing
of ſinne,Sect. 2. which is not any worke of grace wrought in
the heart, proceeding from the power of Chriſt through
the preaching of the word, but onely ſuch outward accident
effects the ſame: which inwardly reuiues the ſinne,
and ſo ripens the ſinner to his iuſt condemnation.Occaſions of the ceaſing of ſinne in the wicked. Prouer, 26. 20. For eitther
the wine is out, and ſo the occaſion ceaſing, the ſinne
for a time ſlaketh from its heate; or our credit bridleth
though our heart be good; either we feare the ſmart, and
 ſo we dare not be medling, or elſe we are out of date: and
 ſo ſinne hath left vs, ſome ſuch thing it is, either wee are

                  deeplier in elſewhere, and ſo you you muſt ſpare vs heere,
 or elſe (as the manner of drunkards is) wee will not ſinne
 in gluttony, that wee may ſinne deeplier in drunkenneſſe.
 Nay to maintaine inward corruptions, as ſpirituall pride,
 hypocriſie and ſuch like, wee will ſimper it mannerly
 in the outward carriage: What ſhall I ſay; may not
ſinne outwardly ceaſe when the Diuell ceaſeth tempting?
And is he not vſually quiet where all's his owne?Luk. 11. 21. Wee
 will not bee riotous in ſinne that wee may longer hold
therein: And to ſay the beſt in this caſe; though wee
 would runne riot, yet the ſpirit of God will bridle vs therein,
though not for our owne, yet for others good, and
yet wee ſhall not champe the bridle; but willingly indure
it; the Lord not forcing the will, but leauing it to its
rage, and by contrary occaſions iuſtly prouoking the
ſame: For either the Spirit beſtowes gifts of knowledge &c.
vppon vs,
                     Sect. 3. How the ſpirit bridles ſin in the wicked. which that wee may put forth to the vtmoſt,
for the maintaining of ſpirituall pride, therefore we deſire
to bee reſtrayned from groſſe and open ſinnes. Or elſe
wee attaine to ſome ſuch calling in the Church or commonwealth

which becauſe it cannot bee managed with credit
if wee fall into foule offences; therefore for our glory and
eſtimation we deſire heere alſo to be reſtrayned; and ſo
are either kept, or not ſuffered to reſt in thoſe groſſe iniquities:
Either the ſpirit awakens the conſcience; and ſo
ſinne is ſuppreſſed, and for a time hindered: Or elſe on
the contrary; cuſtome deads the conſcience, and ſo ſinne is 
quiet, becauſe it is not fealt; In a word, either ſome rod is
our bridle that we cannot as we would, or our profit will 
not ſuffer vs to riot as wee haue done; though otherwiſe 
we exchange for a worſe ſinne, of deceipt or coueteouſneſſe:
Either wee reiourne ſinne becauſe wee haue now
no leyſure, or elſe wee loppe off onely the branches and 
leaue the roote behinde.
                     Sect. 4. Impoſſible for the rich to forſake ſin. Rom, 7. Yea ſo impoſſible is it for the
wicked to forſake ſinne truly that they are not onely ignorant
of the chiefe ſinnes which eſpecially raigne in them,
yea doe not vnderſtand the power thereof, but euen
thoſe that they knowe they will not acknowledge
to bee ſinnes,Eſay, 5 21. either by corruption of iudgement taking
light for darkeneſſe, or by the ſhallowneſſe thereof,
apprehending onely the out-ſide of ſinne, and ſo the beſt
they doe is but to make cleane the out-ſide of the platter.
Thus you ſee the occaſions why the wicked leaue
ſinne,Math. 23. as alſo the manner and meaſure of it ceaſing in
them.
               1 Vſe. Wherin we may learne as to iudge wiſely of al ſuch
glorious ſhewes of ciuill honeſty, naturall righteouſneſſe,
hypocriſie, and ſuch like which go currant in the world for
true conuerſions.
               2 So by the contrary notes we may iudge our ſelues comfortably
whether we be in the faith or no.
               
               And becauſe they which will liue godly in Chriſt Ieſus
muſt ſuffer many afflictions;
                     Obſ. 2. The rage of the wicked ſhall ceaſe for the good of the Church. harken we for our comfort to
that which yet followeth, the holy Ghoſt ſaith, the Kinges
anger is appeaſed. And for the Churches good, the Lord
ſhall ceaſe the rage of the wicked: Ahaſhueroſh
ſhall be angry that Vaſhty may be diuorced, and his

anger ſhalbe appeaſed,1. Cor. 10. 13. that Hester may be aduanced.
 So faithfull is our God not to tempt vs aboue our ſtrength
 ſo mightily doth he bridle the rage of our enemies: ſo
gratiouſly hereby doth he ſeale vnto vs our eternall reſt
 and happineſſe.
               
                  
                  Vſe. 1. And therefore why art thou preſumptious oh thou
enemie ſeeing the goodneſſe of God herein appeareth
daily?Pſa. 42. Oh why art thou ſo diſquieted oh my ſoule ſeeing
 the hand of the Lord is not ſhortned towards thee? Oh be
 ſtill in thy God and truſt in him. For he will yet be thy
 redeemer and thy mercifull God, and for thy eternall comfort
ſtore vp this cordiall, that though God is not as man
to thy hurt and confuſion,Eſa. 48. yet wherin man is good to thee,
therein is he infinitely more: if a mother cannot forſake
her child then much leſſe will he leaue thee, if Ahaſhueroſh
ceaſe his anger that the Church may haue deliueraunce,
thou maiſt then be ſure,Eſay 54. 8. that his anger will not last for
euer,
                  Lamen. 3. but though he hath beene angry with thee a little
yet in euerlasting campaſſion will he gather thee againe.
And for they learning yet obſerue here an other point,
Namely that as thou woulds not haue thy God to be
angry for euer,
                     Obſ. 8. Anger muſt be renounced. 
                  ſo thou must ceaſe from anger. So did
here this wicked Prince and ſhall he riſe vp in iudgment
 againſt thee? ſo nature teacheth thee that thy paſſions
 muſt haue end, and wiſdome aduiſeth thee that anger
 reſt not in thy boſome, thy profit will teach thee that
 things may well goe forward and thy pleaſure will perſwade
 thee that there may be peace with God and man;
what ſhall I ſay? if thou haſt caught a viper yet ſee thou
 noriſh him not, to ſinne is naturall but to continew is
diueliſh.
               
                  Vſe.
                  Not to be iuſtified And therefore ſay not with Ionas thou doſt well
to be angry: it is for thy credit who could endure it:
 Its good to purge choler and thus I will be avenged,
foole that thou art; thou doſt not well to be angry, thy
glory ſhall be thy ſhame, Thy Chriſt hath endured more
for thee, and this ſhall purge thee of grace, and wilt thou

plucke out both thine owne eyes, to plucke out one
of thy brothers? if thou wilt be aduizd by me feede
not thy anger, but rather eaſe thee of ſuch a gueſt, as
will eate thee out of houſe and home, view thy ſelfe 
therefore preſently in the glaſſe of the word, and ſee what 
a monſter thy wrath hath made thee; a diſtracted head,
and furious countenance, eyes ſparkling fire, and hands
full of bloud, a mouth foming out thine owne ſhame, and
feete carrying thee ſwiftly to the fruit thereof; Let thy 
feete therefore carry thee from the obiect of thy wrath
and impoſe ſilence to thy ſelfe that thou maiſt reaſon with
thy paſſion,Remedies of vniuſt anger. hold thy hands wiſely, leaſt thou repent at 
leaſure, and looke vp to that conſuming fire whome thou 
daily offendeſt, imploy thy wit and memory in recording 
the mercies of thy God, and this ſhall moue thee 
to forgiue thy Brother, and remember thy end (thou maiſt 
not liue an houre) and therfore let not the ſonne go downe
vpon thy wrath.
               
               Surely if thou wilt not forſake thy ſinne by remembring
thy end, behold thy ſinne ſhall remember thee
euen when thou wouldſt forget it, and though the King
(no doubt) would haue beene ſpared this memento, yet
ſaith the ſpirit,4. Ephe. 26. 
                  He remembred Vaſhty and what ſhe had
done.
                  
                     Obſer. 4. The conſcience calls the wicked to account in this life togeether with the vſe of it in them. This ſonne of Adam is now called to account in
the cooling of his paſſions and his conſcience remembers
him of his former outrage: ſo wiſe is the Lord
to ſchoole him in his better moode, ſo iuſt is he alſo not
to leaue ſinne vnpuniſhed, and all this by the power of
conſcience left in man by nature; which though it excuſe
for ſinne,
                  Mat. 10. 19. 20. as it is miſinformed by the corrupt iudgment,
that ſo the ſinner might be encouraged to do the ſame,Iohn. 16.
yet withall doth it check and repreſſe the doing thereof,
And though it in ſome meaſure informe vs in wel-doing,Rom. 15.
yet it accuſeth alſo euen that very wel-doing, to the iuſt
confuſion of Carnall confidence, and moſt righteouſly alſo
accuſeth for ſinne,Eſay. 29. 13. both to iuſtifie God againſt whome the
ſin is committed, & by conuincing the ſinner ſo to leaue him

                  without excuſe, and thereby to yeeld him vp to the iaylor
to be reſerued for vengeance euen til he haue paid the vttermoſt
farthing, Oh conſider this yea that forget God and
 ſay the Lord hath forgotten,Iob. 22. 14. he is hid in the clouds, behold
your conſcience will condemne you for ſinne,Ezec. 8. 1
                        •
                     . and
God which is greater then the conſcience muſt much more
condemne you,Ioh. 3. 20. conſider I ſay you vnwiſe among the people,
 that looke vpon the wine in the cuppe, and count it
pleaſant in the going downe thereof, will in not in the
end bite like a ſerpent and wound like a Cockeatrice? will
not thy conſcience write bitter things againſt thee? remember
that for all this thou muſt come to indgement,
and thy conſcience ſhall beginne thy iudgement in this
 life, hope not therefore to corrupt thy conſcience as if it
 ſhould not accuſe, labour not to dead it that it may not
 accuſe thee; flatter not thy ſelfe when it doth excuſe thee
 for ſinne, But bleſſe thy God that thou maiſt ſee thy true
 face in it, And bleſſe him againe that thy conſcience keepes
 thee from ſecurity, And keepe this watch true, by daily
ſetting it by the word, that ſo it may tell true, and not
 deceiue thee, And ſeeing it tells true rebell not againſt
it, though it be but a worme it will turne againe: and at
the beſt it will ſo ſting thee, that thou ſhalt wiſh thy ſelfe
 with the wormes. Of all torments moſt feare this rod,

                  and yet of al rods ſantcified looke for beſt iſſue of this.
               But what doth the conſcience here remember vnto
this miſerable King?
                     Obſe. 5. The particuler euidence of conſcience. ſurely ſhe forgets not any thing that
may torment him, ſhe remembers him of his beautifull
Queene, whoſe comfort he had now loſt, that ſo he might
ſee how iuſtly he was puniſhed.
               Now he burnes in Iuſt, yea ſhe remembers of that ſmall
fault which the poore Queene had committed, that ſo his
ſinne might yet appeare to be the greater in putting
her away for ſo ſlight an offence, yea ſhe remembers him
alſo of thoſe baſe Courtiers that had beene miniſters
to his luſt, that yet hee might bee more vile in himſelfe
as to haue abaſed him to ſuch councellors: yea ſhe

remembers him of the decree, excluding her reſtitution
that ſo this might cut his heart the more, in that the euill
was remedileſſe, that the conſtancy of his lawes muſt make
him conſtant in his miſery.
               Thus you ſee the conſcience remembers with a witneſſe,
ſhe failes not a particuler but ſets his ſinnes in order before
him, and ſhe plaies the Orator to amplifie his ſinnes
that ſo he may haue ſoure ſauce for his vnſauory pleaſures.
               
                  So doth the Lord of conſcience iudge righteouſly:
                  ſo ſhall the ſonne of God iudge the world; we ſhall giue 
an account euery one euen of the things which he hath
done in his body whither they be good or bad.
               
                  So may we beleeue that their ſhalbe a generall iudgment
when we feele the conſcience thus makeing way
for the ſinne, ſo by this ſecret arraignment may we ſtill 
be put in mind of that ſudden and yet moſt certaine iudgment,
that ſo when our Maiſter commeth he may find vs
ready. So by this particular iudgement of the conſcience 
may we learne particularly to iudge our ſelues, yea to
make the worſt of our ſinnes that God may make the beſt
of them.
               
                  He remembred the decree] ſome-what more their is in
this that he is ſaid to remember the decree,
                  
                     Obſer. 6. The accuſation of the conſcience in the wicked an hinderance to repentance. wherein I take
it the Holy Ghoſt would haue vs to vnderſtand the maine
bar of his repentance, that he could not make recompence
to his wife, nor reſtore him-ſelfe to his right, which by
raſhneſſe and folly he had ſtript him-ſelfe of, and therein
alſo to diſcouer his deſperate condition that he is vtterly
excluded from all hope of reconciliation, the meanes hereto
is intimated to be the decree, euen that decree which
his wife councellors had propounded vnto him, and he
in madneſſe hauing aſſented thereto,
                     Obſer. 7. Credit in the wicked oppoſed to conſcience whereby repentance is hindred. cannot now with his
ſafety and credit recall it againe.
               His conſcience tells him that it was a raſh decree and
therefore was to be diſanulled: but his credit tells him that
it ſtands not with his ſtate leaſt their ſhould appeare an

error in his gouernment (a thing which Princes will no
way heare of; as they are peereleſſe in greatneſſe ſo they
muſt be accounted abſolute in goodneſſe: that ſo they
may robbe GOD of his honour; and he may lay their
honour in the duſt) yea his ſafety tells him that he muſt
not croſſe his Princes, nor antiquate his lawes, leaſt his
Princes rebell, and turne the edge of the law againſt
him.
               And therefore in his carnall Wiſdome he ſtickes to
that which was his beſt hold, namely to prouide for
his credit, and preſent ſafety, as for the conſcience, that
was but a fit of melancholy, and howſoeuer it might
lead him to the hope of a better life, if hee would haue
obeyed; yet being without that hope, no maruaile
if he leaues the guide thereto and ſo makes ſhip-wracke
of his conſcience to embrace this preſent world.
               Behold the miſerable eſtate of the ſonnes of Adam!
here is a Kingdome diuided againſt it ſelfe and can it
continew? here is credit againſt conſcience, and ſafety
of life preſent oppoſed againſt the ſecurity of the life
to come: but will you ſee the iſſue? the leane Kine deuoure
the fat,
                     Sect. 1. Gods Iuſtice herein. credit reiects conſcience, and preſent
contentment excludes the hope of future happineſſe. And
yet the Lord is exceeding righteous herein, who though
he hath appointed to fat vp the wicked hereby to the day
of ſlaughter, yet by this combat doth it appeare that hee
puts the choice to themſelues.
               
                  Behold I ſet before thee this daie life and death,
                  Deu. 30. 19 
                  good
 and euill, therefore chooſe life that thou and thy ſeed may liue.
                  
                  Yea that they may the rather be allured to the better:Pſal. 17. 14 behold
the Lord filles their bellies with hidden treasures,
 and tries them thereby whether they will beleeue and
ſee greater things then theſe: Yea he tries them alſo by
ſome croſſes and afflictions, that he might ſee what is
in their hearts and whether they will obey his commandments
or no.
               But all is one,Deu. 8. 2. they haue ſet vp their reſt, they ſee no

better and therefore muſt make the beſt, of that they
ſee.
               Let vs eate and drinke for to morow wee ſhall die, they
haue made a couenant with hell and with death,1 Cor. 15. they
are at an agreement,Eſay. 28. they haue made a mocke at the
councell of the LORD,Pſal. 9. and for Heauen it is but a
dreame, and conſcience a bug-beare: let vs haue the
preſent, and take the future who liſt, depart from vs Lord
we will not the knowledge of thy waies,Iob. 21. 14 our belly is our
God and we will ſacrifice to our net. Thus God appointing,
the wicked are the chooſers, and is God vnrighteous
to giue them their deſire?
               But how ſhall the wicked bee confirmed in this
choyce?
                     Sect. 2. The wicked how ſatisfied herein. how ſhall they bleſſe their ſoules and ſo harden
themſelues therein? do they not heare of a better within
them? Do they not ſee a better before them? yes (beloued)
the conſcience tells them, that there is a better; in that it
checks them in the beſt vſe of the preſent: Yea their happineſſe 
it ſelfe tells them that there is a better, as neither 
yeelding them any ſound contentment while it is preſent,Ecol. 2.
and taking it wings on the ſudden, and flying away.Pro. 23. 
                  Yea
which is more fearefull, their heart leads them to the deſire 
of a better.Num. 24 Oh that I may die the death of the
righteous! how is it then that they will not vſe the
meanes thereto? how is it that ſeeing the better and approuing
the ſame, yet they follow the worſe, and that
with greedineſſe too?
                     Obſ. 8. The conſcience Gods executioner in the condemnation of the wicked. ſurely the worke of the Lord is admirable
herein and worthy to be ſought out of all thoſe
that will ſecure their election, and eſpecially wrought by
the miniſtery of the conſcience.
               Which being GODS Agent in the wicked to accompliſh
his will, the more it is reiected the more it is enraged,
and thereby prooues ſuch an inward hand-writing to confound
all their outward delights, that ſeeing they muſt 
now make the beſt of their miſerable choice, therfore al the
force ſhalbe bent to corrupt the conſcience, yt ſo they may 
enioy without controulement the benefit of their choyce:

hence it is that the right ſquare beeing caſt off,
                     Sect. 1. The falſe rules which the wicked deuiſe to iuſtefie their actions. which
is the word of GOD, falſe rules are deuiſed, to blinde
the light of the conſcience; examples are imbraced, and
multitude is followed, Time becomes one rule and Opinion
another, and to take downe the edge of it, that it may
not cut at all, or elſe very dully, behold here they plunge
them-ſelues deeper in ſinne,
                     Sect. 2. How they dull and dead the conſcience 4. Epheſ. 19. and giue the bridle more freely
vnto all iniquitie, that ſo they may dead the conſcience
and make it paſt feeling, which howſoeuer the wicked
may attayne for a ſeaſon, and in ſome meaſure be free
from the checkes thereof, that ſo they may bleſſe themſelues
in their choyce, and thereby make vp the meaſure
of their ſinne, Yet behold the iuſtice of God; when the
harueſt is ripe the ſickle ſhall be put in, and who ſhall
giue the onſet but the conſcience that was thought to bee
dead:
                     Sect. 3. The conſcience how and when reuiued in the wicked. This doe the wicked ſurely finde in each temporall
croſſe, and eſpecially they drinke deepe of it when death
ſeazeth vppon them: The worme that neuer dies beginnes
with them in this life, yea in their laughter their
heart is ſad, and in the end of that mirth their is vnſpeakable
heauineſſe.Pro, 14. 13
               
               
                   1 Vſe. Thus doth the Lord bring about the deſtruction
of the wicked; and that eſpecially by the miniſtery of
the conſcience: ſo vaine is it for them, to reſiſt the power
thereof, ſo iuſtly they herein renounce their owne ſaluation
in preferring credit or preſent ſafety before the gouernement
of conſeicnce. This was right the caſe of this
miſerable great one. And this is the caſe of the wicked of
the world that are prepared to deſtruction, their conſcience
would retayne them but their credit ſayes no, their ſecuring
for preſent happyneſſe excludes them the hope of
eternall glory: and makes alſo their preſent happyneſſe to be
moſt fearefull and miſerable.
               
                  
                  So righteous is the Lord in accompliſhing of his will ſo inexcuſable
                   are the wicked concerning their owne damnation▪
                   ſo powerfull is the conſcience which is
 ſlightly regarded; ſo mercifull is the LORD heereby

to teach his Children to count all things as dung in regard
of keeping faith and a good conſcence,Phil. 3. 8
But may not a good name and a good conſcience ſtand
together,
                     Obſer. 9. Conſcience and credit in the Godly go to geather. may not he be ſecure of the earth that ſecures
himſelfe to heauen? Is not Godlineſſe profitable aſwell for
this life as the life to come?1 Tim. 4. 8 
                  Had not Salomon, wiſdome
giuen him and ritches to?1 Reg 3. 1 
                  And if we do firſt ſeeke the
Kingdome of heauen ſhall not all theſe things be caſt vpon
vs?Math. 6. 33 
                  If wee preuaile with GOD ſhall we not preuaile 
with men? Are not the Children of GOD of the beſt report?
                  Is not wiſdome iuſtified of her Children? Nay is not 
wiſdome Iuſtified of her enemies? Was not our Sauiour 
acquitted euen of thoſe that condemned him? And
                  
when the waies of man pleaſe the Lord will he not make 
all his enemies at peace with him, yea ſurely if wee could 
beleeue we ſhould be ſtabliſhed,Pro. 16 and if we ſeeke aright
we ſhall find the faithfulneſſe of our GOD? had Ahaſhueroſh
his Iudgement bin right he ſhould haue here ſeene
no direct oppoſition betweene conſcience and true credit:
but that as his conſcience tould him that the decree might
haue beene reuerſed, ſo it might alſo haue well ſtood euen
with his credit to.
               For to examine this point a little in the Court of conſcience?
Why might not this decree with good conſcience
be reuerſed? was it becauſe it was a law of a mighty
Kingdome, the happineſſe whereof depended vpon the
maintenance and obedience of good and wholeſome
lawes?
               Surely; though it cannot be denied but that ſuch lawes
of Kingdomes ought not to be antiquated, which are expoſitions
of the morall law of GOD; and thereby entend
conſcionable obedience thereto (ſuch as the Gentiles
are directed from the light of Nature,Obſ. 10. Lawes what perpetuall & how to bee antiquated. by the benefit
whereof no doubt this Perſian Monarchy had gained
ſome)
and to the Iewes were commended by the mouth
of GOD himſelfe, and ſo from them conueied to the
Chriſtians by the word of God, howſoeuer I ſay they

may not be altered becauſe they proceed from an immutable
ground, and concerne eſpecially an eternall ſubſtance;
yet other perticular lawes their are, concerning
the times, perſons, and diuers occaſions of particular ſtates,
which depending onely thereon, are to determine therewith.
Amonge which lawes ſeeing this was one, as inſtituted
on a perticular occaſion, and that neither warrantable,
therefore in a double reſpect this might well haue bin
abrogated, both in that the occaſion thereof was mutable
and ſo the law might be changed, and alſo being ſlight and
vnſeemly was therfore in equity fit to be cancelled. What
then ſhould be the reaſon why this Perſian ſtate ſhould be
ſo peremptory for the eternizing of ſuch lawes?Sect. I. Worldings why earneſt for the eternizing of their lawes.
               
               
                  Surely, is not hard to conceiue the cauſes thereof, if we
do vnderſtand the nature and condition of theſe Kingdomes.
Old Adam liues not in vaine in all his Children, he
had a conceipt to be like vnto God, and this conceipt is
 the rather entertained of great Monarches becauſe they
are bewitched with the peoples acclamations, the voice of
God and not of man:
                  Act. 12. 25. Herevpon that they might maintaine
an opinion of this deity in the hearts of the people
in the making of their lawes, they eſpecially extended the
ſame. Not onely, in aſcribing the originall of their lawes
to ſome diuine power, as if they had no beginning, but further
alſo procuring hereby an opinion of eternity to them,
that they ſhall ſtand for euer and not to be reuerſed, and
all this to this blaſphemous end that the lawes might be
Aduocates to iuſtifie their deity, as being the daylie rules
whereby their ſubiects were gouerned. From this conceipt
of deity, proceeds vſually two effects I. an opinion
of extraordinary wiſdome, and perfection, and from hence

                  vnmeaſurble pride and ſhameleſſe inſolency, both which
 were alſo no meane occasions for the eternizing of their
lawes. For what could giue greater imputation of wiſdome
vnto them, then to make ſuch lawes that might endure
for euer, what could be added more to their perfection
then hereby to aſcribe vnto them that they could not

Whereby they were not onely maintained their
pride, but further alſo hereby they became Maiſters of
their deſires, not onely to yoake any of their ſubiects 
whom they ment to vnhoiſe, but euen to bridle the King
himſelfe, and to make him a ſlaue to their baſeneſſe and 
ambition,Dani. 6. as by this meanes taking the King at an aduantage,
and thereby tying him (notwithſtanding his after
wit) to ſuch inconueniences, as might not onely wound
his conſcience but empaire his credit too. This wee ſee
here apparant in this Perſian Monarch and the like may
we ſee in his predeceſſor Darius; that which they take
to be their honour, turnes to their diſgrace, becauſe they
preferred with Saule rather to be honored before men,1. Sam 15
then to preſerue a good conſcience in the ſight of God.
               
                  Vſe 1. Wherein as we may ſee the iuſtice of God in taking
the wicked in their owne Councells that ſo their glory
becomes their ſhame: So we may behold on the contrary 
the great mercy of God vnto his Children that preferring
a good conſcience before their outward eſtimation; in preſeruing
of the one they obtaine the other. Whereby as 
the Children of GOD may reape ſound comfort euen
when they paſſe through euill report, that at leaſt they ſhall
finde more fauor,Pro. 28. then he which flattereth with his lips: ſo
it leaues a feareful brand vpon al reprobate Saules that care 
more for the honor of men then the glory of God,I Sam 17 Obſer. 11. Vowes and promiſes what and how to bee kept. that
ſeeing God will honor thoſe that honor him, therefore all
their worldly credit ſhall turne to their confuſion.
               Which as it may leſſon; vs generally to diſcerne betweene
things that differ and ſo wiſely to preferre our
conſcience before our credit; ſo in the caſe of vowes and
promiſes it may be a good direction vnto vs, how farre 
we are bound to ſtand vnto them. Namely if they be 
ſuch as are commanded of God, and do not exclude his 
ordinance, they are within the compaſſe of our power & 
greeable to our callings, if they be not forced from vs, but 
proceed from a willing minde, and tend not to the annihilating 
of our Chriſtian liberty.
               
                  
Laſtly if we haue power of our ſelues to make ſuch promiſes,
as not being vnder the tuition of others, then ſuch
vowes and promiſes are moſt lawfull and do bind vs, yea
though it tend to our owne hinderance.Pſal. 15.
               
               
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it condemneth all popiſh vowes and
ſuch like rules as neither being of things commanded but
contrarying the ſame,1. Popiſh vowes condemned. neither being in our power nor
ſtanding with Chriſtian liberty, but being merely forced
and contrary to our callings:Alſo raſh and forced promiſes. So it alſo reproueth all ſuch
raſh and forced couenants and promiſes, which either being
forced by our paſſion, of others threatnings, are not
therefore to ſtand, becauſe the ground was not voluntary.
And therefore as the Saints of God,Dauid 1. haue wiſely broken
ſuch oathes and raſh promiſes,Sam. 25. ſo may we lawfully refuſe
to ſtand to ſuch couenants,3. To be broken. not vſing our liberty herein as
a cloake of malitiouſneſſe, or deceipt, but endeuoring in all
things to keepe a good conſcience, and ſo wiſely deliuering
our ſelues from the ſnares of the wicked,And how. who if they
haue ſo catcht vs that by the law we are bound, then let
vs follow the Councell of thePro. 7. 1. wiſe man, humble we our
ſelues, ſollicite we our friends, and giue no reſt to our
bones till we haue deliuered our ſelues as a Doe from the
hand of the Hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the
be Fowler;4. How to be preuented. And that being warned we may the better be
armed, that we may preuent ſuch cunning en-ſnaring. Let
                  
                  vs not be ſeruants of men, nor ſlaues to our luſts, keepe
 wee watch before our tongue, and a compaſſe according
 to our callings ſeake wee truth from our hearts and labour
 wee ſincerity in all our actions. Laſtly to our doue-like
 ſimplicity ioyne we ſpirituall wiſdome, ſo ſhall we auoide
 the ſnare of the Hunter, we ſhall not be en-ſnared with the
 words of our owne mouth.
               Laſtly whereas the King though he hath a Law to
cleare him,
                     Obſer. 12. The ſoueraignty of conſcience. and a whole world to defend him; yet notwithſtanding
his conſcience doth moſt righteouſly condemne
him, herein we may behold the ſoueraignty of conſcience,
which if it ſtand with vs, we need not feare who

is againſt vs, if it only plead againſt vs, what will all the
world aduantage vs?
               1. Vſe. Whereby we may learne as to feare in our greateſt
outward ſafety, if the conſcience be not quieted; ſo on
the contrary to be moſt ſecure in the greateſt danger, becauſe 
the ſpirit of a man will beare his infirmitie.Prouer. 18. And
thererfore as we are to preferre the peace of our conſciences
aboue all the world, ſo we are to labour the procuring 
thereof though with the loſſe of all, as knowing that in 
the peace of a good conſcience wee haue a right in all, and
by the ſame ſhall haue that to vſe which ſhall bee better
then great riches of the vngodly, ſo keeping our conſciences
vnſpotted of the world, we ſhall be free from the
danger thereof, and hauing boldneſſe before God in the
peace thereof, we ſhal not need to runne to the world for
a plaiſter to heale it ſoares.
               This the Spirit of God ſettes downe to be the caſe of
Ahaſhueroſh;
                  Obſ. 13. The wicked in the troubles of conſcience runne to the world & carnall helps. Verſe, 2. his conſcience ſo woundes him that he muſt
needes haue helpe, and inſteed of ſuch meanes which
might haue brought him to repentance, his ſeruants aduiſe
him for ſuch as in truth tend eſpecially to the increaſe
of his ſinne.
               
                  (Here what they ſay) Then ſaid the ſeruants of the King
that miniſtred vnto him: Let them ſeeke for the King beautifull
maidens &c.
               Lette vs drowne him againe in pleaſure to driue away
melancholly, that ſo hee may remember his iniquitie no 
more; and ſerue our turnes: ſuch miſerable comforts are 
carnall Phiſitions: ſo wretched is our nature to indure no 
other Phyſicke: ſo iuſtly doth God fit the Phyſition to ye 
                  
patient: ſo doth the wicked helpe each other forward 
to their deſerued wages So doth the LORD threaten
that there ſhall be like Prieſt like people, ſo are Gods
iudgements moſt righteous againſt them; when that by
them is done in the hight of their wiſdome which ye Lord
hath appointed as the only meanes of their deſtruction.
               Wherein we may behold as a ſpecial office of Courtiers.

Namely to bee brokers to the luſts of wicked Princes,Obſ. 14. Courtiers plunge their Princes in pleaſure.
ſo herein alſo their diueliſh pollicy. Namely to plunge
their Princes in pleaſure, vppon pretence of eaſing their
ſhoulders of vnneceſſary affaires; that ſo corrupting their
 conſciences they both may rule them as they liſt, and
 yet by their example iuſtefie them-ſelues. And doth
not the admirable iuſtice of God appeare moſt liuely
 heerin, that as by this meanes, Princes are more deeply
 drowned in all iniquitie, ſo they are more inraged and
poſſeſſed with iealouſie, and ſo vſually ſtrike thoſe that
ſtand next to them: Or if by Gods mercy they are at
length reclaimed, who muſt be the ſacrifices to appeaſe
the people,Ieremy. 8. 10 and purge the land in this caſe? Who muſt
pay for their errors but theſe that haue bene the bellowes
to ſet all on fire?
               
                  Vſe. A notable leſſon for all Chriſtians that they daub
 not vp ſinne with ſuch vntempered morter, neither running
 to company to driue away melancholly, nor falling
to gaming and ſuch like vaine helps.The wounfded cōſcience how to be releued.
               
               But that beeing wounded with ſinne, they goe to
the true Phiſitian for the curing thereof, and ſo vſe
the right meanes which hee hath preſcribed.Ierem, 
                        •
                     . 13. Namely
to,Pſal, 
                        •
                      2. 5. 1. know their iniquity, and 2. acknowledge the ſame
with griefe,Ietem, 3. 36. ſo to bee 3. humbled there-with, as withall 4.
to ſigh for pardon,Hebr, 10. 21. and 5. to beg the ſame inſtantly at the
throne of grace;Peter I, 5. 2. hill. 6. offering holy vowes neuer to commit
the like again;Epheſ, 6. and 7. watching ouer them-ſelues by holy
feare, and 8. ſoberly, that ſo they may ſtand faſt in the day
of temptation. But let vs examine the beſt in their offer:
Namely that the King may haue another ſpouſe for ſo it is
ſaid:Verſe, 4. 
                  That there may raigne inſteed of Vaſhty. A matter very
equal,Obſ. 15. Second marriage not vnlawfull. that ye King ſhould haue a comforter, and the light of
nature here taught theſe prephane men, yt euen a ſecond
 wife was not altogether vnlawfull: and ſeeing, the ſame
 reaſons why we ſhould marry one, may alſo be in force to
 marry another. Namely, that wee may haue the comfort
 of ſweete ſociety; ſee the fruite of our body and auoyd

fornication, I ſee not, but the thing being ſimply lawfull to
marry a wife, we may find euen all theſe bleſſings as well
in the ſecond as in a former choice: Nay if we ſhal conſider
that experience teacheth wiſdome, why may I not hope
to haue more comfort in my ſecond choice then I haue had
in my firſt.
               
                  Vſe 1. And therefore howſoeuer this liberty may be the
occaſion of ſome euill dealing againſt the wife, (which
hath bin the occaſion why ſome haue beene ſtraight euen
in iuſt cauſes to allow of diuorce) & though this liberty be
not indeed to be taken of euery one,1 Tim. 5. but of thoſe eſpecially
that may increaſe ſo the Church of God therby, yet ſeeing
we haue the examples of the holy men of God for our
warrant, & the word alſo doth not ſimply forbid the ſame,
but by a conſequent doth plainely allow it; I ſee not but
this liberty may bee lawfully practiſed among Chriſtians,
obſeruing no other conditions then are required in the
former marriage.
               That which is added concerning the ſpeciall quality
of the wife that muſt be choſen,Obſ. 16. Beauty warily to be propoſed in the choice of a wife. 
                  That ſhe muſt bee picked
out of the moſt beautifull Virgins, as if beauty were the beſt
marke to guide the eye in the choice of a wife: this as in it
ſelfe is more liable to reproofe, ſo, though otherwiſe not to
be neglected, Yet now in conſcience ſhould leaſt haue bin
entended, becauſe beauty was the occaſion of the former
ſinne.Obſ. 17. Godly auoide ſuch occaſions as haue enticed them to ſinne. And ſurely hereby do the Children of God beſt teſtifie
their repentance when they dread the fire that hath ſo
ſcorcht them, and auoide ſuch occaſions as haue bin fuel to
their ſinne. But what do I ſpeake of repentance to this
King and his Courtiers? heres no ſinne acknowledged, and
therefore can we looke for any auoyding the like occaſions?
No, no, their ſinne is their happines, and therfore when
ye former wood is ſpent,Obſ. 18. Prophaine courtiers rea
                     
                        •
                     y to ſatisfie the luſts of their Princes. what ſhould. they do but caſt on
more to maintaine the flame: thus beauty muſt ſtil be ſupplied
to maintaine luſt. Let them ſeeke beautiful Virgins.
Say theſe ioylie courtiers both ſhe wing therein their chiefeſt
aime, & not being ignorant what would pleaſe ye King.
               
                  
                  Vſe. 1 Oh that wee could bee ſo wiſe to take notice
what would pleaſe the King of heauen, as theſe carnall
wretches are to ſerue the honour of this earthly Monarch,
that wee could ſo further one another in the way to happyneſſe,
as the wicked are ſkilful to fit each others turne to
hell, that we could ſee our owne weakneſſe to be humbled
therewith, as the wicked fit each others corruption to the
ſtrengthning thereof, that wee could ſo know our owne
ſtrength to be reſolute againſt ſinne, as the wicked know
each others weakeneſſe to help forward to euil: Surely if
we do not, theſe Courtiers ſhall condemne vs: their wiſdome
in ſinne, our folly to goodneſſe.
               
                  Let them ſeeke for the King beautifull Virgins;
                  Obſ. 19. The beſt gifts of the wicked tend to their deſtr
                        •
                     ction. wel fare
then deformitie, for beauty bringes bondage: here's no
ſeeking for foule ones, the faire muſt ſerue the Court;
So doe the beſt giftes of the wicked tend to their diſtruction,
and no maruaile: For as they are giuen of God in anger
 and not in mercy, ſo they are deſired of the wicked, for
 they though ſeeming good, yet indeed are for true hurt &
 diſtruction. And therfore as they occaſion the wicked to
 reſt vpon them: ſo becauſe theſe will ſerue the turne, for
 their preſent vſe of the world, therefore they will
 not ſeeke after durable riches: VVhereby they
proue alſo meanes to puffe them vp: And ſo they
grow inſolent ouer others, and ſecure of their owne eſtate.
By which meanes ſacrificing to their nets, and making
ye wedge of gold their hope, they become alſo ſnares
and ſtumbling blockes to them and others, and ſo both
haſten and increaſe their damnation.
               That which wee may learne heere is partly touched
beefore.Pag. 13. 2. But heereto we may adde theſe publike leſſons.
               1 vſe. Namely as to condemne the world for reſpecting
 men extraordinarily, only for theſe thinges: ſo much the
rather for excluding by theſe the more excellent bleſſings,
as if ſo be religion were enemy to pollicy, and ſound holineſſe
would not worke true ſubiection.
               
                   And ſeeing indeed theſe are common to all, & are rather

portions caſt vppon the wicked to their greater condemnation:
Therefore lette vs not be diſcouraged if wee are
ſcanted of them, but rather lette vs ſeek after durable riches.
Let vs not take paines and lay out our money vpon things
of no value, but rather let them that thirſt come to the waters
and buy without money, as being aſſured, that if wee
chooſe the better part we ſhal not want the complement,
theſe outward things ſhal be caſt into the reckoning. This
ſhal be wiſdome, riches, honour and all vnto vs.
               Thus farre of the quallitie by which this wife muſt bee
choſen: ſhee muſt bee beautifull, the beſt pearle in a carnall
eye.
               But where ſhall we ſeeke for this beautifull wife? Hearken
what theſe Miniſters aduiſe in this point, muſt we fetch
her from other countries that differ in manners and religion
from vs? No ſay theſe Counſellors.
               Let the King appoint officers throughout all the Prouinces of
the Kingdome, and let the gather all the yong beautifull Virgins
into the Palace of Suſhan into the houſe of the womē vnder the
hand of Hege the Kings Eunuch,Verſe, 3. keeper of the women to giue
them their things for purification.
               And the maid that ſhall pleaſe the King let her raigne inſteed of Vaſhtie.
                  Verſe, 4.
               
               This you ſee is the ſumme of their councell, why this
wife ſhould bee choſen, and it may bee drawne to theſe
heades.
               1 Becauſe it is a matter of ſtate, therefore it muſt be done
in ſtate; Officers muſt be appointed (happily a new) and for
a ſeaſon onely for this worke, that ſo it may be done in order
and decencie
               2 Theſe Officers as they muſt not exceed the boundes of
the Kingdome, ſo their commiſſion is large, the whole kingdome
is their circuit.
               3 Though there be but one to be choſen, yet all the beautifull
Virgins in the Kingdome muſt be ſought out and gathered
together, that ſo of them all this choyce of one may
be made.
               
                  
4 They muſt be brought to the place of Suſhan, neere
the hand of the chiefe Keeper of the women; that ſo they
may be ſure for ſtarting away, or at leaſt looſe the crowne
and pride of their reioycing.
               5 They muſt haue things giuen them for their purification,
that they muſt be trained vp to the faſhion and manners
of the Court, and they muſt be fitted here to the ſtate
and luſt of the Prince &c.
               Theſe are the particulers of this prudent Counſell.
Now let vs examine the equitie thereof.Obſ. 20. Matters of ſtate to be carried with complement
               
               And ſurely that matters of ſtate ſhould be carried in
ſtate, and affaires of Princes ought to haue complement
accordingly: So that howſoeuer they differ from common
men, yet this may ſtand with their lawfull libertie;
both their calling doth require it, and their meanes
will allow; and who may better be imployed herein then
the ſubiect; who fitter then Abrahams ſeruant to procure
a wife for his Maiſters ſonne?Geneſ 4.
               
               Onely obſerue wee that the complement of ſtate bee no
no cloak to ſin, nor countenance to ſecret wickednes. 2. yt
ye matter they are imploied in be anſwerable to their ſeruice
& the ſtate whom it doth concerne, and 3. that the
end be holy & profitable to the church and comō wealth:
which as it condēneth the imploimēt of many vnneceſſary
officers to baſe & vnſeemly ſeruices toward prophāe princes,
whē the ſubiect is taken vp for ſatiſfying priuat luſts:
ſo it is a good leſſon to chriſtiā princes, yt though thei haue
the lawful cōmand of the bodies & good of their ſubiects,
not to make them drudges to euery baſe ſeeruice, but if the
iuſt man bee merciful to his beaſt, then ſurely ought they
much more to be reſpectiue of man,Verſe, 16. 7. as much concerning
their glory & their ſafety too, but of this point more largely
anon. Nay if we conſider ye compaſſe of their commiſſion
yt they muſt not exceed the limits of the Kingdome;
ſurely herein they aduiſe not amiſſe.
               For ſeeing in y• choyce of a wife we ſhould eſpecially reſpect
ſimilitude of time, which is beſt diſcerned by

agreement in the ſame religion,Obſ. 8. Where a wife to be choſen whether at home 
                        •
                     n our owne country or abrod. correſpondency in manners,
and conformity to our guiſe, and laudable faſhion:
was not his owne country likelieſt to afford theſe, and
was it not therefore fit to make his choyſe here? To make
him great and ſtrong by forraine alliance, to vnite diuers
nations by this meanes together: As this is not the
faſhion of Tirants, whoſe greatneſſe riſeth by the ſword
or trechery, ſo indeed Chriſtian Princes are to be wiſe
herein leaſt while that they ſeeke for greatneſſe they looſe
goodneſſe, while they labour to be ſtrong abroad they 
weaken not them-ſelues at home, and while by forraine 
matches they may intend vnity, it proue not occaſion 
both of inteſtine and forraine diſſentions. And therefore
though in this caſe, it is good to leaue great ones to this
liberty, which they will take and aske their inferiors no
leaue, yet I would haue them alſo wiſely to conſider withall,
that a little well knit together by loue, is better then
a great deale ſcattred, and at the beſt linked together with
vnequall bond, And therefore whether their owne kingdome
may not afford ſuch matches, as what they want
in greatneſſe may he ſupplyed but in faithfull loue, and
ioyne that mutual felloſhippe which cannot be had in forraine
matches. But what needs all this: are we not now in
Perſia? heathen examples muſt not be abſolute preſidents;
they can offend enough at home though they chooſe
not their wiues abroad.
               Elſe what need all the beautifull virgins to be gathered
to Suſhan.Obſer, 22. Tyrants how they reuell in the goods and bodies of their Subiects. The King would haue but one and
therefore what neede ſo many hundreds? And though
he might ſhew his power, thus to ingroſſe beauty to him
ſelfe, becauſe if he commanded who durſt deny: yet
ſurely this muſt needs turne to great greefe and diſcontentment
of his ſubiects, thus to bee depriued of the
ſtaffes of their age, and alſo much fruſtrate the end which
he propoſed therein, namely out of thoſe many to make
choyce of one. For if the eye be neuer ſatisfied with ſeeing,
and among ſo many like obiects the minde muſt needs be
diſtracted; how ſhall he grow to a reſolution which ſhall

be ſhe, that in his choice is only led by ſuch a rule as makes
no difference betweene the one and the other vnleſſe we
wil ſay y• out of this multitude he ment to choſe more then
one, though not for his wife yet to ſupplie the number of
his concubines and wandring. Diuah ſtraying ſo farre from
home might be good meat for courtiers (remember I pray
you we are yet in Perſia,) groſer fare wil ſerue them: whatſoeuer
it is, we may here behold ye miſerable ſlauery of ſuch
as liue vnder Godles Princes, the beſt that they haue muſt
ſerue ye Tirants luſt, there ſeruants muſt be his bauds & her
daughters his harlots.
                     
                        •
                      Sam. 8 Beloued, their odious liues and that
which is deererhis harlots their ritches, their liberty ye deereſt
of all their ſoules & conſciences, theſe muſt be proſtituted
to the luſt of wicked Princes. So blaſphemouſly do
they exalt themſelues hourely aboue al that is called God.

                  So iuſt is the Lord to ſatiate the wicked with their owne
 waies: that forſake him to be ruled like other nations. So
                   wiſely doth he make the wicked hereby rods to puniſh
each other.Pro. 14 That as the inſolence of Princes puniſheth the
Idolatry of the ſubiect,1 Sam. 8 ſo the rage of the ſubiect ſhall puniſh
the Idolatry of the Prince.
               
                  Vſe 1. Which though it be no warrant to caſt of the yoake
of gouernment, becauſe the wicked abuſe the ſame: Yet it is
 a good leſſon for Princes not vniuſtly to greeue the ſubiect
by abuſing vnneceſſarily their authority ouer them,
as knowing that howſoeuer their bodies and goods are
theirs at command,Princes how to command their ſubiects. yet it is in the Lord, his glory for & the
publique good. And ſubiects alſo may here take out that
 leſſon as principally to beare the Lords yoake, that ſo the
yoake of man maybe eaſie vpon thē; and to vſe theſe outward
comforts ſoberly yt ſo for thē they may not be a prey
to the wicked, ſo to be patient euen vnder a whip of ſcorpions;
as knowing that all this is of the Lord, he it is that
bridles the rage of the moſt barbarous, & vnreaſonable; he
in his good time will giue a gracious iſſue; and in the
meane time all things ſhall turne vnto their goods.Rom. 8. 27
               
               
                  
4 In that theſe Virgins muſt be brought into the palace
of Suſhan and as it were clapt vnder hatches, vnder the
cuſtodie of the Eunuch that had the charge of the women,
the miſery hereof beeing ſuch as ought not to
bee named among Chriſtians I ſpare therefore to ſearching
therevnto.
                     Obſer. 23. The confuſion of Idolatry and carnall wiſdome.
               
               Onely conſider wee the power of Sathan in theſe
Chrildren of vnbeleefe that as it was counted a great
honor among thoſe vaſſalls of Sathan, to offer vp the
ſoules and bodies of their daughters in fire vnto the diuil;
ſo to proſtitute the chaſtity alſo of their Virgins to the
luſt of their Prieſts, as if it were a ſacrifice moſt acceptable
to their ſuppoſed Gods. Wherevpon alſo it came to
paſſe that as their Princes affected a kind of deity herein to
haue the ſpoile of the Virgins chaſtity, to be a cloake to colour
their luſt, ſo it was no ſmall honour accounted euen
to theſe to become the Paramours to ſo mighty Monarchies.
               
                  Vſe Which as it doth apparantly iuſtifie the righteous
vengeance of God againſt Idolators that they ſhall account
that their greateſt honor which brings both ceraine
infamy in this life and eternall condemnation in the other
life. So we ſhall ſee that the diuell is not dead, if we conſider
a like power of Satan not onely among Papiſts where
this ſinne is maintained;Solemnity. yea worſe iuſtified by Papall priueledge:
But, which (I ſhame to ſpeake) euen among the
profeſſors of the Ghoſpell themſelues, among whome
drunkeneſſe is counted good fellowſhippe and vncleanes
man-hood, whoreing faces it with priueledge,1 Tim. 3 and all iniquity
hath gotten to the vpper hand.
               Well the Virgins are thus appointed to be brought
to Suſan:
                  
                     Obſer. 24. Natures infirmities to be clenſed and abſtinence to be vſed therein. here muſt they now be prepared and faſhioned
to the Court. They aduiſe is. They muſt haue things giuen
them for purification.
               
               That is ſuch things as might both ſerue to cleanſe natures
infirmities, and alſo might ſet out nature more gloriouſly
to the ſatisfaction of the luſt of the eye, wherin that

meanes are vſed to heale Natures ſickenes: This in it ſelfe is
a moſt lawfull thing as both commanded by God,Deu. 21. in a
moſt preciſe manner and tending much to the health of both
parties, in that the diſeaſe is not without his infection.
               
                  
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it condemneth the practize of thoſe
worſe then brutiſh natures that runne together at all
 times without reſpect of natures preuelidge, ſo alſo this
very clenſing ſhall be a heauy witneſſe againſt thoſe gentiles,
yea againſt all ſuch in generall that are thus preciſe
to clenſe the infirmities of the body, and yet neuer regard
the purging of the ſoule And therefore the beſt of vs may
 take out leſſons very profitable hereby, namely by the infermities
of the body to be put in mind of the blemiſhes
of the ſoule, and in the neceſſity and benefit of releeuing
 the one, to labour alſo the releaſing of the other. And ſeeing
ſuch care there was of purifiyng, that theſe virgins
might pleaſe an earthly King,1. Ioh. 3. 3. how ought we to purge
our ſelues, that we may appeare before the Lord Ieſu? ſurely
he that hath this hope will purge him-ſelfe, and to
whome the arme of the Lord ſhall reueale theſe things.
As for the wicked it is not ſo with them: they make cleane
the out ſide, to the further defyling of the inward man,
and this is that for which this purificacion is iuſtly faulted,
becauſe it was to prouoke the luſt of a Tyrant.
               
                  And ſurely if we conſider the other manners of this
purification which was to ſet out nature more gloriouſly
to the bewitching of the eye by ſome painting or new-fangled
attire.
                     Obſe. 25. Out landiſh faſhions vnlawfull. This alſo was moſt prophane and prepoſtrous.
For if the exornation were by ſome ſtrange and
antique attire not agreeable to ſobriety or the gariſh
faſhion of the country; this the Lord him-ſelfe condemes
and doth threaten that he will viſit ſuch as are clothed
with ſtrange apparrell.
               
                  If it be by painting ye viſage or ſuch like hipocriſie;
                     Obſer. 26. Painting of women vnlawfull.
                  this ſurely,
as it diſcouer notorious prides not to be contented with
what God hath giuen, but rather to find fault, yea to go about
 to correct the workemanſhip of God; ſo it beraies our
 folly yt hereby we reproch Nature, while we ſeeke to honor

it, and ſo diſfigure and alter our hue, that God when hee 
comes to iudgement ſhal not know his owne creature:Cyprian. 
                  beſides
what a ſnare and viſer it is to intangle? what a bait to 
intrap, and cloak to hide this ſin: I would the ſhame therof
did not proclaime in our eares.
               1 Vſe. Wel let vs Court, and Citty-dames learn here inſtruction,
& let al take heed of the like hipocriſie, leaſt ſeeming
to be yt which they are not; they proue only what
they ſeeme,2 Tim. 3. & ſo deceiuing others, at length deceiue themſelues.
               Thus far of the counſell that theſe yongſters giue their
Soueraigne: What? now hee is not aſhamed of ſuch councellors?
No ſure he was al on fire with 
                     •
                  uſt, and therfore he
cares not who powres in oyle thereto: and who fitter for
ſuch an occaſion then young heads.
                     Obſ. 27. Young heades fit to giue councell to tirants and godleſſe, Princes. Such Rehoboams are
Princes to be ledde by yong Counſellors, becauſe as they
haue leſſe knowledge, and therefore may be ouer-reached of
their Prince, ſo they haue leſſe courage, and ſo are fitter to
be ouer-ruled by him, and which is the maine, they are leſſe
ſetled in their affections, and therefore moſt likely to aduize 
rather for pleaſure then profit. Vſe 1. A notable leſſon 
                  for Princes that they follow not young heads, but rather 
                  to diſtruſt themſelues whē ſuch ſtand before them; procuring
                  
ſuch as are graue & ſetled in their affections, as may
croſſe thē in their luſts, rather then giue allowance therto.
               
                   But here you ſee like King, like Councellors, they no ſooner
aduize, but he preſently aſſents to it, ſo ſaith the ſpirit.
               
                  This pleaſed the King and he did ſo: It is a true prouerb:
They muſt needes go that the diuell driues, here's more
haſt then good ſpeed; no ſooner ſpoken but approued
preſently, no ſooner approued, but preſently executed.
                     Obſ. 28. Sin impatient of delay.
               
               Behold the impotencie and impatience of ſinne, it admits
no reaſoning to diſſwade the ſinne, it indures no
delaies leaſt it ſhould happily bee fruſtrated, ſo cunning 
is Satan to follow them, ſo madde vppon vs is our corrupt 
nature.
               
               
                  
1 Vſe.
                  Seect. 1. wherby we may learne how to preuent ſin, if temptation
 aſſault demur vpon it wiſely, and ſo thou ſhalt happily
confound the ſame: if it yet be importunate delay the execution
by auoyding the opportunitie and occaſions thereof,Sinne how to be preuented &
 ſo thou maiſt gratiouſly quench the rage of the ſame.
               And ſeeing the wicked are ſo forward to put euill motions
 in practiſe, Oh be thou as ready to entertaine the good
motions of Gods bleſſed Spirit:
                     Sect. 2. The motions of Gods ſpirit how to be incertained. 
                  Eſteeme of them highly, and
imbrace them readily, practiſe them cheerfully and returne
the ſtrength to the giuer: ſo ſhalt thou cheriſh the ſpirite of
God, and by the meanes thereof attaine a perfection.
               
               Well thus you heare the King is pleaſed; And with what
 I pray you? Surely that, here's more fuell preparing for his
 luſt, that hee may lengthen out his dayes in dalliance and
 wantonneſſe. The ordinary state of theſe Perſian Monarches
rather to liue in a chamber making loue Ballads to
their Minions,Obſ. 25. The prophane guiſe effeminate Princes. then to meete the enemie in the gate: their
belly was their God, and their gluttony muſt needes haue
vent, their eyes full of adultery and ſoule fraught with filthineſſe,
 and therefore no maruaile if the body muſt beare the
 burthen and ſerue as a weapon of all vnrighteouſneſſe.
               A notable preſident for Chriſtian Princes to poſſeſſe their
veſſels in holyneſſe and honour, not ſuffering the ſtranger to
deuoure their ſtrength, nor expoſing their poſteritie to curſing
and diſhonour, but to be carefull of chaſtitie in themſelues.
So to baniſh the occaſions there of from their Courts,
as idleneſſe, filthy dancing, vaine ſtage-plaies &c. And to
ſee the Lawes ſeuerely executed againſt this ſin, leaſt the
ſtranger indeed doe deuoure their ſtrength; and as they
tooke it of the hyre of an harlot, ſo they ſhall returne to the
wages of an harlot.
               But he that is filthie will be filthy ſtill. The King is pleaſed,
and he puts his deſire in execution.
               Now let vs further conſider how God is pleaſed herein.
What light bringes hee out of this darkneſſe? What waie
makes he hereby for the deliuerance of his Church?
               In the Cittie of Shuſhan there waas a certaine Iew whoſeVerſe. 5.
                  
name was Mordecai the ſoune of Shimei. &c.
               In theſe few next verſes the holy Ghoſt ſets downe ſuch
meanes whereby Heſter is aduanced to the Court, as ſhew
their grounds and reference to others. And they are of
two ſorts.
               The firſt is her preſeruation and education, being for
an orphane captiue, and ſo more extraordinarily plunged
in affliction, and thereby more extraordinarily caſt vpon
the prouidence of God: who as he vſually worketh by
meanes, ſo he prouides a kinſ-man to become his tutor
and nouriſher, and ſuch a kinſ-man who as he was pertaker
with her in her humiliation ſhould alſo be pertaker
with her of her aduancement.
               This kinſ-man therefore is here deſcribed at large, by
his habitation he dwelt in Suſhan; ſecondly by his Country
he was a Iew. 3. by his name he is called Mordicai. 4. by his
pedigree he was of the tribe ofBitter contrition. 
                  Beniamin where alſo his
deſcent is remembred; the ſonne of Iair, the ſonne of Shimey
the ſonne of Kiſh &c. verſ. 5.
               
               5. He is deſcribed vnto vs by his outward condition, namely
that he was borne, in the captiuity, which the holy
Ghoſt neceſſarily implieth when ſpeaking in the 5. verſe.
of his father Kiſh, He it was (ſaith the ſpirit) which had bin
carried away from Ieruſalem with the captiuity that was caried
away with Ieconiah King of Iuda, whom Nebuchadnezar
King of Babel had caried away. verſ. 6. Wherepon it muſt
needs follow that Mordecai was not caried away in the
captiuity, but his father Kiſh. And ſo the worke of GOD
herein appeeres more admirable, that one man borne in
the captiuity ſhould not onely be gardian to his couſin,
left fatherleſſe and comfortleſſe, who in all likely-hood
might need of ſuch helpe himſelfe, but that both theſe
being in ſuch a deſperate condicion, ſhould be ſo highly
aduanced in the land of their captiuity.
               Now that by this verſe, Kiſh the father muſt be ment, and
not Mordecai the ſonne. I take it is more then
probable.
               
                  
1. Becauſe men at this time vſually attained not to halfe
thoſe yeares (for Iewiſh conceits paſſe them not) as of neceſſity
Mordecai muſt now be of,
                     Obſer. 30. Mordecai was not caried away in the captiuity. if he were one that was
caried away in the aforeſaid captiuity.
               2. The text it ſelfe doth ſeeme to reſolue the matter
where it makes this Mordecai couſin-german to Heſter, 25
being the daughter of Abihail who was Mordecaies Vnkle,Wiſ. 7. 15.
Now among. i. couſins as there is vſually much
likeli-hood of years, ſo there could not here be ſuch difference
as that Mordecai in any wiſe could be of that captiuity.
               3 And what need we ſerch the ſcripture vpon the authors
of Iewiſh fables and vnneceſſary ſuppoſals; ſeeing granting
that there might be diuers men of that ſame name, one
ſucceeding another within generations,Scripture not to be ſtrained. which is neither
contrary to the chronology of the ſtory, nor the Anology
of faith, both the ſcripture is iuſtified in it literall expoſition,
which we are to cleaue vnto, when no falſe-hood or
abſurdity followeth, and there-vpon all this controuerſie
is happily ended?
               So then we will take him for Heſters kinſ-man and indeed
he performeth the part of a Kinſ-man vnto her, as here
in the verſe is deſcribed. He nowriſhed Heſter who was the
daughter of his vnkle, and the holy Ghoſt giueth a fourefold
reaſon of it, One from the bond of affinity, ſhe was his vnkles
daughter, and therefore by the rule of nature he was tied
to nowriſh her. Secondly from her miſerable condition,
ſhe had neither father nor mother, and therefore, ſhe had
need of ſuch of a gardian: and that we may ſee the prouidence
of the Lord, in the tempering of his Childrens miſery,
that there ſhalbe ſomewhat euen therein not onely
to moue to compaſſion, but to giue hope of repentance,
or elſe at leaſt to make miſery greeuious: behold another
reaſon is added.
               Namely the maide was faire and beautifull to looke
 on, and therev on followeth a fourth reaſon: why hee
 did nouriſh her, drawne from his owne conſcience and

holy affection. Namely that after the death of her father and
mother he tooke her for his owne daughter; that is he not only
adopted her to be his Child, as by the rule of conſcience
he was bound, but further alſo as his Child did moſt tenderly
and fatherly traine her vp, 
                     •
                  as his loue did guide
him and her condition did require, hauing alſo likely
ſome portion from her friends, the rather to induce him
thereto: and that may be a ſixt circumſtance in the deſcription
of Mordecai. Namely from the vprightneſſe
of his conſcience and conuerſation in loue: and
this is the firſt,
                     Obſer. 31. Gods Prouidence in planting his children fitly for his glory and their good. meanes here ſet downe of Heſters aduancement.
               Wherefore, that firſt this Mordi
                        •
                     ai was planted in
Suſhan, not in any out or obſcure corner of the Kingdome,
farre from notice and ſo from preferment, but hauing
his abode in the Imperiall Cittie, whereas there wanted
no meanes to corrupt, ſo their wanted not alſo
meanes for imployment and aduancement, according
to the fitneſſe, and forwardneſſe of men thereto; herein
wee may behold, the admirable prouidence of
GOD, not onely, in keeping this his ſeruant and his
Nephew vndefiled in ſuch a ſinke of wickedneſſe, but
hereby alſo making a neerer cut by the aduancement of
theſe, for the deliuerance of his Church.
               And ſurely that Mordecai is reſident in Suſis; that
Suſis hath a Mordecai to keepe out the wrath of GOD,
                     Obſ. 32. The prouidence of God in plan
                        •
                     ing of the Godly among the wicked.
and that Mordecai dwells in S
                        •
                     ſis not ſubiect to Gods
wrath, as being kept from pertaking with them in their abominations,
herein doth appeere two admirable acts of
the divine prouidence.
               The one of his generall prouidence to the wicked, that
when he will lengthen out temporall bleſſings vnto them,
and beare with longer patience, ſuch veſſells appointed 
to wrath, yet that they may ſee it is not for their 
ſakes, therefore hee plants among them ſome Lot or
Mordeeaies, either to bridle their ſinne by their 
example, that ſo they may be fit for longer proſperitie

and thereby flatters themſelues in a vaine happineſſe; or
els to pluck ſome out of the fire that they may avoide
 the vengeance to come, that ſo the decree of GOD being
furthered in adding to the Church, ſuch as ſhalbe
 ſaued, the poore Church growing more viſible, might
haue ſome reſt and ſhelter among the wicked, for the iuſtyfiyng
thereof euen in the ſight of it enemies, when Chriſt
 ſhall raigne euen in the mideſt of them. And the wicked
hereby being conuinced and ſo ripened to their deſtructino,
Gods Children may be alſo furthered and ripened to
 their perfection: and ſo beeing fit for beauty and proſperity
they may enuy the ſame, not ſo much by their
owne care and induſtry, left they ſhould boaſt of themſelues
as by the admirable prouidence of GOD making
their enemies their puruayers, who though they heape
 vp filuer as the duſt, and prepare raiment as the clay, yet
they may prepare it and the wiſe ſhall put it on,Iob. 26. 16. 17 and the
innocent ſhall diuide the ſiluer.
               
                   Where we may learne as to leaue it to Gods prouidence
concerning our abiding, becauſe we are in his hands
to diſpoſe at his pleaſure, and therefore neither to plot
 for our planting in Suſhans, nor to murmur at our Lot in

                  Sodome, ſo for the changing of our habitations, to reſt
vpon the vnchangeableneſſe of that prouidence, who if he
takes vs out of Canaan and plant vs in Aegipt, where wee
would or ſhould not be, yet it is the will of our glorious
GOD and therefore muſt not be gain-ſaid,Pſa. 120. and ſhall
ſerue in the end to our exceeding good: and therefore
that this may turne indeede to our good, Let
vs take it a part of our humiliation that we dwell
in Meſech▪
                   to be humbled for our ſinne,
                     Obſ. 23. Why God remoues out of their Hahitaltions. and yet let vs
account it a part of Gods mercy towards vs, that we are
remooued from Canaan to Aegipt: becauſe Aegipt ſhall
nouriſh vs, when Canaan cannot, and Aegipt alſo ſhall
fare the better for vs, that we may be honoured, onely let
vs be carefull that we fare not the worſe for it: Though
Iſrael play the harlot yet let not Iudah ſinne: gleane we

the good of Egipt, but pertake not with her in her euill:
Lette vs labour if we can to make Sodome better, but at no
hand lette Sodome make vs worſe: Humble wee ye fleſh 
by greeuing at Sodome, and prouoke we the fleſh by croſſing 
                  Haman,
                  2 Pet, ſo the increaſe of their rage ſhal increaſe our
faith; and their plots againſt vs, ſhall ripen their ſinne, that
is, their fall may be our raizing vp, and the place of ſorrow
may be the crowne of our glory. Thus did God prouide
for Mordecai by planting him in Suſis.
               
               But was it poſſible that Suſis did not corrupt Mordecai?
Could Ioſeph liue in Egipt and not ſweare by the life of
Pharoh? Did Moſes leaue Pharohs Court becauſe he would
not inioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon?
               Behold here an act of Gods ſpeciall prouidence Mordecai
ſhall bee in Suſis and yet be vndefiled:
                     Obſ. 33. Gods children are kept pure and made b
                        •
                     tter by their conuer
                        •
                     ation with the wicked. Gods children
ſhall dwell with the wicked and yet keepe their ſincerity;
Elſe how ſhould they know that their ſinceritie is
from him; that the beginning and continuance thereof is
from his mercy; he that giues it without meanes can keep
it contrary to meanes, and therefore neither the terrour,
nor flattery, nor the example, nor fellowſhip of the Sodomites
ſhall corrupt righteous Lot, becauſe the Lord is the
giuer & keeper of righteouſnes: & where the Lord keeps,
contrary meanes ſhall further: great cold without ſhall
cauſe more heate within; and the greater wickedneſſe
of others ſhall make vs both diſcerne and approue better
the righteouſneſſe that is in vs: Yea wee ſhall hold it 
the faſter by how much the more the wicked would
plucke it from vs: as more fearing our ſelues and more 
earneſtly crauing the helpe of God▪ And ſo growing 
more reſolute and conſtant in godlyneſſe, wee ſhall finde 
more comfort and benefit therein, not onely that our
enemies heereby will bee wearied and ſo yeeld vp the
bucklers, but our righteouſneſſe beeing iuſtified euen by
our enemies, & they being hereby inwardly confounded
as they are prepared to their vtter ſubuerſion: ſo we ſhal
gather the fruite of ſuch Trees which they haue planted.
               And therefore howſoeuer wee ſhould rather chooſe to

conuerſe with the godly,
                     Obſer. 34. The godly beſt company and why? becauſe they moſt pleaſe God,
and beſt ſuit with our affections, they are trauelling our
way, and ſo ſhall beſt further vs to happineſſe, they onely
are ſafe company, and who yeeld true comfort:2 Cor. 6. Yet ſeeing
we muſt go out of the world if we will not meddle
with the wicked;
                     Obſ. 35. Why we may conuerſe with the wicked and how. and we are bound to make others better,
without feare of making our ſelues worſe: and God
will try vs whether we do good of conſcience or not: and
ye world muſt haue a ſtumbling-block euen by our liberty
herein: therfore though we are not purpoſely to come into
euil company, or principally to make choice of them, yet if
 God do call vs we are not to refuſe, becauſe his commandement
 is our ſufficient warrant; if God caſt vs vpon them
we cannot chooſe; and then his prouidence is our protection.
 Nay if they ſeeke vnto vs in their extremity wee may
not deny them, for the hole haue no need of the Phiſitian
 but the ſicke. Nay we are to ſeek them out if they be gon
 aſtray & ſo to ouercome them with our loue & induſtry.
 So ſhall they return vnto vs, & not wee vnto them: Gods
power ſhal be ſeen in ye land of Goſhen, and the righteouſnes
of his Saints ſhal haue a glorious trial, whē it is iuſtified
& deſired by ye enemies therof: thus was Mordecai ſafe
in Shuſan. But how comes it to paſſe yt he is planted in Shuſan:
the reaſon hereof the holy Ghoſt deliuers afterward:
namely he was called to the Kings houſhold, & made keeper
of the Court gate (as chief porter & keeper of the Pallace)
wc pallace requiring his continual attendance and the
Court being vſually at Shuſan; therfore he is ſaid to be in
the cittie of Shuſan. And ſurely herein alſo the prouidence
of the Almightie is no leſſe wonderfull thus to prouide
for his ſeruant, in the land of his Captiuitie, that he findes
ſuch fauor with the Prince as to be admitted to his ſeruice,
                     Obſer. 36. God giues his 
                        •
                     auour in the eyes of the wicked.
and that to a place of ſuch truſt & imployment, wc may wel
giue teſtimony of his loyalty and dilligence, as alſo prepare
a way to his further aduancement. Thus hath God giuen
his children fauor in the greateſt of their troubles,
euen with thoſe that are Gods ſpeciall inſtruments for
their greater affliction.
               
                  
Thus was Ioſeph gratious:Geneſ, 39. Whereſoeuer hee came,
his maiſter highly affects him wholy, hee was in his familie
when he was in the priſon,Geneſ. 40, 41. 42. &c. he winnes the Iaylors
fauor, when hee is out of priſon, Pharoh himſelfe ſets
his heart vpon him, yea he found fauor in the ſight euen of
all the Egiptia
                     •
                  s, who in likelyhood muſt needes enuy
his greatneſſe and practiſe againſt him. But what ſhall
we ſay? This is the Lords doing to turne the hearts of 
our enemies: The power of godlineſſe is ſuch, as ſometimes 
                  to rauiſh al:
                  Verſ. 16. 17. and God wil haue both the wicked left
inexcuſable hereby, and his the better ſecured by the ſame:
as hauing a friend in the Court ſo gratious with the greateſt:
who at the beſt are but ſeruants to further the cauſe
of the Church.
               1 Vſe. And therefore though ſeruice of princes bee
no inheritance, and their fauor (as them-ſelues) partiall
and mutable: and ſo not ambitiouſly or corruptly
to be bought or begd of vs, yet neither muſt we neglect 
to demerite the ſame by all lawfull obedience: nor if it
be caſt vpon vs, proudly to reiect it, as being both a true 
note that wee preuaile with God worthily, if we be gratitious
in their eyes who are onely vnder him, and being a
meanes alſo not ſo much to aduance our ſelues as that
the Church of God may finde fauour hereby. This was
the end why the LORD brought Mordecai to the
Court, and ſo did Mordecai very gratiouſly anſwer
this end.
               Well thus wee haue heard of the place of his habitation.
But may wee not know of what Country he was?
Yea the holy Ghoſt tels vs he was a Iew by nation, a ſon
of Iacob, and heire of the Couenant, who in the greateſt
Apoſtacie of his bretheren remained faithfull with
his GOD, and therefore in that greateſt miſery findes
fauour with men.
                     Obſ. 37. God no accepter of perſons. Behold how the Lord is no reſpecter,
of perſons, but in euery nation they that feare him ſhall
be accepted of him, here's tribulation vpō the Iew in general,
becauſe they had forſakē their god,Acts. 10. 35. & yet Mordecai
the Iew is exempted, becauſe he is faithfull with his God:

                   yea here's Mordecai of the houſe of Saul y• rebellious and
 reprobate, and yet gratiouſly deliuered from the common
corruption that ſo hee might bee gratious in
 the eyes of GOD. So iuſt is the Lord to recompence
euery man according to his work, ſo little need hath hee
of the ſinnes of men to aduance his glory, ſo wiſe is hee
 to diſtinguiſh the cauſe from the perſon, ſo abſolutely perfect
to do all thinges by him and for him-ſelfe.
               
                  Vſe. Where we may learn as to be like vnto God in not
 reſpecting perſons, where there is equallitie in the cauſe;
ſo we muſt take heed that with the Anabaptiſt wee abuſe
 not this liberty, as a cloake of diſobedience againſt ſuch
 perſons as the Lord hath aduanced, neither lette vs robbe
Gods free election with the Papiſt,Math, 23. as if becauſe he is no reſpecter
 of perſons, therfore he chooſeth men for their foreſeen
 righteouſneſſe, neither let vs preiudice the ſincerity of
 our brethren, becauſe they want the outward complement
 to their perſons: but ſeeing the Lord regards not ye outſide,
but indeed requireth the hart, & ſo principally accepts it,
therfore let vs not content our ſelues with the out-ſide of
the platter, but let vs labour to make al clean within: if we
be aduanced let vs take heed of oppreſſion, for God will
iudge the greateſt as wel as the leaſt,
                     Obſ. 38. The continuance of the Church and the condition. if we be oppreſſed let
vs not diſpaire, for the cry of ye fatherleſſe is in the eares of
the Lord, only let vs reſigne vp our ſelues wholy into the
hands of yt gratious God who loued vs before wee were,
for his own ſake & not for ours, & ſo let our loue be proportiōable,
not for our ſakes, but for his glory, yt being purged
daily of this droſſy corruption we may be fitted to yt
                   glory immortal & vnſpeakable, wc ſhal inueſt our perſons
according to that meaſure of grace which God hath filled
 them withal. Mordecai the Iew preſerued in Suſis, is a
 Iew of the Tribe of Beniamin, of the poſteritie of Saul, reſerued
among the Heathen, to praiſe the Lord, and deliuer
his Church: Oh ye liberty of the rich mercies of God, how
faithfull is he in his promiſes,Pſal. 80. how mighty to the preſeruation
of his Church?
               Who would haue lookt for good of Sauls poſteritie, yt
                  
was forſaking of God, and had the Kingdome rent from
him? Who would haue thought that there could haue bin
a remnant in Suſis, to call vpon the name of God, and to be
zealous for his glory?Pſal. 80 Wil God plāt a vine in Canaan, & remoue
it into Aegipt? ſhal it be remoued out of Aegipt into
the wildernes, & ſo into Canaan againe? ſhal it be remoued
out of Canaan into Babilon, & from Babilon to Suſis? ſhal
his Church bee toſſed and tumbled to all theſe places?Reuel. 2.
ſhall all ſortes of nations giue harbour thereto? ſhall the
Turke harbour it? yea Antichriſt himſelf ſhal not be able to
roote it out: but euen there ſhalbe a Church, where
ſatan hath his throne and the diuell his Synagogue: Chriſt
ſhall raigne in the mideſt of his enemies.
               1. Behold here the condition of the Church in this miſerable
world:Reaſons. It muſt be a Pilgrime vpon earth, ſcattered
it ſhalbe ouer the face thereof that Gods power may be
more magnified in the preſeruation thereof,
                     Obſ. 39. Condition of the Church to be ſcattered vpon the face of the earth. and his worke
the better accompliſhed both in, and by the ſame, while
it being thus poſted, and toſſed to and fro, they rather
looke and long for that Citty which is aboue; and by being
thus changed, from veſſell to veſſell, it may both
leaue ſauour of it good behind, it to the conuerſion and reuocation
of others, & may haue it owne droſſe alſo purged
out thereby to be prepared to her eternall reſt.
               
                  Vſe 1. By which we may learne to diſcerne the true
Church of God,Eſay 47, not by her ſitting as a Queene of the nations
and flattering her ſelfe that ſhe ſhall not be changed,
but by this we may diſecrne the true Church of God,
namely that as ſhe muſt be toſſed and ſcattered ouer the
face of the earth,Epheſ. 6. ſo ſhe hath her loines guirt vp & her feet
ready ſhod thereto: not ſetting vp her reſt becauſe it is
good to be here, but wayting the Lords leiſure to call her
forth where it pleaſe him. A notable warning to carnall 
Ghoſpellers that if they abuſe the Ghoſpel it ſhalbe taken
away from them,Iere. 7. the Temple of the Lord will be no bond,Ezech. 10. 11.
to hold him among them: And withall a moſt excellent 
comfort to the Children of God: that Suſhan ſhall receiue
them, when Iudah caſts them out, and which may yet make 
                     
for our greater comfort, this remouing of the Church, as it
tends to the continuance therof in this life, fo it alſo fitteth
it to eternall reſt in heauen. And therefore let vs not
thinke it ſtrange if we find not a biding Citty but are toſſed
vp and downe and ſcattred among the nations. It is
the portion that our God hath allotted vs if we wilbe true
members of his Church, and it is good for vs thus to be
changed,Pſal. 55. 15 that we may feate and truſt in God, who as by
remouing our habitations he doth pluck vs out of thoſe
common deſolations, which lie vpon places that deſpiſe his
word: ſo in that he hath giuen vs the heathen for our inheritance
and the vttermoſt bounds of the earth for our poſſeſſion,
hereby doth he alſo inueſt vs with the poſſeſſion of
each Nation and the bleſſings thereof, which indeed properly
do belong to vs: and all this that his Church may
be continued on the face of the earth,
                     Obſ. 40. The faithfulneſſe of God in that the Church of God ſh
                        •
                     ll abide for euer. yea may ſtill preuaile
and get ground in the world, till all her enemies
be troad vnder her feet.
               And is it poſſible that this poore afflicted Church ſhould
ſtill hold our being ſo ſcattercd and weakened? ſhall ſhe
continue for euer and ſhall no power preuaile againſt her?1 Eſay 9.
ſhal there yet be a remnant and a little ſeed; ſhal there be a
truth,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſay 65. and a cluſter that hath a bleſſing in it:Rom. 11 ſhall Mordecai
                   and Heſter both Iewes remaine to reuiue the Church
 of God, when God had ſeemed vtterly to haue forſaken his
 people? yea ſurely the Lord is faithfull, and in indgement remembreth
mercy.
                  Exod. I. 
                  The afflictions of the Church ſhalbe a
 meanes to increaſe the ſame. Yea the enemies of the
Church ſhal become ſeruants vnto it.Pſal. 72. 
                  Her weapons are
 mighty to caſt downe the ſtrongeſt hold. And her ſoundings
are meanes to reuiue her againe.2 Cor. 10. 4 What ſhould I
 ſay? Her outward abaſing, increaſeth inward glory: & her
 inward glory makes way to outward conqueſts. She muſt
 be purged of her droſſe, that ſhe may be cloathed with
perfit beauty: ſhe muſt be blacke among men, that ſhe
may be faire in the eyes of her God, and ſo remaine more
conſtant in his fauor and protection.
               
                  Vſe. Which being ſo. 1. as therefore the bandyings of
 the wicked are in vaine againſt Gods Church, So is ou
                     •
                  
                  
feare as vaine that the Church may be deſtroied. And
                  
therefore as the Church is continued, by being led aſide 
into the wildernes: ſo let vs now liue by faith in the diſcerning
of this Church. Let vs not forſake that fellowſhippe,Hebr. 10.
                  
which God wil not forſake, but let vs cleaue to yt Church
that ſhall abide for euer: old things are paſſed away, and
the ſhadowes are renewed, the vaile is pluckt off and the 
hand writing of ordinances put out. Oh let vs not end in 
the fleſh that haue begenne in the ſpirit. Let vs hold the
profeſſion of our hope without wauering, and continue to
the end, ſo is the crowne of righteouſneſſe laid vp for vs,
which the righteous Iudge ſhall giue at that day.
               And that we may be the rather certaine hereof, behold
the Lord knoweth who are his, he calls them by their
names, yea their names are regiſtred & finally recorded in
the word, that they may be the better perſwaded that their
names are written in heauen: ſo faith the ſpirit.
                     Obſer. 41. Fit names to be giuen to our children. 
                  Whoſe
name was Mordecai. See here the perſon whom God appoints
for the deliuerance of his Church; Mordecai is his
name & bitternes is his portion: he is the ſon of contrition,
yt muſt be ſon of coſolation. So do the children of God anſwere
their names yt which they are they alſo make profeſſion
of. So doth God ſanctifie his childrē to ye accompliſhmēt 
of his worke: So are they fitted to giue him al y• glory.
               
               
                  Vſe 1 Wherby we may learne As; giue fit names to our
children, to ſhew our hope of them, or to put thē in minde 
of their natural condition, or of the means of God towards
them. So we are to acknowledge the loue of God vnto his 
children that takes perticular notice of them in giuing and
changing their names,Sara, Sarah. Abram, Abraham, Iacob, Iſrael. yt they may be witneſſes of his loue
towards them; Yea herein alſo may we obſerue a ſpecial art
of Gods prouidence in recording the names and generations
of ſuch champions of his as haue ſtood out valiantly
for the cauſe of his church: & being his inſtruments for the 
peace thereof: that ſo we may be the better conuinced
in the truth of their ſtories: and ſo our hiſtoricall faith
iuſtyfiyng the truth of the word may make way for
that iuſtifying faith in the Sonne of GOD, that ſo we

haue in him euerlaſting life.Ioh 3. To this end it followeth.
               
                  This Mordecai was the ſonne of Iair the ſonne of Shemei
the ſonne Kiſh a man of Gemine. In which words the holy
Ghoſt ſets downe the pedegree of Mordecai by the
lineall deſcent from his aunceſtors.
               And yet very briefely too,
                     Obſe. 42. Genealogi
                        •
                     s how recorded in the word omitting many generations
as the manner of the ſpirit is, the recording of ſome being
ſufficient to avouch the truth of the ſtory, and among the
reſt mentioning eſpetially ſuch who might more ſet forth
the truth of Gods promiſes to the faithful, and therby more
ſettle faith for future occaſions.
               To this purpoſe is it that many others being omitted,
there is ſpeciall mention made here of the tribe of Beniamin
and of ſome ſuch in ſpeciall which may ſeeme to come
out of the houſe and family of Saul. That ſo we might
know how that this Mordecai was of the houſe of Saul
and therein behold the great mercy of God, who though
he reiected Saul, and in a manner rooted out his poſterity,
yet he ſhewed great mercy vnto the poſterity of Ionathan
not onely in preſeruing the ſame in a lineall deſcent for the
ſumme of fiue hundred yeares (if this Mordecai draw his
petigree there,
                     Obſ. 43. Children ſhall not be puniſhed for the fathers offence. and ſurely it muſt be here or not from Saul)
becauſe his other children left no iſſue behind them, but in
reſtoring alſo the ſame in ſome ſort to the gouernment
which Saul and his poſterity was vtterly depriued of. A
notable demonſtration of the mercies of God that indeed
they are aboue all his workes,2. Sam. 9. 3. he retaineth not his wrath
for euer becauſe mercy pleaſeth him he will not puniſh the
the children for the fathers tranſgreſſion, but the righteous
ſeede ſhall l
                     •
                  ue though the wicked ſtock be rooted vp, for
ſhal not the Iudge of al the world do right? are not al ſoules
 his? hath not he a fatherly care ouer all? ſo that it is not he
 but their ſins that make the difference of their conditions?
               
                  Vſe. 1. Surely if this leſſon were througly learned, how
                   would it humble the firſt borne, that they looſe not their
 birth-right? how would it comfort the out-caſt and deſpiſed
that he may get the bleſſing? how is he taught hereby to

repaire his fathers houſe, euen by declaring wiſely the ſins 
of his father: how may hee hope by this meanes to ſee 
light in darkeneſſe,Eſay. 58. and to turne the curſe into a gratious
bleſſing? what glory ſhall it be to him to borrow the repaire
of the breach and the reſtorer of the paths to dwell in. Such
was Mordecai of the family of wicked Saul; ſuch was the
ſonne of God, many of whoſe aunceſtors in the fleſh were
wicked perſons. So will not God be tied to nature in the
beſtowing of his bleſſings; and ſo wi
                     •
                   God make nature
beholding to him in bleſſing beyond deſert the fruit
thereof.
               And ſurely where God beſtowes bleſſings they come
not alone: behold the ſame God that prouides out of the
loynes of Ionathan thoſe that ſhall build vp the old waſt
places, he alſo continewes the line of Ionathan euen for the
ſpace of fiue hundred yeares and very likely in the poſterity
of Mordecai hath not cut of the ſame;1. Sam. 10. 15. ſo requeſted Ionathan
that mercy might not be cut of from his houſe for euer; ſo promiſed Dauid, and ſo the Lord makes it good; the
ſeed of the righteous ſhall be mighty vpon the earth and
the poſterity of the Iuſt ſhall abide for euer,
                     Obſ. 44. God continueth and bleſſeth the poſterity of the reighteous. but for the
ſeede of the wicked it ſhall be cut of and their generations
ſhal be deſtroyd from the face of the earth: which as it ſtands with the righteouſneſſe of God that they which are
heyres of the couenant ſhould alſo be partakers of the
bleſſing thereof:
                     
                        •
                     al. 112. 
                  ſo it concernes his power to maintaine
the righteous ſeede,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 37. 26. 28 29. which the world eſpecially labours to
roote out: ye yea his mercy is exalted in giuing his children 
herein a pledge of eternall happineſſe, and his Church is by 
this meanes continued, and aduanced on the earth.
               
               Which as it containeth that Doctrine of diuels which 
forbiddeth marriage to the beſt ſort of men, as if it made 
them bad and their poſterity worſe: ſo it alſo checketh the 
infidelity of ſuch who eſteeme the plentiful iſſue as a croſſe
vnto them if they be otherwiſe croſſed and pinched in the
world. Neither can they alſo here be excuſed, who hauing 
children do rather nouriſh corruption in them, that ſo they

may depriue them of the bleſſing of the couenant, then by
holy education fit them thereto:Math. 2. 
                  ſurely that Lord that therfore
made one though he had aboundaunce of ſpirit becauſe
he ſought a Godly ſeede,Pro 2. will vndoubtedly deſtroy
the ſeed, that the ſtranger hath ſownne and the baſtard
ſlips ſhall not take roote.Obſ. 45. Poſterity how to be continued.
               
               Wouldſt thou therfore know how thy poſterity may abide
for euermore. Firſt then graft thou in an holy ſtocke,
and then drinke the waters of thine owne ciſterne,Pro 3. 15. 
                  offer vp
the firſt borne to God and prune thy oliue plants with holy
 diſcipline. Set not thy heart vpon them, neither diſhonor
 the prouidence of thy God in a diſtruſtful ſcraping for thē;

                  imploy them in ſuch callings as may humble the fleſh, and
 ſeaſon them with inſtruction to ſet them to grace, so ſhalt
 thou be a happy father of gratious children, and thou ſhalt
 not only to thy comfort ſee thy childrens children, but to
 thy greater comfort peace vpon Iſrael. Wel thus we have
 heard of the habitation and country of Mordecai. Now lets
a little further confider of his condition, it followeth.Pſa. 128.
               
               
                  Which had beene caried away from Ieruſalem with the
captiuity that was caried away with Ieconiah King of Iudah,
                  Verſ. 6.
                  whome Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel had carried away.
                  
                     Obſer. 46. They let Gods Church to go into captiuity.
               
               In which word being referd as we haue proued before
to the faith of Mordecai the ſpirit of God sets downe the
eſtate and condition of Mordecai by a conſequent, namely
that he was borne in the land of his countries captiuity.
He was a captiue in a ſtrange land, ſo were his fore-fathers
in Egypt, and so are his posterity now ſlaues to all nations
ſo are the children of God exerciſed with this affliction:
Ioſeph was ſould for a bond-ſlaue & it is the lot of ye poore
Chriſtians vnder the Turke and such enemies of the Goſpel
to be ſould & led captiues into a ſtrange land. And that not
without the eſpeciall prouidence of God▪ 
                  both to put his
children in minde of their naturall condition that they are
no better then the ſlaues of Satan,Ecele. 23. 
                  and alſo puniſh them iuſtly
for their 
                     •
                  ornications with other nations, by giving them
vp as a prey vnto them, and yet even to their eſpecial good

and his great glory.Pſal. 137.
               
               Who while they are in Babilon remember Sion, and 
thereby not only apprehend the true cauſe of their affliction
namely the contempt of Sion, and the comforts thereof,
                  but remembring Sion they alſo reuiue ſuch comforts as
before they had ſtored vp, thereby to maintain in them the
true life of grace: and ſo often remembering Sion, and meditating 
thereon as ther by they witneſſe their harty longing
after the ſame, ſo hereby they fit them-ſelues to the reſtoring 
of Ieruſalem. To this end is it that while they are in
captiuity they hartily labour the conuerſion of others, that 
ſo they may offer vp the riches of the gentiles vnto God
and ſo the prouidence of God is magnified ouer them, not 
only in humbling the fleſh in the land of their captiuity
their ſoule refuſeth comfort,Exod 54 but further alſo in quickning
the life of grace their vowes are renewed,Ezra. 45. and heauen ſuffers
violence,Eehe. 45. whereby preuayling with God, they do alſo
preuaile with men, and ſo find ſuch fauour in the ſight of
the heathen that once by them they are ſent forth to Sion
againe.Obſ. 47. Church how prepared to Captiuit.
               
               
                  Vſe. Thus captiuity being a iudgment with may befall
the Church of God, as this condemneth the vaine preſumption
of thoſe that dreame of a locall perpetuity and viſibility
of the Church of God: ſo it alſo chalendgeth their extreame
folly that prepare the Church of God to ſo heauy a
iudgement, either by bringing the Church in bondage at
home, while they captiuate the liberty here of to the luſts 
of men; or by impudent communicating the wickedneſſe 
abroad they do thereby chooſe the threſhing floore, where
the Church muſt be purged. Surely as God is righteous in 
his iudgements ſo is he mercifull, and therefore we ſhall
beare the rod before we feele it, yea one correction of the
almighty ſhal foretel another, that ſo we may ſee the plague
and hide our ſelues, and happily avoyd the vengenace to
come, who ſo is wiſe let him vnderſtand theſe things and
to whom the arme of the Lord hath reuealed them.
               Well the Churh of GOD is in Captiuity, and is it

not to ſome purpoſe that the holy Ghoſt, makes ſuch perticular
and often mention of it?Iere. 39.
               
               1 Yea ſurely.Iere. 51 2 As the Lord is knowne by executing of
Iudgements,Reg 25 2 2. So would he have vs meditate and contemplate
the ſame,Chro. 36. &c. that ſo we may be confirmed more and
more in knowledge.Obſ. 48. Gods Iudgements are to be recorde
                        •
                      & meditated. 3. And ſurely as they are ſome of
thoſe workes of God which are worthier our conſideration
4. So do they keepe vs from ſecurity in ſinne and preſumption
of Gods mercies. They confound Atheiſts and
ſcorners of religion.Pſa 16. They keepe vs in obedience and increaſe
our faith.Pſal. 111
               
               
                  Vſe 1. And therefore ſeeing the Lord doth daily bring
his iudgements to light,Pſal. 10. 4. let them not paſſe aboue our
 ſight as if they concerned vs not. Let vs not eſteeme them
 as the ordinary effects of nature, and therefore haue no reference
 at all to ſinne. Let vs not ſuppreſſe them in policy
 or depraue them by malice. Let vs not in pride diminiſh
 them, or in ſecurity forget them: But in the feare of God
 take we ſpeciall notice of them, as the admirable workes
of God, though nature be vſed in them: As ſeaſonable
 meſſengers or Gods will, and therefore to be hearkened
to;Profits of Gods iudgements. as liuely glaſſes to ſee our faces in, and therefore not
to forget our iniquities that are cenſured thereby: and
as profitable furnaces to purge out our droſſe, and take away
our ſinne,Esay I. and therefore we ſhould be rather be amended
 by them: Surely if they do not amend vs they
will be witneſſes againſt vs and draughts of that cuppe of
wrath which the wicked ſhalbe drunken withall in hell.
               But is the glory of the earth gone into captiuity?
                     Obſ. 49. God often changeth and confoundeth the outward proſperity aud viſibility of his Church. is Ierusalem
the citty of the great God, and place of his delight
where he promiſed to dwell for euer, and ſo made faſt
the barres of her gates, is ſhe led captiue into a ſtrange
land? Doth ſhe dwel among the heathen? and there is none
to comfort her? are her aduerſaries chiefe? & do her enemies
proſper? y• while ſhe was faithful when God troad vpon the
neckes of her enemies and turned Kings in chaines and
Nobles in fetters of yron?Pſ: 13. 2 Oh what a change is here of this

glorious Cittie? hath the Lord forgotten to be morneful?
or can his will be reſiſted? Surely,Eccleſi. 9 as theſe outward
things fall alike vnto all, and no man knoweth Gods loue 
or hatred by them; ſo the outward changes of earthlie 
things do iuſtifie the vnchangeableneſſe and conſtancy of
GOD. Not onely in that he deales indifferently to euery 
ſoule that ſinneth,Rom 1. vnto the Iew firſt, and then to the
Grecian, but further alſo by the changing of the outward 
ſtate in this life, he make way for the accompliſhment of
his vnchangeable and eternall decree concerning the ſaluation
of his Church, to which by theſe outward changes,
ſhe is graciouſly prepared.
               
                  Vſe 1. Which as it makes the way to the accompliſhment
of his owne, ſo it iustifieth alſo the truth of his promiſes,
which being conditional in regard of temporall bleſſings
namely ſo long as they ſhalbe fit for vs, and wee
can make right vſe of them: when we faile in thoſe conditions,
theſe promiſes are yet ſo expired, that the right
of them are remayning; we are onely ſo farre depriued of
the effect, as that being humble therein and ſo renued
by repentance, wee not only recouer our poſſeſſion in
theſe things, but are alſo further fitted to the enioying
of the ſubſtance whereof theſe are but very ſhadowes.
               And therefore as it ſtands with the conſtancy and couenant
of God, that the Church may be thus obſcured,
and to the outward view extinguiſhed, ſo doth it make alſo
for the exceeding good of the Church of God and condemnation
of the world.
                  Obſer. 50. Changes of the Church tend to exceeding good thereof.
               
               Concerning the Church it tends to the good thereof
many waies.
               1. That it may diſcerne it ſelfe to be the true Church of
God, in that it liues and inwardly proſpers, yea intierely
preuailes, though the branches and leaues ſeeme dead and
withred.
               2 The Church hereby is exceedingly humbled in regard
of the abuſe of her former liberty, and ſo is fitted
greeuouſly to repentance.
               
                  
3 She is alſo ſtripped of carnall confidence, by occaſion
whereof ſhe fell to ſuch abuſe and ſo is prouoked to ſettle
wholy on God.
               4 She hath now more comfortable experience of the
power of God and Godlineſſe, who as he now ſhewes
himſelfe more inwardly gratious,1 Ioh. 2. ſo doth he iuſtifie the
ſoundneſſe and integrity of his Church.
               5 She hath now more leiſure gather inward ſtrength
as being happily eaſed of outward proſperity, a very maine
let and weakning thereof.
               6 It hath by this meanes experience of her friends, and
ſo is drawne thinner and nerre to God. And laſtly ſhe is
by this meanes deliuered from greater deſolations which
in the Land of her proſperity might have happened vnto
her: as for the world it receiues his condemnation hereby
many waies. 1. It is offended at this blackeneſſe of the
Church and the croſſe of Chriſt is a ſtumbling blocke
thereto.Ioh. 7. 48. 2. Affliction is hereby added to affliction, and now
they crie downe with it downe to the ground,
                  1 Cor. 1. 23 
                  Haman is not
content that the Church is in bondage,
                     Obſer. 51. The world confounded by the changes of the Church. but he will lay a
plot to roote it out quite. 3. Herevpon growes ſecurity
and ripenes in ſinne and ſo when the harueſt is ripe the
ſickle ſhalbe put in. Ioel. 3. 13. Thus doth God diſpoſe of
theſe great alterations of his Church.Pſal. 137. Thus make they
for his glory the benefit of the Church of God and the
confuſion of the world.Heſt. 3
               
               And therefore ſeeing the Church of God may ſometimes
be thus baſe and contemptable in the eye of the
world. 1.Vses of the afflictions the Church. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     ost we not vpon ſuch preuiledges as are of the
world. 2. Neither content we our ſelues with ſuch whoſe
glory ſhalbe our ſhame.Iere. 7 3. But adorne we the hidden man
in the heart which ſhalbe glorious for euer.Oſſe. 5. 4. Reuerence we
the power of God who is able to ouerthrow the glory of
the world:Amos 5. 5. And feare we his iuſtice if we be found in the
like ſins. 6. But magnifie we his prouidence, yt is able thus to
bring light out of his darkenes. 7. and beleeue we conſtantly
the perpetuity of the Chruch which is meruailouſly preſerued

in her greateſt decaies. Well thus we have heard of
the captiuity of the Church. But who are they that beare
the brunt of this heauy affliction?
               Surely I
                        •
                     coniah the King his Princes and Nobles,
                     Obs. 52. Great ones drinke deepe o
                        •
                      the cup of vengeance. the
mightieſt are moſt humbled & the ritcheſt are moſt aimed
at. So are great ones ſure to drinke deepe of the generall
ſcourge, when happily the poore of the land are eaſed therby:
a matter moſt agreable to the iuſtice of God.Eccle. 9. 6. 1. Becauſe
great ones haue a conceipt,Iere. 39 that they are out of gunſhot,
who dare touch them?Eſay 23. who can pluck them downe?
come famine and ſuch like iudgements, they will haue a
preuiledge, and therefore the Lord to confound their confidence
he hath a rod of his indignation euen to breake
the greateſt in peeces.
               2 Theſe greater perſons are the ring-leaders in ſinne, and
therefore there is a time when they ſhalbe met withall.
               3 They are the rod to ſcourge and afflict their people
and therefore it is iuſt with God to heare the cry ofExod. 22
the poore and to aueng them of their oppreſſors by giuing
them eaſe when their oppreſſors ſhalbe recompenced.2 Theſſ. 1. 7.
               
               4 The pride and couetouſneſſe of the conqueror aymeth
at the greateſt, theſe ſhalbe ſure to the ſpoile, howſoeuer
others ſcape; a notable leſſon both for great ones and
inferiors.
               1 As to humble the great ones in the ſence of their greatneſſe,
becauſe they cannot out-ſtand the wrath of God.
               2 So to aduiſe them alſo to be carefull of their waies, not
ſparing great offences▪ nor preſuming of their owne greatneſſe,
leſ
                     •
                   the ſmart of their ſinne light moſt heauily vpon
themſelues.
               3 Secondly the ſubiect is here inſtructed as not to dreame
of impunity ſeeing the greateſt ſhall ſmart for it, and therfore
to beare the yoake with patience, ſeeing there will be
an end. 4. So to mourne when Princes do eate in the
morning, and ſt
                     •
                  etche themſelues vpon Iuory beds▪
not regarding the affictions of Ioſeph becauſe this is
a certaine note of ſome iudgement inſuing.Amos. 6. 5
               
               
                  
5 And yet herein alſo to comfort themſelues; that God
will ſet a marke on thoſe that mourne for the preſent euills;
they ſhalbe deliuered from the common calamity.
               But who is the rod that the Lord appoints to this
great execution: the holy Ghoſt addeth.
               
                  Whom Nebuchadnezar King of Babel had caried away.
               
               Behold the rod with God vſeth for the chaſtiſement
of his Children:Obſer. 53. God vſeth great and mighty enemies for the chaſtizing of his Church. euen a moſt proud, mighty and malitious
enemy, whoſe eyes ſhall not ſpare them, nay who ſhall
hope vtterly to roote them out. And yet the Lord moſt
righteous and mercifull herein. 1. Abac. 12.
               The righteouſnes of the Lord appeares in theſe circumſtances.Eſay 8. 10.
               
               1 Becauſe it is in his choice to vſe what rod he will and
the rod he vſeth is ſanctified thereto.Sect. I. This ſtandeth with his iuſtice. Eſay 15.
               2 The wickeds teeth are an edgetil they be on this worke,
it is the office they deſire, this count they their greateſt
of happineſſe, all their honour is nothing, becauſe Mordecai
wil not bow vnto them,Ezech. 29. and therefore to chooſe they
will have a fling at Mordecai.
                  I Reg. 22. 3. And is not the Lord
righteous herein,Heſt. 5. ſo to giue them their deſire that while
they ſpurne at a ſtone it breakes them in peeces? Zach. 12.
               4 The Godlie themſelues makes choice of this rod: they
will commit abhomination and al filthineſſe with them,Exo. 23 and
in their extremity they will ſeeke for helpe of them.Iere. 2. 34 5. And
is not the Lord righteous to giue his children their deſire
herein,
                     Sect. 2. It ſtands alſo with Gods mercy. that being thoroughly ſecured hereby they
might anſwere Gods deſire in their vnfained repentance?
1. And doth not this magnifie exceedingly the mercies of
God, to prouide ſuch a furnace as ſhall not dally with
them but purge thē thoroughly.1 Cor. 11. 32 2. That ſo being chaſtized
ſoundly in the world they may not be condemned in the
life to come.
               
                  Vſe 1. Surely as here we may behold the eſtate of the
Church, that ſhe muſt looke for great and ſharpe afflictions

                  So we may alſo take notice of the power of ſinne
in arming our owne fleſh thus cruelly againſt vs;

                  And ſeeing al curſes frō 
                  Adam are turned into bleſſings by
Chriſt, therfore lette vs learn to make our fleſh our friend,
1.
                     Sect. 3. Fleſh how to be mad our 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  not by ſoothing in ſinne, nor pertaking there-with: but
by ſound reproofe and wiſe preſeruing our ſelues from
the contagion thereof: Labour wee to ſubdue the
fleſh 
                     〈◊〉
                   God, and then it ſhall bee ſeruiceable vnto vs.
And in all thinges labour wee to approue our ſelues vnto 
God; ſo ſhall he make our enemies at peace with vs. And 
ſeeing our greateſt enemies are they of our owne fleſh; 
reſt wee not in man,Verſe, 16. 17. nor in the ſonnes of men, put wee no
confidence in a Councellor, no not in the wife that lies 
in our boſom
                     •
                  ;Math▪ 10. but count wee 
                     •
                  l as dung in regard of the
peace of a good conſcienee▪ 
                  ſo ſhal we hereby either make
our enemies our friendes,Mich. 7. or at leaſt we ſhal bridle & ſanctifie
to our good, their rage againſt vs.
               Well thus wee ſee the Church of God is carryed away
captiue▪ But was this the firſt draught of this cup of affliction?
Surely no: We ſhall find that this people of the
Iewes,
                  
                     Obſ. 54. God 
                        ••
                     a
                        ••
                     
                     ſ
                        ••
                     h his children often with the ſame 
                        •
                     od. beſides many fore-running Iudgements of the famine,
peſtilence, ciuill warres, forreyne inuaſions, and the like,
had three great draughts before euen of this cuppe of captiuitie,
and after this dranke the dregges, of this cuppe.
The firſt draught did the Kingdome of Iſrael drinke: One
by Tiglath Pileſer the King of Aſhur, who carried away
diuers of their Tribes into bondage,2. King. 15. 19. and the latter by
Shalmaneſer King of Aſhur, who carried away the whole
reſidue of the ten Tribes into perpetuall captiuitie:2 King 17. 9. 10. 
                  the
other three draughts the Kingdome of Iudah dranke at
in Manaſſeh his time, who was carried away captiue into
Babilon,
                  2 Chro. 33. 11. and vpon his time repentance reſtored againe.
The ſecond draught was in the time of Iehoiakim King of
Iuda, who hauing rebelled againſt Nabuchad-nezzar king
of Babell after that he had ſerued him three yeares;2 Reg. 24. 10. therefore
the King of Babel hauing firſt ſent his Captaines to
ſpoyle and waſte the Country round about, to the very
walles of the Citty, at length in the raigne of Iehotachim
the ſonne of Iehoiachim the former, begirts the Citty and

and ſtrangely beſeegeth it, The extremitie whereof, the
King and his Princes beeing not willing to indure it, by
the perſwaſion of the Prophet Ieremy, yeeld them-ſelues
to the conquerors pleaſure, and ſo for this time though
they ſaued the Citty from deſolation, yet both the ſpoile
thereof was aboundantly carryed away, and togither
with the King,Wiſ. 14. 16. his Princes, and Miniſters of ſtate, and
meanes of defence, at leaſt ſeauenteene thouſand are at this
time carryed into Babilon: and this is the captiuitie mentioned
in this booke of Heſter; the ſame which is here Iechoniah
being no other then Iehoiachim, as appeareth by ye
euidence of the word,1 Chro, 3. 16. and circumſtances of the hiſtory: It
being no vn-uſuall thing with the holy Ghoſt to call one
perſon by diuers names.
                  Ienem, 
                        •
                     2 
                        •
                     4
               
               After this captiuity in the raigne of Iehoiachim, followed
the laſt and moſt extreme draught of this cuppe, ſome
eleuen yeares after, when Zedekiah raigned as Viceroy vnder
Nebuchad-nezzar, who becauſe he rebelled againſt
his Lord:2 Chro. 36. therfore came Nabuchad-nezzar ye
                   ſecond time
and beſeeged the Cittie, and the inhabitants ſtanding
vppon
                     •
                  their defence,Icrem, 39. he after ſome two yeares ſiege took
it,2 Reg. 25. 11. and not onely expoſed it to the ſpoyle of his Army but
after defaced and conſumed it by fire. The glorious Temple
& ſtately Pallaces, the ſumptuous building and proud
walls, all were deſolate, broken downe, and ruinated:
And not onely ſo, but euen all the glory
and multitude of the people were carryed at ſeuerall times
into Babilon, ſaue only ſome poore that were left to Till
the Land.
               Thus did this people drinke of this cuppe of captiuitie, and
yet (as you haue heard) in meaſure, in the branches therof;
not all at once, leaſt they ſhould be drunke thereby, and ſo
returning to their vomit,Eſay, 17. make no right vſe thereof but
by degrees,
                     Obſ. 55. God chaſtiſeth his children in meaſure and by degees. now a little, then ſom-ewhat more, the rod
being a teacher, euen while it lay vpon them, and therein
teaching vs the ſinguler wiſdome and mercy of our God
in the chaſtiſing of his children: he comes not vpon them

                  ſodainly, neither ſweepes he them away at once: but as he
giues them warning of the rod, that ſo they may be prepared
for it, ſo he orders his iudgements that they may beſt
preuaile. And therefore firſt he ſhootes forth his more
gentle and ſcattering arrowes of the famine and peſtilence:
which though they hit ſome, yet they flye ouer
the heades of many, that by theſe, being warned they
might be brought to repentance, when theſe milder corrections
will not ſerue, then hee ſmites them yet ſeauen
times more:
                  Leuit. 1 here come in ciuill diſſentions and forreyne
Inuaſions, to humble & abait the pride of the great ones;
and if as yet they will not returne vnto him, then behold
hee will ſmite them ſeauen times more:
                  Amos. The cuppe of
Capiuitie ſhall be miniſtred vnto them: yet ſhall they
drinke thereof at times, in meaſure and by degrees: So
doth the Lord in iuſtice remember mercy, ſo doth hee
meaſure out his Iudgements, both that wee may beare
them, and that by them we might be brought to repentance:
As for the wicked, the Lord deales not ſo with
them. Affliction ſhall not riſe the ſecond time,
                  1 Nehemia, with one
ſtroke will he make an end of them: roote and branches,
head and taile,
                  Geneſ, 
                        •
                     9. will he cut off at one blow.
               
                  Vſe. Which prouidence of God is manifeſted moſt infallibly
in the courſe of his chaſticements vpon his Church,
as it namely confoundeth the inſolency of the wicked,
who thinke to make an end, when God doth begin; ſo it 
is alſo a gratious checke to the preiudice and impatience
of Gods children, who notwithſtanding this apparant difference
that God makes between them and the wicked in
the ſeuerall chaſticements, which he laies vpon them: for
many times in yt folly doe they both cenſure God as their
enemie,
                  Iob. Lament. 2. and them-ſelues to be dealt withall not as friends
but enemies.
               
                  And ſeeing affliction giueth vnderſtanding, and the
Lord eſpecially aimeth hereat in this ordering of his chaſticements; 
Therefore lette the man of God feare the
rodde, and who hath appointed it. Lette vs taker notice

hereby that God appointeth them, in that they are ſo
wiſely and mercifully ordered: and ſo let vs patiently vndergoe
this burthen and be comforted therein, that wee
are vnder the hands of a father who knoweth whereof
we are made, and therefore will lay no more vpon vs then
 we ſhall be able to indure: And ſeeing the Lord hereby
intends our repentance,Amos. 2. 
                        •
                     3. that if we will 
                     •
                  aſe him of our
ſinnes, he will eaſe vs of his rods: Let vs here wiſely take
notice of the cauſe of the continuance of his iudgements,
namely impenitencie and increaſe of ſinne. And lette this
be our marke▪ to looke for ſeauen times more if we do yet
multiplie our ſinnes againſt the Lord of glory. And therefore
let vs meet the Lord by repentance that he may ſtay
the hand of his iuſtice Let al States be humbled, becauſe
ye Lyon hath roared.Ierem 13. Amos. 3. And ſeeing the hand of the Lord is
ſtretched our ſtil let vs not liue by examples, & build our
happines vpon y• broken reeds of Egipt: Let vs not run to
Aſhur, & truſt in vain helps: but let vs turn to ye Lord, for
he hath wounded and he wil heale vs he wil render vs the
loſſe that the peſtilence and inundations, the intollerable
froſts, and fearefull earth-quakes (our cruell oppreſſors at
home, and treacherous friendes abroad) have made: he wil
yet devell among vs for his name ſake, and reſtore beauty
for aſhes▪ yea we ſhall for euer liue in his ſight. Thus haue
we now the condition of Mordecai, he is in the ſtate
of bondage and ſlauery to ys
                  
                     •
                   wicked: How doth he now
behaue him-ſelfe in this condition? Doth he yeeld to neceſſitie,
and imbrace the preſent world? Doth he renounce
he God and the care of his country, to eat of ſuch things
as pleaſe the wicked? No you haue heard before that he liued
vnrebukeably: but what inſtance haue we to giue euidence
thereof: It followeth therefore
               
               
                  He nouriſhed Hadaſſah that is Heſter,Verſe▪ 7. 
                  his vncles daughter:
What reaſon had he to moue him thereto? Here is, firſt
the bond of nature: She was his vncles daughter. Secondly,
Here is the bond of neceſſitie, for ſhe had neither father nor
mother. Thirdly, here's a priuiledge of nature. And the

Maid was faire and beautifull to looke on, rather to allure
and perſwade him thereto. Fourthly, here is the bond
of conſcience, likely it is ſhe was committed vnto him after
her fathers and mothers deceaſe, and therefore it is
ſaid.
               And after the death of her father and mother, Mordecai
tooke her for his owne daughter.
               Firſt he not only tooke vpon him her education and
maintenance, but adopted her alſo as his owne daughter,
and ſo to conferre vppon her the priuiledges of a
Child.
               Wherein firſt we may behold the great mercie of God
vnto his children, that in their greateſt afflictions, they
ſhall be prouided for: Mordecai ſhall be able to nouriſh
Heſter, and Heſter ſhall haue her Vncle Mordecai not
only to preſerue her from the extremitie of miſery (which
Orphanes are ſubiect to) but to traine vp this tender Maiden
in the feare of God; and to defend her chaſtitie frō the
rage of luſt.
               Two notable priuiledges of Gods children vnder the
croſſe, that either they ſhall be able to ſuccor others, or
they ſhall find reliefe with the ſafety of their credit, and
peace of conſcience.
               And ſurely that Gods children in their troubles,
                     Obſer. 56. Gods children are to comfot & releeue each other in their troubles. as they
are able, ſo they ſhould comfort others, this ſerues
to the magnifying of GODS power, and faithfulneſſe
towards them; and alſo to the great tryall of their
moſt holy faith.
               The power of God is ſeene herein, that the wicked are
brideled, who (out of queſtion) would not haue the righteous
liue by them, vnleſſe they will hang vppon them,
if they might haue their wills, they would keepe them
bare ynough from doing good to others; and ſo the children
of God are planted in the midſt of their enemies, and
herein alſo doth appeare the great faithfulnes of our god,
who inables his children to lend where they ſhould borrow,
and by this to be aſſured of a good ſucceſſe in al occaſions

ſeeing in ye land of their captiuity they can miniſter
to others: and is not our faith very gratiouſly tried herein,
when hauing our liues continually in our hands, and therfore
no certainty of what we haue; yet depēding on Gods
prouidence, we do comfort others, that had more need of
 comfort and remedy our ſelues. Would not ſome carnall
 wiſe virgins haue here replyed; wee haue little ynough
for our ſelues, we cannot ſpare it leaſt wee want in the
 time of need; we muſt keepe ſomwhat to appeaſe our taſkmaiſters,
ſomewhat to buy our liberty, we ſhall be thought
to be rich if we be harbourers of others, and ſo ſhall bee
 markes to the mallice of the ſpoylers: We ſhal hereby diſcouer
 our ſelues to be patrones of ſuch out-caſts, as being
enuied where they deſerue to be pittied, may breed no
good blood for our quiet ſetling: Thus would blind reaſon
 haue ſchooled a carnal man, but the man of God hath
another rule, hee ſees his life is in his hands, and therefore
he will do good while hee may, he knowes now there is
more need and therfore he wil caſt his bread vpon ye waters:

                  and where ſhal he haue ſuch comfor & portion in weldoing,
 as in releeuing the houſhold of faith, he ſees his
brethren like to go to the wal,Moyſes. 1 Exod. and therfore hee wil reſcue
 him though it coſt him the ſetting on; he knowes y• to feare
well doing in regard of the wicked, is to giue ſtrength to
the wicked, and ſo depriue himſelfe of the oportunity of
doing good. He beleeues yt God wil then come to deliuer
 when he caſteeh vp a Moſes to take the cauſe in his hands;
he ſees it will daunt the enemie when Gods children make
 much one of another and hold together; and therefore hee
becomes a meanes to ſtrengthen the weakeſt and vnite
them in families, and ſo bind them in holy leagues and aſſentations
 togither: he feares no euill tidings, no not the
ſpoile of his eſtate,Pſal. 112. becauſe his heart is ſtabliſhed and beleeues
in God, and hee diſiributes thereof to the poore,

                  wherby he wins the hearts of the enemie, yea hee will not
feare vntil he ſee his deſire vpon his enemies. And why?
the Lord is his ſheepheard, and he liues by faith in the ſon

of God, and though he paſſe through fire and water, yet
the Lord ſhall bring him into a wealthier place. This is
ye merciful man that ſowes in teares: the Lord wil recompence
him aboundantly; he ſhal reap in ioy: ſo was Mordecai,
and ſo hee did finde. 1. Vſe. A notable preſident
of tr
                     •
                  e bounty, and therein alſo a liuely marke of the true
child of God. And therefore lette not inabilitie hinder 
vs from comforting others, leaſt the widdowes mite be a
witneſſe againſt vs: Let not pollicie diſcourage vs from 
releeuing the Saints of God, leaſt while we pleaſe men
wee make God our enemie: Lette vs not feare want 
when God is the borrower; let vs not doubt of requital,
where his children are ingaged: let vs not be newters in 
ſuch caſes, where not to be with, is againſt God; but let vs 
maintaine Gods ſide that he may maintaine vs. Obediah
wil nouriſh the Prophets of God, though Iezabel intend
the contrary, and Ionathan will ſuccor Dauid, though his
father ſeeke his life: and did they want their reward? Mordecai
nouriſheth Heſter, who happily for her ſake beeing
beutyful might haue indangered his eſtate. Oh let vs not 
conſult with fleſh where God cōmandeth! But how I pray
you is Heſter nouriſhed? What doth ſhe pay for hir outward
maintenance? Is her conſciēce ſet to ſale for ye belly?
Is her beauty made the broker to maintaine this miſerable
life?Verſ, 12. 10. Doth ſhe offer the ſin of her ſoule, for the fruit of her
body?Verſ, 23. Surely no; vpō theſe tearmes ſhe might haue found
fauour in the eies of a Perſian,
                  Pſa. 69. 22 & ſuch mercies of the wicked
had bin extreme cruelties.
                     Obſ. 57. The bounty of Gods children is no Snare, but eſpecially labours the good of the ſoule. Behold here then the true
bounty of Gods children; their table is no ſnare, their riches
are no bait to corrupt ye ſouls of men: they intend not
to make Dauid their ſlaue, by their kind intertainment,
they giue him not Michel to bereaue him of his life: They
blind not the eyes of the wiſe by their boſome liberality,
nor hunt after the pretious life of men, with their ſacrifices
and peace offerings:Deut, 16. they kill not when they kiſſe: but
giue that it may bee giuen:Verſ, 7. 
                  their principall marke is
to winne the ſoule;Ioh, 2. 
                  So did our Sauiour trune water into

wine, that nature might bee turned to grace: ſo
did he giue a great draught of fiſh to make fiſhers of
men. ſo doth GOD beſtow theſe outward bleſſings,
that beleeuing in him, we may ſee greater things thē theſe.
               And ſo are his children like their heauenly Father, ſo
they do find their bread after many daies againe, when it
is thus diſtrſt
                     •
                  buted in conſcience and wiſdome.
               
                  Vſe 1. A notable rule for true liberality: that the
ſtreame thereof turne good to the ſoule. Not that we
ſhould be exempted hereby from doing good to the
 wicked, vpon pretence to harden them in their ſinne. Neither
                   that we ſhould content our ſelues with that liueleſſe
bounty of many who will ſeeme to comfort the ſoule
with a little lip-labour (God helpe &c.) neither yet to neglect
 our ordinary callings in an honeſt care of this life, as
if all were loſt labour which is not immediately imploied
 vpon the ſoule: But ſo to ſupply the bodie as that it may
 ſerue the ſoule: So to ſeeke the Ki
                     •
                  gdome of Heauen, as
 not to neglect the care of our families: So to ſhew our
true loue to the ſoule by releeuing the body for it ſake:

                  And ſo to humble the ſinne as that we haue compaſſion
 in the perſon: Making difference therein where wee
 ſee likely-hood of moſt inward good: And ſhortning
our bounty where it may be an occaſion to
the fleſh. Thus he that ſcattereth ſhall haue plenty. So
did Mordecai diſtribute, and ſo the Lord gaue a
bleſſing.
               And was it not a wonderfull bleſſing of GOD, that
a beautifull Maiden, left fatherleſſe and motherleſſe,
ſhould meete with ſuch a gardian: who did not ſet
her beauty to ſale,
                     Obſ. 58. God prouides for his children in trouble with the ſafety of a good conſcience. and her conſcience on the racke? how
many deſtreſſed ſoules are there, that in the land of their
captiuity, thinke it an high bleſſing if the ſhip-rack of
their conſcience may procure their quiet and the proſtituting
of their beauty may winne them fauour.
               Behold here then an excellent priuiledge of Gods
children in their extremities, that they ſhall finde releife

with the ſafety of a good conſcience: not one haire
of their head, much leſſe the peace of the minde ſhall miſcary:
thereby: and why? are they not the beloued of God
and in their chaſtizements moſt beloued? and how ſhall
this loue appeare if they bee not kept fit for it? hath not 
God promiſed that all ſhall turne to their good,If they be not here 
                        •
                     y drawn neerer to God & made more conformable to him. and
ſhall then their afflictions be meanes of their chiefeſt
hurt? Haue not the Saints of God come out purer from
this furnace? can the outward reliefe be a bleſſing
without the feaſt of a good conſcience? nay doth not the inward
peace giue true contentment in affliction; and ſo keepes
vs from reaching out our hand to wickedneſſe, for the 
eaſing of our burthen? Would the Godly deſire to liue in 
affliction were it not that they might increaſe in grace,
and be more fitted to Heauen? and will not the Lord fulfill 
the chiefe deſires of them that feare him?
               
               Are we not by theſe troubles ſummoned to our end and 
ſhall we now remoue the care of that which may make vs 
giue vp our account with ioy?
               And what I pray you is it that holdes vp in troubles?
doth man liue by bread onely? ſurely no, it is the ſpirit of a
man that beareth his infirmity, but a wounded ſpirit
who can endure?
               
                  Vſe A notable condition of the height of worldly wiſdome,
whoſe maine plea is this, that they muſt liue, and
therefore when troubles comes, which ſummons them to
die, yet they muſt do as the world doth, that is, that they
may liue longer in miſery, they will (what lies in them) renounce
the meanes of liuing for euer in true happineſſe:
As if there were a neceſſity laid vpon them to make
ſhip-wrack of a good conſcience, that they may eſcape 
death when there is no other likeli-hood but death
knockes now at their dores: Or if there were hope of longer
life, yet the keeping of a ſound heart would not be 
life to the bones, and ſo enable them the better to beare
their infirmity: Where is thoſe mens faith that pleade onely
with Eſau for the pottadge that they may not die 
                  
                   for hunger, and know not that God can giue them the
bleſſing whereby they may haue wiſdome and ritches.

                  What madneſſe is there to runne deeper on the ſcore
when we are called to paiment? What folly to diſtruſt God
 then when we are moſt caſt vpon him? What wiſdome to
 forſake God, when the world forſakes vs, what hope of
comfort in the world when we make it thus our enemie?
               
                  Vſe Well, who ſo is wiſe let him vnderſtand theſe
 things, and to whom the arme of the Lord hath reuealed
 them: Let him learne to liue by faith, that ſo ſinne do
not deceiue him. Let him wiſely conſider the inualuable
 price of his ſoule, and then bethinke that he ſell it not for
that which could not buy it: Let him know he ſhall leaſt
enioy that which he buies at ſo deare a rate: and for the after
receiuing (I tremble to ſpeake of it) Let him remember
 he hath a wiſe prouider, who as he needs not his ſinne to
accompliſh his prouidence ſo he preſerues from ſinne
 that we may be happily contained therein.
               
                  And let him in patience poſſeſſe his ſoule, looking with
Moyſes to the recompence of the reward, that ſo he
may auoide the pleaſures of ſinne, and runne with ioye
the race that is ſet before him: Thus was Heſter preſerued
by the tuition of Mordecai. Thus found Daniel fauor
in the eyes of the Eunuch,
                  
                     Obſer. 59. Of the change of names, and whether it be lawfull now for Chriſtians to change their names. and ſo was kept vndefiled from
the idolatrous meates.
               But let vs proceed a little further, and conſider who it
is that is nouriſhed by Mordecai, who it is that is brought
to ſo low an eſtate. It was Hadaſſah, thatis Heſter, euen ſhe
that is after aduanced to the higheſteſtate on earth.
               Concerning this variety of names impoſed on one perſon,Geneſ. 41. Ioſeph▪ Abraham, Sarah, Iacob, Iſrael. G. 32. Daniel &. Sociſ.
whether it were by Mordecai her Turor as taking her
to be his child, or by the King at her marriage, to giue
her the more honour: For the thing it ſelfe, there is no
controuerſie, but that the cuſtome of changing names,
hath beene ancient,2 Reg. 23 et 24. Ioachim 
                        〈◊〉
                      Zedekiay. and laudable. And the reaſons of
theſe changes, might be theſe.
               1 Either ſome increaſe of bleſſings, a ſpeciall fauour

which hath beene ſignified by ſuch changes, and this
might be the reaſon why the Lord changed names.
               2 Or ſome change of the outward condition, which
was the reaſon why the conquered had their names
changed. 3. Or to ſhew the power of the conquerors
ouer them; ſo ſeruants when they were made free, had alſo
their names changed.
               4 Or laſtly ſome change of the inward condition, and ſo
the names of Chriſtians where changed at their baptiſme,
or at their conuerſion by our Sauiour Chriſt &c.
               
                  Vſe 1 Which howſoeuer it hath beene the practize of
former times, and that vſed not onely by the heathen, but
by God himſelfe, yet as many ſuch cuſtomes were perticular
to their time 2. So I take it, this cuſtome is now ſo
farre antiquated, as the ſpeciall cauſe thereof (namely the
changing of names at Baptiſme) is now ceaſed. 3: Yf among
vs any ſuch occaſion fall out, where Iewes and
Turkes, &c. are to be conuerted, I ſee not but this liberty
remaines ſtill. 4. As for vs who haue ſuch names impoſed
on vs euen at our entrance in the world and Church,
which ſhould be badges of our profeſſion, and prouoke
vs to conſtancy therein: I ſee not why theſe in any ſort
ſhould be changed, vnleſſe we thinke it lawfull to change
our profeſſion with them.
                     Obſ. 60. Thoſe which are raiſed vp to greatest dignities are vſually in moſt deſperate and low eſtate.
               
               And is it then Heſter the Queene; that is Heſter the fatherleſſe?
Is ſhe a miſerable captiue that was after a royall
Empreſſe? muſt ſhe be nouriſhed by Mordecai, who
after giues lawes to a mighty Kingdome? ſo was Moyſes,
Ioſeph and the like: This is the Lords doing and it is admirable
in our eyes.
               1 This doth he in power worke, without and contrary
to meanes to confound the pride of nature. 2. This
doth he in wiſdome, that wee may aſcribe promotion to
him. 3. Nay this he doth in loue, that we may giue him the
glory, in being truly humbled with ſo great aduancement.
               
                  Vſe 1 Learne we here as not to preſume of meanes. 2. So
not to diſtruſt the want of them as to be comforted in our

                   loweſt eſtate, ſeeing it may be bettered, ſo to prepare for
 ſ
                     •
                  und humiliation before we be truly exhalted. So was
Heſter before ſhe was exhalted.
               But what reaſon hath Mordecai to take this care of
Heſter? Firſt it is ſaid ſhee was His vncles daughter.
               
               The band of affinitie moued him to this duty,
ſhee was his couſin Germaine, and therfore hee tooke
charge of her.
               
                   A very good bond to inforce this duty, not only impoſed
by God in this caſe vppon the like occaſions of widdowhood.
                     Obſ. 61. Kin
                        •
                     ed to bee relieued.
&c. But very agreeable to the law of nature, both
being of our blood in a more particular manner, ſo that in
 releeuing of them we keepe the true order of nature; and
ſo performe therein honour to God and our ſelues, as
herein approuing our ſelues to haue naturall affection;
                  1 Rom. the
want whereof is a maine challenge of impiety.2 Tim, 3.
               
               1 Vſe. This condemneth thoſe monſters in nature y• feed
 on their owne fleſh, deuouring their kindred, or leauing
them to the ſpoile: aboue all others affecting them leſt, and
moſt vnnaturally preferring ſtrangers before them.
               As alſo they are here reproued that preferre the naturall
 affinitie before the ſpirituall: And reiect the care of
GODS Church vppon pretence of prouiding for their
families.
               
                   And laſtly hereby wee may learne ſo to ſubdue nature,
that we giue it alſo her right; not ſtripping our poſterity of
their lawful inheritance, vppon pretence of preferring the
ſpirituall affinitie, leaſt we burthen the Church and wrong
our poſterity: but wi
                     •
                  ely deuiding vnto each his right:
our children their patrymony, and the Church her competencie;
in equallitie of inward gifts, giuing nature her priuiledge,
and God the glory in preferring greateſt bleſſings.
               But had Heſter this need of reliefe from her Kinſman?
Yea ſurely it followeth.
               
               For ſhe had neither father nor mother.
               A ſtranger ſhee was, and therefore to be releeued; a

                  kinſ
                        •
                     oman ſhe was, and therefore nature requires it but
ſhe was an O
                        •
                     phane, and therefore there was a neceſſitie
in it.
               And ſurely ſuch is the condition of the children of God,
                     Obſ. 62. God children le
                        •
                     t Orphanes in the world.
they are left fatherleſſe and motherleſſe: euen to the wide
world. And th
                        •
                     t not without the ſpec
                     •
                  all prouidence
of God, who both may thus leaue them as it ſeemeth good 
to him; And doth this alſo for their exceeding good that 
                  forgetting their Fathers houſe and the proppes of fleſh
they may more intirely depend vpon him, and haue better 
experience of his immediate prouidence.
               
                  Vſe 1 And therefore: let it not be ſtrange vnto vs, if
God ſhall thus deale: neither let vs deſire this day of affliction:
ſome are ſick of their parents,Pſal. 27 and in the end they
are ſick for them. Let vs make ſure of God our father 
who now will take vs vp: and make much of our ſpirituall 
Fathers, who in Gods ſteed are ſet ouer vs: Pray we for the 
Magiſtrate who will be alwaies a father vnto vs, and loue
                  
we the Saints that they may be our Father: ſo ſhall we
neuer want a Father, while God hath a Church and Kingdome,
and he ſhall aduance vs his children to that glo
                     •
                  ious
inheritance.
               But doth not God, make his ſeruant gratious in the eye
of Mordecai, the better to moue him to the performance of
this duety? Yea ſurely beſides the inward beauty of her
minde, where-with ſhe was furniſhed to approue her to
Mordecai:
                  
                     Obſer. 63. 
                        •
                     he great
                        •
                     r natures gi
                        •
                     tes nee
                        •
                      the greater 
                        ••
                     idl
                        •
                     s. Behold the Lord adornes her with outward
grace, and beauty, that ſo ſhe might be fitter for that honor
which after was caſt vpon her: ſo it followeth.
               
                  And the maide was faire and beautifull to lo
                        •
                     k
                        •
                      one,
That is, togither with her beautie, ſhe was comely and welfauoured;
two notable outward graces of a yong Virgin:
In regard whereof, as ſhe had more need of a gardian, Becauſe
of natures aptnes to ſinne vpon ſuch a preuiledge,
                  And the forceable battery that would be layd to her
from without: ſo it pleaſeth GOD to prouide for her 
accordingly.
               
                  
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it condemneth the practiſe of parents
that vſually giue moſt liberty where natures gifts are more
eminent, and put forth their beautifull children to the preferment
of the world, as if their outward feature would be
their preueledge and prouider, keeping their more humble
 children (as we ſay) at home vnder gouernment: ſo it is
a notable leſſon to all natures children that haue outward
endouments aboue the other, that in this reſpect they moſt
feare them-ſelues, and they rather carie a ſeuere hand ouer
them-ſelues for theſe priueledges; as knowing that ſuch
gifts not kept vnder, are but fuell to ſinne; yea patterns
thereof, and yet by reſtrayning of them they may be ſanctified
vnto vs.
               
                  And ſurely,
                     Obſ. 46. The gifts of nature being ſantified are good meanes to procure fauour and aduancement to Gods children if it may pleaſe the Lord to ſanctifie them
vnto vs: may they not be furtherances for the bettering of
our eſtate in the world; yea ſurely, as God giues them not
in vaine, but to bee vſed in the world, ſo by this meanes
they ſhall preuaile as both rightly vſed of vs and ſo worthily
reſpected of GOD him-ſelfe: who both craueth his
gifts with conuenient honour in this life, and makes
the leaſt of their ſteppes to aduance, vs to eternall happineſſe.
               
                  
                  And therefore as this doth not warrant that whoriſh
ſophiſticating of natures gifts by adulterous arts vpon
pretence to ſet out nature in her glory, and to procure her
 aduancement: ſo it condemnes on the contrary, that obiect
 of defacing natures endowments, as if they were not
Gods bleſſings but rather enemies to Godlineſſe: And ſo
                   out of theſe contraries we may learne a ciuell courſe, ſo to
eſteeme of theſe guiſts as they further ſanctification;
                     Sect. 1. How to vſe naturs gifts aright. and ſo
to vſe them as may ſtand therewith, Namely in a holy feare
of them to be humbled in them, and the rather in regard of
them both to ſtand in awe of God, as alſo to a voyde ſuch
occaſions as may make them weapons vnto ſinne, maintayning
them daily by the word; and the examples of the moſt
ſober: and wiſely conſidering the changeableneſſe of them
make we them ſeruants to inward graces and let their ſpeciall

grace and luſter be from thence ſo ſhall they ſerue
vs to preuaile with God, and preuailing with God we ſhall
alſo preuaile with Men, well now we ſee the reaſon why
Mordecai takes vpon him the tuition of his kinſwoman:
and that we may obſerue in him a care and conſcience more
then ordinary, behold he not onely receaues her into his
famile, and ſo deliuers her from miſery, but adopts her alſo
as his child: both to giue her more ſecurity & alſo therby
to fit her to further aduancement, as being now the reputed
daughter of him, who was admitted one of the family of
this great Mordecai: and that a place of no meane truſt,
euen to be keeper of the pallace. An office the likeler to be
of more truſt, by how much theſe Perſian Princes kept
great eſtate, and were more iealous of their perſons: and
thereby alſo not vnlikely to be more commodious in regard
of the ſtricktneſſe of acceſſe into the palace. Behold
here a further act of the prouidence of God. Miſerable
Heſter hath now a houſe to put her head in, and the fatherleſſe
hath a father prouided for her by the Lord, for ſo it
followeth, And after the death of her father and mother
Mordecai tooke her for his owne daghter.
                  
                     Obſ. 65. It is lawful to adopt.
               
               
                  See here the lawfulneſſe of this liberty of adoption.Gal. 4. 
                  Mordecai
adopted Hester to be his daughter, ſo doth Pharaohs
daughter Moſes to be her ſonnes: ſo doth God▪ in Chriſt
Ieſus adopt vs to be his ſonnes: A caſe wherein the mercy
and goodneſſe of God is moſt comfortably manifeſted not
onely that the adopter here by is ſupplied with the benefit
of children, which are the bleſſing of God, and ſo-ſtrenght
of age in whom he may receaue his life, and continew
his poſterity,Adoption not commanded but a thing left to our liberty. 
                  but hereby alſo the want and miſery of
orphants is gratiouſly relieued, and that bleſſing of God is
in part performed to a land that there ſhall be no begger
in Iſrael, And doth not the Lord in this liberty prouoke
vs to mercy? doth he not gratiouſly make triall of our
bowels of compaſſion? by leauing vs to this liberty though
hee command it not?

doth he not ſecure vs hereby of doing good ſeaſonably and
conſcionably? are not vaine controuerſies preuented about
dead mens goods? are not fooliſh hopes here by wiſely cut
of? and each man ſent to depend on Gods prouidence and
worke out his liuing?Sect. 2. ſurely though this may iuſtifie the
lawfulneſſe of this liberty, yet becauſe we may abuſe the
ſame to the maintenance of the fleſh, therefore are we to
ſet bounds vnto this liberty,Who to be adopted. both in regard of the perſons
that wee are to adopt, as alſo concerning the end of our
adoption.
               Concerning the perſons we are to adopt, as here we may
ſafely perferre, our kindred before a ſtranger: ſo I take it we
muſt haue herein a principal reſpect vnto the ſpiritual aff
                        •
                     nity
if ſo be our kinne ſhall not be in apparant neceſſity:Thoſe eſpecially which being furniſhed with grace want meanes to imploy the ſame. nay
if the houſe-hold of faith be in like extremity, we are rather
to make our choyce there, then any were elſe: becauſe
we haue more and better bands to tye vs here: And we may
with one compariſon looke for better ſucceſſe of our liberty;
And which is eſpecially to be heeded of vs, becauſe we
haue the example of our gratious God for our warrant
therein; who as he onely adopts thoſe that were eternally
beloued in his ſonne, ſo eſpecially when it is in our choice,
we ought to make choiſe of ſuch for our children by adoption;
who haue beſt euidence to be the ſonnes of God.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it condemneth the practiſe of thoſe that
ty them-ſelues in their choyce ſimply to their kindred,
without reſpect of inward fitnes: whereas they might
haue better choice in the Church; both for inward and outward
guifts; ſo I take it hereby they do much croſſe the prouidence
of God, which entending by this liberty the
choyce of the moſt worthy, is hereby reſiſted, when the
choyce is thus tied to the kindred.Sect. 3.
               
               
                  If it ſhall bee obiected the GOD will prouide
for his,
                     Obiection. God will prouide for his. their gifts wil aduance them, and therefore I
ought rather to prouide for ſuch as by reaſon of there
impotency of gifts are like other-wiſe to ſticke by it:
indeed as the impotencies of nature are to bee ſupplied,

ſo her beſt gifts alſo as hath beene taught,) had need of
a bridle of Tuition to reſtraine their priueledge, and ſo fit
them to grace, but yet warily to be preſerued to the benifit
of adoption, becauſe, as hereby their corruption
is likely to be maintained, ſo without this benefit of adoption,
ſuch as haue beſt gifts of nature, are moſt likely
to ſhift in the world.
               But for the gifts of grace, it is not ſo with them: they
are hated of the world, and ſo make their owners hatefull:
where then ſhall this be remedied? doſt thou ſay God will
prouide for his, and therefore ile paſſe them by? I tell
thee. God hath bountifully prouided for his: he hath giuen
them his ſonne and ſo all is theirs,1 Cor. 3. 22 they haue a right
in all, thou haſt no vſe but for their ſakes; thou art Gods
ſteward for their good. Their is plenty in Aegipt to releeue
the Church. And how ſhalt thou then better make
thee friends of thy vnrighteous Mammon,Luk. 16 then willingly
to admit thoſe into the poſſeſſion thereof: who as they
are expoſed to want to trie thy wiſdome herein, whether
thou wilt ſanctifie thy eſtate or no, and take true comfort
in thy ritches: ſo leſt the gathering of theſe things, might
hinder them in better: therefore the Lord hath a time to
put them into poſſeſſion without their labour whither
thou wilt or no: though thou ſhouldeſt heape vp ſiluer
as the duſt,Iob. 26 and prepare rayment as the clay,
thou maiſt
prepare it,16. but the iuſt ſhal put it on and the innocent ſhall
diuide the ſiluer.17.
               
               And were it not better for thee when it is in thy
choice, to make ſure thy habitation by this life, and ſo
lay vp a good foundation againſt the day of Chriſt, receiuing
God into thy family, in the adoption of his children:
then by ſhutting out the Lord, thereby to ſhut thy ſelfe
out alſo, not onely from the earth, but from heauen to:
and yet al thy policy ſhalbe mightily confounded: Ioſephs
bretheren ſhall bow vnto him: and the righteous ſhalbe
thy haires, whether thou wilt or no?
               
                  Vſe 2 And ſurely this doth no leſſe condemne the

vanity of thoſe, that neglecting religion and onely ſeeking
a name on earth, do therefore make choice of ſuch in this
kind, as are of the name: reiecting alſo nature, & common
humanity: Little do theſe men conſider that it is the
memoriall of the iuſt onely, that ſhall endure for euer,
as for the wicked, their name ſhall rot; and though they
build them houſes, and call them after their names,
though they adopt ſuch children, as may continue the
name; yet looke we to the third generation if the place
remaine in the name, nay conſider we wiſely, if the place
it ſelfe can be found?
               3. As for thoſe who adopt ſtrangers, and do alſo
change their names, mooued thereby neither by the
bond of religion, no not ſo much as nature, but rather
by the abuſe of nature and fellowſhippe in euill: Though
ſuch things ſhould not be named among Chriſtians,
yet it is no meruaile, if like will loue their like, and ſociety
in euill will haue a cloake for the maintenance
thereof
               Thus farre of the perſons whom we muſt adopt.
                     Sect. 4. Ends of adoption.
               
               
                  Now for the ends we muſt propoſe herein; propoſing
principally the glory of GOD, the furtherance of religion
and releeuing of the truely afflicted; we may here
alſo in a ſecond place reſpect preſent comfort herein and
future propagation of poſterity, being wiſely purged of
ſecurity and vaine-glorie.
               Well thus we haue Heſter now the adopted daughter
of Mordecai, and ſo by Gods good prouidence this Orphane
is well prouided for.
               And hath not the Lord much better prouided for vs;
whom he hath in Chriſt Ieſus adopted to be his children,
and ſo to be heires with him of eternall glory? Oh that we
would therefore walke worthy of ſo high a calling; that
we would behaue our ſelues as ſonnes of ſo gratious a Father?
Surely Heſter in all her glory is not like the meaneſt
of the ſonnes of God: and the leaſt in the Kingdome of
heauen hs greater then Salomon in all his Maieſty.
               
                  
Well,
                     Sect. 5. State of adoption in Chriſt how diſcerned. let this be our comfort, that though it be not our
lot to meete with a Mordecai to be adopted to an earthly
Kingdome, yet we haue ſuch an enheritance, which all the
world cannot deptiue vs of. And let vs make triall of our
adoption by our ſtrange cries vnto our Father. Let this 
ſtraight appeare by iuſtifying his cauſe. Let his cauſe be 
maintained by increaſing his kingdome, and his kingdome
being come, Let vs lift vp our heads that his will may be 
done in earth as it is in heauen; that God may bee all 
in all.Obſer. 66. Ophanes are to be prouided for and how. Pſal. 109
               
               And ſurely though it be a curſe vnto the wicked to
be left as Orphanes, yet it is but a temperall iudgement,
and ſo may befall (and hath) the Godly, and therefore
though the wicked being Orphanes ſhall ſeeke their
bread and deſolate places,Deu, 10. 18 yet GOD is the helper of
the Fatherleſſe,Pſal. 9, 19 yea he is a Father vnto them. And therefore
as he hath giuen expreſſe commandement that they
ſhould not be hurt,Pſal. 68. 5. left the like iudgement befall the
oppreſſors,
                     
                        •
                     xod. 22. 22 24 ſo hath the Lord alſo preciſely inioiend that
releefe and ſuccour and that not onely vncertainely as
ſtrangers by ſtartes, and at their felemne feſtiuities, when
by reaſon of the aboundance,Deu. 16, 11 it is not ſo thankes worthy;
but as thoſe within their gates and of their houſhold
that are to haue a free and ſetled maintenance;Deut. 24. as hauing 
a continuall ſet prouiſion allotted thereto: Oh
                  
what a ſanctifying is this of our proſperitie! What a 
comfort in our troubles?Iob. 29 The benifit thereof. 
                  What a ſacrifice to God? what
a ſweet ſauour to man? What peace doth it breed at
home? What true honor abroad.
               
                  Vſe 1. Well, Let this be a glorious crowne to thoſe 
Citties and perſons who haue ſet harbours for Orphanes
and ſtrangers: And let it be the glorie of true religion 
that it hath taught ſuch places and perſons Chriſtian
duetie: Let the Oſtrich be aſhamed that leaues
her egges in the ſand, and let vnnaturallneſſe be confounded
that forſaketh her owne: Crueltie bee condemned 
that makes the fatherleſſe: and let opreſſion
                  
                  
                   ſtoppe her mouth that turnes the fatherleſſe out of their
owne: deteſt we ſuch trechery that makes tuition a
 broker for priuate gaine: and take we heed of hipocriſie
that ſecretly deuoures where it pretends deuotion; and
 in ſteed of Children makes ſlaues or ſpunges of their pupils:
I would our encloſers could waſh their hands from
 this ſinne, and do not gardians of wards trample deepe
herein? Wel let vs not liue by examples but by lawes; & let
good example prouoke vs to the obedience of them. Mordecai
takes vpon him the tuition of this orphane: now let vs
ſee what ſucceſſe he hath herein, it followeth.
               And when the Kings commandement, and his decree
was publiſhed,Verſ. 8 and many maides were brought together to the
palace of Suſhan under the hand of Hege: Heſter was brought
alſo vnto the Kings houſe under the hand of Hege the keeper
of the women.
               In which words the holie Ghoſt ſetteth downe a ſecond
meanes, by which Heſter is aduanced to the Court.
Namely ſhe is taken in the generall ſuruay, according
to the Kings commandement, and ſo togither with thoſe
many other Virgins, that were choſen out by theſe officers
out of all the Kings dominions: ſhe is brought to
the Court; And ſo the Kings commandement and the
thorough execution thereof, is a ſecond meanes of her aduancement.
               And ſurely, if we conſider the end of this commandement:
Namely that the King might haue a wife: if we
obſerue the equity thereof; that he might make choice
of his wife where it pleaſed him; throughout his dominions;
if we wiſely examine the lawfulneſſe of theſe Officers
imployment in this buſineſſe, and ſucceſſe therein:
all theſe will witneſſe vnto vs that Heſter had a lawfull calling
to the Court, the meanes of her aduancement were
honeſt and honorable.
               Shee is not thruſt vpon the Court, to bee a prey
thereto, neither doth ſhe baſely ſeeke to it, to make ſale of
her chaſtitie, ſhee followes it not to catch a fall by it,

but the court followes her, and ſeekes her out: As Daniel
was ſent for, and Ioſeph fetcht out of priſon, ſo ſhe is ſent
for to the Court: GOD guiding the generall intent
of the King to his perticular purpoſe; and ſo reſeruing
the iſſue to his ſpeciall prouidence, that though
ſhee might feare the worſt, to become the Kings concubine,
yet ſhe might hope the beſt, to be receiued as his
wife: and ſo the caſe being doubtfull and the daunger
not being inuincible; ſhe was to caſt her ſelfe vpon the
prouidence of GOD, for a good iſſue of that which
might threaten euill; as vndoubtedly perſwading
her-ſelfe, that as ſhe beleeued, ſo it ſhould come vnto
her.
               Behold then the mercy of GOD,
                     Obſ. 67. God aduanceth his children by 
                        •
                     aire and likely meanes. in the aduancement
of his Children: the meanes thereto ſhalbe faire and
likely: Heſter ſhall haue natures guiftes, to fit her to the
Kings bedde, Shee ſhalbe ſeaſoned with affliction to beare
her greatneſſe more wiſely, Shee ſhalbe trained vp in religion
vnder a gratious Tutor, that ſo hauing fauour
with GOD, ſhe may preuaile with man: And the authority
of the Prince ſhall call her to the Court, that ſo ſhe
may be warranted both from God, and man; ſo was Moyſes,
Mordecai and the reſt. And all this to two ſpeciall ends;
Namely that they may be cleered from ambition & intruſion,
two encrochers on greatnes, and dangerous enemies
thereto, that enuy may be remoued, the moath of aduancement,
that pride may be abandoned which wil make their
fal the greater: that hauing hereby an evidence of their holy
entrance to dignity, they might haue better vſe, and longer
continuance thereof.
               
                  Vſe 1 A notable leſſon, for all aſpirers, that they wait
ſuch holy and likely meanes, as GOD hath ſanctified 
thereto, not thruſting themſelues to preferment. Not 
                  hunting greedily after the ſame, not by baſe flattery, and 
                  detraction to clime into fauour: Neither by 
                     
                        •
                     ordid corruption
                  
to blind-fold greatneſſe. But wiſely to eſteeme their 
                  fitneſſe by gifts both inward, and outward: and yet to wait
                  
                  
                   with comfort a lawfull thereto: not neglecting ſuch
 gracious oportunities as GODS prouidence doth offer,
neither reſiſting ſuch neceſſarie meanes, as may be vnlikely
thereto.
               For to examine a little further the caſe of Heſter: the
king commandeth; muſt ſhe not obey? is it not lawfull
for a ſubject to come to a prophane Court? is it vnlawfull
for a religious perſon to haue her abode among the
wicked? eſpecially, where the prouidence of GOD doth
extraordinarily caſt her, and no preſent iniquity lying
therein? A neceſſity lies vpon her and ſhe cannot
refuſe. Surely Gods children are to yeeld to the neceſſity
of more where as their is a prouidence of GOD to
ouer-rule them to good: and our yeelding thereto, is
not ſimplie euill.
                     Obſ. 68. Gods children are to yeeld to preſent neceſſity keeping themſelues from apparent euil and depending on Gods protection. I. Becauſe all this while we keepe our
ſelues within the compaſſe of Gods protection where by
we ſhalbe ſure to be ſecured our ſelues.
               2. And what know we alſo, whether the Lord hath herein
a further worke to vſe our Miniſtery for the good of others?
was it not ſo with Heſter, Daniel and the like? If
it ſhall be ſaid; that the King had no good intent therein,
becauſe no doubt he ment hereby to ſupplie the number
of his concubines, and it might haue beene Heſters lot,
to haue beene one of them.
               Surely this being but coniecturall, and the publike
purpoſe of the King being to make choice of a wife: and
God intending that purpoſe to preuaile, why might not
Heſter ſafely reſt vpon this knowne purpoſe, and ſo commit
her ſelfe into the hand GOD, for the iſſue thereof?
If it ſhalbe ſaid, that the beſt intent was bad; namely that
Heſter ſhould mary an Infidel. Surely as this cannot chalendge
the Kings purpoſe, which was ſimply to chooſe a
wife, ſo neither may it preiudice Gods prouidence, who
knowing what he would do, prouides this meanes to
bring his purpoſe to paſſe: As for Heſter this was more
then yet ſhe knew of (when ſhe knowes of it you ſhall
heare her Apology.) As yet ſhe hath little reaſon of any

ſuch hope, and therefore ſhe will herein yeeld to neceſſity;
becauſe the Lord might aſwell preſerue her vndefiled
in the Court, as he had done before in the houſe of her
kinſwoman.
               
                  Vſe And therefore as herein ſhe ſeemes to be blameleſſe,
becauſe ſhe yeelds that, which might turne either to
good or euill when ſhe could not otherwiſe chooſe: ſo
herein ſhe doth teach vs. An excellent point of wiſdome
in our obedience. That as we muſt obey rather God then
man: ſo we muſt yeeld to man, when there is no apparant 
diſobediencc to God. We muſt not caſt, what may 
be, ſeeing God may ouer-rule: leſt while we nouriſh
feare, we betray our faith: neither muſt we demur with our
ſuperiors, where our ſelues are vncertaine; but yeeld wee
ſo to neceſſitie, that we ſtill depend on our God: who will
accept our obedience, and giue a good iſſue thereto. So
did Daniell and God preſerued him vndefiled. So did Heſter
and the Lord gaue a bleſſing.
               And yet ſurely not without great difficulties and extremities:
the nerer ſhe came to it, the greater were her
dangers: Firſt, her bodie is in hazad by being left fatherleſſe,
God heere ſupplies and ſhe is receiued into Mordecaies
familie: who together with her bodie, prouides
principally for her ſoule. Here ſhe ſaies no, being where
ſhe hath greateſt comfort, but ſhortly ſhe is remoued
out of heauen euen into hell, to a prophane Court ſhe
is called, where Sathan hath his throne. And to what
end I pray you? ſurely reaſon and likelihood can giue neither,
but to the apparant diſtruction both of bodie and
ſoule.
                     Obſ. 69. God
                        •
                      children, the neerer preferment the greater extremties.
               
               Thus the nerer Gods children approch to their comfort
& preferment; the greater are their dangers, the more
deſperate their extremities. So was it with the I ſraelits
before their deliuerance. Their burdens were increaſed,
their ſtraw was taken away;Exod. 1 Exod. 5 and then came Moyſes, then
came the deliuerance.Cap. 5. Heſt. Genſ. 45. So was it with Mordecai, with
Ioſeph and the reſt: And no maruaile?

For by this it appeares their promotiōs is of God, by how
much the greater they finde the oppoſitions, to the
ſame, that ſo hee may haue onely the glory of their aduancement:

                  this makes Satan to rage the more, that
ſo if it bee poſſible hee may hinder the good of the
 Saintes: hereby the wicked are more confounded,
in the diſapoyntment of their mallice, and hereby
GODS Children are better fitted to their preferment,
and ſo are prouided to make better vſe
thereof.
               
                  Vſe. Whereby as Gods children are taught not to
bee diſcouraged, if their afflictions doe ſtill increaſe
vppon them, becauſe if deliuerance approach not,
yet patience ſhall increaſe, to make the deliuerance
 more glorious when it comes: So are they to increaſe
their faith as their temptations doe increaſe, by more
earneſt prayer, and examining of them-ſelues, more abaſing
them-ſelues, and increaſing conſtancy in wel-doing,
that ſo they may haſten the worke, and bee fitted
thereto.
               Thus was Heſter brought at length from Mordecaies
houſe to the Court, that in this fierie furnace
(beeing throughly purged) ſhee might bee
fitte for the worke that GOD had appoynted, ſo
meruailous is the LORD to turne all thinges to
the good of his children;
                     Obſ. 70. God prepares his church by afflicts to great bleſſings. ſuch difference doth
hee make betweene them and the wicked, that as the
beſt bleſſinges doe make the wicked wiſe, ſo the greateſt
occaſions of euil do make his children better, when neceſrily
they are caſt vpon them.
               And ſurely if wee ſhall wiſely obſerue the prouidence
of God herein; that though Heſter is brought to the
Court, a place of liberty and prouocation to euill:
yet ſhee is reſtrained in the Court, vnder the hand of a
Keeper, and as it were clapt vp in a glorious priſon, being
not to come abroad but when the King calls, nor to
frequent any ſociety, but ſuch as is appointed her for

her neceſſary attendance and comfort; doth not this
exceedingly magnifie the mercy of GOD, that vſeth
this as a preſeruatiue againſt the infection of the
place, and ſo euen therein ſanctifies her comming thether?
Had ſhee beene expoſed to the liberty of the
Court? might acceſſe haue beene free vnto her? As her
tryall had beene the greater, ſo her danger muſt needes
bee the greater.
               And therefore behold here the faithfulneſſe of Almightie
God to his children;
                     Obſ. 71. God breakes the force of temptations and prouideth preſeruatiues againſt them. that, conſidering whereof wee
are made, and what wee can indure, though hee caſt vs
into the Furnace, yet he quallefies the rage of the fire,
or elſe applyeth preſeruatiues that it ſhall not hurt vs.
So doth hee here prouide for his ſeruant Heſter, becauſe
her beautifull youth beeing expoſed to applauſe
and liberty in the Court, might be a meanes of taynting
her; therefore hee makes the place of her aduancement,
the place of her impriſonment, that ſo the luſt of the eye
and pride of life, and ſuch like temptations might want
their nouriſhment, and ſo without wood the fire might
be quenched.
               So when the Lord had brought Ioſeph into the land
of his aduancement, that the pride and fulneſſe of the
Country might not corrupt him; Hee is caſt firſt uppon
Putiphers familie: Where though he receiues no ſmall
preferment, yet it is ſauced with ſuch temptations, as
might greeuouſly humble the heart of his ſeruant. And
yet is hee further ſent to the priſon, where the yrons
might enter into his ſoule, to his further humiliation:
Yea when hee is aduanced, hee hath an Office to
humble him, whereby hee is both kept from the
Court, the place of temptation, and alſo from idleneſſe
the roote of all euill. And was not this a
great humbling to Heſter in the fleſh, that her glorious
beautie muſt bee pinned vp from being ſeene?
ſhee muſt bee kept as a priſoner, where libertye
was ſo pleaſant, And yet the worke of the Lord

moſt admirable herein; both to keepe her flaxe (as I
may ſay) from the fire, and by a leſſe affliction to preuent
a greater.
               1 Vſe. Oh that wee would therefore praiſe the Lord
for his faithfulneſſe and obſerue his gratious prouidence
in the quallifying of our temptations!
               That we would reſt vppon our God, in the greateſt
 extremities, and wiſely admit leſſer chaſtiſments to preuent
 greater. Surely there is no temptation hath ouertaken
 vs, but ſuch as appertaineth to man, and God is
faithfull,1 Cor. 10. 13. which will not ſuffer vs to be tempted aboue
our ſtrength: but will euen giue the iſſue with the
temptation, that wee may bee able to beare it.
               And therefore admit the worſt that may be ſayd in this
caſe: Say it was her great affliction to bee brought to
the Court; and her greater affliction to bee in danger
of defiling: and therefore her infirmitie to put her ſelfe
into this danger (although I cannot ſee how ſhe could
auoyd it) (ſo deſperate is their caſe liuing vnder prophane
gouernement) yet ſeeing God bringes light out
of darkeneſſe, and turnes our infirmities to his glory
and our good: Nay ſeeing hee iuſtifies particular actions
by extraordinary inſtants, which wee being ignorant
off, are therefore to keepe ſilence in: why ſhall we cenſure
that, of the ground whereof wee may bee ignorant?
VVhy doe wee not rather giue our God the glories,
whereof the infirmities of his children, raiſeth
meanes for their ſtrength, and hereby makes way for his
abſolute glory?
               Well thus wee haue heard of ſome of the outward
meanes of Heſters aduancement. Namely Mordecaies
nouriſhing of her, and her bringing to the Court. Now
lette vs further conſider of her intertainment in the
Court, and ſo of ſome meanes wherby ſhe fitted is to the
marriage bed. It followeth.
               
               And the maid pleaſed him,Verſ. 9. and ſhe found fauour in his

ſight and to ſhew that he was pleaſed, hee cauſed her thinges
for purification to bee giuen her ſpeedily, and her ſtate and
ſeauen comely maidens to bee giuen her out of the Kinges
houſe, and he gaue change to her and to her maids of the beſt
in the houſe of the women.
               In which words the holy Ghoſt ſettes downe vnto vs
a third ſteppe to Heſters aduancement. Namely, that ſhe
findes fouour in the ſight of the Keeper of the Maidens.
By which meanes it was likely that the King beging much
ledde by his iudgement and commendation, would cal for
her more ſpeedily to his preſence, and ſo conſequently
preferre her.
               And there is in the word contained two ſpeciall
thinges. i. The fauor that Heſter findes with the Eunuch,
teſtified by a variety, and increaſe of ſpeach; not onely
the Maide pleaſed him (but) ſhee found fauour in his
fight. 2. there are ſet down the vndoubted ſignes of his fauour
in that liberall and extraordinary allowance which
hee affordes her for her maintenance, in the reſt of the
Verſe.
               
               And ſurely that ſhee findes this extraordinary fauour
in the ſight of the Eunuch, who was likely to be a meanes
of her ſpeedy aduancement.
               This magnifieth the gratious prouidence of Almightie
God, who hauing the hearts of all men in his
handes to diſpoſe them as hee pleaſeth;
                     Obſ. 72. Gods children find fauour in ye
                      eyes of ſtrangers. doth therfore
incline the heart of this ſtranger, to affect this
beautifull maiden, that ſo ſhee might haue more libertye
in this time of her reſtraint; and more ſecurity
alſo againſt ſuch dangers as ſuch places doe threaten.
               
                  So gratious is godlyneſſe euen in the eyes of
the wicked, ſo doth the Lord ſtill ſort the meanes for 
the effecting of his righteous will; that the weakeneſſe 
of our faith might be ſupplyed hereby; and he might haue 
the glory of his truth and faithfulneſſe.
               
               1. Vſe. Wherby we are taught as to ſhew fauor vnto

                   ſtrangers, and ſuch as are in affliction. So not to deſpaire
the reconciling moſt bitter enemies, ſeeing our God can
make this Eunuch to affect a poore captiue, how ſhall
not he alſo turne the hearts of our enemies towards
 vs. And therefore let vs not prouoke an enemie by vpbrayding
to keepe him further off, but rather draw we
 him nerer vnto vs by praier, and kindneſſe. Labour we
to pleaſe our God, ſo ſhall his heart be turned towards vs.

                  And make we much of friends, ſeeing the loue of enemies
is ſo douhtfull. Eſpecially, make we much of the
 houſhold of faith, who when they wound vs do not
meanely befriend vs, and yet thats the greateſt enmity we
feare from them. As for our enemies they ſhalbe
 cloathed with ſhame, and though they ſhall iuſtifie vs ſo
farre forth as may make for Gods glorie and our good,
yet this ſhall make to their further condemnation, that
they ſhall like of thoſe, whom they do not deſire to bee
like; they ſhall loue vs for ſuch bleſſings as GOD beſtoweth
on vs, and yet not loue God with vs that they
in like manner may be bleſſed.
               Well thus Heſter finds fauour in the eye of this Eunuch:
But how doth this appeare? It followeth. He makes
haſt to giue her things for her purification: he is not kinde in
ſhew, but he performeth it in-deed: and that we may
know his willingnes, he cauſeth it to be done ſpeedily, yea
he enlargeth him ſelfe, and euen ſtretcheth his authority; he
encreaſeth her attendance, and giues her ſeauen comely
maides out of the Kings houſe, yea he gaue change to her and
to her maides of the beſt in the houſe of the woman; and all
this to make good the truth and greatneſſe of his fauour
towards her.
                     Obſ. 73. Wicked haue the ſhadowes of many excellent vertues and may in ſome ſort teach true kindneſſe.
               
               Thus euer the wicked haue their ſhadowes of excellent
vertues: yea they haue ſome relikes of the true inconſtancies
required therein. They are not onely kinde in
words, but they make it good in deeds: yea they are cherefull
weldoing, and bountifull therein.
               
                  Vſe 1. Which though it will not any thing iuſtifie them

but rather tend to their greater condemnation: becauſe
they fooliſhly content themſelues with this 
                     ••
                  imme light
of nature: which onely concernes this preſent life, and will
not embrace the light of grace, which would lead them
to glory. Yet ſhall euen theſe Gentiles condemne 
many Chriſtians, who as they vſually boaſt of falſe liberalitie;
making great ſhewes in words, and performing 
little in deed: So when they do any thing the Children 
of God taſt leaſt of their bountie: they of all other are
ſhut from their fauours: nay I would the worſt they
could do were not good enough for them:Ioh. 16. 1 I would they
thought they did not God good ſeruice when they entertaine
his Saints with greateſt outrage. Surely though religion
muſt not teach them to fauour their contraries, yet wiſdome
might leſſon them, herein to prouide for themſelues.
Do not they fare the better for the Saints of God? and
ſhall they fare the worſe by them? will they remoue
them out of the gappe, who keepe away their ſcourges,
and are the onely meanes to maintaine their proſperity?
Oh that the world would learne to be wiſe! but he that is
filthy wilbe filthier ſtill.
                     Obſe. 74. Markes of tue liberality.
               
               Laſtly from theſe ſhadowes of bounty we may learne
the true ſubſtance thereof. Not onely in words but in deed
to make good our kindneſſe, and that not forcibly, or with
grudging, but cheerefully; and that not ſparingly and baſely
but bountifully and with a large hand: and if wee
ſhall doe this from the true ground becauſe GOD hath
commanded; and to a right end, namely that God may be
glorified, and our neighbours bettered, thre ſhall not
be any thing wanting to true liberality: but of this heretofore.
That which may further be commended in the Eunuch
is his faithfulneſſe in his office.
                     Obſ. 75. Officers are to be faithfull in diſtributing according to their chardg
                        •
                     . In that he makes not
priuate gaine of ſuch prouiſion as was allowed to theſe
Maidens, but rather enlargeth himſelfe in the true beſtowing
thereof.
               So was Ioſeph faithful in diſtribution of the corne: ſo was
Iacob faithfull, vnder his vnkle Laban. A notable preſident

to all officers,
                     Obſer. 71. Officers are to be faithfull in diſtrubiting according to their charge. A good leſſon for iuſtices, Captains, Gardians for the poore, Treaſureres of prouiſion for the publicque good. &c. that are put in truſt for the behooſe of others
that they lick not their own fingers, & fil there own roofes
with that which ſhould ſerue for the prouiſion of others.
               
                  Vſe. I. Which as it condemneth all Zibaes, and Iudaſſes,
that caried the bagge for their priuate profit, and like falſe
ſtewards rob others to prouide for themſelues ſo it aduiſeth
Princes to appoint ſufficiēt ſtipēds for ſuch kind of officers,
yt they need not fal to ſuch ſhameleſſe oppreſſions. And alſo
teacheth ſuch perſons to be content with their allowance,
& to eſteeme it their greateſt glory, yt their charge proſpers
vnder them, leaſt ye leane kine deuour the fat, the wrongs of
ye oppreſſed cry for vengeance againſt them. That ſo honorable
an attēdance is graūted to this poore captiue, who ſo
lately liued at ye beſt but a ſeruant; in the houſe of her vncle
this as it ſerueth much to ye commendation of the Eunuches
bounty, in whoſe power no doubt it was to haue contented
her with one, ſo doth it much more commend the mercy of
God vnto this his ſeruant: that in this glorious ſeruitude
ſhee there hath this benefit of ſuch ſociety which as ſhee
might better rule, hauing ferme power ouer them, ſo ſhe
might leſſe feare, as being of her owne ſex: which as it might
giue her ſome hope of her further aduancement,
                     Obſ. 76. God raiſeth his to preferment by degrees. as being
yet a further ſteppe thereto, ſo therein we may obſerue the
wiſedome of our good and gracious God, who as he doth
not ſuddenly caſt his vpō preferment, but by degrees raiſeth
vs thereto, that ſo we might the better wield the ſame, ſo in
this manner of his prouidēce doth he much quickē our faith
and patience, that ſeeing him comming wee might not be
haſty,
                     Obſ. 77. Attendance what fit for each ſex. but wait the good time that he hath appointed. Pſal. 125. Concerning
y• kind of attendance that here is tendred to Heſter,
only ſuch of her ſex as being fitteſt thereto: this howſoeuer
in this caſe might haue iealoſie for it ground, yet hath it a
good ground for the like fitnes in our attendance,Obſ. 78. God giues ſignes of his fauour to his children. that they
ſhould be ſuch as be of our owne ſex. the eie of the ſeruant to
looke vpō the hand of his maiſter, & the eie of a maidē vnto the
hand of her miſtres, a matter politickely obſerued in popery
to take away ſuſpition, at leaſt of vncleanes yet ſurely euen

this policy ſhal cōdemne that prophanes, wher there is not
this care of fitnes both to preſerue order, & comlines in the
family, and alſo to auoide occaſions, and apparances of euil.
               Laſtly that to Hester and her maides is giuen charge of
the beſt in the houſe,
                     Obſe. 79. The beſt is due and beſtowed one Gods children. howſoeuer this may be imputed to the
carnal & blind affection of the Eunuch, reſpecting eſpecially
herein the beauty and likelines of Heſter, yet we may herein
behold a ſpecial point of Gods wiſdome y• 
                  Hester being
aduanced to the higheſt dignity, might haue a pledge hereof
in the beſt preferment that the Eunuch could giue her, and
ſo by this liberall and ſutable maintenance might be fitted
therto. So ſhal not the children of God want ſignes of their
faith, to helpe there weakenes,Veſ. & confirme their faith, wherby
we may learne as not to deſire a ſigne when the thing is 
before vs, ſo not to refuſe a ſigne whē God offers it vnto vs,
and wiſely to obſerue ye tracts of Gods prouidence, which 
will not fayle vs with plaine ſignes of his loue towards vs.
               
               
                  And doth not this alſo commend the exceeding faithfulneſſe 
of God vnto his; that as all is theirs in Ieſus Chriſt,
ſo they aboue any other, ſhal ſo farre enioy this right, euen 
in this life as that the beſt and fatteſt ſhal be their portion.
                  So had Iacob and his famile the beſt of the land of Egypt:
ſo had Iacobs poſterity the moſt fruitefull country of the
world: ſo haue ye Saints of God had this their right renewed
that the Goſpell hath taken place euen in the beſt inheritance,
what country may compare in happines with
thoſe where the word hath beene entertayned? So righteous
is the Lord to giue his children the beſt in this life to
aſſure vnto them the enioying of the better, ſo profitable is
Godlineſſe to be recompenced with the beſt gaine: haue
not the children of God ſhared euen with the beſt & of the
beſt? ſhall not the widow giue the Prophet before ſhe
releeue her ſelfe? Shall not Ioſeph haue the next best chariot,
and Mordecai the horſe that the King rides on? Oh
that we could beleeue, how ſhould we be eſtabliſhed! How
ſhould wee enuy the beſt if we could hope the beſt, that
our iniquities did not many times depriue vs of the beſt:
that the world ſhould thinke the worſt to good for the beſt.

                  
                  Surely though wee haue not the beſt in it ſelfe, yet contedneſſe
 may make it the beſt to vs: And if we be faithful in
vſing the leaſt, we may by Gods mercy attain to the beſt:

                  let this be our comfort that wee ſhall haue whats beſt for
 vs: and therein if wee liue by faith, we may take hold of
 the beſt inheritance: onely waite we the Lords leyſure, and
hee will giue vs our hearts deſire: and reſigne our ſelues
alwaies into the handes of our moſt gratious father, who
only knoweth whats beſt for vs.
               Well thus is Heſter now prouided honourably for in ye
houſe of the maidens. How doth ſhee now behaue her
ſelfe to keepe her in fauor? Doth ſhe reueale her country,
which was odious to theſe Gentiles? Doth ſhee conceale
her religion, which was to theſe abhomination? Or doth
ſhe fal to temporiſing after ye manner of the Court? Doth
ſhe forget her former affliction, and ſo grow headſtrong?
Doth ſhee now hauing changed her keeper, change her
obedience? Hearken I pray you what the holy Ghoſt ſaith
of her.
               
                  But Heſter ſhewed not her people nor her kinred:
                  Verſ. 10. That is
ſhe did not make knowne that ſhe was a Iew;
                  Verſ, 20. 
                  nay ſhe did
not diſcouer ſhe was Mordecaies Kinſwoman.
               
               Wherby it is apparant that it was not yet knowne, ſo
the reaſon of this concealment may be coniectured to be
this; namely that had Heſter yet bene knowne to be a Iew;
ſhe might inſteed of good intertainment, receiue both diſhonour
and diſgrace too; as beeing in regard of her country
moſt abhominable to theſe Gentiles.Obſ. 80. Truth may be concealed how, &c. Reaſon therefore
ſhe might haue to conceale her country, and ſurely ſuch I
take it as may ſtand well with religion. Which though
it inioyneth vs a true profeſſion of truth in the ſimplicity
of our hearts, when wee are to giue an account of our
faith: it allowes vs alſo in ſpirituall wiſdome to conceale
the truth, when it may ſtand 1. with Gods glory, 2. the ſatiſfying
of others, 3. ad ſecuring of our ſelues, 4. without the
preiudice to the truth, and iuſt ſcandall to our profeſſion,
eſpecially when we are not queſtioned thereof. So doth

                  Samuel and Moyſes conceale part of truth:Exod. 5. 1. Samuel, 16. 
                  So doth the
Prophet Eliſha conceale the whole truth; when meeting
with the meſſenger of the Kings of Syria who were ſent
of purpoſe to ſeeke him; inſteed of telling them, that hee
was the man (which hee wiſely conceales) hee tels them
that that was not the way, nor that the Towne, in a
                     •
                  l
which hee ſpake truth; but if they would follow him,
hee would lead them to the man they ſought for. So doth
Heſter here wiſely conceale the truth, becauſe ſhee is 
neither demanded the matter, and the concealing therof 
would further her ſafety; And ſurely as none is to bring 
vnneceſſary troubles on himſelfe by reuealing of what
may bee lawfully hidden; ſo by ſuch concealments both 
much glory hath redounded to the truth, and alſo Gods
Children hereby reſerued to better times: and therfore ſo 
we intend not to ſmother the truth by our preſent concealment
thereof,Cautions 
                        •
                     o be obſerued in 
                        〈…〉
                     . but only to refer the diſcouery to in fit
oportunity: ſo we are not aſhamed of the truth of God, but
onely conceale it that it may not bee reproached: So we
do not by ſilence betray the truth, but rather by this hely 
wiſdome keepe it from treachery: So we deny not our 
                     ••
                  ofeſſion,
but only defend our perſon: So we indammage not 
our neighbour by concealing the truth: ſo we 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   not
only the auoyding of danger but rather purpoſe to do the
moſt good hereby. Surely vpon theſe grounds (I take it)
truth may be concealed, eſpecially if it be a truth concerning
only ciuil occaſions. And this was the caſe of Heſter
in this place: ſhe conceales not her religion ſhe denies not
her profeſſion; but onely not being demaunded, ſhee reueales
not her country nor her kinred, both ciuill things.
               
                  Obiect. If it ſhall be demanded how ſhe could conceale
her country, ſeeing her diet and religion which could or
ſhould not be hid, muſt needs declare it though ſhe hold
her peace (as Daniel and his followers euen by this were
neceſſarily diſcouered) And therfore it was vnpoſſible to
conceale her country: vnleſſe you wil ſay, ſhee framed in
her diet an outward ceremony of religion, to the preſent

time, & ſo ſhe would proue no leſſe then a deep diſſēbler.
               
                  Anſ. Surely as wee may not in any caſe iuſtifie diſſembling,
ſo I doubt not but we may very well cleare Heſter
from the ſame, if we conſider that in ſome things, her diet
might be anſwerable to the place wherein ſhee liued (the
Iew agreeing with the Gentile in the promiſcuous eating
of the moſt things) and ſo by yt her country might not be
diſcouered.Doubt. The greateſt doubt is concerning her religion:
how ſhe could conceale her country, vnleſſe ſhee alſo
concealed this; and if ſhe concealed her religion, how ſhe
could practiſe it: which (in my opinion) may be eaſily reſolued,
if we conſider her preſent condition,Anſwer. who liuing
priuate might wel performe her deuotiōs, and yet not be
obſerued, eſpecially hauing now no other meanes and liberty
to practiſe her religion, but ſuch as might well bee
performed ſecretly in her cloſet, onely in the preſence of
her God. If it ſhal be imputed vnto her, yt ſhe ſhould haue
made a bold profeſſion of her nation and religion, therby
the rather to free her from that preſent bondage, and ſo to
preuent her future defiling, rather chooſing to be diſgraced
and caſt out of the Court again, then to indure ye pleaſure
of ſinne for a ſeaſon.
               Surely concerning the profeſſion of our religion,
                     Obſ▪ 81. Religion when & how to be giuen account off. as ye
Apoſtle would haue vs principally readie thereto, that ſo
in due ſeaſon we may publiſh the ſame: ſo he ſeemeth to
aime at a ſpeciall ſeaſon, namely when we are demaunded
a reaſon of our hope.1. Pet. 3. 15. And therefore though no doubt
this ſeruant of God was ready to giue an account of her
religion, yet (I take it) now it was not a fitt ſeaſon, becauſe
ſhe was not demanded the ſame of any: If you ſay,
her own caſe did now eſpecially require it, yt ſhe might be
deliuered from ye imminent danger. Surely for any danger
wherein yet ſhe was, I ſee not but ſhe was to vndergo the
ſame with patience: as being ſo farre ſubiect to gouernement,
as might ſtand with the ſaluation of her ſoule: as for
future dangers, concerning her defiling, &c. though they
were likely in regard of man, yet if wee looke vp to God,

might not they be preuēted? Eſpecially ſeeing ſhe walked
on her wayes, ſhe yet did no more then neceſſitie, and her
dutie impoſed vpon her: and therefore might ſafely waite
vppon the protection of her God: That happily ſhe did
not here abſtaine from all appearance of euill, that ſhee did
not auoid the occaſiōs therto; this being a thing that was
not now in her choyce, as wee may not raſhly condemne
her for the ſame, ſo what know we whether by ſome extraordinary
inſtinct, ſhee was incouraged and warranted
herein. So that in her that may be iuſtifiable, which
of vs ſimply is not to be immitated.
                     Obſ. 82. God vſeth the weaknes of his children in the accompliſhment of his mercies towards them. And ſurely the weakneſſe
of Heſter muſt needs commend highly ye faithfulneſſe
of God to his children, who as he is not diuerted from his
purpoſe towards them by their infirmities, ſo doth hee in
his ſpecial prouidence vſe the ſame in the contriuing of his
work, yt he may haue the only glory of the accompliſhmēt
therof.
               
                  Vſe▪
                   1. Wherby wee may learne that there is a time to
hold our peace as wel as to ſpeak, & when we may ſafely
conceale a truth. 2. We may obſerue the bounds of lawful
ſubiection, that we ſo far obey the magiſtrate as may
ſtand with the ſafety of our ſoules. 3. We may contemplate
ye abſolute power of God, in giuing his children extraordinary
diſpenſations euen beyond his righteous law,
that ſo we may not feare ye pardon of our ſins, if in weakneſſe
they be committed againſt the law of God. Laſtly,
we ſee here an holy vſe of our infirmities; not that wee
ſhould preſume here-vpon to ſin: But rather that hereby
our faith being increaſed we may get dayly from Chriſt
Ieſus more ſtrength againſt ſin, not meaſuring Gods faithfulneſſe
by our deſart, but by the eye of faith, looking
for light out of darkenes, that ſo God may haue the glory
of all his mercies. Thus doth Heſter conceale her country
and her kindred too. But by whoſe aduiſe doth ſhe
this? It followeth.
               
               For Mordecai had charged her that ſhee ſhould
not tell it.
               
                  
Lo here the cauſe of Heſters ſilence: her foſter-father Mordecai
had giuen her this in charge: & among many other
holy inſtructions, which he had furniſhed her withal, that
ſo ſhe might be better armed againſt the abuſes of the
Court: this was one eſpeciall, that ſhee ſhould rule her
tongue, and eſpecially herein impoſe ſilence on her ſelfe, yt
ſhe diſcouer not her Nation, nor her fathers houſe.
               Wherein,
                     Obſ. 83. Gods children ſeaſon one a nother with 
                        〈◊〉
                      councel & wholeſome inſtructions. 1. wee may ſee a notable practiſe of the
Saints of God, Namely to ſeaſon their tender plants
with good counſell, and wholeſome inſtruction: when
they are to leaue the wing (as wee ſay) and trye the
world. So doth Dauid counſell Salomon, and Ioſeph his
bretheren; ſo doth Iacob his children. This is the beſt legacie
they can bequeath vnto them: hereby they ſhew ye
vnfainedneſſe of their loue, and ſo arme them gratiouſly
againſt this preſent euill world.
               Whereby we may learne to ſette forth our children, and
friendes into the world: not ſo much prouiding ſtockes,
and ſuch furniture for the body, as eſpecially with good
counſell to arme the ſoule; as knowing that if it be ſecured
the other ſhall not want, and the full prouiſion for the
body, may bee a meanes to expoſe the ſoule naked to all
temptations.
               But what is the ſumme of this councell that Mordecai
giues to Heſter? Surely ſilence, the chiefe outward ornament
of women and keeper of their chaſtitie,Iacob, 3. 1 Iacob. the gouernment
of the tongue (that vnruly member) which if we refraine
not, our religion is in vaine; and to rule it well, is a
note of true profeſſion.
               Wherin as we ſee the fitneſſe of this Chriſtian councel;
                     Obſ 84. Silence a ſpeciall leſſon to be learned of Cou
                        •
                     tiers.
What fitter leſſon to a woman then ſilence? So we may
learne hereby the neceſſity of this vertue, eſpecially when
wee come abroad in the catching and obſeruing Court.
 VVhat more ſafe for a man here then ſilence? where euery
 word ſhal be ſcanned, and happily peruerted? what greater
 wiſdome here then ſilence? where ye wiſeſt ſpeaches go not
without their cenſure? what greater gaine heere then

ſilence? Whereby a man may learne, and make vſe of all
others ſpeach, that ſo when he is called, he may ſpeak with
authority.
               
                  Vſe. And therefore lette not impudent beggers heere
continue ſtill crauing, vpon preſumptions that the Prince
will neuer be weary of giuing: Lette not diſcourſers runne
them-ſelues out of breath at tables and chambers, to make 
others ſport and them-ſelues a marke for euery mans
tongue: let not cōplementers account it their glory to pratle
of euery thing, when they make no conſcience to practiſe 
the beſt things; let not flatterers truſt to this ſame glibbe & 
ſlippery mēber: to whom being ſo deeply indebpted, they
muſt look to make paiment, and happy are they if ſhame &
repentance wil cleare the ſcore: what ſhould I ſay? Let not 
Carry-tales and Detractors hope to carry it away cleanly,
ſeeing their own tongues ſhal one day cry quittance with
them: But let al remember Mordecaies leſſon to Heſter, y•
in the Court they rule their tongue, and ſo ſhall they bee
ſure to keepe their friend. But what end doth Mordecai
aime at in this his leſſon of ſilence? Surely his heart was
touched with the care of the Church, for he ſaw a greater
ſtorme like to come in vpon it: He feared leaſt Heſter by
this diſ-vnion might indanger the ſame: he hoped that her
wiſe ſilence for a time, might breed good blood for it deliuerance:
and therfore doth he aduiſe her, eſpecially, ſilence
in this caſe, leaſt her diſcouery might bee a meanes of indangering
the Church of God: As beeing that which the
enemy lay in wait for; and to which her weaknes & youth
might be eaſily abuſed. Wherein wee may obſerue what
principally ought to affect vs, ye danger wherof we ought
eſpecially to preuent: Namely the Church of God and its
ſucceſſe.
               1. Thus doth our god principally regard,
                     Obſ. 85. The ſafety of Gods church ought to be our ſpecial care. & ſo ſhould we
haue the like reſpect of it. 2. On the wel-fare hereof depēds
al our priuate happines: and therfore if we be wiſe, we wil
herein be wiſe to our ſelues, 3. yea our care hereof wil be
meanes to cōfort vs in our troubles, & make way for our

                   deliuerance; yea which is eſpecially to be regarded of vs,
our zeale to Gods Church witneſſeth our true intereſt
therein; that if we mourne with it, we ſhall alſo reioyce
therewith;Pſal. 42. 130. and ſo raigne for euer as liuely members
of the ſame in glory. So was Nehemiah, Dauid, Ioſiah and
the reſt.
               1. Vſe. What ſhall we then ſay of thoſe that neuer take
thought for Gods inheritance? Lette it ſinke or ſwimme
 its all one to them: What caſe are they in that drinke
 their wine in bowles, while Ioſeph is in affliction?
How fearefull is their condition that helpe forward the
affliction; reioycing greatly at the Churches fall? And
with all their ſtrength and pollicie cry it downe
to the grounde; But of this wee ſhall haue fitter
occaſion to ſpeake heereafter, when wee conſider of
Hamans and Mordecaies contrary affection heerein.
               Thus you ſee the care of Mordecai for the Church of
God: and to this end you haue heard of his charge to his
Nephew. Now let vs ſee how Heſter obeyes this iniunction:
It is ſaid that
               
                  Shee did not ſhew her people nor her kinred. i.
ſhee was obedient to the Councell of her Father
Mordecai, and doth not diſcouer her country nor
her Fathers houſe.
               A notable marke of the true childe of God:
                     Obſ. 86. Obedience to lawful authority, a true marke of the Child of god. 4. Sam. 15. Namely
in lawful things, to bee obedient to ſuperiors commaunds;
1. So hath God commanded; 2. ſo ſhal we prolong
our daies, 3. ſo is corruption humbled and patience
tryed. 4. ſo is faith excerciſed, and order maintained. 5. ſo
is God honoured better then with ſacrifice. 6. and man alſo
 by obeying more honored then if he could commaund
 obedience. In a word, where obedience is, there is ſafety,
 and all proſperity: but confuſiō followeth diſorder and
diſobedience. What may we then iudge of thoſe y• iuſtifie
treaſon and rebellion in inferiors? that allow the ſubiect to
rebel againſt the Prince, yea to take his life from him?
that warrant the childe to forſake their parents, and

iuſtifie diſobedience in al ſorts: ſhall we think yt this proceeds
from an heroical ſpirit? Shal we eſteem it as greater
obedience and honour vnto God? who becauſe hee is
obeyed aboue man, therfore wee muſt not obey man in
him, & vnder him? So the Papiſts aduance their traitors &
iuſtifie their treaſōs: Surely how neceſſarily muſt theſe erre,
not knowing the Scriptures? how fearefully do theſe reiect
God in not obeying his ordinance? ſhall wee looke that
God will honour them that doe thus diſhonour him?
Bleſſed bee our GOD who hath maintained his own
cauſe, and hath iuſtified his ordinance in the confuſion
of his enemies. So lette all thine enemies periſh oh
Lord, ſo bee thou exalted in the protection of thine
Annoynted.
               But wherin doth this obedience of Heſter ſhew it ſelfe?
                     Obſ. 87. Sincere obedience rather reſpects the power of the Commander then the worth of the thing commanded.
Surely in concealing a ſecret not fitte to be known; No
doubt her father had giuen her many other good leſſons,
& happily among ſo many, ſhe might haue forgottē this;
or happily ſhe might haue diſpenſed with it, as a matter of
no great conſequence; and ſeeing it was a thing would
not be long hid, why might ſhe not preuent the diſcouery
thereof by others, and ſo make her own peace by the
benefit of ſuch fauors wt were caſt vpon hir by ye Eunuch
and ſuch like? neglecting the eſtate of the reſt of her country.
Surely (I take it) herein we may obſerue the conſcionableneſſe of her obedience; that though ſhee might
haue thus ſtrayned in the poynt, yet the reuerent authority
of the commander keepes her from theſe demurres,
and ſo not ſo much ſhee conſiders the waight of the
thing commaunded; as that ſhe is ſimply led by the authority
of her ſuperiors.
               A notable euidence, of the ſincerity of our obedience,
that it depend not ſo much vppon the thing commanded,
as vppon the iuſt authority of the commander him-ſelfe:
becauſe as our ſeruice is then moſt acceptable to GOD
when it hath leaſt reſpect to our ſelues, and moſt to
his glory, ſo it is moſt free from mercenary baſeneſſe

when we ſtand not ſo much vpon the thing commanded
which doth concerne our owne good; as vpon the power
of the commander for whoſe ſake we do it.
               Thus did the Lord trye the obedience of our firſt parents,
the thinges he commandes might ſeeme to bee of
no great waight, but that the Authoritie and commander
gaue power thereto: which they not wayghing duely (as
in conſcience they ſhould) but principally reſpecting
what a ſmal matter was only impoſed; not to cutte of an
Apple: were therefore eaſily drawne to very fearefull
diſobedyence; and ſo haue ſette their childrens teeth on
edge, by eating that forbidden fruit.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Whereby wee may learne, how to certifie our
 obedience. Namely to haue an eſpeciall reſpect to ye iuſt
power of the ſuperior, and ſo in reuerence of that power,
 to yeeld obedience to his righteous commaund: not making
difference thereof, in regard of the things cōmanded,
but performing indifferent obedience to al alike; as they
proceed from a like power of thoſe whome God hath ſet
 ouer vs: making conſcience as well of the leaſt as ye greateſt
commaunds; becauſe the Commaunder is the ſame,
 and his power as great in the leaſt as in the greateſt: And
our faith and humilitie beeing more tryed in obeying the
leaſt, will be a good meanes to further to preferment,
that ſo not obeying man for hope of reward; we may not
yet be diſapointed of our hope in the reward aboue.
                     Obſ. 88. True obedience performed as wel in abſence as in preſence. Thus
doth the Lord approue the ſincerity of Heſters obedience.
Vnto which if wee ſhall adde that which further
in is remembred in the 20. verſe, that Heſter did euen
as conſcionably after the wordes of Mordecai, beeing
now from vnder his gouernment, as when ſhe was nouriſhed
by him: We haue herein a further teſtimony of the vprightneſſe
thereof. The holy Ghoſt (as I take it) ſignifying
herein vnto vs the maine ground of her obedience:
Namely that though ſhee was now exempted from the
ſight and gouernment of her earthly father Mordecai, yet
ſhee remayned vnder the obeyſance of her heauenly

Father: For whoſe ſake ſhee performes as conſcionably
obedience to Mordecai being abſent, as if he had hir vnder
neuer ſo much ſubiection. So doth ſhe approue her
obedience to bee in the ſight of God,Col, 3. 22. and ſo is cleared
from eye-ſeruice, and ſuch like; ſo doth ſhe witneſſe it alſo
to be for the Lords ſake, and ſo purgeth it vtterly of all
carnall reſpects: And in this her bodily abſence performing
as true ſeruice vnto Mordecai as if he were preſent;
ſhee retaines her right in the holy family, and ſo is partaker
of the prayers, and bleſſings thereof. Yea ſhee keeps hereby
within the couenant of God, and ſo prepares a way for
further bleſſings.
               
                  Behold here a patterne of ſincere obedience: And doth
not the Lord requite it accordingly? Yea ſurely, as Heſter
obeyes Mordecai when he is out of her ſight; ſo doth
Mordecai care for Heſter though now ſhe be from vnder
his gouernment. For ſo it followeth.
               
               
                  And Mordecai walked euery day before the Court of the
womens houſe,
                  Verſ, 11. 
                  to know if Heſter did well, and what ſhould be
done with her. Thus carefull is he of his Nephew euen
when ſhee is of yeares to gouerne her ſelfe.
               So ought parents not to reiect the care of their children,
                     Obſ. 89. Parents how far to extend their care for their children
euen when they ſeeme to haue leaſt need of them:
Becauſe 1. as hereby they ſhew the ſoundneſſe of their affection:
ſo this riper eſtate of their children, doth now
moſt require this care, as expoſing their children to more
fearefull extremities, as now knowing their ſtrength, and 
ſo now ſtrong to do euill. And wherein ſhall earthly parents 
better reſemble their heauenly Father, then by continuall 
loue and care of their poſteritie? Nay how ſhall
they otherwiſe differ from bruit beaſts, if they onely care
for their children to hatch them vp, & ſo ſend them forth
into the world;Ruth, 2. and there's an end. Had not Iob a dayly
care of his children, though in regard of the world, they
had no need of him? Becauſe the more they had of the
world, the longer they had liued therein, the more they
were ſubiect to greater danger?Iob. 1. what care had Naomi of

her daughter in law Ruth? how did Moyſes take care for
Gods people when they enioyed great proſperity?
               
                  Vſe 1. Wel let Mordecai condemne prophane parents that
thinke much to giue their Children euen bringing vp, if
they haue done this, they thinke they are fully diſcharged;
eſpecially if they can prouide them ſome trade, or portion
to get a liuing withall: Alas if they conſidered well, the
greateſt care is behind; when do children more greiue
and ſhame their parents, then at this eſtate? when they
come to their owne liberty, and haue fuell to their
luſts? and how many iuſt curſes doe lie vpon parents,
not for giuing too little, when they were Children, as for
giuing to much libertie, when they haue growne vp to
be men.
               If you ſay they are now paſt correction, they are
better able then I,Obiect. wherein then ſhould I ſhew my
care?
               Surely giue good example vnto them, that ſo they may
be ordered.Anſ. 1. 
                  Let them be often in thine eye, that ſo thy
 preſence may awe them; Spare not to reproue them plainely,

                  and forget not inſtruction as occaſion ſhalbe offered.

                  Keepe them to the dueties of children, without reſpect of
 their age, or ritches: ſo ſhalt thou keepe thy iuſt authoritie
ouer them. Keepe the ſtaffe in thine hand, and let
 their maintenance come from thee. Let the Magiſtrate
 helpe thee if correction here be needefull: But eſpecially
 craue helpe of GOD, that his bleſſing may bee vpon
them.
                     Obſer. 89. Care how it may ſt
                        •
                     nd with the prouidence of God.
               
               But what need Mordecai take this care of Heſter?
was he not perſwaded that GOD would care for her?
Yea ſurely, and therefore alſo is he carefull for her, becauſe
he knowes the prouidence of God to ſubordinate
 fit meanes. And who more fitte to care for her then he
that had bound himſelfe thereto?Act. 27. So then an honeſt
 careſtands well with Gods prouidence and faith therein:
 as whereby we both ſhew our ſincere obedience in
 vſing ſuch weake meanes as are ſubordinate thereto, and

ſo auoide ſecurity and preſumption, two maine enemies of
our moſt holy faith.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it condemneth their preſumption, that
caſt all vpon God, neglecting the meanes: So on the other 
ſide it reproueth their carnall confidence who reſt all
on themſelues and ſhut out God. The meane which (I take 
it) is to bee obſerued herein, is an obedience to Gods
commandement, to watch circumſpectly in our callings,
1. caſting about the beſt meanes, and 2. caring to compaſſe
our deſires, that we neither tie 3. the iſſue abſolutely to
our labour, but referre it wholy to the bleſſing of GOD,
nor 4. ſacrifice to our care as if by it we had obtained, nor
by it make 5. ſacrifices of our ſelues to Satan in our cruell
macerating of our ſelues to impotency and diſtruſt. But as
we muſt 1. care, to be humbled thereby; ſo we muſt alſo
caſt our 2. care on God, for he careth for vs, 3. contenting
our ſelues that we haue done our beſt,1 Pet. 4. howſoeuer happily
it may haue bad ſucceſſe, and beeing 4. comforted further
alſo in the greateſt plunges, becauſe our GOD
ſhall turne all to our good. Thus doth Mordecai giue
God the glory of his faith, while yet he ſhewes his loue
to his kinſwoman. And doth not the Lord giue a gracious
iſſue thereto? Conſider I pray you what followeth next.
               12. And when the courſe of euery maide came to go in to
King Ahaſhucroſh after that ſhe had beene &c.
               In theſe three next verſes, the holy Ghoſt ſets downe
the abhominable cuſtome of theſe maidens; in their
preparing to the Kings bedde; and alſo, their admittance
to the ſame.
               Their preparation is ſet downe by two circumſtances.
Firſt by the continuance of Time which was allotted for
this preparation: It was no leſſe then twelue moneths. 2. It
is alſo deſcribed by the meanes thereof, and thoſe are of
two ſorts. The firſt is ordinary, and this alſo is two-fold, they
muſt be annointed and purified ſixe moneths, with oyle of
mirrhe. 2. and the other ſixe monethes with ſweet odours,
and in the purifying of the women.
               
                  
The extraordinary meanes that is allowed for their purification,
is here deſcribed indiferently: Namely whatſoeuer
any of the Virgins did otherwiſe require, to ſet out
their beauty, and ſteale away the Kings heart, that muſt alſo
be giuen vnto them.
               The maidens being thus prepared, are in the ſecond
place, admitted to the Kings bed, and herein alſo we may
obſerue two circumſtances.
               1. The time of their admiſſion, a very ſhort time: In
the euening ſhee went and on the morrow ſhee returned &c.
               
               2. The condition of her admiſſion is here alſo commended,
vnto vs. Namely that when euer ſhe returned, ſhee
came vnto the King no more except ſhee pleaſed the King
and were called by name. This is breefely the ſumme of
theſe words.
               Wherein that no leſſe then a yeare muſt be ſpent in fitting
theſe miſerable Virgins to the luſt of the King,Obſer. 90. A marke of the wicked to riot out time. doth
not this ſet out vnto vs, his moſt prodigious luxury, and
profuſion? doth it not diſcouer ſuch effeminateneſſe, as
cannot well be deciphred? May we not herein obſerue a
note of deſperate folly thus to riot out time in vanity?
May we not ſet it downe as a marke of him, that knowes
not GOD, that he makes no conſcience of the redeeming
of the time,Times portion. but rather imploies his wits and wealth
 in the ſpending and waſting thereof? Surely if time be in
this regard moſt pretious,2 Cor. 6. 2. becauſe the Lord therein offers
vs a pearle of chiefeſt price, no meaner a Iewell, then the
ſaluation of our ſoules? Muſt not ſaluation be farre from
them,Pro. 1. 24. 25 that neglect ſo gratious opportunitie? can they be
accepted of God,Act. 1. 7. that refuſe this acceptable time? And is
 it not more then madneſſe thus to riot out time which is
not ours to diſpoſe, but in the hands of God? can we
be excuſed when the bride-grome ſhall come on the ſuddaine?
               
                  Vſe. Oh that we were wiſe to conſider theſe things!
that our Time-ſeruers would lay it to their hearts: what
a heauy wittnes time wilbe againſt them, when neglecting

the Iewell thereof the ſaluation of our ſoules, they are only
ſlaues to the corruptions of time? Did our gameſters
                  
wiſely conſider of this, that togither with their witte, and
money, and honeſtie, they alſo play away their time, that
moſt pretious time which can neuer be wonne againe:
ſurely they would labour with God,Pſa. 90. 
                        •
                     2l. that he would teach
them to number their daies, that ſo they might apply their 
hearts vnto wiſdome. And ſhall not time be a witneſſe againſt
our wordlings, who haue no leyſure to come to the
marriage of the Kings ſonne? but all time is to little for
their farmes and for their oxen? What ſhall I ſay to our prophane
E
                        •
                     awes; that ſay it is not yet time to build the houſe 
of God? good time enough behinds for the ſaluation of
our ſoules: Let vs be wiſe, and take the time while wee
may: let vs looke to the maine chance; Let our owne
houſes go forward: What is this birth-right to vs? ſhall we
die for hunger? hearken how our voluptuous-perſons, haue
diſpoſed of time? At all times let thy garments bee white,
and let no oyle be lacking vpon thy head.
                  Eccle. 9. 8. 
                  Let vs eate and
drinke,
                  1 Cor. 15. 25 
                  for to morrow we ſhal die: ſoule take thy eaſe thou haſt
goods laid vp for many yeares. Shall not the Lord of that

                     •
                  eruant come in an houre when he knowes not? ſhall not
he ſay, and make it good, thou fo
                        •
                     le this night ſhall thy ſoule
be taken away from thee?
                  Luk. 12. 20. But why ſpeake we to the bellie
that hath no eares? Surely the voice of Time yet was in
our ſtreets and the man of wiſdome,Math 6. 1 Pro. Eſay 55. 2 T
                        •
                     me how to be redeemed. Pro. 6 ſhall heare the name
of God. Oh yee fooliſh how long will yee loue fooliſhneſſe?
Why doe yee lay out ſiluer, and not for bread? Why do you
ſpend your time, and ſtrength, without being ſatisfied?
Say not with thy ſelfe, yet a little ſleepe, yet a litle ſlumbe
                     •
                  ?
put not off (as Felix did) til a more conuenient time?
Oh boaſt not of to morrow, for thou knoweſt not what
a day may bring forth! rather admire the mercy of thy
God, that thou art not alreadie conſumed: and ſeeing the
Lord hath ſpared thee,Eccle. 5. 12 to recouer what thou haſt loſt, Oh
thinke it ſufficient that thou haſt ſpent the time paſt,Lam. 3. 13. after
the luſt of the Gentiles: the more time thou haſt loſt, the

more doe thou labour for the time to come and redeeme
thy time with the price of thy former pleaſures Account
daily with thy ſelfe how thou doſt beſtow it, and esteeme
euery minuite pretious that is offered thee,Eccle. 5. 
                  and be ſure
thou feeſt therein an image of eternity. And conſidering
that the patience of the Lord doth lead thee to repentance,Rom 2. 4.
make no long tarying to turne to the Lord thy God, leaſt
abuſing his patience,Gen. 27. thou harden thine heart, and though
thou cry after, yea bitterly as Eſau did, yet the Lord will
not heare thee,Pro. 1. 24. 28. becauſe thou wouldſt not heare him. Oh
that we were wiſe to conſider theſe things! But they that
are filthy will be filthier ſtill.
               
                  Behold his drunkenneſſe added to thirſt: you haue heard
how theſe Princes Minions ſpend their time,
                     Obſ. 91. Another marke of the wicked to riot cut Gods good creatures a whole yeare
at leaſt muſt be ſpent to fit them to vncleaneſſe, that ſo
they may more deſperately follow the ſame all their life
long. And ſhal they only giue an account of ye miſpending
of their time? No ſurely: what is there that eſcapes taynture
by this abuſe of time? The ſoule that is hardned and
made impudent in ſinne, the body is made a factor and
baud for ſinne, the good creatures of God are made fuell
to ſinne, heer's no ſparing of coſt to maintaine ſinne: All
the creatures of God are to little in this caſe, but that Art
alſo muſt be made a broker euen to corrupt nature (ſix moneths
 with oyle of myrhe, and ſix moneths with ſweet odors)
 and ſuch other purifyings as do belong to women. No end
 of exceſſe vpon pretence of our right in the creature: No end
 of abuſe to condemne our vſurped power ouer them: ſo
corrupt is our nature to abuſe our liberty,Rom. 8. 19. ſo iuſt is
the Lord to turne our liberty to our further condemnation;Ioel. 1.
that the creature abuſed, being ſubiect to vanity,
might cry vnto the Lord to be eaſed of the burthen,
and ſo haſten vengeance vpon the wicked, while they
heape abuſe vpon the creature.
               
                  Vſe. 1. A notable euidence of the fearefull condition of
the wicked, who in the iudgement of the world ſeeme therfore
to be moſt happy, becauſe they haue moſt commaunds

ouer outward bleſſings. Whoſe great liberty on the
creatures, prouoking to greater abuſe, doth either thereby
moue the Lord to caſt out ſuch Nebuchadnezzars as
beaſts in this life,Dan. 4. and to ſtrippe them of all, or elſe there
continuance in theſe bleſſings, encreaſing ſinne vpon
them, doth thereby further vengeance againſt the day
of reckoning. A thing which becauſe the wicked cannot
avoyd as vſurping ouer Gods bleſſings, and therefore
neceſſarily making them ſtrangers vnto them.How to preuent abuſe of the creatures. 
                        •
                     . Cor. 
                        •
                     . 17. 1. Tim. 4. 4. 
                  That
we may therefore avoyd running into the ſame exceſſe; let
vs labour to be in Christ, that ſo we may haue a right in
theſe things, and let vs renew our right by prayer and holy
imployment of them in our ſeuerall callings, that ſo
we may attaine to a right vſe of them, frugally husbanding
them as the good bleſſings of God, and vſing them
ſoberly as hand-maides to higher graces,1. Tim. 6. 19. that ſo we may
lay vp a good foundation by them, and alſo giue a cheerefull
account for them at the day of Chriſt Ieſus.
               But is there no colour for this great exceſſe? might
not this be imputed as a complement of ſtate,
                  Obſ. 92. The wicked haue pretences for their greateſt abuſes. that theſe
maidens ſhould haue ſuch exquiſite preparations, becauſe
it was for the moſt excellent perſonage? might not ſeemelineſſe,
and neceſſity be here pretended, that they might
be offered fitly and vnſpotted to the bed of a King? might
not liberty be pleaded, and therefore who ſhall reſtraine?
might not ability be avouched to iuſtifie this coſt? Surely
the greateſt ſinnes will haue their cloakes, pride muſt
go for cleanlineſſe, and exceſſe muſt keepe ſtate, the clenſing
of the body muſt be with the defiling of the ſoule, and
luſt will haue a law to enrage and prouoke the ſame.
Thus are the wicked deceiued, while they deceiue others,
thus are they hardned in their ſinne while it hath
a cloake to keepe it from ſhame: Thus pretending what
they may doe, what euill will they not proſecute with
greedineſſe, ſeeing power is in their hands, and ſo hauing
made vp the meaſure of their ſinne, bee ſuddenly

caught with deſtruction, while they ſay peace and ſecurity.
1. Theſſ. 5. 3.
               
                  Vſe 1. Oh that we would trie our ſelues whether we
ſtand in grace or no! To ſinne is naturall, but to cloake
ſinne is diueliſh.2 
                  And therefore though outward ability
may afford meanes of ſuch exceſſe;Rules for moderation in the creatures. yet the ability of the
minde ſhould temper ſuch meanes, for the good of both;
and though it be lawfull for me to take my fill of Gods
creatures, yet expediency will moderate as may beſt fit me
to glorifie my Creator: And what ſhould neceſſity do with
ſuch ſuperfluity? what ſeemelineſſe can their be where
Nature is thus adulterated? As for complement of ſtate to
be furniſhed hereby, what greater abaſement of ſtate then
to be a ſlaue where it ſhould rule? and what more enthrals
greatneſſe then abuſe of it power, then exceſſe in it libertie?
Let vs therefore caſt away theſe cloakes of ſhame;
and in the feare of GOD,1 Cor. 10, 31 learne we an holie and ſober
 vſe of the bleſſings of God, let not examples deceiue vs,
 nor libertie enthrall vs: let not neceſſity make vs 
                     
                        •
                     antons,
                   nor fulneſſe make vs miſerable. But vſe we the bleſſings of
 GOD to the glorie of the giuer: Let our callings be the

                  meaſure, and our ſaluation the end, let neceſſity bee the motiue,
                   and true liberty the moderator: Let experience be the
Iudge,
                  1 Cor 10. 8 Rom. Math. 25 and edification the marke we aime at: ſo ſhall we
vſe aright the good bleſſings of God: and being faithfull
in a little, we ſhalbe made ſtewards of great bleſſings.
               Well thus we haue remoued theſe ſhameleſſe vyzards,
and pretences for this. Now let vs examine the true cauſe
of this exceſſe. It followeth in the. 13. verſe. What ſoeuer
ſhe called for,
                  
                     Obſer. 93. The wicked moſt eagerly be
                        •
                     t vpon their luſts, and ſpare no coſt for the ſat flying thereof. Exod. 32 
                  it was giuen vnto her to go with her out of
the womens houſe into the Kings houſe. Lo here the maine
cauſe of all this ſuperfluity. It was to go into the houſe
of the King, to ſatisfie his luſt: And therefore ſpare no
coſt, let there be giuen what-ſoeuer is called for: So engerly
are the wicked bent to the ſatisfying of their luſts, ſo do
they ſpare no coſt, for the fulfilling thereof. Not their
eare-rings and bracelets but ſhall go willingly to make the

yea the fruit of their bodie, for the ſinne of their ſoule.Mich. 6. 
                  Such
paines do they take to increaſe their paine: ſo fooliſh are 
they to beſtow ſuch coſt vpon ſo hard a reckoning. And
                  
yet how ſhall they bewray their loue to ſinne, vnleſſe it
coſt them thus deare? How ſhall they iuſtifie this vanity
in the eye of the world, but by being at ſo great coſt 
for it? if it were not worth it, ſurely ſuch wiſe men would
not lay out ſo much vpon it. It were not worth the hauing,
vnleſſe it coſt them thus deere. How ſhould they
make others in loue with ſinne but by prizing it 
ſo highly? How ſhould ſinne bee nouriſhed, but by 
ſuch aboundance of fuell? There credit now binding 
them, hauing laid out ſo much vpon it, to make the 
beſt of their bargaine; And this coſt, giuing for a
time ſome miſerable comfort in the ſinne, that ſo
they might at length make vppe the meaſure thereof.
               
                  Vſes 1. Which as it condemneth that opinion of the
world, that rich men are onely righteous, and onely the
poore wicked; whereas rather theſe being not able to
be at the coſt of ſinne, are ſo kept from it, the other hauing
where-withall, are the likelier chapmen: So it much 
more condemneth theſe badde market-men, who caſt away
their money on ſuch traſh as ſinne is: yea hereby
alſo do caſt away themſelues.
               Surely if GOD be the beſtower of thoſe outward
bleſſings, and to this end they were giuen, that he might 
haue the glorie: are not great ones here tied to Gods
ſeruice with a greater bond? haue they not better meanes
and leiſure then others to intend the ſame? And yet 
this ſhall not excuſe the poore, but they are badde huſbands
alſo: Though they haue not ſuch meanes, yet they
can beſtow to much coſt on ſinne: they will beſtow
their Time, and whatſoeuer they haue: their wills
are as good, though they cannot put it in practize;
and what can the diuell haue more then all that they
haue.
               Well let ſuch conſider of this, that thinke all coſt to 
                  
little 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſeruice of GOD,1 Malack. that robbe the LORD
in tythes, and offerings: that giue him but the lippes, and
out-ſide in his ſeruice, that rent him in the power and
plenty thereof, as if we could be to righteous or he too
much ſerued, ſhall not the groſſe ſinner riſe vp in iudgement
againſt them?
               But what? muſt theſe wantons haue whatſoeuer they
call for? muſt they do what they liſt as (if their were no
King in Iſrael) and yet doth the King commande it?Indg 17 doth
authority allow ſuch licence to ſinne?
               Behold here a note of wicked Magiſtrates,
                     Obſer. 94. Wicked 
                        •
                     ag
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     rates giue the bridle to ſinne, and countenance wickedneſſe in others. inſtead of
bridling ſinne, they giue the reine to it. Elſe how ſhould
their example bee warranted if they did not warrant others?
How ſhould they hope for the loue of their people, if
they gaue them not this liberty, if they made them not
like vnto them? How ſhould they (as they thinke) keepe
 their ſubiects from plotting againſt them, but by drowning
 them, thus in all kind of filthineſſe? How ſhould they
 hope to rule them at their pleaſure, if they did not thus infatuate
 and abiect them to all kind of pleaſures?
               
                  Thus doth Atheiſticall policy giue liberty to ſinne. But
not I pray you to the confuſion thereof? Let vs a little
examine theſe grounds? muſt ſinne be made common
that I may goe vncontrouled? what extraordinary priuiledge
and delight can I haue herein, ſeeing I abaſe my
pleaſures as common to euery one? What ſecurity can I
haue in the continuance of them when I haue ſo many
ſharers and ſpoilers thereof? Ought I not therefore rather
reſtraine ſinne in others, that ſo I may in them reforme
my ſelfe? that my ill example may be better indured,
when I am beloued not for my owne worth, but for
conſcience ſake? ſurely euen a bad husband, will yet ſee
his ſeruants ſhall worke, that ſo he may haue to maintaine
his vnthri
                     •
                  tineſſe with all: And ſhall I hope to bee beloued
of my people by giuing that libertie which makes
them hatefull to themſelues, and vnfit for any duty wherby
they might ſhew their loue?
               
                  
Surely though by this meanes I make them like vnto
me, yet neither is likeneſſe in ſinne the ground of loue
eſpecially betweene the Prince and ſubiect, neither will
fellowſhippe in euill euer breede true loue, but rather
iealouſie and hatred arc the hand-maides thereof.1 Sam. 14
Remember Amnons loue to Thamar, and the iſſue
thereof.
               And ſhall euil be preuented by giuing the reyne thereto?
doth not liberty to ſinne giue ſtrength thereto, euen
iuſtly to be auenged, of ſuch fooliſh indulgence? It may
be this licence may for a time abiect the ſubiect to a ſlauiſh
obedience, and hauing made him a beaſ
                     •
                   you may
happily ſo vſe him as your drudge and pack-horſe, but if
you tread on a worme to hard, he will turne againe: and
while you hope the better to rule him by drawing him
in pleaſure, take heed you make him not more ſauage and
hard to be tamed.
               And therefore if you plot for true loue and ſecurity of
your ſtates,
                     Obſer. 95. Princes how to ſecure their eſtates. 
                  kiſſe you the Sonne of righteouſneſſe, that your
people may embrace you: Giue lawes that may breed
feare, and chaſe away the wicked, by the power thereof, ſo
ſhall your thrones be eſtabliſhed in iuſtice. So ſhall the
righteous dwell in peace, and ſhall bleſſe your gouernment.
This ſhalbe the meanes to preuent al conſpiracies,
when the Keeper of Iſrael watcheth ouer your Kingdomes,
and knitteth the hearts of your people towards
you, and by this you ſhall learne to be mercifull to your
beaſts, much more to your ſubiects, that they may cheerefully
obey you. Thus ought Godly Princes gouerne
their people: But as for our Perſia
                  ▪ Monarch his luſt is
his law, and his belly his God, and therefore no maruaile
if he do after his kind, and in his greateſt wiſdome haſten
his owne diſtruction.
               For to come now to the iſſue of all this preparation:
of all this libertie and abuſe of GODS creatures: Is it
not to prouoke the luſt of this Epicure, and ſo to
waſt his bodie, and deſtroy his ſoule? yea ſurely, the

holie Ghoſt witneſſeth no leſſe, in that which followeth.
               In the euening ſhee went and on the morrowe ſhee returned,Verſ. 14
into the ſecond houſe of the women vnder the hand of
Shaaſhgaz the Kings Eunuch, which kept the Concubines:
ſhee came in to the King no more; except ſhee pleaſed the
King; and that ſhe were called by name.
               In which words the admiſſion of theſe maidens to the
Kings bedde is declared vnto vs: and, i. the Time of their
admiſſion is ſpecified, in the euening ſhee went, and on
the morrowe ſhee returned that is to ſay,Iob 24, 15 She is, to goe
in the euening, as fitteſt for a worke of darkeneſſe, the
eye of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, he is aſhamed
of the light, he feares it will bewray him. And her
pleaſure continues but for a night:
                     Obſer. 96. The pleaſures of the wicked very ſ
                        •
                     ort and 
                        •
                     lippery. ſo momentary are
the pleaſures which the wicked do enioy. So iuſt is the
LORD to confound their vaine confidence, that
while they promiſe to themſelues perpetuitie therein;
they both preſume of more then the nature of their
pleaſures can performe, and are preuented by Gods iuſtice
confounding the ſame, euen in their greateſt likelihood
and ability thereof. Luk. 12. 20.
               
                  Vſe 1. And ſhall we ſet our hearts on that which is
ſuch a ſtranger vnto vs? So daungerous in the vſe? So
 fearefull in the change? Shall we to catch theſe ſhadowes,
forſake the ſubſtance? ſhall the pleaſures of the
right hand which laſt for euermore, ſhall theſe (I ſay) be
diſclaimed for theſe pleaſures of ſinne which endure but
for a ſeaſon? Shall we thinke our ſelues vnhappie becauſe
 we drinke not of theſe broken miſeries? Shall
we eſteeme thoſe bleſſed that abide in ſuch ſlipperie
places?Iere. 2 
                  Shall we not rather chooſe with Moyſes hauing
 an eye to the recompence of the rewarde?
Ought wee not the rather to ſecure theſe ſlipperie Eſtates
 by ſanctifying them daylie in an holie vſe thereof,Pſal. 73
                   and readineſſe to forgoe them, when the LORD
ſhall call?Hebr. 11
               
               
                  
But is there not a miſtery in this, that the Virgin muſt
come in the euening, and returne in the morning. She
muſt ſtay but a night, luſt muſt haue change, that it may
be ſatisfied,
                     Obſer. 97. Variety in ſin the greateſt ſnare thereto. and change hath a ſore with it, to conſume
the body, and ſo to be auenged for the abuſe of this
liberty.
               So wiſe are the wicked for the maintenance of ſinne.
                  So iuſt is the LORD, in confounding this their wiſdome,
as making it the meanes to haſten their deſtruction. So is
the Epicure met withall in the variety of his danties, ſo is
ambition tangled in the ſtirrops of her climing, ſo
variety of meanes to ſinne, is the ſnare thereto.
               
                  Vſe 1. And may not they then be condemned of extreame
follie, which thinke it pleaſanteſt ſwimming;
where there is many baites? they may bee here, or there:
what liberty is this?
               2. Is not their madneſſe intollerable, that when one
is to much to choake them, wil be nibbling at them all
                     •
                  
nay, will ſwallow them greedily, as if they had found
great ſpoiles. Surely ſuch is the caſe of the Whore-maiſter,
and drunkard: ſuch is the ambitious perſon, the coueteous,
and oppreſſor: ſuch are all they that delight in
ſinne, theſe muſt haue variety▪ that their confuſion may
be the greater. Oh let vs not therefore binde ſinnes togither!
                  Let vs feare ſuch baites as may further change in 
ſinne. Let complementers looke to this, and factors for other 
mens ſinnes. Let vs ſingle out our ſinnes that we 
may the better ouer-maiſter them. Let vs not ſeeke 
after greatneſſe, which may yeeld vs this libertie: But
                  
rather pray for ſuperiors that haue ſuch ba
                     •
                  tes to ſinne,
                  And not liue by examples, which may ſo dangerouſly
corrupt vs.
               Well thus we haue heard what ſhort pleaſure this
poore maiden hath had.
                     Obſ. 98. The wicked fall deeper and deeper into ſinne. Now let vs heare a little of her
paine. It followeth. Shee returned into the ſecond houſe of
the women: that hauing made ſale of her honeſty, and
ſo changed her happie eſtate of Virginity to become a

Concubine, ſhe changeth alſo her habitation: And
whereas before ſhe was in the houſe of the Virgins; now
ſhe is remoued to the houſe of the women; ſuch as had left
their honeſties behind them,R
                        •
                     aſons I. 
                  that here among fellowes
in euill griefe might be prouoked, and yet notwithſtanding
ſhe might be hardened in her ſinne; as being here
like to finde companions therein, & ſo miſerable comforters
to excuſe and iuſtifie the ſame. So cunning is Satan
to maintaine his new gotten hold: So vnthankefull is
ſinne to recompence our ſeruice with ſhame and ſorrow.

                  So deſperate is the condition of the wicked, they ſinke
 deeper and deeper: So iuſt is the Lord in their appointed
 condemnation, that neither ſhortneſſe of pleaſure, nor

                  change thereof into ſorrow; nor diſgrace of men, nor
ſting of conſcience: nothing ſhall ſtay the wicked, indeede
nothing can ſtay them, till they haue made vp their
meaſure, that God may powre on his.
               1. Well let this aduize vs not to beleeue the faire promiſes
of the world; the beſt recompence ſhe can yeeld vs
when ſhe hath made vs ſerue her luſt, is to thruſt vs into
the houſe of the women, to reape deſperate ſorrow for
the ſame, or elſe to harden vs further therein, ſeeing now
we are knowne to be but broken ware, here is the beſt
remedie the world affords for ſinne, euen to ſend vs to
our like companions in euill: that ſo we may haue company
to go to hell withall.
               
                   Who ſo is wiſe let him vnderſtand theſe things, let him
not hope to recouer out of ſinne by giuing further liberty
thereto through fellowſhippe &c. Let him take heed
of the houſe of the women, of pleaſure, ſencerity &c. ſuch
meanes as do harden. Nay let him not enter into his brothers
houſe in the day of his humiliation: miſerable comforters
are theſe all.
               But let him go to his God, by true repentance, and

                  let him ſingle out the Lord, that ſo he may be more vile
in his preſence:Abac. 3. ſo ſhall he finde reſt in the euill day.Pſal. 32. 5.
                  I ſaid I will confeſſe my ſinnes vnto the LORD and thou

forgaueſt me the iniquity of them.
               
               But let vs a little further conſider of that which followeth.
               
                  
                     Shee came into the King no more, except ſhece pleaſed
the King and, (this was a ſigne that ſhee
pleaſed the King) if that ſhee were called by
name.
                  
               
               Behold here a further euidence of the badde wages of
ſinne:
                     Obſer. 99. The vnſatiablenes of the wicked in ſin hath th
                        •
                     s puniſhment attending on it in this life that it ſhall not be ſatisfied. This defiled woman muſt now burne in luſt, and
ſhall not be ſatisfied▪ to the King ſhee muſt come no
more, but at a long leyſure and for other meanes, the iealouſie
and honour of the Prince, and the watchfulneſſe
and ſafety of the keeper will looke to it ſoundly. What
then is her puniſhment? ſurely not onely to be denied
of that, which ſhe moſt deſireth, but by this deniall to
be tormented with the rage of her vnſatisfied luſt, to the
great vexation both of bodie, and ſoule.
               So is the couetous man tormented in the reſtraint of his
vnſatiable deſire; ſo is the proude man reproched becauſe
the world will not honour him;Haman. 5 Heſter. 
                  ſo is the Epicure
puniſhed in this life,
                     Ariſtot. et Plin. de Aquilis. by being giuen vp to ſuch a deſire
of eating, that nothing can ſatisfie; ſo do the birds of
prey euen die for famine. So patient is the Lord hereby
to prouoke the wicked to repentance, ſo iuſtly doth 
hee haſten hereby their condemnation, becauſe ſinne 
reſtrained is the more enraged: ſo wiſely doth hee diſcouer 
hereby the vnſatiableneſſe of the minde to ſinne:
ſo righteouſlie doth he ſeeke vppe into them, there eternall 
vengeance by this, that as their deſire to ſinne
is vnſatiable, and in this life is reſtrained; ſo for this their
infinite deſire, they ſhall eternally burne in hell: where
yet they ſhalbe vtterly depriued, of all ſatisfaction of
their luſts.
               1. Oh conſider this you that forget GOD, and

dead your conſciences,
                     Eph. 4 19. Non cum ſatietate, ſed cū
                     
                     
                        •••
                     ditate indicat ſp
                        •
                     ritus appe
                        •••
                      inſatibi
                        •
                     e, nō ſatiandum. that you may commit ſinne with
greedineſſe: you that enlarge your deſires as hell, that you
may take your fill of ſinne: behold the more greedie you
are, the leſſe you ſhall be ſatiſfied; euen no leſſe then hell
that neuer can bee ſatiſfied. Doe you not ſee herein
how ſinne will owe you nothing? your deſires ſhall bee
laide open, how vnſatiable they are: and God ſhall giue
 you your deſire, you ſhall not bee ſatiſfied. And therefore
condemne not Gods iuſtice, but the vnſatiableneſſe
 of your deſire. Is not this a fearefull ſatiating of the wicked
with his owne wayes?
                  Prou. 14. 4 when hee ſhall not bee ſatiſfied,
wherein hee is vnſatiable, when his 
                     •
                  atiating in ſinne
doth make him more vnſatiable: how iuſt is it that offenders
ſhould burne in luſt, and ſo bee deemed the comfort
 of mariage. Oh leaue therefore to purge the fountaine of
this miſchiefe, labour to preuent vnſatiableneſſe in ſinne,
1. purge it from the heart, or elſe it muſt bee vnſatiable;
2.Vnſati
                        •
                     bleneſſe in ſinne how to bee preuented. 
                  refraine it in the occaſions, which may breed a deſire
of vnſatiableneſſe, looke to the libertie of ſinne, that in
giuing thee thy deſire, ſhall nothing leſſe then ſatisfie
thee: and conſider wiſely the reſt of ſinne, euen reſtleſſe torment,
and yet neuer ſatiſfied.
               
                   And ſeeing our deſires in euill haue ſuch ill ſucceſſe,
oh let vs labour to place them on the true obiect; let
Heauen bee our marke, and godlineſſe our race: here
wee ſhall bee ſatisfied, as hauing aſſurance by faith, and
yet ſtill deſire, beeing ledde forward by hope, that ſo wee
may at length obtaine the fulneſſe of our deſire, in the
end of our faith, which is the fulneſſe of ioy for euermore.
               
                  Thus wee may ſee (for concluſion of this point) that
whether the wicked winne or looſe in ſinne theres no
gaine on eyther ſide.
                     Obſer. 100. The wicked, winners or looſers fare the worſe by ſinne. The King hee takes his libertie
more freely, and is a looſer thereby, hee encreaſeth his
ſinne by abuſing the chaſtitie of others, and putting off
repentance by a new ſupplie; and his body alſo gettes
nothing by the bargaine: as for the poore Concubine,
                  
her loſſe is apparant, ſhee parts full vnwillingly with the
bed of her pleaſure, and meetes vntimely with the houſe
of her ſorrow, ſhee burnes within, and freezeth without,
the King hath ſo his deſire that hee may be leſſe ſatiſfied;
the Concubine hath not hers, and therfore is not ſatiſfied,
and yet the Lord moſt righteous herein: who in not giuing
her her preſent deſire, ſatiſfies her inward and maine
purpoſe, & by this meanes inflameth the ſame namely neuer
to be ſatiſfied, but euer to burne in luſt. Let this impoſe
ſilence to all bragging of diminiſhing of ſinne; the begger
he flatters himſelfe that hee is not prodigall, and the
gelded perſon that hee is not incontinent: what gets hee
hereby, ſeeing hee would be ſo? The great one he boaſts
that he ſteales not for neede, he flatters himſelfe that hee
hath enough to doe at home, what doth this aduantage
him if he ſteale without neede? nay how ſhall we know
hereby, but that he would if he had need whether wee
be reſtrained in what we would, or enioy our deſire to the
vtmoſt: ſinne got ground in both; the outward reſtraint
encreaſeth the inward deſire, and the inward deſire is alſo
enraged by the outward accompliſhment thereof. Let vs
therefore labour firſt to rectifie our defires by the word
of GOD, 
                     
                        •
                     abou
                        •
                     
                   wee to haue our perſons accepted
of GOD, ſo ſinne reſtrained, or committed, ſhall bee
leſſe deſired. And ſo much concerning the abhominable
cuſtome of theſe Concubines. Now let vs ſee
how GOD bringeth light out of darkeneſſe. It followeth.
               
                  Now when the courſe of Heſter the daughter of Abihail
the Vnckle of Mordecay,
                     Verſ. 15. 16 17 18. which had taken her as
his one Daughter came, that ſhee ſhould goe into the
King, &c.
               
               In theſe foure next verſes, the holy Ghoſt ſets downe
vnto vs, 1. the admittance of Heſter into the Kings preſence,
2. her aduancement to the mariage bed, and ſo to

the kingdome, and 3. the ſolemnitie thereof. And that
ſtill wee may ſee the Lord is like himſelfe in vſing fitte
meanes to bring good things to paſſe: the ſpirit of God
ſets downe in this 15. verſe, diuerſe notable circumſtances
to ſhew the orderly and worthy admittance of this poore
captiue to ſo great ſoueraigntie. Firſt, it is ſayd, When the
courſe of Heſter came, that is; ſhee is not hoyſed on the
ſuddaine, leaſt ſhee might bee vnprepared, and puffed vp
therewith: neither is ſhe called before her courſe, leaſt her

                     •
                  ellows might enuie her, as being grieued at it: neither
ſhall ſhe ſtay after her courſe to put her out of hope: but
euen in the fit time.
               
                  When her courſe came,
                  
                     Obſ. 98. Gods children are aduanced in conuenient time. then is ſhe called, then is ſhee aduanced.
So when his appointed time came, and the councell
of the Lord has tryed him, then did the King ſend for
Ioſeph and looſe him, then was hee deliuered and made
Lord of the houſe.
               Thus hath God an appointed time to aduance his
 Children, which ſhalbe fitteſt and moſt comfortable
 for them, that they may know their aduancement is
 not by chance but determined of the LORD: that
they might wait with patience the LORDS good leyſure,
and bee confirmed in faith, for the accompliſhment
thereof.
               
                  Vſe 1. And therefore, as in vaine do the wicked threaten,
(as if the times were in their hands) becauſe Eliah
ſhall proſper, and his word ſhall preuaile againſt

                  Iezabel: ſo weake is the faith of GODS children, that
will preſcribe GOD his time: ſeeing when it is fitteſt
then it ſhall come to paſſe, and art thou wiſer then
 GOD? Oh that we would be ſtill! and the LORD
 would eſtabliſh our hearts? that wee would fit our ſelues, to
the time, that God hath appointed.
               Surely there is an end 
                     •
                  thy hope ſhall not bee
out of,Pro. 2
                        •
                      18 yea the patient abiding of the righteous ſhalbee
galdneſſe.
               
                  
And ſeeing the Lord will not hide from his children
what may be for their good,
                     Obſ. 102. The apointed time of deliuerance is not obſcurely to be gathered out of the word. and they that liue by faith
may ſee a farre of, though the times and ſeaſons are in the
hands of God, yet hath he not left vs without very probable
markes, whereby we may diſcouer the time of a deliuerance,
that ſo we may be better fitted to the entertainment
thereof and be confirmed in our faith, in the enioying
of the ſame: when the ſignes do graciouſly anſwer our
expectation.
               
                  To this pupoſe is it, that as the Lord hath appointed a time
when he will deliuer his Church; ſo doth he alſo in the
word diſcouer the ſame; and alſo not obſcurely layes open
the markes of his childrens apprehenſion thereof.Tokens hereof. And
theſe are either in regard of God who is the delyuerer, or 
in reſpect of them-ſelues that are to be deliuered, or in 
regard of their enemies from whome they are to be deliuered.
               
               
                  Concerning almighty God as he is the onely deliuerer of
his Church:1. In reſpect of God. ſo doth he commend him-ſelfe vnto vs by
ſome ſpeciall actions in the word; when he purpoſeth to
deliver his people; while his people are vnder the burthen,
he is ſaid to be a ſleepe to forget them, to be angry
with them,
                  Pſal. 
                        •
                     4. 
                  &c. not that indeed he is angry, but becauſe
he ſhowes ſuch effects,Pſal. 77. which wee do being angry:
neither that he forgets them, otherwiſe then not to anſwere
their preſent deſires, neither indeed is hee otherwiſe
a ſleepe, then that gratiouſly preſeruing them in
the eſtate of their affliction, he doth not yet deliuer them
out of the ſame. But when the Lord purpoſeth to deliuer
his people, then the ſpirit diſcribes him in another
manner. Namely that he awaketh and rowſeth vp him-ſelfe
as one out of ſleepe, he returneth to his people,
                  Pſal. 74. and hath
compaſſion on them and he repents him of the euill▪
                  Pſal. 101. &c.
And that we may know that the Lord is awake he doth
manifeſt the ſame by many notable ſignes of his ſpeciall
prouidence.
               
                  
                  As firſt he puts on righteouſneſſe as an habergeon & an helmet
of ſaluation upon his head:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſay. 59. 17. 18. 
                  hee puts on the garments of
vengeance for clothing, and is clad with zeale as a cloake.
To what end? Surely to make recompence to requite the fury
of his aduerſaries, with a recompēce to his enemies, he will
fully repay ye Ilands; mark I pray you how the holy Ghoſt
ſets down the order of ye execution of Gods recompence
1. He makes inquirie of the fury of his aduerſaries, he comes
downe to ſee whether they haue done altogether according
to that cry againſt God and his children:Ceneſ. 18. Pſal, 9. 12. 
                  He makes inquiſition
for blood, and remembers it: and forgets not the complaint
of the poore. But doth the Lord make this inquiſition?
How doth hee approue the righteouſnes of the complaint
of the poore?
               Surely,Pſal, 44. 1▪ 
                  By making it apparent that his children for his
ſake ſuffer all theſe euills, in that neither would their enemies
perſecute them,Exod, 5. if they would renounce their God, &
yet they ſhall giue teſtimony of their righteouſneſſe,1 Sam, 24. 26.
though for their credits they muſt ſtill proceed againſt
them. So was our Sauiour Chriſt approued by Pylate &
his wife: ſo did Saul iuſtifie Dauid and yet he continued
perſecuting of him: ſo haue Gods children bene iuſtified
by their enemies. By which it commeth to paſſe that the
more the godly are iuſtified, the wicked are more inraged,
and ſo laye more grieuous burthens vppon the Church of
God. What followeth here-vpon. Now doth the Church
 of God increaſe her cries, and ſo the Lord doth yet further
ſhew him-ſelfe for ye deliuerance therof.Iudge, 5. Namely he
raizeth vp ſome extraordinary Champions to venture themſelues
for the reſkuing of his people:Nehem. 2. Now ſtands vp Nehemiah,
                  4 H
                        •
                     ſtor.
and now reſolues Heſter,
                  Exod. 4. if I periſh I periſh; Now
is Moyſes ſent forth though ſore againſt his will.
               
                  And wil not y• Lord accompany theſe his ſeruants with
 extraordinary power? Yea ſurely: behold here a third note
when God will deliuer his people:Gen. 15. 14. Pſal, 106. Namely hee will ſend
fearefull ſignes into the Land of Ham, and ſhew his wonders
in Egipt, and the red Sea, that ſo the wicked may bee

compelled,1 Sam, 5. to lette his people go: he will ſend Emeroids
among the Philiſtines, and ſoare plagues vppon the vncircumciſed,
that ſo they may bee compelled to ſend ye Arke
home.Geneſ, 15. 14. Thus will the Lord Iudge the Nations before he deliuer
his people; that their hearts hereby being hardned, &
more indurate againſt God and his people, the deliuerance
of the Church may be more free and glorious, and ye confuſion
of the wicked more iuſt and fearefull. Thus doth
the Lord awake and returne when he will deliuer his children,
giuing them herein theſe apparant markes. Namely,
Firſt The clearing of his children by the mouthes of their
enemies: Second, The raizing ſome vp among them to
ſpend their liues in his cauſe. Third, inflicting many ſecret
and open iudgements vpon their mallicious enemies.Fox. So
before he deliuered his Church from the tyrants of Antichriſt
among vs, were not ſome of the perſecutors made
fearefull ſpectators of Gods wrath, to bridle or harden
the reſt? And to iuſtifie the Church of God?
               And ſurely if we do conſider the ſtate of the Church of
God,2 In regard of the church. when the Lord prepares it to a gratious deliuerance,
we ſhall find many euident tokens therein: to giue good
hope of the haſtening of the work: by which we may be
confirmed in the expectation thereof.
               To this purpoſe we may obſerue a different eſtate of ye
Church of God vnder troubles. Firſt, ſhe ſtandes vpon her
priuiledge, as if ſhe had wrong herein: ſhee looks to former
times, and meruailes why ſhe is thus: ſhe growes impatient
vnder the burthen, and complaines of her louers,
that they haue deceiued her; ſhe diſſembles with God and
ſeekes to humaine helpers; ſhe yeelds to the preſent neceſſity,
and ſo ſhe bowes her neck to the yoakes, and her conſcience
to the luſt of the oppreſſor: ſhe giues her moſt pretious
things for meat, and obiecting her ſelfe to the iniquitie
of the time, ſhe giues ouer hope euer to riſe againe,
Thus you ſhall find to haue beene the ſtate of the Church
of God vppon it entrance into captiuity: and ſo along
toward the time of her appoynted deliuerance. As the

Prophets do moſt liuely decipher the ſame:Vid. Ierem, 41. 42. who liued with
them in the captiuity, and obſerued their vſe therof. And
ſurely if we obſerue the prouidence of God herein:Lament, 2. 3. 1 Lamen, 11. Ezech. 
                  doth it
not exceedingly iuſtifie this righteous hād of god againſt
his church? Doth not the church of God hereby ſink deeper
in the myre, and ſo ſet her ſelfe more ſtrongly in the
bondes of Gods iuſtice, that ſo the time appointed of
her trouble may be accompliſhed ouer her? And doth
not the Lord admirably by this meanes bring light out
of darkeneſſe, and ſo prepare his Church to her appointed
deliuerance? Yea ſurely the more Gods children
wreſtle with the rod, the more they are beaten, and at
length tired therewith: and ſo in the end being throughly
weary, ye poore church of God would gladly find ſome
reſt. And ſeeing the hope of the Hils is but in vaine, and
ſhe findes it too true that her louers haue deceiued her:Ierem, 3.
Therefore ſhee reſolues to go and returne to her firſt husband:
                  1 Lamen. 19.
                  to looke vp vnto the Lord and wait for God her Sauiour:
                  Oſea, 2. Mich, 7.
Aſſuring her ſelfe that her God will heare;Pſal, 66. And being
fully reſolued that if there be iniquity in her hand, the
Lord will not heare her prayers; therefore ſhe purpoſeth
to forſake her Louers, and renounce her ſinnes. Heere
is it,Lament, 1. that ſhee weepes continually and giues no reſt to her
eyes, becauſe the Lord hath forſaken his reſt: And that
her ſorrow may be more kindly,Pſal, 137. and take deeper impreſſion,
Shee remembers Syon,
                  Lamen, 5. 18. while ſhe ſits in Babilon: ſhee
remembers all her pleaſant things, that ſhe had in times
paſt: And withall remembers her rebellion which was
the cauſe of that great loſſe:1 Lamen, 7. And ſo apprehends her affliction
from the cauſe and greatneſſe thereof: Thus is
ſhee brought to iuſtifie the Lord,1 Lamen, 18. 
                  becauſe ſhee hath rebelled
againſt him,
                  Pſal, 6. And beeing ſent out of her ſelfe by
an holy diſpaire,Ezec, 28. 45. 
                  acknowledging that ſhe is worthy to bee
cutte off: Shee recouers ſtrength in God from her owne
weakeneſſe: the more vile ſhee findes her ſelfe, the
more ſhee ſtriues with her God to reſtore her beautie
vnto her,1 Lamen, 21. 22. ſhee layes hold on GODS promiſes for the

                  confuſion of her enemies, and in their confuſion ſees a farre
off her deliuerance; here ſhe ſtaies not, but drawes neerer
vnto God;Lament, 2. and ſo yet further abaſeth her ſelfe in the
fury of her miſery,Lament, 3. and ſo farre ſhe wades in the apprehenſion
thereof as that ſhe diſpaires of Gods mercy;Lament, 5 
                        •
                     1. ſhee
concludes in her weakeneſſe,Lam, 3. 
                  that her ſtrength and hope
is periſhed from the Lord.
                  Lamen. 3. 54. 23. 24. 56. 57. 58. 59. 31. 40. 41. 44. 45. Being thus paſt hope, and ſo euen
her ſpirituall weapons fayling her; now ſhe is recouered
by the Lord, & hopes aboue hope: ſhe confirmes her faith
from former experience, and comforts her ſelfe in hir true
humiliation; and ſo gathers aſſurance that the Lord wil not
forſake for euer. She is perſwaded he will returne: ſhe ſees
him comming a farre off: Here-vpon ſhe prepares her ſelfe
to meete her God by examining of her ſelfe, and trying
her waies; ſhe incounters her God by earneſt and hearty
prayer, though ſhee haue the repulſe; yet ſhe will haue
no nay: Her eye droppeth without stay, till the Lord looke
downe and behold from heauen.
               
               And conſidering the promiſes of God for the reſeruing
of the Church: ſhe preſſeth the Lord to ariſe and haue mercy
vpon Syon; and by the power of faith gathers y• the appointed
time is come.Pſal, 102. 14. 15. 
                  That his ſeruāts might delight in the
ſtones thereof; and ſhew compaſſion vnto the duſt of the ſame.
Thus is the Church changed and purged inwardly, that
ſo ſhee may bee fitter for outward glory: And ſo being
fitted, ſhee applaudes the time thereof, not ſo
much for her owne good, as for the glory of God, which
ſhall be magnified in the reſtoring thereof. And from hir
own eſtate may the Church of God gather apparant notes
of her deliuerance.
               Now if wee ſhall looke into the practiſes of Gods
enemies:
                  3 In regard of our enemies.
they will alſo teach vs to geſſe at the time
of the Churches deliuerance.Pſal. 119. VVhen they make no ſpare
of deſtroying, and will roote out GODS word, then
it is time for the Lord to put to his hand for they haue deſtroied
thy law, whē by their pollicy, & cruelty they haue made
ſuch hauock, that there is none to offer him-ſelfe in the

cause of God:Eſay 59. 16. then ſhall the Lords arme ſaue it, his righteouſneſſe
it ſelfe ſhall ſuſtaine his cauſe: when they ſhall
open their mouthes againſt heauen, and blaſpheme the
power and mercy of God.Pſal, 6. 12. Pſal, 9. 16. 
                  Then I wil vp (ſaith the Lord)
to auenge the poore, then ſhall the Lord be knowne by exempting
of iudgements the wicked ſhall be turned into hell, and all
the Nations that forget God:
                  Iſay, 28. 15. Yea, when the wicked haue
made a couenant with hell, and ſo in their ſecurity do bleſſe
their ſoules: as if they had Gods children ſo ſure, that
none could deliuer them: as if their happineſſe were ſo
ſure,1 Theſſ. 5. 3. that none could remoue them: Then ſhall a ſodaine
deſtruction come vpon them: and they ſhal not be able to auoid
it. Then ſhall the deſtruction of the wicked bee the
deliuerance of the Church. Thus euen from our enemyes
wee may heare good newes of deliuerance; their
owne mouthes will tell vs, their practiſes cannot
hid eit.
               A ſecond probabilitie of Heſters aduancement, is that
ſhee is of the ſeed of the righteous,Pſal. 111. which ſhall be mighty
on the earth;
                     Obſ. 103. Gods children in this life aduanced to higheſt dignity. ſhe is ſay they, The daughter of Abihail
the Vncle of Mordecai. i. She is a Iew to whom belongeth
the birth-right, whoſe priuiledge it was to rule the Nations;
to whom Eſau and all his poſterity ſhould bow, and
do homage.
               
                  So faithfull is the LORD in keeping couenant
 for euer: So truly is Godlineſſe profitable for this life: ſo
 all are ours both by right and poſſeſſion: ſo are Gods
 children beſt able to vſe proſperity: ſo is eternall happines
 hereby ſealed vp vnto them. So would the Lord hereby
 teach vs that theſe temporal bleſſings are not euil, becauſe
he beſtowes them in greateſt meaſure vppon them. The
vſes hereof ſee Obſ. 79.
               Onely wee may not here forget what the holy Ghoſt
vouchſafes vs againe to remember.
               
                  Namely, that Heſter was taken by Mordecai for his
daughter.
               
               Thus the Lord thinks it fit againe to make honourable

mention of this charitable worke of Mordecai:
                  The good deeds of Gods children are not forgotten of the Lord. 
                  As
wherin he was glorified and did delight therin, to confounde
the practize of the wicked, that ſeeke to obliterat the ſame
and to approue to his children the acceptaunce of the ſame,
as alſo to aſſure them hereby of the reward to come, and
withall to prouoke the Saints to the imitation thereof.
               
                  Oh how vainely then doth the wicked hope to put out
their names from vnder Heauen: whoſe names as they are 
written in the booke of life, ſo their workes alſo are regiſtred
in the eternall word of God, how wickedly do they depraue,
and obſcure thoſe gratious deeds, which the Lord
of glory makes glorious by his remembrance? how weake
                  
are the Saints to doubt of their well doing, ſeeing the 
God of truth giues euidence thereto. What comfort may 
we haue in the acceptance of our labours, ſeeing the righteous
Lord takes ſuch delight in them? how may we be eſtabliſhed
againſt the reproches of the world? how little
need we eſteeme to be iudged of men,
                  1. Cor. 44. ſeeing it is God that
approueth? who can condemne? with what confidence may 
we prepare our ſelues to ſtand before that righteous Iudge,Reue. 3.
who allready preſents our prayers in the golden cenſor
of his righteouſneſſe: and doth not onely make mention
of vs, but mediation for vs at the throne of glory,
that wee might not bee confounded in the day of refreſhing?
               
                  A third likelyhood here ſet downe of Hesters aduancement,
is her confidence in God and relying on his immediate
prouidence, ſpecified in this; that it is ſaid.
               
               She deſired nothing but what Hege the Kings Eunuch the
keeper of the women ſaid.
               
                  Wherein the ſpirit of God would giue vs to vnderſtand,
that though the other maydens ſtanding vpon there
preferment, vſed all art to ſet out there beauty
as the meanes thereof: and therefore ſpared not to demaund
of the Eunuch ſuch meanes of painting, &c.
as might further the ſame, yet this gratious virgin, contenting
her ſelfe with y• image which God had ſet on her,

and reſting on the diuine prouidence, that had enclinde the
heart of the Eunuch towards her: ſhe doth not impudently
preſſe him further then God ſhould moue his heart: but
humbly takes what Hege directs her to: who no doubt
being enclined of the LORD to ſhew her extraordinary
fauour; was alſo reſtrained of the LORD▪ that hee
ſhould not offer her otherwiſe then was fit for her profeſſion.
The LORD as it is likely, giuing her a like fauour
in the eyes of this Eunuch as he gaue vnto Daniel
with the other, that ſhe was not defiled with this vaine
and ſuperfluous preparation, but as ſhe was willing to
leaue the Eunuch to his liberty, ſo the Eunuch alſo
might leaue her to hers: how-ſo-euer, though in other
things ſhe might happily ſubmit her ſelfe to the
preſent neceſſity: as to take that which the Eunuch offers
her,
                     Obſe. 105. Gods childrens preferment is in faith. and ſo might diſcouer her weakeneſſe and want, of
courage, yet in this doth her faith appeare not obſcurely
that ſhe doth not ambitiouſly ſeeke by corrupt meanes
to aduance her ſelfe: but ſoberlie entertaines the meanes
that are caſt vpon her, reſting on GODS prouidence
for the good ſucceſſe thereof.
                     Sect. 1. 3 Notes of faith. And ſurely (as I take it)
wee may here obſerue diuers notes of liuelie
faith.
               
                  One is that ſhe preſſeth not impudently to inſinuate into
the fauour of this wicked Eunuch, though by the Kings
avthority ſhee might haue occaſion thereto, leſt ſhee
ſhould ſeeme to depend vpon him and giue him ſome
aduantage ouer her pretious liberty; To receiue what
is offered by him, eſpecially moued thereto by the
LORD, herein ſhee ſhewes her faith; which knowing
all was hers, doth herein take her right, and ſhewes her
power therein, in that ſhee refuſeth not her owne,
though tendred by the wicked, Shee knew the prophaneſſe
of the Eunuch could not make GODS bleſſing▪
ineffectuall to his children; And therefore ſhee
receiues them aright, though from an vniuſt poſſeſſor.
And laſtly in that ſhe vſeth such ordinary meanes

as were offered, not ſeeking to aduance her-ſelfe by
adulterating, or prophaning of nature; herein alſo in the
third place ſhe ſheweth her faith, which as it refuſeth not
meanes, ſo it is not curious of meanes; but takes what are
offered, reiects ſuch as are not warrantable.
               
               Whereby we may learne that the aduancement to Gods
children is warrantable and for their good, ſeeing it is
in faith, and hereby to try our ſelues whether we be in
the faith or no.
               
                  A fourth token of her aduancement is this which followeth.Note of Heſters aduancement.
               
               
                  And Heſter found fauor in the ſight of all them that looked
vpon her.
               
               
                  Thus did the Lord make her gratious in the eyes of all
men that her aduancement might be with more power,
and leſſe enuy: both for her owne and the good of others,
that ſhee both to the wicked might be a great terror, as 
being conuinced with the brightneſſe of maieſty appearing
gloriouſly in her, and the Godly might haue a more
gratious protection of her, yea her owne ſlippery eſtate 
might hereby be the better ſerued.
               
                  And ſurely;
                  
                     Obſ. 106. Gods children gratious in the eies of al men. howſoeuer it be the property of GODS
children to be hated of all men, yet is not this incident
vnto all, or not at all times. Some may be exempted
by ſpeciall preuiledge: All at ſome-time ſhall haue
a generall approbation.Math. 10. So had our Sauiour fauour
with GOD and men, who after was hated of all
and forſaken of his owne, ſo when the waies of man do
pleaſe the LORD, hee will make all his enemies at
peace with him: either they ſhall willingly approue
him, or GOD ſhall extraordinarily bridle them: So
doth Hester here finde fauour in the ſight of all, not
that happyly ſome one might not repine at her: but
generally the moſt part applauded her beautie, the
LORD turning their eyes vppon her, 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
and their hearts toward her.
               The ſpeech I take it is hyperbolicall; we being by the vniuerſall
to vnderſtand the moſt, or better ſort, who
giuing her intertainement the inferior durſt not openly
gaineſay. And yet more likely for Heſter to be applauded
of all: becauſe, as there was that apparent which might ſet
the eyes of all vpon her, and moue their hearts towards
her, namely her beauty, ſo that was concealed which
would haue made her hatefull, namely her religion and
country; eſpecially wee are to aſcribe this to the ouerruling
hand of GOD, who thus giues her fauour
generally with all, that ſo her fauour might be more
eaſily perceiued, and conſtantly maintained with the
King, who the rather would affect, where his people
liked, and was likelier hereby to ſettle his affection,
and ſo to continue it to Heſter for the good of the
Church.
                     Obſe. 107. Wicked why have Gods children being forced to approue them. Howſoeuer for the comfort of GODS children
let mee adde this further, that though it be our lotts
generally to be hated, yet they that cry. Crucifie him,
ſhall before cry hoſanna, euen they ſhall be conuinced
in conſcience, that wee are to bee approued, yea
their owne mouthes ſhall giue teſtimony vnto vs, if it
ſhall then bee demaunded: why they doe after hate
vs,1. Pet. 4. 4. the reaſon is plaine, becauſe as they loued vs, to
make vs like vnto them, or to like of them: that ſo
the may fare the better for vs;Iho 16. 2. ſo when they ſee that we
neither like of them,Ioh. 15. nor can be like vnto them: therefore
they ſpeake euill of vs, therefore they hate vs. Thus
do the wicked loue vs, before they hate vs. And doe
they not alſo approue vs euen while they proſecute
their malice againſt vs? yea ſurely though they thinke they
do God good ſeruice, while they thus hardly entreat vs,
yet in that they perſecute vs, they ſhew we are not of
them, we are contrary to them. And do they not herein
wonderfully iuſtifie the generation of the iuſt. Nay
would they not fetch vs againe, when they haue made
vs away? do they not approue vs when they haue made

a riddance of vs?Math. 23. 29. 30. elſe; Why doe they build the tombes
of the Prophets: and garniſh the ſepulchers of the righteous:
and ſay if we had beene in the daies of our Fathers, we
would not haue beene partners with them in the bloud
of the Prophets: What can we haue more? ſeeing they
that hate vs do thus approue of vs? Is not the LORD
wonderfull to cleare vs by the mouthes of our enemies?
may not the Children of God haue this teſtimony to be
approued of all?
               
                  And ſurely if we conſider the power of GOD; who 
hath the hearts of all men in his hands, if wee obſerue
neither bountie of Godlineſſe, which is able to rauiſh all:
If wee wey the priuiledge that the Children of GOD
haue, that all ſhall do ſeruice vnto them: If wee apprehend
the purpoſe of GOD herein, to make the
world more inexcuſable; wee ſhall finde it no hard
matter with Gods Children to be approued generally,
and haue fauorable reſpect of all that looke on them.
               
                  And therefore as this may ſerue to commend the
greateſt Godlineſſe, So it wilbe a heauie witneſſe againſt 
the vngodly that hate where they ſhould loue.
                  Oh what comfort is here to Gods Children that the
world ſhall iuſtifie them! What vantage haue they of 
the wicked whoſe tongues ſhall condemne themſelues
to iuſtifie the righteous? May wee now hope to finde 
ſuch fauour as will ſerue the turne, when GOD at his 
pleaſure, ſhall turne all hearts towards vs? And ſhall
                  
we then make ſhip-wrack of a good conſcience to
winne the fauour of men? Is there no way to bee gracious
with the world but by doubting with it? Oh that
we would trie God in this caſe! how ſhould we preuaile
with men?
               Well,Iacob. Gene. 32. what may we learne further out of this point,
that Heſter being to be aduanced is thus gracious in the
eyes of all?
                     Obſ. 108. 
                        〈◊〉
                      are to be grat
                        ••
                     us, in the eyes of their people.
               
               Surely; that ſuch as are to be in authority, and raiſed to
greatneſſe: they are to be gratious in the eyes of their

people: hereby the Lord approues their gouernement:
and ſo knitting the heartes of the people vnto them,
confirmes and eſtabliſheth the ſame by this meanes: the
bleſſinges of gouernment are plentifully inioied on either
ſide; The Prince rules in loue, and the people obey in
truth; and both ſubiect and people are prepared to eternall
happineſſe.
               
                  Oh that Princes would wiſely lay this to their hearts!and by what meanes.
That they did know that the loue of their ſubiects is the
beſt maintainer of the Crowne and armor of the Prince:
 Surely they would labour to gette and increaſe their
 loue, by requiting ingenuous ſeruice, and accepting it
 cheerefully; by prizing highly the liues of their people,

                  and preſeruing their Chriſtian liberty aboue their liues.
               Thus may Princes bee gratious in the eyes of their
 people, if they eſtrange not them-ſelues from them, nor
 vſe them as ſtrangers; eſpecially if they make them gratious
 in the eyes of God, by giuing good examples vnto
them, and prouiding for their inſtruction in the word
of life.
               
                  Thus is Heſter gratious in the eyes of all men. VVhat
followeth here-vpon?
               
                  Namely;
                  Verſe. So Heſter was taken vnto King Ahaſhueroſh,
into his houſe royall in the tenth month, which
is the month of Tebeth, in the ſeauenth yeare of
his raigne.
               
                  In which words the ſpirit of God ſets downe the receiuing
of Heſter into the Kinges houſe, and the time therof:
that ſo this great benefit might bee the rather
remembred.
                     Obſ. 109. Gods children are not alwaies vnder the rod, but at length find deliuerance from the ſame &c.
               
               And that this miſerable captiue is now taken to
the royall Pallace of this great Monarch, and after many
changes, and remouings from Mordecaies houſe to the
houſe of the maidens, is at length brought to a place
of reſt and honour: Doth not this commend vnto

vs the exceeding faithfulneſſe of God, that will not ſuffer
his children alwayes to lye vnder the burthen, and continually
to paſſe through fire and water,Pſal. 66. but at the length
wil bring them to a wealthyer place.
               Did not Ioſeph at length ſee an end of his troubles
Was not Mordecai quiet at length? Did hee not finde
reſt and honour? Yea ſurely, the Lord is mercifull, and 
will not alwayes bee chiding, becauſe mercy pleaſeth
him:Mich, 7. 
                  he will returne and haue mercy, that his people may
gloryfie him. The rod of the vngodly ſhall not alwaies 
reſt vppon the lot of the righteous,Pſal, 50. 15. leaſt the righteous
put forth his hand to wickedneſſe. The Lord will heare 
the prayers of his children,Pſal, 125. Pſal, 21. 2. 
                  and he will make them hidings
for others, that are in trouble; they ſhall haue gratious 
experience of his mercyfull deliuerance, that they 
may bee more willing to committe them-ſelues to him
in well-doing, and ſo be better fitted to their eternall reſt.
               Loe thus ſhall the man bee bleſſed that feareth the
Lord.Vſe. 1. Mich, 7. 8. 9. 
                  Reioyce not therefore againſt me oh myne enemies,
for though I fall yet I ſhall riſe againe. Oh that 
wee could wait the Lords leyſure and hee would eſtabliſh
our hearts; marke well the iuſt man, and the end 
of that man is peace. Faint not therefore vnder the burthen,
                  neither repine thereat, for thy Sauiour Chriſt doth 
beare the waight thereof: and at length he will caſe thy
ſhoulders of all; ſorrow may be in the euening, but ioy is
in the morning.Ionas, 2. Eſay, 54. 7 8. 
                  I ſayd I mas caſt out of thy ſight, yet will
I looke backe towards thy holy Temple: For a little while did
I forſake thee but in euerlaſting compaſſion will I gather thee
againe, though I vtterly deſtroy al the nations where I haue
ſcattered thee, yet wil I not deſtroy thee; but I wil correct thee
by Iudgement and not vtterly cut thee off:
                  Ierem. 30. Pſal. 73. 
                  But I will guide
thee by my counſel, and after bring thee to glory.
               
               Thus is Heſter now receiued into the houſe-royall of the
King.Pſal, 30. Pſal, 21. 
                  The Lord hath ſette her vp, and not ſuffered her foes
to triumph ouer her, and becauſe the heart of his ſeruant
truſted in the Lord and in the mercies of the moſt high:

therefore ſhee ſhall not ſlide:
                  Pſal. 112 
                  her heart is eſtabliſhed in the
Lord her God: and therefore ſhee will not feare vntill ſhe ſee
her deſire vpon her enemies.
               
               And is not ſo great a bleſſing worthy remembrance?
yea ſurely, the holy Ghoſt preciſely ſets downe the day
and yeare thereof: that ſo we might be prouoked to
remember the ſame And might learne that ſuch bleſſings
ought ſo long to be remembred of vs, as the daies
and times continue in our vſe. So hath the Lord tendered
great bleſſings to his Church, at eſpeciall times. The
returne of the captiuity in the firſt yeare of Darius: the
paſſion at the feaſt of the paſſe-ouer:Dan. 1. Math. 26. Act. 2. 
                  The gift of tongues, at
the feaſt of the pentecoſt &c.
               1. That the extraordinarineſſe of the time, might put vs
in minde of the extraordinary bleſſing, and be a continuall
remembrance of the 
                     •
                  ame for the praiſes of God. So hath
the Church of God appointed and ſet ſolemne times for
the perpetuall remembrance of great bleſſings: and commended
therein the celebration of Gods bleſſings, for
euer,Heſt. 9. ſo was the 14. day of Ader ſet apart to this purpoſe
by ſter and Mordecai: ſo is the 5
                     •
                   of Nouember
conſecrated to the remembrance of the moſt admirable deliuerance
of the 
                     
                        •
                     ritaine State and people from the gunpowder
treaſon.
                     Obſer. 110. Great mercies of God are to be had in remembrance by ſpecial time appointed thereto. And ſurely, as theſe great fauours
of God are liuelie teſtimonies of his power and goodneſſe:
ſo are they worthy to be had in remembrance, yea
very profitable is the remembrance thereof to vs, both to
ſtirre vp our thankfulneſſe, and encreaſe our faith, that ſo
they may be ſanctified, continued and encreaſed vpon vs;
yea be vndoubted pleadges of eternall happineſſe.
               And therefore ſeeing the Lord hereby prouides, that
his bleſſings may not be forgotten, and ſo paſſe without
 their true vſe; this may ſerue for the great condemnation
of the world: who on the contrarie, vſeth all occaſions
to put out the remembrance of Gods mercies
from the earth: either aſcribing Gods mercies to their
wit or deſart, or putting them off to ſecond cauſes: as if

not the LORD but ſome ordinarie meanes had compaſſed
the ſame: or which is worſt of all imputing them
to blind chance &c.. And are not they alſo as faultie 
herein, that diminiſh and obſcure the great workes of
GOD, either not regarding them at all, or ſpeaking baſely
of them? What ſhall we thinke of theſe, that gnaſh their 
teeth hereat, that repine that the Lord ſhould bee gracious
vnto his people? And are there not ſome that 
thinke ſuch great deliuerances are diſcredits vnto a people,
as ſignifying what they had deſerued: and what
ſome of their owne bowells would haue executed on
their Fathers and brethren.
               May nor pollicie aduize that ſo great mercies of God
ſhould be ſuppreſſed, leſt the reioycing thereof, vpbrading 
the wicked ſhould prouoke them to renue their
malice and multiplie their miſchiefes? Surely if there were 
no other euidence to condemne vs of vnthankefulneſſe,
yet the generall ſecurity of a people and encreaſe of
ſinne, is a fearefull witneſſe of their forgetfulneſſe of a
bleſſing: and ſo may bee a meanes to turne it vnto a
curſe.
               
                  Well let vs looke our faces wiſely in this glaſſe: and 
as the Lord hath offered vs time to remember ſo great
mercies: ſo let vs daylie meditate on the wonders of our
GOD. Let vs keepe a regeſter of Gods bleſſings that 
we may keepe our ſelues in the poſſeſſions of them. And
                  
let vs withall keepe an account of our ſinnes: that ſo we
may ſee, what need we haue of Gods mercie, and ſo the
rather meditate thereon.
               
                  And for our comfort let vs further learne this; that 
as God neuer beſtowes great bleſſings but they ſhalbe
truelie ſanctified vnto ſome: ſo if that by this holie
remembrance, we ſhall keepe our right in them, we
ſhall not onely be deliuered in the euill day, when
the LORD ſhall take vengeance on the vnthankefulneſſe
of the world: but we ſhall ſee ſome greater
things then theſe; the LORD will deale wonderfully

betweene Iſrael and Aegipt: when the obſtinate ſhalbe
confounded: then ſhall the righteous flowriſh: yea the
Lord will prouide meanes for the conſtancy of their happineſſe:
for ſo it followeth.
               And the King loued Heſter aboue all the women,Verſ. 17. and ſhee
found grace and fauour in his ſight more then all the
Virgins: ſo that hee ſet the crowne of the Kingdome
vpon her head: and made her Queene inſteede of
Vaſhty.
               
               In which words the ſpirit of God, ſetteth downe what
befell Heſter after her taking into the Kings houſe. Namely
that ſhe is aduanced further to bee Queene in ſteed of
Vaſhtie, which is notably deſcribed. Firſt by the occaſion
hereto; Namely that the King loued her aboue all the women.
And ſecondly by the ſigne of this preferment, hee
ſet the crowne of the Kingdome vpon her head.
               
               Concerning the extraordinarie fauour and affection,
                     Obſ. III. God makes his children gratious when it may ſerue for his glory and their good.
that the King is here ſayd to beare vnto this gracious
maiden. As it was the admirable worke of God for
her more ſpeedie and ſure aduancement, neceſſarily to be
taken at this time, when the yron was in the fire: Carnall
loue being ſo inconſtant, eſpecially when it is in ſome
ſort ſatisfied: And the poore maiden (no doubt) much
 humbled with yeelding to the preſent neceſſity; and
therefore had neede of ſome meanes to caſt light out
 of darkeneſſe, that their might be hope of ſanctifying
of this ſinne into her: So doth it herein moſt notably
commend the power, mercie and Wiſdome of GOD vnto
vs.
               
                  His power in this: that he both can turne the affections
of the wicked vpon his Children, and ſettle them conſtantlie
therevpon, when as the cauſe in them rather threatenes
change.
               
                  His wiſdome alſo appeares in this: that this extraordinary
fauour of the Prince, being now neceſſary, for the

aduancement of Heſter, and ſo for the good of the Church,
though afterward it bated (to ſhew the inconſtancie of
fleſh, and alſo a further power of God in the reuiuing
of the ſame) yet now it increaſeth contrarie to the carnall
occaſion, which being ſatisfied, vſually breedes
loathing: eſpeciall in thoſe, whoſe honour and delight in
is change, ſo that aboue all the reſt onely Heſter is
gracious: the fauour of this great Monarche is conſtant
to her.
               And the mercie of God doth alſo ſhine herein moſt
comfortably, both to the good of the Church, and perticular
contentment of his ſeruant.
               The Church hereby is now prouided for a deliuerer: before
ſhe be plunged into the extremitie of her daunger:
and the poore maiden is by this aduancement recompenced
for hir loſſe; and comforted alſo in ſome
meaſure with the ſanctifying of the ſame in a lawfull
calling?
               Aud ſurely that the Lord prouided a Sauiour before
man had ſinned:
                     Obſer. 112. God prouides a deliuerer for his Church before it be caſt into the extremity of daunger. Eſay 65. Math. 6. that Moyſes is borne before Iſraels oppreſſion
is encreaſed; that Ioſephes aduanced before the
famine is in Canaan: that Heſter is aduanced before Hamans
conſpiring breakes forth, doth not this exceedingly
commend the watchfulneſſe of GOD ouer his
Church? Doth not this manifeſt the freeneſſe of his loue,
that goes before the particular obiect? Doth not this
ſerue much to the confirmation of our faith, that before
we call he will heare vs, before we haue neede hee
willl prouide for vs? So did the LORD prouide an
Elizabeth before the great and ſharpe ſtorme fell vpon his
Church.
               
                  Vſe 1. And ſhall we then feare that the Lord will forſake
vs in our troubles when he prouides meanes of deliuerance
before troubles come? Is he a God a farre off,
and ſhall we not beleeue him to be a GOD nere at
hand?2 Pet. 1. 8. 
                  Oh let vs learne to liue by faith, ſo ſhall we
ſee a farre off! Let it ſtay vs in our preſent troubles, that

God loued vs before we were: that euen when we were his
 enemies,Pſal, 139. he ſought vs, and preuented vs, and ſhall he not
now much more reſkue vs beeing his friends? Oh wee of
little faith!
               But are the mercies of God here at an end? No ſurely,
                     Obſ. 113. The mercies of God to his children paſt finding out.
the mercies of the Lord are euerlaſting, and his truth paſt
finding out: Wade wee yet further into them in this particular
caſe of Heſter, and let vs willingly looſe our ſelues
in the meditation thereof. Was it not a great mercy of
the Lord, to aduance her to the Kinges houſe: And
was it not a greater mercy that in the Kings houſe ſhee
is humbled, that ſo by renuing her repentance ſhee
might bee better fitted to her further eſtate. And was
not the mercy of God very admirable herein, that being abaſed
by the King, ſhe yet finds extraordinary fauour in his
ſight, that ſo ſhee might finde comfort in her former
ſorrow? But was it not yet a further mercy, that beeing
a ſubiect, yea a ſtranger▪ and of the abhominable and
inthralled Nation; yet ſhee is called to bee the lawfull
wife of ſo mighty a Monarch, and not onely ſo,
but euen to bee aduanced to the hygheſt dignitye
of all.
               
                  
                  So conſtant is the LORD, that whome hee loueth,Iohn, 13. 2.
                   hee loueth to the end: Such a priuiledge hath
godlyneſſe that to the pure all thinges are pure:1 Tit, 14.
                  So ſure is our ſaluation that euen all thinges ſhall
 turne to our good.Rom. 8. 29.
               
               
                  Vſe. 1. And ſhall wee then ſinke vnder the burthen
 of our ſinnes, ſeeing wee cannot ſound the depth of
the mercies of God? Shall wee plead vnwiſely againſt
GOD, ſeeing hee cannot chooſe but loue vs, ſeeing
his loue is manifeſted in our ſinnes, and his power in
 our weakeneſſe? Shall wee repine at his chaſtiſements,
 ſeeing of very faithfulneſſe hee doth correct vs?

                  Shall wee diſtruſt his bleſſinges, ſeeing hee beſtowes
them in mercy? Surely, if we ſee not mercy euery where
wee want the eye of faith, And if wee laye not
                  
hold of eternal mercies, we fight not ye good fight of faith.
               But lette vs examine a little further this caſe of
Heſter?
                  1 Tim, 4. Obſ. 114. Whether great proſperity be a bleſſing in mercy to Gods children. May wee truly ſay that here's nothing but mercy?
Was it the mercy of God, that ſhee ſhould bee ſo
highly aduanced? VVhy then doth the ſpirit teach Gods
children to pray, that the Lord would not giue them neither
pouerty nor riches:
                  
                     Obiect. Prouer, 30. 
                  leaſt beeing full they ſhould deny
him: being empty they ſhould blaſpheme God.
               
               
                  Anſ. Surely the prayer of the ſeruant of God, as it
was conditionall, not ſimply renouncing either fulneſſe,
or want, but as it might ſtand with the will of God and
good of the receiuer: ſo thereby doth it graunt a power
vnto God, to giue either fulnes or impoſe wāt at his pleaſure.
And ſeeing where God giues in loue, he alſo ſanctifies
the gift, may not then the Lord giue fulneſſe, and yet
preſerue in humility, and obedience? May he not lay pouerty
on his child, and yet keepe him from impatience?
Yet at leaſt ſo farre as that he ſhall not take the name of
God in vaine: Indeed if nature be left to it ſelfe, and that
as this moſt likely and vſuall be conſidered in this caſe:
fulneſſe may breed forgetfulneſſe, and pouerty prophaneſſe
and diſtruſt of Gods prouidence. And therefore in regard
of our weakeneſſe and aptneſſe to offend in the exceſſe:
Yea conſidering our folly, that wee knowe not whats
fitteſt for vs; and the wiſdome of God, which wee
muſt not ſette to ſchoole: The ſpirit teacheth vs rather
to pray for the meane, that God would feede vs
with food conuenient for vs, neither yet ſimply to tye
God to this meaſure, as if no other were fit for vs, but to
acknowledge herein our infirmity to God, who as without
GOD wee are not able to compaſſe any, ſo leaſt
able to ſway that ſtate, wt is moſt ſubiect to temptation: &
yet this doth not preiudice, but God may giue euen
fulnes: ſeeing hee doth make euen ye greateſt honors conuenient
for his children, and therein doth ſhew his great
mercy in their preſeruation: by how much the more their
eſtate is ſubiect to temptation.
               
                  
                  Yet if it ſhall now be demanded,Queſ. VVhether a man may praie for aboundance? ſeeing the Lord giues
fulneſſe, whether I may not lawfully ſeeke it by prayer
of him?
               
                  Anſ. Surely where God in particular hath promiſed,
aud leades me along with apparant likelyhoods thereof,
there I may ſafely draw on the Lord, to the accompliſhment
of his worke; becauſe by faith we obtaine the promiſes:
and prayer is the meanes to expreſſe and increaſe
our ſaith. And this was the caſe of Dauid when he prayed
for the accompliſhment of Gods promiſe concerning
the Kingdome. But where there is no ſuch manifeſtation
of Gods purpoſe in perticular, there I may ſafely deſire in
generall what God will caſt vppon me for my fitting vnto
him: but for this or that condition, I muſt leaue it to God,
leaſt I preiudice his wiſdome, and diſcouer my diſtruſt, leaſt I
preſume to come to god, wheras al he giues vs is of free mercy.
Only I deny not but ſome extraordinary inſtinct may
warrant ſome perticuler extraordinary practiſe in this caſe:
which being ſingular, is not to be imitated of vs.
               
                  If it ſhall be further demanded whether it be lawfull to
receiue ſuch excellent bleſſings as are caſt vpon vs,
                     Queſ. Whether it be lawfull to receiue great bleſſings offered? ſeeing
Eliſha refuſed Nahamans gifts, &c. Daniel at the firſt refuſed
the Kings reward;
               
                  Anſ. Surely I ſee not, but God being the only giuer, and wee

                  hauing the beſt right; much good likely to be redeemed hereby,

                  and good meanes vſed in the compaſſing thereof; theſe
 thinges conſidered, I ſee not but we may lawfully receiue
 them, as the ſpeciall pledges of Gods fauor: if there be no
leproſie or ſuch like miſchiefe attending vppon them.
               As for Eliſha and Daniel, their refuſal was iuſt, becauſe
the giftes of theſe giuers were reſpectiue and conditional,
if they would doe ſuch a thing for them,
                     Queſ. Whether the Miniſter may receiue wages for his paines? or in regard of
ſuch a thing done: and therefore the ſeruants of God, to ſhew they were not mercenary, did iuſtly refuſe theſe reprochfull giftes. (Say you) may we not then receiue a
recompence in lieu of our paines? Is not the labourer worthy
of his hire? May hee not iuſtly exact it? May he not

lawfully receiue it?
               
                  Yea ſurely,
                  1 Cor, 9. the Lord hath appointed, that they which
ſerue at the Altar ſhould 
                     •
                  ue of the Altar: It is a ſinne not
to giue: It is a greater ſinne to ſpoile and deny: and therfore
it is moſt lawfull to receiue what is due vnto vs. And
yet ſometime we may refuſe, though not ſimply as Eliſha
did: Sometime we may not exact, though we haue power, as
the bleſſed Apoſtle Paul did.1 Cor. 11. Yea may refuſe firſt, & yet receiue
afterward, as Daniel did: refuſe wee may when the
wicked thinke our paines no better worth then their
gifts, or hope that only by theſe gifts they may compaſſe
the benefit of our paines: So did Daniell firſt refuſe the
gifts of the King: So did Peter refuſe the gifts of Simon
Magus; And yet to ſhew our right, wee may alſo receiue
them for our vſe; when theſe ſtumbling-blockes are remoued:
So did Daniel afterward receiue thoſe honours which
before he refuſed.
                     Queſ. Heſters marriage whether lawful or no? And was there not ſome ſuch ſtūbling-block
in the aduancement of Heſter? Might ſhe ſafely marry
with him that was diuorced from his wife? (and acccording
to the cuſtome of theſe countries) was not without
his choyce of wiues. Surely the Lord Ieſus him-ſelfe the
moſt perfect examiner of the Law, he hath determined, yt
whoſoeuer puts away his wife, vnleſſe it be for fornication,
commits adultery: And therefore it followeth that
who ſoeuer marrieth with the party, that takes this liberty
to be diuorced, not vpon that vrgent occaſion; doth no
leſſe commit adultery. And did not the Lord therefore
(though hee had aboundance of ſpirit) yet appoint this
knot in marriage to bee onely of two, and no more: becauſe
he ſought an holy ſeed? How then may Heſter bee
cleared from the caſe of adultery? How can ſhe bee freed
from an vnholy marriage?
               
                  Anſ. May not the Law-giuer diſpence with his Law?
And may not that in Heſter be good by a diſpenſation,
which in others without ſuch extraordinary priuiledge,
is ſimply euill? And what though the Lord ſhoulde
admitte ſinne in the accompliſhment of the worke:

may hee not pardon the ſinner, and get him-ſelfe the glory.
Surely though wee dare not ſimply iuſtifie Heſter in
this caſe; yet if we ſhall meaſure things by the manner &
ſucceſſe, did not the Lord admirably bring this thing to
paſſe? Did it not tend to the great good of the Church.
               Nay who I pray you were looſers hereby? The Lord
hee winnes him-ſelfe great glory, in aduancing ſo highly
his hand-maid from ſo baſe an eſtate. Heſter looſes
not heereby, ſhee obtaines the greateſt honour and
content that the earth can afford; and yet ſhee forſakes
not her righteouſneſſe, but rather increaſeth
it.
               
                  The King hee gaines hereby ſome truer contentment
of his mind and reſtraint of his luſts, yea his reproche in repudiating
Vaſhty is hereby well cured: The Prouinces and
whole Kingdome, they obtaine reſt from their grieuous
oppreſſions: And the poore Church of God, that is the
greateſt gayner, as being deliuered from a moſt deſperate
extremity, and aduanced alſo to great peace and proſperity, euen in a ſtrange land.
               
                  But yet ther is an other flaw in this marriage:
                     Queſ. Whether lawfull to marry with an Infidel. 
                  ſhe marries
with an Infidell and curſed Idolater: how may this bee
diſpenſed withall?
               Surely by the ſame Lord who brings light out of darkneſſe,
and turnes the euills of his children to his glory, and
their good. And yet wee may not ſimply condemne this
maiden herein: ſhe was a ſubiect, and therefore could
not do what ſhe would in this caſe. And yet the Lord here
did what he would:Ioſ, 23. 
                  yea what Heſter ſimply was not to refuſe.
For though the Lord had commanded that his people
ſhould not marry with Idolaters,Iudg. 3. Deut, 21. yet doth he alſo not
ſimply deny them vppon conditions to marry with ſuch
captiues as they had taken in war. And the Saints of God
haue warrantably matched with ſtrangers, & the Idolatrous
brood &c. As Boaz with Ruth, Sampſon with the
Philiſtian &c. When the occaſions haue beene extraordinary
and the diſpenſation heauenly.
               
               
                  
And therefore no warrant for vs that haue choyce of holy
ſeede to ſowe amongſt the thornes: thereby to wound
our owne ſoules, and choake our ſeed, or elſe by the egge
of the Serpent, to breed the Cockatrice, to haue mungrell
iſſue, that ſhall ſpeake halfe Aſhur and halfe Canoon;
ſhall not this vnequall yoake caſt out the yoake of Chriſt?
ſhall not the ſtranger deuoure our ſdtrength? ſhall not the
curſe of God caſt out ſuch roote and branches from the
face of the earth?
               
                  Well, thus wee ſee the mercy of God truly iuſtified in
Heſters aduancement: let vs now ſee how Ahaſhueroſh
the King iuſtifieth and adorneth the ſame: It followeth.
               
                  Hee ſets the Crowne of the kingdome vpon her head, and
made her Queene, &c.
               
               
                  Loe here the enſigne of this great honour which is due
vnto this poore captiue, the Crowne of the Kingdome is
ſet vpon her head. So doth this new Bride-grome ſtriue
to doe all honour vnto his bride: So doth God confirme
his child in this extraordinarie dignitie: by this meanes is
Heſters aduancement made knowne to the Church of
God, and by this full performance of complement, is more
honored and approoued. But this is not all: It followeth.
               
               Then the King made a great Feaſt to all his Princes and
Nobles,Verſe, 18. &c.
               In which words the holy Ghoſt ſets downe vnto vs
the ſolemnization of this royall mariage, and that by fiue
circumſtances.
               1. The King makes a great feaſt thereat to all his Princes
and ſeruants.
               2. This Feaſt is dedicated to the memoriall of Heſter,
which was Heſters feaſt.
               
               3. Reſt is giuen to the Prouinces, they are made pertakers
of this common ioy, that the mariage of Heſter
might be more acceptable to them.
               4. The King gives giftes vnto the poore, and ſends
preſents abroad farre and neere.
               5. Hee ſhewes the power of the King in this his

magnificence, to ſignifie his true contentmēt & ioy in this
mariage. And firſt, to adde greater ſtate & ſolemnity to ye
mariage of his new ſpouſe, the King yet further makes a
ſolemne feaſt to all his Princes and Nobles; of the lawfulneſſe
and right vſe whereof we haue ſpoken plentifully
heretofore.
                     Obſer. 115. Feaſting lawfull at mariages. Only thus much we may further adde concerning
the occaſion of this feaſt: that the cuſtome of ſolemnizing
mariages with feaſts hath beene ancient and
commendable, as being a time of great ioy, and therefore
fitte to be ſhewed in the meanes of ioy; eſpecially in regarde
of ſuch company, as at ſuch times come togeather:
who may lawfully take occaſion of a more liberall refreſhing.
And therefore not vnlawfull to bee vſed, and
hereby euen of Chriſtians, who as they know their libertie:
ſo alſo they can beſt tell how to vſe it, in a wiſe diuiding
of the time, and moderation of Gods bleſſings.
               That which followeth concerning the dedication of the
feaſt to the memory of Heſter;
                  
                     Obſeru. Dedication of feaſts to the memory of perticular perſons. 
                  as it doth diſcouer the
greater affection of the King towards his ſpouſe: ſo
it
magnifieth yet further the mercy of God toward his ſervant:
who by this memoriall is commended to poſteritie,
and euen highly honored of the enemies of God: which
though it be no warrant for that popiſh cuſtome of dedicating
feaſts to the honor of Saints, vnleſſe the fact of a
wicked Prince ſhall iuſtifie the ſame: ſo notwithſtanding
in the equity there of doth approue ſuch holy remembrances
of the Saints of GOD, which may both put them in
minde of Gods mercies towards them; and prouoke poſterity
to an holy imitation thereof: as tombes, trophes, &c.
Thus doth Ahaſ
                        •
                     uer oſh celebrate the memory of Heſter
by a ſolemne feaſt, and ſo ſhall the children of God bee
honored of their enemies, ſo ſhall their names and memorials
be continued to poſteritie.
               And yet the affection of this Monarch ſtayes not here:
but yet furt her to grace this wedding of Heſter, behold,
he giues rest to the Prouinces, which were euen tyred with
taxes and exactions: ſo d
                        •
                      the wicked fare the better euen

for Gods children ſake: ſo doth the Lord make away for
his children, euen to be iuſtified of the wicked.
               And ſurely whither he cauſed theſe nuptials generally
to be ſolemnized throughout his kingdome, by ſetting a
part the day thereto, that the ſubiect might bee pertaker
in the Princes ioy, and celebrate his mariage with feaſting
and libertie; or rather ſpared his ſubiects for the time,
of ſome tribute that was due. This as it makes to the
great honor and celebration of Heſters mariage, becauſe
God being glorified,
                     Obſ. 116. When the righteous are aduanced the people reioice there is peace with men; ſo it alſo
ſerues to the great approbation of godlineſſe, the whole
land it at reſt, when Gods Church is reſpected, when Gods
children are aduanced,Prou. 29. 2 when the righteous are in authoritie
then the people reioyce;Prou. 28. 12 then is great glory, great
peace and contentment. So doth the Lord ſanctifie great 
bleſſings vnto his children, that they may be good foundations
againſt ye day of Chriſt:I. Tim. 6 
                  ſo doth he ſecure here by their
tickliſh eſtates, by knitting the hearts of the people vnto 
them, through the benefit therof. So doth he make ye world
without excuſe, when they ſhall hate that which is the 
onely cauſe of their great eſt honor, ſecurity & contentmēt.
               
                  Vſe. And doth not this condemne the folly of men
that complaine of righteouſneſſe, as if it were the greateſt
trouble-houſe & trouble-ſtate that may be;Nehem. 2. 
                  that thruſt out
Gods children, as the only diſturbers of their reſt & happineſſe;
are not they more then blind,
                  Iob. 21. 15. which ſee no profit in
godlineſſe,Pſal. 4. but ſtill are poaring like the Sodomits, when the
doore is before them: ſaying, who will ſhew vs any good? do
not they open their mouthes againſt heauen,Malach. 3 
                  that ſay it is
in vaine to ſerue the Lord? Are not they the greateſt enemies
to themſelues, that keepe downe Gods children, and
hinder their aduancement; that aboue all things feare leaſt
the Lord ſhould bee glorious in his Saints;Pſal. 2. Math. 10. 34 
                  leaſt hee ſhould
ſet his King vpon his holy hill of Syon? Surely if the ſonne of
GOD,
                  Luk. 12. bring a Sword vpon the earth, it is not becauſe
hee is not the Prince of peace,
                  Eſay. 9 becauſe hee offers not alſo
peace vnto them:Math. 20 but becauſe the world refuſeth peace,
therefore doe they plucke downe a Sworde vpon them,

                  and the corner ſtone becomes a rock of offence. And if
any be afra de, wherein they ſhould take moſt comfort;
they are the ſinners in Ston, that are thus afraide; feare
takes hold vpon the hypocrites: theſe indeed ſhall not
dwell with the deuouring fire: theſe cannot endure the
euerlaſting burning.Malach. 3, 2. 3. 4. 
                  What fleſh ſhall endure when hee appeares;
who is like a purging fire, and like Fullers Soape? Yet
ſhall the ſiluer abide the touche, and be purified thereby,
yea the ſonnes of Leu
                     •
                   ſhallbe fiaed and prepared, that they
may bring offerings vnto the Lord in righteouſneſſe. Then
ſhall the offerings alſo of Iudah and Ieruſalem bee acceptable
vnto the Lord, as in old time, and in the yeares before, yea the
Lord will take away the i
                     •
                  iquitie of the land in one day. Then
ſhall many bee turned away from iniquitie,Malach, 2. and yee ſhall call
euery man his neighbour vnder the Vine, and under the Figtree.
Zacn. 3 9. 10. Then ſhall Ieruſalem be inhabited without
walles, for the Lord will bee unto ber a wall of fire round
about,Zach. 2. 4. 5 and will be the glorie in the midſt of her. Then will the
Lord turne to the people a pure language, that they may all call
vpon the name of the Lord, and ſerue him with our ſhoulder:
Oh that the Lord would ariſe,
                  1. One conſent and without grudging. 
                  & haue mercy on Syon, that
he would take out of the midſt of her them that reioyce of her
pride, and are puffed up, in regarde of the holy mountaine:
that the lying and aequiuocating generation were rooted out,Zeph. 3. 13
that the vile were ſeperated from the precious. Then ſhould
there be an humble and poore people, and they would truſt in
the name of the Lord: then ſhould there bee holy veſſels
vnto the Lord, yea euery pot in Ieruſalem ſhould be holy,
then ſhould not Aſhur ſaue them, neither would they ride vpon
horſes:Oſe. 14 but in their God, the fatherleſſe ſhould finde comfort.
The righteous Lord ſhall bee exalted in the ſaluation of
his choſen.
               
               Vſe. Who ſo is wiſe and hee ſhall vnderſtand theſe things,
and prudent and bee ſhall know them: for the wayes of the
Lord are righteous, and the iuſt ſhall walke in them, but the
wicked ſhall fall therein. But of this point more fully (by
Gods grace) hereafter. It followeth.
               
                  
Gods grace) hereaſter, It followetb.
               
               
                  And gaue rest vnto the Prouinces,
                  Obſ. 117. Princes to the enioying of their pleaſure, are to be carefull not to oppreſſe their ſubiects, but to give ſome relaxation therevvithall vnto them. 
                  and gaue gifts according
to the power of a King.
               
               
                  In that this Perſian Monarch here releaſes his ſubiects
of the burthen of ſubſidies and taxations, when hee and
his court do enlarge themſelues in their pleaſures: herein
we may ſeeke ſhadow of that ſubſtance, which is required
in Chriſtian Princes: namely, that though their ſtate and
fulneſſe affoord them pleaſure and eaſe, by the toyle, and
labour of others, yet in the vſe thereof, they ſhould ſo indifferently
behaue themſelues, as to let this oyle of gladneſſe
runne downe to the skirts of the garment;Pſal. 133. that
thoſe may taſte at leaſt of the cup of their pleaſure: who 
haue eſpecially troad the Wine-preſſe, and prepared the
cup vnto them: and by pertaking therein, may both better 
beare the burthen, and ſo ſtill maintaine the plough in 
going.
               
                  Little therefore do ſuch Princes know what wrong they
do themſelues, when they will not ſpeake comfortably to
their people, much leſſe allow them ſome immunity when
they take their pleaſures: as hereby eſteeming their delight
to be peereleſſe and acceptable, becauſe they are ſingular
and aboue the reach of others, yea accounting their pleaſures
herein the better ſeaſoned, when they are procured
and enioyed with the paine & toyle of their people: And
leſſe doe ſuch know what belongs to God, or the ſafety of
their kingdomes, that giue the bridle to their ſubiects, to
prophane Gods Sabaothes and contemne his word, that
ſo they mighty leſſe enioy them in their godleſſe pleaſures,
or elſe the better endure ſuch drudgery as they are put
vnto, when wicked Princes runne ryot. And ſurely in that
herein they thinke to gratifie their ſinne, & granting pardon
for any offence: this as it doth moſt diſhonor God ſo
it ſhall ſurely tend, to the reproach of ſuch indulgence, as
being the ſpeciall meanes of the diſobeying of gouernmēt
when God is diſhonoured for the contentment thereof.
Oh that gouerners were wiſe to conſider theſe things:

that they would conſider how pleaſures communicated
are both leſſe enuied and leſſe ſet by: and ſo both preuent
danger in their vſe and abuſe alſo by wiſe intermitting
the ſame. And yet yt they would be wiſe in yeelding this
liberty, not to cloake their owne abuſe, neither with the
diſhonour of God, not to the iuſtifying of ſinne, nor hardning
of ſinners▪ not as if hereby they would make demonſtration
of their happineſſe: or baſely proſtitute themſelues
to the luſt of their people: but herein wiſely acknowledging
their common condition by nature, and ſo to
become equall with thoſe of the lower ſort: recompencing
hereby the labour of their ſubiects: and keeping herein
that royal law, euen to do to others as they would be done vnto
them-ſelues: conſidering wiſely that ſeeing they are to
weepe with them that weepe:
                  Rom. 12. ſo they muſt not reioyce to
make their ſubeects heauy.
                     Obſ. 118. Prince▪ honour conſiſts in the eaſing of their ſubiects of their continual burthens. 
                  And ſurely if we conſider this
perticular wherein this heathen Prince gratifies his ſubiects,
namely to releaſe his ſubiects for a time of their
continual taxes; as this was eſpecially intended to honour
his Nuptia's, yt the loynes of his people might bleſſe their
Prince, and his marriage: ſo we ſhall find it no ſmall part of
the Princes honour, as not vnneceſſarily to exact vpon his
people, for the ſatisfying of his pleaſure: ſo euen to remitte
ſomewhat of lawful exactions, to giue ſome breathing &
intermiſſion therto. For is hee not herein a law vnto himſelfe,
when in that which is lawful, he bounds him-ſelfe, &
doth not what he may, but what is moſt expedient? And
ſo ruling him-ſelfe, ſhall better rule his people: Is he not
wiſely to keepe ſome ſtocke in ſtore and not ſtill to bee laying
forth leaſt hee haue not in the ſeaſon to compaſſe the
market: Doth hee not heereby keepe his ſubiects in
heart; that they may ſtill ſupply cheerefully whereas the
King muſt looſe his right, when there is no more to bee
had: And then the King muſt ſupply when the ſubiect
hath it not: Whereas otherwiſe the King receiuing moderately,
the ſubiect may haue where-withal; and ſo both
ſupplyed, and contented thereby.
               
                  
                  Surely happy are thoſe Princes that know their ſtrength;
Yet more happy if they knew how to vſe it: which is not
to inioy their pleaſures with their ſubiects payne, not to
empty their people, to fill them-ſelues; but as to eſteeme
it their glory to haue multitude of people: ſo wiſely to
maintaine this multitude; and will they bee maintained
with nothing? If they be ſtill emptied how can they proſper?
And how can they then bee the glory of the Kingdome?
Wel Behold our Perſian Monarch here doth not only
giue reſt vnto the Prouinces, but alſo.
               
                  Ga
                        •
                     e gifts according to the power of the King.
                  
                     Obſ. 119. Wicked brideled and furniſhed vvith good gifts for the good of the Church. 
                  Thus euen
the wicked, when they are imployed in Gods ſeruice, for
the good of his Church, ſhall not only bee bridled from
much euill which they would do, but moued alſo to doe
much good in ſhew, though otherwiſe they would not do:
Here's no mention of drunkenneſſe, no calling for Vaſhty: as
were in the former feaſt. The marriage of Gods ſeruant
ſhal not be diſhonoured with ſuch abuſes. But what? here's
reſt giuen to the Prouinces who were like to indure heauier
burthens; & gifts diſtributed according to ye power of
the King, whoſe power is vſually ſeene in taking from his
people. So doth God honour his children by reſtrayning
the wicked: ſo doth hee harden the wicked in that they
ſhall not want the ſhew of vertue in the ſeruice of
thoſe which yet notwithſtanding onely for their vertue,
they doe moſt deadly hate: ſo doth he get him glory by
them both in confirming hereby the faith of his children,
                     Obſ. 120. Princes are to be liberall to their ſubiects.
and ripening the wicked to their appointed damnation.
               
                  And if wee ſhall further conſider the bounty of this
Monarch, in giuing gifts ſo magnifically: Doth not the
Lord hereby further honour this aduancement of his ſeruant?
               May not Princes learne hence to bee bountifull
to their ſubiects; and inſteed of pilling of them,
to beſtow ſometimes largeſſe vpon them? May they
not we ldoe it, ſeeing they giue them but their
owne, and doe they not winne their hearts therby

3. and can they ſtore it vp better then there where they
may require it againe. And do they not eaſe themſelues
of much care and feare.
               Surely as it was the cuſtome at ſuch extraordinary kinds
of ioy and feaſting, to enlarge the heart in ſuch gifts, and
ſo ſhall Princes finde a great commodity herein: the people
are contented, and the kingdome well fenced, vertue is
encouraged, and miſerie releiued, and Princes herein do moſt
come neere vnto God, and the people are more faithfully
knit vnto their Gouernors.
               
                  But marke I pray you the bountifulneſſe of this King,
                     Obſ. 121. Gods children ought to be liberall according to their ability and with all their power. it
is ſaid, that he gaue gifts according to the power of the King:
Not niggardly and baſely, but bountifully and according
to his abilitie. So ought the children of God much more
to extend their liberality according to their callings, leaſt
this heathen Monarch riſe vp in iudgement againſt them.
               
                  And therefore they are 1. to diſtribute in faith, with warrant
from the word, and looking for recompence at the
hands of God,Prou. 5. not being wearie of well dooing. 2. They
are to giue in righteouſneſſe, both of that which is their
owne, and alſo where it may bee lawfull, not to maintaine
ſinne, but for loue of the perſon, yea where it is moſt neceſſary,
to thoſe that are in greateſt want: and among
them eſpecially to the houſhold of faith. 4. Wee muſt reſpect
the end of all our well-doing principally the ſaluation
of the ſoule and glory of God: whereby wee may
both condemne all Popiſh charitie, which generally faileth
in all theſe circumſtances, and ſo trie our ſelues whether
we be truely charitable or no.
               Thus is the mariage of Heſter ſolemnized with all the
ſtate and complement ſutable thereto:
                     Obſer. 122. Gods prouidence in vnequall matters and ſocieties of vnlike. thus is a Captiue
Virgin aduanced to bee a royall Queene. Thus is vertue
ioyned to vice to bridle the ſame. Thus is vice a companion
of vertue, thereby to humble and ſo to trie the ſame.
Thus two are in a bed, the one forſaken, the other elected:
both brought together by the Lord, and by him
hereby fitted to their ſeuerall ends. Behold here ſome

reſemblance of the eſtate of Gods children in a viſible
Church, where ſhall they ſit but they may meete with a
Iudas in their diſh?1. Cor. 5. if they will not conuerſe with the vncleane,
muſt they not goe out of the world? doth not the
Lord hereby humble the one, and harden the other? is not
his prouidence moſt admirable, in accompliſhing hereby his
righteous will, in them both. But of this more fitlye by
Gods grace hereafter. And thus farre concerning the aduancement
of Heſter: wherein for conclusion we may note.
1. The faithfulneſſe of God,
                  
                     Obſ 123. The Lord faithfull in in making good his word. making good his promiſe.
That whereas the Prophet Ieremis perſwaded Iechoniah
the King not to ſtand out againſt Nabuchadnezzar; when
he came to beſiedge the Citie, but to yeeld himſelfe willingly
to the decree of God, to goe into captiuitie: promiſing
him there-withall, and the people (in the name of
the Lord) that if they obeyed his councell, it ſhould both
go well with them in the land of their captiuitie, and after
ſeuentie yeares they ſhould againe returne into their
countrie. The King obeying this councell, is honorably
according to his eſtate reſpected during his life; and among
the reſt, this Heſter being daughter to one of thoſe
that were in that captiuitie, is here aduanced to the moſt
eminent dignitie, and ſo is a meanes for the moſt gratious
preſeruation of the Church of God. So conſtant is the
Lord in performing his promiſe: Becauſe he is God and cannot
                  
alter his loue, hee is all ſufficient, and who can hinder 
his purpoſe: hee is truth it ſelfe, and therefore hath he ſaid 
it, and it ſhall ſtand▪ 
                  neither will hee for his glory diſappoint 
the expectation of his people which are his praiſe,
his delight and glory.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Let therefore the faithfulneſſe of God condemne
our diſtiuſt: let the wicked bee confounded, that make a
mock thereat. In the experience of what is paſt, let vs bee 
confirmed in what is behinde, & let this teach vs to keepe 
faithfully lawfull promiſes to each other: and as the Lord 
is faithfull in his promiſes, ſo is hee alſo as faithful in his 
                  threatnings, and therefore let vs feare him for the one, and

loue him for the other: and giue him both the glory of his
mercy and his iuſtice.
               
               
                  Thus doth the righteous Lord make good his promiſe: but
doth he not magnifie alſo his power in the means thereto?
Behold through many croſſings and contrary blaſts, is this
ſhippe brought to the hauen: and through many deſperate
plunges is this poore captiue at length aduanced to
greateſt dignity.2. Cor 4. 6. Lumene Tenebris. 
                  So doth the Lord worke by contrary means,
that his power may be more manifeſt in making ſuch vnlikely
meanes ſerue him. Whereas otherwiſe if the means
were likely,
                     Obſer. 124. The Lord accompliſheth his will by contrary meanes. he might be thought to ſerue them. That carnall
confidence being confounded; faith may be encreaſed:
And the Lord may haue the onely glory of all his mercies,
So, Atheiſme is wiſely conuinced, that imputes things
to chance; ſeeing ſuch contrary meanes, implies extraordinary
power and wiſdome in the effecting of things.
               
                  Vſe 1. Let vs not therefore preſume, when the meanes
are faireſt, neither let vs deſpaire, when they are moſt croſſe
 and vnlikely, And though God vſe contrary meanes, becauſe
 he is able to tunic them to his pleaſure; Yet let vs vſe
                   the moſt likely, where it is left to our choice, and not deſpiſe
the vnlikelieſt, when God impoſeth the ſame. Becauſe,
as here the vnlikelieſt, will beſt trie our faith, ſo there
the likelieſt do ſhew our obedience. 1. As being commanded
of God, 2. and moſt agreable to reaſon fitteſt for our vſe,
and moſt iuſtifiable in the iſſue whether we preuaile or no.
Laſtly that Heſter,
                  
                     Obſ. 125. The greateſt afflictions profitable to Gods children to the obtaining of the greateſt bleſsings. by theſe manifold and ſtrange afflictions,
is neceſſarily brought to ſo great preferment, we may
here obſerue the great benefit of troubles: That they are
means to worke out our greateſt happineſſe. So at that wil
liue Godly muſt ſuffer affliction and by many tribulations
we ſhall enter into the Kingdome of heauen. Becauſe afflictions
do both purge out our droſſe,2 Tim 3. 12 and make vs fit for
mercy,
                  Act 14 and they are good means ſo to humble vs, yt we may
vſe happines aright.
                  Eſay 1. 25 They keepe vs from going a ſtray▪
                   that ſo
we may come to the wiſhed hauen,Pſal. 66 11 and they preſerue vs
from ſuch quickſands,Pſal. 11 9 as would ſinke vs in our iourney.
               
                  
They trie vs wiſely whether we will keepe the way or no,
& proue very comfortable aſſociates, to preuent Idleneſſe, and 
                  weariſomnes. What ſhould I ſay? though the world account 
them euill, and to the wicked the proue no leſſe? yet to Gods 
Children, no bleſſing is well ſeaſoned without them: No bleſſing
well obtained, but by their miniſtery.
               
               
                  Vſe 1. And therefore though the world 
                        •
                     ee 
                        •
                     ffended at
the Croſſe of Chriſt, and eſteeme them curſed of God,
that embrace the ſame;Ioh. 7. 
                  Yet let vs take vp the corſſe, that
ſo we may obtaine the crowne.2 ſ
                        •
                     m 2. 
                  Let vs ſuffer with Chriſt,
that ſo we may reigne with him. Let vs looke for troubles,
when we are about any good: let vs diſtruſt our goodneſſe,
                  
if it be not ſeaſoned with trouble: and let this be our comfort,
that our troubles are but ſhort, but our recompence is
incomparable and ſhall neuer decay.
               Thus Heſter is aduanced through great tribulation; and
at length findes reſt in a moſt honorable eſtate.
               
                  As for her companions it is not ſo with them: Nay the
King himſelfe he findes no reſt. And hath not Heſter alſo
ſome affliction to ſeason her great proſperity? yea ſurely.
The Kings affection growes could and his luſt enereaſeth.
                  Verſ. 19.
And therefore it followeth that The Virgins were gathered
the ſecond time. To wit; for a new ſupplie of the Kings vnſatiable
luſt. So vnreaſonable is luſt, ſo inconſtant carnall
affection: ſo lawleſſe are the wicked: ſo ſhort is any happineſſe
of perfection in this life.
                     Obſ. 126. The luſt of the wicked vnſatiable. 
                  Thus Tyrants ceaſe not to
moleſt, and ſpoile their ſubiects, that they at length may
be iuſtly ſpoiled.
               
                  Vſe 1. And ſhall not the righteous feare euen greateſt
happineſſe? ſhall they reſt vpon it? ſhall they not haue 
their loynes girt to follow hard after the marke? Shall 
the wickeds torments haue an end, whoſe luſts are thus 
endleſſe? ſhall we not hate this fleſh that is ſo treacherous 
& deceitfull? ſhal we not be more watchful ouer our ſelues,
and others, by how much our greateſt happines is ſubiect
to ſuch foyles? ſuch is Mordecai. So it is here recorded
of them.
               
                  
Then Mordecay ſate in the Kings gate.
               
                  That is, he attended on his office in theſe times of Heſters
aduancement, hee doth not preſently conceiue higher
matters, and ſo neglect his ordinary calling (as ſome ambitious
vpſtart would haue done:) buſying himſelfe to
creepe to preferment; hauing ſo direct a meanes to raiſe
him ſpeedily: but ſoberly he attends on his office; as▪ contented
therewith: and for ſtate matters, he leaues them to
higher powers: as for preferment, though the Lord had a
purpoſe ſhortly to aduance him thereto, and therefore it
might be thought ſome ſpirits might bee put into him to
this end, yet wiſely doth this holy man put off the
thought thereof, by accuſtoming himſelfe to his meane
condition, and yet not without regarde of his aduanced
Nephew; whoſe aduancement growing now iealous in regarde
of this new gathering of Virgins, he is therefore ſayd
further to ſit in the Kings gate, to haue intelligence thereof,
and ſo to aduize and determine according. And ſurely
in this example of Mordecay wee haue many notable
points worthy our conſideration.Obſ. 127. Markes of Gods childrē to be contented with our callings, and walke faithfully therein.
               
               
                  One is that he is contented with his calling, and imployes
himſelfe faithfully therein; a notable marke of the childe
of God, who as he is commanded to abide in the calling
wherevnto the Lord hath called him: as being fitteſt for
him, and a tryall of his faith, to exerciſe his humilitie: ſo i
                        •
                     
                  
he to walke faithfully therein, as whereby he doth ſanctifie
the ſame vnto him,
                  1 Cor. 7. 
                  ſhall ſee the bleſſing of God therein, and alſo
make way thereby to a greater bleſſing.
                  1. 2. 3. 4.
               
               
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it condemnes thoſe that will liue in no
calling:
                  Pſal. 128. ſo it alſo reproueth ſuch as make choyſe of ſuch callings
as can yeeld no contentment,
                  Math. 25. neither with any credit or
 comfort can we imploy our ſelues therein: and are not they
 alſo condemned hereby: y• hauing holy & lawfull callings,
 do either baſely abuſe thē
                   to ye luſts of others, or elſe neglect
 thē
                   vnneceſſarily to the ſatisfying of their own luſt? or els
 wickedly giuing thē ouer, or changing thē
                   for others, ſurely
though it be not ſimply vnlawfull to change our callings,

if they will not maintaine vs, or wee bee lawfully called to
other more neceſſary,
                  Callings how to be left and changed. fo
                     •
                   the Church or common-wealth,
as being fitter. So we muſt looke that neceſſity and contentment,
bee the meaſures of our maintenance, and that the
meanes and manners of our further calling,Sect. 2. be direct and
ſutable.Rules how to walke conſcionably in our callings.
               
               As for our holy abiding in the calling vnto which God
hath called vs, Certainely if wee doe but remember the
account wee muſt make; and conſider the vncertaintie
                  
when wee ſhall be called thereto, if we looke for our reward
                  
                  from God, and make a good conſcience our rule to 
direct vs therein; if ſingleneſſe of heart ſhall ſeaſon our 
paines: and caſting our care on God, be the caſting of our 
profit, if our buying to profit, bee not vnprofitable to the 
ſoule; if our ſtriuing for profit be not from a deſire of ritches; 
                  If prayer be the foreman of our ſhop, and thanksgiuing 
vnto God, giue vp the account at night; if Chriſtian 
liberty, keepe the caſh, and con
                        •
                     edneſſe bee the Counter.
Laſtly, if our laying out, bee without prodigalitie, and our 
                  receipts without couetouſneſſe; Theſe rules well obſerued,
and practiſed of vs; ſhall warrant vs ſafe walking in
theſe ſlippery places,1. Tim. 6. and be meanes to lay vp a good foundation
for vs, againſt the comming of Chriſt Ieſus.
               
                  A ſecond thing to be conſidered in Mordekay, is, that
hee is not haſtie of preferment,Obſ. 128. nor ambitiouſlie ſeekes
the ſame:Gods childrē not ambitious nor greedy of preferment 
                  Hee ſits in the Kings gate, hee is not fawning on
Heſter, nor proaling for greatneſſe. A very true and liuely
marke of the child of God: ſuch was Heſter (as we haue
noted before): ſo was Dauid, Ioſeph, and the reſt: theſe
looke higher then the earth, and therefore count theſe things 
as dung: theſe know the danger of climing high: and therefore 
they will not bee too haſtie to catch a fall. In a word;
as the children of God know beſt how to vſe this aboundance,
ſo of all other they haue leaſt need thereof: and
therefore will they not bee too haſty to take this but
then vpon them, that when it is caſt vpon them, they may 
be better able to beare it.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Vſe. 1. Which being ſo, let haſty climers ſee what right
they haue in heauen: let them wiſely conſider how they caſt
 off all-care of vertue, when once they begin to ride poſte
 to preferment As for Gods children let it ſuffice them, that
they can clime no higher; and ſeeing they are haſtning to
the citie which is aboue let them wiſely decline ſuch mountaines
as may require ſome dangerous worſhip at their
 hands, and rather deſire to haue their life hid with Chriſt
in God, ſo may they more freely imploy themſelues in the
things which are aboue, which in the fleſh is kept low; &
 the pride thereof abaſed. And if they will be ſafely ambitious
indeed, let them ſtriue to exceede in grace, and goe formoſt
to heauen: here the more haſt the better ſpeed, and
the ſeaner ſped the leſſer miſery, the longer happineſſe.
               
               
                  But why doth the holy Ghoſt here make ſuch preciſe mention
of Mordecayes ſitting at the gate? no doubt though
he attended his office, hee forgat not his daughter now
being aduanced; and as a tender father, hath an eare after
her; he ſits in the gate to hearken after her eſtate, and to
aduize as he ſhould be called. So carefull ought fathers
to bee for the good of their children. So is cur heauenly
Father carefull and continually prouident ouer vs But of
this point heretofore. As alſo of the next verſe, concerning
the concealing of Heſters nation and kindred, according
as Mordecay had formerly aduized; onely let vs adde
for the iuſtifying of this practiſe of Heſter thus much: that
though ſhe lawfully conceales her country and nation to
preuent danger,
                     Obſ. 129. Aequiuocatiō damnable. yet is ſhe no warrant to Popiſh diſſembling▪
and damnable equiuocating: for ſhee conceales being
 not demanded; they beeing demanded corrupt the
truth, by reſeruing truth in the minde, and vttering a lye
 with the mouth: Shee conceales for the ſafety of her ſelfe,
and the Church of God, they keepe them-ſelues cloſe to
 deſtroy the Church of God. She is commanded by her Vnckle,
who hath lawful power thereto: they take warrant
from that man of ſinne, who hath none to giue. Thus is
Heſter no warrant for Popiſh equiuocating, much leſſe

will equiuocating warrant & maintaine Popery, The Lord
will confound the lyar and the deceitfull man.
               
               
                  And ſeeing that Heſter now beeing ſo honorably maried,
                     Obſ. 130. Honor doth not quench loue in Gods children.
doth yet ſo reſpect the aduice of her Vnckle, this
may teach vs, That as honour doth not quench loue in the
Sanits of God: ſo mariage alſo doth not take away obedience
to Parents.
               
               
                  And ſurely how ſhould honour quench loue in them,
who the more pledges they haue of Gods loue, the more
are they prouoked to loue one another▪ by how much
they haue now better meanes to ſhow their loue: the
fire goe out when more wood is caſt on? and can there be 
a greater honor to honor, then to be kinde and affable to
inferiors and how ſhall honour bee maintained without 
true loue? and if wee loue not may wee hope to bee beloued?
               
                  Vſe. 1. What comfort then can ſuch haue of their greatneſſe
and honors, that place the glory thereof in deſpiſing
inferiors, and giuing them all occaſions of hatted againſt
them? what hope of continuance where loue is not 
ſetled? Let Politicians looke to this, and ſee well to their
ſtanding. Surely feare is but a ſorry keeper of honor, and
iealouſie will hardly procure continuance thereto: let them
hate, me, ſo they feare mee, is the voyce of tyrany: and if
they hate, they will plotte deſtruction: this is the iuſtice
of God. But of this point heretofore. Now.
               
                  Concerning the obedience that this gratious Queene
performes to her father,
                     Obſ. 131. Mariage takes not away obedience from parents. beeing maried away from him:
this alſo teacheth vs: that children are bound to obey their
parents, and performe dutie vnto them, though they be married
from them, and ſo bee vnder an other gouernment.
And the reaſon is, becauſe one of theſe gouernments is ſubordinate 
to the otber. & may both agree without impeachmēt
to each other: yea obedience to either in their places, is that 
wherby they both are-happily maintained: & ſurely, if cō
                  ſent 
of parents be moſt neceſſary to mariage, ought there 
not to be a reſpect ſtill to parents, euen when this bleſſing

is enioyed. Thus did the Patriarches obey their Fathers,
and the commandement of obedience to parents being morall,
and perpetuall, doth it not bind vs all our life long?
               
                  Indeed,
                  
                     Obſ. 132. Maraiage neeres bond then that o
                        •
                      nature. as the bond of mariage is neerer then that of
nature; becauſe it both renewes the bond of nature, and
aduanceth alſo nature to an honorable eſtate: yea reſemsbleth
the moſt neere coniunction betweene Chriſt and his
Church: ſo ought we rather to keepe this bond, then the
bond of nature: if ſuch occaſion ſhould bee offered which
ſhould be preferred: not that herein we breake the bond
of nature, but wiſely eſtabliſh it, in ſubordinating the
ſame to a more high and neerer bond. So is our Sauiour
to be vnderſtood,Math. 19. when he faith: For this cauſe ſhall a man
leaue Father and Mother a
                        •
                     d cleaue to his wife: meaning
thereby, that mariage is a neerer bond, then that of nature:
therefore of the two, rather cleaue to thy wife, if occaſion ſhould
be offered whether ſhould be forſaken. The reſolution hereof
ſtands in the conſideration of ſuch duties, as doe belong to
theſe ſeuerall callings. Whereof ſome are common to both,
others are peculiar to either. Thoſe which are common to
both are either ſimply common to both, or reſpectiuely and
comparatiuely. Thoſe which are ſimply and generally common
to both callings, are 1. Reuerence, 2. Loue, and 3. Naturall
affection &c. generally ſuch as ſimply reſpect their
perſons, as they beare the Image of God, and reſemble his authoritie
ouer vs. Thoſe which are common to both with reſpect
& prolation, are Obedience, Maintenance &c. which
though we owe to both, yet are wee to performe them in
their order. Obedience firſt to the husband before the Father,
maintenance to the wife before the parents, yet herein
alſo being lead by the chiefeſt bond.
                  Galat. 6. 10 Namely to doe good
eſpecially to the houſhold of faith: and wiſely diſcering the
inuincibleneſſe of neceſſitie: not ſtanding on what want
may bee, neither what ſuperfluouſb 
                        •
                     e wee thinke fitte: but ſo
depending on the prouidence of God: as not to neglect
preſent reliefe, and therein to bee led by the neerer bond.
               
                  As for ſuch duties as are proper to either: ſuch as are

                  due beneuolence, cohabitation, in the ſtate of marriage: theſe
not concerning parents, may well be performed without
impeachment to their honour. As likewiſe ſuch dueties
as are not proper betweene the Father and the Sonne,
may very well ſtand with the performance of ſuch as concerne
the State of marriage: ſo that they all tend to the
glorie of God, and principally intend the ſaluation of the
ſoule.
               
               
                  Vſe 1. Which as it condemneth thoſe Parents that hauing
aduanced their Children to this honorable Eſtate
of marriage, do either baſely crouch vnto, or by too much
indulgence looſe the right in their Childrens ſubiection:
So doth it conuince their extreame folly, which is the cauſe 
thereof; Namely, their parting with too great portions, or
putting ouer their eſtates vnto them: By which, it
comes to paſſe, that their Children being puft vp, and
hauing the ſword put into their hands, in ſteed of obedience
to Parentes, do many times beate them with
their owne rodde. And ſo by Gods iudgement prouoking
hereby their Parents in the bitterneſſe of their
ſoules, to curſing and complayning: the Lord heares their
crie, and puniſheth ſuch rebellious plants, by rooting them
out, and laying waſt their habitations.
               
                  And therefore alſo ſuch children may here learne their
leſſon. As not ſo much to ſtand vpon portion, or ſuch outward 
complement for their preferment: ſo to performe conſcionable
obedience, while they are at home, ſo ſhall they
not forget it when they are abroad.
               
                  And married folkes alſo, may here take out their leſſon,
                  not to deſpiſe their aged Parents but rather now
to performe them double honour, becauſe they were
not onely the cauſe of their beeing, but in placing
them thus comfortably, a good meanes of their well
being.
               
                  Yea they that are left of their Parents, to take their 
chance (as we ſay) and to get it out of the fire; theſe
haue moſt cauſe to honour their Parents, becauſe as

they can more ſufficiently requite them in that they were
meanes of their being: So being now put to a more iuſt
triall of the ſincerity of their obedience, and being certainely
perſwaded; that as what was wanting in Parents
hath beene ſupplied by the Lord: ſo his hand ſhall not
be ſhortned if they enlarge theirs; euen where they
haue no other cauſe but only for Gods ſake; when they can
hope for no better pay-maiſter then God himſelfe.
               And thus farre c
                     •
                  ncerning Heſters obedience.
               But what? are all of Heſters minde to performe obedience
to their ſuperiors: doth Ahaſhueroſh finde as faithfull
ſubiects as Mordecai found faithfulneſſe in his
aduanced Nephew? Surely no; Behold Heſter ſo
highly preferred yet performes dutie to her Father, and
yet ahaſhueroſh being chiefe Commander, cannot finde
loyaltie in his ſubiects: but while he is wallowing in
the fulneſſe of his pleaſures and bleſſing his ſoule in
his ſecurity and falſe content, his life is ſought for by
two of his attendants, euen thoſe that he appointed keepers
of the doore, or of the entry, for his greater ſafety: ſo
it followeth.
               In thoſe daies when Mordecai ſate in the Kings gate, two
of the Kings Eunuches Bigthan,
                  Verſ. 21. 22. and Tereſh, which
kept the doore were wroth and ſought to lay hands on
the King Ahaſhueroſh &c.
               In which words the ſpirit of Gods ſets downe a very
ſeareful and yet vſual accident vnto Tyrants: befalling this
voluptious Prince in the glut of his pleaſures to ſauce the
ſame, & ſo to make him more without excuſe: namely a deſperate
treason entended by two of his ſeruants, whom he
put in ſome truſt, tending to no leſſe, then the taking away
of his life. Wherein we may obſerue theſe circumſtances.
               
               1. The time when this Treaſon was committed: In thoſe
dales. i. in thoſe daies of pleaſure and ſecurity, of rauiſhing
and deflowring of Virgins, of enioying delight with the
wronging and oppreſſion of others: then is this

luxurious Prince ſummoned to his account, then is his life
ſought for; then is he moſt in danger.
               2. The perſon is deſcribed by whom the Treaſon is
diſcouered, and the daunger preuented: who is Mordecai
the ſeruant of GOD: he prooues the faithfull ſeruant
to his Prince, he that is moſt deſpiſed, yet does moſt
good.
               Now Mordecai is here deſcribed. 1 by his faithfull attending
on his office: he ſate in the Kings gate. 2. by his
intelligence of the Treaſon. The thing was knowne to Mordecai.
3. by his wiſdome in the diſcouery of it. He told
it vnto the Queene Heſter and Heſter certefied the King
thereof in Mordecaies name.
               
               3. The parties are ſet downe by whom this treaſon is
committed, and that. 1. by their number, they were two,
Secondly by their quality, they were Eunuches. 3. by their
names. they were called Bigthan & Tereſh. 4. by their office,
they kept the doore. 5. by the occaſion mouing them thereto,
they were (wroth.)
               4. The Treaſon it ſelfe is layd open, Namely to laie
hands on the King Ahaſhueroſh to take away his life.
               5. The perſon is deſcribed againſt whom the Treaſon is
committed, namely King ahaſhueroſh.
               
               6. Here is ſet downe the diſcouery of the Treaſon, and
that both by the Author as before, and manner of the
diſcouery, namely inquiſition was made and it was found
to bee ſo.
               
               7. Here is commended vnto vs the execution of theſe
Traitors. They were both hanged on a tree.
               
               8. The holy Ghoſt concludes this hiſtory with a notable
relation of wiſdome euen of thoſe Godleſſe men,
namely it was written in the booke of Chronicles before the
King, that ſo memorable a deliuetance might neuer be
forgotten, and the ſeruice of Mordecai might hereafter be
remembred.
               Theſe are the particulars in this memorable accident.
And 1. conceruing the Time when it fell out.
               
               
                  
                  In thoſe daies] That is when the King is drowning himſelfe
in pleaſure, and ſaith, ſoule take thy eaſe: Then doth
the Lord raiſe ſome of his owne houſe to call him to an
account,Pſ
                        •
                      73 Obſ. 133. The proſperi
                     
                        •
                      of the wicked ſlippery and ſubiect to great daungers. and to ſtrippe him in a moment of all his vaine
confidence. So ſlippery places are great ones placed in:
ſo doth the Lord ſauce their proſperity with ſuddaine and
vnexpected dangers, to confound their carnall confidence
therein; and thereby, to make their dotage much more inexcuſable
that will build their houſe vpon the ſands, which
euery blaſt will ouerturne.Math. 7
               
               
                  
                  1. Whence we may learne, not to giue the bridle to proſperity

                  neither to ſet our hearts vpon it: neither to enuie
 it in others, nor to be greedy of it ourſelues: but to feare
 in our ſelues, and ſeeke to eſiableſh it in our ſuperiors, by

                  praier to God for them, and watchfulneſſe in our callings.
 So doth M
                        •
                     rdecai, he ſate in the Kings gate: he was watchfull
in his calling and ſo the Lord honoreth him to be a
meanes of the preſeruation of his Prince,
                  
                     Obſer. 134. God recompenceth the diligence and honeſt care of his children with good ſucceſſe. and liberty of his
Church.
               
               
                  So acceptable are the labours of Gods Children in his
eyes: ſo doth he win them in this life, to encourage vs in
well doing: and to ſeale vp vnto vs our eternall reward in
the life to come.
               1. Shall we then ſay it is in vaine to ſerue God,Malach 3. what profit
 ſhall we haue if we pray vnto him? No let vs reſolue that
 the Lord is faithfull, that he will not forget our labour, be
it neuer ſo meane, and if we wll trie God further, we ſhall
ſee greater things then theſe. Concerning faithfulneſſe in
walking in our callings we haue ſpoken heretofore.
               
                  One thing we may here further obſerue from the end of
Mordecaies ſitting at the Kings gate,
                     Obſ. 135. God recompenceth out loue to others aboundantly in our ſelues. which was to hearken
how it fared with Heſter: now it went with thoſe that
feared God: That he which was carefull for the good of others,
eſpecially of ſuch as were of the houſe-hold of faith,
hath this fruit of this his loue redounding plentifully
vpon himeſelfe,Pro. 11. 17 
                  hee is mercifull to his owne ſoule; the
LORD by this meanes offering this occaſion for his

owne good and aduancement: ſo gracious is the Lord
to recompence the loue of his ſeruants, ſo thankefull is
loue to come but of our debt; ſo doth the Lord prouoke
vs hereby to mutuall loue, ſo doth he fit vs to perfection
and glory.3 Col. 14
               
               
                  Vſe 1. And therefore, as he which will not be his brothers
keeper, ſhall not keepe himſelfe: ſo let vs in the name 
of God ſhew mercy to our ſelues, in being mercifull to others
there is that ſcattereth and hath plenty,
                  Pro. 11 Eccle 11. I. and though we
caſt our bread vpon the waters, yet after many dates wee ſhall
finde it againe.
                  
                     Obſ. 136. Surely Gods children in ſeeking the beſt bleſsings obtaine all the reſt.
               
               But wherein is it, that the Lord bleſſeth Mordecai? he is
better vnto him, then he did deſire: his deſire only was
that Heſter might be ſafe, and loe the Lord vſeth him as a
meanes for the ſafety of the King too; yea this is turned about
by the Lord as a meanes of his owne further good.
So
                        •
                     b
                        •
                     untifull is the Lord to giue vs more then we deſire:
ſo when we ſeeke the principall,
                  Math. 6. 33. doth he caſt vpon vs other
bleſſings alſo.
               
                  Vſe 1. Let not then the wicked bragge that they haue
more then their heartes deſire:Pſa. 73 Pſal. 106 15 Pſal. 145. ſurely though they
haue their deſire, yet God ſends leaneneſſe into their
ſoules: but the Lord will fulfill the deſires of them that
feare him, yea if they aske wiſdome, he will giue them
both wiſdome,1 Reg. 3. and ritches. Oh that we were wiſe to
chooſe aright! that we would firſt ſeeke the beſt, that ſo 
we may haue all,Luk. 10. 42 
                  and no meruayle if the wicked looſe all
that looſe the beſt.
               
               
                  Well thus you ſee Mordecai, is the happie man, that deliuers
the Kingdome:
                     Obſ. 137. Gods children the onely 
                        •
                     aithfull ſubiects. the righteous onely are they that
ſafegard Princes: they are the only faithful ſubiects: they
onely ſtand in the gappe to keepe out Gods wrath: they
onely hold GOD and his bleſſings to a ſinfull nation:
none can be truly loyall but onely ſuch.Eccle. 22 Eccle. 9 Moyſes. Exod. 32 
                  For they obey
for conſcience and not by conſtraint: they are led by loue
and not by feare. they onelie haue hope of the reward,
and therefore can beare the burthen with patience,

                  they omely feare GOD and therefore can truely reuerence
men.
               
                  Vſe 1. Behold here then the cauſe of the deſolation of
Kingdomes: Namely the want of thoſe that feare the
 Lord: See the policie of Satan in ſetting the world moſt
againſt theſe that ſo the wicked may be the contriuers
of there owne deſtruction, How vaine are Papiſts to boaſt
 of obedience: ſeeing as their profeſſion bewrayeth, that
they feare not GOD: ſo their practizes do daylie diſcouer,
that they will not obey men: How fooliſh is policie,
                   to ſuggeſt Religion, to bee an enemie to States; and
that theſe which beſt ſerue GOD, are leaſt ſeruiceable
to men.
               
                  Surely let Princes ſecure themſelues in the ſafety of
 Gods Children: And let Ezechiel be a ſigne vnto thoſe
 that haue their eyes in their heads. As for Gods Children
let them comfort themſelues,Eecle. 12 though Amos muſt not
 come at Bethel: when all is peace,7. Amos. 2. Reg 3. 13 yet Iehorem, ſhall ſeeke
to Eliſha, When the Lord beginnes to roote. And happy is
 that Kingdome where ſuch Eliſhaes are. Yea more happie
 Sunamite that will ſtay the Prophet with her. Houſoeuer
it is wiſdome is iuſtified of her Children, nay as you heard
before, ſhe ſhalbe iuſtified of her enemies. But how comes
Mordicai to vnderſtand the treaſon?
               
                  Surely the Lord will not hide from his Children what
may concerne their good:
                     Obſ. 138. Gods children skilfull in diſcouering of ſecrets. 
                  their apprehenſions are deepe,
and obſeruations to purpoſe, their knowledge is extraordinary
to boult out miſchiefes, their experience leads them to
geſſe ſhrewedly at mens purpoſes, by their geſtures and
countenance; their wiſdome enableth them by queſtions
and conference to found the mindes of men. Howſoeuer
it is. The thing was knowne to Mordecai. So happie are Gods
Children by this meanes to ſecure others: ſo doth God trie
the wiſdome of his Children by the iuſtice of ſuch dangerous
ſecrets, for the better approuing and ſecuring of
themſelues.
               So did our gracious King admirably finde out the

treaſon wrappēd vp very cloſely in a moſt vnlikely frame
of words, and from a fooliſh ſence gathered a deſperate
practize.
               
                  Vſe 1. Which though it doth not warrant preemption
of extraordinary reuelations, nor ſuch ſuperſtitious conceipts
                  
in Popery for the intelligence of hidden matters, muchleſſe
                  
doth approue thoſe deuiliſh acts which make ſo many
deceiuers, and falſe Prophets in the world. Yet it doth 
iuſtifie that priueledge, that doth onely belong vnto the
Saints. Namely, that the ſpirituall man diſcerneth althings:
not onely concerning matters of ſaluation,1. Cor. 2. but euen ſo far
alſo concerning this life,Amos 3. as Godlineſſe is profitable aſwell
for this as for that other, And therefore as Princes may 
learne hence who to imploy in ſecrets; So may Chriſtians 
generally learne this leſſon.Iob. 33. Namely in doubtful caſes and
extremities, to ſeeke to ſuch interpreters, who can declare
to man his righteouſnes, & diſcouer his dangers▪ that ſo he
may auoide the one and embrace the other.
               Well it pleaſeth the Lord to giue his ſeruant Mordecai
notice of the treaſon:
                     Obſ. 139. Treaſon not to be concealed. how doth he now behaue himſelfe in
ye diſcouery of this ſecret? Conceale it he muſt not, leſt he incur
the penalty of the law, the ſafety of the Prince requires
no leſſe: and the good of the offendors enioynes the ſame,
that the body being puniſhed the ſoule may bee ſaued:
and the common wealth alſo ſhall gaine hereby as being
much ſecured in the detection of ſuch great miſchiefes.
               
                  Which as it iuſtifeth the equity of our law, which makes 
concealers of Treaſon, parties therein: So it diſcouers the 
notable deepeneſſe of Satan in carying theſe miſchiefes
ſo cloſely that they may not be diſcouered. And hereby 
alſo ſubiects may wiſely learne, as to make conſcience of 
their company leaſt they heare what they would not, ſo to
take heed, what they heare, and much more what they conceale,
aſſuring themſelues, that as their is a time to couer
the infirmities of their brethren, from God and men, ſo
their is alſo a time to diſcouer their ſin, when the publique
good requires it, and their priuate alſo will ſort therewith.
               
                  
                  Treaſon then muſt be diſcouered: but yet waril
                        •
                     
                   too: I muſt
haue a good ground for what I report; leſt I be found
to accuſe an innocent: and I muſt be able to vphold the
diſcouery with ſome countenance and reputation, leaſt
I be borne downe in the truth by the greatneſſe of the
offendor
               
                  Behold here then the wiſdome of Mordecai. He relates not
the matter himſelfe to the King, leaſt he might not be
beleeued, or be out-faced by the countenance of the Traytors:
and the King might be enraged,Obſ. 140. Treaſon to be reuealed in wiſdome. or deiected hereby:
and ſo for this ill newes might giue him but ſorry recompence.
But wiſely he goes to the Queene, with whom he
 was of more credit, and might more boldly reueale the
 matter vnto her; whome he knew to be gratious wi
                     •
                  h
her Lord, or els by this demonſtration of faithfulneſſe
might renew her fauour againe. Wherein we may obſerue
a manifold argument of Mordecaies wiſdome.Particulars of Mordecaies wiſdome herein.
               
               1. He takes occaſion hereby to haue acceſſe to Heſter: and
ſo in wiſe ſort to renue his ancient acquaintance with her.
Wheras otherwiſe if he had had no other errant, his comming
might either haue ſmelt of malepartneſſe, or of proud
ambition.
               2. He procures hereby credit to the Narration when it
ſhalbe promoted, by honorable and acceptable a perſonage.
               3. In this his wiſdome he renewes alſo his loue to his
beloued daughter, he enuies not her aduancement, and
therefore will reueale the treaſon himſelfe to take away
the thankes from her; but knowing that fauour was mutable
and greatneſſe iealous; therefore he makes Heſter
                   the meanes to acquaint the King therewith: both, that
ſhe might take occaſion hereby, to performe her duetie to
the King: and alſo might by this meanes renue his affections
towards her. Yea Mordecai might ſafely haue alſo
a further reach herein; namely to tire the ſincere affection
of his daughter towards him, whether ſhe would
make this an occaſion to his good and preferment, or

rather take the glory thereof vnto her-ſelfe.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Whereby we are taught, as rather then to conceale
treaſon to reueale it our ſelues; yet if we may to vſe ſuch
for the acquainting of the Prince therewith, as may procure
more credit to the truth and leſſe daunger to our
ſelues: Let not hope of reward here make vs to haſty, leaſt
the wrath of a King being the meſſenger of death, it
light vpon thoſe that are neereſt thereto: Oh how gratious
is a word in due ſeaſon? how doth the author grace the
narration: whereby we may further learne, to get true fauour
to our perſons, by being gratious with GOD, and ſo
ſhall we happily preuaile with men. And yet, are not to
neglect the meanes of ſuch as are in fauour with men: ſo
we vſe modeſty, and ſincerity therein: Let vs eſpecially
be carefull, not to abuſe them with rumours and falcehoodes:
though Princes for a time are delighted with
theſe; yet falce-hood will out and fauour will change:
and ſo bring ſhame vpon the ſuggeſtors, and reporters
both.
               
                  Thus Heſter is alſo acquainted with this miſchiefe entended
againſt her LORD. What doth ſhe now? doth ſhe
conceale it as being ſicke of her Husband? diſcontent
might haue miniſtred cauſe, and reuenge would haue furthered
the miſchieſe. The incontinency of the King muſt
needs breede iealoſie, and iealoſie is the rage of a man, therefore
he will not ſpare in the day of vengeance; ſome would
haue tickled, at this occaſion, to haue bene rid of a bad huſband,
And luſt here would haue promoted the matter, by
ſuggeſting hope o change, yea ambition too (by your
leaue) would haue puft vp ſome ſuch Semiramis, that ſo
ſhe might raigne alone. But gratious Heſter hath none
of his fuell;Rom. 12. religion hath taught her to paſſe by wrongs,
and to ouer-come euill with good: and therefore no doubt
ſhe is glad by this occaſion to approue herſelfe vnto her
Lord; and thereby alſo to put him in mind of the vncertainty
of his eſtate, and ſo to tender meanes of his reclayming
and amendment, So ought a gratious wife to reſpect

the well-fare of her husband,
                  
                     Obſer. 141. A good wife ought to watch 
                        •
                     uer her husband & to informe him of ſuch daungers as are intented againſt him. and ſo did Abigail aduize
her husband Nabal. So muſt they reueale vnto their
husbands what they know concerning there eſtates as
knowing that they are one, and therefore both there good
or euill doth go togeather, and that eſpecially hereby, they
keepe themſelues in Gods fauour, and thefore though the
husband ſhould take it ill, yet here is the comfort, the Lord
commands it, and he will turne the heart of he husband,
as ſhall be beſt for both.
               
                  Which as it condemneth thoſe murtherous wiues that do
deſperatly ſeeke the life of their husbands either by direct
engines, as poyſon, ſtrangling, &c. or by indirect meanes, as
by faulſe accuſations, vnreaſonable braulings. &c. ſo it doth
alſo condemne thoſe, that flatter them in their ſinne, and
ſooth them vp in their wickedneſſe, and for feare of diſpleaſure
dare not louingly reproue and admoniſh them
therof. And here alſo my wiues learne for theſe inſtruction,
to diſcharge their duties vnto their husbands in giuing
them notice of ſuch daungers, as they are ſubiectvnto,
leauing the ſucceſſe to God,Ziba. who will reward there faithfulneſſe.
               
                  Thus Heſter diſcouers the Treaſon vnto the King, But
doth ſhe enuiouſly conceale the firſt author and ſo take
the credit to her ſelfe? no it is ſaid ſhe certifies the King
thereof in Mordecais name, i. ſhe ſignifies vnto the King
that Mordecai was he firſt diſcouerer; that ſo the Prince
might take notice of his faithfulneſſe, and God might vſe
this as a meanes for the aduancement of his ſeruant, in
conuenient time.
               
                  Thus ought the Saints of God to right each others: in acknowledging
there good parts,
                     Obſ. 142. Gods children ought to approue and promote each other in their weldoing. yea in promoting the ſame:
eſpecially they that are already promoted leaſt they ſhould
appeare to doubt of the worth of their preferment, which
being communicated, if it be good is thereby much bettered
and encreaſed, which is herein ſecured that it hath
more ſupporters: yea is the more honored, in doing honour
to others.
               
                  
                  Vſe. 1. Where is then their religion that detract from each
other, where is their loue, that thinke they do God good
ſeruice in faulſe accuſations, and wrong 
                  
                     •
                  urmiſes, how farre
are theſe from aſcribing vnto the Saints what is there due
which take that from them which they cannot giue them?
Oh what folly is that policy which ſeekes to aduance it ſelfe
by depriuing of others, what trechery that loue which
will aſcribe to others what is none of theirs;crying peace
peace while it ſerues there owne turne, but if a man put
not in their mouthes they prepare warte againſt him,Mich. 2. 6.
                  Oh what ſhall become of them that iuſtifie the wicked
for a reward,Eſay 5. and take away the righteoueſſe of
the righteous from him? The ſeruant of Chriſt Ieſus is
taught here an other leſſon:Pſal, 15. Namely not to ſlaunder
his neighbour, nor falſely to accuſe him, but as he acknowledges
GOD, ſo to giue teſtimony to his gifts, that the
good may be encouraged, and 
                     •
                  OD may bee gloryfied.
               Laſtly in that treaſons,
                     Obſ. 143. Gods prouidence and wiſdome moſt eminent in the diſcouery of treaſons. leſuits in the poulder tr
                        •
                     aſon. and moſt ſecret wickedneſſe, are
thus detected and met withall, this doth notably iuſtifie
the diuine prouidence in ouerruling ſuch euils, and iudging
the ſame, and magnifieth alſo Gods wiſdome, in confounding
the policy of the wicked, who by their ſecrecy in euill,
promiſe to them-ſelues good ſucceſſe therein, whereby
growing confident, and inſolent againſt the Lord who
ſay they ſhall ſee them? who can preuent them? they are
iuſtly met withall in their ſecurity either their owne,
tonges ſhall fall vpon them or the foules of Heauen,
ſhall reueale the miſchiefe, or the wiſdome of the Saints
ſhall diſcouer the ſame. All which did moſt notably
appeare in he diſcouery of the Poulder treaſon, and ſo
doth exceedingly magnifie the truth of Gods prouidence
therein.
               
                  Vſ. 1. Which as it iuſtifieth the truth of the word, that ther
is nothing ſo ſecret, which ſhall not be manifeſted: ſo it is
a notable leſſon to all clookers of ſinne, not to truſt to
ſuch clokes of ſhame for hiding of ſinne, but rather to

conſider,Pro. 28. 
                  that as he that hideth his ſinne ſhall not proſper in
this life, by reaſon of the hell of conſicence attending the
ſame,Num. 33. or elſe, in that the Lord will finde him our therein by
ſome temporal iudgement: ſo ſhall he for all theſe things,
come to iudgement,
                  Ecel. 11. and then the ſecrets of all hearts ſhall be
made manifeſt, that euery one may receiue, according to
his worke: And when the ſlieſt treaſons, & horible murthers
ſhalbe wonderfully diſcouered, tremble thou Atheiſt at the
prouidence of God,Pſa, 14. and though thou ſaieſt but in thy
heart, that there is no GOD, yet remember, that this
thought of thy heart, ſhall one day be diſcouered, yea
the actions of thy life ſhall caſt the dart of thine Atheiſme
in thy face, and reioyce not,Letter to the L. Mounteagle O thou enemy in thy malice
againſt the Saintst, boaſt not, that thou wilt do them
miſchiefe, and they ſhall not know who hurt them: behold,
the Lord is their keeper, and he that toucheth them, toucheth
the apple of his eye, and canſt thou come ſo neare God,
and hope not to be met withall? Let this leſſon all ſorts,
to haue the Lord alwaies before them, ſo ſhall they either
bee kept from running into ſinne, or if they fall,
by the gratious preſence of the LORD be rayſed vp
againe.
               
                  Thus haue we heard, of the meanes and manner that God
vſeth for the diſcouery of this treaſon. Now let vs a little
further conſider the treaſon it ſelfe: And .i. Obſerue we the
authors of it.
               
               It is they were two of the Kings Eunuches.
                  
                     Obſer. 144. Traitors vſe to band themſelues together for the accompliſhment of their miſchiefe.
               
               Behold how ſinne delights in company: eſpecially
treaſon will not be alone; the fact is horrible, and therefore
company muſt needs be had to appeaſe and to embolden
to the miſchiefe trembling conſcience, The attempt is deſperate,
and therefore many hands muſt ioyne therein;
that where one miſſeth the other may hit, And the Lord
herein hath an ouerruling hand: that where one could
keepe counſell, by company it ſhall be reuealed, for
that carnall wiſdome might proue it owne confuſion; do
bretheren in euill further each others puniſhment? ſo was

                  the multitude of conſpirators in the Poulder treaſon a ſpeciall
occaſion of the diſcouery thereof,Conference betweene Hall and Garnet in the Tower. 
                  Let ſinners learne heare
to take heede of ye 
                  multitude, let them not hope by company
in ſinne to carry it more cloſely, or accompliſh it more deſperately; 
nay let them feare whatſoeuer may ſtrengthen and
countenance ſinne, becauſe as repentance is hereby hindred,
and ſecurity encreaſed, ſo vengeaunce is iuſtly haſtened 
by the ſame. Surely as fellowſhippe in euill is a note
of ſinnes wiſdome and confuſion: ſo not to communicate
of each others goodneſſe, is a marke of it vnſoundneſſe:
And therefore let not goodneſſe dwell alone either in
ſingularity or weakneſſe, let it not feare infection,
                  Luk. 23. 32. nor couer
it worthyneſſe,
                  Heb. 10. 23. 
                  but let thoſe are conuerted, conuert
their bretheren, and let not the fellowſhip of the Saints
at any hand be forſaken: but let vs ſupport one another
by loue,Gal. 6. 1. that grace may be the ſtronger: and let vs take
vnto us him that is weake,
                  Eph. 4. 
                  least we alſo be tempted, labouring
to keepe the vnity of the ſpirit in the bond of peace,
that ſo we may grow vp together, As heyres of the
bleſſing.
               
                  Thus we ſee the number of theſe Traytors. Now let vs
a little farther conſider of their condition; it is here ſaid, they
were
               
               Eunuches, that is, they were ſome honorable perſonages
attending on the prince,
                     Obſe. 1. 
                        •
                     6. Great ones vſually actors in treaſons, and why. not gelded perſons as their
name may ſeeme to imply: but becauſe Eunuches, did
ſometime attend in ſuch places, therefore it came to paſſe,
that all which were of any honorable imployment about
the Prince (whether they were gelded or no) were called
Eunuches.
               
                  By which it appeareth, what condition of men are vſually
actors in treaſons; namely, not baſe & inferiour perſons,
whoſe ſpirits are deiected, and hopes lie groueling on the
ground: But men of ſort and quality, ſuch as haue aſpiring
ſpirits, and therefore will be leaueling at the higheſt,
and what more ready then treaſon, to ſerue their ambition?
ſuch (I ſay) as by reaſon of their credit and acceſſe haue beſt
                  
                  
                  opportunity, to committee ſuch hidden miſchiefes: Yea ſuch
as go not without their diſgraces and ſnubbes from iealous
and licentious Princes, and therefore are prouoked to be
 auenged of them. And(which is the moſt materiall of all)
Such as haue beene imployed by wicked Princes, in treacherous
and vile oppreſſions of the ſubiect; and therefore
by the iuſtice of God, do many times practiſe their leſſon
 vpon their teachers, and ſuch as by reaſon of natures gifts
and the abuſe thereof are giuen vp to commit all ſinne,
euen with greedineſſe; and therefore no maruaile, if they
 will make no bones of this ſinne, by which they may hope
to haue a protection for all the reſt: And yet are heerein
met withall, by the diuine iuſtice, who many times turnes
this ſinne to be pay-maiſter for all the reſt; as bringing to
ſhame and confuſion the Authors thereof.
               
                  Vſe▪ 1. Which as it condemneth thoſe, that determine of
ſinne by the condition of the perſon, implying that onely
baſe and ignoble mungrells doe conceiue ſuch monſtrous
ſinnes, as for generous mindes and heroicall ſpirits it comes
not once into their thoughts to commit ſuch outrage:
whereas we ſee the ſchoole of Rome hath ſet downe this as
a marke of the moſt heroicall ſpirit, to riſe vp againſt the
Prince; and experince hath made it too apparant in the
poulder Treaſon: howſoeuer Popery would haue daubed
 the matter: So here generally the beſt priuiledges of nature
are condemned: as beeing the moſt deſperate inſtruments
of ſinne, if they be not ſanctified by grace. And therefore
 here men of reputation may wiſely learne their leſſon, to
ſeaſon their gifts with good education and religion: that ſo
they may be kept within the bondes of obedience to God
 and man. And Princes alſo may learne here their leſſon;
as not to abuſe their attendants. to the hurt of others: ſo
 not to giue them iuſt cauſe of diſcontent: Yea all fleſh may
here learne it leſſon:
                  Mich. 7. not to truſt in a friend;not to put confidence
in a Councellor. No not to truſt the wife that lies in
the boſome▪
                   otherwiſe then to ſubordinate all to God: and
for his ſake to renounce them all: ſo ſhal they be faithfull

vnto vs, ſo farre as ſhall make for our good, and though
they bee vnfaithfull, yet the infidelity of men ſhal not make
the faith of God of none effect.
               
               But let vs conſider a little further of the name and office
of theſe Eunuches. For their Names, they are called
Bigthan & Tereſh: by which it ſeemes that one of them,
namely Bigthan was ſent with others,
                     Obſ. 147. God makes inſtruments of ſin rods to puniſh the ſame. when the King was
in his cuppes, to conuay Vaſhty the Queene to the preſence
of the King. And beholde hee is now one of
them that cal the King to an account for that his notorious
wrong done vnto the Queene. So iuſt is the Lord to
make inſtruments of ſinne, weapons to puniſh the ſame: to the
magnifying of his prouidence and reformation of ye ſame, or
elſe to make him more without excuſe, to his greater confuſion:
but of this heretofore.
               The Office that the holy Ghoſt aſcribes to theſe Eunuchs,
though their name do imply it to be diuers, yet both concurre
in this,
                     Obſ. 148. In greateſt truſt greateſt Treaſon. that it was an Office of ſome truſt: and thence
we may learne not vnprofitably, that Treaſon is in truſt.
Thoſe that are moſt in place of truſt, they proue many
times the greateſt traytors. becauſe theſe, being Princes
creatures (as they call them) new molded to their bent,
the more confidence is hereby put in them, the leſſe ſuſpition
there is of them. Wher-vpon it commeth to paſſe, yt
                  ſecurity is bred in the Prince, & God he is robd of his honour:
the ſubiect he is puft vp, and ſo prouoked to miſchiefe
the Lord he avengeth his glory in giuing him vp to
his luſts, & the ſecuritie of his maiſter, cries aime therto.
               
                  Which as it condemneth that complaint of fleſh & blood,
that they are deceiued in thoſe whom they out moſt in
truſt, becauſe them-ſelues are the cauſe thereof: ſo it doth
                  
not excuſe ſuch as are put in truſt, becauſe their ſinne
is the greater, by how much the more they were the better
thought off.
               
                  And yet Princes, alſo are not to be excuſed neither:
becauſe it is much in them to preuent this miſchieſe. And
therfore ſeeing there muſt be ſome, whom neceſſarily they

muſt truſt:Princes to preuent treachery. That they may not be deceiued by them: Let
them make God their confidence, by keeping them-ſelues
in the bounds of his prouidence: as walking faithfully in
their callings, and ſo bring good examples to their ſubiects,
not being cauſeleſly iealous of them, nor eſtranging our
ſelues from them: But vſing them ſo, that they may rather
ſee they haue need of them, then that Princes haue indeed
other need of their people, the what may as well concerne
their good: tempering their loue with Maieſtie, and
their indignation with clemency. And though they ought
to deſpiſe none, yet not raſhly admitting each one into
their ſeruice before they haue good approbation of his
zeale and loyalty, and therein alſo to make ſome tryal before
they truſt, eſpecially concerning their perſon or the
good of their Kingdome: And when they truſt, yet to keepe
ſuch ſecrets to them-ſelues, as are not fit for them to know, nor
ſafe for Princes to reueale (I meane) theſe Miſteries of gouernment,
which extraordinarily, God reueales vnto them.
And when they haue truſted, yet not further to rely thereon,
Then conſidering they now ſaile (as it were) in another bottome,
ſuch as at leaſt is apt to leake, they be ſo far from remitting
of their care, or yeelding to ſecurity (as the manner
is) as that now rather they ought to haue a more vigilant
eye vnto the maine, and in all humility to caſt their care
vpon God. As knowing that the right end of the ſubiects
imployment by the Prince in matter of truſt, is not to take
away the care of the Prince, as if then there were no need,
but rather to ſettle it more conſtantly on God: becauſe as it
will be imputed vnto the Prince for iealouſie, if hee will not
truſt his ſubiect: and therefore he muſt needs put ſome
in truſt leaſt hee diſcouer feare of his owne
eſtate, which doth proceed from bad deſert: So wil
it imply further a diſtruſt there, where there is no apparant
cauſe, and ſo happily prouoke to giue iuſt cauſe of
diſtruſt.
               And therfore ſeeing thoſe whom he muſt vſe, he muſt alſo
truſt, & yet in truſting of them, both giue them occaſion

to thinke the Prince hath need of them, as alſo, that they are
well conceiued and approued off: leaſt heereby ſuch might
either grow to worke upon their Princes ſecrets, to keep the
ſtate in awe, and thereby to get the head; Very neceſſary it
is, that as Princes be wiſe, what they commit in truſt, ſo they
be not ſecure in the iſſue of it: but rather watch dilligently
ouer the truſt committed, and to keepe the bridle in
their owne handes, by putting it wiſely to God. Whereby
it ſhall come to paſſe: that the ſubiect hereby perceiuing
that he is rather honoured in the caſe committed, then the
Prince diſburthend of the care of his calling, will more
faithfully behaue him-ſelfe to giue ſound contentment:
And ſo the Prince being more ſecured by the loyalty of his
ſubiect, will bee more ſtill prouoked to reſt vpon God: In
whoſe hands ſeeing the hearts of all men are; therefore hee
cannot better ſecure the iſſue of his affaies, then by reſigning
the ſame into the gratious hand of God.
               Thus wee ſee who they are that intend this miſchieſe
againſt y• King.
                  
                     Obſe. 146. Anger incident to Courtiers. 
                  But what might the cauſe be that moued
them thereto?
               
               It followeth: they Were wroth; ſome-what had diſpleaſed
them: either they were not preferred according to their
deſarts and expectation, or they wanted their ſtipend, according
to their places, or they were offended for the diuorcement
of Vaſhty; or they were ſo full fedde, they muſt needs
bee kicking. So apt are ſuch ſtallions to fume and champe
the bridle: So truly is anger the complement of Courtiers:
as whereby they ſhow their ſpirits and vphold their
credits; whereby they obtaine their deſires and put of their
dangers: Whereby they dare their enemies, and hold their
friends. By it they iuſtifie their wrongs, and pay their debts.
Which as it is no warrant for meane ones to giue the reyne
to this ſinne, becauſe the greater flies will breake through,
when the leſſer are intangled. And if it were not, yet we
muſt liue not by examples but by lawes: ſo let euen the
greateſt make this account▪ that the more they ryot in
this ſinne without concealement, the deeplyer are they

engaged in the ſight of God: and the more their ſinne
ſerues there turne in this life, it doth the more make them
indebted to it: and when they haue not where withall to
pay, they muſt lie by it in hell, till they haue anſwered
the vttermoſt farthing. Thus wee ſee great ones will
eaſely be prouoked:
                     Obſ. 150. Anger the occaſion of out ragious ſinne and particularly of treaſon. and ſome ſuch cauſe there might be of
this wrath of theſe Eunuches, but whatſoeuer the Sire
was, the baſtard is anger, and rage likely is the mother
of treaſon and outragious ſinnes, becauſe as it baniſheth
reaſon, and ſo giues way to all vnrulineſſe ſo 
                     
                        •
                     it
ends in malice, and malice will haue bloud; yea ſuch is the
progreſſe of this ſinne of anger, that it will not ſpare it ſelfe
to hurt another, yea none can be priuiledged frō the furious
man he makes no difference of perſons, all cauſes are
a like.
               
                  Vſ, 1. Which as it condemneth natures prophets, that determine
anger to be the whet ſtone to couradge,
                     Obſ. 151. Princes marks of treaſon and rebellion. and ſo giue
way vnto it as a paſſion of credit and no ſmall aduantage,
ſo we may learne to ſuppreſſe the ſame, being fully perſwaded,
that as the wrath of man cannot fulfill the will of
God, ſo much more will it make vs vnſeruiceable to
men. The way to doe this we haue taught before.
               
               
                  Well theſe Eunuches are enraged, and whome is it that
they ayme at? Surely no meaner a perſon then the King:
Kings are the markes for euery one to ſhoot at. They are faire
markes that may be eaſily diſcerned, and many times
they are foule markes to betray Gods glory, and therefore
he iuſtly giues them vp to be betrayed of their ſubiects
yea they make buts of their people, and ſo the arrowes
ſome-times rebounds on them-ſelues, ſo doth GOD
tranſpoſe ſcepters without the ſhedding of innocent blood
ſo when conſcience will not; euen by this feare of danger
doth the Lord keepe wicked Princes in awe, that ſo they
may be ſeruiceable to others, thought it tend to their further
condemnation, ſo doth hee make great one more inexcuſable,
that will build their neſt on ſuch ſandy foundations.
               
                  
                  Vſe. 1. And therefore, as this may humble Princes, in
the greateſt high of their happineſſe ſo it may comfort
them to, that they have right in an other happineſſe; becauſe
this preſent, is ſo vncertaine and ſlippery. And ſeeing
by the tickliſhneſſe of the preſent, the Lord prouokes
them to aſpire to the certaine happineſſe, and yet ſo, as
euen by this tottering ladder they muſt climbe thereto;
Oh let them learne to ſanctifie this their preſent eſtate vnto
them, that it may ſo farre be ſecured, as may further
them to heauen: let them giue God the glory, and maintaine
peace among Men by promoting his Ghoſpel, and in ioyning
obedience to the ſame. So did he preſerue good Elizabeth
from a world of treaſons: ſo hath he preſerued our annoynted
from many conſpiracies, ſo great ſhall bee the glory of the
King in the ſaluation of the Lord.
               
               Thus we haue heard the ſumme of the treaſon, now let
vs further conſider the proſecution of the diſcouery thereof.
               
                  We haue heard heretofore, that Mordecai was the man
that had the firſt inkling of it: hee relates it wiſely to
Queene Heſter, and Hester to the King: what now doth
the King in this caſe? doth he preſently beleeue it though
the reporter were of credit? ſurely No: as Princes are not
to be credulous, eſpecially of ſuch reports, becauſe they
may wrong themſelues in diſcouering a needleſſe feare, yea
they may wrong the innocent, who happily may be miſreported:
yea though he were guilty yet might they wrong
him to, if they proceeded to cenſure before the matter
be throughly ſifted: So euen this heathen Prince keepes
decorum herein: ſo it followeth. That after inquiſition made
when the thing was found out.
               
               Behold here the equity of this heathen Prince,
                     Obſer. 152. Sinne not to be puniſhed before it be conuinced. Gen. 10. in a
caſe of life and death ſo neerely concerning him-ſelfe,
and the preuention wherof conſiſted in ſpeed, yet is he not
haſty to credit a report, muchles to proceed againſt a ſuſpected
offender before the offence be manifeſted & conuinced▪
                  So doth the Lord proceed in iudgement: ſo is innocency preſerued,
whē only accuſation goes not currant; ſo is authority

                      iuſtified: when ſinne is thoroughly convinced: and the offender
happily prepared to repentance.
                  Exod. 23. Doth our law condemne
 any before his cauſe be heared?
               
                  Vſe. 1. By which wee may learne,Leuit. 19. 
                  as not to beleeue reports,
without due inquiſition;Iohn, 7. 
                  ſo to condemne ſuch raſh
iudgements,Act, 23. which execute in the morning, and then fitte
vpon him in the afternoone.Feſtus. Pilatus. I remember policy doth aduize
in theſe caſes of treaſons to ſtrike while the yron is
hotte if the offender bee ſo mighty, as that he bee able to
out-dare the law (as the caſe of ye 
                  Guiſe was vnder Henry ye
                  
third,) here ſaith wiſdome, its good cutting him off firſt, &
then declare the cauſe for iuſtifying of ſuch execution.
And ſurely if the offences of ſuch great ones bee dangerous
and notorious, ſeeing the apparantneſſe thereof is a
ſufficient conuiction of the ſame, it many not be euill pollicie
by ſuch authority, as we may priuately cutte him off,
eſpecially if he bee of power to preuent publique iuſtice.
So doth God iuſtly ſtrike before the fault bee publiſhed:
and ſo may earthly Princes proceed to execution, when
the inquirie and diſcouery of the fact may hinder the
ſame, and indanger their eſtates. Onely herein they muſt
be carefull, not to pretend luſt for a law, and to make their
wills a rule of it righteouſneſſe. This is a prerogatiue wt 
belongeth onely vnto God. As for worldly Princes, they
muſt dye like men; and therefore the liues of men ought
to be pretious vnto them, as they will anſwer an eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. And therefore as ſuſpition
muſt not blind them, or reports miſleade them, to call
the life of their ſubiects into queſtion; ſo when reports
come to them,Ierem, 41. lette them not be ſecure. It is good to feare
 when they ſee but a ſmoake, leaſt Gedaliah looſe his life,
by contemning the danger: And if raking vp the aſhes
they diſcouer the fire, and ſo the fact proue cleare and euident,
let them ſecure them-ſelues, and deliuer the innocēt;
by puniſhing the offender, according to ye quality of his
ſinne. So doth this heathen Prince very maturely proceed to
execution. The thing being found out ſaith the holy Ghoſt

they were both hanged one a tree. A fit recompence for Traitors,
and a iuſt fruit of their ſinne, whoſe end is death,
                     Obſ. 153. Traytors are executed for their outragious offences. and
whoſe wages is damnation. And a very ſafe courſe to be
taken eſpecially with ſuch offenders, whoſe ſparing as it
doth hazard the life of the Prince, ſo it endaungers alſo
their owne ſoules, yea encourageth the wicked, and diſcourageth 
the loyall, breedes confuſion of lawes and is indeed 
the very ſcorne of iuſtice, and gappe to all licentiouſnes:
Whereas by puniſhment of notorious offenders: the lawes 
are eſtabliſhed, iuſtice is honored, and iniquity bridled, the wicked 
humbled, and God himſelfe glorified. So Adoni
                        •
                     ah being 
ſpared will rebel againe, but when he is cut of, the throne 
wilbe eſtabliſhed.1 Reg. 12.
               
               
                  Vſe Oh that Princes would looke to it haue they care to
haue compaſſion on themſelues, while though ſoole-hardines,
or fond clemency, they ſpare ſuch deſperate enemies
that treaſon might hop headles and ſo loyalty might be
ſecured? Surely, though there is difference to be made in a
multitude of offenders: yet is the ſafety of the prince more
pretious then the liues of ten thouſand. And better it is, to
cut of many rotten branches, then endanger the roote, and
hinder the fruit. It is but cruel mercy, that hazards ye ſoule,
and very fooliſh pitty to nouriſh a viper in my boſome,
which hereafter may ſting me. But the King of Kings ſhall
teach them true wiſdome, that if they be wiſe they wilbe
wiſe to themſelues. Al the doubt may be concerning, theſe
Eunuchs whether they deſerued this hainous puniſhment
or no,
                     Obſ. 154. The intent of treaſon diſcouered, is to be puniſhed. ſeeing they miſſed of their purpoſe, & were preuented
therein. The King had no hurt; and why then ſhould
they be touched?
               Surely though purpoſes are ſinnes in the ſight of God:
yet onely actions may ſeeme liable to the cenſure of men.
Who onely can iudge by the out-ſide, and ſo may proceed
accordingly: how ſtands it then with equity that theſe
mens purpoſe is puniſhed: eſpecially ſeeing in other offences
the intent is not taken hold of: ſo that the act by
any meanes be hindered, or preuented: Indeed, if we do conſider

ſinne in it owne deſart, ſo not onely the act but the
purpoſe, yea, the very thought it ſelfe deſerues eternall puniſhment:
but if we meaſure ſinne by the ſubiect wherein
it is, then ſeeing God hath reconciled our perſons
vnto him in Ieſus Chriſt and will remember our iniquities
no more to puniſh them euerlaſtinglv: ſo neither doth
he to any other end chaſtize them in this life, then may
make for the good of the ſinner & the glorie of his name.
               And to this end ſerue the lawes of men: Which intending
the ſaluation of the ſinner in the inflicting of puniſhments:
as they cannot reach to the thought (which is
only Gods prerogatiue) ſo neither do they otherwiſe faſten
on the purpoſe then for a greater good: vſually they
are confined to the outward action, and ſo only cenſure
that: and yet therein alſo, are ſo farre ouerruled by the
condition of the offendor, as to admit qualification for
his peculiar good: that if clemencie be fitter for him, it
is not to be denied, if ſeuerity be neceſſary, yet with this
intent; that by the diſtruction of the body, the ſoule
may be ſaued.1 Cor. 5.
               
               The intent then of the law being the good of mankind:
herevpon it followeth,Reaſons why the purpoſe of treaſon is to be puniſhed with death. that though other ſinnes
be only cenſured by the act, as Murther Theft &c. Yet
Treaſon is to be cenſured by the intent; Becauſe though
it hath not taken effect, yet being a ſinne ſo dangerous
both to the committer and the Kingdome: ſome ſuch
 courſe is to be taken by the wiſdome of the law: that
ſuch deſperate miſchiefes might be vtterly preuented: how
ſhall that be done?
               Surely, by inflicting the puniſhment vpon the intent:
that ſo the intent being met withall, the act may be preuented,
and all hope cut off from being pardoned for the
act: ſeeing, the very intent diſcouered, is ſo deadly to the
 Author. And doth not the general good neceſſarylie force
this ſeuerity? ſeeing the ſuppreſſing of the Prince, is the
ruine of many thouſands? yea threatens the deſtruction of
 the whole common-wealth? What ſhould I tell you of

the calling of the King, doth he not repreſent the perſon,
and adminiſter the office of God himſelfe, who if he puniſh
the thought of the heart, as being his prerogatiue,
why may not the Prince alſo puniſh the intent, ſeeing he
is Gods vice-ge
                     •
                  ent ſo to meet with ſinne as that the holy
purpoſe of the Lord in his ordinance might be beſt accompliſhed,
to the good of the ſinner, and ſafety of gouerment?
And therefore ſeeing intent of treaſon pardoned,
doth but giue further breath thereto, becauſe ambition is
vnſatiable, and ſuch ſinners otherwiſe incorrigible, then by
taking them in the blade, and ſo cutting them timely off.
Is it not more then time to preuent ſuch deſperate onſets
by iuſt ſeuerty, rather then to giue way through impunity
to farther miſchiefe? And ſhall the Traitor thinke he 
hath wrong done vnto him hereby? where thought of the
leaſt ſinne deſerues eternall vengeance if he be met withal
by temporall iuſtice for the determinate purpoſe of a capital
crime, which may alſo be a meanes for the ſauing of his 
ſoule? And what though he faile in the execution of his
miſchiefe? ſhall the Magiſtrate therefore faile in the execution
of iuſtice, ſeeing there was no good will wanting
ſufficient to diſcouer the daungerouſneſſe of the perſon; 
and ſo in wiſedome to haue him cut off? And may not
the purpoſe of ſuch euils proue very hurtfull to gouerment?
may it not breed Iealouſie therein, and imputation of
ſome bad deſart? may it not worke deſperateneſſe in looſe
gouernors and boldneſſe in the like ſinnes?
               Let this be a leſſon for preuenting of ſuch purpoſes, and
the Lord giue vs vnderſtanding in all things.
               Thus are theſe rebellious ſeruants iuſtly met withal:
                     Obſ. 155. God vſually meeteth with treaſons in this life. And
ſhall diſobedient ſeruants ſcape vnpuniſhed? had Zimri
peace which ſlew his maiſter? did the ſeruants of Ammon
carry their treaſon clearely?
               Surely the Lord is righteous and admirable in his iuſtice,
though ſome ſinnes eſpecially are reſerued to the eternall
vengeance, yet hee will puniſh this ſinne of
Treaſon euen in this life, becauſe it ſo nerely toucheth his

Maieſty, and chalengeth his prouidence.
               
                  Vſe. And therefore let not Traytors hope to go vnpuniſhed,1 Rex. 2.
though they ſcape at one time,
                     Obſer. 156. God puniſheth euill ſeruants. yet their ſinne will
find them out in the end,2 Reg. 11. and Ioab ſhal be taken; when
his iniquity is at ye full. And are not diſobedient ſeruants here
alſo iuſtly met withall? yea ſurely, Iehezi ſhall haue aleproſie,
and theſe rebellious ſeruants do meet with a halter.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Which as it may leſſon Maiſters, to watch ouer their
ſeruants, leaſt by diſobedience they fall into theſe trobles,
for which they are like to giue an account, though in the
 meane time the ſeruant ſmart for it; ſo let ſeruants here
learne to performe obedience for conſcience ſake, that ſo
looking for their reward from God, and not form man,
they may not be driuen to ſuch deſperate courſes. And as
they muſt looke for ſuch meaſure, if they breake out into
 ſuch preſumptious ſins: So on the contrary, let good ſeruants
be aſſured, that the diligent ſhall ſtand before Princes,
they ſhall not want euen plentifull recompence.
               Thus the traitors are executed, and Ahaſhueroſh is
preſerued for the good of the Church,
                     Obſ. 155. Gods Children not vnthankfull for ſuch kindnes as they receiue. and who
made the inſtrument thereof but poore Mordecai, and gratious
Heſter: two ſeruants of the moſt high God, do this
good ſeruice to their Prince. And ſo is Ahaſhueroſh aboundantly
recompenced for all his loue to Heſter: he hath his
life giuen him for a prey: ſo do the wicked fare the better
for the elects ſake, ſo do the Children of God recompence
plentifully the good that is done vnto them. Ebedmelech
the Black-a-moore ſhal haue his life giuen him for
a prey: and the Sunamite ſhall receiue her ſonne to life
for receiuing the Prophet, and Obea Edoms houſe ſhall
proſper while the Arke remaines there, Godlineſſe is neuer
vnthankefull to the embracers thereof; her enemies
fare the better for her, and ſhal not much more her friends?
ſhe hath the promiſe of all bleſſings, and ſhall ſhe not
make them good? he preuailes with God, and ſhall ſhe
not preuaile with men? ſhe brings peace whereſoeuer ſhe
comes, and in her pleaſure is life: ritches and honor, bee at

her right hand, yea durable ritches and righteouſneſſe.
               
                  Why are then the children of God counted ſuch trouble-houſes,
could the world indure were it not for them?
are not the wicked preſerued becauſe of them? Oh let vs
                  
make much thē of ſuch profitable gueſts: let vs learn to be 
thankefull of them in this point: lette vs take hold of the 
ſkirt of him that is a Iew, and reſolue to go with him, becauſe
the Lord is with him. Well the King is preſerued;
and his life renued: What muſt this benefit be forgotten?
ſhall Mordecaies ſeruice be buried in forgetfulneſſe? No;
Behold the prouidence of God, in prouiding for his ſeruant,
Marke the care of the Prince that his deliuerance ſhould
be remembred. It followeth.
               
               
                  And this was written in the booke of daies before the
King: That is this admirable deliuerance was committed
to perpetuall record in the Chronicles of the Kingdome:
               
                  Behold here the faithfulneſſe of God, which forgetteth
not the indeauors of his children;
                     Obſ. 157. The Lord taketh notice of the righteouſneſſe of his ſeruants, and cauſeth the ſame to bee commended to poſterity. he hath a bottle to
put their teares in, and a book of remembrance for them
that feare the Lord: Hee makes inquiſition for blood, and ſo
remembreth it; he cauſeth the fact of his ſeruant to bee
committed to perpetual record.
               
                  Vſe. 1. Shall wee then doubt of the acceptance of our
workes; ſhall wee not expect a plentifull reward thereof?
Will not the Lord auenge the blood of his Saints? Wil he
not wipe all the teares from our eyes?
               
                  Oh that we could beleeue! How ſhould wee be increaſed?
that we would conſider wiſely how God records our
wel-doings, what a ſpurre would this bee to prouoke vs
to go forward? What a comfort againſt the hard meaſure
of the world? what peace of comſcience? VVhat euidence
of weldoing? Seeing the Lord makes our enemies
to record the ſame, yea to promote vs thereby to a ſeaſonable
recompence.
               But what ſhould moue this prophane Monarch to haue
Mordecaies faithfulneſſe and his preſeruation thus recorded
to poſterity? Is this intended as a part of Mordecai his

recompene? Or doth he vſe this as a meanes to put him
in mind therof? That ſo in conuenient time hee might accōpliſh
the ſame? Surely though it be not likely this proud
Monarch had any ſuch intent, becauſe al is counted but
due, & thankfulness; here is a rare bird: yet no doubt but he
 had ſome reſpect to him-ſelfe. Namely y• recording ſo
 great a deliuerance of his owne perſon, he might both prouoke
 his ſubiects to take notice thereof, and ſo to preuent
the like miſchiefes: as alſo confirme him-ſelfe the better in
the hope of future good ſucceſſe, and ſo recreate him-ſelfe
at his leyſure with the remembrance therof. The light of
nature leades him thus far, and policy cryes aime therto:
that memorable acts ſhould bee recorded to poſterity.
               And may wee not profitably learne hence to helpe our
memories with ſuch faithfull regiſters:
                     Obſer. 158. Records and outward mo
                     
                        •
                     aments neceſſary for the memorial & vſe of Gods bleſings. and ſo not only to
bleſſe God for the Act of writing and printing: but herein
eſpecially to magnifie his prouidence, that by this meanes,
the word of truth hath bene preſerued, and purely conueied vnto
vs. Surely though the ſoule be the regiſter of the bleſſings
of God, yet muſt the fleſh vſe ſuch meanes to ſtir vp
the heart; as humbling the ſame, in that it needs theſe outward
helpes, may therby ſanctifie and continue the right
vſe of God mercies, in the holy remembrance and ye meditation
thereof: let thoſe boaſt of the ſpirit, which are not
clad with the fleſh, and let ſuch deſpiſe theſe helpes, as
haue not a body of 
                     •
                  inne to hinder ſpirituall duties. And
ſeeing though the letter of the word be not the power of it,
yet ye power cannot bee conceiued, but by meanes of the
letter: let ſuch deſpiſe the word writtē,Anabaptiſt that deſire not the
power of it: and in the pride of their harts wil not be confined
within the bounds thereof.
               And doth not the ſpirit of God herein further teach vs
to record the bleſſings of GOD to poſterity;
                     Obſ. 159. The bleſſings of God are to be recorded to poſterity. and to
commend to, the generations to come the wonderfull
thinges that the Lord hath done for vs? yea certainly,
this ſhal be written for the generations to co
                        ••
                     , and the people
that are created ſhall praiſe the Lord. The Lord hath commanded

great mercies to be commended to poſterity,Pſal. 102. and
hath appointed the monuments therof to be preſerued to
all generations:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      18. 
                  ſo were the rod of Aaron, and the potte of
Manna kept to this end,Exod. 14. 
                  ſo were Alters erected,
                  Heb. 9. 4. and new
names impoſed,Exod 16. to put Gods children in mind of his mercies
towards them:Geneſ 17. Geneſ, 32. ſo did Samuel write the office of the
King in a book,1 Sam. 10. 25. and laid it vp before the Lord, y• it might
be a perpetual glaſſe,Num, 2
                        •
                     . 14. for the Prince to look his duty in: ſo
are the memorable Acts of God, which hee did at the red
Sea: and at the riuer of Arnon, written in a booke. So doth
Iob wiſh that his words were written in a booke, that ſo y•
equity of the cauſe might remaine for euer.Iob, 19. 13. 
                  So when the
Lord will publiſh his wil and haue it commended to the
vſe of poſterity, for our better aſſurance of the accōpliſhment
therof, he commands it to be written in a booke, yea
in a great volume.
                  Eſay, 8. Yea not only to a book hath the Lord
committed his bleſſings,Ierem. 36. 2. but he hath called alſo the times
to witneſſe the ſame,Exod, 14, he hath appointed ſpecial daies for ye
perpetuall memory of his mercies, to be kept ſollemnly
throughout al generations: this care hath ye Lord taken for
the remēbrance of his bleſſings, as being worthy to be had
in remembrance, and profitable for vs to preuent forgetfulneſſe,
the maine cauſe of prophaneſſe,Pſal, 78. 
                  and whereby the bleſſings
of God are taken away from vs, & we expoſed to the
burthen of his Iudgements. And ſhall not this care of the
Lord for the remembrance of his bleſſings bee an heauy
conuiction of our vnthankefulneſſe for the ſame? Shal God
thus ſtriue to put vs in minde of his mercies? Shal he cauſe
vs to record them in bookes to poſterity? Shal he moue vs
to ſet a part a day for the memoriall thereof for euer? And
ſhall we not bee ſtirred vp by this meanes to cleaue vnto
our God and to root out the name of Amelecke from
vnder heauen? Who ſo is wiſe lette him vnderſtand
theſe things, to whom the arme of
the Lord hath reueald
them.
               FINISH
            
         
      
   