
      
         
            
            
            THE
CATHOLIKE
MODERATOR:
OR
A MODERATE
EXAMINATION
OF THE DOCTRINE
of the PROTESTANTS. Prouing against the too rigid CATHOLIKES
of these times, and against the Arguments especially, of
that Booke called, The Answer to the Catholike Apologie, That we,
who are members of the CATHOLIKE, APOSTOLIKE, & ROMAN
CHVRCH, ought not to condeme the PROTESTANTS for
HERETIKES, vntill further proofe be made. First written in French by a Catholike Gentleman,
and now faithfully translated.
            See the occasion of the name of HVGVENOTS,
after the Translaters Epistle.
            LONDON,
Printed for NATHANIEL BVTTER.
1623.
         
         
            
            
            THE TRANSLATER TO
the Christian Readers.
            AND TO ALL THOSE ESPECIALly,
whose hard hap it is, or may be, to be seduced
vnto Popery: That by the helpe of this Booke,
and their owne Prayers, they may be deliuered
from the the Euill, when the Priests and Iesuits
would Lead them into temptation.
            
               THere is a bold Nation of men (the Tempters
aboue mentioned I meane) slily of late
crept in amongst you (well-meaning and
abused people) whose enticements (as you
know too well) still begin with the Church;
saying you Protestants are direct Hereticks,
you haue no Church: Are you therefore reconciled to the
Church? Meaning all this time the Romane Church. Had
they fairely meant the Catholike Church, I know no Caluinist
that hath put this Article out of his Creed, I beleeue in the
holy Catholike Church. And to say, I beleeue: What else implies
it, but to beleeue himselfe to be of it; else, why his
Creed? That therefore you may make one Romanist to answer
all the rest; doe but turne him, that would seduce you,
vnto these two first Chapters; and he shall there finde, that
for those few points of Reformation, both in matter of Doctrine
and Ceremonie, wherein the Protestants haue iustly
dissented from the Papists; we can be no Heretiques. And
that their owne new Doctors, who boast so much of Antiquitie,
can no where shew our Doctrine to be sufficiently
condemned, before the time of that fifth Gospell of the Romanists,
               
the Councell of Trent I meane, which ended no more
than some 60 yeeres agoe; the third Chapter will euidently
shew them. And how incompetent a Iudge an Aduersarie is,
and how vnlawfull a Councell that of Trent was, the Instances
of the fourth and fifth Chapters will euince it. Lastly, that
we Protestants, hauing euer continued true members of the
true, holy, and catholique Church, doe not now need any
Reconciliation to theirs of Rome, the last Chapter will abundantly
demonstrate it. Which six Chapters being written by
a Gentleman, who euery where professes himselfe one of
theirs, if they would offer to shift off (as they haue euasions
enow) by saying that what is written in this Booke, is but
the opinion of one Doctor: Loe then, we haue not only the
Authors opinions, but the strength of his reasons to vrge
them withall. All which are so mannerly, so directly, and so
succinctly toucht vpon, and come off so handsomely, as no
man (in my opinion) hath yet said better, that purposed to
say so little.
            To giue you therefore the minde of the Authour in a
word: Nothing was here written, with any intention to
vrge vs Protestants, any whit to depart from our Right in
yeelding to a Reconciliation with them; but to perswade
them rather, to esteeme better of vs: and to demonstrate
withall, that if they will iudge right, they must needs thinke
well. And this is the purpose of the Translator also. To shew
you therefore to vnderstand all this Booke: If the Reader
shall sometimes feele, that this Author now and then giues
the Protestants a light fillip by the way; he shall obserue in
the conclusion, that it was to reach his owne Romanists, a
smarter blow; which is satisfaction enough. And that hee
giues vs any at all, let vs but consider, that the Author
though he were a moderate man, yet that he was withall a
Papist, and it will take away much of the scandall. Lastly,

which will giue vs as much aduantage as we can desire from
one man, which is to answer them by one of their owne; this
Gentleman the Author H. C. was too well knowne here in
England to haue continued a most zealous Roman Catholique
vntill his dying day, and yet neuerthelesse are all his
Reasons for Moderation, directed to the Papists, as if they
should first begin it; and all his conclusions directly for the
Protestants, as though we should still hold them. Nay and
which is somewhat more; whereas all this is with vs of England,
common to our Brethren the Protestants of France,
yet doth this Booke make more for vs at home, than it doth
for them, for whose sakes it was first written. For though we
haue with them entertained the points of Reformation; yet
haue we not so far receded from the more Primitiue Roman
Church (which he stands for) but that we still retaine more
of the necessarie Ceremonies, Solemnities, and Church Discipline,
than they of France haue done; witnesse his second
Chapter of Ceremonies; which is still for our aduantage.
            As therefore this little Booke hath beene twice already
printed in France, which is an Argument of the Protestants
good liking of it there; so hath it foure or fiue seuerall times,
both by Diuines and Gentlemen of our owne Religion, been
translated both into Latine and English, which is a demonstratiue
Reason to me, how much it hath beene lik'd and desired.
To saue therefore the labour of writing it out, which I
still obserued, as many desirous to doe as could get Copies
of it, I haue thought fit to let mine be published: desiring all
those that light vpon it, to be as impartiall and charitable, as
the Author himselfe wishes them; which if they be, I hope
well that the strictest need not be offended, and the wellminded
may reape much benefit by it. Which being my only
desire, I shall euer pray for.
         
         
            
            THE FIRST OCCASION
how the name of HVGVENOTS,
which our Author euery where vseth,
came first to be giuen to the
French PROTESTANTS.
            THere is euer some Salt as well as Gall in malice, and this
temper makes it sometimes bitterly witty; as may appeare
by this name of Huguenots, by which and no other, doe
the French Papists generally vouchsafe to call the Protestants. It
was taken vp about the yeere 1559. which was some foure or
fiue yeeres before Mr. Calvins death. Till which time they were
called Tourengeaux, of the Citie of Tours, where the Protestants
mostly vsed: But about that time, there hauing beene a
foolish opinion, of a Night-Spirits walking vp and downe the
streets, which they called King Hugon: This fancie made one of
the Citie Gates to be called King Hugons Gate; and the Protestants
being once obserued in the night to goe thorow that Gate
vnto their Assemblies and holy Exercises; were hereupon called
Huguenots. He that will see more of this Name, and the occasion
of it, may finde a handsome Discourse of it in Monsieur
Pasquiers Recherches, lib. 7. cap. 52. whither I refer you.
         
         
            
            TO
ALL THE KINGS
FAITHFVL SVBIECTS,
and principally to those Catholikes,
that are desirous of the quiet of the
Church and State.
            
               THERE are now thirty yeeres and more
(at seuerall times) since we haue had perpetuall
warres with the Huguenots, as with
Rebels and Heretikes; though we haue
perceiued of late, that our former opinion
was wrongfully conceiued against them: and we may
be also mistaken in the latter; and that time, which hath
made it appeare, that they are not Rebels, may discouer
likewise vnto vs that they are not Heretikes. But howsoeuer,
it were much to be wished in the meane time, that
we would entertaine a charitable conceit of them, till
there be more euidence giuen in against them.
            The bitter dissention in Religion, hath beene the
spring-head of all our miseries. That was it, which
brought them forth at first, and which yet nurseth them:
whence it is now come to passe, that those men who are

at this present, disturbers of the State, haue at the very
selfe-same time begun to raise tumults in the Realme,
and to reviue and exasperate the differences which we
haue in Religion: In such fashion, as that the practises of
the principall Leaguers, and the turbulent Sermons of
diuers Preachers (for I blame not all) haue beene (as it
were) Hippocrates twins, who went alwaies together,
laught alwaies together; and it may chance, that these
also may weepe together: and we haue seene the experience
of it, that the tongues of the one haue done more
mischiefe than the swords of the other.
            See the cause then, why in the beginning of these late
troubles, the Catholike Apologie hath laboured to qualifie
this heat, and to confute the slanders giuen out
against the Reformed Religion, and those of it. Which
Apologie hath beene in part refuted, but so coldly, that
no proofes which the Confuter produceth, could make
me see any reason, why we should so peremptorily condemne
the Huguenots for Heretikes, although differing
from vs, about the explication of some points of Religion.
Vpon which I was induced a yeere since & more,
to answer the Reasons aforesaid. But finding the Arguments
to be of great weight, I iudged it fitter to write a
iust Treatise thereof by it selfe, than to answer the obiections
hudled vp together by another man: which hath
caused mee also both to suppresse that which I had written
already, and to defer that which I purposed to write.
And longer I suppose I had deferred it, if these late Tragedies
acted in the murthers of our two last Kings,Henry 3. had
not put me in the conceit of it,Henry 4. how that these horrid
Acts sprung from the selfe-same fountaine, and that
only vpon this ground too, namely, That the Errours of

the Huguenots are so exceedingly enormous; they found
their Maximes, by which they perswade themselues;
That a man may take any course lawfull or vnlawfull,
to destroy them and their fauourers.
            Another motiue I also had, which induced me to
proceed in my purpose of writing. Which was the
consideration of the fortunate proceedings of our
late King HENRY (whom his enemies made to be
called, Great) all the time that he continued Protestant:
Then whose troubles we need seeke no further
example, to shew how God both dislikes mans bloudie
courses, and disposes also of his owne proceedings,
his owne way. For God neuer produces any
extraordinary euent, without some extraordinary
Designe. But how extraordinarily God in the beginning
fauoured his Maiestie, whiles he continued Protestant,
none knowes so well as his enemies, forasmuch
as God made vse of their courses, for his aduancement.
They conceited it, that by embroyling
France in Ciuill warres, to haue ruined him; and these
warres haue increased his honour and power. They,
impatient of delayes, thought presently by vniustifiable
practises, to haue vrged the late KingHenry 3. to haue
prosecuted him with more violence, than he had done
heretofore; and these plots of theirs, haue been both
the causes of the vtter ruine of his enemies, and of his
reconcilement to the King. Briefly, his enemies thrust
Armes into his hands for their owne destructions:
and those deuices by which they had thought to
haue chased him out of Guyen, haue brought him into
the heart of France; and by the selfe-same meanes
whereby they thought to take away his life, they haue

giuen him the Kingdome. May wee imagine that
God had no designe, in the bringing about of these
purposes? Or what else may wee gather out of all
this; but that God is angry, when we will not permit
him to dispose of his owne Church, his owne
way, but deuise to preuent him by our owne wisdomes?
For which respect, I protest before God, that
had I beene the sorest enemy that the King had had,
yet should I thinke that for no other reason God had
so many wayes fauoured him, than to punish vs, who
by vniustifiable practises out of an impatient zeale,
would haue rooted out the Reformed Religion,
though erroneous.
            Haply then it may fall out, that if wee alter our
courses, God will also change his. And as those designes
of ours, by which we verily thought to haue
aduanced our Religion haue hindred it: So God also
may turne the same meanes which we feared would
hinder our Religion, to the aduancement of it. In the
meane time let vs know thus much; That God neuer
blesses those mens courses, which thinke to anticipate
him through impatience. Let vs then haue patience
a while; and when wee shall perceiue the times of
peace to be fittest for our purposes, let vs (a Gods
name) offer the same conditions vnto the Huguenots,
which they propounded vnto vs before; which was,
to assemble the best learned men in both Religions,
to discusse friendly the points in controuersie; to the
end, that the quiet of the Common-wealth, may goe
along with that of the Church: which if the Huguenots
shall accept of, (as I make no doubt but they
will) I perswade my selfe, that there may be such a

course taken in the Conference, that discouery may
be made of many things, which haue beene concealed
hitherto from both of vs. Not that I imagine any
noueltie can be found out in Religion, (God forbid
that I should euer thinke so) but that the meaner
questions in controuersie, being reconciled, the impertinent
ones omitted, the greater may be insisted
vpon, to be cleared by more euident demonstrations.
            Nor can either partie (considering the points be
already sufficiently discussed) imagine that such a
conference would be vnprofitable; for although
there can hardly be found more solid Arguments,
than those wherewith we haue serued our selues heretofore;
yet is it one thing to proue, and another thing
to satisfie: now wee must not so much maintaine a
side, to vanquish; as to winne those that are in the
wrong. And thus much I dare say, and I will be able
to make good against any contradiction; that neither
partie, haue in any conference as yet taken that
course, which they ought and might haue followed,
for the satisfaction of the aduerse partie, and the clearing
of doubts.
            For mine owne part, though I be the meanest of a
Million, who haue embroyled themselues in the disputes
of the time, yet dare I vndertake to reduce the
points in controuersie to so short an issue, and to set
downe such a course for the handling thereof; that
more of the truth shall be discouered in this one conference,
than in all the other disputes, which haue
beene since Martin Luther first opposed himselfe
against the Pope. For both the issue shall bee so

drawne, and the meanes so disposed of; that the persons
of neither Religion (keeping themselues to
their owne proper Maximes) shall be able to reiect
them. I should be too impudent to giue it out, if I
were not well assured of my abilitie for the performance.
But I am acquainted well enough with the
euasions of either side, I know their fallacies, and I
haue also the Art to preuent them.
            But the time seemes not to be yet so fit, for wee
must haue our spirits quiet, as well as our State; and
aboue all, free from that same preiudication. For
if we Catholikes come to a Disputation, being confident
before hand, that the Huguenots are already
condemned for Heretikes: And they on the other
side, that they vnderstand the Scriptures better than
S. Austin, and that all is cleare on their side; to what
purpose serues such a Conference? The Priests and
Ministers may seeme as confident as they please, for
they are our Teachers; but we should not be so resolute,
for we are but Learners. The end which they
propose, is the Victorie; but the end which we seeke
for, is the Truth. Which if wee haue found, why
looke we further? But if we beleeue without searching,
we may very well be deceiued.
            The chiefe reason then, which induced me to reassume
my designe of writing in this point of Moderation,
was; that our spirits being something pacified,
wee might be the better prepared to a Conference,
and in that Conference make discouery of the
Truth; and by discouery of the Truth, establish
a Peace in the Church of God. But I suspecting mine
owne insufficiencie, and fearing withall to bestow

my labour in vaine: and on the other side, being
wondrously desirous to see an vnion in Religion, I
chose rather to hazard that paines which I had already
taken, in publishing that answer which I had
made before, than to lose a new.
            The reason then why I that am a Catholike, doe rather
blame the rigour of ours against the Huguenots,
than theirs against vs (both parties being faulty much
alike) is; because he that would reforme another, must
begin at himselfe.
            The importunitie and arrogancie of mine Aduersarie,
vrges me sometimes to write not so like a Catholike,
which I doe not purposely to confute the
Catholike Religion: but to shew only; That the errors
of the Huguenots are not so grosse, as our side perswades
themselues they are. And knowing also that
no one thing hath more suppressed the Truth, than
the meane esteeme that the one partie hath of the
others Arguments. Which (God knowes) is meerly
out of ignorance; forsomuch as the deeper learned
any man is, the more difficultie he finds in confuting
his Aduersarie. For it is most certaine, that Ignorance
engenders Vehemencie, and Vehemencie blinds vs from
discouering the Truth. For their ignorance that are
in the rights, makes those likewise the more vehement
that are in the errour; and the ignorance of
those that are in errour, blinds them the more.
            See then the true intent of this my Discourse:
wherein though I may perchance haue vsed some
Reasons, which in too rigorous a Iudgement, may
be esteemed with the most, in fauour of these new
opinions; yet is not my intent, with them to seduce

any man, or to turne them from the Faith of their
forefathers, but only to purge their spirits from preiudication
vntill further proofe be made. And if such
proofe be made (without which I conceiue no hope
of vnion in the Church) I adiure thee (beloued Reader,
of whether Religion soeuer thou beest) to come
with a spirit void of this preiudication: Such a spirit
I wish to thee, as I protest I my selfe haue; and I pray
God to confirme in all of vs. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            The Argument of the Booke.
            
               THe Catholique Apologie hath endeuoured to acquit
the Huguenots of heresie by two Reasons.
The first is, for that the Religion pretended to be
Reformed, is not hereticall of it selfe, for that
the substance of the Catholique Faith is receiued by the
Huguenots, and that the Ceremonies which they haue reiected,
were vnknowne to the ancient Church, of which
two points, viz. Doctrine and Ceremonies, all Religion is
composed. The second is, that their Religion hath not beene
as yet condemned by any lawfull Iudgement: because that before
the Councell of Trent, it was not condemned in any Generall
Councell, and that the Councell of Trent is neither
lawfull of itselfe, nor as yet approued of in France. Vpon
which consideration, albeit that the Huguenots had wandred
from the true faith, yet ought we not to proceed against
them, as against Heretiques, vntill they haue receiued an
arrest of condemnation from a generall Councell: no more
th
                  •
               n we can in iustice put a Malefactor to death, although he
be notoriously capable, vntill he be cast by the Iury, and hath
had his triall.
            The Author now of the Answer to this Apologie, in the second
part of his booke, from the fifth Chapter to the fifteenth,
trauailes hard to refute the foresaid Reasons: in the fifth
Chapter, he only propounds his Method; in the sixth, hee
would shew, that the Religion of the Huguenots is quite
another from that of the Catholiques; in the seuenth, that
the Ceremonies of the moderne Church of Rome were obserued
in the Primitiue Church; in the eight, that the Doctrine
pretended to be Reformed, stands condemned by ancient

Councels: in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. he defends
the Councell of Trent; whereof the 11, 12, and 13. are to
proue, that that Councell is absolutely lawfull, and the 9,
10, and 14. that it is receiued in France: after which method
I will also diuide my defence into these six Chapters.
            1. In my first, I will proue against the reasons of his sixt
Chapter, that the Catholiques and Huguenots thus farre
agree in Doctrine, that they are both of one and the same
Faith and Religion.
            2. In my second, against his seuenth Chapter, that neither
the Catholiques, nor the Huguenots, doe accord with
the Primitiue Church in the matter of Ceremonies: and that
for this reason the Huguenots are not to be condemned.
            3. In my third, against his eighth, that before the times
of the Councell of Trent, they stood not publikely and lawfully
condemned.
            4. In my fourth, against his 11, 12, and 13. Chapters,
that the Councell of Trent is not lawfull.
            5. In my fifth, against his 9, 10, and 14. Chapter, that it
is not receiued in France.
            
            6. In my sixth and last I will conclude, that the Huguenots
may be good right be still reputed for members of the
Catholique, Apostolique, and Roman Church.
         
      
      
         
            
            CHAP. 1.
            
               That the Catholikes and Huguenots thus farre forth
agree in Doctrine, that they are both of the same
Faith and Religion.
            
            
               IT is most cleare, that men of the same
Church and Religion, may differ neuerthelesse
about some opinions in Diuinitie.
Austen accords not to Hierome,
nor Epiphanius to Chrysostome,
nor Cyprian to Cornelius, nor Irenaeus
to Victor, and questionlesse one of
them was in the errour; yet were they
all Doctors, approued by the Church, and Saints euery one
of them. Euery errour doth not separate a man from the
Church, nor should we regard so much the number, as the
qualitie of them. Arrius accorded with the Catholikes in all
points but one; insomuch as the change of a word, yea of one
bare letter, would haue compounded the controuersie;
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . and
yet was he the greatest Heretike, that euer the Church was
troubled with. Origen, on the other side, dissented in infinite
Tenents, from the other old Doctors, and was yet neuerthelesse
esteemed a member of the Church.
            To see then, whether the Huguenots be of another Religion
than wee, neither their errors, nor their numbers
is the thing which is so much to be regarded, but the
nature of them only is it: That is to say; what Errors are

to be reputed for Heresies, and whether theirs be of that
nature.
            There be two things which (according to the opinion of
the Catholikes) make Errors to proue Heresies. The one,
when the Errour is of it selfe so enormous, that he is at all
times an Heretike that holds it. So that euen before the Nicene
Councell had decided it, Ebion, Paulus Samosetanus, and
Arrius stood then as Heretikes, for that they denied the eternall
Diuinitie of the Sonne of God.
            The second thing which (according to our opinion) makes
an Errour to become an Heresie, is; when any man maintains
an opinion in point of Doctrine, contrary to the Decrees of a
Generall Councell. So then, the Heresie lies not so much in
the mischieuousnesse of the opinion, as in the resistance made
against the ordinance of the Church. For example: The
opinion of S. Cyprian touching Rebaptization, was not Heresie
in him, because there was not as then any Decree of Councell
made against it: But since that (say we) this opinion is
condemned legally, it were flat Heresie in any other that
should hold it. Of this second Species of Heresie, I will intreat
in my third Chapter: In this, only of the former: which
is; Whether the errors of the Huguenots be in themselues so
enormous, that they destroy the very foundation of Faith, and
by consequence keepe them off, from being of the same Religion
with vs.
            Let vs see then,The first Reason. Pag. 20. how our Antagonist takes vpon him to
proue the contrary. In the first place (saith he) both parties, as
well the Catholikes as their Aduersaries, repute one another for
Heretikes. I answer, that I finde no impossibilitie, why they
may not be both deceiued. For two brothers being in choler,
may well renounce one another; and yet they leaue not
for all that to continue true brothers alwaies. Cyrill and Theodoret
accused one another for Heretiques, and yet neither of
them was so. So that this reason is only drawne from the
passion of men, when Reason hath abandoned them.
            But how doth he proue,Pag. 21. that the Catholikes repute the Huguenots
for Heretikes. The Catholike Church (saith he) hath by

the Councell of Trent, condemned diuers of the Lutheran opinions.
I answer (according to my first distinction) that it is one
thing to returne an opinion for an heresie by condemnation;
and another thing to repute it so, of its owne nature. Now
whether or no the Huguenots be hereticks by condemnation,
we will argue it hereafter in our third, fourth, and fifth Chapters.
But here we dispute only of the nature of their errour;
wherein his proofes are nothing to his purpose. But (saith
he) At Rome euerie holy Thursday the Pope pronounces them
excommunicate,
               Pag. 21. 
               and prohibits all Chatholikes to reade their
Bookes. In like manner, the same day also he excommunicats
all sinners; of whom hee dares not denie but that many
are of the Church; else should he himselfe be condemned
for an hereticke by the Councell of Constance, which gaue
sentence against Iohn Huz: That the Church consists as well
of the bad, as of the good. And whereas the Huguenots
Bookes be prohibited, so are also the Bookes of Machiauel,
Aretine, and diuers other Catholikes.
            
            Let vs next see the opinion which the Huguenots haue of
the Catholike Doctrine.Pag. 21. 
               Caluine (saith he) writes that the
principall points of Doctrine in the Church of Rome, are almost
vtterly abolished, and the right vse of the Sacraments in many
fashions corrupted. He needs but little explication; the words
themselues answer him. Caluin saies not, that the Sacraments
are vtterly taken away, but the right vse of them, many waies
corrupted: Nor, that the principall points of Religion are
vtterly destroied, but almost abolished. A man may be almost
kild, and yet liue.
            Secondly, to proue how their Religion differs from ours,The second Reason.
he produces the controuersies of Originall sinne, Free-will,
Iustification, Merits, and diuers others which he iudges of
most consequence. It is the greatest pittie in the world to
heare how the most of the Preachers in both Religions commonly
fight with their owne shadowes, not vnderstanding
what it is that their aduersarie holds; which comes only of
the subtleties of words inuented by the Deuill to disturbe the
Peace of the Church. One partie vnderstanding the word

Iustification in one sense, and another in another; one, Faith
one way, and another in another; one, Grace in one fashion,
another after another, and so of the rest: that which we say
being true, in our acception of the word, and that which they
say being likewise true, as they take it. So, that if the desire
of contention were once taken away, we should soone finde,
that the most of these disputes wherewith peoples eares are
filled, are onely the subtelties of the Schoole, vpon the Etimologies
and Definitions of words only. Whence it came to
passe, that in the conference at Regenspurg, the Catholikes and
the Protestants fell to some agreement in the question of Originall
sinne, of Predestination, Free-will, and diuers other
points,Lindanus in prefat. in Lib. de querela pacis. which is also confessed by Bishop Lindanus one of the
tartest enemies that the Huguenots euer had. Neue
                  •
               thelesse the
Authour of this answer is so ill aduised, as to chuse out these
questions principally, to shew the differences betweene them
and vs.
            For mine owne part, I will not take vpon me to reconcile
the said questions, neither know I well (to confesse mine
owne ignorance freely) whether it be possible to be done or
no: only thus much I assure my selfe, that the difference is not
so great, as it is iudged to be. Nor will I too exactly search out
the point in controuersie, because I well hope some other
man may more happily performe it hereafter. Only I will
discourse vpon the said questions as they are commonly vnderstood
by the best Doctors in each Religion. In which
sense I affirme (for ought that I haue yet seene) that the errours
of the Huguenots are not so grosse, as that they impeach
their being members of the Catholike Church. To cleere
which point, I will reduce these questions to these foure
heads. 1. The Scripture. 2. Iustification. 3. Prayer. 4. The
Sacraments.
            
            
                Concerning the Scripture,Scripture. Pag. 23. he chargeth the Huguenots only
with one errour, which is, that they reiect the Bookes of Tebit,
Iudith, the Machabees, and the rest which they call Apocryphall,
notwithstanding that they were approued for Canonicall
by the Councell of Trent.
            
            
               To which I answer: That the Huguenots doe not altogether
reiect them, but esteeme of them as of holy writings, and
full of pietie, of greater authoritie than any other booke; only
they doe not state them in the same ranke with the other
bookes, which are found written in the holy tongue. And
this it seemes to me,Tom. 1. Contr. 1. l. cap. 4. that Bellarmine after a sort accords vnto:
for that in his diuision of the Bookes of the Old Testament,
he makes two Classes. In the first hee rankes the bookes receiued
by the Huguenots: And those which be called Apocryphall,
in the second. But what though the opinion of the
Huguenots bee in this point condemned by the Councell of
Trent, yet is the Councell of Laodicea cleere on their sides:
And so are also Hierome, Origen, & Nicholaus Lyra himselfe,
Cardinall Caietane, and many other pillars of the Roman
Church. So that I would faine know, if that this errour of the
Huguenots be so enormous, as that for this cause they must
necessarily be Heretiques; wherefore then did it not as well
hinder Hierome from being a Saint, and Cardinall Caietane
from being a Catholike.
            
            Now vnder the title of Iustification,Iustification. I cōprehend al the differences 
mentioned in the answer, which were determined in
the sixth Session of the Councell of Trent, touching 1. The
Cause; 2. The Matter; 3. The Instrument; 4. And the Effects
of our Iustification. By the Source or principall Cause, I meane,
That disposition by which our Nature (as we Catholikes
vse to say) being both preuented and accompanied by the
grace of God, prepares it selfe to Iustification; that is to say,
To the operation of the Free-will, which remained in man
after his Fall.Free-will. Pag. 24. For the compounding of this difference; mans
Free-will must be considered in these three estates; Before
the Fall of Adam, after the Fall, and in the time of his regeneration,
after he was againe restored. Wherein there is
contained whatsoeuer is necessary for a Christian to beleeue;
namely, That man before the Fall of Adam had Free-will
both to good and euill; And that by his Fall he lost the libertie
to doe good: And that by Grace in his Regeneration he
againe recouered it. Thus farre the Catholikes and the Huguenots
               
are agreed: The imaginarie controuersie then lies only
in the manner how this will is enfranchised or made free.
The Huguenots auerring, That tis the Grace of God, which
sets it at libertie by giuing it new powers, whereof it was altogether
destitute before. The Catholikes likewise auerring,
that the grace of God hath set it at libertie, by loosing the
chaines wherewith it was before so captiuated, that it could
not set a worke the powers that it had. See here then the true
difference betweene them in this point, wherein though the
Huguenots may bee deceiued, yet is their errour nothing so
dangerous, as to ouerthrow the foundation of Faith. In the
discussing of which point, we are principally to regard two
things: The Iustice of God in punishing Adams sinne by
this captiuitie; and his Mercy againe in freeing vs. Now if
the Huguenots be in the wrong, their errour is onely in augmenting
the Iustice and Mercie of God, by affirming, That
the freedome of our wills, is not onely bound, but slaine (as
it were.) Death now is a more grieuous punishment, than
imprisonment, and it is a greater mercie to giue life to the
will, than libertie. But what need the common people
breake their braines, about these Metaphors of binding and
killing, which they can neuer comprehend? Tis sufficient
for them to know, that nothing can be done without Gods
good grace, and to say all with Saint Austen, To doe freely,
comes from the Nature of man; to doe well, from Grace; but to
doe euill, from our corrupt Nature. Which saying, as it containes
the whole doctrine of Free-will, so is it consented vnto,
as well by the Catholikes as the Huguenots.
            
            The second thing which I obserued in Iustification, is the
Matter, that is to say; Whether that righteousnesse, which is
infused into vs by Grace, or that of Christ imputed vnto vs
by Faith, be it, by vertue whereof we be iustified before God.
And this question, though it be all one with that of Iustification,
yet our aduersarie, thereby to multiply the number of
his controuersies, makes two of them, so desirous hee is of
contention. Concerning which point, the Huguenots are in
no error in the ground and substance of the question; so that

though they may be thought to differ neuer so much from
vs in the circumstances, yet may they for al that be very good
Catholikes. For example; A tree which hath the Root, Stocke
& many Armes of it sound, may be a good tree though some
one bough be crazed: But the Catholikes and the Huguenots
are agreed vpon the Root of the question, that is to say, That
there are two things necessary: That we be first quit of our
Sinnes, and that wee be next indued with Righteousnesse; to
put off our old garments, and re-invest our selues with new.
            1. Vpon the first, the Catholikes and the Huguenots are
agreed; namely, That we are pardoned of our sinnes, and
redeemed from hell, meerely by the blood of Iesus Christ.
            2. Touching the second, both sides hold alike; That to
be admitted entrance into heauen, we haue need of Righteousnesse,
and that this Righteousnesse comes from Christ.
            Now the Righteousnesse which is of Christ, is either Inherent
in him, & reputed ours, or Inherent in vs, & proceeding
from him; being by his grace infused into our hearts; which
Act the Huguenots call Sanctification: Finally, the Huguenots
confesse as well as the Catholikes, that there be indeed
both these kindes of Righteousnesses, onely they differ vpon
this, whether the Righteousnesse Inherent in Christ and
imputed to vs, or that Inherent in vs, and proceeding from
him, be it; by vertue whereof wee become iustified in the
sight of God. And what is it to vs, whether another man
paies our debts for vs, or giues vs money to pay it our selues?
So that (in a manner) they both acknowledge the selfe same
Root, the same Stocke, and the same Armes of this question,
onely they cannot agree vpon the smaller Branches which
grow out of these Armes. Nay more; they both acknowledge
the same Branches too, but they cannot agree, vpon
which of them they should roost. For the Huguenots confesse,
that whosoeuer are saued, are also first sanctified; that is to
say, That they haue that kinde of Righteousnesse, which the
Catholikes call Inherent or Secondarie Righteousnesse. But
they say, that they dare not build vpon it, but onely
vpon that Righteousnesse, which being inherent in

Christ, is by Faith imputed to them. Seeing then, that this
Righteousnesse of Christ is by generall consent acknowledged
to bee most perfect; though there may perhaps bee
thought to be some errour in the Huguenots doctrine, yet no
danger can come of it. Like as when a man laies hold on a
strong bough, he may very well be deceiued in fearing another
may be too weake; yet without doubt he cannot fall, so
long as he embraces that which cannot breake.
            Next followes the Instrument by which we imbrace this
Righteousnesse,The Coniunction of Faith & Grace. p. 23. and that is Faith; about the nature whereof
the Huguenots seeme to him, to hold another error; For that,
They deny (saies he) that Grace may bee lost, without the losse
of Faith. Which is but a meere cauill of his, vpon the double
signification of the word Faith. For, if we affirme, That Faith
is nothing else, but to beleeue that God is so and so, and that
he hath done such and such things, and to be briefe, that all
the Christian doctrine is most true; the Huguenots will say
(with Saint Iames) That the deuills also beleeue as much,
and that the deuills haue Faith, though without Grace. So
that the Huguenots mistake, is nothing but in the word, for
that they teach, That the Faith of that man, which is deuoid
of Grace and Charitie, merits not the honourable title of a
Iustifying Faith; and that such a Faith as this, is but the Instrument
onely by which we are iustified, which is euer accompanied
with Grace, and followed by good Workes. We
affirme likewise; That a Faith without Charitie, is a Faith
without Forme; wherefore, since the Forme is it, which giues
the Being to the thing, it must needs follow; That a perfect
Faith can haue no Being, without Charitie: which Tenet
is consented vnto, both by the Huguenots and the Catholikes
themselues: onely we differ in termes: the Huguenots calling
Faith without Charity, an Historicall or dead Faith; and we,
a Faith without Forme. O my God, what a pittie it is, to behold
the simplicitie of our Christian Faith, thus puzled about
these quiddities.
            There remaines now the Effects of our Iustification, Good
Workes:Merit of Workes. By which euen we Catholikes say, That a man is

not made Iust, but that being iustified before, he increases in
Righteousnesse: That is; of a Iust man, hee becomes more
Iust; and being regenerate & in the state of Grace, He may (as
our Aduersarie saies) fulfill the Law in such a sort, that he may
by it truly and properly merit eternall life. But as for the fulfilling
of the Law, seeing the Huguenots doe their best to performe
it, although they may be thought to erre, in confessing
they cannot doe it, yet hath our Sauiour himselfe promised
free pardon for it, in the Parable of the Sonne, who refused to
doe his Fathers will, and yet did it.
            To returne then to Merits by Workes, the more accurate
sort of Catholikes peremptorily deny, that they are at all meritorious,
vnlesse they be dyed in the blood of Christ. And I
assure my selfe, that not one amongst ten thousand Catholikes,
vnderstands sufficiently the meaning of this phrase; Workes
dyed in the blood of Christ: but simply and without other addition
they will say, That they are in good hope to merit heauen
by their Workes. So that (we see) there be three seuerall
opinions touching this question.
            The first is of the vulgar Catholikes, who are more in number 
a thousand times, and who simply affirme; That they are
indeed able to merit eternall life by their Good Workes.
            The second is of the Huguenots; who absolutely deny,
That Good Workes doe merit at all: only (say they) God out
of his pure Grace, for the Loue of his Sonne, grants them a
recompence.
            The third is the opinion of the Iesuites and the learned 
               Catholikes, who deny, that any kinde of Workes doe of
themselues merit, but such onely (as I said) as are dyed in
the blood of Chr
                  •
               st. Which opinion accords much better
with the Huguenots doctrine, then that of the vulgar Catholikes:
for a thing dyed, is not altered in substance, as Copper
though gilded, yet continues Copper still: the tincture and
the gilding making the thing onely fairer to the eye. And
so is it with our Workes, which being by nature corrupt, remaine
corrupt still, though dyed in the blood of Christ;
howbeit that the tincture and gilding, makes them more

pleasing vnto God, and for the loue which hee beares to
Christs blood, to bee rewarded. And if peraduenture they
make conscience of vsing the word Merit, let vs hearken to
S. Bernard: A man cannot (saith he) merit eternall life,
               Serm. 1. de anuntiatione Beatae Virginis. 
               by any
good works whatsoeuer. And yet I trow, that S. Bernard was
in this no Huguenot. For I well know, that a Iesuite with some
neat distinction, can make him speake like a Catholike, whatsoeuer
his meaning was. Let vs then but doe the Huguenots
the like courtesie, and make the same distinction in the interpretation
of their Tenent, as we would doe in the explication
of S. Bernards, and in this point they will proue as good Catholikes
as S. Bernard, or our selues.
            
                The fourth point is Prayer:Prayer. Pag. 26. to wit, whether we ought to
inuoke the Saints or not. The difference betwixt vs lies in
two points: First, whether we ought to direct our prayers vnto
them; the second, whether they pray for vs.
            For the first this I say; That the Catholikes themselues make
two extremities: to wit, in the not inuoking them, as the Huguenots
doe; and in honouring them too much; which is to
say, in attributing to them that honour, which is due only
vnto God, which the Schoolemen call Latria; which whosoeuer
does, they themselues hold him for an Idolater. Now the
poore people which vnderstand not the Greeke, nor what
Latria meanes, nor comprehends any other mediocritie, than
to adore right downe, or not to adore at all; goes to it bonafide,
and with as much deuotion, adore our Lady and the other
Saints, as they doe God himselfe; in such fashion, as that very
hardly (euen in the iudgement of Catholikes) can the Catholikes
themselues herein auoid Idolatry.
            As for the other extremitie, those Catholikes that maintaine
Inuocation of Saints, teach only thus much: That it is lawfull
to inuoke them, and not vnlawfull, not to inuoke them. So
that there can come no great danger of it, in following the Catholikes
doctrine if true, nor in following the Huguenots
though erroneous. The Huguenots say furthermore, that we
ought to honour them; which we may very well doe without
inuoking them. As a Subiect may well honour his Soueraigne

being absent, though he neuer presented any petition
to him in all his life.
            As for the second point; to wit, whether they pray for vs
or not: I affirme that there be Huguenots, that will confesse
that they doe; neither doth Caluin himselfe deny it: only he
saith, that he troubles not himselfe greatly, to know whether
they doe or no. But should any of them denie it; where is the
danger? Bellarmine that great Master of Controuersies affirms,Tom. 1. Contr. 6. lib. 3. cap. 15.
That the soules in Heauen, doe pray for the soules in Purgatory,
and they in Purgatory, for those on earth. And yet notwithstanding
confesseth, that Dominicus à Soto denieth the
first, and S. Thomas Aquinas the second. Wherefore seeing that
Purgatory is more beneficiall to the Pope than Paradice, I
can perceiue no reason wherefore the Huguentos should rather
be Heretiques for disagreeing with the Catholikes about the
Intercession of the Saints in Heauen, than the Catholikes are
for differing amongst themselues about the Intercession both
of the soules, and for the soules in Purgatory.
            The last point wherein the Huguenots are departed from 
the Roman faith is, touching the Sacraments; wherein the
number,The Sacraments and their number. Pag. 25. nature, and particular Sacraments are to be considered
of. And they first miscount themselues in the number,
reckoning but two, whereas the Councell of Trent hath concluded
it, that there are seuen. Which obiection of his is but
friuolous; insomuch as the difference lies more in the words,
than in the thing. For taking the word Sacrament properly,
S. Austin saith, that there be but two, that is to say, Baptisme,
& the Eucharist. Further, it is an ordinarie phrase amongst vs
Catholikes to say, That all the Sacraments issued out of our Sauiours
side: whereas there issued nothing frō thence saue water
and bloud, which according as Chrysostome, Cyril, and other
Ancients interpret it, represent the two Sacraments: that is,
Baptisme by the water, and the Cup of the Lords Supper, by
the bloud. To which our Catholike Doctors giue no other answer
than this: That the two Sacraments haue some kinde of
dignity aboue the rest; which comes to no more than to say,
that there be two principall Sacraments, and fiue more, inferiour
to those two. Which is all one with the Huguenots opinion,

though in diuers termes. They say that there be but
two properly; we say that there be but two principally: We
againe, that there be fiue more of an inferiour order; they
confesse that there may be more, if we meane of Sacraments
in the generall signification.
            For Caluin yeelds, that Order is a Sacrament, but not common
to all men, nor will our Catholike Doctors say otherwise.
Againe, they will confesse with S. Paul, that Mariage
is also a Sacrament, taking it in that generall signification
wherein the Ancients haue translated the Greeke word.
Briefely, they will yeeld that there be seuen, but not barely
seuen. And in truth there was none of the Ancient Fathers,
that euer light vpon this number of seuen. So that though
the Huguenots cannot so euenly iumpe vpon the number, seeing
the Primitiue Church could not doe it; wee may perchance
condemne them of ignorance in Arithmeticke, but
their errour in Theologie cannot be so great.
            But he may argue, that they are mistaken in the very nature
of the Sacraments;The difference betwixt our Sacraments, and those of the old Law. Pag. 26. because they deny them to be distinguished
in force and vertue, from the Sacraments of the old Law,
or that they confer grace. I answer: That this is a meere slander;
for the Huguenots doe distinguish them from the Sacraments
of the old Testament; and doe affirme, that they doe
also confer grace. What would you desire more of them? But
not (saith he) ex opere operato. The difference then is not in
the matter, whether our Sacraments confer more grace, or are
of more efficacie, than those of the old Law, but in the manner
only, by what meanes this grace is conferred. As for the manner,
we should not me thinks too narrowly prie into it, as Bellarmine
very sagely aduiseth vs.Tom. 2. contr. 1. lib. 2. cap. 1. 
               Like as in Christs miracles
(saith he) the parties that were healed, needed not to inquire in
what manner the garment of Christ did cure them, it being sufficient
to them to beleeue only, that the touch of it wrought the
cure: iust so is it not necessarie (saith he) that the Ministers or
the Receiuers of the Sacraments should be curious to know, in
what manner they become the causes of our Iustification.
            
            We come next to the particular Sacraments, whereof hee
makes mention but of three only: That is to say, Baptisme,The efficacie of Baptisme. Pag. 23.
               
the Sacrament of the Altar, and Penance. Touching Baptisme,
they affirme, saith he, That Originall sin sticks so close to man, that
neither by Baptisme, nor any other remedie, can it be gotten off. I
answer: That euen the Huguenots confesse as freely as the Catholikes,
that a man is washed from Originall sinne by Baptisme,
which is enough for a Christian to beleeue in this point: so that
the difference lies meerely in the nicity of the word, whether it
should rightliest be called Sinne, or no Sinne: The Catholikes
holding, that the Sinne is so farre remitted, that the concupiscence
which remaines, ought not to be called Sinne: The Huguenots
affirming, that the remaining Concupiscence may very
well be called Sinne, although they herein consent to the Catholikes,
That a man is so clearely absolued and discharged of it, that
it is not reputed as a Sinne. For which cause in no other sense
doe they deny the grace receiued in Baptisme, though they still
esteeme themselues sinners altogether, than the Debtor doth his
Creditors mercy; who confessing that he hath receiued the fauour
of him, to haue his debts forgiuen, doth neuerthelesse acknowledge
himselfe his debtor. Which way soeuer it be taken,
the sinner is pardoned, and the debtor discharged, and what need
haue we to desire more?
            Hee may say perchance againe:Of Infants dying without Baptisme. That the Huguenots erre not
so much in acknowledging the benefits receiued in Baptisme,
because they are not so well aware of the danger that followes the
want of it: For they affirme (saith he) that the children of Christians
may be esteemed righteous, and haue admittance into the kingdome
of heauen without Baptisme, notwithstanding that Iesus Christ
hath said, That whosoeuer is not borne againe of water and of the
Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen: I answer:
that the Huguenots affirme not, that euery childe borne of Christian
Parents dying without Baptisme is saued, but those only
whom God in his eternall counsell hath elected. So that the question
is not so much about Baptisme, as about Gods electiō: wherin
there can be no danger, to confesse our ignorance, referring still
Gods owne decrees to his owne good pleasure, as the Huguenots
doe. For they instance not in what children are elected, but forbeare
to presse into Gods cabinet, and out of that to pronounce,
that such and such children shall be saued.
            
               And if he replies againe, That the Election of God is neuer destitute
of these secondarie meanes, and that Baptisme is the means,
by which he saues those that are elected; and that it is a most manifest
signe, that those who are depriued of this Baptisme, are also
depriued of that election: I answer; That there be Catholikes,
who teach, that a man may be saued without these secondarie
meanes. S. Damascene, S. Brigid, and some other Catholikes doe
hold, that the Emperour Trajanes soule was deliuered out of Hell
by the prayers of S. Gregory, notwithstanding that he died a Painim,
and without Baptisme. If they then be not Heretiques, that
teach the mercy of God to be so great, that he saued one who had
sinned actually, notwithstanding that he died without Faith, and
without Baptisme; why should it be accounted Heresie, to say,
that he sometimes saues little Innocents, who neuer had more
than Originall Sin? For it is a more extraordinary thing, to draw
one out of Hell, than to keepe one from going thither. And what
fauour God had shewen to one, he may likewise shew to many.
            As for that text of S. Iohn, Regenerate of water and of the Holy
Ghost, it is to shew; that the ordinary meanes vnto saluation, is to
conioyne the outward signe, to the inward grace, according to S.
Pauls saying, That with the heart man belieues vnto righteousnes, & with the tongue he confesses to saluation; which shewes thus much;
that ordinarily the outward cōfessiō goes with the inward affection:
nor can it be inferred out of the former text, That faith can neuer
be without the confessiō of the mouth, no more than it can by
the other, that Grace cannot be without the washing of the body.
Finding now no great matter in the Huguenots Doctrine blameworthy
about the Baptisme of Christ;The Baptisme of Iohn.
                he descends to the Baptisme
of Iohn: which in the Huguenots opinion differs not at all
from that of Christ. To which I answer; That all the Huguenots
hold not this opinion: Secondly, that this difference is of no such
great importance, because that they that hold it, doe it not to derogat
from the Baptisme of Christ; for that they esteeme it not
Iohns Baptisme, but Christs, administred by Iohn, before Christs
declaring of himselfe, as it was by the Apostles afterwards. Finally,
all this dispute is not about Christs Baptisme which the people
receiue, but about Iohns, which they receiue not; and consequently
it matters not much, to vnderstand the force & efficacie of it.
            
               In the next place followes the Sacrament of the Altar,Transubstantiation. Pag. 26. which
comprehends two differences propounded in the answer. Which
be, Christs presence in it; and the Sacrifice of the Masse. Vpon
the first the Huguenots are accorded with the Catholikes in the
thing it selfe; that is, That our Sauiour is truly present in the holy
Sacrament, and that we doe eat his body, and drinke his blood.
The difference only lies in the manner, how he is present, & how
we eat and drinke him. Which errour cannot touch the foundation
of Faith, for as much as, according to our Catholike Doctors
opinion, it was left free for euerie man, by the space of 1000
yeeres after Christs death, to beleeue this presence of his, in what
manner they thought best, prouided that they beleeue it at all.
Whence it is manifest, that it is but the Huguenots ill luck to liue
in such a rigorous age of the Church, otherwise they should not
for this haue beene heretickes. For diuers of the ancient Fathers
were infected with this errour.Theod. Dialog. Gelasius lib. de duabus naturis. 
               Theodoret, yea and Gelasius too,
who was also Pope, haue written in expresse words, That euen after
the Consecration of these holy Mysteries, the very nature and
substance of the bread remained still. True it is that the Huguenots
may well be shent for reuiuing of this errour, when they see
that the Church of Rome, and which is more, the Pope himselfe
hath condemned it; neuerthelesse seeing that Gelasius, who was
likewise a Pope, held the verie same error; we Catholikes should
doe well to qualifie it all we can, for the reputation of the Sea
Apostolique.
            
            Now for the Sacrifice of the Masse,The Sacrifice of the Masse. Pag. 26. they both confesse with St.
Paul, that there is but one Sacrifice for sinne, namely, that one of
Iesus Christ vpon the Crosse; in such sort, that the Catholikes affirme
not, that they make any new Oblation, but only represent
that former one, so oftentimes ouer, as they celebrate the Eucharist,
in which Christ is continually offered vp. But for as much as
St. Paul teaches,Heb. 7. 10. 
               That there is not only but one Sacrifice, but also
that Iesus Christ is but once offered: this Doctrine of ours had
neede be verie subtilly interpreted, which no man in my iudgement
could finelier doe then St. Thomas Aquinas, who saith,Thomas part. quest. 83. Artic. 1. 
               That
this Sacrament is named an Immolation of Christ, in two regards,
the first, for that (as St. Austin saith) Signes are called by the names
of the things whereof they be Signes: the second, for that by vertue

of this Sacrament, we are made partakers of the death of Iesus Christ.
Well, let vs see then how far the Huguenots accord with St. Thomas
in these two manners of the offering vp of Christ Iesus. For
the first, seeing that it is collected out of St. Austen, let vs heare
him in his owne words.Aug. ad Bonifacium, epist. 23. 
               He falsifies not (saith he) who saies that
Iesus Christ is offered vp euerie day, for if the Sacraments had not a
kind of resemblance of the things whereof they be Sacraments, they
could not be Sacraments at all; and by reason of this resemblance,
they ordinarily take the names of the things themselues. According
to which interpretation the Huguenots will also say, that Christ is
offered vp in the Sacrament, for as much as the Sacraments haue
the name of the things which they signifie. And seeing that the
Eucharist signifies the death of Christ, a man may well giue the
same tearme to the Eucharist, which he does to his death. And
for as much as he was offered vp by his death, the Huguenots will
confesse likewise, that he is also offered vp in the Eucharist, by
reason (as St. Austen saith) of this resemblance betweene them.
            Concerning the second respect, for which S. Thomas saies, that
the Eucharist is called the Immolation of Iesus Christ, that is, for
that in the Sacrament we are made partakers of the death of Iesus
Christ; the Huguenots will also agree thereunto. For it is their
common phrase of speech to say, that in this Supper they are
made partakers of the death and passion of Iesus Christ. Now if
there be any third way of offering, questionlesse it is no matter of
any great importance; for that S. Thomas was so good a Catholike,
and so subtle a Logician, and aboue all, so experienced in the distinctions
and other stratagems of the Schoole, would neuer haue
made mention barely of two manners of offerings, had there been
any third of any consequence.
            The last Sacrament which he instances in, is Penance,
               Penance. Pag 26. wherein
the Author of the answer obserues no difference, but onely names
it in that fashion, that I cannot see what fault hee findes in the
Huguenots doctrine. But to picke out his meaning, I trow, that
the difference lies principally in two points: That is to say, Whether
this Penance be well called a Sacrament, or not; and secondly,
What be the parts of it. For the first point, of the title of Sacrament;
It is but a wrangling about the word, as I haue shewed
before, when I discourst of the number of the Sacraments. As for

the parts; Namely, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, if that
he blames the Huguenots for not holding them properly parts
thereof; I answer him, That neither doe all Catholikes hold
them so: For Durandus makes but two parts, Confession and Absolution,
and Scotus saies, that there is but one, which is Absolution.
            
            But if the question be whether these three things be requisite
or not, the Huguenots will also say that they are; to wit, that it is
necessary for a Penitent to haue Contrition and sorrow of heart,
to confesse and acknowledge our sins vnto God, nay, and that it is
profitable also to confesse them to the Pastors of the Church, but
not so absolutely necessarie: because (according to the iudgment
of the learned Catholikes) this Auricular Confession was neuer instituted
by God,In Annotat. ad lib. Tertull. de poenitent. a. nor yet of a long time practised in the Church;
as Beatus Rhenanus, who was himselfe a Catholike, hath very well
obserued.
            Finally, as for Satisfaction, it is to be considered either in this
life, or in the life to come in Purgatory. That in this life, the Huguenots
approue of, and teach it to bee most necessary to Saluation,
to giue satisfaction to men whom we haue any way offended,
and in regard of our sins against God, to walke in newnesse of life.
Moreouer, they confesse that God punisheth men in this life by
temporall afflictions, yea, euen those whose sins are pardoned.
            Tis true indeed,Purgatorie, Pag 26. that they deny any satisfaction or punishment
to be in Purgatory after death for sinne: but herein their error
cannot be great;Lib. 21. de Civ. Dei, cap. 26. first because S. Austen puts it down no otherwise
than as a thing probable and not necessary, saying no more, but,
It may be that it is true. And secondly, because that neither can the
Catholikes agree vpon it amongst themselues; some of them placing
Pargatory here vpon earth, others vnder it; some neither
aboue, nor below, but in the Aire. Some affirme, that all the Elect
shall goe thither, yea the Apostles and Martyrs themselues: others
thrust in those only, who haue not in this life giuen full satisfactiō
for their sins. And for the fire, some would haue it a Materiall fire;
some, fire and water; others, neither of both. Lastly, some there be
that teach, that the soules are there tormented by Deuils; others, by
Angels, others by neither of both. How then I pray is this questiō
likely to be so necessary, about wch there is so much vncertainty,

that we neither know (as I haue shewed) who they be that goe
thither, nor where it is, nor by whom they are to be tormented,
nor what they are to suffer. The difference then betwixt the Catholikes
and the Huguenots, is but this; That the Huguenots beleeue
it not at all, and the Catholikes know not what they beleeue.
            See here in briefe the Huguenots opinions vpon the points before
mentioned, by which we may perceiue their errours not to
be in the substance of Faith, and doe not therefore hinder them
from being of the Church and Catholike Religion. For euery errour
in Theologie doth not separate a man from the Church. S.
Cyprian was an Anabaptist in the point of Rebaptization, and yet
was he a Martyr. S. Hierome (as I said before) held those bookes
of Scripture for Apocryphall, which the Councell of Trent hath
since concluded to be Canonicall, and yet remaines hee still Canonized
for a Saint. Tertullian one of the ancient Fathers fell to
be a Montanist: And Origen alone held as many errours, as all
the Huguenots together; yet was he one of the most famous Doctors
of the whole Church. And to come neerer to our times; In
how many questions of Diuinitie did Scotus and Thomas Aquinas
differ, the two prime pillars of Schoole-Diuinitie? Melchior
Canus and Bellarmine accuse Caietane of diuers errors, who for
all that remaines one of the venerable Colledge of Cardinals.
The Dominicans and Franciscans could neuer yet agree about our
Ladies conception, yet be both of them held for very good Catholikes.
So that, as I said, the Huguenots may very safely be accounted
good Catholikes, so long as they hold the foundation of
Diuinitie, although they put some few tyles out of order on the
roofe of the house, and build with hay and straw: vpon condition
still, that (as S. Paul saith) it be vpon the same foundation. Otherwise
we must conclude, the Martyrs, the Saints, the ancient Fathers,
the Doctors of the Church, the prime Schoolemen, the Cardinals,
yea and the Catholikes themselues, to be no Catholikes.
         
         
            
            CAP. 2.
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Catholikes as well as the Huguenots doe not agree with
the ancient Church in matter of Ceremonies: and that therefore
the Huguenots are not to be condemned.
            
            
               AS in men we consider their bodies, and
their apparell; so in the Church likewise
we consider the Doctrine, and
the Ceremonies. As for the doctrine
or body of Religion, I haue showne
in the former Chapter that the Huguenots
haue the braine, the heart,
and the liuer, and all other the vitall
parts, whole and sound: that is, that they yet hold all the principall
points of faith, and that the maine thing that can seeme
to be blamed in them, is, that they haue some certaine warts
or spots in their skinne; certaine errors I meane, in the circumstances
and application of that faith. Now for the apparell
and ceremony of Religion, I confesse that the Church of
the Huguenots is not so gorgeously or richly set out as the
Church of Rome, and is for the same cause not so well entertained,
and more despised in the Courts of great Princes and
Monarches of the world: which I iudge to be the reason why
the Catholike Apology endeuoured to excuse the simple and
naked Ceremonies of the Reformed Church, without any intent
thereby to disparage the gorgeous and gay attire of the
Catholike Church; but to shew onely, That wee should not
so meanly esteeme this outward simplicity, as to condemne it
without hearing. Euen as that officer would bee held too rigide
and seuere, that would hinder a poore man from presenting
his Petition to the Prince, because hee is not clad like a
Courtier.
            The reason for which the Apology doth excuse them, is,
for that the ancient Church did sometimes heretofore content
her selfe with the like simplicity. Now vpon this occasion
the Author of the answer perswades himselfe that he hath gotten

a great aduantage vpon the Catholike Apology: Because
(saith he) he can proue, that diuers of these ceremonies which
the Huguenots doe reiect are very ancient: To which I answer,
That I willingly accept as much as hee grants, that is,
that he cannot proue that all the ceremonies of the Church of
Rome be most ancient, but onely (as he saith) diuers of them.
As for those diuers which hee instanceth in, that you may see
how impertinent they are, I will make it appeare in these two
things: First, that he doth not proue against the Huguenots
that the Church of Rome doth agree with the ancient Church
in the selfe same ceremonies. Secondly, that admitting that
the ancient Church had them in vse, yet are not the Huguenots
to be condemned for hauing disused them.
            For the first point:That the Church of Rome agrees not with the Primitiue Church in matter of ceremonies. my purpose is not to condemne
the ceremonies of our Mother the holy Church, but since that
our side are so strait laced, as to hinder our reconciliation for a
thing so indifferent as these ceremonies are; I haue taken the
boldnesse to oppose them: and to shew, That the Huguenots
may easily answer the argument which hee alleages: which I
write not to iustifie them, but with a purpose that wee should
not so confidently assure our selues, that all is so cleare on our
sides. Let vs heare then how the Huguenots may answer the
15 examples which he bringeth.
            
                The first example is the signe of the Crosse:
               Signe of the Crosse. Pag. 27. concerning
which, the Huguenots will confesse that it hath beene anciently
vsed; but that the vse of this was brought into the Church,
vpon a particular occasion, and proper onely to that age. For
the Pagans amongst whom the Christians in those dayes conuersed,
were wont when they met with a Christian to make
the signe of the crosse in derision of their Christianity, for that
the God whom they worshipped was hanged vpon a crosse;
so that the Christians, to shew that they were not ashamed of
such a death, in al their actions would stil make the sign of the
crosse. But now this occasiō being taken away, the Huguenots
may likewise say, that it is not necessary to cōtinue the practice
no more then it is to apply a plaister to a woūd already healed.
            As for praying to the East: I neuer yet knew any Huguenot

that held it vnlawfull to pray towards the East, nor any Catholike 
that thought it vnlawfull to pray also towards other
quarters of the world.Praying towards the East. Pag. 28. What more then is there to be said betweene
them, but onely that it is an indifferent custome, which
hath not beene alwayes so strictly obserued in all Churches.
For Socrates saith that in the Church of Antioch,Lib. 5. cap. 21. the high
Altar was placed cleane contrary, and towards the West.
            As for the inuocation of the Eucharist, our aduersary affirmes,
that it appeareth by Saint Basile,
               Inuocation of the Eucharist. 
               That this inuocation
was then and from the Apostles time practised, when they shewed
the Eucharist. I answer; that these words make nothing against
the Huguenots, for a man may very well vse inuocation in the
time of the celebration of the Sacrament, and all the while direct
his inuocation to God, and not to the Sacrament. True
it is, that there was a speciall Prayer appointed for that purpose,
which Saint Basile thought to haue beene a tradition of
the Apostles: But now the Catholikes themselues doe not any
longer obserue that forme of prayer: and it cannot be found
in any antiquity, what forme of prayer that was, which Saint
Basile speakes of. So that if this prayer were an Apostolicall
tradition, our Church hath had small care in preseruing it;
which made me beleeue that we haue some things put vpon
vs vnder the title of Apostolicall tradition, which are not so.
For it is still as easie to inuent some new tradition, which wee
haue not yet receiued, as to forget those which we haue already
entertained. For God ordinarily where he takes away the
memory, supplies that defect with inuention and sufficiency
of iudgement. It being very wisely done, when we haue lost
one tradition, to put another in the place, thereby to keepe
the number full still, and entire.
            The fourth example is of Hallowing the water in Baptisme.
               
Now the Huguenots will confesse with Saint Basile,
               Blessing of the water in Baptisme. Pag. 28. that the
water of Baptisme ought to bee blessed: But this they deny;
that this hallowing was such heretofore, as that now in vse
with vs. For as much as they say, That water and all other
creatures are sanctified by God already: and particularly that
the water of Baptisme needs no benediction to make it more

holy;Homil. 25. in Iohan. because (as saith Saint Chrysostome) Christ by his Baptisme
hath blessed all waters. But if my Antagonist will proceed
further to inferre, that the water in Baptisme ought of
necessity to be hallowed in the same sort that it is now; I say
that Eusebius writes that Constantine the Great would haue
men to baptise in Iordan; and yet I neuer heard that all the
water of Iordan was made holy water.
            
               
                They will say as much of the consecration of the Oyle: the
word consecration at the first,Consecration and vse of Oyle in Baptisme. Pag 28. Tertull lib. de corona militis.
                signifying no more then the institution
of a signe to an holy vse. And as for the vse of oyle,
like as the ancient Church made vse of it in Baptisme, so did
they also of milke and honey; neither of which are any more
in vse, no not in the Romane Church. Why then should the
Huguenots be blamed more for the want of one ceremony,
then the Catholikes would be for want of another? And this
also serues to disproue that other example which followes, to
wit, that the Romane Church agreeth with the ancient in all
the ceremonies of Baptisme.
            
                His next example is of the Fast in Lent,
               Lent. which Saint Hierome
esteemes for an Apostolicall tradition. To which the
Huguenots will answer, that Epiphanius saith,Epiphan. haerest. 75. that it is an Apostolicall
tradition also to fast vpon Wednesdayes and Frydayes,
except vpon those betwixt Easter and Whitsontide: in
which time the said S. Hierome in the very book quoted by the
Answerer,Hieronim. contra Lucif. saith that it is vnlawfull to fast: & yet do the Catholikes
fast notwithstāding vpon Fridaies in that very time. Why
then are the Huguenots more to be blamed for disusing the custome
of the ancient Church in the obseruation of the forty
dayes before Easter, then the Catholikes, for dissenting from
the same Church, in the obseruation of the 50. dayes after?
            
                Concerning the sacrifice for the dead, it appeares by that
Liturgy of the Greekes,Sacrifice for the dead. which is read in the fift Tome of Saint
Chrysostomes workes, that they made mention amongst the
dead (for whom they made their oblations) of the Apostles
and Marytrs; who according to the iudgement of all parties,
doe goe directly into heauen, and haue no need of any such
oblation as men offer at this day, for the easing of the soules

departed. So as the Huguenots will say, that it must needs
follow that the soules of the Saints which are in Paradise are
holpen by such oblations, (which none of the wiser Catholikes
will maintaine) or else that the sayd sacrifice for the dead
was no other thing then a Commemoration made in the time of
the Celebration of the Eucharist; and thus much the wiser sort
of Huguenots will not find fault withall.
            The next example is of the Baptisme of Infants:
               Baptisme of infants. which the 
Huguenots allow of as well as the Catholikes.
            As for the mixing of water with the wine in the Chalice,Mixture of water with the wine in the Chalice.
               
this in the iudgement of the better learned Catholikes, is not a
thing so necessarily required. And why then should we blame
the Huguenots for omitting this ceremony? In like manner
the better learned amongst the Hugenots will confesse that it
is lawfull: and why then should they blame the Catholikes
for obseruing it? That which is not necessary may lawfully
be omitted, and that obserued which is lawfull.
            Another example is of perpetuall single life,
               Perpetuall single life. which the Huguenots 
blame not: but they will say that the obseruation of it in
those times was voluntary, and not constrained; and that men
were neuer compelled to vow it, as appears by the very Canōs
themselues. The Church (saith one Canō) after the constitution of
the Apostles, added some counsell of perfection, as this of the single life
of Priests: where we may obserue 2. things against the answer;
one is, that single life was ordained by way of counsell, not of
commandement: the other, that it was ordained since the Apostles
times, & could therefore be no tradition of the Apostles.
            The next example is of the solitary or contemplatiue life;
               Solitary life.
               
which the Huguenots will not absolutely condemne: but they
may well say that it hath beene in times past, much different
from this of our Hermites and Anchorits at this day. For they
which first brought in this manner of liuing, obserued it onely
in the time of persecution, to auoid idolatry, and all other occasions
of being enforced to vnlawfull actions by the tyrants
which then ruled:Sozomen. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 12. as the Ecclesiasticall stories do testifie in the
liues of S. Paul and S. Anthony, the two first Hermits.
            
            Now for the order of Monkes:
               Orders of Monkes. the Huguenots will name

the very yeare when each of them was inuented. And what
though the name of Monks was vsuall in the primitiue Church
yet were they then other manner of Monkes, then ours at
this day. For first, they earned their liuings by the sweat of
their browes. Secondly, diuers of them were marryed, as Athanasius
writes.Athanasius ad Dracontium. Finally, the Huguenots will say, that there was
neuer Monke in the Primitiue Church that killed a King; nor
any Catholike in those times, that would haue approued it.
            
                There remaines the election of meats; which the Huguenots
approue,Election of Meates. so that it be done with discretion, and not meerly
for conscience, according to the custome of the ancient
Church. For the better clearing of this point, we may (me
thinkes) distinguish betweene the difference of meats, and
the choyce of meats. For the Huguenots will say, that there is
no difference of meats in respect of Religion; for that it is
lawfull to eat indifferently of all sorts of meats, without making
scruple of Conscience; but that men for the taming of
their flesh may abstaine from such meats, as they finde to prouoke
them to concupiscence: which kinde of abstinence because
it is left free, to the choise of him that fasteth, may properly
be called Election of meats. For the Apostles (saith the
Ecclesiasticall Story) haue left it to euery mans libertie,Tripartite 9. 38. to vse
as well in their fasts, as on other dayes, such kinds of meats as
they best like of. Whereas the Fasts enioyned by the Church
of Rome, may rather (will the Huguenots say) be called
A Prescription of meats, then a free Election: Because Election
is still voluntary, and their abstinence is constrained.
            
                Finally, concerning Holy-daies, which they call an Apostolicall
tradition,Holy-daies. I say, that the Ecclesiasticall Stories shew
the cleane contrary;Lib. 5. cap. 21. For Socrates saith in expresse words,
That the Apostles ordained nothing concerning Holy-dayes. Again,
they which supposed them to haue beene ordained by the Apostles,
are enforced at length, to place the obseruation of
them in the Classe of things indifferent. For of all the Festiuall
daies, there was not one of them which hath beene obserued
with more deuotion then Easterday; which notwithstanding,
the Westerne Church vsed to celebrate vpon Sunday, and the

Easterne, vpon other daies: the one confirming their custome
by the tradition of S. Peter and Paul, and the other by the tradition
of Philip and Iohn.
               Soz. 7. 19. Which controuersie, was thus taken
vp betwixt Polycarpus, and Victor Bishop of Rome;
namely, that the obseruation of it should be left free and indifferent.
Now the Huguenots doe not simply condemne
the obseruation of Holy-daies, but only the forcing to the obseruation
of them. For in England, Germany, Switzerland,
and other Countries, where the pretended Reformed Religion
is established, they to this day obserue diuers Saints daies,
without reprehension of the Huguenots in France.
            But put the case,That the Huguenots are not to be blamed for leauing off the Ceremonies of the ancient Church. that the vse of all the foresaid Ceremonies
were such in the ancient Church, as they now are 
                  〈◊〉
                the
Romane; yet say I, that all these examples make nothing to
the purpose; Forasmuch as Ceremonies (as I haue said) are
but the apparell, which alters the fashion euery foot, and are
fitted to time and place: which our Aduersary himselfe confesseth.
For, knowing that the most part of our Ceremonies
were vnknowne to the Ancients, he hath no other Answer
then this, which will also serue to answer him againe, viz:
That it matters not much, whether the Ecclesiasticall Ceremonies
were in vse in the Primitiue Church, or were newly taken
vp in these latter times. Now the Scriptures (will the Huguenots
say) denounces the same curse against those which
adde, as against those which take away: so that if it be lawfull
for the Romane Church to adde any thing to the ancient
Ceremonies, it is as lawfull for them also to take away, especially
those which haue beene added.
            Secondly, the Church is called Primitiue, either in regard
of it selfe, because it is truly ancient; or in respect of the moderne
Church of Rome, as it is more ancient in its selfe. If we
speake now of the Church, as it is ancient in it selfe; the Huguenots
will say, that there is no resemblance betwixt the Ceremonies
of the ancient Church and those of the moderne.
But if we speake of that which is more ancient then ours,
(from which only our Aduersaries Arguments are drawne)
they will say, that (besides all this, that the most part of our

Ceremonies are different) yet at that time also were there too
too many in the Church;Epist. 119. 19. in so much as Saint Augustine in his
time complained exceedingly of the multitude of them.
            Finally, as the ancient Church had some Ceremonies which
the Huguenots haue not; so had it likewise others, which the
Church of Rome hath not; as Milke and Honey in Baptisme,
and the fashion of plunging the Infant thrice to the bottome:
which haue beene abrogated (as Saint Thomas saith) to auoid
the calumnies of the Sabellians, who for this custome reproched
the Christians, that they worshipped three Gods. From
whence we may collect, how indifferent things these Ceremonies
are, so long as they are not abused: and on the other
sid
                  •
                how lawfull it is, yea, and how necessary, to take away
the vse of them, for preuenting of an inconuenience. So
that we may say thus much in the Huguenots behalfe; that
they doe, not in this point, swarue so much from the practice
of the ancient Church, seeing they doe not condemne those
diuers Ceremonies which were practised anciently; notwithstanding,
that they doe now forbeare them, especially when
they haue obserued them to change into so much superstition,
as that our better learned Catholikes, doe euen laugh at
the poore people, whom they themselues haue abused.
         
         
            CAP. 3.
            
               That the doctrine of the Huguenots hath not beene condemned by
any lawfull Iudgement, before the Councell of Trent.
            
            
               HItherto haue I spoken of the Huguenots Religion
as it is in it selfe, As well in Doctrine, as
in Ceremonies, viz: That Ceremonies be
things indifferent; And as for their errors in
doctrine, that they be not in the foundation
of faith. So that they, not being Heretikes in respect of the
wickednesse of their opinions; let vs now trauerse the Inditement,
to finde whether they be so by condemnation. Now
our Aduersarie to conuict them, produces the Decrees of diuers

Councels: to which, before I make answer, I will propose
these 4 Considerations.
            The first is this:1 Consid. Aug. Epist. 112, Whether a generall and lawfull Councell,
may erre or not in the substance of faith; seeing that it is
made vp of men, in whose testimonie (as saith S. Augustine)
there is so little certaintie, his words be these: A man may beleeue
the Scriptu
                     •
                  es, without doubting; but for any other testimonies,
it is lawfull either to beleeue them or not to beleeue them. So
as this priuiledge, to be of an irrefageable certaintie, is only giuen
to the Scriptures: which if it be true, then all the passages
which are drawne from the authoritie of Councels, are thus
farre forth only, of weight, as they can be made good by the
Scriptures. Neuerthelesse, this being the common answer of
the Huguenots: I will make no further vse of it; but like a
true Catholike, confesse this to be an infallible Maxime;
That a lawfull and generall Councell, cannot erre in the substance
of faith.
            
            The second is:2 Consid. Whether if such a generall Councell may
erre, though not in the substance of faith; yet at least in other
points of Diuinitie of lesse consequence; And if they may erre
in these, then, seeing (as I haue showne) that the Huguenots
errors be not in the substance of faith, that it followes hereupon,
That the Councels may erre in their definitiue decisions
of those Controuersies which are betwixt the Huguenots
and vs, being only points of lesser consequence. Whereupon
it followes, That this second sort of heresie becomes supernumerary,
and their errors not being heresies in their owne nature,
cannot be made heresies by bare condemnation. For the
reason why he is counted an Heretike, who resists the Decrees
of a Councell, is; for that in doing so, he resists the
Iudgement of the Holy Ghost, which doth still, and infallibly,
accompany the Councell. But now, if the Holy Ghost
be no further forth promised to assist the Councell, then when
it treateth of things necessary to saluation; Then they, who
hold some tenets contrary to the Councell in other things, do
not herein resist the iudgement of the Holy Ghost,Stapleton Princip. Doctrin. cont. 4. lib. 6. cap. 15. and by
consequence are no Heretikes. Stapleton, professor of the

Controuersies at Doway, and one of the most learned Catholikes
of our times, who hath written most accurately of this
Argument) holds, That the holy Ghost is onely promised to
assist the Councells in necessary things, and that in other
things they may erre.Andradius defen
                     •
                  fid
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  
                  dent. Lib. 4. And Andradius himselfe, who defends
the Councell of Trent, in the very same Booke wherein
hee does defend it as generall, lawfull, and sound in the matter
of Faith,Co
                     •
                  cil. Trid. Sess. 3. condemnes the vulgar translation of the Bible,
as corrupted, although the said Councell had authorized it for
authenticall; so little did hee trust to the iudgement of Councells
in things which were beside the essence of faith.
            But admitting thus much;3. Cons. That a lawfull Councell cannot
erre at all, yet is there still a third difficulty; viz. Whether
these Councells which hee produceth against the Huguenots
bee lawfull: which euen a Catholike may safely deny; for as
much as there bee diuers nillities to bee found in them, and
namely in their manner of proceeding, which are no where
found in the ancient Councells, as I will shew in the next
Chapter, when I treat of the Councell of Trent. Now, the
Huguenots will bee very well content to bee tryed by the Ancient
Councells, held in the first 600 yeares of Christ; namely,
vntill such time as the Pope (as they say) hauing gotten so
absolute a Monarchie in the Church, tooke away the liberty
of Councells, and subiected the suffrages of the other Bishops
to giue with him: now all the Councels alleadged by our Aduersarie
are since that time.
            There remaines a fourth difficulty,
                  
                     •
                   Cons. namely, Whether the
Huguenots haue been iustly condemned by the latter Councells.
Now vpon these foure considerations, a man may perceiue
how friuolous his brags are of the Councels; for as much
as he is able to conclude nothing, vnlesse he hath leaue granted
him before hand to adde what authority to the Councels
he pleaseth; to make what Councells lawfull hee listeth, and
to force the Councells to speake what hee would haue them:
The most innocent man in the world might bee conuicted
by such proofes, if a man would beleeue without further examination,
whatsoeuer euery witness shall bring against him:

and when his Aduersary also shall haue leaue, both to packe
the witnesses at his owne pleasure, and also to iudge of their
testimonies.
            But to returne to our purpose. Let vs see next, whether the
Huguenots stand lawfully condemned by those Councells
which hee produceth, or not. The Catholike Apologie denies
it; whereby (in my conceit) hee shewes a great deale of
zeale to the Romane Religion. For, considering what a world
of people are infected with the Huguenots doctrine, by reason
that it is not yet condemned by any lawfull forme of proceeding;
he endeuors to perswade with the Catholikes, to cause
a lawfull Councell to bee called to confute them, to the end,
that the Huguenots might bee satisfied by being shewed their
errors, and bee left without excuse for reiecting the doctrine
of the Church of Rome. But obseruing that there bee many
seditious Catholikes (who rather thirst to kill their bodies,
then to saue their soules) doe hinder so holy a designe, vnder
colour, that they bee already condemned by other Councells:
The Catholike Apology doth very well herein, to aduise them
not to desist for all this, but to pursue so good an enterprise;
for as much as the former Decrees, by which the Huguenots
stand condemned: are not of such authority, but that they may
appeale from them to an higher power. So that wee must
sue out another Processe against them, to get such a Iudgment
as they themselues shal
                  •
                neuer bee able to except against. Now
our Aduersary answers, that there is no neede to take this
course, affirming that they bee indeed cast already by such a
Iudgment; which hee proues by two reasons. One is, that
the doctrine of the Romane Church hath beene publikely
confirmed by generall Councells, before that of Trent. The
second is, that the Huguenots religion is the same with that
of ancient Heretikes, which hath beene heretofore condemned.
            For the first,Transubstantiation: The chiefe Controuersie is (saith hee) about
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; which is not onely determined
by the Councell of Trent, but also by tenne most ancient
councels of the Church. To make good which assertion,

he cites the Councell of Vercelles, Tours, Vienna, Constance,
Florence: and of fiue others, celebrated at Rome; the chiefe of
which was that of Lateran, vnder Innocent the third. And
these be the tenne Councels which our Aduersary styles the
most ancient Councells of the Church. Certainely, then was
the Church a long time without Councels, for the ancientest
of these was 1000 yeares after the Apostles times. But peraduenture
he meanes it onely of the Church of Rome, as it is different
in doctrine from the ancient Church; which is as much
to say, As th
                  •
               se Councells are the most ancient of this (Romane)
Church, which not long before the celebrating of
these Councells, became a new Church, and quite contrary
to the former. And in this sense, hee doth not account these
Councells as simply ancient, but the most ancient onely of
that Church▪ which is not ancient. I can but wonder how he
comes so ill aduised, as to giue this aduantage to the Huguenots,
as to conclude vpon him out of his owne premises; That
our holy mother Church of Rome, is a new Church: and so giue a
hint to the vulgar to discouer by his owne confession, that it
is so indeed. Which inconuenience, the Author of the Catholike
Apologie was better aware off to preuent it, for knowing
very well, that we are not able to make good the doctrine
of the Romane Church by the ancient Councells, he aduiseth
rather that wee should labour the calling of a new one; lest
that by vrging the other, which indeed bee not ancient, the
common people might come by this meanes to suspect that
our doctrine is new.
            But to returne to the said Councells: besides this, that
they are all new, there be also seuen of the tenne which were
neuer receiued for generall, by the most learned defenders of
the Romane religion; and by the opinion therefore of those
very Catholikes, they may erre, and by consequence it will
bee lawfull to appeale from them to a generall Councell. Iust
as the opinion of S. Cyprian about Rebaptization, being cond
                  •
               mned
at Rome in a particular Councell, by Pope Cornelius,
and the sentence ratified by Pope Stephan; yet did S. Cyprian
neuerthelesse continue in his former opinion, accusing both

the Popes and the Councels of errour; which certainely hee
would not haue done, had hee esteemed the authority of a
particular Councell, without appeale: whereby it appeares,
that of those tenne Councells which hee vrgeth, the
                  •
               e be but
three, namely, that of Lateran, of Vienna, and of Florence,
which be esteemed generall, euen by the Catholikes themselues:
and so by consequence onely three, which haue power
definitiuely to determine, and not to bee subiect to an appeale
to bee made from them.
            As for the Decree of that Councell of Lateran,
               Councell of Lateran. wee ought
not to thinke it strange, that the Huguenots except against it,
seeing that the said Councell, in the iudgement euen of the
Catholikes themselues might erre, in the sentence giuen against
them; for Scotus saith of Transubstantiation, That it is
but an opinion probable; now, an opinion probable is not
necessary; and in determining vpon a doctrine which is not
necessary, Stapleton saith: That a generall Councell may erre:
whereby it appeares, that in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
the Decree of the Councell aforesaid was not certaine. Can
wee imagine then that the Huguenots will stand to such a Decree,
which the Catholikes themselues confesse to bee subiect
to errour.
            As for the Councell of Vienna,
               Councell of Vienna. this errour (saith hee) is
condemned in it, which is: That wee ought not to doe any honour
or reuerence to the holy Eucharist; which, as euery man
knowes is the errour of Caluin, and of all the Sacramentaries.
I answer: That our Aduersary, and such as hee, doe much
iniury the church of Rome, in giuing the Huguenots occasion
to reproach the Catholikes, as to twit them, that they bee lyers
and slanderers. For they of the Religion doe not affirme
(as hee would make them) that wee ought not to giue any
honour or reuerence to the Eucharist: but that wee should
not adore it as the Catholikes doe.
            The last Councell is that of Florence;
               Councell of Florence. the authority wherof,
the Huguenots may well except against, for that 
                  〈◊〉
                dissents
from other Councells. For the Councells of B
                     •
                  sil and Constance,
both which our Aduersary rankes here amongst the generall

Councels, haue adiudged it, That the authoritie of a
Councell is aboue the Pope; whereas the Councell of Florence,
makes the Pope aboue the Councell. Which sentence is not
only (as I thinke) contrary to the Councell of Basil and
Constance, but contradictory also to the iudgement of all the
Diuines in Paris at that time. So that if the Huguenots doe
ill in dissenting from the Councell of Florence, they doe it by
the example of Catholike Diuines and of other Councels,
yea of those which are generall, by the iudgement euen of our
Aduersary himselfe,
            The second doctrine which he instances in,Freewill. is that of Freewill;
for denying of which, the Manichees and other Heretikes
stand condemned by S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Leo, &c.
Now I answer: That the Huguenots deny it not in the same
manner that those Heretikes did, as is to be well seene in the
doctrine of the Manichees: who made two necessary Principles;
the one of Good, and the other of Euill; and as absolutely
denied Freewill, as well of doing ill, as of doing good.
But when he can shew, that the Huguenots hold any such opinion,
his examples will serue to some purpose.
            Further, he confirmes the said opinion by foure other
Councels, viz: by a particular one held in France, and by
those of Auranches, Sens, and Constance. I answer; that it
were but an easie matter so to interpret the said Councels, as
that the Huguenots need not refuse them in this point of Freewill.
But for breuities sake, I will not stand to examine them,
because that three of them be particular, and for that respect
may erre (as I haue shewn before) and may be appealed from:
and for the fourth, which is that of Constance, though it be
called generall by our Aduersarie, yet Bellarmine neuerthelesse
receiues but 18. Councels for generall and lawfull, of
which ranke this of Constance is none.
            The third heresie that he speakes of is,Children dying without Baptisme. That the Huguenots
hold, that little Children dying without Baptisme, doe
not perish; which that they doe, is plaine enough (saith he.)
And how? namely, by so many testimonies of Scripture, by
so many Decrees of ancient Councels, by so many resolutions

of holy Fathers; And yet does he alledge but two
passages only out of S. Austen, who indeed as he was of this
opinion, That Children could not be saued without Baptisme;
so held he likewise, That they could not be saued without the Eucharist
Which opinion of his, euen our Catholikes themselues
doe condemne. Why then should the Huguenots be
Heretikes rather for dissenting from S. Augustine in one Sacrament,
then the Catholikes are for disallowing his iudgement
in the other?
            The fourth point is the Worshipping of Images:
               Worshipping of Images. which was
confirmed by the second Councell of Nice, vnto which I may
well oppose the Councell of Franckford, celebrated since that
of Nice, which both contemned and condemned the authoritie
of that Councell, and the Decrees of it. Neither does it
make anything for our Aduersary, to say that these testimonies
are of weight enough amongst Catholikes, for there were
none in the Councell of Franckford but Catholikes, and the
Popes Legates themselues, which assisted at it. Obserue then
all the Councels which our Aduersary hath rakt together against
the Huguenots; All of which, excepting those three
of Lateran, Vienna, Florence, and this last of Nice, are perticular,
and so by consequence, their Decrees may be anulled
and reuersed. Further of these foure, which by some are accounted
generall; the first, (that of Lateran I meane) was by
the sentence of Scotus and Stapleton (two grand Catholikes)
subiect vnto error. The words he vrgeth out of the second,
(viz: that of Vienna) are nothing to the purpose. The Iudgement
of the third (which is that of Florence) is contrary to
the Decrees of the Councels of Basile and Constance. The
last of Nice, was condemned by that of Franckford: wherefore
then, should the Huguenots giue way to the authoritie of
such Councels, from whom the Catholikes themselues, yea
Councels also of Catholikes themselues, doe disagree, how
can wee hope then to conuert them by such proofes? let vs
call a new one then; let vs giue indifferent audience to
their Ministers, let vs refute their Arguments to their very
faces, else shall wee neuer recall the Huguenots, that are

gone astray, into the right way.
            
                The second reason, whereby our Aduersarie confutes the
Huguenots, i
                  •
               ;That the Doctrine o
                     •
                   the Huguenots is not the same with that of the ancient Heretikes already condemned. Because they agree in doctrine with the ancient
Heretikes, viz: the Arrians, who (as S. Augustine testifies)
reiected, 1. Prayers for the dead: 2. The set times of
Fasting: 3. The difference betwixt the Bishop and the ordinary
Priest: And 4. with Iouinian and Vigilantius, in the
point of Continencie and Virginitie. 5. Merit and rewards
of Saints: 6. The Adoration of Reliques: 7. The Inuocation
of Saints: 8. The Election of Meats. I answer.
First,Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 17. That euen as a good Catholike may erre, so may an Heretike
also speake truth. S. Cyprian and Ticonius the Donatist,
hauing diuersly interpreted a place of the holy Scriptures, S.
Augustine reiects S. Cyprians exposition, and allowes that of
Ticonius. So that it is not enough barely to shew that an Heretike
hath maintained such and such an opinion, vnlesse he
proue withall, that the said opinion is hereticall. Secondly, I
haue shewed in the former Chapter, that the vse of things indifferent,
might be lawfull in the ancient Church, and yet vnlawfull
in this of ours: so that the Huguenots may iustly
blame the selfe-same things which the said Heretikes did vniustly
except against, vntill we can proue, not only the things
to be the same; but also make it appeare, that there is not now
a greater abuse, in the same things, then there was then. As
for the opinions following, the Huguenots will affirme, that
neither did the Fathers hold them in the same manner that the
Catholikes now doe, nor that the Heretikes tooke the same
exceptions to them, that the Huguenots now doe, as we may
perceiue by the examples following.
            First,Prayer for the dead. as for Prayer for the Dead, the Huguenots will affirme,
That the Church in the beginning, celebrated only a Commemoration
of the dead, wherein (as I shewed in the former
Chapter) they made mention likewise of the Apostles, and of
those that be already gone to heauen. Now this Commemoration
(will the Huguenots say) brought forth Prayer for the
dead, this Prayer brought forth Purgatorie; Purgatorie, Pardons;
and Pardons haue brought in pence into the Popes

coffers. Now (will they say further) that so long as these
abuses were not in the Church, if any man had found fault
with this custome, of Commemoration, he should but haue
shewed himselfe to be of a quarrelsome spirit, yea, they will
further say; that petty abuses, especially such as bare a shew of
Charitie, might somewhat be winked at, as Prayer for the
Dead, had: which custome serued then also to stirre vp in the
Pagans, a better esteeme of the Christian faith: but this occasion
being now ceased, and the abuses remaining so great, as
they affirme them to be; tis now no time to winke at them
any longer, nor is there any other meanes left vs, to reforme
them, then to take away the first occasion whence they proceeded,
thogh in themselues they be of no great consequence.
So that if we will shew wherein the Huguenots resemble the
other ancient Heretikes, in taking exceptions vnto Prayer for
the dead, we must shew withall; how that the ancient Church
vsed the same chaffering for Pardons and Indulgences, for
the deliuering of soules out of Purgatorie, that the Church of
Rome at this day doth. Otherwise, the abuse being not the
same, the things deserue not equall blame, and they that finde
fault with them, are not alike faulty.
            Touching set Fasting daies, I am heartily sorry, that he, in 
giuing out,Set Fasting daies. that the Huguenots doe herein imitate the ancient
Heretikes, giues them aduantage to reuenge themselues vpon
vs, and to proue the cleane contrary; namely, that it is we that
follow the ancient Heretikes:Euseb. 5. 16. for Eusebius saith, That it was
Montanus the Heretike, who first set downe the Rules for Fasting,
seeing that before that, these set Fasting daies were not
ordained with any intention to bind the Consciences, but for
orders sake only. Surely then he was not in the right, whosoeuer
found fault with them, seeing there was at first no superstition
in them. But since that (say the Huguenots) the
superstition is come to that height, that the very day, only because
it is such, or such a Saints Eue, is esteemed much holyer
th
                  •
               n other daies. So then, this order hauing occasioned superstition,
to auoid this superstition, wee may dispose otherwise
of that order.
            
               
                And now as concerning the difference betweene the Bishop
and the ordinary Priest;Distinction of Bishops and Priests. the Huguenots will say, that at
first they were both equall: but that since then, some amongst
them haue beene promoted to dignity aboue the rest, and at
last One is become Monarch ouer them all. Now (will the
Huguenots confesse) that before this vniuersall Monarchy of
the Pope, there was not the like reason to blame the distinction
of degrees in Pastors, which in it selfe was tolerable, and
not altogether vnprofitable: But they will say withall, that it
is most manifest, how that the Fathers neuer held this distinction
to haue beene instituted by God, but onely to be a positiue
ordinance of men,Comment in cap. 1. Epist. 
                     •
                  d Titum. to preserue (as Saint Ierome saith)
the vnity of the Church. A Priest (saith he) is the same with a
Bishop, but it was afterwards ordained throughout the world
that one should be made choice of aboue the rest, for the auoiding
of Schisme. Howbeit he confesseth that Bishops are superior
to Priests, by Custome rather, then by diuine Ordination.
            
                The fourth point wherein he saith that the Huguenots doe
imitate the ancient Heretikes,Mariage and Virginity. is concerning Mariage and Virginity,
which is but a meere calumny: for the Huguenots affirme
not with Iouinian, That mariage is simply equall to virginity;
but onely in such a sense as Saint Augustine speakes it,
who sayes, that he dares not prefer the virginity of S. Iohn, before
the mariage of Abraham. Nor with Vigilantius, that it is
vnlawfull to make a Priest, vnlesse he were first maried: but
with that holy man Paphnutius, that it is lawfull for a Priest
to be maried.
            
                Touching the Merits and rewards of the Saints, I cannot tell
what he would say:Merits of Saints. for if he meanes by it, That the Saints receiue
a recompence of their good workes the Huguenots wil
agree to it: but if he meanes it of workes of supererrogation, laid
vp (as they say) in the treasury of the Church, and applied by
the Popes Indulgences, vnto the soules of other men; the
Catholikes will say, that the Church liued in the same ignorance
for the first thousand yeares, that the Huguenots now
doe: for it is not long since that for the benefit and aduancement

of the Pope, God first reuealed this treasure, which had
lyen hid so long, and the most gainfull commoditie of Indulgences
also.
            Now as for Reliques, I say that euen the same Saint Hierome
               
               
who wrote against Vigilantius for taking exception to the Reliques
of Saints;Worshipping of Saints and their Reliques▪
                doth yet in the same booke against Vigilantius,
allow of the Eues of Saints: howbeit for certaine abuses
committed in the night of the said Eues, which they called the
Vigils, the Catholikes themselues haue forbidden them: And
now fast onely vpon the Eues, although the dayes doe still
retaine the names of Eues. So then, we must either grant that
the catholikes are condemned by Saint Hierome, as wel as the
Huguenots; or else that the abuse of things, causes them to be
thought blame worthy at one time, and not at another. So
that we must not consider whether the Huguenots agree with
Vigilantius, in the taking exception to Reliques; but whether
there bee not now more abuse in the worshipping of them,
then in Saint Hieromes time. For the Huguenots doe not now
simply except against Reliques, insomuch that I haue heard
diuers Huguenots say, That if they could bee certaine that
they had any ancient monument of our Sauiour, or of his Apostles,
they would make very pretious esteeme of them: and
farre more, then of any antique medall or other antiquity of
the old Romanes. By greater reason then doe they honour
their persons, although they doe not inuoke them being dead,
for that (say they) themselues forbade it whilest they liued. So
that if we will proue the Huguenots to be enemies to the honour
of the Apostles, wee must proue out of their writings,
That such was their will to be inuocated. Else will the Huguenots
tell vs, That they haue the Saints in more honour then
the Catholikes; in that they haue such a care to obserue their
precepts now after their deaths: It being euident, That that
child who is most carefull to performe his last will and testament,
loues hid deceased father best, then if he should onely
keepe his picture by him.
            The eight and last opinion of the ancient Heretikes,Election of meats. is,
               the Election of meats. Whereunto the Huguenots will giue the

same answer as to the former obiections: viz. that it was vnlawfull
in those times to find fault with the election of meats,
and yet lawfull to condemne it now. The reason is, for that
it was then an order onely, without enforcing of the conscience
to obserue it.
            And if any man reply, That they now in the Church doe
but the same, and that it is onely the meaner sort of people
that account one meat holier then another: and that the better
learned Catholikes hold, that the sin of eating flesh vpon
dayes whereon it is forbidden, is onely in regard of the ordinance,
and not in regard of the nature of the meats: Whence
comes it then that Durandus that great defender of the ceremonies
of our Church,Durand. l. 6 de aliis ieiuniis. makes vse of this reason, to confirme
abstinence from eating of flesh; namely, That fish is a more
holy meat: for that in the time of Noahs flood, God cursed the
earth, and the creatures that it brought forth, but not the
waters.
            See here now the ancient heresies reuiued (as he saith) by
the Huguenots: but he is in the wrong: for that they ought
not to be ranked amongst the Heretikes, vntill such time as
we haue made proofe, how that the Church of Rome doth
not onely agree with the Primitiue in the same things, but
also in the very circumstances of the things: for those things
which are of themselues ceremonies, are also of themselues
indifferent; and it is the right vse or abuse of them, which
makes them lawfull or vnlawfull. So that by consequence it
may be at this time lawfull, and at another time vnlawfull, to
take exceptions to them; Euen as it was not lawfull to breake
the brazen Serpent,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                whilest it was a Sacrament, but necessary
to breake it, when it became an Idoll.
         
         
            
            CAP. 4.
            
               That the Councell of Trent is not lawfull.
            
            
               WEE are come at last, thankes bee to God,
to the holy Councell of Trent; a Councell
whereof our Aduersary had need to make
good account, for that the proofes drawne
from the former Councells, concerned only
two or three questions; and those also,
rather probable coniectures, then proofes.
But as for the Councell of Trent, that openly confutes
all the heresies now maintained by the Huguenots; by
reason whereof, our Aduersarie toyles himselfe more in the
defence of that, then in any other question whatsoeuer: albeit
hee vses not any proofes to confirme it, but answers onely
to the obiections of the Catholike Apologie, which I find to
bee three in number.
            The first is; That the Pope did therein take vpon him 
the office both of Iudge and Partie: and that himselfe conuoked
the Councell, and sat President in it.
            The second is; That those who sought the reformation,
could not bee heard in it.
            The third: that for as much as the Huguenots are able to 
alledge diuers nullities, both in the forme, and also in the
definitions of the said Councell; wee are not bound to accept
of the ordinances thereof without examination of them: For
as much as S. Iohn hath commanded vs to try the Spirits.
            
            To the first Obiection: That the Pope was both Iudge and
Party, he answers: That the Pope ought not to lose his right
of calling Councells, and of being President in them, for that
hee had obtained this right 1500 yeares before. The Huguenots
can easily cut him off 500 yeres of his time. In all which
space, the Pope neither once called any general Councell, nor
sat President in it. The first of Nice was called by Constantine
the great. That of Constantinople by Theodosius Senior:
That of Ephesus, by Theodosius Iunior: That of Chalcedon, by

               Marcianus, the Emperour. The same also may bee affirmed
of those that sat President in them. In the Councell
of Nice was Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spaine, President.
In the Councell of Ephesus, Cyril, Patriarch of
Alexandria. And thus much may suffice for so euident
a truth.
            Secondly, he answers; That it is nothing repugnant to the
equity of a great Prince, to bee both Iudge and Partie. In so
much as a Soueraigne Prince is perpetually Iudge, vntill hee
bee lawfully declared to haue forfeited his principality, although
the suite bee commenced against himselfe. But I say,
that there is still a third, which arbitrates betwixt the Prince
and his Subiects, when there is a suit betweene them: And
although the Iudge bee the Princes Officer, yet may he pronounce
sentence against him,En denier resort. which himselfe cannot repeal;
and there is no Prince, but a Tyrant, that would reuerse that
iudgment, as the Pope hath done in disanulling the decrees of
the Councels of Basil & Constance, made against himselfe. But
admit I should confesse, that a Prince might bee Iudge in
his owne cause; yet ought that to be vnderstood in a suit of
mean consequence: but when the controuersie be, whether he
be a lawfull King or not, we may well assure our selues that he
would neuer bee deposed, if hee might bee his owne arbitrator:
and of this nature is the first Article of the processe against
the Pope. The Huguenots deny him to be head of the church;
How then I pray shall this Controuersie bee decided, if there
be no other Iudge besides himselfe?
            Thirdly, hee shewes by examples, that Pope Marcelline,
Sixtus the third, Symachus, Leo, Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria,
Cyril, and Leo the first, were Iudges in their owne
causes. As for S. Marcelline (saith he) when as hee had offered
Incense vnto Idols, hee went and accused himselfe in the
Councell of Sinuessa, and yet durst no man denounce Sentence
against him, but all the Bishops cried out with one consent:
Father, iudge thy selfe with thine own mouth. To which I answer:
That it is easie to discouer this to be but a forged Councell,
which brings in the Emperor Dioclesian, talking with S.

               Marcelline at Rome, and enticing him to Idolatry;Sigonius de oceidentis Imp. l. 
                     •
                  . whereas
Dioclesian was at the same time at Nicomedia, a City of Bithinia.
Secondly, there is a great deale of difference betweene a
plaine case, & a right in question. For S. Marcelline was accused
of an act, of which he was most apparantly guilty: So that
the Bishops perceiuing that the Pope denied not the fact, and
that hee was penitent for it, offered to referre themselues to
that sentence which hee would giue against himselfe lust as
if a man should say to a Theefe that were taken in the manner;
Thou seest thy selfe openly guilty, thou knowest likewise
the punishment ordained by the law for such offences,
What thinkest thou that thou hast deserued? Speake a Gods
name and bee thine owne Iudge: surely this would bee very
acceptable to all malefactors, to conclude thereupon, that
they should haue no other Iudges goe vpon them but themselues.
His second example is of Sixtus the third, who being
(saith hee) accused of adultery, would haue a Synode called
by th'Emperours authority. But they would not, nor indeed,
durst they (saith hee) meddle with his Cause before all the
Bishops were met, and that they vnderstood the Popes
pleasure, whether hee were willing to haue them so decide
his businesse, or not. I answer; that this was but a singular
fauour shewne him by the Emperour Valentinian, by
reason of his innocency: For the Pope himselfe was willing
that other men should haue beene Iudges in his businesse:
But it followes not hereupon, that euery Pope in euery
cause ought to clayme the same priuiledge; but the contrary
rather: viz. That Pope Sixtus the fift, who would not
suffer himselfe to bee indged by any other man, ought to
haue beene so, because Sixtus the third, who would haue been
so was not. What necessity is there in censuring him,
whose innocency is cleare; and as it was a token of innocency
in the one to submit himselfe vnto censure, so to refuse
all mens verdicts, but his own, is an euidence▪ that hee
findes himself guilty. But I demand now, whether that singular
priuiledge granted vnto Sixtus, must thenceforth be taken
for a leading cause or not? If he answers no, then is this instance

nothing to his purpose: if yea, The Catholikes will oppose it;
for Bellarmine confesseth,Tom. 1. Cont. 4. that in case of heynous crymes,
a Councell may be called to sit vpon the Pope:Lib. 4. Cap. 9. But the thinks
not peraduenture that Sixtus was accused of any heinous
crime: which (as I thinke) is the reason that hee names not
his fault, because he barely intimates, that he was accused of
Adultery; whereas indeed, hee was accused for defiling of a
Nunne; which wee, good Catholikes, style not Adultery, but
Incest; by reason of the spirituall consanguinity which is betwixt
a Priest and a Nunne.
            His third example is of Symachus, whose consent (saith
hee) was required euen for the calling of that Councell, wherin
himselfe was accused. The Huguenots will desire no more
at the Popes hands, then to doe as Symachus did; for, albeit
his consent went to the calling of the Councell; yet when it
was called, hee tooke not vpon him the part of a Iudge in it,
but with all humblenesse purged himselfe before the Councel
of those crimes which hee was charged withall.
            The fourth example is of Leo the third, of which passage
the troath is this: The Romans bearing a spleene to Leo, for
that Charlemaigne the Emperour had inforced them to sweare
alleageance to him; out of meere malice laid many slanders
vpon him; But Charlemaigne appearing at Rome, they, for
feare of him, durst not stand to it to prosecute their proofes
against him, but at the very first canuasse they all cryed out;
That the Apostolike Sea could not bee iudged by any man. Which
clamour testifies nothing else, then, That is the nature of the
vulgar, to fall from one extreame to another. And therefore
they hauing slandered the Pope before out of malice, they
afterwards thought to curry fauour againe, by flattering him
for feare. But let vs heare what followes: Did not Arrius
(saith hee) heretofore dispute the case in a matter of faith with
Alexander? Notwithstanding was this Alexander iudge in
the Councell of Nice. Was not Cyril President in the Councell
of Ephesus, notwithstanding hee was one of the parties?
And who but Leo sat President at the Counsell of Chalcedon,
notwithstanding that all the difference then was betwixt him

and Dioscorus? I answer: That the controuersies which then
were betwixt Alexander, Cyril, Leo, and the foresaid Heretiques,
concerned them no more, then it did the rest of the
Bishops of the Church: whereas that of the Pope is a priuate
quarrell, wherein the dignitie of his person is questioned. Againe,
Cyril was not President of the Councell, so as that hee
could allow or anull the Decrees as hee thought good; but
sate only first in order, hauing otherwise but his single voyce;
whereas the Pope now a dayes hath his negatiue voice to disanull
a whole Councell though generall: yea, and to make
his Decretalls vpon what hee lists, without a Councell. As
for Alexander, he sate neither as Iudge nor President, but only
as a priuate Bishop amongst the rest. To conclude, Leo
came not at all to the Councell of Chalcedon, and Anatolius,
Patriarch of Constantinople sate President in it.
            His concluding reason why the Pope may bee Iudge, is;
because (as hee saith) hee is not Iudge alone, but hath diuers
Assistants. I answer: That in the latter Councells hee hath
beene sole Iudge; and that the rest of the Bishops haue not
beene so much his Assistants, as his Vassalls. For, whatsoeuer
the Councell decrees, is voyde, without the confirmation of
the Pope bee to it, (witnesse his abrogation of the Councells
of Frankford, Basil, and Constance.) Contrariwise, whensoeuer
the Pope makes a Decree without a Councell, it is of as
much vertue as the definitions of the most holy Councell, that
euer was or can bee. For the Popes Aduocates maintaine,
that hee cannot erre in a matter of faith, though hee should
giue iudgement without a Councell: and that a Councell may
erre, if not confirmed by him. To what purpose then, serue
the other Bishops ioined with him as companions, when as he
may doe all without them, and they nothing without him?
            The second Obiection of the Catholike Apologie,Obiect. 2. 
               viz.
That the Huguenots had not fayre audience: is first (saith he)
confuted by that very booke which the Protestants set forth,
intituled, Causacur Electores: For they confesse in that booke
that they were summoned to the Councell. And wee may
read moreouer of many ample safe Conducts, whereby full liberty

was giuen to the Protestants, to come to the Councell.
And this briefly is his answer; to which I reply:
            First, that the booke which hee mentions, deliuers no reason
why they came not to the Councell, but why they iudged,
that the forme of proceeding in that Councell was like to
bee such, as that their comming thither would haue beene to
no purpose. But to what end answers hee, that they were
summoned? The Apologie affirmes not, that they were not
called, but that they were not heard. For it is not enough for
a Iudge to call both the parties before him, if hee suffers but
one of them to speake: and iust thus fell it out at that Councell
of Trent; for Brentius, and other Diuines of Sweuia were
sent thither by the Duke of Wittenberge, but might not be suffered
to dispute when they came there▪ 
               Melancthon also, and other
Ministers of Saxony, were vpon the way, but turned back
againe, hauing receiued intelligence from Mauritius, the Electors
Ambassador there, that they could not be heard.
            Secondly, I reply; that admit that they had beene suffered to
dispute, and had been heard, yet were the Conditions altogether
vnequal, for they requiring to haue a deciding voice, with
the rest of the Councel, according to the form of the safe Conduct
graunted to the Bohemians by the Councell of Basil. But
the Tridentine Fathers would none of that; refusing to admit of
any to haue decisiue voices, but only the Catholike Diuines.
            Thirdly, the Huguenots had good cause to suspect the safe
conduct; for Iohn Hus had also a safe conduct from the Emperour
Sigismund, to come to the Councell of Constance; and
yet comming thither, was there burnt.
            To the third Obiection,Obiect. 3. 
               viz: That the Apostle commands
vs to trie the Spirits whether they be of God, or no; he answers:
That the Apostle there speakes not of such things as be already
certaine, and defined in the Church: but of matters rather
vp-start & ambiguous, as are those of our trecherous Aduersaries.
Soft and faire, not too fast; there is no man affirms, that we
must try a thing that is certaine; but that we are not to settle
our beleef vpon it, without proofs that it is certain. For a thing
may be certaine in it selfe; neuerthelesse, if it does not appeare

to be certaine vnto vs, we may well make triall of it, for that
without trying, we cannot vnderstand the certaintie. But it
is (saith he) lawfull to try the Huguenots opinions, because
they be new and ambiguous. If then it be lawfull to try the
new, tis also lawfull (say I) to try the old; for two opposite
Opinions are Relatiues; so that we cannot make demonstration
that the new are false, but we must proue withall, that the old
are true. And as for the ambiguitie of the Hugnenots doctrine;
if it be ambiguous, then is it not certainly false; and if their
doctrine be not certainly false, then is not the Catholikes certainly
true: and consequently, euen by the iudgement of our
Aduersarie himselfe, it is lawfull to trie it. But let vs now examine
his reasons vpon which he concludes, that it is not lawfull
to try the Spirits of the Councell.
            First (saith he) if we ought to try them all, then were it
lawfull to try the Spirits of the Councell of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, & Chalcedon: Whereupon it must follow, that
we ought to discusse againe the wicked heresies of Arrius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutiches, and examine againe the
sacred Scriptures themselues, the Oracles of the Prophets, the
History of Moses, and finally the holy Gospell. At length he
concludes, That if things which be determined by the holy
Councels, ought to be held for certaine, there is no reason to
suffer the Decrees of the Councell of Trent, to be called againe
into question. I answer: That we ought to hold the Decrees
of the former Councels for most certaine; and yet is it lawfull
neuerthelesse, to make question of the determinations of the
Councell of Trent: to which purpose diuers reasons might
be alledged; how be it, this one may suffice for the present:
For that in euery Councell, we ought to deliberate and measure
things, before we iudge; and after this, the iudgement
of a Councell which hath duly examined and iudged, (according
to the right measure) ought not to be called againe in
question. But to know now, whether a man hath truly measured,
we must take consideration of the size and manner of
measuring by it. Now will the Huguenots say, that the Rule
which the Conncell of Nice did measure by, was only the

Scripture, or the written Word, as the words of Constantine
doe testifie:Theod. l. 10. c. 70. which be these. 
                  All seditious contention set aside,
let vs discusse the things in controuersie by the testimonie of
the Scriptures diuinely inspired.
                The manner of measuring
then was, to apply the Doctrine to the said Rule or Scripture,
and accordingly to receiue or reiect it, as it was conformable
or varying, to or from the said Rule. But now hath the Councell
of Trent (will the Huguenots say) much failed in all these
circumstances.
            For first, it decided before it measured, for as much as euen
before their comming to the Councell, they were euery man
of them, resolued to condemne the Huguenots. Secondly,
in examining and measuring of the questions, it measured not
by the written Word only, but by Traditions also, as it was agreed
vpon at the fourth Session of the said Councell. So
that it measured sometimes, either without a Rule, or at least
by a Rule, very contrary to that of the Councell of Nice.
Thirdly, admit that it had measured by a true Rule; yet did it
not so much apply the doctrine to the Rule, as bend the Rule,
to make it fit to the doctrine, viz: peruerted the Scripture by
an interpretation forced to their owne opinion: For in the
fourth Session, it was decreed, That no man should giue any other
interpretation, then that which was consonant to the doctrine of the
Church of Rome. So that in stead of measuring their doctrine
by the Rule, they measured the Rule by their doctrine.
            But he followes it further against the triall of the Spirits;2. Reason.
that if we should try all, then should we call againe into question,
the very Bookes of the holy Scripture it selfe. I answer
no; and that it followes not, that we should call in question
againe the bookes approued by ancient Councels, because
they reiect some, which are approued by the Councell of
Trent; seeing that in this particular, the iudgement of that
Councell, is suspected euen by Catholikes themselues. For
Sixtus Senensis a great Catholike, yea, euen since the Councell
of Trent, hath reiected for Apocryphall, the seuen last Chapters
of the booke of Hester, which were approued by the Councell
of Trent; which doubtlesse he would neuer haue done, had

he held it vnlawfull to try the Spirit of the said Councell.
            Thirdly he argueth;3. Reason. that if matters already determined and
defined, may be brought in question againe, what end then
would there be of Controuersies? I answer, that this reason
is not sufficient to stay the triall of Councels, because that
this is the way to set an end to Controuersies: for that it is
not enough to dispatch Controuersies, vnlesse we be sure that
this dispatching, is a well ending of them. And so the Arrians
might euen as well haue perswaded vs, to rely vpon their
packt Councell of Ariminum, to giue an end to Controuersies.
To which our Aduersarie can shape no other answer,
but that their Councell was not lawfull, and that the Councell
of Trent was. Well then (say I) that though wee may
not examine the Decrees of a Councell, yet may we try whether
the Councell were lawfull or not: and for this once, we
desire no more aduantage then this; and thus much must be
granted vs in despite of the world. For if we ought simply
to rely vpon the Authoritie of Councels, which commonly
passe for lawfull amongst our Doctors, without any further
enquirie; there is no reason wherefore the Graecians should
rather assent to the second Councell of Nice, which allowed
of Images; then to that of Constantinople, made vp of 300.
of their owne Bishops, which condemned them.
            The fourth Reason,4. Reason. for which he takes away the libertie of
trying their doctrine, from the people, is quoted out of the
17. Chapter of Deuteronomie, where it is commanded, That
men should enquire of the Priests and Leuie
                  •
               s, and the Iudge
appointed for the time in cases of difficultie. And Moses
(saith our Aduersarie) addeth not, Try the Spirits of the Priests
and Iudges; But if any grow proud, and will not obey the command
of the Priests, that man shall die, by the sentence of the Iudges.
Nor is this much different from that which our Lord
saith in the Gospell of Saint Mathew, The Scribes and Pharisees
sit in Moses chaire, whatsoeuer therefore they say vnto you, that
obserue and doe. As for Moses Commandement, it was giuen
vnto the Iewes;Rab. Sal. 
                     •
                  archi in Deute onom. whereupon Rabbi Salomon Iarchi concludes,
That we are to beleeue whatsoeuer the Iewish Priests say. Since

then that their Priests interpreted the Prophecies, euen of
Christ himselfe, otherwise then we Christians doe. A Iew
will say that Christ is not yet come, because their Priests deny
it; and if according to our Aduersaries saying, we ought not
to trie the Spirits of their Priests; I demand then, how he
will answer the Iewes, and I will answer him, as he does them;
namely, that in the text this clause is inserted, According to
Law, that is to say, we are to obey their Commandements, so
farre forth, ay they are agreeable to the Law; which how
can we know, vnlesse we examine it. So that let our Aduersarie
take his choice; either to confesse, that we are not in this
place forbidden to try the Spirits of the Priests, or else to acknowledge
himselfe to be a Iew.
            To the place of Saint Mathew,
               5. Reason. because he saith, how that
it is not much vnlike: our answer shall likewise be the same.
For our Sauiour hath not commanded vs to obey the Pharisees
in all things, simply; but not to take such scandall at their
liues, as that we should refuse to obey them, when they speake
well. For, should we simply giue credit to what they bid vs,
without tryall of it,Mat. 17. why should we beleeue that Iesus Christ is
the Sonne of God, when as the high Priest said that hee blasphemed
in calling himselfe so.
            His last reason is drawne from the Councell of the Apostles
mentioned Acts 15. It seemed good vnto the holy Ghost and to vs:
Whence he concludes, That Gods Spirit is so infallibly tyed vnto
a lawfull Councell, that we ought not to call the definitions of it into
question: nor would Saint Paul himselfe (saith our Aduersary)
examine the instructions of the Councell of the Apostles:
as Saint Luke saith, Acts 16. Hee gaue them that to obserue,
which was ordained by the Apostles and the Elders which were at
Ierusalem. I would faine aske one of our Catholike Doctors,
to what purpose are there so many disputations and consultations
at our Councels, if so be that the holy Ghost doth so infallibly
direct them? His answer will be, That Gods ordinary
prouidence is such, as that hee still assists them with his
Spirit, when they for their parts, apply that diligence, which
they ought, and not otherwise; Iust as hee makes not the

ground fruitfull, but when the husbandman tills and sowes
his corne in it, and applyes such labour as the soyle requires.
And thus much is cleare by this passage: namely, That the
Apostles did apply all industry and the aptest meanes, for the
resoluing of the doubts proposed: for it is said, That after a
long disputation Peter stood vp: whence a man may conclude;
That the holy Ghost is no otherwise promised to a
Councell, then conditionally; viz. when the Councell doth
apply all the meanes and industry on their parts, for the finding
out of the truth: and that otherwise it may be destitute
of Gods Spirit, namely; when it doth not apply the meanes.
So that albeit wee are not to examine the Decrees of that
Councell, which hath vsed these meanes; yet may wee enquire
whether it hath applied these meanes or no; for that
we cannot be otherwise assured that Gods Spirit did assist it.
The Huguenots I know well, will require another manner of
tryall; not onely of the course in the proceedings, but of the
Articles also concluded vpon. But that the Hugenots may
not haue a twofold aduantage against vs, we should doe well
to shew them: first, That the Councell of Trent hath obserued
these lawfull courses; and then shall wee haue but one
thing to doe; which is, To make good the Articles; which
are so difficult to be proued, that it would be wisely done of
vs, to put it off as long as we can, and first to decide all other
differences.
         
         
            CAP. 5.
            
               That the Councell of Trent hath not as yet been receiued in France.
            
            
               EVen as the Kings of France ought to haue
no one thing in greater recommendation,
then to be the inheritors of the vertues
of their predecessors; so should they
not likewise bee more carefull of any
thing, then to eschew such occasions as
might soile the reputation of this vertue,
and bewray them to haue cooled in the zeale and piety of

their Ancestors: who (as all know) haue euer beene accounted
the eldest sonnes of the Church, and the maine vpholders
of the Sea Apostolique: and for that one reason of this
their zeale, haue receiued more priuiledges and honors, then
any other Prince of Christendome whatsoeuer. Now then,
seeing that the Councell of Trent hath established so many
decrees, so directly opposing the former priuiledges and honors;
what hath it done more by so doing, then to proclaime
to the world, That the Kings at this day haue lesse zeale then
their Ancestors had, and are therefore vnworthy to enioy
those honors bestowed vpon them. So that the reason why
our later Kings haue reiected the said Councell, may bee, for
that they could not well approue of that, without reprouing
of themselues; nor publish it, without publishing also vnto the
world, a shamefull confession of their owne demerits. But to
come to the point; I purpose onely to buckle to the obiections
of the Catholike Apology, which our Aduersary offers to
confute; and those be three.
            1 That the Kings of France haue euer refused that Councel.
            2 That it hath called in question the precedency and priority
of place, which was due vnto our Kings, in all assemblies.
            3 That there be diuers things decreed in the said Councell,
flatly against the liberties of the French Church, and
the Maiesty of the King.
            As for the first point;1 Obiection. namely, that it hath neuer beene receiued
by our Kings: he answers to it in generall; That this
obiection touches not so much the Councell, as it reproacheth the
Kings of France. For what else can this meane (saith he) then to
perswade all men, that our Kings haue beene Schismatikes, and
disobedient to the Vniuersall Church. I answer, That it is no
newes to haue the Kings of France oppose themselues against
the Councels of the Church of Rome: seeing that not the
Councell of Trent alone, hath beene refused by King Henry
the second, and all his Sonnes who reigned after him; but
euen the generall Councell of Vienna also, was neuer wholly
receiued in France. And euen as King Henry the second, forbade
his Bishops to be present at the Councell of Trent, so

would not King Charles the seuenth suffer his to bee present
at that of Basil: and yet was not he any whit the more a Schismatike
(as our Aduersary concludes) nor disobedient to the
Church vniuersall. But let vs see now, how hee demonstrates
the Councell of Trent to haue beene receiued by our Kings:
There be certaine Letters (saith he) of Charles the ninth yet to be
seene,
               1 Reason. 
               in which he honoureth and reuerenceth that Councell: and in
the very same page, to answer that obiection of K. Henrie the
seconds forbidding his Bishops to repaire vnto that Councell,
he hauing nothing else to say; then That it is not so necessary to
looke so narrowly into what King Henry did at the beginning; for,
that the admitting or receiuing of a Councell, ought not to be taken
from the beginning but from the ending of it. According to which
rule I also answer, That the Letters sent by Charles the ninth,
before the Councel broke vp, do not proue his approbation of
the Councell, because he refused to receiue it, when it was
fully ended. For if the reiecting of it by King Henry the second
before the end of it, does not proue that hee did finally
reiect it; no more doth that honor which Charles the ninth
did it, before it broke vp, proue that he did receiue it.
            Secondly,2 Reason. 
               The King (saith he) shewed the reason why the
Bishops of France came no sooner to the Councell; which is one of
the most pleasant Arguments that yet I euer heard. For if
this be a sufficient reason to proue that the King did receiue
the Councell, because he gaue a reason for the absence of his
Bishops; then haue the Protestant Princes of Germany
also receiued it, because they publisht a whole booke of
the reasons that moued them to absent themselues from
thence.
            Thirdly,3 Reason. 
               The King (sayes he) sent his Orator and Ambassador
the Sieur de Lansack, Knight of his owne Order, thither;
who in his Maiesties name was at the Councell; with whom he ioyned
in commission Reginald Ferrier President of the Parliament,
and Guy de Faur, Iudge Maior of Tholouse. A goodly proofe,
The King approued of the Councell, because hee sent his
Ambassador thither. As though the Electors of Germany of
the confession of Ausburgh, sent not their Ambassadors thither

also? Where then lies the force of his Argument, is it in
this, that Monseur de Lansacke was a Knight of the Order, or
in this, That he was accompanied by Monseur du Ferrier &
de Pibrac: For no other sense can I collect out of his words,
nor any other proofe for the receiuing of the Councell; nor
is there indeed any other. For the King sent not his Ambassadors
to the Councell, to confirme it; but to admonish it,
to reforme the abuses of the Church; giuing expresse charge
vnto his Ambassadors, that they should sollicite the Fathers,
not to decree any thing against the Huguenots; vntill they
themselues had first of all reformed the abuses in the Ecclesiasticall
Polity: And in case that this were not done, then that
they should protest against the said Councel: all which appears
in the Letters which the King himselfe sent vnto Monseur du
Ferrier. See here then the briefe of the Kings Commission,
and of Monseur du Ferrier and de Pibrac their Orations in the
Councell: They both, and Monseur du Ferrier especially,
often in the Kings name requiring the reformation of the abuses
of the Church. Which admonitions for that the Councell
did reiect, they according to their Kings command, reiected
the Councell, and refused to subscribe to it; nor did
the King afterwards receiue it, or the court of Parliament
euer publish it; no not after that Saint Bartholmewes day,The massacre Anno Dom. 1572 when
the time seemed most importune to fauour any thing, that
might be preiudiciall to the Huguenots.
            But at least, the Bishops haue approued it. For when the decrees
of it were openly read in the last Session, the Bishops were present
and gaue their voyces and suffrages.
            
            I answer:4 Reason. first; that so farre was the consent of the Bishops
from confirming of the Councell, that quite contrary it discouers
the vniust proceedings of it. For those Bishops that
gaue their voices to it, in the last Session; gaue their sentence
deliberatiue vpon the points which had beene treated vpon,
in the former Sessions vnder Paulus the third, and Iulius the
third, before that the said Bishops came to the Councell; a
thing contrary to all Ciuill Law, to equity it selfe, and to the
customes of all the Parliaments, high courts of Iustice, and

other Iudiciaries, which out of the persons of many Iudges,
are made one body; In all which, those that haue not beene
there all the time, are not suffered to deliuer their opinions.
            Secondly, it does not hereupon follow, that the Bishops
haue approued of this Councell, because they gaue their consents
to the Articles of it: For there is a great deale of difference
betwixt those that agree in opinion with the Decrees of
a Councell, and those that vphold an opinion, only because
the Councell hath decreed it. For our Aduersarie agrees in
opinion with the Deuill, in that it is written how God gaue
his Angels charge ouer our Lord Iesus Christ: yet he does not
I thinke beleeue it neuer the more for that the deuill said it.
Furthermore, at what time as they gaue their consent to the
Articles aforesaid, the Councell was not confirmed by the
Pope: now it is our Aduersaries owne Tenet, That a Councell
is voide, if not confirmed by the Pope; and this one reason he
makes to serue his owne turne against the Councell of Basil.
It is (saith he) a Rule most generally knowne, that Councels are
not to be receiued, without the Authoritie of the Pope. Whereupon
it followes, That those who gaue their consents to the
said Articles, did at the very same time when they gaue their
consents, hold the said Councell, to be as yet, no Councell.
So that a man cannot hereby proue, that they did receiue the
Councell, because they gaue their voices to the Articles.
            To the second Obiection,2. Obiection. which touches vpon the precedencie
of the most Christian King, he answers thus in briefe:
That the Councell was so farre from offering to diminish the Kings
Authoritie; that to the contrarie, the Kings Ambassadors by the
vnanimous consent of all, were seated immediatly next after the
Emperours; but the Spanish Ambassador, out of his ranke in another
place: to the end, that if it so fell out, that any man were
set out of his place, yet should it not be preiudiciall vnto him. He
should not haue answered, That the Councell seated the Kings
Ambassador next vnto the Emperors, but only, that the Councell
did not put him out of his right place. For in the 22. Session,
Monsieur du Ferrier, & de Pibrac, being suspitious of the
affection of the Councell, went in betimes to take vp their

places, insomuch that the Count de Luna Ambassador for the
King of Spaine, made publike protestation before the Fathers,
how that his place was taken vp: Whereupon Monsieur de Pibrac
required, that the said Protestation of his, might not be
preiudiciall to his Kings Prerogatiue, whose Ambassadors
had euer had the first place, next to the Emperours, as they
had at the Councels of Constance and Lateran: But for all
this, the Councell would not vmpire the businesse. And
though they tooke not the place away from the Kings Ambassadors,
yet our Aduersary confesseth, that they would
not pronounce that this place did belong vnto them. For
first he saith, That the Spanish Ambassador was set out of his
place. Secondly, That if any man were by chance set out of his
ranke, yet would not the Councel haue it to be preiudiciall vnto him.
Which is nothing else then to declare, That that place, which
they permitted the Kings Ambassadors to keepe for the
time for auoiding of contention (and for that they had betimes
already taken it vp much against the wils of the Fathers)
should not be preiudiciall vnto that right, which they
thought to be due vnto the King of Spaine.
            Secondly, put case the Councell to haue beene so euenly
affected (as he would make it) yet did they wrong (say I)
neuerthelesse, in forbearing to be vmpires openly in the Kings
cause; For there is no man, that can deny a thing most apparant,
at the first dash, but he must gaine vpon it, by little and
little. So that the first degree to it, is to call a thing into question:
nor does any man willfully call a thing into question,
vnlesse he purposes absolutely to deny it afterwards. So that
it is easily discerned, that the Councell at this time bringing
the Kings precedency into question, and making the King
of Spaine equall with him, had a plot in it, at the next
Councell to giue him the place aboue the King of France.
            Lastly, admit the Councell to haue had no such plot vpon
him, but only to carry an euen regard to both, yet the wrong
remaines neuerthelesse, it being no lesse iniurious to make an
inferior equall to his superior, then to make an equall, superior
to his equall.
            
               Thereremaines now (saith our Aduersarie) the last Obiection
only, viz: That the Councell of Trent hath decreed diuers things
against the Realme of France; which is the reason that it is not
receiued there. But this Obiection (saith he) serues little to the
purpose: For the question is not only about Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction,
but about Faith and Religion. Wherefore although that
the Decrees of the Councell for reformation bee not receiued in
France, yet the Decrees which treat aboue Faith, are.
            Our Aduersary cannot deny, but that the Councell of Trent
hath decreed some things against the French libertie; only
he answers, that all this hinders not the receiuing of the other
Articles which meerely concerne Faith. His owne words are,

                  This Obiection serues to little purpose, for that the question is not
only about Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, but about Faith, and
Religion.
                And I say againe, that this answer of his, serues as
little to the purpose; for that we treat not of things that concerne
either Reformation, or Faith, but of the Authoritie only
by which those Decrees were enacted. That is to say, whether
the Iudgement of the Councell of Trent, be in France receiued
for a sentence not lyable to be appealed from? and whether
they here beleeue those Articles wherein they agree with the
Councel implicitely, for that the Councell hath decreed them.
            For how shall it be proued, that a man who beleeues a
thing which another hath reported, did beleeue it vpon the
reporters credit, vnlesse he be confident withall, that he who
reported this, would not report an vntruth, and that he durst
trust him in any thing. But France now does not beleeue the
Councell of Trent in all things: for our Aduersarie himselfe
confesses, that it refused the Decrees of the Councel which
touched vpon Reformation. Wherupon it follows, that though
France doth agree in opinion with the Councel in what it decreed
concerning matters of Faith, yet does it not hold this
opinion for any regard to the Councels authority, but for some
other respect; else might he conclude as well, That the Huguenots
do receiue the said Councell, for that they beleeue diuers
Articles of it, which are against the Anabaptists, and other
Heretikes of our time. For euen as they refuse the authority of

the said Councell, in that very same part whereof they receiue
the Articles; so may we as well refuse the whole Councell,
and yet receiue all the Articles; there being the same respect
from the Articles of one part, to the authority of the
same part, as from the authority of the whole, to the authoritie
of the whole. But let vs now marke how he concludes,
that this Councell is receiued in France. Our Aduersaries owne
selfe confesseth (saith hee) That this Councell is receiued by the
Bishops: but what man can perswade himselfe, that the Bishops
haue another faith and religion from that professed by the King,
and all the Catholike people? For, how may the King bee styled,
The most Christian, if hee were of a Faith singular from the Bishops?
And how should the people bee called, The Lords Flocke,
vnlesse they acknowledged some Pastors?
            
            See then, this in briefe is his Argument: The Bishops haue
receiued the Councell; The King and the people haue beleeued
the Bishops. Ergo, The Councell hath beene receiued by the
King, the Bishops, the Clergie, and likewise of all the people of
France. I haue shewen already how he hath not made it good
as yet, that the Bishops which then were, haue receiued it: and
for the Bishops and Clergie at this day, though diuers of
them for the aduancement of the Holy League, haue endeauoured
to cause the said Councell to bee receiued; yet might
the King and the people refuse it notwithstanding, and yet
not cease for all that, to bee of the same faith with them; in
so much as the approbation of that Councell is not an Article
of faith: for the Councell of Ephesus hath expresly prohibited
vs the addition of any other Article of faith vnto those which
were then receiued; in which number, the receiuing of the
Tridentine Councell is not. But, supposing that they were not
of the same faith, what danger could come of it? The King
(saith he) should not then bee most Christian, nor the people Christ
his flocke. First, as for the King, for as much as this reason is
drawne from his Title; I say, that if the King were the greatest
Heretike in the world, yet should hee not bee depriued of
his Title. Henry the eight, King of England, receiued the
Title of Defender of the faith from Pope Leo the tenth, for

writing against Luther. King Edward the sixt, and the last
Queene of famous memory, and the now raigning KING,
who haue changed the Religion, for defending of which,
King Henry receiued this Title, doe still keep the same Style:
And by very good right too; for Titles, though personall, and
proper only to the first of the Race that receiue them, (as Catholike
to Ferdinando King of Arragon; Defender of the faith, to
Henry the eight King of England) yet doe they descend vnto
their successors, as ornaments onely annexed to their State.
So that it is not Philip of Austria, who is Catholike in that
sense, but the King of Spaine. For, if wee consider of Kings
onely in point of Religion, the King of France may be as good
a Catholike as the King of Spaine; and the King of Spaine as
good a Christian as the King of France; and yet the Title of
Christian belongs onely vnto the one, and the Title of Catholike
to the other.
            But aboue all, is this reason ill applied against the King of
France, for that Christian is not a title to distinguish one Christian
from another, but to distinguish them all from Pagans;
and in this sense is it giuen to the King of France, as to the first
King of Europe, that abolished Paganisme, and who still had
the most warres of all with the Sarazens, enemies of the name
of Christ. True it is, that this title might incline him the
more to imbrace that doctrine which is best, but for that it
hath not beene hitherto agreed vpon which of the two is the
best, wee must not proue one doubt by another. For the
Huguenots may as well conuert this reason to perswade the
King to reforme the Church, as the Catholikes vse it, to incline
him to maintaine the Romish Religion: howbeit there
is not any thing that the King can doe, more worthy of this
Title of his, then to doe both; that is to say, to maintaine the
Romane Church, and to reforme it. Neither is there any contradiction
in these two, seeing there is no better meanes to
make the Iron endure long, then to scowre away the rust; nor
to maintaine the Church of Rome, then to reforme the abuses
of it. Neuerthelesse, to establish such a course, that any of
the Iron bee not scraped away, in stead of the rust; and yet

see that it bee bright scowred; there is no safer meanes then
to doe quite contrary to that which our Aduersay aduiseth;
viz. To let their Councell of Trent sleep, and to call another,
wherein both parts may haue indifferent hearing: by which
meanes, if so bee that there bee any corruption in the Church
of Rome, it may bee seene into and purged. And if there be
any error in the doctrine of the Huguenots; they may bee evicted
and instructed in a better faith. And this were the way
to reunite vs all in one faith; and this would bee an act indeede
well worthy a most Christian King.
            3 But descend wee now to the people: How should they
(saith he) bee the sheepe of Christs flocke, if so bee they acknowledg
not any Pastors? I answer; That they may well enough acknowledge
their Pastors, though they beleeue not iust as the
Pastors of their Countrey doe. For that no man is obliged to
build his faith, but vpon an infallible foundation: and it is
confessed by the Catholikes themselues, that all the Bishops
in a whole countrey may erre in point of faith. So that the people
are not alwaies obliged, to ground their faith vpon that
of their Bishops, and consequently may bee of another faith,
and yet bee of the flocke of Iesus Christ: As in very troath,
our Sauiour does not call them his Sheep which heard the
Bishops, but those that heare his voyce; which is, the word
of God.
            Let vs now looke vpon his conclusion: And so (saith hee)
is the Councell honoured of the King, the Bishops, the Clergie,
and likewise of all the people of France. Admit it were so; yet
for all this does it not follow, that it is receiued in France, vnlesse
hee can shew withall, that all the Estates doe receiue it:
that is, The Church, the Nobility, and the People: But hee
makes no mention of the Nobility, but onely of the Church,
and the third Estate, so that at the most it is receiued but of
two of the three Estates: which may be the cause that our Aduersary,
to keep vp the number diuides the Church into two
parts, viz. Bishops, and Clergie: The Councell (saith hee) is
receiued of the Bishops, the Clergie, and likewise of all the people of
France. Which is a new diuision of the Estates, neuer, as I

perswade my selfe, heard of before. Iudge then what iust occasion
the Nobilitie of France now haue to reiect this Councell,
when as those who would haue the Councell receiued,
doe reiect the Nobility.
         
         
            CAP. 6.
            
               That the Huguenots may very rightly bee accounted members of
the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romane Church.
            
            
               THis Chapter at the first blush, seemes to
treat of the same Argument that the first
does; for hauing there proued it, That
the Huguenots are of the same religion
with vs Catholikes, it may follow also,
that they bee of the same Church too:
And yet to my thinking, these two Chapters
may very well bee parted; not so much in regard of the
difference of the nature of the subiect, as of the humours of
the persons. For commonly, when a Huguenot would draw
a Catholike to his opinion, he begins euermore with the particular
Controuersies; and so, vpon the purity of his doctrine,
hee inferres the verity of his Church.
            A Catholike, on the other side, when hee would winne a
Huguenot, beginnes still with the Church, and so by the verity
of the Church, concludes the purity of his doctrine: and
commonly, when either of them gets the other out of this
tracke, they are to seeke; which is one of the reasons that they
cannot satisfie the aduerse partie. For he that would perswade
another, must not begin with that principle which to him
seemes best, (though indeed it be so) but with that which
seemes best in his opinion whom hee desires to perswade; otherwise,
hee shall but lose his labour.
            For, when a Huguenot shall haue vrged a thousand passages
of holy Scripture, to proue the truth of his owne particular
assertion, hee shall not bee a whit the nearer; and why?
For that a Catholike will say instantly with himselfe; What
though I cannot answer him, yet another may: and if I am to

beleeue nothing which I am not able to maintaine by disputation,
then should I not beleeue the proceeding of the holy
Ghost, the vnion of both Natures in Iesus Christ, the mysteries of
the holy Trinity: all which I haue beleeued, without being able
to maintain them, or so much as vnderstand them. And euen
so, the authority of the same Church which makes mee beleeue
these mysteries, without being able to maintaine them,
makes me also to beleeue the holy sacrament of the Altar, Purgatory,
&c. without being able to maintaine them. So that if a
Hugu: proceeds no further, & does not shew a reason how a
man may be assured of these mysteries without the Churches
authority; or else (which I hold more reasonable) why wee
ought wholly to relye vpon the authority of the Church in
one point, and not in another; hee shall neuer say ought to
the purpose. Nor can the Catholikes haue any happier success
in their perswasiues; for when they talke to the Huguenots
of the Church; how the Church saies this, and the Church
saies that, and the Church cannot erre: They who are not
brought vp to such kinde of phrases; and who found their
faith vpon this perswasion, That the Scripture is cleere on their
sides; What care wee (will they say) what the Church saith,
so long as wee agree in opinion with the word of God. So
that a Catholike shall neuer bee able to perswade them to any
thing, if hee beginnes not at their foundation, and proue, that
the Scripture makes not so clearely for them, as they imagine
it does: and then when they once perceiue, that they cannot
confute the Catholikes by Scripture, they will bee compelld
to confesse; That a man can haue no assurance of his faith,
without submitting his own iudgment to the iudgment of the
Church: which (as wee say) according to Christs owne
promise, is infallibly accompanied with the holy Spirit. For
mine own part, although it bee not my intention to entice
any man, either to one Religion or the other, but to
qualifie onely the passions of men: yet for feare that I
should commit the same errour in this Treatise of Pacification,
which they often doe in the course of their perswasiues, I
thoght good to subioine this Chapter also; to the end that my

reasons might be drawne from the principles of both Religions.
And thus hauing proued in the first Chapter, by examination
of the particular questions, according to the Huguenots
method, That they be no Heretikes; I was also desirous to
adde this Chapter, that according to the Catholikes manner
of proceeding (that is as much to say, as according to the Nature
of the Church) I might also proue them (the Huguenots)
to be no Heretikes. For, it were but labour lost, to tell
many of our Catholikes, that the Huguenots hold many of
the fundamentall points of faith as well as we, seeing they take
not the skantling of an heretike by his opinions, but only by
this marke, That he is out of the Church, vnderstanding thereby
no other Church, then that which we call Catholike, Apostolike,
and Romane: excluding all those out of the Church, to
whom these three titles may not be giuen, what opinion soeuer
they be of. For which reason I resolued to proue, that these
three titles doe belong vnto the Huguenots.
            
            And first touching the title of Catholike;
               Catholike. the Church is 
called Catholike in three respects. First, in regard of it selfe.
2. In regard of the Iewes. 3. In regard of Heretikes.
            
            Now the Church is called Catholike in regard of it selfe,
because in the vniuersalitie thereof,How the Church is called Catholike in respect of it selfe. it comprehends all times,
and all places, viz: the whole number of the Elect, as well
those who haue beene since the beginning of the world, and
are now departed and triumphant in heauen, enioying euerlasting
blisse; as those that are ordained to the like blessednesse
whether now aliue, or to be borne hereafter. Which definition
is founded vpon the Scriptures; for S. Pauls words are;
The Church of the first-borne,
               Heb. 12. 23. 
               which are written in Heauen: and
who are written in heauen, but the Elect? from whom the reprobates
are in this specialty distinguished,Reuel. 13. 18. 
               That their names
are not written in the Booke of the Lambe. The Church then
consists of the Elect, who are not restrained to any place or
time, For Iesus Christ hath redeemed with his bloud (saith Saint
Iohn) Out of euery kinred,
               Reuel. 5. 9. 
               and tongue, and people, and nation.
With which definition the Fathers iointly consent;August. de Catechizandis Rudibus, cap. 12. 
               All
they (saith Saint Augustine) which are holy and sanctified,

which are, haue beene, and shall be, are Citizens of the heauenly
Ierusalem:
               Greg. Mor. in Iob. lib. 28. cap. 9. And S. Gregory the Pope (that my proofe may be
the more authenticall) saith, That all the Elect are embraced in
the bosome of the Church, and all the Reprobates are without. And
yet was poore Iohn Husse burnt for an Heretike, for affirming
the very same.
            O wicked Catholikes, that haue made a man to be burnt
for an Heretike, for affirming no more, then what a Saint had
done, and (which is more) then a Pope had said before him.
So then in this signification, neither the Church of Rome,
nor that which themselues call the Reformed Church, can properly
be called the Catholike Church, but only parts of it.
Nay, we cannot truly affirme, that they be parts of the Catholike
Church; but that God hath both in the Romane Church,
and in the Reformed, some that be members of the Catholike
Church. Which is as much to say, as that diuers shall be
saued in both Churches. Like as there were many amongst
the Iewes at the comming of Iesus Christ, and at this day be
in the Greeke Church, and in Prester Iohns Country, which
doe embrace the Christian faith, without acknowledging the
Pope. So that if we appropriate the title of Catholike to the
Romane Church only taking it in this signification; it must
needs so low, that either all the Catholikes are elected (though
the Catholikes themselues write that diuers Popes haue beene
damned) or else, that no Iew was euer saued before Christs
comming, and that God hath not had his Church at all times:
or that no Greeke nor Affrican can be saued in our time; and
then God should not haue his Church in all places. Againe,
if we attribute not this title of Catholike only to the Church
of Rome, I can see no reason why the reformed Church should
be more excluded then the rest. To be briefe, when we passe
our censure vpon any man, whether he be of the Catholike
Church, or not; we must speake either according to Faith, or
according to Charitie. If according to Faith, we cannot say,
that such or such a man is a Catholike, because it is God that
knoweth who are his,
               2 Tim. 2. 19. saith S. Paul: But if wee passe our iudgment
according to charity, this will haue vs esteeme all those

to bee of the true Catholike Church, which bee of the visible;
of which I will next speake, and shew how it may bee termed
Catholike.
            2 The Church, as I haue proued already, comprehends 
all the Elect, those as well that be already in heauen,How the Church is called Catholike, in respect of the Iewes. as those
that are yet on earth, and remaine mingled among the wicked;
which last, though generally more in number, yet the
Elect beare the name of the better part. So that both good
and bad, which make an outward profession of the true faith,
are reputed members of the true Church. According to the
Parable of the net,Mat. 13. which held the bad fishes as well as the good.
This Church was separated from the rest of the Gentiles,
with a partition wall (as it were) and before the comming of
Christ pend vp in one country, and restrained to the Family
of Israel: But since Christs comming,Ephes. 2. 14. 
               This partition wall is (as
S. Paul saith) broken downe; so that neither Iew nor Greeke are
excluded. And by reason of this difference, that the Iewes in
those dayes had onely this priuiledge, and that now no one
particular country hath it more then another, the Church is
called Catholike: that is to say, Spread all the world ouer. And
for that shee is so vniuersall, shee is diuided into particular
Churches: As in Saint Pauls time, into the Church of Ephesus,
of Rome, of Galatia, of Corinth, &c. and no one of these
Churches hauing any priuiledge more then another, they
were all together called The Church Catholike: not that it is
alwayes euery-where, but for that no country is excluded,
and no place priuiledged. So then, no place being excluded,
there may be other Churches besides that of Rome; and no
place being priuiledged, euen Rome it selfe may be cut off
from the Church.
            3 Thirdly, the Church is called Catholike, in respect of 
the Donatists,How the Church is called Catholike, in regard of Heretikes. who denied the Church to bee dispersed all
ouer the world; but held it to be coopt vp in Affrica: wherevpon
it came to passe, that those Churches which held the
contrary, were called the Catholike Churches. Euen as at
this day, these Churches that hold, the Church to haue need
of reformation, are called The Reformed Churches: Which is

the reason why the more ancient Fathers neuer vsed this
terme Catholike, to distinguish the pure Churches from the
hereticall; but called them Orthodoxall. But in processe of
time, by reason that the Orthodoxe Churches held, that the
Church was Catholike or Vniuersall; these two words Catholike
and Orthodoxall, were taken in one and the same signification:
so that at last, this title of Catholike, was not onely
giuen to the Church, to distinguish the Orthodox from the
Donatists, but also from all other Heretikes. For a Catholike
in proper speech is not opposite to all sorts of Heretikes, but
to the Iewes onely and the Donatists. But for as much as
custome is the matter of words (as we see in this word Tyrant,
anciently taken in good part for a King, and now onely for a
bad King) this word Catholike is taken contrary to his nature,
in the signification of a pure Church; in such a sense as that
a particular Church may be called a Catholike Church, and
more or lesse Catholike, proportionably as it is more or lesse
pure. So that the question betweene the Catholikes and the
Huguenots, lies not in this point, viz. Which of the Churches
is the Church Catholike; but whether of them is most
Catholike, and which most corrupted: for in some degree
both of them may be Catholike, so long as they hold the
substance of faith, (as I shewed in the first Chapter) and both
of them in some sort may be corrupt: it being a thing most
certaine, That euery visible Church may haue errors, more
or lesse.Bernard▪ in Cantica, Sermone. 38 
               The Church (saith Saint Bernard) as long as shee is in
the tabernacle of this body, hath not attained vnto the perfection of
beauty, and is not therefore absolutely faire: For it is the priuiledge
of the Church Triumphant onely to be faire, and as S.
Paul saith, without spot or wrinckle.
               Ephes. 5. True it is indeed that the
Church is sometime called faire, but this is euer comparatiuely:Cant. 1.
wherefore the Bridegroome in the Canticles saith of his
Spouse (which is the Church) that shee is the fairest of women:
that is, not simply faire (saith S. Bernard) but the fairest
among women. And for that selfe same reason, is she in one and
the same verse, styled both blacke and faire. I am blacke (saith
the Spouse) but I am comely.
            
            
               I am not ignorant how that the Ancients also did vse this
word Catholike, for a distinction from an Heretike, in another
signification; which in truth was according to the proper
interpretation of the word, taking Catholike or Vniuersall,
for a marke of the true Church. For which reason in the
ancient Church, when as the whole visible Church yet retained
the faith receiued from the Apostles, and that some
part of it became corrupted; for the exact discerning vnto
whether side we ought to leane, Vincentius Lyrinensis
               Vincent. Lyr. l. aduers. haereses. gaue
this Rule: What else should we doe (saith he) but prefer the safety
of the body, before a rotten member. And therefore, for that the
body of the Church was at that time sound, all the Church
was called Catholike, for so much this word Body, as well as
that word Catholike, implies an vniuersality; so that the distinction
of Catholike and Heretike, serues but to distinguish
the sound body, from a corrupted member. But so soone as
the body it selfe became corrupted, then this rule and distinction
failed. For which reason Vincentius makes a difference
betweene a Catholike in place, and a Catholike in time. And
euer when a Catholike in place is not a sure marke, he hath
recourse vnto a Catholike in time. But (saith he) if any new
infection goes on,
               Eodem lib. adu. haeres. 
               not onely to corrupt a part, but the whole Church,
then must we cleaue to antiquity. So that the difference between
the Catholikes and the Huguenots, lying in this point, Whether
the body of the Church be corrupted or no? wee must
not speake of the Church which is Catholike according to
place, but according to time. And that Church is Catholike
(saith Vincentius) which holds that religion which hath beene
euer hitherto embraced. And to discerne which Religion
hath beene alwayes embraced, when as the body of the
Church, or the visible Church (as saith the same Vincentius)
is corrupted; we must still haue recourse vnto Antiquity, and
say with Tertullian, Illudverum, quod primum:
               Tertul. lib, de praescript▪ adu, haeres. 
               
                  That is truest
which is ancientest. So as that is the Catholike Church, which agrees
in faith with the more Primitiue Church.
                So that if wee
would discusse it, whether the Catholikes or the Huguenots
be most properly the right Catholikes; wee must consider

first, whether of them best holds of the faith of the Apostles:
and next, of that of the ancient Doctors and Councels of
the Church.
            As for the Title Apostolike; The Church may bee called
Apostolike, as well in regard of the Writings, as of the Preaching
of the Apostles. As for their Writings, those Churches
which imbrace the doctrine deliuered in them, are intituled
Apostolike; yea, and more or lesse Apostolike, as they do more
or lesse agree, or disagree, to or from the said doctrine. So
that the word Apostolike is all one with the word Orthodox,
or with Catholike, taken in the last signification. And if the
Church of the Huguenots may bee intituled Catholike, or Orthodox,
they may also by the same reason be called Apostolike:
nay, and more properly Apostolike then Catholike. For the
visible Church, being (as I haue shewed) not absolutely, but
comparatiuely, more or lesse Catholike or Apostolike: the Huguenots,
though they may offend in default, and so be lesse Catholike
rather; yet in this, they offend rather in the excesse, and
are too Apostolike: as being so strict, that they will readily beleeue
nothing, but what the Apostles haue written.
            
                Secondly, those Churches were called Apostolike, which
were instructed by the liuely voice of the Apostles,Apostolike. and where
the Apostles haue had their seats, as Ierusalem, Antioch,
Ephesus, Alexandria, &c. where the Apostles Peter, Iames,
Iohn, and Marke the Euangelist, sate; and are therefore from
all Antiquity styled Apostolicall Seaes, as well as Rome: howbeit
that this signification is rather an ornament then a mark,
of a pure Church. For Antioch, Alexandria, and other Churches
of Greece, where the Apostles preached; haue either altogether
forsaken the name of Christ, or are at the least (according
to the Catholikes Tenet) quite cut off for Schisme
and Heresie, from the communion of the true Church: and
France, Spaine, Poland, Germany, England, and Denmarke,
where the Apostles neuer had any Bishopricks, haue sithence
beene the true Churches. So that in this signification a
Church may bee pure, and yet not bee Apostolike; and a
Church which is Apostolike, may be impure.
            
               The last title, though first in estimation with the Catholiques,How the Huguenots may be said to be of the Roman Church. is 
that of Roman; which I haue obserued to haue beene taken in three
seuerall sorts. First, the Roman Church is only taken for the Diocesse
of Rome, and was in the beginning, for the Citie of Rome
alone. As in S. Pauls time, who inscribed an Epistle seuerally to
Rome alone, as he did likewise to those Churches of Corinth, Ephesus,
Galatia, &c. For had the Church of Rome beene euery where at
that time spread abroad, he had not needed to haue written to other
Churches seuerally, because that in writing to that of Rome, he had
then written to them all: And yet would our people needs make
vse of this Epistle, to proue by it, The Roman church to be the catholique
Church, because that in it,Rom. 1. 8. 
               S. Paul saies, Your faith is spread
abroad in all the world: as if S. Paul had not said the same to the
Church of Thessalonica,
               1 Thess. 1. 8. 
               Your faith which you haue to God-ward is
spread abroad. But had the Church of Rome beene (as they would
haue it) esteemed by S. Paul as all one with the Catholique; without
all doubt his Epistle to the Romans had beene intituled Catholique,
as well as those of S. Iohn, S. Peter, S. Iames, and S. Iude, which
are therefore stiled Catholique, for that they were written to the
Catholique Church. Now taking the Roman Church in this signification,
I confes that not the Huguenots Churches alone are separated
from the Roman Church, but all other catholique Churches besides:
so that to this day they in France make a distinction of sundry
customes of the Roman Church, and of the Church Gallicane.
            
            Secondly, the Church of Rome is taken for the Westerne Church,
insomuch that the Roman, Latine, and Occidental Church, doth signifie
one and the same thing, to distinguish it from the Greeke and
Easterne Church; iust as the Empire of the East, and the Empire of
the West, were called the Empires of Rome and of Constantinople,
because that these two Cities were the chiefe seats of the Empire:
and so by reason of the dignitie of the Citie of Rome, which was the
seat of the Emperours that reigned in the West, all this Westerne
part, was called the Roman Empire, and all the Westerne Church
the Roman Church: that is to say; The Church contained vnder
the Roman Empire. So then, if we call it the Roman Church, for
distinguishing it from the Greeke and Easterne Churches; then also
may the Huguenots Churches be members likewise of the Roman
Church, for that they be Westerne, and not Greeke, nor Easterne
               
Churches. If in respect of the Roman Empire, (taking the Roman
Empire largely, as it was) they also be vnder the Empire, and by
consequence, vnder the Church. But taking the Empire as it now
is, then may the Churches of Germanie, some of which haue shak't
off the Popes authoritie, be more properly stiled members of the
Roman Church, than Rome it selfe; insomuch as Germanie and not
Rome, is at this day called the Roman Empire.
            Lastly, the Roman Church is vnderstood, for all those, that doe in
Faith communicate with the Church of Rome: that is to say, those
that be of the Romish Religion. I demand then their meaning, whether
they vnderstand by the Romish Religion, those points in which
the Huguenots doe agree with vs, or those wherein they disagree
from vs, or both the one and the other.
            If those points wherein they agree with vs; then they are directly
of the Roman faith. If for the points only wherein they dissent,
then are the beleefe in the Trinitie, and all the Articles of the three
Creeds, of the Apostles, of Nice, and of Athanasius, wherein they
doe agree, no Articles of the Romish Religion.
            But if they take the Roman Religion, for all the points of it together,
both for those wherein they doe agree, and all the other too;
I demand once againe, whether so exact an agreement in all points,
be required or not? And if not; then seeing that the points whereupon
the Huguenots be agreed with the Catholikes, be for number
more, and for importance greater, than those questions are, vpon
which they disagree; they may yet neuerthelesse be reputed to be
of the Roman Church and Faith: forasmuch as things for the most
part take their Denomination from the better part. Euen as we vse
to say; those people are of a sanguine cōplexion, in whom bloud is
predominant, although their temper be of other humours too. But
if we affirme, that no man can be of this Church, vnlesse he beleeues
all, and the selfe-same, that the Church of Rome doth; then
say I, that whilest we goe about to proue, that the Huguenots be not
of our Church, we shall shew withal, that we haue not any one man,
who is absolutely of the Church: insomuch as that there is no one
man, learned or vnlearned; that beleeues all, iust as the Church
doth.
            For it is the credit of our Doctors, to maintaine singular opinions
by themselues; which may be the reason why Bellarmine, the

greatest Aduersarie to the Huguenots, accuses all the Catholikes that
euer were before him, of Error, and those especially, which haue
written against the Huguenots; as Genebrard, Pighius, Eckius, Hosius,
Canus, Caietane, Scotus, Durand, S. Bonauenture, S. Thomas,
S. Damascene: (for he spares not the Saints neither) the like courtesie
also shewes he to the Ancient Fathers, S. Augustine, S. Bernard,
S. Chrysostome, and much adoe he hath to let S. Paul alone So that
amongst so many dissentions, either hath the Church beleeued
nothing at all, or else hath the Church beleeued them altogether,
that is to say, contradictions; or else that the Church hath beleeued
but only some of them: and perchance, they haue all beleeued
contrary to what the Church beleeueth.
            Come we now to the common people, and they vnderstand not
the one halfe part of that, which we teach them: and when wee
tell them of such points of Diuinitie, wherein they were neuer
brought vp; their fancies framing Idea's vnto themselues, vpon
what they heare, make them conceiue Chimaera's in their braines,
and to beleeue the quite contrary to what the Church doth, before
they are well aware of it.
            But our Catholikes now haue found out a remedie for that;
which is, That an implicite Faith is enough for the common people,
which is as much to say, as to thinke only, & to beleeue only as the
Church doth, though they doe not so indeed. So then, seeing that
an implicite Faith is, To beleeue the contrary, and yet thinke they
beleeue the same; if we could but once perswade the Huguenots,
that they doe verily beleeue as our Church of Rome doth in euery
thing, although indeed they doe not, they shall be of our Church.
See then, if I haue not taken a better method to conuert them, than
any other Catholikes haue yet light vpon. They labour to conuert
them to our Explicite faith, which were to make them beleeue all
the particulars of our Faith. And I, perceiuing them altogether
vncapable of this Explicite Faith, haue endeuoured my selfe to
make them embrace the Implicite Faith, which is much the easier
of the two, and to perswade them to beleeue, that they doe already
beleeue, as our Church beleeueth: and consequently, that their
Faith is the same, and their Church the same. That so by this perswasion
they may proue, if not so good Catholiques as the Priests,
yet at least, as good Catholiques as the people.
            
               But to returne againe to my purpose; it appeares by what hath
beene said; that if we stand for so strict an vnion in euery point,
then will not the Catholiques themselues, neither learned nor vnlearned,
be of the Roman Church. Forasmuch as the learned will
not beleeue as the rest doe, and the vnlearned cannot. And would
we content our selues with an essentiall vnion, the Huguenots may
then well be of it. Whereupon it followes, that we must
needs yeeld to one of these; That either the Huguenots
are of the Roman Church, or else that
the Catholikes are not.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Errata in some Copies.
            Pag. 54. l. 5. for Authoritie (in the first place) reade Articles.
            
            
               End
         
      
   