
      
         
            
            
            
               A briefe expoſition
of ſuch Chapters of the
olde teſtament as vſually are
redde in the Church at common praier on
the Sundayes, ſet forth for the better
helpe and inſtruction of the vnlearned.
By Thomas Cooper
Biſhop of Lincolne.
            Whatſoeuer things are written before
time they are written for our learning
that wee through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures
might haue hope.
            Rom. 15.
            ¶Imprinted at London by H. D. for Rafe
                  •
               
Newbery dwelling in Fleeteſtreete.
         
         
            
            
            An Epiſtle to the Reader.
            
               
                  I Am not of
that opinion
(good chriſtian
Reader)
that I
thinke the
ſcriptures of
God, as touchinge
the
ſubſtance of doctrine contained in them,
be of ſuch difficultie to the learned and
ſkilfull in the tongues, that they may not,
with the aſsiſtance of Gods grace and
meane diligence, eaſily atttaine to the vnderſtanding
of them. But for ſomuch as
God worketh nowe by ordinarie meanes,
and not by miraculous inſpiration, as hee
did in the Apoſtles time, it can not be denied
but that to the vnlearned reader or

hearer that wanteth the helpe of knoweledge
and vnderſtanding, they may bring
ſome difficultie, as well for the matter in
ſundrie particular places, as generally for
the phraſe and maner of penninge farre
differing from other writers. Wherefore
I thought it woulde not be vnprofitable to
the Church of Chriſt, nor vnpleaſaunt to
the Godly, if, for the help and furtherance
of ſuch vnlearned perſons, I did ſet foorth
ſome briefe and plaine expoſition of the
Chapters of the old teſtament, which vſually
are red in the Church on the appointed
dayes of common prayer.
            Beſide the motion of ſome godly perſons,
and other cauſes, wherewith I haue bene
induced herevnto, one principall is this,
that the aduerſaries of the Goſpell, when
they are by vs blamed for keeping the people
of God in ignorance of the Scriptures;

and hauinge their common prayer in a
ſtraunge tongue, haue nothing more readie,
then this anſwere, that the common
people do not only heare the Pſalmes and
other partes of the Scripture euen nowe
that they be in Engliſh with as little fruit
and ſmall edefying, as they did before, but
alſo with ſome perill of conceiuing erronious
and falſe opinions by hearing thoſe
thinges which they doe not vnderstande.
This anſwere, as it is vntrue in a great
part, (for that we ſee manye nowe, which
conceiue good inſtruction and ſweete comfortes
by hearing the Scriptures redde,
where none did before,) ſo I cannot denie,
but in ſome it is to true, But ſurely in ſuch
perſons as either vpon 
                  〈◊〉
                opinion
miſlike the ſeruice and ſtate of religion,
or elſe as men giuen ouer to the cares
of the world and luſtes of the fleſh haue no

ſenſe of God or godlyneſſe. Otherwiſe
there is no man ſo ſimple but that by learning
the Scriptures, although hee vnderſtande
not the whole matter, nor euerye
clauſe therof, yet he ſhall light vpon ſome
partes whereby he may gather both good
instruction of his faith, and profitable leſſons
for the amendement of his life. Yea,
and the verye Godleſſe wordling that is
furthest from all true ſenſe of Religion
and holyneſſe, ſhall heare thoſe terrible
threatninges of Gods iustice, that when
God ſhall touch him by ſickeneſse or other
affliction, bee hee neuer ſo deſperate, ſhall
make his conſcience to quake. But that
the more good might bee wrought in mens
hearts, and the leſſe euill conceyued in erronious
opinions, I thought ſome ſuch traueile
as this is might be a very good meanes,
and eſpeciallye where they lacke the

preſence of ſome learned and diſcrete mā
to teach them. In this doing albeit my
conſcience did beare me witneſſe of a good
meaning, and did put mee in hope to doe
ſome good thereby: yet, to confeſſe the
truth, I both was and yet am ſomewhat abaſhed
to giue my traueiles abroade vnto
the world. I know how daintie theſe days
are, and haue felt by experience how waiwarde
and vncharitable many be in ſcanning
of other mens doinges, very ready to
ſhake euery fillable and letter, and without
any iust cauſe at all to obiect heynous
and blaſphemous crimes. If I pleaſe not
ſuch perſons (gentle Reader) thou maiſt
not greatly maruaile, For in dede neither
doe I ſeke it, neither thinke my ſelfe hable
to doe it. I write not to them, I write to the
good and modeſt Chriſtian that delighteth
in reading and hearing of the worde

of God, and lacketh thoſe ordinarie helps,
whereby he may the ſooner attaine to the
vnderstanding of it. And, this my purpoſe
conſidered, I trust, ſhall bee ſufficient to
moue the godlye learned of the Church to
interprete my doinges to the best, and to
take this my ſmall traueile in good parte,
although they finde not in it a number of
things, which are of neceſsitie to be looked
for in ſuch woorkes, as are layde forth for
learned men to traueile in They ſhall not
finde here, either eloquence in penning, or
great ſhewe and varietie of learning, or
curious triall and conference of expoſitions
and tranſlations, or large diſcourſes of
difficult matters in controuerſie. Theſe
things the wiſe and learned know are fitter
for mother kinde of writing, then for
this. They ſhall finde here a briefe and
eaſie expoſition of the texte, whereby the

vnlearned reader may not only the ſooner
attaine to the true ſenſe and meaning of
the holyghost, the authour of the Scriptures,
but alſo learne ſome godly inſtructions
out of the ſame. If I had written to
the learned, I woulde haue indeuoured to
my power in ſome other points to haue ſatiſfied
their expectation: but in this I haue
tempered my ſelfe wholye to the vnderſtanding
of the moſt ſimple. My meaning
was before I had publiſhed anye part, to
haue written of ſo manye of the Chapters
as are redde on the dayes of common praier,
and alſo of the Pſalmes. But forſomuch
as my health and ſome other neceſſarie
buſineſſes will not ſuffer me to doe it
with ſo much ſpeede as my deſire was, I
thought it not good in the meane time to
ſtay from them that nede the help hereof,
ſo much as I haue preſently done. The reſidue

as God ſhall giue mee ſtrength and
leaſure, I minde in conuenient time to finiſhe,
and ſo I leaue thee to the direction
of Gods holy ſpirite, and theſe my doings
to the charitable iudgement
of the godlye.
            Vale
         
         
            
            Faultes eſcaped.
            
               Fol. 32. b. for Capter, reade Chapter.
               33. a. for the ſame and diſtinctly, read, plainly and diſtinctly.
               64. a. for continuance, reade countenance.
               79. a. for felicie, read felicitie.
               82. b. for Waruell though, read no Waruell though.
               101. for where, read were.
               111. a. for If, reade it.
               113. a. for peregrinage, reade pilgrimage.
               119. a. for ta obſerue, reade to obſerue.
               124. b. for mercie God, reade mercie of God.
               127. a. for Iſaac olde, reade Iſaac waxed olde.
               139. b. for be the life, reade by the life.
               143 b. for then the vndertaking, reade then by the vndertaking.
               147. a. for interprete, reade Interpreters.
               175. b. for fellowes, reade followers.
               239. a. for, that Woiſes here vttereth that is, reade, that Woiſes vttereth
is, and leaue out that.
               241. b. for but oblation, reade but an oblation.
               242. b. for had not gathered, reade had now gathered.
               261. a. And made to them his lowe, leaue it out.
               279. a. for of his flocke, reade of his ſtocke.
               293. b. had ruled, leaue out had.
               296. b. for to be thought that, reade to be thought but that.
for in his flocke, reade in his ſtocke.
               320. b. for moyſting, reade moyſture.
               321. b. for this their beautie, reade this the beautie.
               322. a. for by this benefite, reade by his benefite.
               337. b. for the chil, reade the children.
               354. a. for benefices, reade benefites.
               355. b. for endue, reade endure.
               350. a. in the .11. ſide of Ddd. for continuance, reade countenance.
               380. b. for riches his benefites, reade riches of his benefites.
               382. b. for other Iewes did, reade other Iewes did thinke.
            
            
               
IN the Copie that the Printer vſed, ſundrie applications
of the text were ſtriken out, bicauſe I thought
them ſomewhat troublous to the vnlearned reader,
and bicauſe the quotations in the margent that were
made for the confirmation of ſuch applications, were
not ſo plainly ſtriken out, they printed the ſame quotations,
and thereby it commeth to paſſe, that ſundry
of them in the margent are not fitlye to the places
which they are ſet againſt, as theſe eſpecially that folowe.
            
               Fol. 2. b. Deut. 3. b. 15.
               Pſal. 77. d. 41.
               Fol. 4. a. Eſay. 66. a. 3.
               Pſal. 51. d. 17.
               Pſal. 39. b. 9.
               Fol. 13. b. lo. 10. a. 3.
               2. Tim. 2. c. 19.
               2. Pet. 2. b. 9.
               Fol. 14. a. 1. Tim. 4. a. 1.
               Fol. 17. a. Iacob. 4. e. 9.
               Pſal. 74. b. 8.
               Fol. 18. a. 1. Reg. 20. e. 30.
               Fol. 24. b. Eccle. 7. b. 14.
               Fol. 25. a. Exod. 5. e. 21.
               Rom. 7. b. 13.
               Fol. 57. a. Iacob. 4. c. 10.
               Fol. 104. b. Dan. 14. a. 8. 10.
               Fol. 206. a. 1. Cor. 7. d. 19.
               Gal. 6. d. 15.
               Fol. 207. a Io. 4. d. 24.
               2. Cor. 3. d. 17.
               Phil. 3. a. 3.
               Eſay. 43. b. 7.
               Fol. 215. b. Pſal. 108 d. 29.
               Pſal. 110. a. 1.
               Luc. 1. g. 68.
               Ephe. 1. a. 3.
               Fol. 232. a. Ephe. 4. a. 4.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt Sunday in Aduent
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 1.
            
               THe viſion of Eſay the ſonne of Amos, which he 
ſawe vpon Iuda and Hieruſalem, in the dayes of
Vzia and Ioathan, Ahaz and Ezekia, kings of Iuda.
               2 Heare,Deut. 31. a. 1 O heauens, and hearken O earth: for
the Lord hath ſpoken, I haue nouriſhed and brought vp children,
and they haue done vnfaythfully againſt mée.
               3 The Oxe hath knowne his owner, and the Aſſe his maiſters
cribbe: (but) Iſraell hath not knowne, my people hath
giuen no heede. 4. Ah ſinfullnation, a people laden wyth
iniquitie, a ſeede of the wicked, corrupt children: they haue
forſaken the Lorde, they haue prouoked the holy one of Iſraell
vnto anger, they are gone backwarde.
               5 Why ſhould ye be ſtricken any more? (for) ye are euer
falling away: euery heade is diſeaſed, and euery ha
                     ••
                   heauy.
               6. From the ſole of the foote vnto the heade there is nothing
ſounde in it: (but) woundes, blaynes, and pu
                     •
                  ifiyng
ſore: they haue not bene ſained, neyther wrapped vp, neyther
molified wyth the oyntment.
               7 Your land is waſted, your Cities are burnt vp, ſtraungers 
deuour your lande before your face,Eſay. 
                        •
                     . b. 5 and it is made deſolate,
as it were the deſtruction of enimies (in the time of
warre.) 8 And the daughter of Sion ſhall be left as a cotage
in a vineyarde, like a lodge in a garden of Encumbers,
like a beſieged Citie.Gene, 19. c. 24 9. Except the Lorde of hoſtes had
left vs a ſmall remnant, we ſhould haue béene as Sodoma,
and like vnto Gomorra. 10 Heare the worde of the Lord
ye Lordes of Sodoma, and hearken vnto the lawe of our
God thou people of Gomorra. 11 Why offer ye ſo many
ſacrifices vnto me will the lord ſay?Pſal. 50. c. 23 I am full of the burnt
offerings of weathers,Mich. 6. b. 7 and of the fatneſſe of fedde beaſtes,Ier. 6. e. 20
I haue no pleaſure in the blood of bullocks,Amos. 5. c. 22 lambes, & goates.
               
                  
12 When ye come to appeare before me treading in my
courtes, who hath required this at your handes?
               13 Offer me no mo oblations, for it is but loſt labour:
incenſe is an abhominable thing vnto me, I may not away
with your newe Moones, your ſabbathes, and ſolemne méetings,
your ſolemne aſſemblies are wicked.
               
                   14 I hate your newe Moones and appoynted feaſtes euen
from my very heart, they make me wearie, I cannot abide
them.1. Pet. 3. d. 12 15 When ye holde out your handes, I will turne
mine eyes from you: and though you make many prayers;
yet I will heare nothing at all,Eſay. 59. a. 3. Agge. 2. c. 14 ſeeing your handes are full of
bloud. 16 Waſh you, make you cleane, put away your
euill thoughtes out of my ſight: ceaſſe from doing of euill.
               17 Learne to doe well,Mich. 6. b. 8 applie your ſelues to equitie, deliuer
the oppreſſed, helpe the fatherleſſe to his right, let the widowes
complaint come before you.
               18 And then go to,Pſal. 4. a. 5 ſayth the Lorde, let vs talke together:
though your ſinnes be as red as ſcarlet, they ſhal be as white
as ſnowe: and though they were like purple, they ſhall be as
white as wooll. 19 If ye be willing and obedient ye ſhall
 eate the good of the lande. 20 But if ye be obſtinate and rebellions,
ye ſhall be deuoured with the ſworde:Pſal. 73. d. 17 for the mouth
of the Lorde hath ſpoken (it.) 21 Howe happeneth it then
that the faythfull Citie which was full of equitie, is become
(vnfaythfull) as a whore? Righteouſneſſe dwelt in it, but
now murtherers. 22 Thy ſiluer is turned to droſſe, and
thy wine mixt with water. 23 Thy princes are wicked
and companions of théeues: they loue gifts altogither, and
gape for rewardes:Pſal. 50. c. 18 Eſay 5. e. 23. As for the fatherleſſe they helpe him not
to his right, neyther will they let the widowes cauſes come
before them. 24 Therefore ſaith the Lorde God of hoſtes,
the mightie one of Iſraell: Ah, I muſt eaſe me of mine enimies,
and auenge me of mine aduerſaryes.
               25 And I ſhall lay my hande vpon thée, and purely purge

away thy droſſe, and take away all thy tinne.
               26 And ſet thy iudges againe as they were ſometime, and
thy ſenatours as they were from the beginning: and then
thou ſhalt be called the righteous Citie, the faythfull Citie.
               27 Sion ſhall be redéemed with equitie, and her conuertes
with righteouſneſſe. 28 But the tranſgreſſours, and the
vngodly, and ſuch as forſake the Lorde, ſhall altogither bée
vtterly deſtroyed.Eſa. 65. a. 3 29 For ye ſhall be confounded for the
trées which ye haue deſired: and ye ſhall be aſhamed of the
gardens that ye haue choſen.
               30 For ye ſhall be as a trée whoſe leaues are fallen away,
and as a garden that hath no moyſtneſſe.
               31 And the very ſtrong one (of your Idols) ſhall be as
towe,Math. 3. c. 12 and the maker of it as a ſparke (of fire) and they ſhall
both burne together, and no man quench them.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the firſt
Chapter of Eſay.
               The viſion of Eſai the ſonne of Amos,Verſ. 1.
which he ſaw vpon Iuda. &c.
               THe firſt verſe conteynet
                     •
                  
the tytle, which briefly noteth what
the thing is, by whome it was vttered,
agaynſt what place and people,
and in what time.
               It is a viſion, that is, a propheſie
or reuelation declared by almightie God: and
therefore not to be eſteemed as any ma
                     •
                  s deuiſe,
and vttered by Eſaias the ſonne of Amos deſcending
of the royall lyne of the kings of Iuda. Who

prophecied in the raignes of Ozias, Ioathan, Achas,
and Ezechias, as it may be thought by the ſpace of
foureſcore yeares. And vttered this prophecie
agaynſt the nation of Iurie, and Hieruſalem the
chiefe and royall citie thereof: that is to ſay, againſt
that Nation that God had choſen of all other for
his peculier people, and had mainteyned and preſerued
it with great benefites, and yet nowe was
fallen from his true worſhippe, vnto Idolatrie,
ſinne, and wickedneſſe. And therefore ſayth he.
               Heare O heauens, and hearken O earth:Verſ. 2. 3. 4. Deut. 32. a. 1
for the Lorde hath ſpoken. &c.
               That he may the more earneſtly mooue that dul
and hard harted people, he beginneth with a tragicall
exclamation and calleth heauen & earth to witneſſe
agaynſt them, as if he had ſayde. Forſomuch
as the vnthankfulneſſe and wicked ſtubburnneſſe
of this people is ſuch, as they will giue no eare to
the worde of God, earneſtly calling them to repentaunce,
I turne my ſpeeche to you (O heauens)
and ſpeake to thee (O earth.) Though heauen be

                     〈◊〉
                   of, yet 
                     ••
                  ely it will heare, though the earth
be hard and ſtonie, yet it will relent and be moued:
but this people will not bend, this Nation will by
no meanes be reclaymed.Deut. 32. b. 15 *Yea they are more dull
and vn
                     ••
                  nſible in the vnderſtanding of Gods will,
and of his great goodneſſe toward them, than the

                     〈…〉
                   beaſtes are. For what Oxe doth not
from 
                     〈◊〉
                   himſelfe to his mayſter, that keepeth him?
What Aſſe doth not acknowledge and looue thoſe

that feede him? But my people (ſayth the Lord)
whom I haue cheriſhed,Eſay. 5. a. 4. whome I haue *foſtered
as my *children,Gal. 4. a. 6. with all care and tenderneſſe, do
not onely with vnthankfull mindes forget my benefites,
but with ſtonie and ſtubburne heartes refuſe
to heare my calling,Deut. 14. a. 1 and in all maner of wickedneſſe
bende themſelues againſt me, and ſtriue
to prouoke my wrath and indignation agaynſt
them.
               Whie ſhould ye be ſtricken any more? for
ye are euer falling away:Verſ. 5. &c.
               From the beginning of the fift verſe to the tenth,Verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
he doth greatly amplifie their wayward ſtubburnneſſe,
declaring that as they could not be woonne
to repentance, nor mooued to turne to their gracious
Lorde by conſideration of his exceeding great
benefites towarde them: ſo neyther could they be
reclaymed, nor anye thing at all mooued with the
grieuous plagues and puniſhmentes, which to
that onely purpoſe (as a mercifull father) he had
brought vppon them, but rather by the ſame hys
plagues, they increaſed in ſtubburnneſſe, & waxed
euery day worſe than other. And therfore ſayth he,
To what ende ſhould I plague or ſcourge you with
aduerſitie any further?
                  Verſ. 5. ſeeing your obſtinacie is ſuch,
as you will increaſe in wickedneſſe, and ſtill heape
ſinne vpon ſinne, and offence vpon offence.
               The Realme of Iurie may well be reſembled to
a mans bodie: the heade and heart whereof is the
Citie Hieruſalem, and the King and Princes with

the reſidue of the inhabitants thereof: and the other
cities and townes as the inferiour members.
All which I haue grieuouſly touched with my ſeuere
iuſtice and ſharpe puniſhments, ſo that from
the * crowne of the head, to the ſole of the foote,
                  Verſ. 6. Deut. 28. d. 35 from
the higheſt Citie, to the loweſt Village, from the
nobleſt perſon, to the baſeſt ſubiect, there is none
but he hath felt the bitter ſmart thereof, and that in
ſuch ſort as no Phiſition is hable to cure, or heale
their feſtured ſores, that is, nor King, nor Counſaylour,
nor Prince, nor Prieſt, nor Prophete, can
helpe the miſerie of this kingdome, and reſtore it
to the preſtinate ſtate and integritie againe.Verſ. 7. Their
lande lyeth waſte, their Cities are burnt with fire,
ſtraungers poſſeſſe their Countrey, their poſſeſſions
are ſpoyled,Verſ. 8. their royall Citie Hieruſalem is
left deſolate, as a lodge in a vineyard, or a Cotage
in a Cucumber garden, that hath no houſe neere
vnto it, their people are ſlaine, their glorie decaied,
their ſtrength conſumed,Verſ. 9. yea, if the Lorde of hys
great mercy had not * left thē ſome cōfort, through
the promiſed ſéede of Meſsiah,
                  Rom. 9. f. 29 Gen. 19. c. 24 their deſolation had
beene euen as the deſtruction of Sodome and Gomorrha,
and yet I ſay, all this notwithſtanding are
their hearts nothing mooued to repent or to turne
to the Lorde for mercie.
               Heare the worde of the Lorde ye Lordes
of Sodoma,Verſ. 10. and hearken. &c.
               And for that they did flatter themſelues in theVerſ 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15
middes of this great wickedneſſe with a vaine opinion

of hypocriticall iuſtice, and ſuperſtitious
worſhipping of God, as thoughe by ſuche meanes
they ſhould winne his fauour towarde them: The
Lorde plainly ſheweth that he doth lothe and abhorre
their ſacrifices, and offerings, their feſtiuall
dayes, and their ſolempne meetinges, yea though
they were commaunded by his owne lawe,Luc. 16. d. 15 ſo long
as they were voyde of * inwarde holineſſe of heart
and minde,Deut. 6. a. 5 and diſtayned with ſinne and wickedneſſe
both before God and the worlde.Eſa. 29. d. 13 In which
place the more to mooue them,Pſal. 77 d. 41 almightie God ſeemeth
to labour with diuerſitie of woordes to lette
them vnderſtande how little account he maketh of
ſuch externall worſhipping, being deſtitute of true
holineſſe, & right worſhipping in ſpirite & in truth.
VVhy offer you (ſayth he) ſo many ſacrifices. &c.
I am full of them, I haue no pleaſure in them, VVho
required them at your hands, Offer no more, It is but
loſt labour,Eſay. 66. a. 3 It is * abhominable vnto me. I may not away
with them,Pſal. 51. d. 17 They are wicked. I hate them, They
make me weary,Pſal. 39. b. 9 I cannot abide them. I will not heare
your prayers, I will turne mine eyes from you.
               By all which wordes, God ſheweth how little he
regardeth hipocriſie, where true holineſſe wāteth.
               Then from the ſixtenth verſe,Verſ. 16. 17 18. 19. 20. to the .xxj he ſheweth
what is the right way to winne his fauour.
Make you cleane, (ſayth he) put away your wicked
thoughts and deuiſes, Ceaſſe from doing euil, Learne
to do good, Applie your ſelues to equitie, Deliuer the
oppreſſed, Helpe the fatherleſſe, Heare the widowes
complaint. For theſe are the true fruites of right

repentance. And then, If your ſinnes were as red as
ſcarlet, in token that you had deſerued bloud and
confuſion, they ſhall be as white as ſnow, in teſtimonie
that by Gods mercie ye be cleared from them.
This if you will doe, the Lorde will looke fauourably
on you and proſper you, but if you continue
obſtinate and rebellious, as hytherto you haue
done, the ſworde of Gods wrath ſhal vtterly deuour
you, (for his owne mouth hath ſpoken it) and
therefore thinke not that it is mans worde onely.
               How happeneth it then that the faithfull
Citie which was full of equitie.Verſ. 21. &c.
               From the .xxj. to the ende of the Chapter Eſay
prophecieth, that god hauing deſtroyed the naughtie,
and rebellious people, wil reſtore and reforme
the kingdome of Iſraell by Chriſt Ieſu the true
Meſsias, & by him giue them true iuſtice and integritie.
And that he may the more aggrauate their
preſent fault in ſo wicked reuolting from God, the
Prophete, in the perſon of God himſelfe, by admiration
wooondreth, howe it commeth to paſſe, that
that Citie, which before time hath bene ioyned to
almightie God as a faythfull, pure, & chaſt ſpouſe,
hath nowe forſaken him, as a light ſtrumpette, and
giuen ouer hir ſelfe to all corruption and naughtineſſe.
In ſo much that there is neyther in Prince
nor people any integritie or vpright dealing, but
altogither corruption, vnfaythfulneſſe, counterfeyting,
forgerie, diſſimulation, falſehoode, deceyte, oppreſſion
and briberie: and that is it, that he meaneth,

when he ſayth,Verſ. 22. 
                  Their ſiluer is turned to droſſe,
and their wine is mixed with water. Meaning therby,
that their ſinceritie and integritie in all maner
of dealing, is turned to falſehoode and forgerie.
And therefore,Verſ. 24. Deut. 28. g. 63 Prou. 1. c. 26 with ſorrowe and groning, he proteſteth,
that he will eaſe his ſtomacke, * and be reuenged
of this his froward and ſtubburne people,
which, for that cauſe he calleth nowe his enimies.
And yet leaſt ſuch as haue ſome feare of GOD
ſhould haue their conſciences to much ſhaken with
this terrible threatning,Verſ. 25. 26 27. Eſay. 30. d. 18 Pſal. 2. c. 13 Eſa. 57. d. 16 he doth * comfortably qualifie
the grieuouſneſſe thereof, ſignifying that hee
will not cleane deſtroy his Church, but with the
fire of affliction will purge the droſſe and corruption
from it: that they which feare God, and haue
the grace of repentaunce, by this meanes, beeing
put in minde of their dutie, and ſeperated from the
wicked and obſtinate, may ſerue him more trulye
and ſincerely in all maner of Godlineſſe.Verſ. 28. 29. 30. 31. And notwithſtanding,
he plainely ſayeth, that the wicked
tranſgreſſours, that haue forſaken God, and cleaned
to ſuperſtition and Idolatrie (for that he meaneth
by their trees and gardens which they had
choſen) ſhal not eſcape the ſcourge, but he deſtroyed
and brought to cōfuſion togither with their Idols.
               Vnder trees and in groues or gardens, they
were woont to ſacrifice to their Idols.
               Out of this Chapter are theſe leſſons
to be taken.
               1 Firſt, that we do not truſt and glorie in the bare

names of Chriſten men, the Church of Chriſt, the
people of God, the children of God, for theſe names
are burthens vnto vs and notes of vnthankefulneſſe
(as the like were to the Iewes) if we ſerue
not God ſincerely according to our profeſſion, and
therfore cannot turne away the diſpleaſure of God
from vs, which he iuſtly conceiueth for our ſinnes.
               2 Secondly, that we be not negligent and contemptous
in hearing the worde of God, and preaching
of his holy will, calling vs to repentance, leſt
he call heauen and earth, and his vnſenſible creatures
to witneſſe agaynſt our obſtinacie, as he did
agaynſt the Iewes.
               3 Thirdely, that we be not vnmindefull of the
great benefits of God from time to time beſtowed
vpon vs, but that with thankfull heartes and obedient
mindes, we acknowledge and confeſſe the
ſame, leaſt we be iuſtly in the ſight of god eſteemed
more dull and thankeleſſe, than the brute beaſtes
are to their mayſters and keepers.
               4 Fourthly, when God ſhall for our ſinfulneſſe,
fatherly chaſtice vs with any ſcourge of aduerſitie,
whether it be with warre, ſedition, trouble, ſickneſſe,
pouertie, vexation of minde, or any other affliction,
publique or priuate, of purpoſe by that louing
correction to bring vs home to him againe by
repentance, that we doe not ſtubburnely ſtande agaynſt
him, as the Iewes did, but with humble
and repentant heartes ſubmit our ſelues and flie
to him for mercie through Chriſt Ieſu our Sauiour.
               
                  
5 Fifſtly, that we flatter not our ſelues and think
to winne Gods fauour by externall and ſuperſtitious
worſhipping of God, being inwardly deſtitute
of true fayth toward God, and vnfeyned loue
or vpright dealing towardes our brethren. For
God doth here notably declare how he lotheth, and
abhorreth ſuch maner of hypocriſie.
               6 Sixtly, when want of repentance, and the
multitude and greatneſſe of our ſinnes ſhall prouoke
the iuſtice of god, to lay his heauy hand vpon
vs by rayſing vp of cruell Tyrannes, or bringing
in of forraine enimies by his iuſt iudgement, to
ſpoyle our countrey or people, that we conceyue
this comfort of his great mercie, that he will not
vtterly and for euer deſtroy his Churche, and the
number of them that feare him, but by this meanes
will purge them from their owne corruption,
and from the infection of the wicked ones, that
they may more ſincerely ſerue him in ſpirite and
in truth.
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday in Aduent
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 2.
            
               THe ſelfe ſame worde that Eſay the ſonne of Amos 
ſawe vpon Iuda and Hieruſalem.
               2 And (this) ſhall come to paſſe in the latter dates,
The hill of the Lordes houſe ſhal be prepared in the
heigth of the mountaines, and ſhal be higher than the hilles,
and all nations ſhall preaſe vnto him.
               
                  
3 And a multitude of people ſhall go, * ſpeaking (thus one
to another) Come,Pſal. 94. a. 1 Heb. 3. a. 13 Eſa. 54. c. 13 Pſal. 128. a. 6 Luc. 24. g. 47 Rom. 15. d. 19 Iohn. 5. c. 27 Iohn. 16. a. 8 Pſal. 118. 165 let vs aſcende to the hill of the Lorde, to
the houſe of the God of Iacob, and * he will inſtruct vs of his
wayes, and we will walke in his pathes: for * out of Sion
ſhall come a lawe, and the worde of the Lorde from Hieruſalem.
4 And ſhall * giue ſentence among the heathen, and
ſhall * reforme the multitude of people: they ſhall breake
their ſwoordes alſo into mattocks, and their ſpeares to make
ſythes: And one people ſhall not lift vp a weapon againſt
another, neither ſhall they learne to fight from thenceforth.
               
                   5 Come ye O houſe of Iacob, and let vs walke in the light
of the Lord. 6 For thou haſt forſaken thy people the houſe
of Iacob, bicauſe they be repleniſhed (vvith euils) from the
eaſt, and with ſorcerers like the Philiſtines, and in ſtraunge
children they thinke themſelues to haue inough.
               7 Their lande is full of ſiluer and golde, neither is there
any ende of their treaſure: their lande is alſo full of horſes,
and no ende is there of the
                     ••
                   charrettes.
               8 Their lande alſo is full of vaine Gods,Hier. 10. c. 14 Pſal. 115. a, 4 Pſal. 135. d. 15 and before the
worke of their owne hands they haue bowed themſelues, yea
euen before the thing that their owne fingers haue made.
               9 There knéeleth the man, there falleth the man downe
(before them:) therefore forgiue them not.
               10 Get thée into the rocke, and hide thée in the grounde for
feare of the Lorde, and for the glorie of his Maieſtie.
               11 The high lookes of man ſhall be brought lowe,Iacob. 4. d. 6 Pſal. 131. a. 1 and the
hawtineſſe of men ſhall be bowed downe: and the Lorde
alone ſhall be exalted in that day. 12 For the day of the
Lord of hoſtes (shall be) vpon all the prowde, loftie, and vppon
all that is exalted, and he ſhall be brought lowe.
               
                   13 And vpon all high and ſtoute Cedar trées of Libanus,
and vpon all the okes of Baſan. 14 And vpon all the high
mountaynes, and vpon all the high hilles.
               15 And vpon euery highe tower, and vpon euery fenced

wall. 16 And vpon all the ſhippes of Tharſis, and vpon
all pictures of pleaſure. 17 And the pride of man ſhall bée
brought downe, and the loftineſſe of men ſhall be made low,
and the Lorde alone ſhall be exalted in that day.
               18 As for the Idols he ſhall vtterly abholiſhe.
               19 And they ſhall créepe into holes of ſtone, and into caues
of the earth for feare of the Lorde, and for the glorie of hys
maieſtie, when he ariſeth to deſtroy (the vvicked ones of) the
earth. 20 In the ſelfe ſame day ſhall man caſt away his
Gods of ſiluer, & his Gods of golde into the holes of Mowles
and backes, which he neuertheleſſe had made to him ſelfe to
honour them.Luke. 23. d. 29 21 And they ſhall créepe into the cliftes of
the rockes, and into the toppes of the harde ſtones for feare
of the Lorde, and for the glorie of his maieſtie, when he ariſeth
to deſtroy (the vvicked ones of) the earth.Math. 10. c. 18
               
               22 Ceaſſe therefore from man in whoſe noſthrilles there
is breath: for wherein is he to be accounted of.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the ſeconde
Chapter of Eſay.
               The ſelfe ſame word that Eſay the ſonne
of Amos ſaw vpon Iuda.Verſ. 1. &c.
               
                  IN the firſt verſe is conteyned
the ſame matter that was in the firſt of
the Chapter before.
               In the three next verſes Eſay propheciethVerſ. 2. 3. 4. &c.
of the kingdome of Chriſt, the
aduauncement of his Church, and the conuerſion
of the Gentiles, that ſhoulde be in the latter

dayes, that is, when the ceremoniall law, and the
figures and ſacrifices appoynted by Moiſes ſhould
haue an end in the truth of the very Meſsiah Chriſt
Ieſu the ſauiour of the worlde.
               The Temple of Hieruſalem was buylded by
Solomon vppon mount Sion, and was the onely
choſen place, where God would be ſpecially woorſhipped
and ſerued: ſo that in ſundrie places of the
Pſalmes,Pſa. 131. c. 8. 13 Pſal. 3. a. 6 2. Par. 7. c. 16 Pſal. 20. a. 3 Pſal. 78. g. 68 Pſal. 83. a. 8 it is ſayd, that The Lord had choſen * Sion
for his habitation bicauſe of the Arke of his preſence
there in the temple reſerued. For this cauſe
in the ſcriptures Sion and Hieruſalem are taken for
the type and figure of the true Church of God vnder
Chriſt.Heb. 12. f. 22 As ſaint Paule to the Hebrues. You are
come to the mounte Sion and to the Citie of the lyuing
God, the celeſtiall Hieruſalem, and to an innumerable
companie of aungels, and vnto the congregation
of the firſt borne. That is to ſay, to the bleſſed
Church of Chriſt. Wherefore in this place by the
Hyll of the Lordes houſe, that is, mount Sion, is
ment the Church of Chriſt, the congregation of the
faythfull, which at the comming of Chriſt ſhould be
aduaunced aboue all the kingdomes of the earth,
and enlarged with great glorie, by the conuerſion
of the Gentiles from their Idolatrie, to the fayth
of Chriſt, throughout the whole worlde.
               The glorie and aduauncement of the Church
which is here ſo highly ſpoken of, muſte not bee
thought to conſiſt, in the honour, power, and riches
of the worlde, (wherein the Church is alway contemptible)
but in the heauēly doctrine, ſtrong faith,
true worſhipping of God, charitie, patience, conſtancie,

and all Godly giftes of grace, which meruelouſly
ſhined in the Godly fathers, and firſt profeſſours
of chriſtian Religion, that followed after
Chriſt in all Nations and Countreys of the earth.
For as Chriſtes kingdome is ſpirituall: ſo is the
glorie of the ſame ſpirituall and not worldly.
               When the Prophete ſayth, Come let vs aſcende
to the hill of the Lorde, he, to the reproofe of the
Iewes, doth note the readineſſe and willingneſſe
of the Gentiles (in whoſe perſon this is ſpoken)
not only to imbrace the fayth of Chriſt themſelues:
but alſo cheerefully to encourage other to the ſame.
Which may appeere in this, that by the preaching
of the Apoſtles within thirtie yeares, (as Euſebius
ſayth) all the Nations of the earth were woonne to
the fayth of Chriſt, and the receyuing of his Goſpell.
And he will inſtruct vs in his wayes. Hereby
is to be noted, that the chiefe care and ſtudie of the
true church of Chriſt, ought to be in the inſtructing
of his people, what his wayes are, and not to leade
thē into mens fantaſies, or into their own deuiſes.
               Out of Sion ſhall come a lawe, and the
worde of the Lord. &c.
               The law of grace and truth, that is, the Goſpell of
chriſt Ieſu *began firſt in Hieruſalem.
                  Math. 5. f. 35 Luke. 2. g. 46 There chriſt
preached in the Temple, there he wrought many
miracles,Act. 2. a. 1 *there he ſent downe the holyghoſt vpon
his Apoſtles. From *thence he ſent his meſſengers
and preachers of his Goſpell into all partes of the
worlde,Mark. 16. c. 15 Math. 28. d. 19 to reforme the people and bring them by
repentance from Idolatrie and wickedneſſe to the

true worſhipping of God, and vertuous conuerſation
of life, that is, to make them ſubiectes to the
kingdome of Chriſt.
               They ſhall breake their ſwoordes into
mattocks,Verſ. 4. and their ſpeares. &c.
               As the Goſpell is a doctrine of reconciliation
and peace making betweene God and vs, through
Chriſt Ieſu our ſauiour: ſo doth it pacifie and quiet
men among themſelues alſo. In ſo much that they
which be the true members of the kingdome of
Chriſt doe not vſe to ſtriue by fighting and warre
for their priuate quarelles, but liue togither in vnitie,
loue, and concorde. Or if any doe otherwiſe, it
is a great burthen to their conſciences, and an euident
note of their imperfection. Inſomuch as they
ſhew themſelues not to haue that * badge or cognizance,Iohn. 13. d. 35 1. Iohn. 4. c. 13
whereby the ſeruauntes and ſubiectes of
Chriſtes kingdome are knowne. And yet doth not
this place prohibite Princes and Magiſtrates to
make warre for the maintenance of iuſtice and
godlineſſe. For they haue the ſworde put into their
handes by God, whoſe miniſters they are, for the
defence of them which are cōmitted to their charge,
the widowe, the fatherleſſe, and the poore and innocent
oppreſſed.
               Come ye O houſe of Iacob,Verſ. 5. and let vs walk
in the light of the Lorde.
               In this fift verſe the Prophete by emulation of
the Gentiles, prouoketh the Iewes vnder the

name of the houſe of Iacob, to imbrace the fayth of
Chriſt, and walke in the light of his Goſpell. As if
he had ſayd: Beholde ſtraungers whom we eſteemed
as a fooliſh people, that alway worſhipped Idols,
and liued in all vncleanneſſe, with how great
deſire forſake they their Idols and ſeeke after the
true God? Are not we aſhamed, that we are the
laſt, that are ioyned to Chriſt and his Church? To
vs the law was giuen, to vs the Prophetes preached,
Chriſt was borne among vs, he is our heritage,
come, let vs imbrace him, if we glorie to be
of the houſe and poſteritie of Iacob, it ſhould be aſſured
to vs that Chriſt is that promiſed ſeede. For
Iacob prophecied,Gen. 49. b. 10. 
                  Hunc fore expectationē Gentium,
that he ſhould be the expectation of the Gentiles, &
now you ſee our father Iacobs promiſe fulfilled, &c.
Let vs walke therefore in this light of the Lorde:
for this Sauior is the true light. But as Chriſt
ſayth in the thirde of S. Iohns Goſpell,Iohn. 3. c. 19. Iohn. 1. b. 10. 
                  This is the
cōdemnation, that the light came into the world, and
the worlde loued darkeneſſe, more then light.
               
               Wherefore in the foure next verſes the ProphetVerſ. 6. 7. 8. 9
foreſeing the obſtinacie of the Iewes in refuſing
Chriſt, and their delightin witches, ſorcerers,
and ſoothſayers, more than the ſuperſtitious Chaldees
and Philiſtines, and the confidence in their
ryches, and ſtrength of horſes and chariots, and
truſt in forraine friendes, and woorſhipping of Idols:
foreſeeing (I ſay) all theſe thinges, and alſo,
that the ſecrete but iuſte iudgement of God for the
ſame, had giuen them ouer, he ſaith he wil not pray

to god for them, but leaueth them to his iuſtice, and
deſireth him not to pardon them their obſtinacie
and wickedneſſe. Therefore forgiue them not,
ſayth he.
               Get thee into the rocke,Verſ. 10. &c. and hide thee in
the grounde for feare of the Lord, &c.
               The Prophete doth here inſult vpon the ſtubburne
Iewes, as if he had ſayde, Oh you wicked
generation, ſeeke refuge, if you can, in the rocke,
ſeeke corners to hide you in the caues of the earth,
and though you doe finde ſuch places, you ſhall not
ſcape from the wrath & indignation of God. Yea,
if you were ſhut vp and incloſed in a rocke, the iuſtice
of God woulde finde you out, and plague you
for your ſinnes. And not you onely, but all the
proude of the earth, who in the glorie and ſecuritie
of their wealth, ſet vp their faces againſt the liuing
God. Were they as high as the Ceders of
Lybanus, yea, or any mountaines in the whole
earth, Were they as ſtrong and ſtiffe necked as the
Okes of Baſan, Were they of as great force as
fenced Caſtelles and Towers, or as gorgeous as
the ſhips of Tharſis, or as highe minded and loftie
as Lucifer, The mightie Lord of hoſtes ſhall putte
them downe, and make them bende, and his glory
onely ſhall be aduaunced in the day of his wrath.
               As for your Idoles,Verſ. 18. &c. they ſhall be deſtroyed and
brought to confuſion, and your ſelues, that haue
made them your gods, and put your truſt and confidence
and your whole delight in them, ſhall ſee ſo

little helpe of your miſerie by them, that you ſhalbe
aſhamed of them, and caſt them into holes & cliftes
of rockes to hide them, and your owne groſſe folly
from the face and maieſtie of the Lorde.
               Therefore leaue of the truſt and confidence that
you haue conceyued in your ſelues or in anye
ſtrength of man, and put your truſt in the Lorde
alone.
               For mans life is brickle and fraile, euen as the
breath paſſing out of the noſthrils.
               Out of this Chapiter are theſe leſſons
to be learned.
               1. Firſt wee haue to learne the authoritie and
truth of Gods holy word, and his Prophets which
ſo many hundred yeares before did ſo euidentlye
tell of the kingdome of Chriſt, the conuerſion of
the Gentiles, & the reiecting of the Iewes, which
from the beginning had bene accounted the choſen
people of God.
               2 Secondly, that the chiefe ſtudie of the church
of Chriſt, ought to bee, to inſtruct the people of
God in his wayes, and on the other part, that it
is their duetie, that aſſociate themſelues vnto the
Church, not onely to learne his wayes, but alſo to
walke in his pathes, and to declare their profeſſion
in the behauiour of their life.
               3 Thirdely, that they which be the Citizens of
the heauenly Hieruſalem, and the true members of
the Church of Chriſt vſe not by ſtrife, and contention,
fighting and warre to ſeeke one the hurt of the

other: but ſtudie to liue together in vnitie and concorde,
charitie and brotherly loue, as the children of
one father and heyres of one kingdome.
               4 Fourthly, that we beware leaſt through our
obſtinate refuſing of the Goſpell of Chriſt we be
giuen ouer by almightie God, and caſt into perpetual
induration and vtter confuſion as the Iewes
were, in whome we ſee euen to this day a dreadfull
example of Gods ſeuere iuſtice.
               5 Fiftly, that witchcraft, ſorcerie, ſoothſaying, and
confidence in worldly ſtrength and riches, are odious
to almightie GOD, for that theſe things doe
leade men from that truſt and confidence that they
ſhould haue in God alone, and turne the glorie of
God vnto creatures, which is directly agaynſt the
firſt commaundement.
            
         
         
            The ſeconde Sunday in Aduent
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 5.
            
               
                   NOwe will I ſing my beloued friend, a ſong of my
friend touching his vineyarde.Math. 21. d. 33 My beloued friende
hath a vineyarde in a verye fruitfull plenteous
ground. 2 This he hedged, and gathered out the
ſtones from it, and planted it with the choyſeſt vine: In the
middes of it builded he a tower, alſo made a wine preſſe
therein: and he looked that it ſhould bring him grapes, and
it brought forth wilde grapes. 3 Nowe O Citizen of Hieruſalem,
and man of Iuda, iudge I pray thée betwixt me and
my vineyarde. 4 What more coulde haue bene done for

it, that I haue not done? wherfore then hath it giuen wilde
grapes, where I looked to haue had grapes of it?
               5 Well, nowe I ſhall tell you howe I will doe with my
vineyarde: I will take the hedge from it that it may periſh,
and breake downe the wall therof that it may be troden vnder
foote.Eſay. 1. b. 7 6 I will lay it waſte, it ſhall neither be digged
nor cut, but beare thornes and briers: I will alſo forbed the
clowdes that they ſhall not raine vpon it.
               7 As for the vineyard of the Lord of hoſtes, it is the houſe 
of Iſraell: and the man of Iuda, the plant of his pleaſure:
Of theſe he looked for equitie, but ſée there is oppreſſion, for
righteouſneſſe, and lo it is a crying.
               8 Wo vnto them that ioyne one houſe to another, and
bring one lande ſo nie vnto another, that there is no more
place: Will ye be placed alone in the middes of the earth?
               9 Theſe things are in the eares of the Lorde of hoſtes: of
a truth great and fayre houſes ſhall be without any dweller
in them. 10 And ten acres of vines ſhall giue but a quarl,
and thirtie buſhels of ſéede ſhall giue but an Eph
                     ••
                  .
               11 Wo be vnto them that riſe vp earely to follow 
                     ••
                  
                  kenneſſe,
continuing vntill night, till they be ſet on fire with
wine. 12 In their feaſtes are harpes and lutes, tabrets
and pipes, and wine: but they regarde not the worke of
the Lorde, and conſider not the operation of his handes.
               13 Therefore commeth my folke into captiuitie,Deut. 4. b. 7 Hier. 5. a. 4. bicauſe
they haue no vnderſtanding: Their glorie is family
                     ••
                   with
hunger, and their multitude dried vp with thirſt.
               14 Therefore gapeth hell and openeth hit mouth maruelous
wide, that their glorie, multitude, and wealth, with
ſuch as reioyce in her, may deſcende into it.
               
               15 Thus hath man a fall and is brought low,Eſa. 2. b. 10. 11 and the high
looke of the prowde ſhall be layde downe.
               16 But the Lorde of hoſtes ſhal be exalted in iudgement,
and God that is holy is ſanctified in righteouſneſſe.
               
                  
17 Then ſhall the ſhéepe eate as they were woont, and
the rich mens waſtes ſhall ſtraungers deuour.
               18 Wo be vnto them that draw wickedneſſe with cordes
of vanitie, and ſinne as it were with a cart rope.
               19 Which vſe to ſpeake on this maner,2. Pet. 3. a. 4 Hier. 2. c. 8 Hier. 17. c. 15 Let him make
ſpéede and haſten his worke, that we may ſee it: let the counſaile
of the holy one of Iſraell come and drawe nie, that wée
may know it. 20 Wo be vnto them that call euill good, and
good euill, which make darkeneſſe light, and light darkneſſe,
that make ſower ſweete, and ſwéete ſower.
               21 Wo be vnto them that are wiſe in their owne ſight,Prou. 3. a. 7 Ro. 12. d. 16
and thinke themſelues to haue vnderſtanding.
               22 Wo be vnto them that are ſtrong to ſuppe out wine,
and expert men to ſet vp dronkenneſſe.
               23 Wo be vnto them that giue ſentence with the vngodly
for rewardes, but condemne the iuſt cauſe of the righteous.
24 Therefore like as fier licketh vp the ſtrawe, and
as the flame conſumeth the ſtubble: euen ſo their roote ſhall
be as corruption, and their bloſſome ſhall vaniſh away lyke

                     〈◊〉
                   for they haue caſt away the law of the Lorde of hoſtes,
and deſpiſed the worde of the holy one of Iſraell.
               25 Therefore is the wrath of the lorde kindled agaynſt his
people, and hath ſtretched forth his hande vpon them, yea he
hath ſmitten them: and the hilles did tremble, and their car
                  
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  s
did lie torne in the open ſtréetes: and in all this the
wrath of God hath not ceaſſed, but his hande ſtretched out
ſtill. 26 And hée ſhall giue a token to a people of a farre
countrey, and ſhall hiſſe vnto them from the end of the earth:
and beholde they ſhall come haſtily with ſpéede.
               27 There ſhall not be one faint nor féeble among them, no
not a ſluggiſh nor ſléepie perſon: there ſhall not one of them
put of his girdle from his loynes, nor looſe the latchet of hys
ſhoe. 28 His arrowes are ſharpe, and all his bowes bent:
his horſe hoo
                     •
                  es are as flint, & his cart whéeles like a whirle

winde. 29 His crie is as it were of a Lion, and he roreth
like Lions whelpes: they ſhall rore and hantch vp the pray,
and no man ſhall recouer it, nor got it from them.
               30 In that day he ſhal be ſo fierce vpon him as the raging
of the ſea: then one ſhall beholde the land, & lo darkneſſe and
ſorrow, and the light is darkened in the heauens thereof.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the fift
Chapter of Eſay.
               
                  Nowe will I ſing my beloued friende aVerſ. 1.
ſong of my friend &c.
               
               
                  THe parable of the * vine vſed
by the Prophete in this fift Chapter,Hier. 2. e. 21 Math. 21. c. 33 Mark. 12. a. 1 Luke. 20. b. 9
doth, vnder figuratiue and borowed
ſpeach, containe in effect the ſame matter
that was vttered in the beginning
of the firſt Chapter, that is, the great goodneſſe of
God towarde the Nation of the Iewes, the vnthankfulneſſe
of the people, and the plague or puniſhment
threatned for the ſame. And euen the
ſame three things haue you here to note.
               The beloued friend that the Prophete ſpeaketh
of in the firſt verſe,Verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. is God himſelfe, the vineyarde
is the houſe of Iſraell, the choſen vine the people
of Iurie, the 
                     〈…〉
                   that it was planted in, the
lande of promiſe flowing with milke and body: the
the hedge or bounde that he ſet about it, was the
prouidence of God and defence of his good Aungels,
together with princes magiſtrates & lawes

both politike and other by him appoynted. The ſtoning
was the caſting out of the Idolatrous Chanaanites,
and other heathen enimies before them.
the tower that he builded, was the name of God,
and maieſtie of his preſence among them. The
watchmen in the tower, were his prophets which
were ſent in his name to forewarne his people of
all daunger iminent to them, either from God or
their worldly enimies. The vine preſſe was ſincere
and true doctrine according to the law of god
with the knowledge of his true worſhip which hee
gaue to them only of all the Nations of the earth.
               And therefore when God had thus huſbanded,
fenced, and dreſſed his vine, he might iuſtly looke
for ſweete grapes out of the which pleaſant and acceptable

                     •
                  uy
                     •
                  e ſhould haue beene preſſed to hys delight
and glorie.
               The ſweete grapes that God looked for, were
true fayth, and worſhipping of the name of God,
obedience to his holy commaundements, a charitable
and louing minde toward their neighbours.
In gouernment of the common welth integritie,
and diligent keeping of the lawes, puniſhing of the
wicked, defence of ye widow, fatherleſſe, poore, & innocent.
But cōtrary to the hope and expectation of
this heauenly huſband, the vnkindly vine brought

                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     •
                  inking wilde grapes, that is, infidelitie,
and miſtruſt in GOD, ſuperſtition, Idolatrie,
murdering of his prophetes and meſſengers, hatred,
grudge, and malice among themſelues, oppreſſion,
crueltie, briberie, extortion couetouſneſſe,

dronkenneſſe, banketting, and all voluptuous and
filthie liuing, yea, and aboue all, contempt and hatred
of Gods worde. Wherfore god iuſtly threatneth,
that he will take away from them the care of
his diuine prouidence, and the gouernmēt of good
lawes and princes wherwith they were defended,
that they may ſo lie open to the ſpoyle of their enimyes.
               And alſo that he will not ſende anye more among
them his prophetes, nor the heauenly dewe
of his grace and wholeſome doctrine, whereby before
time they were inſtructed. Finally, that he
will take all his good giftes and benefites from
them, wherewith before they were aboundantlye
bleſſed.
               In the reſidue of the Chapter the Prophet vpbraydeth
them with the perticuler wilde grapes
with which the lord was diſpleaſed,Verſ. 8. 9. 10. as Couetouſneſſe,
and Extortion, Dronkenneſſe, and Banketting,
Securitie and contempt of Gods worde. &c.
               
               As touching Couetouſneſſe,
                  Pſa. 38. b. 9. 10 Math. 19. e. 23 Amos. 5. c. 11 Eſay. 1. f. 23 Iacob. 1. b. 11 he reprehendeth
the greedie heart and minde that thinketh it hath
neuer inough. For otherwiſe it is not ſinne to
haue two howſes, or two peeces of ground, ſo it be
not with the oppreſſiō or iniurie of our neighbour.
But to haue ſo couetous a minde that he thinketh
all to little for himſelfe, and therefore (as Chriſoſtome
ſayth) woulde take from the poore, if they
could, the very vſe of the ſonne, and are grieued to
ſee their neighbours vſe the common elements of
the worlde, that it is, that the Prophete here ſo

ſharpely rebuketh, and therefore threatneth that
God will make their fayre gaye houſes deſolate,
and their lande barraine vnto them, which they
haue purchaſed with ſo great iniurie and oppreſſion
of other.Deut. 28. d. 38 Mich. 6. c. 15 Agge. 1. a. 6 In ſo much that * ten Acres of vines
ſhall ſcant yeelde one quart of wine, and thirtie
buſhels of ſeede ſcant one pecke.
               The ſeconde vice is Dronkenneſſe,
                  Verſ. 11. 12. 13. 14. Luke. 21. g. 34 Rom. 13. d. 13 Gal. 5. c. 18. * and banketting,
with muſicke and wantonneſſe, which the
Prophete threatneth that God will puniſh with
captiuitie and extreeme famine and hunger, in ſo
much that both riche and poore ſhall die for hunger
in great multitudes. For that is it he meaneth whē
in the .14. verſe he ſayth. Hell gapeth and openeth
her mouth wide to receyue the number of them that
ſhall die, as it were in a generall plague or murreyne.
               
               By Glorie, he meaneth Riche and Noble: By
Multitude, the commons and poorer ſort.
               The ſeuententh verſe is a * conſolation of the
poore and godly which were oppreſſed by the couetous
and wicked drunkardes,Verſ. 17. Iohn .10. a. 3. 2. Tim. 2. c. 19 2. Pet. 2. b. 9 and ſhal remaine
after their plague and take the fruition of that
wealth that the wicked were conſtrayned to leaue
as waſte. For by the names of ſheepe, and ſtraungers,
he meaneth the Godlye that were left after
the puniſhment of the wicked: and had their houſes
and landes taken from them, into the which
they were nowe reſtored againe.
               The thirde ſower grape is Obſtinacie in ſinne
and manifeſt deriſion and contempt of god and his
woorde. That is it that the Prophete meaneth

when he ſayth,
               Wo bee to them that drawe wickedneſſe
with cordes of vanitie.Verſ. 18. 19. &c.
               That is, that with vaine allurements doe leade
their mindes to increaſe in wickedneſſe, and adde
ſinne to ſinne, whatſoeuer perſwaſion ſhall be
made to the contrarie. As by thinking that that
is no ſinne which in deede is ſinne, or that that
is but a ſmall offence and pardonable which is an
heynous and grieuous offence before God. Which
at the length breake out of this,1. Tim. 4. a. 1 Iudas 5. d. 1. 18 that they * deryde
and ſcoffe at the threatning of Gods iuſtice. And
ſay, O you Prophets and Preachers, you threaten
Gods plague to come vpon vs, but in the meane
ſeaſon we enioy our pleaſant life: ſo that God doth
ſhewe himſelfe rather to be content with our maner
of liuing then with yours, or if he do not, when
his plagues light vpon vs then tell vs of them, but
it appeareth they are * long in comming,Eze. 12. g. 27 2. Pet. 3. a. 4. and god
is not ſo readie to puniſh as you ſay he is.
               The reſidue of the ſower grapes are not onely
the cloking of vices with the faire names of vertue,Verſ. 20. 21. 22.
and diſgracing of vertues with the foule names
of vices: but alſo pride, ſelfelyking, and bryberie
in Magiſtrates which are plaine in the text.
Agaynſt all which he threatneth his grieuous plagues,
and ſayth,Verſ. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 
                  Hee will deſtroy great and ſmall,
ſtrong and weake among them, that is, both roote and
braunche.
               
               And after that, to their vtter confuſion, he will

bring vpon them a mightie armie of ſtraungers,
Nations dwelling farre of, which ſhall be luſtie,
couragious, and fierce, earneſtly bent agaynſt
them, and well appoynted in all maner of weapons,
munition, and furniture. Which is ment of
that hoſte that Veſpaſian and Titus brought to the
ſiege and deſtruction of Hieruſalem.
               
            
         
         
            The ſeconde Sunday in Aduent
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay .24.
            
               
                   BEhold, the Lord maketh the earth waſte and empty,
he turneth it vpſide downe, and ſcattereth abroade
the inhabitours thereof.Oſe. 4. b. 9 2 And the prieſt ſhall bée
as the people, and the mayſter as the ſeruaunt, the
miſtreſſe like the mayde, the ſeller like the byer, he that lendeth
vppon vſurie, like him that boroweth vppon vſurie, the
creditour as the dettour. 3 The lande ſhall be cleane waſted
and vtterly ſpoyled: for ſo the Lorde hath ſpoken.
               4 The earth is ſorie and conſumeth away, the worlde is
féeble and periſheth, the prowde people of the earth are come
to naught. 5 The earth alſo is become vnprofitable vnder
the inhabitours thereof, which haue tranſgreſſed the lawes,
chaunged the ordinannce, broken the euerlaſting couenant.
               6 Therefore hath the curſe conſumed the earth, and they
that dwell therein are fallen into treſpaſſe: Wherefore the
inhabitours of the earth are periſhed with drougth, and fewe
 men are left behinde. 7 The wine fayleth, the vine hath
no might, all they that haue béene merie of heart are come to
mourning. 8 The mirth of tabrets is layde downe, the
noyſe of ſuch as haue made meri
                     •
                  is ceaſſed, the ioye at the

harpe is at an ende. 9 They ſhall drinke no more wine
with mirth, ſtrong drinke ſhall be bitter to them that drinke
it. 10 The Citie of vanitie is broken downe, euery houſe
is ſhut vp, that no man may come in.
               11 In the ſtréetes is there a crying becauſe of wine, all
cheare is vaniſhed away, the mirth of the lande is gone.
               12 In the Citie is left deſolation, and the gate is ſmitten
with deſtruction. 13 For in the middes of the lande, euen
among the people it ſhall come to paſſe as at the ſhaking of
Oliues, & as the grapes are when the wine harueſt is done.
               14 They ſhall lift vp their voyce, and make a mery noiſe:
and in magnifying of the Lord ſhal they crie out of the weſt.
               15 Wherefore prayſe ye the Lorde in the valleyes, euen
the name of the Lorde God of Iſraell in the Iles of the ſea.
               16 From the vttermoſt part of the earth haue we hearde
prayſes and mirth, becauſe of the righteous: and I ſayde, I
knowe a thing in ſecrete, wo is me: the tranſgreſſours haue
offended, the tranſgreſſours haue grieuouſly offended.
               17 Fearefulneſſe, the pit, and the ſnare are vpon thée, O
thou that dwelleſt on the earth. 18 It will come to paſſe,
that whoſoeuer eſcapeth the fearefull noiſe, ſhall fall into the
pitte, and he that commeth out of the pitte, ſhall be taken
with the ſnare: for the windowes from on high are open, and
the foundations of the earth are mooued.
               19 The earth is vtterly broken downe, the earth hath a
ſore ruine, the earth quaketh excéedingly.
               20 The earth ſhall réele to and fro like a dronkarde, and
ſhall be remooued like a tent, and the iniquitie thereof ſhall
be heauie vpon it, it ſhall fall, and not riſe vp againe.
               
               21 And in that day ſhall the Lorde viſite the hoaſt aboue
that is on hie,Iohn. 48. g. 44 and the kinges of the worlde that are vpon the
earth. 22 And they ſhall be gathered togither as they that
be in priſon, and they ſhall be ſhut vp inward, and after many
dayes ſhall they be viſited.Luc. 21. e. 25 23 The moone ſhall be abaſhed,

and the ſunne aſhamed, when the Lorde of hoſtes ſhall
raigne in mount Sion and in Hieruſalem with worſhip, and
in the ſight of ſuch as ſhall be of his counſell.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the. 24.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Beholde the Lord maketh the earth waſt
and emptie,Verſ. 1. 2. he turneth it. &c.
               
                  IT is not vnknowne, that
vntill the cōming of our ſauiour Chriſt
the Iewes only were the Church and
choſen people of god, and the Gentiles,
that is, al other nations of the earth (of
which number we alſo are) were as ſtraungers
from god, giuen ouer to Idolatrie & wickedneſſe,
and had no true ſenſe nor knowledge of God and
his right worſhip. But after that the Iewes obſtinately
had * refuſed Chriſt and his Goſpel preached
vnto them,Luc. 19. b. 14 Iohn. 9. e. 28 Math. 23. d. 37 and the Apoſtles were ſent to publiſh
the ſame into the whole worlde, the Iewes
by Gods iuſt iudgement, were reiected to be no
more of the Church of god, and the other Nations
of the earth before time kept from the true knowledge
of God, were then receyued and choſen as
his Church and people.
               Of this reiecting of the Iewes, and of the horrible
deſolation of their Countrie and Citie Hieruſalem.
For their obſtinacie in refuſing Chriſt the
true Sauiour offered vnto them, and of the calling

of the Gentiles, doth the Prophete ſpeake in
this Chapter.
               This plague of Gods heauy iudgement vpon
the Ievves, doth the Prophet ſet forth in forme of a
waſte or deſolation made in warre. For albeit
the Ievves after their reiecting were in deede by
warre vnder Veſpaſian and Titus, brought to miſerable
waſte and deſolation: yet is this place not
onely to be vnderſtanded therof, but alſo and ſpecially
of their Spirituall calamitie being vtterly refuſed
to be the people of God, and turned out of all
that heauenly riches, glory, bleſſe, and comfort that
they had before through the lawe, promiſe, and couenant
of almightie God made vnto them. Which
was a farre more grieuous plague than the ſpoile
of their Countrie, and ſubuerſion of their Citie.
For by that, the glorie of Gods kingdome among
them was raſed and defaced.
               In warre, men eyther are ſlaine or caſt out of
their Countrie, the lande is made waſte from inhabitance,
goodlye buildinges are ouerthrowne.
There is no regarde of prieſt or people, maiſter
or ſeruant, maiſtreſſe or mayde, riche or poore. &c.
all ſortes are ſpoyled and feele the plague thereof.
And then needes muſt the inhabitantes lament
and mourne, and the whole Countrey be turned
into an horrible and miſerable fourme and ſhape.
As this was the outward waſte, ſo was the Spirituall
deſolation no leſſe, but rather more grieuous.
For they were bereft of all that maieſtie and
glorie that they had before God, they remained no

longer the people of God. Fewe of them came to
the knowledge of ſaluation. Both prieſt and people,
mayſter and ſeruant, and al other ſortes without
difference were caſt of from God, and the benefite
of all his bleſſings. To conclude, kingdome
and prieſthoode, and all the treaſures of heauenly
knowledge were taken from them. And that not
by the hande of anye mortall Prince, but by the
mightie power of God. For the Lorde (ſayth he)
ſhal make waſte the land, & the Lord hath ſpoken it.
               
               The cauſe is added in the fift verſe, They haue
tranſgreſſed the lawes, They haue chaunged the ordinances,
They haue broke the euerlaſting couenant.
That is to ſay: They haue tranſgreſſed the
lawe of the tenne commaundementes preſcribing
the true worſhip of God and dutie towarde theyr
neighbours, they haue not kept the ordinaunces
appoynted for the gouernement of their common
weale and externall forme of Religion, they haue
broken the euerlaſting Couenant and teſtament,
whereby God had bounde himſelfe for euer to bee
the God of Abraham, and of his poſteritie. For
they reiected that happie ſeede of Abraham,
                  Gen. 18. c. 18. Act. 13. g. 47. Gal. 3. b. 8. Eccle. 44. d. 25 * Chriſt
Ieſu, in whome promiſe was wade that all the nations
* of the earth ſhould be bleſſed. This was
of all other the moſt grieuous offence. For they
that reiect Chriſt and his Goſpel, reiect from them
ſelues all hope of Saluation.
               Therefore hath the curſe conſumed the
earth,Verſ. 6. and they that dwell, &c.
               
                  
                  This curſe is that which God threatneth.
                  Leu. 26. c. 16. Deut. 28. b. 16 * Leu. 26.
and * Deut. 28. agaynſt them that keepe not his law.
Curſed ſhalt thou be in the Citie, and curſed in the
fielde, curſed ſhall be the fruite of thy bodie, and the
fruite of thy lande &c.
               The wine faileth,Verſ. 7. 8. 9. the vine hath no might,
all they that haue bene merie. &c.
               By the decay of wine, myrth, ſolace, and minſtrelcie:
he ſignifieth that he will take from them
all thoſe his creatures wherin they did delight and
take pleaſure,Iacob. 4. c. 9 Pſal. 74. b. 8 and caſt them into * lamentation,
ſorowe, and mourning, and want of all comfort,
both before God in conſcience, and before the world
outwardly.
               The citie of vanitie is broken downe,Verſ. 10. 11. 12. Pſal. 9. b. 7 euery
houſe is ſhut vp. &c.
               The deſtruction of Hieruſalem and the ſorowfull
deſolation therof is deſcribed in theſe three
verſes.
               For in the middes of the lande,Verſ. 13. euen among
the people it ſhall come. &c.
               Becauſe he hath before prophecied of the deſtruction
of the lande and kingdome of Iurie, and
of the reiection of that people, leaſt it might bee
thought that God ſhoulde haue no face or countenaunce
of a Church in the whole worlde: he ſignifieth
here both that ſome re
                     •••
                  an
                     •
                   of the Iewes
ſhould be ſaued, as S. Paule wryteth,Rom. 11. a. 5 and alſo that

he will rayſe vp a more ample and glorious church
of all the other Nations of the earth, which ſhall
giue prayſe and glorie to his name.
               This is it that he meaneth in the .13. verſe, when
he ſaith, That it ſhal fal out as in the latter end of harueſt,
ſome Oliues and ſome cluſters of grapes will bee
left on the trees, being but a ſmall portion in compariſon
of the whole. Euen ſo ſome of the Iewes
ſhould receyue Chriſt and be ſaued, and thoſe but
fewe in reſpect of the whole Nation that were reiected.
               In theVerſ. 14. 15 Pſal. 114. c. 12. 14. 15. and 16. verſes, by thoſe that ſhall
crie out of the weſt, and prayſe the Lorde in the valleyes,
and in the Iſles of the ſea, and from the vttermoſt
partes of the earth. He meaneth the number of
the Gentiles in all places, that profeſſing the Goſpell
and ſaluation by Chriſt, ſhall giue prayſe and
glorie to the name of God for the ſame.
               I knowe a thing in ſecrete,Verſ. 16. I know a thing
in ſecrete, wo is me. &c.
               Here the Prophete breaketh out to ſorrowfull
lamentation for the reiecting of his people and
countreymen from the fauour of god through their
obſtinate tranſgreſſion,Rom. 9. a. 2 as if he had ſayde, * wo is
me for that I doe with ſorrowe and heauineſſe of
heart foreſee that at the reuealing of the Goſpell by
Meſsiah, many other nations imbracing the ſame,
fewe of my Countriemen ſhall receyue the ſweete
comfort thereof. For they ſhall heynouſly and grieuouſlye
tranſgreſſe in contemning and refuſing

Chriſt the Meſsiah and Sauiour. And therefore
God ſhall by his iuſt wrath refuſe and caſt of them
alſo from the number of his people.
               Fearefulneſſe,Verſ. 17. the pit, and the ſnare are
vpon thee, O thou that dwelleſt, &c.
               To this place Eſay hath prophecied, as it is
noted before, of the reiecting of the Iewes and calling
of the Gentiles, to the knowledge of GOD.
Nowe he telleth what ſhall become alſo of the other
wicked inhabitours of the earth, and kingdomes
of the worlde which ſhall continue in wickedneſſe
after the goſpel publiſhed, and the kingdome
of Chriſt ſpred and enlarged by Chriſt and his Apoſtles:
and eſpecially towarde the latter ende of
the worlde.Verſ. 23. 
                  VVhen the Church and kingdome of
Chriſt, who is the Lorde of hoſtes ſhall be ſet vp in
Sion and Hieruſalem, that is, in the Church of God,
with ſo great maieſtie and heauenly brightneſſe,
that it ſhal farre paſſe the Sunne and the Moone:
then ſhall theſe troubles happen to the wicked of
the worlde.Amos. 5. e. 19 Eſay. 15. d. 9 1. Re. 20. e. 30 
                  He that ſhall eſcape the fearefull noyſe
ſhall fall into the pit, and he that ſcapeth the pit ſhall
light into the ſnare, that is, they ſhall haue no quietneſſe
nor reſt, but ſhall runne out of one calamitie
into an other vntill they periſh vtterly. For euen
as in the generall deluge, ſo ſhall the windowes
of heauen be opened, and God ſhall powre downe
his plagues vppon the wicked and vurepentaunt
contemners of the Goſpell. And the very earth it
ſelfe and the powers and kingdomes thereof ſhall

ſtagger and reele, and in the end conſume and take
a newe ſhape. For the iniquitie thereof ſhall be as
an heauie burthen vnto it. &c.
            
         
         
            The thirde Sunday in Aduent
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 25.
            
               
                   THou art my Lorde my God, I will magnifie thée,
I will giue thankes vnto thy name, for thou haſt
brought woonderfull things to paſſe, according to
thine olde councels truly and faythfully.
               2 Thou haſt made a Citie a heape of ſtones,Eſay. 26. a. 5 and brought
a ſtrong towne into decay: the habitation of ſtraungers haſt
thou made to be no Citie, neyther ſhall it be buywed anye
more. 3 Therefore ſhall the mightie people giue glorie unto
thée, the Citie of the valiant heathen ſhall feare thée.
               4 For thou haſt bene a ſtrength vnto the poore, and a ſuccour
for the néedie in his trouble, a refuge agaynſt euil weather,
a ſhadowe agaynſt the heate: for the blaſt of raging
men is like a ſtorme that caſteth downe a wall.
               5 Like as the heate in a drie place waſteth all things: ſo
ſhalt thou ſuppreſſe the noyſe of aliauntes, the heate (is
abated) with the ſhadowe of the clowde (euen ſo shall God)
aſſwage the noyſe of the cruell tyrannes.
               
                   6 And in this mountaine ſhall the Lorde of hoſtes make
vnto all people a feaſt of plenteous and delicate things,Luc. 14. d. 23 euen
of moſt pleaſant and daintie diſhes. 7 And in this mountaine
ſhall the Lorde deſtroy the couering that all people are
wrapped in,Apoc. 7. c. 27 and .21. c. 4 and the hanging that is ſpred vpon all nations.
               8 As for death he hath deſtroyed it for euer, and the Lorde
God ſhall wipe away teares from all faces, and the rebuke

of his people ſhall he take away out of all the earth, for ſo
the Lorde hath ſayde.Ephe. 2. a. 13 9 And or that day it ſhall be ſayde,
Lo this is our God, we haue wayted for him, and he ſhall
ſaue vs, this is the Lorde in whome we haue hoped, we will
be merie and reioyce in the ſaluation (that cometh) of him.
               10 For in this mountaine ſhall the hande of the Lorde
ceaſſe, and Moab ſhall be threſhed vnder him, euen as ſtraw
is troden to dung on the dunghill. 11 And he ſhall ſtretch
out his hande in the middes of them, as he that ſwimmeth
caſteth out his handes to ſwimme: and with the ſtrength of
his handes ſhall be bring downe their pride.
               12 The ſtrong holde alſo and defence of thy walles hath he
ouerthrowne & caſt downe, and brought them in the grouned,
euen vnto duſt.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .xxv.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Thou art my Lorde my God,Verſ. 1. I will magnifie
thee, I will giue thanks: &c.
               
                  THe Prophet in this Chapter
foreſeeing in ſpirit,Iudas. 6. c. 14 1. Reg. 12. b. 11 Exod. 6. a. 6. Math. 2. c. 13 Exod. 2. b. 10 Dan. 6. f. 21 and earneſtly conſidering
the meruelous * preſeruation
of the church and kingdome of Chriſt
euen in the middeſt of the furious raging
of this worlde, coulde not but breake out to
the great prayſe & extolling of the ſame his woonderfull
goodneſſe and clemencie, ſaying: Thou art
my Lorde my God. &c.
               
               The thing for the which he extolleth Chriſt Ieſu
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  the Meſsias and ſauiour (for he is that Lord and
God to whom he ſpeaketh) is, that he maruelouſly
preſerueth his Church and people,Titus. 1. a. 2 2. Cor. 1. d. 20 Rom. 4. d. 21 2. Par. 6. a. 4 and fulfilleth
all his counſayles and promiſes *truely and faythfully.
For albeit they ſeeme often to be prolonged
and deferred, ſo that the faithleſſe iudge them to be
falſe and vaine, yet in the ende they prooue alway
moſt firme and true, and are fulfilled with great
glorie.
               Theſe counſayles and promiſes conſiſt in two
poyntes. The one is, that Chriſt will ouerthrowe
and vtterly confounde all Empires, and Kingdomes
of the worlde, all Princes and Tirannes and
all other whatſoeuer they be that afflict and perſecute
the Godly that profeſſe his name, and of this
ſpeaketh he in the ſeconde and thirde verſes.
               The other poynt is that he will * deliuer and
preſerue from all euill his Church & people ſeeme
they neuer ſo miſerable poore and contemptible in
the worlde,Luke. 1. g. 71 Pſal. 17. e. 28 Pſal. 21. b. 6 and of this ſpeaketh hee in the other
partes following.
               Thou haſt made a city an heape of ſtones,Verſ. 2.
and brought a ſtrong towne. &c.
               By the time paſt the Prophete ſignifyeth what
GOD doth preſently, and alway will doe in his
Church, and by the ſinguler number ſpeaking of
one Citie, he meaneth many: ſo that the ſence is:
I therefore prayſe thee O thou Meſsias and Sauiour,
my Lorde and God, that by thy mightie power,
thou doeſt ouerthrow and bring to vtter confuſion

the great Cities, principalities, and powers of the
worlde that perſecute thy Church, and afflict thy
people, and repell thy Goſpell. This is it that thou
promiſeſt to Abraham our father ſaying.Gen. 12. a. 3. 
                  I wil bleſſe
them that bleſſe thee, and I will curſe them that curſe
thee. &c. And therefore all powers that will not
* ſubmit themſelues to thee,Pſal. 72. d. 2 
                        •
                     
                   ſhall periſh and come
to deſolation.
               Therefore ſhall the mightie people giue
glorie vnto thee, Verſ. 3. the Citie of, &c.
               Great principalities and Cities contemning
and perſecuting thy worde, are therefore brought
to cōfuſion, that other by their example may learn
to feare thy name, and acknowledge thy maieſtie
and mightie power.
               For thou haſt beene a ſtrength vnto the
poore,Verſ. 4. 5. and a ſuccour for, &c.
               This is the ſeconde part of the counſayles and
promiſes of Chriſt that he faythfully perfourmeth,
that is, that he preſerueth and ſuccoureth his people
in all their affliction, and therefore to the great
comfort of all that are troubled in conſcience or otherwiſe
is called here, The ſtrength of the poore,
The ſuccour of the needie, A refuge againſt euill weather
and tempeſtuous troubles, A ſhadow agaynſt the
heate of perſecution, to ſaue and keepe his people.
And here is it to be obſerued diligently, that the
people of GOD are often afflicted and perſecuted
in this worlde: and therefore that all which

will ſubmit themſelues to the kingdome of Chriſt
muſt looke for * no better entertainement here,2. Tim. 3. c. 12 and
yet with ſtrong fayth conceyue this comfort that
their king, their Lorde and God, will either mightilye
deliuer them preſently, and bee reuenged of
their enimies: or elſe giue them that ſtrength of
ſpirite, that they ſhal not onely paciently ſuffer that
which ſhal be laid vpon them,Colo. 1. a. 12 2. Theſ. 1. a. 5 Act. 5. g. 41 but alſo as S. Paule
ſayth, * Glorie in their afflictions, that God hath
thought them worthie to ſuffer for his names ſake.
               
               And in this mountaine ſhall the Lorde of
hoſtes make vnto all people a feaſt,Verſ. 6. &c.
               The Mount here ſpoken of, is the hill of Sion,
whereby the Church is figured. The feaſt, is the
feaſt of his Goſpell publiſhed, and calling all men
to the ſweeteneſſe of euerlaſting life, which was
firſt preached in Hieruſalem by Chriſt himſelfe,
where alſo he beſtowed the daintie and delicate diſhes
of his holy ſpirite and heauenly graces to all
them that receyued his Goſpell: that is to ſay, The
heauenly foode of Chriſt himſelfe.
                  Iohn. 6. g. 58 Rom. 5. b. 11 Rom. 5. d. 18 Ioh. 10. e. 28 
                  (* Iohn. 6. Remiſſion
of ſinne, *Reconciliation, Acceptation, * Iuſtification
before God, The aſſured gift of euerlaſting * life,
and The inheritance of the kingdome of God.
               
               In this Mountaine therefore was the table
as it were firſt ſpredde for this heauenly banquet,
and from thence were the meſſengers ſent into all
partes of the worlde to bid the gheſtes,Math. 22. a. 4 Luke. 14. d. 16 as Chriſt
ſignifieth by a parable. Math. 22. and Luke. 14▪
               
               
               And in this Monntaine ſhall the Lorde
deſtroy the couering,Verſ. 7. 8. &c.
               The couering and hanging or the mourning
garment wherin all men are wrapped, is Corruption
and Sinne, whereby ſorrow, daunger, ſhame,
and reproch is come vnto them, & by which, death
alſo hath inuaded them.Rom. 6. d. 23 * For death is the rewarde
of ſinne. But the daunger both of the one and of the
other, and the ſorrowe, weeping, and heauineſſe
that commeth by them,Eze. 19. d. 12 Oſe. 13. c. 14 1. Cor. 15. g. 55 Heb. 2. d. 14. is cleane taken awaye by
Chriſt Ieſu, as S. Paule ſayth, 1. Cor. 15. * VVhere
is thy ſting, O death? O hell, where is thy victorie?
The ſting of death is ſinne, the power of ſinne is the
lawe, but thankes be to God, that hath giuen vs victorie
by Chriſt Ieſu. Therefore with glad and thankfull
heartes the Prophete maketh the people of
God, and ſubiectes of the kingdome of Chriſt to
reioyce and triumph for the ſame, ſaying:
               Lo,Verſ. 9. this is our God, wee haue wayted for
him, and he ſhall deliuer vs, &c.
               Here the Prophete noteth the three ſacrifices,
wherewith the Church of Chriſt and his people do
worſhip him 1 The firſt is Fayth and Beleefe of
hart, noted in this word, VVe haue wayted for him,
that is with conſtant fayth we haue abidden hys
comming, being aſſured that he would deliuer vs.
               2 The ſecond is Confeſsion with the mouth. For
we muſt not onely beleeue in heart that Chriſt Ieſu
is the ſauiour of the worlde, as S.Rom. 10. b. 10 
                  Paule ſayth,

but alſo confeſſe with mouth, and therefore ſayth
the Prophete here, Lo this is our God, &c.
               
               3 The thirde is Triumphant gladneſſe in heart
and conſcience for the ſaluation happened by chriſt
our Sauiour, which is vttered in theſe wordes.
VVe will reioyce and be mery in the ſaluation. &c.
               
               For in this Mountaine the hande of the
Lorde ſhall abide,Verſ. 10. 11. 12. &c.
               By the hande of the Lorde he vnderſtandeth
the power and maieſtie of Chriſt that ſhal remaine
alway in his Church,Mat. 28. d. 20 
                  For I am with you (ſayth he)
to the ende of the worlde, that is in vertue, power,
and maieſtie of his Godhead, though, as touching
his humanitie, he be abſent in heauen on the right
hande of God the father. By the name of Moab
that ſhoulde be threſhed and troden vnder lyke a
dunghill, he meaneth all the enimies and aduerſaryes
of Chriſt and his Goſpell, vpon whom our
Sauiour Chriſt ſhal ſtretch out his hande like one
that ſwimmeth, that he may threſh them and beate
them as it were to duſt, and bring to confuſion all
their glorie and great ſtrength. The Moabites
were the ſworne and perpetual enimies to the Iſraelites,
and therefore by that name doth he note
all the aduerſaryes of the people of God.
            
         
         
            The thirde Sunday in Aduent
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 26.
            
               
                  
IN that day ſhall this ſong be ſung in the land of Iuda,
We haue a ſtrong Citie,Prou. 18. c. 11 Zach. 2. a. 5 ſaluation ſhall God appoynt
in ſteade of walles and bulwarkes.
               2 Open ye the gates,Pſal. 118. b. 19 that the righteous people
which kéepeth the truth may enter in.
               3 By an aſſured purpoſe wilt thou preſerue perfect peace,Rom. 5. a. 5
bicauſe they put their truſt in thée. 4 Put ye your truſt
alway in the Lorde: for in the Lorde God there is ſtrength
for euermore.Eſay. 25. a. 2 5 For he hath brought downe the high minded
Citizens: as for the proude citie he hate brought it lowe,
euen to the grounde ſhall he caſt it downe, and bring it vnto
duſt. 6 The foote, euen the foote of the poore, and the ſteps
of ſuch as be in neceſſitie ſhall treade it downe.
               7 The path of equitie wilt thou graunt vnto the full (O
                  
                  thou moſt righteous) thou ſhalt order the path of him that
is righteous.Prou. 16. a. 1 Hier. 10. d. 23 8 Yea in the way of thy iudgements, O lord,
haue we put our truſt in thée: thy name alſo and the remembraunce
of thée, is the thing that our ſoule longeth for.
               9 My ſoule hath longed for thée al the night,Pſal. 63. a. 2 and. 143. a. 6 and with my
ſpirit which is within me will I ſéeke thée earely in the morning:
for when thy iudgements are in the earth, the inhabitours
of the worlde ſhall learne righteouſneſſe.
               10 Shall the vngodly man be fauoured, which hath not
learned righteouſneſſe, but 
                     ••
                  th wickedly in 
                     •
                  he earth
where nothing ought to be done but that which is righteous?
he ſhall not ſée the glorie of the Lorde. 11 Lorde when thy
hande is lift vp to ſtrike, they ſée it not: but they ſhall ſée it,
and be confounded with the zeale of the people, and the fyre
that conſumeth thine enimies ſhall douour them.
               12 Lorde vnto vs thou ſhalt prouide peace:Phil. 2. a. 13 for thou alſo▪
haſt wrought all our workes in vs. 13 O Lorde our God,
other Lordes beſides thée, hath ſubdued vs: but we will be
mindefull onely of thée, and of thy name.
               14 The deade will 
                     〈…〉
                  , they that be out of life wyll 
                  
not riſe againe, therefore haſt thou viſited and rooted them
out and deſtroyed all the memorie of them.
               15 Thou haſt increaſed the people, O Lorde, thou haſt increaſed
the people, thou art glorious, thou haſt ſent them far
of vnto all the coſtes of the earth.Leu. 26. g. 43 16 Lord in trouble haue
they viſited thée, they poured out their prayer when thy
chaſtening was vpon them.Iohn. 16. c. 21 17 Like as a woman with
childe that draweth nie towardes hir trauayle is ſorie and
cryeth in hir paynes: euen ſo haue we béene in thy ſight O
Lorde.Rom. 8. d. 22 18 We haue bene with childe and ſuffered paine,
as though we had brought forth winde: for there is no ſaluation
in the earth, neyther doe the inhabiters of the worlde
ſubmit themſelues.1. Cor. 15. d. 35 19 Thy deade men ſhall liue, euen as
my body ſhall they riſe againe: awake and ſing ye that dwel
in duſt, for thy deawe is euen as the deawe of hearbes, and
the earth ſhall caſt out them that be vnder her.
               20 Come my people,Gen. 19. b. 10. Apoc. 6. d. 16. enter thou into thy chambers, & ſhut
thy doores about thée, hyde thy ſelfe for a little while, vntill
the indignation he ouerpaſt. 21 For beholde the Lorde is
comming out of his place,Mich. 1. a. 3 to viſite the wickedneſſe of ſuch as
dwell vpon earth: the earth alſo ſhall diſcloſe her bloudes, and
ſhall no more hide them that are ſlaine in her.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .26.
Chapter of Eſay.
               In that day ſhall this ſong be ſung in the
land of Iuda,Verſ. 1. We haue a ſtrong citie, &c.
               
                  AFter that the Prophete in
the former Chapter hath recyted the
benefites that c
                     •
                  me to them that acknowledge▪
Chriſt the true Meſsias
                  
and ſauiour, he nowe maketh a ſong or pſalme in
meeter, wherewith the faythfull, in that day, may
comfort themſelues, and arme their conſciences agaynſt
the temptation and offence riſſing in the
world by the proſperitie and ſucceſſe of the wicked.
For where before it is promiſed, that Chriſt in
his kingdome ſhall take away all mourning, ſorowe,
and weeping from his people, and deliuer
them from all miſerie and oppreſſion, and contrarywiſe,
that he will threſhe downe the wicked to
duſt: to them that looke into the outwarde face of
the world, and as naturall men onely conſider the
thing, it may ſeeme to be all cleane contrary, a
                     •
                  d
the wicked to flouriſhe and proſper in all felicitie,
and the good and godly to be kept vnder in ſhame,
ſorow,Luke. 16. e. 19 and miſerie. As it appeareth in the * Parable
of good poore Lazarus, and the riche prowde
glutton. Agaynſt this offence, as I haue ſayde,
doth the Prophete here arme and comfort the people
of God.Verſ. 1. 2. 3. The firſt comfort is this. VVe haue a
ſtrong Citie, ſaluation ſhall God appoynt in ſteede of
walles and Bulwarkes. That is, howſoeuer the coū
                  tenaunce
of the worlde ſeemeth towarde vs, howſoeuer
the wicked ſeeme to be in great ſtrength and
glorie, and we in great weakeneſſe and miſerie:
yet haue we a ſtrong Citie, a mightie Citie, the
Church of God, the heauenly Hieruſalem, in which
the Lorde God himſelfe our ſaluation is in ſteede
of VValles and Bulwarkes, agaynſt all the pride
and ſtrength of the worlde, as he ſayth alſo by hys
Prophete Zacharie.
                  Zach. 2. b. 
                        •
                     
                   2. I will be a fierie wall rounde

about them, and a glorie in the middes of them.
               
               This Citie is the Church, the foundation thereof
is Chriſt and his doctrine, the walles and bulwarkes
the might and maieſtie of Chriſt, agaynſt
which the gates of Hell,
                  Math. 16. c. 18s and all the * powers of
Sathan cannot preuaile. The gates to enter into
this Citie, is the preaching of the Goſpell, and
that not in one place onely, but in all places of the
worlde, and whereſoeuer the Goſpell is preached,
there is a gate to enter into this Citie of God. The
way to enter is by fayth to embrace the goſpell of
Chriſt. The Citizens that doe enter are all faithfull,
which are * iuſtifyed by fayth in the bloud of
Chriſt.Rom. 3. d. 25 1. Iohn. 1. c. 7 Ephe. 1. b. 7 And of them is it that he ſpeaketh in the ſeconde
verſe.
               Open you the gate that the righteous people
may enter in.Verſ. 2. &c.
               Wherefore when theſe gates be opened, by the
meſſengers of God and preachers of his goſpell,
let all that tender their health and ſaluation make
ſpeede to receyue it, that they may enter into this
Citie where onely the ſure ſtrength of God is for
euer more to ſaue and deliuer.
               For he hath brought downe the high minded
Citizens: as for the prowde,Verſ. 5. &c.
               This is the ſeconde argument of conſolation
in this Pſalme to ſtirre vp the people of God to
confidence and conſtancie agaynſt the tentation
before mentioned. For he deſcribeth how mightily

Chriſt ouerthroweth the wicked, that ſeeme to
themſelues and to the worlde to bee in greateſt
glorie and felicitie. He hath pulled downe (ſayth he)
the high minded Citizens. This is it that the bleſſed
virgine ſpeaketh in her ſong.Luke. 1. e. 52 Ioſu. 10. d. 24 
                  He hath depoſed
the mightie from their ſeate, and hath exalted the
humble and meeke. And yet was not ſhee that
ſpake thus of her ſelfe greatly exalted in ſight of
the worlde, but remayned ſimple and poore. But in
the kingdome of Chriſt and in heauenly glorie before
God, ſhe was exalted to a very high degree,
and contrariwiſe the enimies of the Goſpell, and
the prowde of the worlde, that is, the obſtinate Iewes
and other aduerſaries were in the ſame reſpect
throwne downe, and afterwarde alſo in the
worlde by gods mightie hand grieuouſly plagued.
               The path of equitie wylt thou graunt vnto
the iuſt,Verſ. 7. 8. 9. O thou moſt righteous, &c.
               The right way and the path of equitie, which
Chriſt our Lorde graunteth to his ſubiectes, is the
preaching of his goſpell, in that muſt they walke;
that will go the ſtreight way to heauen: All other
waies be but errours and wicked ſeducings, what
countenance ſoeuer be ſet vpon them. Therefore
ſay the ſayntes of God, In the way of thy iudgementes
(O Lorde) that is, in the truth of thy Goſpell,
haue we put our truſt in thee, thy name alſo and
the remembraunce of thee, is the thing that our ſoule
longeth for,
                  Pſal. 1. a. 2 Ioſu. 1. b. 8 Pſal. 118. 97. and that not once in a yeare, * but day
and night continually. For then onely may men

learne iuſtice truely when thy iudgements are in the
earth, that is, when thy doctrine and Goſpell is
preached ſincerely and truely.
               This place is diligently to be noted that we
may thereby be more inflamed to the whole ſome
doctrine of the Goſpell. For the moſt part thinke
it a matter ſmally apperteining to them, and turne
ouer the care thereof to Miniſters and ſuch olde
men as can do little elſe, then come to the Church,
and heare preachinges, and are, as they ſay, paſt
the worlde. And they themſelues followe theyr
worldly buſineſſes, their Marchandies, their huſbandrie
and other occupations, and feele nothing
at all that longing and greedie deſire of god
and his Goſpell, that the prophet here ſpeaketh of.
               Shal the vngodly man be fauoured,Verſ. 10. which
hath not learned righteouſneſſe, &c.
               Shall grace & mercie be offered to the wicked?
ſhal the Goſpel be preached, ſhal remiſſion of ſinne
in Chriſt Ieſu, ſhall the fauour of God and eternall
life be declared vnto them, when as they will
not learne to doe iuſtice, they will not amend, they
will not accept the mercy of God? But although
the euen, plaine, and ſmooth waye of Gods holye
worde be offered them, yet will they ſtill wander
after theyr owne pathes to errour and * vngodlyneſſe:Prou. 27. c. 22 Eccle. 7. b. 14
and will not ſee the glory of the Lorde.
               Lorde when thy hande is lift vp to ſtrike,Verſ. 11.
they ſee it not: but they ſhall ſee it, &c.
               
                  
That is, when thy mightie hande is lifted vp in
the meruelous woorkes of glorifying thy ſonne by
miracles, by his woonderfull reſurrection from the
dead, by the ſending of the holyghoſt, by publiſhing
of the Goſpell throughout the worlde,Exod. 5. e. 21. Rom. 7. b. 13 and by thy
heauie plagues threatned to all the * refuſers therof,
they yet will not ſee and vnderſtande it. But
when that the ſame Chriſt thy ſonne ſhall come in
his maieſtie, and reueale his glorie to the whole
worlde: then ſhall the wicked contemners of chriſt
be aſhamed,Sap. 5. a. 2. Sap. 3. a. 3 in ſuch ſort, that they ſhall * pine away
with enuie of thoſe things, that they ſhal ſee to happen
to the people of God, and be deuoured and
conſumed with eternall fyre.
               Lorde vnto vs thou ſhalt prouide peace:Verſ. 12. 13
for thou alſo haſt wrought, &c.
               Before, he had ſpoken of the wicked, but nowe
he addeth the other part of the contrary compariſon,
what ſhall be done to the faythfull and godly.
As if he had ſayde, The vngodly ſhall be aſhamed
and pine away and be conſumed with fyre, but vnto
vs the faythfull and godly, our Lorde and Sauiour
Chriſt giueth * peace,Iohn. 14. d. 27 Luke. 22. c. 29 that is, perpetuall * felicitie
and tranquilitie. For Chriſt hath obteyned
for vs of God the father all thoſe bleſſings, that we
haue not onely bodily, but alſo and ſpecially ſpirituall:
that is,Ephe. 1. b. 7 Rom. 4. b. 8. * remiſſion of ſinnes, * imputing of
Chriſtes iuſtice to vs, and the ſpirite of GOD to
* mortefie the luſtes of the fleſh,Rom. 8. c. 13 Rom. 5. a. 1 whereby we haue
* peace and quietneſſe of conſcience before God

and the worlde.
               The dead will not liue,Verſ. 14. they that be out of
life will not riſe againe, &c.
               Here entereth the firſt part of an other contrary
compariſon betweene the wicked and the godly,
and in this verſe he ſayth of the wicked, that they
doe die, and liue not againe, for their reſurrection
ſhall bee to them a death perpetuall, and no life.
And although they ſeeme to proſper, and flouriſhe
long on earth, to the annoyance of the godly: yet
the Lorde viſiteth them in due time,Pſal. 9. b. 7 Pſal. 33. c. 16 * and rooteth
the memorie of them out of the earth, ſo that they
ſhall neuer ryſe againe to glorie.
               Thou haſt increaſed the people,Verſ. 15. 16. 17. O Lorde,
thou haſt increaſed, &c.
               This is the other part of the cōpariſon touching
the godly, as if he had ſayde, Thou (O lord chriſt)
deſtroyeſt the wicked and rooteſt out theyr memorie,
neuertheleſſe thou doeſt gather thy Church,
and increaſe the number of thy people, that thy
glorie may be ſpred and extended to the vttermoſt
boundes of the earth. And yet doeſt thou not gather
them to reſt and quietneſſe of this life, but to
great vexation and affliction: and therfore doe they
reſort to thee in theyr trouble,Pſal. 61. c. 8 * and poure out their
prayers to thee in the time of thy chaſtening. For
* thy chaſtening they do acknowledge it to be whatſoeuer
commeth.Iob. 2. c. 10 Iob. 1
                        •
                     . c. 21 Although it be the hande of the
wicked: yet they knowe it to proceede from thy fatherly

prouidence to their great benefite and commoditie,
that their fayth may be increaſed, & their
ſpirite ſtyrred vp to call vpon thee.
               Thy dead men ſhall liue,Verſ. 19. euen as my body
ſhall they riſe againe, &c.
               The wicked although they flouriſh for a tyme in
this worlde, yet ſhall they not liue in bleſſe after
the reſurrection of the deade, but ſhall die for euer.
But the godly, that haue liued here in trouble, and
dyed in thee, ſhall riſe againe to lyfe, and ioyes
euerlaſting.
               Come my people,Verſ. 20. 2
                        •
                     
                   enter thou into thy chambers,
and ſhut thy doores, &c.
               This is a conſolation in the perſon of Chriſt
exhorting his people, paciently for a time to beare
the affliction and trouble of this life, and to enter
into the cloſets and ſecretes of their heartes, and
call vpon the name of the Lord, for the ſuccour and
ſtrength of his holy ſpirit, vntill the time of his indignation
be paſt.Eſay. 13. b. 11 Oſe. 1. b. 4 Luke. 12. a. 2 Gen. 4. b. 10. Apoc. 6. c. 10 For the Lorde in ſhort time will
come * to viſite the wickedneſſe of the earth, and
the earth ſhall no longer keepe ſecrete but * diſcloſe
the bloud and crueltie that hath beene ſhewen to
the ſaintes of God, that his iuſtice may proceede agaynſt
them for the ſame.
            
         
         
            The fourth Sunday in Aduent
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 30.
            
               
                  
                   ALas for thoſe diſobedient children ſayth the Lorde,
that they will take counſayle and not of me,Eſay. 8. b. 10 that
they will take a ſecrete aduiſe and not out of my ſpirite,
and therefore adde they ſinne vnto ſinne.
               2 Euen they that walke to go downe into Egypt, and
haue aſked no queſtion at my mouth, but ſéeke ſtrength in
the might of Pharao, and truſt in the ſhadow of Egypt.
               3 Therefore ſhall the ſtrength of Pharao be your confuſion,
and the truſt in the ſhadow of Egypt your ſhame.
               4 For his Capitaynes were at Zoan, and his Ambaſſadours
came vnto Hanes. 5 They were aſhamed of the
people that could doe them no good,2. Re. 18. d. 21 Hier. 17. b. 5 Exe. 29. a. 6 and that might not helpe
them nor ſhewe them any profite, but were their confuſion
and rebuke. 6 The burthen of the beaſtes of the South.
In a lande of trouble and anguiſh, from whence ſhall come
the yong and olde Lion, the viper and fierce ſerpent that flieth
agaynſt them, that vpon coltes beare their ryches, and
vpon camels their treaſures, to a people that can doe them
 no good. 7 For vaine and nothing worth ſhall the helpe of
the Egyptians be: therefore haue I cryed vnto Hieruſalem,
they ſhall haue ſtrength inough if they wil ſettle their minds
in quiet
                     •
                  eſſe.Eſay. 8. a. 1 8 Now therefore go thy way, and write this
be
                     •
                  ore them in a table, and note it in a booke: that it may finally
remaine and be kept ſtill for euer.
               9 For this is an obſtinate people,Eſay. 1. d. 10 and diſſembling children,
children that refuſe to heare the law of the Lorde.
               10 For they ſay vnto the ſéers, Sée not: and to them that
be cleare of iudgement, Looke not out right things for vs:
but ſpeake fayre wordes vnto vs, looke out errours.
               11 Get you out of this way, depart out of this path, and
turne the holy one of Iſraell from vs.
               12 Wherefore thus ſayth the holy one of Iſraell, Becauſe
your heartes riſe agaynſt this worde, and becauſe you truſt
in wrong dealing and peruerſe iudgement, and put your

confidence therein. 13 Therefore ſhall ye haue this miſchiefe
for your deſtruction and fall, like as an hie wall that
falleth becauſe of ſome ryft or blaſt, whoſe breaking commeth
ſodainly. 14 And the hurt thereof is like an earthen 
veſſell which breaketh without helpe,Pſal. 2. b. 9 ſo that in the burſting
of it, there is not founde one ſheuer to fetch fire in, or tos take
water withall out of the pitte. 15 For thus ſayth the Lord
God, euen the holy one of Iſraell,Exod. 14. c. 13 1. Chr. 20. c. 5 In repentance and in reſt
ſhal ye be ſafe, in quietneſſe and ſure confidence ſhall be your
ſtrength, but ye haue had no lyſt thereto.
               16 For ye haue ſayde, No, but we will eſcape through
horſes, therefore ſhall ye flie: and we will get vs vp vpon
ſwift beaſtes, and therfore ſhall your perſecutors be ſwifter.
               17 A thouſande ſhall flie at the rebuke of one,Leu. 26. a. 8. Ioſu. 23. a. 3 and at the
rebuke of fi
                     •
                  se ſhall ye all flie, till ye be left as a ſhip maſt vpon
the top of a mountaine, and as a breaken vpon a
                     •
                   hill.
               18 Therefore 
                     •
                  oth the Lorde cauſe you to wayte,Rom. 2. a. 4 that he
may haue merrie vpon you, to the intent that he may haue
the preeminence when he is gratious vnto you: for the Lord
is the God of iudgement. Bleſſed are all they that hope in
him. 19 If the people remaine in Sion and at Hiesruſalem,
thou ſhalt not be in 
                     〈◊〉
                  : but at the voyce of thy
complaint ſhall he haue mercie vpon 
                     •
                  hée, and when he 
                     ••
                  
                  reth
it, he ſhall giue thée an aunſwere.
               20 And though the Lorde giue you the breade of trouble,
and the water of aduerſitie, thy raine ſhall be no name ſ
                     •
                  
ſcant, but thine eyes ſhall ſée thy raine.
               21 Yea and th
                     ••
                  e eare ſhall heare the talking of him that 
both ſpeake behinde thée:Deut. 4. a. 1 This is the way, walke y
                     •
                   in it,
turne not aſide neither to the right hande, nor to the left.
               22 Ye ſhall deſtroy alſo the couering of your ſiluer Images,
and the decking of your golden Idols, euen as filthineſſe
ſhalt thou put them away: and thou ſhalt ſay vnto it, Get
thée hence. 23 Then ſhall God giue raine vnto thy ſéede,

that thou ſhalt ſow the ground withall, and breade of the increaſe
of the earth, which ſhall be fat and very plenteous: in
that day alſo ſhall thy cattell be fed in large paſtures.
               24 The oxen likewiſe and the yong Aſſes that eare the
ground, ſhall eate cleane prouender, which is purged wyth
the winde and the fan.2. Pet. 3. b. 7 25 Finally, vpon euery hie mountaine
and hill ſhall there be riuers, and ſtreames of waters in
the day of the great ſlaughter when the towers fall.
               
                   26 Moreouer, the light of the Moone ſhall be as the light
of the Sunne, and the Sunne light ſhall be ſeuen folde, and
haue as much ſhine as in ſeuen dayes beſide, when the Lord
bindeth vp the fore of his people, and healeth the ſtroke of
their wounde. 27 Beholde, the fame of the Lorde commeth
from farre, and his preſence is ſo hote, that no man is
able to abide: his lippes are full of indignation, & his tongue
is as 
                     〈◊〉
                   fire. 28 His breath is a vehement flood
of water that reacheth vp to the neck: that he may ſift away
the heathen in the 
                     •
                  ine of vanitie; and his breath is a bridle of
 errour in the rawes of the people▪ 29 And ye ſhall ſing like

                     〈◊〉
                   in the night when the holy ſolemnitie beginneth, and ye
ſhall haue gladneſſe of hart; like as when one commeth with

                     〈…〉
                   he hill of the Lorde, and to the moſt mightie one

                     〈…〉
                   And the Lorde ſhall cauſe his glorious voles
to be hearde, and ſhall declare his ſtretched ou
                     •
                   arme with a
terrible countenauncee; and with the flame of a conſuming
fire, with noyſome lightning, with a ſhowre, and with hayle
ſtones. 31 For through the voyce of the Lorde ſhall Aſſur
be deſtroyed,Eſay. 10. a. 5 which 
                     〈◊〉
                   other men with the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   And it ſhal come to paſſe, that whither ſoeuer he goeth;
the rod ſhall rleaue vnto him which the Lorde ſhall lay vpon
him with tabrets and harpes: and with great warre ſhall
he fight agaynſt his hoſt.Math. 25. c. 30 33 For the fire of hell is ordeyned
from the beginning, yea euen for the king is it prepared:
this hath the Lorde ſet in the déepe, and made it wyde,

the burning wherof is fire and much wood: the breath of the
Lorde which is like a riuer of brimſtone doth kindle it.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .30.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Alas for thoſe diſobedient children ſayth
the Lorde,Verſ. 1. that they will take, &c.
               
                  AT what tyme the Aſſirians
vnder * Senacherib,
                     4. Reg. 19. a. 1 Eſay. 36. g. 37 2. Par. 32. a. 
                           •
                        
                      in the tyme of Ezechias,
inuaded Iurie, and put Hieruſalem
in great feare, * many of the
Princes and people were verye earneſt
to haue ſel
                        ••
                      for ſuccour into Egypt▪ and might
hardly be perſwaded otherwiſe.Eſay. 36. b. 6 And 
                        〈◊〉
                      they
were commaunded by God in their diſtreſſe to put
their truſt in him, and not ſeke helpe at the heathen
and godleſſe people, that were 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     Eſay in
this 
                        〈…〉
                     
from that put 
                        〈◊〉
                      and ſayth,Verſ. 1. 2. 3: 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     dicut children (ſayth the Lorde) that contemning
my worde whereby I haue promiſed them helpe
agaynſt the Aſsirians, will 
                        〈◊〉
                      followe theyr
owne 
                        〈…〉
                     
of my holy ſpirite, ſeeke ayde of ſtraung
                        •••
                     
for their defence, and ſo adde 
                        〈◊〉
                      vpon ſinnes not
onely diſobeying my worde in taking that aduice,
but ſtubburnely refuſing my calling back from the
execution 
                        〈◊〉
                      purpoſe. They 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
and confidence that they ſhoulde haue in me, and
follow their owne counſayle and ſeeke their owne
ſtrength by the power of the * Aegyptians.
                     Iere. 42. b. 14 Deut. 17. d. 16 Pſ. 146. a. 3. 4 Eſay. 20. a. 5 But that
vaine ſhadow of Pharoes power and the Aegyptians,
ſhall be their confuſion.
                  
                     Yea they ſende theyr Princes in ambaſſage to the
farremoſt partes of Aegypt,
                     Verſ. 4. 5. that is, to Zoan & Hanes
with rich preſentes and giftes in ſeruile maner to
craue ayde of a godleſſe people, that ſhall neyther
be willing nor * hable to helpe them.Eſay. 31. a. 3
                  


                  The burthen of the beaſtes of the South.Verſ. 6. 7.
In a lande of trouble, &c.
                  The Prophete doth not onely reprooue theyr
doyng, but amplifyeth their follie, ſhewing that
they take great and daungerous iourneyes, with
their beaſtes l
                        •
                     aden wyth treaſure to paſſe into
Aegypt through the wilderneſſe (which is here noted
by the lande of anguiſh and trouble) and by the
wayes were aſſaulted by Lyons and other wilde
beaſtes▪ and 
                        〈◊〉
                     , with great hurt and daunger:
And all to bie the helpe of them that 
                        ••
                     re not
hable to ſuccour them, whereas they might haue
had the readie helpe of God at home, If, according
to his worde and preaching of his Prophete, they
would haue called vpon him, and put their truſt in
hims.


                  Nowe therefore go thy way write this
before them in a table,Verſ. 8. 9. &c.
                  Theſe wordes be ſpoken in the perſon of God

to the Prophete, willing him to write this propheſie,
and to ſet it in the ſight of the people, that it
might remain for an euerlaſting memorie againſt
them, and that all ages might thereby vnderſtand
what an * obſtinate, ſtubburne, and waywarde
people this was,Act. 7. f. 51 Hier. 7. f. 26 that, by no preaching or teaching
of the Prophetes of GOD, could be withdrawne
from their vnfaythfull deuiſes.


                  For they ſay vnto the Seers,Verſ. 10. Se not: and
to them that be cleare, &c.
                  By the name of Seers, and thoſe that vnderſtand
he meaneth the Prophetes and Preachers that
God had ſent vnto them. In this place therefore
Eſay painteth forth the waywarde obſtinacie and
contempt of Gods worde before mentioned. In ſo
much that they did not only turne away their eies,
their eares, and all their ſences, from the doctrine
of his truth, but alſo derided the ſame, and deſired
to haue it vtterly rooted out and taken away. Of
which virulent furie of the wicked ryſeth all affliction,1. Reg. 13. a. 4 2. Reg. 1. b. 9 2. Pa. 26. d. 19 Actes. 7. f. 54 Math. 14. a. 3
perſecution, and trouble againſt the prophets
and meſſengers of God. For when once they can
not abide the truth, then ſeeke they all meanes to
* vexe them, by whome it is offered and brought
vnto them.


                  Looke not out right thinges for vs:Verſ. 10. but
ſpeake fayre wordes vnto vs, &c.
                  It cannot be thought that any people can be ſo
obſtinately blinded,Hier. 22. e. 21 Oſe. 12. b. 5 Math. 19. b. 14 that they will with ſo * open

wordes * proteſt that they will not here the truth,Pſal. 35. a. 3 Eſay. 28. c. 12 Hier. 44. d. 16
vnder the name of the truth, or, that they will with
plaine wordes deſire to be deceiued, and be led into
errour by flatterie: but rather with a countenaunce
of hypocriſie will deteſt the truth vnder the
name of falſehood and errour, becauſe it is to them
ſharpe and vnpleaſaunt, and, vnder the name of
truth and godlineſſe deſire to haue * erronr and
falſehoode,1. Tim. 4. a. 3 beeyng to them more pleaſaunt and
acceptable,Mich. 2. c. 11 becauſe it is more * agreeing to theyr
fantaſies. But the Prophete here pulleth of their
viſarde, and letteth them be ſeene, as they are inwardely
in heart and mynde, in deede abhorring
the truth.


                  Wherefore thus ſayth the holy one of Iſraell,Verſ. 12. 13 14. 15. 16
Becauſe your heartes riſe, &c.
                  In theſe verſes next folowing is denounced a
grieuous threatning of God agaynſt ſuch wilfull
and obſtinate refuſers and contemners of hys
worde. Seeing, ſayth hee, your wickedneſſe is
ſuch, thus ſayth that holy god, that hath choſen Iſrael
for his peculier people: Becauſe you haue refuſed
this my worde and promiſe, wherby I haue
vndertaken to preſerue and deliuer you from your
enimies, in all your aduerſities, and putte your
truſt in wrong dealing and peruerſe iudgement by
ſeeking helpe of Idolatours with money and ryches:
therefore, I ſay, ſhall extreeme deſtruction
come vpon you. And as an high wall, if it begin to
haue a clift, falleth ſodainly before men beware o
                        •
                     
                     
it: ſo you, which by the bleſſing of God haue beene
hitherto highe and notable, becauſe you haue begun
to be cleft with the breech of vufaythfulneſſe,
and wickedneſſe, ſhall fall vpon the ſodaine to extreeme
cōfuſion.Pſal. 2. c. 9 Apoc. 2. f. 27 Yea, and euen as an * earthen veſſell
ſo broken, by the fall of a great ſtone vpon it,
that one ſharde or ſhiuer is not left ſo big as to carie
a cole of fire on, or to take water out of a pitte:
ſo you, I ſay, that haue hitherto beene the veſſels
of Gods great mer
                        •
                     ie, ſhall be ſo oppreſſed and deſtroyed,
that ſcant any remnant ſhall be ſaued,Verſ. 17. yea,
in the ende you ſhall be brought to ſo ſmall a number,
that you ſhall be but here and there one, as it
were a maſte of a ſhippe vpon a mountayne, or a beacon
vpon an hill. Which ſhall remaine onely as a
token of the great calamitie that by Gods hande
ſhall fall vpon you.


                  Therefore doth the Lorde cauſe you to
waite,Verſ. 18. that he may haue, &c.
                  Here the Prophete declareth a cauſe, why they
ſhould leaue the helpe of ſtraungers, and put their
truſt in him: that is, becauſe he hath determined to
ſaue them from the Aſsirians, if they will 
                        •
                     arie in
their Citie, and cal vpon him for helpe. The Lord,
ſayth he, cauſeth you to wayte, and deferreth hys
doing, not that he intendeth to forſake you, but that
he may merrifully, and with the more glory of his
iudgement deliuer you.
                  Therefore ſhould ye be of good cheere,Pſal. 2. c. 12 Hier. 17. a. 7 and looke
for the helpe of the Lorde. For * bleſſed are they,

and good ſhall come vnto them, that put their truſt
in the Lorde.Verſ. 19. For this I doe aſſure you, ſayth the
prophete, if the people remaine in Hieruſalem with
quiet truſt in God,1. Cor. 10. c. 13 2. Pet. 2. b. 9 * though for the time they feele
ſome trouble, hurt, and ſcarcitie by the enimies beſieging
them: yet ſhall they not periſh, & be oppreſſed,
but, at their firſt complaint and calling vpon
him,Verſ. 20. he will haue mercie on them. And although
the Aſsirians ſhall ſeeme ſo to haue waſted their
countrey, that they ſhall not haue any ſuſtenance to
liue by: God yet wil ſo mercifully deale with them,
that he ſhall giue them plentie of foode, with raine
and proſperous weathering to maintaine ye ſame.
Yea,
                        Verſ. 21. Iohn. 8. b. 12 Iohn. 14. a. 6 Phil. 1. a. 6 and as a paſtour folowing his flocke doeth
guide them with his 
                        〈◊〉
                      vnto the right way: ſo
ſhall the Lorde ſende them Prophetes, Princes,
and Rulers, that ſhall gouerne and guide them,
that they in their doings may go neyther on the
right hande nor on the left, but keepe the ſtraight
and true way.Verſ. 22. But the Lorde doth not onely require
of them, that they ſhould remaine with quiet
truſt and cōfidence in him,Iud. 10. b. 7 3. Reg. 14. d. 15 1. Cor. 10. b. 7 Gal. 5. d. 20. 1. Cor. 6. b. 
                           •
                        
                      but alſo that they ſhould
deſtroy and caſt away their filthie Idols, the * worſhip
whereof hath led them from the true ſeruice
of God, and ſo cauſed them grieuouſly to offende,
and to ſtray from the right way of his worde appoynted.


                  Then ſhal God giue raine vnto thy ſeede,Verſ. 23. 24
that thou ſhalt ſow the ground, &c.
                  Againe the Prophete doth put them in minde

of that great and good bleſſing of plentie and ſucceſſe
of all thinges, that God would ſende them, if
they would forſake their owne waywarde doings,
and turne to him by repentance. Theſe be the bleſſinges
of wealth and proſperitie that he promiſeth
to them,Deut. 28. a. 1 Leu. 26. a. 4 that followe his will. Deuter. 28. and
Leuit. 26.


                  Finally,Verſ. 25. vpon euery high mountaine and
hill there ſhall be riuers, &c.
                  The Prophete ſayth, that at that time that god
ſhall deſtroy great multitudes of the Aſsirians, and
pull downe their high towers, that is, ouerthrow
their mightieſt Princes, then ſhall there be great
ſtore of water and ſprings on all the hilles of Iuda,
whereby their drie landes may be made battle and
fertile. Yea, when God ſhall haue deliuered them
out of daunger and reſtored them to their former
libertie.


                  Then ſhall the light of the Moone be as
the light of the Sunne,Verſ. 26. &c.
                  That is, God ſhall poure vpon his people ſo
great ioy and gladneſſe, that the ſunne and moone
ſhal ſeeme to them to be farre brighter than before
they were. For to thoſe that are in daunger and
heauineſſe, the ſunne and moone doe ſeeme darke
and dimme, and when they be deliuered, al things
for ioy, ſeeme more bright and comfortable. And
becauſe theſe particuler deliueraunces of the Iewes
from their enimyes, often in the Prophetes

are figures of the great deliuerance of the people
of God from their ſpiritual enimies by Chriſt Ieſu:
this whole place may well be interpreted of the
happie and * ſpirituall ſucceſſe,Actes. 2. c. 17 Eſay. 44. a. 3 Ephe. 1. a. 3 that by Chriſt, ſhall
come to the faythfull, and of the great brightneſſe
of his holy ſpirite, which then ſhoulde ſhi
                        •
                     e farre
more plentifully, then euer it did before.


                  Beholde the fame of the Lorde commeth
from farre,Verſ. 27. and his preſence, &c.
                  This is an other cauſe why that people ſhoulde
ſtay themſelues in the truſt of God, and not ſeeke
other forraine ayde and ſtrength. For that he will
deſtroye the Aſsirians and come vpon them as a
dreadfull and terrible God, his countenaunce, his
wordes, yea the very breath of his mouth ſhall be
ſo terrible to them, that although they be a mightie
nation, yet ſhall they not be hable to abyde it, but
that he will ſhake and ſift them, and as it were
with a * bitte in their mouthes ſo turne them,Eze. 29. a. 4 that
with all their power they ſhall fall downe and
come to nothing.Verſ. 30. Yea the Lorde ſhall cauſe hys
terrible voyce to be heard among them, and ſhall
ſo ſtretch out his arme vpon them, as he ſhall moſt
dreadfully declare his grieuous anger towardes
them:Exod. 9. c. 23 Pſal. 10. b. 7 Verſ. 32. euen as if he had ſent downe flames of deuouring
fire, * lightning and ſtormes of haile from
heaueu to conſume them. And this ſcourge of
Gods wrath ſhall not depart from them whither
ſoeuer they go: Inſomuch that the very king himſelfe
ſhall be touched with it, and be partaker of

that hell and deuouring fire, that the iuſtice of God
hath prepared for them euerlaſtingly.
               
            
         
         
            The fourth Sunday in Aduent
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 32.
            
               BEholde, a king ſhall gouerne after the rule of righteouſneſſe,
and the princes ſhal rule according to the
ballance of equitie. 2 And that man ſhall be vnto
men as a defence for the winde, & as a refuge for the
tempeſt, like as a ryuer of water in a thirſtie place, and the
ſhadow of a great rocke in a drie lande.
               3 The eyes of the ſéeing ſhall not be dimmse, and the eares
of them that heare ſhall take diligent hésede.Eſay. 29. f. 18
               
               4 The heart of the vnwiſe ſhall attaine to knowledge,
and the vnperfect tongue ſhall ſpeake plainely and diſtinctly.
               5 Then ſhall the fooliſh niggard be no more called gentle,
nor the churle liberall. 6 But the niggarde will ſpeake
niggardly, and his heart will worke euill, and play the hypocrite,
and imagine abhominations agaynſt God, to make the
hungrie leane, and to withholde drinke from the thirſtie.
               7 The weapons of the churliſh are euill, he deuiſeth noyſome 
deuiſes, that he may beguile the poore with deceytfull
wordes, yea, euen there as he ſhould giue ſentence with the
poore.Prou. 17. b. 8 But the liberall perſon imagineth honeſt things,
and commeth vp for liberalitie vnto promotion.
               9 Vp ye rich and idle women, hearken vnto my voyce, ye
careleſſe daughters marke my woordes.
               10 Many yeares and dayes ſhall ye be brought in feare O
ye careleſſe women: for the vintage ſhal faile, and the harueſt
ſhal not come. 11 Be abaſhed you that liue in aboundance,

tremble you that liue careleſſe, caſt of your rayment, make
your ſelues bare, and put ſackecloth about you.
               12 For as the infantes wéepe when their mothers 
                     •
                  ea
                     •
                  es
are tryed vp: ſo ſhall you wéepe for your fayre fieldes and
fruitefull vineyardes. 13 My peoples field ſhall bring thornes
 and thiſtles: and ſo ſhall it be in euery houſe of voluptuouſneſſe,
and in euery citie that reioyceth.
               14 The palaces alſo ſhall be broken, and the greatly occupied
cities deſolate: The towers and bulwarkes ſhal become
dennes for euermore, where wilde Aſſes take their pleaſure,
and ſhéepe their paſture. 15 Vnto the time that the ſpirite
be powred vpon vs from aboue, and that the wilderneſſe be
a fruitfull fielde, and the plenteous fielde be reckened for a
wood. 16 Then ſhall equitie dwell in the deſert, and righteouſneſſe
in a fruitfull lande. 17▪ And the worke of righteouſneſſe
ſhall be peace,Rom. 5. a. 1 Hier. 33. c. 16 and her fruite reſt and quietneſſe for
euer. 18 And my people ſhall dwell in the Innes of pe
                     •
                  ce,
and in ſure dwellings, in ſafe places of comfort.
               19 And when the hayle falleſh, it ſhall fall in the wood, and
the Citie ſhall be ſet lowe in the valley.
               20 O howe happie ſhall ye be when ye ſhall ſafely ſowe
your ſéede beſide all waters, & driue thither the féete of your
Oxen and Aſſes.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .32.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Beholde,Verſ. 1. 2. a king ſhall gouerne after the
rule of righteouſneſſe, &c.
               
                  IN this Capter Eſaias literally
ſpeaketh of the happie ſtate and
gouernment of the kingdome of Iurie
and Hieruſalem, that ſhould be vnder

                  Ezechias, after God had deliuered them from the
daunger and inuaſion of the Aſsirians. But prophetically
he meaneth of the kingdome of Chriſt
the Meſsias and ſauiour. For albeit Ezechias was
a good and godly Prince, and his people well and
wiſely guided by him: yet was there not vnder
him nor can there be in any worldly 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſuch perfection as is 
                     〈…〉
                  . Therfore
he referreth them, as I haue ſayde, to the ſpirituall
kingdome of Meſsias, vnder 
                     〈◊〉
                   all
theſe things ſhall be perfourmed.Verſ. 2. 
                  He ſhall gouerne
according to the rule of righteouſneſſe, 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
that is to ſay, his 
                     〈…〉
                  lance
of equitie. He 
                     〈…〉
                  
agaynſt the coldeneſſe of worldely 
                     〈…〉
                  
to ſuccour them in the bluſtering ſtormes of
tentation,Verſ. 3. a Pleaſant riuer with his grace to 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Verſ. 4.
                  
                     〈…〉
                   among
his people.
               
               Then ſhall the fooliſh niggard be no more
called gentle,Verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8 nor the churle, &c.
               In the kingdomes of the worlde there is great
hypocriſie and diſſimulation, and as Cato once
ſayd, they lee
                     •
                  e the true & proper names of things,
and lauiſhing of other mens goodes is called liberalitie,

                     •
                   and raſhe, boldeneſſe is termed valiauntneſſe,
couetouſneſſe, thrifty ſparing, &c. and al foule
vices 
                     〈◊〉
                   with the fayre tytles of vertues. But
in the kingdome of meſsias it ſhall not be ſo,Luke. 3. e. 35▪
                   * the
viſardes of hypocriſie ſhall be ſhaken of,1. Cor. 14. e. 25 and euery

                     〈…〉
                   and knowne by their

                     〈…〉
                   and operations.Heb. 4. c. 12
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   and y
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  e women,Verſ. 9. and 
                     •
                  earken
vnto my voyce ye careleſſe, &c.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   in this place leaueth 
                     〈…〉
                  
of the 
                     〈…〉
                   and turneth to the 
                     〈…〉
                  
Iewes. By the riche

                     〈…〉
                   the great and wealthie

                     〈…〉
                   which and both heare Chriſtes,Mat. 23. d. 37 Luc. 13. g. 34 Math. 11. c. 21 Luke. 10. c. 13 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  curitie for euer.
                  Verſ. 10. 
                  Many yeares and dayes ſhall you be

troubled becauſe the vintage ſhall ſay le; and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
ſhall not come in. The lawe of Moiſes euen from
the beginning mannred, dreſſed and prepared the
Iſraelites along time, as it had beene a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
that when the Meſsias ſhould come they ſhoulde receyue
him, and bring forth fruite accordingly, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
it falleth out cleane contrary. For when he ſhall
come, he ſhall finde no grapes there, but wylde
grapes and thiſtles. Therefore ſo great calamitie
ſhall come vpon you,
                  Verſ. 11. 12. 13. as you ſhall be aſtonied therwith:
and, through extreeme ſorow, torment your
ſelues, pul of your garments, and weare ſackcloth
vpon you.
                     
                        •
                     
                   You ſhall be wayle your 
                     〈…〉
                  
time battle, but now 
                     〈…〉
                  
your vines, your lands, 
                     〈…〉
                  
chriſt the Meſsias had * 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Act. 2. c. 11. 1
                        •
                     
                  
his ſpiritie vpon hi
                     •
                   Apoſtles at the time 
                     〈…〉
                  .Verſ. 15. 16. 17.
Inſomuch thatVerſ. 19.
if there fall anyPſal. 90 a. 1 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   * they ſhall be

ſo armed with the ſpirit of God, and ſtrength from
aboue, that it ſhall not hurt them. Oh how happie
ſhall you then be, when this great plentie, tranquillitie,
and quietneſſe ſhall come among you, ſo
that both Oxe and Aſſe, both Iewe and Gentile, ſhal
ioyne togither in the profeſſion of one fayth.
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday after Chriſtmas
at Morning prayer.
                  Eſay. 37.
            
               
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   heard that, he r
                     •
                  nt his clothes, and
put on ſackcloth,2. Reg. 19. a. 1 and went into the temple of the
Lorde. 2 But 
                     •
                  e ſent 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
chiefe ouer the houſeholde 
                     〈◊〉
                   the f
                     •
                  rthe, with the 
                     〈…〉
                  
clothed 
                     〈…〉
                  ,Ionas. 3. a. 5 vnto the Prophete Eſay the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                   7 Beholde, I will rayſe vp a 
                     〈◊〉
                   agaynſt him, and he
ſhall heare a rumour,Eſay. 31. b. 9 and he ſhall go againe into his Countrey,

                     〈◊〉
                   will I deſtroy him with the ſworde in her owne

lande. 8 Nowe when Rabaſakeh returned,1. Sa. 23. c. he ſworde the
king of Aſſiria laying ſtege to Libnas: for he had vnderſtanding
that he was departed from Lachis.
               9 And there came a rumour that Tharakas king of Ethiopia
was come forth to warre agaynſt him: and when the
king of Aſſiria heard that, he ſent other meſſengers to king
Ezekia with this commaundement. 10 Say thus to Ezekia
king of Iuda, Let not thy God deceyue thee in whome
thou hopeſt and ſayſt, Hieruſalem ſhall not be giuen into the
handes of the king of Aſſiria. 11 For lo, thou knoweſt wel
how the kings of Aſſiria haue handled all the 
                     〈◊〉
                   that they
haue ſubuerted: and hopeſt thou to eſcape?
               12 Were the people of the Gentiles whome my progen
                     •
                  tours
conquered, deliuered at any time through theft Gods?2. Re. 17. a. 6
(As namely) Goſan, 
                     〈…〉
                   and the 
                     〈…〉
                  
and Au
                     •
                  ? 14 Now when 
                     〈◊〉
                   had 
receyued the letter of the meſſengers, 
                     〈…〉
                  
vp into the 
                     〈…〉
                  
the Lorde. 15 And 
                     〈…〉
                   (on this
maner.
                  Exod. 25. c. 1
                        •
                     
                  ) 16 O Lorde 
                     〈…〉
                   which

                     〈…〉
                   is God
of all the kingdomes of the worlde, for thou onely haſt 
                     〈…〉
                  
heauen and earth. 17.Gene. 1. a. Baruc. 1. c. 13. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Lorde and

                     〈◊〉
                  , open 
                     〈…〉
                  
wordes of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , which hath 
                     〈…〉
                   to
blaſphéeme the liuing God. 18 It is true O Lorde that the
kings of Aſſiria haue conquered all kingdomes and landes.
               19 And caſt their Gods in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  : for thoſe were 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gods
but the workes of mens handes, of wood or 
                     〈◊〉
                   therefore
haue they deſtroyed them. 20 Nowe therefore 
                     〈…〉
                  
O Lorde our God from the handes of 
                     〈…〉
                   that all
the kingdomes of the earth 
                     〈◊〉
                   know that thou onely art

the Lorde. 21 Then Eſay the ſonne of Amos fent vnto
Ezekia, ſaying: Thus ſayth the Lorde God of Iſraell, wheras 
thou haſt made thy prayer vnto me as touching Sennacherib
the king of Aſſiria. 22 This is the aunſwere that
the Lorde hath giuen concerning him: Diſpiſed art thou
and mocked O daughter Sion, he hath ſhaken his heade
at thée O daughter of Hieruſalem. 23 But thou Sennacherib,Zach. 2. b. 8 Math. 25. d. Act. 9. c. 14
whome haſt thou defied and blaſphemed? Agaynſt
whom haſt thou lifted vp thy voyce, and exalted thy prowde

                     •
                  ookes? euen agaynſt the holy one of Iſraell.
               24 Thou with thy ſeruants haſt blaſphemed the lord,
and thus holdeſt thou of thy ſelfe▪ I wil couer the hie mountaynes
and ſides of Libanus with my horſemen, and there
will I cut downe the hie Ceder trées, and the fayreſt Firre
trées: I will vp in the heigth of it and into the chiefeſt of his

                     〈…〉
                   If there be no water, I will graue and
drinke: and as for waters of defence, I will drie them vp
with the féete of mine hoaſt. 26 Yea, haſt thou not heard
what I haue taken in hand and brought to paſſe of old time?
That ſame will I doe now alſo, and waſte, deſtroy, and bring
ſtrong Cities vnto heapes of ſtones.
               27 For their inhabitours ſhall be like lame men brought
in feare and confounded: they ſhall be like graſſe and gréene
hearbes in the fielde, like the hay vpon houſe toppes, that
withereth before it be growen vp. 28 I know thy wayes,
 thy going forth, and thy comming home, yea and thy madneſſe
agaynſt me. 29 Therefore thy furiouſneſſe agaynſt
me, and thy pride is come before me, I will put my ring in
thy noſe, and my bridle bitte in the 
                     •
                  awes of thée, and turne
thée about euen the ſame way thou cameſt.
               30 I will giue thée alſo this token (O Ezekia) this yeare
ſhalt thou eate ſuch as groweth of it ſelfe, and the ſeconde
yeare that which ſpringeth againe of the ſame, & in the thirde
yeare ye ſhall ſowe and reape, yea, ye ſhal plant vineyardes,

and enioy the fruites therof. 31 And ſuch of the houſe of
Iuda as are eſcaped ſhall come togither, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſhall take roote beneath, and bring forth fruit aboue.
               32 For the eſcaped ſhall go out of Hieruſalem, and the
remnant from the mount Sion: and this ſhall the zeale of
the Lorde of hoſtes bring to paſſe. 33 Therefore thus ſayth
the Lorde concerning the king of the Aſſirians, He ſhall not
come into this Citie, and ſhall ſhoote no arrow into it, there
ſhall no ſhield hurt it, neither ſhall they call ditches about it.
               34 The ſame way he came he ſhal returne, and not come 
at this Citie ſayth the Lord.2. Re. 19. g. 35 Eccle. 48. d. 22 Eſay. 31. b. 8 2. Ma. 15. d. 22 35 And I will keepe and ſaue
this Citie (ſayth he) for mine owne, and for my ſeruant Dauids
ſake. 36 Thus the aungell of the Lorde went forth,
and ſlue of the Aſſirians hoſt an hundred foure ſeore and fiue
thouſand: and when men roſe vp earely in the morning, beholde
they 
                     〈…〉
                   and all my full of 
                     •
                  eads 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               37 So Sennacherib the king of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   brake vp and
dwelt at Nini
                     •
                  e. 38 Afterwarde it chaunced as he prayed
in the temple of Neſroch his God, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   and Sarazer
his owne ſonnes 
                     ••
                  ue him with the ſworde, and fled into
the lande of Armenia; and Aſarhaddon his ſonne raigned
in his ſteede.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .xxxvij.
Chapter of Eſay.
               When Ezechias heard that,Verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. he rent hys
clothes, and put on ſackcloth, &c.
               
                  THis Chapiter is annexed to
the former as a part of the ſame hiſtorie,
the declaration wherof is ſo plaine
and eaſie to be vnderſtanded; that the
text needeth no expoſition at all. Only

you haue to obſerue certaine good and whole ſome
leſſons to be gathered out of it.Num. 25. b. 7 Exod. 32. f. 29 Iohn. 2. c. 17 Num. 14. b. 6 And firſt you haue
to note in Ezechias, and his people a great * zeale
for the glorie of the name of God, wherewith they
may ſeeme to be more touched then with their own
miſerie and diſtreſſe. For all the while their countrey
was in ſpoyling, as they ſhewed themſelues
ſomewhat troubled, ſo yet did they not declare ſo
great ſorowe. But after that they heard the name
and power of the God of Iſrael ſo blaſphemed, they
rent and toare their clothes, and, after the maner
of the Countrey thereby declared extreeme ſorow,
deteſtation, and abhorring of ſo great wickedneſſe.
This zeale of Gods holy name and glorie ſhoulde
we follow,Pſal. 68. b. 10 and be * earneſtly mooued in heart and
minde,Pſal. 119. 139 when we heare the Goſpell of Chriſt and
the truth of his worde reuiled and euill ſpoken of,
but the maner of the worlde is otherwiſe. Men
are much mooued with their owne reproches, and
ſeeke reuengement of euery light worde and ſmall
iniurie, but for the hinderance of Gods glorie and
of his worde we make ſmall account.
               Secondly, here is to be obſerued and diligently
to be learned, by the example of the good king Ezechias,
and his people, what we ought to doe in
our great miſerie and diſtreſſe, that is, not neglecting
ſuch meanes as God hath giuen, and by hys
worde alloweth to helpe vs, to put our whole truſt
and confidence in God,Pſal. 120. a. 1 Pſal. 121. a. 1 Ionas. 2. a. 3 2. Cor. 1. b. 10 and with repentant hearts
& humble mindes to * flie to him by earneſt praier,
and calling vpon his bleſſed name for helpe. For

ſo here doth Ezechias and his people, and with all,
ſeeketh meanes to confirme and ſtrengthen theyr
fayth being ſomewhat ſhaken, with the inſtruction
of Gods holy worde and promiſes. For that cauſe
doth he here ſende to Eſay the Prophete, by whoſe
mouth God giueth them great comfort, and willeth
them not to feare. For ſayth he in the Lordes
name, I will rayſe vp a winde agaynſt him, and hee
ſhall heare a rumour that ſhall carie him backe into
his Countrey agayne: and yet ſhall he not ſo eſcape,
for euen there I will deſtroy him.
               
               Say thus to Ezekia king of Iuda,Verſ. 10. 11 12. 13. Let not
thy God deceyue thee, &c.
               Heare we haue to learne, that God oftentimes,
after promiſe and comfort of deliuerance giuen,
doth, for the time, encreaſe and double, as it were,
the affliction of his people, as he doth here to Ezechias,
and his ſubiects by this ſeconde meſſage, being
in deede more terrible and blaſphemous than
the former. And yet doth he not this, that he mindeth
to breake promiſe,Math. 15. c. 22 Luke. 18. a. 2 Heb. 12. d. 11 Iob. 6. a. 8 Pſal. 26. d. 14 or to forſake his people,
but for to* exerciſe and trie their fayth, and to ſtirre
them vp to more earneſt prayer and calling vpon
his name: and that in the ende their deliueraunce
may be both to his people more pleaſaunt, to himſelfe
more glorious, and to the aduerſaries the
greater confuſion.
               Nowe when Ezekia had receyued the
letter of the meſſengers,Verſ. 14. &c.
               
                  
Here is to be learned the nature and condition
of a true* fayth,Rom. 4. c. 18 Iud. 8. a. 8 Math. 15. d. 27 which riſeth againſt the greatneſſe
of tentation, as it is written that the ſtocke of the
Palme tree doth; agaynſt an heauie burthen layde
vpon it. God increaſeth the daunger; and Ezechias
encreaſeth his fayth and feruencie in prayer.
Neyther doeth he giue ouer, as the maner of the
fleſh is, but paciently continueth and wayteth for
the comming of Gods mightie hand and fulfilling
of his promiſe, and reſorteth to his old ſuccour and
ſanctuarie of prayer and calleth vpon God.Verſ. 16. 17 18. 19. 20. Heb. 11. f. 33 Hier. 5. a. 3 Oſe. 13. b. 4 In
whome you maye learne alſo the maner of true
prayer, firſt proceeding out of a * cōſtant & a ſtrong
fayth, ſecondly directed to the * ouely liuing and
true GOD, thirdely notſomuche deſiring their
owne deliueraunce and worldelye benefite, as
the * ſetting oute of the glorie and name of God.Math. 6. b. 9 Luke. 11. a. 2 Eſay. 8. c. 13
For to that ende the whole courſe of his prayer
tendeth.
               This is the aunſwere that the Lorde hath
giuen concerning Sennacherib,Verſ. 22. &c.
               As Ezechias continueth in conſtant fayth and
prayer, ſo doth the Lord in comforting and promiſing
helpe by the mouth of his Prophet, vntil their
full deliuerance be wrought, which not long after
he putteth in execution mightily and miraculouſly.
Wherein we haue to obſerue the force * & ſtrength
of conſtant,Math. 17. c. 21 Pſal. 49. c. 15 Iacob. 5. d. 17 earneſt, and faythfull prayer, which is
ſuch, that albeit God doth for the exerciſe thereof
deferre his working, yet in the ende, if ordinarie

meanes want, he will miraculouſly by his Aungels
from heauen worke the help and deliuerance
of his faythfull people calling vpon him, rather
then they ſhall periſhe in their daunger, and their
enimies triumph ouer them.
               Thou with thy ſeruants haſt hlaſphemed
the Lorde,Verſ. 24. 25. and thus holdeſt thou, &c.
               The Lorde by his prophete reprooueth the pride
and blaſphemie of the tyranne, and rehearſeth the
prowde bragge that he made of himſelfe. By the
mountaynes and ſides of Libanus, he meaneth the
kingdomes and cities of thoſe people, that Sennacherib
had conquered: and by Ceders and Firre
trees, and the chiefeſt of their wooddes, he vnderſtandeth
their kinges, princes, and ſtrong holdes.
By the conſuming of their fenſiue waters, he noteth
that by pollicie and labour he deriued away,
and turned the courſe of ſuch waters, as were lettes
and ſtayes to his purpoſe.
               Haſt thou not heard what I haue taken
in hande and brought to paſſe,Verſ. 26. 27 28. 29. &c.
               The Prophete in the perſon of God reprooueth
the proude bragge of the Aſsirian Prince. Doeſt
thou thinke, ſayth the Lord, that thou by thy owne
pollicie and wiſdome haſt conquered ſo many Cities
and kingdomes?Ex. 6. 7. 8. &c Baruc. 3. b. 16. Sap. 12. a. 2 Pſal. 43. a. 1 haſt thou not heard what I
haue done in times paſt? I * haue before time declared
by my Prophets that I would deſtroy wicked
kingdomes, and puniſhe the naughtineſſe of

men by the ſpoyle of their Cities, yea and with the
rodde of Chaſticement to correct euen mine owne
people,Pſal. 78. a. 1 Luke. 19. g. 44 and bring their Cities to heapes * of ſtone,
that haue I nowe done by thee, as by mine inſtrument.
Wherefore, although thou thinkeſt thy
ſelfe to haue done great feates by theſe conqueſts,
and turneſt all this to thine owne glorie: It was
not thou, but I, that did it. For thou haddeſt not
bene hable without me to haue woonne one poore
towne. I knowe thy wayes, thy goyng foorth,
and thy comming home. I did firſt ſet thee in thy
royall throne, and then ſtirred thee to vndertake
theſe great enterpriſes agaynſt the kingdomes of
the earth; for their puniſhment. And nowe I ſee
thou doeſt not acknowledge mee, but ſetteſt vp thy
countenaunce and blaſphemous mouth agaynſt
me, as a furious and madde man. Therefore, I
tell thee,Eze. 29. a. 4 Eze. 38. a. 4 Pſal. 3. a. 7 Pſal. 57. a. 6 I will put a * ring in thy 
                     •
                  oſ
                     •
                  , and a bitte
in thy lippes, that albeit thou ſhew thy ſelfe neuer
ſo wilde and wanton a Colt, I wil turne thee euen
the ſame way that thou cameſt.
               I will giue thee alſo this token (O Ezekia)
this yeare ſhalt thou eate, &c.Verſ. 30.
               
               Leaſt Ezechias and his people ſhould be diſcouraged
with the long delay: God ſignifyeth, that the
warre ſhould yet continue three yeares, and that
in the meane time he woulde almoſt * miraculouſly
maintaine them from famine.4. Reg. 7. d. 19 The firſt yeare,
by that which groweth of it ſelfe, the ſecond, by that
which falleth of the former harueſt, and the thirde

yeare in which the warre ſhoulde be ended, and
they deliuered, by their ordinarie and quiet labour
and trauaile of the ground.
               Thus the aungell of the Lord went forth,Verſ. 36.
and ſlue of the Aſsirians hoaſt, &c.
               Here is declared the execution of that promiſe,
that god had made by his prophet Eſay, & the miraculous
deliuerāce of his people: wherin we haue to
note, firſt the ſeuere iuſtice of God againſt a prowd
and blaſphemous tyranne, killing in one night by
his aungell .185000. of his ſouldiours. Secondly,
the long ſuffering of God,Sap. 11. d. 24 Rom. 2. a. 3 2. Pet. 3. b. 9 who ſuffered Sennacherib,
to go * vnpuniſhed three yeares, that if he would
haue repēted, he might haue found mercie. Thirdly,
that the wicked ſometime eſcape from meane
daunger, and by Gods prouidence are reſerued to
greater. As heare Sennacherib eſcapeth killing
by the Aungell, and is murthered of his owne ſonnes
in the ſeruice of his * Idolatrous Gods,Sap. 14. d. 27 becauſe
he would not acknowledge the true God.
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday after Chriſtmaſſe
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 38.
            
               ABout this time was Ezekia ſicke vnto death, and the 
Prophete Eſay the ſonne of Annos came vnto him,2. Reg. 20. a. 1 2. Ch. 32. a. 14
and ſayde, Thus commaundeth the Lord: Set thine
houſe in order, for thou muſt die and not eſcape.
               
                  
2 Then Ezekia turned his face towarde the wall, and
prayed vnto the Lorde. 3. And ſayde, Remember O Lorde
I beſeech thée, that I haue walked before thée in truth and a
ſtedfaſt hart, and hane done the thing that is pleaſant to thée.
And Ezekia wept 
                     •
                  ore. 4 Then ſayd God vnto Eſay.
               5 Go,Ionas. 3. b. 10 and ſpeake vnto Ezekia, The Lorde God of Dauid
thy father ſendeth thée this worde, I haue heard thy prayer,
and conſidered thy teares: beholde I will put fiftene yeares
mo vnto thy lyfe. 6 And deliuer thée and the Citie alſo
 from the hande of the king of Aſſyrla: for I will defende the
Citie.3. Reg. 2. g. 4. Re. 20. c. 11 7 And take thée this token of the Lorde that he will
doe it as he hath ſpoken. 8 Beholde, I will turne the ſhadow
of Ahaz diall that nowe is layde out with the Sunne,
and bring it tenne degrées backward:Ioſu. 10. e. 11 So the Sunne turned
ten degrées backwarde, the which he was deſcended afore.
               9 A thankesgiuing vvhich Ezekia king of Iuda vvrote,
vvhen he had bene ſicke and vvas recouered.
               10 I thought I ſhould haue gone to the gates of hel when
mine age was ſhortned, and haue wante
                     •
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of my
yeares 11 I ſpake within my ſelfe, I will neuer viſite the
Lorde (the Lorde I ſay) in this life: I will neuer ſée man among
the dwellers of the worlde. 12 Mine age is 
                     〈◊〉
                  
together and taken away from 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
I haue hewen of my lyfe (by my ſinnes) like as a weauer
cutteth of his webbe: he will with pining ſickeneſſ
                     •
                  
make an ende of mée, yea he will make an ende of me in one
day.Iob. 4. b. 9. 13 I thought I would haue liued vntill the morowe,
but he bruiſed my bones like a Lion: and in one day thou
wilt make an ende of me. 14 Then chattered I like a ſwalowe,
and like a Crane, and mourned like a Doue, I lift vp
mine eyes into the heigth: O Lorde (ſayde I) my ſickneſſe
kéepeth me downe, 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou me. 15 What ſhall I ſay the
Lorde hath made a promiſe to me, yea and he him ſelfe hath
perfourmed it: I 
                     〈◊〉
                   therefore ſo long as I li
                     •
                  e sremember

this bitterneſſe of my life. 16 O Lord to all thoſe that ſhall
liue hereafter, yea to all men ſhall it be knowne, that euen in
thoſe yeares I haue a ioyfull life, and that it was thou that
cauſedſt me to ſléepe, againe thou haſt giuen life to me.
               17 Beholde, bitter as gall was my penſiueneſſe, ſo ſore
longed I for health, and it was thy pleaſure to deliuer my
life from the filthie pit: for thou it is (O Lorde) that haſt caſt
all my ſinnes behinde thy backe.Pſal. 6. a. 5 68. b. 115. b. 18 For hell prayſeth not
thée, death doth not magnifie thée: they that go downe into
the graue prayſe not thy truth. 19 But the liuing, yea the
liuing knowledge thée, as I doe this day: the father telleth
his children of thy faythfulneſſe.Luke. 1. g 20 To heale me it is the
Lordes worke, and we will ſing my ſongs in the houſe of the
Lorde all the dayes of our life. 21 And Eſay ſayde, Take a
playſter of figges, and lay it vpon the ſore, ſo ſhal it be whole.
               22 Then ſayde Ezekia, O what a myracle is this, that I
ſhall go vp into the houſe of the Lorde.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .38.
Chapter of Eſay.
               About this time was Ezechias ſicke vnto
death,Verſ. 1. and the Prophete Eſay, &c.
               
                  IN this Chapter we haue the
example of an other grieuous tentation
of the good king Ezechias. Who
being deliuered from the daunger of
the Aſsirians, as is declared in the former
Chapter, read at morning prayer, is now caſt
into a grieuous and daungerous ſickeneſſe: yea,
and hath the Prophete ſent vnto him, to denounce,

as it were from the mouth of God himſelfe, that he
ſhoulde aſſuredly die. At what time this ſickneſſe
happened it is not certaine, whether before the
ſiege of Hieruſalem or after. But more likely it is
that it happened afterwarde. For otherwiſe ſo notable
a circumſtance in the time of ye ſiege could not
haue bene among other omitted.Pſal. 33. d. 19 Actes. 14. d. 22 Iacob. 1. a. 2 By this example
we haue to learne that God * often ſendeth many &
grieuous tentations euen to the good and godly,
ſometime by warre, ſometime by ſickeneſſe, ſometime
by vniuſt infamie and reproche, ſometime otherwiſe.
In all which we muſt learne conſtantly
to continue in fayth and prayer and neuer to diſpayre.
For that GOD of his fatherly prouidence
doth it, (not for our hurt and hinderaunce) but for
the triall and increaſe of our fayth.
               Then Ezechia turned his face towarde
the wall,Verſ. 2. and prayed, &c.
               It is not to be merueled that Ezechias was
touched with * ſorow by the meſſage of death declared
to him by the prophet. He was a natural man,
and therfore abhorred death in his fleſh, he feared
it to be ſome token of Gods diſpleaſure towarde
him, becauſe the prophet brought him that meſſage
from god. He had not yet made perfect the good reformation
of his countrey, that he had begun: and
finally he had yet no iſſue to ſucceede him.
               Remember O Lorde I beſeech thee,Verſ. 3. that
I haue walked before thee in truth, &c.
               
                  
Here Ezechias in this diſtreſſe (to our good example)
reſorteth to his olde Sanctuarie of prayer
and calling vpon God. Neyther doth he, as it may
ſeeme, in his prayer eyther quarrell with God, as
dealing hardly with him, or glorie in his owne
worthineſſe and vertues. But rather comforteth
himſelfe and ſtirreth vp his fayth agaynſt that tentatiō,
which happely Sathan then did put into his
minde, that he ſhould be reiected and reprobated of
God, & therfore, ſayth he, that all that he did proceeded
from a good heart and minde, and reſpected
therein the good will and pleaſure of God, according
to his holy worde:1. Tim. 1. d. 19 2. Cor. 1. c. 12 Act. 23. a. 1 wherein he might well and
did comfort his troubled minde with the * teſtimonie
of a good conſcience, & yet not ſo, that he would
therevpon ſtande in iudgement before God.
               Then ſayde God vnto Eſay,Verſ. 4. &c.
               This alteration of ſentence is not to be thought
mutabilitie or vnconſtancie in GOD, who by the
ſame Prophete before had denounced death to the
ſame partie. For the threatnings and promiſes of
God are oftentimes conditionall and not of determinate
purpoſe in himſelfe, and therefore vpon the
fulfilling of the condition may they without note of
inconſtancie be altered. As it appeareth in the
threatning of the Niniuites,
                  Ion. 1. a. 1. &c Ge. 20. a. 3 &c 
                  Ionae. 1 and of the king
of Gerar. Geneſ. 20. which afterwarde by their repenting
and turning to God was altered, and ſo
was it here with Ezechias.
               
               
               I will put fiftene yeares moe vnto thy life.Verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8
And deliuer thee and the Citie alſo, &c.
               Beholde the effect of earneſt prayer, and the
readie and mercifull goodneſſe of GOD towarde
them that call vpon him, who doth not onely heare
his prayer, but alſo confirmed his promiſe thereof
by a notable and ſtraunge miracle.
               A thankeſgiuing which Ezechias king of
Iuda wrote,Verſ. 9. when he had beene ſicke, &c.
               This good king Ezechias would not paſſe ouer
with ſilence the great benefite that God ſhewed in
reſtoring him to his health, and by his Example
teacheth, what all good men ſhould doe, when they
feele the great mercies of God wrought in them:
that is, not onely to make it knowne to them that
we liue withall, but alſo to cauſe it to remaine in
remembrance to poſteritie, that Gods name therby
may be the more glorified,Exod. 15. a. 1 1 Sa. 2. a. 1 &c 2. Reg. 22. a. 1. Io. 2. d. 1. &c. Luke. 1. g. 68 Luke. 2. e. 29 Luc. 1. e. 46 and other the better
comforted. Thus did * Moyſes, this did * Anna Samuels
mother, thus did * Dauid * Ionas * Zacharie,
* Simeon, and the bleſſed virgine * Marie. In the
firſt part of this praier he rehearſeth the penſiue &
ſorowful cogitations that he conceyued in his hart
in time of his ſickneſſe, through the feare of death
& hell. In the latter, he acknowledgeth the mightie
worke of God & yealdeth prayſes for the ſame.
               I thought I ſhould haue gone to the gates
of hell when mine age,Verſ. 10. 11. &c.
               
                  
By theſe wordes it maye appeare in what ſort
Ezechias did beholde death, and whye he ſhewed
himſelfe ſo penſiue therein: that is, becauſe hee
thought himſelfe out of the fauour of GOD, and
therefore in daunger of hell fire. For death in deed
is terrible to them that in ſuch ſort conſider it: but
to them that in ſtrength of * fayth beholde it ioyned
with the fauour of God,Prou. 14. d. 32 Phil. 1. d. 23 it is very pleaſaunt, and
therefore ſayde Paule. I deſire to be diſſolued and to
be with Chriſt.
               
               Mine age is folden together and taken
from me like a ſheepeheards cottage,Verſ. 12. &c.
               By this maner of ſpeech he ſignifieth that God
had determined to take this worldly life from him,
in ſhort time, & to tranſferre him to another place,
as the maner of ſheepeheardes in that countrey is
to remooue their Cotes from place to place, as they
chaunge the Paſture, and place of feeding theyr
Cattell.
               I thought I ſhould haue liued till the morow,Verſ. 13.
but he bruiſed my bones, &c.
               I was, ſayth he, in ſo great diſpaire of my life,
that at night I was in doubt, through the vehemencie
of my ſickneſſe, whether I ſhould liue vntil
the morning. Yea I was ſo farre paſt as I was
not hable to ſpeake diſtinctly, but vttered a confuſe
chattering like the noiſe of a Swallow or Crane,
and a mourning like the noyſe of a Doue.
               
               Thou it is O Lorde that haſt caſt all my
ſinnes behinde thy backe.Verſ. 17. &c.
               Here Ezechias plainely confeſſeth, what the
cauſe was of his ſickeneſſe and of his reſtoring to
health.Iohn. 5. c. 14 1. Cor. 11. 30. * Sinne was the cauſe of his ſickeneſſe,
and the mercy of God forgiuing the ſame and turning
them from his ſight was the cauſe of his deliuerance.
Wherefore it cannot be thought, when
before he ſayth, he walked in truth and a ſtedfaſt
heart before God, that he ſought thereby to be iuſtified
in the ſight of GOD, but rather as I haue
ſayde before, that he vttered thoſe wordes in comfort
of himſelfe, that he was not vtterly reiected of
God, albeit he were then puniſhed.
               For hell prayſeth not thee,Verſ. 18. death doth not
magnifie thee, nor they that go down, &c.
               The Senſe of this verſe is vtterd in many of the
Pſalmes,Pſal. 6. a. 5 Pſal. 87. c. 11 Pſal. 117. c. 17 as in the. * 6. the. * 87. and the. * 117.
               The deade ſhall not prayſe thee, nor all that go downe
into the pit. &c.
               By which wordes and the like, neyther Dauid
nor Ezechias denie that the ſpirite of the dead haue
their actions before God to his glorie, or affirme
that they periſh together with the bodie: But they
ſignifie, that thoſe that be deade, buried and layde
in the graue, ouerwhelmed wyth earth, haue no
longer their bodily Actions in the Church of God
here in this worlde, nor cannot ſet forth among
men liuing here the clemencie, mercie, and goodneſſe

of God toward them, to the prayſe and glorie
of his name in this worlde, like as the liuing may.
The dead, as touching their body, are in y• graue,
as touching their ſoules, they are in heauen, but ſo
as they cannot* returne into the worlde to preach,Luke. 16. f. 27
declare, and ſet forth to men the maieſtie, iuſtice,
and mercie of God.
            
         
         
            The .2. Sunday after Chriſtmas.
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 41.
            
               BE ſtill you I landes and hearken vnto me: let the 
people lay their ſtrength together, let them come hither,
and then ſhewe their cauſe: we will go to the

                     〈◊〉
                   together. 2. Who rayſed vp the iuſt man from
the eaſt, and called him to go forth? who caſt downe the people,
and ſubdued the kinges before him? that he may throwe
them all to the grounde with his ſworde, and ſcatter them
like ſtubble with his bowe. 3 He foloweth vpon them, and
goeth ſafely himſelfe, and that in a way where before his
foote had not troden. 4 Who hath made and created theſe
things? euen he that called the generations from the beginning,
euen I the Lorde which am the firſt, and with the laſt.
               5 The Iſ
                     •
                  es ſaw and did feare, and the endes of the earth
were abaſhed, drew 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and came hither.
               6 Euery man helped his neighbour, and ſayde to his brother,
Be ſtrong. 7 The Carpenter comforted the Goldſmith,
and the Goldsſmith the Hammerman, ſaying, Sowder
win do very well in it: & they faſtened it with na
                     ••
                  es, that
it ſhoulde not be mooueel. 8 But thou Iſraell art my ſeruant,
thou Iacob whom I haue choſen, thou art the ſéede of

Abraham my beloued. 9 Thou art he whome I led from
the endes of the earth: for I called thée euen from among
the glorious men of it, and ſayde vnto thée, Thou art my ſeruaunt,
I haue choſen thée, and not caſt thée away.
               10 Be not afrayde,Eſay. 44. b. 8. for I am with thée: Melt not away as
waxe, for I am thy God to ſtrengthe thée, helpe thée, and
kéepe thée with the right hande of my righteouſneſſe.
               11 Beholde, all they that reſiſt thée ſhall come to confuſion
and ſhame, and thine aduerſaries ſhall be deſtroyed and
brought to naught. 12 So that who ſo ſéeketh after them,
ſhall not finde them, thy deſtroyers ſhall periſhe: and ſo ſhal
they that vndertake to make battell agaynſt thée be as that
is not, and as a thing of naught. 13 For I the Lorde thy
God will ſtrengthen thy right hande, euen I that ſay vnto
 thée: Feare not, I will helpe thée. 14 Be not afrayde thou
little worme Iacob,Eſay. 44. a. 2. and thou deſpiſed Iſraell: for I wil
helpe thée ſayth the Lorde, and the holy one of Iſraell thy redéemer.
15 Beholde, I will make thée a treading cart and a
newe ſtayle, that thou mayeſt threſhe and grinde the mountaynes,
and bring the hilles to powder.
               16 Thou ſhalt fanne them, and the winde ſhall carie them
away, and the whirle winde-ſhall ſcatter them: but thou
ſhalt reioyce in the Lord, and ſhalt delight in the holy one of
Iſraell.Gen. 23. c. 14 17 When the thirſtie and poore ſéeke water and
finde none, and when the tongue is drie of thirſt, I giue it
them ſayth the Lorde, I the God of Iſraell forſake them not.
               18 I bring forth flooddes in the hilles,Eſay. 35. b. 7 43. 44. a. 3 and welles in the
plaine fieldes: I turne the wilderneſſe to riuers, and the drie
lande to conduites of water. 19 I plant in the waſt ground
trées of Cedar, Boxe, Myrre, and Oliues, and in the drie I ſet
Firre trées, Elmes and Hawthornes together.
               
                   20 All this doe I, that they altogether may ſée and marke,
perceyue with theyr heartes and conſider, that the hande of
the Lord maketh theſe things, and that the holy one of Iſrael

bringeth them to paſſe. 21 Stande at your cauſe ſayth the
Lorde, and bring forth your ſtrongeſt ground, ſayth the king
of Iacob. 22 Let them bring forth their Gods, and let their
Gods tell vs what ſhall chaunce hereafter, yea let them ſhew
vs the thinges that are paſt what they be, let them declare
them vnto vs, that we may take them to heart, aud knowe
them hereafter. 23 Either ſhew vs things for to come, and
tell vs what ſhall be done hereafter, ſo ſhall we know that ye
are Gods: doe ſome thing either good or bad, ſo will we both
knowledge the ſame, and tell it out. 24 Beholde ye are
Gods of naught, and your making is of naught: yea abhominable
is the man that hath choſen you.
               25 Neuertheleſſe,Eſay. 43. a. I haue waked vp one from the north,
and he ſhall come from the eaſt, he ſhall call vpon my name,
and ſhall treade vpon princes as vpon clay, and as the potter
treadeth downe the mire. 26 Who declared this from the
beginning, and we will know him: or from the olde times,
and we will confeſſe and ſay that he is righteous? but there
is none that ſheweth or declareth any thing, there is none
alſo that heareth your wordes.
               27 The firſt is he that ſhall ſay to Sion, Beholde, beholde
they are preſent: and to Hieruſalem it ſelfe will I giue an
Euangeliſt. 28 But when I conſider, there is not a man
among them, nor any that can giue counſaile, nor that when
I examine them that can anſwers one worde.
               29 Lo wicked are they, and vaine, with the things alſo
that they take in hande, yea their Images are but winde and
vaine things.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the. xlj.
Chapter of Eſay.
               
               Bee ſtill you Iſlandes and hearken vnto
me:Verſ. 1. let the people lay their. &c.
               
                  ESay in this Chapter imagineth
god to ſtande in place of iudgement,
as it were, at the barre pleading
his owne cauſe agaynſt the Idols
and falſe Gods of the Heathen,
and al the worſhippers of the ſame. Which he doth
to this ende, not onely to confound the heathen for
the vanitie of their worſhipping of Idols, ſtockes
and ſtones, but alſo to confirme and eſtabliſh hys
owne people of the Iewes and other in the true
worſhip of him ſelfe being the onely, liuing, and almightie
God, maker and gouernour of all things.
And therefore as being in place of iudgement hee
thus beginneth. Bee ſtill and keepe ſilence all you
inhabitours of the Iſlandes, and other partes of the
earth, that worſhip your falſe Gods. Lay your
ſtrength together, arme and furniſh your ſelf with
as good matter as you can for your defence, to anſwere
that I ſhall ſay, and then will I pleade the
cauſe with you euen in iudgement of the world, &c.
               Who rayſed vp the iuſt man from the eaſt,verſ. 2. 3. 4.
and called him to go forth. &c.
               This is his fyrſt reaſon againſt the heatheniſh
worſhippers of Idols. By ye iuſt man he meaneth
ye Patriark Abraham, whom God called out of his
coūtrie of Meſopotamia from Idolatrie wherin he
was bredde,Gene. 12. a. 1. Actes. 7. a. 3 and cauſed him to go into the lande of

                  Chanaan and there to worſhip the true god, where
alſo, although he were in a ſtraunge lande vtterly
vnknowne, god did ſo proſper and defend him, that
he made euen kings abaſhed to worke him villainy,
as it appeareth in Pharao king of Egypt. Gen, 12
and Abimelech king of Gerar Gen. 20 & 21.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 12. d. 18 Gen. 20. b. 9 Gen. 21. c. 13. yea and
at another time gaue him force and hability to put
to flight and chaſe foure kinges at once, which had
caried away priſoner his coſin* Loth. Gen 14.Gen. 14. c. 16. which
eaſie victory god vttereth here by this ſpech: Scattering
them like ſtubble with his bowe.
               
               The force of this example is thus: This maruelous
calling, defending & proſpering of one meane
man in a ſtraunge Countrie agaynſt ſo noble and
mighty perſons, and the making of him ſo notable
a man among them done and wrought by me only,
yea and the true ſeruice and honor wherwith he
worſhipped me the only liuing God, coulde not bee
vnknowne to all your Idolatrous nations thereabout.
For he preached and declared theſe thinges
as a Prophete,Verſ. 5. and gaue you to vnderſtande by
whoſe power it was done, yea, you ſawe it, you
knewe it, and were abaſhed at it: and therefore
ſhoulde you haue ſought to haue learned at hys
hande, whyle he was amonge you, the knowledge
and ſeruice of that mighty God, that did ſo aduance
and * defend him,1. Sa. 14. a. 6. in farre other maner than your
Idols were hable to do.Vers. 6. But you were ſo farre frō
thus doing, that you comforted & encouraged one
another forwarde in your wicked Idolatrye, and
ioyned your helpes togither to make vp your grauen

and carued Goddes.Verſ. 7. The Carpenter who had
carued the ſtocke, ſpake to the Goldſmith to lay on
the plates of ſiluer or gold, that it might ſeme a gay
God, and the Goldeſmith inſtructed the hammer
man to ſet it on fynely and ſmooth, and to ſoulder it
ſurely,1. Sam. 5. b. 5. Actes. 19. e. 24 and ſet it faſt with nayles, and *this did you
altogither take conference to ſette forwarde your
worſhipping of Images & Idols, as you yet continue.
And therfore are you in the iudgement euen
of men *vnexcuſable,Rom. 1. c. 20 that by this means knowing
the power of the true God, you haue not yelded to
doe condigne worſhip to him, but run on yet ſtill in
your owne vayne and *groſſe phantaſies.Rom. 1. c. 23 Sap. 12. d. 24 Hereby
ought we alſo to learne dearely beloued, euen in
theſe our dayes, in howe great danger we are, and
how vnexcuſable before god, if we, hauing ſo great
oportunitie to learne the truth of the doctrine and
goſpell of Chriſt doe neglect the ſame, and followe
on ſtill in the deſire of our olde ſuperſtition and Idolatrie.
The calling, preſeruing, and defending of
Abraham was not ſo great, nor the publiſhing of
the true knowledge of God by him ſo notable, as
the publiſhing, proſpering & defending of his Goſpell
hath bene in theſe latter days agaynſt Popes,
Princes, Prelats, and al powers of the earth. And
therfore may God more iuſtly ſtande in iudgement
with vs to our vtter condemnation, if we do not acknowledge
his goodneſſe.
               But thou Iſraell art my ſeruant,Verſ. 8. thou Iacob
whome I haue choſen. &c.
               
                  
Leaſt that Gods people of the Iewes and
other faithfull of hys Churche ſhoulde bee diſcouraged
with the pryde and proſperitye of the
Heathen, and their cruelty agaynſt them: Here
doeth hee comforte and aſſure them that hee will
helpe and defende them alſo as notably and with
as great terrour to the wicked, as hee had done
their father Abraham.
                  Gen. 22. c. 16 Pſal. 104. a. 8 Luke. 1. g. 73 Heb. 6. a. 17 Verſ. 9. Shewinge that hee had
*bounde himſelfe by Couenant to be the mightie
and defending God not onely of Abraham but alſo
of his poſterity. And putting them in mind of their
wonderfull deliueraunce out of Egypt, whence
he led thē through the deſert into the land of Chanaan
which he had promiſed before to the ſeede of
his loued ſeruant Abraham.
                  Verſ. 14. 
                  Therefore (ſayth he)
be not afraid thou little ſilly worme Iacob. Thoughe
my Church and people that put their truſt in mee
ſeeme neuer ſo ſimple and contemptible,Pſal. 21. b. 6 1. Cor. 4. b. 9 and euen
as very wormes of the earth in ſight of the gay mē
and great powers, and as it were * Lions of the
worlde:2. Tt. 4. d. 17 yet are they my people & the ſheepe of my
paſture. And therefore will I and 
                     •
                  he holy one of
Iſraell my ſonne Chriſt Ieſu their Redeemer, preſerue
and defend them,Verſ. 15. yea, I wil make them as a
treading Cart, & as a new ſtayle wher with corne
is threſhed,Ioſu. 10. d. 24 that they may threſh, *grind, and beate
to duſt Mountains and Hils, that is, the high and
mighty Empires, kingdoms and principalities of
the world, thinke they themſelues neuer ſo ſtrong.
They ſhall fanne and ſcatter them abroade with a
whirle winde to vtter confuſion. For ſo haue you

ſeene it come to paſſe by all thoſe mightie Monarchies
& Principalities, that from time to time haue
vexed and perſecuted the Church of God. Therefore
(ſayth God) faint not, but put thy truſt and reioyce
in mee, and in the holy one of Iſraell Chriſt
Ieſu the true Meſſias and Sauiour, and wee wil
not ſuffer you to miſcary.
               When as thirstie and poore ſeeke water
and finde none,Ver. 17. 18 19 and when their, &c.
               Here God promiſeth the Iewes in captiuitie
of Babilon, and other of his Church, that he will
not onely defende them from perſecution, and pull
downe their enimies, but relieue them with ſuch
thinges as they want, and ſupplie their hunger,
thirſt; and other neceſſities both worldly and ſpirituall.
But this place is ſpecially to be vnderſtanded
of the ſpirituall graces of God in ſatiſfying the
poore, hungrie, and thirſtie conſciences wyth the
bleſſed water of ſaluacion: That is, the true knowledge
of God, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                   by Chriſt Ieſu. Of which
water Chriſt himſelfe ſpeaketh in the fourth of S.
Iohn:
                  Iohn. 4. b. 14 
                  VVhich ſhall be made a fountaine of water
ſpringing to eternall life. Such fountaynes rayſed
God in many drie and barraine mountaynes, whē
he ſpredde abroade his true knowledge among
the Gentiles. As firſt; for example, in the Empyre
of Babilon,Dan. 2. g. 47 by occaſion of a *dreame expounded
by Daniel, by the myracle of the yong men preſerued
in the *fierie fornace,Dan. 3. g. 28 by the deliuerance of
Daniel from the *Lions. &c.Dan. 6. f. 20 By which the worſhipping

of the liuing god was acknowledged and
commaunded.Mat. 28. d. 19 Mark. 16. d. 15 But eſpecially he opened theſe
fountaynes, when he * ſent abroade his Apoſtles
and other furniſhed with the ſpirite of God to publiſhe
the doctrine of ſaluation in all the partes of
the earth, whereby not onely a number of thirſtie
conſciences were refreſhed, but theyr barren
ſoules alſo made fruitfull, and brought forth fayre
and goodly trees of all ſortes pleaſaunt to beholde
and yelding good fruites to the glorie of God and
to the comfort of his people.Verſ. 20. And all this, only did
the mightie hande of God.
               Stand at your cauſe,Verſ. 21. ſayth the Lorde, and
bring forth your ſtrongeſt ground, &c.
               The Prophete in the perſon of God turneth
his ſpeech again to the gods of ye Gentiles & to the
idolatrous worſhippers of them:3. Reg. 18. c. 27 & * willeth them
to ſtande to their cauſe, and ſay the beſt for them,
that they coulde to proue them Gods. And becauſe
their greateſt glorie was in propheſying and telling
things to come, he doth Chalenge them euē in
that very poynt, whereby he giueth to vnderſtand
that their predictiōs were either in things natural,
ſuch as wiſe & ſkilful worldly men might by obſeruation
foretell, or elſe they were friuolous, vaine,
and vncertaine: and to bee interpreted on both
parts. Inſomuch that euen their Oracles of Apollo,
accounted of all other the moſt certaine, were
eſteemed euen among themſelues by a common
prouerb as Shipmēs hoſes that might be faſhioned

to diuers purpoſes.3. Re. 20. d. 23 1. Re 28. b. 14 2. Theſ. 2. c. 11 For by ſuch ſubtil meanes
the deuill did *delude thoſe, that were giuen to the
worſhipping of Idols. And alwayes are they ſuch
as tende to the confirmation of vanitie and ſuperſtition,
and neuer to the correction of wickedneſſe
and vice.2. Pet. 1. d. 21. But the * Prophecies of the liuing
God are alway, not onely certaine and true, but
alſo of ſuch matter as farre paſſeth either the common
courſe of nature, or humaine obſeruation:
noting things with the circumſtances and diſtinction
of tymes, perſons, and places. And alway are
directed to the maintenance of true religion and
vertuouſneſſe of life, and puniſhing of ſuperſtition,
Idolatrie, vice, and wickedneſſe. Such are the
prophecies of Daniel, certaine hundred yeares before
telling of the foure great Empyres and the
deſtruction and ende of the ſame. Such were the
prophecies of Eſay, Hieremie, and other concerning
the captiuitie of Babilon, & the deliuerance of
the people of God after a certaine appointed time.
Such was the prediction of all the Prophets generally
touching the true Meſsias,
                  Eſay. 11. a. 1 Mich. 5. a. 2. Gen. 4. 9. b. 10 Zach. 9. b. 9 Eſay. 61. a. 1 Zach. 12. c. 10 Pſal. 15. c. 10 Pſal. 21. c. 18 Pſal. 67. b. 19. and Sauiour
Chriſt Ieſu, with the * ſtocke that he ſhoulde come
of, the * place and * time of his byrth, the maner of
his * eſtate and life, his miraculous * workes, his
* death, * his reſurrection, and * aſcention. Wherfore
the God of Iſraell is the true God, and the
Idolles of the Gentiles are nothing, neyther are
hable to doe any thing, but by the deluſion of the
Deuill to the deceyuing of the wicked and naughtie
men by Gods iuſt iudgement, becauſe they

would not know the truth.
               I haue waked vp one from the north,Verſ. 25. and
he ſhall come from the eaſt, &c.
               That God may ſhewe himſelfe onely to haue
the vniuerſall knowledge of things to come, he in
this place (to the terrour of the Deuils by whoſe
deluſion the Idols of the Gentiles doe ſtand) prophecieth
of the cōming of Chriſt the Meſsias, whom
he rayſeth vp and ſhall bring vnto him from the
Eaſt, and from the Weſt, of all ſortes of people of
the heathen: which together with him, ſhall call
vpon the name of the true and onely liuing God.
So ſayth Chriſt, Math. 8. Many ſhall come out
of the eaſt and out of the weſt,
                  Mat. 8. b. 11 Luke. 13. f. 29 
                  and ſit in the kingdome
of God with Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob. This prophecie
we ſee was fulfilled by Chriſt, and the lyke
hereof neuer vttered any of the Gentiles Gods.
But GOD himſelfe it was that firſt gaue knowledge
hereof at Sion,
                  Verſ. 27. and at Hieruſalem: and there
fyrſt declared, that theſe people of the Heathen
Nations ſhoulde come vnto him, and as it were
Poynted to them wyth his finger ſaying: Beholde
they are preſent. This did he by Chriſt the principall
Euangeliſt, and after by other ſent abroade
from Hieruſalem into the whole worlde. This
hath God pleaded his cauſe with the Gentiles and
in the ende concludeth them and their Gods to be
wicked and vaine.
            
         
         
            
            The 2. Sunday after Chriſtmas
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 43.
            
               
                   BVt nowe the Lorde that made thée O Iacob, and he
that faſhioned thée O Iſraell, ſayth thus, Feare not,
for I haue redéemed thée,Eſay. 41. b. 9 Deut. 7. a. 6 and. 26. d. 18 I haue called thée by thy
name, thou art mine own. 2 If thou goeſt through
the water, I will be with thée, the ſtrong floudes ſhall not ouerwhelme
thée: and if thou walkeſt through the fire, it ſhall
not burne thée, and the flame ſhall not kindle vpon thée.
               3 For I am the Lorde thy God, the holye one of Iſraell
thy ſauiour: I gaue Egypt for thy deliuerance, the Ethiopians
and the Sabées for thée: 4 Bicauſe thou waſt déere
in my ſight, and bicauſe I ſet by thée and looued thée: I will
giue ouer all men for thée, and deliuer vp all people for thy
ſake.Eſay. 41. d. Math. 8. b. 5 Feare not, for I am with thée, I will bring thy ſéed
from the Eaſt, and gather thée togither from the Weſt.
               6 I will ſay to the north,Eſay. 29. d. 32 Gal. 3. a. Let go: and to the ſouth, kepe
 not back: but bring me my ſonnes from far, and my daughters
from the endes of the worlde. 7 (Namely) all thoſe
that be called after my name: For them haue I created, faſhioned,
and made for mine honour. 8 Bring forth that
people which is blinde and yet hath eyes,Luke. 14. e. 21. which are deafe although
they haue eares.Ephe. 2. c. 12 9 If all nations come in one and
be gathered togither, which among them ſhall declare ſuch
thinges, and tell vs the thinges that are paſt? let them bring
their witneſſe, ſo that they be iuſt: els let them heare, and
ſay, It is truth. 10 You are my witneſſes ſayth the Lord,
and my ſeruant whome I haue choſen: therfore be certified
and giue me faithful credence, and conſider that I am he before

whome there was neuer any God,Oſe. 13. b. 10. neyther ſhall be any
after me. 11 I am, euen I am the only Lord, and beſide me
there is no ſauiour. 12 I gaue warning, I made whole, I
taught you when there was no ſtraunge God among you:
and this recorde muſt ye beare me your ſelues, ſayeth the
Lorde,Io. 10. f. 36 that I am God. 13 And euen he am I who was
frō the beginning, and there is none that can take any thing
out of my hande: I doe the work and who ſhall be able to let
it? 14 Thus ſayth the Lord the holy one of Iſraell your 
redéemer,Eſay. 5. d. For your ſake I haue ſent to Babilō, and brought
it downe: all they are fugitiue with the Chaldees, whoſe ſorowfull
crye is in their ſhippes. 15 I am the Lorde your
holy one, which haue made Iſrael, and am your king.
               16 Thus ſayth the Lorde,Ioſue. 3. c. Exod. 14. e. 21 Eſay. 10. a. euen he that maketh a way in
the ſea, and a foote path in the mightie waters.
               17 It is he which bringeth forth the charets and horſes,
the hoſte and power of warre, that they may fal togither and
neuer riſe, and be extinct, like as towe are they quenched.
               18. Remember not thinges of olde, and regarde nothing
that is paſt. 19 Beholde I ſhall make a newe thing, and
ſhortly ſhall it appeare, and ſhall you not knowe it? I will
make a way in the deſert, and riuers of water in the wilderneſſe
20 The wilde beaſtes ſhall worſhip me, the dragons
and the yonge Eſtriches: for I ſhall giue water in the
wilderneſſe, and ſtreames in the deſert, that they maye giue
drinke to my people whom I choſe. 21 This people haue
I made for my ſelfe, and they ſhall ſhewe foorth my prayſe.
               22 For thou Iacob wouldeſt not call vpon me, but thou
hadſt an vnluſt towarde me O Iſraell. 23 Thou gaueſt
me not thy beaſts for burnt offeringes, neither didſt honour
me with ſacrifices:Eſay. 1. d. Hier. 17. c I haue not bene chargeable vnto thée in
offerings, neyther gri
                     ••
                  ous in incenſe. 24 Thou boughteſt
me no deare ſpice with thy money, neyther powredſt the
fat of thy ſacrifices vpon me: but thou haſt laden me with

thy ſinnes,Pſal. 14. a. Hier. 33. b. 8. and wearied me with thy vngodlyneſſe.
               25 Where as I yet, euen I am he only that for mine own
ſelues ſake doe away thine offences, and forget thy ſinnes, ſo
that I will neuer thinke vpon them. 26 Put me nowe in
remembrance, for we will reaſon togither, and ſhewe what
thou haſt for thée to make thée righteous. 27 Thy firſt father
offended ſore,Gen. 3. b. Nu. 20. d. 24. and thy rulers haue ſinned againſt me.
               28 Therfore I prophaned the princes of the ſanctuarie, I
did curſe Iacob, and gaue Iſrael into reproofe.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. xliij.
Chapter of Eſay.
               But nowe the Lorde that made thee, O
Iacob, and he that faſhioned thee, &c.Verſ. 1.
               
               
                  FOr ſo muche as the ſmall
number of the good and godly people,
had iuſt cauſe to bee in great feare,
through the prophecy of their Captiuitie
in Babilon before declared, and
to dreade thereby the ſubuerſion of the whole
Church of God then liuing: the Prophete in thys
place vnder the perſon of God doth adde a ſinguler
and great comfort. By the name of Iacob and
Iſrael he vnderſtandeth the whole Church of God.
For he ſpeaketh here not onely to the Iewes for the
comfort of their deliuerance from the captiuitie of
Babilon: but alſo and ſpecially to all the faythfull
of his Church,Rom. 4. b. 11 which be the true * ſeede of Abraham,
as Paule ſayth, and the right ſucceſſion of Iacob, to

whome this promiſe was made,Gen. 22. d. 18. 
                  In thee and in
thy Seede all the Nations of the earth ſhall be bleſſed.
And againe,Gene. 28. c. 15. 
                  I will bee thy keeper whither ſo euer
thou go. Of which promiſes he putteth them in
minde, when he calleth them by the name of Iacob,
as he doth alſo comfort them not a little, in that he
ſayth, he is their * Creator, Maker,Ephe. 2. b. 10. and Redeemer,
and calleth them His owne. For God cannot
neglect thoſe that he hath faſhioned to his owne
Image, and redeemed with ſo precious a treaſure,
and purchaſed to be his owne people, Therefore
ſayth he:
               If thou goe through the water, I will bee
with thee,Verſ. 2. the ſtrong flouds ſhall not, &c.
               By the tearmes of * VVater and Flouds,
                  Pſal. 87. b. 7 
                  Fire,
and Flames, he vnderſtandeth al maner of Tentations,
Troubles & Afflictions, that any way either
in Soule or bodie might come vnto thē: and aſſureth
them yt they ſhall not miſcarie by any of them.
               I gaue Egipt for thy deliuerance,Verſ. 3. 4. the Ethiopians
and the Sabees, &c.
               That is ſuch care and loue haue I had toward
my Church and faythfull people, that to deliuer
and preſerue them, I haue afflicted Aegypt, Aethiope,
Sabaea, and many other mightie Princes and
Kingdomes, and in like maner will deale with all
other Nations that ſhall worke trouble to them.
Therefore bee not diſmayde, but be of good comfort.
               
               I will bring thy ſeede from the Eaſt,Verſ. 5. 6. 7 and
gather thee together, &c.
               Here is plainly prophecied the Calling of the
Gentiles to the fayth of Chriſt, and the gathering
of the diſperſed children of God from all the quarters
of the earth. As if he had ſaid, you feare that
if Hieruſalem, (as my Prophete hath ſayde) be deſtroyed
and the people led captiue, and Princes of
the earth perſecute them: that there ſhall bee no
Church nor any that ſhall liue to ſerue God. But
feare it not,Mat. 28. d. 20 
                  I will be with them euen to the ende of
the world, to bring the ſeede of my people together,
and to * gather the members of my Church out of
all the quarters of the earth,Pſal. 49. a. 5. Pſal. 105. g. 45 Pſal. 146. a. 2 from the Eaſt and
from the Weſt. And I will ſay to the North, giue
me my children, that thou haſt kept in blindneſſe,
as if they had had no eyes, and let them come and
ſee the light of the truth. And to the South will I
ſay, forbid not them to come and heare that I call
by the preaching of my Goſpel, though before they
were deafe and heard not.
               This is it that Chriſt ſpeaketh of.Mat. 8. b. 11. 
                  Many ſhall
come from the eaſt and from the weſt, and reſt with
Abraham and Iſaac in the kingdome of God. This
is it that is ſpoken in the Actes of the Apoſtles.
You ſhall be my witneſſes in Hieruſalem and in all
Iurie,
                  Act. 1. a. 8. 
                  and Samaria and to the vttermoſt partes of the
earth. Wherefore God promyſeth here the great
enlarging of his Church and faythfull people.
               
               If all Nations come in one and bee gathered
togither which among them. &c.Verſ. 9.
               
               As in the 41.Eſa 9. 41. a. 1. Chapter, So here the Prophete imagineth
God to ſpeake before a Iudge, as if hee
had ſayde, I haue declared two arguments of my
Deity, that is, that I am he which from the beginning
declared to the Patriarches, that I woulde
ſend my Sonne the true Meſsias and ſauior of the
worlde, and that I would deliuer my Church and
people, not only from the perils, that ſhortly ſhall
be in the Captiuitie, but alſo encreaſe the number
of them out of all the partes of the worlde. Part of
theſe thinges you ſee fulfylled alreadie: the other
ſhall as aſſuredly come to paſſe. Therfore go to, let
all Nations and people of the worlde come togither
which worſhip ſtocks and ſtones and Gods of
their owne making,Eſay. 41. f. 22. and lette vs heare whether
their Gods or their ſoothſayers enſpired with the
Deuil be hable to declare or tell 
                     〈◊〉
                   any ſuch
things, let them bring forth their witneſſes to iuſtifye
the matter.Vers. 10. 11. 12. 13. But you my people can 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and
your cōſciences can be witneſſes, that theſe things
which I haue ſpoken for my ſelfe and againſt the
worſhippers of Idols, are true. Therfore miſtruſt
not, feare not, put your confydence in me, ſticke to
the true worſhipping of me. For I am the true
God that neuer had beginning nor ſhall haue 
                     ••
                  
                  ding,Iob. 1. 
                        •
                     . b. 
                        ••
                      Io. 10. c. 28
                        •
                     
                  
that made all things, that preſerueth & maintaineth
all thinges, and * out of whoſe handes no
power can take any one man that I will ſaue. &c.
               
               For your ſake I haue ſent to Babilon and
brought it downe: all they,Verſ. 14. 15. 16. 17. &c.
               He ſpeaketh of that is to come, as if it were paſt
and done. For he here telleth howe he will deliuer
his people from the captiuitie of Babilon. The
ſenſe is, you are in great feare, my people, for your
captiuitie, that ſhall be in Babylon, but I haue already
deuiſed your deliuerance. I will in conuenient
time ſend Darius and Cyrus, the Medes and the
Perſians into Babilon with mightie power whiche
ſhall vtterly ouerthrowe the whole power of Babylon
and Chaldey, and tranſferring the Empyre
to the Perſians, ſhall by their noble king Cyrus deliuer
you. This will I your God and redeemer do
for you, &c.
               Remember not things of olde,Verſ. 18. and regard
nothing that is past.
               He prepareth here to vtter a prophecie of the
comming of Chriſt, as if he had ſayde. Remember
not thinges done before time, I haue wrought
great benefytes for you, I haue deliuered you out
* of Aegypt.
                  Exod. 20. a. 2. I brought you through ye red ſea, I cō
                  ducted
you through the wilderneſſe into the lande
of Canaan, I gaue you victory ouer your enimies,
but * remember not theſe benefites in compariſon
of that I will nowe tell you,Iere. 23. b. 7. I will worke a newe
thing that ſhall farre paſſe theſe.Verſ. 
                        ••
                      20 
                  I will make a way
in the deſerte, and riuers of water in the wilderneſſe.
The wylde beaſtes ſhall worſhip me, &c. That is, I

will not onelye deliuer you from the Captiuitie of
Babilon, and bring you home ſafe through daungerous
wayes and paſſages, which may iuſtly bee
compared to anye of the former benefites: but in
thoſe Nations and Countries alſo which hitherto
haue beene as deſerts or wilderneſſes without all
good culture of godlyneſſe, and drie and barraine
without any Springes of Gods good graces and
wholeſome inſtructions: In thoſe places, I ſaye,
will I treade out a true pathe, and highe waye to
heauen, and wildiſe vraſweete ſprings and plentifull
ryuers of heau
                     •
                  enly doctrine by the preaching
of the Goſpell of Chriſt. In ſo much that thoſe
people which for their rude and ſauage barbarouſneſſe,
and for the fylthineſſe of their lyues myght
well ſeeme wilde beaſts, Dragons and Eſtreches,
ſhall lay aſide their deteſtable and naughty Idolatrie,
and their foule and fylthie vices, and become
true worſhyppers of my name and notable examples
of all vertuous lyfe to the aduauncement of
my great glorie and praiſe.
               For thou Iacob wouldeſt not call vpon me,Verſ. 22. 23. 24
but thou haddeſt an vnluſt toward. &c.
               Leaſt the people of God being puffed vp and
ſwelling in their owne conceptes, ſhould thinke
thys great and ſtraunge matter was wrought for
their▪ * Deſertes or worthineſſe,Deut. 9. a. 4 he ſayth plainely,
that they had 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſuch thing; eyther by calling
vpon his name, or by offering of ſacrifyces, or burning
of Incenſe, or bying of coſtly Spices for the

holy Oyle commaunded Exod. 30.Exod. 30. c. 25. nor by any other
maner of ſeruice, in reſpect whereof this ſingular
and vneſtimable benefite was wrought, but rather
by their ſinnes, had altogether deſerued the contrarie,
and prouoked God to iuſt wrath, and therefore,
that this thing proceeded of Gods mere mercy
and exceeding loue towards Mankinde, for his
owne felfes ſake, as he ſayeth, For his owne ſelfes
ſake putting awaye their ſinnes out of his remembrance:
ſo that neyther their owne Worthyneſſe,
nor the iuſtice of their aunceſtors coulde deſerue it.
For as Adam was a ſynner, 
                     〈…〉
                   all the other
that they came of, and both gouernours and people
had geeuouſly offended God.
            
         
         
            The. 1. Sunday after the Epiphanie,
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 44.
            
               SO heare nowe O Iacob my 
                     〈…〉
                  
                   whom I haue choſen. 2 For thus ſayth the Lord
that made thée, faſhioned thée, and helped thée, euen
from thy mothers wombe: Be not afrayde O Iacob
my ſieruaunt, thou righteous whome I haue choſen.
               3 For I ſhall poure water vpon thy drie grounde,Eſay. 35. b. 7 11. and. 14. c Eze. 36. d. 25 Ioel. 2. f. 28 Actes. 1. b. 27. and
riuers vpon the thirſtie: I ſhall poure my ſpirite vpon the

                     〈◊〉
                  , and my bleſſing vpon thy ſtocke.
               4. They ſhall grow togither like as the graſſe, and as the
willowes by the waters 
                     〈◊〉
                   On
                     •
                   ſhall ſaye, I am the
Lordes: another ſhall call himſelfe 
                     〈…〉
                  
the thirde ſhall ſubſcribe with his hande 
                     〈…〉
                  
giue himſelfe vnder the name of Iſraell.
               
                  
6. Thus hath the Lorde ſpoken, 
                     〈…〉
                  
and his redeemer the Lorde of hoſtes: 
                     〈…〉
                  
laſt,Eſay. 12. a. Apoc. 1. b. c. Eſay. 48. c. 1
                        •
                      Reue. 22. 
                        •
                     . Eſay. 43. b. & beſides me there is no God. 7 If 
                     〈◊〉
                   he like me, let
him call forth the thing paſt, and openly ſhewe it, and lay it
plaine before me what hath 
                     〈…〉
                   I appoynted the
people of the world, and what ſhall be ſhortly, or what ſhall
come to paſſe (in tune long to 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) 
                     〈◊〉
                  
things? 8 Be not 
                     〈…〉
                  
tolde you hitherto and warned you? ye 
                     〈…〉
                  
your ſelues: is there any 
                     〈…〉
                  
I ſhould not knowe 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Eſa. 42. b. 10. Sap. 13. c. 13
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   and maketh alſo a God thereof to honour it,
and a grauuen Image to knéele before it.
               16 One péece he burneth in the fire, with another he r
                     •
                  
                  ſteth fleſh,
that he may eate reſt his belly full: with the thirde
he warmeth himſelfe, and ſayth, Aha, I am well warmed, I
haue béene at the fire. 17 And of the reſ
                     ••
                  ue he maketh him
a God, and a grauen Image for himſelfe: he knéeleth before
it, he worſhippeth it, he prayeth vnto it, and ſayth, Deliuer
me,Eſa. 42. a. 16. for thou art my God. 18 Yet men neither conſider nor
vnderſtande, becauſe their eies be ſtopped that they can not

                     〈◊〉
                  , and their heartes that they cannot perceyue.
               19 They 
                     〈◊〉
                   not in their mindes, for they haue neyther
knowledge nor vnderſtanding to thinke thus, I haue
brent one péece in the fire, I haue baked bread with the coles
thereof, I haue roſted fleſh withall and eaten it: and I will
now of the reſidue make an abhominable Idoll, & fall downe
before a rotten péece of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 20 Thus doth he but loſe his
labour, 
                     〈…〉
                   turne him aſide,
ſo that 
                     〈…〉
                   to thinke, Do
not 
                     〈…〉
                   Iſrael, 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
ſerue me, O

                     〈1 paragraph〉
                  
                  Eſa 9. 43. d. 25.
                  Gen. 2. a. 1. Eſay. 45. c. 18.
                  
them backwarde, and make their cunning fooliſhneſſe.
               26 He doth ſet vp the purpoſe of his ſeruant, and fulfilleth
the counſayle of his meſſengers: concerning Hieruſalem he
ſayth it ſhall be inhabited, and of the Cities of Iuda they ſhal
be builded againe, and I will repayre their decayed places.
               27 He ſayth to the depth, Be drie: and, I will drie vp water
flouds. 28 He ſayth of Cyrus, he is my heardman, ſo
that he ſhall fulfill all thinges after my will: he ſayth alſo of
Hieruſalem, It ſhall be builded: and of the temple, It ſhall
be faſt grounded.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the. 44.
Chapter of Eſay.
               But heare now O Iacob my ſeruant,Verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and
Iſrael whom I haue choſen. &c.
               
                  FOrſomuche as God in the
ende of the former Chapter had charged
his people with Sinne and grieuous

                     〈◊〉
                  , and that for the ſame
ſome 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhould come vpon
them by their captiuitie in Babilon: Here in thys
place he doth adde ſweete words, and a gentle and
mercifull mitigation & comfort, ſaying as it were,
Albeit grieuous 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhall come vpon thee being
led away captiue 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Babilon, yet heare now,
what I thy Lorde and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that haue * 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and preſerued thée,Iob. 31. b. 15 Pſal. 21. b. 10 Pſal. 70. b, 6. 7 by my diuine prouidence,
euen from thy mothers wombe, will doe for thée
my choſen ſeruant. Albeit thou Iacob art nothing

in thy ſelfe, and that no nobilitie in thee or worthineſſe

                     〈◊〉
                   deliuer thee from this wrath and great
calamitie: yet the adoption and choyſe that I thy
heauenly father of my meere mercie in my Sonne
the Melsias & Sauiour, haue vouchedſafe to make
of thee, man be of ſufficient force to deliuer thee, and
to turne all the benefites of the forgiueneſſe of thy
ſinnes vpon thee, that is, not onely thy wonderfull
diſpatch out of Babilon,
                  Verſ. 3. but alſo the watering with
the knowledge of the true doctrine of Saluation,
and the gift of my holy ſpirite: whereby thou and
all thoſe that by fayth ſhall ſhewe themſelues to be
thy true poſterity, and of the number of mine elect,
ſhall grow and proſper in all goodneſſe, ſubmitting
their ſelues to the profeſſion of my holye name.Eſa. 41. c. 10. Eſa. 43. a. 1. 65
Therefore * feare not, nor flit not from my true
worſhipping to the Seruice of ye Idols of Babilō,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Verſ. 6.
                  Eſay. 41. a. 4. Apoc. 1. b. 8
                  3 Reg. 15. b. 12 Dan. 14. a. 4.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
in face of the worlde. Wherefore I ſay againe, be
not afrayde, I haue tolde you and warned you before.
Put your truſt in me.
               All caruers of Images are but vaine,Verſ. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. &c. and
the carued Images that they loue, &c.
               Vnto the ende of the twenteth verſe. In this
ſeconde part of the Chapter, GOD doth ſharpely
and grieuouſly reprooue, and at large ſcornefully
deride the fonde blindeneſſe,Baruc. 6. b. 19. 26. 48. 56. 67 and furious rage and
madneſſe of thoſe that make Gods, Idols, or Images
for themſelues to worſhip. And as it is
pleaſant in this place to conſider, how he painteth
out the buſie vanitie of them, that make the Idols
and the fonde and importunate deſire of thoſe that
long for them, and the vnſenſible groſſeneſſe of
ſuch as be giuen to the worſhip of them: Euen ſo
may it ſeeme horrible in the ſight of God and man,
that man indued with reaſon, and the moſt honorable
creature of god ſhould euer fal to ſo extreme
Blindeneſſe, as that he will aduenture with his
owne handes to make him a God, or an Image
to worſhip as God. But ſome will ſay, no man
was euer ſo blinde to thinke the images Gods,
or to worſhip them as Gods, and ſo crie the Papiſtes
at this day for their defence, and ſay they
haue Iniurie, when they be ſo charged. And yet
ſurely is their defence herein no better, than the
defence of the Heathen and Gentiles, whom God
here thus mocketh and reprooueth. For they had
the ſame anſweres and pretences, and yet is it

euident, that both the one and the other do ſo rage
in their madneſſe, that ſo ſoone as they be made by
a Mortall, wicked, and Sinfull man, they thinke
them to haue a certain deuine Grace in them, and
therefore doe they Cap and kneele vnto them, call
vpon them,Baruc. 6. b. 19. Burne incenſe, and ſet vp candels and
other giftes before them, and runne Hundreds of
myles to worſhip them. And if they ſhoulde ſhewe
and declare to the world the very True worſhip to
the Liuing God, they could not ſet it out by more euident
meanes. Wherfore (dearely beloued) earneſtly
conſider with your ſelues, how pitifully you
haue bene abuſed in the time of Papiſtrie,Exod. 20. a. 4 Leu. 26. a. 1. Deut. 5. a. 8. Deut. 27. c. 15 and by
Gods *commaundement giuen ſtraitly to the contrary,
and by this place of the Prophete now read,
Learne you how wickedly, and how diſpleaſantly
you haue done in his ſight.
               Conſider this O Iacoh,Verſ. 21. 22. 23. 24. & Iſraell, for thou
art my ſeruant, &c.
               Nowe God returneth to an other warning and
comforting of his people, that ſeing the Idols of
the Gentiles, and all that worſhip them, ſeeme they
for the time neuer ſo proſperous, are in deede in
the ſight of God vaine, wicked, and odious, and ſeing
that he is the gracious Lorde that hath Made
them,2. Theſ. 2. c. 13 Apoc. 5. c. 9 1. Io. 2. b. 12 1. Io. 4. c. 18 Preſerued them, *Choſē them to be his ſeruants,
*redeemed them, and forgiuen their ſinnes:
That they ſhould not *feare, nor ſtarte *from hym
by any temptation or affliction, but in their hartes
reioyce and giue thankes continually for this hys

great goodneſſe and mercie towarde them, which
is ſuch, as not onely they, but alſo in their behalfe,
*Heauen,Pſal. 149. a. 1. Earth, Mouutaines, Woods, Trees and
all the other creatures of God ſhould triumph and
be gladde of, and giue glorie and praiſe vnto hys
name.
               Towarde the ende he doth in plaine and flatteVerſ. 26. 27. 28.
wordes renewe the promiſe of their deliuerance
from Babilon, and ſayth, he will fulfill the words
of his ſeruants the Prophets, and that their Citie
Ieruſalem ſhould be repayred again, their Temple
buylded, and that it ſhould be done by a king of
the Perſians named Cyrus. Surely this is a notable
place to confirme the certainetie of Gods prouidence
in diſpoſing of things,Tit. 1. a. 2. 2. Pet. 1. d. 21 Rom. 1. a. 2 3. Re. 13. a. 2 and the *truth of his
worde and Prophets in foretelling the ſame. For
theſe wordes were vttered by the Prophet long
before Cyrus was borne. From the death of Eſaie
vnder Manaſſes vnto the birth of Cyrus was aboue
an hundred yeres: and a good ſpace before, the Citie
of Ieruſalem was deſtroyed, & the people ledde
captiue into Babilon. yea, when the Iewes themſelues
for the moſt part coulde not be perſwaded
that ſuch miſery ſhould come vpon them, and therfore
hated and perſecuted the Prophets, and when
as yet no man coulde dreame that eyther the Empire
ſhould fall from the Babilonians, being now in
their great pride, to the Perſians, which were yet of
no great name, or that there ſhoulde one riſe among
the Perſians, whoſe name ſhould be Cyrus:
Then I ſay ſo long before, in ſo vncredible and ſo

vnlikely a time was this promiſe and propheſie
vttered, to the great aſſurance of Gods truth, and
mightie prouidence not onely in this matter, but in
all partes of his holy worde, giuen vs by the ſame
ſpirite of truth that this was.
            
         
         
            The 1. Sunday after the Epiphanie,
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 46.
            
               
                   BEl is fallen, Nabo is broken downe, whoſe images
were a burthen for the beaſts and cattell,1. Sam. 15. a. 4 Ier. 50. a. 2 to ouerlade
them, and to make them wearie. 2 They are ſunke
downe and fallen together, for they maye not eaſe
them of their burthen, therfore muſt they go into captiuitie.
               3 Hearken vnto me O houſe of Iacob, and all ye that remayne
yet of the houſe of Iſraell, whom I haue borne from
your mothers wombe, & brought you vp from your byrth.
               4 It is euen I which ſhal beare you vnto your laſt age:Exod. 20. a. 1.
I haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   you, I will alſo nouriſhe you, beare you, and
ſaue you. 5 Whome will ye make me like, or to whome
wyll ye make me equall or compare me, that I ſhould be like
him?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      32. a. 3. 6 Take out ſiluer and golde out of your purſes, and
way it, and hire a Goldeſmith to make a God of it, that men
 may knéele downe and worſhip it: 7 Yet muſt he be taken
on men ſhoulders and borne,Eſay. 44. c. 13 Baruc. 6. c. 25. and ſet in his place, that he
may ſtande, and not moue out of his place; and if one crye
vnto him, he giueth no anſwere, and deliuereth not the man
that calleth vpon him from his trouble. 8 Conſider 
                     •
                  hys
well, and be aſhamed, go into your owne ſelues.
               9 Remember the things that are paſt ſince the beginning

of the worlde, that I an
                     •
                   God, and that there is elſe no God,
yea, and that there is nothing like vnto me.
               10 In the beginning of a thing I ſhewe the ende thereof,
and I tell before, things that are not yet come to paſſe: My
deuiſe ſtandeth ſtedfaſtly ſtabliſhed, and I fulfill all my pleaſure.
11. I call a byrde out of the Eaſt, & the man by whom
my counſayle ſhall be fulfilled out of ſtraunge countries; as
I haue ſpoken, ſo will I bring to paſſe: aſſoone as I thinke
to deuiſe a thing,Exod. 16. a. I doe it. 12 Heare me O ye that are of
an hie ſtomacke, but farre from righteouſneſſe:
               13 I ſhall bring forth my righteouſneſſe, it is not farre,
and my health ſhall not carie long away: I will lay health
in Sion, and in Iſrael my glorie.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the
xlvj. of Eſay.
               Bel is fallen,Verſ. 1. 2. Nabo is broken downe,
whole images were a burthen, &c.
               
                  FOr ſomuch as GOD by his
Prophets had threatned that Hieruſalem
ſhould be deſtroyed, and the people
ledde Captiue into Babilon: Eſay,
in this chapiter and others, doth inſtruct
and exhort ſuch as were faythfull of the people
of God,Iacob. 4. e. 10. 1. Pet. 5. b. 6. Phil. 4. c. 12 that they ſhould not be *offended wyth
their owne 
                     〈◊〉
                   that God, for the it offences, had
ſient vpon them,Pſal. 36. a. 1. Pſal. 72. b. 12. al it with the *proſperitie and ſucceſſe
of Babilon, and ſo by that occaſion fall from
the worſhipping of the true God to the Idols of the

Gentils. Therefore he here denounceth that Bel
and Nabo, the great golden Idols of the Chaldees,
in whome they put their truſt, ſhall be pulled
downe and caried away in Cartes & vpon beaſtes
backes by Cyrus and the Perſians in the conqueſt of
Babilon, and in the tranſferring of the Empire vnto
the Perſians. That meaneth he when he ſayth,
Their Image ſhall be a burthen for the beaſts, &c. and
that the ſame being made of Golde were ſo heauie
that they ſhould wearie euen ſtrong cattell, and
cauſe them to ſinke vnder the burthen.
               Hearken vnto me,Verſ. 3. 4. O houſe of Iacob, and
all ye that remaine yet of the, &c.
               God doth here warne his people againe, what
great difference is betweene the vaine Idols of
the Gentiles and himſelf,1. Pet. 5. b. 7. who hath euer had *care
for them and preſerued them, euen like a moſt tender
mother, yea farre more carefully and tenderlye
then any carnall mother can doe.Eſa 9. 49. d. 15 * For as the
mother beareth the childe in the wombe, bringeth
it forth into the worlde, feedeth, cheriſheth, and keepeth
it ſo long as it is not able to prouide for it
ſelfe: ſo when it commeth to age, ſhee ſhaketh a
great part of her care away.
               But God beareth vs in the purpoſe of his Election,
bringeth vs forth with the knowledge of our
redemption in Chriſt Ieſu, feedeth and cheriſheth
vs with the continuall foode of his heauenly doctrine,
ſaueth vs, and caryeth vs in his armes from
all daunger by the might of his prouydence, & that

not onely in infancie and yo
                     •
                  ng age, as mothers.
doe, but in olde age, and in all Times. as It maye
well appeare by the preſeru
                     •••
                  on 
                     〈…〉
                  
his Church, euen in theſe latter and daungerous
dayes againſt all the aſſaultes of 
                     〈◊〉
                   and
hys inſtruments.
               Whome will you make me like,Verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8 or to whom
will ye make me equall. &c.
               Seing that the tender mercie and goodneſſe of
God towards his people is ſuch, as he hath declared,
he doth here ſharpely reproue them that forſaking
his true worſhip, preſcribed in hys law, ſeeke
to honor him in Idols and Images, and thereby
to make hym ſo *vyle that they compare and reſemble
hym to the baſeſt of hys creatures.Act. 17. g. 29. Rom. 1. c. 23. And
therefore he doth here againe deride and ſcorne
their induſtrie and readineſſe to beſtow all maner
of *coſt and charges,Dan. 3. a. 1. and to pull out of their purſes
Golde & Siluer to ſet forth Idolatrous worſhipping
of God by Images, whereas they will
make great daunger to beſtowe anye thing to aduaunce
Gods holy worde and true worſhip according
to the ſame.
               This is a notable place againſt all ſuch as ſeeke
to defende the vſe of Images, by ſaying that they
doe not thinke them to be Gods, nor worſhip them
as Gods, but that they doe worſhip God in them &
by them. For here you vnderſtande that God neither
will be *reſembled by any Image, nor worſhipped
in it. For firſt the making of Images to

worſhip of directly agaynſt the commaundement
of God. and ſecondly he cannot be pleaſed wyth
any worſhip, 
                     〈…〉
                   which is directed to him in
in 
                     〈◊〉
                   Name of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Only * ſonne Chriſt Ieſu,Io: 14. b. 13. and not
vnd
                     •
                  r. the pretence of any Image.
               Remember the things that are paſt ſince
the b
                     •
                  ginning of the worlde,Ver. 9. 10. &c.
               This is an exhortation to ſuch of his people as
were inclined to the worſhipping of Images Remember
(ſayth he) that which I haue tolde you of
the vanitie of Idols and Images, and conſider
that they haue their beginning of mortall & * wicked
men,Deut. 27. c. 15. not hable to helpe themſelues, and that
I your God am * euerlaſting without beginning,Eſa. 44. a. 6.
and without ending, knowing and vnderſt anding
all things, and that there is no Image wherein I
can be worſhipped,2. Cor. 4. a. 4 but onely the * expreſſe Image
of my Deitie my ſonne Chriſt Ieſu your Sauiour
and the true Meſsias. Wherefore yet agayne
I ſay vnto you, beware, of the Idolatrie of the
Gentiles,Pſal. 32. c. 11 and cleaue faſt vnto me. For * my deuiſes
ſhall ſtedfaſtly be eſtabliſhed, and I will fulfill
all my pleaſure, and whatſoeuer I haue declared
to you by my Prophets for your comfort. Yea euen
as I haue promiſed you, I will bring a Birde out
of the Eaſt,Verſ. 11. that is, a noble king of the Perſians, that
ſhall with great power breake into Babilon, trauſferre
the Empire from them, and reſtore you to
your Countrey againe. And not onely this, but
I wil alſo in conuenient and ſhort time bring forth

my iuſtice and ſauing health, and ſet my ſaluation
in Sion and my glorie in Hieruſalem by the comming
of the Meſsias and Sauiour of the worlde.
            
         
         
            The 2. Sunday after the Epiphanie,
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 51.
            
               HEarken vnto me ye that holde of righteouſneſſe, and 
ye that ſéeke the Lord: take héede to the ſtone wherout
ye are hewen, and to the graue wherout ye are
digged.Gen. 21. a. 2 Rom. 4. a. 3 Gen. 12. a. 2 2 Conſider Abraham your father, and Sara
that bare you, howe that I called him alone, and bleſſed
him, and increaſed him. 3 Therefore ſhall the Lorde comfort
Sion, and repaire all hir decay, making hir deſert as a
Paradiſe, and hir wilderneſſe as the garden of the Lorde:
Myrth and ioy ſhall be founde there, thankeſgyuing and the
voyce of praiſe. 4 Haue reſpect vnto me then O my people
both highe and lowe, and laye thine eare vnto me: for a
lawe and an ordinance ſhall go forth fro me to lighten the
gentiles.Eſay. 2. a. 3 5 It is harde by that my health and my righteouſneſſe
ſhall go forth, and the people ſhall he ordered with
mine arme: the Ilandes (that is the Gentiles) ſhall hope
in me, and put their truſt in mine arme.
               6 Lift vp your eyes towarde heauen,Math. 24. c. 29 2. Pet. 3. d. 7. and loke vpon the
earth beneath: for the heauens ſhall vaniſhe awaye lyke
ſmoke, and the earth ſhall ware olde lyke a garment, and
they that dwell therem ſhall periſhe in like maner: but my
ſaluation ſhall endure for euer, and my righteouſneſſe ſhal
not ceaſe. 7 Hearken vnto me ye that haue knowledge 
in righteouſneſſe,Mat. 10. d. 26 Luke. 12. a. 7 thou people that heareſt my lawe in thine
heart: feare not the reuylings of men, be not afraide of their

blaſphemies. 8 For wormes and mothes ſhall eate them
vp like cloth and weell: but my righteouſneſſe ſhall endure
for euer, and my ſauing health from generation to generation.
9 Wake vp, wake vp, and be ſtrong O thou arme of
the Lorde, wake vp, like as in time paſt, euer, and ſince the
the worlde beganne.Eſay. 14. d. 22. Exod. 14. c. 16. 10 Art not thou the ſame arme that
haſt wounded the prowde, and hewen the Dragon in
péeces? Art not thou euen the ſame which haſt dryed vppe
the déepe of the Sea, which haſt made plaine the ſea ground,
that the deliuered might goe through?1. Eſd. 1. b. 3. 11 Therefore
the redéemed of the Lorde ſhall turne againe, and come with
ioy vnto Sion, continuall ioy ſhall be on their heade, and
mirth and gladneſſe ſhall be with them, and ſorrowe and
wo ſhall flie from them.2. Cor. 1. c. 14. 12 Yea I, (euen) I am he that
in all things giueth you conſolation:Eſa. 40. a. 6. 1. Pet. 1. d. 24. what art thou then
feareſt a mortall man and the childe of man, which goeth away
 as doth the floure? 13 And forgetteſt the Lorde that
made thée, that ſpreade out the heauens, and layde the foundation
of the earth: but thou art euer afrayde for the ſight
of thine oppreſſour, which is ready to doe harme: where is
the wrath of the oppreſſour? 14 The exile maketh haſte to
be looſed, that he dye not in priſon, and that his bread fayle
him not.Eſay. 48. a. 2. 15 I am the Lorde thy God that diuide the ſea,
and his waues ſhall rage, whoſe name is the Lorde of hoſts.
               16 I haue put my wordes in thy mouth,Eſay. 49. a. 2. and haue defended
thée in the ſhadowe of my hande, that I maye plant the
heauens, and lay the foundation of the earth, and ſaye vnto
Sion. Thou art my people. 17 Awake, awake, and ſtande
vp O Ieruſalem,Ier. 25. c. 15. thou that from the hande of the Lorde
haſt drunken out the cup of his wrath, thou that haſt ſupped
of and ſucked out the ſlumbring cup to the bottome.
               18 For among all the ſonnes whome he hath begotten,
there is not one that maye holde it vp, and not one to leade
it by the hande of all the ſonnes that he hath nouriſhed.
               
                  
19 Both theſe things are happened vnto thée, but who is
ſory for it? yea deſtruction, waſting, hunger, and ſworde,
but who will comfort thée?
               20 Thy ſonnes lye comfortleſſe at the heade of euerye
 ſtréete like a taken veniſon, and are full of the terrible wrath
of the Lorde, and puniſhment of thy God.
               21 And therefore thou miſerable and dronken (howbeit
not with wine) heare this: 22 Thus ſayth the Lorde, thy
Lorde and God, the defendour of his people, Beholde I will
take the ſlumbring cup out of his hande, euen the cup wyth
the dregges of my wrath, that from henceforth thou ſhalt
neuer drinke it more. 23 But I will put it into their hand
that trouble thée, which haue ſpoken to thy ſoule, Stoupe
downe, that we may go ouer thée, make thy body euen with
the grounde, and as the ſtréete to go vpon.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. lj.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Hearken vnto me ye that holde of righteouſneſſe,Verſ. 1. 2. 3
and ye that ſeeke, &c.
               
                  THe good and godly people in
the time of Eſay, ſeeing themſelues
fewe in number, and hearing by the
Prophetes, that they ſhoulde be ledde
captiue into Babilon, greatly feared
that all faythfull and true worſhippers of GOD
ſhould in that perſecution be vtterly conſumed:
Therefore God here ſpeaketh to them, and comforteth
them, ſignifying that he will not onely in
that trouble of Babilon preſerue his choſen and elect

of the Iewes, but alſo not long after, greatly
encreaſe the number of his Church, by the* acceſſe
of all Nations,Io. 10. c. 16. Eze. 37. f 22 that he would call to the light of his
truth, and to his true worſhip by the promiſed Meſſias,
and Sauiour of the ſeede of Abraham. And firſt
he willeth them to conſider The rocke wherout they
were hewen, and the denne whereout they were digged,
that is as he expoundeth himſelfe, Abraham
their father, and Sara their mother of whome they
diſcended: and that God called Abraham being but
one man* out of his Countrey,Gen. 12. a. 1. and ſuffered him
to liue in Chanaan, to the age of an hundred yeres,
and his wife foureſcore without children: and yet
that he ſo encreaſed him, that his iſſue prooued innumerable
as the * ſande of the ſea.Gene. 15. a. 5 Gene. 32. c. 12 And by this
example he willeth them & all other faithful to vnderſtand,
that though his Church & people appere
to the world to be neuer ſo much afflicted, or to be
brought to ſo low an ebbe, yet he will increaſe and
multiplie it with exceeding numbers, and bring
them out of miſerie and trouble vnto great ioy,
myrth, and comfort. Yea that he will repayre the
ruine and decaye of his Church, and make their
deſert, and wilderneſſe, a Paradiſe and garden
of pleaſure. The ruine and decay of Sion, are ye loſt
ſheepe of the houſe of Iſraell, which Chriſt and his
Apoſtles reſtored. The Deſert and VVilderneſſe,
are the Gentiles, which of olde had refuſed the true
knowledge of God, and therefore were as ſtraungers
to the promiſe of ſaluation. But the ſe deſerts
God made pleaſant Gardens by the teaching and

publiſhing of his Goſpell. This is it, that he promiſeth
when he ſayth,Verſ. 4. 
                  A lawe and ordinance ſhall go
forth from him to lighten the Gentiles.
               
               The time is euen at hande that my health
and righteouſneſſe ſhall go forth,Verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8 &c.
               Be of good cheere my people ſayth God, and be
not ouerwhelmed with the heauineſſe of your affliction.
It is euen at hande that not onely my ſauing
health ſhall go forth to preſerue you, but the
might and ſtrength of mine arme alſo by the preaching
of the Goſpell to gouerne and guide all other
Nations.Math. 12. b. 21 Inſo much that the * inhabitantes
of the Iſlandes and other countryes ſhall beleeue
in me, and put their truſt in my name. And do you
not miſtruſt this health and ſaluation that ſhall
come to you by the Meſsias.
                  2. Pet. 1. b. 10. For * heauen and earth
with all the inhabitours thereof ſhal vaniſh away
as ſmoke, but the iuſtice and ſaluation wrought by
the ſonne of God, ſhall be moſt certaine and continue
for euer. Therefore my people that vuderſtand
righteouſneſſe,Mat. 24. a. 9 Iohn. 15. c. 20. Luc. 21. c. 16 Mat. 5. a. 11. feare not the * reuilings, raylinges
and reproches of men, that ſhall fall vpon
you for the profeſſion of my name and truth. For
your enemyes ſhall be conſumed as a garment
with mothes, and my ſauing health that you truſt
in, ſhall ſtande ſtedfaſt for euer and euer.
               Wake vp wake vp,Verſ. 9. and be ſtrong, O thou
arme of the Lorde, &c.
               In theſe three verſes next following God comforteth

his people with the example of their deliuerance
out of Egypt. But his maner of vtterance
is with great maieſtie, figuratiuely turning hys
ſpeech to his owne diuine power: the ſenſe whereof
is this. Thou mightie power of God, that manye
tymes ſince the beginning of the worlde haſt
ſhewed thy ſelfe, rayſe thy ſelfe now in this great
anguiſhe and care that his people are nowe in.Verſ. 10. Is
not that mightie arme hable to deliuer his ſeruāts
now in this miſerie,Exod. 12. c. 29. which before time did * wound
the pride of Aegypt? and wyth thy woonderous
workes hew in peeces that dreadful Dragon Pharao?
and dryed vp the ſea, and made it to ſtande as
*walles on eche ſide of thy people paſſing through,Pſal. 135. b. 13
and reſolued the ſame againe to the confuſion of
thy enimies?Verſ. 11. Therefore let not the Redéemed of
the Lord feare, but that they ſhal with ioy returne
againe to Sion, and there remaine with muche
myrth and gladneſſe.
               It is I,Verſ. 12. 13. it is I, that in all things giueth you
conſolation: what art thou then, &c.
               God ſharply rebuketh his people for Timorouſneſſe
and continuall miſtruſte in all their aduerſities.
It is I, ſayth he, it is not Abraham, nor
Moyſes, nor Aaron, nor any of my Saynts your
Predeceſſours, but euen I my ſelfe the mightye
God your Lorde that doth alwaye * comfort and
helpe you.Pſal. 9. b. 9. Seeing then the Idols, that your enimies
truſt in, are ſo Vaine, as I haue tolde you,
and they themſelues ſo Fraile and mortall, and on

the contrary part, I your Lord your aſſured God,
ſo mightie and of ſo great force, as I haue alway
declared my ſelfe, aſwell in the creation of the
worlde, as in the preſeruation of you, and delyuerance
out of Aegypt from your prowde oppreſſour,
whome I then brought full lowe, and made him
glad to haſten you away out of the Exile that you
then were in,Verſ. 14. 15. Exod. 12. c. 36 and gaue you the * treaſures of hys
people, that you might not want breade and ſuſtenance
by the way: ſeeing, I ſay, all this is ſo, why
doe you ſtill miſtruſte and feare the power of vain
men, ſeeme they in the worlde neuer ſo terrible?
Remember therefore my promiſes, whereby I
haue aſſured you, that I will deliuer you, and acknowledge
you for my people.
               Awake,Verſ. 17. awake, and ſtande vp O Hieruſalem,
thou that from the hande, &c.
               The Lorde here comforteth his people in telling
them, that he wil take the ſcourge of his wrath
from them, and lay it vpon their enimies. By the
Cuppe, and by drinking, it is vſuall both in the olde
teſtament and newe to vnderſtande Affliction, as
in Hier. 25.Ier. 25. d. 15. 
                  Take this cup of wine of my furie at my
hand. &c. And Chriſt himſelf in his agonie. Mat. 26.
Let this cuppe paſſe from me, &c. that is,Math. 26. d. 39 this ſcourge
of my Croſſe and paſſion. The plaine ſenſe of thys
place is: O my Church, be of good comfort, for
albeit thou haſt for a time through my wrath for
thy ſinnes beene grieuouſly afflicted, and no man
either would or coulde comfort and helpe thee,Verſ. 18. 19. yet

after I ſhall come through thy repentance, of my
mercie pardoning thy ſinnes, this my bitter Cup
of affliction ſhall be taken from thee,Pſal. 78. b. 6 and * poured
vpon the heades of thoſe that haue oppreſſed thee
to their vtter confuſion. By the Slumbring or poiſoned
cuppe, he meaneth the grieuous aduerſities,
that hath ſo touched and weakened them as they
are not almoſt hable to ſtande, but ſtagger and
reele as they go, as it were men halfe deade.
               Thy ſonnes lye comfortleſse at the heade
of euery ſtreate like a taken veniſon,Verſ. 20. &c. &c.
               In theſe verſes he deſcribeth the great miſerie,
that the Iewes were in at theyr captiuitie in Babilon,
not onely cruelly murdered in all Cities, but
pyning for hunger and dying in the ſtreetes, as it
appeareth by the hyſtorie of Tobie.
                  Tob. 1. d. 21.
               
            
         
         
            The. 2. Sunday after the Epiphanie
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 53.
            
               
                   BUt who hath gyuen credence vnto our preaching? or
to whome is the arme of the Lorde knowne?Iohn. 12. e. 38. Rom. 12. c.
               
               2 For he did growe before the Lorde like as a
branche, and as a roote in a drye grounde, he hath
neyther beautie nor fauour: when we looke vpon him, there
ſhall be no fayreneſſe, we ſhall haue no luſt vnto hym.
               3 He is deſpiſed and abhorred of men,Eſay. 52. c. 14. Heb. 5. a. 2 he is ſuch a man
as hath good experience of ſorrowes and infirmities: We
haue reckened him ſo vile, that we hid our faces from him.
               
                  
4 Howbeit,Math. 8. b. 7. 1. Pet. 2. c. 24. he onely hath taken on him our infirmitie,
and borne our paines: yet we did iudge him as though he
were plagued, and caſt downe of God.
               5 Whereas he (notvvithſtanding) was wounded for our
offences,1. Cor. 15. a. 3 and ſmitten for our wickedneſſe: for the paine of
our puniſhment was layde vpon him, and with his ſtripes
are we healed. 6 As for vs we are all gone aſtraye lyke
ſhéepe, euery one hath turned his owne way: but the Lorde
hath throwne vpon him all our ſinnes.
               7 He ſuffered violence, and was euill intreated, and
did not open his mouth: he ſhal be led as a ſhéepe to be ſlaine,
yet ſhall he be as ſtill as a Lambe before the ſhearer,Iere. 11. d. 10. Math. 26. f. 63 Act. 8. f. 32 and
not open his-mouth. 8 From the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and iudgement
was he taken, and his generation who can declare? for he
was cut of from the grounde of the lyuing, which puniſhment
did go vpon him for the tranſgreſſion of my people.
               9 His graue was giuen him with the condemmned,Math. 27. e. 38 and
with the riche man at his death, whereas he did neuer violence
nor 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,1. Pet. 2. d. 19 Iohn. 12. c. 23. Rom. 8. d. 17 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
him with infirmitie, that when he had made his 
                     〈…〉
                  
of the Lorde ſhall proſper in 
                     〈◊〉
                   hande.
               11 Of the trauaile and labour of his 
                     〈…〉
                   the
fruite and be ſatiſfied:Rom. 3. a 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   my righteous 
                     〈…〉
                  
knowledge iuſtifie the multitude, for he ſhall 
                     〈…〉
                  
their ſinnes. 12 Therefore will I giue him among the great
ones his part, and he ſhall deuide the ſpoyle with the mighty,
becauſe he giueth ouer his ſioule to death,Math. 15. c. Luk. 22. d. 37
                  
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the. liij.
Chapter of Eſay.
               But who hath giuen credence vnto our
preaching?Verſ. 1. or to whome, &c.
               
                  ESay, in ſundry places of hys
prophecies ſpeaketh ſo plainely of the
vocation of the gentyles to the fayth,
of the kingdome of Chriſt, of his merueylous
byrth, of his ſtocke and kindred,
&c. that he is of a auncient wryters eſteemed
as an Euangeliſt, recording thinges paſt, rather
then a Prophet foretelling things to come, albeit
he was before the comming of Chriſt aboue. 750.
yeares. And yet of all the parts of his prophecies
is there none wherein he doth ſo plainely ſpeake
of Chriſt, of the ſtate of his life, of his death and
paſſion, and of the fruites thereof, as he doth in
this preſent chapiter. Neyther is there any place
of the olde Teſtament out of the which ſo manye
allegations be made by Chriſt and his Apoſtles,
as out of this part of Eſay.
               
               The Prophete in the latter ende of the former
chapiter had ſayde, that as Chriſt ſhould be publiſhed
and knowne among all the Gentiles, ſo the
ſtate and maner of his lyfe ſhould be ſo * baſe and
ſimple as all men ſhould woonder at it.Math. 13. g. 55. Therefore
in the begynning of this chapiter, as it were vnder
the perſon of the Apoſtles and firſt preachers

of the Goſpell, he breaketh 
                     〈◊〉
                   to a lamenting of
the * ſmall number of them,Rom. 10. c. 16. that at the publiſhing
of this doctrine would giue credence to it. So
ſtraunge and ſo * vnlikely a thing ſhall it ſeeme to
them to haue ſaluation by one, that in continuance
of the worlde, appeared ſo meane a perſon, as
Chriſt ſhould be, eſpecially ſeing the Prophets in
other places deſcribed the Meſsias as a myghtie
Prince and king.
               For he did growe before the Lorde like as
a branch,Verſ. 2. 3. and as a roote in. &c.
               Shootes or branches doe ſometime ſpring vp
in drie barraine groundes, but bicauſe 
                     •
                  hey haue
not moyſture and fatneſſe of the earth they proſper
not, nor proue faire and large to ſee to. So
Chriſt, when he came in fleſhe, and ſprang vp here
in the ſoyle of this drie and horraine worlde, entring
his ſpirituall kingdome, he ſhewed not hymſelfe
of anye notable continuance and authoritie,
nor flouriſhed in the worlde with princely maieſty
and power, but appeared rather as a thinne, ſlender,
and vnprofitable ſhoote, more meete to be caſt
into the fyre, or to be trodden vnder foote then to
looke for any great fruite of it. Therefore when
they behelde him, they ſawe no maieſtie in hym,
but eſteemed him as an abiect,Phil. 2. a. 7. as * an outcaſt, and
as a contemptible perſon not worthye ſo much as
once to be looked on. This euydently appeareth to
haue bene in Chriſt, aſwel in the reſidue of his lyfe
as eſpecially at his death & paſſion, whē they ſcorned

and 
                     〈…〉
                   when they buffeted him,Pſal. 21. b. 8. Luke. 23. b. 11 Sap. 2. d. 18 and
crowned him 
                     〈…〉
                  , when they preferred a
robber and a murderer before him, when they cried
away with him, awaye with him, and crucifie
him,Mat. 27. b. 21 finally, when with great deſpite they hanged
him betweene two theeues.
               Howbeit,Verſ. 4. 5. he onely hath taken on him our
infirmitie, and borne our paines. &c.
               And yet (ſayth the Prophet in the perſon of the
Church of God) this Cōtemptible Perſon, whom
we eſteemed as a worme of the earth, was the only
man, that hath 
                     〈◊〉
                   vpon him out infirmitie,
and borne our paines. When we ſaw him not only
ſo baſe and ſimple,Math. 10. c. 25 but ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Gal. 3. b. 13.
                  Verſ. 6.
               
               A ſhéepe of all cattell is moſt fooliſh; and the flock

being once ſcattered, euery one runneth his way,
and not one knoweth how to Returne to the folde,
vntill he be fet by the ſhepeherde. By this Similitude
he expreſſeth our waywardneſſe, ignorance
and blindneſſe, that being once gone aſtray from
God,Iohn. 6. e. 44 we neyther * can, nor will, nor know howe to
returne to him againe, vntill our gracious and
good paſtor Chriſt Ieſu, vpon whome God hath
layd our ſinnes, doe ſeeke vs and * Bring vs home
to the folde vpon his ſhoulders.Luke. 15. a. 5
               
               Hee ſuffered violence, and was euill entreated,Verſ. 7.
and did not open, &c.
               The Sheepe whether he be ſhorne or led to the
ſlaughter, he neuer byteth nor ſtrugleth, no nor ſo
much as openeth his mouth to bleate, to ſignifie any
Miſliking:Marc. 14. f. 61 By this he diſcribeth the great obedience
and * pacience of our Sauiour Chriſt at the
time of his paſſion, ſufficiently declared by the Euangeliſtes.
This place, and certaine verſes folowing
are interpreted by ſaint Peter. 1.1. Pet. 2. d. 22. Act. 8. f. 32. 
                  Pet 2. and
Actes. 8. by Philip to the Eunuch.
               
               From the priſon and iudgement was hee
taken,Verſ. 8. and his generation, &c.
               This is to be vnderſtanded of the Reſurrection
of Chriſt, and deliuerance from death and miſerie.
Although Chriſt was taken, bounde, deſpiteouſly
entreated,Phil. 2. a. 8. adiudged to die, & laſt of all, put to * moſt
reprochfull death: yet he was by Gods mightye
hande deliuered from miſerie, from bondes, from

death, and reſtored to life and glorie for euer to endure.Rom. 6. b. 9.
                  For Chriſt (ſayth Paule) being rayſed from
death, dyeth no more, death hath no more dominion
ouer him. No man therefore is hable to declare
the euerlaſting age and continuance of Chriſt. The
cauſe why he was ſo Glorified, is in the latter part
of the verſe ſet forth, for that he did vouchſafe to
die and ſuffer puniſhment for the ſinnes of the people
of God.
               His graue was giuen him with the condemned,Verſ. 9.
and with the rich man, &c.
               By the Rich man is ment the cruell and violent
oppreſſor, and by the Graue, the maner and place
of his death. So that the ſenſe is, he ſuffered and
was put to death in that place, that was appointed
for the wicked and condemned perſons, that vſe
extortion and violence,1. Pet. 3. d. 18. whereas he * neuer did iniurie,
neither vttered deceyte with his mouth.
               Yet hath it pleaſed the Lord to ſmite him
with infirmitie,Verſ. 10. that when, &c.
               The death and paſſion of Chriſt for our ſinnes,
was not the worke of enimies, but of our mercifull
* God and heauenly father.Rom. 8. f. 32 
                  God (ſayth the
Prophete) would ſtrike him with infirmitie, to the
ende that when he had * giuen his lif
                     •
                   as a Sacrifice
for ſinne,Iohn. 10. d. 18. he might ſee the ſeede of his faythfull
poſteritie made happie for euer, and that this will
and deuiſe of the lord might proſper & be throughly
wrought by him.
               
               Of the trauayle and labour of his ſoule
ſhall he ſee the fruit and be ſatisfied, &c.Verſ. 11.
               
               He declareth what fruite Chriſt ſhall haue by
his Death and Paſſion. For the labour, trauaile,
ſorowe, anguiſhe, care, and reproch that he ſuſtayned,
as well in all the reſidue of his life as eſpecially
at his death, he ſhall with ioy and gladneſſe
beholde and be ſatisfied with true and eternall felicitie,
and the fruites of all heauenly goodneſſe and
bleſſinges, and that not onely for himſelfe, but for
* all them,Iohn. 17. d. 24 that through fayth, ſhall acknowledge
the ſame and beleeue in him. For it followeth, that
this righteous ſeruant of God, Chriſt Ieſu, through
his knowledge ſhall iuſtifie many, that is, ſhall pay
the raunſome for theyr ſinnes, reconcile them to
God, and cauſe them through the price of his bloud
to be accounted iuſt before God. For this in deede
is our true Iuſtificatiō, whē we, of our ſelues ſinfull,
by the mercie of God, in Chriſt Ieſu, are accepted
as iuſt.
               Therefore will I giue him amōg the great
ones his part,Verſ. 12. and he ſhall deuide, &c.
               In this verſe as in a concluſion the Prophete
reciteth the chiefe poyntes of Chriſtes death, and
the benefites that come to the faythfull thereby.
Firſt his * obedience in giuing ouer his ſoule to
death,Phil. 2. a. 8. Secondly that he was * reputed among ſinners,Luk 22. d. 37 Luk. 23. ſ. 47.
and wicked perſons. Thirdely that he was
an * innocent,1. Pet. 3. d. 18. and dyed not for his owne ſinnes,

but for the ſinnes of Mankinde. Fourthly, that he
is nowe become an * Interceſſour for ſinners,Rom. 8. g. 34. Heb. 7. d. 25 and
in the dignitie of the high prieſt according to the order
of Melchiſedech. Wherefore ſayth God the father,
I will giue him his part among the great
ones, and he ſhall Conquer & ſubdue Sathan with
all his power, and take awaye the ſpoyle of his
Kingdome, and bring to his owne ſubiection all
Nations, euen to the vttermoſt boundes of the
earth.Luk. 22. d. 37. Marc. 15. c. 28 This verſe alſo is expounded of Chriſt, by
Chriſt himſelfe, Luke. 22. and Marke. 15.
            
         
         
            The 3. Sunday after the Epiphanie,
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 55.
            
               
                   COme to the waters all ye that be thirſtie, and ye that
haue no money,Eccle. 51. d. 23. Iohn. 7. e. 37. Apoc. 22. d. 17 come, bye that ye may haue to eate:
come, bye wine and milke without any money or money
worth. 2 Wherefore doe ye laye out any money
for the thing that féedeth not, and ſpende your labour about
the thing that ſatiſfieth you not?Act. 13. e. 34. 2. Sam. 7. e. 13 But hearken rather
vnto me, and ye ſhall eate of the beſt, and your ſoule ſhall
haue her pleaſure in plenteouſneſſe. 3 Encline your eares
and come vnto me, take héede (I ſay) and your ſoule ſhall
lyue: for I will make an euerlaſting couenant wyth you,
euen the ſure mercies of Dauid. 4 Beholde, I gaue him
for a witneſſe among the folke, for a Prince and a teacher
vnto the people. 5 Lo, thou ſhalt call an vnknowne people:
and a people that had no knowledge of thée ſhall runne
vnto thée, becauſe of the Lorde thy God and the holye one of

Iſraell which glorifieth thée. 6 Séeke the Lorde whyle he 
may be founde,Ezec. 18. c. 21. and call vpon him whyle he is nye.
               7 Let the vngodly man forſake his owne wayes, and the
vnrighteous his owne imaginations, and turne againe vnto
the Lorde,Pſal. 103. a. 4. Eſay. 65. d. 24 ſo ſhall he be mercifull vnto him: and to our
God, for he is verie readie to forgiue.
               8 For thus ſayth the Lorde, My thoughtes are not your
thoughtes, and your wayes are not my wayes.
               9 But as farre as the heauens are higher then the earth:
ſo farre doe my waies excéede yours,Deut. 32. a. 2 and my thoughtes
yours. 10 And like as the raine and ſnow commeth downe
from heauen, and returneth not thither againe, but watereth
the earth, maketh it fruitefull and gréene, that it may
giue corne vnto the ſower, and bread to him that eateth:
               11 So the worde alſo that commeth out of my mouth
ſhall not turne againe voyde vnto me, but ſhall accompliſhe
my will, and proſper in the thing whereto I ſende it.
               12 And ſo ſhal ye go forth with ioy, and be led with peace:
the mountaines and hilles ſhall ſing with you for ioye, and
all the trées of the fielde ſhall clappe their handes.
               13 For thornes there ſhall growe Firre trées, and the
Myrre trée in the ſtéede of bryers: and this ſhall be done to
the praiſe of the Lord, and for an euerlaſting token that ſhal
not be taken away.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. lv.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Come to the waters all yee that be thirſtie,
and ye that haue no money, come, &c.
               
                  
                  THE Prophet in the former
Chapiters had euydentlye ſpoken of
the Goſpell of Chriſt, and of the benefites
that come to his Church by it,
nowe he earneſtly calleth and exhorteth
all men to heare the ſame, and by faith to receyue
it, and not to hearken after other doctrines,
whereby they cannot haue true comfort of conſcience.
What auayleth it, that Chriſt dyed for mankinde,
and purchaſed great benefites for them, if
they doe * not Beleeue it,Rom. 10. b. 9. Rom. 3. d. 22. nor ſhew themſelues deſtrous
to obtaine it. Come therefore (ſayth he) to
the waters. &c. By the Water to drinke, and by the
Breade to eate, he meaneth the ſame water and
bread that Chriſt ſpeaketh of. Iohn. 4. & 6. VVhoſoeuer
(ſayth he) ſhall drinke of the water that I ſhall
gyu
                        •
                      him,
                  Iohn. 4. b. 14 
                  ſhall neuer thirſt againe, but the water that
I ſhall giue him, ſhalbe a foūtaine ſpringing to euerlaſting
life. And again as touching the bread. Iohn. 6
I am the breade of life that diſcended from heauen.
                  Iohn. 6. f. 91
                  If one eate of this breade he ſhall liue for euer. The
Water and Breade then, wherevnto the Prophet
in this place calleth, is Chriſt Ieſus offered to vs
in his Goſpell. And by Wine & Milke he vnderſtandeth
the ſame thing. For there is none other
foode, whereon our Soules can feede, but Chriſt &
his Doctrine: in which are cōprehended al things,
wherby we are nouriſhed to euerlaſting life. Here
is to be noted, Firſt, that God to this heauēly foode
calleth not one nor two,Math. 11. d. 28 but * All, excepting no coū
                  trie,
no ſtate, no kinde or degree of perſons. Secondly,

that he calleth thē, that be Thirſty, that is,
ſuch as long after it, or greatly deſire it. He calleth
not thoſe,Luke. 18. b. 9 that * ſwell in truſt and confidence of their
owne worthyneſſe, and therefore thinke they haue
ſmall neede of Chriſt and hys Goſpell. No, nor
ſuch as liue in * ſecuritie and delight of worldly
Pleaſure:1. Theſſ. 4. a. 7 and therfore haue no care for the fauour
of God nor deſire of eternall life, but ſuch he calleth,
as haue feare of God in their conſciences, and
ſence of his wrath againſt ſinne. Thirdly, is to be
obſerued that he offerth theſe things Freely, without
any reſpect of our * worthyneſſe,Ephe. 2. b. 8 and therfore
ſayth, Come and bye wythout mony.
               
               Wherefore doe ye laye out any money for
the thing that feedeth not. &c.Verſ. 2.
               
               As God by his Prophet calleth his people to
the liuely Water & heauenly Foode before mentioned,
ſo doth he rebuke them, that they beſtowe
their coſt, labour, & trauayle to attaine that, which
in deede is no foode, and wherwith their Soules
cannot be relieued, that is to ſaye, that they leaue
the liuely fountayne of Gods mercie in Chriſt Ieſu,
and ſeeke after ſaluation by their owne works,
or by ye obſeruation of mens Deuiſes, Traditiōs,
and Doctrines, wherwith God by his Prophet in
another place doth proteſt,Eſay. 29. d. 13. Math. 15. a. 9. that * They worſhip him
in vaine.
               
               Encline your eares and come vnto mee,
take heede (I ſay) and your ſoule, &c.
               
                  
That which before he vttered Figuratiuely, he
ſpeaketh nowe in plaine wordes, that is, that they
ſhould harken and giue dyligent eare vnto Hys
doctrine, and not be ledde away by the Fantaſies
of men.Pſal. 88. a. 4 2. Reg. 7. b. 12 For, ſayth he, * I will make my euerlaſting
couenant with you. I once promiſed to Dauid my
ſeruant, that of his ſeede I would bring forth a
Sauiour of the worlde, by whome I woulde be
reconcyled to all them, that beleeued in him, and
that I would choſe thē as my Sonnes and heires
of euerlaſting lyfe. This promiſe or couenaunt,
that by my othe I confirmed,Rom. 11. d. 29. confirmed, I will * keepe and
performe to you for euer. Cleaue therefore to my
doctrine and ſwerue not from it.
               Beholde,Verſ. 4. I gaue him as a witneſſe among
the people, for a prince, &c.
               This may be Literally ſpoken of Dauid; But
prophetically it is ment of Chriſt,Iohn. 18. g. 37. Iohn. 3. b. 11 Apoc. 1. b. 5 whome he ſayth
he gaue to the people as a *witneſſe, to Iuſtify the
promiſe of his mercy made vnto them, as a Prince
to gouerne and rule them with the direction of his
Spirit, as a Teacher to inſtruct and lead them into
all truth.
               Loe,Verſ. 5. thou ſhalt call an vnknowne people:
and a people that had no knowledge, &c.
               
                  Eſay prophecieth of the calling of the Gentiles,Math. 28. d. 19 Actes. 22. e. 21 Ephe. 2. d. 17. Mark. 16. e. 15
and ſayth, that Chriſt by his Apoſtles ſhall *call
that people, that neuer knewe him before, and
that they ſhall gladly and readily runne after him,

becauſe of the comfortable and ſweete Doctrine of
the Goſpell that he publiſhed.
               Seeke the Lorde while he may be founde,Verſ. 6. 7.
and call vpon him, &c.
               After the publiſhing of his mercie through the
Meſsias and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſu, he nowe exhorteth
the Iewes, and in them all other to turne to
God by earneſt repentance, while his mercie and
goodneſſe is ſo freely offered. For if they ſtubburnly
refuſe,Math. 21. d. 43 Iohn. 12. e. 35 when God is neere at hande, and calleth
to mercie, he will * afterwarde turne his face from
them, and be ſo farre of in his diſpleaſure, that he
will not heare their prayers. God is ſayde to bee
Nigh, when by the Preachers and teachers of hys
Goſpell he calleth to repentance, and exhorteth to
imbrace his mercie liberally and bountifully offered:
And then to be Farre of, and hard to be Found
when for theyr obſtinacie, of his iuſtice, he turneth
his eyes from them, and wil not heare their crying
& complayning at all, as he threatneth in the firſt
of this Prophete Eſay.
                  Eſay. 1. d. 15. The reaſon which the Prophete
vſeth to mooue them to repentance, is the exceeding
great * Readineſſe and inclination of God
to mercy and forgiueneſſe,Pſal. 144. d. 19 eſpecially towarde all
them, that with Sorrowfull and contrite hearts
turne vnto him.
               For thus ſayth the Lorde,Verſ. 8. 9. My thoughtes
are not your thoughtes, &c.
               I knowe, ſayth God, you are all greedie of reuengement,

and ſeeke for euery ſmall offence to be
wreaked, but I am not ſo. Your mercy is Wauering
and mutable, but mine is Cōſtant and perpetuall.
You are merciful by Pangues and paſſions,
but it is of my Nature and ſubſtance to be mercifull.
Wherefore you may not meaſure my wayes
and cogitations by your owne. Heauen and earth
are not ſo farre diſtant, nor ſo farre vnlike, as your
corrupt Nature, and mine is.
               Lyke as the raine and ſnowe commeth
downe from heauen,Verſ. 10. 11. &c.
               By this notable ſimilitude is painted out ye truth,
force, and efficacie of the promiſe of Gods mercie,
which is the Goſpel of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſu
Chriſt. The raine and ſnow commeth downe from
heauē, not to be as an idle ſpectacle, or to return vp
into the ayre agayne without vſe or profite, but to
moyſten the earth and to make it * fruitfull.Heb. 6. b. 7. This
is the vſe wherevnto the prouidence of God hath
appoynted it, and this doth it perfourme, whenſoeuer
it lighteth on grounde that is not altogether
ſtonie and harde. Euen ſo is it with the Goſpell
of our Saluation by Chriſt, which proceded out of
the mouth of God, and was promiſed by him from
the beginning of the worlde, and was appoynted
by his goodneſſe not to be publiſhed,Colof. 1. b. 6 10 * in vaine, but
ſo to fall & moyſten the field of Gods Church, that
it may be fertile, and in deed bring forth the fruit of
remiſſion of ſinnes, Adoption into ye Children of
God, Iuſtice before God and the world, and Aſſurance

of euerlaſting life.
               This is the true and right vſe of the Worde of
God, and of his holy Goſpell, whereby we are aſſured
of his mercy. Neither is there any thing
more certaine, than that it ſhall worke this effect,
if it light not on heartes * harder than any ſtone,Luk. 8. a. 6.
and ſuch as through ſtiffeneſſe and want of fayth,
will not receyue the Moyſture of it.
               And ſo ſhall you go forth with ioy,Verſ. 12. 13. and be
led with peace: the mountaynes, &c.
               He numbreth here fiue kindes of fruites that
ſhall ſpring of the doctrine of the Goſpell.
               The firſt is, that as Moyſes led forth the children
of Iſraell out of Aegypt: euen ſo ſhall Chriſt leade
forth and deliuer the faythfull people of God, from
the bondage of Sathan and all their ſpiritual enimies,
to their exceeding great ioy and comfort.
               The ſeconde, that he ſhall not onely leade them
forth with ioy, but in peace alſo, and ſhall make
them Quiet in conſcience, and ſet them in ſuch ſafety,
that neither Trouble, nor Afflictiō, nor Death,
nor Hell ſhall be hable to hurt them.
               The thirde, that Mountaynes and Hilles, that
is, all the creatures of God, and euen the verye
Aungels in heauen ſhall triumph and reioyce for
this our Deliuerance out of that thraldom wherinto
we fell by the offence of our firſt father Adam.
               
               The fourth, that the ſweete dewe of the Goſpell
for Briers and Thornes, ſhall bring forth Firre &
Mirre, and other fruitful trees, that is, for wicked,

vniuſt, and naughtie perſons, it ſhall make iuſt,
good,1. Cor. 6. c. 11. and godly men. Thus ſayth ſaint Paule, you
were whoremaſters, adulterers, wanton perſons, worſhippers
of Images, but now you are waſhed, you are
ſanctified, you are iuſtified by the name of the Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               The fift, that the immortall prayſe and glorie of
God ſhall bee ſet forth in the Church among hys
Saintes, for this his great Mercies.
            
         
         
            The. 3. Sunday after the Epiphanie
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 56.
            
               
                   THus ſayth the Lorde, Kéepe equitie, and doe right:
for my ſauing health ſhall come ſhortlye,Math. 3. c. 17. and my
righteouſneſſe ſhall be opened.
               2 Bleſſed is the man that doth this, and the mans
childe which kéepeth the ſame: he that taketh heede that hée
vnhalow not the Sabboth (that is) he that keepeth himſelfe
that he doe no euill.Eſay. 58. c. 13. 3 Then ſhall not the ſtraunger which
cleaueth to the Lord,Deut. 23. c. 7 ſay, Alas the Lord hath ſhut me cleane
out from his people: neyther ſhall the gelded man ſay, Lo I
am a drie trée.Sapi. 3. b. 14. 4. For thus ſayth the Lorde vnto the gelded
that kéepeth my Sabboth, (namely) that holdeth greatly
of the thing that pleaſeth me, and kéepeth my couenant.
               5 Vnto them will I giue in my houſeholde and within my
walles a better heritage and name then if they had bene called
ſonnes and daughters:Iohn. 1. c. I will giue them an euerlaſting
name that ſhall not periſh. 6. Againe, the ſtraungers that
ſticke to the Lorde to ſerue him, and to loue his name,Iohn. 8. c. and to
be his ſeruantes, and all they which kéepe themſelues that

they vnhalowe not the ſabbath, namely that they fulfill my 
couenant. 7 Them will I bring to my holy Mountaine,
and make them ioyfull in my houſe of prayer: their burnt
offerings and ſacrifices ſhall be accepted vpō mine aulter: for
my houſe ſhall be called an houſe of prayer for all people.
               8 Thus ſayth the Lorde God which gathereth together
the ſcattered of Iſraell,3. Re. 8. c. 13 Math. 21. b. 15 Mar. 11. b. 13. Luk. 19 g. 46. I will bring yet an other congregation
to him. 9 Come all ye beaſtes of the fielde, that yée
may deuour all the beaſtes of the woodde.
               10 For his watchmen are all blinde,Iere. 12. b. 9. Ezec. 34. a. 
                        •
                     
                   they haue altogether
no underſtanding, they are aldumbe dogges not being hable
to barke, they are ſléepie, ſluggiſh are they and lie ſnorting.
               11 They are ſhameleſſe dogges that be neuer ſatiſfied: the
ſhepeheardes alſo in like maner haue no vnderſtanding, but
euery man turneth his owne way, euery one after his owne
couetouſneſſe with all his power. 12 Come (ſay they) I
will fetch wine, ſo ſhall we fill our ſelues, that we may bée
drunken: and doe to morow like as to day, yea & much more.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. 56.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Thus ſayth the Lorde, keepe equitie,Verſ. 1. and
doe right: for my ſauing health, &c.
               
                  THE Prophet in thys place
declareth what God requireth at our
handes,Luk. 1. g. 75. when he hath ſhewed hys
mercie and goodneſſe toward vs, that
is, that we ſhould not liue ſtill in ſinne
and wickedneſſe, but ſhew the * true fruites of repentance,
and leade our life in equitie and iuſtice.

And his reaſon & cauſe, that he alleageth is this,
that his ſauing health and his righteouſneſſe is
nigh at hand, and readie to be opened to vs. Wherby
is to be gathered, that the narre God is to vs in
mercie and goodneſſe,Rom. 13. c. 11 the narre *we ſhould be to
him in vertuous and godly lyfe.
               Bleſſed is the man that doth this,Verſ. 2. and the
mans childe which keepeth, &c.
               In accompting him *happie and bleſſed,Pſal. 118. a. 1 that imbraceth
this doctrine and lyueth godlye, he giueth
to vnderſtande, that manye will be harde harted
and not followe it: but leaſt their waywardneſſe
ſhould be an hinderanre to the better diſpoſed, he
pricketh them forwarde with the commendation
of the thing by the great Fruit that commeth of it,
that is, true Bleſſedneſſe. And bicauſe the Saboth
day is the chiefe ſigne of the worſhip of God, by
that he vnderſtandeth all the partes of true pietie
and godlyneſſe, and not onely the outwarde obſeruation
of the day.
               Then ſhall not the ſtranger that cleaueth
to the Lorde,Verſ. 3. 4. 5 ſaie, Alas, &c.
               Straungers & Eunuches as appereth Deut. 23.
were by the lawe excluded from certaine priuileges
among the Iewes,Deut. 23. a. 2 and not had in ſuch credite
and eſtimation as they that were Iewes borne.
Wherefore the Prophet by the name of ſtraungers,
and Ennuches, or gelded men, vnderſtandeth
all them which in any reſpect, or in conſideration

of any reproch might ſeeme to be vnworthye
of the grace of God, or to be accompted of the number
of his people. And therefore in this place he
ſheweth that the free grace of God, whereof he
hath ſpoken before, ſhould be ſuch, as they alſo
ſhould be made partakers of it, which before were
ſtraungers from God and ſeemed not to haue any
acceſſe to the throne of his mercie and goodneſſe.
This is it that Saint Paule ſpeaketh of Ephe. 2.Ephe. 2. b. 12.
                  At that tyme you were wythout Chriſt, as aliauntes,
from the common weale of Iſraell & ſtraungers from
the Teſtamentes of promiſe, &c. but nowe in Chriſt
Ieſu you, which ſometymes were farre of, are made
nighe by the bloud of Chriſt.
               
               God therefore to the fruition of his mercie in
Chriſt Ieſu, calleth of all ſortes of men euen of
the meaneſt and loweſt,Act. 10. c. 34. * without reſpect of perſons,
and excludeth neyther Iewe nor Gentile,
nor forrainer nor other, ſo that they ſerue him and
keepe his couenant. To the gelded men he promiſeth
that he will giue them a better name then if
they were called Sonnes & daughters of Iſrael:
meaning that he woulde gyue them that name
whereby they ſhould be written in the boke of lyfe
and accompted Citizens of heauen & of the houſeholde
of God. To the Strangers he promyſeth,
that he wyll bring them into the holye Mounte of
his Church, and make them members therof, that
he will make them * gladde in his houſe of prayer
by hearing their deſires and ſatiſfying their requeſtes,Eſay. 2. a. 3
that the offerings and Sacrifices of their

godly and vertuous workes ſhall be accepted before
him.
               Come all ye beastes of the fielde,Verſ. 9. 10. 11 12. that yee
maie deuour all the beaſtes of, &c.
               Nowe Eſaias ſeeing the people of God exceedinglye
Miſled and brought in daunger of Gods
highe diſpleaſure, by them that ſhould haue bene
their Inſtructors and teachers: with great heate
he addeth a verie bitter and grieuous reproufe of
thoſe to whome the charge and gouernement of
them was committed, and therein comprehendeth
not onely Biſhops, Prieſtes, and Prophetes, but
alſo Princes, Iudges and Magiſtrates: which
two ſtates God hath appointed as two eyes to direct
and guyde his Church. As if the Prophete
had ſayde, It behooueth the Gouernours of the
people of God to be ſkilfull and * learned,Pſal. 2. c. 10. Malach. 2. b. 7 but theſe
are blinde and ignorant, and altogither without
vnderſtanding.Ezec. 33. a. 2 They ſhould * be Inſtructors, and
Counſaylours to direct the people, but they are
Dumbe dogs not able to barck or giue warning
of any daunger. They ſhould be Watchfull, diligent
and painefull, but they ſhew themſelues ſleepie
and ſluggiſh, and are giuen ouer to Idleneſſe,
Eaſe and pleaſure of the world, not paſſing what
corruption eyther of life or doctrine grow among
their people. They ſhoulde as good Paſtours
* feede their ſheepe,Iohn. 21. c. 15. Act. 20. f. 28. Mich. 3. d. 11. Mich. 3. b. 5 but they feede themſelues, and
through immoderate & greedy * Couetouſneſſe become
as ſhamleſſe dogges that neuer be ſatiſfied,

but alwaies crauing.1. Tim. 3. a. 2. Titus. 1. b. 6 1. Per. 5. a. 3. They ſhould be * ſober & giue
* example to other of the feare of God and obedience
to his worde when they are called to repentance.
But they giue themſelues to banquetting
and with manifeſt contempt of GOD encourage
one an other to ſurfetting and dronkenneſſe, and
that with ſuch obſtinacie as though they beleeued
there were no life after this. Therefore will God
bring both vpon people and gouernours wylde
beaſtes of the fielde to deuour them, that is, cruell
and Bloudie enimies, that ſhall deſtroy them.
            
         
         
            The. 4. ſunday after the Epiphanie,
at Morning praier.
            Eſay. 57.
            
               THe righteous periſheth, and no man regardeth it 
in his heart:Sap. 2. b. 10 good godly people are taken away, and
no man conſidereth it, namely that the righteous is
conueyed away from the wicked. 2 He conuneth
into peace, and godly men reſt in their chambers, and before
the godly man goeth peace.Math. 12. d. 39 3 Come hither therefore ye
charmers children, ye ſonnes of the adulterer and the whore.
               4 Wherein take ye your pleaſure? vpon whome gape
ye with your mouth, and bleare out your tongue? Are yée
not children of tranſgreſſion, and a féede of diſſimulation?
               5 Ye make your fier vnder the Okes,Eze. 16. b. 20. Eſay. 65. a. 7. Iere. 7. a. 9 Deut. 18. b. 10 Eze. 20. e. 28. Leuit. 20. a. 2. and vnder all gréene
trées, and ye offer children in the vallcis and dennes of ſtone.
               6 Thy part ſhall be with the ſtonie rockes by the riuer,
yea euen theſe ſhall be thy part: for there thou haſt poured
meate and drinke offering vnto them: ſhoulde I delight in

that? 7 Thou haſt made thy bed vpon high mountaines,
thou wenteſt vp thither, and there thou haſt ſlame ſacrifices.
               8 Behinde the doores and poſtes haſt thou ſet vp thy remembrance,
when thou hadſt diſcouered thy ſelfe to another
than me, when thou wenteſt vp and made thy bed wider, and
with thoſe Idolles haſt thou made a couenaunt, and louedſt
their couches where thou ſaweſt them.Eze. 16. b. 9. Oſee. 12. a. 1 9. Thou wenteſt
ſtreight to kings with oyle and diuers oyntments, (that is)
thou haſt ſent thy meſſengers farre of, and yet art thou fallen
into the pitte. 10 Thou art wearie for the multitude of
thine owne wayes, yet ſaydeſt thou neuer, There is no hope:
thou haſt had the life that thy handes wrought, and therfore
thou art careleſſe. 11 For whom wilt thou be abaſhed or
feare, ſéeing thou haſt broken thy promiſe, & remembreſt not
me, neither haſt me in thine heart? Thinkeſt thou that I alſo
will holde my peace as aforetime, that thou feareſt me
not? 12 Yea verily I will declare thy goodneſſe and thy
 workes, but they ſhall not profite thee. 13 When thou
cryeſt, let thy choſen heape deliuer thée: but the winde ſhall
blōwe them forth,Rom. 11. a. 2 and vanitie ſhall take them all away: neuertheleſſe
they that put their truſt in me, ſhall inherite the
lande,Eſay. 40. c. 15. and haue my holy hill in poſſeſſion. 14. And therefore
thus he ſayth, Make plaine, make plaine, and clenſe the
ſtreete, take vp the ſtumbling blockes out of the way of my
people. 15 For thus ſayeth the hie and excellent, euen he
that dwelleth in euerlaſtingneſſe,Eſay. 66. a. 1. whoſe name is the holye
one: I dwell hie aboue and in the ſanctuarie, and with him
alſo that is of a contrite and humble ſpirite doe I dwell, that
I may heale a troubled minde, and a contrite heart.
               16 For I chide not euer,Pſal. 103. a. 9 and am not wroth without
ende: but the blaſting goeth from me, and is included in the
body, and I made the breath. 17 I am wroth with him for
his couetouſneſſe, I ſmite him, I hide 
                     〈◊〉
                   and am angrie,
and he turneth himſelfe and followeth the way of his owne

heart.Luc. 15. a. 5 18 I haue ſéene his wayes, and I heale him, I leade
him, and reſtore to him comfort, and to thoſe that were ſorie
for him. 19 I make the fruites of thankeſgiuing, that he
may ſay,Ephe. 2. c. 14. Peace, peace, vnto them that are farre of, and to
them that are nie ſayth the Lorde, I make him whole.
               
               20 But the wicked are like the raging ſea that can not
reſt,Eſa. 48. d. 22. whoſe water fometh with the mire and grauell.
               21 Euen ſo the wicked haue no peace, ſayth God.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .lvij.
Chapter of Eſay.
               
                  The righteous periſheth and no man regardeth
it in his heart.Verſ. 1. &c.
               
               
                  IN theſe two firſt verſes the
Prophet reprooueth the Negligence
and dulneſſe of the people in conſidering
the worke of God, that is, when
they ſee the good, godly, & righteous
men, eyther cruelly ſlaine by Tyrannes, or otherwiſe
dying by common death, they weigh not gods
meaning and purpoſe, nor vnderſtande what therby
is pretended to come vpon the worlde. They
thinke the wicked that liue longer, and remaine after
them are happier than they. But God taketh
them away, that they may not beholde and be pertakers
of thoſe miſeries and heauie plagues, that
he will bring vpon the wicked. Beholde, ſayth God
to good king Ioſias, thou ſhalt be conueyed to thy
graue in peace,
                  4. Re. 22. d. 20 
                  that thine eies may not ſee all the euils

that I vvill bring on this place.
               
               The common ſort thinke the death of the Godly
is miſerable,Verſ. 2. but the Prophete here affirmeth that
they departe from trouble and miſerie of this life,
and go to Peace in that place, where they reſt in
eaſe & quietneſſe, as it were men in their Chambers
ſafe from all trouble and daunger.Apoc. 14. c. 13. 
                  Bleſſed are
they therfore that die in the Lorde, for they reſt from
their labours, but the wicked in their death are
curſed, for that the worme of their conſcience neuer
dyeth.
               Come hither therefore ye Charmers children,
ye ſonnes of the adulterer. &c.Verſ. 3. 4
               
               In a good part of this Chapter following, the
Prophete bitterly inueigheth agaynſt the wicked
that derided the worde of God and his Prophets,
and gaue themſelues to witchcraft, ſorcery, Idolatry,
and falſe worſhipping of God,Dent. 18. c. 11. *contrary to his
lawe and holy woorde. By Charmers children, and
Sonnes of Adulterers, he vnderſtandeth thoſe, that
delighted in charming, & the ſpirituall whordome
of ſuperſtition and Idolatrie.
               
                  VVho is it, ſaith Eſaias, againſt vvhome you ſo
take pleaſure in ieſting & ſcoffing? whom doe you
mocke? at whome is it, that you gape with your
mouthes, & lill out your tongues? you thinke you
doe this againſt me, and ſuch other the Preachers
and Prophetes of God, that he ſendeth to call you
from your wickedneſſe. But I will you to vnderſtand,
that they bee not agaynſt vs, but agaynſt

God that ſent vs.Act. 22. b. 8. Zach. 2. c. 8. *It is God that you contemne
and mocke in vs. It is God agaynſt whome you
gape and lyll out your tongues. You will ſeeme
to be the people of GOD, but all thys reproch
of your ſcorninges lyghteth vpon hym. You
wyll chalenge to be of hys Church, and of the
number of them that worſhippe him, and yet his
worde and doctrine is it againſt which you ſhewe
al this diſpite. You will ſeeme to be good and godly,
but you are in deede tranſgreſſors, hypocrites and
diſſimulers, giuing the name of Gods true worſhip
to your ſuperſtition and Idolatrie.
               You are not contented to followe the preſcript of
my holye worde,Verſ. 5. commaunding you to ſacrifice
and doe worſhippe to me before the * Arke in the
Temple,Exod. 25. b. 22 Exod. 29. g. 42 but you ſeeke ſtraunge wayes of worſhypping,
and make your fiers vnder euery Oke
and greene Tree, and in the Valleyes and Dennes
of Stone, cruelly kill and offer your children, according
to the maner of the Heathen.Verſ. 6. I choſe you
to be my portion, my part, and my heritage of all
the people of the earth, but ſo that you ſhoulde bee
contented with me your God alone, and with that
Worſhippe that I had appoynted. But ſeeing you
haue forſaken me, and contrarie to my lawe made
you Images and aulters of ſtone by the ryuer ſides: I
leaue you nowe to your owne ſuperſtitious deuiſes,
and that ſhall be your part, that you haue choſen.
For before them you plentifully powred out
your meate and drinke offerings.
               
               Thou,Verſ. 7 O Hieruſalem, haſt made thy bed
vpon high Mountaines. &c.
               That is, thou haſt vpon the high mountaynes
made thy large Chappelles and Aulters, in which
thou goeſt an whooring and offereſt ſacrifices to other
Gods beſides me,Verſ. 8. yea, behinde euery Chappell
doore thou hangeſt vp thy monuments of remembraunce
to ſhew the great deuotion and zeale
that thou beareſt to thoſe Idols and falſe Gods
before whome thou haſt diſcouered thy vnfaythfulneſſe
towardes me, and haſt gone on pilgrimage
from place to place whereſoeuer thou heardeſt ſuch
dennes of Idolatrie to be. Thus doeſt thou Hieruſalem,
leaue no place vndiſtayned with thy wickedneſſe,
Groues, wooddes and trees, Welles and
riuers, rockes and ſtones, mountaines and hilles,
valleys and playnes, and euery place that to thee
ſeemeth pleaſant.Verſ. 9. Yea and aboue all this miſtruſting
my ayde and helpe in thy diſtreſſe, Thou ſendeſt
Preſents and meſſengers for ayde and ſuccour to
Heathē and Idolatrous Princes, which haue not bene
hable to deliuer thee.Verſ. 10. I haue apoynted thee but one
way of ſafetie, that is, the Obedience of my lawe:
But thou forſakeſt that, and traueyleſt about many
wayes and deuiſes of thine owne braine, and
that ſo diligently and earneſtly, that nothing can
make thee giue ouer, no not though thou ſee thy labours
to be loſt and vtterly vnprofitable, yet ſo
long as thou canſt feele thy handes hable to ſtyrre,
wilt thou neuer ſay, I am now weary of my vaine

labours, I haue done. Whome haſt thou feared in
all this thy traueyle?Verſ. 11. thou wilt pretende perhaps,
that thou haſt bene abaſhed of me, but I tell thee,
I will no longer diſſemble as before I haue done,
thou ſayeſt falſely, thou haſt not remembred me,
nor are thy ſacrifices ſuch as I delight in,Verſ. 12. or ſuch
wherewith thou canſt be holpen, but ſuch they are
as blinde thee, and make that thou canſt neuer
knowe thine owne ſinne and wickedneſſe, but put
thee in confidence of thine owne iuſtice.Verſ. 13. Therefore
when thou in thy diſtreſſe ſhalt lament and crie, let
all the Heape of thy hill woorſhippes and Idolatrous
deuiſes deliuer thee, if they can, but of ſo little
weyght are they, and of ſo ſmall force, that one
blaſt of vanitie ſhall blowe them all away. Conſider
therfore in what maner of thinges you haue
put your truſt.
               Neuertheleſſe, they that put their truſt
in me ſhall inherite the lande,Verſ. 13. &c.
               This ſeconde part of the Chapter is a comfort
of the godly that turne to God by repentance, and
put their truſt in him. For as the wicked ſhall periſh
and vaniſh away with their Idols, ſo ſhall the
faythfull that truſt in God be ſaued and receyue
comfort.
               Therefore thus ſaieth the Lorde,Verſ. 14. make
plaine, make plaine. &c.
               As the Prophete here particulerly reſpecteth
the comfort of the faythfull in his time, ſo he eſpeciallye

regardeth the promiſe of ſaluation made in
Meſsias Chriſt Ieſu. And therefore as in an other
place it is ſayde in the perſon of Iohn Baptiſt,Eſay. 62. d. 10 Math. 3. a. 3 Luk. 3. a. 4 
                  Parate
viam domino. &c. ſo here in the perſon of the
Apoſtles and Preachers of the Goſpell, he ſayeth,
Make plaine, make plaine, and clenſe the ſtreetes, take
all ſtumbling blockes and offences out of my peoples
way. Remooue all impediments, that is, ſelfloue,
contempt of God and his worde, vnfaythfulneſſe,
care of the worlde, delight in pleaſure, ſuperſtition,
Idolatrie, falſe worſhippings, and all other
lettes whereby my people are hindered from comming
to me.Verſ. 15. For though I dwell high in heauen,
I will not diſpiſe the humble and contrite heart. I
will not be *long angrie with poore and troubled
conſciences,Pſal. 102. b. 9. but with the ſpirite of my comfort will
I relieue them.Verſ. 16. I will not ſtriue with them for euer,
I know their wickedneſſe, I made their ſpirite
or ſoule, and incloſed it in that brickle bodie.
They are not hable therfore to abide my diſpleaſure.Verſ. 17.
I am wroth with them for the tyme, and puniſh
them for their couetouſneſſe and other offences,Pſal. 88. e. 33
not to confound them, but to the ende that they
ſhould forſake them. But ſo corrupt are they, that
they go on ſtill in the wayes of their owne heartes
and will not obey.Verſ. 18. Therefore I might iuſtly deſtroy
them, but I will not, I will preuent them
with my mercye, and I will bring them into the
way againe, and direct them with my ſpirit, I will
*reſtore them to comfort,Deut. 32. f. 39. 1. Sam. 2. a. 6. Verſ. 19. and make glad thoſe that
be ſorrowfull in their behalfe. I will woorke the

fruites of prayſe and thankeſgiuing by the mouth
of preachers, that ſhall denounce peace and comfort
to all, aſwell thoſe that be farre of as thoſe that
be nigh, aſwell to Iew as Gentile, and of the Iewes
aſwell to them that are captiue abroade, as to
them that are in their countrie at home.Verſ. 20. 21. But the
wicked, and they that doe not beleeue, ſhal haue no
peace, no quietneſſe, no comfort, but perpetual torment
and anguiſh of mind, ſo that their conſciences
ſhalbe like the Sea toſſed with waues and ſurges.
            
         
         
            The fourth Sunday after the Epiphanie
at Euening prayer.
            Eſay. 58.
            
               CRie nowe as lowde as thou canſt, leaue not of, A lift vp
thy voyce like a trumpet,Ezech. 3. c. 14. and ſhewe my people their
offences, and the houſe of Iacob their ſinnes.
               2 For they ſeeke me dayly, and will knowe my
wayes, euen as it were a people that did right, and had not
forſaken the ſtatutes of their God: they aſke of me concerning
right iudgement, and will be nie vnto God.
               3 Wherefore faſt we (ſay they) and thou ſéeſt it not?Math. 9. d. 14. we
put our liues to ſtraytneſſe, and thou regardeſt it not?
               4 Beholde when ye faſt,Eſay. 1. b. your luſt remayneth ſtill, for ye
doe no leſſe violence to your debters: lo, ye faſt to ſtrife and
debate, and to ſmite with your fiſt without mercie: nowe ye
ſhall not faſt thus, that your voyce might be heard aboue.
               5 Thinke ye this faſt pleaſeth me,Zach. 7. a. 5. that a man ſhould chaſten
himſelfe for a day? and to hang downe his heade like a
bulruſh, and to lie vpon the earth in an hearie cloth? Should

that be called faſting, or a day that pleaſeth the Lorde?
               6 Doth not this faſting rather pleaſe me,Deut. 15. a. 3 That thou loſe
 the wicked bandes, that thou take of the ouer heauie burthens,
that thou let the oppreſſed go free, and breake all maner
of yoke?Eze. 18. b. 16. Math. 25. c. 35 7 To deale thy breade to the hungrie, and to
bring the poore wandring home into thy houſe? when thou
ſéeſt the naked that thou couer him, and hide not thy ſelfe frō
thine owne fleſh.Luk. 11. d. 41. 8 Then ſhall thy light breake forth as the
morning, and thy health flouriſhe right ſhortly: righteouſneſſe
ſhall go before thée, and the glorie of the Lord ſhall embrace
thée.Prou. 21. b. 9 Then if thou calleſt, the Lord ſhall aunſwere
thée, if thou crieſt, he ſhall ſay, Here I am: yea if thou layeſt
away from thée thy burthens, and holdeſt thy fingers, and
ceaſſeſt from vngracious talking?Zach. 7. b. 9. Math. 5. b. 7 10 If thou haſt compaſſion
vpon the hungrie, and refreſheſt the troubled ſoule:
then ſhall thy 
                     ••
                  ht ſpring out in the darkeneſſe, and thy
darkeneſſe ſhall be as the noone day. 11 The Lorde ſhall euer
be thy guide,Iohn. 4. c. 14. and ſatiſfie the deſire of thine heart in the
 time of drought, and fill thy bones with marie: thou ſhalt be
like a freſh watred garden, and like the fountaine of water
that neuer leaueth running. 12 Then the places that haue
euer bene waſte, ſhall be builded of thée, there ſhalt thou lay
a foundation for many kinreds: thou ſhalt be called the maker
vp of the breach, and the builder againe of the waye to
dwell in.Eſay. 56. a. 2. 13 Yea if thou turne thy féete from the ſabbath,
 ſo that thou doe not the thing which pleaſeth thy ſelfe in my
holy day, and thou call the pleaſant, holy, and glorious ſabbath
of the Lorde, and that thou giue him the honour, ſo that
thou doe not after thine owne imagination, neyther ſéeke
thine owne will, nor ſpeake (thine ovvne) woordes:
               14 Then ſhalt thou haue thy pleaſure in the Lorde, and I
will carie thée hie aboue the earth, and féede thée with the heritage
of Iacob thy father: for the Lordes owne mouth hath
ſo promiſed.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .lviij.
Chapter of Eſay.
               Crie now as loude as thou canſt, & leaue
not of, lift vp thy voice, &c.Verſ. 1.
               
               
                  THe Prophete in this Chapter
reciteth and telleth, as it were, euen
from the mouth of God himſelfe,
the wordes that he ſpake vnto him agaynſt
the Hypocriſie and other wickedneſſe
of his people. Crie, ſayth he, as loude as
thou canſt, and ceaſe not, deale not coldely and
faintly with them,1. Tim. 5. d. 20 2. Tim. 4. a. 2. Ier. 48. b. 10 but * vehemently, earneſtly,
yea, and continually. For of all other, Hypocrites
that ſtand in opinion of their owne iuſtice, are moſt
* difficultly reclaymed,Io. 9. g. 40. and moſt hardly brought to
the acknowledging and confeſſing of their owne
wickedneſſe, without which they can neuer truely
repent.Verſ. 2. They will ſee me good and godly, they will
pretende to ſeeke me dayly, and to knowe and vnderſtande
my wayes, they will aſke and deſire to
learne right iudgement, as though they were in
deede good people, and had not forſaken me theyr
Lorde God:Verſ. 3. But all is but hypocriſie and diſſimulation.
For wherin doe they put their truſt in time
of my plague and ſcourge that I ſend vpon them?
or howe thinke they to procure their reconciliation
vnto my fauour again? By confeſſing their ſinnes

and flying to my mercie as they ſhould doe? No,
no, but in their workes of Hypocriſie. VVherefore
(ſay they) doe we faſt, torment, and puniſh our ſelues
with ſtraitneſſe of life, and thou doſt not ſee it nor regarde
it? As though their outward Faſting, or going
in heare and ſackcloth were a thing ſo worthie
in my ſight, as in reſpect thereof I ſhould deliuer
them.Verſ. 4. Faſting is good, if it be vſed as an outward
teſtimonie of that* earneſt repentance and ſorowe
for your ſinnes,Ioel. 2. c. 12. Ionas. 3. b. 5 that inwardly is in deede in your
heartes. But if you truſt in the worthineſſe thereof,Ro. 9. g. 31. 32.
and thinke * thereby to deſerue my fauour, it is
wicked and abhominable in my ſight. Your faſt is
a faſt of hypocriſie. For in the verye day of your
faſting, the luſt and affection of your owne will
doth ſtill continue, and you * follow your ſute, ſtrife
and contention againſt your poore brother and creditour,Math. 12. a. 7.
euen for a ſmall trifle, as egrely, fiercely,
and cruelly as euer you did, as though you faſted
to ſhewe fierceneſſe and violence, and not to vſe
mildeneſſe and mercie. Thinke you this faſting
can pleaſe me when you go hanging downe your
heades with preſence of ſorow and holineſſe,Verſ. 5. and
in your heartes haue nothing but fierceneſſe and
crueltie?
               Doth not this Faſting rather pleaſe mee,
That thou loſe the wicked bandes, &c.Verſ. 6
               
               After God hath diſcouered the hypocriſie of his
people, he now ſheweth what ye right Faſt is, that
he delighteth in? and what the true meanes is to

procure hys Fauour, which he noteth in twoo
poyntes.Eſa. 1. e. 17 Mich. 6. c. 8. The one, that they vſe * clemencie towarde
their Creditours, and eaſe them of the wicked
bondes of vſurie and extortion, wherein they
haue wrapped them: and take from them the
heauie burthens and yokes by which they doe oppreſſe
them, & driue them oftentimes to ſel landes,
goodes, and all that euer they haue, and to leaue
wife and children in moſt miſerable beggerie.Verſ. 7. The
other poynt is mercie and * liberalitie to the poore
and needie,Luc. 14. c. 13 1. Iohn. 3. c. 17. 1. Tim. 6. d. 18. Tob. 4. b. 7. and to ſuch as be in affliction or trouble
anie way, whome to the vttermoſt of their power
with theyr ſubſtaunce they ought to relieue: conſidering
that they are their owne fleſhe, and creatures
of the ſame God which hath giuen them abundance.
Vnder theſe are conteyned all the
workes of mercie.
               Then ſhall the light breake forth as the
morning,Verſ. 8. 9. and thy health flouriſh, &c.
               Nowe followeth ample and great rewardes,
wherewith they ſhall be bleſſed that vſe theſe workes
of mercie. Firſt, their Light, that is, their felicie
& good ſucceſſe ſhall breake out and be euident
to all men. Secondly, their helth and good eſtate
ſhall flouriſhe and encreaſe dayly more and more.
Thirdly their Iuſtice ſhall haue good *teſtimonie
and fauour before God:Pſal. 111. b. 8. who of his mercie will
accept it. Fourthly, God ſhall embrace them, and
ſaue them harmeleſſe in * all their neceſſities.Tob. 4. b. 10. Pſal. 40. a. 1. Eſay. 65. d. 24.
               
               Fiftly, God will heare their prayers, and be * ready

whenſoeuer they call vpon him.
               If thou layeſt awaye from them thy burthens,Verſ. 9.
and holdeſt thy fingers, &c.
               That the things may more deepely ſinke into
memorie, he repeateth againe the ſame workes of
mercie, and in other wordes the ſame promiſes of
rewarde.Verſ. 10. In the middes of thy Darkneſſe, that
is, of thy Aduerſitie, thy Light, that is, thy Felicity
ſhall ſpring vp, and thy aduerſitie ſhall be turned
into felicitie.
               The Lord ſhal alway be thy guide, thy Patrone
and Defender▪
                  Verſ. 11. In the time of drought & ſcarcitie
he ſhall plentifully ſatiſfie thy hartes deſire, and
fill thy bones with marrow and make thee ſtrong.
Thou ſhalt euer Proſper and ſpring like a newe
watered Garden, and like a Fountaine that is neuer
drie▪
                  Verſ. 12. Yea, thou ſhalt ſo grow in welth as thou
ſhalt not onely aduance thine owne decayed familie
and kindred, but to the benefite of the common
weale repaire Places and Waies waſted & fallen
to ruine, and ſo haue the name of the reſtorer of
thy ſtocke and Countrie.
               Yea, if thou turne thy feete, from the ſabbath,Verſ. 13. 14.
ſo that thou doe not the thing, &c.
               As the Iewes faſted, ſo did they keepe the Sabbath
day, that is, Externally, and in way of hypocriſie,
not rightly, and as God appointed. Therefore
he doth here alſo teach them the true maner of
ſolemniſing his holy day.Exod. 35. a. 1. The * Sabbath was ordained

that they ſhould learne to doe ſhe will of
God,Exod. 31. c. 14. Leuit. 16. g. 30 Eſay. 56. a. 2 Act. 13. e. 14. 1. Cor. 16. a. 2. to walk in his way, and to * heare and reade
his worde. But they ſolowed their owne will, they
walked in their owne way, they harkened to their
owne deuiſes, wherfore, ſayth God, if thou follow
not thine owne will, if thou walke not in thyne
owne wayes, if thou harken not to thyne owne
deuiſes, but giue glorie vnto my name: then ſhalt
thou keepe an acceptable Sabbath in my ſight,
then ſhalt thou through peace and quyetneſſe of cō
                  ſcience
delight in the Lorde. Then will Iaduance
thee aboue other kingdomes of the earth. Then
will I feede the with the fruites of Iacobs heretage,
that is, with all thoſe bleſſings that are to
come by the promyſed 
                     •
                  eede and Sauiour of the
Worlde.
            
         
         
            The 5. Sunday after the Epiphanie,
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 59.
            
               BEholde the Lordes hande is not ſo ſhortened that it 
can not helpe,Eſay. 50. a. 2. Num. 11. a. 2. Iere. 5. b. neyther is his eare ſo ſtopped that it
may not heare. 2 But your miſdeedes haue ſeperated
you from your God, and your ſinnes hide hys
face from you, that he heareth you not.
               3 For your handes are defiled with bloud,Eſay. 1. d. 15. and your fingers
with vnrighteouſneſſe: your lippes ſpeake leaſings,
and your tongue ſetteth out wickedneſſe.
               4 No man regardeth righteouſneſſe, and no man iudgeth
truely: euery man hopeth in vaine things, and imagineth

deceipt, conceyueth wearineſſe,Iob. 15. d. 35. Pſal. 7. b. 15. and bringeth forth euill.
               5 They bréede Cockatrice egges, and weaue the Spiders
webbe, who ſo eateth of their egges, dyeth: but if one
treade vpon them, there commeth vp a Serpent.
               6 Their webbe maketh no cloth, and they may not couer
them with their labours: their deedes are the déedes of wickedneſſe,
and the worke of robberie is in their handes.
               7 Their féete runne to euill,Prou. 1. c. 16. Pſal. 5. d. 6 Rom. 13. b. 15. and they make haſte to ſhed
innocent bloud: their counſels are wicked counſels, harme
and deſtruction are in their wayes.
               
                   8 But the waye of peace they knowe not, in their goings
is no equitie: their wayes are ſo crooked, that whoſoeuer
goeth therein knoweth of no peace.
               9 And this is the cauſe that equitie is ſo farre from vs,
and that righteouſneſſe commeth not nigh vs: we looke for
lyght,Deut. 28. d. 29 Iohn. 12. c. 40. loe it is darkeneſſe: for the morning ſhyne, ſée, we
walke in the darke. 10 We grope like the blinde vpon
the wall, we grope euen as one that hath none eyes, we
ſtumble at the noone day, as though it were towarde night
in the falling places, lyke men that are halfe dead.
               11 We reare all like Beares, & mourne ſtill like Doues:
we looke for equitie, but there is none: for health, but it is
farre from vs. 12 For our offences are many before thée,
 and our ſinnes teſtifie againſt vs: yea we muſt confeſſe that
we offende, and knowledge that we doe an
                     ••
                  ſſe.
               13 (Namely) tranſgreſſe and diſſemble againſt the Lorde
and fall away from our God, vſing preſumpteous and 
                     •
                  rayterous
imaginations, & caſting falſe matters in our hearts.
               14 And therefore is equitie gone aſide,Oſe. 4. a. 1. and righteouſneſſe
ſtandeth farre of, truth is fallen downe in the ſtréete,
and the thing that is plaine and open, may not be ſhewed.
               15 Yea the truth is taken awaye, and he that refrayneth
himſelfe from euill, muſt be ſpoyled: when the Lorde ſaw
th
                     •
                  s, 
                     〈◊〉
                   diſpleaſed him fore that there was no equitie.
               
                  
16 He ſawe alſo that there was no man righteous, and he
wondred that there was no man to helpe hym: wherefore he
helde him by his owne power, and he ſuſtayned hym by his
owne righteouſneſſe.Ephe. 6. b. 11 1. Theſ. 5. a. 8. 17 He put righteouſneſſe vpon him
for a breaſt plate, he ſet the helmet of health vpon his head:
he put on wrath in the ſteade of clothing, and tooke iealouſie
about him for a cloke. 18 Euen as when a man goeth forth
wrathfully to recompence his enimies, and to be auenged of
his aduerſaries, he will recompence and reward the Ilands.
               19 They ſhall feare the name of the Lorde from the ryſing
of the ſunne, and his maieſtie vnto the going downe of
the ſame: for he will come as a violent water ſtreame
which the winde of the Lorde hath moued.
               20 But vnto Sion there ſhall come a redéemer, and
vnto them in Iacob that turne from wickedneſſe,Rom. 11. d. 26 Pſal. 13. a. ſayth the
Lorde. 21 I will make this couenant with them (ſayth the 
Lorde:) My ſpirite that is vpon thée, and the wordes which
I haue put in thy mouth, ſhall neuer go out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy chylders children, from this time
forth for euermore worlde without ende, ſayth the Lorde.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the
lix. of Eſay.
               Beholde, the Lords hand is not ſo ſhortened,Verſ. 1. 2.
that it cannot helpe, &c.
               
                  IT is no doubt but the Prophet
doth in all this Chapiter anſwere
the cogitations of the wycked hypocrites
mentioned in the Chapiter before:
which did impute the calamitie

that God had ſent vpon them, not to their owne
ſinnes,3. Reg. 8. d. 35. Iudith. 5. c. 18. Lamēt. 3. e. 42 as they * ſhould haue done, and ſo bene moued
to repentance, but to the great ſeueritie and
ſharpeneſſe of almightie GOD towarde them.
Therfore the Prophet here ſheweth that God lacketh
in himſelfe neyther Power, nor Will to helpe
them, but that he is hindered and ſtayed by their
naughtineſſe and wicked life: which at large he
reciteth.Verſ. 3. Eſay. 1. b. 15. Firſt he chargeth them with * Bloud, Crueltie,
violēce and Extortion, which is to be thought
to haue beene both in Magiſtrates and priuate
perſons.Eſa. 9. b. 15. 16 Secondly, with * vntruth, Falſhoode and
Lying, as well in doctrine by their Prieſts & falſe
Prophets, as by other in contractes & bargaines.
Thirdly,Verſ. 4. with vnrighteouſnes, and Corrupt iudgment
through hatred, loue or briberie. Fourthly,
that they put their truſt in vanitie, craftie deuiſes,
and wicked doings.
               They breede Cokatrice Egges,Verſ. 5. and weaue
the Spiders webbe, who ſo eateth, &c.
               By this figuratiue Speech he reproueth the ſtudies,
endeuours, and workes of the wicked, which
all are eyther as Cockatrice Egges * poyſonous
and hurtfull,Pſal. 13. a. 5 Rom. 3. c. 13. either as Spiders Webbes vnder a
faire ſhew, Vaine, and vnprofitable. If a man vſe
their counſayles, thinking them to be good, they
ſhall worke him deſtruction, euen as the Egges of
a Cockatrice to him that eateth them. If a manne
any way touch them, he ſhall be in daunger of the
poyſonous infection that commeth of them. Therfore

the beſt way is to ſhun their Companie.Verſ. 6. The
Spiders webbes although they be finely and artificially
wrought, yet ſerue they to no vſe, neyther
can men make any garment of them wherewith
to couer them from the weather. So the counſailes
of the wicked, thoughe they ſeeme neuer ſo
finely deuiſed,Ier. 49. b. 7. yet are they * vnprofitable, & wyll
helpe a man nothing at all.
               Their deedes are the deedes of wickedneſſe,Verſ. 6. 7.
and the worke of robberie, &c.
               By theſe words that folow, it may well be gathered
what he ment by ye former figuratiue Speech.
For,Pſal. 13. a. 7 Prou. 1. b. 11 he ſaith, Their counſailes are wicked counſailes,
* harme and deſtruction is in their wayes. This is
the plaine effect of the Cockatrice Egges.
               But the way of peace they knowe not,Verſ. 8. in
their goings is no equitie, &c.
               They hate peace and quietneſſe, and be altogether
giuē to Strife, Cōtention, Variance, Iniury,
and violence. Yea, all their deuiſes and wayes are
ſo crooked and ouerthwart, that they tende to trouble
and buſineſſe, ſo that he that followeth them
ſhall neuer be quiet.
               And this is the cauſe that equitie is ſo
farre from vs,Verſ. 9. and that, &c.
               Hitherto the Prophete hath paynted out the
vices and wickedneſſe of the hypocrites, that they
might the better vnderſtande for howe grieuous

cauſes God was diſpleaſed with them, and that the
cauſe was in them ſelues, and not in Gods harde
dealing. Therefore he nowe ſheweth, how great
puniſhments by Gods iuſt iudgement, doe light
vpon them for the ſame.Iudic. 1. a. 7. 1. Reg. 15. g. 33. Coloſ. 3. d. 25. Firſt that as they haue
* vſed other, ſo they are now by their enimies oppreſſed
with violence and iniurie, and the righteouſneſſe
and helpe of God is farre from them, and
doeth not deliuer them. Secondly, that where
through their hypocriticall faſting without repentance,
they looked for light, that is, for felicitie and
the brightneſſe of Gods helpe and comfort, they
haue * darkeneſſe,Eccle. 11. b. 16. that is, aduerſitie and certaine
token of his heauy diſpleaſure.Verſ. 10. Yea they are wrapped
in ſo great trouble, calamitie and miſerie, as
they are vtterly aſtonied and at their wittes ende,
and cannot tel what to deuiſe to helpe themſelues,
but are as men blinde and in great darkeneſſe,
that grope by the walles to get out of a maze or
intricate place,Verſ. 11. and can finde no way. Thirdely,
that, when they ſee themſelues ſo beſet with miſery
as they can with no ſhift eaſe themſelues: they
ſometimes * breake out for ſorow, and roare like a
Beare,Gen. 27. e 34. ſometime they lament and mourne as a
Doue, and looke for ſuccour and helpe at the goodneſſe
of God, and yet it is farre from them. For
ſeeing they haue deceyued the expectation of God
in looking that they ſhould repent: meruail though
he * fruſtrate their hope againe in looking for equitie
and goodneſſe at his hande.Iob. 8. b. 13.
               
               
               For our offences are manye before thee,Verſ. 12.
and our ſinnes teſtifie, &c.
               The Prophet in way of lamentable complaint
confeſſeth the manifolde and great offences of the
people, which yet they coulde not bee brought in
themſelues to acknowledge.Verſ. 13. Namely that they
departed from the Lorde, and rebelled againſt him
with trayterous imaginations, and woulde not obey
his worde. That they vſed falſehoode and diſſimulation
in their heartes, when they ſpake faire
with their tongues.Verſ. 14. That Iudgement and righteouſneſſe
was gone farre from them, becauſe
truth and equitie was cleane ouerthrowne, and
could take no place among them.Verſ. 15. Yea right and
honeſtie was ſo hateful, that he which would, vpon
the feare of God, refraine himſelfe from euill, and
not deale in wickedneſſe as they did,Gen. 19. b. 9. was in * daunger
to be ſpoyled. Which great enormitie was vnto
the Lorde very vnpleaſant.
               He ſawe alſo that there was no man righteous,Verſ. 16.
and he wondered, &c.
               As the Prophete hath ſhewed before, that God
of great and iuſt cauſe had plagued his people: So
nowe he declareth that of his owne good and mercifull
motion, without the helpe or entreatie of any
man, he is enclined to deliuer them, and doth prepare,
and as it were arme himſelfe to be reuenged
on their enimies. God, ſayth the Prophete, ſeing
and wondering that among all his people there

was not one worthie the name of a righteous and
iuſt man, that might helpe and entreate for them,
of his owne ſtrength and goodneſſe taketh vpon
him to deliuer them.Verſ. 17. And he armeth himſelfe with
righteouſneſſe as a Breaſt plate, with health, as a
Helmet, with wrath & diſpleaſure as a coate, with
zeale and ielouſie towarde his people as a cloake,
and ſo goeth on as a mightie Prince, to be reuenged
on his enimies, in ſo terrible maner, that all
the partes of the Earth,Verſ. 18. euen the very Iſlandes
and thoſe that be furtheſt of ſhal tremble and wonder
at it, yea, and ſubmit themſelues vnto the maieſtie
of his name. When the Prophete ſayth, that
They ſhall feare the name of the Lorde from the ryſing
of the Sunne,
                  Verſ. 19. 
                  to the going downe of the ſame;
Diuerſe doe interprete it to be ſpoken of the comming
of the Gentiles, & all the partes of the Earth
to the true knowledge of God, when that he ſhould
ſende his Meſsias and Sauiour, to ſubdue, not onely
worldely aduerſaries,Coloſ. 1. b. 13 but eſpecially *Satan, and
all the ſpirituall enimies of his people, which are
the ſtirrers of all trouble and affliction againſt his
Church. And in deed in the promiſe of euery great
and notable deliueraunce, the Prophete vſeth to
end it with applying of the ſame, to the deliuerance
that ſhould be made by the promiſed ſeede, and Sauiour
of the worlde.2. Cor. 1. d. 20 *For in him and by him all
particular promiſes tooke their effect.
               But vnto Sion there ſhall come a redeemer,Verſ. 20.
and vnto them in Iacob, &c.
               
                  
As this may be well vnderſtanded of the particular
deliuerance from the miſerie and affliction,
whereof he hath ſpoken before: So it is eſpecially
ment of the general deliuerance and reſtoring that
ſhould be made by Meſsias.
                  Rom. 11. d. 26. For Paule Rom. 11.
may ſeeme ſo to interprete it, although in wordes
he be ſomewhat diuerſe, following in deede Septuagin.
interpretes. The redeemer of Sion and of
thoſe Iſraelites, that turne from their wickedneſſe
and cleaue vnto the Lorde is Chriſt Ieſus, who redeemeth
them frō Sinne, Errour, Idolatrie and
*all maner of vngodlineſſe,Pſal. 129. b. 8. Titus. 2. c. 14. wherewith they were
before ouerwhelmed.
               I wil make this couenant with them (ſayeth
the Lorde:)Verſ. 21. My ſpirite that is, &c.
               This couenant God maketh with all the faithfull,
not onely of the houſe of Iacob,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but of all other
Nations alſo, and of his whole Church, that is,
that the grace of his holy Spirite, and the truth of
his Worde and Goſpell,Eſay. 54. b. 10. Iere. 31. f. 33 Heb. 10. c. 16. Pſal. 88. d. 29. ſhall *neuer depart from
them. Whereſoeuer therefore the Spirite of God
is, and the truth of his Worde, there is his true
Church, and contrariwiſe wherſoeuer the Church
is, there is the truth of his Worde, and the grate of
his Spirite. And where his Worde is reiected,
and mans Deuiſes followed, there is not his true
Churche, though they glorie in the name of the
Church neuer ſo much. This is a notable commendation
of the miniſterie of Gods Worde and
preaching of his Goſpell, being a portion of Gods

couenant with his elect, and an vnfallible token of
his true Church.
            
         
         
            The 5. Sunday after the Epiphanie,
at Morning prayer.
            Eſay. 64.
            
               
                  
                  
                     •
                   That thou wouldeſt cleaue the heauens in ſunder
and come downe, that the mountaines might melt
away at thy preſence. 2 Lyke as at an hote fyre,
and (that the malicious might boyle avvay) as
the water doth vpon the fire: whereby thy name might be
knowne among thine enimies, and that the Gentiles might
tremble before thée. 3 When thou wroughteſt wonderous
ſtraunge workes, we looked not for them: thou cameſt
downe, and the hilles melted at thy preſence.
               4 For 
                     •
                  ite the beginning of the worlde it hath not bene
heard or per
                     ••
                  y
                     •
                  ed, neyther hath any eye ſéene another God1. Cor. 2. a. 9.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   thée, which dueſt ſo much for them that put their truſt
in thée. 5 Thou helpeſt him that doth right with chearefulneſſe,
and them that thinke vpon thée in thy wayes: but

                     〈◊〉
                  , thou haſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   angrie, for we offended, and haue bene
euer in ſinne,Rom. 3. d. 24. Pſal. 14. b. 11. though the worlde haue cleaued to them, yet
ſhall we be ſaued. 6 We are all as an vncleane thing,
and all our righteouſneſſe are as filthy ragges: we fall euerſec
                     ••••
                  
as the leafe, for our ſinnes carie vs away lyke the
 winde. 7 There is no man that calleth vpō thy name, that
ſtandeth vp to take holde by th
                     ••
                  : therefore hydeſt thou thy

                     〈◊〉
                   from vs, and conſumeſt vs, becauſe of our ſinnes.
               8. But 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,Rom. 9. c. 20. O Lorde, thou father of oures, we ar
                     •
                   thy
clay, and thou act our potter, and we all are the worke of
thy I. & Be not to ſore diſpleaſed O Lord, and kéepe not

our offences to long in thy remembrance: but conſider that
we all are thy people.Pſa. 79. a. 9. Iere. 10. d. 24 Mich. 3. c. 12. 10 The Cities of thy Sanctuarie
lye waſte, Sion is a wilderneſſe, and Hieruſalem a deſert.
               11 Our holy houſe which is our beautie where our fathers
praiſed thée is brent vp: yea, all our commodities and
pleaſures are waſted away. 12 Wilt thou not be intreated
O Lorde, for all this wilt thou holde thy peace, & ſcourge
vs ſo ſore?
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. 64.
Chapter of Eſay.
               O that thou wouldeſt cleaue the heauens
in ſunder and come downe,Verſ. 1 &c.
               
                  THis Chapiter is a parcell of
that matter that was conteined in the
former. For from the ſeuenth verſe of
the .lxiij. Chapiter vnto the ende of
this, is a Prayer made by Eſaias for ye
people, to vſe in time of their grieuous affliction,Iere. 13. c. 18. Iudith. 8. c. 14. Dan. 9. a. 3
in which they are taught with how great *humbleneſſe
and ſorrow of hart they ſhould confeſſe their
ſinnes, for which, that Plague was ſe
                     •
                  t. Secondly,
at whoſe handes they ſhould looke for deliuerance:Eſay. 43. b. 11. Oſe. 13. b. 4. Math. 11. d. 28 Pſal. 77. a. 7.
that is, *at Gods hande alone. Thirdly,
how they ſhould comfort themſelues and *ſtrengthen
their faith, with the Memory of thoſe wōderful
actes, that God had done for them and their fathers
before time. In this place they breake out to
an earneſt wiſhe. Oh, ſay they, that thou wouldeſt

cleaue the heauens in ſunder, and come downe, when
our fathers were oppreſſed in Aegipt, though they
looked for no ſuch goodneſſe at thy hande, yet thou
diddeſt vouchſafe to come *downe from heauen to
delyuer them,Exod. 3. b. 8. and that with ſo great Maieſtie and
Terrour through thy wonderfull works, that thy
name was known and dreadfull, not only to thine
own people *but alſo to thine enimies,Ioſu. 2. b. 9. Exod. 13. d. 18. Pſa. 77. f. 51. whom thou
didſt mightily conſume. In the *Deſert alſo thou
waſt continually with them to defende them. And
when thou purpoſedſt to publiſh thy law vnto vs,
thou cameſt downe from Heauen with ſo great
Maieſtie of thunder and lightning, that as water
boyleth and conſumeth ouer the fyre: ſo did the
Mountaine *Sinai ſeeme to melt away being in a
great ſmoke with thy preſence.Exod. 19. d. 18. Deut. 4. b. 11. O that thou wouldeſt
now doe the like in working our deliuerance,
that thy name might be knowne, and thy Maieſtie
feared, euen among the myghtieſt of thyne
enimies, &c.
               The reſt of the Chapiter folowing is plaine and
eaſie to be vnderſtanded.
            
         
         
            The Sunday called Septuageſima
at Morning prayer.
            Geneſ. 1.
            
               IN the beginning God created heauen and earth. 
                     •
                  
2 And the earth was without fourme,Act. 14. c. 15. Pſal. 33. a. 6. Eccle. 18. a. 1. Heb. 11. a. 3. and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
boyde: and darkeneſſe (vvas) vpon the face of the
déepe, and the ſpirite of God moued vpon the face

of the waters. 3 And God ſaide. Let there be light: and
and there was light. 4 And God ſaw the light that it was
good: and God deuided the light from the darkneſſe.
               5 And God called the light day, and the darkeneſſe night:
and the euening and the morning were the firſt day.
               6 And God ſaide, Let there be a Firmament betwéene
the waters,Pſal. 136. a. 6 and let it make a deuiſion betwéene waters
and waters. 7 And God made the Firmament, and ſet a
deuiſion betwéene the waters which (vvere) vnder the firmament,Pſal. 33. b. 8
and the waters that (vvere) aboue the firmament:
and it was ſo. 8 And God called the firmament heauen:
and the euening aud the morning were the ſecond day.
               9 And God ſayde,Pſal. 148. a. 4 Let the waters vnder the heauen be
gathered togither into one place, and let the drie lande appeare:
and it was ſo.Pſal. 33. a. 7 10 And God called the drie lande the
earth, and the gathering togither of the waters called he the
ſeas: and God ſawe that it was good.
               11. And God ſayde, Let the earth bring forth budde and
gréene hearbe apt to ſéede, and fruitfull trées, yéelding fruite
after his kinde, which hath ſéede in it ſelfe vppon the earth:
and it was ſo. 12 And the earth brought forth gréene herbe
apt to ſéede after his kinde, and trée yelding fruit, which had
ſéede it in ſelfe after his kinde. 13 And God ſaw that it was
good. And the euening and the morning were the third day
               14 And God ſayde,Pſal. 136. b. 7. Deut. 4. b. 10. Let there be lights in the firmament
of heauen, that they may deuide the day and the night, and
let them be for ſignes and ſeaſons, and for dayes and yeares.
               15 And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heauen,
that they may giue light vpon the earth: and it was ſo.
               16 And God made two great lightes: a greater light to
rule the day, and a leſſe light to rule the night, and (he made)
ſtarres alſo. 17 And God ſet them in the Firmament of
the heauen, to ſhine vpon the earth.
               18 And to rule the day and night, and to make difference

betwéene the light and the darkeneſſe: and God ſaw that it
was good. 19 And the euening and morning were the
fourth day.Iere. 31. d. 20 And God ſayde, Let the waters bring forth
moouing creature that hath life, and foule that may flie vpon
the earth in the open firmament of heauen.
               12 And God created great whales, and euery liuing and
mouing creature, which the waters brought forth after their
kind, and euery fethered foule after their kind: and God ſaw
that it was good. 22 And God bleſſed them, ſaying, Be
fruitfull, and multiplie, and fill the waters of the ſea, and
let foule multiplie in the earth. 23 And the euening and
morning were the fift day. 24 And God ſayde, Let the
earth bring forth liuing creature after his kinde, cattell,
worme, and beaſtes of the earth after his kind: and it was ſo.
               25 God made the beaſt of the earth after his kinde, and
cattell after his kinde, and euery thing that créepeth vpon
the earth after his kinde: and God ſawe that it was good.
               26 God ſayde,Coloſ. 3. b. Let vs make man in our Image, after our
likeneſſe, and let them haue rule of the fiſhe of the ſea, and of
the foule of the ayre, and of cattell, and of all the earth, and
of euery créeping thing that créepeth vpon the earth.
               27 So God created man in his owne Image, in the Image
of God created he him,1. Cor. 11. a. 7. Math. 19. a. 4. Eccle. 17. a. 1 male and female created hée
them. 28 And God bleſſed them, and God ſayd vnto them,
Be fruitfull, and multiply, and repleniſhe the earth, and ſubdue
it, and haue dominion of the fiſhe of the ſea, and foule of
the ayre, and of euery liuing thing that mooueth vpon the
earth. 29 And God ſayde, Beholde, I haue giuen you euery
hearbe bearing ſéede, which is in the vpper face of all the
earth, and euery trée in the which is the fruite of a trée bearing
ſéede, (that) they may be meate vnto you.
               30 To euery beaſt of the earth alſo, and ſo euery birde of
the ayre, & to euery ſuch thing that créepeth vpon the earth,
which doth liue, I haue giuen euery gréene herbe for meate:

and it was. 31 And God ſawe euerye thing that he had
made: and beholde, it was excéeding good. And the euening
and the morning were the sixt day.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the firſt
Chapter of Geneſis.
               In the beginning GOD created heauen
and earth,Verſ. 1. &c.
               
                  THis booke is called Geneſis,
becauſe in the very firſt entrāce therof
by the courſe of ſixe dayes worke is
declared the Beginning, Creation,
and as it were, the firſt Natiuitie of
heauen and earth, and all thinges therein conteyned,
by the mightie worde and wiſedome of God
made and framed of Nothing. Which the Spirite
of God mooued his faythfull ſeruant Moyſes to do,
thereby as well to refell that generall and groſſe
errour of the Idolatrous Gentiles throughout
the whole worlde, which gaue themſelues ouer to
the * worſhip and ſeruice,Ro. 1. c. 23. 25. Eſay. 45. a. 7. Pſal. 148. c. 12 Pſal. 82. d. 17 Ioſu. 2. b. 11. eyther of common and
baſe creatures, either of falſe and vainely deuiſed
Gods: As alſo to *ſhew that the God of Iſrael was
the Onely, True, and Almightie God, maker of
Heauen and of Earth, and all the partes thereof.
               In that he ſayth: In the beginning God made
heauen and earth, &c. we haue to learne, Firſt that
the worlde is * not of euerlaſting Continuance,2. Pet. 3. b. 10. as

ſome vaine Philoſophers haue taught,Heb. 1. c. 11. but that
being made by God, certainely it had a beginning,
and euen as certainely ſhall in due time haue an
ende.Pſa. 102. d. 26 27. As it is ſayde, Pſal. 102. In the beginning, O
Lorde, thou lay deſt the foundation of the earth, and
the heauens be the workes of thy fingers, They ſhall
periſh, but thou ſhalt continue for euer, &c. Secondly,
that it was not made of it Selfe, by Chaunce,
or otherwiſe, as Democritus dreamed, but by the
workemanſhip of ſome other beſide it ſelfe. Thirdly,
that it was made by God, that therby we might
be admoniſhed of his great Wiſedome, Power,
and goodneſſe towarde Mankinde, to whoſe vſe
principally theſe things might ſeeme to be framed.
Fourthly, that it was made of nothing, and therefore
we may not Imagine as ſome wickedly haue
done, that there was a Matter whereof the world
was made coeternall with God himſelfe before all
Beginning.
               And here it is to bee wiſhed that all Chriſtian
heartes would enter into a perfect Conſideration
of this Worke of God in Creating of the world, ſo
that when they looked vp into heauen and ſawe the
Sunne, the Moone, the Planets, the Starres,
and all the furniture thereof keeping their orders
and courſes, they woulde thinke earneſtly wyth
themſelues, that they ſawe the meruelous workemanſhip
of God their heauenly Father, Maker,
and Creator of all things. And when they conſider
the Ayre, the Water, the Earth, and all things
therein conteyned in their kindes and places and

offices diſtincted, that they woulde Remember the
ſame was made by the ſame our God and gracious
Lorde to the vſe of vs mortall men. By this
meanes ſhould they diſcende from the faith of their
Creation,Sap. 11. d. 25 1. Pet. 5. b. 7. Sap. 6. b. 8. Pſal. 35. b. 7 to the fayth and beliefe of Gods diuine
* Prouidence and tender Loue and care that hee
beareth toward mankinde, which in all afflictions
is the moſt aſſured ſtay and comfort.Eſay. 12. b. 4 Pſal. 8. a. 4. Pſal. 104. a. 2. This did Dauid
to his great conſolation, as well in the eight
Pſalme, as in the. 104. and many other.
               And the ſpirite of GOD mooued vpon
the face of the earth,Verſ. 2 &c.
               The confuſed Heape of heauen and earth was
without ſhape, vnperfect, and darke, and yet not
vtterly deade, but was indued with the ſtrength of
Gods ſpirite, and ſo made liuely to continue vnto
the worldes ende.
               And GOD ſayde, Let there be light:Verſ. 3
and there was light.
               We may not here conceyue that God hath any
corporall Voyce, or ſuch maner of Speach as doth
proceede by tongue, and lippes, from mortall men.
For to Speake, in God, is nothing, but with an aſſured
and effectuall will, to determine with himſelfe,
and to doe that he hath determined. We haue
here to learne alſo that all thinges were made by
the mightie power of Gods worde, that is to ſay,
by the Wiſdome, Purpoſe, and Counſaile of God,
which was Chriſt Ieſu, the ſeconde perſon in Trinitie,

as ſaint Iohn doth expounde it in his Goſpel.
In the beginning (ſayth he) was the VVorde,
                  Iohn. 1. a. 1. and the
VVorde was with God, and God was that VVorde.
The ſame was in the beginning with God, and all
things were made by it. &c.
               And God ſaw the light that it was good:Verſ. 4.
and God deuided the light, &c.
               This maner of Iudgement God giueth of all
things that he made, he ſayth not, God ſawe that
they were pleaſant, beautifull, and faire, but that
they were * Good.Eccle. 39. e. 34. Whereby we may learne that
God did not ſo much reſpect his owne glorie in the
faireneſſe of his workes, as he did the benefite and
and Commoditie of Mankinde to whoſe vſe he
made them.
               Let there be a Firmament betweene the
waters,Verſ. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. and let it make a deuiſion, &c.
               Let there be a Firmament, that is, as the Hebrue
ſpeaketh. A Stretching out or a Setting abroad
betweene waters and waters. Vnto thys maner
of ſpeaking the Scripture often alludeth, as
Eſay. 42.Eſay. 42. a. 5. 
                  He that made the heauens and ſpreade them
abroad,
                  Eſay. 40. e. 22 
                  &c. And in the 40. Chapiter. He ſpreadeth
out the heauens as a couering, he ſtretcheth them out
as a Tent to dwell in, &c.
                  Pſal. 104. a. 3. And Pſal 104. He ſtretcheth
out the heauens as a Curtaine. Wherefore it maye
well be gathered that this Firmament is nothing
but a large Stretched out ſpace betweene waters
and waters, betweene waters aboue, and waters

beneath, and ſuch as we ſee betweene the clowdes
which are the vpper waters, and the Sea and
Ryuers which are the neather waters by Gods
ordinaunce gathered into their appointed places.
All that is aboue vs is deuyded into two partes,
the one called Aether, which is the vpper part of
the Firmament wherein the Starres & Planets
are, the other called the Aire, which is agayne deuyded
into three partes. The vpper Region next
the Firmament, The middle Region where the
Clowdes and vpper waters by Gods prouidence
are ſtayed, to the great benefite of the world, and
The neather part left for the commoditie of Gods
Creatures to liue and breath in. The vpper waters
are reſerued aſwell to make the earth * Fruitfull,Act. 14. c. 17.
by ſending them downe in due ſeaſon according
to his gracious prouidence, as alſo by hys
iuſtice in way of puniſhment to work the Plague
of Sinfull men, as we euidently ſee in the example
of the * generall Deluge,Gene. 7. d. 21. and in ſending vnſeaſonable
weathering to take from vs the fruites of
the earth.Sap. 10. a. 4
                  Eccl. 40. b. 10
               
               Let the earth bring forth budde & grene
hearbe apt to ſeede,Verſ. 11. 12 and fruitfull, &c.
               When we ſee theſe faire and manifold Commodities
of the earth, the greene Graſſe, the bewtifull
Flowers and hearbes, the Fruites of Trees and
Graine to the ſingular benefite of man and beaſt:
we muſt not thinke that the ſame cōmeth by courſe
of Nature only, but by the ſingular Prouidence of

God ſending the ſame to the Reliefe of his creatures.
For the ſweet cōfort of this place, read Pſal.
104.Pſa. 104 b. 14 
                  He cauſeth graſſe to growe for cattell, and herbes
for the vſe of men, that he maye bring forth Foode
out of the earth, both VVine that maketh gladde the
hart of man, and Oyle to make him haue a cheerefull
countenance, and alſo Bread to ſtrengthen mens harts.
God hath made not onely fruites of one kinde: but
of Innumerable ſorts, that we might thereby vnderſtande
the bountifull goodneſſe and riches of
his mercies towardes vs.
               Let there be lightes in the Firmament of
heauen,Verſ. 14. &c. that they may deuide, &c.
               
                  Et ſint in ſigna, &c. The vſe and benefite of the
Moone, Sunne, and Planets, is not onely to giue
light vnto the worlde, but to make diſtinctions of
Times and ſeaſons, as Sommer, VVinter, Autumne,
& the Spring, alſo Yeares, Moneths, VVekes,
dayes, and houres, which diſtinction much ſerueth
to the vſe and commoditie of mans life.
               And God made the beaſte of the earth,Verſ. 25.
and euery thing that creepeth, &c.
               Hereby we haue to learne that the Prouidence
of God ſtretcheth not onely to Man, Beaſt, Fiſhe,
Foule & ſuch like, but to the verie ſmalleſt things,
and of leaſt eſtimatiō, as Wormes, Flees, Fleas,
and other Vermine whatſoeuer: be they in mans
fight neuer ſo contemptible. For God vſeth the
ſame at his pleaſure, eyther to the benefite, or to

the puniſhment of Mankinde, as it may very well
* appeare by ſundrie of the Plagues of Aegipt,
                  1. Exod. 8. a. 3 16. 18. 19.
wherein he vſed theſe things for his inſtruments.
               And God ſayde,Verſ. 26. let vs make man in our
Image, after our likeneſſe, &c.
               After God had created and made perfite all the
Furniture of Heauen and earth, and by his wiſedome
marueylouſly diſtincted eche thing in hys
kinde, place, and office, he laſtly commeth to the
Making of mankinde, as that thing vnto whoſe
vſe principallie al other his creatures might ſeeme
to be framed. That he in the vſe of them might
vnderſtande the great goodneſſe of his Lorde and
Maker towarde him, and for the ſame yeelde vnto
him true Worſhip and glorie. Concerning Man,
he noteth here briefely 3. thinges, his Creation,
his Dignitie, his Bleſſing and encreaſe.
               Of his Creation it will be ſpoken in the next
chapiter more particularly. Of his Dignitie aboue
all other Creatures, this is one euident teſtimonie,
that he ſayth not, let Man be made, as he
ſayde before of other things. Let there be a lyght:
Let there be a Firmament &c. But to declare vnto
vs, that it was a Worke of greater worthyneſſe,
He as it were, calleth in cōſultation his VViſdom,
that is, the ſeconde perſon in Trinitie, and hys
Vertue or VVoorking Power, that is, his Holy ſpirit;
and ſaith, Let vs make man. So that in the making
of Man, is a more perfite token giuen of the
Three Perſons in Trinitie, then in the Creating

of any other part of the worlde. And further to declare
the Dignitie of man,Gen. 5. a. 1. He was made according
to the * Image of God:Coloſ. 3. b. 10 whereby we maye
not thinke,Gen. 9. a. 6. 1. as ſome wicked heretikes haue done,
that God hath a like proportion of body,Cor. 11. b. 7 as we ſee
man to haue.Eccle. 17. a. 6. For that is not the Image or likenes
that is here ſpoken of, but as God was Wiſe,
Iuſte, Mercifull, Good, Innocent, Holy, Immortall,
ſo was Man made by God, wiſe, iuſte, mercifull,
good, innocent, holy, immortall: and to expreſſe
a more perfite lykeneſſe he was made of power,
and appointed Lorde and Ruler ouer all the other
Creatures of the worlde. This Image, by the
fall of Adam was almoſt cleane blotted out,1. Cor. 15. f. 45 and
reſtored againe by the * ſecond Adam Chriſt Ieſu to
that perfectneſſe that this frayle and mortall lyfe
might beare, carying continually about with vs in
our boſomes the *ſtings of our corruption,Ro. 7. d. 23. 24 lyricking
vs forward ſtill to vngodlyneſſe. The bleſſing
of encreaſe and multiplying that God giueth vnto
Man; declareth that he was made Male, and Female,
to the ende that by lawfull procreation they
might fulfill the earth, and raiſe vp a large and
great Church or congregation of holy Creatures,
to giue Honor and glorie to their Lorde and maker.
Wherefore it cannot be thought that Mariage
and the lawfull ioyning of Man and Woman
is an euill or an vncleane thing, but the lawfull
and good ordinance of God himſelfe. And therfore
well ſayth Saint Paule.
                  Heb. 13. a. 4. 
                  Honorable in all perſons is
VVedlock and the bedde vndefiled, but VVhooremayſters

and Adulterers God will iudge.
               
               God ſawe euery thing that he had made
and beholde they were exceeding,Verſ. 31. &c.
               This Iudgement of God, that here he gyueth
vpon hys workes, pronouncing them to be all verie
Good, ought to be vnto vs a Rule that we preſume
not to ſpeake or thinke otherwiſe of them,
and ſhewe our ſelues therein vnthankfull to our
God & maker. If there be eyther fruites or herbs,
or beaſts that we accompt and call Euill or Hurtfull,
it riſeth eyther of our Vnperfitneſſe that vnderſtande
not the right vſe of them, or elſe of the
Curſe of God for the Sinne and fall of Adam, by
which, as Man himſelfe, ſo diuers other Creatures
are fallen frō that Perfection in which they
were firſt made by GOD, So that the Sinne of
Man and not Gods creation is cauſe therof.
            
         
         
            The Sunday called Septuageſima
at Euening prayer.
            Geneſis. 2.
            
               
                  THus the heauens and earth were finiſhed and all
the hoaſt of them.Exod. 20. b. 11 2. And in the ſeuenth day God
ended his worke which he had made.Deut. 5. b. 14. And the ſeuenth
day he reſted from all his worke which he had
made.Heb. 4. b. 4. 3 And God bleſſed the ſeuenth day, and ſanctified it:
becauſe that in it he had reſted from al his worke which God
ordened to make. 4 Theſe are the generations of the heauens,
and of the earth when they were created, in the daye

when the Lorde God made the earth and the heauens.
               5 And euery plant of the fielde before it was in the earth,
and euery herbe of the fielde before it grewe: For the Lorde
God had not (yet) cauſed it to raine vpon the earth, neyther
(vvas there) a man to till the grounde.
               6 But there went vp a miſt from the earth, and watered
the whole face of the ground.1. Cor. 5. f. 45. 7 The Lorde God alſo dyd
ſhape man of the duſt of the ground, and breathed into hys
noſethrilles the breath of life, and man was a liuing ſoule.
               8 And the Lorde God planted a Garden eaſtwarde in
Eden, and there he put the man whome he had ſhapen.
               9 Moreouer, out of the ground made the Lorde God to
growe euery trée that was fayre to ſight, and pleaſant to eat:
The trée of life in the middeſt of the Garden, and the trée of
knowledge of good and euill. 10 And out of Eden there
went forth a ryuer to water the Garden, and from thence it
was deuided, and became into foure heades.
               11 The name of the firſt is Piſon, the ſame is it that compaſſe
                     •
                  h
the whole lande of Hauilab, where there is golde.
               12 And the golde of the lande is very good.Eccle. 24. d There is alſo
Bdellium, and the Onix ſtone. 13 The name of the ſecond
riuer is Gihon: the ſame is it that compaſſeth the whole land
of Ethiopia. 14 The name of the thirde Ryuer is Hidekel,
and it goeth towarde the eaſt ſide of Aſſyrta: and the
fourth ryuer is Euphrates. 15 And the Lorde God tooke
the man, and put him into the gardē of Eden, that be might
worke it, and kéepe it. 16 And the Lorde God commaunded
the man, ſaying, Eating, thou ſhalt eate of euery trée of the
garden. 17 But as touching the trée of knowledge of
good And euill thou ſhalt not eate of it: For in what daye ſo
euer thou eateſt thereof, thou ſhalt die the death.
               18 And the Lorde God ſayde, It is not good that the man
ſhould be alone, I will make him an helpe lyke vnto hym.
               19 And ſo out of the grounde the Lorde God had ſhapen

euery beaſt of the fielde, and euery foule of the ayre, and;
brought them vnto man, that he might ſée howe he woulde
call them: For likewiſe as man named euery lyuing thing,
ſo was the name thereof. 20 And the man gaue names to
all cattell, and foule of the ayre, and to euery beaſt of the
fielde: but for man founde he not an helpe like vnto him.
               21 The Lorde God cauſed a déepe ſléepe to fall vpon Adam,
and he ſlept, and he tooke one of his ribbes, and cloſed
vp the place with fleſhe in ſteade thereof.
               22 And the ribbe which the Lorde God hath taken from
man,1. Cor. 11. b. 9. made he a woman, and brought her vnto the man.
               23 And man ſayde,Math. 19. a. 5. This is nowe bone of my bones, and
fleſhe of my fleſh,Marc. 10. a. 7. 1. ſhe ſhall be called woman, bicauſe ſhe was
taken out of man.Cor. 11. a. 8. 24 For this cauſe ſhall man leaue his
father and his mother,Epheſ. 5. c. and ſhall be ioyned with his wyfe:
and they ſhall become one fleſhe. 25 And they were both
naked the man and his wyfe, and were not aſhamed.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .ij.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               Thus the heauens and earth was finiſhed
and all the hoaſt of them,Verſ. 1. &c.
               
                  SEing, that when Man was
made, the whole worlde had his perfection
and ending, it maye appeare
that all thinges by Gods goodneſſe
were made for man and to his vſe:
which conſideration o
                     ••
                  ght to moue men to bee
thankefull vnto God for ſo great and vneſtimable
Benefites,Math. 5. b. 16. 1. and to *Cor. 10. g. 31 doe all things to his Honour

and glorie, according to the ende of their Creation.
For as the world was made for Man: So Man
was created to ſet forth the praiſe and glorie of
God. By this worde Hoſte he meaneth the Furniture
of heauen and Earth, and the Multitude of
all Gods creatures belonging to them both. And
therfore when God is often in Scripture called*
The Lorde of Hoſtes,
                  1. Reg. 1. a. 3. it is ment he is the Lord and
maker of all Creatures,Eſay. 1. f. 24 and hath them all at hys
commaundement eyther to defende his people, or
to worke puniſhment vpon his Enimies.
               And the ſeauenth daye he reſted from all
the workes that he made,Verſ. 2. &c.
               Verie well ſaith Auguſtine, God reſted the ſeauenth
day from the worke of Creation, but he neuer
Ceaſeth from the rule of his gouernance. For
the ſame God that in the beginning made Heauen
and Earth, and all Creatures contayned in them,
doth now alſo continually Preſerue, Maintaine,
and gouerne the ſame. Therefore we are no 
                     〈◊〉
                  
nowe daylie bounde to thanke God for the Preſeruation
of his Creatures to our vſe, then we
were at the beginning for Making of them. We
maye not thinke that Creatures once made doe
preſerue and proſper themſelues by a courſe of
Nature o
                     •
                  ely, but that it is the finger of God, and
his gratious Prouidence, that wo
                     ••
                  eth cōtinually
in them.Act. 17. f. 28. 
                  By him, ſaith Saint Paule, wee haue our
Being,
                  Heb. 1. a. 3. 
                  we Liue, and we Mooue. And to ye 
                  Hebr. Suſtayning
all things by the worde of his power.
               
               
               And God bleſſed the ſeauenth day and
ſanctified it:Verſ. 3. becauſe, &c.
               There are 4. cauſes why God ſanctified the
ſeuenth day. 1 The firſt becauſe he ceaſed from the
making of any mo new Creatures. 2 The ſecond,
for the Worthyneſſe of mankinde, whoſe creation
and making was the Ende of the whole worlde.
               3 The thirde, that it might be an inſtitution and
ordinance of a worſhip due vnto God on the behalf
of Man, wherby he ſhould ſet forth his prayſe and
Glory, and acknowledge his vneſtimable goodneſſe
towarde him. 4 The fourth, that it might be
a Figure of Immortality, and of our eternal Reſt
with God in heauen after the ende of the worlde.
               For the Lord God, had not yet cauſed it to
raine vpon the earth,Verſ. 5. &c.
               At the beginning, thinges that grewe on the
Earth were brought forth by God without raine,
and without labour of mans hande, but afterward
God giueth in commaundement, that Man ſhould.
Manure the Earth, and God did ſende Raine to
ſeaſon and moyſt it. Wherefore Men muſt Laboure
and traueile, Plant and Sowe, and not
looke to eate the fruites of the Earth *in Idleneſſe.2. Theſ. 3. c. 10 1.
And yet muſt he not ſo truſt in his worke and labour
as though it coulde be of any force,Tim. 5. c. 17 or worke
benefite vnto him without the goodneſſe of God in
Seaſoning the Earth, and proſpering his labors
and traualles. The prouidence of God will haue

both to go togither, Mans painefull labour, and
Gods gracious working.
               The Lord alſo did ſhape man of the duſt
of the Grounde,Verſ. 7. &c.
               Here Moyſes returneth againe to the worke of
the ſixt day, and expoundeth nowe that he left vnſpoken
before, that is, that God made the body of
Man of the duſt of the Earth. He had before ſayde
that God did make Man according to his owne
Image, which was the greateſt Dignitie that
could be giuen vnto Man, But nowe leaſt, by that
pretence, he ſhould be puffed vp with Pride, he ſetteth
before his eyes his Baſe and ſimple beginning,Iob. 10. b. 9. Pſal. 102. c. 14 Gen. 18. d. 27. Sapi. 10. a. 2. Tob. 8. b. 8.
that he came of the * Duſt of the Earth. And
therefore hath no cauſe to glorie in his owne worthineſſe.
And if he be any thing more than any other
common Creatures, that the Prayſe thereof
is to be giuen to God alone.
               Therefore to beate downe the pride of Mans
corrupt Nature,Eccle. 10. a. 9. very wel ſaith Ieſus Sirach. VVhy
art thou ſo proude, O thou Duſt and Aſhes.
               
               And the Lorde God planted a Garden
Eaſtwarde in Eden,Verſ. 8. 9. &c.
               In this that God did ſet Man in a Paradiſe or
Garden of pleaſure, it maketh muche to the aduauncement
of Mans dignitie, and the ſettinge
forth of the great Fauour of God towarde him,
who woulde not haue his principall Creature,
whome he had made as Lorde of all other, to inhabite

in a cōmon place of the Earth, but in a plat
framed of purpoſe, & repleniſhed with al maner of
pleſure & delight according as is here diſcribed by
Moyſes. Where or in what part of the world this
Paradiſe was, or whether it doe at this day remaine
or no, we may not be Curious to ſearch or
determine. It may well be thought, that that place
of delight and pleaſure, that was prepared for
Man in his Innocencie, when he ſinned and fell
from the obedience of God his maker, was defaced,
partly by the * Curſe,Gen. 3. c. 17. that for the ſame fel vpon
the Earth, partly by the generall Deluge ouerflowing
the whole lande, and all the partes thereof.
And if we ſhoulde aſſigne it to any place, it is
moſt likely to haue beene about the coaſtes of Meſaporamia,
and Armenia. &c. where the Riuers
Euphrates and Tigris are. The Tree of Life planted
in Paradiſe, may be thought to be that, by the
fruite whereof, if man had not Sinned, he ſhould
haue continued Immortall. The Tree of knowledge
of Good and Euill, was that tree which God
to trie the Obedience of Adam did Forbid him to
taſte of, and tooke the name of that miſerable euent
that after fell vnto him by his Diſobedience. For
thereby he vnderſtoode euill, and was aſhamed of
himſelfe.
               And out of Eden there went foorth a ryuer
of water,Verſ. 10. &c. &c.
               Forſomuch as the Riuers that beare thoſe
names at this day, and flowe into the partes here

mencioned haue their heades and beginninges
farre aſunder: it is mooued as a doubt howe they
are reported here to haue one heade and ſpring.
For aunſwere herevnto we muſt vnderſtand that
in the time of the generall Deluge, when all the
fountaynes of the Earth brake out, by the prouidence
of God, to drowne the worlde for ſinne: it is
not vnlikely that this Spring alſo and the Ryuers
that grewe thereof by the continuance of the
Deluge did alter, and varied their courſe, and toke
alſo other beginnings then before they had. Some
other thinke, that at the ſame Deluge the ſea ſwelling
to drowne the Earth, did ouerwhelme that
place where Paradice was, & from whence theſe
Ryuers had their beginning, and that it ſo remayneth
at this day, either where the redde Sea is, or
in ſome partes of the Sea there bordering.
               And the Lorde God commaunded Man,Verſ. 16. 17
ſaying, eating thou ſhalt eate, &c.
               It is not to be thought that God had Inſpired
the diuin
                     •
                   knowledge of good and euill into the
fruites of this tree: but it is to be vnderſtanded,
that it was a type or Figure of perfite knowledge
of good and euill, which becommeth the wiſedome
of God alone, being hable to declare the perfect
cauſes of all thinges, both generally and particularly,
wherevnto God woulde not haue Man arrogantly
to aſpire, as a thing farre aboue his Cō
                  dition,
and therefore commaunded him vnder a
great paine not to taſte of this fruite. Auguſtine
                  
and others iudge that the name was giuen to this
tree by the euent that folowed. For Man by the
taſting of that fruite, to his owne great harme, by
experience learned the difference betweene the
goodneſſe of obedience,Leuit. 22. b. 
                        •
                     . Heb. 2. a. 2. innocencie, felicitie, immortalitie,
and the * euill of diſobedience, ſinfulneſſe,
miſerie, and death.
               And the Lorde ſayd,Verſ. 18. it is not good for man
to be alone, I will make him an helpe, &c.
               Seeing that God had made Man as he did other
Creatures, to this ende, that he ſhould multiply
and encreaſe vpon the face of y• Earth: it was
not fitte and conuenient for him to be alone: therefore
God of his great goodneſſe reſpecting this his
purpoſe in creating of Mankinde, ſayth, he will
make an Helper to Adam, like himſelfe. The woman
lawefullye ioyned to Man bringeth three
Helpes, which he cannot haue without hir.
               1 The firſt is the Helping to Procreation and
multiplying of mankinde.
               2 The ſeconde is, that ſhe is a lawfull Remedie
agaynſt whoredom & al filthy & vncleane luſts. To
auoyd fornication (ſayth Paule) let ech man haue his
wife.
                  1. Cor. 7. a. 2 And again. It is better to Marry than to burne.
               
               3 The thirde Helpe is Comfort in ſickeneſſe, in
affliction, and in all houſhold cares and troubles,
as in education of children, and keeping the family
in order. In this place haue we the Inſtitution
and notable commendation of matrimonie by God
himſelfe, euen before the fall of Adam. Which maketh

greatly agaynſt all ſuch, that, vnder a colour
of hipocriſy in the Spirit of Antichriſt, depraue the
Inſtitution of God, and make Mariage a Wallowing
in the Fleſh, or a Permiſſion onely for the
auoyding of a greater euill. &c.
               For this cauſe ſhall man leaue his father
and his mother,Verſ. 24. and ſhall be ioyned, &c.
               After the Inſtitution of matrimonie, Moyſes
addeth the Indiſſoluble bonde and knot whereby
the huſbande and wife are faſtened togither by the
ordinance of God,Math. 19. a. 5. Marc. 10. a. 7. Ephe. 5. g. 31. and ſheweth, that it is * ſtraighter,
than any other coniunction in the ſocietie of
mankinde. Inſo much that it is a leſſe offence to
forſake Father and Mother, and to leaue them
ſuccourleſſe (whiche notwithſtanding ought by
Gods commaundement to be honoured) then it is
to doe the like towarde his lawfull maried Wife.
Wherefore let them looke well, what they doe, that
are readie for Light and Small cauſes to Seperate
man and wife. Seeing that Chriſt himſelfe
ſayth,Math. 19. a. 9. that VVhoſoeuer is ſeparated from his wyfe,
ſauing for fornication, and marieth another, committeth
adulterie.
               
            
         
         
            The ſunday called Sexageſima,
at Morning prayer.
            Geneſis. 3.
            
               
                  
ANd the Serpent was ſubtiler then euery beaſt of
the fielde which the Lorde God had made, and he 
ſaide vnto the woman:VViſd. 2. d. 4. yea, hath God ſaide, ye ſhall
not eate of euery: tree of the garden? 2 And the
woman ſayde vnto the Serpent, We eate of the fruite of
the trées of the garden. 3 But as for the fruite of the trée
which is in the midſt of the garden, God hath ſayde, Ye ſhall
not eate of it,2. Cor. 11. a. 3 neyther ſhall ye touche it, leaſt peraduenture
ye die. 4 And the Serpent ſayde vnto the woman, Ye
ſhall not dye the death. 5 For God both knowe, that the
ſame daye that ye eate thereof, your eyes ſhall be opened,
and ye ſhall be as Gods, knowing good and euill.
               6 And ſ
                     •
                   the woman, ſeing that the ſame tree was good
to eate of, and pleaſant to the eyes, and a trée to be deſired to
make one wiſe, tooke of the fruite thereof, and did 
                     •
                  ate, and 
gaue alſo vnto her huſbande being with hir, and he did eate.
               7 Then the eyes of them both were opened, and they
knewe that they were naked, and they ſowed Figge leaues
together, and made themſelues apernes.
               8 And they heard the voyce of the Lorde God, walking
in the Garden in the coole of the day 
                     〈◊〉
                   Adam and his wife
hid themſelues from the preſence of the Lord God amongſt
the trées of the garden. 9 And the Lord God called Adam,
and ſayde vnto him, Where art thou? 10 Which ſaide, I
heard thy voyce in the garden, and was afrayde, becauſe I
was naked, and hid my ſelfe. 11 And he ſayde, Who tolde
thée that thou waſt naked? Haſt thou not eaten of the ſame
trée, concerning the which I commaunded thée that thou
ſhouldeſt not eate of it? 12 And Adam ſayde, The woman
whome thou gaueſt (to be) with me, ſhe gaue me of the trée,
and I did eate. 13 And the Lorde God ſayde vnto the woman,
Why haſt thou done this? And the woman ſayd, The
Serpent beguyled me, and I did eate.
               14 And the Lorde God ſayde vnto the Serpent, Becauſe
thou half done this, thou art curſed aboue all cattell, and aboue 
                  
euery beaſt of the fielde: vpon thy belly ſhalt thou go,
and duſt ſhalt thou eate all the dayes of thy life.
               15 I will alſo put enmitie betwéene thée and the woman,
betwéene thy ſéede and her ſéede: and it ſhall treade downe
thy head, and thou ſhalt treade vpon his héele.
               16 But vnto the woman he ſayde, In multiplying, I will
multiply thy ſorowe and thy conceptions. In ſorrowe thou
ſhalt bring forth children: thy deſire (shalbe) to thy huſband,
and he ſhall haue the rule of thée. 17 Vnto Adam he ſaid,
Becauſe thou haſt hearkened vnto the voyce of thy wife,
and haſt eaten of the trée concerning the which I commaū
                  ded
thée, ſaying, Thou ſhalt not eate of it: curſed is the
grounde for thy ſake, in ſorrowe ſhalt thou eate of it all the
dayes of thy life. 18 Thorne alſo and thiſtle ſhall it bring
forth to thée, and thou ſhalt eate the hearbe of the fielde.
               19 In the ſweate of thy face ſhalt thou eate breade, till
thou be turned againe into the grounde; for out of it waſt
thou taken: For ouſt thou art, and into duſt ſhalt thou be
turned againe. 20 And Adam called his wifes name Heua:
becauſe ſhe was the mother of all lyuing.
               21 Vnto Adam alſo and to his wife did the Lorde God
make garmentes of ſki
                     ••
                  es, and he put them on.
               22 And the Lorde God ſayde, Beholde, this man is become
as one of vs, in knowing good and euill: And nowe
leaſt peraduenture he put forth his hande, and take alſo of
the trée of life and eate, and liue for euen:
               23 The 
                     •
                  efore the Lorde God ſent him forth from the garden
of Eden▪ to dreſſe, the grounde whence he was taken.
               24 And ſo he droue out man, and at the Eaſt ſide of the
Garden of Eden he ſet Cherubins, and a fierie two edged
ſworde, to kéepe the way of the trée of lyfe.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .iij.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               And the Serpent was ſubtiler then euery
beast of the fielde,Verſ. 1. which the, &c.
               
                  IN this chapter are 3. things
conteyned. Firſt, the temptation, ſeducing
and tranſgreſſion of mankind
wrought by the Serpent. Secondly,
the Condemnation and puniſhment
of Man, Woman, and the Serpent. Thirdly, the
the Caſting of Man out of Paradiſe. As touching
the firſt, Saran, enemie to Mankinde, and enuying
the happie eſtate, that he was in by the ſufferance
of God, abuſed the Serpent as his fitteſt
I
                     •
                  ſtrument to deceaue man, and Seduce him frō
the obedience of God. For we may not thinke, that
the Serpent dyd this of his owne motion, nor
phantaſtically dreame, that beaſtes of the fielde
Coulde then vſe a diſtinct Speech, to declare there
mindes, as here the Serpent doth: But God for
Cauſes, to his ſecrete wiſedome onely knowne,
ſuffred the Deuill to abuſe the tongue of the Serpent,
as he afterward did ſuffer him to be a * lying
ſpirite,3. Reg. 22. c. 21 in the mouth of the falſe Prophetes to deceyue
Achab. And as the good Angell of God, miraculouſly
* opened the mouth of Balahams Aſſe
to Speake vnto hys maiſter.Num. 22. c. 2
                        •
                     
                   And if it ſhall ſeeme

ſtraunge to any man, that Eua was not afraide to
talke with the Serpent, he muſt vnderſtande that
before Adam fell from God by Diſobedience, the
beaſtes of the fielde were not ſo terrible to Man,
as ſince that time they haue beene. Yea, it may well
be gathered, that the Serpent was more familiar
with Man, then any other beaſt, and that the Deuill
Craftily tooke that occaſion to worke by hym,
and the woman ſooner ſeduced and ouercome, as
well by that, as by hearing of him to ſpeake, Contrarie
to the maner of other beaſtes: This I gather
by that puniſhment of the Serpent that God
after pronounceth: I will ſet enemitie betwene thee
and the woman, &c. For thereby it maye appeare,
that, before, there was a Certaine inclination of
kindneſſe and familiaritie, betweene them, more,
then in other.
               In this temptation of Adam in Paradiſe, we haue
to learne, that no Place is free to man from temptation,
yea that the Deuill, then worketh moſt perilouſly,
and moſt preuayleth, when we are in the
ſtate of Proſperitie and Felicitie, and therfore at
that time we ought by all meanes moſt diligently,
to beware of him. For by Proſperitie we ſooneſt
forget our ſelues, and are moſt eaſely intrapped.
               And the Serpent ſayde vnto the woman,Verſ. 4.
ye ſhall not die the death, &c.
               Here let vs diligenly note, How Satan not only
at thys time, but in all ages dealeth toward God,
and his holy worde. When the will of God is deliuered

vnto his people,Act. 20. f. 29 Math. 13. d. 28 Gal. 3. a. 1. Gal. 1. b. 6. by his true and ſincere
worde, * then immediatly doth the Deuill by his
Inſtrumentes ſeeke to Corrupt, and falſifie the
ſame, eyther by manifeſt impugning it, as vntrue,
or by writhed interpretations drawing it to another
Sence, then it was ſpoken in, and al to ſeduce
the people of God, frō his True worſhip and obedience.
From this roote commeth thoſe things, that
of late hath bene taught in the Church, when God
had ſayde* Thou ſhalt make vnto thy ſelfe no grauen
Image:
                  Deut. 5. a. 8. Exod. 20. a. 4. Leuit. 26. a. 1 
                  thou ſhalt not bowe downe vnto them, &c.
The Serpent with his lying tongue impugneth
it, ſaying: Thou mayeſt with great holyneſſe, fill
the Churches and places of prayer with Images,
and go in Pilgrimage to them, and worſhip them
by kneeling, by offering, by ſenſing and all other
meanes of honour▪
                  Math. 26. c. 27 Marc. 14. c. 23 1. Cor. 11. f. 25. Luk. 22. b. 17. When Chriſt ſaide in the * inſtitution
of the Sacrament, Drinke you all of this:
Nay ſayth the Serpent, The laye men maye not
drinke of this, but Prieſts onely. When the word
of God teacheth vs that Chriſt▪
                  Heb. 10. c. 14. 
                  with * one oblation
made perfite all that be Sanctified: The inſtruments
of Satan Crie, naye, we muſt haue a daylie Sacrifice
Propiciatorie in the Maſſe, as well for the
quick as for the dead. This is the perpetuall maner
of the Deuils working againſt Gods holye
Worde. Therefore; Chriſtian men muſt beware,
that in the true worſhip of God, they be not drawn
away from the obedience of his True, & Sincere
Worde, by any Interpretations, ſeeme they neuer
ſo gaye in the iudgement of man.
               
               Then the eyes of them both were opened
and they knewe that they,Verſ. 7. 8. &c.
               The eyes of men are 3. wayes opened to
ſee. Firſt, by the doctrine of Gods holye worde:
For ſo Chriſt ſaide vnto Paule, that he would ſend
him to the Gentiles to opē there eyes that they might
turne from darkeneſſe to light.
                  Act. 26. d. 18. Secondly, our eyes
are opened by Affliction and Trouble to deſcend &
looke into our owne boſomes, and ſee and Confeſſe
what we are.Eſay. 28. c. 19. 
                  For trouble and vexation (ſayth
the ſcripture) gyueth vnderſtanding, as it appeareth
in the example of the * prodigall ſonne.Luk. 15. d. 18. Thirdlye,
our eyes be opened, by the gnawing of our
owne Conſciences after ſinne Committed, where
as the Deuill before the offence done, doth blinde
our vnderſtanding. And ſo were the eies of Adam
and Eue nowe opened, that they ſawe their owne
nakedneſſe, and felt the Corruption of their nature,
which they ſought to remedie, not by ſeeking
vnto God, but by their owne Deuiſes in couering
their nakedneſſe with Figge leaues. Thys propertie,
our Corrupt nature draweth Continually
from our firſt parentes, that though we ſee our
owne wickedneſſe, in the iudgement of our Conſcience,
yet we will not * eaſely confeſſe it,1. Reg. 15. d. 20 and flye
vnto God for remedie,Luk. 5. b. 8. * but flie rather from God,
and ſeeke to hide it, and heale it by all the meanes
and ſhiftes that we can of our ſelues deuiſe.
               
               And Adam and his wife hid themſelues
from the preſence of the Lord,Verſ. 8. &c.
               Note what Sinne worketh in man, after it is
Committed, Firſt, his Conſcience with greeuous
remorſe accuſeth, and Condemneth hym in hys
owne iudgement. Then it extingueſheth the truſt
and Confidence in the goodneſſe of God, and maketh
him with a deſperate and aſtonied minde to
flie from God, from whome, notwithſtanding, he
Can in * no wiſe hyde hymſelfe.Pſal. 138. b. 7 And laſtly, when
he Can not eſcape,Ionas. 1. a. 3 he ſeeketh by ſtubborne hipocriſie
to excuſe himſelfe by other, yea rather to lay the
fault vpon God himſelfe, then with humble ſubmiſſion
to acknowledge his fault.
               And the Lorde God called Adam,Verſ. 9. and
ſaide vnto him, Where, &c.
               Thys is an example of the great goodneſſe of
God, that when we wickedly haue offended hym,
and ſeeke to hide our ſelues from him, with daunger
to fall into further miſchiefe, he mercifully calleth
vpon vs by ſundrie meanes to come vnto him
by repentance.
               And the Lorde God ſaide vnto the Serpent,Verſ. 14. 15.
becauſe thou hast done this. &c.
               After the fault of diſobedience was by Adam, and
his wife verie hardly Confeſſed, God proceedeth
to Condemnation and puniſhment. And firſt beginneth
with the Serpent, as the principall Inſtrument

of this miſchiefe, in whoſe puniſhment are
fower partes noted, That, he, was curſed aboue all
other beaſtes of the earth: that he ſhould go vpon hys
belly creeping: That he ſhould eate duſt all the dayes
of his lyfe: & That there ſhould be enemitie betwene
the woman, and him, and betweene the ſeede of the
woman, and his ſeede. This kinde of Puniſhment,
as it is literally vnderſtanded of the Seede of the
woman, and of the naturall Serpent, ſo miſtically,
and in waye of propheſie, is it to be vnderſtanded
of the great Serpent Satan, and the true
and bleſſed ſeede of woman Chriſt Ieſu,
                  Oſee. 13. d. 14. 1. Iohn. 3. b. 8. 1. Cor. 15. g. 55 * who in
deede cruſhed the head of Satan and brake all the
power of his kingdome. And yet is it permitted to
the ſame Serpent, that he ſhall Treade vpon the
heele of the ſeede of woman, that is, that He in the
world ſhould Perſecute and trouble the profeſſors
of the name of Chriſt, and ſo much as he coulde
work them Sorow, but yet not ſo, that he can preuayle
againſt them, for that they haue obteyned
victorie ouer him in Chriſt Ieſu.
               
               But vnto the woman he ſayde,Verſ. 16 In multiplying,
I will multiplie thy, &c.
               The Woman was the ſecond Inſtrument and
worker of Diſobedience, therfore, God proceedeth
next to Her iudgement, ſaying, In ſorow ſhalt thou
bring forth thy children, &c. God of his mercie doth
ſo puniſh woman in bodily Paine,1. Tim. 2. d. 15. that both * hir
ſoule may be ſaued, and the Propagation and increaſing
of mankinde not hindered thereby. God

did iuſtly Debaſe hir to the Subiection of her huſbande,
by him to be guyded and ruled, becauſe ſhe
had ſo lightly giuen place to the lying *allurement
of the Serpent,2. Cor. 11. a. 3. thereby to Satiſfie hir owne luſt
and affection.
               Vnto Adam he ſayde,Verſ. 17. becauſe thou haſt
hearkened to the voice of thy wife, &c.
               THe Serpent offended by the Inſtinction and
acte of Satan, the Woman, by the Seducing of the
Serpent, Adam, not by the deceyte of the Serpent,
but willingly to pleaſe his wife, diſpleaſed
God.1. Tim. 2. d. 14▪
                   For Adam (as ſaint Paule ſayth) was not ſeduced,
but woman was 
                        •
                     educed by the Serpent. But
neyther was the Serpent excuſed becauſe he was
wrought thereto by Satan, nor the Woman becauſe
ſhe was beguiled of the Serpent, nor Adam becauſe
he was not Seduced, but ſtudied to ſatiſfie y•
diſordered affection of his wife: But they all by
Gods iudgement ſuſteyned their iuſt rewarde and
puniſhment. Wherefore, we muſt beware howe
we condiſcend to breake the lawe of God * vpon
any excuſable Pretence,1. Reg. 15. b. 9. whatſoeuer it be. God wil
be obeyed, he will not be Satiſfied with our fayre
Excuſes and Pretences.
               Curſed is the grounde for thy ſake,Verſ. 17. 18▪
                   in ſorrow
ſhalt thou eate of it all the dayes, &c.
               God curſed not Man as he did the Serpent,
but for mans Sin and diſobedience Curſeth the
Earth, to the ende that that Creature which at the

beginning to mans behoofe was bleſſed with fertilitie,
and encreaſe, might nowe by the hardeneſſe
and barrenneſſe therof driue ſinfull man to labour
for his foode, and in the Sweate of his browes to
eate his breade. Wherefore, whenſoeuer dearth
or ſcarcitie Commeth, by reaſon that the earth in
due time doth not yeelde the fruites thereof, we
muſt vnderſtande and learne, the Cauſe thereof
is in our owne * ſinfulneſſe,Pſa. 106. d. 34 Gene. 13. b. 10 for that Gods iuſt iudgement
for our offences will not ſuffer the labours
of our hands to proſper with vs.
               For duſt thou art,Verſ. 19. and into duſt thou ſhalt
be turned againe, &c.
               This is a notable Sentence to beate downe
the pride of man, that we hereby conſidering what
we are of our ſelues * by our firſt parents,1. Cor. 15. c. 22 Rom. 5. d. 12. may be
made humble, and lowely in our owne ſight, and
not be puffed vp with pride towarde any man, but
rather Contemne the inſolencie of the worlde, and
take in good part all miſerie and Calamitie, that in
this fleſh ſhall fall vnto vs, looking continually to
that felicitie that is * purchaſed for vs by Chriſt Ieſus
our ſeconde Adam.
                  Rom. 5. b. 11. 15. 17. 18. 19. It cannot be, that we ſhall
feele the ſweetneſſe of the felicitie of our redemption
by Chriſt Ieſu, except we feele in deede wyth
humble heartes what we are by the diſobedience
of our firſt father, that is nothing but Duſt & Aſhes.
               
               And the Lorde ſayde,Verſ. 22. beholde this man is
become as one of vs in knowing good, &c.
               
                  
By this euent we may learne, with howe euill
ſucceſſe man doth yeeld to the diſobedience of God,
at the perſwaſion of Sathan, and his wicked inſtruments.
They where promiſed to be Gods: but,
after they had eaten, they were ſo farre from the
glorie of God, that they were debaſed vnder the
Condition of Man, and made almoſt equall wyth
Beaſts. They were promiſed the Knowledge of
good and euill, wherby they ſhoulde aſcend to perfect
Wiſedom, but they became more mad and fooliſhe,
than other common Creatures, they vnderſtoode
what was Good, but by the miſerable loſſe of
that goodneſſe which before they had, they knew by
experience in Sin what was euil, but that Knowledge
and experience they bought with the Loſſe
of eternall Felicitie and Loue of God.
               Therefore the Lorde God ſent him forth
of the Garden of Eden,Verſ. 23. &c.
               It was the iuſt iudgement of God, to Caſt
Adam out of Paradice, becauſe he neglecting the
conſideration of ſo great Dignitie & felicity, wherin
he was placed, did tranſgreſſe the Law of Paradice
forgetting whence he was taken, and into
what Place he was tranſferred.
               At the East ſide of the Garden he did ſet
Cherubins,Verſ. 24. and a fierie two edged, &c.
               God might by ſome priuie meanes haue kept
Adam out of Paradice, and from the tree of Life,
but his pleaſure was, by this outwarde and ſenſible

way, to Cut of from Adam all hope of atteyning
the ſame hereafter: that thereby, he might the
ſooner ſubmit himſelfe to the will and pleaſure of
God. Mans ſtubburnneſſe hopeth and attempteth
many things impoſſible, which he woulde not
doe, if he did ſee before his eyes vnuincible reſiſtance,
as in this place the Aungell and the fierie
ſworde Was.
            
         
         
            Sexageſima Sunday
at Euening prayer.
            Geneſis. 6.
            
               ANd it came to paſſe, that when men began to be multiplied
in the vpper face of the earth, there were
daughters borne vnto them. 2. And the ſonnes of
God alſo ſawe the daughters of men that they were
fayre, and they tooke them wyues, ſuch as they lyked, from
among them all. 3 And the Lorde ſayde, My ſpirite ſhall
not alwayes ſtriue with man, becauſe he is fleſhe: yet hys
dayes ſhall be an hundred and twentie yeares.
               4 But there were Gyantes in thoſe dayes in the earth:
yea and after that the ſonnes of God came vnto the daughters
of men, and had begotten children of them, the ſame became
mightie men of the worlde, and men of renowne.
               5 But God ſawe that the malice of man was great in the
earth, and all the imagination of the thoughtes of his heart
(vvas) onely euill euery day. 6 And it repented the Lorde
that he had made man vpon the earth, and he was touched
with ſorowe in his heart. 7 And the Lorde ſayde, I will
from the vpper face of the earth, deſtroyman whom I haue
created: from man vnto cattel vnto worme, and vnto foules
of the ayre: For it repenteth me that I haue made them.
               
                  
8 But Noah founde grace in the eyes of the Lorde.
               9 Theſe are the generation, of Noah. Noah (vvas) a iuſt
man, and pefect in his generations, and walked with God.
               10 Noah begat thrée ſonnes, Sem, Ham and Iaphath.
               11 The earth alſo was corrupt before GOD, and the
ſame earth was filled with crueltie. 12 And God looked vpon
the earth, and beholde it was corrupt: for all fleſhe had
corrupted his way vpon earth. 13 And God ſaid vnto Noah,
The ende of all fleſh is come before me, for the earth is filled
with crueltie through them, and beholde I will deſtroy them
with the earth. 14 Make thée an Arke of Pine trées: Habitations
ſhalt thou make in the Ark, and ſhalt pitch it within
and without with pitch. 15 And of this faſhion ſhalt thou
make it: The length of the Arke (shall be) thrée hundred cubites,
the breadth of it fiftie cubites, and the height of it
thirtie cubites. 16 A window ſhalt thou make in the arke,
and in a cubite ſhalt thou finiſh it aboue: but the doore of the 
arke ſhalt thou ſet in the ſide thereof. With thrée loftes one
aboue another ſhalt thou make it. 17 And beholde I, euen
I doe bring a floud of waters vpon the earth, to deſtroye all
fleſh wherein is the breath of life vnder heauen, and euerye
thing that is in the earth ſhall periſh.
               18 With thée alſo will I make my couenant: and thou
ſhalt come into the Arke, thou and thy ſonnes, thy wyfe, and
thy ſonnes wiues with thée. 19 And of euery liuing thing
of all fleſh, a payre of euery one ſhalt thou bring into the ark,
to kéepe them aliue with thée, they ſhall be male and female.
               20 Of feathered foules alſo after their kinde, and of all
cattell after their kinde, of euery worme of the earth after
hys kynde, two of enery ſort ſhall come vnto thée, to
kéepe (them) aliue. 21 And take thou with thée of all meats
that is eaten, and thou ſhalt lay it vp with thée, that it may
be meate for thée and them. 22 Noah therefore did according
vnto all that God commanded him, (euen) ſo did he.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the ſixt
Chapter of Geneſis.
               And it came to paſſe,Verſ. 1. 2. 3 that when men began
to be multiplied in the vpper, &c.
               
                  THe ſonnes of God, in this
place, are taken to be the ſonnes of
Seth and his godly poſteritie, whiche
profeſſed the name of GOD and his
true worſhip. And the daughters of
men, are vnderſtanded to be the Daughters of
Cain, and his vngodly Generation, which contemned
the name of God, and gaue themſelues to the
luſtes of the worlde. So that the ſenſe is, that the
whole worlde was Corrupted, and giuen ouer to
their ſenſuall pleaſure. For, not onely the wicked
generation of Cain, and his ofſpring, but the poſteritie
of the godly alſo, forſooke the feare of God, and
without all regarde of Conſcience, onely, to ſatiſfie
their Carnall luſt,Exod. 34. b. 16 Deut. 7. a. 3 1. Cor. 5. b. 6 Gen. 3. a. 6. 
                        •
                     . Reg. 11 a. 4. and pleaſure, tooke wiues of the
daughters of the vngodly worldlings, *which ſeduced
them from the true worſhip of God and vertuous
life, to the Contempt of God, and all Corruption
and wickedneſſe of the fleſh. Therefore
GOD iuſtly breaketh out in diſpleaſure agaynſt
mankinde, and ſayth, that His ſpirite ſhoulde not alwayes
or for euer thus ſtriue and trauaile with them,
as hitherto he had done, to bring them to amendment,

becauſe they were altogither fleſhly and vncorrigible,
and giuen ouer to the wicked deuiſes of
their owne mindes. Wherefore, he doth appoynt
them *a determinate time,Ionas. 3. b. 4 within which, if they did
not repent and amende, he woulde ſurely deſtroy
them. And this time was the ſpace of one hundred
and twentie yeares.
               And there were Giants in thoſe dayes vpon
the earth:Verſ. 4. yea and after that, &c.
               THe Giantes were not onely men of verye
big Stature, but alſo of great Might, Authoritie
and power, by reaſon of their ſtrength, aud vſed
their force to the tyrannicall oppreſſion of other
with great violence. Such became many of them,
that were of the poſteritie of the Godly, and tooke
wyues among the daughters of the wicked and
vngodly: ſo that to their fleſhly and ſenſuall pleaſure
in Choiſe of their wiues, they added extortion
and violent oppreſſion of other, and eſpecially of
the Power ſort. Thus God oftentimes dealeth by
iuſt iudgement for the Sinnes of the people* ſending
Tyrannes and oppreſſours to beare rule ouer
them.Iob. 34. d. 30.
               
               But God ſaw that the malice of man was
great,Verſ. 5. 6 &c. And it repented him, &c.
               By this, we ſee the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Sin is, to prouoke
the heauie wrath of God agaynſt vs, and to Cauſe
him to repent of all his goodneſſe, that he hath ſhewed
toward vs. Moyſes ſayth not, The malice of

man was vpon the earth, but the malice of man was
Great vpon the earth.
                  Eſay. 30. d. 18▪ Sap. 11. d. 24 Luk. 13. b. 8 Whereby we learne that the
goodneſſe of God is ſuch, that it doth * Long ſuffer
the malice of men, and doth not by and by puniſhe
the ſame, onleſſe it doth greatly encreaſe and ſhewe
it ſelfe vncorrigible. When Moyſes ſayth, It repented
God, &c. We muſt vnderſtand that there is not
either Repentance or Sorow, or any ſuch mutable affection
in God, but that the ſcripture often ſpeaketh
of God, according to the capacitie & maner of mortall
men, that we may the more eaſily Conceyue
what is ment. And the maner of men is, by the
Deede to iudge of the Affection of the minde.
               When we ſee a Potter breake and deſtroy ſome
veſſel that he hath made, we iudge, that he Repenteth
him to haue made it, and ſeeth ſomewhat that
he doth greatly miſlike in it. Euen ſo, becauſe God
the Maker of the worlde, and Framer of Mankinde,
determined, for Sin by the inſtinction of
Satan increaſing in men, vtterly to Deſtroy hym
from the face of the earth, whome before he had
made & loued: In reſpect of This fact, I ſay, and
not in reſpect of Mutabilitie in God, Moyſes vſed
theſe words. It Repented him to haue made man, &c
               
               But Noah founde grace in the eyes of
the Lorde.Verſ. 8. &c.
               This clauſe hath a ſinguler Comfort for all good
men, that liue in ſuch times of generall Corruption,
as was before the Deluge, before the deſtruction
of Sodome, and nowe in theſe Latter dayes.

For albeit, the vniuerſall Sinfulneſſe of the world
doth pull vpon the wicked, the iuſt and terrible
Plagues of God, yet, of his fatherly goodneſſe, he
will not Neglect thoſe, that truly Feare him, but
wil prouide for them,Gen. 7. a. 1 Gen. 18. d. 16. though they be but Few, yea
though it be but * One alone, as it appeareth in
Noha and Loth.
               
               Noah was a iust man,Verſ. 9. and perfect in his
generations, and walked, &c.
               This place ſheweth a notable Commendation
of Noah, that he was a Iuſt man, and in Compariſon
of men of his time, a ſincere & vprightman,
voyde of C
                     •
                  aft and de
                     •
                  ey
                     •
                  e, and giuen to Iuſtice,
and truth, contrarie to the 
                     〈…〉
                   of that
time,2. Par. 6. c. 14 Deut. 13. a. 4. Gen. 17. a. 1. to Propoſe God, and his holy will as a certaine
Rule to folow in all his life.
               And God looked vpon the earth,Verſ. 12. 13. and beholde
it was corrupt, &c.
               Becauſe the Wrath of God is Horrible, and the
ende of all fleſh was at hande: Moyſes vſeth here
an earneſt repetition of the great Wickedneſſe of
the World, that Gods Iuſtice in puniſhing might
the more appeare, when he ſayth, He will deſtroye
them with the earth that they dwell in.
               
               Make the an Arke of Pine trees,Verſ. 14. &c. habitations
ſhalt thou make in the Arke, &c.
               In theſe wordes that folowe to the ende of this

Chapter, Moyſes deſcribeth the Inſtrument, and
Meanes wherby God ſaued Noah, and the reſidue
of the faythfull, that is, the Maner & Proportion
of the Arke.
               Now ſo ſmall a compaſſe, as is here mentioned
might conteine ſo great a number of beaſtes, or
how the ſame beaſtes came to Noah, or how they
were mainteined wyth foode, when they were
there, with a number of ſuch vaine and curious
queſtions we muſt leaue to the Heathens, and wicked
Heretikes, which by ſuch meanes haue ſought
occaſion to diſcredite the Scriptures, and meruelous
workes of God. And ſuch as he faythfull,
and haue the feare of God, muſt with Reuerence,
in this, and ſuch other great workers of God, acknowledge
not onely 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or two, 
                     〈◊〉
                   number of
extraordinarie, 
                     〈◊〉
                   & 
                     〈◊〉
                   doings,
beyonde the compaſſe of Mans reaſon and capacitie.
And not by and by to thinke, that all is falſe
and vaine that our weakneſſe is not hable to yeeld
an accounte of. Rather let vs learne this leſſon,
that Admightie GOD to puniſhe the wicked and
ſinnefull perſons, and to preſerue and ſane ſuche
as beleeue & truſt in hym,Deut. 29. a. 5. Ioſu. 6. c. 20 Ioſu. 10. c. 13 Dan. 3. g. 94. 2. Pet. 2. c. 16. both can and wyll Alter
and * turne the Natures and poſſibilities of all
hys Creatures, as 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſundrie * examples left for
our inſtruction in the holye Scriptures, he hath
declared.
            
         
         
            
            The ſunday called Quinquageſima,
at Morning praier.
            Geneſis. 9.
            
               ANd God bleſſed Noah, and his ſonnes, and ſayde vnto 
them, Be fruitfull and multiply, and repleniſhe the
earth. 2 The feare of you, and the dread of you,
ſhall be vpon euery beaſt of the earth, & vpon euery
foule of the ayre, vpon all that moueth vpon the earth,
and vpon all the fiſhes of the ſea, into your hande are
they delyuered. 3 Euery thing that moueth it ſelfe, and
that liueth, ſhall be meate for you, euen as the gréene herbe
haue I giuen you all things. 4 But fleſhe in the life therof
(vvhich is) the bloud thereof, ſhall ye not eate.
               5 And ſurely your bloud of your lyues will I require: at
the hande of euery beaſt will I require it, and at the hand of
man, at the hande of mans brother wyll I requyre the lyfe
of man. 6 Who ſo ſheddeth mans bloud, by man ſhall his
blood be ſhed, for in the image of God made 
                     •
                  e man.
               7 But be fruitfull, and multiplie you, bréede in the earth,
and increaſe therein. 8 God ſpake vnto Noah, and to hys
ſonnes with him ſaying. 9 Behold, I, euen I ſtabliſhe my
couenant with you, and with your ſéede after you.
               10 And with euery lyuing creature that is with you, in
foule, in cattle, in euery beaſt of the earth which is with you,
of all that go out of the arke, whatſoeuer lyuing thing of the
earth it be. 11 And my couenant I make with you▪ that
from henceforth all fleſh be not rooted out with the waters
of a floode, neyther ſhall there be a floode to deſtroy the earth
any more▪ or. And 
                     〈◊〉
                  . This is the token of the couenant

which I make betwéene me and you, and euery lyuing
creature that is with you for euer.
               13 I doe ſet my bowe in the clowde, and it ſhall be for a
token betwéene me and the earth. 14 And it ſhall come to
paſſe, that when I bring a clowde vpon the earth, the bowe
alſo ſhall be ſéene in the ſame clowde.
               15 And I will thinke vpō my couenant which is betwéene
me and you, and euery liuing creature in all fl
                     •
                  ſhe: and it
ſhall no more come to paſſe, that waters make a floode to deſtroy
 all fleſhe 16 And the how ſhall be in the clowde, and
I will looke vpon it, that I may thinke vpon the euerlaſting
couenant betwéene God & euerie lyuing creature in all fleſh
that is vpon the earth. 17 And God ſaide vnto Noah, This
is the token of the couenant which I haue made betwéene
me and all fleſhe that is vpon earth. 18 The ſonnes of
Noah going forth of the arke, were Sem, Ham, and Iapheth:
and Ham is the father of Chanaan.
               19 Theſe are the three ſonnes of Noah, and of them was
the whole earth euerſpread. 20 Noah alſo beganne to be
an huſbandman, and planted a Vineyarde.
               21 And he drinking of the wine, was dronken, and vncouered
within his Tent. 22 And Ham the father of Chanaan,
ſeing the nakedneſſe of hys father, tolde his two brethren
 without. 23 And Sem and Iapheth laking a garment,
layde it vpon their ſhoulders, and comming backwarde,
couered the nakedneſſe of their father, namely their
faces being turned away, leaſt they ſhould ſée their fathers
nakedneſſe. 24 And Noah awoke from his wine, & knew
what his yonger ſonne had done vnto him.
               25 And he laid, Curſed be Chanaan, a ſeruant of ſeruants
ſhal he be vnto his brethren. 16 He ſaide moreouer: Bleſſed
be the Lord God of Sem, and Chanaan ſhall be his ſeruant.
               27 God ſhall inlarge Iapheth: and he ſhall dwell in the
tentes of Sem, and Chanaan ſhall be his ſeruant.
               
                  
28 Noah liued after the floode three hundred & fiftie yeres.
               29 And all the dayes of Noah, were nine hundred and
fiftie yeares, and he died.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the
ix. Chapter of Geneſis.
               And God bleſſed Noah,Verſ. 1. 2. and his ſonnes,
and ſayde vnto them, &c.
               
                  AFter the Hiſtorie of the generall
Deluge or drowning of the world
for ſinne declared in the former Chapiters:
Moſes in verie good order now
commeth to ſpeake of the next age and
worlde following,1. Cor. 10. c. 11 in the * latter ende whereof we
nowe 
                     〈◊〉
                  . And he begynneth his diſcourſe at that
thing that is firſt, and of greateſt Maieſtie, that
is, at the Comfortable ſpeeche that GOD had to
Noah and hys Children in bleſſing them, & Confirming
their hartes againſt that great feare, that
they might well Conceyue vpon the drowning of
the worlde, and Deſtroying of mankinde from the
fa
                     •
                  e of the earth. For by thys, that GOD doth
ſo largely comfort Noah by bleſſing him, it maye
be gathered howe greatly hys minde was before
troubled. This Bleſſing doth not only Comprehend
the grace of Fertilitie and increaſe by multiplying
vpon the earth, but the opening alſo of the
purpoſe of God in Reſtoring the worlde agayne
by Noah and his children, whome he ſo marueylouſly

and graciouſly had preſerued to that ende.
Therefore that they might not Doubt or feare in
their harts, he declareth the ſtate and ende of their
life to come, willing them To increaſe and multiply
and repleniſhe the earth. Yea, and to their further
Comfort delyuereth to them in ſubiection,Gen. 1. c. 19. 30 Pſal. 8. b. 7. * all the
beaſtes of the Earth and Fiſhes, of the Sea to
their vſe and Commoditie. Of this bleſſing and
gracious gift of God, it Commeth, that all beaſts
and Cattell doe with ſuch obedience, and ſo Conueniently
ſerue to the vſe and benefite of our lyfe:
The Oxen to be accuſtomed to the yoke, the Horſes,
and other beaſtes to Cariage, Kine to yeelde
vnto vs their milke, and Sheepe their fliſes to
clothe vs, yea and the ſame 
                     〈◊〉
                   all the reſidue of
his Creatures to be vnto b
                     •
                   as Foode and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
And therfore it behoueth vs in theſe things
* thankfully to acknowledge and prayſe the exceeding
goodneſſe & Liberalitie of our good and gracious
Lorde towarde vs.Pſal. 3
                        •
                     . a. 1
               
               Euery thing that mooueth or liueth ſhall
be meate for you,Verſ. 3. euen as the, &c.
               By this ſome gather that men before the floode
did not eate Fleſh, but liued onely by fruites and
Hearbes of the ground, and that nowe onely, and
not before, God gyueth leaue to man to eate fleſh.
Herin, as I will not greatly contend, ſo yet it ſeemeth
not to me ſo likely. For it is euident, that in y•
Generall bleſſing, God made man Lorde, and
Mayſter of all his Creatures, and that Beaſtes

were killed as well for Sacrifice, as to haue their
Shinnes to make them Clothes: And then Can
it not well be thought, that the Fleſhe of the ſame
beaſts was vnprofitably Caſt away, but ſerued to
the vſe of mans foode.
               But fleſhe in the life thereof,Verſ. 4. 5. 6. which is, the
bloud ſhall ye not eate, And ſurely, &c.
               This forbidding to eate Bloud is a part of Diſcipline,Act. 15. f. 29.
to accuſtome the people of God to Lenitie
and myldeneſſe among themselues. For if 
                     〈◊〉
                  
they ſhoulde haue 
                     〈…〉
                  
to eat the Bloud of beaſtes, it might be 
                     〈…〉
                  , people
that it would haue 
                     〈…〉
                  
murder and crueltie among themſelues. And therfore
doth he 
                     〈…〉
                  ,Deut. 12. b. 16 1. Reg. 14. e. 33.
For ſayth he, whoſoeuer ſheddeth mans
bloude, by man ſhall his bloude be ſhed 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   By which

                     〈…〉
                  .Rom. 13. a. 4. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
thinke by this ſaying, that it is lawefull for Priuate
perſons in way of Reuenge to Kil any be he
neuer ſo Great an offendour.
               Beholde I,Verſ. 9. &c. euen I ſtabliſhe my couenaunt
with you, and with your ſeede. &c.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ,

in the mindes of Noah 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   his po
                     •
                  teritie, and leaſt
they ſhould Do
                     •
                   when they lawe the ayre ouercaſt
with clowds, that God 
                     〈◊〉
                   againe Deſtroy
the worlde with water: of his great goodneſſe hee
doth here aſſure Noah and all his children, and all
other that in lime ſhould come of them, yea, and all
liuing creatures, made to the vſe of man, that he
will no more in that Sort ouerwhelme the earth
with water. This Promiſe and couenant doth he
ſet forth with earneſt woords and often repetition,
that it might of 
                     〈…〉
                   the better beleeued

                     〈…〉
                   and more aſſured credite
thereof 
                     〈…〉
                   the ſame by a Signe
or Sacrament, oppoynting the Rainebow in the

                     〈…〉
                   his coneuant. By the

                     〈…〉
                  
eſtimable goodneſſe towarde them. Who is

                     〈…〉
                  
thereof.
               Noah alſo beg
                     •
                  nne to bee an husband
man,Verſ. 20. and planted a Vineyarde, &c.
               By theſe wordes it is not to be, vnderſtanded,
that Noah 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
of God although he were aged, he beg
                     •
                  n
                     •
                   to
be take himſelfe againe to the Manuring of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
earth and made a Vineyarde▪ &c.
               And he drinking of the wine was dronken,
and vncouered within his,Verſ. 21. &c.
               In that Noah dranke Wine he did not offende,
for it was lawefull to vſe the benefites of God,
and the * labours of his 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  1. Tim. 4. a. 4. Pſal. 127. a. 2.
                  
                     •
                  span
               Hereby,Prou. 31. a. 4. Eſay. 5. c. 11. Eſay. 28. b. 7 Oſe. 4. b. 11. Gal. 5. d. 21. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   may we learne how 
                     〈…〉
                  
nothing but to go from Tauerne to Tauerne, eating

and drinking vntill they haue ſo ouercharged
themſelues, as, beſide other Filthineſſe with great
ſhame they are driuen to v
                     ••
                  ode their vntemperate
ſtomacks. No merueyle though God puniſhe
ſuch exceeding grieuouſly as he ſhreatneth. Eſay. 5.Eſay. 5. c. 13. Verſ. 22.
               
               And Ham the father of Chanaan ſeing
the nakedneſse of his father, &c.
               Thus God puniſheth vndiſcrete Parents; that

                     〈…〉
                  
                  Sap. 3. c. 12.
                  Eccle. 41. b. 10.
                  Pr
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Prou. 19. c. 18. 1.
                  Reg. 3. c. 13., as he had done.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Prou. 10. a. 1.
               
               
               And Sem and Iaphet taking a garment,Verſ. 23.
layde it vpon their ſhoulders, &c.
               As in Ham we haue a Paterne of a lewde and
vnnaturall ſonne: ſo haue we in Sem and Iaphet an
example of good and godly children, not onely nothing
at all delighting in the reproch of their Father,
but being hartily ſorie for the ſame, and with
all Reuerence, Shamefaſtneſſe, and modeſtie,
*ſeeke 
                     •
                  o hide that vncomelyneſſe,Eccle. 3. a. 6. 7 that had happened
vnto him. And this in deede is the office of
good children, not as Ham, to Diſcrie and blaſe abroade
the Shame of their parentes: but, with 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Secrecie and honeſtie, to hide ſuch blemiſhes, as
ſhall happen vnto them.
               And Noah awooke from his wine,Verſ. 24. &c. &c.
and ſaide curſed be Chanaan, &c.
               This is the Curſe of Ham, and his wicked Poſteritie,
as a dewe rewarde of his vndewtifulneſſe
towarde his father, And alſo ſhe Bleſſing of Sem
and Iaphet wherewith God proſpered them, as
well for this their Reuerence towarde their Pa
                  
                     •
                  entes,
as for their other Obedience to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
God. This curſe of Ham, & the bleſſing of Sem 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Iapher
                  ▪ with their poſlepitie was vttered by Noah
in way of prophecie. For Ham 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the father of
the inhabitants of the lande of Chanaan, that was
ſubdued by the mightie hand of God, and deliuered
in ſubiection to the Iſraelites, after their comming
out of Egypt. Of Sem 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   the people

of Iſrael whom God merueilouſly preſerued, and
brought into that lande of promiſe, where they
were Lords ouer the poſteritie of Ham. Of Iaphet
and his progenie came, the moſt part of the Gentiles,
which a long time were ſeperated from the
knowledge of God, and ſo deuided from their brethren
of the Iewes and of the poſteritie of Sem. But
at the comming of Chriſt, by the ſweete voyce of
the Goſpel,Io. 10. c. 16. they were brought vnder one * Sheephearde
and one Folde, and ſo according to the
bleſſing of their father Noah dwelled in the tentes
of Sem,
                  Act. 13. g. 46. Math. 10. a. 6. and were partakers of the promiſes * firſt
made to the loſte ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael. So
that this is an euident teſtimonie of the Calling of
the Gentiles, euen by the mouth of the holy Patriarke,
ſo manye hundred yeares before in deede it
was performed.
            
         
         
            The ſunday called Quinqua geſima▪
at Euening praier,
            Geneſis. 12.
            
               
                   AND the Lord ſayde vnto Abram, 
                     •
                  et th
                     •
                  e out of ſhy.
Countrey, and out of thy Nation, and from thy fathers
houſe, vnto a lande that I will ſhew thée.
               2 And I will make of thée a great people, and will
bleſſe thée, and make thy name great, that thou ſhalt be a
bleſſing. 3 I will alſo bleſſe them that bleſſe thée, 
                     〈◊〉
                   curſe th
                     •
                  
that curſe th
                     ••
                  , & in thée ſhall 
                     〈…〉
                   of ye earth be 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               4 And ſo Abr
                     ••
                   departed as the Lord
                     •
                  had 
                     〈…〉
                  
him
                     •
                   and Let 
                     〈◊〉
                   with him: and Abram was 
                     〈◊〉
                   and

fiue yeares olde when he departed out of Haran.
               5 And Abram tooke Sarai his wife, and L
                     •
                  t his brothers
ſonne, and all their ſubſtance that they had in poſſeſſion, and
the ſoules that they had begotten in Haran, and they departed,
that they might come into the lande of Chanaan: and
into the lande of Eh
                     ••
                  aan they came.
               6 Abram paſſed through the lande, vnto the place of Sichem,
vnto the plaine of Mor
                     •
                  h. And the Chanaanite (was)
then in the lande. 7 And the Lord appearing vnto Abram,
ſayde, Vnto thy ſéede will I giue this lande: and there builded
he an aulter vnto the Lorde which appeared vnto him.
               8 And remoouing thence vnto a mountaine that was eaſtwarde
from Bethell, he pitched his tent, hauing Bethell
on the weſt ſide, and Hai on the eaſt: and there be buylding
an aulter vnto the Lorde, did call vpon the name of the Lord.
               9 And Abram tooke his iourney, goyng and iourneyng towarde
the ſouth. 10 And then there was a famine in that
lande, and therefore went Abram downe into Egypt, that he
might ſoiourne there: for there was a griouous famine in
the lande. 11 And when he was come néere to enter into
Egypt, he ſayde vnto Sarai his wife, Beholde, I know that
thou art a fayre woman to looke vpon.
               12. Therefore ſhall to come 
                     〈…〉
                  , that when the Egipti
                     ••
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   wife, and they will ſhe
is his, but they ſaue thée aliue. 13 Say I pray thée, that 
thou art my ſiſter, that I may fare well for thy ſake, and that
my ſoule may liue through thy occaſion.
               14 And ſo when Abram was come into Egipt, the Egiptians

                     〈…〉
                  , for ſhe was very fayre.
               15 The princes alſo of Phara
                     •
                   ſawe 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and commended
h
                     ••
                   before Pharad: and the woman was taken into Phara
                     ••
                  
houſe. 16 
                     〈…〉
                   for her ſake: and
he had ſhéepe, 
                     〈…〉
                  , and
mayde ſeruants, 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
17 But the Lorde plagued Pharao and his houſe wyth
great plagues, becauſe of Sarai Abrams wife.
               18 And Pharao calling Abram, ſayde, Why haſt thou
done this vnto me? 19 Why diddeſt thou not tell me that
ſhe was thy wife? why ſaydes thou, She is my ſiſter? and
ſo I might haue taken her to be my wife? Nowe therefore
beholde, there is thy wife, take her and go thy way.
               20 And Pharao gaue his men commaundement concerning
him: and they conueyed him forth, and his wife, and
all that he had.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xij.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               And the Lorde ſayde to Abram:Verſ. 1. Get thee
out of thy Countrey, &c.
               
                  GOd would not haue his choſen
ſeruant Abram, whome of his ſinguler
grace hee had appoynted to a
great purpoſe, any lōger to be Tempted,
Troubled, & Afflicted among the
wicked Chaldees,
                  Act. 7. a. 2. though they were of his kinred:Gen. 15. b. 7.
And therefore * willeth him to depart.Iudith. 5. a. 8.
                  Heb. 11. b. 8.
               
               Here we haue to note, that, when it pleaſed
God to Cal one, whom he might appoint to be Father
of the faythfull, he did not chooſe him out of the
Poſteritie of the Wicked; but from the Generations
of the Godly, though they were now fallen to
great corruption, and liued in Idolatrie. And this
perſon doth God call Freely, not in reſpect of anye

Woorthineſſe or dignitie in the partie. For there
are not here recited any merites or deſer
                     •
                  es in Abram
why God ſhoulde ſo it but 
                     〈◊〉
                   proceeded
only of the Mere grace, and Free election of God.
               By this departure of Abram out of his wicked
Countrey, If may ſeeme to be drawne into queſtion,
whether a godly man maye liue among hys
wicked Countrey men or no, but is bound in conſcience
to depart from them, whē Vice & naughtineſſe
doth increaſe. To this, it may be anſwered,
that there are two cauſes, for which a godly man
may & ought to Forſake the Companie and habitations
of the wicked. 1 The one is, if he can not
be out of daunger of Life and Conſcience among
them, 
                     •
                  or haue any hope to Preuaile and do Good
by drawing them to repentance. 2 The ſecond,
if he haue the 
                     〈…〉
                   of gods commaundement
calling him, and good Oportunitie to Spreade the
glorie of God, and ſtudie of his true worſhip in an
other place. Otherwiſe, if theſe cauſes be not, as
they were both in Abram, I thinke he is not bound
in conſcience to depart, but without Sinne maye
Tary among them,Gen. 19. a. 1. as Loth did in Sodome.
               
               And I will make of thee a great people,Verſ. 2. 3.
and will bleſse thee, &c.
               This Bleſſing that God here promiſeth to Abrain
is in wordes very great and notable, But if
we looke to the maner of perfourming it, in the face
of the worlde, it will ſeeme ſomewhat ſtraunge to
mans reaſon. He promiſeth Abram Multiplying,

and Bleſſing, if he depart out of his Countrey, but
it might ſeeme more likelie, that he ſhould grow to
wealth and power, if he Ta
                     •
                  yed in his Countrey.
Furthermore, when he dyed in the lande of his peregrinage,
he was in deede welthy and riche, but
he ſcantly left One Sonne to performe the great
Bleſſing of the increaſe of his Seede. Yea, and the
ſame Sonne hauing lyke condition as his father
had, left but One ſonne behinde him partaker of
the Promiſe; And laſtly when ſome ſhew of great
increaſe appeared in the ſonnes of Iacob, by Hunger
and Famine,Ge. 46. a. 1. &c they were * driuen to go into
Aegypt, and there in deede increaſed in great numbers,
but yet vnder the croſſe of Trouble and Afflictiō:
as it is read;Exod. 1. c. 12 
                  The mor
                        •
                      that they did 
                        •
                     ppreſſe
them, the more they mereaſed and multiplied.
               
               This muſt we diligently conſider i
                     •
                   the bleſſing
of Abram, that we may learne, howe God bleſſeth
his in this world, leaſt we fall into the iudgement
of carnall men, and thinke them Happie and bleſſed,
whi
                     •
                  h in deede are curſed and vnhappie▪ For
Gods Bleſſing doth not alway go with the Wealth
of the worlde, nor his Curſe with Affliction and
trouble, but moſt commonlye in cleane contrarie
maner. For it is profitable for the Elect of god,
often, in this life to be vnder the bridle of Affliction
and Trouble.Pſal. 118. b. 71 
                  It is good for me, ſayth Dauid, that
thou haſt Humbled me. Who would haue eſteemed
Ioſeph happie,Gen. 37. f. 28. when he was * ſolde into Aegypt;
and there a long time kept in Priſon? Or Dauid,
when he was Tenne yeares Perſecuted of Saule?
                  1. Reg. 23. d. 25
                  
Or in time of his kingdome,2. Reg. 2. b. 8. 2. when he was troubled
with ſo many Warres and * Rebellions?Reg. 15. e. 12 2. But
as the kingdome of God is Spirituall,Reg. 20. a. 1. 3. ſo are his
Bleſſings for the moſt part Spiritual,Reg. 1. a. 5. and not according
to the iudgement of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               And in thee ſhall all the kindredes of the
earth be bleſſed,Verſ. 3 &c.
               This place is diligently to be imprinted in the
mindes of the faythfull, as one of the ſweeteſt Promiſes
of our Free bleſſing in Chriſt Ieſu, that is in
all the Scriptures. We be taught in theſe wordes
to learne the riches and abundance of Gods mercie,
who doth not reſtraine his bleſſing to anye one
Houſe, kindred, or Nation, but doth freely impart
it to All the Kindreds of the earth. Therefore when
Chriſt ſent his Meſſengers to beſtowe this bleſſing,Math. 28. d. 19
he ſayd,Marc. 16. d. 15 
                  Go into the whole worlde, and declare
theſe good tydings To all creatures.
               
               Moreouer, this bleſſing here promiſed is our
Iuſtification.
                  Galat. 3. b. 8. For ſayth Saint Paule, * The ſcripture
foreſeeing that God iuſtified the Nations of the earth
by fayth, preached of the ſame to Abraham before,
ſaying: In thee ſhal all Kinreds of the earth be bleſſed.
               
               Thus Bleſsing then to ſaint Paule is Iuſtifying,
and Bleſſed are Iuſtified. And this Iuſtifiyng by S.
Paule,
                  Rom. 4. a. 6. is by Fayth and * not by our Workes. To
conclude, the foundation of this free bleſſing or
Iuſtification is the ſeede of Abraham,
                  Gal. 3. c. 16 * Chriſt Ieſu.
Wherefore we ſee, that God him ſelfe in thys
place to Abraham is the Firſt preacher of our Free

out ſome great conſideration, whie God did nowe
chiefely plague the Chananites after that Abram
and other good, and godly perſons were come among
them.Gen. 18. c. 26. It might ſeeme more likely that God
for the * Iuſtes ſake woulde haue ſpared them,Act. 27. d. 24. or
that all things,Exod. 32. d. 14 for their cauſe, ſhoulde haue gone
the more Proſperouſly with them. But ſeeing it
pleaſed God otherwiſe, we muſt thinke that Gods
pacience was greatly ſtirred againſt them, both by
ſome meruelous increaſe of their Stubburnneſſe,
and wickedneſſe, and alſo by the malicious and
frowarde Abuſing of the Godly. For, ſo we ſee it
oftentimes by the prouidence of God, that, when
Gods truth and his holy will is preached, & taught
in the worlde, by his notable and worthie inſtruments,
ſome great Aduerſitie and Plague doth
followe to the puniſhment of the ſtubburnneſſe,
and blaſphemie of the wycked agaynſt it. The
cauſes of which plagues the Malice of the worlde,
to their further cōdemnation, not ſeeing their owne
Sinnefulneſſe, doth blaſphemouſly. Impute to
the true Doctrine of God, and to the good and godly
perſons publiſhing the ſame. Thus was it in
the time of Hieremie,
                  Ier. 44. d. 16 and of the Prophetes. Thus
was it in the Primitiue Church. Thus it is now
in theſe Latter dayes.
               And when he was come nere to enter into
Egypt, he ſayde vnto Sarai,Verſ. 11. 12. 13 &c.
               Here, firſt, we haue to note that euen Godly
men comming among the Wicked, or into place of

daunger, though they put their truſt in God, yet
are they not voyde of care and feare,1. Reg. 21. d. 13 and * Deuiſe
by all meanes they can, howe they may Shunne
and auoyde the ſame. Secondly, we haue to conſider
the Violence & Malice of the wicked, which
to ſatiſfie there Filthie, and fleaſhly Luſt, whyll not
ſpare to commit any Miſchiefe, eyther by Murder
or otherwiſe. Thirdly, it may be doubted howe
a godly man can deuiſe to ſaue himſelfe by a Lye,
for aunſwere wherevnto, vnderſtande you there
are three kinds of Lying. 1 Firſt, when we vtter an
Vntruth. 2 Secondly, when we denie a Truth.
3 Thirdly, when Truth is diſſembled, and for the
time vpon conſiderations concealed. The two firſt
wayes no man can vſe without ſinne, nor ought to
ſaue himſelfe by them. The thirde waye Abram
did vſe, concealing that Sarah was his wyfe, and
yet vttering no vntruth in ſaying ſhe was hys
ſiſter. But neyther in this, nor yet in that, that
foloweth, is it to be thought, that Abram was voide
of ſome Imperfection, proceeding of to much timorouſneſſe
and want of confidence in the promiſes
of God. For how can it ſtand with perfit Sinceritie,
for his bodily ſafetie, and hope of better intertainement
in a ſtraunge place, to haſarde the
Chaſtitie of his faythfull, true, and louing Wife,
and giue occaſion both to her, and to the Prince,
or other of the Egiptians, to commit adulterie.
               Saint Paule ſayth VVe may not doe ill that good
may come therof.
                  Rom. 3. b. 8. We haue not therfore any colour
here in Abram, wherby we may be encouraged for

any cauſe, to vſe the lyke dealing: but rather a
plaine example, that euen Holy men are ſubiect
to * Frailetie and weakeneſſe of Faith,Gen. 19. b. 8. and therby
ſometimes doe that, which is Euill, and can not be
defended.
               And ſo when Abram was come into Egipt
the Egiptians behelde the woman,Verſ. 14. &c.
               Marke here the vanity of Worldly & fleſhly perſons.
Abram vndoubtedly was a man of comely
Stature, Graue in countenāce, & of much Humanitie
and curteſie in behauior. And Saray his wife
a Sober matron Modeſt, Chaſt, and vertuous, of
farre more bewtie of mynde, than ſhe was of bodie.
And yet theſe fleſhly men had no conſideration
of thoſe giftes,Iudit. 10. d. 18 Da. 14. a. 8. 10 but, with vnchaſte affections, * caſt
their eyes altogether vpō hir faireneſſe. And euen
for the ſame take her, without further conſideration,
to be a Preſent for the Prince hymſelfe, wherby
may appeare a great corruption of that kingdome,
as well in the Prince as in the People.
For had not the Prince ſhewed himſelfe in lyfe to
be ſuch a one, as, to ſatiſfie his fleſhly luſt & pleature,
he regarded neither honeſtie nor godlyneſſe,
but onely the bewtie of the perſon: The Egiptians
would neuer haue bene ſo readie to haue tolde the
King, nor he to haue taken her into his houſe vpō
their report. Therefore it is well ſayde that the
Offence of a Prince is a Double Offence, as well
for the euill, that is in the thing it ſelfe, as that it is
an Example to drawe many to the like euill.
               
                  
For * ſuch as the Prince is, ſuch are the People.Prou. 29. b. 12.
               
               But the Lorde plagued Pharao and his
houſe with great plagues,Verſ. 17. &c.
               God that is the author of Mariage, is defendor
of the Innocencie and Chaſtitie of the godly, and
ſharpe Puniſher of the breakers thereof, as ſai
                     •
                  t
Paule ſayth.Heb. 13. a. 4. * Fornicators and adulterours God will
Iudge. Therefore with grieuous plagues doth he
puniſhe Pharao and his houſhold for intertayning
Abrams wife, and purpoſing vnlawfull Mariage
with hir, though it were to hym vnknowne, that
ſhee was Wyfe to an other man. What Plagues
then may they looke for at Gods hande, that bende
there whole endeuor to Allure the known Wiues
of other men to wickedneſſe and Filthy Luſt, and
take the ſame almoſt to be no Sin, but a Solace
and Paſtime. Surely they can not looke for ſo
great puniſhment as God in his iuſte meaſure of
tyme wyll caſt vpon them.
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday in Lent
at Euening prayer.
            Geneſis. 19.
            
               
                   ANd there came two Angels to Sodome at euen, and
Lot ſat at the gate of Sodom: and Lot ſeing (them)
roſe vp to méete them, and he bowed himſelfe with
his face towarde the grounde.
               2 And he ſaide, Oh my Lordes, turne in I praye you into
your ſeruantes houſe, and tarie all night, and waſhe your

féete, and ye ſhall riſe vp earely to go your wayes. Which
ſaide, Nay: but we will bide in the ſtréete all night.
               3 And he preſſed vpon them excéedingly, and they returning
into vnto him, entred into his houſe: & he made them
a feaſt, and did bake vnleauened bread, and they did ea
                     •
                  e.
               4 And before they went to reſt, the men of the citie (euen)
the men of Sodome compaſſed the houſe rounde about,
both olde and yong, all people from (all) quarters.
               5 And they calling vnto Lot, ſayde vnto him, Where
are the men which came in to thée this night? bring them
out vnto vs, that we may knowe them.
               6 And Lot went out at the dore vnto them, and ſhut the
dore after him. 7 And ſayde, Nay, I pray you brethren,
doe not (ſo) wickedly. 8 Beholde, I haue two daughters
which haue knowne no man, them will I bring out nowe
vnto you, and doe with them as it (ſeemeth) good in your
eies: onely vnto theſe men doe nothing, for therefore came
they vnder the ſhadow of my roofe.
               9 And they ſayde, Stande backe: And they ſaide againe.
He came in as one to ſoiourne, and will he nowe be a iudge?
we will ſurely deale worſe with thée then with them. And
they preſſed ſore vpon the man (euen) Lot, & came to breake
vp the dore. 10 But the men put forth their hande, and
pulled Lot into the houſe to them, and ſhut to the dore.
               11 And the men that were at the dore of the houſe they
ſmote with blindneſſe both ſmall and great: ſo that they
were wearied ſéeking the dore. 12 And the men ſayd vnto
Lot, Haſt thou here anye beſides? ſonne in lawe, and thy
ſonnes, and thy daughters, and whatſoeuer thou haſt in the
citie, bring them out of this place.
               13 For we will deſtroy this place, becauſe the crie of
them is great before the face of God: for the Lord hath ſent
vs to deſtroy it. 14 And Lot went out, and ſpake vnto his
ſonnes in lawe which mari
                     •
                  d hys daughters, ſaying, Stand

vp, get ye out of this place: for the Lord will ouerthrow this
Citie. But he ſéemed as thoughe he had mocked vnto hys
ſonnes in lawe. 15 And when the morning aroſe, the Angels
cauſed Lot to ſpéede him, ſaying, Stande vp, take thy
wyfe, and thy two daughters which be at hande▪ leſt thou
periſhe in the ſinne of the citie. 16 And as he prolonged
the time, the men caught both him, his wife, and his two
daughters by the handes, the Lorde being mercifull vnto
him: and they brought him forth, and ſet him without the
citie. 17 And when they had brought them out, (the angels)
ſaid, Saue thy ſelfe, and looke not behinde thee, neyther 
                     •
                  ary
thou in all this plaine (countrey:) Saue thy ſelfe in the
mountayne, leaſt thou periſh. 18 And Lot ſaid vnto them,
Oh, not ſo my Lords. 19 Behold thy ſeruant hath found
grace in thy ſight, and thou haſt magnified thy mercie which
thou haſt ſhewed vnto mée in ſauing my lyfe: Beholde I
cannot be ſaued in the Mountaine, leaſt ſome harme fall
vpon me, and I die. 20 Beholde here is a citie by to flye
vnto, euen yonder little one: Oh let me eſcape thyther: Is
it not a little one, and my ſa
                     •
                  le ſhall liue?
               21 And 
                     •
                  e ſayde vnto him, Sée, I haue receaued thy requeſt
as concerning this thing, that I will not ouerthrowe
this citie for the which thou haſt ſpoken.
               22 Haſte thée, and he ſaued there: for I can doe nothing,
till thou be come thither. And therefore the name of the citie
is Zoar. 23 And the ſunne was now riſen vpon the earth,
and Lot was entred into Zoar. 24. Then the Lord rained
vpon Sodome and Gomorrhe brimſtone and fyre, from the
Lorde out of heauen: 25 And ouerthr
                     •
                  we thoſe cities,
and all that playne region, and all that dwelled in the cities,
and that that grewe vpon the earth.
               26 But Lots wife folowing him, looked behinde her, and
was turned into a piller of ſalt. 27 Abraham ryſing vp
early, got him to the place where he ſtoode before the preſence

of God. 28 And looked towarde Sodome and Gomorrhe,
and towarde all the lande of that plaine countrie,
and behelde, and lo the ſmoke of the countrie aroſe as the
ſmoke of a furnaſſe. 29 And it came to paſſe, that when
God deſtroyed the Cities of that region, he thought vpon
Abraham: and ſent Lot out from the middeſt of the ouerthrowe,
when he ouerthrewe the cities in one of the which
Lot dwelled. 30 And Lot departed out of Soar, & dwelled
in the Mountaine with his two daughters: for he feared
to tary in Soar, but dwelled in a caue, he & his two daughters.
31 And the elder ſaide vnto the yonger, Our father is
olde, and there is not a man in the earth to come in vnto vs,
after the maner of all the worlde. 32 Come, let vs giue
 our father wine to drinke, and lye with him, that we maye
ſaue ſéede of our father. 33 And ſo they gaue their father
wine to drinke that night: and the elder daughter went and
laye with hir father, and he perceyued it not, neither when
ſhe lay downe, neyther when ſhe roſe vp.
               34 And on the morrowe the elder ſaide vnto the yonger,
Beholde, yeſternight laye I with my father: let vs make
him drinke wine this night alſo, and go thou and lye wyth
him, that we may raiſe vp ſéede of our father. And they made
their father drinke wine that night alſo.
               35 And the yonger aroſe, and lay with him: and he perceyued
it not, neyther when ſhe laye downe, neyther when ſhée
roſe vp. 36 Thus were both the daughters of Lot wyth
childe by their father. 37 And the elder bare a ſonne, and
called his name Moab: the ſame is the father of the Moabites
vnto this day. 38 And the yonger bare a ſonne alſo,
and called his name Bennami: the ſame is the father of the
children of Ammon vnto this day.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the xix.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               And there came two Angels to Sodome,Verſ. 1. 2. 3
and Loth ſeing them, aroſe vp, &c.
               
                  IN the begynning of this
Chapiter is ſet before vs a worthye
and notable example of * hoſpitality,Eſay. .58. b. 7 Rom. 12. c. 13. 1. Tim. 5. b. 10. Ezec. 16. f. 49
diligently to be conſidered, as well
for the great Humanitie declared in
it, as alſo becauſe of that Admonition that ye Apoſtle
giueth to the * Heb.
                  Heb. 13. a. 2. 
                  By hoſpitalitie ſaith he ſome
vnwares haue receyued Angels into their intertainment.
By which wordes we are inſtructed not
onely to vſe Hoſpitalitie, but alſo are directed to
conſider the Examples of Abraham and Loth that
the ſame thing may happen by Gods good Prouydence
to vs, that did to them: that is, by that occaſion
to haue the great bleſſing of God and Deliuerance
from his dreadfull plagues. This muſt we
doe as Loth and Abram did, Readily, Willingly,
Earneſtly and Humbly.
               And before they went to reaſt,Verſ. 4. 5. the men of
Sodome compaſſed the houſe, &c.
               Thys place is diligently to be weyghed, that
the heynous and Horrible Sin of the Sodomites
may be vnderſtāded, and by it, the Iuſtice of Gods

iudgement worthyly conſidered. Firſt, they aſſault
the houſe of a Iuſt and Innocent man their
neighbour, and that not by Authoritie of any Officer
and Magiſtrate, but of their owne priuate
affection to ſatiſfie their wicked vnnaturall, & filthy
luſt. And this did not two or three, but the whole
Multitude of the City, declaring an vniuerſal, and
Generall corruption, euen from the childe to the
olde gray heares, without reſtraint or correction
of any Lawe, Officer, or Magiſtrate. So that beſide
the greatneſſe of the offence generally ſpredde,
there appeareth an open Impunitie, whereby all
men were ſuffered to giue themſelues ouer to Filthineſſe,
and that with ſuch impudencie, that they
openly declared themſelues to haue * no regarde
either of God or of mā,Prou. 18. a. 3. but with bold and Shameleſſe
faces, and with filthie mouthes in open ſpeech
breathed out that wickedneſſe, that of it ſelfe is
horrible to be thought and conceiued in the minde.
               Bring the men out vnto vs,Verſ. 5. ſay they, that
we may knowe them, &c.
               * Such Impudencie in Sin is alway an aſſured
token that the grieuous plague of God is at
hande.Iud. 20. a. 3. 5. And laſt of all, when they were by iuſt Loth
godly and vertuouſly perſwaded to the contrary,
they did not onely with Indurate heartes reiect
his Admonition, but with reproch and threatning
vſed violence againſt him. Wherefore their ſinne
may well appeare to haue come to full Ripeneſſe,
and moſt iuſtly to haue pulled on their heades the

dreadfull vengeance of God from heauen.
               Let vs moreouer call to our remembrance that
Chriſt himſelfe compareth * the dayes of Noe,
                  Luk. 17. f. 27. 28. and
Loth vnto theſe latter dayes, in which we nowe
liue, & doth reſemble them in deepe Securitie, and
exceſſiue Senſuall pleaſure riſing of great welth
and riches. Conſider therefore this our age, and
beholde how Generall Corruption that there is in
abuſing the good giftes of God to all Loſeneſſe of
lyfe and ſenſualitie, euen from the childe cockered
vp in wantonneſſe, vnto the olde man, that hath
worne his age in the ſame. Conſider what Securitie,
what Impudencie, yea and Impunitie in
doing wickedneſſe, and what Obſtinacie and ſtubburnneſſe
there is, in contemning and diſdainfully
with mockes and ſcornes reiecting all good and
* godly Admonition to the contrary,Ier. 7. e. 24. 25 Ier. 44. a. 5. 16 Pſal. 49. c 18. Math. 23. d. 37 2. Pa. 24. e 20 by whome ſoeuer
it be made. Surely it cannot be, but that this
State muſt ſpeedily drawe eyther the Ende of the
world and the general Day of iudgement, or ſome
Terrible plague from heauen for the wickedneſſe
of mankinde.
               And Lot went out of the doore vnto them
and ſhut the doore after him,Verſ. 6. 7. 8 &c.
               In Loth we haue the example of a Godlye
man dangerouſly aduenturing his life to the fury
of wicked perſons, that by all perſwaſion he might
withdrawe them from their miſchieuous purpoſe.
But in this may ſeme ſome great blemiſh and imperfection,
that he did offer the Chaſtitie of hys

daughters to be diſtayned wyth the Villanie of
theſe vuchaſt Sodomites. For although villanie
practiſed with the Maydens had beene farre leſſe
grieuous, than that which they offered to the ſtrangers:Rom. 3. a. 8.
Yet S. Paule ſayth, VVe may not doe euill
that good may come of it. He ought in deede faith
and courteſie to his Gheſtes, and ſhoulde, by
all lawfull meanes, haue Defended them, but hee
was no leſſe Bounde to his Daughters, then to
the Strangers, but rather in nature much more.
Fathers haue authoritie ouer their Daughters,
but not to cauſe them to ſuffer villanie and Diſhoneſtie
in their bodyes and ſoules agaynſt the lawe
of God. But it is to be thought that the good man
was ſo aſtonied with the outragious wickedneſſe
of the Sodomites, that he coulde not well tell what
to doe, and therfore in theſe great Troubles of his
minde to haue made this Vnlawfull Offer.
               But the men put forth their hande and
pulled Loth into the houſe,Verſ. 10. 11. &c.
               When Good men be in great diſtreſſe in reſiſting
the naughtie attempts of the wicked, then God eyther
* by the handes of hys Angels * or by other
meanes of his diuine prouidence deliuereth them,Act. 5. d. 19 Act. 22. e. 18. Act. 23. d. 16
as he doth Loth here in this place, ſtriking the filthie
Sodomites with blindneſſe.
               And the men ſayde vnto Loth,
                     
                        •
                     ſ. 12. 13. 14 hast thou
here any beſides? ſonne in law, &c.
               Here appeareth the bountifull goodneſſe of God

towarde the faythfull, who is not onely readie to
deliuer them from the deſtruction of the wicked,
(as he doth here vnto Loth) but * alſo to impart to
them his Purpoſe,Gen. 18. c. 17. and for their ſakes to ſaue other,
if they doe not ſtubburnely refuſe and deride
the grace of God, as the ſonnes in law of Loth are
in this place declared to haue done. In the offer
of the Angels, you haue to obſerue the vneſtimable
goodneſſe of God. In the doing of Loth, the
Readineſſe of the faythfull to call the wicked by repentance
to ſaue themſelues. In his ſonnes in law
and other, Indurate heartes and Contempt of
God and all godly admonition.
               And when the morning roſe, the Aungels
cauſed Loth to ſpeede him,Verſ. 15. &c. &c.
               If man Linger, and by the dulneſſe of the fleſh
be ſlacke to depart from confuſion, and to take the
right waye to ſaue himſelfe from the Plagues of
God, if the parties be not ſtubburnely giuen ouer
to wickedneſſe, the readie mercies of God doth by
all meanes Haſten him, and pricke him forwarde,
and in a maner Draw and cōpell him to the ſame,
as you ſee the Angels do here by Loth, Bringing
him out of the Citie, Haſtening him by wordes,
Telling him the daunger, Shewing him what he
ſhall doe.
               And Loth ſayde vnto them, Oh not ſo
my Lorde,Verſ. 18. &c. &c.
               Loth fearing leaſt by going ſo farre as the hill

hee ſhoulde in the meane time be wrapped in the
daunger, before he coulde come thither: after a
thankefull acknowledging of the goodneſſe of God
towarde him, deſireth a ſhorter ſpace, and that he
might ſaue himſelfe in the little Citie or towne not
farre of,Iacob. 5. d. 17. by the ſame euent,1. Reg. 7. b. 8. called after Zoar.
                  3. Reg. 8. c. 23. And
that we might vnderſtand how * forcible ye prayers
of good men are with God,Exod. 17. c. 11 it was graunted him:3. Reg. 13. b. 6.
Notwithſtanding the ſame was one of the Sinfull
Cities,Iob. 42. c. 10. that GOD was purpoſed to haue deſtroyed.Prou. 15. d. 29
Yea and the Angell ſayth,Act. 9. g. 40. he coulde doe
nothing vntill Loth came thither:4. Reg. 4. f. 35. declaring, that
not only the gates and powers of Hell, but not ſo
much as the Angels of heauen can be ſuffered to
doe any thing repugnant to their health? whome
God will Saue and Deliuer.
               Then the Lord rayned fire and brimſtone
vpon Sodome and Gomorrah,Verſ. 24. 25. &c.
               The terribleneſſe of the puniſhment declareth
howe Horrible and Lothſome their Sinne was
in the ſight of God. Strange & deteſtable ſinnes
are by the Iuſtice of God plagued with rare and
dreadfull puniſhmentes, that all poſteritie maye
by their Example be taught to beware.Ezec. 16. f. 49 * Becauſe
they had abuſed the goodneſſe of God, in giuing
them Fertilitie, Plentie and Welth, & had turned
his creatures (which they ſhould haue vſed wyth
thankfulneſſe) to the fulfilling of their foule and
filthie luſt in all maner of ſenſualitie: therfore God
Rayneth vpon them now, and caſteth downe from

heauen not the ſweete dewe & moiſture to increaſe
the fertilitie and plentie of the earth, but Stinking
Brimſtone and fyre to bring deſolation both vpon
them, and the lande where they dwelled.
               But Loths wife following him looked behinde
her,Verſ. 26. and was turned, &c.
               God by his Angell had commaunded that they
ſhould not looke backe,Luk. 17. g. 32. in token of their willing
and * ſpeedie departure from the companie of the
wicked.Luk. 9. g. 62. But Loths wyfe becauſe ſhe Beleued not
the Aungell,Exod. 12. e. 33. or that ſhe Doubted it woulde not
come to paſſe, or elſe otherwiſe of a Curious and
carnall affection deſired to ſee the thinge, or in remēbrance
of her Sonnes in lawe and daughters,
or of the Goods that ſhe had left behind, did Looke
backe and lingered on the way, and ſo was turned
into a ſalt ſtone as a perpetuall memorie and Example
howe vnpleaſant Diſobedience is to God.
               And the elder daughter ſayde vnto the
yonger,Verſ. 31. our father is olde, &c.
               This Inceſtuous acte of Loths daughters and
their father, maye ſeeme not onely ſtraunge but
Horrible to be Committed by them, who did yet,
as it were before their eyes beholde the heauie
hande of God, for the like vncleaneſſe in the Sodomites.
But that the leſſe offence may be taken here
at, and ſome doubtes aunſwered, we will briefely
examine the hyſtorie in this maner. This doing
of Loth and his daughters may be conſidred three

wayes, eyther in reſpect of the fact it ſelfe, or of
their knowledge or ignorāce, or of their intent and
 purpoſe. The qualitie of the fact in it ſelfe conſidered,
is verie greeuous, not onely in that he had to
doe with two ſiſters, but the ſame alſo his owne
daughters, And therefore can not be iudged to be
 leſſe then Horrible Inceſt in the fact it ſelfe. If we
reſpect Loth he knewe not what he did, and ſo the
ſcripture ſayth, He knewe not when they came to
bedde, or when they roſe: and therefore can he not
be condemned of wilfull Inceſt. And yet his dronkenneſſe
may not be ſo Excuſed, but that he muſt
needes be noted of Vntemperancie. For although
after ſo great feare and trouble of minde in himſelfe
& his daughters, he might drinke wine more
then vſuall, to comfort his ſpirites, yet he ſhoulde
not in anye wiſe haue gone ſo farre, as to haue
bene dronke therewith, and incited to Vncleane
 luſt of the bodye. And further, if we conſider the
Intent and purpoſe of the Daughters, by the teſtimonie
of the ſcriptures they ſeeme not to haue
done the thing ſo much for the heate of bodily pleaſure,
as of a deſire to raiſe poſteritie and iſſue after
them: becauſe, through feare aſtonied, they thought
all mankinde had bene extinguiſhed by that terrible
plague of God. The ſumme then is this, The
fact being of it ſelfe horrible as well in the Father
as in the Daughters, by conſideration of ſome circumſtances
is extenuated, but not ſo, that they can
be diſcharged of Iuſt Crime and blame.
            
         
         
            
            The firſt Sunday in Lent
at Euening prayer.
            Geneſis. 22.
            
               AFter theſe ſayings, God did tempt Abraham, and ſaid 
vnto him, Abraham. Which aunſwered, Here I am.
               2 And he ſayde,Gen. 11. d. 17. Take thy ſonne, ſhine onely ſonne
Iſahac whom thou loueſt, and get thée vnto the land
Moriiah, and offer him there for a whole burnt offering vpon
one of the Mountaynes which I will ſhewe thée.
               3 Then Abraham roſe vp earely in the morning, and ſadled
his Aſſe, and tooke two of his yong men with him, and
Iſahac his ſonne, and cloue wood for the whole burne offering,
and roſe vp and got him to the place which God had appoynted
him. 4 The thirde day Abraham lift vp his eyes,
and ſawe the place a farre of. 5 And ſayde vnto his yong
men, Bide here with the Aſſe, I and the ladde will go yonder
and worſhip, and come agayne to you.
               6 And Abraham tooke the woodde of the whole burnt offering,
and layd it vpon Iſahac his ſonne: but he himſelfe tooke
fire in his hande and a knife, and they went both of them together.
7 Then ſpake Iſahac vnto Abraham his father,
and ſayde, My father. And he anſwered, Here am I, my
ſonne. He ſayde, Sée here is fire and wood: but where is the
beaſt for a whole burnt ſacrifice? 8 Abraham aunſwered,
My ſonne, God will prouide a beaſt for a whole burnt ſacrifice:
and ſo they went both together.
               9 And when they came to the place which God had ſhewed
him,Iames. 2. d. 21 Abraham buylt an aulter there, and dreſſed the woodde,
and bound Iſahac his ſonne, and layde him on the aulter aboue
vpon the wood. 10 And Abraham ſtretching forth his

hande, tooke the kni
                     •
                  e to haue killed his ſonne.
               11 And the angell of the Lorde called vnto him from heauen,
ſaying, Abraham, Abraham. And he ſayde, Here (am) I.
               12 And he ſayde, Lay not thy hande vpon the childe, neyther
doe any thing vnto him: for nowe I knowe that thou
feareſt God, & haſt for my ſake net ſpared thine onely ſonne.
               13 And Abraham lifting vp his eyes, looked, and beholde,
behinde (him) there was Ramme caught by the hornes in a
thicket: and Abraham went, and ſooke the Ramme, and offered
him vp for a whole burnt offering in the ſtéede of his
ſonne. 14 And Abraham called the name of the place, The
Lorde will ſée. As it is ſayde this day, In the mount will the
Lorde be ſeene, 15 And the aungell of the Lorde cried vnto
Abraham from heauen the ſeconde tyme.
               16 And ſayd,Luk. 1. g. 73. By my ſelfe haue I ſworne ſayth the Lord,Heb. 6. b. 11.
becauſe thou haſt done this thing, and haſt not ſpared thyne
onely ſonne. 17 That in bleſſing I will bleſſe thée, and in
multiplying, I will multiplie thy ſéede as the ſtarres of heauen,
and as the ſande which is vpon the ſea ſyde, and thy
ſéede ſhall poſſeſſe the gates of his enimies.
               18 And in thy ſéede ſhall all the nations of the earth be bleſſed,Act. 3. e. 25.
becauſe thou haſt heard my voyce.
               19 So turned Abraham againe vnto his yong men: and
they roſe vp, and went together to Béer-ſaba, and Abraham
dwelt at Béer-ſaba. 20 And after theſe things, one tolde
Abraham, ſaying, Beholde Milcha, ſhe hath alſo borne children
vnto thy brother Nachor. 21 Hus his eldeſt ſonne,
and Buz his brother, and Camuel the father of the Syrians.
               22 And Cheſed, and Hazo, and Pildaſh, and Iidlaph, and
Bethuel. 23 And Bethuel begat Rebecca. Theſe eight did
Milcha beare to Nachor Abrahams brother.
               24 And his concubine called Reumah, ſhe bare alſo Tebah,
and Gaham, Thahas, and Maacha.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxij.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               After theſe ſayings God did tempt Abraham
and ſayde vnto him,Verſ. 1. &c.
               
                  
                     MOſes in this Chapter ſetteth
forth a ſinguler and rare Hiſtory, and
in deede woonderfull, whether you
conſider God commaunding ye thing,
or Abraham obeying, and readie to
perfourme it. In that he ſayth, God tempted Abraham,
we muſt vnderſtande,Math. 4. a. 1. 1. Theſ. 3. b. 5. that God tempteth
not * as the Deuill and his Miniſters doe,Act. 5. a. 3. to induce
a man to ſinne, but to Trie and Prooue hys
faith, & that not becauſe he is ignorant, what is euē
in the Secrets of mans heart. But eyther that he
may knowe his owne weakeneſſe, as he did to the
* Iſraelites in the deſert,Deut. 8. a. 2. or to the ende, that, that
thing which is excellent in him, may be notoriouſly
knowne, to the example of all other, and to the
aduauncement of his glorie. And ſo doth he in this
place tempt Abraham to ſet before the eyes of all
poſteritie a ſinguler example of Faith and Obedience.
               Take thy ſonne,Verſ. 2. thine onely ſonne Iſahac
whome thou loueſt, &c.
               This Tentation ryſeth by ſundrie degrees to an

exceeding great triall of the fayth of Abraham, to
kill any Innocent perſon may ſeeme an vniuſt and
cruell thing: much more to kill, not one of his Aliance
and kindred onelye, but his owne naturall
Sonne, yea, and his Onely ſonne, and that onely
ſonne, that he, at the appoyntment of God, loued
ſo tenderly,Gen. 21. b. 12. and vpon * whom the Fulfilling of the
promiſe and bleſſing of God did ſeeme to depende,
this, I ſay, was a marueylous triall of his fayth.
And it was no ſmall tentation alſo, that it might
ſeeme vncredible, that the true and lyuing God
ſhould nowe delite in the ſacrifice of mans bloud:
It was neuer before done. Nor Adam, nor Abel,
nor Noe, were willed to doe the like, Yea, God him
ſelfe had ſhewed,Gen. 9, a. 5. 6. 
                  Gen. 9. that he deteſted the ſhedding
of mans bloud. Therefore Abraham might
haue ſuſpected that this commaundement was not
of God, but of the Deuill, to drawe him and his
ſonne to the diſpleaſure of God, and to defeate and
ouerthrow the fulfilling of the bleſſing of all the
Nations in earth by his ſeede.Heb. 11. d. 19. But ſo * ſtrong was
Abrahams faith, as al this could not ſhake it, no not
though both he and his wife were paſt children by
the courſe of Nature.
               Then Abraham roſe vp early in the morning
and ſadled his Aſſe,Verſ. 3. 4. &c. &c.
               This is in Abraham an example of a wonderfull
Obedience. It maye appeare, that this man,
euen from the beginning of his calling, had ſetled
his minde both conſtantly to Beleue whatſoeuer

God promiſed, (were it neuer ſo vnpoſſible to humaine
reaſon) and alſo wyllingly to obey that he
was commaunded by him, though it ſeemed neuer
ſo lothſome, diſpleaſant, and odious in the ſight of
the worlde.Gen. 12. a 4 He * forſooke his naturall countrie, He
liued wyllingly as an exile in a ſtraunge land, being
preſſed with * famine,Gen. 12. b. 10. He bare it paciently and
went into Egypt, He by the appointment of God,
put from his his elder ſonne * Iſmaell whome he
loued,Gen. 21. b. 14. and ſetled his hope altogither vpon the
yonger. And nowe ſheweth himſelfe readie to offer
his life alſo at the cōmaundement of the Lord:
Such is the fayth and obedience of the ſaintes of
God. For they alwaye cleaue to the ſincere and
Simple worde and commaundement of God. If
there be any thing therein, that ſeemeth difficulte,
ſtraunge, or abſurde, that they leaue to the wiſedome
and prouidence of God, to the vnderſtanding
wherof they are not hable to attaine. And in deede
right Faith & Obedience are grounded and ſtayed
vpon theſe two things, that is, the Truth, and the
Omnipotencie of God. If his promiſe ſeeme vnpoſſible,
& thereby ſhake our faith, it is Staied vp
by the conſideration of his Truth. For he can not
* but ſpeake that is True,Titus. 1. a. 2. ſeeme it neuer ſo vnpoſſible.
And againe if we doubt of the truth, we
ſtrengthen our ſelues with his Omnipotency: and
therefore appeare it to mans weakeneſſe neuer ſo
vntrue, yet God is hable to performe it. With theſe
two pyllers did Abraham ſtay vp his fayth and ſet
forwarde is readie obedience, that is declared in

all this hiſtorie.
               And Abraham ſtretching forth his arme
tooke the knife to haue killed,Verſ. 10. &c. &c.
               Nowe the purpoſe of God is opened, and the
matter declared, that whatſoeuer GOD cauſed
Abraham hitherto to do, was not to this ende, that
his ſonne ſhould be Sacrificed, but that his fayth
and Obedience toward God ſhould be tried and
teſtified to the worlde. For when Abraham had prepared
and done all thinges, and was nowe in readineſſe
to haue offered vp his Son in ſacrifice, the
Angell of God, euen in the very point, ſtaieth him,
ſaying: Lay not thy hande vpon the childe, nowe I
knowe that thou feareſt God. In which words, he
ſheweth alſo, that the feare of God is the Roote of
true obedience. God knewe before, that Abraham
did feare him: but by this maner of ſpeaking the
ſcripture gyueth vs to vnderſtande, that GOD
doth not regarde the Shewe and pretence of hys
feare and worſhip,Rom. 2. b. 13. but the true * Practiſe of the
ſame in deede,Iac. 1. d. 22. that the world alſo may vnderſtand
the ſame and * glorifie God therein.Math. 5. b. 16. They are deteſtable
to God, that pretend to feare and worſhip
him, and doe not in deede but by hipocriſie and diſſimulation.
Therfore doth he extoll here the Faith
of Abraham, that ſhewed ſo notable proofe therof.
               And Abraham lifting vp his eyes looked,Verſ. 13. 14.
and beholde there was, &c.
               God of his ſinguler prouidence, by ſuch meanes

as his wiſedome onely knoweth, prepared this
Ramme to be their vpon the ſodaine, to be offered
in the place of Iſaac. And Abraham to make a ſolemne
and perpetuall Memoriall not of his owne
Doing, but of gods Mercies: chaungeth the
name of the place, calling it, The Lorde will ſee, to
ſignifie, that God is readie, and at hande alwaye
to His, and ſeeth them in their diſtreſſe and neede.
               And the Angell of the Lorde cryed to
Abraham the ſeconde time.Verſ. 15. &c. &c.
               Thys is the fruite of Abrahams fayth and obedience,
that by the Mouth of the Angell of God
he hath Confirmed vnto him the great Bleſſings
that God before had promiſed. But for ſomuch as
the reaſon why God doth here ſo bleſſe Abraham
is added in thys wiſe. Becauſe thou haſt done thys
thing, and haſt not ſpared thy only ſonne, &c. There
may ſeeme two great Doubts to be moued. Firſt,
howe this may ſtande with the Free Promiſe of
the ſame bleſſing made to Araham cap. 12.Gen. 1
                        •
                     . a. 2. before he
ſhewed this obedience. Secondly, becauſe this
part of the bleſſing (In thy ſeede all the nations of
the earth ſhall be bleſſed) doth appertain to the Spirituall
and Heauenly bleſſing in the Sauiour of
the world Chriſt Ieſu: It may ſeeme by the words
that the ſame bleſſing did depēd vpon this Fact of
Abraham, ſo that, if he had not this done, that promiſe
had not bene performed. For he ſayth, Becauſe
thou haſt done this thing, &c. and becauſe thou haſt
heard my voyce. But thys maye ſeeme verie abſurde

and repugnant to the Scriptures that the
Sauing of the worlde by Chriſt, ſhould be graunted
becauſe of the Obedience of Abraham and not
of the Free mercie of God.
               To theſe doubtes we muſt anſwere, that, with
out exception, theſe Promiſes were made and in
dewe tyme performed of the free mercie of God,
and loue towarde, not Abraham alone, but all
mankinde alſo: not regarding their Worthineſſe,
but his Owne goodneſſe. And when God ſayth,
Becauſe thou haſt done this thing, and becauſe thou
haſt heard my voyce, we muſt vnderſtande, that
God, for our imbecillitie and weake capacitie in
heauenly matters, ſpeaketh in this place, as he
doth in manye other, after the Maner of Men.
For a man oftentimes hath a fauourable inclination
to loue an other, and that of his owne motion,
without any conſideration of deſert in the perſon,
and vpon the ſame loue towarde him, doth freely
promiſe him ſome good benefite and pleaſure. But
when he ſeeth the good will of the partie towarde
him againe, he is greatly Delited therewith, and
the more he doth declare it by his readie ſeruice,
the more he is incenſed to performe his Liberall
Promiſe to him, and to aſſure him of the ſame.
               In ye like maner doth God deale here with Abraham.
The principall Cauſes of theſe bleſſings,
and the Performance thereof are the Truth and
Free mercie God as it maye appeare in that they
were made to Abraham not onely * before he did
this,Gen. 12. a. 3. but before Iſaac was borne. The ſecond cauſe

that moueth God here to repeat them, and to confirme
Abraham in the aſſurance of them, was his
* Faith and obedience in this place declared.Iere. 5. a. 3.
               
               After theſe thinges one tolde Abraham,Verſ. 20. &c.
beholde Milcha, ſhe hath, &c.
               This may ſeeme ſtraunge to the worldly Man,
that Abraham forſaking his countrie at the calling
of Almightie GOD, and hauing the promiſe of
great increaſe of his ſeede: at the length when he
was an Hundred peares of age, hath but One
ſonne, and Nahor his brother, who taried behinde,
and had no promiſe of God, hath by that time a
Number of children. So the Bleſſings and Promiſes
of God, in this life ſeeme not to take ſuch
force, but the vngodlye be more happie then they.
But the onely ſonne of Abraham, was not giuen
by the Common Courſe of Nature, as Nahors
were, but of the mightie Power of God, aboue
all Nature or reaſon: and, before the birth of the
Child, he had the Promiſes of gods bleſſings and
the aſſured couenāt of God,Gen. 17. a. 7 that he would be * His
God, and the God of his Seede, which was a far
greater Felicitie, then the Multitude of Nahors
children.
            
         
         
            The ſecond Sunday in Lent
at Morning prayer.
            Geneſis. 27.
            
               
                  
                   AND it came to paſſe, that when Iſahac wasxed olde,
and his eyes were dimme, ſo that he could not ſee, he
called Eſau his eldeſt ſonne, and ſayee vnto him, My
ſonne? And he ſayde vnto him, Here am I.
               2 And he ſayde, Beholde, I am nowe olde, and know not
the day of my death. 3. Now therefore take I pray thée thy
weapons, thy Quiuer and thy Bowe, and get thée to the
fielde, that thou mayeſt take me ſome veneſon.
               4 And make me well taſting meates ſuch as I loue, and
bring it to me, that I may eate, that my ſoule may bleſſe
thee before that I die. 5 But Rebecca heard when Iſahac
ſpake to Eſau his ſonne: And Eſau went into the fielde to
hunt veneſon, and to bring it. 6 And Rebecca ſpake vnto
Iacob hir ſonne, ſaying, Beholde, I haue hearde thy father
talking with Eſau thy brother, and ſaying.
               7 Bring me veneſon, and make me daintie meate, that
I may eate, and bleſſe thée before the Lord, afore my death.
               6 Now therefore my ſonne heare my voyce in that which
 I commaunde thée. 9 Get thée to the flocke, and bring me
thence two good kiddes from the goates, and I will make of
them pleaſant meates for thy father, ſuch as he loueth.
               10 And thou ſhalt bring it to thy father, that he may eate,
and that he may bleſſe thée before his death.
               11 Then ſayde Iacob to Rebecca his mother, Beholde,
Eſau my brother is a hearie man and I am ſmooth.
               12 My father ſhal peraduenture féele me, and I ſhall ſéeme
vnto him as though I went about to beguile him, and ſo ſhal
I bring a curſſe vpon me, and not a bleſſing.
               13 And his mother ſayde vnto him, Vpon me be the curſſe
my 
                     〈◊〉
                  : onely heare my voyce, and go and fetch me them.
               14 And (Iacob) went, and fet them, and brought them to
his mother: and his mother made pleaſant meate, ſuch as
ſhe knew his father loued. 15 And Rebecca fet goodly rayment
of her oldeſt ſonne Eſau, which were in the houſe with

her, and put them vpon Iacob her yonger ſonne.
               
                   16 And ſhe put the ſkinnes of the kiddes vpon his handes,
and vpon the ſmooth of his necke. 17 And ſhe put that pleaſant
meate and breade which ſhe had prepared, in the hande
of her ſonne Iacob. 18 When he came to his father, hée
ſayde, My father? And he aunſwered, Here am I: who art
thou, my ſonne? 19 And Iacob ſayd vnto his father, I am
Eſau thy eldeſt ſonne, I haue done according as thou baddeſt
me: ariſe I pray thée, ſitte, and eate of my veneſon, that
thy ſoule may bleſſe me. 20 And Iſahac ſayde vnto hys
ſonne, Howe commeth it that thou haſt founde it ſo quickly
my ſonne? He aunſwered, The Lorde thy God brought it to
my hands. 21 Then ſayde Iſahac vnto Iacob, Come néere,
and I will féele thée my ſonne, whether thou be my very ſon
Eſau, or not. 22 Then went Iacob to Iſahac his father,
and he felt him, and ſayde, The voyce is Iacobs voyce, but
the handes are the handes of Eſau. 23. And he knewe him
not, becauſe his handes were hearie as his brother Eſaus
handes: and ſo he bleſſed him. 24 And he aſked him, Art 
thou my ſonne Eſau? And he ſayde, That I am.
               25 Then ſayd he,Heb. 11. d. 20. Bring me, and let me eate of my ſonnes
veneſon, that my ſoule may bleſſe thée, And he brought him,
and he eate: and he brought him wine alſo, and he dranke.
               26 And his father Iſahac ſayd vnto him, Come neere, and
kiſſe me my ſonne. 27 And he went vnto him and kiſſed
him: and he ſmelled the ſauour of his rayment, and bleſſed
him, and ſayde, Sée, the ſmell of my ſonne is as the ſmell of a
féelde which the Lorde hath bleſſed. 28 God giue thée of the
deawe of heauen, and of the fatneſſe of the earth, and plenty
of corne and wine. 29 People be thy ſeruantes, and Nations
bowe to thée: be Lorde ouer thy brethren, and thy mothers
children ſtowpe with reuerence vnto thée: curſed be he
that curſeth thée, and bleſſed be he that bleſſeth thée.
               30 Aſſoone as Iſahac had made an ende of bleſſing Iacob,
                  
and Iacob was ſcarſe gone out from the preſence of Iſahac
his father, then came Eſau his brother from his hunting.
               31 And he alſo had made a pleaſant meate, and brought it
vnto his father, and ſayde vnto his father, Let my father ariſe,
and eate of his ſonnes veneſon, that thy ſoule may bleſſe
me. Then his father Iſahac ſayd vnto him, Who art thou?
He aunſwered, I am thy ſonne, thy firſt borne Eſau.
               33 And Iſahac was greatly aſtonied out of meaſure, and
ſayde, Which (is he) and where is he then that hath hunted
veneſon and brought it me, and I haue eaten of all, before
thou cameſt? and haue bleſſed him, yea, and he ſhalbe bleſſed.
               34 When Eſau heard the wordes of his father, he cryed
aloud and bitterly aboue meaſure, and ſayd vnto his father,
Bleſſe me, I alſo (am thy ſonne) O my father.
               
                   35 Who aunſwered, Thy brother came with ſutteltie,
and hath taken away thy bleſſing.Gen. 25. e. 33 36 And he ſayd againe,
Is not he rightly named Iacob? for he hath vndermined me
nowe two times: (Firſt) he tooke away my byrth right, and
ſée, nowe he hath taken away my bleſſing alſo. And he ſayd,
Haſt thou kept neuer a bleſſing for mée?
               37 Iſahac anſwered and ſayde vnto Eſau, Beholde, I
haue made him thy Lorde, and all his brethren haue I made
his ſeruantes: Moreouer with corne and wine haue I eſtabliſhed
him: what ſhall I doe vnto thée now my ſonne?
               38 And Eſau ſayd vnto his father, Haſt thou but that one
bleſſing my father? bleſſe me, I am alſo (thy ſonne) O my
father. So lifted vp Eſau his voyce, and wept.
               39 Then Iſahac his father aunſwered and ſayde vnto
him,Heb. 11. a. 20. Beholde thy dwelling place ſhall be the fatneſſe of the
earth, and of the deawe of heauen from aboue.
               40 And through thy ſworde ſhalt thou liue, and ſhalt bée
thy brothers ſeruant: and it ſhall come to paſſe, that thou
 ſhalt get the maiſtrie, and thou ſhalt looſe his yoke from of
thy necke. 41 And Eſau hated Iacob, becauſe of the bleſſing

that his father bleſſed him withall. And Eſau ſayde in
his heart, The dayes of ſorowing for my father are at hand,
then will I ſlay my brother Iacob. 42 And theſe wordes
of Eſau her elder ſonne were told to Rebecca: And ſhe ſent,
and called Iacob hir yonger ſonne, and ſayde vnto him, Behold,
thy brother Eſau as touching thée doth comfort himſelfe
(full purpoſing) to kill thée. 43 Nowe therefore my
ſonne, heare my voyce: make thée readie, and flie to Laban
my brother at Haran. 44 And tary with him a while,
vntill thy brothers fierceneſſe be ſwaged.
               45 And vntill thy brothers wrath turne away from thée,
and he forget the things which thou haſt done to him, then
will I ſende and fet thée away from thence: why ſhoulde I
be deſolate of you both in one day? 46 And Rebecca ſpake
to Iſahat, I am wearie of my life for the daughters of Heth:
If Iacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, ſuch as theſe
(vvhich are) of the daughters of this lande, what good ſhall
my life do me?
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxvij.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               And it came to paſſe, when Iſahac olde,
and his eyes were dimme, &c.
               
                  THis whole hiſtorie that Moſes
ſetteth forth in this Chapiter ſo
largely, may ſeeme at the firſt to conteyne
no great matter of weight, but
onely the Sleight and Craft of a mother,
and her ſonne, cauſing the Father to tranſferre
the bleſſing of his Heritage vpon one, that

he would not haue done it vnto. But if with Reuerence,
as our duetie is, we looke into the ſcriptures
of God, and lay aſide vaine and wicked cogitations,
we ſhall ſee in this place the worke of the
wiſedome & Prouidence of God vſing the Blemiſhes
and frailties of the Godly, vnto his glorie, and
to the perfourmance of his determined purpoſe
and promiſe. For as the Patriarkes were Godly
men,Eccle. 44. c. 16 17. 18. &c. and in the * ſinguler Fauour of GOD, ſo
had they, as men, their Imperfections and offences:
which God vndoubtedly miſliked, and yet, of
his mercie, pardoned, as in other Chapters before
is declared. The like is here nowe in this place,
as well in Iſaac as in Rebecca, and Iacob her ſonne.
Therfore no perſon can by them take Example of
the like doyng, but rather learue a Godly leſſon to
be more ware of themſelues, and to take heed leaſt
to the Haſarding of the Fauour of God they doe
that, which ſhall be contrarie to his holy Will and
diſpleaſant vnto him.
               When the two children were borne, the determined
purpoſe of God was declared,Gen. 25. c. 23. and his Election
made manifeſt,Oſee. 12. a. 3 * That the elder,
                  Rom. 9. c. 12. 
                  Eſau, ſhould
be Seruant vnto Iacob the yonger. This was reuealed
vnto Rebecca, and not vnknowne to Iſaac the
father. And yet this notwithſtanding, of a Carnall
affection and loue towarde his elder Sonne, hee
ſought to Tranſfer the bleſſing of God & heritage
of preheminence in the couenant of God vnto him:
Wherein he might ſeeme to ouerthwart the Election
of God, which coulde not be done without ſome

offence, and therefore GOD did ſuffer him to be
Deluded by his Wife and Childe. And yet this
humaine affection in Iſaac was ioyned with a conſtant
fayth in the fauor of God, wherby he beleeued
that aſwel himſelf as other Patriarks were ordeined
y• good inſtruments of God, by their bleſſings
to denounce and declare the Heritage and Succeſſion
of the Couenant of God made to Abraham
and his Seede.
               
               And Rebecca ſpake vnto Iacob her ſonne
ſaying,Verſ. 6. 7. &c. beholde, I haue heard, &c.
               
                  Moſes here declareth, by what Craft the bleſſing
was tranſferred to Iacob from Eſau. And truely
this dealing of Rebecca is not without blame. For
albeit ſhe could not rule her huſbande, and Cauſe
him to yeelde to the declared purpoſe of God, in
preferring Iacob the yonger brother: yet ſhoulde
ſhe not haue vſed ſo vncomely and vnlawfull
meanes to worke the thing by Counterfeyting
and Vntruth.
               If ſhe * knewe,Gen. 25. c. 35. as ſhe did in deede, that it was the
Immutable purpoſe & electiō of God, She ſhould
haue paciently looked, and haue abidden vntill
God had wrought it by ſuch waies as he thought
good, if ſhe could not by any godly perſwaſiō haue
brought it to paſſe. But ſuch Frailetie God often
in his Saintes of his great mercie pardoneth,
when it is not done of Malicious minde and purpoſe,
as ſurely it was not in Rebecca, but of a deſire
by ſome meanes or other to bring that to effect,

which ſhe knewe was the will of God.
               Then ſaide Iacob to Rebecca his mother,Verſ. 11. & 
                        •
                     
                  
Beholde, Eſau my brother, &c.
               
                  Iacob did to eaſily yeelde to his Mothers perſwaſion,
and, as in his words, he ſhewed, that he
feared his father, and was lothe to enter his diſpleaſure:
ſo he ſhoulde haue feared GOD much
more, and Conſidered, what a blemiſhe it was to
purchaſe his bleſſing by Coūterfayting & vntruth.
For although he reſpected a right ende, that is, to
attaine that,Gen. 25. c. 23. which was the * promiſe of God: yet
by Such meanes he ſhould not haue done it.
               Then ſaide Iſaac vnto Iacob come neere,Verſ. 21. 22.
and I will feele thee my ſonne, &c.
               
                  Iſaac did ſuſpect, that he was abuſed, & therefore
Tryeth the matter by all meanes he can. But
it pleaſed God to dull hys ſenſes, partly to ſhewe,
that Man laboureth in * vaine to ouerthwart hys
Purpoſe,Gen. 45. c. 8. & that which he is determined to haue:Gen. 48. d. 18.
partly,Prou. 21. d. 30. that, by this maner of correction, he might
puniſhe and Chaſtice his Immoderate affection
towarde Eſau his elder ſonne.
               God giue thee of the dewe of heauen,Verſ. 28. 29. &
of the fatneſse of the earth, &c.
               Vnder theſe worldly bleſſings the auncient fathers
conteined the Heauēly promiſes, Albeit they
be not vitered ſo Plainly, as they haue bene ſence
in the time of the Goſpell. For Gods will was to

deale with thē vnder tipes * and figures of worldly
things.1. Cor. 16. b. 11 And therefore the lande of Chanaan and
the Fertilitie thereof is a tipe of the heauenly and
euerlaſting Felicitie with God, and the Subiection
of enemies doth ſignifie the Conqueſt and ouerthrowe
of our Spirituall enimies to whome
we were thrall and in daunger.
               When Eſau hearde the wordes of his father,Verſ. 34. &c.
he cried alowde, &c.
               A man might think, that Gods mercy would haue
bene mooued with this * heauie and ſorrowful complaynt
of Eſau,
                  Heb. 12. d. 17. for the loſſe of his fathers bleſſing:
but it is euident, that this lamentation did not proceede
of a Sound fayth and true Repentance, but
rather of a prowde minde and of a Deſperate furie
and rage, as it maye appeare by the Hatred
that he proteſted, and by the bitter wordes & greeuous
Threatnings that after he vſed againſt hys
brother, Manacing that after his fathers death
he would aſſuredlye kill him. And of what affection
he was, and howe ſmally he eſteemed his birth
right and the felicitie that might come thereof, he
declared, when he Solde the ſame to Iacob his
brother for a meſſe of wortes.
               And ſhe called Iacob her yonger ſonne &
ſaide vnto him, thy brother,Verſ. 42. 43. &c.
               The bleſſing that Iſaac had giuen to his yonger
ſonne might ſeeme of Small force, ſeing he was
brought euen nowe preſently into ſo great Feare

to be Slaine by hys brother: and this was vndoubtedly
no ſmall temptation and trouble to the
minde of Rebecca, that ſhe ſawe her ſonne, whome
ſhe ſo tenderly loued, by her Fact to be brought in
daunger of Preſent death. But yet did ſhe and
her ſon ſo much eſteeme this Bleſſing, that rather
then they woulde yeelde it vp to Eſau to haue his
fauour, he was Contented to go into voluntarie
Baniſhment and ſhe to forgo the Preſence and
Companie of her ſonne, that ſhe ſo much eſteemed.
By this example in Iacob we muſt learne to take
paciently,Ge. 12. c 10. 12 if after the hope of Gods bleſſing and of
his fauour,Gen. 32. c. 9. 11 *immediatly the Croſſe of affliction do
followe,Ge. 37. a. 5. 20 and not for the trouble and daunger of
the worlde to forgoe the ſweete promiſes of God.Exo. 5. b. 3. 9.
Neyther muſt we ſeeke to purchaſe the quietneſſe
of thys lyfe with the Loſſe of Goddes Heauenly
Bleſſing.Ioh. 9. d. 33. 34.
               
            
         
         
            The ſecond Sunday in Lent
at Euening praier.
            Geneſis. 34.
            
               
                   DIna the daughter of Lea, which ſhe bare vnto Iacob,
went out to ſée the daughters of the lande.
               2 Whom when Sichem the ſonne of Hemor
the Heuite Lord of the countrie ſawe, he tooke her,
and laye with her, and defiled her.
               3 And his heart laye vnto Dina the daughter of Iacob,
and he loued that damſell, and ſpake kindely vnto her.
               4 And Sichem ſpake vnto his father Hemor, ſaying, Get

me this maiden vnto my wife. 5 And Iacob heard that he
had defiled Dina his daughter (his ſonnes being with their
cattle in the fielde) and Iacob helde his peace vntill they
were come. 6 And Hemor the father of Sichem, went
out vnto Iacob to commune with him.
               7 And when the ſonnes of Iacob (comming out of the
fielde) heard it, it grieued them, and they were not a little
wroth, bicauſe he had wrought folly in Iſrael, in that he had
lyen with Iacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be
done. 8 And Hemor communed with them, ſaying, The 
ſoule of my ſonne Sichem lōgeth for your daughter: I pray
you geue her him to wyfe. 9 And make maryages wyth
vs, and giue your daughters vnto vs, and take our daughters
vnto you. 10 And ye ſhall dwell with vs, and the lande
ſhall be before you: dwell, and doe your buſineſſe therein, and
haue poſſeſſions therein. 11 And Sichem ſayde vnto her father
and vnto her brethren, Let me finde grace in your eies,
and whatſoeuer ye appoint me, that wyll I geue.
               12 Aſke fréely of me both dowrie and giftes, and I wyll
giue according as ye ſaye vnto me, ſo that ye geue me the
damſell to wyfe. 13 But the ſonnes of Iacob anſwered to
Sichem & Hemor his father, talking amongeſt themſelues
deceptfully: becauſe he had defyled Dina their ſiſter.
               14 And they ſaide vnto them, We can not doe this thing,
that we ſhould geue our ſiſter to one that is vncircumciſed:
for that were an abhomination vnto vs.
               15 But in this will we conſent vnto you: if ye will be as
we be, and all the males amongſt you be circumciſed.
               16 Then will we geue our daughters vnto you, and take
your daughters to vs, and will dwell with you, and be one
people. 17 But and if ye will not hearken vnto vs to be
circumciſed, then will we take our Daughter, and go our
waies. 18 Their wordes pleaſed Hemor, and Sichem hys
ſonne. 19 And the yong man differde not to doe the thing,

becauſe he had a luſt to Iacobs daughter: he was alſo moſt
ſet by of all that was in his fathers houſe.
               20 Then Hemor and St
                     ••
                  em his ſonne went vnto the
gate of their citie, and cōmuned with the men of their citie,
ſaying. 21 Theſe men liue peaceably among vs, and dwell
in the lande, and doe their occupation therein: and beholde,
the land is large ynough for them, we will take their daughters
to wiues, and giue them our daughters.
               22 Onely herein will they conſent vnto vs for to dwell
with vs, and to be one people, If all the males that are among
vs be circumciſed, as they are circumciſed?
               23 Shall not their goodes and their ſubſtance, and all their
cattell be oures? let vs onely conſent vnto them, and they
will dwell with vs. 24 And vnto Hemor and Sichem hys
ſonne hearkened all that went out of the gate of the citie:
and all the males were circumciſed, whatſoeuer went out
 at the gate of his citie. 25 And the thirde day whyles they
were ſore, two of the ſonnes of Iacob, Simeon and Leui
Dinas brethren, tooke eyther of them his ſworde, and went
into the citie boldly, and ſlue all the males.
               26 And ſlue alſo Hemor and Sichem his ſonne with
the edge of the ſworde, and tooke Dina out of Sichems
houſe, and went their way. 27 And the ſonnes of Iacob
comming vpon the dead,
                     
                        •
                     
                   ſpoyled the citie, bicauſe they had
defiled their ſiſter.
               28 And tooke their ſhéepe, oxen, and their aſſes, and whatſoeuer
was in the citie, and alſo in the fields.
               29 And all their goodes, and all their children, and their
wiues tooke they captiue, and made hauok of all that was in
the houſe. 30 But Iacob ſaide to Simeon and Leui, Ye
haue troubled me, and made me to be abhorred of the inhabitours
of the land of the Chanaanite and the Pherezite: and
I being fewe in number, they ſhall gather themſelues together
againſt me, and ſlay me, and ſo ſhall I and my houſe he

deſtroyed. 31 And they anſwered, Should he deale wyth
our ſiſter as with an harlot?
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxxiiij
Chapter of Geneſis.
               Dina the daughter of Lea, which ſhee
bare vnto Iacob, went out to ſee, &c.
               
                  
                     MOſes in this Chapter ſetteth
forth a great tentation that happened
vnto Iacob, far more troubleſome and
daungerous, then that was of the
feare of his brother Eſaus diſpleaſure.
He was nowe at ſome quietneſſe in the companie
of his wife, children, and familie, and ſo had remayned
a good time, doing vndoubtedly the dutie
of a good and godly Gouernour of his houſholde.
But ſodainely falleth out this trouble and reproch
of the Rauiſhing of his daughter Dina, much ſurelye
to the griefe of his minde, that did ſo deerely
eſteeme the Chaſtitie of his daughter. By which
we may vnderſtande, both what daunger maye
come to yong womē by Idle gadding and Gaſing
abroad without the company of ſome graue Perſons
to Ouerſee them: and alſo, that euen good
men ſometime haue ſo waiwarde and ouerthwart
Wantons to their children, as wil not well be brideled
within order, when their Parents haue done
all that they can. And yet maye there ſeeme ſome

negligence in Lea hir mother, that ſhe did ſuffer
hir ſo Looſely to go abroade.
               And Sichem ſpake vnto his father Hemor,Verſ. 4.
ſaying get me this maiden, &c.
               The heart of this yong Gentleman was ſo
ſet vpon this Maiden in vntemperate heate of
loue, that he coulde not ſatiſfie himſelfe by hir defyling
and rauiſhment, but nowe ſeeketh to haue
her to wife, and that in a maner by force. For although
both his father and he vſed Faire wordes
and great promiſes: yet he keepeth her at home in
his houſe and would not ſuffer her to retourne to
her father. If he had ſought to haue maried her
before the Villanie offered, there had bene no
great euill, but firſt to worke ſo great reproche to
the People of God, and his Choſen Patriarke,
and then to ſeeke vnder a faire colour a forcible
Mariage made the offence the greater.
               And Hemor the father of Sichem went
out vnto Iacob,Verſ. 6. &c.
               A godly Father and a good Prince or gouernour
would firſt haue ſharpely corrected his Son,
and then afterwarde haue done that might haue
ſeemed agreeable to reaſon and godlineſſe. But it
may appeare this Hemor was a cockering father,
and a Looſe gouernour, and that the like examples
of wantonneſſe had bene common there without
puniſhment. And therfore the ſame prouoked God
of his iuſt iudgement to ſuffer ſo great a Plague

to come vpon them, although the Sonnes of Iacob
which were the inſtruments thereof can not be
excuſed of outragious Furie, that for the offence of
Oue perſonne deſtroyed and ſpoyled the Whole
Citie.
               And Hemor communed with them ſaying,Verſ. 8. &c.
The ſoule of my ſonne, &c.
               In that Hemor ſo earneſtly labourethe to Iacob
and his Sonnes for the mariage of Dina, and
made ſo great offers, it may appeare, that euen among
the Heathens and Infidels, it was thought
neceſſarie to haue the Conſent of Parents to the
Mariage of their Children, Much more ſhoulde
that reuerence be vſed among Chriſtians, and
them that profeſſe the Feare of God.
               But the ſonnes of Iacob anſwered to Sichem
and Hemor talking among,Verſ. 13. 14. &c.
               It is not to be merueiled, if the ſonnes of Iacob
were much grieued to haue ſo great a reproch and
villanie wrought to their fathers Houſe, neyther
are they in that any thing to be blamed; yea, if there
had bene any ordinarie Magiſtrate to haue puniſhed
ſo great an outrage, they might and ought
with ſafe conſcience to haue complayned to him.
But I ſee not, by what authoritie they coulde take
the ſworde of Reuengement in their *owne hands,
and ſo farre exceede the Meaſure of Iuſtice, as to
deſtroy an whole Citie for the offence of one. Well
might they be the Inſtruments of Gods Iuſtice,

for cauſes to them vnknowne, but that doth not
excuſe them, who followed their owne affection
and deſire of Reuengement.
               In that they doe diſſemble here and pretende
conſent of Mariage, if the Sichemites would be circumciſed,
it doth increaſe their fault, and they make
the ordinance of God a colour to worke their affection.Gen. 24. a. 3.
For their conſciences did tell them,Gen. 28. a. 2. 2. that
neyther conueniently they might * marie wyth the
Inhabitants of that Countrey,Cor. 6. c. 14. neyther in deede
that they did meane ſo to doe, but to be reuenged,
they ſuffered the Sacrament of Gods Couenant
to bee Diſtayned of the Faythleſſe and Heathen
perſons.
               Their woordes pleaſed Hemor and Sichem
his ſonne,Verſ. 18. &c. &c.
               When Hemor the Prince and his Sonne, and
all the reſidue of the people at their perſwaſion did
ſo eaſily yeelde to the motion of Iacobs Sonnes
wo
                     ••
                   any further inſtruction: it is euident they had
no conſcience at all, nor paſſed what Religion they
receyued, nor what God they worſhipped, ſo they
might be in hope either to ſatiſfie their bodily pleaſure,
or to attaine ſome Worldly Commoditie and
rycheſſe. For theſe were the onely cauſes and reſpectes
that mooued them. And where ſuch mindes
are both in Prince and Subiectes, there can not
want aboundance of all euill. Wherefore, albeit
it be not expreſſed in the text, it may well be gathered
there were great Vices generally among thē,

that prouoked the Wrath of God agaynſt them.
               And the thirde day while they were ſore,Verſ. 25. &c
two of the ſonnes of Iacob, &c.
               Albeit onely the two ſonnes of Iacob are here
named, it is not likely they did the thing alone, but
that they were the chiefe cauſers and Capitaynes,
and had other of their brethren and of their fathers
familie with them, without their fathers conſent,
or at the leaſtwiſe pretending that they would doe
nothing but fetche home their Siſter, who was
there vniuſtly detayned, and not making him priuie
of their whole purpoſe.
               But Iacob ſayde to Simeon and Leuie,Verſ. 30. ye
haue troubled me and made me, &c.
               
                  Iacob chaſticeth his Sonnes, and ſheweth how
Raſhly and vndiſcretely they haue done, and into
how great daunger they had brought both hym &
themſelues, and al that euer apperteyned to them.
And ſurely if GOD had not of his diuine Prouidence
marueylouſly Preſerued his people, leſſe
daunger coulde not haue followed, then Iacob
ſpeaketh of. But the Raſhneſſe and Heate of
yong men is ſuch, that they are ſo blinded with the
deſire of theyr owne phantaſies and affections, as
they regarde no perilles, nor thinke any Councell
to be like to their owne.
            
         
         
            
            The thirde Sunday in Lent
at Morning prayer.
            Geneſ. 39.
            
               IOſeph was brought vnto Egypt, and Putiphar a
Lorde of Pharaos, and his chiefe ſtewarde, an Egyptian,
bought him of the Iſmaelites which had
brought him thither. 2 And God was with Ioſeph,
and he became a luckie man, continuing in the houſe of his
mayſter the Egyptian. 3 And his mayſter ſaw that God
was with him, and that God made all that he did to proſper
in his hande. 4 And Ioſeph found grace in his mayſters
ſight, and ſerued him: And he made him ouerſeer of his houſe,
and put all that he had in his hande. 5 And it came to paſſe
from the time that he had made him ouerſéer of his houſe,
and ouer all that he had, the Lorde bleſſed the Egyptians
houſe for Ioſephs ſake: and the bleſſing of the Lorde was vpon
all that he had in the houſe, and in the fielde.
               6 And therefore he left all that he had in Ioſephs hande:
and he knewe nothing with him, ſaue onely the breade which
he did eate. And Ioſeph was a goodly perſon, and a well fauoured.
7 And after this, his maiſters wife caſt her cyes
vpon Ioſeph, and ſayde, (come) lie with me.
               8 But he refuſed, and ſayde vnto his maiſters wife, Beholde,
my maiſter woteth not what he hath in the houſe with
me, and hath committed all that he hath to my hande.
               9 There is no man greater in the houſe then I, neyther
hath he kept any thing from me but onely thée, becauſe thou
art his wife: howe then can I doe this great wickedneſſe,
and ſinne agaynſt God? And after this maner ſpake ſhée to
Ioſeph day by day: but he hearkened net vnto her to ſléepe

néere hir, or to be in hir companie. 11 And on a certaine day
Ioſeph entered into the houſe to doe his buſineſſe, and there
was none of the houſholde by, in the houſe.
               12 Then ſhe caught him by the garment, ſaying, lie with
me. And he left his garment in hir hande, and fled, and got
him out. 13 And when ſhe ſawe that he had left his garment
in hir hande, and was fled out.
               14 She called vnto the men of hir houſe, and tolde them,
ſaying, Sée, he hath brought in an Hebrue vnto vs to doe vs
ſhame: for he came in to me to haue lyen with me, and I began
to crie with a lowde voyce. 15 And when he hearde
that I lift vp my voyce and cryed, he left his garment with
me, and fledde away and got hym out.
               16 And ſhe layde vp his garment by hir, vntill hir Lorde
came home. 17 And ſhe tolde him with theſe wordes, ſaying,
This Hebrue ſeruant which thou haſt brought vnto vs,
came vnto me to doe me ſhame. 17 But aſſoone as I lift vp 
my voyce and cryed, he left his Garment with me and fled
out. 19 When his mayſter heard the wordes of his wife,
which ſhe tolde him, ſaying, after this maner did thy ſeruant
to me,Pſal. 103. b. 18 he waxed wroth. 20 And Ioſephs maiſter tooke him,
and put him in priſon, in the place where the kings priſoners
lay bounde: and there continued he in priſon.
               21 But the Lorde was with Ioſeph, and ſhewed him mercie,
and got him fauour in the ſight of the Lord of the priſon.
               22 And the kéeper of the priſon committed to Ioſephes
hande all the priſoners that were in the priſon houſe: and
whatſoeuer was done there, that did he.
               23 And the kéeper of the priſon looked vnto nothing that
was vnder his hande, ſéeing that the Lorde was with him:
For whatſoeuer he did, the Lord made it to proſper.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxxix.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               Joſeph was brought vnto Egypt,Verſ. 1. and Putiphar
a Lorde of Pharaos, &c.
               
                  
                     MOſes in this Chapter beginneth
to ſet forth a notable example in
Ioſeph of the Prouidence and wiſedome
of God, turning the enuious
and Malicious indeuors of Ioſephs
brothers vnto the worke of his Glorie and preſeruation
of his people. God was determined, that
after certaine yeares,Deut. 28. b. 15 Leuit. 26. b. 14 for the * Sinfulneſſe of men
there ſhould by his iuſt iudgement come vpon all
that part of the world a general Plague of Dearth
and Scarcitie,Malach. 2. a. 2 in which there was great daunger
that Iacob and his ſonnes and familie, being the
poſteritie of the ſeede of Abraham, to whom he had
made his Couenant, ſhoulde Periſhe and die for
Lacke of ſuſtenance. Therefore, many yeares before
taking occaſion of hys brothers Malice, he
* ſendeth Ioſeph before into Egypt,
                  Pſa. 104. b 17 and there after
ſome trouble, at the length aduaunceth him to
great Power and honour, that he might be an
helper and Succourer for his Father & brethren,
in the time of their great Diſtreſſe. The Brothers
of Ioſeph neyther foreſawe any euill to come, nor
ſought for any thing in their doings, but the Satiſfying

of their owne Enuie and Malice towards
him, but God vſed their Malice for the inſtrument
of his glorie.
               And God was with Ioſeph,Verſ. 2. 3. 4 and he became
a luckie man, continuing in the, &c.
               By this example in Ioſeph we haue to learne
that God oftentimes Suffereth thoſe that he loueth
moſt deerely, and by whome he will ſet foorth
the Glorie of his name,1. Reg. 19. b. 12 Dan. 6. e. 16. to be caſt unto * Trouble
and Affliction.1. Reg. 23. d. 36 But yet he is ſo carefull for them,
that he doth not onely Stay the power of the wicked
towarde them, but alſo worketh them Grace,
Fauour, and Credite, euen with Heathens and
vngodly perſons,Exod. 12. f. 36. ſuch as this Putifer the Egyptian
and the keeper of the priſon were.Pſa. 105. g. 44 So that vnder
his * very Enimies,3. Reg. 18. c. 13. he doth preſerue hys elect and
choſen.
               
                  Ioſeph, was nowe become a Bondeman, and
afterwarde is made a Priſoner, and yet God increaſeth
him with his bleſſings. Whereby we may
vnderſtande, that God hath a loue and care of his,
thoughe they be neuer ſo baſe, ſo ſimple, and ſo
Miſerable in the worlde.
               And the Lorde bleſſed the Egiptians
houſe for Ioſephs ſake,Verſ. 5. 6. &c.
               God for his electes ſake doth not onely oftentimes
Spare the godleſſe and Wicked Perſons,
but alſo * bleſſeth them with increaſe of worldly benefites,G
                        •
                     n. 30. e. 30.
by that meanes to aſſwage their furious

and Tyrannicall ſpirites towarde them, that they
may liue in more Quiet and comfort vnderneath
them.
               And after this his maſter wife caſt her
eyes vpon Ioſeph,Verſ. 7. &c. and ſaide, &c.
               Nowe falleth out a newe temptation to Ioſeph
by his maſters wife, through which he was caſt into
greater trouble, then euer he was before.
               In Putifars wife yo haue y• example of a wicked
and Adulterous woman, who although ſhe had a
Noble man to her huſband, that honoured and loued
her: yet, of a ſinnefull and ſhameleſſe nature,
being a Woman, Woeth this godly yongman her
own Seruant, and entiſeth hym to horrible Aduterie,
moued onely therevnto by the good giftes,
and bleſſings of God as well in the Bodie, as in
the minde of Ioſeph. And in thys her diueliſh purpoſe
gyueth not ouer by ſundrie repulſes, but with
impudent Obſtin
                     •••
                  , contrarie to the nature of
Womanhead, contynueth in the ſame, euen to the
vſing of Violence to the yong man. And when ſhe
ſawe his Conſtancie to be ſuch, as by no way shée
could winne him, with ſhameleſſe Malice to cloke
and colour her owne wickedneſſe (as the * maner
of ſuch perſons is) ſhe accuſeth hym to her huſband,Prou. 30. c. 20
that he would haue Rauiſhed her, and by
that occaſion, cauſed him to be caſt into priſon.
               In Ioſepth you haue ye example aſ wel of a faithful
ſeruant, as of a Chaſt yong man, hauing the feare
of God before hys eyes. For albeit he were vnmaried,

in the Heate of yong yeares, and prouoked
by his Ladie and Maiſtres at ſundrie times,
watching fitte occaſions of ſecreaſie for ſo lewde a
purpoſe: yet could he neuer be wonne to yeelde to
ſuch vnthankfull Villanie toward his Maiſter, of
whome he had bene intertayned with ſo great fauour.
Yea, and when by the Malice of the woman
the matter was brought to extremitie, he rather
choſe bothe to * leeſe the Fauour and credite wyth
his maiſter,2. Cor. 6. b. 8. and to abide all Miſerie, Impriſonment,
yea and Death alſo, then any way to haue
his Conſcience touched with ſo Fowle a ſinne before
God.
               And Ioſephs maister tooke him and put
him in priſon,Verſ. 20. in the place, &c.
               This was great Lightneſſe and raſheneſſe in
Putifar eyther by the blinde Rage of Ielouſie, or
by Immoderate affection and Credite toward his
lewde wife without iuſt and further Examination
to condemne a ſeruant, whom he had of long time
Tried ſo Faithfull and profitable, and in whome
he had ſeene the euident tokens of Gods Fauour
and aſſiſtance in all his doings.
               But the Lorde was with Ioſeph,Verſ. 21, 22. &c. and
gotte him fauour with, &c.
               God neuer leaueth his,Pſal. 90. c. 15 but in the * deepeſt afflictions
is with them,Pſal. 33. d. 19 and procureth them reliefe.
            
         
         
            
            The thirde Sunday in Lent
at Euening prayer.
            Geneſis. 42.
            
               
                   ANd Iacob ſeyng that there was corne in Egypt, ſaid
vnto hys ſonnes. Why gape ye one vpon another?
               2 And he ſayde, Beholde, I haue heard that there
is corne in Egypt: get you downe thyther, and bye
vs corne from thence, that we may lyue, and not dye.
               3 So went Ioſephes ten brethren downe to bye corne in
Egypt. 4 But Beniamin Ioſephs brother would not
Iacob ſende with his other brethren: for he ſayde, Leſt peraduenture
deſtruction come vpon him.
               5 And the ſonnes of Iſrael came to bye corne among other
that came: for there was dearth in the lande of Chanaan,
6 And Ioſeph was gouernour in the lande, & ſolde
to all the people of the lande. And Ioſephes brethren came,
and bowed themſelues with their faces downe to the ground
before him. 7 When Ioſeph ſawe his brethren, he knewe
them, and made hymſelfe ſtraunge vnto them, and ſpake
roughly vnto them, ſaying, Whence come ye? They anſwered,
Out of the lande of Chanaan to bye vittayle.
               8 And Ioſeph knewe his brethren, but they knewe not
him. 9 And Ioſeph remembred his dreames which he dreamed
of them, and ſaide vnto them, Ye are ſpies: and to ſée
where the lande is weake, is your comming.
               10 And they ſaide vnto him. Nay my Lorde, but to bye
vittayle thy ſeruantes are come. 11 We are all one mans
ſonnes, and meane truely, and thy ſeruantes are no ſpies.
               12 And he ſayd vnto them againe, Nay: but to ſée where
the lande is weake, is your comming.
               
                  
13 And they ſaide, We thy ſeruants are twelue brethren,
the ſonnes of one man in the lande of Chanaan: and behold
the yongeſt is this day with our father, and one no man weteth
where he is. 14 And Ioſeph ſayde vnto them, That is
it that I ſpake vnto you when I ſayde, Ye are ſpies.
               15 Hereby ye ſhall be proued (by) the lyfe of Pharao, ye
ſhall not go hence except your yongeſt brother come hither.
               16 Send out one of you, which may fet your brother, and
ye ſhall be kept in priſon, that your wordes may be proued
whether there be any truth in you: or elſe, (by) the lyfe of
Pharaoye are but ſpies. 17 And he put them altogither in
warde thrée daies. 18 And Ioſeph ſayd vnto them the thirde
day, This doe, and liue: (for) I feare God.
               19 If you be true men, let one of your brethren be bound
in the houſe of your priſon: and go ye, carie corne (to put
avvay) the famine from your houſholde.
               20 But bring your yongeſt brother vnto me, and ſo ſhall
your wordes be tried true, and ye ſhall not die. And they did
ſo. 21 And one ſayde to another, We haue verily ſinned
againſt our brother, in that we ſaw the anguiſh of his ſoule,
when he beſought vs, and we would not heare him: & therfore
is this trouble come vpon vs.
               22 And Ruben anſwered them, ſaying. Saw I not vnto
you, that you ſhould not ſinne againſt the la
                     •
                  , and ye would
not heare? and ſée, now his bloud is required.
               23 They were not aware that Ioſeph vnderſtoode them:
for he ſpake vnto them by an interpreter.
               24 And he turned from them and wept: and turned to
them againe and communed with them, and tooke out Simeon
from amongſt them, and bound him before their eies.
               25 And Ioſeph commaunded to fill their ſacks with corne,
and put euery mans money in his ſacke, and to giue them
vittaile to ſpende by the way: and thus did he vnto them.
               26 And they laded their aſſes with the corne, and departed

thence. 27 And as one of them opened his ſack for to giue
his aſſe prouēder in the Inne, he eſpied his money, for it was
in his ſackes mouth: 28 And he ſaide vnto his brethren,
My money is reſtored to me againe, for lo, it is in my ſacke.
And their heart fayled them, and they were aſtonied, and
ſayde one to another, why hath God dealt thus with vs?
               29 And they came vnto Iacob their father, vnto the land
of Chanaan, and tolde him all that befell vnto them, ſaying.
30 The man (vvho is) the Lorde of the lande, ſpake
roughly to vs, and tooke vs for ſpies of the countrie.
               31 And we ſayde vnto him, We meane truely, we neuer
were ſpyes. 32 We be twelue brethren, ſonnes of our
father: one is awaye, and the yongeſt is thys day with our
father in the lande of Chanaan. 33 And the Lorde of the
countrie ſaide againe vnto vs, Hereby ſhall I knowe that ye
meane truely: Leaue one of your brethren here with me,
and take (foode) to put away the famine from your houſholdes,
and get you awaye. 34 And bring your yongeſt
brother vnto me, that I may knowe that you are no ſpies,
but meane truely: ſo will I deliuer you your brother, and
ye ſhall occupie in the lande. 35 And as they emptied their
ſackes, beholde, euery mans bundell of money was in his
ſacke: And when both they and their father ſawe the bundelles
of money, they were afraide.
               36 And Iacob their father ſayde vnto them. Me haue ye
robbed of my children: Ioſeph is away, and Simeon is away,
and ye will take Beniamin away: all theſe things are
againſt me. 37 Ruben, ſaid vnto his father, Slay my two
ſonnes, it I bring him not to thée againe: deliuer him to my
hande, and I will bring him to thée againe. 38 And he ſayd,
My ſonne ſhall not go downe with you, for his brother is
dead, and he is left alone: if deſtruction come vpon him by the
way which ye go, ye ſhal bring my gray heade with ſorowe
vnto the graue.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .42.
Chapter of Eſay.
               And he ſaide,Verſ. 2. beholde, I haue hearde
there is corne in Egypt, &c.
               
                  THe houſe of the good Patriarke
and godly father Iacob was ſubiect
to the neceſſitie and daunger of the
Famine,Gen. 12. c. 10. euen as * before it had happened
to Abraham and Iſaac.
                  Gen. 26. a. 1. So God
is wont often to make his good and godly perſons
partakers of the common Calamities to the ende
that that rod, which is to ye wicked a Puniſhment
and correction, may be to them an Exerciſe of their
Fayth and pacience,Ier. 37. c. 14. to their greater benefite:Ezech. 4. b. 8. So
it fell out to * Ieremy,
                  Dan. 3. b. 18. 
                  Ezechiel, Daniel. We haue here
alſo to obſerue the courſe of Gods Prouidence
falling out to truth, when men leaſt thinke of it.
Ioſephs * Dreame,Gen. 37. b. 7. that moued his brethren to enuye
him, is nowe vpon this occaſion to be fulfilled.
Ioſeph was now of great authority in Egypt, without
whoſe conſent, no Corne could be ſolde. And
Iacob, although vnknowing, is moued by the Inſtinction
of God to ſende his ſonnes into Egypt to
bye corne, by which occaſion they muſt needs come
to Ioſeph and Honor him as Lorde of the lande.
               
               So went Ioſephs tenne brethren,Verſ. 3. 4. &c. but
Beniamin Ioſephs brother, Iacob, &c.
               You haue here the Example of a Fatherly and
tender Loue towarde his yonger ſonne, whom he
would not raſhely commit to Daunger, eyther by
reaſon of his Tender age, or other Incident occaſions,
more like to fall to hym, then to his other
Children.
               And Ioſephs brethren came,Verſ. 6. and bowed
themſelues before him, &c.
               The Dreame that Ioſeph tolde to his brethren
Cap. 37.Gen. 37. b. 7. 9 is here performed, but vtterly as yet
vnknown to themſelues, as often Propheſies are
fulfilled by the Ignorance of men in Gods affayres.
It was propheſied that the Iewes ſhould
Reiect and put to death Chriſt the Son of God,
which they did in deede by Ignorance. For if they
had known it they would not haue crucified the Lord
of glorie.
                  Act. 3. c. 17. 
                  Act.
                  1. Cor. 2. b. 8. 3. 1. Cor. 2. The Apoſtle propheſeth,
That in the latter dayes ſome ſhould attende to falſe
ſpirites and doctrines of Deuils. 1. Tim. 4.1. Tim. 4. a. 1. And ſo we
ſee it to haue fallen out, but not with ye Knowledge
and Confeſſion of them, that doe it, who obſtinately
ſtande in this that they Defende nothing but
Truth and Godlyneſſe.Pſal. 50. a. 5. But * God will be alway
iuſtified in his Prophecies and Promiſes,Pſal. 61. a. 9. and all
* Men ſhall be founde Liers.Pſal. 115. a. 11.
               
               
               When Joſeph ſawe his brethren he knewe
&c.Verſ. 7. 
                        •
                     
                   and ſpake roughly vnto them, &c.
               This might ſeeme to be of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or vpon
deſire of Reuengement, that Ioſeph vſeth the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Roughly. But we 
                     〈…〉
                   the
Acts of good men by the 
                     〈…〉
                   at
the firſt, vntill we ſee the Ende of their doings. For
oftentimes, they haue other cauſes 
                     〈…〉
                  
then commonly to all men are knowne. Chriſt him
ſelfe ſpake *Math. 15. c. 24 26. Roughly to the 
                     〈…〉
                  
the firſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the End he 
                     〈…〉
                   with Clement.
               Ioſeph knowing by his 
                     〈…〉
                   the Wickedneſſe
of his Brethren, might 
                     〈◊〉
                   Doubt, whether
they had 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈…〉
                  
his yonge
                     •
                   brother 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  To boulte it out, whether it 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               And Ioſeph remembred his dreames,Verſ. 9. that
he dreamed of them, &c.
               
                  Ioſeph 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   before▪
Therefore being put in 
                     〈◊〉
                   of them now,
he ſo deale
                     ••
                  y 
                     〈◊〉
                   his brethren, as, when they
ſhould be opened vnto them, thée might not onely
ſimplie Beleeue them, but with Feare 
                     〈◊〉
                   Reuerence
acknowledge the Tri
                     ••
                   of GOD in them,
with 
                     〈◊〉
                   of their 
                     〈…〉
                   Malice.
               
               Hereby you ſhall be prooued be the life of
Pharao,Verſ. 15. 16. ye ſhall not go hence, &c.
               It may ſeeme iuſtly to be called into queſtion,
both how Ioſeph might without blame, Diſſemble
as he doth in this 
                     〈◊〉
                  , & alſo vſe this Prophane
and 
                     〈◊〉
                   Othe by tho life of pharao.
               
               Surely I thinke Many Singuler factes of the
auncient Potria
                     •
                  kes before the law publiſhed are
not to be draw
                     •
                  e into commen Examples for vs
now to 
                     〈◊〉
                  . It may be, that they had certaine

                     〈…〉
                   of God, by which they were
mooued to doe ſome thinges otherwiſe, then the
common precept requireth. Neither is it neceſſarie
for vs to Iuſtifie all their Factes as good. For
they 
                     〈…〉
                  
in a Heathniſh maner.Pſal. 62. b. 10
               
               And bee put them,Verſ. 17. altogether in Warde
three dayes, &c.
               While we read this, we may be admoniſhed to

                     〈…〉
                  
of vs.Pſal. 112. a. 7. For God may * turne our State
and giue to him 
                     〈◊〉
                   to be Reuenged,Iudic. 16. g. 28 as we ſee
here in Ioſeph and his brethren.Iudith. 14. c. 11 It was an eaſie
matter for Ten of them to worke,Eccl. 4. c. 14. violence to One
poore childe. But ſo God had done, that it was euen
as eaſie for Ioſeph to haue requited thē, if he had

                  
                     〈…〉
                   of God then the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               And Ioſeph ſayde vnto them,Verſ. 1
                        •
                     . the thirde
day this doe and liue, &c.
               
                  Ioſeph ſheweth in this place an Example of
Godlineſſe, and of 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Verſ. 21.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Here appeareth the * good effectes of

                     〈…〉
                  
the Securitie and forgetfulneſſe of our Sinfull
actes,Pſal. 77. d. 38. Pſal. 82. d. 15 Pſal. 
                        〈◊〉
                      71. Eſay. 26. c. 16. Oſ
                        •
                     . 6. a. 1. 2. Par. 33. c. 12. and wicked 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Baruc. 3. a. 1 Iona
                        •
                     . 2. e. 8.
at Gods hand by 
                     〈…〉
                  
before this Trouble did with deepe Securitie forget

the 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Sap. 4. d. 
                        ••
                     , v but * nowe they can ſay, Verily we haue offended
agaynſt our brother. &c.
               And he turned from them and wept:Verſ. 24. and

                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 paragraph〉
                  
                  2. Theſ. 1. b. 6. 7.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Verſ. 25. 26.
               
               
               And Jacob ſayd my ſonne ſhall not go
downe with you,Verſ. 38. &c.
               We may ſee here againe, howe Greatly Iacob
was troubled with Sorow for his childe. He ſawe
his houſeholde in great Diſtreſſe of Famine,
and yet had he almoſt rather die, then haſarde his
Sonne. Wherby we may vnderſtand, that Naturall
Affections are not in Holymen, to be Reproued,
ſo long as they be ioyned with the L
                     •
                  ue and
Feare of God:Rom. 1. d. 31. 2. And therefore are they * not to be

                     〈◊〉
                   as the Stoikes fondely 
                     〈◊〉
                  .Tim. 3. a. 
                        •
                     . Hereof
haue we a notable example in this Hiſtorie of Iacob
and Ioſeph, in the Chapters following. If it
had pleaſed God to let Iacob knowe, that this matter
was wrought by his ſonne Ioſeph, all that now

                     〈…〉
                   him, woulde haue turned to his

                     〈…〉
                   and ioy. But ſo it pleaſed him, by
this Trouble,Prou. 17. a. 3. to * exerciſe his Seruant, and as it
were to Prepare him to the great:Sap. 3. a. 5. Ioy that was

                     〈…〉
                   to come, that it might the 
                     〈◊〉
                   more
Pleaſant vnto him, when▪ he ſaw all things to fall

                     〈…〉
                   expertation.
            
         
         
            The fourth ſunday in Lent
at Morning prayer.
            Geneſis. 43.
            
               AND the 
                     〈◊〉
                   was great 
                     〈◊〉
                   the lande.

                     〈…〉
                   paſſe, when they had 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   which they had brought 
                     〈…〉
                   the lande of Egypt,

their father ſayde vnto them, Go againe (and) bye vs
a little foode. 3 Iudas anſwered him, and ſayde, The man
did ſolemnely proteſt vnto vs ſaying: Ye ſhall not ſ
                     •
                  e my
face except my brother 
                     •
                  e with you. 4 If thou wilt ſende
our brother with vs, we will go downe and 
                     〈◊〉
                   thée foode.
               5 But if thou wilt not ſende him, we will not go downe
for the man ſayde vnto vs, Ye ſhall not ſee my face except
your brother be with you. 6 And Iſraell ſayde, Wherefore
dealt ye ſo cruelly with me, as to tell the man that ye
had yet a brother? 7 They anſwered, The man aſked vs
ſtraightly of our (ſtate) and of our kindred, ſaying, Is your
fat her yet 
                     〈…〉
                   And we 
                     〈◊〉
                  
him according to the (
                     〈◊〉
                  ) of theſe 
                     〈…〉
                  
any meane knowe that he woulde ſay, Bring your brother
downe (vvith you?) 8 Then ſand Iudas vnto Iſraell his
father, Sende the lad with me, that we may ariſe and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and that we may liue, and not die, yea both we and thou, and
alſo our meanie. 9 I will be 
                     〈…〉
                  
and ſet him before 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  yes,Gen. 44. g. then let me 
                     〈…〉
                  
for euer. 10 Truely except we had made 
                     〈…〉
                  
this we had turned the 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               11. And 
                     〈…〉
                  
of the lande in your 
                     〈…〉
                  
curtſie of bawme, and a curtſie of honie, ſpices & myrre, nuts
and almondes. 12 And take double money in your hande,
and the money that was brought againe in your ſacks, take
it againe with you, peraduenture 
                     〈…〉
                   ſome ouerſight.
               13 Take alſo your brother with you,Gen. 32. and ariſe, and go againe
vnto the man. 14 And God almightie giue you mercie
in the ſight of the man, that he may delcuen you your other
brother, and this Beniami
                     •
                  : and thus I am as 
                     〈…〉
                  
is quite robbed of his children▪ 15 
                     〈…〉
                   the preſent,

and twiſe ſo much more money in theyr hande, wyth
Beniamin, and roſe vp and went downe to Egipt, and ſtoode
before Ioſeph. 16 When Ioſeph ſawe Beniamin wyth
them, he ſaid to the ruler of his houſe, Bring theſe men home
and ſlay, and make readie: for theſe men ſhall dine with me at
noone. 17 And the man did as Ioſeph had, and brought thē
vnto Ioſephes houſe. 18 When the men were brought into
Ioſephes houſe, they were afrayde and ſayde, Becauſe of
the money that came in our ſackes mouthes at the firſt time
are we brought in: that he may ſeeke occaſion agaynſt vs,
and violently lay handes vpon vs, to bring vs in bondage,
and our aſſes alſo. 19 Therefore came they to the man that
was the ruler ouer Ioſephs houſe, & communed with him at
the doore of the houſe. 20 And ſayd, Oh ſir, we came downe
hither at the firſt time to bie foode. 21 And as we came to
an Inne, we opened our ſackes, and behold euery mans money
was in the mouth of his ſacke (euen) our money in full
weight: and we haue brought it againe in our hande.
               22 And other money haue we brought alſo in our hande to
bie foode: but we cannot tel who put our money in our ſacks.
               23 And he ſayde, peace be vnto you, feare not: your God,
and the God of your father, hath giuen you that treaſure in
your ſackes: I had your money. And be brought Simeo
                     •
                  
out to them. 24 And the man led them into Ioſephs houſe,
and, gaue them water to waſhe their féete, and gaue their
aſſes prouender.
               25 And they made readie their preſent agaynſt Ioſeph
came at noone: for they hearde (ſay) that they ſhoulde 
                     •
                  ate
breade there. 26 When Ioſeph came home, they brought
the 
                     〈…〉
                   to him which was in their handes,
and 
                     〈◊〉
                   the before him.
               27 And be aſked them of 
                     〈…〉
                  , and ſaide, Is your
father that olde man which you 
                     〈…〉
                   good health?
and is he yet aliue? 28 They anſwered, Thy ſeruant our

father is in good health, and is yet aliue. And they bowing
themſelues, made their 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 29 And he lifting vppe
his eyes, behelde his brother Beniamin his mothers ſonne,
and ſayde. Is this your 
                     〈◊〉
                   brother of whome ye ſpake
vnto me? And he ſaid, God be mercifull vnto thée my ſonne.
               30 And Ioſeph made haſte (for his heart did melt vpon
his brother) and ſ
                     •
                  aught (vvhere) to wéepe: and entre
                     •
                   into
his chamber, and wept there. 31 And he waſhed his face,
and came out & refrayned himſelfe, and ſayd, Set on bread.
               32 And they prepared for him by himſelfe, and for them
by themſelues, and for the Egiptians which did eate with
him, by themſelues: bicauſe the Egiptians may not eate
breade with the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , for that 
                     〈…〉
                   to the
Egyptians. 33 And they ſate before him, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   borne according
to his age, and the yongeſt according to his youth:
and the men 
                     〈…〉
                   themſelues.
               14 And h
                     •
                   ſent rewardes vnto them from before himſelfe:
But 
                     〈…〉
                   ſo much as anie

                     〈…〉
                   with him.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the
xliij. Chapter of Geneſis.
               And it came to paſſe when they had eaten
vp the corne which they had,Verſ. 2. &c.
               
                  IT may ſeeme doubtfull how
ſo Little a porcion of Come, as 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Aſſes dyd bring ſo Long a iourney;
coulde ſ. long a' tyme▪ finde to great a
Number as were of Iacobs retinewe.
For beſides the .lxvi. perſons that deſcended of his

bodye,Gen. 46. c. 36. as is mentioned Cap. 46 it can not be but
that he & they had a great nūber of ſeruants. But
we muſt conſider that the ſeruants might be fedde
with Herbes, Rootes, and Acornes, as the maner
of the Eaſt partes is in the time of diſtreſſe. And
that the Corne that was brought, was in Sparing
maner employed to the ſuſtenance of other
his Sonnes and Nephewes.Eccl. 4. c. 17. 18 2. This was a * harde
temptation,Pet. 2. b. 9. that thys Godly Father, whome God
had taken by his promiſe into his Protection, was
nowe brought to ſo great a Neceſſitie for want of
Suſtenance, yea and in that lande wherein God
had promiſed his Abundant bleſſing. This in a
frayle man might haue ſhaken the credite of that
notable promiſe.Gen. 35. b. 11. 
                  Cap. 35 I am thy God encreaſe and
multiply. I will bleſſe thee. It is profitable for vs
in time of Affliction to conſider ſuch Examples of
the holy Fathers, that we maye learne by the lyke
Armour of truſt in the prouidence of God, and pacient
expectation of his bleſſed will to Ouercome
ſuch Tentation euen as they did.
               If thou wilt ſend our brother with vs,Verſ. 4. 5. we
will go downe, &c.
               It may ſeeme Contrarie to the dewtie of Good
and obedient Children ſo preciſely to preſcribe a
Condicion vnto their father: but for ſo much as
they were driuen to this Neceſſitie by the ſtreight
charge that Ioſeph gaue them not to come without
their brother, they durſt not yeelde without Condicion.Gen. 42. g. 38.
And becauſe Iacob had * before ſo ſtifly ſtoode

in the refuſall to ſende Beniamin, they doe nowe
the more plainly declare their Neceſſitie with the
cauſe thereof, and that without anye iuſt Reproofe
of Obſtinacie or Diſobedience.
               The man aſked vs ſtreightly of our ſtate
and of our kindred,Verſ. 7. ſaying, &c.
               Becauſe Iacob accuſed his ſonnes of Cruell dealing
toward him, in telling that they had a yonger
brother, they Excuſe and cleere themſelues, by declaring,
1 Firſt, the Curious Queſtioning, that
the man vſed to them of their State and Kindred:
whereeby they were Driuen to anſwere. 2 Secondly,
that they were in that caſe they might not
chooſe to anſwere, and that according to the Troth.
3 Thirdly, that they coulde not Surmiſe that he
would haue ſaide vnto them. Bring your yonger
Brother.
               
               Then ſayde Iuda to Iſraell his Father,Verſ. 8.
ſende the lad with me, that, &c.
               
                  Iuda perſwadeth his Father, to yeelde to the ſending
of Beniamin, 1 Firſt, by the Neceſſitie of
dearth and Hunger, wherein he and all his dyd
ſtande. 2 Then the vndertaking vpon his peryll
the ſafe Bringing home of the yong man. 3 Laſtly,
by the hurte and Hinderance that they had alreadie
Suſteyned by thys his delay. And therfore
the father nowe after his affection is ſomewhat
Quailed, vpon better conſideration yeeldeth to that
before he refuſed, and as a wiſe man Inſtructeth

them in what maner they ſhould go,Gen. 32. b. 5. & what they
ſhould doe to * appeaſe the Rigour of the Gouernour,
and to ſhunne ſuch daunger as might ſeeme
to be toward them. And yet not truſting altogither
to thys policie, prayeth to Almighty God moſt hartily
to Proſper them, and ſende them mercye in
his ſight.
               When the men were brought into Ioſephs
houſe they were afraide,Verſ. 18. &c. &c.
               A conſcience * guiltie of wickedneſſe,Sap. 17. c. 11. and a man
put in feare is alway Suſpicious, and ſurmiſeth
that euery thing is done to his harme, though it be
farre otherwiſe. So Ioſephs brethren, being in
feare, Suſpect euill and daunger to come of that
which in deede was done of Gentleneſſe, and therfore
ſeeke, ſo much as they can, to preuent it by offering
againe their Money, that they caried away
with them in their ſackes.
               And he ſaide,Verſ. 23. 24. peace be vnto you, feare not:
your God, and the God of your, &c.
               An example of a godly, faythfull, and gentle
Seruant. Becauſe he ſawe them in a great feare
he comforteth them, and willeth them to be of good
cheere, aſſuring them of that which they Doubted
of, and as for their Money that was in their ſacks,
he wylleth them to Thanke their GOD for it, by
whoſe goodneſſe it was wrought. And yet vnderſtanding
his maiſters Purpoſe, as a faythfull ſeruant,
doth not bewray the ſame vnto them.
               
               And he aſked them of their welfaire and
ſaide,Verſ. 27. &c. is your father that olde man. &c.
               In theſe Queſtions of Ioſeph and in the reſidew
of his dealing declared in this place towarde his
brethren,Gen. 17. c. 18. Gen. 46. d. 29 Tob. 7. a. 7. 8. Rom. 9. a. 3. you maye perceiue the * Force of gentle
and Naturall Affection toward ſuch as by Nature
we are Bounde vnto: and yet the ſame by Ioſeph
with great wiſedome and Moderation for certain
purpoſes repreſſed and diſſimuled for the tyme.
Such affections therefore may well ſtande wyth
Wiſedome and Godlineſſe, and in ſundrye places
are Praiſed in the ſaintes of God.
               And they prepared for him by himſelfe,Verſ. 32.
and for them by themſelues, and for, &c.
               They prepared for Ioſeph by hymſelfe, as a
Prince and great Perſon. For them and the Egiptians
ſeuerally,Iohn. 4. a. 9. becauſe the Egiptians did Diſdaine
and Abhorre to eate with the Hebrewes. In which
part we haue to note, firſt, touching Ioſeph,
                  Sap. 10. c. 14. Pſa. 104. b. 18 Pſal. 112. a. 6. That,
although from verie Poore e
                     •
                  tate, yea, * and out of
the Priſon he was adualiced to highe Dignitie, &
vndoubtedly reteyned the ſame humbleneſſe of
minde, that was in him before: yet, he was content,
and thought it no Burden to his Conſcience
to obſerue the Comelyneſſe of his eſtate, and to
ſit Seuerally as a great Piere and State of the
Realme.2. Reg. 2. a. 4. Eſther. 2. c. 17. Dan. 2. g. 48. The lyke we ſee in Dauid, Heſter, Daniell,
&c. Honours annexed to Power and dignitie
they Refuſed not, but with modeſtie and gentleneſſe

in the feare of God vſed the ſame. The cauſe
why the Egiptians Diſdained the Hebrews was for
that they were Graſiers and keepers of cattell, as
is mentioned Cap. 46.Gen. 46. d. 34. which might ſeeme to proceede
of a great Pride in the Egiptians, wherewith
Ioſeph as a wiſe man doth ſeeme to beare, leaſt by
Strugling againſt that which he could not mend,
he might take away that Oportunitie that he had
purpoſed to worke the Reliefe, and ſinguler Benefite
of his Father and Brethren. Some write,
that the Egiptians worſhipped Sheepe as Gods,
and therfore did hate the Hebrews becauſe they did
not onely feede Sheepe, but alſo Kyll & eate them,
ſo that their lothing of the Hebrews came not only
of Pride, but alſo of Idolatrie and Superſtition,
becauſe they vſed Crueltie towarde their Gods.
            
         
         
            The fifte Sunday in Lent
at Morning prayer.
            Exodus. 3.
            
               MOyſes kept the ſhéepe of Iethro his father in lawe 
prieſt of Madian: and he droue the flocke to the
backſide of the deſert, and came to the Mountaine
of God Horeb. 2 And the Angell of the Lorde
appeared vnto hym in a flame of fyre out of the middeſt of
a buſhe. And he looked, and beholde the buſhe burned wyth
fyre, and the buſhe was not conſumed.
               3 Therefore Moyſes ſayde, I will go nowe, and ſée this
great ſight, howe it commeth that the buſhe burneth not.
               4 And when the Lorde ſawe that he came for to ſée, God

called vnto him out of the middeſt of the buſhe, and ſayde,
Moyſes, Moyſes? And he anſwered, Here am I.
               5 And he ſaide, Drawe not nigh bither: put thy ſhwes of
thy féete, for the place wheron thou ſtandeſt is holy ground.
               6 And he ſaide, I am the God of thy father, the God of
Abraham, the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob. And
Moyſes hid his face: for he was afrayde to looke vpon God.
               
                   7 And the Lorde ſayde, I haue ſurely ſéene the trouble of
my people which are in Egypt, and haue heard their crye
from the face of their taſke maiſters: for I knowe their ſorrowes.
8 And am come downe to deliuer them out of the
hande of the Egiptians, and to bring them out of that land,
vnto a good lande and a large, vnto a lande that floweth with
mylke and hony, (euen) vnto the place of the Chanaanites,
and Hethites, and Amorites, and Pherezites, and Heuites,
and of the Iebu
                     •
                  ites.
               9 Nowe therefore beholde the complaint of the children
of Iſrael is come vnto me: and I haue alſo ſéene the oppreſſion
wherewith the Egiptians oppreſſed them.
               
                   10 Come thou therfore, and I will ſend thée vnto Pharao,
that thou mayeſt bring my people the children of Iſrael out
of Egypt, 11 And Moyſes 
                     •
                  aide vnto God, what am I to
go vnto Pharao, and to bring the children of Iſrael out of
Egypt? 12 And he anſwered, For I will be with thée: and
this ſhall be a token vnto thée that I haue ſent thée, After
that thou haſt brought the people out of Egipt, ye ſhall ſerue
God vpon this mountaine. 13 And Moyſes ſayde vnto
God, Beholde, (vvhen) I come vnto the children of Iſrael,
and ſhall ſay vnto them, The God of your fathers hath ſent
me vnto you: And if they ſaye vnto me, what is his name?
what anſwere ſhall I giue them?
               14 And God anſwered Moyſes, I am that I am. And he
ſaid, Thus ſhalt thou ſay vnto the children of Iſrael, I am
hath ſēt me vnto you. 15 And God ſpake further vnto Moſes.

Thus ſhalt thou ſay vnto the children of Iſrael. The Lorde
God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Iſaac,
and the God of Iacob hath ſent me vnto you: This
is my name for euer, and this is my memoriall into generation
and generation. 16 Go, and gather the elders of Iſrael 
togither, and thou ſhalt ſay vnto them, The Lorde God
of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Iſaac,
and the God of Iacob appeared vnto me, and ſayde, In viſiting,
haue I viſited you, and knowe that which is done to
you in Egypt. 17 And I haue ſayde, I will bring you out
of the tribulation of Egypt, vnto the lande of the Chanaanites,
and Hethites, and Amorites, & Pherezites, and Heuites,
and Iebuſites, (euen) into a lande which floweth with
milke and hony. 18 And they ſhall heare thy voyce: then
both thou and the elders of Iſrael ſhall go vnto the king of
Egypt, and ſaye vnto him, The Lorde God of the Hebrews
hath met wyth vs, and nowe let vs go we beſéech thée thrée
dayes iourney into the wilderneſſe, and doe ſacrifice vnto the
Lorde our God. 19 And I am ſure that the King of Egypt
will not let you go, no not in a mightie hande.
               20 And I will ſtretch out my hande, and ſmite Egypt
with all my woonders which I will doe in the mids thereof:
and after that he will let you go.
               21 And I will get this people fauour in the ſight of the
Egyptians, ſo that when ye go, ye ſhall not go emptie.
               22 But euerye wyfe ſhall borowe of her neighbour and
of her that ſoiourneth in her houſe, Iewels of Siluer, and
Iewels of Golde, and rayment: and ye ſhall put them on
your ſonnes and daughters, and ſhall robbe the Egiptians.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the thirde
Chapter of Exodus.
               
               Moſes kept the ſheepe of Iethro his father
in lawe priest of Madian,Verſ. 1. &c.
               
                  AS in the other Chapters before
haue bene declared the great Oppreſſion
and Miſerie of the children of
Iſraell in Aegypt, ſo in this Chapter
and the reſidue folowing, is ſet forth
the great and mercifull Goodneſſe of Almightye
God deliuering them from the ſame. And as touching
Moiſes, whom God had choſen to be his Inſtrument
herein, we may in him learne howe God
vſeth commonly to deale with his Elect. This Moſes
was at this time of all men in the worlde moſt
acceptable to God, whome euen from his mothers
wombe he had choſen to be the Deliuerer of hys
people, and the Publiſher of his lawe. And yet it
pleaſed him to ſuffer the ſame Moyſes to be in Baniſhment
* fortie yeares,Act. 7. c. 23. not onely among heathen
perſons, but in the poore and harde condition of a
Sheepehearde. And yet may we not thinke, that
God at the ſame time did Contemne Moyſes, but
vndoubtedly had great Care of him, and while he
was in the trauaile of a Sheepeheard,Gen. 37. f. 28. 1. Reg. 21. d. 10 Dan. 2 b. 13. Math. 2. c. 13. did prepare
for him an Office farre aboue the Dignitie or maieſtie
of any earthly Prince. The like we ſee in Ioſeph,
in Dauid, in Daniel, and in our ſauiour Chriſt
himſelfe.
               And the Angell of the Lord appeared to
him in a flame of fire,Verſ. 2. 3. &c.
               
                  
When God of his goodnes was diſpoſed to Deliuer
his people out of Aegypt, becauſe of 
                     〈…〉
                  
matter of Great weight, & in the ſight of 
                     〈…〉
                  
Vnpoſſible, the Egyptians being Mighty 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and the Iſraelites Poore and miſerable, and for that
Moyſes might doubt of his Calling to ſo great a
purpoſe: God vſeth at the beginning a ſtravnge
and woonderfull Miracle of a Fyre burning in a
buſh, and yet the buſh not conſumed therewith. I
thinke it not ſo profitable to recite the Allegories,
that many interpreters do mention in this place.
For the true and ſimple 
                     〈◊〉
                   is, as I haue
ſayde, that God purpoſing to call Moyſes to Deliuer
his people, doth Confirme him there in by this
Miracle of the burning Buſhe, that he might not
Doubt, but that the voyce that ſpake 
                     〈◊〉
                   him
was in dede from God, and not by the Deluſion of
any Man.
               And when the Lorde ſawe that he came
to ſee,Verſ. 4. God called vnto him, &c.
               It is no repugnancie, that the Scripture before
reported, that the Angel appeared in a Fla
                     •
                  e
office, & here in this place 
                     •
                  yth, that God Called
Moyſes. For God ſpeaketh by his Angels, as he
doth by his Prophets and other Miniſters. God
is the Maiſter and Inſtructer, and the Angell is
the Miniſter in the name and authoritie of God
doing the Meſſage.
               When he ſayth, The place is holy, he meaneth not
that the Ground or earth was of it ſelfe more Holy

or acceptable to GOD than anye other place was.

                     〈◊〉
                   God minded in that place to Reueale himſelfe
and his holy Will vnto Moyſes, and afterwardes
in the ſame place to Publiſhe his lawe and bleſſed
Worde, and therefore he doth call it Holy. For like
cause 
                     
                        •
                     acob called the Place where in a * dreame he
ſaw
                     ••
                   ladder goyng vp to heauen,Gen. 28. d. 17. and the Lorde
ſtanding at the toppe of it, by the name of The terrible
houſe of God and gate of heauen.
               
               
                  Hieruſalem is * called the Holy Citie,
                  Math. 27. f. 53 becauſe
Gods worde and his true worſhip was there declared.
Take away the Worde of God, and his diuine
Preſence, and the Place of it ſelfe is Indifferent
as other are.
               As touching that God willeth Moyſes to put of
his Shooes, by that token or ceremonie of his
Bare feete he woulde ſtrike into him a Reuerence
towarde that Viſion, that in the name of God appeared
vnto him: And alſo that he ſhould now reſigne,
and giue ouer that State, that he was in at
that time, and ſubmit himſelfe wholy to the Will of
God, nowe at this time reuealed vnto him, and to
this preſent calling to be the Deliuerer of his people.Ruth. 4. b. 7.
For in ye .4. of Ruth, the putting off of the Shoe
is a token of Reſigning or giuing ouer his Right
to an other.
               I am the God of thy father,Verſ. 6. the God 
                     •
                  f Abraham,
the God of Iſaac, &c.
               This is that notable Sentence which Chriſt vſeth
in theMath. 22. d. 32 .22. of Math. to proue the Reſurrection,

and that the Soule liueth after it is Depart
                     •
                  d
from the body, and therewith ſtopped the mouthes
of the Saduces.
               And the Lorde ſayde,Verſ. 7. &c. I haue ſurely ſeene
the trouble of my people, &c.
               Such is the goodneſſe of God, that when helpe
and ſuccour ſeemeth vtterly Deſperate, then he offereth
his mercie, and mightlly Deliuereth, euen
when his people Leaſt thinke of it. Thereby are
we taught at no time to Deſpayre of Gods Help,
ſeeme it neuer ſo Hard or Vnpoſſible to the world.
Then is Gods Glorie moſt ſet foorth, when in
greateſt Difficultie he Deliuereth. The Iſraelites
were nowe more Vniust in the ſight of God 
                     •
                  hen
that they might Hope for any Reliefe at his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
For they had almoſt Forgot GOD and his true
Worſhip. And is the world they were more Weak
and Miſerable, then eyther three, many man ſee
them, coulde Deuiſe whiche ware it 
                     •
                  ought he
wrought. In this great Diſtreſſe God calleth 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     ſes,
and offereth their Deliuerance, not in reſpect
of any Worthineſſe in them, but partly of his great
Pitie that he tooke of their miſerie and a
                     •••
                  iction▪
partly for the truth of his * Promiſes,Gen. 12. a. 2. Gen. 26. a. 4. Gen. 32. c. 12. that he had
made to their Forefathers▪ 
                  Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob.
And herby teacheth vs, to the great ſtrengthning
of our fayth, that although there be much vnworthineſſe
in vs, yet▪ for his truthes ſake, and for
the Glorie of his name; he will fulfill his Promiſes,
and worke the ſafetie of his people agaynſt all

the gates of hell.
               Come thou therefore,Verſ. 10. and I will ſende
thee vnto Pharao, &c.
               Here Moyſes is called to this office of a Deliuerer
of the people of GOD, and we by him are
taught not Ambiciouſly to offer our ſelues to any
high Office or Function, but diligently to followe
that State, that we be in, and loke in all things for
the Calling of God, eyther by himſelfe, or by hys
Officers, to whome he hath giuen Authoritie.
               And Moiſes ſayde vnto God,Verſ. 11. what am I
to go vnto Pharao, &c.
               This Refuſall was not of Diſobedience to the
will and calling of God, but a Confeſſing and acknowledging
of his Infirmitie, as afterwarde
G
                        •
                     deon and othere did.Iudi
                        •
                     . 6. c. 15. As if he had ſayde, I am
but a poore Sheepehearde, and ſea
                     •
                  t hable to kepe
my ſheepe from the wilde beaſtes of the Deſert:
But the Aegyptians are a Mightie people, and
their king a ſterne and Prowde Tiranne: therefore,
O Lorde, I ſee a great vnfitneſſe in my ſelfe
for ſuch a purpoſe. As it is Sinne to withſtande
the Calling of God, ſo is it a Vertue to acknowledge
his Weakeneſſe and Diſhabilitie.
               And he anſwered,Verſ. 12. for I will be with thee:
and this ſhall be a token, &c.
               If God had promiſed Moyſes an infinite number
of mightie Armyes to worke this exployte, it

had not bene halfe ſo much as that in this place he
offereth.Rom. 8. f. 31. * For if God himſelfe be with vs, all the
Power of ye World is in vaine againſt vs. He doth
alſo ſtrengthen his Weakeneſſe with further aſſurance
that this his calling ſhould be of ſuch Force,
and of ſo good Effect in the ende, that in the ſame
Place, He and they togither, ſhould Worſhip theyr
God, that hath Deliuered them.
               And Moyſes ſaid vnto God,Verſ. 13. &c. when I come
vnto the children of Iſrael, &c.
               
                  Moyſes being nowe well Confirmed for himſelfe,
and his owne Calling, deſireth alſo that he
may be hable by ſome euident meanes to Aſſure
the Iſraelites of the ſame, leaſt, when he came vnto
them and declared, that he was appoynted their
Capitain and Deliuerer, they ſhould Refuſe him,
and aſke from what God he was ſent. For the Iſraelites
being brought vp a long time among Idolatours
in Aegypt, had almoſt forgot the True and
liuing God of their fathers. Therefore Moiſes deſireth
to know here the Name of God, which was
ſome Timerous Curioſitie in Moyſes, and therefore
God by his anſwere ſignifieth, that he ſhould
Stay himſelfe vpon his Worde and Promiſes
made both now to him, and before time to his and
their forefathers Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob, rather
then to enquire for his name, whoſe Nature, Maieſtie,
and Power is vnſpeakable, and not to be vttered
by any Name. Wherefore God anſwereth
I am, that Iam, and ſay vnto the children of Iſrael,

I am, hath ſent me vnto you, &c. That is, the Beear
and the onely Vnſearchable Subſtance that hath
his being of himſelfe and of none other: and of
whom all things that are *haue their Being,Act. 17. f. 28. Life,
and Moouing, Euen I that eternall God that is
nowe, and euer hath beene, who in the beginning
made Heauen and earth & gaue Life and Being
vnto all Creatures, and that afterwarde made his
Promiſe and Couenant to your fathers Abraham,
Iſaac, and Iacob, that he woulde be their God and
the God of their Seede,Pſal. 104. a. 8. that God I ſay, * mindefull
of his promiſes, and pitying your miſeryes, hath
nowe ſent me vnto you to be your Capitaine and
guide to deliuer you out of that great Tyrannie
and Crueltie wherwith you are now Oppreſſed in
Aegypt.
               
               And they ſhall heare thy voyce,Verſ. 18. then both
thou and the elders of Iſrael, &c.
               Now he Inſtructeth Moyſes what he ſhall pretende
to Pharao in his meſſage, that he may ſuffer
them to go. Wherein it may with ſome offence appeare
as though God did teach Moyſes to Lie. For
the chief purpoſe was not in the Deſert to do Sacrifice
to God, but to conuey themſelues away out
of Aegypt, into the lande of Chanaan. For anſwere
wherevnto we muſt conſider. 1 Firſt, that
Peculier things done Extraordinarily, by the Inſpiration
or commaundement of God, are not to be
taken as Generall Rules or examples for all men
to followe. 2 Secondly, there is a difference betweene

Lying and Diſſimuling. A godly, and wiſe
Man in time and place may Diſſemble and not
vtter his Purpoſe: But none ſauing wicked and
vaine perſons doe Lie.Gen. 12. b. 7. Pſa. 104. a. 11. 1. Par. 16. b. 18 As touching the Lande of
Chanaan promiſed *to them by God, what did it appertaine
to Pharao to knowe? In that Moyſes is
taught to ſay, they ſhould goe three dayes iourney
into the wilderneſſe to Sacrifice to God, it was
no Vntruth.Exod. 24. b. 5. For in Exod. 24. it is declared they
did ſo.
               And I am ſure the king of Egipt will not
let them go,Verſ. 19. no not in a mightie &c.
               God telleth Moyſes of this before, leaſt when
it ſhoulde ſo fall out hereafter, it myght ſhake
Moyſes his fayth, and make him to Doubt of his
calling. So God vſeth often to Forewarne his Elect
of ſuch Stormes as are to come, leaſt in the
time of their troubles they ſhould Faint and Miſtruſt
his gracious Promiſes of comfort and bleſſing.
So our Sauiour Chriſt tolde his Apoſtles,
when he ſent them to preach.Mat. 10. b. 17. 
                  They ſhall delyuer
you vp (ſayth he) vnto their counſailes and ſhal whip
you.
                  Io. 15. c. 20. And againe. Ioh. 15. If they haue perſecuted me,
they will perſecute you alſo.
                  Io. 16. a. 2. And Ioh. 16. The tyme
ſhall come when they that kill you ſhall thinke them
ſelues, to doe acceptable ſervice to God.
               
               Theſe things haue I tolde you (ſayth Chriſt) that
when they come to paſſe,Io. 16. a. 4. you maye not be offended
therwith, but remember that I haue forewarned you.
               
               And I will ſtretch out my hand and ſmite
Egipt with all my wonders,Verſ. 20. &c. &c▪
               
               He doth againe Comforte Moyſes with the promiſe
of his Mightie aſſiſtance, and the great Succeſſe
that he wyll worke for hym and hys people.
But this may ſeeme ſtraunge, that God ſayth he
will helpe the Iſraelites to Spoyle and Robbe the
Egiptians. We muſt learne that the Eternall God
and Lorde of Heauen and Earth, that made the
Lawe, is not bounde and tyed by his owne Law.
Therfore that the Iſraelites do by the appointment
of God, is no Breach of his law, but a work of Obedience
to his holy will.*Pſal. 23. a. 1 GOD is Lorde of all
things, neyther hath any Man any thing, but that
he hath at Gods hande, and that not in perpetuall
Poſſeſſion, but ſo of Loan for the time that he may
without vniuſtice take it away from any. It was
Iuſtice alſo before God that they, which had beene
Enriched by the Oppreſſion and iniurie of the people
of God, ſhould alſo by the appointment of God
haue their Iniurious gotten Goodes taken from
them by the ſame People. But I muſt often repeate
this, that ſuch Extraordinarie Acts done by
the eſpeciall Commaundement of God, are not to
be drawne into the Example of common life.
            
         
         
            The fift Sunday in Lent
at Euening prayer.
            Exod. 5.
            
               
                  
MOyſes and Aaron went in afterwarde and folde 
Pharao, Thus ſayth the Lord God of Iſrael. Let
my people go, that they may holde a feaſt vnto me
in the wilderneſſe. 2 And Pharao ſaide, Who is
the Lorde that I ſhould heare his voyce, and let Iſraell go?
I knowe not the Lorde, neyther will I let Iſraell go.
               3 And they ſayde, The God of the Hebrues hath called
vs: let vs go we pray thée thrée daies iourney into the deſert,
and doe ſacrifice vnto the Lorde our God: leaſt he ſmite vs
with peſtilence or with the ſworde.
               4 Then ſayde the King of Egypt vnto them, Wherfore
doe ye Moyſes and Aaron let the people from their workes?
get you vnto your burdens. 5 And Pharao ſaide furthermore,
Beholde, there is much people nowe in the lande, and
you make them leaue their burdens.
               6 And Pharao commaunded the ſame day the taſkmayſters
which were amongſt the people, and the officers ſaying.
7 Ye ſhall geue the people no more ſtrawe to make
 bricke withall, as ye did in time paſt: let them go and gather
them ſtrawe themſelues. 8 And the number of brick
which they were wont to make in tyme paſt, lay vnto their
charges alſo, and miniſhe nothing thereof: for they be
Idle, and therefore crye, ſaying. We will go, and doe ſacrifice
vnto our God. 9 They muſt haue more worke laide
vpon them, that they may labour therein, and not regarde
vaine wordes. 10 Then went the taſkemaſters of the people,
and the officers out, and tolde the people ſaying, Thus
ſayth Pharao, I will giue you no more ſtraw.
               11 Go your ſelues and gather you ſtrawe where yée can
finde it: yet ſhall none of your labour be miniſhed.
               12 And ſo were the people ſcattred abrode throughout all
the lande of Egypt, for to gather ſtubble in ſteade of ſtraw.
               13 And the taſkemaiſters haſted them forwarde, ſaying,
Fulfill your worke, your daylie taſkes in their due tyme, as

if you had ſtrawe. 14 And the officers of the children of
Iſrael which Pharaos taſkemaiſters had ſet ouer them,
were beaten. And they ſaide vnto them, Wherfore haue ye
not fulfilled your taſke in making of bricke both yeſterday
and to day, as well as in times paſt?
               
                   15 The officers alſo of the children of Iſrael, came and
complayned vnto Pharao, ſaying: Wherefore dealeſt thou
thus with thy ſeruants? 16 There is no ſtraw giuen vnto
thy ſeruantes, and they ſay vnto vs, Make bricke: and thy
ſeruants are beaten, and there is wrong done to thine owne
people. 17 He ſayde, Ye are Idle, Idle are ye: and therefore
ye ſay, We will go, and doe ſacrifice vnto the Lorde.
               18 Go therfore nowe, and worke, and there ſhall no ſtraw
be geuen you, and yet ſhall you deliuer the whole tale of
bricke. 19. And the officers of the children of Iſrael dyd
ſée that they were in worſ
                     •
                   ca
                     •
                  e, after it was ſayde, Ye ſhall
miniſhe nothing of your bricke, of your daylie taſke in due
tyme. 20 And they met Moyſes and Aaron, which ſtoode in
their way as they came out from Pharao.
               
                   21 And ſaide vnto them, The Lorde looke vpon you and
iudge you, which hath made the ſauour of vs to be abhorred
in the eyes of Pharao, and in the eyes of his ſeruants, and
haue put a ſworde in their hande to ſ
                     •
                  ay vs.
               22 Moyſes returned vnto the Lorde, and ſayde, Lorde,
wherefore haſt thou ſo euil entreated this people? And wherfore
haſt thou ſent me? 23 For ſince I came to Pharao to
ſpeake in thy name, he hath fared foule with this folke: and
yet thou haſt not deliuered thy people at all.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .v.
Chapter of Exodus.
               
               Moyſes and Aaron went in afterwarde
and tolde Pharao,Verſ. 1. Thus ſaith, &c.
               
                  AFter Moyſes and Aaron had
nowe purchaſed Credite with the Iſraelites,
                  Exod. 4. g. 31.
as is mentioned in the *former
Chapiter, they enter nowe into
the execution of their office for the deliuerance
of the people of God, and ſpeake vnto
Pharao for them. This was in them a great Obedience
vnto God in a matter verie vnlike for them
to bring to paſſe in the ſight of the worlde, and ioyned
with their great perill and daunger in dealing
with ſo ſterne and Obſtinate a Tyranne. Their
obedience to the calling of GOD ſprang out of a
Conſtant* Faith in the promiſes of God by Miracles
confirmed vnto them.Heb. 11. e. 26. 27. By the ſame meanes
muſt we alſo learne to frame our ſelues to the Obedience
of Gods Calling, though it ſeeme to be
ioyned with neuer ſo great daunger. And yet although
they haue the calling and commaundemēt
of God to deliuer his people: they doe not ſtirre
the Iſraelites to Rebellion,Iere. 29. b. 7. and will them to arme
themſelues againſt the Tyranne, were he neuer
ſo Cruell and iniuryous, but in curteis maner entreate
him, that they maye haue licence to depart
into the wilderneſſe. But what obteyned they, by
their endeuour? Firſt Pharao Cōtemneth and deſpiſeth
the God of Iſraell:
                  Verſ. 2. 
                  VVho (ſayth he) is the
Lorde that I ſhould heare his voyce? Then he chargeth
Moyſes & Aaron as authors of Sedition ſaying,

                  VVherefore doe yee lette the people from their
worke
                        •
                      &c.
                  Verſ. 4. Laſtly he Oppreſſeth the people farre
more Grieuouſly then he did before. For he cauſeth
them to gather ſtrawe and ſtubble, & yet to make
their Full taſke of Brickes, as they dyd before.
               Theſe things happened not without the Knowledge
of God,Exod. 3. d. 19. for he ſaid before, *I know that Pharao
will not let you go. But Gods pleaſure is in
this maner of Deliuerance of his people to ſet vp
a Spectacle or Example to all ages to learne in
what Sort he will vſually delyuer his people out
of the kingdome of Satan, Wickedneſſe, and Error.
Firſt, he ſendeth abroade his Meſſengers, Prophetes,
and Preachers to publiſh the ſweete voice
and Promiſes of his Worde and Goſpell, Then,
when they beginne to execute their office, and men
ſomewhat hearken vnto them, the Deuill by hys
Inſtruments Raiſeth greater trouble and Affliction
then euer they had before, ſo that manye
mindes be therewith greatly Offended. Yet in the
ende,Luc. 21. c. 15. Act. 6. c. 10. God by the *Mightie power of his Spirite
and holy Worde ouerthroweth the kingdome of
darkeneſſe and Deliuereth his people out of the
Tirannie of Egipt.
               
               And the officers of the children of Iſrael
did ſee that they were in woorſe,Verſ. 19. &c.
               Theſe officers of the Iſraelites by this Cruell
anſwere did not acknowledge the wicked & Obdurate
hart of Pharao againſt the holy wil of God,
as they ſhould haue done, & with Pacience Comfort

themſelues and their brethren: but after the
maner of olde Adam Murmure againſt GOD,
quarreling with his ſeruauntes Moyſes, & Aaron,
and laying all the cauſe of the trouble vpon them,
Wherein they ſhew an example both of Impiety,
and Vnthankfulneſſe. Impious it was to lay the
fault of their affliction and miſerie vpon them that
were the Miniſters of Gods bleſſing, and of their
gracious Deliuerance. Great vnthankfulneſſe
might it appeare, ſeing Moyſes and Aaron did hazard
their Liues for their great Benefite, to Call
and accompt them Tormentors and Murderers
of the people.Verſ. 21. For, ſay they, You haue put a ſworde
into their hands to kill vs. But this is and hath bene
the Courſe of the worlde alwayes. The cauſe of
all Miſchiefe, when it ryſeth after the publiſhing
of the worde of God, is Caſt vpon the Miniſters
and Preachers of the ſame, and in ſteede of thankfull
minds, they haue all Spite and Reproch that
can be done or ſpoken againſt them.3. Reg. 18. c. 17 Iere. 20. a. 2. Act. 23. a. 2. Act. 28. 
                        •
                     . 22. Act. 19. e. 29. So was it
in the time of the Prophets▪ So was it in the time
of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, So was it in the time
of the Primitiue Church, as it maye be declared
by infinite examples.
               Moiſes returned vnto the Lorde and
ſayde,Verſ. 22. 23. Lord wherefore haſt thou ſo, &c.
               
                  Moyſes here, in part doth Well and godly, in
part he ſheweth his Weakeneſſe, Miſtruſt, and
infirmitie. He doth Well in this, that he both not
Storme and rage agaynſt thoſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   S
                     •
                  aunderers,

* nor doth not requite euill with euill,Rom. 12. d. 21. and
alſo that he doth not giue ouer his calling, and Flee
from God, but rather runneth to him for Succour
and comfort: For ſo the Text ſayth, He returned to
the Lorde. He ſheweth his Weakeneſſe, in that he
ſeemeth not througly to Remember the wordes of
God Before ſpoken to him,Exod. 3. f. 19. when God ſayd, I know
that Pharao will not deliuer you, no not in a mightie
hande, and therefore he doth complaine and quarrell
with God.
               
                  VVherefore (ſayth he) haſt thou ſo euill intreated
this people, and why haſt thou ſent me? As though
any thing had happened which God had not Before
tolde him ſhoulde come to paſſe: and yet God
doth not Sternely rebuke Moyſes, but mercifully

                     〈◊〉
                   with his Infirmitie, & ſtrengthneth him
with the Renewing of his Promiſe, and ſignification
that he will nowe begin to ſhewe his mightie
power againſt Pharao, for their deliuerance.
            
         
         
            The ſixt Sundaye in Lent
at Morning and Euening
prayer. Exod. 9. 10.
            
                THe Lorde ſayde vnto Moyſes, Go in vnto Pharao,
and thou ſhalt tell him, Thus ſayth the Lorde God
of the 
                  〈…〉
                Let my people go, that they may

                  〈…〉
                If thou refuſe: to, let them go, and

                  〈…〉
                Beholde, the 
                  •
               ande of the Lorde is

                  〈…〉
                is in the fielde (for) vpon horſes, vpon
aſſes, vpon camelles, vpon ouen, and vpon ſheepe, there ſhall

be a mightie great 
                  〈◊〉
               . 4 And the Lorde ſhall doe
wonderfully betwéene the beaſtes of Iſraell and the beaſtes
of Egypt, ſo that there ſhall nothing die of all that pertayneth
to the children of Iſraell. 5 And the Lorde appoynted
a time, ſaying, to morowe the Lorde ſhall finiſh this worde in
the la
                  •
               de. 6 And the Lorde did that thing on the morowe,
and all the cattell of Egypt dyed: but of the cattell of the
children of Iſraell died not one. 7 And Pharao ſent, and
behold, there was not one of the cattel of the Iſraelites dead:
And the hart of Pharao was hardened, and he did not let the
people go. 8 And the Lorde ſayd vnto Moyſes and Aaron,
Take your handes full of aſhes out of the fornace, and Moſſes
ſhall ſprinkle it vp into the ayre in the ſight of Pharao.
            9 And it ſhall be duſt in all the lande of Egypt, and ſhall
be ſwelling ſores with blaynes both on man and beaſt thorowout
all the land of Egipt. 10 And they tooke aſhes out
of the fornace, and ſtoode before Pharao, and Moſes ſprinckled
it vp into the ayre: and there were ſw
                  •
               lling 
                  •
               ores with
blaynes, both in men and in beaſtes.
            11 And the ſorcerers could not ſtand before Moſes becauſe
of the blaynes: for there were b
                  •
               tches vpon the enchaunters
and vpon all the Egyptians.Exod. 4. d. 21. 12 And the Lord hardened the
hart of Pharao, and he harkened not vnto them, as the 
                  •
               ord
had ſayd vnto Moyſes. 13 And the Lord
                  •
                ſayde vnto Moyſes,
Riſe vp earely in the morning; and ſtande before Pharao,
and thou ſhalt tell him. Thus ſayth the Lorde God of
the Hebrues, Let my people go, that they may ſerue me.
            
            14 Or elſe I will at this time ſends all my plaguey vpon
thine heart, and vpon thy ſeruants, and on thy people: that
thou mayſt know that there is none like me in all the earth.
            15 For now I wil, ſtretch out my hand, that I may ſmite
thée and thy people with peſtilence, and thou ſhalt periſhe
from the earth.Rom. 9. d. 17. 16 And in verſe déede for this cauſe haue I
kept thée▪ for to ſhew thée my power, and that my name may

be declared throughout all the worlde.
            17 Yet exalteſt thou thy ſelfe againſt my people, that thou
wilt not let them go? 18 Beholde, to morowe this time I
will ſende downe a mightie great hayle, ſuch a one as was
not in Egypt ſince the foundation thereof was layde, vnto
this time. 19 Send therefore now, and gather thy beaſtes,
and all that thou haſt in the fielde: for vpon all the men and
the beaſtes which are founde in the fielde, and not brought
home; ſhall the hayle fall, and they ſhall die.
            20 And as many as feared the worde of the Lord amongſt
the ſeruants of Pharao, made their ſeruants and their beaſts

                  •
               lee 
                  ••
               to the houſes. 21 But he that regarded not the worde
of ſhe Lorde, left his ſeruants and his beaſtes in the field.
            
                22 And the Lord ſayd vnto Moſes, Stretch forth thy hand
vnto heauen, that there may be hayle in all the lande of Egypt,
vpon man, and vpon beaſtes, and vpon all the hearbes
of the fielde throughout the lande of Egypt.
            23 And Moyſes ſtretched forth his rod vnto heauen, and
the Lord thundred and hayled, and the fire ranne along vppon
the grounde, and the Lord hayled in the lande of Egypt.
            24 So there was hayle, and fire mingled with the
h
                  ••
               le ſo grieuous, and ſuch as there was none throughout all
the lan
                  ••
                of Egypt ſince people inhabited it.
            25 And the hayle ſmote throughout all the land of Egypt,
all that was in the field▪ both man and beaſt: and the hayle
ſmote all the hearbes of the fielde, and broke all the trées of
the fielde. 26 Onely in the lande of Goſen where the children
of Iſraell were, was there no hayle.
            27. And Pharao ſent and called for Moſes and Aaron, and
ſaide vnto them, I haue now ſinned: the Lorde is righteous

                  〈◊〉
                I and my people are vngodly. 28 Praye ye vnto the
Lorde, that theſe thunderings of God and hayle may be 
                  〈…〉
               :
and I will let you go, and ye ſhall 
                  •
               ar
                  •
               e no longer.
            29 
                  ••
               yſes layde vnto him, Aſſoone as I am out of the

Citie, I will ſpread abroade my handes vnto the Lorde, and
the thunder ſhal ceaſſe, neither ſhall there be any more haile:
that thou mayſt know howe that the earth is the Lordes.
            30 But I know that thou and thy ſeruants yet feare not
the face of the Lorde God. 31 And ſo the flaxe and the barlie
were ſmitten, for the barly was ſhot vp, and the flaxe was
boulled. 32 But the wheate and the rie were not ſmitten,
for they were late ſowne. 33 And Moiſes went out of the
Citie from Pharao, and ſpred abroade his handes vnto the
Lorde: and the thunder and hayle ceaſſed, neyther rayned it
vpon the earth. 34 And when Pharao 
                  •
               awe that the raine
and the haile, and thunder were ceaſſed, he ſinned yet more,
and hardened his hart, he and his ſeruants. 35 And the hart
of Pharao was hardened, neyther would he let the children
of Iſraell go, as the Lord had ſayde by the hand of Moiſes.
         
         
            The .6. Sunday in Lent at Euening prayer. Exod. 10.
            
               ANd the Lorde ſayde vnto Moyſes, Go into Pharao:
for I haue hardened his heart, and the heart of his
ſeruantes, that I might ſhewe theſe my ſignes before
him. 2 And that thou tell in the audience of
thy ſonne, and of thy ſonnes ſonne what things I haue done
in Egypt, and the miracles which I haue done amongſt
them: that ye maye knowe howe that I am the Lorde.
               3 And ſo Moyſes and Aaron came into Pharao, and ſaid
vnto him, Thus ſayth the Lord God of the Hebrewes: How
long wilt thou refuſe to ſubmit thy ſelfe vnto me? Let my
people go, that they may ſerue me.
               4 Or elſe if thou refuſe to let my people go, beholde, to
morrowe will I bring Graſhoppers into thy coaſtes.
               5 And they ſhall couer the face of the earth, that it can
not be ſéene: and they ſhall eate the reſidue which remayneth
vnto you and is eſcaped from the hayle, and they ſhall eate
euery gréene trée that beareth you fruite in the fielde.
               
                  
6 And they ſhall fill thy houſes, and all thy ſeruaents houſes,
and the houſes of all the Egiptians, after ſuch a maner,
as neyther thy fathers, nor thy fathers fathers haue ſéene
ſince the time they were vpon the earth vnto this day. And
he turned himſelfe about, and went out from Pharao.
               7 And Pharaos ſeruantes ſayd vnto him, Howe long
ſhall he be hurtfull vnto vs?Exod. 8. a. 1. Exod. 9. a. 1. Let the men go, that they may
ſerue the Lorde their God: knoweſt thou not yet that Egypt
is deſtroyed? 8 And Moyſes and Aaron were brought againe
vnto Pharao, and he ſayde vnto them, Go and ſerue
the Lorde your God: but who are they that ſhall go?
               9 And Moyſes anſwered, We will go with our yong, and
with our olde, and with our ſonnes, and with our daughters,
and with our ſhéepe, and with our Oxen we muſt go: for we
muſt holde a feaſt vnto the Lorde.
               
                   10 And he ſaide vnto them, Let the Lorde be ſo with you
as I will let you go, and your children: take héede, for ye
haue ſome miſchiefe in hande. 11 Nay not ſo, but go ye
men, and ſerue the Lorde: for that was your deſire. And
they were thruſt out of Pharaos preſence.
               12 And the Lorde ſaide vnto Moyſes, Stretch out thine
hande ouer the lande of Egipt for Graſhoppers, that they
may come vpon the lande of Egipt, and eate all the hearbes
of the lande, and all that the hayle left behinde.
               13 And Moyſes ſtretched forth his rod ouer the lande of
Egipt, and the Lorde brought an eaſt winde vpon the lande
all that day, and all that night: and in the morning the eaſt
winde brought the graſhoppers.
               14 And the graſhoppers went vp ouer all the lande of Egipt,Pſal. 104. c. 30 Sa. .16. b. 9. Ioel. 1. a. 4.
and remained in all quarters of Egypt verie grieuouſly:
before them were there no ſuch graſhoppers, neyther after
 them ſhall be. 15 For they couered all the face of the
earth, ſo that the lande was darke, and they did eate all the
hearbes of the lande, and all the fruites of the trées whatſoeuer

the hayle had left: there was no greene thing left in 
the trées, and hearbes of the fielde through all the lande of
Egipt. 16 Therefore Pharao called for Moyſes and Aaron
in haſte and ſaide, I haue ſinned againſt the Lorde your
God,Exod. 9. f. 28. Exod. 8. b. 8 and againſt you. 17 And nowe forgiue me my ſinne
onely this once, and pray vnto the Lorde your God, that he
may take away from me this death onely.
               18 And (Moyſes) went out from Pharao, and prayed
vnto the Lorde. 19 And the Lorde turned a mightie ſtrong
weſt winde, and it tooke away the graſhoppers, & caſt them
into the red ſea: ſo that there was not one graſhopper in all
the coaſtes of Egipt. 20 And the Lord hardened Pharaos
heart,Exod. 4. d. 21 ſo that he woulde not let the children of Iſrael go.
               21 And the Lord ſaide vnto Moyſes, Stretch out thy hand
vnto heauen, that there maye be vpon the lande of Egypt
darkeneſſe which maye be felt.
               
               22 And Moyſes ſtretched forth his hande vnto heauen:
and there was a thicke darkeneſſe vpon all the lande of Egypt
thrée daies.Sap. 17. a. 5. 23 No man ſaw another, neyther roſe vp
from the place where he was by the ſpace of thrée daies: But
all the children of Iſrael had light where they dwelled.
               24 And Pharao called for Moyſes and 
                     •
                  ayde, Go, and 
ſerue the Lorde: onely let your ſhéepe and your oxen abide,
and let your children go with you.
               25 And Moyſes ſaide, Thou muſt geue vs alſo ſacrifice
and whole burnt offerings, for to doe ſacrifice vnto the Lord
our God. 26 Our cattell alſo ſhall go with vs, and there
ſhall not one hoofe be left behinde: for thereof muſt we take
to ſerue the Lorde our God, neyther doe we knowe with
what we muſt doe ſeruice vnto the Lorde, vntill we come
thither. 27 But the Lorde hardened Pharaos heart, and
he would not let them go. 28 And Pharao ſaide vnto hym,
Get thée from me, & take héede vnto thy ſelfe that thou ſéeſt
my face no more: for whenſoeuer thou commeſt in my ſight,

thou ſhalt die. 29 And Moyſes ſaide, Let it be as thou haſt
ſaide, I will ſée thy face no more.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .ix. and .x.
Chapter of Exodus.
               The Lorde ſaide vnto Moyſes, goe vnto
Pharao, for I haue hardened, &c.
               
                  IN theſe two Chapiters read
this day in the Church, are recited
ſundrie of thoſe plagues wherewyth
God Puniſhed Pharao, and wrought
the Deliuerie of the People out of Egipt.
And becauſe God was determined to ſet his
People at Freedome,Iob. 4. b 9. and was hable * with one
Breath to haue confounded Pharao & ouerthrown
the Whole power of the Egiptians, a man myght
marueyle, why he dyd Deferre the tyme ſo long,
and worke ſo many Meane miracles, whereas
he might haue brought it to paſſe with one Mightie
and terrible worke. Seing eſpecially that God
did know that Pharao would not repent and yeeld.
To this cogitation, GOD himſelfe anſwereth
in the .13. 14. 15. and 16. verſes of thys nynth Chapiter.
Go thy wayes, ſayth God to Moyſes, and tell
Pharao, &c. let my people goe & ſerue me, or elſe at
this tyme I wil ſend al my plagues vpon thyne hart,
and vpon thy ſeruants, and on thy people: that thou
may eſt know there is none like me in al the earth, &c.

And in verye deede, for this cauſe haue I kept thee to
ſhewe thee my power, and that my name may be declared
throughout all the worlde. Here haue we an
euident cauſe, why GOD did ſo long Suffer the
wicked and obdurate hart of Pharao: that is, that
God might * ſet forth his Glorie,Rom. 9. d. 17. and by this terrible
Example be knowne to the whole worlde
That he was a Mightie God, & hable to breake
the power of their Enimies, were they neuer ſo
Obſtinate and Stiffe harted againſt hym.
               That he was a Seuere God,Leuit. 26. c. 1
                        •
                     
                   and * would terriblie
puniſhe the Obdurate & vnrepentant ſinners,
Yea though they be neuer ſo great Kings & Princes.
That he is a Wiſe God, that can Turne the
wicked Malice and Obſtinacie of ſinners to the
Working of his greater glory. That he is a Carefull
and mercifull God towarde his people, and for
their defence and deliuerance will not ſticke to
Breake and Pull downe euen Mightie Princes
and people. There is alſo an other cauſe why God
doth here Suffer Pharao, & at other times Beare
with other Grieuous ſinners, and onely for the
time puniſhe them with Light & Meane plagues,
and this is, By his great Lenitie, Sufferance and
Mildeneſſe, if it might be, to bring them to repentance,
or otherwiſe, if they will not repent, that
they ſhall declare themſelues to the worlde to bee
Vnexcuſable, and God in his Iudgement, when
he doth confounde them, to be a iuſte God. Of this
Cauſe ſpeaketh Paule Rom.
                  Rom. 2. a. 4. 2. Eyther deſpiſeſt thou
the ryches of his goodneſſe and long ſufferance, not

knowing that the kindeneſſe of God leadeth thee to
repentance, &c.
               
               When God is ſayd To harden the hart of Pharao,
we maye not thinke that God doth Force and
Compell Pharao to ſinne, or that the blame of his
obſtinacie, and vnrepentant hart can iuſtly be laide
vpon God,Iob. 34. a. 10. Sap. 14. a. 9. Pſal. 5. a. 5. 6. *For God doth neyther worke Sinne
himſelfe, nor would haue it to be Wrought of other:
But God by his ſeruantes Moyſes & Aaron
offered to Pharao his holye worde, and great miracles,
and he, being of nature Wicked and waywarde
from God, and vtterly deſtitute of his holy
Spirit) of which al Inclination to goodneſſe commeth)
did more and more Harden his harte, and
Withſtande the will of God. For the Corrupt nature
of man, without the ſinguler grace of God,
when he heareth Gods worde and will declared to
him, doth not only not yeelde vnto it, but more and
more ſtormeth againſt both the Worde it ſelfe, and
the Meſſengers that bring it.1. Cor. 2. d. 14. 
                  For naturall man vnderſtandeth
not thoſe things that are of God, no nor
cannot. Wherefore when we ſee in theſe Chapiters
that all endeuour is vſed both by God and by his
ſeruauntes to perſwade Pharao, and yet that he is
nothing Mooued eyther by his Worde, or by his
threatnings, or by his Miracles, or by ye counſaile
and aduertiſement of Moyſes and Aaron, yea or of
his owne ſubiectes: we are taught that all the
Workes & endeuours of Man to bring ſinners
from their obſtinacy vnto the Imbracing of Gods
holy will, is all Vaine, vnleſſe it pleaſe God alſo

to worke by his holye ſpirite. Wherefore we muſt
ſubmit our ſelues to the mightie hande of God in
his ſecreat iudgementes, and continually in our
prayers *craue the aſſiſtance of his grace and good
ſpirite,Pſal. 142. b. 1
                        •
                     
                   which may ſo worke in vs that both we our
ſelues may humbly Receiue the worde of GOD,
and that our endeuour to perſwade other, may by
him be Effectuall.
               Moreouer, when there happeneth vnto vs vnſeaſonable
Weathering, Plagues, and other ſickneſſes
of ſundrie ſortes, terrible Nayle, Thunder,
and Lightning, Murraine of cattaile, Deſtruction
of corne or fruites, by blaſt, Vermine, or otherwiſe,
we muſt by theſe examples learne, that they
come not by Chaunce, or by naturall cauſes onely:
but that they are Sent of God as Puniſhmentes
of our Sinne and Diſobedience to the will and
worde of God,Sap. 12. a. 2. and as * Meanes to bring vs to Repentance,
or elſe that God will lay on vs continually
mo of his Plagues, vntill he bring vs to Vtter
confuſion, as hee did Pharao and the Egyptians.
All whoſe Diſobedience ſprange of this
Roote, that they Contemned the worde of God
brought vnto them by his ſeruantes. The Contempt
whereof, if repentaunce did not preuent it,
God hath alway puniſhed with Induration and
vtter Deſolation.
               When we reade that the Iſraelites were cleare
from all thoſe grieuous Plagues with which the
Aegyptians were puniſhed, we muſte to our comfort
conſider, that GOD oftentimes Preſerueth

his people from thoſe Miſeries, that he caſteth vpon
others. And yet, if we looke into the common
courſe of the worlde,Ier. 12. a. 1. Iob. 21. a. 7. Habac. 1. a. 3. we ſhall ſee, that the * Wicked
are in more Felicitie, and more Free from puniſhment,
then the good and godly. And this tentation
hath often * ſhaken the mindes of the Saintes of
God,Pſal. 72. a. 5. as it appeareth in ſundrie Pſalmes.
               What then ſhall we ſay to this? Surely the
Common ordinance of GDD is, that the Godly
ſhould be in Happineſſe and eſcape Plagues, and
the Wicked onely be Puniſhed. And if this common
ordinance of God be altered, It is eyther becauſe
they that profeſſe the name of God be* Sinfull,Num. 14. f. 41
and Liue not according to theyr Calling: or
elſe that Gods good and fatherly will is, by ſuche
Chaſticing and Affliction of this life, to keepe his
ſeruants in Obedience, & to Quicken their Fayth,
and put them in minde of the Heauenly felicitie
and life euerlaſting.Prou. 30. b. 9. Deut. 32. c. 15. The Care and Cogitation
whereof in time of *Proſperitie is more Cold and
Slacke in vs then our duetie requireth.
            
         
         
            Eaſter daye
at Morning prayer.
            Exodus. 12.
            
               
                   AND the Lord ſpake vnto Moyſes and Aaron in the
lande of Egypt, ſaying. 2 This moneth ſhall bée
vnto you the beginning of Monethes: and the firſt
moneth of the yeare ſhall it be vnto you.
               
                  
3 Speake ye vnto all the congregation of Iſraell, ſaying,
In the tenth day of this moneth euery man take vnto him
a lambe according to the houſe of the fathers, a lambe thorowout
euery houſe. 4. If the houſeholde be to little for the
lambe, let him take his neighbour which is next vnto hys
houſe, according to the number of the ſ
                     ••
                  les, euery one of
you according to his eating ſhall make your count for a
lambe. 5. And let your lambe be without 
                     •••
                  miſh, a male of
a yeare olde (vvhich) ye ſhal take out from among the ſhepe,
and from among the goates. 6 And ye ſhall kéepe him in
vntill the four
                     •
                  enth day of the ſame moneth: and euery aſſemble
of the congregation of Iſraell ſhall kill him about
euen. 7 And they ſhall take of the bloud and ſtrike it 
                     〈◊〉
                  
two (ſide) poſtes, and on the vpper doore poſt, in the houſes
where they ſhall eate him. 8 And they ſhall eate the fleſhe
the ſame night, roſt with fire, and with vnleauened breade:
and with ſowre hearbes they ſhall eate it.
               9 See that ye eate not there of rawe, nor ſodden with water,
but roſt with fire: the head, feete, and purtenance thereof.
               10 And ye ſhall 
                     〈◊〉
                   nothing of it remaine vnto the morning:
That which remayneth of it vntill the morow, ſhal ye
burn
                     •
                   with fire. 11 Of this maner ſhall ye eate it, Wyth
your loynes g
                     •
                  rded, and your ſhooes on your feete, and your
ſtaffe in your hande, and ye ſhall eate it in haste: for it as the
Lordes Paſſouer. 12 For I will paſſe thorow the lande of
Egypt this ſame night, and will ſmite all the firſt borne of
Egipt from man to beaſt, and vpon all the Gods of Egypt
I will execute iudgement: I (am) the Lorde.
               13 And the bloud ſhall be vnto you 
                     〈◊〉
                   token in the houſes
wherein you are: and when I ſee the blood, I will paſſe ouer
you, and the plague ſhal
                     •
                   not be vpon you to deſtroy you,
when I ſmite the lande of Egypt. 14 And this day ſhall be 
vnto you a remembrance: and you ſhall kéepe it an holy feaſt
vnto the Lorde throughout your generations, ye ſhall kéepe

                  
                     〈◊〉
                   holy for an ordinance for euer. 15 Seuen dayes ſhall ye
eate vnleaue ned bread, ſo that the firſt day ye put away leauē
out of your houſes: For whoſoeuer eateth leauened bread
from the firſt day vnto the ſeuenth day, that ſoule ſhall be rooted
out of Iſraell. 16 The firſt day ſhall be an holy conuocation
vnto you, and the ſeuenth day ſhall be an holy conuocation
vnto you: and there ſhall be no maner of worke done
in them, ſaue about that onely which euery man muſt eate,
that onely may ye 
                     •
                  oe. 17 And ye ſhall obſerue the feaſt of
vnleauened bread: for this ſame day haue I brought your
armies out of the lande of Egypt, therefore ye ſhall obſerue
this day, and all your children after you, by an euerlaſting
decrée. 18 The firſt moneth, and the fourtenth day of the
moneth,Leuit. 23. a. 5. Num. 28. c. 16. at euen ye ſhall eate vnleauened bread, vnto the one
and twentie day of the ſame moneth at euen againe.
               19 Seuen dayes ſhall there be no leaneued bread founde
in your houſes: and who ſoeuer eateth leauened bread, that
ſoule ſhall be rooted out from the congregation of Iſraell,
whether he be a ſtraunger or 
                     •
                  orne in the lande.
               20 Ye ſhall eate no leauened breade: but in all your habitations
ſhall ye eate vnleauened breade.
               
                   21 Then Moyſes called, for all the elders of Iſraell, and
ſayde vnto them; Chooſe out; and ta
                     ••
                   you to euery houſhold
of you a l
                     •
                  mbe and kill the Paſſeouers.
               22 And take a 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Heb. 11. f. 28. and dip it in the bloud that
is in the baſon, and ſtrike the vpper poſt of the doore, and the,
two ſide poſtes with the bloud that is in the baſon: and none
of you go out at the doore of his houſe vntill the morning.
               23 For the Lorde will paſſe ouer to ſmite the Egiptians:
and when he ſéeth the bloud vpon the vpper doore poſt and
the two ſide poſtes, he will paſſe ouer the doore, and will not
ſuffer the deſtroyer to come into your houſes to plague you.
               24 Therefore ſhall ye obſerue this thing for an ordinance
to thée and to thy ſonnes for euer. 25 And when ye be come

to the lande which the Lorde will giue you, according as he
hath promiſed, ye ſhall kéepe this ſeruice.
               26 And when your children aſke you, What maner of
ſeruice is this that ye doe? 27 Ye ſhall ſay, It is the ſacrifice
of the Lordes Paſſeouer, which paſſed ouer the houſes
of the children of Iſraell in Egypt▪ and he ſmote the Egiptians,
and ſaued our houſes. And the people bowed themſelues,
and worſhipped. 28 And the children of Iſraell went 
and did as the Lorde had commaunded Moiſes and Aaron,
ſo did they.Sap. 18. b. 5. 10 29 And at midnight the Lorde ſmote the firſt
borne in the lande of Egypt, from the firſt borne of Pharao
that ſate on his ſeate, vntill the firſt borne of the capt
                     ••
                  e that
was in priſon, and all the firſt borne of cattell.
               30 And Pharao roſe in the night, he and his ſeruantes,
and all the Egyptians, and there was a great crie in Egypt▪
for there was not a houſe where there was not one deade.
               31 And he called vnto Moyſes and Aaron by night, ſaying,
Riſe vp, and get you out from amongſt my people, both you
and alſo the children of Iſraell: and go, and ſerue the Lorde
as ye haue ſayde. 32 And take your ſhéepe and your droues
with you as ye haue ſayde: and depart, and bleſſe me.
               33 And the Egyptians forced the people; that they might
ſen
                     •
                  e them out of the lande in haſt: for they ſayd, We be all
(but) dead men. 34 And the people tooke their dough before
it was ſowred, which they had in ſtore, béeing bounde in
clothes vpon their ſhoulders.Exod. 11. a. 2 35 And the children of Iſrael
did according to the ſaying of Moiſes▪ and they borowed of
the Egyptians iewels of ſiluer, and iewels of golde, and rayment.
36 And the Lord gaue the people fouour in the fight
of the Egyptians, ſo that they gr
                     ••
                  nted ſuch things as they
had re
                     ••
                  red: and they robbed the Egyptians.
               37 And the children of Iſrael tooke their iourney from Rameſis
to Suchoth, ſixe hundred thouſand men of foote, beſide
children. 38 And a great multitude of ſundrie other nations

went alſo with them, and ſhéepe and oxen, and excéeding
much cattell. 39 And they baked vnleauened cakes of the
dough which they brought out of Egypt, for it was not ſowred:
For they were thruſt out of Egypt, and could not tary,
neither had they prepared for themſelues any prouiſion of
meate. 40 The dwelling of the children of Iſraell which
they dwelled in Egypt, was foure hundred & thirtie yeares.
               41 And when the foure hundred and thirtie yeares were
expyred, euen the ſelfe ſame day departed all the hoſtes of the
Lorde out of the lande of Egypt. 42 It is a night to bée
obſerued vnto the Lorde, in the which he brought them out
of the lande of Egypt: This is that night of the Lord, which
all the children of Iſraell muſt kéepe throughout their generations.
43 And the Lorde ſayde vnto Moiſes and Aaron,
This is the law of Paſſeouer: there ſhall no ſtraunger eate
thereof. 44 But euery ſeruant that is bought for money,
after that thou haſt circumciſed him, ſhall eate thereof.
               45 A ſtraunger and an hyred ſeruant ſhall not eate therof.
46 In one houſe ſhall it be eate
                     •
                  , thou ſhalt 
                     〈◊〉
                   none
of the fleſhe out of the houſe, neither ſhall ye breake a bo
                     •
                  e 
thereof. 47 All he congregation of Iſraell ſhall obſerue
it. 48 If a ſtraunger alſo dwell 
                     〈◊〉
                   you, and will helde
paſſeouer vnto the Lord, let him circumciſe all that be 
                     ••
                  les
and then let him come and obſerue it, and he ſhall be as one
that is borne in the lande: for no vncircumciſed perſon ſhall
eate thereof. 49 One maner of lawe ſhall be vnto
him that is borne in the lande, and vnto the ſtraunger that
dwelleth among you. 50 And all the children of Iſrael did
as the Lorde commaunded Moyſes and Aaron, ſo did they.
               51 And the ſelfe ſame day did the Lorde bring the children
of Iſraell out of the lande of Egypt with their 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xij.
Chapter of Exodus.
               And the Lord ſpake vnto Moiſes,Verſ. 1. &c.
Saying this Moneth, &c.
               
                  THe Hiſtorie of the oppreſſion
of the children of Iſraell in Aegypt, and
their maruelous deliuerance from ye
tyrannie of Pharao, deſcribed in the
former Chapters, doth, as it were, in
a liuely Image ſet before our eyes our ſpirituall
deliuerance from the tyrannie of Pharao the deuill,
and from the heauie burthens of Sinne and Wickedneſſe,
wherwith we were ouerwhelmed in the
Aegypt of this worlde. Our Pharao is the Deuill,
our Aegypt is this worlde, our bondage is the ſubiection
to Satan and his kingdome, our taſkes of
Bricke, are the grieuous burthens of our ſinnes,
our Moiſes is Chriſt, our Deliuerance is the Conqueſt
that our Sauiour Chriſt made of Sin, Satan,
Hell, and Death, by the merite of his paſſion.
And as the night before the Iſraelites were Deliuered,
it pleaſed God to ordeyne them a Sacrament,
whereby they ſhould from time to time call
into theyr remembrance the great benefite of God
ſhewed vnto them, and yeeld moſt heartie thankes
to him for the ſame: Euen ſo our ſauiour Chriſt,
the night before he went to his paſſion, thereby to

worke our deliuerance,Mar. 14. c. 24 Luc. 22. b. 19. 1. Cor. 11. e. 24. * ordeyned the holye Sacrament
of his laſt ſupper, wherby we might confirme
in our memorie the worke of our redemption,
and ſet forth his death vntill his laſt comming.
This Sacrament of the Iewes, now here diſcribed
in this Chapter, is called the Paſſeouer, becauſe
by the ſprinkling of the doore poſtes with the bloud
of the lambe, God willed his Angell to Paſſeouer
the houſes of the Iſraelites, and not to ſtrike them
with that puniſhment, wherewith he plagued the
Aegyptians. In like maner when Almightie God
ſeeth the bloud of the Innocent Lambe his deere
ſonne Chriſt Ieſu, ſprinckled vpon the doore poſtes
of our Conſciences by Fayth in his Paſſion, the
execution of his wrath due for ſinne doth paſſe and
not light vpon vs, as it doth vpon the Reprobate
and Wicked, that haue not Fayth nor Beleeue his
Goſpel. But forſomuch as this whole Sacrament
of the Iewes Paſſeouer, is nothing but a comfortable
& ſweete preaching to vs of the death of Chriſt,
and the myſterie of our redemption, I thinke it
good to note ſome chiefe and particuler poyntes
thereof vnto you.
               The Paſcall lambe, as I haue ſayde, is Chriſt
Ieſu,
                  1. Cor. 5. c. 7. for ſo ſayth ſaint Paule. Our Paſſeouer is offered
Chriſt Ieſu, And for this cauſe alſo Iohn ye 
                  Baptiſt
poynting vnto him,Iohn. 1. d. 29. ſayde: Beholde the Lambe of
God that taketh away the ſinnes of the VVorlde.
               
               This Lambe muſt be without ſpot,
                  Verſ. 5. to note therby
the innocencie of our Sauiour Chriſt, who therefore
of ſaint Peter is called The Immaculate and vndefiled
                  1. Pet. 1. d. 19.
                  
                  Lambe, For in him there was no ſinne, although
he tooke vpon hym the Burthen of all our
ſinnes.Verſ. 5. This lambe was taken From among the
ſheepe, to declare the humanitie of Chriſt, who was
taken out of the flocke of that breede that God before
had bleſſed in Abraham. And therefore ſayth
ſaint Paule to the Hebrewes.
                  Heb. 2. d. 16. 
                  He tooke not the nature
of Angels vpon him, but the ſeede of Abraham.
               
               The Paſſeouer was killed in the euening,
                  Verſ. 18. 
                  and
latter part of the day, and ſo Chriſt came to redeeme
and deliuer Mankinde towarde the latter ende of
the worlde.Verſ. 7. The bloud of the Lambe Sprinckled
vpon the doore poſtes, as is before ſayde, is the
bloud of Chriſt, by fayth, ſprinckled in our conſciences.Verſ. 9.
As the fleſh of the Lambe might not bee
eaten raw, ſo muſt not Chriſt be receyued as a raw,
an vnperfite, or an vnſufficient Sacrifice, only for
originall ſinne, or for our ſinnes before Baptiſme
onely, or for the ſinnes of ſome, and not of other:
But for a ſufficient Sacrifice and ful Satiſfaction
for all the ſinnes of the whole worlde, that eyther
hath bene,Heb. 10. c. 14. or hereafter ſhall be. For as Paule ſaith
to the Hebrewes. VVith one oblation once made, he
made perfite all that be ſanctified.
                  Verſ. 8. The Lambe muſt
be eaten with bitter herbes, in ſignification that the
receyuing of Chriſt by fayth, in this worlde is ioyned
with the bitterneſſe of Affliction and Trouble.
For whoſoeuer will liue holily in Chriſt Ieſu ſhall
ſuffer perſecution.
                  2. Tim. 3. c. 12. Nothing muſt be left of the lambe
vntill the morning,
                  Verſ. 10. to note that we muſt repent and
beleeue in Chriſt, while we be in this life, and not

deferre the matter to another time. For Chriſt can
not be beneficiall to them, that in this life doe not
acknowledge him.Verſ. 15. The Paſchall Lambe Muſt be
eaten with vnleauened breade: to declare that the
fayth of Chriſt may not be mixed eyther with the
Soureneſſe of error and falſe doctrine, or with corruption
of Sinfull and wicked life, but altogither
with truth and ſinceritie. Therefore Chriſt gaue
his Diſciples warning That they ſhould beware of
the * leauen,
                  Luc. 12. a. 1. Marc. 8. b. 15. that is, the corrupt doctrine of the Phariſies
and Saduces.
                  1. cor. 5. c. 8. And ſaint Paule to the Corinth.
Our paſſeouer is offered Chriſt Ieſu. &c. Therfore let
vs ſolemnize the feaſt, not in the leauen of malice and
craftineſſe, but in the vnleauened breade of ſinceritie
and truth. The loynes of them that eate the Paſſeouer
muſt be gyrded, as prepared to a iourney, in
token that they that doe receyue Chriſt, muſt be as
Pilgrimes in this life, and in readineſſe to paſſe
out of the Egypt of this world, into the land of promiſe
our heauenlye Heritage.Heb. 13. c. 14. For we haue not
here a Citie or place to dwell in, but we muſt looke
alwayes to the heauenly Hieruſalem that our Sauiour
hath purchaſed for vs.Luc. 12. c. 35. And therefore, Luk. 12.
Chriſt warneth vs, That vve ſhould haue our loines
gyrded, and lampes in our handes, like vnto ſeruants,
that are readie looking for their maiſter vvhen he vvil
come. This feaſt of the Paſſeouer was ordeyned
to be kept once euery yeare, not only, that the people
ſhoulde themſelues call to remembrance their
Deliuerie: but alſo by that occaſion, from time to
time inſtruct their youth, and teach them to vnderſtande

Gods great goodneſſe towarde them, and
his Miraculous woorkes by hys myghtie hande
wrought for them. Wherefore we alſo at the ſolemniſing
of the memoriall of oure Paſſeouer
ſhould not onely *1. cor. 11. f. 26. ſet forth the death and paſſion of
Chriſt and the great mercies of GOD thereby
brought vnto vs: but teach our youth and children
alſo, that they may in like maner vnderſtande the
Benefit of our redemption in Chriſt, and the ſweet
comfort that riſeth thereof.
               And Pharao called vnto Moſes and Aaron
by night ſaying,Verſ. 31 &c. riſe vp, &c.
               Here is the effect of Gods mightie working for
his people, and the fulfilling of his promiſe, that
the obſtinate and harde hearte of Pharao, which
had ſet himſelfe againſt Gods purpoſe, was nowe
ſo broken, that he was not onely wylling to let the
Iſraelites go, but alſo did Haſten them away to depart
with ſpeede: ſo that they could not haue time
to prepare themſelues eyther bread or meate for
the iourney, in ſo much that they were faine to
take their dowe before it was ſowred, and carie it
on their ſhoulders. And in remembrance of this
fulfilling of their promiſe, and of their ſpeedie deliuerāce,
he willed them euer after to Solemniſe
the feaſt of vnleauened bread.
               And the children of Iſrael did according
to the ſaying of Moyſes,Verſ. 35. 36. &c.
               In this place is to be obſerued the fulfilling of

an other promiſe of God made not onely to Moſes
in the third Chapiter of this booke,Exod. 3. a. 8. Gen. 15. c. 13 Act. 7. a. 6. but to Abraham
alſo manye yeares before. Gene. 15. Knowe thou
ſayth God, that thy ſeede ſhall be a ſtraunger in a
lande that is not his, and the people therof ſhall keepe
them vnder in bondage, and ſhall afflict them foure
hundred yeares: but I will iudge that people, and afterwarde
they ſhal depart with great ſubſtance. This
promiſe is here fulfilled. For the Iſraelites depart
with great Treaſure, that they borrowed of the
Egiptians. As touching the doubt howe the Iſraelites
might ſpoyle the Egiptians by borrowing their
Iewels, and not minding to come againe, I haue
ſpoken in the expoſition of the thirde Chapiter.
Verſ. 21. 22.
               And the children of Iſrael toke their iourney
from Rameſis to Sucoth,Verſ. 37. 38. &c.
               God had promiſed to Abraham, that he woulde
multiply his ſeede as the ſtarres of Heauen, which
we ſee in this place alſo notablie fulfilled. Iacob
entered into Egipt but with ſixtie and ſixe perſons,Gen. 46. c. 26.
and nowe although they liued in great ſeruitude
and bondage many yeares, in ſo much that their
men Children were ſlaine and murdered. yet they
be nowe growen to this great number of men beſide
Children.
               The dwelling of the children of Iſrael,Verſ. 40. 41.
while they dwelled in Egipt, &c.
               This number of yeares is not to be accompted

from the entrance of Iacob into Egipt with his familie,
for that was but two hundred and ten yeres:
But the reckening muſt begin from that time that
Abraham went into Egipt becauſe of the Famine,
and from the time that the Promiſe was made to
him for the bleſſing of his ſeede.Gen. 15. a. 4. Gal. 3. c. 17. 
                  Gen. 15. This may
appeare by the wordes of S. Paule. Gal. 3. This I ſay
that the lawe, which beganne afterwarde beyonde
430. yeres, doth not diſanull the teſtament, &c.
               
               Whē 
                  Paule ſayth. The law that was made afterward,
he meaneth after the Promiſe made to Abraham,
whereof he had ſpoken in the wordes immediatly
before. So that from the promiſe made to Abraham
vnto the making of the lawe, was but little
aboue .430. yeares, And then all that time can not
be aſſigned to the dwelling of the children of Iſrael
in Egipt after Iacob came thether. But becauſe the
ſeede of Abraham was ſo many yeares Pilgrimes
in ſtraunge landes, therefore is it ſo ſayde in this
place.
            
         
         
            Eaſter day
at Euening praier.
            Exodus. 14.
            
               ANd the Lorde ſpake vnto Moyſes, ſaying.
               
               2 Speake to the childrē of Iſrael, that they turne
and pitche their tentes before Pi-hahiroth betweene
Migdol and the ſea; ouer againſt Baal-ſephon: and
before that ſhal they pitch by the ſea.; For Pharao wil ſay
of the children of Iſrael, They are tangled in the lande, the

wilderneſſe hath ſhut them in. 4 And I will harden Pharaos
heart, that he ſhall followe after you, and I will get
me honour vpon Pharao, and vpon all his hoaſt: The Egiptians
alſo ſhall knowe that I am the Lorde. And they did
ſo. 5 And it was tolde the king of Egipt, that the people
fledde: And the heart of Pharao and of his ſeruants turned
againſt the people, and they ſaide, Why haue we done
this, that we haue let Iſrael go out of our ſeruice?
               6 And he made readie his charet, & tooke his people with
him. 7 And tooke ſixe hundred choſen charrets, and al the
 charets of Egipt, and captaines vpon euery one of them.
               8 And the Lorde hardened the heart of Pharao king of
Egipt, and he folowed after the children of Iſrael: but the
children of Iſrael went out with an highe hande.
               9 And the Egiptians folowed after them, and all the horſes
and charets of Pharao,2. Mach. 4. a. 9 and his horſemen, and his hoaſt
ouertooke them pitching of their tent by the ſea,Ioſua. 24. a. 6 beſide Pihahiroth
before Baal-ſephon. 10 And when Pharao drew
nigh, the children of Iſrael lift vp their eies, and beholde, the
Egiptians folowed after them, and they were ſore afraide:
and the children of Iſrael cried out vnto the Lorde.
               11 But they ſaide vnto Moyſes, becauſe there were no
graues in Egipt, haſt thou therfore brought vs away for to
dye in the wilderneſſe? Wherfore haſt thou ſerued vs thus
for to carie vs out of Egipt? 12 Did not we tell thée this
 in Egipt, ſaying, Let vs be in reſt, that we maye ſerue the
Egiptians? For it had béene better for vs to haue ſerued the
Egiptians, then for to die in the wilderneſſe.
               13 And Moyſes ſaide vnto the people, Feare ye not, ſtande
ſtill, and beholde the ſaluation of the Lorde which he wyll
ſhewe to you this day: For ye that haue ſéene the Egiptians
this day, ſhall ſée them no more for euer.
               14 The Lorde ſhall fight for you, and ye ſhall holde your
peace. 15 And the Lorde ſaide vnto Moyſes, Wherefore

cryeſt thou vnto me, ſpeake vnto the children of Iſrael that
they go forwarde. 16 But lift thou vp thy rod, and ſtretch
out thy hande ouer the ſea, and deuide it aſunder, and let the
children of Iſrael go on drie ground through the midſt of the
ſea. 17 And beholde I (euen) I will harden the hart of the
Egiptians, and they ſhall follow after them: and I will get
me honour vpon Pharao, and vpon all his hoaſt, and vpon
his charets, and vpon his horſemen.
               18 And the Egiptians ſhall knowe that I am the Lorde,
when I haue gotten me honour vpon Pharao, vpon his
charets, and vpon his Horſemen.
               19 And the angell of God which went before the hoaſt
of Iſrael, remoued and went behinde them: and the piller
of the clowde went from before their face, and ſtoode behind
them. 20 And came betwéene the tents of the Egiptians,
and the tents of Iſrael,Pſa. 104. d. 39 and it was a clowde & darkneſſe, and
gaue light by night: and all the night long the one came not
at the other. 21 And Moyſes ſtretched out his hande ouer
the ſea, and the Lorde cauſed the ſea to go backe by a verye
ſtrong eaſt winde all that night, and made the ſea dry (land)
and the waters were deuided.Pſal. 77. b. 13. 22 And the children of Iſrael
went into the midſt of the ſea vpon the drie (ground,)
and the waters were a wall vnto them on their right hande
and on their left hand. 23 And the Egiptians folowed, and 
went in after them to the midſt of the ſea, euen all Pharaos
horſes, his charets, and his horſemen.
               24 And in the morning watche, the Lorde looked vnto the
hoaſt of the Egiptians out of the piller of the fyre and of
the clowde, and troubled the hoaſt of the Egiptians.
               25 And tooke of his charet whéeles, and caried them away
violently. So that the Egiptians ſaid, Let vs flie from
the face of Iſrael: for the Lorde fighteth for them againſt
the Egiptians. 26 And the Lorde ſaide vnto Moyſes,
Stretch out thine hande ouer the ſea, that the waters maye

come againe vpon the Egiptians, vpon their charets, and
vpon their horſemen. 27 And Moyſes ſtretched forth his
hande ouer the ſea, and it came againe to his courſe earely
in the morning, and the Egiptians fled againſt it: and the
Lorde ouerthrewe the Egiptians in the midſt of the ſea.
               28 And the water returned, and couered the charets,
and the horſemen, and all the hoaſte of Pharao that came
into the ſea after them, ſo that there remayned not one of
them.Eſay. 11. d. 16. 29 But the children of Iſrael walked vpon drie
(lande) through the midſt of the Sea, and the waters were
a wall vnto them on the right hande of them, and on the left.
               30 Thus the Lorde deliuered Iſrael the ſelfe ſame daye
out of the hande of the Egiptians:1. Mac. 4. a. 9. and Iſrael ſawe the
Egiptians dead vpon the ſea ſide.Pſal. 105. b. 12 31 And Iſrael ſaw that
mightie power which the Lord ſhewed vpon the Egiptians:
and the people feared the Lorde, and beléeued the Lorde and
his ſeruant Moyſes.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. 14.
Chapter of Exodus.
               And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moyſes,Verſ. 1. &c. ſaying,
&c. For Pharao will ſay, &c.
               
                  IN this Chapter is deſcribed
the great daunger, that the Iſraelites
were in after their departure out of
Egipt, at the redde ſea, and their merueylous
deliuerance from the ſame.
Whereby we ſee, that, although Moſes and the children
of Iſrael did folowe the calling of God, & were

guyded by his angels at their departure, yet were
they not quite out of perill and daunger: Yea rather,
becauſe Pharao had deliuered them againſt
his will by Gods mighty hande, he purſueth them
nowe more eagerly, and doth his beſt to worke
them greater perill. Euen ſo thoſe which Chriſt
hath deliuered out of the bondage of Satan, by the
might of his power, haue not yet their Full tranquillitie
and quietneſſe, but rather, becauſe he was
forced to deliuer them, he ſtryueth by all his miniſters
to worke them greater trouble. Therefore,
we muſt not imagine, that aſſoone as we followe
Gods calling in this lyfe in the profeſſing of Chriſt
and his Goſpell, that we are by and by in the lande
of promiſe flowing with Milke and Honie.Gen. 12. b. 10. Gen. 42. a. 2 1. Sa. 21. a. 3. 2. Reg. 15. c. 14 But
yet ſtill remayneth to vs, whyle we are here the
dangers of enimies, of the Sea, of the wilderneſſe,
of hunger, of thirſt, of colde, of heare, &c. as
we ſee happened to the Iſraelites for our inſtruction.
Againe as we ſee this daunger happened to
the Iſraelites not without the knowledge of God
(for he telleth Moyſes of it before hande): Euen
ſo we muſt vnderſtande, that thoſe troubles, that
happen to vs, Come not wythout the certayne
knowledge and prouidence of God. Therefore we
may not * murmure,1. Cor. 10. b. 10 Exod. 16. b. 7. Num. 11. a. 1. as the Iſraelites did, and miſtruſt
God, or impute the ſame to euill fortune, to
the Deuill, or to euill men, but paciently looke for
Gods purpoſe therein, with ſure truſt of his helpe,
if the ſame be eyther for his glorie or for our commoditie.
Laſtly, God doth not ſende ſuch troubles

and daungers to his people, for that he meaneth
to forſake them, & leaue them ſuccourleſſe to their
enimies, but rather that he may glorifie his name
and ſet forth his exceeding mercies & ſauing helth
towarde them, that followe the calling of his holye
worde.
               And it was tolde the king of Egipt,Verſ. 5. &c. that
the people fledde, and the hart, &c.
               Here may we learne the Diſpoſition of the wycked,
which after the example of Pharao and the
Egiptians, being ſomtime broken with the plagues
and puniſhmentes of God, with hipocriſie, for the
time, ſeeme to repent them, and to leaue their euil.
But ſo ſoone as Gods heauie hande is taken from
them, and any occaſion giuen of miſchiefe, as ſaint
Peter ſayth,2. pet. 2. d. 22. 
                  They fall as Dogges to their vomet, and
Hogges to their vvalovving in the myre. For ſuch it
were better neuer to haue knowne the way of Iuſtice,
then after knowledge to forſake it. Moreouer,
the wicked haue great hope in their Deuilliſh
attempts: but God turneth it to their owne confuſion
as we ſee here by Pharao and the Egiptians.
               
               And when Pharao drewe nighe,Verſ. 10. &c. the
children of Iſrael lift vp, &c.
               The nature of affliction is, as fyre, to Trie the
good and ſounde hartes from hypocrites and diſſimulers,
which folowe the profeſſion of God for the
worldes ſake. Some of the children of Iſrael call
vpon God, as knowing in him to be their onely

ayde: Otherſome, and the more part, forgetting
Gods mightie workes ſo lately done for them, repent
them of their following of God, and Raile at
their guyde and leader Moyſes with ſpiteful reproches.
But he, as a good and mercifull Gouernour
doth not ſtorme with them, nor requite them with
that which in Iuſtice they might ſeeme to deſerue,
but Comforteth them with the repeating of the
promiſes of God and the aſſurance of his mightie
helpe: thereby teaching vs, that in time of aduerſitie
their is no ſurer comfort then to call to our
Remembrance the ſweete promiſes of God made
vnto his people, and the example of ſuch things,
as he hath done for them.
               And the Lorde ſaide vnto Moyſes wherfore
crieſt thou vnto me,Verſ. 15. &c.
               The text ſaith not that Moyſes Cried in his praier,
nor that any voyce was heard come from him,
But he cryeth in the eares of the Lord that Prayeth
in fayth with a feruent and earneſt minde,
though no voyce be harde to other in his prayer.
And ſuch earneſt * calling vpon God with hart and
minde doth alwaye preuayle and taketh effect
before God,Act. 10. a. 4. Iacob. 5. d. 16. as we ſee here that Moyſes prayer
doth.
               Speake vnto the children of Iſrael,Verſ. 15. &c. that
they go forwarde, &c.
               Here now God▪ ſheweth his mightie arme ſtretched
out to the deliuerance of his people, and worketh

3. great and wonderfull Miracles. The
firſt, that the Angell of God, which directed the
pyller of fyre,Pſa. 104. d. 38 and the clowde before the people of
Iſrael, doth nowe ſodainely withdrawe himſelfe
backe, and is placed betweene the Egiptians and the
campe of Iſrael, ſo that on the part of Iſrael in the
night time there was a light and brightneſſe that
they might ſee to doe any thing, that they thought
good: and on the part of the Egiptians was ſo great
darknes, that they did ſcant ſee one the other, much
leſſe were hable to doe any thing againſt the Iſraelites.
The ſecond Miracle was that by the ſtretching
out of Moyſes rodde,Verſ. 21. there came ſuch a ſtrong
winde, as ſtaied the waters of the Sea, that the
children of Iſrael might paſſe through vpon the dry
lande.Verſ. 23. 24. The thirde is, that when the Egiptians deſperately,
as men blinded with the furie of their
owne wickedneſſe, did follow the Iſraelites to the
Sea, the Angell of God ſo abaſhed them, that
they were readie to flie from the face of Iſrael, and
then, Moſes at the appointment of God ſtretching
out his rodde, the waters returned vpon them in
ſuch ſort that the Egiptians with all their power
were drowned in the ſea. By theſe Miracles the
name of God was glorified throughout the whole
worlde, and he knowne to be both a mightie and
mercifull God in the defence of his people, and alſo
a ſeuere Lord in puniſhing ſuch as did reſiſt his
holy will. The tone of which two things ought to
ſtrengthen our faith in time of aduerſitie, and to
make vs to put our aſſured truſt in God, as one

that by his mightie power Can, and of his mercyfull
goodneſſe Will deliuer vs. The tother ſhoulde
ſtirre vp in vs the feare of God, and cauſe vs in
time to repent, and to embrace his worde and calling,
leaſt, for our vnrepentant hartes, he deale
with vs, as he did with Pharao and the Egiptians.
               
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday after Eaſter
at Morning prayer.
            Numeri. 16.
            
               AND Corah the ſonne of Iſaar, the ſonne of Caath,
the ſonne of Leui,Eccle. 45. c. 18. went apart with Dathan and Abiram
the ſonnes of Eliab, and On the ſonne of Peleth,
the ſonne of Ruben. 2 And they roſe vp before
Moſes, with certaine of the children of Iſrael, two hundred
and fiftie, which which were capitaynes of the multitude,
famous in the congregation, & men of great renoume.
               3 And they gathered themſelues togither againſt Moiſes &
Aaron, and ſaid vnto them, Ye take to much vpon you, ſéeing
all the multitude are holy euery one of them, and the Lorde
is among them: Why lift ye your ſelues vp aboue the congregation
of the Lorde? 4 And when Moiſes heard it, he
fell vpon his face. 5 And ſpake vnto Corah, and vnto all
his companie, ſaying, To morow the Lorde will ſhewe who
are his, who is holy, and who ought to approch me vnto him:
and whome he hath choſen, he will cauſe to come neare vnto
him. 6 This doe therefore: Take you fire pannes, both
Corah and all his compainie. 7 And put fire therein, and
put incenſe in them before the Lorde to morowe: And the
man whom the Lorde doth chooſe, the ſame ſhall be holy. Ye
take to much vpon you ye ſonnes of Leui.
               
                  
                   8 And Moyſes ſayde vnto Corah, Heare I pray you, ye
ſonnes of Leui.Mum. 3. b. 12 9 Séemeth it but a ſmall thing vnto you,
that the God of Iſrael hath ſeparated you from the multitude
of Iſraell, and brought you to himſelfe, to doe the ſceruice
of the tabernacle of the Lorde, and to ſtande before the
multitude, and to miniſter vnto them?
               10 He hath taken thée to him, & all thy brethren the ſonnes
of Leui with thée: and ſéeke ye the office of the prieſt alſo?
               11 For which cauſe both thou and all thy companie are gathered
together agaynſt the Lorde: And what is Aron, that
ye murmure agaynſt him? 12 And Moyſes ſent, and called
Dathan and Abiram the ſonnes of Eliab: which ſayde,
We will not come vppe. 13 Is it a ſmall thing that thou
haſt brought vs out of the lande that floweth with milke and
honie, to kill vs in the wilderneſſe: except thou make thy
 ſelfe Lord and ruler ouer vs alſo? 14 Moreouer, haſt thou
brought vs vnto a lande that floweth with Milke and honie,
and giuen vs inheritance of fieldes and vineyardes? Wilt
thou put out the eyes of theſe men? We will not come vp.
               15 And Moyſes waxed very angrie, and ſayde vnto the
Lorde, Turne not thou vnto their offering: I haue not taken
ſo much as an aſſe from them, neyther haue I hurt any
of them. 16 And Moyſes ſayde vnto Corah, Be thou and
all thy company before the Lord, both thou, they, and Aaron,
to morow. 17 And take euery man his cenſer, and put incenſe
in them, and bring ye before the Lorde euery man his
cenſer, two hundred and fiftie cenſers: thou alſo and Aaron,
euery one his cenſer. 18 And they tooke euery man his cenſer,
and put fire in them, and layde incenſe thereon, and ſtoode
in the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation with Moyſes
and Aaron. 19 And Corah gathered all the congregation
agaynſt them vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation:
and the glorie of the Lorde appeared vnto all the
congregation. 20 And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moyſes and

Aaron, ſaying. 21 Seperate your ſelues from among this
congregation, that I may conſume them at once.
               22 And they fell vpon their faces, and ſayde, O God, the
God of Spirites of all fleſhe, hath not one man ſinned?
Wilt thou be wrath with all the multitude?
               23 And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moyſes ſaying.
               24 Speake vnto the Congregation, and ſay, Get you away
from about the tabernacle of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.
25 And Moyſes roſe vp, and went vnto Dathan and
Abiram: and the elders of Iſraell folowed him.
               26 And he ſpake vnto the congregation, ſaying, Depart I 
pray you from the tentes of theſe wicked men, and touch nothing
of theirs, leaſt ye periſh in all their ſinnes.
               27 And ſo they gate them from the tabernacle of Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, on euery ſide: And Dathan and Abiram
came out, and ſtood in the doore of their tentes, with their
wiues, their ſonnes, and their little children.
               28 And Moyſes ſayd, Hereby ye ſhall know that the Lord
hath ſent me to do all theſe workes: for I haue not done them
of mine owne minde. 29 If theſe men die the cōmon death
of all men, or if they be viſited after the viſitation of all men,
then the Lorde hath not ſent me. 30 But and if the Lorde
make a newe thing, and the earth open her mouth, and ſwallowe
them vp with all that they haue, and they go downe
quick into the pitte: then ye ſhall vnderſtand that theſe men
haue prouoked the Lorde. 31 And aſſoone as he had made 
an ende of ſpeaking all theſe wordes, the ground cloue aſunder
that was vnder them.Deut. 11. a. 6. Num. 26. b. 10 Pſal. 106. c. 17 32 And the earth opened her
mouth, and ſwallowed them vp, and their houſes, and all the
men that were with Corah, and all their goodes.
               33 And they and all that they had went downe aliue
vnto the pitte, and the earth cloſed vpon them: and they
periſhed from among the congregation.
               34 And all Iſraell that were about them, fled at the crie

of them: and they ſayd, Leaſt the earth ſwallowe vs vp alſo.
               35 And there came out a fire from the Lorde, and conſumed
the two hundred and fiftie men that offered incenſe.
               36 And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moyſes, ſaying:
               37 Speake vnto Eleazar the ſonne of Aaron the prieſt,
that he take vp the cenſers out of the burning, and ſcatter the
fixe here and there, for they are halowed.
               38 The cenſers of theſe ſinners againſt their owne ſoules:
let them make of them broade plates for a couering of the
aulter: For they ffered them before the Lorde, and therfore
 they are halowed, and they ſhall be a ſigne vnto the children
of Iſraell. 39 And Eleazer the prieſt tooke the braſen cenſers
which they that were burnt had offered, and made brode
plates for a couering of the aulter. 40 To be a remembrance
vnto the children of Iſraell, that no ſtraunger which
is not of the ſéede of Aaron, come néere to offer incenſe before
the Lorde, that he be not like vnto Corah and his companie,
as the Lorde ſayde to him by the hande of Moyſes.
               41 But on the morow, all the multitude of the children
of Iſraell murmured agaynſt Moyſes and Aaron, ſaying, Ye
haue killed the people of the Lorde. 42 And when the multitude
was gathered againſt Moyſes and Aaron, they looked
towarde the tabernacle of the congration: and beholde, the
clowde couered it, and the glorie of the Lorde appeared.
               43 And Moyſes and Aaron came before the tabernacle
of the congregation. 44 And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moſes
ſaying. 45 Get you from among this congregation, that I
 may conſume them quickly. And they fell vpon theisr faces.
               46 And Moyſes ſayde vnto Aaron, Take a cenſer and
put fire therein out of the aulter, and poure on incenſe, and
go quickly vnto the congregation, and make an attonement
for them: For there is wrath gone out from the Lorde, and
there is a plague begunne. 47 And Aaron toke as Moyſes
commaunded him, and ranne into the middes of the congregation:

and behold the plague was begunne among the
people, and he put on incenſe, and made an attonement for
the people. 48 And when he ſtoode betwéene the dead and
them that were aliue, the plague was ſtayed.
               49 They that died in the plague, were fourtéene thouſande,
and ſeuen hundred, beſide them that died about the
conſpiracie of Corah. 50 And Aaron went againe vnto
Moyſes before the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation,
and the plague was ſtayed.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xvj.
Chapter of Numbers.
               And Corah the ſonne of Iſaar, &c. went
apart with Dathan and Abiram, &c.
               
                  THe Scripture in this place
ſetteth forth vnto vs an example of
repining Of the wicked, and of rebelling
againſt the good Magiſtrate and
ordinance of God. Wherein we haue
to marke, that no Prince or Magiſtrate can be ſo
good and vpright, but that wicked and lewde ſubiectes,
blinded with their priuate affections, will
rebell and * picke quarrels againſt him.2. Reg. 15. a. 3. 
                  Moyſes
and Aaron were choſen and appointed by GOD
himſelfe: they had the continual aſſiſtance of Gods
holy Spirit, and Angels guiding them and working
with them. They were painefull and diligent
in their office, verye carefull for the good eſtate of
the people,Num. 12. a. 3. verie
                     •
                   milde and mercifull in their gouernment,

and Farre from all couetouſneſſe, briberie,
and corruption. And yet did Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, with many other rebel agaynſt them,
reprooued them, and diſcredited them in all theyr
doyngs as ambitious, prowde, cruell, and falſe.
In this example we haue to obſerue: Firſt, that
the * rootes of rebellion commonly are,2. Reg. 15. a. 4. Pride and
ſelfeliking, Enuie and ambition. For pride cauſeth
men to haue a great liking of themſelues, and to
thinke themſelues more Worthie men to be in honour
and dignitie than anye other. And therefore
mooueth them partly to Enuie, partly to Diſdaine
other, and ambitiouſly by ſturre and rebellion to
ſeeke that, which by other quiet meanes they cannot
get. That this was the roote of this rebellion
here mentioned, it appeareth by that Moyſes ſpeaketh
to them.Verſ. 7. &c. 
                  You take to much vpon you, you ſonnes
of Leui. Seemeth it but a ſmall thing vnto you,
that God hath ſeperated you, and taken you to his
owne ſeruice, but that you muſt ſeeke the office of the
prieſt alſo? In theſe wordes, he toucheth theyr
Pride and Ambition. Secondly, wee haue to
marke what Inſtruments Rebels commonly vſe
agaynſt good Princes and Rulers, that is to ſaye,
Lying, and Diſſimulation. By Lying they ſpreade
falſe and vn
                     •
                  eue reporrtes of the Prince,2. Reg. 16. b. 7. that he is
Prowde, that he is Couetous,Eccle. 10. d. 20 yt he is Cruell, that
he Oppreſſeth the commons, &c. Yea and depraue
all his well doynges, to bring him the ſooner in
Hatred with the people, and to cauſe them to miſlike
him which commonly with euery apparant

cauſe, are eaſily caryed to the deſire of alteration of
Princes and Rulers, eſpecially if they vſe ſeueritie
of Iuſtice in puniſhing. By Diſſimulation they
cloke their owne Ambitious purpoſe of aduauncing
themſelues, and pretende forſooth, that they
doe all for the Loue and ſafegard of the common
weale, and for Pitie toward the poore commons,
and for their eaſe and reliefe, when as in deed they
ſeeke nothing but the ſetting vp of themſelues, or
the wreaking of malice on ſome, that be in honour
and dignitie. By this bayte the common ſubiects
are allured to take part with them, and headelong
to thruſt themſelues, not onely to daunger and
ſlaughter,Rom. 13. a. 2. but alſo to the iuſt * vengeance of God,
that commonlye followeth for the ſame. Theſe
meanes doe Corah, Dathan, and the other vſe agaynſt
Moyſes and Aaron.
               
               For firſt they ſay vnto them, You take to much
vpon you, wherein they note Pride and Ambition
in them. And againe in the. 13. Verſe. Is it a ſmall
thing; that thou haſt brought vs out of the land that
flovveth vvith milk and honie, to kill vs in the VVilderneſſe,
but that thou make thy ſelfe Lorde ouer vs
alſo? In theſe wordes of an obſtinate ſtubburnneſſe,
euen agaynſt his owne conſcience, Dathan
obiecteth to Moyſes ambitions ſeeking of principalitie,
where as in deede he ſawe, by the woonderfull
workes wrought by him, that he was called therto
by God. But this is of Exceeding malice, that he

                     •
                  ayeth agaynſt him, as a great fault, that thinge
which was the Worthieſt act that euer he did, that

is the Deliuerie of the Iſraelites out of the miſerable
bondage of Aegypt. And yet this wicked Rebell
calleth it here a bringing of the people out
of A lande flovving vvith milke and honie. An horrible
Bondage and Oppreſſion, in diſpite of their
gouernour, is tearmed a ſtate of great felicitie,
and all of purpoſe to make him odious to the people.
Their Diſsimulation appeareth in this, that
whereas they ſeeke nothing but principalitie, and
the high Prieſthood, they pretende fauour and loue
towarde the people. All the people ſay they are holy
euery one of them, as if they had ſayde, they are all
the people of God, and therefore whie ſhoulde you
gouerne them ſo ſternely? whie ſhould you ſo oppreſſe
them? And againe, You bring forth the people
to kill them in the VVilderneſſe. As though the
Pitie of the people had mooued them to that purpoſe,
and not rather their own ambitious mi
                     •
                  ds.
By this, common people may learne to Beware
of the diſſimuled pretences of ſuch as be Capitaynes
in Rebellion.Prou. 24. c. 21 And for their owne ambitious
purpoſe ſeeke to leade them to vnquietneſſe,Titus. 3. a. 1. trouble
and daunger.
               It is not vnprofitable to conſider how Moyſes
as a good Gouernour and hauing a cleere conſcience,
did in this trouble behaue hymſelfe, he is not
greatly Aſtonied or diſmayed, nor ſeeketh any vnlawful
or extraordinarie meanes to repreſſe them.
But firſt, he was aſſured in his conſcience he was
called and appointed to that office by God, & therefore
he reſorteth to him in earneſt prayer. For the

                  Falling dovvne vpon his face mencioned in the
fourth verſe, was not for Feare of the Rebell, but
an earneſt proſtrating hymſelfe before God, praying
for his aſſiſtance. Then he Reproueth the Rebelles
and telleth them of their fault, how greatly
they doe againſt their Dutie, and howe Vnthankfully
towarde God, and thereby exhorteth them to
quyetneſſe. He ſendeth for ſome of the other Rebelles
Dathan and Abiran to haue delt with them
in like maner, if they would haue come vnto hym:
But they ſtubbernly refuſed it. Laſtly, ſeing they
would not yeelde to reaſon or perſwaſion, with an
aſſured confidence of the goodneſſe of his cauſe,
he putteth it into Gods hande by his mightie power
to determine & ende the matter. This ſhould
all good Princes and Rulers in ye like caſe folow.
Firſt,2. Reg. 15. g. 32▪
                   to * call vpon God earneſtly and faythfully,
then to vſe all the quyet meanes they can by reaſon
to perſwade them. And if that will not ſerue,
as ſeldome times it doth, (ſuch is the furie of Rebelles)
then with an aſſured confidence in the prouidence
of God, and the right of their cauſe, being
Gods appointed gouernours, by battayle or other
lyke meanes to commit the thing to His hande to
determine, who neuer hath hitherto vſed to gyue
ſentence or ſucceſſe on the parte of the Rebels.
               And Corah gathered all the congregation
againſt them &c.Verſ. 19. and the glorie, &c.
               The verie confidence, that Moyſes ſhewed in the
Goodneſſe of his cauſe, might well haue Abaſhed

their rebellious ſpirites, Much more, when they
ſawe the glorie of the Lorde appeare on the part
of Moyſes, and to ſpeake vnto him, they ſhould
haue bene abaſhed and giuen ouer their wicked
purpoſe. But ſuch a furie doth alwayes folow the
mindes of Rebels, that though they ſee neuer ſo
preſent daunger, they will as Corah and his company
doe, as it were, Face God himſelfe and neuer
giue ouer, vntill by the iuſt iudgement of God, they
bring themſelues to vtter confuſion.
               And aſſoone as he had made an ende of
ſpeaking,Verſ. 31. &c. the ground cloue, &c.
               By this dreadfull puniſhment of deſtroying the
principall doers, by the ſwallowing of the Earth,
and with fyre from heauē, God declareth, & would
haue it knowne to the worlde, howe he doth Hate
and D
                     •
                  teſt▪
                  Pro. 24. d. 22. * ſuch as rebell agaynſt their Princes
and Rulers appointed by him to gouerne them,
which he afterwarde more amply declareth.Verſ. 41. For
when, euen the next day folowing the people murmurd
againſt Moyſes and Aaron and that puniſhment
wherewith God had plagued the Rebelles:
Gods wrath was ſo kindled againſt them, that if
the earneſt Prayer and endeuour of Moyſes and
Aaron had not beene, he woulde haue vtterlye
deſtroyed them All from the face of the earth. And
yet could not Moyſes with ſuch ſpeede appeaſe his
wrath, but .xiiij. thouſande of them were ſlaine to
the terrible Example of all other, that in any age
ſhould follow their euill doing. And in deede, if we

looke into the hiſtories of all times,2. Reg. 17. f. 23 2. we ſhall finde,
that Rebellions and Inſurrections haue ended in
the vtter deſtruction of them,Reg. 18. c. 14 2. that haue beene the
doers of it.Re. 20. g. 22 3. For they ſtriue not againſt the Magiſtrate,
but againſt God that ordayned him.Reg. 2. g. 44 
                  For
vvhatſoeuer povvers there are,
                  Rom. 13. a. 1. 
                  they are of God.
Paul. Rom. 13.
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday after Eaſter
at Euening prayer.
            Numb. 22.
            
               ANd the children of Iſrael departed and pitched in the
fieldes of Moab, on the other ſide of Iordane from 
Iericho.Ioſue. 24. b. 9. 2▪ And 
                     •
                  alue the ſonne of Ziphor ſaw all
that Iſrael had done to the Amor
                     •
                  tes.
               3 And the Moabites were ſore afraid of the people, becauſe
they were manye and they were ſtrikon with ſcare of the
children of Iſraell. 4 And Moab ſaide vnto the elders of
Madian, Now ſhall this companie 
                     •
                  ick vp all that are round
about vs, as a
                     •
                  ore 
                     〈◊〉
                   vp the graſſe of the field. And
Balac the ſonne 
                     〈◊〉
                   was▪ king of the Moabites at
that time.Deut. 23. a. 4. 2. 5 He ſent meſſengers therfore vnto Balaam the
ſonne of Beor to Pethor,Pet. 2. c. 15. which is by the riuer of the lande
of the children of his folke, to call him, ſaying, Beholde, there
is a people come out of Egipt, and beholde they couer the
face of the earth, and dwell it ouer againſt me.
               6 Come now therfore I pray thée, and curſe me this people,
for they are to mightie for me, ſo it may be I ſhal be hable
to ſmite them, and to driue them out of the lande: For
I wore that he whome thou bleſſeſt is bleſſed, and whome
thou curſeſt is curſed. 7 And the elders of M
                     •
                  ab, and the

elders of Madian departed, hauing the (revvarde) of the
ſoothlaying in their hande: And they came vnto Balaam,
and tolde him the wordes of Balac.
               8 He anſwered them, Tarie here this night, and I wyll
bring you worde, as the Lorde ſhall ſaye vnto me. And the
Lordes of Moab abode with Balaam.
               9 And God came vnto Balaam, and ſaide, What men
are theſe wyth thée? 10 And Balaam ſaide vnto God,
Balac the ſonne of Ziphor king of Moah hath ſent vnto me
(ſaying,) 11 Beholde, there is a people come out of Egipt,
and couereth the face of the earth: come nowe therefore,
and curſe them for my ſa
                     •
                  e, ſo it may be that I ſhal be hable
to ouercome them in battaile, and to driue them out.
               12 And God ſaid vnto Balaam, Go not thou with them,
neyther curſe the people: for they are bleſſed.
               13 And Balaam roſe vp in the morning, and ſaide vnto the
Lordes of Balac, Get you vnto your lande: for the Lorde
will not ſuffer me to go with you.
               14 And the Lordes of Moab roſe vp, and went vnto Balac
and ſaide, Balaam would not come with vs.
               15 And Balac ſent againe a greater companie of Lords,
and more honourable then they. 16 Which came to Balaam,
and tolde him, Thus ſayth Balac the ſonne of Ziphor,
Oh let nothing let thée, but come vnto me.
               17 For I will greatly promote thée vnto great honour,
and will doe whatſoeuer thou ſayeſt vnto me: come I pray
thée curſe this people for my ſake.
               18 And Balaam anſwered and ſaide vnto the ſeruantes
of Blalac:Num. 24. c. 13 If Balac would geue me this houſe full of Siluer
and Golde, I can not go beyonde the worde of the Lord
my God, to doe leſſe or more. 19 Nowe therefore I praye
thée, tarie ye here this night, that I may wit what the Lord
will ſay vnto me more. 20 And God came vnto Balaam
by night and ſayde vnto him, If the men come to cal thée, riſe

vp and go with them: but looke what I ſay vnto thée, that
ſhalt thou doe. 21 And Balaam roſe vp earely, and ſadled
his aſſe, and went with the Lords of Moab.
               22 And the wrath of God was kindled, becauſe he went:
and the angell of the Lorde ſtoode in the waye to be againſt
him as he rode vpon his aſſe, and his two ſeruauntes were
with him. 23 And when the aſſe ſaw the Angel of the Lord
ſtande in the way, and hauing his ſword drawne in his hand,
the aſſe turned aſide out of the waye, and went out into the
fielde: And Balaam ſmote the aſſe, to turne her into the way.
               24 But the angel of the Lorde ſtoode in a path betwéene
the vineyardes, and there was a wall on the one ſide, and another
on the other. 25▪ And when the aſſe ſaw the Angel
of the Lorde, ſhe thruſt her ſelfe vnto the wall, and cruſht
Balaams foote againſt the wall: and he ſmote her againe.
               26 And the Angell of the Lorde went further, and ſtoode
in a narrowe place, where was no waye to turne eyther to
the right haude, or to the left. 27. And when the aſſe ſawe
the angel of the Lorde, ſhe fell downe vnder Balaam: and
Balaam was wroth and ſmote the aſſe with a ſtaffe.
               28 And the Lorde opened the mouth of the aſſe,2. Pet. 2. c. 15. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhe
ſaide vnto Balaam, What haue I done vnto thée, that thou
haſt ſmitten me nowe three times?
               29 And Balaam ſaide vnto his aſſe, Becauſe thou haſt
mocked me: I would alſo there were a ſword nomine hand,
for euen nowe would I kill thée. 30 And the aſſe ſaide vnto
Balaam, Am not I thine aſſe which thou haſt ridden vpon
ſince the firſt time vnto this day? Was I euer wont to doe
ſo vnto thée? He ſaide, nay. 31 And the Lorde opened the
eyes of Balaam, and he ſawe the angell of the Lorde ſtanding
in the way, hauing his ſworde drawne in his hande: he
bowed himſelfe therefore, and fell flatte on his face.
               32 And the Angell of the Lord ſaide vnto him, Wherfore
haſt thou ſmitten the aſſe theſe thrée times? Beholde I came

out to withſtand  thée, becauſe (thine hart) hath declined
out of the way before me. 33 And the aſſe ſaw me, and turned
from me nowe three times: or elſe if ſhe had not turned
fro me, I had ſurely ſlaine thée, and ſaued her aliue.
               34 Balaam ſaies vnto the angell of the Lorde, I haue ſinned,
for I wiſ
                     •
                   not that thou ſtoodeſt in the way againſt me.
Now therefore if it diſpleaſe ſhée, I will turne home againe.
               
                   35 The angell of the Lorde ſaide vnto Balaam, Go wyth
the men: but what I ſaye vnto thée, that ſhalt thou ſpeake.
And ſo Balaam went with the Lordes of Balac.
               36 And when Balac heard that Balaam was come, he
went out to méete him vnto a citie of Moab, which is in the
border of Ar
                     •
                  on, in the vttermoſt coaſt.
               37 And Balac ſaide vnto Balaam, Did I not ſende for
thée to call thée: and wherefore cameſt thou not vnto me?
Am I not hable in déede to promote thée vnto honor?
               38 And Balaam made anſwere vnto Balac, Lo, I am
come vnto thée: and can I now ſay any thing at all? The
worde that God putteth in my mouth that ſhall I ſpeake.
               39 And Balaam went with Balac, and they came vnto a
citie of ſtréets.Num. 23. c. 16. 40 And Balac offered oxen and ſhéepe, and
ſent (thereof) to Balaam, and to the Lords that were with
him. 41 And on the morowe Balac tooke Balaam; and
brought him vp into the his places of Baal, that thence he
might ſée the vttermoſt part of the people.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxij.
Chapter of Numb.
               And the children of Iſrael departed and
pitched in the fieldes of Moab,Verſ. 1. &c.
               
               
                  IN the ende of the former .xxi.
Chapter it was ſayde, that Schon king
of the Amorhites did conquere & take
from the king of Moab all his lande,
euen vnto Arnon, which, as maye in
this place appeare, is not ſo to be taken, but that
there was a portion of lande yet remayning to the
Moabites, ouer which Balach, their king raygned.
But in likelyhood, his kingdome was not ſo mightie,
that he durſt with his power, wythſtande the
Iſraelites, and therfore he craueth of the Madianites
and other his neighbours, that they woulde ioyne
with him agaynſt them.Gen 19. g. 37. The Moabites diſcended
of one of the daughters of Loth, & the Madianites
came from Abraham by Cethura,
                  Gen. 25. a. 1. and therefore
were they as kinne vnto the Iſraelites, and ſhoulde
in curteſſe, euen by the Lawe of nature, haue vſed
more gentleneſſe vnto them paſſing through their
Countrey.
               The Hiſtorie of this Chapiter, and of the next
following, comprehendeth many matters worthie
the obſeruing. Firſt, it ſheweth that Satan by his
inſtruments ceaſeth not, continually by Violence
and force, by craft and ſubtiltie, by all the meanes
he can, to worke trouble, daunger and confuſion
to the people and Church of God. And on the contrarie
part it ſetteth forth, howe God as a carefull
protectour doth Defende the ſame, and turneth all
the endeuours of their enemies to their greater
commoditie and benefite. As here he turneth their

                     〈◊〉
                   that was purpoſed into a notable bleſſing,

                  He ſent meſſengers therefore to Balaam the ſonne of
Peor. &c.
                  Verſ. 1. It is not likely that this Balaam as ſome
doe gather, ſhoulde haue dwelt in Meſopotamia.
For that country is a great number of miles from
Moab, ſo that it could not wel be, that he could haue
bene twiſe ſent for, within ſo ſhort ſpace as the circumſtances
of this Hiſtorie doe ſignifye. It maye
be, that he dwelt in the countrie of Madian or there
about Eaſtwarde from Moab, ſo that by that occaſion
the king of Moab did the ſooner here of his
fame: which from the other place ſo many hundred
myles of,Num. 31. b. 8. he coulde not doe. We reade cap. 31. that
Balaam was ſ
                     •
                  aine amonge the Madianites, and
therby he may appeare to haue bene of that countrie.
Neyther is it to be thought that this Balaam
was an ordinarie Prophete of God, and indued
with the ſpirite of continuall prophecie and charge
of doctrine, as the other Prophetes were: For,
2. Pet. 2.2. Pet. 2. c. 15. he and his fellowes are condemned. I
thinke rather he was a Southſayer or Sorcerer,
which vſed the helpe of euill ſpirites, and by them
did ſome ſtraunge things, that brought him in admiration
with the Heathniſhe people of thoſe
partes. And yet, when the cauſe of Gods people
came in hande, it pleaſed God by his holy ſpirite,
for the time, to Bridle his wicked affection, to ſtop
his couetous mouth; and to vſe his tongue euen
againſt his will, as an inſtrument to bleſſe his
people, and by prophecie to ſhewe to his enimies
the cauſe why he did ſo ſingulerly preſerue them,
that is, becauſe the true Meſsias ſhould deſcende of

them. And this interpretatiō can not ſeeme ſtrange
and repugnant to the ſcriptures, that God for the
time putteth his ſpirite of Propheſie euen into the
wicked, to their further condemnation. For, we
read in Samuel,
                  1. Sa. 19. d. 20. when Saule ſent his men to apprehend
Dauid, although they went to an euill purpoſe,
yet the ſpirite of God entered into them, ſo
that they prophecied, yea and the reprobate Saule
himſelfe folowing after them with the ſame minde
did prophecie alſo, whereof roſe this common ſaying.
Is Saule alſo among the Prophets?
               
               He anſwered them,Verſ. 8. Tarie here this night
and I will bring you worde, &c.
               At the firſt ſight there doth appeare a great ſhew
of Holineſſe that he will not go with them, no nor
giue them any anſwere, vntill he knewe Gods
pleaſure therein, but all was but Hypocriſie. For,
he woulde gladly haue gone with them for couetouſneſſe
of the great rewardes that were promiſed
to him. But the ſpirite of God Brideled his couetous
minde, and ouerruled his tongue and doynges,
that his Heathen enimies might thereby
learne their Vanitie and fooliſhe ſtriuing agaynſt
him and his people.
               Get you vnto your lande,Verſ. 13. For the Lorde
will not ſuffer me to go with you, &c.
               Here Balaam bewrayeth ſomewhat his Hypocriſie.
If his minde had beene Syneere, and had
made vnto them a free anſwere, that they ſtriued

in vaine agaynſt thoſe, that God had bleſſed, they
would neuer haue ſent vnto him the ſeconde meſſage:
but by a doubtfull anſwere he did the more
inflame them. For when he ſayth, God would not
ſuffer him to go vvith them, he ſignifieth there was
a good will in himſelfe, if that he might haue done
it, and therefore thought they, by further intreatie
and more Hope of gaine, to perſwade him.
               Then Balac ſent againe a greater companie
of Lordes and more honorable,Verſ. 15. &c. &c.
               By the former plaine anſwere that God gaue,
willing Balaam not to go, both Balach the king of
the Moabites ſhoulde haue learned his vaine trauaile
agaynſt the people of God, and Balaam the
Prophete alſo to haue chaunged his couetous affection
into a ſincere mind, in folowing that thing,
which he vnderſtoode to be Gods pleaſure. But
the Heathen king thought God to depende vpon
mans pleaſure,Iacob. 1. c. 17. and that he would haue bene * mutable
as man was: And the Couetous prophet increaſing
his hypocriſie, retayned the ſame corruption
of mind that he did before. When Balaam ſaid;,
If Balach vvould giue me his houſe full of ſiluer and
golde, I can not go beyonde the vvorde of the Lorde,
&c. It might ſeeme to haue proceeded of a great
Holineſſe and ſubmiſſion to the will of God. But
if he ſpake it Sincerely, why did he tempt God againe
with a newe queſtion? Did he thinke God
mutable, and to be woonne to wickedneſſe as himſelfe
was? Surely his endeuour doth declare no

other opinion to haue bene in him, but that the 
                     •
                  pirite
of God would alſo be Double and mutable as
the euill ſpirites were, whoſe councell he had before
vſed. And therefore, he ſheweth, that he had no
ſounde fayth or feare of God, but onely was caried
away with his Couetous deſire, if God woulde in
any wiſe haue ſuffered him. But it may then be
ſayde, whie did God yeelde vnto him, and bid hym
go with thoſe ſeconde Meſſengers? Truly not becauſe
he Lyked eyther the minde of Balaam, or the
thing it ſelf, but that he gaue ouer an obſtinate mā
to the affection of his owne minde, that both he and
they that ſent for him, might with more ſhame and
griefe Learne the will of God, which at this firſt
anſwere, they would not receyue.
               And the wrath of God was kindled,Verſ. 22. becauſe
he went: and the Angell, &c.
               By this we may vnderſtande, that God lyked
not the endeuour of Balaam, and therfore not onely
with greater daunger bringeth him to learne
his pleaſure, but to his reproche cauſeth a verye
Aſſe to ſee and vtter that, which he blinded with couetouſneſſe,
woulde not conceyue. And whereas,
touching the * ſpeaking of the Aſſe,2. Pet. 2. c. 16. the Deuill may
put into our heartes ſome vngodly cogitations to
the diſcredite of the holy ſcriptures, we muſt ſtay
our ſelues vpon theſe wordes, And the Lorde opened
the mouth of the Aſſe. If then it were ye Lords
doyng, it is not here tolde as any ordinarie doyng,

but miraculouſly, as the woonderful worke of God

                     〈◊〉
                   the abaſhing of his enimies, and comfort of the
faythfull that feare God. We thinke it no great
matter for a man to cauſe a Pie or Popingay to
vtter certaine diſtinct wordes and ſpeaches. Wee
maye not then iudge it ſo Vncredible a matter,
if it be attributed to God for his glorie ſake, and to
reproue the wicked, yt he maketh an Aſſe to ſpeake:
ſeeing eſpecially that the Fyneſt tongued man, if
Gods gift had not beene in the beginning, could no
more haue framed his tongue to ſpeach, then now
an Horſe or an Aſſe can doe. The Lorde therefore
is Lorde of ſpeach and vtterance, and can at his
pleaſure, giue it to thoſe creatures that haue it not,
and take it from them that haue it, as it appeareth
by Zacharie.
                  Luc. 1. b. 20 
                  Luc.
                  Math. 15. c. 31. 1. and a number of other,Marc. 7. d. 37 which
in the time of Chriſt, by his prouidence were borne
dumbe. Neither is it to be accounted a much greater
miracle to make an Aſſe ſpeake, then to reſtore
to the vſe of his tongue a man dumbe borne. They
then, that with ſcorne wil diſcredite this, wil in like
maner Diſcredite all the Miraculous workes of
God.
               And whē Balac heard that Balaam was
come,Verſ. 36. 37. he went out to meete him, &c.
               This place declareth how Obſequious and full
of ſubmiſſion thoſe perſons are to their falſe Prophetes,
which beſide the true feare of God are giuen
ouer to Superſtition. The King here commeth

forth for honours ſake to 
                     〈…〉
                  
vpon the way. Like honour we 
                     〈…〉
                  
the Emperour and ſundrie other 
                     〈…〉
                  
Kings haue giuen to the Popes. But 
                     〈…〉
                  
or neuer reade, that the like reuerence 
                     〈…〉
                  
vſed to the true Prophets and Miniſters 
                     〈◊〉
                  
For the world more loueth & honoreth that is 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and euill, then that which is pure and good.
            
         
         
            The ſecond Sunday after Eaſter
at Morning prayer.
            Numb. 23.
            
               ANd Balaam ſayd vnto Balac, Buylde me here ſeuen 
aulters, and prepare me here ſeuen oxen and ſeuen
rammes. 2 And Balac did as Balaam ſayde, and
Balac and Balaam offered on euery aulter an oxe
and a ramine. 3 And Balaam 
                     •
                  ayde vnto Balac, Stande
by thy whole burnt ſacrifice, and I will go, if ſo be that the
Lord will méete me: and whatſoeuer he ſheweth me I will
tell thée. And he went vp hyer. 4 But God met Balaam,
and (Balaam) ſayde vnto him, I haue prepared ſeuen au
                     •
                  ſers,
and haue offered vpon euery aulter an oxe and a ramme.
               5 And the Lorde put a ſaying in Balaams mouth, and
ſayde, Go againe to Balac, and ſay on this wiſe.
               6 And when he went againe vnto him, 
                     •
                  o, he ſtoode by his
whole burnt ſacrifice, he and all the Lordes of Moab.
               7 And he 
                     •
                  olie vp his parable, and ſayde, Balac 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
of Moab hath brought me from Meſapotamia,Num. 22. a. 2. out of the
mountaynes of the Caſt, (ſaying) Come, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iacob for my
ſake, come and defie Iſrael. 8▪s How that 
                     〈◊〉
                   him, whom

                  
                     〈…〉
                   or howe ſhall I defie him, whom the
hath no
                     •
                  . 
                     ••
                  fied? 9 For from the toppe of the rocks

                     〈…〉
                   from the hilles I beholde him: lo, the people

                     〈…〉
                   themſelues, and ſhall not be reckened among

                     〈…〉
                  . 10 Who can tell the duſt of Iacob, and the
number of the fourth part of Iſraell? I pray God that my
ſoule maye die the death of the righteous, and that my laſt
ende may be like his. 11 And Balac ſayde vnto Balaam,
What haſt thou done vnto me? I tooke thée to curſe myne
enimies, and beholde, thou haſt bleſſed them altogither.
               
                   12 He anſwered and ſayd, muſt I not take héede to ſpeake
that which the Lorde hath put in my mouth.
               13 And Balac ſayde vnto him, Come I pray thée with me
vnto another place, whence thou mayſt ſée them, and thou
ſhalt ſée but the vtmoſt part of them, and ſhalt not ſée them
all: curſe them out of that place for my ſake.
               14 And he brought him into a fielde where men might ſée
farre of, to the top of an hill, and built ſeuen aulters, and offered
an oxe and a ramme on euery aulter.
               15 And he ſayde vnto Balac, Stande here by thy whole
burnt ſacrifice, while I méete (the Lorde) yonder.
               16 And the Lorde met Balaam,Num. 22. g. 38 and put a worde in his
mouth, and ſayde, Go againe vnto Balac, and ſay thus.
               17 And when he came to him, beholde he ſtoode by his
whole burnt ſacrifice, and the Lordes of Moab with him.
And Balac ſayd vnto him, What hath the Lorde ſayde?
               18 And be tooke vp his parable, and anſwered, Riſe vp
Balac, and heare, & hearken vnto me thou ſonne of Ziphor.
               19 God is not a man that he ſhould lie,1. Cor. 1. b. 9. neyther the ſonne
of man that he ſhoulde repent: ſhoulde he ſay and not doe?
or ſhoul
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  e ſpeake and not make it good?
               20 Beholde I haue taken vpon me to bleſſe: for he hath
bleſſed, and it is not in my power to alter it.
               
                  
21 He behelde no vanitie in Iacob, nor ſawe tranſgreſſion
in Iſrael: The Lorde his: God is with him, and the ioyfull
ſhoute of a King is among them.
               22 God brought them out of Egypt, they haue ſtrength
as an Vnicorne. 23 For there is no ſorcerie in Iacob, nor
ſoothſaying in Iſraell, according to this time it ſhall be ſaide
of Iacob and Iſraell, What hath God wrought?
               24 Beholde the people ſhall riſe vp as a Lion, and heaue
vppe himſelfe as a yong Lion: he ſhall not lie downe vntill
he eate of the pray, & drinke the bloud of them that are ſlaine.
               25 And Balac ſayde vnto Balaam, Neither curſe them,
nor bleſſe them at all.
               26 But Balaam anſwered and ſayd vnto Balac, Tolde
not I thée, ſaying, All that the lord ſpeaketh, that I muſt do?
               27 And Balac ſayd vnto Balaam, Come I pray thée, and
I will bring thée yet vnto another place, if at all it will
pleaſe God that thou mayſt thence curſe them for my ſake.
               
               28 And Balac brought Balaam vnto the top of Peor, that
looketh towarde Ieſimon.
               29 And Balaam ſayde vnto Balac, Make me here ſeuen
aulters, and prepare me here ſeuen oxen, & ſeuen rammes.
               30 And Balac did as Balaam had ſayde, and offered an
oxe and a ramme on euery aulter.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxiij.
Chapter of Numbers.
               And Balaam ſayde vnto Balac,Verſ. 1. &c. buylde
me here ſeuen aulters and prepare, &c.
               
                  
                  THere maye appeare ſome
Heathniſh pompe and ſuperſtition in
erecting of theſe ſeuen aulters, and
appoynting for Sacrifice ſeuen oxen,
and ſeuen rammes: becauſe the true
Saintes of God neuer vſed the like, and God him
ſelfe by his commaundement had appoynted Moiſes
to make but one aulter,Exod. 20. d. 24 whereon his people
ſhould offer ſacrifices vnto him. Therefore this
falſe Prophet doth here alſo bewray himſelf in his
ſhewe of Gods worſhip, to haue mixed Heathniſh
Superſtition and Magicall deuiſes of his owne.
And yet neuertheleſſe, that it pleaſed God, in ſome
reſpect, to ſuffer him to be the inſtrument of the holy
ghoſt, to vtter ye truth of his bleſſing of his people,
and the promiſes made before to Abraham and
other of the Increaſe and proſperous ſucceſſe of
theyr ſeede: that their wicked enimies to their further
condemnation might haue ſome Vnderſtanding
thereof.
               But God mette Balaam,Verſ. 4. and Balaam
ſayde vnto him, I haue prepared, &c.
               It maye ſeeme verie ſtraunge, that God would
in any point communicate with the fylthyneſſe of
Balaams deuiſes.3. Cor. 6. c. 14. 1. For there is no partaking betweene
light and darkeneſſe,
                  Cor. 10. c 20 and God deteſteth all
ſocietie with Deuils. Yet although God hate the
wicked corruption of Balaam, it did not let him, but

that in ſome Particuler thing he might vſe hym to
his purpoſe. For this meeting of Balaam was no
token of Gods fauour, neyther that he did Alow
the ſuperſtition of the ſeauen aulters and ſacrifices:
But as he often vſed wicked perſons for inſtruments
of his glorie, So doth he nowe vſe the
mouth of this falſe Prophet, to publiſhe vnto the
Infidels and Heathens the promiſe and couenant
that he made with Abraham and his ſeede. By this
meanes he proclameth great comfort to his people,Iohn. 18. c. 14.
euen out of the mouths of their * enemies, and
by the endeuours of them that with all meanes
they could, did ſeeke their confuſion.
               And he tooke vp his Parable and ſaide,Verſ. 7. 8
Balac the king of Moab, &c.
               By a Parable is vnderſtanded an Hie kinde of
Speech, which by the inſtinction of the holye ghoſt
he vſed, therewith the more to Abaſh and wound
the harte of the wicked king Balac, that he myght
the ſooner knowe, not onely how Fooliſh, but how
vaine alſo his endeuor was to ſtriue againſt God,
and to haue that people curſed, that God had bleſſed.Num. 22. b. 6.
And whereas * Balac had ſaide of Balaam, that
whomſoeuer He bleſſed, was bleſſed, and whomſoeuer
He curſed, was curſed, In this place to the
further reproch and griefe of that naughtie king,
Balaam with his owne mouth renounceth that prerogatine,
and ſayth plainly, he can not Curſe him,
that God hath not curſed, giuing that Power and

honor to God, and ſhewing that in this reſpect he
is not Ruler of his owne tongue, but that God for
his people ſake, had Brydeled both his will and
his ſpeech.
               Loe,Verſ. 9. the people ſhall dwell by themſelues,
and ſhall not be reckened amonge, &c.
               When he ſayth they ſhall dwell by themſelues,
his meaning is not, that they ſhall dwell in ſolitarineſſe,
but that they ſhall holde themſelues contented
with their owne ſtate, and truſting in their
God, whom they worſhipped, ſhould not neede nor
deſire the protection and helpe of any other people.
And therfore it foloweth, that they ſhould not
be accompted among Nations,Deut 4. b. 7. * becauſe no nation
or people ſhould be worthie to be compared vnto
them,Pſal. 147. a. 8. for that they were adopted and choſen as the
onely people of God, whom he would take vnder
his defence and protection.
               Who can tell the duſte of Iacob,Verſ. 10. and
number the fourth part of Iſrael, &c.
               By the Duſt of Iacob he vnderſtandeth the great
Multitude wherwith God would bleſſe that people,
and therein he alludeth to the promiſe of God
made to Abraham,
                  Gen. 22. d. 17. * that he would multiplye his
ſeede as the Sande of the ſea, &c.
               And Balac ſaide vnto him,Verſ. 13. come I pray
thee with me vnto another place, &c.
               
                  
In this that foloweth, we haue to note the blind
obſtinacie both of Balac in his ſuperſtition, and of
Balaam in his couetous affection. For albeit, God
had euidently nowe at two ſundrie times declared
his purpoſe: yet neyther the wycked king
would be ſatiſfied, nor the falſe Prophet perſwaded
to leaue his tempting of God. But both of
them, by ſuperſtitious chaunging the place, indeuour
to make God ſhew himſelfe mutable, and as
it were, by their ſuperſtitious Importunitie, to
winne his fauour from his people, and to make
him to yeelde to their lewde and naughtie affections.
Therefore God maketh the falſe Prophet to
pronounce ſentence againſt himſelfe, and that obſtinate
and wicked king, in ſaying: God is not a
manne that he ſhoulde lye, neyther the ſonne of a
man that he ſhould repent: ſhould he ſay and not do?
or ſhould he ſpeake and not make it good? &c. And
yet all this would not ſatiſfie them, ſuch is the maner
of the obſtinate and reprobate ſinners, that
no teaching nor declaring of the holy will of God,
can make them ſo to chaūge their mindes, but that
they will more and more continue in their Deuilliſhe
and naughtie purpoſes.
               And the ioyfull ſhoute of a king is a
mong them,Verſ. 21. &c.
               By this he meaneth that the Maieſty and might
of God as their louing king and gouernour is among
them, for their aſſured defence, to their great
ioye and comfort.
               
               According to this time it ſhall be ſaide of
Iacob and Iſrael,Verſ. 23. what hath, &c.
               That is to ſaye, According as at this time it is
ſayd, what wonderous works hath God wrought
for this people? ſo ſhall it more and more be ſayde
hereafter. For God hath promiſed for Euer to be
their God, and to deale Wonderfully for them.
               He ſhall not lye downe vntill he eate of
the pray,Verſ. 24. and drinke the bloud, &c.
               In this verſe he noteth that the People of Iſrael
ſhall be Valiant, ſtrong and mightie as a Lyon,
and hable to conquer and ſpoile their enimies, that
vniuſtly doe aſſault them, and by violence ſeeke to
doe them wrong.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond Sunday after Eaſter
at Euening prayer.
            Numbers. 25.
            
               
                   AND Iſrael abode in Sittim, and the people began to
commit whooredome with the daughters of Moab.
               2 Which called the people vnto the ſacrifice of their
gods: And the people did eate, and bowed downe to theyr
gods. 3 And * Iſrael coupled himſelf vnto Baal Peor,Deut. 4. a. 3 and
the indignation of the Lorde was kindeled agaynſt Iſrael.
               4 And the Lorde ſayde vnto Moyſes: Take all the heades
of the people, and hang them vp before the Lord againſt
the ſunne, that the wrath of the Lordes countenaunce may
be turned away from Iſrael. 5 And Moyſes ſayd vnto the
iudges of Iſrael, Euery one ſlay his mē that were ioined vnto
Baal Peor. 6 And behold, one of the children of Iſrael
 came & brought vnto his brethren, a Madianitiſh woman in
the ſight of Moyſes, & in the ſight of all the multitude of the
children of Iſrael that wept before the dore of the tabernacle
of the congregation. 7 And when Phinees the ſonne of Eleazar,
the ſon of Aaron the Prieſt, ſawe it, he roſe vp out of
the middes of the companie, and tooke a iauelin in his hand,
               8 And went after the man of Iſraell into the tente, and
fhruſt them thorough, both the man of Iſraell, and alſo the
woman, euen through the belly of hir: And the plague ceaſſed
from the children of Iſraell.1. Cor. 10. a. 8 9 And there dyed in the
plague twentie and foure thouſande.
               10 And the Lord ſpake vnto Moyſes, ſaying:
               11 Phinees the ſonne of Eleazar, the ſonne of Aaron the
prieſt,Eccl. 45. f. 23 1. hath turned myne anger away from the children of
Iſraell,Ma. 2. f. 54 whyle he was zealous for my ſake among them, that
I had not conſumed the children of Iſrael in my ielouſie.
               12 Wherfore ſay,Mala. 2. a. 5 Behold, I giue vnto him my couenant
of peace. 13 And he ſhall haue it and his ſéede after him,
euen the couenaunt of the prieſts office for euer, bicauſe he

was zealous for his Gods ſake, and made an attonement for
the children of Iſrael. 14 The name of the Iſraelite thus
killed, which was ſlaine with the Madianitiſh woman was
Zamri the ſon of Salu, a lord of an houſe and kinred of Simeon.
15 And the name of the Madianitiſhe woman, that
was ſlaine, was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur, a head ouer the
people of his fathers houſe in Madian.
               16 And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moyſes, ſaying:
               17 Vexe the Madianites, and ſmyte them.
               18 For they trouble you with their wyles, which haue beguiled
you by deceyt in the cauſe of Peor,Nu. 31. a. 2. and in the cauſe of
their ſiſter Cozbi, the daughter of a lorde of the Madianites,
which was ſlain in the day of the plague for Peors ſake.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .xxv.
Chapter of Numeri.
               And Iſraell aboade in Sittim,Verſ. 1. and the
people began to commit whoordom. &c.
               
                  THe offence that is deſcribed in thys
chapter to haue bene committed by the
childrē of Iſrael, may ſeme to be wroughte
by the * wicked policie of the falſe
prophet Balaā,
                  Nu. 31. c. 16. who ſeeing before that the fauor
of god was much enclined to the Iſraelites, did
aduertiſe the Moabites, to ſuffer their wiues &
daughters to be carnally abuſed by them, to the
end that their God being * diſpleaſed with their
whooredome & adulterie,Pſal. 5. a. 5. might forſake them,Job. 4. b. 8. 9.
and ſo leaue them to the daunger of theyr enimies.Heb. 13. a. 4
                  
This was a maruellous way wardneſſe
in the Iſraelites,Exo. 5. d. 21. Exo. 15. d. 25 Exo. 16. a. 2. Exo. 17. a. 3 Nu. 14. a. 2. Nu. 13. e. 26 27. Ex. 17. b. 11. 13 that neyther with aduerſitie,Exo. 5. d. 21.
nor proſperity they could be reteined in their dutie
toward God.Exo. 15. d. 25 In aduerſitie, they * ſundry tymes
murmured againſt God.Exo. 16. a. 2. And now in proſperitie
being come to a * fertile coūtrey,Exo. 17. a. 3 and hauing
great ſucceſſe of * victorie,Nu. 14. a. 2. they are caryed
away with looſeneſſe and wanton luſt towarde
ſtraunge women,Nu. 13. e. 26 27.
                  Ex. 17. b. 11. 13 and thereby prouoke the heauie
* wrath of God againſt them.Job. 31. b. 11. 12
               
               Wherfore by this example, we are admoniſhed
in bothe ſtates of Fortune to beware, and
to call earneſtly vnto God for the aſſiſtaunce of
his grace, that wee be not caryed from the remembrance
of our dutie, eyther with the griefe
of the tone, or with the pleaſauntneſſe of the
tother. In this example alſo wee haue to obſerue
howe perillous the companie of * wicked
women is,Pro. 5. a. 3. 4. not onely for the grieuouſneſſe of
whoordome it ſelfe,Pro. 7. d. 25. 26. 27. but alſo for the perill: that
is,Eccl. 9. b. 8. 9 leaſt we be ledde alſo by the poyſoned pleaſure
therof vtterly to * forſake God,Eccl. 19. a. 2. 3. and to contemne
his holy lawe and true worſhip.Reg. 11. a. 1.
               
               And the Lord ſayde,Verſ. 4. take al the heades
of the people, and hang them. &c.
               Iuſtly doth Saincte Paule.1. Cor. 10. b. 8 1. Corinth. 10.
admoniſhe vs to beware of whooredome and
fornication, leaſt the lyke perill of Gods wrath
doe lyghte vpon vs alſo.
               
                  
The common multitude of the offenders were
ſlayne by hande, as a
                     •
                  ter doth appeare: but the
heades and ryngleaders of the people to that
wickedneſſe, that is, the Princes, Magiſtrates,
and rulers,Eccl. 19. a. 3. who ſhuld haue ſtayed and puniſhed
this foule offence,Ezec. 14. b. 8 are by God commaunded to
be hanged vp againſt the ſunne,Nu. 5. d. 27 that their * puniſhement
mighte be the more grieuous,Nahū 3. a. 6 to the
terror of other.Deu. 19. d. 20 For the prince or greate perſon
offendeth double, bothe in the filthineſſe of the
deede it ſelfe, and alſo in the example whereby
he draweth a number to the lyke naughtyneſſe.
Suche as the greate perſons are, ſuche commonly
are the people. Wherfore wel ſaith wiſedom
cap.
                  Sap. 6. a. 7. 9 6 The mightie perſons shal myghtily be
punished. A notable leſſon is here to be gathered
of al them, which at this day make ſo ſmal
accompt of fornication, whooredome, and adulterie,
as though it were no ſynne at all: yea as
though it were a praiſe or glorie to them to be
knowne and taken to be ſuche perſons.
               And beholde one of the children of Iſraell
came and brought vnto.Verſ. 6. 7. 8. 9 &c.
               This was a notable ſpectacle of the cōtempt
of God and all good men, when Moyſes and
the people were before the doore of the Tabernacle
bewayling and lamenting the wickedneſſe
that was encreaſed among them, and by their
prayers & tears, ſought to turne the diſpleaſure
of God frō thē: this mā, as it were in deſpite of

them all, and of God himſelfe, in their ſyghtes
brought a ſtraunge ſtrumpet into his tent to be
abuſed of himſelfe and of his children. By this
example it may appeare,Prou. 18. a. 3. that wickedneſſe was
growne to a very * high degree among them,
ſeing that they had therin caſte away al ſhame
* and feare of God.Ec. 1. e. 27. 28 This was none of the common
ſort of people that cōmitted this outrage.Pſal. 13. b. 7.
He was a lorde, and a noble man of the houſe of
Simeon, & the ſtrumpet alſo was a Lady or Gē
                  tlewoman,
the daughter of Sur, an head ruler
of the Madianites. Wherby it appereth, what
kinde of perſons doe ſooneſt breake out to ſuche
foule examples of the contempt of God. And as
the offence committed was greuous, ſo was the
Authour and manner of the puniſhment extraordinarie.
               For Phinees was a prieſt and no ciuile Magiſtrate:Nu. 1. g. 50. &c.
his * office was to ſerue God in the tēple,Exo. 28. g. 43
and not by death to puniſh offenders: yet bicauſe
the example of the wickedneſſe was horrible, he
was ſtirred vp vndoutedly by the ſpirit of God,
in the vehemencie of his zeale for Gods cauſe,
to vſe an extraordinarie puniſhmēt of thoſe perſons,
that with ſuch deſpite of Gods lawe and
true worſhip, did grieue the heartes of all good
men in their heuie diſtreſſe. And therfore though
this fact of Phinees be greatly praiſed both here
and in other * places of the holy Scripture,Pſa. 105. e. 30 1. yet
being but a peculiar inſtinction of God in this
one cauſe,Ma. 2. f. 54 1.
                  Ma. 2. f. 54 1. Cor. 10. b. 8 it is not to be taken as an example cō
                  monly

of all perſons to be folowed. For if euery
priuate man ſhould take vpon him to puniſh offences,
and that by death, it would grow to very
greate diſorder. But Magiſtrates and they to
* whom God hath committed the ſworde,Rom. 13. a. 4 may
here learne, with how earneſt zeale they ſhould
ſee to the repreſſing and puniſhing of ſynne and
wickedneſſe, and not as commonly they doe, eyther
winke at it without puniſhment, or ſo triflingly
puniſhe it, that it is rather a mockerie
than a puniſhment.
               Then God ſpake to Moyſes,Verſ. 10. 11. ſaying:
Phinees the ſonne of Eleazar. &c.
               By this God ſheweth, that Phinees was led
by his inſtinction to the zelous execution of that
puniſhment, & therfore doth not only ſhewe him
ſelfe to lyke well of it, but alſo rewardeth him
with the * perpetual annexing of the high prieſthood
to him and to his houſe & poſteritie.Ec. 45. d. 28. 29. 30. Here
good princes and magiſtrates, may learne, that
God with great bleſſing, will rewarde the iuſt,
and with ſharp puniſhment correct the authors
of wickedneſſe and vice.
            
         
         
            The third Sunday after Eaſter
at Morning prayer.
            Deuteronomie. 4.
            
               NOw therfore hearken O Iſrael, vnto the ordinances &
lawes which I teach you for to do them, that ſo ye may
liue, and goe in and poſſeſſe the land whiche the Lorde

God of your fathers giueth you. 2 Ye ſhal put nothing vnto
the worde which I commaund you, neither ſhal you take
ought from it, that ye may kéepe the cōmaundements of the
Lorde your God whiche I commaunde you.
               3 Your eyes haue ſéene what the Lorde did againſt Baal
Peor:Nu. 25. a. 4. Joſu. 22. e. 17
for all the men that folowed Baal Peor, the Lord thy
God hath deſtroyed from among you.
               4 But ye that cleaue vnto the Lord your God, are aliue
euery one of you this day. 5 Behold I haue taught you ordinances
& lawes, ſuch as the Lord my God cōmaunded me
that ye ſhould do ſo in the land whither ye go to poſſeſſe it.
               6 Kepe them therfore & do them, for that is your wiſedom
and vnderſtanding in the ſyght of the people, that they may
heare all theſe ordinances, and ſay: Surely it is a wiſe and
vnderſtanding people, it is a great nation.
               7 For what other nation is ſo great, that gods come ſo nie 
vnto, as the Lord our God is nie vnto vs in all things as oft
as we call vnto him? 8 Yea and what nation is ſo greate
that hath ordinances and lawes ſo righteous, as all this law
which I ſet before you this day? 9 Take héed to thy ſelf therfore,
and kéepe thy ſoule diligently, that thou forget not the
things which thyne eyes haue ſéen, and that they depart not
out of thy heart all the days of thy life:Deu. 6. d. 21. but teach them thy
ſonnes, & thy ſonnes ſonnes. 10 Specially the day that thou
ſtodeſt before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lorde
ſayde vnto me, Gather me the people together, and I will
make them heare my words, that they may learne to feare
me all the days that they ſhal liue vpon the earth,Ephe. 6. e. 1. Exo. 19. c. 12. & that they
may teach their children. 11 Ye came and ſtode alſo vnder
ye mountayn, & the mountayn burnt with fire euen vnto the
middes of heauen, and there was darkneſſe, cloudes, & miſt.
               12 And the Lord ſpake vnto you oute of the middes of the
fire,Exo. 20. c. 18 and ye hearde the voyce of the wordes, but ſawe no ſimilitude,
but hearde a voyce onely.
               13 And he declared vnto you his couenant which he commaunded

you to do, (euen) ten commaundements, which he
 wrote vpon two tables of ſtone. 14 And the Lord cōmaunded
me that ſame ſeaſon that I ſhould teach you ordinances
and lawes which ye ought to do in the land whither ye go to
poſſeſſe it. 15 Take therefore good héede vnto your ſelues,
as pertaining vnto your ſoules, for (ye ſawe no maner of image
in the day that the Lorde ſpake vnto you in Horeb out
of the middes of fire.) 16 Leſt ye marre your ſelues, & make
you a grauen image & picture of any maner of figure, whether
it be the likeneſſe of man or woman.
               17 The likeneſſe of any maner of beaſt that is on the
earth, or the likeneſſe of any maner fethered foule that flyeth
in the ayre. 18 Or the likeneſſe of any maner worme that
créepeth on the earth, or the likeneſſe of any maner fiſh that
is in the waters beneath ye earth.Deut. 7. a Sap. 14. a Iob. 21. c 19 Yea, and leſt thou lift
vp thyne eyes vnto heauen, and when thou ſéeſt the ſunne,
the Moone, and the ſtarres, with al the hoaſt of heauen, ſhuldeſt
be driuen to worſhip them, and ſerue them, and ſhuldeſt
worſhip and ſerue the things which the Lord thy God hath
made to ſerue all nations vnder the whole heauen.Gen. 1. b
               
               20 But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you out of
the yron fornace,Deu. 34. c. 4 euen out of Egypte, to be vnto him a people
and inheritaunce, as ye be this daye.
               21 Furthermore the Lord was angrie with me for youre
wordes, and ſware that I ſhould not go ouer Iordane, & that
I ſhould not go in vnto that good lande which the Lorde thy
 God giueth thée to inheritance. 22 But I muſte dye in this
land, and ſhall not go ouer Iordane: but ye ſhall go ouer and
poſſeſſe that good land. 23 Take héed vnto your ſelues that
ye forget not the appointment of ye Lord your God which he
made with you, & that ye make you no grauen image or likeneſſe
that the lord thy God hath forbidden thée.
               24 For the lord thy God is a cōſuming fire,He. 12. d. 29. & a ielous God.
               25 When thou ſhalt beget children, and thy children beget
children, and ſhalte haue remained long in the lande,

if ye do wickedly, and make any maner of grauen image,
and worke euill in the ſight of the Lorde thy God, to prouoke
him to anger: 26 I call heauen and earth to recorde
againſt you this daye, that ye ſhall ſhortly periſhe from of
the lande wherunto you go ouer Iordane to poſſeſſe it: ye
ſhall not prolong your dayes therein, but ſhall vtterly be
deſtroyed. 27 And the Lord ſhal ſcatter you among the
people, and ye ſhal be left fewe in number among the nations
whither the Lord ſhall bring you.
               28 And there ye ſhall ſerue Gods which are the work of
mans hande, wood and ſtone, which neither ſée nor heare,
nor eate, nor ſmell. 29 If frō thence thou ſhalt ſeke ye Lord
thy God,Sap. 1. a. 1. thou ſhalt finde him, * if thou ſeke him with all
thy heart, and with all thy ſoule. 30. When thou art in
tribulation, and when all theſe things that be here ſpoken
of are come vppon thée, euen in the latter dayes if thou 
turne to the Lorde thy God, and ſhalt be obedient vnto his
voyce:Le. 26. g. 44 31 (For the Lorde thy God is a mercifull God) he
will not forſake thée, neither deſtroye thée, nor forget the
appoyntment of thy fathers which he ſware vnto them.
               32 For aſke of the dayes that are paſte, which were before
and ſince the day that God created man vpō the earth,
and (aſke) from the one ſide of heauē vnto the other, if euer
there came to paſſe ſuche a great thing, or whether anye
ſuch like thing hath ben hearde as this.
               33 Did euer any people heare the voyce of God ſpeaking
out of the middes of a fire, as thou haſt heard, & yet lyued?
               34 Or hath God aſſayed to go and take him a people frō
among nations, by temptations, by ſignes, by wonders, by
warre,Pſal. 136. b 12 by a mighty hande, by a ſtretched out arme, and by
great ſightes, according to all that the Lord your God dyd
vnto you in Egipt before your eyes?
               35 Vnto thée it was ſhewed that thou mighteſt knowe
that the Lord is God, and that there is none other but he.
               36 Out of heauen he made thée heare his voyce,Exo. 19. c. 9. that he

                   might inſtruct thée: and vpō earth he ſhewed thée his great
fire, & thou heardeſt his word out of the middeſt of the fire.
               37 And bycauſe he loued thy fathers, he choſe their ſéede
after thē,Exo. 13. c. 14. and brought thée out in his ſighte wc his mightie
power * out of Egipt. 38 To thruſt out natiōs greater &
mightier than thou before thée, & to bring thée in, & to geue
thée their land to inheritāce, as it is come to paſſe this day.
               39 Vnderſtand therfore this day, and conſider it in thine
hearte, that the Lorde is God in heauen aboue, and vpon
the earth beneath, neither is there any other.
               40 Thou ſhalt kepe therfore his ordināces & hys commaūdements
which I cōmaund thée this day, y• it may go
wel with thée, & with thy childrē after thée, and that thou
maiſt prolong thy dayes vpō the earth, which the lord thy
God geueth thée for euer. 41 Then Moyſes ſeuered thrée
cities on the other ſyde of Iordane toward the ſun riſing.
               42 That he ſhoulde flée thither whych had kylled hys
neighboure vnwares,Nu. 35. a. 6. and hated him not in times paſt, &
therfore ſhuld he flée vnto one of the ſame cities, and liue.
               43 Namely Bezer in the wilderneſſe euē in ye plain coū
                  trey
of the tribe of Ruben, and Ramoth in Gilead of the
tribe of Gad, & Golan in Baſan of the tribe of Manaſſe.
               
                   44 And ſo this is the lawe which Moyſes ſet before the
children of Iſrael: 45 Theſe are ye witneſſes, ſtatutes, &
ordinances, which Moiſes told the children of Iſraell after
they came out of Egipt. 46 On the other ſide Iordane in
the valley ouer againſt ye houſe of Peor, in the land of Sehon
king of ye Amorites which dwelt at Heſbō, whō Moiſes
& the children of Iſrael ſmote after they were come out
of Egipt.Num. 21. e. 24. 26. 47 And poſſeſſed his land, & the land of Og king
of Baſan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on the
other ſide of Iordane towarde the ſunne riſing.
               48 From Aroer which is by the banke of ye riuer Arnon,
vnto moūt Sion which is Hermon. 49 And all the plain
on the other ſide Iordane eaſtward, euen vnto ye ſea which
is in the plaine vnder the ſprings of the hyll.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the fourth
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               Now therfore,Verſe. 1. 2. hearken O Iſraell vnto
the ordinaunces and lawes. &c.
               
                  THis whole Chapter containeth nothyng
but an earneſt exhortation to
the children of Iſrael not only with
diligence to harken to the ordinances
and lawes of God,1. cor. 7. d. 19. gal. 6. d. 15. 16 but alſo in
dede to * obſerue and performe the ſame, bicauſe
the lawe of God is a doctrine of practiſe and not
of hearing onely. The condition of their reward
is added, that ſo they might liue and poſſeſſe the
lande. For the promiſes of God made to them
were * conditionall,Deu. 11. d. 22 27. and depended vpon their obedience
vnto his ordinances. And in the ſecond
verſe this is notable, that he ſtraightlye chargeth
them, That they do not adde any thing to his
lawe, nor Take any thing from it. Therby declaring
that God will be worſhipped onely according
to his worde, and that all vnneceſſarie traditions
of mens deuiſes do * hinder Gods word,Mar. 7. b. 9. 13.
and carie men from the ſimple trueth therof.
               The firſt reaſon of exhortation that Moyſes vſeth,
is the exāple of the great & ſharp punniſhment
that God vſed vppon them that reuolted
from him & fell to the worſhipping of Baal Peor
the Idoll of the Madianites and Moabites as it is
written Num. 25.Num. 25. c. 9 The ſeconde reaſon is in the
fifte verſe, by the aucthoritie of the lawe maker

God himſelfe. For he ſaith, I haue taught you
ordinaunces ſuch as the Lorde my God hath commaunded
mee: and thereby willeth them ſo to
eſteme the lawes not as the commaundements
of * men onely,1. theſ. 2. c. 13. but of God that appointed them.
The third reaſon is in the. 6. & 7. verſes by the
renowne and fame of great wiſdome, and of the
ſingular fauour and ready helpe of God toward
them, which ſhoulde be ſpred of them among all
nations to their great comfort and commendation.
In the. 9. verſe hee concludeth with admonition,Deu. 11. c. 19.
that they ſhould not only themſelues
diligently remember the lawes of God, but alſo
* inſtruct and teach their children and poſteritie
in the ſame.Pſal. 77. a. 7.
               
               Speciallye the day that thou ſtoodest before
the Lord thy God in Horeb.Verſe. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. &c.
               In theſe verſes is contained an other reaſon to
moue thē by the remembrance of the * terrible
manner,Heb. 12. e. 17. and ſolemne maieſtie that God in their
ſighte and hearing dyd vſe in the publiſhing of
his lawe with thunder, and lightening & earthquake,
with fyre, cloudes and darkneſſe. In ſo
muche that they confeſſed themſelues not to be
* hable to abide the dredful maieſtie therof,Exo. 20. c. 19. as it
is largely declared in the .20. of Exodus.
               
               Take therefore good heede vnto youre
ſelues as parteining vnto.Verſe. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. &c.
               He ſtraightly chargeth them to beware vpon

daunger of their ſoules health, that they did not
make vnto themſelues the Image of anye thing
in heauen, in earthe, or in the water vnder the
earth. And ſignifieth that, by the wiſedome and
prouidence of God,Jo. 4. d. 24. 2. cor. 3. d. 17. in the publiſhing of the law,Phil. 3. a. 3.
they heard a voyce onely and ſawe * no figure,Eſai. 43. b. 7.
leaſt they ſhoulde take vpon them by that figure
to repreſent God, which would not be repreſented
by anye worldly thing. This commaundemente
he ſundrye times repeateth, to thende to
beate into their mindes howe odious Idolatry
and the worſhipping of Images and falſe gods
was vnto him.
               Furthermore the Lorde was angry with
mee for your woordes.Verſe. 21. 22. 23. &c.
               By his own example Moiſes willeth them to
beware, howe they fell into the diſpleaſure of
God by diſobeyng his holy will.Nu. 20. b. 11. 12. For if the ſeueritie
of his iuſtice was ſo ſharpe * toward Moiſes
for a litle miſtruſt in his promiſe,Deu. 1. f. 37. how much
more would it be vpon them, if they did fall from
his true worſhippe to Idolatrie,Pſ. 105. e. 32. and to the open
diſobedience of his lawes and ordinances?
               For,He. 12. g. 29. ſaith he, the Lorde is * a Conſuming fire to
deſtroye the obſtinate & diſobedient, and a Ielous
God that will not ſuffer his glorye to be gyuen
to other.
               When thou ſhalte beget children.Verſe. 25. 26. 27. 28. &c. I
call heauen and earth to witneſſe. &c.
               
                  
Moyſes in this place moueth them to the diligent
obſeruing of the law of God,Ex 32. f. 28. by laying before
them the threatnings of Gods iuſtice and
* puniſhments,deu. 11. c. 16. 17 that ſhall come vpō them for the
contrary:Nu. 25 a. 2. 9 that is,Jud 2 a. 3. 11. That they ſhould periſhe from
the land whereunto they were goyng,Jud. 3. c. 8 14 and ſhould
not therein prolong their dayes.Jud. 4. a. 3. That the Lord
ſhuld ſcatter them in ſubiectiō of other nations.Jud. 6. a. 1. 2
That he wold giue them ouer to the vnſenſible
worſhipping of ſtockes and ſtones,Jud. 8. f. 27. & the workes
of mens hands.3. reg. 11. b. 11. In which point we of this latter
time haue to lerne,3. reg. 14. c. 10 that the groſſe Idolatry,4. Reg. 16. a. 3
that hath growen by pilgrimage and worſhypping
of Images,4. Reg. 17. c. 25. 26. hath beene the * iuſt plague of
God ſent vpon men,4. re. 19. g. 37 bicauſe they departed from
the obedience of Gods holy word,Ro. 1. c. 21. 24 vnto worſhipping
of him by their owne deuiſes, and traditions
of men.
               If from thence thou ſhalt ſeke the Lord
thy God,Verſe. 29. 30 31. thou ſhalt finde him. &c.
               Leaſt when the puniſhments before mentioned
for their offences, by Gods iuſt iudgemente
ſhould light vpon them, they ſhoulde diſpeire of
the mercie of God, and ſo cutte of the occaſion of
repentance, in this place he ſayth, whē god doth
caſt thē out into ſtrange nations,Ez. 18. e. 21. 32 if they doe * repent
them of their wickedneſſe,Pſ. 50. d. 18. and ſeeke after
their Lorde and God, that he will receyue them
to his mercie. For God is to his people a mercifull

father and not a terrible iudge.Haba. 3 a. 2. And * when
he puniſheth, he doth it not to deſtroy them, but
by a * fatherly correction to pull them frō their
diſobedience and wickedneſſe,Sa. 11. b. 10. 11 which whenſoeuer
they ſhall doe, the boſome of his mercye and
goodneſſe is ready to receyue them.
               For aſke of the dayes that are paſt.Verſe. 32. 33. 34. 35. &c.
and aſke if euer there came. &c.
               There is nothing that can more moue either a
godly perſon, or anye man of common ſenſe and
reaſon to loue and obey one, than to conſider hys
great works and benefites done for his defence
and deliuerance out of thraledome and miſerye.Deu. 7. c, 18.
Therefore Moyſes willeth the children of Iſraell
to deſcend into earneſt * conſideration with
themſelues,Deu 8 c. 11. how great and maruellous workes
God had done for them.Pſa. 77. a. 9. That he choſe them
firſte as his peculiar people among all the nations
of the earth: that, when they were holden in
miſerable * captiuitie vnder the tyrannye of the
Egiptians,Exo. 5. c. 14. of his meere mercy without any regard
of their worthynes,Exo. 9. a. 6. 10. 23. and farre beyond their
hope or expectation,Exo. 10. a. 4. 22. he by mightie * power deliuered
them. By his own voyce with great maieſtie
of ſignes and wonders he publiſhed hys
law vnto them, that they might not be ignorant
of hys holye will and commaundementes.
               He maruellouſly gaue victory vnto them againſt
mighty * kings and Nations,Nu. 21. a. 3. 24. 33. and to bring them

into a bleſſed lande and countrey,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 24. c. 12. 
                        ••
                     ud 5. c. 16. Pſa. 43. b. 8. by his power &
not * their might: he turned out the inhabitants
thereof before them. Therefore if after ſo great
and many benefites they ſhould reuolt from this
ſo gratious, mercifull, and mightye a God, they
ſhould ſhewe themſelues very vnthankfull, and
worthy of great puniſhments.
               Thē Moyſes ſeuered three Cityes on the
otherſide of Iordane.Verſe. 41. 42. 43. &c.
               Bicauſe it ſemed not iuſt in the ſight of God,
that they, which had committed manſlaughter
vnwillingly by caſualtie and chaunce, ſhould be
puniſhed as wilfull murderers, or thoſe that
wittingly doe kil men, or commit any other hainous
offence: Therefore God appoynted Moyſes
to aſſigne ſixe Cities, that myght be as ſanctuaries
for ſuch perſons to reſorte vnto for their
ſalftie. Of which, theſe are three that Moyſes
here in this place ſpeaketh of.Nu. 35. b. 14 Deu. 19. a. 2. Joſu. 20 a. 2 Of the ordaining
of theſe Cities of refuge, you may read Num. 35.
Deut. 19. Ioſua 20.
            
         
         
            The thirde Sundaye after Eaſter
at Euenyng prayer.
            Deut. 5.
            
               
                   AND Moyſes called all Iſrael & ſayd vnto them: Heare O
Iſrael, the ordinances and lawes whiche I ſpeake in
your eares this daye, that ye may learne them, & fulfill

them in déede. 2 The Lord our God made a couenāt with
vs in Horeb. 3 The Lorde made not this couenaunt with
our fathers, but with vs: euen with vs, which are al here alyue
this day.Exo. 19. a. 5. 4 The Lorde talked with you face to face
in the mount out of the middes of the fire.
               5 And I ſtoode betwéen the Lord and you the ſame time,
and ſhewed you the word of the Lord: For ye were afrayde
at the ſight of the fire, and went not vp into the mount, and
he ſayd:Exo. 20. a. 2. 6 I am the Lord thy God which brought thée out
of the land of Egypt from the houſe of bondage.
               7 Thou ſhalt haue none other gods in my preſence.
               8 Thou ſhalt make thée no grauen image,Leui. 26. a. 1. or any likenes
of that which is in heauen aboue, or that is in earth beneath,
or that is in the waters beneath the earth.
               9 Thou ſhalt neither bowe thy ſelfe vnto them, nor worſhip
them: for I the Lord thy God am a Ielous God, viſiting
the wickedneſſe of the fathers vpon the children, vnto the
third and fourth generation among them that hate me.
               10 And ſhewe mercy vpon thouſands among them y• loue
mée,Exo. 34. b. 7 and kepe my commaundementes.
               11 Thou ſhalt not take the name of the Lorde thy God in
vaine:Jere. 32. c. 18 for the Lorde will not holde him giltleſſe that taketh
his name in vaine.Leu. 19. b. 12. 12 Kepe the ſabbath day, that thou ſanctifie
it as the Lord thy God hath commaunded thée.
               13 Sixe dayes thou ſhalt labour, and doe all that thou haſt 
to doe:Leui. 23. a. 3. Exo. 20. b. 8. 9. 10. 14 But the ſeuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: thou ſhalt not do any worke, thou nor thy Sonne,
nor thy Daughter, nor thy man ſeruaūt, nor thy maide, nor
thine Oxe,Jere. 2. a. 2. He. 4. a. 4. nor thine Aſſe, nor any of thy 
                     ••
                  ttell, nor ye ſtranger
that is within thy ga
                     •
                  es: that thy man ſeruaunt, and thy
maide maye reſt as well as thou.
               15 Remember that thou waſt a ſeruaunte in the lande of
Egipt, & how that the Lord thy God brought thée out thence
through a mightie hand & a ſtretched out arme: For which
cauſe the Lord thy God cōmaunded thée to kepe ye Sabbath
day.Exo. 20. b. 12. Luck. 3. a. 8. 16 Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy

God hath commaunded thée,Mat. 15 a. 4 that thy dayes maye be prolonged,
and that it may go well with thée in the land which the
Lord thy God geueth thée.Mat. 5 d 21 17 Thou ſhalt not kyll.
               18 Thou ſhalt not commit adulterie.
               19 Thou ſhalt not ſteale. 20 Thou ſhalt not beare falſe
witneſſe againſt thy neighbour.Rom. 7. b. 7. 21 Thou ſhalt not luſt after
thy neighbours wife, thou ſhalt not couet thy neighbours
houſe, his fielde, his ſeruant, or his maide, his Oxe, his Aſſe,
or ought that thy neighbour hath.
               22 Theſe wordes the Lord ſpake vnto all your multitude
in the mount out of the middes of the fire, of the cloude, & of
the darkneſſe, with a great voyce, & added no more (therto:)
and wrote them in two tables of ſtone, and deliuered them
 vnto me. 23 And it came to paſſe, that when ye heard the
voyce out of the middes of the darkneſſe (for the mountaine
dyd burne with fire) then ye came vnto me, with the Captaines
of your tribes, and your Elders.
               24 And ye ſaid, Behold, the Lorde our God hath ſhewed
vs his glory and his greatneſſe,Exo. 19. d. 18 & we haue hearde his voyce
oute of the middes of the fire: we haue ſéene this daye that
God doth talke with man, and he yet liueth.
               25 Now therfore why ſhoulde we dye? that this great fire
ſhould conſume vs: If we heare the voyce of y• Lord our God
any more, we ſhall die. 26 For what fleſh hath it bene that
euer heard the voyce of the liuing God ſpeaking oute of the
middes of the fire (as we haue done) and yet did liue?
               27 Go thou and heare all that the Lord our God ſaith, and
tell thou vnto vs all that the Lord our God ſaith vnto thée,Exo. 19. a. 8. &
 we will heare it, and doe it. 28 And the Lorde hearde the
voyce of your words when ye ſpake vnto me, and the Lorde
ſaide vnto me, I haue heard the voyce of the wordes of this
people which they haue ſpoken vnto thée: they haue wel ſaid
all that they haue ſpoken.Jere. 14. b. 7. 29 Oh that there were ſuch an
heart in them, that they would feare me, & kepe all my commaundements
alway, that it might go well with them, and
with their children for euer. 30 Go and ſay vnto them, Get

you into your tentes againe: 31 But ſtand thou here by me,
and I will tell thée all the commaundements, ordinances, &
lawes which thou ſhalt teach them, that they may doe them
in the land which I geue them to poſſeſſe.
               32 Take hede therefore that ye doe in déede as the Lorde
your God hath commaunded you, and turne not aſide either
to the righte hande, or to the left: 33 But walke in all the
wayes which the Lorde your God hath commaunded you,
that ye may liue, & that it may go well with you, and that ye
may prolong your dayes in the land which ye ſhal poſſeſſe.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .v.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               And Moyſes called all Iſrael,Verſe. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and ſayd
vnto them, heare O Iſrael, &c.
               
                  
                     MOyſes purpoſing in this chapter by
repetition to call to their remembraunce
the lawe and commaundementes,
that god gaue vnto hys
people in Horeb: In theſe fine fyrſt
verſes, in way of a preface, he exhorteth & admoniſheth
them diligently to harkē to the lawes &
ordinances of God, and that in ſuch ſort as they
maye in dede* perfourme them,Act. 10. f. 35. and not onely by
hearing receyue them.Rom. 2. b. 13. For they conteyne that
bleſſed couenaunt, whereby both God did more
euidently and notablie binde him ſelf to be their
god, thā he did before time to their fathers: and
they alſo with like proteſtatiō ſubmitted themſelues
to be his people, ſo that they coulde not

now without great blame fal frō his obedience.
               I am the Lord thy God which broughte
thee out of the land of Egipt.Verſe. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. &c. &c.
               Almighty God, that his law might haue the
greater reuerence & maieſtie with his people,Pſa. 45. a. 10 in
the firſt entrance he *challengeth to himſelf the
authoritie of a Lord & God ouer them,Pſal. 49. b. 8 
                  I am ſaith
he,Pſ. 94. a. 6. 7 Pſ. 85. b. 8. 9. 
                  the Lorde thy God, *therby giuing thē to vnderſtande
that they ought of right to ſubmit thē
ſelues to his will and pleaſure. Secondlye he
putteth them in mind of the great benefite of deliuerance,
that they had receiued at his hande,
*therby the more to moue & allure them to obedience.Pſal. 17. a. 1. Pſ. 85. c. 11. 12 By theſe ten commaundements we may
fully & perfectly learne thoſe things whereof by
the law of Nature we haue but a ſingle & bare
taſte onlie,Deut. 6. b. 5. mar. 12. c. 30 Luc. 10. e. 27 Pſa. 5. a. 4. 6 Job. 4. a. 8. 9. Eſa. 13. b. 11. Luc. 13. f. 27. that is: Firſt, that we owe a *perfect
loue, reuerence, and feare toward God. Secondly,
that he is pleaſed with godlines and iuſtice, &
diſpleaſed *with wickedneſſe and diſhoneſtie.
Thirdlye, by examining our liues according to
this rule of his perfecte iuſtice, that we are of
oure ſelues* vnworthye to be eſteemed his creatures:Dani. 9. b. 7.
ſeing that we do not in our obedience fulfill
that end *wherunto we were made by him.Ephe. 2. b. 10 Titus. 2. c. 12.
And forſomuch as God the law maker is ſpirituall,
in this his lawe he ſpeaketh not onely to
our body in requiring external iuſtice, but alſo to
our ſoule, requiring inward and ſpirituall integritie,
and in dede ſuch puritie as the Angels in
heauē haue: as it may appeare by Chriſts own

interpretation* Mathew.
                  Mat. 5. g. 48. Mat. 22. d. 37 5. and likewiſe when he
ſaith* Thou shalt loue God with al thy hart, wyth
all thy mind, with all thy ſoule. &c.
               
               Moreouer to the right vnderſtanding of theſe
commaundements, we muſt not onely conſider
the euils that by them God forbiddeth, but the
vertues and good things that are contrarie vnto
the euill. For in forbidding the euill, he commaundeth
the good. As for example, when he
ſaith,Exo. 20. b. 14. *Thou shalt not commit adultry, he doth
not onlie prohibite all vncleane actes & thoughtes,
but alſo commaundeth the contrarie, that
we ſhould moderate our whole life in all chaſtitie,
puritie, and continencie, yea & to our powers
prohibite vncleaneſſe in other alſo.
               Theſe wordes the Lorde ſpake vnto all
your multitude in the mount.Verſe. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. &c. &c.
               That the wayward people might not diſcredite
the law of God, & make the leſſe accompt of
it, bicauſe he was the miniſter thereof: Moyſes
in this place putteth them in minde, that God
himſelf with his owne *voyce gaue theſe commaundements
in the hearing of them all,Exo. 20. a. 1. 19. 20. & that
with ſo great *terrour and maieſtie of thunder,Heb. 12. c. 18. 21.
lightening, fire, & earthquake, that they themſelues
confeſſed they were not hable to abide it,
& therfore erneſtlie deſired, that Moyſes might
be a mediatour betwene God and thē in the deliuerie
of his lawes, binding themſelues wyth
this* promiſe,Ioſu. 24. f. 24 that they would accepte & fulfyll
thoſe lawes, that he, in the name of God, ſhould

deliuer them, wherfore he willeth them to take
hede that they did in dede performe thoſe things
that God had commaunded, & not to turne aſide
from them,de. 17. c. 10. 11 either* on the righte hande or on the
left:Deu. 28. b. 14 that they might enioye the promiſes that
God in like maner had made vnto them.
               Oh that there were ſuch an heart in thē
that they would feare mee.Verſe. 29. &c.
               It is God onely that is hable to mollifie the
ſtome harts of men, & giue them pliant and obedient
willes to fulfill his commaundementes.
What may it meane then, that God in this place
both wiſhe to his people ſuch an hart as would
feare him, ſeing that he only can giue it and they
of thēſelues not able to haue it? Surely he doth
not ſignifie hereby,2. Cor. 3. b. 5. Phil. 2. b. 13. that men of their *owne free
willes are hable to frame their harts to the perpetuall
loue and feare of God.Jo. 15. a. 5. Pſal. 9. b. 19. But he, ſpeaking
after the manner of men, declareth, that it is a
thing rather to be wiſhed, than to be looked for,
that the wayward people of the Iewes ſhuld for
euer be obedient to his lawes and ordinaunces.
               God by wiſhing that his people might, or by
commaunding that they ſhoulde kepe his commaundements
doth not ſignifye, that they haue
of themſelues power to doe them, but by the
commaundement they maye learne, what they
ſhould doe,Pſa. 142. b. 11 Rom 8. a. 3. Rom. 7. d. 24 and in finding wante in themſelues
be driuen to ſeke habilitie* where it is to be had,
that is, at the mercy & grace of almighty God.
            
         
         
            
            The fourth Sunday after Eaſter
at Morning prayer.
            Deut. 6.
            
               THeſe are the commaundementes, ordynaunces, and 
lawes, which the Lorde your God commaunded mée
to teache you, that ye mighte doe them in the lande
whither ye goe to poſſeſſe it.
               2 That thou mighteſt feare the Lorde thy God,Deu. 10. c. 20 and kepe
all his ordinances and his commaundements which I commaund
thée, thou and thy Sonne, and thy ſonnes ſonne all
the dayes of thy life: that thy dayes may be prolonged.
               3 Heare therefore O Iſraell, and take héede that thou doe
it, that it may go well with thée, and that ye may encreaſe
mightily, as the Lorde God of thy fathers hath promyſed
thée, a land that floweth with milke and hony.
               4 Heare O Iſrael, the lord our God is lorde onely.
               5 And thou ſhalte loue the lorde thy God with all thyne
heart,Mar. 12. c. 20 Mat. 22. d. 37 Luc. 5. c. 27. de. 11. d. 18. 19 and with all thy ſoule, and with all thy might.
               6 And theſe wordes which I commaunde thée this day,
ſhalbe in thine heart: 7 And thou ſhalt ſhewe them vnto
thy children, and ſhalt talke of them when thou art at home 
in thine houſe, and as thou walkeſt by the waye, and when
thou lyeſt downe, and when thou riſeſt vp.
               8 And thou ſhalt binde them for a ſigne vpon thine hand,
and they ſhalbe as frontlettes betwéene thine eyes.
               9 And thou ſhalt write them vpō the poſtes of thy houſe,
and vpon thy gates. 10 And when the Lord thy God hath
brought thée into the land which he ſware vnto thy fathers,
Abraham, Iſahac, and Iacob, and ſhall geue to thée great and
goodly Cities which thou buildedſt not.
               11 Houſes full of all maner of goodes whych thou filledſt
not, and we
                     ••
                  es digged which thou diggedſt not, vineyardes
and Oliue trées whych thou plantedſt not, and when thou
haſt eaten and arte full.
               
                  
12 Then beware leſt thou forget the Lord which brought
thée out of the land of Egipt from the houſe of bondage.
               
                   13 Thou ſhalte feare the Lorde thy God and ſerue hym,
and ſhalte ſweare by his name.Exo. 10. c. 20.
               
               14 Sée that ye walke not after ſtraunge Gods,Luc. 4. b. 8. the Gods
of the Nations which are about you.
               15 (For the Lorde thy God is a Ielous God among you)
leaſt the coūtenance of the Lord thy God be moued to wrath
againſt thée, and deſtroy thée from the face of the earth.
               16 Ye ſhall not tempt the Lord your God,Mat. 4. b. 7. Luc. 4. b. 12. Exod. 17. a. 7 as ye did in the
place of temptation. 17. But you ſhall diligently kepe the
commaundementes of the Lord your God, and his teſtimonies,
and his ordinaunces which he hath commaunded thée.
               18 And thou ſhalt doe that which is ryght and good in the
ſight of the Lord: that thou mayſt proſper, & that thou mayſt
go in, and poſſeſſe that good lande which the Lord ſware vnto
thy fathers. 19 To caſt oute all thine enemies before
thée, as the Lord hath ſaid. 20 And whē thy ſonne aſketh
thée in time to come, ſaying: What meaneth theſe teſtimonies,
ordinances, and lawes, which the Lorde our God hath
commaunded you? 21 Then thou ſhalt ſay vnto thy ſonne:
We were Pharaos bondmen in Egipt, & the Lord brought
vs out of Egipt with a mightie hande.
               22 And the Lorde ſhewed ſignes, and wonders, great and
euill vpon Egipt, vpon Pharao, and vpon all his houſholde,
 before our eyes: 23 And brought vs oute from thence, to
bring vs in, and to geue vs the lande which he ſware vnto
oure fathers. 24 And he hath commaunded vs to doe all
theſe ordinaunces, and to feare the Lorde oure God for our
wealth al the dayes of our life, as it is come to paſſe this day.
               25 Moreouer, this ſhalbe oure righteouſneſſe before the
Lorde oure God, if we take heede, and kéepe all theſe commaundementes,
as he hath commaunded vs.
            
            
               
               The expoſition vpon the .vj.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               Theſe are the commaundementes,Verſ. 1. ordinances,
and lawes, whiche. &c.
               
                  
                     MOyſes purpoſing to exhorte the Iſraelites,
to a diligent and faithfull
obſeruation of the law of God, beginneth
with the repetition of that
whereof he hath before ſundry tymes
ſpoken; that is, that the lawes whiche he
dothe ſo earneſtly admoniſhe them to keepe,Leu. 18. a. 4 Leu. 20. b. 8 de. 5. d. 32. 33 are
*not his, nor deuiſed of his owne brayne, but
ſuche as were deliuered him of the Lord, and of
that Lord, which had not only euer ſhewed himſelf
their gratious and good God,Joſu. 24. a. 2. 6. 7. &c. but alſo *choſen
them to be his peculiar people, and vndertaken
to defende them from all their enimies: and
therfore, that they coulde not without moſt iuſt
blame refuſe obedience therevnto.
               And for ſo muche as Saincte Paule ſayeth,Rom. 15. a. 4
                  VVhatſoeuer is written, is written to our inſtruction,
I thinke there is no better maner of expoſition,
ſeing the text is plaine inough of it ſelfe,
than to apply the ſame vnto vs. We haue far
greater cauſe by our obedience to ſette forth the
glorie of God than they had.
               Firſt then, as Moyſes exhorteth the Iſraelites,
wée muſte feare God. For as Salomon
ſayth:Prou. 1. a. 7 
                  The feare of God is the beginning of wiſedome.
This feare will not onely beate downe

our pryde and confidence in oure ſelues: but alſo,
will bee as a brydle to ſtaye vs from euill,
and to repreſſe the wicked iuſtes and affections
that riſe in vs, contrary to the law of God.
*Feare of the Lorde repreſſeth ſinne,
                  Eccl. 1. c. 27. (ſayeth Ieſus
Syrach) Chap. 1. And Salomon,
                  Prou. 8. b. 13. 
                  Prouerb. 8.
Feare of the Lord doth hate euill. Contrarywiſe,
where feare of God is not, men run headlong
to all wickedneſſe, yet muſt not this feare be in
the faithfull a bonde and ſeruile feare, wherein
we think of God only, as he is a terrible iudge,
for ſo Satan *and the wicked do feare God:Jacob. 2. d. 19
But our feare muſte be ioyned with the earneſt
loue of God. We muſte not onely feare God for
his iuſtice,1. Io. 4. d. 18. but wee muſte* loue him alſo for his
mercie and goodneſſe towardes vs. And therefore
Moyſes afterward addeth,Verſ. 5. 
                  Thou shalte loue
the Lorde thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy ſoule, and with all thy might.
               
               This Loue of God in the faithfull *doth far
more earneſtly bridle them from the diſobediēce
of gods holy lawes,Exod. 1. b. 14 than feare can doe.Sap. 6. c. 19. For they
that by a ſure faith,Ecc. 2. c. 18. 19 haue the true ſenſe of Gods
infinite mercies towards them, and therby vnfaynedly
loue hym,Phi. 3. b. 7. 8. are more* readie to pleaſe
God,Rom. 8. g. 35 and to ſhewe themſelues thankful to him,Pſa. 68. b. 10
than feare of his iuſtice can make them lothe to
diſpleaſe and offende him by ſinne and wickedneſſe.Pſa. 118. 137
The one of theſe,Act. 5. g. 41. that is Feare, muſte repreſſe
and keepe vnder olde Adam, and the carnall
man. The other, that is, Loue, doth ſet forwarde

and encourage the ſpirituall and newe
man, that is begotten in Chriſt Ieſu.
               Moreouer,Verſ. 7. Eccl. 3. c. 22. Exo. 13. b. 9. Le. 6. b. 12. 13 de. 11. c. 18. 19 Joſu. 1. b. 8. Pſal. 118. 97. 1. Timo. 4. d. 15. 16. forſomuch as our corruption is
ſo great, and our inclination vnto euill ſo ready,
that we ſoone forget our duties towarde God:
after Moyſes his counſell, wee muſt ſeeke by all
meanes that we can, to* imprinte his holy will
in oure heartes, to ſette it before oure eyes, and
to make it* continually, as it were to ring and
ſound in our eares. This will beſt be doone by
the diligent reading, hearing, and meditating of
the holie Scriptures, by whiche the wil of God
is learned. For this cauſe Dauid ſayeth, that
Hee is bleſſed whiche delighteth in the lawe of the
Lorde,
                  Pſalm. 1. a. 1. 
                  and exerciſeth himſelfe therein both day
and nighte.
                  Verſ. 7. 8. 9 This is it, that Moyſes meaneth,
when he biddeth the Iſraelites, that they ſhould
Talke of the lawes of God in theyr houſe, By the
way, Lying downe to bedde, Riſing vp in the morning,
That they shoulde bee as a ſygne in theyr
hands, as a Frontlet before their eyes, and VVryte
them on their doore poſtes, That is, by all meanes
they can, to make them ſelues famyliar
with them, that by the fleſhe and the worlde
they myghte not bee drawne to forgetfulneſſe
thereof.
               And when the Lorde thy God hathe
broughte thee into the lande.Ver. 10. 11. 12 &c.
               This is an other good Inſtruction that

                  Moyſes vſeth to the Iſraelites, and behooueth
vs alſo to follow:Pſa. 32. b. 5. 6 Act. 17. f. 28. Act. 14. c. 17 that is, that with earneſt conſideration
we call to mynde the *ineſtimable benefites
that God hath doone for vs, whiche are
farre greater and of more worthineſſe, than are
theſe worldly benefites whiche God here is reported
to haue done for the Iſraelites. For he
doth not only continually from tyme to tyme beſtowe
vpon vs the lyke worldly and outwarde
bleſſings to our no ſmall comfort and quietneſſe
in this lyfe,Ephe. 1. a. 3 Gala. 1. a. 4 Rom. 1. b. 11. Coloſs. 1. b. 15. but hath alſo enriched vs with his
ſpirituall* treaſures and bleſſings, as the *deliuerance
from the tyrannie of Satan, ſinne, and
Antichriſt,eph. 1. c. 12. 17 1. Pet. 2. b. 9. Rom. 8. c. 17. Jacob. 2. b. 5 1. Pet. 3. d 22 *the knowledge of his holy worde, &
*light of his Goſpel, wherby we are to be made
the children of God, and *heires, not of the land
of Chanaan, and the fruites and pleaſures therof:
but of the celeſtiall Ieruſalem, the kingdome
of God, and eternall lyfe with Chriſte Ieſu in
heauen. And if the conſideration of worldly benefits
might be ſo good a ſtay vnto the Iſraelites,
how much more ought theſe to be vnto vs, if we
think our ſelues worthie the name of chriſtiās?
               See that you walke not after ſtraunge
gods,Verſ. 2. and the gods of the nations. &c.
               As the Ievves, and by them all other are
forbidden to worſhip ſtraunge gods: ſo are we
alſo to woorſhip the liuing God with ſtraunge
worſhip, that is, with any other worſhip, than
he himſelfe in his holie worde hath appointed.

We muſt beware therefore, that wee fall not away
from Gods true worſhip *in ſpirit & truth,Jo. 4. e. 23. 24
vnto idolatrie,4 Re. 17. e. 29 ſuperſtition, and fonde* deuiſes of
men, therby thinking to pleaſe God. For as god
is a ielous God, and will be worſhipped alone,
and not with other falſe Gods, ſo is he a ſeuere
God, and delyghteth more in ſingle obedience
to his woorde, than in ſacrifice, ſuperſtition, or
any of mans deuiſed holineſſe, thoughe it ſeeme
neuer ſo pleaſant in the ſight of the worlde, or to
be done of neuer ſo good an intent.
               *Saule when he ſpared the fat beaſtes of the
Amalekites for ſacrifice,1. Re. 15. e. 21 might ſeme to haue done
it for a good purpoſe. But God dyd ſo muche
miſlyke it, that for the ſame he caſt hym bothe
oute of his fauoure, and out of the kingdome of
Iſraell.
               
               And when thy ſonne aſketh thee in time
to come,Verſ. 20. ſaying: What meane. &c.
               It is not ſufficient for vs to know the true
worſhip of God oure ſelues,Exo. 24. c. 12 Leui. 11. b. 11. deu. 4. b. 9. 10 Ecc. 30. a. 2. 3 Eccle. 22. a. 3. Deu. 11. c. 19. Gen. 18. c. 19 1. Pa. 28. b. 9. 2. Reg. 12. f. 25 Dani. 13 a. 3. Tob. 1. b. 10 Tob. 14. c. 8. but we muſt deſyre
alſo to inſtruct *and teache other, and eſpecially
oure owne *children, that Gods true Religion
may be deliuered from hande to hande, and ſo be
enlarged to our poſteritie. How farre from this
are a greate number of ſuche as will be called
Chriſtians, and neither can nor will teach theyr
ſonnes and daughters themſelues, nor yet procure
them to bee inſtructed by other, no nor to

come thyther, where, by order they are appoynted
to bee taughte the principles of chriſtian
faith.
               Surely it muſte needes be thoughte, they
haue ſmall feare of God, little ſenſe of the myſterie
of oure redemption in Chriſte, no regarde
of the good eſtate of their chyldren, or of the
ſaluation of their owne ſoules. They ſhould
teache theyr children in lyke manner as Moyſes
here commaundeth the Iewes, and ſaye:
We were of oure ſelues,Ephe. 2. a. 3 Sap. 12. b. 10. Iere. 13. d. 23. and of oure* owne natures,
as bondeſlaues, and ſubiecte to Sathan,
ſynne, and Hell, And it pleaſed Almightie
God of his exceeding greate mercie, withoute
any regarde of woorthyneſſe in vs, to
ſende downe his only and dearely beloued ſonne
from heauen to take fleſhe of the bleſſed virgin,
and here liued in this worlde in great contempt
and reproche, and at the laſte was put to moſte
cruell death, by his paſſion, paying the ranſome
for oure ſinnes, and for vs ſatiſfied the Iuſtice
of God.Rom. 5. b. 11. So that we by* him are nowe reconciled
to God, haue remiſſion of our ſinnes, and in
his ſight are reputed iuſt, and appoynted heires
of eternall lyfe wyth Chryſte Ieſu. For thys
cauſe doe me* aſſemble togyther in the houſe
of Prayer,Pſ. 108. d. 29 Pſ. 110. a. 1. and vſe the Sacramentes and myſteries
of oure Religion, thereby to call into our
remembraunce this vneſtimable benefite,Luk. 1. g. 68. Ephe. 1 a. 3. and
to* giue thankes vnto him for the ſame, and to
pray for the aſſiſtance of his holy ſpirite, that in

all vertuouſneſſe and holyneſſe of lyfe, we may
ſhewe our ſelues thankefull, and ſtudie to liue
according to thys our holye vocation, that the
name of God maye in vs bee prayſed.
               This I ſaye, ſhoulde they teach their children,
to make them to vnderſtande why they
be called Chriſtians, and what the ſubſtance of
true religion is.
            
         
         
            The fourth Sunday after Eaſter
at Euenyng prayer.
            Deuteronomie. 7.
            
               WHen the Lorde thy God ſhall bring thée into the land
whither thou goeſt to poſſeſſe it,Deu. 31. a. 3. and hathe caſte oute
many nations before thée, the Hethites, the Gergeſites, the 
Amorites, the Chanaanites, the Pherezites, the Heuites,
and the Iebuſites, ſeuen nations greater and myghtier than
thou:Ex. 34. b. 11. 2 And when the Lorde thy God hathe ſette them
before thée, thou ſhalte ſmyte them, and vtterly deſtroy
them, and make no couenaunt with them, nor haue compaſſion
on them. 3 Thou ſhalte make no mariadges with
them: neyther giue thy daughter vnto his ſonne, nor take
hys daughter vnto thy ſonne.
               4 For they will deceyue thy ſonne, that he ſhould not folowe
mée, and they ſhall ſerue ſtraunge gods: and then wil
the wrath of the Lorde waxe hotte agaynſt thée and deſtroy
thée ſodeinly. But thus ye ſhall deale with them: ye ſhall
ouerthrowe their aulters, and breake downe their pillers:
cutte downe their groaues, and burne theyr grauen Images
wyth fyre.
               
                  
6 For thou arte an holy people vnto the Lord thy God:Deu. 14. a. 2.
the Lord thy God hath choſen thée,Ex. 19. a. 2. 4 to be a ſpecial people vnto
himſelfe aboue all nations that are vpon the earth.
               
                   7 The Lord did not ſet his loue vpon you, nor chooſe you
bicauſe ye were mo in numbre than any people (for ye were
the feweſt of all people:)Gen. 22. c. 16 8 But bycauſe the Lorde loued
you, and bicauſe he wold kéep the othe which he had ſworne
vnto your fathers, therfore hath the Lorde brought you out
through a mightie hande, and deliuered you out of the houſe
of bondage, from the hande of Pharao king of Egypt.
               9 Vnderſtande therefore, that the Lorde thy God, he is
God, and that a true God, which kéepeth appointment and
mercie vnto them that loue him,Exod. 20. a. 2 and kéepe his commaundementes
throughout a thouſande generations:
               10 And rewardeth them that hate him, to their face, ſo that
he bringeth them to naughte, and doth not deferre the time,
but rewardeth him, that hateth him, before his face.
               11 Kéepe thou therefore the commaundementes and ordinances,
and lawes, which I commaunde thée this daye, that
thou do them. 12 If ye hearken vnto theſe lawes, and obſerue
and do them: the Lord thy God alſo ſhall kéepe vnto
thée the couenant and the mercie whiche he ſware vnto thy
fathers. 13 He will loue thée, and bleſſe thée, and multiplie
thée: he wil alſo bleſſe the frute of thy wombe, and the fruite
of thy lande, thy corne, thy wyne, and thyne oyle, and the
increaſe of thy kine, and thy flocks of ſhéep in the land which
 he ſware vnto thy fathers to giue thée.
               14 Thou ſhalt be bleſſed aboue all nations: there ſhall be
neither man nor woman vnfruitfull among you, nor any of
your cattell ſhal be barren. 15 Moreouer the Lord wil take
away from thée all maner infirmities,Exo. 23. d. 26 and will put none of
the euill diſeaſes of Egypt (which thou knoweſt) vpon thée:
but will ſende them vpon all them that hate thée.
               16 Thou ſhalt conſume all the nations whiche the Lorde
thy God ſhal deliuer thée:Ex. 9. a. 9. 11 thyne eye ſhal haue no pitie vpon

them, neither ſhalte thou ſerue their gods, for that ſhall be
thy decaye. 17 If thou ſaye in thyne hearte, Theſe nations
are mo than I, howe can I caſte them out?
               18 Thou ſhalte not feare them:Deu. 20. a. 1. Joſu. 8. a. 1. but remember what
the Lord thy God did vnto Pharao, and vnto all Egypt.
               19 The greate temptations whyche thyne eyes ſawe,
and the ſygnes, and wonders, and the myghtie hande, and
ſtretched out arme, whereby the Lorde thy God broughte
thée oute: ſo ſhall the Lorde thy God doe vnto all Nations
of whome thou arte afrayde.Ex. 13. d. 28.
               
               20 Moreouer, the Lorde thy God will ſende hornets
among them, vntyll they that are lefte and hyde themſelues
from thée, bée deſtroyed.
               21 Thou ſhalte not feare them: for the Lord thy God is
among you, a myghtie God and a terrible.
               22 For the Lorde thy God will put oute theſe nations
before thée by a little and a lyttle: thou mayeſt not conſume
them at once, leaſte the beaſtes of the fielde increaſe
vpon thée.Exo. 23. d. 29 23 But the Lorde thy God ſhall giue them before
thée, and ſhall deſtroye them with a myghtie deſtruction,
vntill he haue brought them to naught.
               24 And hée ſhall delyuer theyr Kings into thyne hande,Joſ. 10. b. 8.
and thou ſhalte deſtroye their name from vnder heauen:
There ſhall no man bée able to ſtande before thée, vntyll
thou haue deſtroyed them.
               25 The grauen Images of their Gods ſhalte thou burne
with fyre,Joſ. 7. a. 12. 2. Mac. 12. f. 40. and couet not the gold and ſiluer that is on them,
nor take it vnto thée, leaſt thou be ſnared therein: for it is
an abhomination before the Lord thy God.
               26 Bryng not therefore abhomination into thyne houſe,
leaſt thou be a curſed thing as it is: but vtterly defye it and
abhorre it, for it is a curſed thing.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the ſeuenth
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               When the Lorde thy God ſhall bring
thee into the lande.Verſe. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. &c.
               
                  FOrſomuche as not onely the Iſraelites
but all mankinde through natural corruption
are verie prone to Idolatrie
and ſuperſtition, Moyſes as a good gouernour
and Father, dothe* forwarne them of
one great daunger,Sap. 18. c. 19. Mar. 13. c. 23 whereby, if they tooke not
heede, they might ſoone be caried or led awaye
from the true worſhip of God. And that is the
league, alliance and mariadge with Heathens,
and ſuche as were of corrupt faith and religion.
               For they which willingly ioyne with infidels,
doe, as it were, drawe in one yoke with them to
their owne deſtruction. Drawe not (ſayth ſainct
Paule) in one yoke with the vnfaithfull.
                  2. Cor. 6. c. 14 Wherby
ſurely he meaneth ioyning with them in al thoſe
wayes, by whiche wee maye be broughte into
their familiaritie.Eſa. 52. c. 11. 2. Theſ. 3. b. 6 2. Ti. 2. c. 19. 1. Eſa. 10. b. 11 They that meane faythfully
to ſerue God, muſt alwaye haue *ſeparation
betwene them and the wicked. Therfore Gods
will is, that wee ſhoulde not onely wyth open
conſente not ioyne with them, but bycauſe of
our owne frayltie that will bee ſoone myſledde,
to beware of all theyr allurements.
               
                  
But bicauſe, if we wil haue no ſocietie with
the wicked,1. Cor. 5. c. 10. we muſte* leaue thys lyfe, we muſt
make ſome difference betweene ſuch contractes
as doe linke vs vnto them, and other, whyche
leaue vnto vs oure chriſtian faythe and libertie
without daunger. So long as wee liue among
the vnfaithfull, wee cannot ſhunne the ſocietie
of thoſe thinges that appertaine vnto common
lyfe, as it appeareth in Loth, but if we goe further
by leagues of nygh frendſhippe, and *ioyning
in defence one of the other,3. Re. 22. a. 4. Ex. 34. b. 12. 2. Par. 19. a. 2 or in mariage
or ſuche lyke, ſurely wee open a wyde gap to
the deuill to tempte vs, and to drawe vs by little
and little to corruption of Faith and Re;igion,
or at the leaſt wyſe, to ſtoppe our mouthes,
and ſtaye oure endeuours from the defence and
furtherance of Gods true worſhip againſt ſuperſtition
and idolatrie.
               When Moyſes not onely forbyddeth ioyning
in familiaritie with the wicked, but alſo
willeth them to Smite and vtterly deſtroy them,
nor to Haue anye compaſsion on them: it maye
not ſeeme eruell or vniuſt. They haue for their
warraunte the commaundemente of GOD,
who, beſyde that hee is Lorde of the whole
worlde, and had promiſed the countrey where
the Chanani
                        •
                     es dwelt, vnto his people to inhabite,
foure hundred yeares before: for their wickedneſſe
mighte iuſtly haue deſtroyed them, as
he declareth to Abraham. Gen. 15.Ge. 15. c. 13.
               
               And if then from that time to this the ſpace

of foure hundred yeres of his great mercie God
gaue them reſpite to repente, and they contynued
ſtyll in wickedneſſe, and encreaſed theyr
ſynnes to full meaſure, thys ſtraighte puniſhemente,
that God here and in other places commaundeth,
can not in any wyſe ſeeme crueltie,
and extremitie: but to out example, a token of
his *iuſt iudgemēt againſt the obſtinate and vnrepentant
ſinner.Pſal. 118. 75. 156.
               
               If God ſay,Leu. 18. d. 25. 
                  Leui. 18. That the earth did ſpue
them out for their ſinne, as beeing wearie of the
ſtenche thereof: the people of GOD as his inſtrumentes
myghte iuſtely deſtroye them, and
pulled daunger vpon them ſelues, when they
did not. For oftentymes God vpbraydeth them
with ſharpe reprofe, for that they ſpared thoſe,
that he would haue puniſhed.
               For thou arte an holye people vnto the
Lorde thy God.Verſ. 6. 7. 8 &c.
               In this part Moyſes putteh them in mind
that God hath choſen them among all nations
of the earthe to bee hys peculiar people, and
declareth wyth what cauſe hee was moued ſo
to doe, and to what ende. The cauſe of Gods
election,Ephe. 1. a. 5. he ſheweth to be his *onely loue, mercie,
and truthe, and not any reſpecte of woorthyneſſe,
honour, or multitude in them. For,
they were the waywardeſt, the baſeſt, and the
ſmalleſt people of a greate multytude.
               
                  
Only of his mercie he called Abraham the father
of the faithfull, and ſet his loue vpon him, and
promiſed with aſſuraunce of an othe that hee
woulde bee *his God,Gen. 17. a. 7. and the God of his ſeede,
and then he woulde giue the *land of Chanaan,
                  Gen. 12. b. 7:
as an heritage vnto his ſeede.Pſa. 104. a. 11 Therfore to fulfyll
thys hys promyſe, as a true and faithfull
Lord, though they otherwiſe deſerued, he hath
remained their good God, and giuē to them his
lawe, that they mighte not be ignoraunt of his
holy wil. &c. The end whervnto God did choſe
them, was not that they ſhould continue in ſuperſtitious
idolatrie and wickedneſſe: but that
they ſhould be an *holy people vnto him,Leu. 11. g. 44 1. and ſtudie
to obſerue his lawes and ordinaunces,Pet. 1. c. 15. and
for that purpoſe hath he from tyme to tyme ben
ſo gratious and merciful vnto them.Eph. 1. a. 4. The ſame
admonition muſte we alſo learne to applie vnto
our ſelues, God of his meere mercie, and not of
our* worthineſſe,Ro. 9. f. 25. 26 hath choſen and called vs to
bee his people,Oſee. 2. d. 23. and membres of his Churche,
and partakers of all thoſe promyſes, that hee
hath made to mankinde in Chriſte, and that not
to this ende to continue in ſinne and ſenſual lyfe,
for he hath not called vs to vncleanneſſe, ſayeth
Saincte Paule,
                  1. Theſ. 4. b. 7 but to *liue before him in holyneſſe
and righteouſneſſe all the dayes of our life.Luke. 1. g. 75.
And *we are his worke builded on Chriſte Ieſu,
                  Ephe. 2. b. 10
to thoſe good workes, which he hath prepared
for vs to walke in.
               
               Vnderstande therefore,Ver. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13 14. 15. that the Lorde
thy God is God, and that a true. &c.
               The people of Iſraell are here aduertiſed,
that God their Lorde is a true and a iuſt Lorde,
& that he ſitteth as* iudge of the whole worlde.Pſa. 95. b. 13.
And as of his truth he hath and will fulfill* all
that he hathe promyſed them:Ro. 4. d. 21. ſo woulde he of
his iuſtice*rewarde the good,Job. 33. d. 26. that obeyed hys
lawes and ordinaunces,Pſa. 61. b. 11. and woulde puniſh the
contrarie. To the fulfillers of his will hee promiſeth
the bleſſing of the frute of their wombe,
their lande, corne, wyne, and oyle, the increaſe
of theyr kyne, ſhepe, and other cattell, the taking
awaye from them all manner of *ſyckeneſſes
and infyrmities:Pſa. 102. a. 34 and eſpeciallye ſuche
lotheſome and noyſome ſores and diſeaſes,Exo. 23. e 25. 26. &c. as
they knewe were among the Aegyptians, Fynally,
*victorie ouer theyr enimies,De. 20. a. 4. and all felicitie
of thys lyfe.Nu. 10. b. 9.
               
               If wee doe not ſee the promiſe of worldly
felicitie, and this general decree of God alway
to take place among the faithfull, but that the
better ſorte of men are often in more miſery, and
the* wicked worldlings in more proſperitie:Pſ. 72. a. 3. &c we
muſt conſider firſt,Job. 4. d. 18. that* no man, no not the beſt,
doth ſo fulfill the lawe of God, that he can of iuſtice
require to haue the rewarde due therevnto.
Secōdly,Job. 1. b. 9. that either the *deuil of ſpite worketh
trouble in this world to the ſeruāts of God,Apo. 2. c. 10. bicauſe

he is wel aſſured he can not hurt thē in the
life to come, or elſe the fatherly prouidence of
Almightie God doth think it more ſaife for his
children in this wicked worlde to be vnder the
croſſe and affliction,Pſa. 77. d. 38 that they may the *more often
remember him,Pſa. 119. a. 1. and not be caried away with
the faire allurementes of this lyfe wherewith
Satan,Eſai. 26 c. 16 as by a poyſoned bayte, doth draw hys
impes vnto him.Act. 14. d. 22
               
               If thou ſaye in thyne hearte,Verſe. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. theſe nations
are moe than I. &c.
               Bicauſe it might ſeeme a very difficulte and
almoſt vnpoſſible matter, that the Iſraelits ſhuld
conquer and driue out of their countrey ſuche a
number of mighty people, as dwelt in the lande
of promiſe, God by the mouthe of his ſeruannt
preuenteth that cogitation,Exo. 14. c 14. and aſſureth them,
that he wil be their helper and aſſiſter,Deu. 1. e. 30. and* wil
fyght for them againſt thoſe ſinfull people,Ioſ. 23. a. 3. 10 and
that not only by ordinarie meanes of warre, but
alſo that he wold bring hornets, and other noyſome
flyes and vermine to weerie and conſume
them. And for confirmation of their faith herein,
he willeth them to remember the Strange ſignes,
and wonders, and the Mighty hand, and Stretched
out arme, that in their knowledge and ſyght he
vſed agaynſt Pharao and the Aegyptians, at the
tyme of their deliueraunce. By this alſo wee
haue to learne, ſo often as GOD willeth vs to
doe that thing which in face of the world may

ſeeme harde and difficulte and aboue oure power
to bring to paſſe,Jud. 6. c. 14. that we* diſpaire not, but
wyth ſtrong faithe vndertake it,Ro. 4. d. 20. 21 1. beeing well
aſſured,Reg. 14. a. 6 that the ſame GOD, that wylled vs
to doe it,Ma. 14. d. 29 is hable alſo to bryng it to paſſe
by vs.
               The grauen Images of their Gods ſhalt
thou burne with fire.Verſ. 25. 26. &c.
               Before, God forbad thē to worſhip the gods
of the Gentiles,4. Re. 23. a. 4 15. 20. &c. now, he commaundeth to*deſtroye
and *burne with fyre theyr Images,Deu. 12. a. 2. 3 Ie. 43. d. 12. 13 yea
and in token of their vtter deteſtation of ſuche
idolatrie,Exo. 32 e. 20 not onely to alter their ſhape and fygure
in melting them,De. 27. c. 15. but not ſo muche as turne
to theyr owne vſe the matter that they were
made of, leſt by hauing the matter in ſome price,
they ſhoulde be ſnared, and ſomewhat the more
enclyned to Idolatrie. Althoughe thys were
but a politique precept for the time to the Iewes:
yet may wee gather therby, how lothſome, odious,
and deteſtable Idolatrie is to God.
            
         
         
            The fifthe Sundaye after Eaſter
at Mornyng prayer.
            Deuteronomie. 8.
            
               AL the commaundementes whyche I commaund thée
 this day, ſhall ye kéepe for to doe them, that ye maye

liue, and multiplye, and goe in, and poſſeſſe the lande which
the Lorde ſware vnto our Fathers.
               2 And thou ſhalt remember all the way which the Lorde
thy God led thée this fourtie yeares in the wilderneſſe,Deu. 29. a. 5. for
to humble thée, and to proue thée, and to knowe what was
in thine hearte, whether thou wouldeſt kepe his commaundementes,
or no.Exo. 16. d. 15 3 He humbled thée, and ſuffered thée to
hunger,Num. 11. b. 7 and fedde thée with Manna, which neither thou nor
thy fathers knewe of:Mat. 4. a. 4 to make thée knowe that a man doth
not lyue by bread only,Luc. 4. a. 4. but by euery (vvorde) that procéedeth
out of the mouth of the Lorde, doth a man liue.
               4 Thy rayment waxed not olde vpon thée,Deu. 29. a. 5. neyther dyd
thy foote ſwell theſe fourtye yeares.
               5 This alſo ſhalte thou conſider in thine heart: that as a
man chaſtiſeth his ſonne, ſo the Lord thy god chaſtiſeth thée.
               6 Therfore ſhalt thou kepe the commaundements of the
Lord thy God, that thou walke in his wayes, and feare him.
               7 For the Lorde thy God bringeth thée into a good land,
a land in the which are riuers of water, and fountaines, and
deapthes that ſpring out of valleys and hylles.
               8 A land wherin is wheate and barlie, vineyardes, figge-trées,
and pomgranates, a land wherein is oyle oliue & hony.
               9 A lande wherein thou ſhalt eate breade without ſcarceneſſe,
neither ſhalte thou lacke anye thing: a lande whoſe
ſtones are Iron, and out of whoſe hylles thou ſhalte digge
braſſe. 10 When thou haſt eaten therefore and filled thy
ſelfe, thou ſhalt bleſſe the Lord thy God, for the good lande
which he hath geuen thée. 11 Beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God, that thou wouldeſt not kepe his commaū
                  dements,
his lawes, and his ordinances, which I cōmaunde
thée this day.Nu. 15. c. 18. 1. 12 Yea, and when thou haſt eaten and filled
thy ſelfe,Cor. 10. a. 7 and haſt buylt goodly houſes and dwelt therein:
               13 And when thy beaſtes and thy ſhéepe are waxen manye,
and thy ſiluer and Golde is multiplied, and all that thou
haſt is encreaſed: 14 Then beware leaſt thine heart riſe,
                  
and thou forget the Lord thy God which brought thée out of
the land of Egipt, and from the houſe of bondage.
               15 And which was thy guide in the great & terrible wilderneſſe
(vvherin vvere) fierie ſerpentes, ſcorpions, & drouth
without any water: But he brought out water for thée out
of the rocke of flint:Exo. 16. d. 17 16 He fed thée in the wilderneſſe with
Manna,Ex. 17. a. 2. which thy fathers knew not, for to humble thée, and
to proue thée, and that he myght ſo doe thée good at the latter
ende.1. reg. 2. b. 9. 17 Leaſt thou ſhouldeſt ſaye in thine heart, My power
and the might of mine owne hande hath prepared mée
this aboundaunce: 18 But remember the Lorde thy God,
for it is he which geueth thée power to get ſubſtaunce, for to
make good the promiſe which he ſware vnto thy fathers, as
appeareth this daye. 19 And if thou forget the Lorde thy
God, and walke after ſtraunge Gods, and ſerue them, and
worſhip them: I teſtifie vnto you this day that ye ſhall ſurely
periſhe. 20 As the nations which the Lorde deſtroyed
before your face, ſo ye ſhall periſhe, bycauſe ye would not be
obedient vnto the voyce of the Lord your God.
            
            
               The expoſition vpon the .viij.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               All the commaundements whych I commaunde
thee this day.Verſe. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. &c.
               
                  FOrſomuche as the Iſraelites were
not nowe far of from the land of Canaan,
Moyſes putteth them in minde
therof, and ſignifieth that the ſame
God which did require them to be

obedient vnto hys lawe was nowe euen at the
poynt to fulfill his promiſe, and to ſet them in
poſſeſſion of that countrey, and therefore, that
they ſhoulde be more willing and readye to folow
him, and to obſerue his ordinances.
               He willeth them alſo to haue in remēbrance
how God vſed them in the wilderneſſe for the
ſpace of fourtie yeares,Exo. 20. c. 20 by hunger, thirſt & ſome
other aduerſityes* trying them whether they
would remaine his faithfull and obediente people
or no.Ju. 2. d. 21. 22 1. For God did not bring them into thoſe
diſtreſſes,Pe. 1. b. 6. 7 and lacke of foode & other things neceſſary,
bicauſe he hated them, but as a good father,
to proue them and humble their hearts before
him, and that they might learne and vnderſtand,
that man liueth not by bread onely, but by
euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God. For thoughe there were no foode in the
world to ſuſtaine mans life, yet is God hable by
his diuine prouidence miraculouſly to preſerue
vs. As he did feede them in the wilderneſſe with
*Manna from heauen,Exo, 16. d. 15 a foode that neither they
nor their forefathers euer heard of: and cauſed
the ſtony* rocke to yelde them water to quenche
their thirſt,Exo. 17. b. 6. yea and moreouer cauſed their rayment
in fourtie yeares ſpace neuer to *weare or
conſume,Deu. 29. a. 5. nor theyr feete to ſwell or be greeued
wyth contynuall trauayle.
               Theſe ſtrange things wrought he, that they
mighte learne to put their truſte in him, and be
well aſſured, that ſo great daunger could neuer

come vnto them, but that he was hable, & readily
woulde deliuer them oute of it, if they dyd
faithfully ſerue him. And therfore Moyſes wylleth
them to harken vnto this theyr gracious
Lord, to feare him, and to walke in his wayes.
               For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into
a good lande.Verſe. 7. 8. 9. &c.
               
                  Moyſes deſcribeth vnto them the *fertile and
plentifull countrey,Ex. 3. a. 8. that God had prouided for
them,Nu. 13. f. 28. flowing with aboundance of all fruites,
commodities & delectable pleaſures:Deu. 6. a. 3. that they
might be the more *willing and ready to ſhewe
their thankfull obedience towarde him.Je. 11. a. 4. 5.
               
               If the ſame land of Canaan be not at this day
ſo fertile, as is here reported, nor anſwerable to
many parts of Moyſes his deſcription, but lieth
in a great part waſt, as ſome trauailers declare,
we may not thinke it ſtraunge. For beſide the
mutation that naturallie may come to any coū
                  trey
in the ſpace of .3000. yeares, it pleaſed God
of his goodnes at this time here mentioned, to
make it y• more fruitfull bicauſe of his choſē people,
that he promiſed to place there, which good
bleſſing may well be thought to haue continued
ſo long as his people kept his commaūdement,
and contynued in any tollerable obedience of the
lawes and ordinaunces by him appoynted.
               But when they both fell from the true obſeruation
of the outwarde lawe, and alſo reiected

the true Meſsias and Sauioure of the
worlde, no meruaile, if that curſe fell both vpon
them & their land, which, before, God had oftentimes
threatened, whereby great alteration
therof might fall.
               When thou haste eaten therefore and
fylled thy ſelfe,Verſe. 10. thou ſhalt bleſſe. &c.
               The Iſraelites are here warned in the time of
their proſperitie,Exo. 32. b. 6. & the enioying of Gods benefites,
that they ſhew themſelues thankfull,Neh. 9. e. 25 & erneſtly
to take hede that in time of their* wealth
they waxe not wanton & forget God,Eze. 16. f. 49 3. by whoſe
goodneſſe they are in that felicitie.reg. 14. b. 7.
               
               Howe neceſſary this admonition might then
be to them and is alſo preſently to all other, the
common courſe of mans lyfe righte well declareth.
What one among an hundred is there,
which by wealth & continuall ſucceſſe doth not
wax inſolent and forget his duety toward God?
Moiſes in his ſong chap. 32. of this booke, ſaith of
the Iſraelites. Thou art vvel fedde, Thou are growē
thicke,
                  Deu. 32. c. 15. 
                  Thou arte euen laden vvith fatneſſe: and he
hath forſaken God his maker, & Regarded not the
Lord of his ſaluation. In which wordes he prophecied
before hand, what wold come to paſſe among
them, and therfore erneſtly he willeth thē
here to take hede. VVhen thou haſt eaten & filled
thy ſelfe, ſaith he, and builded goodly houſes. &c.
Bevvare leaſt thy hearte riſe, and thou forgette the
Lorde thy God.
               
               
                  
Here he noteth wherby mē in ſuch caſe ar moued
to forget God, that is, Riſing of their hearte
with pride & inſolencie of minde. For fewe there
are, that in great wealth & proſperitie can holde
themſelues within the boundes of modeſtie and
humbleneſſe,2. pa. 26. c. 16. but ſo ſone as they perceiue them
ſelues to flouriſh & be * aloft,Judit. 1. c. 7. their minde alſo in
ſuch ſort ſwelleth with ſelfliking,Pro. 1. d. 32. that they doe
not onely contemne other, but let ſlippe alſo the
feare of God himſelfe, and by litle & litle are caried
on, through the allurement of Satan, that
they cleane fal from him.3. reg. 11. a. 14 Let Solomon hereof be
a notable example: and Chriſt himſelf ſaid, That
it was as hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdome
of God,
                  Ma. 19. d. 24 
                  as for a Camell to go through a needels
eye. Therefore Moyſes calleth the Iſraelites
to remembrance, and willeth them not to forget
what they were in Egipt and in the wilderneſſe,
and how louingly & mercifully God then dealte
for them,Deut. 2. b. 7. & gaue them * all things at their nede,
that by that meanes they might the ſooner acknowledge
him to be the * authour and worker
of al their proſperitie,Pſal. 22 a. 
                        •
                     . and ſo continne in his true
worſhip and obedience. Otherwiſe if they goe
from their Lord & God, and giue themſelues to
the worſhipping of ſtrange gods, he proteſteth &
denounteth to them, that they ſhall aſſuredly
periſhe, and be deſtroyed, in like maner as they
had ſeene God to worke the confuſion of other
nations before their faces. For where the mercie
of God and his bountifull goodneſſe eyther

is abuſed, or will not preuaile, his Iuſtice and
ſeueritie muſt needes take place.
            
         
         
            The fifth Sundaye after Eaſter
at Euening prayer.
            Deut. 9.
            
               HEare O Iſrael, thou paſſeſt ouer Iordane this daye, to 
goe in and poſſeſſe nations greater and mightier than
thy ſelf; cities great and walled vp to heauen.
               2 A people great & tall,Nu. 13. c. 27. the children of the Anakims which
thou knoweſt of, and of whom thou haſt heard ſay, who can
ſtand before the children of Anac?
               3 Vnderſtand therfore this daye, that the Lord thy God is
he which goeth ouer before thée as a conſuming fire, he ſhall
deſtroy them, and he ſhal bring them downe before thy face:
So thou ſhalt caſte them out, & bring them to naught quickly,
as the Lorde hath ſayde vnto thée.
               4 Speake not thou in thine heart, after that the Lorde thy
God hath caſt them outs before thée, ſaying: For my righteouſneſſe
the Lorde hath brought me in to po
                     ••
                  eſſe this lande:
but for, the wickedneſſe of theſe natiōs the Lord hath caſt thē
oute before thée. 5 It is not for thy righteouſneſſe ſake, or
for thy right heart that thou goeſt to poſſeſſe their land: But
for the wickedneſſe of theſe Nations the Lord thy God doth
caſt them out before thée to perfourme the worde which the
Lorde thy God ſware vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Iſahac,
and Iacob.
               6 Vnderſtande therefore that it is not for thy righteouſneſſe
ſake that the Lorde thy God dothe gyue thée this good
lande to poſſeſſe it, ſéeyng thou art a ſtifnecked people.
               
                  
7 Remember, and forget not howe thou prouokedſt the
Lord thy God to anger in the wilderneſſe, ſince the day that 
thou diddeſt depart out of the lande of Egipt, vntill ye came
vnto this place,Exo. 14. b. 10 Exo. 16. a. 2. Exo. 17. a. 2. Exo. 24. d. 18 Exo. 34. d. 28 Exo. 31. d. 18. ye haue rebelled againſt the Lord.
               8 Alſo in Horeb ye prouoked the Lorde to anger, ſo that
the Lord was wroth with you to haue deſtroyed you.
               9 When I was gone vp into the mount, to receiue the
tables of ſtone, the tables of the couenaunt which the Lorde
made with you, and I abode in the mount fourtie dayes and
fourtie nightes, when I neither dyd eate breade nor drinke
water. 10 And the Lorde deliuered me two tables of ſtone
written with the ſinger of God, and in them were conteined
all the wordes which the Lorde ſaid vnto you in the mount
out of the middes of the fire, in the day when ye came together.
11 And when the fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes
were ended, the Lorde gaue me the two tables of ſtone, the
tables of the couenaunt.Exo. 32. b. 7. 12 And the Lorde ſayde vnto mée,
Ariſe, and get thée downe quickly from hence, for thy people
which thou haſt brought out of Egipt haue marred all▪ they
are turned at once oute of the waye which I commaunded
them, and haue made them a molten image.
               13 Furthermore, the Lorde ſpake vnto me, ſaying, I haue
ſéene this people, and beholde it is a ſtifnecked people.
               14 Let me alone that I may deſtroy them, and put oute
the name of them from vnder heauen, and I will make of
thée a mightie nation, and greater than they be.
               15 And I turned me, and came downe from the hill, euen 
from the hill that burnt with fire, and the two tables of the
couenaunt were in my handes.
               16 And I loked, and beholde ye had ſinned againſt the
Lorde your God, and has made you a molten calfe, and had
turned at once out of the way which the Lord had commaū
                  ded
you.Exo. 32. c. 19. 17 And I toke the two tables and caſt them oute
of my two handes, and brake them before your eyes.
               18 And I fell downe flat before the Lorde as at the firſte

time,Exo. 24. c. 18 and fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes I did neither eate
breade nor drynke water, bycauſe of all your ſinnes which
ye ſinned in doying wickedly in the ſighte of the Lorde, in
that ye prouoked him vnto wrathe.
               19 (For I was afrayde, that for the wrath and fierceneſſe
wherwith the Lord was moued againſt you, he would haue
deſtroyed you) But the Lord heard me at that time alſo.
               20 The Lord was verye angry with Aaron alſo, to haue
deſtroyed him: and I made interceſſion for Aaron alſo the
ſame time. 21 And I toke your ſinne, the Calfe which ye
had made, and burnte him with fire, and ſtamped him, and
grounde him verye ſmall, euen to duſt: and I caſte the duſt 
thereof into the brooke that deſcended out of the mount.
               22 Alſo at the burning place,Exo. 17. a. 4. Nu. 11. a. 4. &. 21. 4. at the place of tempting, and
at the Sepulchres of luſt, ye prouoked the Lord to anger.
               23 Likewiſe when the Lorde ſent you from Cades Barnea,
ſaying, Go vp and poſſeſſe the land which I haue giuen
you:Act. 7. a. 39. you rebelled againſt the worde of the Lorde your God,
and neither beloued him, nor hearkened vnto his voyce.
               24 You haue bene rebellious vnto the Lord ſince the day
that I knew you. 25 And I fell downe flat before ye Lord
fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes, as I fell downe before: for
the Lorde ſayde he would deſtroy you.
               26 I made interceſſion therefore vnto the Lorde,Exo. 34. b. 9. & ſayde,
O lorde God, deſtroy not thy people and thine inheritaunce
which thou haſte deliuered through thy great goodneſſe, and
which thou haſte broughte out of Egipt through a mightye
hande. 27 Remember thy ſeruauntes Abraham, Iſahac,
and Iacob, and looke not vnto the ſtubberneſſe of this people
nor to their wickedneſſe and ſinne.
               28 Leaſt the lande whence thou broughteſt them, ſaye,
The Lorde is not able to bring them into the lande whych
he promiſed them, and becauſe he hated them, therfore hath
he caryed them out to ſlay them in the wilderneſſe.
               
                  
29 Beholde, they are thy people, and thine inheritaunce
which thou broughteſt oute in thy mightye power, and in
thy ſtretched out arme.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .ix.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               Heare O Iſrael,Verſe. 1. thou paſſeſt ouer Jordane
this day, to goe in and poſſeſſe. &c.
               
                  THe Iſraelites were a proude wayward
and vnthankefull people, ſone forgetting
Gods benefites done vnto them.Deu. 6. d. 23 Deu. 26. b. 9. Ioſu. 24. d. 17
Wherefore the purpoſe of Moiſes is in
this chapter to * beate into their memorye that
they were made the heires of the land of Chanaan,
& came to al that felicitie, wherin they either
had or ſhould be, onely by the free goodnes and
mercye of God, for his promiſes & for his couenauntes
ſake, and not by their owne ſtrength, or
for their owne worthines. In this, to perſwade
them, he vſeth two reaſons eſpecially. The one
by comparing them with the people of that coū
                  trey.
The other by the example of their owne
wayward and rebellious doyngs againſt God.
               As touching the former, he ſayth, the people of
that countrey were farre greater in number, &
mightier in power than they were. For manye
of them were of the race of the * Giaunt Anac,
                  Nu. 13. d. 34.
ſtrong and mightie perſons, as the meſſengers,

that went to viewe the lande, did bryng worde:
So that they were ſtricken with feare,Nu. 14. a. 2. & * murmured
againſt GOD as hauing brought them
to a land vnpoſſible for them by conqueſt to get.
Wherefore if GOD by hys mightye hande did
worke it for them, they oughte to acknowledge
they did ſtande and depende onelye vpon hym.
And as they were not hable to worke thys of
their owne ſtrength, ſo coulde they not iuſtlye
thinke, that GOD did it for them of dutie or for
their owne worthines, but rather that they had
deſerued the cleane contrarye at his hande: and
that he letteth thē vnderſtand (as I haue ſaid)
by laying examples of their owne wickedneſſe
and rebellious ſtomackes againſt him. The firſt
is their dealyng at Horeb Exodus.
                  Exo. 32. a. 1. &c. 32. when Moiſes
was gone vp into the mountayne and there
taried fourtie dayes to receyue the exquiſite inſtruction
of the law of GOD, and to bring with
him the two Tables of the tenne commaundementes:
They in the meane tyme forced Aaron
to make thē a Golden Calfe to worſhyp. The ſeconde
is their offendyng at the burning place,
Num.
                  Num. 11. a. 1 11. where GOD conſumed many of them
with fyre. The thirde was their murmuryng
for lacke of water Exodus.
                  Exo. 17. a. 2. 17. at whyche tyme
GOD gaue them water out of the rocke.
               The fourthe, was at the Sepulchers of luſte
Num.
                  Nu. 11. d. 20 11. when they longed for fleſhe, and GOD
gaue thē 
                  Quailes to eate an whole moneth together,
vntyll it came out at their noſes againe.
               
                  
The laſte is at Cades Barne,
                  Nu. 13. &. 14 a. 4. 
                  Num. 13. When at
the returne of the Meſſengers they murmured
againſt God and againſt Moiſes & deſired to
returne into Egipte. The foure latter examples
are onlie briefly touched in verſe. 22. 23. The firſt
he ſtayeth long vpon, from the .8. verſe to the .21.
reciting almoſt the whole ſtory out of Exod. 32.
but altering the order of ſome particular poyntes,
of whiche before I ſpake.
               I thinke good briefly to note, that, if the children
of Iſraell in no reſpect of their owne worthines,
were made heires of the land of Cbanaā,
and partakers of his earthly bleſſings: muche
more we maye not thinke, that the Miſterie of
our redemption, Reconciliation to God, Remiſsiō
of ſinnes, Iuſtification before God, & Aſsignement
to euerlaſting life, is beſtowed vpō vs, as manye
haue wickedly taught, in regard of anye part of
oure owne good workes and weldoynges, but
throughe fayth in the free mercye of God for the
merite and paſſion of our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſu.
You be ſaued ſayth Saynt Paule Epheſians.
                  Ephe. 2. b. 8. 2.
By grace throughe faithe, and that not of your ſelues,
for it is the gifte of God, not of your vvorkes,
that no man may glorye.
               
               The glory then hereof muſte be giuen to God
alone. It is a thyng of farre greater worthyneſſe
to attayne Remiſsion of Synnes, and The
Kingdome of Heauen, than it is to poſſeſſe the
land of promyſe, and felicitie in the worlde.
               It is a thyng muche farther aboue the power

of man to conquer Sinne, Sathan, Deathe, and
Hell, than it was to ſubdue the children of Anac.
Therfore, as I haue ſaid, if they were forbiddē
to reſpecte their owne power or worthyneſſe in
thoſe things that were the leſſe, and but onely
figures of other, muche more are we by Gods
worde in like manner charged in thoſe that are
the greater things, and the truth of ſuche as the
other did but onely ſignifie.
               Alſo in Horeb you prouoked the Lorde
to anger,Verſe. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. &c. ſo that the Lord. &c.
               This is the firſt example of their tranſgreſſion
at Horeb in making the Golden Calfe. In
which it ſhal be good to conſider what their offence
was, how much God was diſpleaſed therwith,
& howe Moyſes their gouernour behaued
himſelfe.Gene. 5. a. 5. Gene. 8. d. 21 As touching the firſt, although * mans
corruption, deſtitute of the grace of God, is very
prone euē to the groſſeſt Idolatry, yet it is hardly
to be thought, that the Iſraelites, who, ſo lately
before, had ſene ſo many wonderous workes
done, as well in Egipte as in the wilderneſſe, by
the myghtye hande of the liuing God: woulde
now ſodainly be ſo bewitched as to forſake him
vtterlye, and in ſteede of him worſhip a Golden
Calfe,
                  Exo. 32. a. 4. and * attribute to it thoſe benefites that
they had receyued of God, before the Calfe by
themſelues was made. It is rather lykely,
that bycauſe they thoughte Moyſes was nowe

gone, and therefore the leſſe eſteemed the forme
of Religion by him declared, they woulde haue
a worſhipping of God of their owne deuiſing,
and an Image, as they thought, in which they
myghte honour hym. For ſuche is the groſſenes
of mans wytte, that he thinketh he hathe not
God preſent wyth hym, nor dothe not rightly
worſhyp him, vnleſſe it be in ſome viſible forme
of hymſelfe deuiſed. If they did worſhippe the
Calfe as God, it was in them an exceeding furie
and aſtoniednes of common reaſon and ſenſe.
If they dyd onely worſhippe God in the Calfe,
and thoughte ſome diuine holineſſe therin, as it
is moſte likelye: yet it was a greuous offence
and directly againſt the * fyrſt commaundement,Ex. 20. a. 3. 4 Deu. 5. a. 7. 8
whiche was giuen them by GOD with greate
maieſtie and terrour but a litle time before.
               For in the fyrſte commaundement God dothe
not onelye forbydde ſtraunge Goddes, but alſo
ſtraunge worſhyppyngs of GOD, deuiſed by
man contrarye to hys holye worde.
               They brake alſo the couenant that * before,Exo. 19. b. 8. they
had condeſcended vnto, to followe the worſhip
of GOD appoynted in hys lawe, and not to departe
from it, wherefore ouer and beſyde their
Idolatrous worſhippe, they myght be eſtemed
falſe, traiterous, and forſworne perſons in the
ſyghte of GOD.
                  Verſe. 13. 14, Gods diſpleaſure then was
iuſte agaynſte them,Exo. 32. b. 9. Act. 7. f 51. for they were, as he ſayth,
a * ſtifnecked people that by no meanes woulde
be kepte in hys true obedience, and therefore

purpoſed vtterlye to haue deſtroyed them, and
to haue put oute the name of them from vnder
Heauen.Verſe. 20. Yea, he was exceedyng angrye alſo
wyth Aaron, and woulde haue deſtroyed hym
in like manner, bycauſe he was ſo timerous and
fainte harted that for any cauſe he wolde yelde
to be their inſtrument or helper to worke Idolatrye.
This offence of the Iſraelites God opened
firſte vnto Moiſes,
                  Verſe. 12. 13. ſaying: Thy people,
vvhiche thou haſte broughte oute of Egipte haue
ſore offended, they are turned at once oute of the
vvaye that I commanded them &c. And wyth
all declareth his greuous diſpleaſure towarde
them, & that for their deteſtable wickedneſſe he
minded to take them from the face of the earth.
Then Moiſes as a good gouernour, carefull for
that people which God had committed to him,
fell downe before the Lorde making earneſt interceſſion
for them & ſaid.Verſe. 26. 27. 28. 29. 
                  O Lord god deſtroy not
thy people and thine enheritance, vvhich thou haſt
deliuered through thy great goodnes &c. By whoſe
example, we alſo are taughte the forme of true
and Godlye prayer grounded vpon the promyſes
of God. For God had ſayde that he had
choſen the Iſraelites for hys peculiar people, and
that he would by mighty hand deliuer them, to
the end that he myght ſet forth the glory of hys
name through all the worlde. He promyſed alſo
to the Patriarkes Abraham, Iſahac, and Iacob,
that he woulde preſerue them and their ſeede,
and giue vnto theyr ſeede the land of Chanaan.
                  
Vpon theſe promiſes doth Moiſes with a ſtrong
faith ground his prayer,Nu. 14. c. 17 Deu. 26. c. 15. and earneſtly* preſſeth
God with the ſame, and that he woulde not goe
frō theſe promiſes, though the ſtifnecked people
had deſerued the contrary. Adding alſo the great
reproche that might riſe to his name among the
heathen from whence they came, that is, the
Egiptians, who wold ſay, That their God vvas not
hable to bring them into that land, that he had promiſed
them, but bicauſe he hated them, caried thē
forthe into the vvilderneſſe to ſlay them.
               
               In which words Moyſes ſheweth himſelf alſo
to haue a great care of the glory of God, and
therfore that he craueth his gracious mercy toward
the Iſraelites not onely for their ſakes, but
alſo that he thought, it woulde make greatly to
the aduauncement of the glory of God, & ſtaying
of the reproche therof among the wicked. Such
maner of prayer is alſo of great force and effect
with God, and doth appeaſe his wrath, & ſtaye
him from the execution of his purpoſed plagues
againſt his people offending. And therfore doth
it folow Exo. 32.Exo. 32. d. 14 
                  The Lord refrained himſelf from
the euill, vvhich he ſaide, he vvoulde doe vnto his
people. Whē 
                  Moyſes had in this maner appeaſed
the wrath of god in the moūt, he did not ſo ſtay,
but, comming downe among the people and ſeing
their wickedneſſe, in greate zeale and vehemency
of ſpirite he caſte the Tables of the law
out of hys hand, ſo that he brake them. Which
is not to be thoughte furye or rage in Moyſes,
                  
but, as I haue ſaid, an earneſt zeale, and a declaration
of his great grief of heart, that he cōceyued,
not for any worldely matter, but to ſee the
*glorie of God and his true woorſhip to be ſo
wickedly diſtayned and ouerthrown among his
owne people.Nu. 25. c. 13. And bicauſe he was a magiſtrate
and gouerner, he proceedeth further, both to the
deſtroying and taking awaye of the Idoll: and
alſo to the ſharpe puniſhment of the chief offenders.
In ſuche matters where Gods glorie is
diſtained, priuate perſons in deed haue to deale
by prayer only, as not hauing the ſworde of correction
put into their hande, but the magiſtrate
ought not only to vſe prayer, but his authoritie
alſo giuen him of God to repreſſe the wickedneſſe,
and to *puniſh the offenders,Rom. 13. b. 4 to the example
of other. The number of them that Moyſes
executed for this offence were about three thouſand,
as it appeareth Exod.
                  Exo. 32. f. 28. 32. And beſyde this,
he toke the Golden Calfe, and buent it, & ſtampt
it euen to very duſte, and caſt it into the brooke,
that no memorie of ſo wicked idolatrie myghte
remayne.
               When Moyſes ſayeth,Verſ. 18. verſe. 18. That he fell
dovvne flatte before the Lorde, euen as at the firſte
tyme, and faſted fortie dayes and fortie nights. &c.
It is not to be thoughte that this his faſting
was in tyme before his ſeconde aſcending into
the hill, when he was commaunded to prepare
newe tables, otherwiſe he ſhoulde appeare to
haue faſted thryſe, which was not true, & therfore

that which he addeth ver. 25. is but a repetitiō
of that which he ſpeaketh, verſ. 18 & was performed
in the Mount, when at the appointment
of God, hee caried vp other tables to haue the
lawe of God newe written in them. For, bicauſe
the couenant by their ſinne and offence was fordone,
it coulde not be againe confirmed, and the
tables of the couenāt new written, but with the
lyke ſolemnitie, that was before: and therefore
Moyſes taried there fortie days and fortie nightes,
and neither did eat bread, nor drinke water.
               The Prayer that is added in the later ende
of the chap. was not vſed at his ſeconde going
vp into the mount, as it may ſeeme by the order
of the telling of it here, but it was the prayer
that he made at the firſt tyme when God declared
his diſpleaſure, & purpoſed to haue deſtroyed
the people. Wherfore it is euident, the ſtorie is
here repeted by Moyſes ſomewhat interruptly,
and not in the order wherein euery thing was
done. His purpoſe was to put them in mind of
the thing which they well knew, and therefore
regarded not ſo muche the order in telling.
            
         
         
            The Sunday after the Aſcention
at Mornyng prayer.
            Deuteronomie. 12.
            
               
                   THeſe are the ordinances and lawes which ye ſhall obſerue
and doe in the land which the Lorde God of thy
fathers giueth thée, to poſſeſſe it as long as ye liue vpon

the earth. 2 Ye ſhall deſtroye all places wherein the nations
which ye ſhal poſſeſſe ſerued their gods,Deut. 7. a. 2. vpon hye moū
                  taines,
on hilles, and vnder euery gréene trée.
               3 You ſhal ouerthrowe their aulters, and breake theyr pillers,
and burne their groues with fire, and you ſhall hewe
downe the grauen images of the gods that they haue, and
bring the names of them to naught out of that place.
               4 Ye ſhal not do ſo vnto the Lorde your God:
               5 But ye ſhall ſéeke the place which the Lorde your God
ſhall chooſe out of all your tribes,2. Pa. 7. c. 16. to put his name there, and
there to dwell, and thither thou ſhalte come:
               6 And thither ye ſhall bring your whole burnt ſacrifices,
your offrings, your tithes, and heaue offerings of your hand,
your vowes, your fréewill offerings, and the firſte borne of
your kine, & of your ſhéep. 7 And there ys ſhall cate before
the Lorde your God, and ye ſhall reioyce in all that ye put
your hand vnto, both ye and your houſholdes, wherein the
Lord thy God hath bleſſed thée. 8 Ye ſhall not do after all
the things that we do here this day, euery mā what ſéemeth
him good in his owne eyes. 9 For ye are not yet come to
reſt, and to the inheritance which the Lord your God giueth
you. 10 But when ye go ouer Iordane, & dwell in the land
which the Lord your God hathe giuen you to inherite, and
when he hath giuen you reſt from all your enimies rounde
abouſe, and ſhall dwell in ſafetie: 11 Then vnto the place
which the Lorde youre God hathe choſen to put his name
there,3. Re. 8. c. 29. ye ſhall bring all that I cōmaunde you: youre whole
burnt ſacrifices, your offerings, your tythes, the heaue offering
of your hande, and all youre ſpeciall vowes whiche yée
vow vnto the Lorde. 12 And ye ſhal reioyce before the lord
your God, ye & your ſons, & your daughters, your ſeruants, &
your maidens, & the Leuite that is within youre gates, foraſmuche
as he hath no parte nor inheritance wyth you.
               13 Take héede that thou offer not thy whole burnte offerings
in euery place that thou ſéeſt.Deu. 10. b 9. &. 18. a. 1.
               
               
                  
14 But in the place whiche the Lord ſhall chooſe in one of
thy tribes, there thou ſhalt offer thy whole burnt offerings,
and there thou ſhalt doe all that I commaunde thée.
               15 Notwithſtanding, thou mayſte kill and eate fleſhe in
all thy cities, whatſoeuer thy ſoule luſteth after, according to
the bleſſing of the Lord thy God which he hath giuen thée:
both the vncleane and the cleane maye eate thereof, of the
Roe bucke, and of the Harte.
               16 Only ye ſhall not eate the bloud, but poure it vpon the
earth as water. 17 Thou mayſt not eate within thy gates
the tythe of thy corne, of thy wyne, and of thy oyle, and the
firſt borne of thy kine, and of thy ſhéepe, neyther any of thy
vowes whiche thou voweſt, nor thy fréewill offerings, or
heaueoffering of thyne hande:
               18 But thou muſte eate them before the Lorde thy God
in the place which the Lord thy God hath choſen, thou and
thy ſonne and thy daughter, thy ſeruant and thy mayd, and
the Leuite that is within thy gates: and thou ſhalte reioyce
before the Lord thy God in all that thou putteſt thyne hand
to.Eccl. 7. d. 31. 19 Beware that thou forſake not the Leuite, as long
as thou lyueſt vpon the earth.
               20 If,Deu. 19. b. 8. when the Lorde thy God ſhall enlarge thy border
as he hath promiſed thée, thou ſay, I will eate fleſh (bicauſe
thy ſoule longeth to eate fleſhe) thou mayſt eate fleſhe what
ſoeuer thy ſoule luſteth. 21 If the place whiche the Lorde
thy God hath choſen to put his name there, bée too far from
thée, then thou ſhalt kill of thy oxen and of thy ſhéep whiche
the Lord hath giuen thée, as I haue commaunded thée, and
thou ſhalt eate in thyne owne citie whatſoeuer thy ſoule luſteth.
22 And as the Roebucke and the Harte is eaten,Deu. 15. d. 22 ſo
thou ſhalt eate them: both the cleane and vncleane ſhal eate
of them. 23 But take héede that thou eate not the bloud:
for the bloud is the lyfe, and thou mayſte not eate the lyfe
with the fleſhe. 24 Thou ſhalt not eate it, but poure it vppon
the earth as water. 25 Thou ſhalt not eate it, that it

maye goe well with thée, and with thy children after thée:
but thou ſhalt doe that whiche is ryghte in the ſighte of the
Lorde. 26 But thy holy things whiche thou haſte, and
thy vowes, thou ſhalte take, and come vnto the place
which the Lord hath choſen. 27 And thou ſhalte offer thy
whole burnt offerings both fleſhe and bloude vpon the aulter
of the Lorde thy God: and the bloud of thine offerings
ſhall be poured out vpon the aulter of the Lorde thy God,
and thou ſhalt eate the fleſhe. 28 Take héede, and heare all 
theſe words which I cōmaund thée, that it may go wel with
thée, and with thy children after thée for euer, if thou doeſt
that whiche is good and righte in the ſighte of the Lorde thy
God. 29 When the Lorde thy God ſhall deſtroy the nations
before thée whither thou goeſt to poſſeſſe them, and thou
ſuccéedeſt in their inheritaunce, and dwelleſt in their lande.
               30 Beware that thou be not taken in a ſnare after them,
after that they be deſtroyed before thée, and that thou aſke
not after their Goddes,deu. 1. c. 7. 12 ſaying: As theſe nations ſerue theyr
Gods, I wil do ſo likewiſe. 31 Nay, thou ſhalt not do ſo vnto
the Lord thy God: for all abhominations, and that whiche
the Lord hateth, the ſame haue they done vnto their goddes.
               32 For they haue burned both their ſonnes & their daughters
with fire before their goods.Joſu. 1. d. 13. Deut. 4. a. 4 Joſu. 23 b. 6. Therefore whatſoeuer I
commaund you, take héede ye do it: and put thou naughte
thereto, nor take ought therefrom.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xij.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               Theſe are the ordinaunces and lawes
whiche ye ſhall obſerue and doe. &c.
               
                  
                  AS Moyſes before in ſundry places
had warned the Iſraelites earneſtly
to ſhun Idolatrie and falſe woorſhipping
of God, ſo here, that they
might haue the leſſe occaſion to be
ſeduced,4. Re. 18. a. 4 Deut. 7. a. 5. Exo. 23. f. 24. 2. Pa. 14. a. 3. 2. pa. 15. b. 8. 3. Re. 18. f. 40 hee chargeth them, when God hathe
brought them into the land of Chanaan, & giuen
thē the poſſeſſion therof: that they ſhuld *deſtroy
all the places, wherin thoſe wicked nations ſerued
their gods, yea and to ouerthrow their aulters,
breake their pillers, burne their groues,
hewe downe their grauen images, and ſomuch
as they coulde, bring the names of them out of
memorie, that they remayned not among them
as ſtumbling ſtockes for them to fall at.
               Wherin we alſo haue to learn, that to the vttermoſt
of our power, we ſhould deface the monumēts
of Idolatrie, & yet after the Idolatrie &
falſe worſhipping of God is by good order and
doctrine taken away, as touching the outwarde
things that they vſed, ſome more libertie is left
to chriſtiās, than was to the Iſraelites. For I do
not ſee, but that chriſtian mē may wel vſe churches,
and ſome other things that haue bene before
time wickedly abuſed, and apply the ſame
things now to better vſes. As the precepts for
auoyding of Idolatrie were perpetual, & binde
all ages: ſo this commaundement of deſtroying
the places. &c. was but temporall, and an
ordinance to them only giuen, and therfore doth
not bynd all other in like maner, as it did binde
them.
               
               You ſhall not doe ſo to the Lorde youre
God,Verſ. 4. but ye ſhall ſeeke the place. &c.
               In this part of the chapter, Moyſes by gods
Authoritie appointed to the Iſraelites a certain
order, to be obſerued in the externall exerciſe of
Gods true worſhip, wherby it might differ frō
all falſe woorſhippyngs of Idolatrous Gods,
diſperſed throughout the world: and that is it,
that hee woulde haue but one Sanctuarie, and
one Aulter,
                  Eph. 4. a. 4. thereby to declare their*vnitie and
conſent in one faith and religion. Therefore he
appointeth but one place* where he wil be worſhipped,Pſal. 121. a. 1
and thither he willeth them all to reſorte,
and to that place to bring their offrings.
               The choyce of this place God reſerueth to
himſelfe, neyther was it appointed among the
people of Iſraell, vntill the tyme of king Dauid,
and then choſe hee Mounte Syon, and the Citie
of Hieruſalem,
                  Pſa. 78. g. 73. as it is ſayde, Pſalme. 78,
Hee refuſed the tabernacle of Ioſeph, hee choſe
not the trybe of Ephraim, but choſe the trybe
of Iuda, euen the hyll of Syon vvhyche hee loued.
And agayne Pſalme. 132. God hathe choſen
Sion,
                  Pſa. 132. d. 14 
                  and had a deſire that it myghte bee an habitation
for him. This is (ſayeth he) my reſt for euer,
here I vvill dvvell. &c.
               
               In all the meane time vntill Dauids reigne
the Arke of GOD had not anye ſettled place,
but yet they dydde woorſhyppe GOD, and
doe Sacrifice where the Arke and the Tabernacle

was. So that euery man or euery Tribe
did not erect a ſeuerall aulter where they might
ſacrifice to their God. The ſacrifices and offerings
mentioned, verſ. 6. are ſuch as by God him
ſelfe were appointed to diuers purpoſes,Leuit. 2. 3. 4. &c. Nu. 15. &c. as appeareth
Leuit. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. & 7. Num. 15. and in
ſundry other places. In al thoſe ſacrifices the
Prieſtes and Leuites that attended vpon the
ſeruice of God hadde their portions appointed
them: the reſidue they that offred did eate with
thankes giuing & reuerence. For by this ſpeech
To eate before the Lord, is noted the holy feaſtes
that they ſolemniſed at ſacrifices, as a differēce
from their other meales and eatings. For then
were they at the tabernacle where god did principally
declare his preſence to them, and therfore
were ſayd To eate before the Lorde.
               
               Notwithstanding thou mayſt kill and
eate fleſhe in all thy cities.Verſ. 15. 16. &c.
               God permitteth the Iſraelites to eate fleſhe,
ſuche as they lyke in any place, ſo that it were
not offered to him in Sacrifice but vſed as their
common meate. And he putteth for example, the
Roe and the Harte, whiche were neuer offered
to God, and therefore mighte all ſortes of men
eate of them: yea euen ſuche as by Gods lawe
were compted vncleane, and needed purification
by the order of the lawe, but of Sacrifices none
ſuch might eat before they were purged. But as

God permitteth them to eate fleſhe: ſo he forbiddeth
them to eate the bloud, the whiche hee
doth Leuit.
                  Le. 17. b. 10. 17. farre more earneſtly. The lyke
*inhibitiō he vſed alſo to Noah after the deluge,Gene. 9. a. 4.
Whiche God didde to accuſtome his people to a
more myldeneſſe among themſelues, that they
ſhoulde not be readie to murder and ſlaughter.
For when by Gods ordinance they had learned
to ſpare the Bloud of beaſtes, they muſt nedes
think it a greater* crueltie to ſhed mans bloud.Hest. 4. a. 4. Dani. 2. c. 15.
Therfore in Geneſis, God immediately after the
prohibition to eate the bloud of beaſtes,Gene. 9. a. 5. addeth,
VVhoſoeuer sheadeth mans bloud, by man shall
his bloud be shead.
               
               Thou mayste not eate within thy gates
the tythe of thy corne.Verſe. 17. 18. &c.
               As Moyſes hadde ſhewed them, that they
might eate fleſhe, ſo now he telleth them what
they may not eate, that is, their tythe, the fyrſt
borne of their cattell, their vowes, their freewil
offerings. &c. For of all theſe, ſo muche as was
Gods portion, was allotted to the fynding of
his miniſters, the Prieſts, the Leuites, and alſo
the poore people, as maye in parte appeare,
Nu.
                  Nu. 18. c. 21. 18. And therfore they myght not eate them
at home,Deu. 19. d. 27 1. Cor. 9. c. 13. Eccle. 7. d. 31. that they might not defraud the miniſters
of God, of whom they* ought to haue care,
and therefore God chargeth them that they doe
not forſake the Leuite: but the reſidue of the
ſame * Sacrifices that was not appointed to theDeu. 18. a. 1.
                  
Prieſts. &c. they are commanded to eate before
the Lord, that is at his Tabernacle, where hee
chiefly declared his preſence.
               When the Lorde thy God ſhall enlarge
thy border as he hath promiſed.Verſe. 20. 21. 22. &c. &c.
               Here is repeated the ſame thing that was
ſpoken Verſe 15. 16. that they might eate fleſhe
according to their habilitie that God had giuen
them, and how they might eate it, that is, as a
common meate, not as a Sacrifice. There is
added alſo a more large and earneſt* prohibitiō
of eating of bloud,Leui. 7. c. 27. Leui. 19. f. 26 bycauſe in the bloudis life, or
the vitall ſpirites, ſo that it may ſeeme crueltie
to eate bloud. To eate bloud of it ſelfe, was not
a matter of ſo greate momente, and therefore
when God preſſeth ſo earneſtly the prohibition,
and with ſo great puniſhmente, it is euident the
Lawe tendeth to ſome other ende, that is, that
they might eſteme the Liues of all things, and
eſpecially of Man, to be precious. And therfore
(ſaith he) The bloud is the life.
               
               But thy holy thinges whiche thou hast,Verſe. 26. 27.
and thy vowes, thou ſhalt take. &c.
               This maketh the former Precept more plain,
and ſheweth euidently, that the cauſe whiche
God would haue no mo places of worſhip than
one, was, that the diuerſitie of places and Aultars

might not among that wayward people
cauſe ſo many Seueral Gods as they had ſeuerall
places of worſhip. Therefore are they willed
here to bring al Holy things, that is, ſuch as
be dedicated to God, or appointed for Sacrifice,
to that appointed place where the Lord wolde
chooſe to be worſhipped.
               Take heede and heare all theſe wordes
which I commaund thee.Verſe. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. &c.
               Forſomuch as the Imitation of that people
that dwelled in the land of Chanaan, mighte bee
a great occaſion eaſily to leade them to Idolatrie
and worſhipping of ſtrange gods, Moyſes
heere ſtraightly forbiddeth them not ſo muche
as to Enquire of the maner of their falſe Gods.
For this is lightly the beginning of all Idolatrie,Sap. 14. b. 12.
when men, vnderſtanding the ſimplicitie of
Gods true worſhip, curiouſly Enquire of mens
deuiſes, whether there be any thing in thē worthy
obſeruation, which they may adde, as they
thinke, to beautifie the ſimplicitie of Gods cō
                  maundement,
and ſo by little and little fall eyther
to flat Idolatrie, or to very Groſſe ſuperſtition.
Wherefore God bridleth here this looſneſſe
of his people, and ſaith, They may not do ſo
to their Lorde God, for hee did not onely miſlike
thoſe falſe worſhippings, but dyd Hate
them, Loth them, & accompted them Abhominable,
and eſpecially that Horrible vſe of Burning

their ſonnes and daughters vnto deuils.
               Therefore to knit vp this inſtruction, God
commaundeth them that they ſhoulde cleaue
faſte vnto his worde, and not in any poynte to
alter it, eyther By adding any thing thereto, or by
taking any thing therefro. As if hee had ſayde,
that all ſtudies and indeuours of men to woorſhip
him,Deut. 4. a. 2. not proceding out of this* roote of his
holy word and law, ſeemed they neuer ſo godly,
were ſuperſtitious, wicked, and abhominable in
his ſyght. And therefore they may ſeeme to
breake the firſt commaundement, and to frame
vnto themſelues ſtrange Gods, which worſhip
God in any other maner, than in his worde is
appoynted.Eſa. 29. d. 13. For this cauſe doth Eſaie chap. 29
threaten horrible puniſhment to ſuche perſons.
Bicauſe (ſaith God) this people hath vvorshipped
mee vvith their mouth, and their hartes farre from
mee, and their feare tovvards mee hath proceded of
the commaundementes of men, I vvill doe maruels
among this people,
                  1. Cor. 1 c. 19. 
                  For the vviſedome of their vviſe
men shall perishe, &c. Seing therfore the whole
worſhip of God that theſe many yeares hath
ben in the Churche of Rome, hath bene altogither
Mans deuiſe beſyde and contrary to the
word of God,2. Co. 3. d. 14. Jo. 7. g. 47. Io. 9. g. 40. no maruell if God hath ſo *blynded
and aſtonied thewiſedome & vnderſtanding
of the chiefe doctours and beſt learned of them,
that they ſtand in defence of very groſſe errors
and ſuperſtitions.
            
         
         
            
            The Sunday after the Aſcention,
at Euenyng prayer.
            Deuteronomie .xiij.
            
               IF there aryſe among you a Prophete, or a dreamer of 
dreames, and giue thée a ſigne or a wonder.
               2 And that ſigne or wonder which he hath ſayde, come
to paſſe, and then ſaye: Lette vs goe after ſtraunge Gods
(which thou haſt not knowne) and let vs ſerue them:
               3 Hearken not thou vnto the wordes of that prophete or
dreamer of dreames:Deut. 8. a. 2 For the Lorde thy God proueth you,
to knowe whether ye loue the Lorde youre God with all
your heart, and with all your ſoule.
               4 Ye ſhall walke after the Lorde youre God, and feare
him, kéepe his commaundementes, and hearken vnto his
voyce, you ſhall ſerue him, and cleane vnto him.
               5 And that prophet or dreamer of dreames ſhall dye (bicauſe
he hath ſpoken to t
                     •
                  rlie you awaye from the Lorde
your God whiche brought you out of the lande of Egypte,
and deliuered you out of the houſe of bondage, to thruſt thée
out of the waye whiche the Lorde thy God commaunded
thée to walke in) and therfore thou ſhalt put the euill away
from thée. 6 If thy brother, the ſonne of thy mother, or
thyne owne ſonne, or thy daughter, or the wyfe that lyeth
in thy boſome, or thy frende which is as thyne owne ſoule
vnto thée, entice thée ſecretely, ſaying: Let vs go and ſerue
ſtraunge gods (which thou haſte not knowne, nor yet thy
fathers.) 7 And they be any of the gods of the people which 
are rounde aboute you: whether they bée nye vnto thée or
farre off from thée, from the one ende of the earth vnto the
other: 8 Thou ſhalte not conſent vnto him, nor hearken
vnto him,De. 17. b. 12. thyne eye ſhall not pitie him, neyther ſhalt thou
haue compaſſion on him, nor kéepe him ſecrete.
               
                  
9 But cauſe hym to be ſlayne: Thyne hande ſhall bée
fyrſte vpon him to kill him, and then the handes of all the
people. 10 And thou ſhalte ſtone him with ſtones that he
dye: bycauſe he hathe gone aboute to thruſte thée awaye
from the Lorde thy God whiche broughte thée out of the
lande of Egypt, and from the houſe of bondage.
               11 And all Iſraell ſhall heare and feare, and ſhall doe no
more any ſuche wickedneſſe as this is among you.
               12 If thou ſhalte heare ſaye in one of thy Cities whiche
the Lorde thy God hath giuen thée to dwell in.
               13 That certaine men béeing the children of Beliall, are
gone out from among you, and haue m
                     •
                  ued the inhabiters
of their Citie, ſaying: Let vs goe and ſerue ſtraunge gods
whyche ye haue not knowne:
               14 Then thou muſt ſeeke, and make ſearch, and enquire
diligently: and beholde, if it be true, and the thing of a ſuretie,
that ſuche abhomination is wrought among you:
               15 Then thou ſhalt ſmite the dwellers of that citie with
the edge of the ſworde, and deſtroye it vtterly, and all that
is therein, and the very cattell thereof, wyth the edge of the
ſwoorde: 16 And gather all the ſpoyle of it into the middes
of the ſtréete therof, and burne with fyre bothe the citie and
all the ſp
                     •
                  yle thereof euery whitte for the Lorde thy God:
and it ſhal be an heape for euer, and ſhal not be built agayn.
               17 And there ſhall cleaue naughte of the damned thing
in thyne hande, that the Lorde maye turne from the fierceneſſe
of his wrath, and ſhew thée mercie, and haue compaſſion
on thée, and multiplie thée, as hée hathe ſworne vnto
thy fathers.
               18 Therefore ſhalte thou hearken vnto the voyce of the
Lorde thy God, to kéepe all his commaundementes whiche
I commaunde thée this daye, that thou doe that whiche is
right in the eyes of the Lorde thy God.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xiij.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               If there ariſe among you aprophete or
a dreamer of dreames.Verſe. 1. &c.
               
                  IN the later end of the former chapter,
Moyſes had willed the people in any
wiſe to beware of the ſtrange worſhip
of heathen Gods: Now he willeth thē
to take heed of falſe teachers riſing amōg themſelues,
& ſeking to 
                     •
                  educe them frō the true worſhip
of God, that in any wiſe they do not herken
or giue credit vnto thē, The Deuil enuying the
true honor of God, doth not only ſeke to blemiſh
& ouerthrow the ſame by forain enimies,Act. 20. f. 30 1. Jo. 2. c. 19. but alſo
euē at * howe in the houſe of God he rayſeth
Falſe Doctours and teachers▪ that vnder faire
titles and goodly pretenſes of holineſſe, maye
draw the people of God from his known truth.
Wherefore Moyſes here noteth the coloures
wherewith the Deuill by his miniſters in this
caſe vſeth to deceiue mē, They wil take on them
the name of Prophetes, or ſuch as haue reuelation
from God by dreames, yea and ſometime he
will help thē by Gods ſufferance to *work ſome
ſtraunge and miraculous thing,Ma. 24 c. 24 that by ſuch a
Sy
                     •
                  ne or wonder, they maye gather the greater
credite in their falſe doctrine. Wherfore
God, here fore warneth, his faythful people to
take heede of ſuche gaye tales, and to ſuſpecte

ſuch faire pretences, and to cleaue only to hys
word,Jo. 10. c. 27. and hearken to *his voice, from whyche,
if their teachers do ſwarue, and wil them to do
that is contrary thereto, they muſt not beleeue
them, but accompt them as wicked Seducers
and deceiuers. This leſſon is ſo giuen to the Iſraelites,
that it may bee alſo an inſtruction to all
the faithfull in the Church of God at all times,
and eſpecially in theſe latter dayes, wherin the
Holy Ghoſt hath giuen warning before hand,
that Antichriſt and his miniſters ſhould vſe the
ſame meanes, and that ſo mightely, that if it
were poſſible he ſhould Seduce* euen the elect
of God.Mat. 24. c. 4 When Moyſes ſayeth, The Lorde your
God proueth you. &c. we muſt vnderſtande that
God doth not tempt or proue, of purpoſe to lead
or induce to that whiche is euill, or to lay ſtumbling
blocks, at which his people may take offence
& fall, but only by ſuch meanes to examine
and 
                     •
                  rie them & to make that knowne openly to
the World, which he knoweth to be inwardly
in their hearts whether it be good or euill. So
did God tempt Abraham Gen 22.Gen. 22. a. 2. that his faith
might be 
                     •
                  nown 
                     •
                  o al mē. So did Chriſt tempt
the womā of Chanaā,
                  Mat. 15. c. 26 whē he called hir dogge,
and refuſed to heare her praier. And for this and
doth S. Paule ſaye,1. Co. 11. d. 19 1. Cor. 11. that There muſt be

                        ••
                     ctes in the church, that they that be proued may
be knowne. For this cauſe then God ſuffereth
ſuche Soducers to be in his Churche, that by
them the Hypocrites and diſſimulers may be

tryed from the faythfull and electe Children of
God. The good man may ſome times, by ſuche
meanes, fall into errour, and be intrapped of the
wicked, but it is onely in ſome parte, and for a
time, and after returneth againe by repentance,
which god ſuffereth in him to puniſh his Negligence,
that did not beſtowe ſufficient diligence
in ſtudiyng and meditating in the word of God,
or did not Liue ſeuerely according to his profeſſion
and calling.Verſe. 5. When in the. 5. verſe, Moiſes
ſaith, And the Prophete or dreamer of dreames shal
die.
                  1. Io. 4. a. 1. 
                  &c. He declareth that we muſt not only *diſcerne
falſe teachers from other, and beware of
them, but that they muſte by the Magiſtrate be
ſeuerelie puniſhed to the example of other, leaſt
the infectiō of their corrupt Doctrine do deſtroy
the ſoules of many, and diſturbe the Churche of
God. In that he appointeth the puniſhment of
Death, we haue to note theſe circumſtaunces:
That it muſt not be executed by euery Priuate
mā,Rom. 13 a. 4. but by the Magiſtrate, who hath *Aucthoritie
giuen of God to puniſhe the wicked. That
not euery one that hath diſperſed ſome errour
to the offence of the godly, is by and by to be taken
and put to Death, but ſuch onely as be principall
Ringleaders, & ſeeke by all meanes they
can to drawe the people of God to Apoſtaſie and
forſaking of his fettled and knowen truth, and
vtterlye to ſubuert the ſame.
               And laſtly, that the Crime muſt be euidently
knowē and tried, and the partie fully conuicted.

It ſemeth to many, that it is Extremitie & trueltie
in matter of Religion & conſcience to vſe the
puniſhment of Death, and they ſaye that Chriſt
was milde and mercifull, & required his Diſciples
to folow his ſteppes. In ſo much that whē
they deſired fire to come from heauen to puniſhe
euill perſons he ſaid,Luc. 9. g. 55. 
                  They knew not of what ſpirit
they vveare, But let thoſe men conſider, that it
was the Lord of al Mercy, that appointed here
this order of puniſhment, and alſo let them remember
what extreme crueltie it is for a Magiſtrate
to whoſe charge God hath committed hys
people, to ſe the Soules of a number of his people
by wicked Doctrine or other like indeuor to
be pulled from God & hys true worſhip, and lamentablie
drawen to Hel & perpetual Damnation,
& yet not to cauſe the Roots & workers therof
to be taken awaye, that their poyſon may not
ſo largely be ſpred to the great daunger of other
and the decaie of Gods glory and truth.
               IF thy brother the ſonne of thy mother,Verſe. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. or
thine owne ſonne. &c.
               The ſame that was before ſpoken of falſe
Prophets & teachers only, is here applied euen
to euery one of ye people: whoſe offence although
it may ſeme ſomewhat the leſſe, bicauſe of their
Ignoraunce, & that they haue not the Office of
teaching, yet the Forſaking of God & his truth,
and the ſeking to miſleade other with them, is
to God alwayes and in all perſons vntollerable.

But this is to be obſerued bothe in this place &
before, that ſuch puniſhmēt is not to be vſed, but
where Gods true Religion is throughly knowē
and Settled, as it was at this time among the
Ievves. This is to be conſidered how Earneſtly
God requireth this puniſhment to be done. For
he willeth vs not to regarde eyther brother or
ſyſter,Deu. 29. c. 18 1. Jo. 3. b. 7. or childe, or wife, or any* perſons whatſoeuer
thoughe he be vnto vs as oure owne life.
Wherby he declareth how earneſt our ſtudie and
endeuour ſhould be to maintayn his True worſhip.
Al natural affections be they otherwiſe neuer
ſo cōmendable,Exo. 32. f. 27 Luc. 14. f. 26 yet ought they to *giue place
to the zeale of Gods glory & to the affection that
we ſhoulde haue to the eſtabliſhing of the ſame
among his people.Jere. 48. b. 10 Apoc. 3. c. 16 For in gods cauſe to be *ſlack
and colde in conſideratiō of theſe perſons, what
els is it, than to ſet our affections againſt Gods
commaundements, and to ſhewe that we more
eſteeme oure Naturall friends than we do God
and his Glory. Wherfore ſayth God, Thou shalt
not obey him, thine eye, which commonly is the
inſtrument of pitie, shall not ſpare him, nor take
mercye vpon him, no, nor thou shalt not hide him
or kepe him ſecrete, but cauſe him to be ſlaine: and
yet to make the charge more vehemēt he addeth
Thine hande shall be firſte vpon him to kill him.
This he ſpeaketh bicauſe the maner* was,Jo. 8. a. 5. that
in ſtoning of perſons condemned the witneſſes
ſhold caſt the firſt ſtones at them, to declare that
in their conſcience, the witneſſe was true.
               
                  
The cauſe and ende of this ſeueritye added in
the .11. verſe, is diligentlie to be marked, And all
Iſraell shall heare and feare, and shall doe no more
any ſuch vvickedneſſe. The good and godly are
ſtayed from euill throughe the loue of God and
reuerence of his worde: but the other, which are
alwaye the more parte, will not be brideled but
with* Seueritie & feare of puniſhment,Pſa. 82. d. 15 Pſa. 77. d. 38 whereby
we may learne howe neceſſary ſharpe correction
and puniſhment is in Chriſtian cōmon weales.
For ſuch is the corruption of mans nature, that
where they ſee hope of impunitie, they runne on
headlong to the greateſt miſchiefes. But by example
of puniſhment and feare of Iuſtice they
be ſomewhat ſtayed and kept in order.
               If thou ſhalt heare ſay in one of thy Cities,Verſe. 12. 13. 14. 15.
which the Lorde. &c.
               If the infection of Apoſtaſie and falling from
God, doe growe from the falſe Prophete to the
people, and from ſome of the people to a whole
Citie, God willeth the whole Citie not to be
ſpared, but to be put to puniſhmente and vtter
deſolation. For better it were that a fewe dyd
periſhe * than Gods true worſhip ſhould be ouerthrowen
and his glory decaye.Exo. 32. f. 27 But in this place
eſpecially, as in the other alſo, before Men proceede
to puniſhment, God woulde haue them
enquire and ſearche out the matter diligently,
that they dyd not vpon light report raſhly condemne

men. But if it were founde for a ſuertie,
then that they ſhould ſmite them with the edge
of the ſworde, and to declare Gods iuſte wrathe
againſt the Reuolters from his knowen truth
and right worſhip, and not to ſpare ſo muche as
their Cattell.
               And gather all the ſpoile into the middes
of the ſtreete thereof.Verſe. 16. 17. 18. &c.
               God willeth the whole furniture and Implements
of the Citie to be gathered into one place,
and burned with fire,Joſu. 6. c. 18. &c. and * not to turne any therof
vnto their owne vſe. It maye be, God ſomewhat
herein reſpected their couetouſnes, that
they might not couer a corrupt affectiō of couetouſnes
with a pretenſed zeale of Gods iuſtice.
But the principall cauſe, that Moiſes here vttereth,
that is, that the people by this might be
more accuſtomed to the hating and Deteſtation
of that whiche they ſaw God ſo greuouſly dyd
abhorre.
            
         
         
            Whitſundaye at Morning prayer.
            Deuteronomie. 16.
            
               OBſerue the moneth of newe corne, that thou mayeſt 
offer the paſſouer vnto the Lorde thy God: For in the
moneth when corne beginneth to rype, the Lorde thy
God brought thee out of Egipt by night.
               2 Thou ſhalt therfore offer the Paſſouer vnto the Lorde
thy God (of ſhéepe and oxen) in the place which the Lord ſhal

chooſe to put hys name there.Exo. 13. b. 7. Thou ſhalt eate no leauened
breade with it: but ſeuen dayes ſhalte thou eate vnleauened
breade therewith, euen the breade of tribulation (for
thou cameſt oute of the lande of Egipte in haſte) that thou
mayeſt remember the daye when thou cameſt oute of the
lande of Egipte, all the dayes of thy life.
               4 And there ſhalbe no leauened breade ſéene in all thy
coaſtes ſeuen dayes long, neither ſhall there remayne anye
thyng of the fleſhe which thou offereſt the firſte day at euen
vntyll the mornyng.
               5 Thou mayeſt not offer the Paſſouer wythin anye of
thy gates which the Lord thy God geueth thée.
               6 But in the place which the Lorde thy God ſhall chooſe
to ſet hys name in, there thou ſhalt offer the Paſſouer at
euen, about the goyng downe of the Sunne, in the ſeaſon
that thou cameſt oute of Egipte.
               
                   7 And thou ſhalte roſte and eate it in the place whiche
the Lorde thy God hathe choſen, and thou ſhalte returne
on the morowe, and goe vnto thy tentes.
               8 Sixe dayes thou ſhalte eate ſwéete breade, and the ſeuenth
daye ſhalbe a ſolempne aſſemblye before the Lorde
thy God: thou ſhalte doe no worke therin.
               9 Seuen wéekes ſhalte thou number vnto thée,Leui. 23. c. 16 Actes. 2. a. 1. and beginne
to number the ſeuen wéekes when thou beginneſt to
put the ſicle to the Corne.
               10 And kéepe the feaſt of wéekes vnto the Lord thy God,
with a frée will offering of thyne hande, whiche thou ſhalte
geue vnto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord thy God
hath bleſſed thée. 11 And thou ſhalt reioyce before the Lord
thy God, thou, and thy Sonne, thy Daughter, thy ſeruant
and thy mayde, and the Leuite that is within thy gates, and
the ſtraunger, the fatherleſſe, and the widdowe that are among
you, in the place whyche the Lorde thy God hathe
choſen to put hys name there.
               12 And remember that thou waſte a ſeruant in Egypte:

and thou ſhalte obſerue and doe theſe ordinaunces.
               13 Thou ſhalte alſo obſerue the Feaſt of Tabernacles ſeuen 
dayes, after that thou haſt gathered in thy corne and thy
wine. 14 And thou ſhalt reioyce in thy feaſt, thou and thy
ſonne, thy daughter, thy ſeruaunt, and thy maide, the Leuite,
the ſtraunger, and the fatherleſſe, and the Widowe that are
within thy gates.Exo. 23. c. 15. 15 Seuen dayes ſhalte thou kéepe a ſolemne
feaſt vnto the Lorde thy God in the place which the
Lorde ſhall chooſe: for the Lorde thy God ſhall bleſſe thée in
all thy fruites, and in all the workes of thine handes, therfore
ſhalte thou be glad. 16 Thrée times in a yéere ſhall all thy
males appeare before the Lorde thy God in the place whiche
he ſhall chooſe,Exo. 23. c. 14 in the feaſt of unleaucned because, in the feaſt
oſ weekes, and in the feaſt Tabernacles: and they ſhall not
appeare before the Lorde emptie.
               17 Euery man ſhall geue according to the gift of his hand,
and according to the bleſſing of the Lorde thy God which he
hath geuen thée. 18 Iudges and officers ſhalt thou make thée
in all thy cities which the Lord thy God geueth thée throughout
thy tribes, and they ſhal iudge the people with iuſt iudgement.
19 Wreſt not thou the lawe,Exo. 23. a. 2. Eccl. 20. d. 19 Deu. 1. c. 17. Leui. 19. c. 15 Exo. 23. b. 8. nor knowe anye perſon,
neither take anye rewarde: for giftes doe blinde the eyes
of the wyſe, and peruert the wordes of the righteous.
               20 That whiche is iuſte and righte ſhalte thou folowe,
that thou mayeſt lyue, and enioye the lande whych the Lord
thy God geueth thée.
               21 Thou ſhalte plante no groue of anye trées neare vnto
the aulter of the Lorde thy God which thou ſhalt make thée.
               22 Thou ſhalte ſet thée vp no Piller which the Lord the
God hateth.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xvj.
Chapter of Deuteronomie.
               Obſerue the moneth of newe corne,Verſe. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6. 7. 8. that
thou maieſt offer the Paſſouer. &c.
               
                  THe Iſraelites in this place are commaū
                  ded
wyth all diligence to obſerue the
three principall Feaſtes, wherein they
were appointed eſpecially to reſort to
the place, that the Lorde would chooſe, that is,
the Citie of Hieruſalem. The firſt Feaſt was the
Paſſouer, called here the Moneth of nevvecorne,
and by vs noted vnder the name of Eaſter.
               
               The ſecond was Pentecoſt, called here the Feaſt
of vveekes and by vs VVhitſontide. The thirde
was the Feaſt of Tabernacles. As touchyng the
Paſſouer, there is more large declaration of it
vpon Exodus.
                  Exo. 12. a. 1. &c. 12. redde on Eaſter day. It was ſolemniſed
the firſt moneth, that is, the moneth of
Marche, and here is called the Moneth of nevve
corne, bycauſe fruite and graine then began to
growe toward ripening. For in thoſe countries
being many degrees more Southward & narre
the ſunne, Harueſt is much ſooner than with vs
Northwarde.
               At this Feaſt beſyde other ceremonyes they
were appoynted to offer vnto God a certayne
ſmall portion of their eares of new corne, therby
confeſſyng that theyr towardneſſe of Harueſt
was of Gods onely goodnes, and alſo praying
that he would vouchſafe to proſper to their vſe,

that which was on the grounde, & for this cauſe
eſpeciallye is the tyme of this Feaſt called the
Moneth of newe corne.
                  Exo. 12. c. 16. Exo. 13. b. 6. The principall cauſe of the
Inſtitution* of the Paſſouer was to put them in
continuall remembrance of Gods maruellous
benefite in paſſing away his plague from them,
and not ſtriking them when hys Angell* killed
all the firſte borne of Egipte.
                  Exo. 12. c. 29. At this Feaſt by the
ſpace of ſeuē dayes they might eate no leauened
bread, whereby they were put in minde of their
Haſtie diſpatch out of Egipte. For albeit Pharao
was obſtinately ſet, not to let them goe, yet God
by his mighty plagues ſo Brake his harte, that
he did not onely deliuer them, but forced them to
depart with ſuch ſpede, as they coulde not abyde
to leuen their dowe, but caried it away on their
ſhoulders, Whiche their haſtie departure 
                     ••
                  s
ſome trouble to them, and thereof doth this vnleauened
bread put them in remembrance, and
for that cauſe is called here The bread of tribulation.
As for all other ceremonies appertainyng
to this Feaſt, they are expounded in the chapiter
aboue mentioned.
               Seuen weekes ſhalt thou number to thee,Verſe. 9.
and beginne to number. &c.
               From the day after that the Meaſure or Portion
of newe corne was offered vnto the Lorde,
whiche I thinke was in the ende of the Feaſt of
Paſſouer reckning ſeuē ful Sabathes or wekes

to the nexte daye after the ſeuen weekes ended
are iuſte fiftye dayes, & was the time appoynted
for the Pentecoſt, called here the Feaſt of vveekes
and in Exodus.
                  Exo. 23. c. 15 23: The Feaſt of Harueſt, and wyth
vs as I haue ſayd, is named VVhitſontide. The
firſte cauſe of the ordynance of thys Feaſte was
that they mighte remember the Libertie that
God had geuen them, and ſhewe themſelues
thankefull for the ſame. For fiftie dayes after
their comming out of Egipte, God gaue them the
Lawe in Mount Sinay, and firſt ordained them
a free State and Policie by peculiar Lawes among
themſelues, whereas before, they were in
bondage and lyued in miſerable oppreſſion vnder
the Lawes and * tyrannie of the Egiptians.
                  Exo. 1. b. 10.
An other cauſe of the Inſtitution hereof was,
that they myghte offer a newe Oblation vnto
God, that is two Loaues of new Corne baked,
as the firſt Fruites, in way of thankeſgeuing to
the Lorde: So that they did not offer onelye the
Meaſure of Newe corne before Harueſt, but Oblation
alſo towarde the ende of Harueſte. And
thereby are taughte, as We alſo ſhoulde be, that
the Fruites of Harueſte come not eyther of the
Fertilitie of the groūd, or of their owne Labour
and trauayle, but of the ſinguler Fauour and
Bleſſing of God, and therefore that they ſhould
vſe the ſame not to Ryote and Drunkēneſſe, but
wyth reuerence and * thankeſgeuyng.1. tim. 4. a. 4. The third
cauſe of the Inſtitution was, that it might be a
figure both of the true Libertie of conſcience, and

of the ſpirituall Harueſt that was to come, vnder
the true Moyſes and Deliuerer Chriſt Ieſu.
For euen as fiftye dayes after the deliuerie of
the Chyldren of Iſraell oute of Egipte they had
the Lawe geuen them in Mounte Sinay: So
the fiftieth daye after oure deliuerance from the
Tyrannie of Sinne and Sathan by the Deathe
and Reſurrection of Chriſte, (whiche was the
true* Paſſouer),1. Cor. 5. c. 7. The holye Ghoſte was ſente
downe from Heauen which myghte not onelye
wryte the eternall lawe of God in oure heartes
& make vs free Citizens of the heauenly Hieruſalem,
                  Jo. 20. e. 21. Act. 10. g. 42 Pſa. 146. a. 2. Pſa. 49. a. 5. Mar. 13. d. 27
but alſo by the Apoſtles and other good
Miniſters & labourers, might* gather together
the Spirituall Harueſt of God throughoute the
whole worlde, and that all Faithfull might receyue
the firſte Fruites of the benefytes of hys
Deathe and Reſurrection. We do not therfore
Obſerue this day ſuperſticiouſly, bicauſe the like
was ordeined among the Iewes, But for that it
is an ordinarie time appoynted for the people of
God to aſſemble & heare the declaration of thoſe
maruellous workes of God, which as at thys
tyme were done after the Aſcention of Chriſte
into Heauen. For then dyd Chriſte declare and
confirme the Maieſtie and trueth of hys Goſpell
wyth wonderfull Miracles, So that it
was euidente that he onelye was the trewe
Meſsias and Sauioure that the ſame Holy Ghoſt
had ſpoken of manye yeares before vnto the
Patriarkes, and Prophetes.
               
                  
And bycauſe at the tyme of Pentecoſt when the
Holye Ghoſt was giuen, the Goſpell firſte began
to be publiſhed, we may not thinke that one
or two Feſtiuall dayes is appointed for the perfourmance
thereof: but from that firſt Pentecoſt
vntill the worldes ende, ſhould be to vs one perpetuall
VVhitſonday, in which we ſhould wyth
thankeſgiuing reioyce for our ſpiritual fredome,
and take in the fruites of Chriſts bleſſed Paſſion
and Reſurrection.
               Thou ſhalte obſerue alſo the feaſt of the
Tabernacles ſeuen dayes.Verſe. 13. &c.
               This Feaſt of the Tabernacles or Tentes was
Solemniſed the .15. of September, when they
had not gathered in all their fruites, graine, and
wine. All the tyme of this Feaſt for the ſpace of
ſeuen dayes they dwelt in Tentes or Bowthes
of grene trees,Num. 28. Num. 29. Leuit. 23. and obſerued ſundry ceremonies
and oblations declared Num. 28. 29. Leuit. 23. and
other where. The cauſes of the ordinance were
partly to put them in mind of their former Condition,
Whence they came, and that it was God
that firſte made them to dwell in Tentes in the
wilderneſſe, whē he brought them out of Egipt.
               
               Secondlye, that they mighte remember the
wonderfull miracles and benefites that God
did in maintayning and Preſeruing them vntill
they came into the lande of Chanaan, where
they founde in ſteede of Tentes and Tabernacles,
                  
goodlye ſtrong Cities, and faire houſes to inhabite:
and by this occaſion were they willed
to compare the Felicitie that they ſhoulde be
in the land of Chanaā
                   with the Neceſſity & hard
ſtate that they had before, when they were conſtrained
to inhabite in Bouthes & Tabernacles,
and thereby learne not to waxe inſolent, but to
giue thankes to God the Authour of that great
bleſſing. None of theſe Feaſtes might be Solemniſed
in any place but where the Lord had choſē
                  to
ſet his name, & would eſpecially be called vpō,
& that as I haue ſaid, in the time of Dauid, was
Hieruſalē, Before that, where the Tabernacle of
God was.
               Iudges and officers ſhalt thou make thee
in all thy Cities which the Lord.Verſe. 18. 19. 20. &c.
               Now Moiſes addeth certaine politicall orders
and inſtructions for choiſe of cōuenient Magiſtrates
in their common weale, and for the ſincere &
vpright dealing therin. For ſeing the Iudgemēt
Seate of y• 
                  Magiſtrate is, as it were a ſanctuary
& a place of reliefe & ſuccour for the ſuccourleſſe,
the poore and needy, and other whatſoeuer perſons
oppreſſed by iniurie, it might ſeme moſt lamentable,
if they comming thither for ſuccour,
ſhuld light vpō Theues & Robbers, that wil ſell
right for gaine and money. Therfore Moiſes willeth
Magiſtrates & Iudges in anye wiſe to beware
of* Partialitie & Briberie,Deu. 1. c. 17. as y• thing that ſhutteth
vp the eyes of diſcretion and wiſedome, and

corrupteth al true Iudgement. For ſaith he, Gifts
doe blind the eyes of the vviſe, and peruerte the wordes
of the righteous.
               
               Thou ſhalte plante no Groues of anye
trees neere vnto thee.Verſe. 21. 22. &c.
               The heathen vſed to plante Groues of wood
about the Chappels of their Idols, & ſometime
made Pillars to ſet their falſe Gods on, wherefore
bicauſe God will haue his Religion not to agree
with the Idolatours worſhip of the Gentils,
he briefely forbiddeth thoſe two things.
            
         
         
            Trinitie Sundaye at Morning
prayer.
            Geneſis. 18.
            
               
                   ANd the Lord appeared vnto him in ye plaine of Mamre:
and he ſate in his tent doore in the heate of the day.Heb. 13. b
               
               2 And he lift vp his eyes and loked, and lo, thrée men
ſtoode by him: and when he ſawe them, he ranne to meete
them from the Tent doore, and bowed himſelfe towarde the
ground: 3 And ſaid, Lorde, if I haue now founde fauour in
thy ſight, paſſe not away I pray thée from thy ſeruant.
               4 Let a litle-water I praye you be fet, & waſhe your féete,
and refreſhe your ſelues vnder the trée.
               5 And I will fet a morſell of bread to comfort your heartes
withall, and then ſhall you goe your wayes: for therfore are
ye come to your ſeruant. And they ſaid, Doe as thou haſt ſaid.
               6 And Abraham went apace into the Tent vnto Sara, and
ſaid, Make redy at once thrée meaſures of fine meale, kneade
(it) and make cakes vpon the hearth.
               
                  
7 And Abraham running vnto his beaſtes, fet a calfe tender
and good, and gaue it vnto a young man: and he haſted to 
make it ready at once. 8 And he toke butter and milke, and
the calfe which he had prepared, and ſet it before them, and
ſtoode himſelfe by them vnder the trée: and they did eate.
               9 And they ſaide vnto him, Where is Sara thy wife? He
anſwered, Beholde, in the Tent.
               10 And he ſaid,Gen. 17. c. 19. I will certainely returne vnto thée if I liue:
and ſo, Sara thy wife ſhall haue a ſonne.Gene. 21. a. 1. That hearde Sara
in the Tent doore, which was behinde him.
               11 Abraham and Sara were both olde, & well ſtricken in
age: and it ceaſſed to be with Sara after the manner as it is
with women. 12 Therefore Sara laughed within her ſelfe,
ſaying, Now I am waxed olde, ſhall I geue my ſelfe to luſte,
and my Lord olde alſo.
               13 And God ſaide vnto Abraham, Wherefore did Sara
laugh, ſaying, Shall I of a ſuertie beare a childe, whiche am
olde? 14 Is anye thing vnpoſſible to God? According to the
time appoynted will I returne vnto thée if I liue: and Sara
(ſhall) haue a ſonne. 15 Then Sara denyed it, ſaying, I 
laughed not: for ſhe was afraide. And he ſaide, It is not ſo,
but thou didſt laugh.
               16 And the men riſing vp from thence, loked toward Sodome:
and Abraham went with them to bring them on the
waye. 17 And the Lorde ſayde, Shall I hyde from Abraham
that thyng whiche I doe,
               18 Seyng that Abraham ſhall ſurely be a greate and a
mightie nation, and all the nations of the earth ſhalbe bleſſed
in him?Gene. 12. a. 3. 19 I knowe this alſo, that he will commaunde hys
children and his houſholde after him, that they kepe the way
of the Lord, and to doe iuſtice and iudgement, that the Lorde
maye bryng vpon Abraham that he hath ſpoken vnto him.
               20 And the Lorde ſayde, Becauſe the crye of Sodome
and Gomorrhe is greate, and becauſe their ſinne is excéeding
gréeuous.
               
                  
21 I will goe downe now, and ſée whether they haue done
altogether according to that crye which is come vnto me: and
if not, I will knowe. 22 And the men departed thence, and
went to Sodomewarde: but Abraham ſtoode yet before the
Lord. 23 And Abraham drew neare, and ſaid, Wilte thou
alſo deſtroy the righteous with the wicked?
               24 If there be fiftie righteous within the Citie, wilte thou
deſtroye, and not ſpare the place for the fiftie righteous that
are therin? 25 That be farre from thée that thou ſhouldeſt
do after this maner, and ſlay the righteous with the wicked,
and that the righteous ſhould be as the wicked, that be farre
 from thée: Shall not the iudge of all the world doe according
to right? 26 And the Lord ſaide, If I finde in Sodome fiftie
righteous within the citie, I will ſpare all the place for their
ſakes. 27 And Abraham aunſwering, ſayd, Behold I haue
taken vpon me to ſpeake vnto the Lord, which am but duſt
and aſſhes: 28 If there ſhall lacke fiue of fiftie righteous,
wilt thou deſtroy all the citie for (lacke) of fiue? And he ſaide,
If I finde there fortie and fiue I will not deſtroy them.
               29 And he procéeded to ſpeake vnto him againe, and ſaide,
What if there ſhalbe fortie founde there? He aunſwered, I
will not doe it for forties ſake.
               30 He ſaid vnto him againe, Oh let not my Lord be angry
that I ſpeake: What if there ſhall thirtie be founde there?
And he ſaide, I will doe nothing if I finde thirtie there.
               31 He ſaide againe, O ſée I haue taken vpon me to ſpeake
now alſo vnto my Lord: What if there ſhalbe twentie found
there? He aunſwered, I will not deſtroye (them) for twenties
ſake. 32 And he ſayd, Oh let not my Lord be angry, & I wil
ſpeake yet but this once: What if ten ſhalbe found there? He
anſwered, I will not deſtroy (them) for tennes ſake.
               33 And the Lord went his way aſſoone as he had left communing
with Abraham: and Abraham (alſo) returned vnto
his place.
            
            
               
               The expoſition vpon the .xviij.
Chapter of Geneſis.
               And the Lorde appeared vnto him in
the plaine of Memre.Verſe. &c.
               
                  THis Chapter ſheweth how God appered
by his angels vnto his ſeruant
Abraham: Then how Abraham inuited
and entertayned the Angels, thinking
them at the firſt to haue ben Men, as they
appeared. And laſtly, howe the Angels reuealed
to him the purpoſe of God to deſtroy Sodom,
and what talke Abraham had with them.
               If we loke to the time of this appearāce, it may
be thought it was ſhortely after Abraham had
circumciſed himſelfe and all his. And thereby
haue we to learne how diligent and * readie the
prouidence of God is to Viſit,Luk. 15. e. 20 Comfort, & Confirme
ſuch as by true faith and obedience, haue
ſubmitted themſelues vnto his Religiō, & holy
ordinaunces. The chiefe cauſe of the ſending of
theſe angels vnto Abraham, was to confirme to
him and his wife Sarah, the promiſe that he had
made him of a Chyld by her,Gen. 17. c. 16. of whom the Bleſſed
ſeede ſhould deſcende. By the way alſo he reueleth
to him the deſtruction of Sodome and Gomorrha.
Why it pleaſed God to ſende three Angels,
& not two, or one, we muſt not with vayne
curioſitie ſearch. It is not wicked to think that
he reſpected therin the myſterie of the holy Trinitie,
as many of the anciente Fathers haue

writtē: but whether that agree with the Simplicitie
of the hiſtorie, I leaue to the iudgement
of the godly.
               In Abraham we haue an example of a godly
& willing deſire to entertain Strangers, and
to relieue them, which is not vnfruteful for vs
to conſider. Firſt therefore Abraham ſate at his
Tent dore in the heate of the day, vndoubtedly
not of Idlenes, but of purpoſe to eſpie if any trauailers
paſſed by, that he might entreate them
to ſtay and take ſome reliefe. And therfore whē
he ſaw the Angels, thinking them to haue ben
Men, He ran vnto thē, He might haue called to
them, or ſent a ſeruant, but in running himſelfe,
appeared a more godly willingneſſe. And when
he came vnto them, he bowed himſelfe with all
humbleneſſe, though he had neuer ſeene thē before,
and called the one of them by the name of
Lord for reuerēce, thinking him happily a worthier
perſon than the two other. If (ſayth he) I
haue found fauour in thy ſight, paſſe not away. &c.
So ready was this godly father to * liberalitie
in entertainement,Job. 31 d. 32. 3. Jo. a. 5. 6. that he ſignifieth, they ſhuld
rather do him a pleaſure, than receiue any benefite
at his hād, and that it were a reproch to him
if they did not vouchſafe to tarie with him. The
things that he promiſed them were but ſmal, A
little water to wash their feete, and a morſell of bread
to comforte thē. Which he doth to that end, that
their modeſtie and baſhfulneſſe might not think
that they ſhuld be chargeable and burdenous to

him, & ſo be the lother to tarie. Mē in thoſe coū
                  tries
vſed to trauaile cōmonly bare footed, and
therfore was it eaſe and comforte to wayfaring
men to * waſh their feete.1. Ti. 5. b. 10. The place whither he
biddeth thē to reſt thēſelues was vnder a tree.
Such was the ſimplicitie of y• anciēt time, they
had not yet takē vp the waſting of their ſubſtāce
in building of Gay houſes & gorgeous parlers.
               This Reuerende Patriarke and father of the
faithful, whom god vſed ſo familiarly with his
angels, dwelt in a Tent or Tabernacle, & had no
houſe at all,1. Pet. 2. b. 11 Heb. 13. c. 14 to declare y• he was but a *pilgrime
in this land, and had no place of long abiding.
               And they ſaide,Ver. 5. 6. 7. 8. do as thou haſt ſaid, and
Abraham went apace. &c.
               Forſomuch as it was the pleaſure of god, that
it ſhould not yet be knowne, what the Angels
were, as Abraham was ready and willing to
offer them ſuch things as were for the reliefe of
wayfaring mē, as he toke them to be: ſo do they
will him to do as he had ſpoken, concealing as
yet, that they were the Angels and meſſengers
of God ſent vnto him. And Abraham in making
the prouiſiō, ſheweth the ſame humblenes & ready
good will, that he declared in the bidding. He
wēt apace to Sarah into the Tent, He ran vnto the
beaſtes, He fet a tender and a good calfe, He prouided
all that he had ſpoken, not onely of the beſt,
but with ſpeed. For as he knew it to be curteſie
to entertayne ſtraungers: ſo hee thoughte it

no good manner to cauſe them to tarie longer,
than happily the neceſſitie of theyr buſyneſſe
woulde ſuffer them. As wel by the place before
mentioned, as by the reſidue of this Entertainment,
we may learne, that the worlde was not
yet growen to ſuch a nicitie, tenderneſſe, and delicacie
in feeding, & other furniture, as by Senſualitie
men ſince that are come vnto, and eſpecially
in theſe latter dayes.
               Here ſome moue queſtion how the Angels
did eate, or whether they did eat or no? Seing
that they be celeſtial Spirits, and haue no Bodies,
that neede ſuſtenance and feeding: ſurely
Godly Chriſtians muſt not in ſuch queſtions be
curious. As gods pleaſure was, that they ſhuld
be taken as men for the time: So of his diuine
power, whiche dayly worketh ſtrange things,
he had prouided bodies for them to walke in,
and with the ſame bodyes did they eat, althogh
their Spiritual ſubſtance needed no ſuſtenance.
And when their appointed offices were done,
the meate and drinke vaniſhed away togyther
with the Bodies.
               And they ſayde vnto him, where is Sarah
thy wife,Verſ. 9. 10. 11. he anſwereth. &c.
               In the former Chapiter we reade, that Abraham
had receyued a manifeſt declaration of the
promiſe of a Sonne by Sarah his wyfe. This
promiſe vndoubtedlye Abraham beleeued, but

                  Sarah did not, as may appeare by this place. And
therefore the Angell of God aſketh for Sarah,
thereby to haue an occaſion to renewe and confirme
that promiſe, and alſo to reproue Sarahs in
credulitie, who meaſured the promiſes of God
by the *likelyhoodes of natur all power.Luk. 1. d. 34. When
the Angell ſaid, that at his returne, Sarah ſhuld
haue a Chylde, it may be thought, that Sarah liſtened
behinde the Tente doore, what talke the
Strangers had with hir huſbande. Wherein
ſhe by example declareth, how hard a matter it
is, to haue euē the honeſteſt and moſt chaſt Matrones
to leaue al maner of womanly Curioſitie.
Although as a modeſt and ſober wife ſhe
ſtayed within the Tent, and came not foorth to
ſhew hir ſelfe vnto the ſtrangers: yet could ſhe
not ouercome this tentation of curious deſire to
knowe what was ſpoken. When Sarah he arde
the Angel ſay ſhe ſhold haue a childe, ſhe laughed
at it as a vaine and vnlikely thing, and therin
vndoubtedly did greatly offēd. For ſhe might
well knowe that promiſe came from God, being
ſo well agreeing with that which was ſpoken
to hir huſband not long before. And therefore by
vnlikelyhode of nature, to deride it as falſe, was
in hir much raſhnes. But that which followeth
was of womanly Baſhfulneſſe, when ſhe beeing
charged, for hir laughing beeing ſome what
aſtonied doth denie it. Sarah laughed, not aloude
as the maner of diſſolute women is, but ſoftly
within hir ſelfe. When it is ſaide, It ceaſed to bee

vvith Sarah, after the Maner as it is with VVomen:
The meaning is, ſhe had not thoſe ſuperfluities
that all women naturally haue, ſo long as they
by age may haue children. As hir Chaſtitie is to
be reuerenced, ſo was it a great blame and fault
in hir not only to * Miſtruſt the promiſe of god,Baru. 1. d. 18.
but alſo to Laugh it to ſcorne, bycauſe it ſeemed
vnlikely to naturall Reaſon.
               And the men riſing vp from thence looked
toward Sodome.Verſe. 16. 17. 18. 19. &c.
               Abraham perfourmeth that, whiche is the
third parte of Hoſpitalitie, that is, Courteſie in
diſmiſſing his geſts. He taketh not his leaue of
them at his Tent, but perceiuing their iourney
toward Sodom, went part of the way with thē,
which his paines God well requited, opening to
him by his Angell the purpoſe to deſtroy Sodom
for the horrible ſinne and wickedneſſe thereof.
Shall I (ſaith the Lord) Hide from Abraham that
thing whiche I doe: ſeeyng that Abraham shall
ſurely be. &c. It may be that one of the Angells
to whome Abraham in all this ſtorie had directed
his ſpeech, vttered theſe words in the hearing
of Abraham Wherin he noteth two cauſes
why he wold reueale this thīg vnto him. The
one is the great preheminence of that promiſe,
that he had made to him before time of the Increaſe
and multiplying of his ſeede. Seing ſaith
he, that Abraham shall ſurely be a mighty Nation.
                  
The other is, For that he knewe him to be ſo
godly a man as woulde not only himſelfe liue
in Iuſtice and iudgemente, but alſo woulde. Inſtruct
his children, and Houſhold To keepe the
way of the Lord.
               
               By thys, Godly Parentes maye learne,
that it is theyr Office and duetie to ſee theyr
families * inſtructed and taughte,Eph. 6. 
                        •
                     . 4. and that in
the Way of the Lorde, and to be Carefull for
them, that they may not onely liue vertuouſly
and godly while they be children and ſeruants
vnder them, but after their life too.
               But Fathers now a dayes are farre from
this care. They deuiſe howe to * leaue theyr
chyldren Ryche and Wealthye,Pſa. 16. d. 16 but of the Inſtruction
and teachyng how to keepe the way
of the Lorde they haue, God knoweth, ſo ſmall
regard as thoughe it did Nothyng appertayne
vnto them.
               And the Lord ſaide,Verſ. 20. 21. becauſe the crie of
Sodome and Gomorha is greate. &c.
               There is a double Crie that ſoundeth in the
eares of the Lorde. The one is the crie of Wickedneſſe
and Sinne, and that is it the Angell
here ſpeaketh of: The wickedneſſe of Sodome
Cried vnto God, that is, was ſo great that it
required▪ Wrath and vengeance from God.
               Sometyme the Bloud of the oppreſſed and
afflicted Sainctes of GOD, dothe in lyke
manner Crye vnto hym. For ſo dydde the

bloud of Abel crie vnto the Lorde.
               When the Scripture ſayth, that God commeth
Down to ſee or know any thing, we may
not thinke that there is eyther Mouing of place
or want of Knowledge in God. But then God
is ſayde to come Downe, when he doth applye
himſelfe to worke ſomewhat to oure behoofe,
And then he is ſayd to come to Knowe or See,
when hee ſo Worketh, that eyther Men or his
Angels may know. God right well knew that
the Sinne of Sodome after his long Pacience &
Suffring, was come to full ripeneſſe: but hee
ſent downe his Angels, that not only Abraham
and Loth, but the Whole world alſo by their
puniſhment, ſhould vnderſtande how greeuous
and deteſtable their ſynne was in the ſighte of
God.
               And Abraham drewe neere and ſayde,Verſ. 23. 24. 25. &c.
wilt thou alſo deſtroy the righteous. &c.
               The Saintes of God are alway Louers of
mankynde and are greeued to vnderſtande of
the Plague and Puniſhmente euen of the
wicked, whome wyth all their heartes they
would wiſhe rather to Liue and Repente, than
to dye in their ſinnes. Therfore Abraham here
vnderſtanding by the Angell, that the Viſitation
of Sodome, and thoſe other Cities was at
hande, ſheweth himſelf very careful for them,
and as it were by the remembrance of thoſe
good and iuſt mē that might be in it, doth moue

God to haue pitie on them, and to ſpare their
plague. Good men doe not quickely diſpaire of
any, ſeeme they neuer ſo euill. And therfore Abraham
thought, in ſo great a Multitude, that
there muſt needes haue ben ſome mean number
of good men, for whoſe cauſe God wold extend
his mercie alſo vpō the other. If there had ben
iuſt men in Sodome, they muſt haue ben perſons
vncircumciſed, and no partakers of the couenāt
of God. And yet this Reuerend Patriarke being
himſelfe a iuſt man, circumciſed, of the aſſured
couenant with God, and the Father of the
Faithful, did not in reſpect of himſelf contemne
ſuche, but made that accompte of them, that,
if there had bene ſuche, he would haue God to
haue ſpared the wicked for their ſakes.
               In Abraham talking with God, we ſee a certain
ſtrife between the Charitie and Loue that
was in him toward the Sodomires, and the conſideration
of his own humbleneſſe and vnworthyneſſe
in the ſight of God. His Charitie moued
him to intreate for them. But the conſideration
of his owne vnworthineſſe, beeing but
duſte and aſhes, did on the other parte abaſhe
hym, and therefore doth ſo often deſire pardon
of his ſpeeche.
               What if tenne ſhall bee founde there?Verſe. 32.
He anſwered, I will not deſtroy. &c.
               Some may doubt why Abraham deſcended
not to a ſmaller number of ſixe or foure, but

ſtayed at ten. But it may be, that he was ſtayed
with Modeſtie and 
                     •
                  aſh fulneſſe, hauing ſo often
before excuſed his boldneſſe. Or elſe whē he perceyued
the Angell to yelde to tenne, he thought
it were vnlikely, that in ſo Great a companie,
there ſhould not be that number of Iuſt men.
               Or elſe vnderſtanding by the Angel, that there
were not tenne, he did not iudge them Worthie
to be preſerued by Gods mercie, and therefore
ſo ſtayed himſelfe. But whatſoeuer the cauſe
hereof was, This is of Gods exceeding great
Mercies, and a ſingular Comforte to the Iuſt
and godly, that the Angel of God, in puniſhing
the wicked, ſhall not only Fynde them out, and
Preſerue them,Gen. 19. 6. 16. as appeareth by * Loth, but alſo
in reſpecte of a ſmal number of them, will ſpare
the Sinfull and wicked, that they may haue lō
                  ger
* tyme to Repent.Sap. 11. d. 24.
               
               This Horrible wickedneſſe of the Sodomites,
did not at once encreaſe to ſo greate an outrage,
as it may before be perceyued by the Angell,
but firſt began Riot and Seuſualitie, thorough
Wealth and plentie of Gods benefites.
Then followed Pryde, Crueltie, and Vnmercyfulneſſe.
And laſtly Induratiō, with Contempt
of God, and all godlie Aduertiſementes, ſo that
they * gaue themſelues ouer to all Fylthyneſſe
euen with Delight.Eph. 4. d. 19
               
               And the Lord went his way ſo ſoone as
he had lefte communing with.Verſe. 33. &c.
               
                  
The other two Angels are mentioned before,
Verſ. 22. to haue departed toward Sodome,
but this thirde, to whom Abraham had directed
his talke, taried with him vntill this tyme.
               So that we haue here a teſtimonie of Gods
great goodneſſe, who wold not haue his Angel
departe, before that Abraham had finiſhed euen
his Laſt demaund. And then Abraham alſo departed
homewarde, beeing vndoubtedly very
penſiue and ſorie for the plague that ſhould fall
vpon the inhabitantes of Sodome and Gomorrha.
But in the meane tyme, they themſelues,
whome this thing ſhoulde haue moſte nighely
touched, were drowned in deepe Securitie, and
delighting in filthie pleaſure, to fulfil the ſame,
aſſaulted the houſe of iuſt Loth,
                  Luc. 12. c. 20. Pſa. 72. c. 19. Ecc. 5. b. 7. Eſai. 30. c. 13 to pul foorth the
Strāgers that were with him. Thus * ſodainly,
when the ſinfull leaſt thinke of it, doth their
Plague fall vpon their heads, by the iuſt iudgement
of God.
            
         
         
            Trinitie Sundaye at Euening
prayer.
            The firſte Chapiter of Ioſuah.
            
               AFter the death of Moyſes the ſeruaunt of the Lorde,
it came to paſſe, that the Lorde ſpake vnto Ioſuah, the
ſonne of Nun, Moyſes miniſter, ſaying:
               2 Moyſes my ſeruant is dead: nowe therefore aryſe, goe
ouer this Iordane, thou and all this people, vnto the lande

the which I to them (the children of Iſraell) doe giue.
               3 All the places that the ſoales of your féete ſhall treade
vpon, haue I giuen you, as I ſayde vnto Moyſes.
               4 From the wilderneſſe and this Libanon, vnto the great
riuer Euphrates,Deu. 11. c. 24 Joſu. 14. b. 9. all the lande of the Hethites, euen to the
great ſea towarde the goyng downe of the Sunne, ſhall be
youre coaſt. 5 There ſhall not a man be able to withſtand
thée all the dayes of thy lyfe:Joſue. 3. b. 9. for as I was with Moyſes, ſo
will I be with thée, and wil not fayle thée, nor forſake thée.
               6 Bée ſtrong therefore and bolde:Gen. 4. c. 16. Deu. 31. d. 23 for vnto this people
ſhalt thou deuide the lande for inheritance, whiche I ſware
vnto their fathers to giue them.
               7 Only be thou ſtrong, and of a ſtoute courage, that thou
mayſte obſerue and doe according to all the lawe whyche
Moyſes my ſeruaunte commaunded thée:Deu. 5. c. 32. turne from the
ſame neyther to the ryght hande, nor to the lefte, that thou
maiſt doe wyſely in all that thou takeſt in hande.
               8 Let not the booke of this law depart out of thy mouth,Deu. 17. d. 19 Nu. 32. d. 20
but occupie thy mynd therin day and night, that thou maiſt
obſerue and doe according to all that is written therein, for
then ſhalt thou make thy way proſperous, and then ſhalte
thou doe wiſely. 9 Haue not I commanded thée that thou
ſhouldeſt be ſtrong and hardie, and not feare, nor be faynte
hearted? For I the Lorde thy God am with thée, whether
ſoeuer thou goeſt. 10 Then Ioſuah cōmanded the officers
of the people, ſaying. 11 Go through the middes of the hoſt,
& cōmaunde the people, ſaying: Prepare you vitailes: for after
thrée days ye ſhall paſſe ouer this Iordane, to goe in and
enioy the land which the Lord your God giueth you to poſſeſſe
it. 12 And vnto the Rubenites, Gadites, and halfe the
tribe of Manaſſes ſpake Ioſuah, ſaying: 13 Remember the
worde whiche Moyſes the ſeruante of the Lorde commanded
you, ſaying: The Lord youre God hath giuen you reſt,
and hathe giuen you this lande. 14 Youre wyues, youre
chyldren, and youre cattell ſhall remayne in the lande

which Moyſes gaue you on this ſide Iordane: but ye ſhal go
before your brethren armed, all that be men of warre, and
helpe them: 15 Vntill the Lorde haue giuen youre brethren
reſt as he hath you, and vntyll they alſo haue obteyned
the land whiche the Lorde your God geueth them, and 
then ſhall ye retourne vnto the land of your poſſeſſion, and
enioy it, whiche (land) Moyſes the Lords ſeruant gaue you
on this ſide Iordane toward the ſunne riſing.
               16 And they aunſwered Ioſuah,Jere. 42. a. 5. ſaying, All that thou
haſt commaunded vs we will doe: and whither ſoeuer thou
ſendeſt vs we will go.
               17 According as wée obeyed Moyſes in all thyngs, ſo
will wée obey thée: onely the Lorde thy God be with thée,
as he was with Moyſes.
               18 And whoſoeuer he be that doth diſobey thy mouth, and
will not hearken vnto thy words in all that thou commandeſt
him, let him die: only be ſtrong, and of good courage.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the firſte
Chapter of Ioſuah.
               After the death of Moyſes the ſeruant
of the Lorde,Verſe. 1. 2. it came to paſſe. &c.
               
                  THe fyrſte Chapiter of the Booke of
Ioſuah conteyneth three parts. Firſt,
the Calling & Comforting of Ioſuah:
ſecondly, the accepting of the Charge
by Ioſuah, and thirdely, the Submiſſion of the
people vnto his gouernement.
               After what manner God ſpake to Ioſuah
                  
at this tyme, it is not in the Scripture expreſſed:
whether it were by inwarde inſpiration,
or by viſion, or by the miniſterie of an Angell, or
ſome good man. Only we haue to vnderſtand,
that the wordes here vttered to Ioſuah, proceeded
from God, and from hys authoritie, and
teache vs theſe good leſſons.
               Firſte, that Moyſes the good ſeruant of God
dyed, and went the common waye of all fleſhe,
and therfore that we,Pſa. 88. g. 47 Job. 10. d. 20 Phil. 1. d. 23. that folow, may not looke
for any * perpetuitie or long continuance in this
life, but muſt loke and * long alway for the bleſſedneſſe
and Happie eſtate of the Lyfe to come,
where Death ſhall * ende his kingdome bothe
of Soule and Bodie.1. Co. 15. g. 54 Secondly, wee are inſtructed,
what to iudge of Moyſes, after his
death, and by him of all other the Saintes of
God, that is, to Iudge thē the good ſeruāts of
God, and the bleſſed Miniſters of his vneſtimable
Benefites towarde Mankinde: but yet
not ſo, that wee make them Gods by worſhipping
of them, by putting truſt and confidence in
them, and by calling on them in the time of our
diſtreſſe.Eſai. 42. b. 8. For thoſe pointes of * honor belongeth
to God alone, & can not be giuen to other without
manifeſt perill of Idolatrie. And therefore
it may be thought, that the prouidence of God
did hide and keepe ſecrete the bodie of Moyſes
from the Ievves,
                  Deu. 34. b. 6 
                  Deut. 34. that they myghte not
haue that occaſion to abuſe it to Idolatrie.
               Thirdly, wee haue to obſerue by the example

of Moyſes, that albeit God ſometyme doth
puniſh good mē temporally for offences cōmitted,
yet he doth not perpetually reiect them, but
after their death acknowledgeth thē for his ſeruants,Nu. 20. b. 12 Nu. 27. c. 14 Deu. 1. f. 37.
as he did here call Moyſes, notwithſtanding
that for his miſtruſt at ye * Waters of ſtrife,
he did cut him off frō enioying yt lād of promiſe.
               Fourthly, lette vs learne, That when good
Princes or Magiſtrates be taken away, that it
is in the hand of God to * place others,Eccle. 10. a. 4 and that
his diuine Prouidence hath ſingular care therof:
as we may vnderſtand, as wel by this place
as by a number of other examples in the ſcriptures.
God puniſhed Nabuchadnezer.
                  Dan. 4. g. 34 
                  Daniel. 4.
Vntill he vnderſtode that the moſte high ruled in
the kingdom of men, and gaue it to vvhō he luſted.
               
               All the places that the ſoales of youre
feete ſhall treade vpon.Verſe. 3. 4. &c.
               In this place, the Lord as it were, boūdeth
out that land & countrey, that by his promiſe he
gaue to the ſeede and iſſue of Abraham. On the
Eaſt part, vnto the great riuer Euphrates, vnto
which the bounds of the dominion of the Ievves
were extended vnder Dauid, and Salomon, and
not before. On the Weſt, with the great Sea,
that is, the middle Sea, whiche is here called
Great, in compariſon of thoſe pooles, which in
the Hebrue tongue are called Seas, as the Sea of
Tyberias, On the Northe, with Mounte Libanus,
On the Southe, wyth the Deſertes of

                  Arabia, and the Countrie of Aegypte. In theſe
bounds is cōteined the whole land of Chanaan.
               
               There ſhal not a man be hable to withſtand
thee all the dayes of thy life.Verſe. 5. 6. &c.
               Forſomuche as Ioſuah might iuſtely be abaſhed
to take vpon him that Charge, and gouernement,
whiche beſides the way wardneſſe
of the people, was ioyned with ſo greate Difficultie
and * danger,Exo. 17. b. 4 it pleaſeth God in this place
to Comfort and ſtrengthen hym with the aſſured*
promiſe of his aſſiſtāce,Heb. 13. a. 5. and good Succeſſe
in his doings againſt all his enimies whatſoeuer
they be. Out of which words al good Princes,
Magiſtrates, & Officers, may gather ſingular
inſtruction of comfort, to Animate them
againſt the difficulties & troublous Storms of
their charge, which are ſuch, as oftētimes hath
cauſed euē Heathen perſons rather to deſire to
liue a Priuate life, than to abide the hazard and
daunger thereof. And ſurely, there is no State
of men that needeth ſo greate comforte of the
Prouidence and care of Almightie GOD for
them, as Princes and Magiſtrates do. Their
office is not only to * Eſtabliſh and Spread the
true Religion and worſhipping of God,4. Re. 23. a. 3. 4. re. 22. b. 13 1. Re. 23. a. 4. Jere. 22. a. 3. but
alſo to * repreſſe the contrarie. To make and
defende good lawes agaynſt all kynde of enormities.
To iudge iuſtly, and to defende the
cauſe of the poore and innocente, againſte the
violence and iniurie of the oppreſſoure. Yea

and oftentimes to leuie warre either againſte
the * foraine enemies,2. Sa. 10. b. 12 2. reg. 20. a. 6 or to repreſſe wicked and
rebellious * ſubiectes, which things if they doe
faithfully and diligentlye, it cannot be but they
ſhall caſt themſelues into ſo great perils & daungers,
as will greatly abaſhe and trouble them, if
by this place and ſuche other they doe not * conceaue
an aſſured truſt in the helpe and aſſiſtaunce
of God,Pſa. 118.. 50. 2. reg. 22. a. 1. whoſe Magiſtrates and Officers they be.
For this cauſe doth God ſo oftē repeate here vnto
Ioſue, that he ſhould be Strong, and Stoute, and
Bolde, and of good Courage, for that he vvould be
vvith him, and not faile him in anie diſtreſſe. &c.
               
               Onlie be thou ſtrong,Verſe. 7. 8. and of a ſtoute courage,
that thou mayest obſerue. &c.
               Aboue all things God will haue a Prince or
Magiſtrate to be conſtante, earneſt, and of ſtoute
courage in the obſeruation and maintenance of
his holy lawe, and ſo to cleaue to his word, that
he depart not from it, Either on the right hand, by
adding Superſtitious holines vnto it, Either on
the lefte hande, by Altering or Diminiſhyng any
thing therin conteined. For this cauſe doth he ſo
ſtraitely charge Ioſua in thys place to bende his
ſtudie eſpecially to his lawe, and to occupie his
minde therin both daye and nighte. By whych
wordes their * wicked errour is reproued,Pſa. 118. 24. 92. 104. which
bothe dehorte Princes from the Study of the
Scriptures, as a thyng not fitte for them, and

alſo pull from them the charge to ſee vnto the
Maintenance of true Religion and Holineſſe, as
a matter that litle belongeth to their office. But
God here doth not onely require it of Ioſue, but
alſo addeth a promyſe, that So he shall doe vviſelie,
in all that he taketh in hand, and make his vvaies
and doyngs proſperous.
               
               Then Ioſuah commaunded the Officers
of the people,Verſe. 10. 11. ſaying. &c.
               This is the ſecond part of the chapiter, wherin
Ioſuah vndertaketh the office, and ſheweth
example of his Faith and Obedience to the calling
of almightie God. For albeit there mighte
appeare many things in ſighte of the worlde to
deterre him from it, yet, becauſe he had the calling
of God and the promiſe of his aſſiſtaunce, he
cleaueth to that, and is not driuen backe wyth
the apparance of anye worldlye daunger like to
fall vnto him. Vpon this Pillar ought all good
Princes to ſtaye themſelues in their calling, and
in doyng anie thing that apperteineth to their
office. Ioſuah putteth the people alſo in mind of
their duetie, and appoynteth them in good order
and Policie what to doe.
               Wherin Magiſtrates alſo haue to learne, that althoughe
their chiefe ſtaie and comforte be in the
prouidence & promiſe of God, whoſe Miniſters
they are: yet they may not neglect ſuche lawfull
and Politique meanes in doyng of things, as by

the which God commōly vſeth to giue Salftie,
Succeſſe, & Victorie to his people. For, to neglecte
ordinarie meanes, ſo long as a man maye
haue them & vſe them, is rather to tempt God,
than truelie to put confidence and truſt in him.
               The Rubenites and Gadites Ioſuah appointeth
to goe before their brethren, bicauſe they had
their poſſeſſion aſſigned them on that ſide of Iordane,
and forſomuche as they had that preheminence,
firſt to know their portion of the lande of
Promiſe, it might ſeeme good reaſon, that they
did abide the greater burden vntill their brethrē
alſo were ſettled in their places, that ſhoulde be
allotted vnto them. And ſo the Rubenites and Gadites
did promiſe to Moyſes. Num. 32. by reading
of whiche place,Nu. 32. f. 31. this wil be the better vnderſtanded.
               And they anſwered Ioſuah ſaying,Verſe. 16. 17. 18. All
that thou haſt commaunded vs. &c.
               In this thirde parte of the chapiter the people
ſhewe their obedience vnto that Prince and
leader, that was by God appointed vnto them:
All things, ſaye they, That thou haſt commaunded
vs, vve will doe. Whereby we maye learne an example
of obedience to Magiſtrates, & not onely of
obedience, but alſo of carefull loue toward them.
For that it was that here moued the people to
praye for Ioſuah, ſaying, The Lorde thy God be
vvith thee, as he vvas vvith Moyſes.
               
               
                  
Whereby we are taught alſo to pray to God for
the good eſtate of oure Princes, that we maye
quietlye liue vnder them,1. Tim. 2. b. 2 as S. Paule ſaith, in honeſtie
and godlines.
               
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday after Trinitie
at Mornyng prayer.
            Ioſua. 10.
            
               
                   NOwe when Adonizedec King of Hieruſalem had heard
howe Ioſuah had taken Ai, & had deſtroyed it: (and how
that as he had done to Iericho and her king,Joſua. 8. a. 3. Joſua. 6. euen ſo he
had done to Ai and her king) and how the inhabitours of Gibeon
had made peace with Iſrael, and were among them:
               2 They feared excéedingly, for Gibeon was a great Citye
as any Citie of the kingdome, and was greater than Ai, and
all the men thereof were verye mightie.
               3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Hieruſalem ſente vnto
Hoham king of Hebron, and vnto Pira king of Iarmuth, and
vnto Iaphia king of Lachis, and vnto Dabir king of Eglon,
ſaying. 4 Come vp vnto me, and helpe me, that we maye
ſmite Gibeon: for they haue made peace with Ioſuah, and
with the Children of Iſrael.
               5 Therefore the fiue kinges of the Amorites, the kyng of
Hieruſalem, the kyng of Hebron, the kyng of Iarmuth, the
king of Lachis, and the king of Eglon, gathered themſelues
together, and went vp, they with all their hoaſtes, & beſieged
Gibeon, and made warre againſt it.
               6 And the men of Gibeon ſent vnto Ioſuah to the hoaſt in
Gilgal, ſaying, Withdraw not thy hand from thy ſeruants,
come vp to vs quicklye, and ſaue vs, and helpe vs: for all the
kings of the Amorites which dwell in the mountaynes are
gathered together agaynſt vs.
               
                  
7 And ſo Ioſuah aſcended from Gilgal, he and all the people 
of warre with him, and all the men of might.
               8 And the Lorde ſaide vnto Ioſuah, Feare them not: for I
haue deliuered them into thine hande, neither ſhall anye of
them ſtande againſte thée. 9 Ioſuah therefore came vnto
them ſodenly, and went vp from Gilgal all night.
               10 And the Lorde troubled them before Iſrael, and ſlue
them with a greate ſlaughter at Gibeon, and chaſed them along
the way that goeth vp to Bethoron, and ſmote them to
Azeka and Makeda. 11 And as they fled from before Iſrael,
and were in the goyng downe to Bethoron, the Lorde caſte
downe greate ſtones from heauen vpon them vntill Azeka,
and they dyed: there were moe dead with hayle ſtones, than
they were whom the children of Iſrael ſlue with the ſword.
               12 Then ſpake Ioſuah to the Lorde in the daye when the
Lorde deliuered the Amorites before the Children of Iſrael,
and he ſaide in the ſighte of Iſrael,Eſa. 28. f. 21. Eccl. 46. a. 4 Sunne ſtande thou ſtyll
vpon Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon.
               13 And the Sunne abode, and the Moone ſtoode ſtyll, vntyll
the people auenged themſelues vpon their enemyes. Is
not this written in the booke of the righteous? So the Sunne
abode in the middeſt of heauen, and haſted not to goe downe
by the ſpace of a whole daye.
               14 And there was no daye like that before it or after it,
that the Lorde heard the voyce of a man: for the Lord fought
for Iſrael. 15 And Ioſuah returned and all Iſrael wyth
him vnto the campe to Gilgal.
               16 But the fiue kings fled, and were hyd in a caue at Makeda.
17 And it was tolde Ioſuah, ſaying, The fiue kings
are founde hyd in a caue which is at Makeda.
               18 And Ioſuah ſaide, Roule great ſtones vpon the mouthe 
of the caue, and ſet men by it, for to kepe it.
               19 And ſtande ye not ſtyll, but folow after your enimies,
and ſmite all the hindmoſte, and ſuffer them not to enter
into their Cities: for the Lorde your God hath deliuered

them into your hand. 20 And when Ioſuah and the Children
of Iſrael had made an ende of ſlaying them with an
excéeding greate ſlaughter, tyll they were waſted: the reſte
that remayned of them, entred into walled Cities.
               21 And all the people returned to the hoaſt to Ioſuah at
Makeda in peace, neither dyd anye man moue his tongue againſte
the Children of Iſraell.
               22 Then ſayde Ioſuah, Open the mouth of the caue, and
bring out thoſe fiue kings vnto me out of the caue.
               23 And they dyd ſo, and broughte thoſe fiue kinges vnto
him out of the caue, (euen) the king of Hieruſalem, the King
of Hebron, the king of Iarmuth, the king of Lachis, and the
king of Eglon. 24 And when they broughte oute thoſe fiue
Kings vnto Ioſuah, Ioſuah called for all the men of Iſrael, &
ſaide vnto the chéefe of the men of warre which went with 
him, Come néere, and put your féete vpon the neckes of
theſe Kings. And they came néere, and put their féete vpon
the neckes of them. 25 And Ioſuah ſayde vnto them: Ye
ſhall not feare, nor be faint hearted, but be ſtrong, & plucke
vp your heartes: for thus ſhall the Lorde doe to all your enemyes
againſt whom ye fighte.
               26 And then Ioſuah ſmote them, and ſlue them, and hanged
them on fiue trées: and they hanged ſtyll vpon the trées
vntyll the euenyng. 27 And at the goyng downe of the
Sunne,Deu. 21. d. 22. Joſua. 8. f. 29 Ioſuah gaue commaundement, and they toke them
downe of the trées, and caſte them into the caue wherin they
had béen hyd: and layde great ſtones in the caues mouthe,
(vvhich remaine) vntyll this day.
               28 And that ſame daye Ioſuah tooke Makeda, and ſmote
it with the edge of the ſwoorde, and the kyng thereof alſo
deſtroyed he vtterlye: wyth all the ſoules that were therein,
and let none remaine: and he did to the king of Makeda, as
he did vnto the king of Iericho.
               29 Then Ioſuah went from Makeda,Joſu. 6. b. 26. and all Iſrael wyth
him vnto Libna, and fought againſt Libna.
               
                  
30 And the Lorde delyuered it and the King thereof into 
the hande of Iſrael: and he ſmote it with the edge of the
ſworde, and all the ſoules that were therein, He let non
                     •
                  
remaine in it: but did vnto the King thereof as he did vnto
the King of Iericho.
               31 And Ioſuah departed from Libna, and all Iſrael with
him vnto Lachis, and beſieged it, and aſſaulted it.
               32 And the Lord deliuered Lachis into the hand of Iſrael,Joſua. 6. c. 21
which toke it the ſeconde daye, and ſmote it with the edge of
the ſworde, and all the ſoules that were therin, doyng according
to all, as he had done to the citie of Libna.
               33 Then Horam king of Geſer came vp to helpe Lachis:
and Ioſuah ſmote him and his people, vntill none remayned
of him. 34 And from Lachis Ioſuah departed vnto Eglon,
and all Iſrael with him, and they beſieged it, and aſſaulted
it. 35 And toke it the ſame daye, and ſmote it with the edge
of the ſworde, and all the ſoules that were therin he vtterly
deſtroyed the ſame daye according to all that he had done to
Lachis. 36 And Ioſuah departed vp from Eglon, and all
Iſrael with him, vnto Hebron, and they fought againſt it.
               37 And when they had taken it, they ſmote it with the
edge of the ſwoorde, and the King thereof, and all the
townes that perteyned to it, and all the ſoules that were
therein, and he lefte none remainyng: but dyd accordyng
to all, as he had done to Eglon, and deſtroyed it vtterly, and
all the ſoules that were therin.
               38 And Ioſuah returned, and all Iſraell wyth him to 
Dabir, and foughte againſt it.
               39 And when he had taken it, and the king therof, and all
the townes that parteyned therto, they ſmote them with the
edge of the ſworde, and vtterly deſtroyed all the ſoules that
were therin, neither let he anye remaine: euen as he dyd to
Hebron, ſo he did to Dabir and the King thereof, as he had
done alſo to Libna and her king.
               
                  
40 Ioſuah therefore ſmote all the hyll contreys, and the
South countreys, and the valleys, and the downes, and all
their kings,Deu. 20. d. 16 & let none remaine of them, but vtterly deſtroyed
all that breathed, as the Lorde God of Iſrael commanded.
               41 And Ioſuah ſmote them frō Cades Barnea vnto Aſah▪
and all the countrey of Goſen (euen) vnto Gibeon
               42 And all theſe kinges and their lande dyd Ioſuah take
at one time: becauſe the Lord God of Iſrael fought for Iſrael.
               43 And Ioſuah and all Iſrael returned vnto the hoaſt that
was in Gilgal.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .x.
Chapter of Ioſuah.
               Nowe when Adonizedec king of Hieruſalem
had heard how Ioſuah.Verſe. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6. &c.
               
                  IN Adonizedec and the other fiue kings
of the Amorites, that are ſpokē of in this
chapiter, is expreſſed to vs the nature
and propertie of wicked and obſtinate
enemies of God and his people. If maruellous
things be wrought againſt them, they be ſtricken
with * feare,Exo. 15. b. 16 2. pa. 20. e. 29. & yet will they not ſubmit themſelues
to the mightie hand of God, and acknowledge
his power: but ſtill encreaſe in wickednes
and become more obſtinate, heaping to themſelues
greater confuſion.Joſu. 6. c. 20. Theſe kings had* hearde
and vnderſtoode, as well as the Gibeonites, how
maruellouſly God had dealte for his people againſt*
Seon King of the Amorites,
                  Nu. 21. d. 24 Nu. 21. e. 34. and* Og king

                  Baſan, and alſo againſte the Cities of Iericho,
and of* Aye,
                  Joſua. 8. a. 1. whereby they mighte haue beene
taughte, how vaine their cruell and wicked endeuour
of reſiſtaunce woulde be vnto them. But
they were ſo farre from that cogitation, That,
becauſe the Gibeonites had* ſubmitted themſelues
to the Children of Iſrael,
                  Joſua. 9 b. 8. they here Ioyu
                     •
                   in
Conſpiracie to deſtroye them and their citie. In
which pointe the Gibeonites ſet forth vnto vs the
Image of all them, that, forſaking the Errour,
Blindneſſe, and wicked obſtinacie of the world,
doe ioyne themſelues to God and his people.
               For by and by their verie Neighbours, Yea the
nigheſt of their Kin, ſeeke to Vexe and Perſecute
them with all extremitie: and that not becauſe
they be Sinfull or euil, or becauſe they are
Idolatours, Couetous perſons, Adulterers and
ſuche like, (for at thoſe thinges they can winke
well inough) But becauſe They make peace vvirh
Ioſuah, and the Children of Iſrael,
                  Joſua. 9. c. 35 that is, * becauſe
they Allie themſelues to GOD and his people.
But in ſuche caſes wee muſte learne by earneſt
Prayer and interceſſion to flee for ſuccour to our
Ioſuah, Chriſt Ieſu, who vndoubtedly wil ſpedelie
helpe and aſſiſte vs againſt ſuche enemies, as
Ioſuah doth here the Gibeonites.
               
               And ſo Joſuah aſcended from Gilgal,Verſe. 7. 8. 9. 10. he
and all the people of warre.
               
                  
Forſomuch as the Gibeonites were the confederates
of Iſrael, Ioſuah doth here the part of a
wiſe,1. par. 19. b. 13 good, and faithfull* Prince, that he is ſo
ready to reſcue and helpe them in their daunger.
For if he ſhoulde haue done otherwyſe, beyng
nowe become his Subiectes, he ſhoulde bothe
haue omitted his duetie towarde them, and alſo
haue procured to him and his people, a note of
Vnfaithfulneſſe toward ſuch as had ſubmitted
themſelues vnto him, and whom he had receiued
to his defence & protection. In that he doth
it with Spede, and commeth Sodainly on his
enemies in the night ere they were ware of him,
he played the parte of a Wiſe and Skilfull Captaine,
vnderſtanding that in warfare, after men
be once in good readineſſe, nothing more preuaileth
than ſpedie dealing with good watching of
oportunitie of place and time.
               This is not to be omitted,Exo. 4. c. 15. Eſa. 41. b. 10 that God is* ready
to comforte his good Princes and Gouernours
in their enterpriſes for the defence of his people.
Feare not them, ſaith God, I haue deliuered them
into thy handes:
                  Exo. 14. d. 25 2. par. 32. b. 8. Judit. 5. c. 16. and therefore dyd he eaſilie obtayne
Victorie of them, yea God will* fight for
them miraculouſlie, altering the courſe of all naturall
effectes, rather than they ſhoulde miſcarie,
or want ſtrength and oportunitie to be reuenged
on his enemies. As we ſee in this place
by two Notable and ſtraunge Miracles, killing
moe of the enemies with Haileſtones from heauen
than the Iſraelites did with the ſworde.
               
               Then ſaid Joſuah vnto the Lorde.Verſe. 12. 13. 14. 15. &c.
and he ſaid in the ſight of Iſrael. &c.
               A queſtion maye in this place be moued,
whether Ioſuah did wel in aſking ſuch a ſtrange
Miracle of God, or whether he mighte ſeeme
rather to tempte God in ſo doyng. To whiche
it maye be anſwered, that vndoubtedly he dyd
it by Inſtinction of the Spirite of GOD in a
ſtrong faythe, beyng perſwaded, that it would
be to the glorie of God. For Gods purpoſe was
by thys Miracle to confirme the Faith of his
People, and to abaſhe the Chanaanites his enemies,
to declare his power to thoſe Heatheniſhe
and Godleſſe People, and by this Miracle to
declare vnto them that he was the onelye Authoure
and worker of all thoſe Miracles, that
they before had heard of in Egipte, and in the wilderneſſe.
               And yet the praying for ſuche Miracles is
not now to be followed of vs. For God, hauing
nowe abundantlie declared his wyll and pleaſure
in his holie Worde lefte vnto vs by our Sauioure
Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, will haue his
People to cleaue ſtedfaſtlie to that,Mat. 12. d. 39 and* not to
looke for Signes and Miracles from Heauen.
But thys is notable, and to oure great comfort
to be obſerued, that Ioſuah by his Prayer might
ſeeme to haue the Sunne and Moone and all
the Creatures of God at his commaundement.
               
                  
By like force of Prayer Moyſes opened awaye
throughe the redde Sea Exodus. 14.Exo. 14. a. 15 Exo. 17. b. 11. and ouercame
in Battayle the Amalachites, Exodus. 17.
Ioſaphat ſubdued his enemies and cauſed them
to kill one the other 2. Croni. 20.2. pa. 20. d. 23 
                  Ezechias deliuered
his Citie Hieruſalē
                  
                  ▪ & cauſed alſo the Sunne
to goe backe certayne degrees.2. pa. 32. c. 21. d. 24. 2. Croni. 32. By
which Examples we alſo ought to con
                     ••
                  iue an
aſſured hope in the trueth of Gods promiſes,
when in ou
                     •
                   great perils and daungers we call
vpon God, and praye to him for his helpe and
deliuerance.
               The fiue Kings fledde and were hidde
in a Caue at Makeda.Verſe. 16. 17. 18. &c.
               Theſe fiue Kinges fledde, and thought they
had eſcaped the Plague of God, bycauſe they
were not killed eyther with the ſworde of the
Iſraelites, or with the Hayle from Heauen. But
God of his Iuſtice reſerued them to a greater,
and a more notable Puniſhmente, bycauſe the
were the Ringleaders and chiefe ſtirrers of others
to withſtande the People of God.
               In like maner Sennacherib.
                  2▪ pa. 32. c. 21. 2. Croni. 32. eſcaping
the Daunger of Battaile, was murdered in the
Temple of his Gods that he ſerued.
               
                  Ioſuah, when he vnderſtode the Kings were
hidde in the Caue he prouided them to be kepte
in Sa
                     ••
                  etie, but he dothe not omitte the oportunitie

wyth ſpeede to followe his enemies, and
ſo to ſubdue them, that they might not be hable
afterward to recouer their power & worke him
newe trouble. In this that Ioſuah cauſeth his
Captaines to ſet their feete vpon the Neckes of
ye Kings, it may ſeme a barbarous Crueltie, but
he knew they were the enemies of God, and vnderſtode
alſo, that his people did often Miſtruſt
the promiſes, that God had made vnto them, &
therefore his meaning was by this ſigne to aſſure
them that as God had don
                     •
                  e by theſe enemyes,
that might ſeeme the moſt mightie: ſo he
woulde doe alſo by the reſidue, and therefore willed
them not to doubte or to be * fainte hearted,Deu. 7. c. 18. 1. par. 22. c. 13.
but to be well aſſured of the aſſiſtaunce of their
Lorde and God, ſo long as they faithfullye ſerued
him, thoughe their enemies did ſeeme neuer
ſo mightie. And the ſame, in effect, God did
Iuſtifie immediatlie. For they did not only with
good ſucceſſe conquere theſe fiue kinges, that
were conſpired, but alſo a number of other cities
and Principalities, that are here reckened vp
euen to the ende of this Chapiter, as Makeda,
Libna, Lachis, Gazer, Eglon, Hebron, and Debir. If
Ioſuah killed in theſe victories Man, Woman,
and Child, we may not thinke it crueltie in him,
For he had the ſpeciall commaundement of God
ſo to doe: Suche were their Sinnes and offences
in the ſighte of God.1. reg. 15. b. 9. 3. re. 20. g. 42 And Saul, and Achab
maye be an example to all Princes what daunger
it is to ſhewe Mercy to them, whom God,

for Iuſt cauſes to his ſecrete wiſedome knowen
woulde haue to be puniſhed.
            
         
         
            The firſt Sunday after Trinitie
at Euenyng prayer.
            Ioſua. 23.
            
               
                   ANd it came to paſſe, a long ſeaſon after that the Lorde
had giuen reſt vnto Iſrael from all their enemies round
aboute, that Ioſuah waxed olde, and was ſtriken in
age. 2 And Ioſuah called for all Iſrael, and for their elders,
their heades, their iudges, and officers, and ſaide vnto them,
I am olde and ſtricken in age.
               3 And ye haue ſéene all that the Lorde your God hathe
done vnto all theſe nations before you, howe the Lorde your
God hymſelfe hath fought for you.
               4 Beholde, I haue diuided vnto you by Lot theſe nations
that remayne to be an inheritaunce for youre Tribes, from
Iordane, with all the nations that I haue deſtroyed, euen
vnto the great ſea Weſtwarde.
               5 And the Lorde your God ſhall expell them before you,
and caſt them from oute of your ſighte, and ye ſhall conquer
their lande, as the Lord your God hath ſaide vnto you.
               6 Be ye therefore of a good courage,Deu. 5. b. 9. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 28. b. 14. that ye kepe, and doe
all that is written in the booke of the Lawe of Moyſes, that
ye bowe not aſide therefrom to the ryghte hands nor to the 
lefte. 7 Neyther company with theſe nations that is with
them that are lefte wyth you, neyther make mention of
the name of theyr Gods, nor cauſe to ſware by them, neyther
ſerue them, nor bowe your ſelues vnto them.
               8 But ſticke faſte vnto the Lorde your God, as ye haue
donne vnto thys daye.
               9 So ſhall the Lorde caſte oute before you great nations

and mightye, as no man hathe béene able to ſtande before
you hitherto.
               10 One man of you ſhall chaſe a thouſande:Leui. 26. b. 8 Deu. 32. d. 30 for the Lord
your God he fighteth for you, as he hath promiſed you.
               11 Take good heede therfore vnto your ſelues, that ye loue
the Lorde youre God.
               12 Els, if ye goe backe and cleaue vnto the reſte of theſe
Nations that remaine with you, and ſhall make mariages
with them, and goe in vnto them, and they to you:
               13 Be ye ſure that the Lorde your God will no more caſt
oute all theſe Nations from before you,Nu. 33. g. 55 but they ſhalbe
ſnares and trappes vnto you, and ſcourges in your ſydes
and thornes in your eyes, vntyll ye peryſhe from this good
lande which the Lorde your God hath giuen you.
               14 And beholde, this daye doe I enter into the waye of
all the worlde, and ye knowe in all youre heartes and in all
youre ſoules, that nothyng hath fayled of all the good things
which the Lorde your God promiſed you, but all are come to
paſſe vnto you, and nothing hath failed thereof.
               15 Therefore, as all good thinges are come vpon you
which the Lorde your God promiſed you: ſo ſhall the Lord
bryng vpon you all euyll, vntyll he haue deſtroyed you
from thys good lande whiche the Lorde youre God hathe
giuen you.
               16 When ye haue tranſgreſſed the Teſtamente of the
Lorde youre God whych he commaunded you, and haue
gone and ſerued ſtraunge Gods, and bowed your ſelues to
them: then ſhall the wrathe of the Lorde waxe whote vpon
you, and ye ſhall periſhe quickly from the good land whiche
he hath giuen you.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxiij.
Chapter of Ioſuah.
               And it came to paſſe, a long ſeaſon after
the Lorde had giuen reſt.Verſe. 1. 2. &c.
               
                  THe Lande of Chanaan was nowe by
the Iſraelites poſſeſſed. The portions
were allotted to eche Tribe, all
things appertaining aſwell to the
ſtate of the common weale as of Religion,
was nowe eſtabliſhed. And Ioſuah their
Prince and Captaine waxen olde and farre ſtricken
in yeares. Therefore he, as a good Prince,
drawing nowe to the ende of his life, ſheweth
himſelfe to haue had a care, not onelye for the
good gouernemente of the people of God in his
life time,3. Reg. 2. a. 3. but alſo that the true * worſhip of God
and obedience to Gods holy worde mighte continue
among them to Gods glory after his life
time. And therefore in this place he calleth the
People, and vnder Magiſtrates together, & vſeth
vnto them a verye fatherly exhortation to continue
in the loue, obedience and true worſhip of
God: declaring vnto them the greate benefites
and bleſſings of God, that ſhall come to them, if
they doe ſo, & the aſſured daunger of his wrathe
and diſpleaſure to be poured vpon them, if they
did otherwiſe. As touching that is ſaide in the
firſt verſe After the Lord had giuen reſt vnto Iſrael,
wee are by it inſtructed to acknowledge God

only to be the Author & * giuer of Peace,Leui. 26. a. 6 Nu. 6. d. 26 Joſu
                        •
                     . 23 a. 1. 4. re. 20. d. 19 2. Pa. 14. a. 6. 2. pa. 20. f. 30 Tranquillitie,
and quietneſſe vnto common weales,
and the reſtrayner and brideler of all aduerſarie
powers, that they worke not ſo much trouble
and daunger to the people of God, as otherwyſe
they would doe: And therfore, that both
wee, and all ſuche whome God bleſſeth with
thoſe giftes, ought to ſhew our ſelues Thankful,
and to accept the ſame as his gracious mercie
to allure vs to Repentance.
               And you haue ſeene all that your Lord
God hath done vnto all theſe.Verſe. 3. 4. &c.
               
                  Ioſuah putteth them in mynde of the benefites
of God ſhewed vnto them, and dothe aſſure
them, that the ſame their Lorde and God.
will alſo performe the reſidue of his promyſe,
and make perfecte the worke that he hath begonne,
if they doe continue in his faythfull obedience.
By proofe and triall of that is * paſt,Deu. 32. a. 7 he
exhorteth them to the vndoubted expectation
of thoſe things that were to come.
               By this that Ioſuah foure tymes in this
place repeateth, The Lord youre God, wee may
not thinke, that he is not the God of other Nations
alſo. For God is the Generall Lord and
gouernour, not only of all Nations, but alſo of
al particuler Perſons & creatures of the world,
* and by him do they liue,Act. 17. f. 28 and haue their being.
But the Iewes he hadde choſen as his peculiar
People, and deliuered to them his lawe, & made

to them his lawe, and made to them his promiſes
eſpecially, and therfore is he here called, The
Lorde their God. Whē he ſayth, that God hathe
fought for them, we are taught that all Victorie
and good Succeſſe in warre cōmeth of God, &
* vnleſſe he doe fight for vs,Pſa. 126. a. 1. all labor & ſtrength
of men is in vayne. And the ſame God dothe
alway aſſiſt his people, and giue Victorie vnto
them, vnleſſe their vnthankfulneſſe in abuſing
his Benefites doe moue his iuſtice, by his and
their enimies to puniſhe them.
               Goe to therfore,Verſe. 6. and be of good courage,
that you take heed and do all that. &c.
               This is the ende why God eyther bleſſeth
his people wyth Tranquillitie and quietneſſe,
or giueth them Victorie agaynſte enimies:
that they maye continue in the obedience of his
bleſſed will declared in his holie woorde, which
conſyſteth not onely in the Knowledge of his
Lawe, and in the externall profeſſyng of the
ſame in wordes, or outwarde behauiour, but in
deede, and in hearte and mynde. And therefore
ſayth Ioſuah, Take heede and doe all that is written
in the booke of the Lawe of Moyſes, yea, and
that in ſuche ſorte, That they goe not aſide on the
righte hande, or on the lefte.
                  1. reg. 15. c. 22 For God * loueth obedience
more then all the gay deuiſes of mans
Brayne, and therfore will be worſhipped according
to his holy worde.
               
               Neyther companie with theſe nations,Verſe. 7.
that is with them, that. &c.
               How daungerous the Fellowſhip & Companie
of the wicked is, we ſee too too many examples
dayly before our faces. And if we be loth to
come in that Cōpanie by which we thinke our
bodies ſhall be infected with any contagious
diſeaſe: much more ought we to fear the Infection
of our Soules,Deut. 7. a. 2. 1. Co. 10. d. 20 and to dread leaſt * by ſocietie
of perſons corrupted, either in life or religion,
we ſhuld be ledde from the true Seruice of
God. No mā * Toucheth pitch but he ſhalbe defiled
with it.Eccle. 13. a. 1. 2. Cor. 6. c. 14 No man or woman vſeth the companie
of them that be euill, but he taketh ſome
hurte by thē, either in Life or Credite. In that
he ſaith, Make no mention of their Gods, he dothe
not forbidde them, to name Dagon, Aſtaroth, or
Baalim, but y• they ſhoulde make no Honorable
Mētion of them, nor vſe their names with reuerence,
but with Deteſtation, But eſpecially
they might * not Sweare by thē.Deut. 6. c. 13. For to y• perſō or thing by which any mā ſweareth, he doth
attribute diuine Power and Worſhip: that
is, That he ſeeth the harts and cogitations of
men, That hee knoweth their ſecrete partes,
That hee can and will rewarde the good and
puniſhe the wicked. Therefore let men conſider
with what conſcience they can ſweare by
Saints departed, or by any Perſon or Thing
be it neuer ſo Holy, other than God alone,

whoſe onely Power and Propertie it is to vnderſtande
the inwarde Thoughtes of man.
               One man of you ſhall chaſe a thouſand
for the Lord your God.Verſ. 10. 11. &c.
               
                  In the Leuit cap. 26.Leui. 26. a. 3. 7. 8. If you keepe my commandements
(ſayth the Lord) you ſhall perſecute your
enimies, and they ſhall fall vvith the ſvvorde before
you, and fiue of you shall perſecute an hundred,
and an hundred of you shal perſecureten thouſand.
               In this place he ſayth, One of you shall perſecute
a thouſande, whereby he giueth to vnderſtande,
that God will abundantly fulfyll hys
promiſe vnto them. Example wherof, God ſhewed
in ſundrye places of the Scriptures,Judi. 7. d. 21. 1. Sā. 14. b. 12 2. pa. 20. d. 22 2. pa. 32. d. 21 as
Iudic. 7. by Gedeon. 1. Sam. 14. by Ionathas. 2.
Chro. 20▪ by Ioſaphat. &. 32. by Ezechias.
               
               If you go backe and cleaue vnto the reste
of theſe Nations.Verſe. 12. 13. &c.
               As before he hath exhorted by conſideration
of the great benefites, that God had and would
do for them, if they cōtinued in his obediēce, ſo
nowe he moueth them by Laying before thē the
threatnings of Gods iuſt plagues and puniſhments,
if they did otherwiſe, and reuolted from
his true worſhip, ſaying, that God would not
only not deſtroy thoſe people that were among
them, but hee woulde ſuffer them to bee vnto
the Iſraelites as ſnares and traps to take and entangle

them in wickedneſſe, As Scourges in their
ſides to vexe and trouble them, as Thorns in their
eyes, to greeue them, and to bleare their eyes,
that they ſhoulde not diſcerne good from euill,
falſhoode from truth, light from darkneſſe &c.
And bycauſe nothing could be more dangerous
vnto them, or a greater ſnare to lead them from
God, than to ioyn in Societie, League or Mariage,
with thoſe wicked people: Therefore he
oftē & earneſtly willed them to beware of that.
Wherby Chriſtiā Princes and people, that profeſſe
the truth of Chriſtes Goſpell, ought alſo
to learne how perilous it is for them,Exo. 23. g. 32. Deut. 7. a. 3. Exo. 34. b. 15 to * linke
in League or Mariage with the enimies or aduerſaries
of the ſame, leaſt God make them vnto
vs as Snares, as Whips, and as Thornes
in our eyes. &c.
               Behold this day do I enter into the way
of all the worlde,Verſe. 14 and ye knowe. &c.
               By this faſhion of Speaking, that He entred
the way of al the world, he meaneth Death, which
* way all liuing Creatures of this worlde muſt
tread.3. Reg. 2. a. 2. Wiſe and Learned mē haue deuiſed remedies
for al maner of diſeaſes, but neuer any could
Inuent how to put away Death. That is the
aſſured end wherto in this world we ſhal come,
whether we ſleepe or wake, or whatſoeuer we
do, we Haſten to this end:Eccl. 38. c. 23. Job. 7. a. 6. So * little aſſurance
haue we of this miſerable life, wherewith wee
are ſo greatly in loue. In the ende Ioſuah putteth

them in mynde, that as God of his great
mercie, hath and will aſſuredly fulfyll his promyſes,
ſo that one worde thereof ſhall not be
fruſtrate or vayne: In like maner he wil of his
Seueritie & Iuſtice, bring vpon them all thoſe
euils, that he hath Threatned, if they doe fall
from him by diſobediēce, to Idolatrie and wickedneſſe.Mat. 24. c. 35
                  For Heauen and Earth shall perishe (as
Chriſt ſaith Mat. 24.) but the vvordes of God shall
not perish.
               
            
         
         
            The ſecond Sunday after Trinitie
at Morning prayer.
            Iudicum. Cap. 4.
            
               
                   ANd the chldren of Iſraell began againe to do wickedly
in the ſight of the Lord, when Ahud was dead.
               2 And the Lorde ſolde them into the hande of Iabin
king of Chanaan, that raygned in Hazor, whoſe captaine of
warre was called Siſara, whiche dwelt in Haroſeth of the
Gentiles. 3 And the Children of Iſraell cryed vnto the
Lord, for he had nine hundred charets of yron: and twentie
yeares he troubled the children of Iſraell very ſore.
               4 And Debora a prophetiſſe the wife of Lapidoth iudged
Iſraell the ſame time. 5 And the ſame Debora dwelt vnder
a paulme trée, betwéene Ramath and Bethel in mount
Ephraim: and the children of Iſraell came vp to hir for
iudgement. 6 And ſhe ſent and called Barak the ſonne of
Abinoam out of Kedes Nephthali, and ſaid vnto him, Hath
not the Lord God of Iſraell commaunded, ſaying, Go, and
 drawe towarde mount Thabor, and take with thée ten
thouſand men of the children of Nephthali and of the children
of Zabulon? 7 And I will bring vnto thée to the riuer

                  
                     •
                  iſon, Siſara the captayne of Iabins armie, with his
charetts and his people, and will deliuer him into thyne
hands. 8 And Barak ſaid vnto hir, If thou wilt go wyth
me, I will go: but and if thou wilt not come with me, I wil
not go. 9 She ſaide, I will ſurely go with thee, but thys
iourney that thou takeſt ſhall not be for thine honoure: for
the Lorde ſhall deliuer Siſara into the hande of a woman.
And Debora aroſe, and went with Barak to Kedes.
               10 And Barak called Zabulon & Nephthali to Kedes,
and ledde after him ten thouſand men: and Debora wente
with him. 11 But Haber the Kenite whyche was of the
children of Hohab, the father in law of Moyſes, remoued
from the Kenites, and pitched his tente vnto the playne of
Zaanaim, which is by Kedes.
               12 And they ſhewed Siſara that Barak the ſonne of Abinoam,
was gone vp to Mount Thabor.
               13 And Siſara gathered together all his charettes, euen
nine hundreth Charettes of yron, and all the people that
were with him from Haroſeth of the Gentils vnto the ryuer
of Kiſon. 14 And Debora ſayde vnto Barak: Vp, for
this is the day in which the lord hath deliuered Siſara into 
thine hand, is not the Lord gone out before thée? And ſo Barak
went downe from mount Thabor, and ten thouſande
men after him 15 But the Lord deſtroyed Siſara and all
his Charetts, and all his hoaſt with the edge of the ſworde
before Barak: ſo that Siſara lyghted downe of his Charet,
and fled awaye on his féete.)
               16 But Barak followed after the Charets and after the
hoaſt vnto Haroſeth of the Gentiles,Pſalme. 83. b and all the hoaſte of
Siſara fell vpon the edge of the ſwoorde, and there was
not a man lefte. 17 Howebeit Siſara fledde away on his
féete to the t
                     •
                  nte of Iaell, the wyfe of Haber the Kenite,
(for there was peace betwéene Iabin the king of Hazor,
and the houſeholde of Haber the Kenite.
               18 And Iael went out to méet Siſara, and ſaid vnto him:

Tourne in my lord, tourne into me, feare not. And when he
had tourned in vnto hir into hir tent, ſhe couered him with
a mantell. 19 And he ſaide vnto hir, Giue me I pray thée a
litle water to drinke, for I am thirſtie. And ſhe opened a
bottell of milke, and gaue him drinke, and couered him.
               20 And againe he ſaide vnto hir, Stand in the doore of the
tent: and whē any man doth come and enquire of thée, whether
there be any man here, thou ſhalt ſay, Nay.
               21 Then Iael Habers wife toke a nayle of the tent, and
an hammer in hir hande, and wente ſoftly vnto him, and
ſmote the nayle into the temples of his head, and faſtned it
into the ground: (for he ſlumbred ſore, and was wéery,) and
ſo he dyed. 22 And behold as Barak folowed after Siſara,
Iael came out to méete him, and ſaid vnto him: Come,
and I will ſhewe thée the man whome thou ſéekeſt. And
when he cam into hir tente, beholde Siſara lay dead, and
the nayle was in his temples.
               23 And ſo God broughte Iabin the king of Chanaan into
ſubiection that day before the children of Iſraell.
               24 And the hand of the Children of Iſraell proſpered, and
preuayled againſt Iabin the king of Chanaan, vntill they
had deſtroyed Iabin king of Chanaan.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .iiij.
Chapter of the Booke of Iudges.
               And the children of Iſrael began agayn
to do wickedly in the ſight of God.Verſe. 1. 2. &c.
               
                  IN this place and in the Chapiters before
& after, thoſe Promiſes & Threatnings
be often fulfilled towardes the
Iſraelites, that Moyſes and Ioſua their

Gouerners before their departures out of this
lyfe moued by the Spirit of god declared to thē.
For here in this boke we read oftētimes of Falling
from God to wickedneſſe & error,Jud. 2. b. 14. and often
tymes of Gods * plagues caſt vpon them for
the ſame.Judi. 3. b. 8. Alſo of often Repentaunce and tourning
to God,Judic. 6. a. 1. and Gods often mercifull deliueraunce
of his people,Jud. 8. c. 27. when they forſooke their
wickedneſſe, and called vpon him for ſuccour.
               Wherby wee muſt learne, that Gods worde
is vnfallible true, as wel in the promiſes of his
Mercie & goodneſſe towarde them,Eſai. 66. a. 2. Pſa. 50. c. 17. that wyth
* contrite hearts come vnto him,Eſai. 61. a. 1. as alſo in the
Threatnings of his iuſtice, to the ſtubburne &
obſtinate ſinner, that will not Repent.
               As touching this place, let vs marke, that
nothing is more perilous than carnall Securitie,
and Abuſyng the proſperous Benefites of
God.
               After the Meſopotamians, the Moabites, and
Philiſtines were ouercome, as is before mencioned,
it might ſeeme the Iſraelites ſhould haue
had no Enimie, that would once haue ſtirred againſt
them.Jud. 3. d. 30 For they enioyed great * tranquillitie
and Peace Foureſcore yeares togither.
               But Wealthe and Proſperitie breedeth wantonneſſe
and forgetfulneſſe of God. And therefore
ſodainly while they thought all was huſht
& quiet, another Enimie was rayſed vp, whom
they little thought of, that is, Iabin king of the
Chanaanites, whoſe predeceſſour before they had

ſlayne, and deſtroyed his royal Citie Hazer, Ioſue.
11.Joſue. 11. b. 13 But nowe his Nephew or cooſen of the
ſame name was growen to ſo great power that
he had ſubdued the Ievves, and held them in miſerable
Bondage, which for al his ſtrength, hee
had not bene hable to bring to paſſe, if God for
their ſinnes Had not ſolde them into his handes to
be puniſhed for their offences. The Tirannie of
Iabin was the more cruell agaynſt the Iſraelites,
bycauſe they had before (as I haue ſayd) ſlayne
his predeceſſor, and burnte his royall citie with
fire to the ground.
               And the children of Iſraell cried vnto
the Lorde for he had.Verſe. 3. 900. &c.
               Where the Chanaanites had afflicted the people
of Iſraell twenty yeares, we may not thinke
that in all that time before, they neuer cried vnto
God, but happily their crying and calling vpon
God before, was rather in way of murmuring
and muttering againſt God and the rod of
his Chaſticement: but nowe when with repentant
and ſorowfull harts they pray vnto God
and acknowledge their wickedneſſe and trāſgreſſion,
with redy mercy he heareth and helpeth
them.
               And Debora a prophetiſſe the wyfe of
Lapidoth iudged Iſraell.Verſe. 4. 5. &c.
               That God might make the deliuerāce of his
people more glorious vnto him, by the miniſterie

and * weakneſſe of a woman he worketh it,1. Cor. 1. c. 27. &
therby ſheweth that neyther might of Princes,
nor policie of Captaines, nor ſtrēgth of armies,
nor ſwiftneſſe of chariots, is hable to hold them
in miſerie that God wil haue deliuered.
               In this that God chooſeth a Woman to be a
Prophetiſſe, & thereby the inſtructer & teacher,
the guyd & gouerner, yea, & the Deliuerer of his
people, he ſheweth that he doth not alway reiect
that Sexe or kind from the miniſterie of his
holie will, neyther in matters of Policie, nor of
Religion,Heſt. 15. c. 8. but that oftentymes he wil * vſe them
to his glorie,Judit. 8. b. 8 as the good Nurſes and Patrons
of his Churche and people.
               And ſhe ſent and called Barak,Verſe. 6. 7. the ſon
of Abinoam, out of Kedes. &c.
               Some thinke that Debora had oftentymes
before, aduertiſed Barak, that he ſhould attempt
the deliuerance of the people, & that he through
Timorouſneſſe had ſtayed, and therfore now ſhe
opēly before the people declareth the ſame vnto
him, & that in the Name & Authoritie of God,
after the maner of Prophets, adding the promiſe
of God to hys further confirmation. For,
(ſayeth ſhe) in the perſon of God: I vvill bring
or dravve vnto the ryuer Kiſon, Siſara the Captayne.
&c.
               And Barak ſayde vnto hir,Verſe. 8. If thou wilt
goe with mee, I will goe: but and &c.
               
                  
                  Barak in theſe woordes may ſeeme to haue
ſomewhat doubted of his calling, and therfore
Debora ſignifyeth, that the Glorie and chiefe
Prayſe of this Victorie ſhoulde bee giuen from
him to a Woman.
               Other thinke, that he ſpake not this of any
miſtruſt of his Calling, but bicauſe he would be
ſure to haue hir with him, as the Prophetiſſe of
God, by whoſe Wiſedome he might be inſtructed
to all oportunities. And therfore S. Auguſt.
readeth in ye text theſe words, Bycauſe I knowe
not vvhat day the Angell of God shal proſper mee.
               
               When Debora willeth Barak to gather ten
thouſandemen, wee muſte conſider, that God
had ben hable withoute Mās helpe to Subdue
their enimies, but by this he wold declare, that
hee dothe not reproue iuſt Warre, nor the helpe
of mannes ſtrengthe, when it is vſed wyth
truſt and confidence in Him.
               Whē God ſaith, that he wil draw Siſara to the
Riuer Kyſon, we may vnderſtād that God Draweth
both to good & alſo to Euil, y• is in the way
of puniſhmēt: but this he doth in a diuers maner.
Whē he Dravveth to Good, he healeth our
corrupt mindes, & by his Grace prepareth vs to
that, which otherwiſe we could not do. When
he Dravveth vs to Euill, we neede no Motiō nor
helpe therevnto, beeing altogither by our Corruption
bent vnto the ſame, only God directeth
oure euill doings to his Glorie and to oure Puniſhmente.
               
               But Heber the Kenite,Verſe 10. whiche was of
the children of Hobab, father. &c.
               This is here added, bycauſe of Iael, Hebers
wyfe, who is after reported to kill Siſara wyth
a Nayle. &c. The cauſe that moued Heber to liue
ſeparatly from his kinſmen is not here expreſſed.
It maye bee ſome lyke cauſe as moued Abraham
and Loth to dwel aſunder,Ge. 13. b. 9. that is, great
Plentie of cattell, and Scarſitie of paſture.
               And Debora ſayd vnto Barac,Verſ. 14. &c. Vp, for
this is the day in whiche the Lord. &c.
               
                  Ioſephus writeth, that Barac was muche abaſhed
of the power of Siſara, and woulde haue
ſtedde into the Mountaynes, but that hee was
ſtayed by Debora, who ſignifyed to hym, that
this was the tyme in which the Prouidence of
God had appoynted to Deliuer Siſarah and his
armie into his hands, as the Hiſtorie declareth
that in deede it did fall out.
               Howbeit Siſara fled awaye on his fecte
to the tent of Iael,Verſ. 17 wife of Heber. &c.
               
                  Siſara was a wicked and Cruell Tiranne, &
a Perſecuter of the people of God: he truſted in
his power and ſtrength of his armie, he had no
ſmal truſt in the Alliāce and Confederacie of other
neere vnto him:2. Pa. 32 d. 15 Iudith. 1. c. 7. and vpon * cōfidence hereof,

of, was puffed vp wyth Pryde, and wyth extreme
Tirannie ſoughte to oppreſſe the Iſraelites.
But when God * viſited hys wickedneſſe,
neyther his Policie and experience in warre,
neither the power and Multitude of his Souldiours,
neither the Strength of his yron Chariottes
coulde helpe hym, but that hee Fledde,
and that on foote, from a Small number of aduerſaries,
and had reprochefull and villanous
Death, where he truſted for helpe and comfort.
So God vſeth to deale wyth the enimies of
his people.
               And Jael went out to meete Siſara,Verſ. 18. &c. and
ſayde vnto him: Turne in my lord. &c.
               It maye here be Doubted, howe Haber
Iaels huſbande, beeing of the people of God,
coulde haue League with a Heathen & godleſſe
Prince.
               Surely to haue ſuch league as tendeth only
to the ſa
                     •
                  fe Enioying of the Limites & boundes
of their Poſſeſſion, ſemeth not to be againſt
the Scriptures.Ge. 31. f. 44. 
                  Iacob had league with Laban:
And the children of Iſrael, ſauing ſeuen natiōs,
had truce with other countreys aboute them.
But to deſire ayde of them, or to ioyne power
with them in aſſiſtance any way, may appeare
vtterly to bee agaynſte the worde of God, and
alwayes hathe fallen oute euill to them that
haue vſed it. As it maye appeare by the example

of Ioſaphat, going with the king of Iſrael, againſte
Ramoth in Gilead.
                  2. pa. 19. a. 2. And God by his prophete
reproued him for the ſame. 2. Paral.
               
               But what ſhall we here ſaye of Iael, who
ſeemeth in the killyng of Siſara, bothe to haue
done againſt the League and couenant of peace
betweene them, and alſo to haue broken the
lawe of Hoſpitalitie, contrary to Nature, and
the preſeruation of humane Societie?
               Surely, in other caſes to breake League
and Hoſpitalitie, and vnder pretence of Frendſhippe,
to Murther ſuch as committe themſelues
vnto vs, may well ſeeme a foule and horrible
acte: But that Iaell here doth, was a certayne
deuiſe and practiſe of Faythe and obedience
towarde God.
               For as it is lawfull for any, by what meanes
he can, to kill ſuche a perſon as the Prince
hath proclaimed a Traitour, and put out of his
protection: So was it lawfull for Iaell to kyll
Siſara, whome ſhe nowe knew to be the enimie
of God and the oppreſſour of his people, and
had declaration therof by the Prophetiſſe Debora,
as from the mouth of God hymſelfe.
The Leuites killed the worſhippers of the golden
Calfe, hauing no reſpect of Aliance or Kinred.
Exod. 32 and yet are they reported To haue
Conſecrated their handes vnto the Lorde.
                  Exo. 32. f. 28.
               
               That whyche is appoynted by GOD, can
not ſeeme to bee agaynſte hys Lawe. Iaell
was of the people of God, and therfore might

ſhe well adde her helping hande to their deliuerance,
eſpecially agaynſte an vnrepentant Tiranne,
and ſeeyng the ſame to bee appoynted
by God.
            
         
         
            The .ij. Sunday after Trinitie
at Euening prayer.
            Iudges. 5.
            
               THen Debora and Barak the ſonne of Abinoam ſang 
the ſame day ſaying. 2 Praiſe ye the Lorde for the
auenging of Iſraell, and for the people that became
ſo willing. 3 Heare O ye kings, hearken O ye Princes:
I, euen I wyll ſyng vnto the Lorde, I wyll ſyng prayſe to
the Lorde God of Iſraell.
               4 Lorde when thou wenteſt out of Seir, when thou departedſt
out of the féeld of Edom, the earth trembled, and
the heauens rayned,Deut. 2. a. 9 the cloudes alſo dropped water.
               5 The Mountaines melted before the Lorde, euen as
did Sinai before the Lord God of Iſraell.Pſal. 97. a. 5 Exo. 19. c. 18.
               
               6 In the dayes of Samgar the ſonne of Anath, in the
dayes of Iael the hye wayes were vnoccupied, and the trauaylers
walked thorough bywayes.
               7 The inhabitauntes of the townes were gone, they
were gone in Iſraell, vntyll I Debora came vp, whyche
came vp a mother in Iſraell.
               8 They choſe newe Gods, and then had they the enimie
in the gates: was there a ſhield or ſpeare ſéene among fortie
thouſande of Iſraell?
               9 My heart loueth the gouernours of Iſrael, and them
that are willing among the people: O praiſe ye the Lord.
               
                  
10 Speake ye that ryde on fayre aſſes, ye that dwell by
Midden, and that walke by the wayes.
               11 For the noyſe of the archers among the drawers of
water ceaſſed, there ſhall they ſpeake of the righteouſnes of
the Lord, his righteouſnes in his vnfenſed townes in Iſrael:
then ſhall the people of the Lord goe downe to the gates.
               12 Vp Debora vp: get thée vp, and ſing a ſong: ariſe Barak,
and leade the captiuitie captiue thou ſonne of Abinoam.
               13 Then ſhall they that remayne haue dominion of the
proudeſt of the people: the Lorde hath geuen me dominion
ouer the mightie.
               14 Oute of Ephraim was there a roote of them againſte
Ameleck, and after thée Beniamin among thy people,
Out of Machir came rulers, and out of Zabulon they
that handle the pen of the writer.
               15 And of Iſachar there were Princes with Debora, and
Iſachar, and alſo Barak he was ſent on foote into the valley:
for the diuiſions of Ruben (vvere) great thoughtes of heart.
               16 Why abodeſt thou among the ſhéepe foldes, to heare
the bleatings of the flockes? for the diuiſions of Ruben were
great thoughtes of hearte.
               17 Gilead alſo abode beyonde Iordane: and why doth Dan
remaine in ſhippes? Aſer continued on the ſea ſhore, and taried
in his decayed places.
               18 (But) the people of Zabulon haue ieoparded their liues
vnto the death, like as did Nephthali in the hye places of the
féelde. 19 The kings came and foughte, then foughte the
Kings of Chanaan in Thanack by the waters of Megiddo,
and wanne no money.
               20 They foughte from heauen, euen the ſtarres in their
courſes foughte againſte Siſara.
               21 The riuer of Kiſon ſwept them away, that auncient
riuer the riuer Kiſon: O my ſoule, thou haſt marched valiauntly.
22 Then were the horſe hoofes ſmitten a ſunder
by the meanes of the praunſings, that their mightie men

made. 23 Curſe ye the Citie of Meros (ſayde the Angell of
the Lord) curſe the inhabitantes thereof: bycauſe they came
not to helpe the Lord, to helpe the Lord againſt the mightie.
               24 Iael the wyfe of Haber the Kenite ſhalbe bleſſed aboue
other women, bleſſed ſhall ſhe be aboue other women in the
tent. 25 He aſked water, and ſhe gaue him milke, ſhe
brought foorth butter in a Lordly dyſhe.
               26 She put her hande to the nayle, and her righte hande
to the Smithes hammer: with the hammer ſmote ſhée Siſara,
and ſmote his heade, wounded him, and pearſed his
temples. 27 He bowed him downe at her féete, he fell
downe, and laye ſtyll at her féete: he bowed hymſelfe and
fell: and when he had ſunke downe, he laye there deſtroyed.
               28 The mother of Siſara looked oute at a wyndowe, and
cryed throughe the latteſſe, Why is his charet ſo long a comming?
Why tary the whéeles of his charets?
               29 All the wyſe Ladyes anſwered her, yea and her owne
wordes anſwered her ſelfe.
               30 Surely they haue founde, they diuide the ſpoyles,
euery man hathe a damſell or two: Siſara hathe a praye of
diuers coloured garmentes, euen a praye of rayment dyed
with ſundrye colours, and that are made of néedle worke:
rayment of diuers colours and of néedle worke on both ſides,
whiche is méete for him that is chiefe in diſtributing of
the ſpoyles.
               31 So periſhe all thine enemyes, O Lorde: but they that
loue him, let them be as the Sunne when he ryſeth in his
might. And the lande had reſt fortie yéeres.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the fifth
Chapter of Iudges.
               Then Debora and Barak,Verſe. 1. 2. 3. the ſonne of
Abinoam ſang the ſame daye. &c.
               
                  NO kinde of worſhip is to God more
pleaſant, nor by the holye Ghoſt in
the Scriptures more earneſtly required,
than, when God hathe ſhewed
the great benefites of his mercie
towarde his people,Rom. 1. a. 8. 2. Cor. 1. b. 11. that they * for the ſame
declare themſelues Thankefull, and prayſe his
holie name therefore. Call vpon mee, ſaieth God,
by his Prophete Dauid in the daye of they trouble,Pſa. 49. c. 16.
and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie
me, not that God needeth oure Glorifying or
prayſing, beyng of himſelfe moſt Glorious and
worthy praiſe: but he * deliteth in Thankfulnes,Pſa. 68. e. 30.
and alſo for our cauſes would haue his enemies
by that meanes feared, when they vnderſtande
him to be declared by his people to be ſo terrible,
and mightie a puniſher of his ſinfull and wicked
aduerſaries. And on the other parte, that they,
which be weake and fainte, may haue their faith
Strengthened, and more readily commit themſelues
vnto his mercy, when they perceiue him
to be ſo willing and gracious a God beyonde all
Deſerte & Expectation of his mere goodneſſe to
deliuer them.
               Therefore Debora doth here the parte of a good

and faithfull Gouernour, that is both her ſelfe
ſo ready,Pſa. 94. a. 12. and alſo * willeth the reſidue of hir people,
in this pleaſant & triumphant Song to the
terrour of the enemies, and comfort of the faithfull,
to Set forth the Mightie & mercifull goodneſſe
of God towarde them. The like examples
we haue in Moyſes at the redde Sea,Exo. 15. a. 2. 1. Reg. 2. a. 1. Judit. 16. a. 1 In * Anna
for her ſonne Samuel, In * Iudith for her victorie
ouer Holophernes, &c.
               
               The People that became ſo vvilling, were the
tribes of Zabulon and Nepthalie, who did readily
folowe the Appointment of God declared by
Debora and for the ſame doth ſhe here and afterwarde
Praiſe them and Reproue the other.
               Lorde when thou wentest out of Seir,Verſe. 4. 5.
when thou departedſt out of the. &c.
               
                  Debora praiſeth God by rehearſing ſome of
his former actes, done for his people in the Wilderneſſe,
and namelye at their departure from
Mount Seir in the lande of the Edomites the poſteritie
of Eſau.
                  Deu. 2. c. 12. 
                  Deu. 2. We reade that the Iſraelites
had Coaſted about Seir the ſpace of .38. yeres,
and were not greatlye terrible to anye of theyr
enemies. But when by Gods appointment they
departed from thence towarde the land of Chanaan,
He being their Guide & Leader in the Pillar
of Fire and the cloud, he did with ſuch Maieſtie
then deale for them, that the Chananites and
other enemies were ſtrickē with Feare, as if the

Earth had ſhaken, or Heauē had poured downe
Stormes & Tempeſtes againſt them, or as the
Moūtaines had melted with fire and Smoke,
as Sinay did at the preſence of the Lorde when
he gaue his law vnto his people.
               In the dayes of Samgar the ſonne of Anath,Verſe. 6. 7.
in the dayes of Iahel. &c.
               Before, Debora had praiſed God as the Ancient
Patrone of Iſrael, now ſhe commeth to this
noble deliuerāce that it pleaſed him, to his greater
Glory and more Terrour of his enemies, to
worke by her a Simple & Fraile womā. Samgar
was a Valiant man and Iudged Iſrael, and ſ
                     •
                  ue
ſixe Hundred Philiſtines with an Oxe goade as
it is mencioned in the.Judic. 3. e. 31. 3. Chapiter. But he deliuered
not Iſrael ſo, but that they were deteyned
in ſo miſerable Oppreſſion of the Chanaanites as
they coulde not goe out of their Cities with out
Spoyling or killing, neither in the high way as
trauellers, neither as huſband mē in the fieldes:
So that both Tillage of lād, & traffike of Marchandice
was vtterly decayed among them, vntill
this Victorie and deliuerance wrought by
Debora, who Gouerned & Iudged the people of
God rather as a carefull Mother, then a ſterne
Prince. Wherefore in this place by compariſon
with Samgar, who yet was a good man, She
amplifieth this preſent Mightie worke of God
done by Her.
               
               They choſe newe Goddes,Verſe. 8. and then had
they the enemie in the gates. &c.
               So ſone as the people * forſoke God,Judic. 3. b. 12. and fell
to Idolatrie, he cauſed their enemies to plague
them with Warre, in ſuche ſorte, that of a great
number of thouſandes of the Iſraelites, not one
durſte take ſpeere and ſhielde againſt their oppreſſours.
               My harte loueth the Gouernours of
Iſrael and them that are willing.Verſ. 9. 10. 11 &c.
               As if Debora had ſaide, It is the exceeding
mercie of God that he thus deliuered his people
by a fewe of the Baſeſt and Weakeſt of them,
wherfore my harte deſireth nothing more, than
that all you of * Iſrael ſhoulde praiſe the name of
the Lorde.Pſa. 134. c. 19 And firſt, I admoniſhe you, that are
Princes * and Chiefe men,Pſa. 137. a. 5 and ride on faire Aſſes
and ſitte to Iudge the people, or dwell in the
Citie of Midden, I admoniſhe you alſo that be
wayfairing men, and trauaile eyther in Marchandice
or otherwiſe. For that Libertie, that
you were reſtrained from before, through oppreſſion,
is nowe * reſtored to you.Pſa. 128. a. 4. The noyſe of
the Archers that Murdered and Robbed them,
which in this drie Countrey droue your cattaile
to water, is now ceaſed, and you are out of feare,
and may both kepe your Cattell, and goe ſafelie
to prouide water. Yea, in thoſe places and other

vnfenced townes, where you laye open to the
ſpoile of enemies, you may now boldly ſet forth
the Righteouſnes of the Lord, & you may ſalfelie
goe downe to the gates & places of Iudgement
to haue Iuſtice miniſtred vnto you.
               Vp Debora,Verſe. 12. vp, gette the vp, and ſing a
ſong: Ariſe Barak. &c.
               The Prophetes and Saintes of God neuer
thinke themſelues earneſt enoughe in giuyng
Thankes, & Prayſing of God, and therfore they
often vſe ſuch ſtirrings and prouocatiō of themſelues.
She willeth Barak alſo now in triumphe
to leade them Captiue, which before kepte him
and other in moſte Miſerable Captiuitie. Yea,
ſaieth She,Judi. 14. b. 12 the * poore remnant of Iſrael that is
not worthie to be called an Armie, for that they
were of the pooreſt, and weakeſt of the people,
ſhall haue Dominiō ouer thoſe Proude & mightie
Chanaanites, that did ſo ſternely vſe them.
               Out of Ephraim was there a roote againſt
Amelek,Verſe. 14. 15. 16. and after thee. &c.
               In theſe verſes Debora reciteth by what Inſtrumentes
it pleaſed God to giue this victorie,
and what Tribes they were that folowed Barak
and which they were that did not accompanye
him. Firſt, out of Ephraim Hir ſelfe and other as
the Roote and beginning. Nexte, a ſmall number
oute of Beniamin. Thirdlie a companie of

Strong & warlike men out of the Tribe of Manaſſes,
a 
                     •
                  hiefe Citie whereof was Macher.
               
               And oute of Zabulon and Nephthalie a number
more fitte for Learning, & to handle the Penne,
than with Sword & ſhielde to deale againſt the
enemie: For that She meaneth by theſe wordes,
To handle the penne of the vvriter. The tribe
of Iſachar alſo ſente worthie and experte men,
and therefore are they here Ioyned in praiſe and
cōmendatiō with Barak. The Tribes then that
gaue aide to this victorie were Ephraim, Beniamin,
Manaſſes, Iſachar, Zabulon, and Nephthalie.
Iuda, Simeon, Leuie, and Gad are not ſpoken of.
Ruben, Dan, & Aſar are mencioned with reprofe.
For that it is, that ſhe meaneth by theſe words:
For the diuiſions of Ruben vvere great thoughtes of
harte. &c. The Rubenites dwelt in ye fertile Paſtures
beyonde Iordane & ſemed to be more carefull
for their Sheepe and Cattaile, than for the
freedome and good ſtate of their countrey: and
therefore throughe Pride and diſdaine woulde
not accompanie Debora and Barak.
               
               
                  Gilead & Dan are for like cauſe reproued, & A ſar,
that dwelte toward the Sea coſte, and ſet their
mindes vpon their ſhippes and the decayed places
of their countrey. But theſe pretences could
not in the ſight of God * excuſe thē,Jere. 48. b. 10 when they
by his Propheteſſe were called to further the
Deliuerāce of his people. For it may ſeme they
could haue bene content to liue in thraldome vnder
the Heathen and godleſſe enemies, So that

they might tollerablie enioye their worldly riches.
The tribe of Zabulon and Nepthali is praiſed,
bicauſe although they were not Valiant &
warlike men, but of the meaneſt ſort of the people,
yet they Haſarded their liues for the Libertie
of their countrey.
               The kings came and fought,Verſe. 19. &c. then fought
the kings of Chanaan in Thanach. &c.
               Nowe She ſheweth how fiercelie the Kings,
that is, Siſara, & the other Noble captaines that
were in his armie, did aſſaulte the Iſraelites, and
with how great confidence, and hope of Spoyle
they ſet vpon them, by the Riuers of Thanach &
Megiddo, but to their owne Ouerthrow and confuſion.
               For the Lord * fought for his people from Heauen,Exo. 14. c. 14 1. pa. 14. c. 15.
and ſo abaſhed their enemies, that they ſcāt
durſt abide the Sight of thē. Ioſephus writeth
that ſuch a Tempeſt of wind & ſtorme of Hayle
came in the faces of the Chanaanites that they
were not hable to ſtand before the Iſraeltes. Yea,
a great nūber of them in 
                     ••
                  eeing were drowned
and as it were Svvept avvay with the Riuer Kiſon:
by which the fielde was foughte. Yea and
the horſe men fled with ſuche violence, that they
rent their horſes hoofes.
               Curſe ye the Cittie of Meros,Verſe. 23. (ſayde the
Angell of the Lorde) Curſe the. &c.
               
                  
                  Meros was a Citie of the Iſraelites neere to
Thabor, where the victorie was gotten, & therfore
vnexcuſable, becauſe they came not forth to
helpe, and by the Angell of God are here curſed.
Whereby all men are taught* not to withdrawe
their helping hand,3. Reg. 2. a. 7. Judic. 12. a. 2. when God calleth to the deliuerance
of his people from the wicked tirannie
of the oppreſſour. In the reſidewe, the Prophetiſſe
pleaſantly ſetteth forth the geſture, Policie
and ſtouteneſſe of Iael in killing Siſara, with the
great reproche of that proude and confident tiranne,
that ſo long vnder his Prince had oppreſſed
Gods people. In the ende to the comforte of
the faithful, in waye of concluſion or rather of a
triumphant reioyſing, She addeth that God in
like maner will deale* with all his enemies,Pſa. 72. d. 27 and
they that loue him and put their truſt and confidence
in his mercy, ſhall proſper and Floriſhe as
the Sunne riſen to his might: that is, when he
is come to his midde dayes courſe.
            
         
         
            The thirde Sunday after Trinitie
at Mornyng prayer.
            1. Samuel 2.
            
               
                   ANd Hanna prayed, and ſayde, Myne heart reioyceth
in the Lorde, and mine horne is exalted in the Lorde:
my mouthe is wyde open ouer mine enemies, for I
reioyce in thy ſaluation.
               2 There is none holye as the Lorde: for without thée is
nothing, neither is there any of ſtrength as is our God.
               
                  
3 Talke no more proudely, let not arrogancie come out
of your mouthes: for the Lorde is a God of knowledge,Deu. 8. d. 18. and
his purpoſes come to paſſe.
               4 The bowe with the mightie men are broken, and they
that were weake haue girded themſelues with ſtrength.
               5 They that were full haue hyred oute themſelues for
breade, and they that were hungrye ceaſſe, tyll the barren
haue borne ſeuen,Deu. 32. f. 39. Job. 13. a. 2. Sapi. 16. b. 13. and ſhe that had many children, is waxed
féeble. 6 The Lorde killeth and maketh aliue, bryngeth
downe to the graue and fetcheth vp againe.
               7 The Lorde maketh poore, and maketh riche, bringeth
lowe, and heaueth vp on hye.
               8 He raiſeth vp the poore out of the duſt, and lifteth vp the
begger from the dounghill, to ſet them among princes and to
make them inherite the ſeate of glorye: For the pillers of the
earth are the Lordes, and he hath ſet the worlde vpon them.
               9 He will kéepe the féete of his Saintes, and the wicked
ſhall kepe ſcilence in darkeneſſe, and in his owne might ſhall
no man be ſtrong. 10 The Lordes aduerſaries ſhall be deſtroyed
of him, and oute of heauen ſhall be thunder vpon
them: the Lorde ſhall iudge the endes of the world, and ſhall
giue mighte vnto his king, and exalte the horne of his annointed.
11 And Elkana went to Ramath to his houſe, and
the lad did Miniſter vnto the Lord before Eli the prieſt.
               12 But the ſonnes of Eli were Children of Belial, and
knew not the Lord: 13 And the prieſts cuſtome toward the
people was, that whenſoeuer anye man offered anye offering,
the prieſts lad came whyle the fleſhe was a ſéething,
and a fleſhhooke with thrée téeth in his hand.
               14 And thruſt it into the panne, kettle, caldron, or pot: and al
that the fleſhhooke broughte vp, that the prieſt toke for him
ſelfe: And ſo they dyd vnto all the Iſraelites that came thither
to Silo.
               15 Yea, and thereto before they burnt the fat, the prieſts
lad came, and ſayde to the man that offered, Geue fleſhe that

I maye roſte it for the prieſt: for he will not haue ſodden
fleſhe of thée, but rawe.
               16 And if any man ſaide vnto him, Let them burne the fat
according to the cuſtome, and then take as muche as thy
                     •
                  e
heart deſireth: Then he would anſwere him, Yea thou ſhalt
giue it mée now, and if thou wilt not, I will take it with violence.
17 And the ſinne of the young men was verye great
before the Lorde: for men abhored the offering of the Lord.
               18 But the childe Samuel Miniſtred before the Lord
                     •
                  
girded with a linnen Ephod.
               19 Moreouer, his mother made him a little coate, and
brought it to him from yéere to yéere when ſhe came vp with
her huſband to offer the yéerely ſacrifice.
               20 And Eli bleſſed Elkana and his wife, and ſayde, The
Lord giue thée ſéede of this woman, for the petition that ſhe
aſked of the Lorde. And they went vnto their owne home.
               21 And the Lord viſited Hanna, ſo that ſhe conceyued, and
bare thrée ſonnes, and two daughters: and the childe Samuel
grewe before the Lorde.
               22 Eli was very olde, and heard all that his ſonnes did vnto
all Iſrael, and howe they lay with the women that wayted
at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation.
               23 And he ſaide vnto them, why doe ye ſuche things? for
of all theſe people I heare euill reportes of you.
               24 Oh, nay my ſonnes: for it is no good reporte that I
heare, howe that ye make the Lordes people to treſpaſſe.
               25 If one man ſinne againſt another, the iudge ſhall iudge
it: but if a man ſinne againſte the Lorde, who will be his
dayſeman? Notwithſtanding they hearkened not vnto the
voyce of their father, bicauſe the Lord would ſlay them.
               26 The childe Samuel profited and grewe, and was in
fauour both with the Lorde and with men.)
               27 And there came a man of God vnto Eli and ſaide vnto
him, Thus ſaith the lorde, Did not I plainely appeare vnto
the houſe of thy father, when they were in Egipte in Pharaos

houſe? 28 And I choſe him out of all the tribes of Iſrael
to be my prieſt, for to offer vpō mine aulter, and to burne
incenſe, and to weare an Ephod before me: and I gaue vnto
the houſe of thy father all the offeringes made by fyre of
the Children of Iſrael.
               
               29 Wherefore treade ye downe my ſacrifice and mine
offering which I commaunded in the Tabernacle, and honoureſt
thy children aboue me, to make your ſelues fat of the
firſt fruites of all the offeringes of Iſrael my people?
               30 Wherfore the Lorde God of Iſrael ſayth, I ſaide that
thy houſe and the houſe of thy father ſhould walke before me
for euer: but now the Lord ſayth, That be farre from mée,
for them that worſhippe me I will worſhippe, and they that
deſpiſe me, ſhall come to ſhame.
               31 Beholde, the dayes come that I will cut of thine arme,
and the arme of thy fathers houſe, that there ſhall not be an
old man in thine houſe. 32 And thou ſhalt ſée thine enemie
in the habitation (of the lord) & in all the wealth which (God)
ſhall giue Iſrael: and there ſhall not be an olde man in thine 
houſe for euer. 33 Neuertheleſſe, I will not deſtroy euery
one that come of thée from mine aulter, to make thine eyes
to faile, and to make thine heart ſorowfull: and all they that
be multiplied in thine houſe, ſhall dye (vvhen they be) men.
               34 And this ſhalbe a ſigne vnto thée that ſhall come vpon
thy two ſonnes Hophni and Phinehes: in one day they ſhall
dye both. 35 And I will ſtirre vp a faithfull prieſt, that ſhal
doe according to my heart and minde, and I will builde him
a ſure houſe, and he ſhall walke before mine annoynted for
euer. 36 And all that are leſt in thine houſe, ſhall come, and
crouche to him for a péece of ſiluer and a morſell of breade,
and ſhall ſay, Put me (I pray thée) in one office or other among
the prieſtes, that I may eate a morſell of bread.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .ij.
Chapter of .1. Samuel.
               And Hanna prayed,Verſe. 1. and ſayd, My hart
reioyceth in the Lord▪ &c.
               
                  THis Hanna the wife of Helcana, as is
mentioned in the 1. Chapiter of this
boke, hauing bene long Baraine, &
without childe, to hir great reproch
& griefe of minde: at the laſt through
earneſt praier, obtained of god hir ſonne Samuel,
and by hir vow dedicated him to the Seruice of
God. Wherefore in this chapiter ſtirred by the
motion of Gods holie Spirit, ſhee yeldeth moſt
hartie thankes and praiſes to God for the ſame.
               And albeit this be the chiefe purpoſe of Her
ſpeache, yet in the vehemencie of her ſpirite ſhe
breaketh out to greater matter, & exceeding lie
extolleth the mightye Power of God in other
things alſo. My hearte, ſaieth ſhe, reioyſeth,
whiche before was wrung with ſorowe: my
Horne, that is, my ſtrength and glory is now extolled,
which before was ouerthrowen in ſhame
and reproche: my Mouth is now free, which erſt
was ſtopped with heauineſſe, and I reioyce not
in mine owne ſtrength or doyng, but in the ſaluation
of the Lorde.Verſe 2. The Lord our God is onlie
Holie and of almightie Power, and my gladnes
in him is not vaine.Verſe. 3. Therfore you wicked
ones ceaſe to Breath out the pride and arrogancie
of your hartes, his knowledge is infinite,

his power is exceding great,Pſa. 113. a. 3. & is hable to bring
to paſſe whatſoeuer he will haue done.Verſe. 4. He ouerthroweth
the mightie, and breaketh their
ſtrength and power:Verſe. 5. he ſetteth vp the afflicted
and troubled perſons, & compaſſeth them with
his ſtrength and aſſiſtance.Luc. 1. e. 52. The riche that did
feede at full he bringeth to pouertie and neede:
Suche as were oppreſſed with hunger he bringeth
to greate plentie.Verſe. 6. 7. Pſa. 112. a. 8. The baraine he maketh
mother of manie children: and ſuch as had plentie
of children he maketh baraine. Yea, the Lord
killeth and bringeth euen from Deathes doore
to Life againe. The riche he pulleth downe out
of his Glory, and lifteth vp the poore from lowe
eſtate euen to the dignitie of Princes. The
Stedineſſe of the earth is in his handes, and he
cauſed it, and hath placed all the other elements
about it, as it were their foundation whereon
they reſted.Verſe. 9. The feete of his Saintes, that is,
all their Workes, Studies, Indeuours, and
Coūſailes he proſpereth: but the wicked he cauſeth
to periſhe in the darke cloudes of affliction.
               All the enemies of God that ſet themſelues againſt
him and his truth,Verſe. 10. with his mightie power
he will from Heauen ouerthrowe, and eſpeciallie
when he hath giuē his Kingdome to his
anoynted Meſsias & Sauiour that is to come.
               But the ſonnes of Helie were Children
of Belial and knew not the Lord.Verſe. 12. &c. &c.
               
                  Children of Beliall are diſſolute & looſe young

men giuen ouer to wickedneſſe, and not ſtaied or
bridled with the feare God: & ſuch the Sonnes
of Helie are here deſcribed to be, Contemners of
God, and of his holie ordinances, Couetous,
Cruell, Proude, Gluttenous. They were not
Contented with thoſe portions that the Lorde
had aſſigned them,Exe. 29. e. 26 Nu. 18. c. 21. Leui. 7. d. 34 
                  Exodus. 29. Num. 18. Leuit. 7.
But by violence and extortion tooke from men
what they luſted. Which dealing, cauſed the people
to lothe the Sacrifices of God.
               So great a miſchiefe is it, if the Miniſters of
Gods Religion doe wickedly abuſe to their gaine
the Sacramentes of God, or not deale in them
with comelie Reuerence, for the reproche of the
Sacramentes tende to the diſhonour of God.
               Howe greuous this offence of the Sonnes of
Helie was in the ſight of God, it doth afterward
appeare. There might ſeme to be great blame in
the Magiſtrates, that ſeyng this outragious contempt
of God and his Lawes, would not ſeeke
to Redreſſe the ſame.
               But the Childe Samuel Miniſtred before
the Lorde girded with.Verſe. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . &c.
               
                  To Miniſter before the Lorde, is to Miniſter
in the ſeruice of God. Ephod was a little linnē
garment from the ſhoulders downe toward the
middle, which the Leuites alſo vſed in the ſeruice
of the Temple. But the Ephod which the Prieſt
wore was of another ſorte: and was made of
Golde, blewe Silke, Purple Scarlet, & White

twined ſylke with brodered worke.Exo. 28. a. 6. 
                  Exod. 28.
               Elie was verie olde, and hearde all that
his ſonnes did vnto Iſrael,Verſe. 22. and. &c.
               
                  Helie for age was not hable to execute the
office of the Prieſt himſelfe, and therfore committed
it vnto his ſonnes, who fouly abuſed it
to gods diſhonor, and great offence of his people.
The women that are mentioned to haue
wayted at the doore of the Tabernacle, eyther
came thither to be purified, or to helpe forward
the holie miniſterie, and by theſe wicked Prieſts
were eyther by corruption allured to adulterie,
or by violence rauiſhed.
               And he ſaid vnto them,Verſ. 23. 24. Why do ye ſuch
thinges? for of all theſe people. &c.
               He ſhould ſharply haue rebuked them, yea
and with further puniſhement haue put them
from the holie Miniſterie, as ſuch perſons that
diſhonoured the ſeruice of God: but as a negligent
man in Gods cauſe, and a co
                     •
                  kering 
                     •
                  ather
toward his children, he reproueth them 
                     •
                  oldly,
& ſayde only that he Heard euil report of them,
and therfore they being now acuſtomed to their
wicked doings, were nothing amended therby.
               When one h
                     •
                  rteth an other man, he offendeth
God,Verſ. 25 but, by Media
                     ••
                  on: but when he treſpaſſeth
in matter of Religion and holineſſe, he
offendeth God Immediatly.
               As touching theſe woordes that bee added,

They hearkened not to their father, Bicauſe the
Lord would ſlay them: It maye ſeeme repugnant
to that God ſpeaketh by Ezec. cap.
                  Eze. 18. e. 23. 18. As ſure as I
liue, I vvill not the death of a ſinner. &c. And in Eſay
cap. 28.Eſai. 28. e. 21. God mynding to puniſhe the people
ſaith, that he wil do A ſtrange work, a ſtrange act:
that is, ſuche an one as vſually doth not belong
vnto him. Howe then doth he ſay here that Hee
will ſlay them? For anſwere herevnto, we muſt
know, That God is not the directe Authoure
of Deathe either of the ſoule or of the body: For
Deathe came in by ſinne.Rom. 5. b. 12. 
                  Rom. 5. & Sinne was
wrought by Satan, father both of ſinne & Death,
and therefore is he iuſtly called of Sainct Iohn
A manqueller.
                  Jo. 8. 14. Therefore, when God puniſheth
or killeth, he may well be ſaide to do A ſtrange
work, and ſuch a thing, as in his ſimple & reuealed
will, he doth not delite in. S. Auguſtine noteth
two kinds of VVill in God, y• one Simplex,
that is, his ſingle & Directe Will, the other Retribuens,
that is, his Requiting Wil, wherby he
killeth, and puniſheth. For as in hys ſingle and
directe will he would not haue ſinne, ſo would
he not haue the puniſhmēt of ſinne, but is Driuen
vnto it by the impenitent ſynners, that, of
his iuſtice he muſt needes giue them the reward
of that wickedneſſe, which he would not haue:
And therfore in his Simple and Reuealed will
for the loue he beareth to mankinde, he is grieued
to ſee man caſt him ſelfe into the daunger
therof. When God in Ezechiel ſaith, I wil not the

death of a ſinner: We muſt further vnderſtād, that
there are two ſorts of ſinners, The penitente,
and the Impenitent ſinner: God of his mercie
*will not the death of the Penitente ſinner,1. Jo. 1. d. 9. Eze. 33. c. 12. although
he haue iuſtly deſerued it. This Wil is
ſo Firme, Sure, & Reſolute, that he bindeth it
with an oth, ſaying, As ſure as I liue. The Impenitent
ſinner, of his iuſtice he muſt & will puniſh
by Death both of body and ſoule: And ſuch were
the ſonnes of Helie, of whome here it is ſpoken.
               There came a man vnto Hely and ſaid
vnto him,Verſe. 27. thus ſaith the Lord. &c.
               Now God ſendeth his meſſenger to Helie to
declare vnto him, as well the grieuouſneſſe of
his ſonnes offēces cōtinued by his Slacknes,
as alſo the Great puniſhment that ſhuld come
vnto him for the ſame. The Men of God are all
they which being lightned with the Spirite of
God, declare his wil vnto his people: Some of
which be ordinarie Miniſters in the Church of
God,1. Ti. 6. c. 11. and ſo doth Paule cal Timothie, The man of
God: Some ar extraordinarie, for ſome peculiar
purpoſes of greate importance, as this meſſenger
in this place was, but who it was by name
the Scripture expreſſeth not. And here wee
may learne, that when the ordinarie miniſterie
is corrupted, and regardeth not the worde of
God: The Holie Ghoſt rayſeth vp other extraordinarie
to reproue them.
               
                  
Examples hereof we haue in the Prophets,
and in Chriſt and his Apoſtles. The Prophets
and meſſengers of God alway vſe this preface,
Thus ſayth the Lorde, wherby as Ambaſſadors
from God they declare their Commiſſion, and
that they mynd to vtter nothing but that, wherof
they haue warrant from God himſelfe.
               Ambaſſadors may not goe beyond their Commiſſion,
nor the Meſſengers of God beyond his
reuealed will.
               
                   In this Meſſage the Prophet firſt putteth
Helie in mynde of the ſingular benefit that God
gaue to his anceſters, appointing the prieſthood
to remaine to that familie, thereby the more to
 amplifie his vnthankfull negligence. Then hee
layeth before him his offence and treſpaſſe done
againſt God, that for to benefite and pleaſure
his lewde Children, he ſuffered the Sacrifice
and true worſhin of God not only to be abuſed
or diſhonored, but to be brought to vtter Contempt,
and as it were trodē vnder foote, and the
 harts of the people alienated from it. Laſtly, he
declareth his puniſhmente, that God repenteth
him of that priuiledge that he had giuen to hys
familie, and would take the ſame frō him: that
there ſhould neuer be old man in his houſe, but
ſhould dye as ſoone as they came to mans ſtate
bicauſe he ſo negligently abuſed the reuerend
authoritie of his age.Verſe. 32. That he should ſee, that
is, That his poſteritie ſhould ſee, his enimie and
one that he did enuie, in the houſe of the Lorde,

and that in the time of Salomon when the people
of God had greateſt proſperitie. That they
of his flocke ſhould come to extreame pouertie
and neede. And in aſſurance, that all theſe
things in their due time ſhould come to paſſe,
he giueth him this vnpleaſant token, that his
two ſonnes ſhould Die both in one day. This
maye bee a terrible example to all Parentes,
Princes, and Magiſtrates, that by their ſlackneſſe
and remiſſe gouernemente ſuffer corruption
of Gods true worſhip, and wickedneſſe of
life to encreaſe in their children or ſubiects, for
lacke of Seueritie and iuſt Puniſhment. This
puniſhmente of taking away the prieſthoode
from the houſe of Helie God doth not preſently
execute, but differreth it vntill the reigne of Salomon
when Sadoc was placed in Abiathars
roome.3. Reg. 2. c. 27 3. Reg 2. In the meane time God of hys
mercie gaue time to his poſteritie to repente.
            
         
         
            The .14. Sunday after Trinitie
at Morning prayer.
            Ieremie. Cap. 5.
            
               LOke thorough Hieruſalem, beholde and ſée, féeke thorough 
hir ſtréetes alſo within, if ye can finde one man
that doth equall and righte, or ſeeketh for the truth, and
I ſhall ſpare that Citie ſaith the Lord.
               2 For though they can ſaye, The Lorde liueth: yet they
ſweare to deceiue. 3 Wheras thou (O Lord) lookeſt only

vpon faith and truth: Thou haſt ſcourged them, but they
toke no repentance, thou haſt corrected them for amendement,
but they refuſed thy correction, they made their faces
harder than a ſtone, and would not amend.
               4 Therefore I thought in my ſelfe, Peraduenture they
are ſo ſimple and fooliſh that they vnderſtand nothing of the
Lords way, and iudgements of their God.
               5 Therefore will I go vnto their heads and rulers, and
talke with them, if they know the way of the Lorde, and
iudgements of their God: But theſe in like manner haue
broken the yoke, and burſt the bondes in ſunder.
               6 Wherefore a Lion out of the wood hath hurte them,De. 32. d. 20
and a woolfe in the euening ſhall deſtroy them, the Leopard
doth lye lurking by their cities, to teare in péeces all them
that come therout: for their offences are multiplied, and their
 departing away is encreaſed.
               7 Shoulde I then for all this haue mercie vpon thée?Sopho. 1. a.
Thy children haue forſaken me, and ſworne by them that
are no Gods: and albeit that I fedde them to the full, yet
they fall to adulterie, and haunt harlots houſes.
               8 In the deſire of vncleanely luſt they are become lyke
the ſtoned horſe,Eze. 22. b. 11 euery man neygheth at hys neighbours
wife 9 Should I not correct this, ſaith the Lorde?Jere. 9. b. 9. ſhoulde
I not be auenged of euery people that is like vnto this?
               10 Climbe vp vpon their walles, beate them downe, and
deſtroy them not vtterly: take away their battlements, bycauſe
they are not the Lords. 11 For vnfaithfully hath the
houſe of Iſrael and Iuda forſaken me, ſayth the Lord.
               12 They haue denied the Lorde and ſayde,2. Pet. 2. a. 1. Jere. 14. b. 13. It is not hee
that looketh vppon vs, tuſh, there ſhal no miſfortune come
vppon vs, we ſhall ſée neither ſword nor hunger.
               13 As for the warning of the prophets, it is but wynd, yea
there is not the word of God in them: ſuch things ſhall happen
vnto themſelues. 14 Wherefore thus ſaith the lorde
God of hoſtes: Bicauſe ye ſpeak ſuch words, behold y• words

that are in thy mouth will I turne to fire, & make the people
to be wood, that the fire may cōſume them. 15 Lo I wil 
bring a people vpon you frō farre,Deu. 28. c. 4. O houſe of Iſrael,Baru. 4. c. 9. ſaith the
Lord, a mightie people, an old people, a people whoſe ſpeach
thou knoweſt not, neither vnderſtandeſt what they ſaye.
               16 Their arrowes are ſodain death, yea they themſelues
be very Giants. 17 This people ſhall eate vp thy fruite &
thy meat, yea they ſhal deuoure thy ſonnes & thy daughters
thy ſhepe & thy bullocks, they ſhal eat vp thy grapes & figgs:
As for thy ſtrong & wel defenſed cities wherin thou diddeſt
truſt, they ſhal bring to pouertie, & that through the ſworde.
               18 Neuertheleſſe, I wil not thē haue done with you, ſaith
the Lord. 19 But if they ſay: Wherfore doth the lorde our
God al this vnto vs?Jere. 16. b. 10 Then anſwer them, Bicauſe y• lyke as
ye haue forſaken me, & ſerued ſtrāge gods in your lād, euen
ſo ſhal ye ſerue ſtrāgers out of your land. 20 Preache this
vnto the houſe of Iacob, & crie it out in Iuda, and ſaye thus:
               21 Heare this thou fooliſh & vndiſcrete people: Ye haue eies 
but ye ſée not,Eſai. 6 b. 8. eares haue ye,Iohn. 9. d. 39 but ye heare not.Job. 26. d. 10 22 Feare ye
not me, ſaith the lord? will ye not tremble at my preſence?
which bynd the ſea with the ſand by a cōtinual decrée, ſo yt it
cānot paſſe his boundes: for though it rage, yet can it do nothing,
& though ye waues therof do 
                     •
                  wel, yet may they not go
ouer. 23 But this people hath a falſe & obſtinat heart, they
are departed & gone away frō me. 24 They thinke not in
their hearts, O let vs feare the lord our God, who giueth vs
rain early & late when néed is, which kepeth euer ſtil ye harueſt
for vs yerely. 25 Neuertheles your miſdéeds haue turned
theſe frō you, & your ſinnes haue robbed you of good thin
ges. 26 For amōg my people are found wicked perſons, y•
priuily lay ſnares & wait for mē, to take them & deſtroy thē.
               27 And lyke as a net is full of birdes, ſo are their houſes
full of that whiche they haue gotten with falſhood and deceipt.
Hereof commeth their great ſubſtance and riches.
               28 Hereof are they fatte and wealthye, and are more 
                  
miſcheuous than any other: they miniſter not the lawe,
they make no ende of the fatherleſſe cauſe, yea and they
proſper: yet they iudge not the poore according to equitie.
               29 Shoulde I not puniſh theſe things ſayeth the Lorde?
ſhould not I be auenged of all ſuche people as theſe be?
               30 Horrible and gréeuous things are done in the lande.
               31 The Prophetes teache falſly, and the preachers receiue
gifts, and my people hath pleaſure therin: what will
come thereof at the laſte?
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .v.
Chapter of Hieremie.
               Looke through Hieruſalem, behold and
ſee,Verſe. 1. ſeeke through hir ſtreetes alſo. &c.
               
                  THe Prophete Hieremie in the former
Chapiter had notably deſcribed the
comming of Nabuchodonoſors armie
into Ievvrie, and the greate waſte and
ſpoyle that he ſhould make of that countrey, euen
to the very walles of the citie Hieruſalem,
whiche therfore ſhould be in greate feare, euen
as a woman in trauayle with chylde.
               Therfore in this place, before hee noteth the
deſtruction of that Citie, he maketh proofe and
declaration of the Iuſtice of God in doing of it.
For we ſee commonly, when God puniſheth the
wicked for their offences, that they are ſo obſtinate
and ſtiffenecked, and ſo farre from anie

ſenſe of true repentaunce and turning to God,
that they murmure againſt god, and accuſe him
for dealing ouer Rigorouſly and Cruelly with
them, and that he puniſheth them more ſharply
and grieuouſly than their offences Deſerue.
               Wherfore God by his Prophet ſheweth, that
they are ſo farre ouerwhelmed with their wickedneſſe,
as there is not left one Iuſt mā amōg
them, in cōſideratiō of whom, he might Spare
them, & therefore, that of his Iuſtice he muſte of
neceſſitie puniſh them. Looke (ſayth he) through
Hieruſalem, beholde and ſee, ſeeke thoroughe her
ſtreates. &c. In which words God willeth euen
the whole Worlde to looke diligentely into the
ſtate of that Citie, that was called by the name
of The holie Citie, & to ſee whether there were
any thing or Perſon in it, in reſpect whereof, he
ſhoulde ſhewe Mercie toward it.
               For though they can ſaye,Verſe. 2. 3. The Lord liueth:
yet they ſweare to deceyue. &c.
               Here the Prophete detecteth their Hipocriſie,
and ſignifieth, that albeit they pretend to
be the People of God and to haue a reuerēce to
the name of God, and therefore will call him to
witneſſe in their affaires, and Sweare by his
name, as by that which they accōpt very Holie:
yet it is but wicked Hipocriſte in them, and
indeede the Prophanation of the name of God.
For they ſweare falſely and vntruly to* deceyue
their neyghbour,Pſ. 14. a. 3. 4. Pſa. 23. a. 4. and to worke their vniuſte deuiſes,

& ſo by Periurie make the Name of God
a Cloake & meane to further their owne Wickedneſſe:
Wheras God Looketh only vpon faith
and truth,
                  Pſ. 77. d. 40 and regardeth not the faire * Pretēce
of his Name, when the true Reuerence therof
is not in their hearts.
               This place ought to teach vs, that the Name
of the * Churche,
                  Jere. 7. a. 4. or People of God, the Title of
Chriſtians, the Externall Sacraments of chriſtian
Religion, are not ſufficient to moue the Fauour
of God toward vs, nor to make vs his people,
vnleſſe the feare of God and true Holyneſſe be
in our heartes.
               In the begynnyng of the thirde Verſe,
whiche in deede ſhoulde be a parte of this ſecōd,
the Prophet altereth the Perſon, and turneth
the ſpeach vnto God himſelfe.
               Thou hast ſcourged them,Verſe. 3. but they toke
no repentance, thou haſt corrected &c.
               This was of exceding great Stubborneſſe
in the Iewes, and of Indurated heartes, that
they coulde not bee moued to Repentance, no
not with the heauie Plagues and puniſhments
that God did bryng vpon them to that ende:
yea they rather hardened their faces, as it wer,
againſte God, and became ſhameleſſe in their
wickedneſſe, caſting of al conſideration of Godlyneſſe
and Honeſtie.
               
               Therfore I thought in my ſelfe,Verſe. 4. peraduenture
they are ſo ſimple and &c.
               Forſomuch as it might be thought, the Simple
&. Fooliſhe people did amiſſe by Ignorance
and errour only, and that the wyſer and better
ſort had more Care of ye feare & ſeruice of God:
hee turneth nowe to the Princes, Prieſts, Magiſtrates,
and Rulers, and ſheweth that they
alſo, whiche of duetie ſhould haue ben not only
Inſtructers, Leaders & Guyders to other, but
alſo correcters & Puniſhers of their Leudneſſe,
were become more ſtubborne and diſſolute than
they, and had cleane caſt frō them the bond and
Yoke of Obedience to the Holie Will & Lawe
of God. So that there myght ſeeme no Hope,
eyther in Prince or People, in Riche or poore,
in Learned or Ignorant, but that they All were
giuen ouer to their owne Luſtes and Senſual
appetites.
               Wherfore a Lyon out of the wood hath
hurte them, and a Wolfe in the. &c.
               By the Lion, the VVolfe, and the Leopard,
the Prophet meaneth the Aſsyrians, the Aegyptians,
and ſundrye other Enimies, that ſhoulde
come vpō them, and ſo ſtraightly Beſiege them
in their Cities, that not One ſhuld be hable to
goe out, but ſhoulde be Taken and Slayne.
               When the prophet ſayeth, The Lion out of

the wood, and a VVolfe in the euening; hee noteth
the Crueltie and fierceneſſe of the enimies. For
the Lion when he commeth out of the wood for
his pray is very hungrie, and the VVolfe that
hath miſſed his feeding al the day long, is in the
euening more greedy and fierce. And ſuch he ſignifieth
that theſe Enimies ſhuld be. The Lion
Hath hurt thē, ſaith Ieremie, that is, Shall hurte
them. For the manner of the Prophets is oftentimes,
by y• time Paſt to note the time to Come,
as well in the threatnings of puniſhments, as
in the Promiſes of Gods good bleſſings. And
thereby do they ſignifie that the truth of either
of thē is ſo aſſured, as if they were Alredy perfourmed.
The cauſe of all the Afflictions and
troubles that God caſteth vpon his people, is
noted to be the encreaſe of their Wickednes and
Contempt of God and his word.
               Shoulde I then for all this,Verſe. 7. 8. 9 haue mercie
vpon thee? Thy children haue. &c.
               God here ſheweth that of neceſſitie his very
Iuſtice forceth him Sharply to puniſh thē,
As if he had ſaid,Gen. 18. c. 25 Seeing I am the* Iudge of
the world, how ſhould I let them eſcape vnpuniſhed,
which ſo obſtinately of purpoſe prouoke
my wrath againſt them? Should I not then
make my glory and maieſtie cōtemptible in the
world? Shuld I not make the wicked to think
I were no God? yea, y• there were no God at al,

that woulde puniſhe their naughtie and ſynfull
lyfe? Wherfore as of my Mercie I am moſt redie
to pardon the Repentante ſinner that leaueth
his wickedneſſe, and turneth to me: So
muſte I of my Iuſtice ſharply plague the obſtinate
and ſtiffenecked offender that runneth on
headlong in his owne naughtie wayes.
               God, turning his ſpeeche to the Citie Hieruſalem,
ſayth, Hir children, that is, her inhabitantes
hath vnthankfully alſo abuſed his benefites
whiche he beſtowed vpon them, and when
he fed them with Plentie and Abundance of al
things, they turned it to the Pāpering of their
bodyes, and to the mayntenance of their wanton
luſtes, in ſuche ſorte that they became as
Stalions or ſtone horſes euery one neighing at
his neighbours wife. By which compariſon he
maruelouſly ſetteth foorthe theyr outragious
Incontinencie and Diſſolute life, and giueth vs
alſo to vnderſtand how eaſily Wealth and * plē
                  tie
doth breed Looſeneſſe and wantonneſſe,Ez. 16. f. 49 Jere. 22. e. 27 if we
learne not to vſe with reuerence and feare the
good bleſſyngs that GOD poureth vpon vs,
and that God alſo will bee auenged of vs for
the ſame. For the Iuſtice of God muſt needes
puniſh the ſame in vs, as well as he did in the
Iewes, and ſo hee heere earneſtly affirmeth,
when he ſaith, Should I not be auenged on euery
people that is like vnto this? &c.
               
               
               Climbe vp vpon their walles,Verſe. 10. beat them
down, and deſtroy them not vtterly. &c.
               This is ſpoken by God to the enimies of
the Iewes, as it were, to haſten and encourage
thē, to Plague that naughty people. By which
maner of ſpeaking, God giueth his people to vnderſtād
both that the Inuaſiō of their enimies,
that ſhoulde come vpon them, was only at the
appoyntment & callyng of God, and that they
were therin the Miniſters and * executioners of
his iuſtice:Jere. 25. b. 9. and alſo that they ſhould be hable by
no meanes to Eſcape the danger therof, eyther
by their Strong & ſenſed Cities, or otherwiſe.
               In theſe wordes, And deſtroy them not vtterly,
God limitteth the power of the enimies, & leaueth
hope of Pardon to his people, if they will
in any tyme Repent and turne vnto him.
               The goodneſſe of God vſeth all meanes that
may be, to prouoke them to leaue their wickedneſſe,
before he bring vpon them extreme Deſolation
and confuſion.
               In the 11. 12. 13. verſes God agayne alledgeth
the iuſte cauſes of their Plague, that is, that
they had vnfaythefully by Apoſtaſie, forſaken
hym, Denyed hys Prouidence, contemned the
Thretnings of his Prophets,Jere. 43. a. 2. as * Falſe, Vain,
and fooliſhe, and ſayde, that the Puniſhmentes
of Warre, Famin, and Hunger, ſhould not light
vpon them, but on the Prophetes themſelues,
that ſpake ſo muche of them.
               
                  
Such is the obſtinacie of the wicked againſt
all godly Aduertiſemēts, that they wil not only
not acknowledge them to be Good & true, but
impute the cauſe of Gods wrath and diſpleaſure
to thoſe Meſſengers that hee ſendeth to
call them to Repentance.
               Wherfore thus ſayth the Lorde of hoaſtes:Verſ. 14. 15. 16. 17.
Bicauſe ye ſpeake ſuch words. &c.
               God ſheweth howe grieuous and intollerable
the Contempt of his word and miniſters is
in his ſight, & how Seuerely he wil puniſh the
the ſame. Bicauſe (ſaith he) you haue thus Cō
                  temptuouſly
thought and ſpoken of my worde,
vttred by my prophet,Pſa. 118. 159. as though it were * vain,
falſe, and of no credite: beholde ſayth God (turning
his ſpeache to Hieremie) That woorde of
which they make ſo ſmall accompt, and which
they eſteeme of ſo little Force, I wil make as
Fire in thy mouth, & that leude People ſhal be
as wood or ſtubble. And euē as certenly as Fire
cōſumeth wood y• is caſt into it, ſo aſſuredly ſhal
the Might and Truth of that my Word vttered
by thee, bring vpon them the Plague and
Deſolation that it hath threatned vnto them.
               In the .3. nexte Verſes, he deſcribeth the
Myght and cruell Barbaritie of thoſe enimies
that he would bring vpon them.Verſe. 15. 16. 17. They ſhal be
(ſayeth hee) A mightie people, whoſe power
they ſhall not be hable to reſiſte. An olde people,
that by long continuance in Empire and dominion

is waxen Proud and ſterne, and therby
will vſe the leſſe mercie: A people whoſe ſpeache
they knew not, and therby could not deale with
them by entreatie to obtaine fauoure. They are
ſo mighty men and ſo ready Archers, that none
eſcapeth that they ſhoote at, and therefore their
Arrowes may well be ſaide to bee Sodaine death:
So barbarous and fierce they ſhall be, as they
will not ſpare either Sonnes or Daughters amōg
you, they wil Cōſume your meats, your frutes,
your Grapes, your Figges, they wyl Deſtroy
your ſheepe, your Oxen, your bullockes, and all
your Cattell, neither ſhall you haue any Defēce,
healpe, or ſuccoure, againſt them. For the ſenſed
Cities, wherein you truſt, ſhall in that day nothing
healpe you, but that by the force of the
ſword they ſhall bring you to great diſtreſſe and
pouertie.Verſe. 18. 19. And although that this threatning be
very terrible, yet he ſaith further, that He wyll
not ſo haue done with them, but will adde greter
Plagues and puniſhments. And therefore,
bycauſe God ſawe their wayward obſtinacie,
that they would not only not acknowledge
their fault and repent, but alſo would murmure
againſt him, as dealing cruelly and vniuſtly
with them, and puniſhing them without good
cauſe, Hee willeth the Prophete to anſwere
this their blaſphemous murmuring, and tell
them plainly, That forſomuch as they had forſaken
the true worſhip of the liuing God, & did
Sacrifice to ſtrange Goddes at home in their

owne Lande, whyche God had gyuen them,
He would nowe for puniſhment thereof, cauſe
them to be led Captiue into Babilon, & to ſerue
ſtrange Lordes and Maiſters in a Countrey
that was not theirs.
               Preache this vnto the houſe of Iacob,Verſe. 20. 21.
and crie it out in Juda. &c.
               God leaueth nothing vndone, whereby this
Stubburne people may declare themſelues vnexcuſable,
if they doe not Repent & forſake their
wickedneſſe, and therefore chargeth the Prophete,
that they lacke not Teaching and Preaching,
and the euident declaration of Gods Iuſtice
to come vpon them, and that in ſuch maner,
as they maye not thinke it to be Wordes onely
and bare Threatninges to feare them, but that
they maye be well aſſured that they ſhall be as
truely perfourmed in dede, as they were vttered
in wordes.
               And then, if they did not obey, they ſhoulde
ſhew themſelues to be not only a Blockiſhe & a
foliſhe people, but in dede as indurate Storkes
and Stones, and altogether like thoſe Idolles
that they worſhipped which had eyes,Pſal. 113. b. 6. and yet
ſawe not, and eares, and yet hearde not. &c. but
did ſuffer the Worde of God to paſſe as if it had
bene ſpoken to Vnſenſible creatures.
               To the further amplification,Verſe. 22. and condemnation
of their Obſtinacie, in reiecting al obedience

and Feare of God, he compareth them to the Sea.
The Sea, ſaithe he, then whiche there is nothing
more forcible and violente, yet at my Decree
and appointment dothe it* tarie within his
boundes,Pſa. 103. b. 10 and in his greateſt rage and ſwelling
of Waues dothe not breake oute beyonde the
bankes of light Sande and Grauell.
               Hereby this People mighte be taughte how
great my Power is, & ſo learne to Feare me, as
their God, and to Obey me as their Lorde that
made them and all the worlde beſide: but they
are more dull of vnderſtanding than the* Vnſenſible
creatures,Eſai. 1. a. 3. and further from obedience than
the furious and raging Surges of the Sea.
               
               Although the exceeding might and power of
God in bounding the Sea within certaine Limites
did not moue them to feare his Maieſtie:Verſe. 24.
yet conſidering that of his fatherly Prouidence
he ſent them Raine in due times, & all maner of
Seaſonable weathering, to temper the groūd,
that it mighte bring forth Fruites to their vſe
and commoditie, it ſhould haue ſomewhat enclined
their hartes to Loue his Fatherly goodneſſe,
and Reuerently to haue ſerued him. But
they were as v
                     •
                  thankefull toward the Goodneſſe
and mercie of God, as they were obſtinate
againſt his Power and Maieſtie.
               Neuertheleſse youre miſdeedes haue
turned theſe from you.Verſe. 25. &c. &c.
               
                  
Hereby we are taught that when God taketh
from vs the Fruites of the Earth, and his
other good bleſſinges, the cauſe thereof is our
owne Sinfulneſſe and forſaking of God and his
true Seruice.
               In the 26. and 27. verſes, the Prophete reckeneth
vp ſome of their offences, and eſpeciallye
their Falſheade, Deceipte, and Crafte in trapping
and ſnaring the ſimple, and by vniuſt and
ſuttell meanes, drawing them into daunger, ſo
that it maye appeare there remayned among
them no Faithe, nor Trueth, nor Integritie and
vprighte dealing, but altogether couetous craftineſſe,
iniurie and oppreſſion.
               And as the People were giuen to extortion
and oppreſſion:Verſe. 2
                        •
                     . ſo were the Magiſtrates negligent
in miniſtring Iuſtice, in defending the innocent,
and puniſhing the violence of the oppreſſour
and wrongfull doer.Jere. 2. b. 8. Jere. 8. d. 10. Jere. 6. d. 13. Yea and the * verye
Prophetes alſo, Preachers and Prieſts which
ſhould haue inſtructed and taught both People
and Magiſtrate: were themſelues giuen ouer to
Couetouſnes and Briberie, and by falſe prophecying
& teaching noſeled the people in their wickedneſſe,
and in the contempt of God and of his
true Prophetes. And therfore God denounceth
that he muſt needes of his Iuſtice puniſhe both
them and all ſuche other wicked People as
they are.
            
         
         
            
            The .14. Sunday after Trinitie
at Euening prayer.
            Ieremie. Cap. 22.
            
               
                   THus ſayeth the Lorde, Goe downe into the houſe of
the King of Iuda, and ſpeake there theſe wordes.
               2 And ſaye, Heare the worde of the Lord, thou king
of Iuda that ſitteſt in the kingly ſeate of Dauid, thou and thy
ſeruants, and thy people that goeth in and out at theſe gates.
               3 Thus the Lorde commaundeth,Eſai. 1. d. 16. Jere. 21. c. 12. Zach. 7. c. 9. Kepe equitie and righteouſneſſe,
deliuer the oppreſſed from the power of the violent,
doe not gréeue nor oppreſſe the ſtraunger, the fatherleſſe,
nor the wydowe, and ſhed no innocent bloude in this
place. 4 And if ye kéepe theſe things Faithfully, then ſhall
there come in at the doore of this houſe, Kinges to ſit vpon
Dauids ſeate, they ſhal be caryed in charrets, and ryde
vpon Horſes, bothe they and their ſeruantes, and their people.Eſai. 1. e. 20. Heb. b. 6. 8.
5 But if ye will not be obediente vnto theſe commaundementes,
I ſweare by myne owne ſelfe, ſayeth the
Lorde, this houſe ſhalbe waſte.
               6 For thus hathe the Lorde ſpoken vpon the Kinges of
Iuda, Thou Gilea
                     •
                   arte vnto me the heade of Libanus:
ſhall I not make thée ſo waſte as the Cities that no man
dwell in? 7 I will prepare a deſtroyer with his weapons
for thée, to hewe downe thy eſpeciall Cedar trées, and
to caſte them in the fire.
               
                   8 And all the people that goe by this Citie, ſhall ſpeake
one to another, Wherefore hathe the Lorde done thus vnto
this noble Citie?
               9 Then ſhall it be anſwered, Becauſe they haue broken
the couenaunt of the Lorde their God, and haue worſhipped
and ſerued ſtrange Gods.
               10 Maurne not ouer the dead, and be not woe for them:
but be ſorie for him that departeth awaye, for he commeth

not againe, and ſéeth his natiue countrey no more.2. Chr. 3. c.
               
               11 For thus ſayeth the Lorde as touching Sellum the
Sonne of Ioſias King of Iuda, which raigned after his father,
When he is caryed oute of this place, he ſhall neuer
come hither againe.
               12 For he ſhall dye in the place wherevnto he is led captiue,Eſai. 5. c. Agge. 1. a.
and ſhall ſée this lande no more.
               13 Woe worthe him that buyldeth his houſe with vnrighteouſneſſe,
and his parlours with the good that he hath
gotten by violence, which neuer recompenceth his neighbours
labour, nor payeth him his hire.
               14 Who thinketh in himſelfe, I will builde mée a wyde
houſe and gorgious parlours, who cauſeth wyndowes to be
hewen therein, and the ſéelings and ioyſtes maketh he of
Cedar, and painteth them with Sinoper.
               15 Thinkeſt thou to raigne nowe that thou haſte incloſed
thy ſelfe with Cedar? Dyd not thy father eate and drynke
and proſper well, as long as he dealt with equitie and righteouſneſſe?
16 Yea, when he helped the oppreſſed and poore
to their righte, then proſpered he well: from whence came
this, but onely becauſe he knewe me, ſaith the Lorde?
               17 Neuertheleſſe as for thine eyes and thyne heart, they
looke vpon couetouſneſſe, to ſhedde Innocent bloude, to doe
wrong and violence.
               18 And therefore thus ſayth the Lorde againſt Iehoakim
the ſonne of Ioſias King of Iuda,4. Reg. 24. a. 2. &c. Jer. 36. e. 30. They ſhall not mourne
for him (as they vſe to doe) Alas brother, alas ſiſter: neither
ſhall they ſay vnto him, Alas for that noble prince.
               19 But as an aſſe ſhall he be buryed, corrupte, and bée
caſte withoute the gates of Hieruſalem.
               20 Climbe vp the hill of Libanus (O thou daughter Sion)
lifte vp thy voyce vpon Eaſan, crye from all partes: for all 
thy louers are deſtroyed.
               21 I gaue thée warning whyle thou waſt yet in proſperitie:
but thou ſaydeſt, I will not heare: And this manner

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
haſte thou vſed from thy youth, that thou wouldeſt neuer
heare my voyce.
               22 All thy heardmen ſhalbe dryuen with the winde, and
thy darlinges ſhalbe caryed away into capitiuitie: then ſhalt
thou be broughte to ſhame and confuſion, becauſe of all thy
wickedneſſe.Eſai. 13. d. Eſai. 21. a. Jere. 12. b. Jere. 21. a. 2. Reg. 24. b. 23 Thou that dwelleſt vpon Libanus, and
makeſt thy neſt in the Cedar trées, O howe litle ſhalte thou
be regarded when thy ſorowe and panges come vpon thée,
as vpon a woman trauailing with childe?
               24 As truely as I liue ſaith the Lorde, thoughe Conanias
 the ſonne of Iehoakim king of Iuda were the ſignet of my
right hande, yet will I plucke him of.
               25 And I will giue thée into the hande of them that ſéeke
thy life, and into the power of them that thou feareſt, euen
into the power of Nabuchovonozor the King of Babilon, and
into the power of the Chaldées.
               26 Moreouer I will ſende thée and thy mother that bare
thée into a ſtraunge Lande where ye were not borne, and
there ſhall ye dye.
               27 But as for the Land that ye will deſire to returne vnto,
ye ſhall neuer come at it againe.
               28 This man Conanias ſhall be like an Image robbed
and torne in péeces, and like a veſſell wherein there is no
pleaſure: Wherefore bothe he and his ſéede ſhall be ſent awaye,
and caſt into a lande that they knowe not.
               29 O thou earthe, earthe, earthe, heare the worde of the
Lorde. 30 Thus ſayth the Lorde, Write this man deſtitute
of Children: for no proſperitie ſhall this man haue all
his dayes, neither ſhall anye of his ſéede be ſo happie as to
ſitte vpon the ſeate of Dauid, and to beare rule anye more
in Iuda.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxij.
Chapter of Hieremie.
               Thus ſayeth the Lorde,Verſe. 1. goe downe into
the houſe of the King of Iuda. &c.
               
                  THat this admonition mighte be of the
greater force with the people, the Prophete
is here willed by God to goe to
the Prince & Counſailers themſelues,
and to declare the Meſſage to them. For the inferiours
and ſubiectes might wel thinke it was
no Idle or trifeling admoniſhment that was denounſed
to the chiefe and principali rulers, but
that in dede it ſhoulde be fulfilled. The Kings
of Iuda and poſteritie of Dauid had a ſingular preheminence
in the Couenant of God,Pſa. 88. d. 28 & a peculiar
Promiſe, that that line and ſucceſſiō ſhould continue
for euer. This promiſe which ſhould haue
put them in minde of their duetie, they turned to
the maintenance of their obſtinacie and ſtubburneſſe:
thinking, bicauſe of this Promiſe, that al
the Threatnings of puniſhment and deſtructiō
declared by the Prophete, were but Vaine, and
not agreing with the former Couenant.
               Therefore God here willeth his Prophete
plainely to ſignifie to the King himſelfe, and to
all his Princes,2. ſam. 7. b. 13 that as the promiſe was conditionall,
and required as well their Obedience on
the one parte, as his Trueth on the other: ſo if
they fulfilled not the Condition, they neyther
might nor ſhould be Partakers of the Benefite

of the couenant. The Place was holye wherein
the Kings of Iuda did ſit, and they were Figures
of the kingdome of Chriſte, therefore the Iuſtice
of God might the leſſe beare with their wickedneſſe.
By this we maye learne, that no Title of
Dignitie, Preheminence, or holineſſe, cā ſaue vs
from the iuſte plague of God, if we Depart from
the Truth of his holie will and couenant. Keepe
equitie and righteouſneſſe, ſayeth the Prophete,
Deliuer the oppreſſed from the power of the violent,
Doe not greeue nor oppreſſe the ſtranger, the fatherleſſe,
or the vvydovve, Shedde no innocente bloude.
Execute Iudgement faithfully and truely in all
things, and towarde All perſons, and then ſhall
ye proſper and flouriſhe, and ye ſhall enioye the
Promiſes made to Dauid and to his Poſteritie:
But if ye will not ſo doe,Jere. 21. d. 12. but cōtinue in * Iniurye,
Oppreſſion and Violence, as before time ye haue
done, I ſweare vnto ye by mine Owne ſelfe, and
by my truth, that the holy Citie of Dauids throne
and kingdome ſhal not helpe you, but that I wil
make this Houſe to be Waſte, and giue it as a
Praie vnto the enemies.
               For althoughe Hieruſalem,
                  Verſe. 6. which is The head
of Libanus, be the place which I haue choſen for
the peculiar Seate of my worſhip: yet ſeing it is
fallen from me to wickedneſſe and Idolatrie, I
eſteme it nowe no otherwiſe, than I doe Gilead,
and the kingdome of the tenne Tribes wherein
it ſtandeth. And as I haue dealte by that Kingdome,
and for the Diſobedience thereof made it

waſte and deſolate, euen ſo will I doe by Hieruſalem
and the kingdome of Iudah, and wil bring
the enemie to deſtroy that alſo ſeing they wil by
no meanes be reclaimed. The kingdome wherin
Mounte Gilead ſtandeth, is farre larger and
of greater worthineſſe in it ſelf thā 
                  Libanus, and
the Kingdome of Iuda, wherof Hieruſalem is the
thiefe Cittie. Therefore if I ſpared not that,
they may not thinke that I will ſpare Hieruſalem
and Iuda.
               
               I will prepare a deſtroyer with his weapons
for thee,Verſe. 7. to hewe downe. &c.
               Bicauſe he had ſaide, that Hieruſalem ſhould
be deſtroyed, he now ſheweth the Meanes and
the maner howe it ſhould be donne. This Deſtroyer
is the armie of the Chaldees and Babilonians,
which was brought by God vpon his people.
They came not of their owne motion, but
were led therto of God, as his Scourge to the
Puniſhment of the wicked, & therefore he ſaith,
I vvill prepare a deſtroyer. By whiche wordes
bothe the Ievves, and by them, All other haue to
learne,Jere. 9. d. 11. That it is * God that bringeth affliction
& trouble vpon ſinners, and therfore ſhould they
alſo conſider, that they haue not onely to deale
with the outward enemie that perſecuteth thē,
but with God himſelfe, whoſe Will no power
or endeuour can Reſiſt. And therefore that the
beſt way is, when in ſuch caſe we feele the Heauie
hande of God laide vpon vs, by earneſt Repentance

humblie to ſubmitte oure ſelues vnto
him & craue his Mercie. To hevve dovvne their
eſpeciall Cedar trees, may either be takē literallie
that they ſhould make Spoile of that goodlie
Woode of Libanus, & of the notable Timber
thereof, wherein the Ievves greatly gloried, or
els it maie be vnderſtanded figuratiuelie of the
beames of the Temple, which at the deſtruction
thereof ſhould be cut oute to the fire, or thirdlie
of their Noble men and all the glory of their Citie
and kingdome, the chiefe whereof ſhould be
brought to confuſion.
               And all the people that goe by this Citie,Verſe. 8. 9.
ſhall ſpeake one to another. &c.
               Before time God had beautified the Citie of
Hieruſalem with his maruellous benefites, ſo
that it was ſpoken of as a wonder or Miracle
among ſtraunge Nations howe mightilie God
did maintaine and defende them: In ſo muche
that verie ſtraungers and Heathen perſons did
vnderſtand, that it was not their owne ſtrength
or Policie that did preſerue them ſo, but the
mightie and maruellous Power of their Lord
and God. Therefore, when they ſhoulde nowe
ſee the ſame Citie, that was ſo Famous and
had in ſo greate price, to be vtterlie deſtroyed, in
their Common Talking of the ſame, the one
ſhould anſwere the other, that the cauſe of this

deſolation was, For that they had broken the Couenant
of their Lorde. In whiche pointe the obſtinate
Dulneſſe of the Ievves is verie muche
noted, ſeyng that forraine Nations, Heathen,
and Strangers from God, ſhould ſo eaſilie conceiue
the cauſe of their Deſtruction, when as
they themſelues whiche had bene ſo accuſtomed
to the workes of God, woulde not vnderſtand
it, no not at the telling and declaration of the
Prophetes.
               Mourne not ouer the deade,Verſe. 10. &c. and be
not woe for them, but be ſorie. &c.
               When People doe flee from their enemies
into any place bicauſe they are not hable to Reſiſte
them, they commonly doe hope for a Better
day & for a time of Returne into their countrey,
and an Ende of the miſerie, & therfore doe
they abhorre Deathe more than baniſhment or
any other trouble. But the Prophete in this
place ſignifieth, that the Miſerie of the baniſhed
Perſons ledde away Captiue ſhoulde be ſo
greate, and ſo withoute hope to ſee their Countrey
againe, that anie Deathe mighte Iuſtlie
ſeeme more tollerable: and therefore ſaith he,
Mourne not ouer the dead,
                  Eze. 24. d. 17 bycauſe they ſeme to
be in better caſe than ſuch as be aliue. And this
doth he confirme by the example of the kings
themſelues. Ioakim called alſo Eliakim King
of Iuda, was taken Priſoner by the Babilonians,
                  
and Dying by the way, with great Contempt,
was left without Buriall, as afterward is declared
more largely: and yet might he ſeme to be
in good caſe in compariſō of Ioakim, named alſo
Iechonias, and here called Sellum, Who was led
Captiue & dyed in baniſhment, and neuer returned
into his Countrey. Some doe interprete
this place, and this grieuous Threatning, of Sedechias,
to whom it maye verie well in ſome reſpecte
agree. When the texte ſaith, that Sellum
was The ſonne of Ioſias, it is not ſtrange in the
Hebrewe tongue, by the Sonne to vnderſtande
the Nephewe or other Succeſſour of the ſame
line.Mar. 12. d. 35. Math. 1. a. 1. So Chriſt is called The ſonne of Dauid, as
lineallie deſcending from Dauid.
               
               Woe worth him,Verſe. 14. that buildeth his houſe
with vnrighteouſneſſe. &c.
               From this place vnto the .20. verſe the Prophete
enueigheth bitterly againſt King Ioakim,
called alſo Eliakim, who may ſeme to haue bene
a Glorious Proude and Pompous Prince, not
contented to dwell in ſuch houſes and Palaices
as his predeceſſours had vſed, but Enlarged the
ſame, and builded them farre more Gorgeouſlie
with all maner of painting and gaye furniture:
and that with the grieuous Iniurie & Oppreſſion
of his Subiectes, pilling them of their Wages
and iuſte rewarde of their Labour, which
thing here God by his Prophete ſharpelie reproueth.
To dwell in faire houſes is not, of it

ſelfe,Abac. 2. c. 12 Gen. 11. a. 4. euill, but bicauſe the building of Sumptuous
places cōmonly is ioyned with * Pride and
Vaineglorie, and wyth the Oppreſſion of the
poore: Therfore God declareth himſelfe in this
place and ſundry other, ſo muche to myſlike it,
and eſpecially when Princes or other Rich perſons
doe it with ſuch Delight,Abdi. 1. a. 4. as though they
eſteemed their greateſt Felicitie to be therin.
               Which may ſeeme to be noted in theſe wordes,
Thinkeſt thou to raigne novv that thou haſt encloſed
thy ſelf in Cedar.
                  Verſ. 15. 
                  &c. As if he had ſaid, Now
that thou haſte buylded to thyſelfe goodly and
ſumptuous houſes with Cedar 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , thou thinkeſt
thy ſelf a Notable and worthie Prince, and
that thy gay Buyldings and pompous doings
ſhall be thy chief Glorie, and thy Stay in thy
kingdom: but they ſhal be no help vnto thee at
all,Haba. 2. c. 1
                        •
                     
                   but rather the haſtning of thy ouerthrowe,
bicauſe the Crie & Lamētation of thoſe Poore
mē that thou haſt oppreſſed Iniurioulſly to that
ende, doth ring in myne eares, and calleth continually
for puniſhment.Verſe. 17. The meanes to proſper
in thy Kingdome, is not by ſettyng vp of
Sumptuous buildings, but in the Feare of my
Name to deale with Equitie & Righteouſnes,
and to helpe the Poore oppreſſed,2. pa. 35. d. 25 4. Re. 23. e. 25 as thy * father
Ioſias did beefore thee, who was a Good and a
godly Prince. But thou cleane 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
arte giuē ouer to Couetouſneſſe, Oppreſſiō, crueltie,
and ſhedding of Innocent bloude. Therefore
thy Captiuitie by the King of Babylon, and

thy miſerable 
                     •
                  nde muſte of Neceſſitie come
vpon thee.
               And therefore thus ſayeth the Lorde againſt
Joakim the ſonne of Ioſias.Verſe. 18. &c.
               The Prophet ſignifieth by the Word of the
Lorde, and from his owne mouth, that Ioak
                        •
                     m,
who in his Life tyme prouided ſo Sumptuous
Palaces to dwel in, in reward of his Oppreſſion
& Crueltie, at his death ſhuld not only want
that Solemnitie of Buriall and mourning,
which comonly Princes & Greate perſonages
haue,Verſe. 19. but alſo ſhuld be caſt out like an Aſſe, or other
Contemptible beaſt without Burial at al,
& lie Rotting vpon the face of the Earth, to be
Meate for the Birdes of the Aire.
               A notable example may this be to All them,
which with Cōtempt of gods word, & the Iniurie
of their Subiects & Tenāts ſet their chief
delite in gorgious Buildings & pōpous works.
               Climbe vp the hill of Libanus,Verſ. 10. O thou
daughter of Sion, lift vp thy voyce &c.
               
                  Hieremie perceiuing the Iewes to be ſettled
in deſperate Obſtinacie, in this verſe doth ſcornfully
deride y• vain Truſt, which in time of their
Diſtreſſe they had in their forain Frēds, to whō
they were all
                     •
                  ed, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , the Aegyptians, and
other Borderers. And to let them Vnderſtand,
that all that Hope was to no Purpoſe, in way
of Deriſion, as I haue ſayde, he willeth them

vnder the Name of Sion, to 
                     •
                  limbe vp to Mount
Libanus, on the one ſyde, and to the hill of Baſan,
on the other, and to crie out with Loude voyce
for Succour, that they might be heard the Further.
For all their Louers and Frendes ſhoulde
Forſake them, and be Deſtroyed themſelues before
they could come to Helpe them. The Aegyptians
as Ioſephus writeth,Li. Ant. 10. cap. 10. comming to Rayſe
the ſiege of the Babylonians, at Hieruſalem wer
Diſcomfited and ouerthrowne, that they could
not helpe them: and therefore the Armie of the
Babylonians returning to Hieruſalem, toke and
ſpoyled the Citie, and Led awaye the King and
all the reſidue Captiue.
               I haue declared this vnto you (ſaith Hieremie
to y• 
                  Iewes,
                  Verſ. 2
                        •
                     . vnder the Name of y• Daughter
of Sion) when ye were in Proſperitie, but youre
perpetual maner hath ben, neuer to Hearken to
the Voyce of the Lord, but way wardly to Contemne
it.Verſe. 22. Therfore youre Princes and peeres,
that be as your Guydes and Leaders, & youre
Capitaines and ioylie men that you Delighte
and put youre Truſte in, ſhall bee Lightly, as
it were with a Whirlewynde Driuen awaye
in Captiuitie, and your ſelues brought to ſhame
and Confuſion, bycauſe of youre Obſtinate
wickedneſſe.Verſe. 23. You thinke youre ſelfe in greate
Honour and Felicitie, & Glorie muche in that ye
dwell in houſes Gorgiouſly Seeled with Ceders
of Libanus, but all that your Gayneſſe ſhal
be little regarded in the tyme of your Sorow,

when the Violēce of the enimie ſhall Sodaynly
come vpon you at the time ye leaſt thinke of it,
euen as the throwes of a Woman labouryng
with chylde.
               As truly as Jliue,Verſ. 24. 25. 26. 27. ſaith the Lord, though
Iechonias the ſonne of Ioakim. &c.
               The maner of the Prophetes is almoſt continually
to vtter their ſayings in the Perſon of
God,Eſai. 1. c. 10. Eſai. 24. a. 3. Eſa. 1. e. 20. Eſai. 58. d. 14 and oftentymes to * repeate that it is the
worde of the Lorde, and that the Mouthe of the
Lord hath ſpoken it, to the intent that the people
might be wel Aſſured, that it was no vain
ſpeache that they vttered, but the certaine Will
and determinate Purpoſe of God. And therfore
if they would ſhunne the danger thereof, that
they ought to giue credite to it, and Beleeue it.
               Of all other, Princes doe moſt hardely Beleuethe
declaration of Aduerſitie to come vnto
them, bicauſe they haue commonly the greateſt
worldly Helpes to deliuer them.
               Wherfore that Iechonias, otherwyſe called
Ioakim the ſonne of Ioakim, might not doubt of
that he here ſpeaketh, he vttreth it in the Perſon
of God, and confirmeth it with an othe.
               That although he ſit 
                     ••
                  on the holie Throne of
Dauid, yet he ſhoulde be a miſerable Captiue,
yea, God ſheweth himſelf ſo to deteſt that king
for the Contempt of his Word, that though he
were as ſtraightly ioyned to him as a Signet
on his right hand, yet he woulde plucke him of,

and caſt him into the hāds of his Enimies, that
ſeek his life. And that bothe He & his Mother
that bare him, and his Seruāts with al other
that wer Chief about him, ſhuld be led Captiue
into a Strāge lād, & there Die in great miſerie.
               O thou Earth,Verſe. 29. 30. earthe, earthe, heare the
woorde of the Lorde. &c.
               Forſomuch as the Iewes had ſo great confidēce
in the Promiſe that was made to Dauid,
for the continuance of his poſteritie in his ſeate,
So long as the Sunne and Moone endured,
                  Pſal. 89. f. 36 as neither
Prince nor People coulde in anye caſe bee
brought to Beleue the Threatnings of God to
the contrary: therfore the Prophet here in earneſt
maner, bicauſe the People were ſo Obſtinate,
turneth his Speache to the Earth, and openly
denounceth, that he was Willed by God
himſelf to ſet vp this Prophecie in writing vpō
the doores of the Temple, to the knowledge of
all men, that Iechonias ſhuld not Proſper in his
Iſſue, nor haue any child That shuld be ſo happie
to ſit on the ſeat of Dauid, and beare rule after him.
And yet maye not this ſeeme repugnante to the
prophecie of Iacob,Ge. 49. b. 10. 
                  That the ſcepter should not be
taken from Iuda, and a Lawgiuer from betvveene
his feete vntill Silo came. &c. For althoughe the
Iewes after this Iechonias, had no king in Succeſſion,
either vnto the time of the Captiuitie or
after, whiche reigned among them with ſuche
Libertie and Maieſtie, as the kings of Iuda
                  
before had Done: yet had they a Gouernement,
by which they had Ruled bothe their Common
weale, and the External forme of Religion, according
to the Lawe of Moyſes, vntill the very
comming of our Sauioure Chriſt, vnder the Romaines,
by whō euen that mean Libertie which
they had to that Time, was taken away, and
the Prophecie of Iacob fulfilled, as well in the
Loſſe of their gouernement, as in the comming
of Meſsias, that ſhould be the Expectation of the
Gentiles.
               
            
         
         
            The .xv. Sunday after Trinitie
at Morning prayer.
            Hieremie. 35.
            
               THe wordes whiche the Lorde ſpake vnto Hieremie in
 the raigne of Iehoakim the ſonne of Ioſias king of Iuda
are theſe: 2 Goe vnto the houſe of the Rechabites,
and call them out,2. Re. 10. e. 23 and bring them to the houſe of the Lord,
into ſome commodious place, and giue them wine to drink.
               3 Then took I Iazaniah the ſonne of Hieremie, the ſonne
of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his ſonnes, and
the whole houſholde of the Rechabites.
               4 And brought them into the houſe of the Lord, into the
cloſet of the children of Hanan the ſonne of Iegedaliah, the
man of God, whiche was by the cloſet of the Princes, that
is aboue the cloſet of Maaſiah the ſonne of Sellum, whiche
is the treaſurer. 5 And before the ſonnes of the kinred of
the Rechabites, I ſet pottes full of wyne, and cups, and ſayd
vnto them, Drinke wine: 6 But they ſayde, Wée will
drinke no wine: for Ionadab the ſonne of Rechab oure father

commaunded vs, ſaying: Ye and your ſonnes ſhall neuer
drinke wyne,Jere. 29. a. 5. buylde houſes, ſowe no ſéede, plante no
vines. 7 Yea ye ſhall haue no vineyards: but for all your 
time ye ſhall dwell in tentes, that ye maye liue long in the
lande wherin ye be ſtraungers. 8 Thus haue wée obeyed
the commaundemente of Ionadab, the ſonne of Rechab
our father, in al that he hath charged vs, and ſo wée drinke
no wine all our lyfe long, wée nor our wyues, our ſonnes,
and our daughters. 9 Neither buyld we any houſe to dwel
therein: we haue alſo among vs neyther Vineyardes, nor
corne lande to ſowe: 10 But we dwell in tentes, we obey
and do according vnto al that Ionadab our father commanded
vs. 11 But nowe that Nabuchodonozor the King of
Babylon came vp into the lande, we ſayd: Come, let vs go
to Hieruſalem, that we may eſcape the hoaſt of the Chaldeis
and the Aſſyrians: and ſo wée dwell nowe at Hieruſalem.
12 Then came the word of the Lord vnto Hieremie,
ſaying: 13 Thus ſayeth the Lorde of hoaſtes, the God of
Iſrael, Go and tell the men of Iuda, and the inhabiters of
Hieruſalem, Will ye not be reformed to obey my wordes,
ſayeth the Lorde? 14 The wordes whiche Ionadab the
ſonne of Rechab commaunded his ſonnes, that they ſhould
drinke no wine, are faſte ſurely kept, for vnto this day they,
drinke no wine, but obey their fathers commandement
                     •
                   but
as for me, I haue ſtande vp early, I haue ſpoken vnto you,
and giuen you earneſt warning, and yet haue ye not ben obediente
vnto mée.Jere. 18. b. 11. Jere. 25. a. 5. 15 Yea I haue ſent my ſeruantes all
the Prophets vnto you, I roſe vp early and ſent you word,
ſaying: O turne you nowe euery man from his wicked
way, amende your lyues, and goe not after ſtraunge gods
to woorſhippe them, that yée maye continue in the lande
whiche I haue giuen vnto you and your fathers: but ye
woulde neyther heare me, nor folow me.
               16 The children of Ionadab Rechabs ſonne, haue ſtedfaſtly
kept their fathers commandemēt that he gaue them:

but this people is not obedient vnto me.
               
                   17 And therfore thus ſayth the Lorde of hoaſtes the God
of Iſrael, Behold, I wil bring vpon Iuda, & vpon euery one
that dwelleth in Hieruſalem,Pro. 1. c. 28. Eſai. 45. b. Jere. 7. b. 13. all the trouble that I haue deuiſed
againſt them: For I haue ſpoken vnto them, but they
woulde not folowe, I haue called vnto them, neuertheleſſe
they woulde giue me no anſwere.
               18 Ieremie alſo ſpake vnto the houſholde of the Rechabites,
Thus ſaith the lord of hoaſtes the God of Iſrael: Foraſmuche
as ye haue obeyed the commaundement of Ionadab
your father, and kept all his preceptes, and done according
to all that he hath bidden:
               19 Therfore thus ſayth the Lorde of hoaſtes,Jer. 33 c. 17. the God of
Iſrael, Ionadab the ſonne of Rechab ſhal not fayle, but haue
one out of his ſtocke to ſtande alway before mée.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxxv.
Chapter of Hieremie.
               The wordes which the Lord ſpake vnto
Hieremie,Verſ. 1. 2. &c. in the raigne of. &c.
               
                  
                     GOD willing to confounde the obſtinate
Diſobedience of his people vnto
his Law, and to declare how vnexcuſable
they were, In this Chapiter
willeth the Prophete, to their
reproch & ſhame, to lay before them the exāple of
the Rechabites Conſtantly Obeying the cōmandement
& order of their Anceſters, though they
were but Mortal men, without breache, for the
ſpace of .300. yeres. The Rechabites are thought
to haue bene the Poſteritie eyther of Iethro,
                  
or of * Hobab,
                  Judi. 4. b. 11. Exo. 18. b. 9. who * followed Moyſes & the Iſraelites,
through the Wilderneſſe into the Lande of
Chanaan, and were promiſed to haue had an heritage
with the Children of Iſrael in that lande,
but it appeareth they had not. For they were
diſperſed in ſundrye Tribes, and ſome of them
dwelled euen among the Heathen, and yet were
they cōmonlie diligent Obſeruers of the Law,
and men that Feared God.
               Of this ſtocke came Ionadab the ſonne of Rechab,
who liued in the time of Iehu & may ſeeme
to haue bene of greate credite and authoritie.
For it was he that Iehu tooke by the * hand into
his Chariot when he was goyng in great zeale
to deſtroye Achab his houſe,4. re. 10. d. 15. for the Wickedneſſe
that he wrought againſt the Lorde.
               This Ionadab for certaine conſiderations, which
after ſhalbe noted, gaue in charge to his childrē,
that they and their Poſteritie for euer ſhuld forbeare
the Drinking of Wine, the Tilling of the
Earth, the keeping of Vines, & dwelling in any
Builded houſes, but only to vſe for their abiding
Tentes and Bouthes. This order and commaundement,
as I haue ſaide, the Poſteritie of
the Rechabites kept very diligently from the time
of Ionadab their father or Aunceſtour, vnto this
time of Hieremie, which was .300 yeares.
               The occaſiō that God toke at this time, was,
that theſe Rechabites, whiche hitherto had not
dwelt in anye Townes & Cities, but in Tentes
and Bouthes in the fieldes, throughe the great

Spoile and waſte that Nabuchodonoſor and the
Chaldees did make in all the Countrey of Iurie,
were forced, for their ſalftie, to come and dwell
in Hieruſalem in ſuche places, as they mighte
get. And yet did they obſerue all the other partes
of Ionadabs commaundement, although by
meere neceſſitie they were driuen, at this ſeaſon
to dwell in houſes.
               Wherfore, Ieremie, by the commaundemēt of
God, in ſuch ſort, as is declared in this chapiter,
calleth the Rechabites together,Verſe. 4. 5. being manie in
number, vnto a place by the Temple whiche
was notorious, and where things done coulde
not be kept cloſe, but muſte needes be ſpredde by
fame both through the whole Citie and Countrey.
For it is not to be thoughte that Hieremie
did it ſecretely or in cloſe maner. For ſuch a multitude
coulde not be called to ſuch a place without
admiration and greate expectacion of ſome
notable thing to followe. Hieremie therefore in
the place here diſcribed, in ſolemne manner ſetteth
pottes of Wine before them, and willeth
them to Drinke.Verſe. 6. 7. But they refuſe ſo to doe, alleadging
for their excuſe their Obedience to the
order and commaundemente of their Aunceſtor
and forefather Ionadab, who had giuen them
charge to obſerue thoſe things, which are euidente
in the Texte.
               Here maye ſeeme to be ſome doubtes Iuſtlie
moued. Firſt, whether the Rechabites did offend
or no in refuſing to Drinke Wine, at the bidding

of the Prophete of God. Therein they
mighte ſeeme to ſet more by a tradition of their
fathers, than by the appointment of God vttered
by the Prophete. But wee reade not, that
the Prophete Hieremie did ſay vnto them, that
it was Gods will and commaundemente, that
they ſhoulde Drinke Wine: but it ſemed to them
a bidding of the Prophete ſimply, & vttered to
them withoute the Authoritie of Gods name.
               And yet in their refuſing thereof, they vndoubtedly
did excuſe themſelues with greate modeſtie:
ſo that if the Prophete had preſſed Gods
commaundement vpon them, it may be thought
they woulde haue yelded, as they did to dwell
in houſes in Hieruſalem, when they coulde not
ſalfely haue place abroade to vſe their Tentes.
               Secondly if maye be doubted whether Ionadab
did well in bidding them to forbeare Wine,
or not to vſe Tillage, not to plante Vines, or to
dwell in houſes. For therein ſemeth to be ſome
great Superſtition to forbid the people of God
to vſe his Creatures, and thoſe trades of Life
that haue their Iuſte comendatiō in the Scriptures,
and were vſed by good and Godlie men.
And therfore this place is alleadged of ſome for
the maintenance of Monaſtical vowes and ſuch
like Obſeruations of mens Traditions euen
with burden of Conſcience and reſtrainte of
Chriſtian Libertie.
               Surelie, it is not to be thought, that Ionadab did

meane to Inſtitute any new worſhip of God, or
to laye any burden of Holineſſe or Religion vpon
their Conſciences in the forbidding of theſe
things, but only the obſeruation of a Politique
meanes, whereby they mighte be traded to a
more Moderate life, & eaſier Contempte of the
worlde. For it is to be thoughte that Ionadab
(who ioyned himſelfe to Iehu in the puniſhment
of the wicked houſe of Achab) had great feare of
God, and a deſire to haue his Law & true Worſhippe
reſtored and maintained. And bicauſe he
ſawe that Senſualitie, Looſneſſe of life, & glory
of the world, were the chiefeſt Cauſes, that did
carie the Iſraelites from the Obedience of God,
fearing ſome great Plague and puniſhment to
followe for the ſame,Deu. 8. d. 20. Deu. 11. d. 28. Jere. 42. d. 22 according to the * Threatnings
of the lawe, ſo muche as mighte be, to
preuent the ſame Inconuenience, in his flocke or
kindred, He enioyned them to forbeare Wine,
whereof ryſeth Drunkenneſſe and Wanton luſt,
and not to vſe any other trade of life, thā Paſturing
or keping of Cattaile, wherein they were
alwayes brought vp, from their firſt fathers.
               
                  Ionadab thought that kind of life to be beſt, whervnto
himſelfe had beene accuſtomed. He ſawe
what Incōueniences Immoderate vſe of Wine
did bring, all which they ſhun that Forbeare it.
And they haue their mindes Freer that are not
Tied to Tillage & huſbanding of Vineyardes.
               And if God did bring any Plague vpon their
Countrey for the Sinnes of the People, their

loſſe ſhoulde be the leſſe, and they mighte more
eaſily ſhift for themſelues. But, howſoeuer it
was in Ionadab, wee reade not here, that God
doth praiſe that ordināce, but only ſemeth to like
the Obedience of the Rechabites, and taketh the
ſame for an Example to reproue the Ievves for
their Diſobedience and contempt of his holie
Lawes and ordinances: being not their Earthlie
father but the euerliuing Lorde and God.
               Then came the worde of the Lorde to
Hieremie ſaying.Verſe. 12. &c. &c.
               In theſe verſes foloweth the applying of this
example and compariſon of the Rechabites. In
which application, theſe things are to be noted,
Firſt the compariſon betwene a mortal man and 
God. If the Authoritie of Ionadab, a mortal and
fraile Creature preuailed ſo much with his poſteritie,
whom he did neuer greatly benefite: how
much more Iuſtlie ſhoulde the Maieſtie and Eternall
Power of God in giuing of his Lawe,
haue bene eſteemed among his owne people, vpon
whom he had beſtowed ſo many and ſo great
bleſſings? Secondly, Ionadab gaue his Commaundement 
but Once, and neuer called vpon it
afterwarde, and yet was it obſerued very curiouſlye
for the ſpace of .300 yeares: But Gods
Law, as it was once giuen with greate Maieſtie
& terrour, ſo was it Continually called vpon
by his Prophetes and teachers, euen by the

diligent and carefull ſending of God himſelfe.
And that in ſo earneſt maner as poſſibly could be
deuiſed, and yet woulde they neuer either continue
in his obedience, or eaſilie returne vnto his
true worſhip, when they were once fallen from
it.3 Thirdly, thoſe things which God required
of the Ievves, were not of like Seueritie and
rigour, as the commaundementes of Ionadab to
his poſteritie. For he lefte vnto them the vſe of
Tillage, Inhabitinge of houſes, Drinkinge of
Wine, Planting of vines, and all ſuch other like
things that mighte be to their comforte in the
worlde, and onely required that they would not
run after the worſhipping of other Gods. And
yet would they not therin obey him, nor yet reclaime
themſelues, when they were reproued,
wheras the Rechabites did not onely kepe themſelues
in more Obedience of the Lawe of God,
than they did, but alſo tied themſelues to the
ſtreicte and rigorous obſeruation of the orders
before mentioned, onelie in reuerence of Ionadab
their Anceſter and Forefather, by whom they
were giuen.
               And therefore thus ſaith the Lorde of
hoſtes,Verſe. 17. the God of Iſrael, beholde. &c.
               Nowe that God by the example of the Rechabites
had confounded the diſobedience of his
People, and ſhewed, that they haue nothing
to laie for their excuſe, he addeth what puniſhment

ſhall come vpon them for it.
               Forſomuch, ſaith he, as I haue often ſente my
Prophetes vnto you to cal you to repentance, &
to bring you home againe into the righte way, &
yet you will not in any wiſe heare them: I will
ſpeake no more vnto you in way of exhortation,
but I will pronounce terrible Sentence againſt
you, and moſt earneſtly aſſure you, that thoſe puniſhmentes,
that I haue deuiſed, withoute faile
ſhall come vpon you.
               Here is to be noted, that whē men Obſtinatelie
refuſe the comfortable worde of God ſent vnto
them in the waie of inſtruction and teaching,
they ſhall after heare and feele his Dreadfull
worde of Threatning iuſte puniſhment to come
vpon them for their Diſobedience and cōtempt.
               Hieremie alſo ſpake vnto the houſholde
of the Rechabites,Verſe. 18. 19. thus ſaith. &c.
               After that he hath pronounced puniſhment
againſt the Ievves, for their Contempt of Gods
holy will: he declareth alſo, that God of his
goodneſſe according to his Promiſe anexed to
the fifte commaundemente, woulde reward the
obedience and Reuerence that the Rechabites did
ſhew towarde their Father Ionadab, and that
he would ſo proſper their ſtocke, as They should
neuer faile of one to ſtande before him, that is,
whiche ſhoulde be acceptable vnto him. For
it cannot be interpreted that they ſhoulde ſtand

before God in the Miniſtration of the Temple,
for that was appointed to the Prieſtes and Leuites
onely. As touching that the Patrons of
ſuperſtition alleadge this place for the Maintenance
of obedience to mens traditions in the
Churche, it is verie vnfit. For the Rechabites, as
is ſaide before, were not tied to this obſeruatiō,
with opinion of Holineſſe, or as a worſhipping
of God, as men were with the traditions of the
Church of Rome, but obſerued thoſe things as
Politique orders of life, with Reuerence of their
Anceſters, by whom they were enioyned.
            
         
         
            The .15. Sunday after Trinitie
at Euening prayer.
            Ieremie. Cap. 36.
            
               IN the fourth yéere of Ioakim the ſonne of Ioſias the king
 of Iuda, came the word of the Lorde vnto Ieremie, ſaying.
               2 Take a booke,Jere. 30. d. 2. and write therin all the wordes that I
haue ſpoken to thée againſt Iſrael, againſt Iuda, and againſt
all the people, from the time that I began to ſpeake vnto thée
in the raigne of Ioſias, vnto this daye.
               3 That when the houſe of Iuda heareth of ye plague which
I haue deuiſed for them, they may peraduenture turne euerie
man from his wicked waye, that I may forgiue their offences
and ſinnes.
               4 Then dyd Ieremie call Baruch the ſonne of Neriah,
and Baruch wrote in the booke at the mouth of Ieremie all
the wordes of the Lord which he had ſpoken vnto him.Jere. 45. a. 1.
               
               5 And Ieremie commaunded Baruch, ſaying, I am in
priſon, ſo that I may not come into the houſe of the Lorde.
               
                  
6 Therefore goe thou thither, and reade the Booke that 
thou haſte written at my mouth, (namely) the words of the
Lorde, and reade them in the Lordes houſe, vpon the faſting
daye, that the people, whole Iuda, and all they that
come out of the cities may heare.
               7 Peraduenture they will pray méekely before the face
of the Lorde, and turne euery one from his wicked waye:
for great is the wrath and diſpleaſure that the Lorde hathe
taken againſte this people.
               8 So Baruch the ſonne of Neriah did according to al that
Hieremie the Prophet commaunded him, reading the wordes
of the Lorde out of the booke in the Lordes houſe.
               9 And this was done in the fifth yeare of Iehoakim the
ſonne of Ioſias king of Iuda,Jere. 26. a. 2. in the nynth moneth, when
it was commanded that all the people of Hieruſalem ſhould
faſt before the Lord, and they alſo that were come from the
cities of Iuda vnto Hieruſalem.
               10 Then redde Baruch the words of Hieremie out of the
booke within the houſe of the Lorde, out of the treaſurie of
Gamariah the ſonne of Saphan the ſcribe, which is beſide
the higher loft of the newe doore of the Lordes houſe, that al
the people might heare. 11 Now when Micheas the ſonne
of Gamariah the ſonne of Saphan, hard al the words of the
Lord out of the booke. 12 He went downe to the kings palace
into the ſcribes chamber, for there al the Princes were
ſet, Eliſama the ſcribe, Dalaiah the ſonne of Semei, Elnathan
the ſonne of Achbor, Gamariah the ſonne of Saphan,
Zedekias the ſonne of Hananias, with all the princes.
13 And Micheas tolde them all the wordes that hée
hearde Baruch reade out of the booke before the people.
               14 Then all the princes ſent Iehudi the ſonne of Nathaniah,
the ſonne of Selemiah, the ſonne of Chuſi, vnto Baruch,
ſaying: Take in thine hande the booke whereout thou
haſt readde before all the people, and come. So Baruch the
ſonne of Neriah tooke the book in his hād, & came vnto them

15 And they ſayd vnto him, Sit downe & reade the booke,
that we may heare alſo. So Baruch redde, that they myght
heare. 16 Now when they had heard all the words, they
were abaſhed one vpon an other, and ſayde vnto Baruch:
Wée will certifie the king of all theſe wordes.
               17 And they examined Baruch, ſaying: Tel vs, how diddeſt
thou write all theſe wordes out of his mouthe?
               18 Then Baruch anſwered them: He ſpake al theſe wordes
vnto me with his mouthe, and I wrote them in y• booke.
               19 Then ſayde the princes vnto Baruch, Go thy waye,
hyde thée with Hieremie, ſo that no mā know where ye be
               20 And they went in to the king to the Courte (but they
kept the booke in the chamber of Elizama the ſcribe, & tolde
the king al the words that he might heare. 21 So the King
 ſent Iehudi to fet him the booke: which he brought out of Elizama
the ſcribes chamber, and Iehudi redde in it, that the
King & all the princes which were aboute him might heare.
               22 Nowe the king ſate in the winter houſe (for it was in
the ninthe moneth) and there was a fire before him.
               23 And when Iehudi had red thrée or foure leaues therof,
he cut the book in péeces with a penknife, and caſt it into the
fire vpon the harth, vntill the booke was all brent in the fire
vpon the harth.1. Mac. 3. c. 24 Yet no man was abaſhed thereof, nor
rent his clothes, neither the king himſelf, nor his ſeruants,
though they heard all theſe words. 25 Neuertheleſſe Elnathan,
Dalaiah, and Gamariah beſought the king that he
would not burne the book: notwithſtanding the king wolde
not heare them, 26 But commanded Ierahmel the ſonne
of Amelech, Saraiah the ſonne of Ezriel, & Selemiah the
ſonne of Abdeel, to lay handes vpon Baruch the ſcribe, and
vpon Ieremie the Prophet: but the Lord kept them oute of
ſight. 27 Now after that the king had brent the Booke, and
the ſermōs which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Hieremie,
the word of the Lord came vnto Hieremie, ſaying:
               
                   28 Take an other booke, & write in it all the forſayd Sermons

that were written in the firſt booke which Iehoakim
the king of Iuda hath brent. 29 And tell Iehoakim ye king
of Iuda, thus ſayth the Lord: Thou haſt brent the Booke,
and thoughteſt within thy ſelfe: Why haſte thou written
therin, that the king of Babylon ſhal come and make this
land waſt, ſo that he ſhal make both people and cattell to be
out of it?2. Reg. 24. b. Jere. 22. c. 30 Therfore thus the Lord ſayth of Iehoakim
the king of Iuda: There ſhall none of his generation ſitte
vpon the throne of Dauid, his dead coarſe ſhall be caſte out,
that the heate of the day, and the froſt of the night may come
vpon him. 31 And I wil viſite the wickedneſſe of him, of
his ſéede, and of his ſeruants: Moreouer all the euill that
I haue promiſed them, thoughe they hearde me not, will I
bring vpon them, vpon the inhabiters of Hieruſalem, and
vpon all Iuda. 32 Then tooke Hieremie an other booke
and gaue it Baruch the ſcribe the ſonne of Neriah, whiche
wrote therin out of the mouth of Hieremie, all the ſermons
that were in the firſt booke, which Iehoakim the king of Iuda
did burne: and there were added vnto them many moe
Sermons, lyke vnto the former.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxxvj.
Chapter of Hieremie.
               In the fourthe yeare of Iehoakim,Verſe. 1. 2. 3. the
ſonne of Ioſias the king of Iuda. &c.
               
                  IN this chapter is deſcribed a notable
hiſtorie, & very profitable to be conſidered,
how God apointed Hieremie to put
in Writing al the Sermons & Prophecies
that frō the beginning he had vttred by his
mouth againſt Iſraell and Iuda, & how Hieremie
                  
performed the ſame by his miniſter or Secretarie
Baruch, whom he cauſed alſo to Reade the
ſame openly in the Temple, and what thereof
folowed, before the king hymſelfe and all the
Nobles and Counſellours.
               The Iewes oftentimes had heard the word
of God at the mouthe of Hieremie, and yet notwithſtanding,
did obſtinately Contemne & reiect
the ſame. Wherfore god nowe willeth him
to put the ſumme of all in Writing, that either
they might be therwith ſomwhat more moued
to embrace the ſame, and to Turne to the true
worſhipping of God: or elſe that his woordes
might remain in Writing,Jo. 12. f. 48. as * witneſſes againſt
their obſtinate, and Indurate heartes, whiche
by no calling or teaching coulde be broughte to
Relent. By this example wee may learne the
greate Benefite & commoditie of Writing, and
that the People of God may be wel taught, not
only by a mans own Speach, but alſo by Reading
of the Good & godly Exhortatiōs of other
vnto them. Thoſe things that are vttered by
mouth only, may ſoone ſlip out of memorie, & be
forgotten, or not be wel vnderſtāded at the firſt,
But whē they remain in Writing, they may be
redde again, & better weighed & cōſidered at leiſure,
& ſo wil both ſticke more Surely in remē
                  brance,
and be the more eaſily vnderſtanded.
               Seing therfore the Prophet by ſpeaking, had
laboured in vaine, wyth that waywarde People
the ſpace ofJere. 25. a. 3. .23. yeares, as appeareth cap. 25.

of the Prophet, God now willeth him to Write
the Prophecies whiche he had Vttered, to the
end they might haue no Excuſe, nor want anye
externall meanes, wherby they might come to
the vnderſtanding of his will,Jere. 26. a. 3. Ezec. 2. b. 7. and therby turne
vnto him, that he mighte take mercie of them:
or elſe that y• their obſtinate Diſobedience both
of the King, the Counſellors, & the whole People
might be made thereby more notorious and
open to the worlde.
               Then dyd Hieremie call Baruch,Verſ. 4. 5. &c. the
ſonne of Neriah, and Baruch. &c.
               The readie Willingneſſe of Baruch is here to
be obſerued, who was not onely Contented to
Write the thing at the Mouth of Hieremie, but
alſo at his Appointment openly to Reade it in
the face of all the People, wherof in all likelyhood
of Reaſon, it muſte needes haue ben, that
great Diſpleaſure and danger ſhuld haue come
vnto him. But to Further the will of God, hee
did not ſticke to hazard himſelfe to all Perils of
the world. Neyther may we thinke, that Hieremie
Cūningly ſhifted the danger hereof from
himſelfe to Baruch. For hee coulde not procure
greater Miſliking by this publiſhing of things
in Writing, than he had doone by Speaking of
the ſame to their faces. It may bee, that for
ſome cauſes and reſpectes hee was letted and
ſtayed by the Spirit of God, that he might not
doe it himſelf, for ſo I iudge this place to be vnderſtanded.

Now Hieremie ſhuld be Letted by
Impriſonement, I doe not well conceiue, ſeing
verſe. 19. of this ſame chap. Baruch is willed by
the Princes, That he and Hieremie shoulde hide
themſelues, and not be knowne where they vvere.
And alſo in the .26. verſe, the king willeth certain
to lay hand on Baruch & Hieremie, but that
The Lord kept them out of ſight. Whiche cōmandement
& maner of Speaking, ſhould not haue
ben vſed, if Hieremie had ben in priſon before.
               And therfore that which ſome Tranſlaters interprete
Clauſus ſum, that is, I am in priſon, or
shut vp, other doe expounde, Detentus or impeditus
ſum, that is, I am ſtayed or letted, meaning,
by the Spirite of God: as we read that Paule
was Letted and ſtayed from going to Bithinia.
                  Act. 16. a. 7
               
               In the ſeuenth Verſe Hieremie noteth the
cauſe why he willed Baruch to Reade his Sermōs
vnto the people, that is, if it were poſſible,
that they might be moued to Turne from their
Wicked wayes, & humble thēſelues in Prayer
before the face of the Lord, therby to turn away
his heauie Wrath and diſpleaſure from them.
               True Prayer is alway ioyned with Faith &
hūblenes. Faith doth lift vp our mindes to heauē,
and maketh our Prayer to Aſcend vnto the
Lord, Feare & reuerēce which is ioyned wt faith,
bicauſe of ye ſenſe of our vnworthines, doth moue
vs to Hūble & debaſe our ſelues in the ſight of
God, & to 
                     •
                  lee only to his Mercie, & eſpecially,
whē he declareth Signes of his terrible Wrath

toward vs, as he did at this tyme by the Prophete
to his People. If God did but Lightely
threaten vs, we ſhould not Contemne it, but be
Greatly moued therwith: and much more whē
he ſheweth his Diſpleaſure ſo greuous, as we
may Iuſtly looke for Vtter confuſion.
               So Baruch the ſonne of Neriah did
according to all that Hieremie.Verſe. 8. 9. 10 &c.
               He deſcribeth now the readie Obedience of
Baruch, & the maner of his doing, noting the circumſtances,
at what Time, in what Place, and
before Whom it was done. It was done the fift
yeare and ninth moneth of Ioakims Reigne: at
that tyme that the king according to the cuſtomable
maner of the Iewes in tyme of danger,
had commaunded a ſolemne and Publique faſt,
and Prayer to be made vnto the Lord, to turne
away the Danger that they were in by Nabuchodonoſor
and the Chaldeis at their firſt Inuaſion
that was made in his Reigne, and is mentioned
.4. Reg. 24.4. Re. 24. a. 1 This maner is very good, in
time of Danger to proclame publique Prayer &
Faſting withal, that we may by that Teſtimonie
declare the true Sorow of our hearts, conceiued
bicauſe of the diſpleaſure of God toward
vs. But we are taught by this place, that External
Prayer & Faſting done for a Forme only,
and not with earneſt Repentaunce and true
Faith to God, doth not at all moue gods mercie
toward vs, but rather incēſeth his diſpleaſure,

and Haſteneth his heauie iudgement, bicauſe of
our Hipocriſie and diſſimulation. How vnpleaſant
ſuch Faſting is to God, ye may reade Eſaie
58.Eſai. 58. b. 5. Joel. 2. c. 13. & what the true Faſt is, ye may learne there
alſo, and Ioell. 2. Suche a tyme Hieremie had
choſen, very fit for the publiſhing of the Thretnings
of God againſt them, that they might be
Moued not onely to Praye, but alſo, as he ſayeth,
To pray meekely before the face of the Lorde.
               
               
                  Baruch did reade theſe Prophecies of Hieremie
in a notable place of the Temple here deſcribed,
verſe. 10. where the Greateſt aſſembly of
the People was, and where he mought be beſte
hearde. His Audience were not one or two, but
the Whole number of the People, as wel of the
Citie, as alſo of the Countrey, gathered together
at that tyme: wherby his doing was the
more Notable, and further Knowne and Publiſhed.
               Nowe when Micheas the Sonne of
Gamariah had hearde all.Verſ. 11. &c &c.
               It is not here expreſſed of what mind or Purpoſe
this Micheas did make ſo greate Speede
to declare the doing of Baruch vnto the Nobles
and Counſellers. If he did it as beeing ſtricken
with Admiration and Terrour of thoſe things
that he did heare, as it may be thought he did,
(bycauſe hee was the ſonne of Gamariah, who
ſhewed himſelfe to haue the Feare of God, in
perſuading the King not to Burne the Booke,)

then his doyng was worthy greate commendation.
But if he did it to purchaſe Blame vnto the
Prophete, or to get Fauour of the Counſailers,
it was that, which alway dothe folow the Prophetes
& Preachers of almightie God in doing
of his meſſage:Eſai. 53. a. 1. Rom. 10. c. 16 Jo. 12. f. 38. Jo. 7. b. 12. that is that * All doe not heare
them fruitfullie & to good purpoſe, but Some
are readie to depraue their doings and ſayings,
& by malitious Accuſations to worke thē trouble
and danger. But howſoeuer it was with
Micheas, it was not done withoute the aſſured
prouidence of God, that the Prince and Nobles
might knowe of it, and not pretende ignorance.
Where by ye way this alſo is to be Noted, that
while the multitude and people were at the common
appointed Prayer in the houſe of God, the
Nobles, verie v
                     •
                  ſeaſonablie, were in the Counſaile
houſe conſulting by like what might be beſt
to doe. The care of Praying to God ſhold haue
touched them aſwell as the people, and afterwarde
taken oportunitie to haue mette in counſaile.
               Then all the Princes ſent Iehudi the
ſonne of Nathaniah.Verſe. 14. 15. &c.
               It may appeare that the Princes did not neglect
the reporte of this matter, as being ſtriken
with feare of Danger hanging ouer them, and
therefore with ſpede they ſente a Meſſenger, as
may appeare of ſome Name and credite, to bring
Baruch vnto them 
                     ••
                  ho althoughe he migh
                     •
                  e

loke for nothing but Impriſonment & Danger
of life, yet was he willing and ready to goe Before
them, and there in their hearing, Redde the
ſame things that he had openlye declared vnto
the People.
               Nowe when they had hearde all the
wordes,Verſe. 16. &c. they were abaſhed. &c.
               The Maieſtie of Gods wordes and Threatnings
in the Prophecies of Hieremie, ſtrake a
Feare and terrour into the hartes of the Princes,
ſo that as men aſtonied, they loked one vpon the
other. But yet there appeared great wante of
True repentāce and right feare of Gods wrath.
For if that had bene in them, ſurely they would
haue donne as Ioſias▪
                   did at the readyng of the
Booke of the lawe of God.4. Re. 22. b. 11 2. Reg. 22. But the affection
of theſe Noble men ſeemed, in compariſon
therof to be Fainte & colde. They queſtioned
with Baruch, how he was hable to write thoſe
things, and he anſwered ſimply, that Hieremie
ſpake them and he wrate them at his mouthe.
Wherby they might vnderſtand that it was not
done by the curious Deuiſe & Induſtrie of man,
nor laid vp together in writing as matters Curiouſly
penned: But by the ſtrength of ye Spirite
of God, which brought thoſe things freſhe in remembrance
to Hieremie, that he in ſpeache had
vttered long before. With whiche conſideration,
& the weighte of thoſe things that were redde,
they being Somewhat moued, ſaid they would

Enfourme ye king of all that was done, & know
his pleaſure. But bicauſe they ſuſpected his
Furie & crueltie, they willed Baruch & Hieremie
to Hide themſelues out of the way, that no mā
might know where they were.
               And they wente in to the King to the
Court,Verſe. 20. &c. but they kept the booke. &c.
               The Princes might ſeme to be touched with
ſome Feare of God, but yet not ſo greatlye, but
that they feared the Prince more, and eſpecially
the multitude of them. And therefore did they
put the matter ſo vnto him, that they would not
doe otherwiſe than ſtoode with his Pleaſure.
Some of them did more Freelye deale with the
King, as Elnathan, Dalaiah, and Gamariah, and in
his moſt vehement rage with ſome Danger of
their owne ſtate & liues perſwaded & intreated
him not to Burne the booke. But nothing could
ſtaie his Furie, but that before he had hearde it
redde through, euē in Contempt of God & of his
worde and Threatnings, he out it in peeces and
caſt it in the fire. When God, in the wordes of
his Prophete, did ſo terribly Thunder in ye eares
of the king, he ſhould haue bene Greatly moued
therwith,3. Re. 21. g. 27 2. pa. 34. d. 19 and haue * Rent & tore his garments
in token of the inward feare and Sorow of his
hearte, knowing moſt aſſured Danger to hang
ouer both him and his kingdome. But after the
maner of Indurate hartes, as a furious beaſt he
Rageth euē againſt God himſelf, & thinketh by
Fire, as it were, to Conſume his Threatnings.

If he thought it to be the doyng of poore Hieremie
onely, why did he make ſo great accompt of
the matter, and ſhew himſelfe ſo much grieued
therwith, ſeyng he knewe, that ſo contemptible
a perſon, as he iudged him to be, coulde not of
himſelfe worke hurte to him, or to his realme?
If his conſcience, trembling at the matter, dyd
tel him, that the Authoritie of God was in thoſe
wordes, why did he ſo furiouſlie ſtorme at the
thing, as thoughe he had bene hable by his rage
to haue Diſcountenanced the wrath of God toward
him and his people?Jere. 38. a. 4. 1. Re. 22. c. 13. Luc. 13. c. 14. 3. reg 22. b. 8. But cruell Hipocrites
haue euer ſome * pretenſes of reaſon to bolſter vp
their obſtinacie againſt God & his Prophetes,
and therefore cauſed he Hieremie and Baruch to
be ſent for, if God had not hyd them, and by his
prouidence kepte them from his furie and wicked
purpoſe. For God vſeth to preſerue his
Meſſengers from danger and perill, euen maugre
the heades of all his Enemies vntill their
full and appointed time be come, that his Name
may be glorified, & his Truth enlarged by their
Death.
               Nowe after the King had burnte the
booke,Verſe. 27. &c. and the ſermons which. &c.
               The wicked perſecuters thinke by crueltie
and violence to Suppreſſe and Extinguiſhe the
worde of God and his trueth, but by his prouidence
it riſeth more Strongly againſt them to

their greater confuſion. Ioakim thoughte by
caſting the Booke of Hieremies Prophecies into
the fire, he had, as it were, cutte of the hande of
God, and deliuered himſelfe and his kingdome
from thoſe plagues, that weare denounced by
thoſe * Seditious and Factious men,3. reg. 18. c. 17 as he toke
them, Hieremie and Baruch. But beholde, that
he and all his, mighte vnderſtande that he ſtruggled
in vaine, and ſtroue againſte the ſtreame,
the prouidence of God publiſheth another booke
containing not onely the ſame matter, but alſo
an euidente declaration of Gods iuſte Iudgement
and ſharpe puniſhment to come vpon that
wicked King and his ſtocke, that is, that his
owne deade Corpſe ſhoulde be caſte forthe contemptuouſlie
withoute Buriall,Jere. 22. e. 19. as is ſaide in
the former Chapiter, and that none of his iſſue
and generation in righte deſcente ſhould ſit any
time in the throne of Dauid after him. For Iechonias
his Sonne raigned onely three monethes,
and was ledde away Captiue, ſo that he might
ſcantly ſeme to haue raigned: and Sedechias was
his Vncle and was ſet vp in deſpite of him and
his Sonne Iechonias or Ioakim after whō they
had no King of that directe liue but Zorobabel
vntill the comming of the Meſſias Chriſt Ieſu,
                  Eſai. 11. a. 1. Act. 13. d. 23.
who was The yong branche that ſprang a freshe
out of the olde vvorne ſtocke of Ieſsie as oute of a
roote that had not flouriſhed in manye yeares
before. Yea, and he aſſureth both the King and
al his people, though they did neuer ſo contemptuouſly

refuſe to hearken to his worde, that he
woulde viſite their wickedneſſe, and bring vpon
them all thoſe euils that he hath promiſed. In
like maner God in al ages dealeth with the perſecuters
of his word and holy Scriptures, and
neuer more than in theſe latter dayes. The enemies
of the Goſpell haue thoughte to ſuppreſſe
Gods trueth by burning the godly writings of
learned men: and by deſtroying the Preachers
and profeſſours of the ſame with fire, and with
the ſworde, ſhedding their bloude moſt cruellie.
But the prouidence of God raiſeth other euen of
the aſhes of them, that doe as conſtantly teache
and defende his truth euen to the faces of them,
and maugre their heartes publiſhe the Goſpell
in writing more largely thā euer it was before.
And ſo wil it be, vntill God bring their iuſte deſerued
plagues vpon their heades, though they
in the meane time to the heaping of his greater
wrath vpon them, in furious rage kill and ſ
                     •
                  ea
ſome of his Saintes which he hath appointed
that way to glorifie his name.
            
         
         
            The .16. Sunday after Trinitie
at Morning prayer.
            Ezechiel. Cap. 2.
            
               
                   ANd then ſaid he vnto me, St
                     •
                  nde vp vpon thy féete (O
thou ſonne of man) and I will talke with thée.
               1. And the ſpirite 
                     〈…〉
                   when he had ſpoken

vnto me, and ſet me vpon my féete, ſo that I hearde him that
ſpake vnto me. 3 And he ſaid vnto me, Thou ſonne of man,
I ſende thée to the Children of Iſrael, to a rebellious people
which haue rebelled againſte me, both they and their forefathers
haue wickedly behaued themſelues againſte me, euen
vnto this verye daye. 4 For they are children of a harde
face and ſtiffe heart, I doe ſend thée vnto them, & thou ſhalte
ſay vnto them, Thus ſaith the Lorde God.
               5 And whether they will heare or refuſe (for they are a rebellious
houſe) yet they maye knowe that there hath bene a
Prophet among them. 6 And thou ſonne of man feare thē
not, neither be afraide of their wordes, for briers & thornes
are with thée, and thou doeſt dwell among ſcorpions: feare
not their wordes, nor be abaſhed at their lookes, for they are
a rebellious houſe. 7 And thou ſhalt ſpeake my wordes vnto 
them, whether they will heare or refuſe, for they are rebellious.
8 Therefore thou ſonne of man, obey thou all
things that I ſay vnto thée, and be not thou rebellious like the
rebellious houſe: open thy mouth, and eate that I giue thée.
               9 And I loked, and behold a hand was ſent vnto me, and
loe, in it was a roule of a booke. 10 And he opened it before
me, and it was written within and without, and there was
written therin lamentations, and mourning and woe.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .ij.
Chapter of Ezechiel.
               And then ſaide he vnto me,Verſe. 1. 2. ſtand vp vpon
thy feete (O thou ſonne of man). &c.
               
                  IN the firſte Chapiter of this Prophete
in a viſion was declared what He was,
& of how greate aucthoritie that called
Ezechiel, that is, the Omnipotente and

euerliuing God, and the Lorde of Hoaſtes: vnto
whoſe dominion all Creatures are ſubiecte,
and by him are gouerned and maintayned.
               Nowe the Prophete in this place hathe, as it
were, his Commiſſion deliuered vnto him, and
is ſente as Gods Meſſenger, vnto the Iſraelites
liuing in baniſhmente, and is inſtructed what
maner of people they are, how they will receiue
him, and howe he ſhall behaue himſelfe toward
them. In the ende of the former Chapiter, it is
mentioned that Ezechiel ſeyng in a viſion an
Image of the glorie of God, not being hable to
abyde the Maieſtie thereof, fell downe vpon his
face,Da. 10. b. 8. in like manner as we reade that Daniell did
when he ſawe a terrible viſion. And there vvas
no ſtrength, ſaith he, remaining in me. &c. and yet
I hearde the voyce of his vvordes, and fell aſtonied
vpon my face. Such is the frailtie of man, as he
is not hable to abide but a meane ſhadowe of
the glorious Maieſtie of God.
               But the ſame God, ſuffereth not theſe good men
that he hath ouerthrowne with terrour of his
glorie to remaine long proſtrate and caſt downe,
but he comfortablie erecteth them with his ſpirite,
as we ſee in this place in Exechiel, whom
he not onelye commaundeth to ſtande vp vpon
his feete that he may ſpeake vnto him, but alſo
endueth him with his ſpirit that he may be hable
ſo to doe. For ſuch is our weaknes, that whē
we be once ouerthrowne, we cannot riſe of oure

ſelues, but onely by the mighte of Gods Holie
grace and Spirite. Wherefore ſayth S. Paule,
VVe are not able of our ſelues to doe any thing,
                  2. Cor. 3. b. 5. 1. Co. 15. b. 10 
                  but
al our ſufficiēcie is of God: And again, Not of my
ſelf, but of the grace of God in me.
               
               
                  Ezechiel therfore ſtādeth not here vpō his feet
of himſelf, but by ye Spirite of God entring into
him. Neyther was the outward Word of God
ſufficiēt for this Purpoſe. For the Strength &
might of the word of God, is by ye Grace of his
Spirite goeing alwaye with it. The externall
VVord, as his bleſſed Inſtrument, ſoundeth in
the eare, and moueth the ſenſe, but the Spirite of
God worketh in the heart.
               And he ſaid vnto me,Verſe. 3. 4. thou ſonne of man
J ſende thee to the children of. &c.
               
                  Hovve shal they hear ſaith Paule vvithout prea
ching,
                  Ro. 10. c. 14. 
                  and hovve shall they preache, onleſſe they be
ſent? God therefore commonly vſeth in notable
maner, to call his Prophets, and they alwaye
lightly declare their owne calling and ſending,
as here Ezechiell dothe, that they may not bee
thought to haue Come of themſelues,Jer. 23. e. 21. * as they
commonly do that are Seducers and deceiuers
of the People, but to be Sente and appoynted
by God.
               Here is alſo declared to Whom, and to what
maner of perſons the Prophet is ſente, that is,
to the children of Iſrael liuing nowe in Captiuitie,

and wyth greate Impacience, murmurynge
agaynſte GOD and hys Iuſtice. So
that neyther by Teaching they coulde bee perſuaded,
neyther by the Scourge and puniſhemente
of God anye thing amended. Therefore
are they deſcribed to bee a Rebellious people,
euer Stryuing and ſettyng them ſelues agaynſte
GOD,
                  Pſa. 77. f. 63 as their * Fathers had done before
them, A people of an Harde and impudente
face, whome Nothyng coulde make aſhamed,
but rather wyth Stoute countenaunce, will
Defende their Wickedneſſe, and Glorie in it,
and therefore by Hieremie alſo are they ſayde,
To haue an Harlottes forheade.
                  Jere. 3. a. 3. They are noted
alſo to bee a People of a Stiffe hearte, that
is, of an Obſtinate and headie mynde, whome
neyther Godly perſuaſion nor greuous puniſhmente
coulde moue to retourne to God, and acknowledge
their fault.
               When GOD obiecteth to his People, the
Imitation of their Forefathers, wee alſo are
Taughte to beware, howe wee Stubburnely
Staye oure ſelues agaynſte the Callyng of
God and his holie woorde and Goſpell, by the
Imitation of oure Forefathers.
               And yet wee ſee, that men in theſe dayes
ſhew
                     •
                   no greater grounde of their Conſciences,
than to ſaye, They will Beleeue and doe

                     〈◊〉
                   their Forefathers haue doone. If that

                     ••
                  eaſon bee ſounde, (as by this place and manye
other wee are Taughte it is not) Surely

the Iewes might well ſeme excuſable, and not
ſo much to be blamed for reiecting the doctrine
of the Prophetes, and of Chriſte and his Apoſtles:
For vpon that reaſon they chiefly grounded
them ſelues. Therefore wee oughte diligently
to Learne by the vnfallible rule of Gods
woorde Wherein oure Fathers dyd well, and
therein to followe them, and contrarywyſe,
gladly to Shunne and forſake thoſe thinges
that they doe otherwyſe.
               When God commaundeth Ezechiel to goe to
the Children of Iſraell, and ſaye vnto them Thus
ſayth the Lord, both Preachers haue to learne,
that they remembre whoſe Meſſengers they
are, and that they Teache not the people of
God their owne Phantaſies and deuiſes, but
that only,1. Cor. 11. c. 23 1. Cor. 15 a. 3. as Paule ſayeth, whyche they haue
receyued of GOD, that they maye boldly ſay,
with Ezechiel, Thus ſayth the Lord. And on the
other parte, the hearers and people are by the
ſame woorde inſtructed, when they heare the
Preachers, not to make accompte of them as
ſimple men onely, nor to accepte their wordes
as the wordes of men, but as the Doctrine of
God, whoſe ambaſſadours they are, ſent by him
to enfourme them of hys holy will and pleaſure,
and to leade them into his wayes. The
Preachers of God muſt not loke to haue, their
Doctrine by and by to be thankfully & frutefully
received, or that their laboures & 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſhall

haue fauourable and good Succeſſe.
               The Prince of this Worlde is enimie to God
and to his cauſe, and therfore wil not eaſily ſuffer
them that forſake God, and fighte vnder his
Banner, to yelde to the obedience of God, and
to be reformed at his callyng.
               Therfore ſayth God to Ezechiel, VVhether
they will heare or refuſe, giue not ouer thy function
and office of teaching, but let them knovve, to
their further Condemnation, and to the takyng
away of all Pretenſes of ignorance, That there
hath ben a Prophet of God among them, to gyue
them warning, and to cal them from their wickedneſſe.
I know, and I tel thee before hand,
that they are a Rebellious and obſtinate People,
and wyll not hearken vnto thy Preaching
nor accepte thy Doctrine, but thou haſte my
Commandemente, and my Commiſſion to confirme
thee,1. Cor. 3. b. 6. therfore performe that, *Plant and
water that ſtony and harde Ground, and leaue
the Increaſe and ſucceſſe to me. If they repent
thou mayſte haue Comforte of thy trauayle, if
they continue Stubburne, they muſt haue Iuſtice
for their Diſobedience.
               And thou ſonne of man feare them not,Verſ. 6. 7.
neither be afrayd of their wordes. &c.
               Suche is the Frayltie and timorouſneſſe
of Man, that hee cannot chooſe but bee Moued
with the Clamour and obloquie of many

agaynſte hym. Therefore God dothe heere
ſtrengthen, and as it were Arme Ezechiell his
Prophete agaynſte the waywardneſſe of that
People, and wylleth hym to take pacientely
whatſoeuer they ſhall doe or ſaye.
               
                  Hypocrites ryſe agaynſte Gods truth, and
in woordes pretende Gaye and holye Titles
and Names for the colour and maintenaunce
of their Doings, and deale Fiercely in wordes
and countenaunce with them that Teache the
contrarie, as the Papiſtes and other Aduerſaries
doe at this daye agaynſt the true Miniſters
of God. But they muſt Comfort them
ſelues, and (as he willeth his Prophete Ezechiell
in this place) not be afrayde nor abaſhed
thereof. It is the ordinarie meanes of them
that bee Enimies to GOD and to his Truth.
If in the heate of their Spirite, they call vs
Schiſmatikes, Heretikes, vnlearned, vile, contemptible,
yea dogges and dounghilles of the
Earth: yet muſt wee not bee ſo Ouerthrowne
therwith, as for it to leaue our office and duetie
of Teaching vndone, but rather with great
Conſtancie, ſet our ſelues agaynſt their waywarde
Wickedneſſe,2. Cor. 6. b. 7 and By the Povver of God
and armour of Righteouſneſſe, paſſe through honour
and dishonour, good reporte and euill, and
neuer yelde or giue place to the Stubburne Enimies.
Though they bee as Thornes vnto vs,
and euery way Moleſte and greeue vs, though
they bee as Scorpions, and wyth the venim of

their ſclaunderous tongues, poyſonouſly ſtinge
vs, yea oftentymes vnto verie death: yet muſte
wee remember that in this place God ſpeaketh
to Ezechiel, Feare not their vvords, but ſpeake my
truth vnto them, vvhether they vvil heare it, or refuſe
it.
               
               Therefore thou ſonne of man obey thou
all things that I ſaye vnto thee.Verſe. 8. &c. &c.
               There is none meete to be the Meſſenger of
God, and the teacher of his people, but ſuche a
one as hath bene firſte Taught of him, and at
His hande learned his holie Will, and the myſteries
of his Truth. Therefore the Prophete
is here willed, To open his mouthe, and to eare
all that the Lorde doth giue him, that is, That
hee ſhoulde Faythfully receyue at his Hande,
and diligently Imprinte in his Memorie, and
in his Hearte digeſte all the woordes that the
Lorde ſhoulde ſpeake vnto him. For ſo God
ſayth to him in theEze. 3. b. 10.. 3. cap. verſe. 10. This booke
is deſcribed to bee written vvithin and vvithoute,
that is, to Conteyne muche and Plenteous
matter touchyng the Children of Iſraell,
and all bytter and vnpleaſaunt, ſhewyng the
Signes and tokens of Gods wrathe agaynſt
them, ſo that they coulde Conceiue nothyng
thereof but matter of Sorrovv, Mourning, Lamentation
and VVoe. For ſeing the Sweeteneſſe
of his Promiſes coulde not allure them,

he endeuoreth to breake their Stubborn heartes
wyth the terrible Threatnings of his diſpleaſure.
In the .8. Verſe, God armeth his
Prophet agaynſt an other Temptation, wherwith
the myndes of many are caryed awaye,
and enclined eyther not to Receyue the woorde
of God, or when they haue receyued it, to Reuolte
from it againe: and that is, the Conſent
of the Multitude thinking the contrarie.
               Wherfore hee ſayeth vnto Ezechiell, Obey thou
all things that I shall ſaye vnto thee, and bee not
lyke this Rebellious houſe. I knowe it maye
ſeeme an Harde tentation to thee to teache the
contrarie of that, which they all thinke and defende
to bee true,3. Re. 18. d. 21 and with a verie * few good
men to ſtande againſt the whole multitude and
Conſent of them, which are called and compted
my People. But I tell thee, what ſoeuer they
Pretende, and howeſoeuer faire Titles and tokens
they haue had of my Fauoure, they are
a Stiffenecked and rebellious People, whiche
vnder their faire Pretenſes, ſette them ſelues
agaynſte mee, and my Holie will. Therefore
beeware thou be not like them, nor Yelde not
to their Conſente and Multitude, but cleaue
faſte to my woorde, and to that I ſaye vnto
thee.3. Re. 22. a. 8. * For one man with my Truth is better
and more to be credited, than the whole World
agreeing in the contrarie.
               The lyke Inſtruction god vſed to Eſai. cap. 8.

warning him,Eſai. 8. c. 12. 
                  That hee should not vvalke in the
vvay of that people, nor ſpeake vvordes of Conſpiracie,
that is, of Cōſent or agreement in one opinion,
VVhen this people shall ſay Conſpiracie, be
not afrayde of them, but ſanctifie the Lorde of hoaſtes,
and let him be your feare and dreade. S. Peter
in his firſt Epiſtle cap. 3. verſe. 14. 15.1. Pet. 3. c. 14. 15. alludeth to
the ſame place confirming the faithfull, againſt
the Conſpiracie and agreement of the Ievves in
Perſecuting the Goſpell.
               It behoueth vs alſo in theſe latter and perilous
dayes, in ſo greate a multitude conſpiring
againſt the worde of God and the profeſſion of
his Truthe, to arme oure ſelues with the ſame
weapons of Comforte, wherwith we ſee God
furniſhed his Prophetes and Apoſtles againſt
the countenaunce of the whole worlde. This
ſending foorthe of Ezechiell is more largely declared
by the Prophete hymſelfe in the thyrde
Chapiter.Ezec. 3. a. 1. &c.
               
            
         
         
            The .xvj. Sunday after Trinitie
at Euening prayer.
            Ezechiell. 14.
            
               
                   THere reſorted vnto me certain of the 
                     ••
                  ders of Iſrael,
and ſat downe by me. 2 Then came the word of the
Lorde vnto mée, ſaying. 3 Thou ſonne of man, theſe
men haue ſette vp their Idols in their heartes, and put the
ſtumbling blocke of iniquitie before their face, ſhoulde I
then anſwere them at their requeſt?
               
                  
4 Therfore ſpeak vnto them, & ſay vnto thē, thus ſaith the
Lorde God, Euery man of the houſe of Iſrael that ſetteth
vp his Idols in his hearte, and putteth the ſtumbling blocke
of his iniquitie before his face, and commeth to the Prophete:
vnto that man will I the Lord my ſelfe giue anſwere when
he commeth, according to the multitude of his Idols.
               5 That the houſe of Iſrael maye be ſnared in their owne
heartes, becauſe they be cleane gone from me all of them
thorowe their Idols.
               6 Wherfore tell the houſe of Iſrael, thus ſaith the Lorde
God: Returne and cauſe to returne from your Idols, and
turne your faces from all your abhominations.
               7 For euery man, whether he be of the houſe of Iſrael, or
a ſtranger that ſoiourneth in Iſrael, which departeth from
me, and ſetteth vp his Idols in his hearte, and putteth the 
ſtumbling blocke of his wickedneſſe before his face, and commeth
to a Prophete for to aſke counſell at me through him:
vnto that man will I the Lord giue anſwere by mine owne
ſelfe. 8 I will ſet my face againſt that man, and will make
him to be an example (for other) yea and a common by word,
and will roote him oute of my people, that ye maye knowe
howe that I am the Lorde.
               9 And if that Prophete be deceiued when he telleth a thing
then I the Lorde my ſelfe,2. Reg. 22. c. haue deceiued that Prophete, and
will ſtretche oute my hande vpon him, to deſtroy him out of
my people of Iſrael.
               10 And they ſhalbe puniſhed for their wickedneſſe, according
to the ſinne of him that aſketh ſhall the ſinne of the prophete
be: 11 That the houſe of Iſrael may wander no more
from me, neither be any more defiled in all their tranſgreſſions:
but that they may be my people, and I their God, ſaith
the Lorde God. 12 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto
me, ſaying. 13 Thou ſonne of man,Eze. 4. c. 16. Eze. 5. c. 17. when the land ſinneth
againſt me by committing a treſpaſſe, I will ſtretche out my
hand vpō it, and breake their ſtaffe of bread, and ſend dearth

vpon them, to deſtroy man and beaſt foorth of it.
               
                   14 And though Noe, Daniel, & Iob, theſe thrée men were
among them:Jere. 15. a. 1. yet ſhall they in their righteouſneſſe deliuer
but their owne ſoules, ſaith the Lord God.
               15 If I bring noyſome beaſtes into the land, & they ſpoils
it, and it be ſo deſolate that no man may paſſe throughe it for
beaſtes, 16 If theſe thrée mē were alſo in the middeſt therof:
as truely as I liue ſaieth the Lorde God, they ſhall ſaue
neither ſonnes nor daughters, but be onely deliuered them
ſelues: and as for the land it ſhalbe waſte.
               17 Or if I bring a ſworde vpon this land, and ſay, Sword
goe through the lande, ſo that I ſlay downe man and beaſt in
it. 18 And if theſe thrée men were therin: as truely as I
liue ſaith the Lord God, they ſhal deliuer neither ſonnes nor
daughters, but onely be ſaued themſelues.
               19 If I ſend a peſtilence into this land, and powre out my
ſore indignation vpon it in bloud, ſo that I roote out of it both
man and beaſt: 20 And if Noe, Daniel, and Iob were therin,
as truely as I liue ſaith the Lord God, they ſhall deliuer
neither ſome nor daughter, but ſaue their owne ſoules in
 their righteouſneſſe. 21 Moreouer thus ſaith the Lord God,
How much more when I ſende my foure troublous plagues
vpon Hieruſalem, the ſworde, hunger, perilous beaſtes, and
peſtilence to deſtroy man and beaſt out of it?
               22 Beholde there ſhalbe a remnant ſaued therin, whiche
ſhall bring forth their ſonnes and daughters, behold they ſhal
come forth vnto you, and ye ſhall ſée their way and their enterpriſe,
and ye ſhalbe comforted concerning the euill that I
haue brought vpō Hieruſalē (euen) cōcerning all that I haue
brought vpon it. 23 They ſhall comfort you when ye ſhall
ſée their way and workes: and ye ſhall know how that it is
not without a cauſe that I haue done al againſt Hieruſalem,
as I did, ſaith the Lorde God.
            
            
               
               The Expoſition vpon the .xiiij.
Chapter of Ezechiel.
               There reſorted vnto me certaine of the
Elders of Iſrael,Verſe. 1. 2. 3. and ſate downe. &c.
               
                  THe Iſraelites which had fallē from God
to Idolatrie and falſe worſhip, liuing
nowe in baniſhmente and Captiuitie
in Babilon, were ſore greued with theſe
greate miſeries & tirannicall oppreſſions which
they by the Chaldees ſuſtained, and yet were nothing
at all moued to repent and turne frō their
wickednes. Wherfore ſome of the Elders of thē
retaining ſtill in their heartes, not onely an inclination,
but an earneſt affection to continue in
their Idolatry, deſirous to heare ſome good tidings
of their deliuerance at the hand of Ezechiel
the Prophete of God, with Diſſimulation & Hipocriſie
came vnto him, and ſitting by him began
to moue queſtion howe they ſhoulde behaue
themſelues in the Captiuitye, and what they
mighte beſte doe, what God had reuealed vnto
him touching them, & what hope there was of
the reſtoring of Hieruſalem. And forſomuch as
the Prophete might haue ben deceiued by their
Hipocriſie, & haue thought that they had truely
and ſincerely repented: God openeth their Diſſimulation
vnto him, & teacheth him home he

ſhall anſwere them according to their deſertes.
Theſe men, ſaith God, that come vnto thee are
Hipocrites and diſſimulers, and be not inwardlie
as they pretende out wardlye. For whereas
the Hart of my people ſhuld be the Seate of my
true worſhippe, and their Life a declaration of
my glory vnto the world: Theſe men cleane contrary
haue ſet vp Idols in their heartes, & long
ſtill to continue in the worſhipping of them. And
the wicked life which they openly leade, is as a
ſtumbling blocke to many other, whereby they
are cauſed to fall frō me. Should I then be ſought
for by ſuch as they are? or shoulde I anſvvere them
at their requeſt, which by ſuche dealing doe in a
maner openlie delude me, and ſeme not to eſteme
me as a God? For if they did, they muſt needes
knowe that their wicked Hipocriſie coulde not
be hid from me. Out of this place we haue to
learne, Firſt, howe depely the wicked vſe to diſſimule,
& to pretende an obedience to God, and a
loue to his trueth, when in their heartes they
meane nothing leſſe.Mat. 19. a. 3. In like manner the Scribes
and Phariſeis often came to Chriſt: wherfore we
muſt take hede and beware of them. Secondly,
we are taught, that God knoweth all thinges,
and that the ſecretes of our heartes are not hid
from him.Heb. 4. d. 13 Prou. 15. a. 3. 
                  All things, are open to the eies of God,
ſaith Paule. And Salomon, The eies of God in
euerie place beholdeth both the good and the euill.
We muſt ſo liue therfore, as we be ſure that we
haue God witneſſe of all euen our moſte ſecrete

doings, yea of the very cogitations and deuiſes
of our hartes. Thirdly, we are inſtructed how
to come vnto god, or to his Prophetes to learne,
that is, ſincerelie and truely. And we Come vnto
God, when we come to reade or to heare his
holie Worde and ſcriptures: And therfore muſte
we doe it with a ſimple & a true meaning harte,
leaſt it fall out to vs, as it did to theſe olde diſſimuling
Iſraelites.
               
               Therfore ſpeake vnto them, and ſay vnto
them,Verſe. 4. thus ſaith the Lorde. &c.
               Forſomuch as their impudencie was ſuche,
that notwithſtanding the loue of Idolatry that
reigned in their hartes, and the greate wickedneſſe
that to the offence of other appeared in
their liues, yet they durſte to come to Ezechiel to
learne the will of God and his determination
touching them: God willeth his Prophete to
tell them, that he will anſwere them himſelfe,
but not as they hoped and deſired, nor any thing
at all to their liking, but in ſuche ſorte, as of his
Iuſtice they for their horrible Idolatry and other
wickedneſſe deſerued. For that is ment by
theſe wordes, According to the multitude of his
Idolles.
                  Verſe. 5▪
                   In ſuch ſorte, ſaith God, I will anſwere
them as I wil make openly knowē that is now
ſecrete and hidde, and that all men ſhall vnderſtande
there is not one iote of godlye motion in
them. And I vvill ſo ſnare them in their ovvne conſciences,
                  
that they th̄ſelues ſhall declare to the
world they thought not in their hearts, as they
pretended out wardly to haue done. The cauſe
of this vnpleaſant anſwere that God maketh
to them, is, for that through Idolatry they had
forſaken him.
               Therefore God,Verſe. 6. 7. as a mercifull Lorde, deſirous
rather to haue them amende then to periſhe,
biddeth his Prophete to will them either
vnfainedly to returne frō their Sinfull life and
abhominable Idolatrye, and alſo to cauſe other
to returne whome by their example and inſtruction
they had miſledde: or els that they ſhoulde
be ſure to haue a verye vnpleaſante anſwere at
the mouth of God himſelfe, whether they were
Ievves naturally borne,Nu. 15. b. 15 29. or ſuche * ſtrangers as
were Circumciſed, and profeſſing the Law and
Couenante of God did liue among them. When
God requireth that they ſhould not only themſelues
amende and turne vnto him, but cauſe
other alſo to doe the like, Wee are taughte the
manner and nature of true repentance, whiche
throughe the feare of God hating wickedneſſe
himſelfe cannot abide it in other, but by all the
meanes he can ſeeketh to refourme the ſame,
and eſpeciallye if his Conſcience tell him, that
the ſame perſons in anye parte, haue bene miſledde
by his example.
               
               I will ſet my face againſt that man,Verſe. 8. and
will make him to be an example. &c.
               Forſomuch as Threatning prophecies doe
nothing at all or very litle moue the mindes of
them that be obſtinate, becauſe they thinke thē
to be as it were Thunder without Lightening,
and vaine terroure withoute effecte: therefore
God declareth to them by his Prophete, that
the things be not ſo earneſtly ſpoken, but that
they ſhalbe as effectually put in execution. And
that he will in dede. Set his face, that is, his countenance
and whole power agaynſt them, and
not onely make them a by worde and common
Prouerbe vnto al men, but cleane root them out
of the number of his people, that they may right
well knowe that he is not onelye a threatning
but alſo a Iuſte and a puniſhing God, whiche
will in dede perfourme that, that he hath ſpoken
in woorde.Verſe. 9. And bycauſe it mighte be that
notwithſtanding the Threatnings of Ezechiell,
they had ſome comforte in the ſayings of their
falſe and flattering Prophetes, whiche framed
themſelues to ſpeake vnto them things altogether
delectable and pleaſant: God willeth them
to take hede thereof, for that their wickedneſſe,
in his iuſt Iudgement, had deſerued to be Deceiued
by ſuche.3. Re. 22. d. 22 As Achab had bene long before
againſte Gods true Prophete Micheas.
               
               The wicked haue alwayes their hirelings and
flatterers that vpholde and maintayne them

in their errours, contrarye to the Meſſengers
of God and the Teachers of his holye worde.
               And that happeneth vnto them by their Iuſte
deſerte, becauſe they haue before time ſo ſtubbournely
diſobeyed God, when he called them,
by his true Miniſters. This is it that Sainte
Paule ſaith, that God woulde ſuffer the wicked
in the latter dayes to be ſeduced by falſe Teachers,2. theſ. 2. c. 10.
                  Bicauſe they receiued not the loue of the truth
that they might be ſaued, and therefore vvould ſend
them ſtrong eluſions that they shoulde beleeue lyes.
Many at theſe dayes doe harden themſelues by
like perſwaſions againſt the Preachers of the
Goſpell. Oh ſaye they, there be a Number of other
learned mē that Teach otherwiſe thā they
doe, and in ſuche a time of contention and diuerſitie
of opinions, Howe can we knowe what is
the truth? Let them therfore ſtriue among themſelues,
wee will liue and beleeue as we haue
donne before time. But they ſhould learne by
this place of Ezechiel, that ſuche diuerſitie of opinions
& troubles in Doctrine and Religion,
doe not happen in the church by Chaunce or fortune,
but by the Woorking and prouidence of
God for the puniſhmente of the Sinnes of his
people, and eſpecially for their waywarde neglecting
and contemning of the worde of God
Preached vnto them. And therefore ſhoulde
they be the more Carefull, ſtudious, and diligente
bothe in reading the Scriptures and in
Praier to God, that they might vnderſtand the

truthe, and not ſo eaſyly eyther be Confirmed
in Superſtition, or caried awaye to falſhoode
and Errour.
               And they ſhal be puniſhed for their wickedneſſe
according to the ſinne of.Verſe. 10. &c.
               As hee before had ſayde, that the People
for their Stubborneſſe ſhoulde bee plagued: ſo
here hee declareth, that the lyke ſhoulde fall
alſo vpon the falſe Prophetes. And ſo proueth
it true that Chriſte ſayth, If the blynd leade
the blynde,
                  Mat. 15. b. 14 
                  they shall both fall into the ditche.
               
               The Falſe teachers ſpeak many things that
they knowe to bee otherwyſe than Truth, and
the Obſtinate people will not abyde to heare
them, that vtter the truth, and ſo Truthe depraued
of the tone, and refuſed of the tother,
pulleth Gods heauie Iudgemente vpon them
bothe.
               That the houſe of Iſraell bee led awaye
no more from me through errour.Verſ. 11. &c.
               As God to the benefite of the faithful doth
ſuffer falſe Prophetes and teachers, and other
Schiſmes and troubles to ryſe among his people,
that their Faith maye bee the vetter tryed
and proued: So doth he to their lyke cōmoditie
oftentimes greeuouſly Puniſhe bothe the falſe
Teachers, and Suche as giue credite to them.
               For by that meanes the Faithefull and electe

which through weakeneſſe and frayltie did before
ſtagger and doubt in their conſciences, are
confirmed and euidētly vnderſtand the Iudgemēts
of God in them. Therefore, ſayth God,
That the houſe of Iſrael may be led no more. &c.
By the Houſe of Iſraell he dothe not note the
whole people (for among them were the Seducers,
and the People ſeduced) but the Electe
of God, and thoſe that were of the true ſeede of
Abraham, of which happily many were for the
tyme Miſſeled by the falſe Prophets, & the example
of other. And now by the ſmart of their
Puniſhement being quickened, and as it were
wakened out of their errours, they looke more
diligently and carefully vnto the truth of God,
and retourne from their Corruptions into the
whiche they had bene carryed awaye before,
and beeing nowe Ioyned to the Couenaunte
of God agayne, become his People, and Hee
their God.
               And the woorde of the Lord came vnto
me,Verſe 12. &c. ſaying: Thou ſonne of man &c.
               The Iewes were greatly ſtayed from Repentaunce
by an hope and confidence that they
had in the Prayers of holie men, whiche they
thought did liue among them: Oh (ſayd they)
The Earneſt prayers of ſo many Godly men
and women, as vndoubtedly are of the Iewes,
muſt needes be heard, and obteyne fauour with

God, and to cauſe him to withdrawe his Plagues
and puniſhmentes. This Vayne confidence
God by his Prophet in this ſecond parte
of the Chapiter taketh from them. For where
as he hath Foure plagues, whiche he is determined
to bryng vpon them, that is Famine,
Wylde beaſtes, the Sword, and the Peſtilence,
he doth aſſure them, that if Noe, Daniel, and Iob,
or the Holieſt men that euer liued, were at this
tyme amongſt them, they ſhoulde not by theyr
Prayers in any one of theſe Plagues, obtaine
pardon for any, but for themſelues only, No not
for their owne ſonnes and daughters, or ſuche
as were nigheſt to them: muche leſſe ſhoulde
they be hable to preuaile by their Prayers now
when God in his Iuſt diſpleaſure ſhall caſt vpon
that wicked People not any one, but all
thoſe Foure Plagues together. When men go
on forewarde in their wickedneſſe, it is but a peruerſe
and vayne perſuaſion to thinke they
ſhall eſcape the puniſhemente and Plagues of
God by the Faith and Prayers of other. They
muſte Repente themſelues, if they will looke
to haue God turne his wrathe from them.
               God ſpeaketh fyrſte ſeuerally of euery one of
theſe Plagues, and ſtill addeth, that Noah,
Daniell, and Iob, ſhould not be hable to deliuer
any, but their owne ſoules. Verſ. 13. 15. 17. 19.
               In the one and twentie Verſe he maketh
his Collection from the leſſe to the greater,Verſe 21.
That yf they coulde not obteyne for One,

muche leſſe ſhuld they be hable to deliuer when
he ſente al Foure vpon them to Deſtroye man
and beaſte oute of their countrey. A lyke ſentence
dothe God vtter by the Prophete Hieremie.
If Moyſes and Samuell did ſtande before me,
                  Jere. 15. a. 1.
                  my hearte shoulde not bee tovvarde this people.
The meaning of bothe theſe places is, That
God woulde neuer bee Reconciled to them, and
turne his Plagues from them, no not thoughe
his holyeſt Sainctes and ſeruauntes whome
hee hathe moſte eſteemed, had bene aliue and
entreated for them, bycauſe they dyd ſo Stubbornly
continue in the Contempt of his worde,
and woulde not ſyncerely Repente.
               The Papiſtes doe very fondly and vnfitly
alledge theſe Places, to proue that Sainctes
departed, make Interceſſion for vs, and
therefore that wee muſte Pray vnto them in
our Diſtreſſe. But the Prophete ſayeth not
that thoſe Holie men doe make Interceſſion
for the People, but putting a caſe Impoſſible,
ſaith, if They were amōg them, and did intreat
for them,1. Jo. 2. a. 1. 2. they ſhould not be hearde. VVe haue
only one mediatour and interceſſor to God, Chriſte
Ieſu, and he is the propitiation for our ſinnes. And
againe,1. Tim. 2. b. 5. 
                  There is one God and one Mediatoure of
God and man Chriſte Ieſu vvho gaue himſelfe as
the price of our Redemption.
                  Coloſſ. 4. a. 3. Thoſe that bee alyue,
bothe maye and oughte to praye one for
an other,1. theſ. 5. d. 25 Heb. 13 d. 18. and therfore Paule often deſyreth the
Churches to praye for him: but when they be

once dead, we haue no warrant in Gods worde
either that they Pray for vs, or that we ſhould
Pray to them.
               Beholde,Verſe. 22. 23. there ſhall be a remnant ſaued
therein, which ſhall bring. &c.
               By A remnante ſaued, hee meaneth thoſe
whiche ſhoulde eſcape the Slaughter in Ievvrie,
and after the Taking of the Citie. Hieruſalem,
bee broughte Captiue into Babylon to
the reſidue, whoſe wicked wayes and corrupt
maners, when they did ſee and beholde, they
ſhoulde Comforte or quiet their mindes, and
not ſo much Murmure againſt the Iuſt iudgemēt
of God, as hitherto they had done. For the
Iſraelites that were in Baniſhment, (to whome
Ezechiel ſpeaketh thus) when they heard of the
Lamentable deſtruction of Ievvrie: with troubled
minds they Murmured againſt God, as
dealing ouer rigorouſly with his owne people.
But God by his Prophete telleth them, that
when they ſhall ſee the Remnant of the Iewes
come among them, and cōſider their Abhominable
workes and doings: They ſhall comforte
and quiete theyr troubled mindes, Acknowledge
the Iuſt iudgement of God, & See that
it is not withoute cauſe that hee hath in ſo
Seuere maner dealt with Hieruſalem.
               
            
         
         
            
            The .xvij. Sunday after Trinitie
at Morning prayer.
            Ezechiel. 16.
            
               AGayne the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, ſaying:
2 Thou ſonne of man, ſhewe Hieruſalem their abhominations:
3 And ſay, Thus ſayth the Lord God
vnto Hieruſalem: Thy habitation and kinred is of the land
of Chanaan, thy father was an Amorite, thy mother an Hithite.
4 In the day of thy birth when thou waſt borne, the
ſtring of thy Nauell was not cut of, thou waſt not bathed
in water to make thée clean, thou waſt not ſalted with ſalt,
nor ſwadled in cloutes. 5 No eye pitied thée to doe any of
theſe things for thée, for to haue compaſſion vpon thée: but
thou waſt vtterly caſt out vpon the field in contempt of thy
perſon in the daye of thy birth. 6 Then came I by thée,
and ſaw thée defiled in thyne owne bloud, and I ſayd vnto
thée, when thou waſt in thy bloud, Liue (euen) when thou
waſt in thy bloud, I ſayd vnto thée, Liue.
               7 I cauſed thée to multiplie, as the bud of the fielde, thou
arte growne vp, and waxen greate, thou haſte gotten a
maruelous pleaſant beautie, thy breaſtes are faſhioned, thy
heare is goodly growne, wheras thou waſt naked and bare.
               8 Nowe when I wente by thée, and looked vpon thée, behold
thy tyme was come, yea (euen) the tyme to woe thée:
then ſpred I my cloathes ouer thée to couer thy diſhoneſtie,
yea I made an othe vnto thée, and contracted my ſelfe with
thée (ſayth the Lord God) and ſo thou becameſt myne own.
               9 Then waſhed I thée with water, and purged thy bloud
from thée, and I anoynted thée with oyle.
               10 I cloathed thée with broydred woorke, and ſhod thée
with badgers ſkinne, and I girded thée aboute with fine linnen,
& couered thée with ſilke. 11 I decked thée with coſtely
apparell, I put bracelets vpon thy handes, a chayne aboute
thy neck. 12 And I put a frontlet vpon thy face, & earerings
vpon thyne eares, and a beautiful crowne vpon thine head.
               
                  
13 Thus waſt thou deckt with golde and ſiluer, and thy
rayment was of fyne linnen: and of ſilke, and of broydred
work: thou didſt eate fine floure, hony and oyle, maruelous
beautifull waſte thou, and thou didſt luckily proſper into a
kingdome. 14 And thy name was ſpread among the Heathen
for thy beautie: for it was perfect through my beautie
which I put vpon thée, ſayth the Lord God.
               15 But thou haſt put thy confidence in thyne owne beautie,
and played the harlot bicauſe of thy renoune, and haſte
poured out thy fornications with euery one that wente by,
thou waſt his. 16 Thou didſt take thy garments, & deckt
thy hie places with diuers colours, & played the harlot thervpon,
they come not, and it ſhall not be. 17 The goodly Iewels
which I gaue thée of myne owne gold and ſiluer, haſt
thou taken and made thée mens images therof, and cōmitmitted
whoordome with them. 18 Thy broydred garmentes
haſt thou taken, and deckt them therewith: myne oyle
and incenſe haſt thou ſet before them. 19 My meat which
I gaue thée, as fine floure, oyle and honie to féede thée withall,
that haſt thou ſet before them for a ſwéet ſauour: & thus
it was ſaith the Lord God. 20 Thou haſt taken thine own
ſonnes & daughters whom thou haſt begotten vnto me, and
theſe haſt thou offred vp vnto them to be deuoured: is this
but a ſmall whoordome of thine?Leuit. 20. a. 2 Leui. 18. c. 12. 2. Re. 23. b. 6. 21 And thou haſt ſlaine
my children, and deliuered them, to cauſe them to paſſe (thorough
the fire) for them. 22 And yet in al thine abhominations
and whoordomes, thou haſt not remembred the dayes
of thy youth, howe naked and bare thou waſt at that time,
and waſt defyled in thyne owne bloud. 23 After all theſe
thy wickedneſſes, (wo, wo vnto thée, ſayth the Lorde God.)
               24 Thou haſte buylte vnto thée an hye place, and haſte
made thée an hye place in euery ſtréete. 25 Thou haſte
buylt thine hie place at euery head of the waye, thou haſte
made thy beautie to be abhorred, thou haſt opened thy feete
to euery one that came by, and multiplied thy whoordome.
               
                  
26 Thou haſt committed fornication with the Egyptians
thy neyghbours whiche were great in fleſhe, and thus haſt
thou increaſed thyne whoordome to anger mée.
               27 Beholde, I did ſtretch out my hand ouer thée, and did
miniſhe thine ordinarie (foode) and deliuered thée ouer into
the willes of them that hate thée,Ezech. 4. d. (euen) to the daughters of
the Philiſtines,Ezech. 5. d. which are aſhamed of thyne abhominable
wayes.Ezech. 14. c. Ezech. 25. a. 28 Thou haſt played the whoore alſo with the Aſſyrians,
bicauſe thou waſte inſatiable: yea thou haſt (I ſay)
with them played the harlot, and yet hadſt thou not inough.
               29 Thus haſt thou furthermore multiplied thy fornication
from the lande of Chanaan vnto the Chaldées, and yet
thou waſt not ſatiſfied herewith. 30 How weake is thine
heart ſayth the Lord God, ſéeing thou doeſt all theſe, (euen)
the workes of a preſumptuous whooriſhe woman?
               31 Buylding thy hye places at the heade of euery waye,
and makeſt thy hye places in euery ſtréete: thou haſte not
ben as an other whoore that holdeth ſcorne of a rewarde:
               32 But as a wyfe that breaketh wedlocke, and taketh other
in ſtead of hir huſband. 33 Giftes are giuen to al other
whoores: but thou giueſt rewardes vnto al thy louers, & rewardeſt
them to come vnto thée on euery ſide, for thy fornication.
34 It is come to paſſe with thée in thy whoordomes
contrary to the vſe of other women, yea there hath no ſuche
fornication ben committed after thée: ſéeing that thou giueſt
giftes vnto other, & no reward is giuē thée, therfore thou art
contrarie. 35 Therfore heare the word of the lord, O thou
harlot. 36 Thus ſayth the Lord God, Bicauſe thou haſte
poured out thy braſſe, & diſcouered thy filthines through thy
fornications with thy louers, and with all the idols of thine
abhominations, and in the bloud of thy children, whom thou
haſt giuen them: 37 Behold therefore, I will gather together
all thy l
                     •
                  uers, with whom thou haſt taken pleſure, yea
and all them whome thou haſte loued, and euery one that
thou hateſt: I will (I ſaye) gather them together rounde

about againſt thée,Eſai. 47. a. and will diſcouer thy ſhame before them,Nah. 3. a.
that they may ſée all thy fylthineſſe.Eze. 23 b. 10
               
               38 Moreouer, I will iudge thée as a breaker of wedlocke &
a murtherer, & recompence thée thine owne bloud in wrathe
and ielouſie. 39 I will giue thée ouer into their handes, and
they ſhall deſtroy thy hie place, & breake downe thy hie places,
they ſhall ſtrippe thée alſo oute of thy clothes: thy fayre
iewels ſhall they take from thée, and ſo leaue thée naked and
bare.Leuit. 20. d. 40 Yea they ſhall bring a company vpon thée, which
ſhall ſtone thée with ſtones, & thruſt thée through with their
ſwordes. 41 They ſhall burne vp thy houſes with fire, and
puniſhe thée in the ſight of many women: thus will I make
thée ceaſſe from playing the harlot,4. Re. 25. b. 9 ſo that thou ſhalt giue out
no more rewardes. 42 So will I make my wrath toward
thée to reſt, and my ielouſie ſhall depart from thée, and I will
ceaſſe, and be angry no more. 43 Seing thou remembredſt
not the dayes of thy youth, but haſte fretted me in all theſe
things: behold therfore I wil bring thine owne wayes vpon
thy head ſaith the Lorde God, ſo that thou ſhalte not commit
(any more) miſchiefe vpon all thine abhominations.
               44 Behold, all they that vſe common prouerbes, ſhall vſe
this prouerbe alſo againſt thée, ſaying, Such a mother, ſuch a
a daughter. 45 Thou art euen thy mothers owne daughter,
that hath caſt of her huſband & her children: yea thou art
the ſiſter of thy ſiſters, which forſooke their huſbandes & their
children: your mother is an Hithite, and your father an Amorite.
46 Thine eldeſt ſiſter is Samaria, thée and her
daughters that dwell vpon thy lefte hand: but thy younger
ſiſter that dwelleth on thy right hande is Sodoma and her
daughters. 47 Yet haſt thou not walked after their wayes,
nor done after their abhominations, as a litle and a litle:
but in all thy wayes thou haſt bene more corrupt than they.
               48 As truely as I liue, ſaith the Lorde God, Sodoma thy
ſiſter with her daughters, haue not done as thou haſt done
and thy daughters.
               
                  
49 Beholde, the ſinnes of thy ſiſter Sodoma were theſe:
Pride, fulneſſe of meate, and aboundance of welneſſe, theſe
things had ſhe and her daughters: beſides that they ſtrengthed
not the hand of the poore and néedie.
               50 But they were hautie, and committed abhomination
before mée, therefore I toke them away as I ſawe good.
               51 Neither hathe Samaria done halfe of thy ſinnes, yea
thou haſte excéeded them in thine abhominations, and haſte
iuſtified thy ſiſters in all thine abhominations whiche thou
haſte done. 52 Therefore thou whiche didſt condemne
thy ſiſter, beare thine owne ſhame, for thine owne offences
that thou haſte committed more abhominably than they
did, whiche in déede are more righteous than thou arte, be
thou (I ſay) aſhamed, and beare the ſhamefull rebuke, ſéeing
that thou haſt iuſtified thy ſiſters.
               53 Therefore I will bring againe their captiuitie, the captiuitie
of Sodom and her daughters, & the captiuitie of Samaria
and her daughters, and the captiuitie of thy captiuities
among them. 54 That thou maiſt take thine owne confuſion
vpon thée, and be aſhamed of all that thou haſte done, in
that thou haſte comforted them.
               55 And thy ſiſter Sodom and her daughters ſhall returne
to their former ſtate, Samaria alſo and her daughters ſhall
returne to their former ſtate, when thou and thy daughters
ſhall returne to your former ſtate.
               56 For thy ſiſter Sodom was not heard of by thy reports
in the daye of thy pride. 57 Before thy wickedneſſe was
diſcouered according to the time of the reproche of the daughters
of Aram, and of all the daughters of the Philiſtines
rounde aboute her, whiche diſpiſe thée on all ſides.
               58 Thou haſte borne thy wickedneſſe and thine abhomination,
ſayth the Lorde.
               59 For thus ſaith the Lorde God, I might (by right) deale
with thée as thou haſt done, which haſt diſpiſed the othe in
breaking the couenant.
               
                  
60 Neuertheleſſe, I will remember my couenaunt with
thée in the dayes of thy youth, and I will eſtabliſhe vnto thée
an euerlaſting couenante.
               61 Then ſhalte thou remember thy wayes, and be aſhamed
when thou ſhalte receiue thy ſiſters (both) thy elder and
thy younger: and I will giue them vnto thée for daughters,
but not by thy couenaunt.
               62 And I will eſtabliſhe my couenant with thée, that thou
maiſt knowe that I am the Lord.
               63 That thou maiſt thinke vpon it, and be aſhamed & neuer
open thy mouth any more for ſhame of thy ſelfe, when I
am pacified toward thée for all that thou haſt done, ſayth the
Lorde God.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xvj.
Chapter of Ezechiel.
               Againe the woorde of the Lorde came
vnto me ſaying,Verſe. 1. Thou ſonne of. &c.
               
                  THe ſumme of this long Chapiter is
contayned in theſe fewe woordes,
Shevve Hieruſalem their abhominations.
For by a long figuratiue ſpeache
vnder the ſimilitude of an Adulterous
woman, that without all ſhame & moderation
dealeth vnthankfully & vnfaithfully with
a louing and kind huſbande: the Prophete meruelouſly
painteth forth and notably amplifieth
the filthy abhominations, ſpirituall adultries
and other wickednes of that Citie and People.
               
                  
In the firſte parte, he ſetteth forth their poore
eſtate, and the greate goodnes of God towardes
them. Secondly he declareth their vnthankfulneſſe
and wicked abuſing of his benefites.
               Thirdly, he deſcribeth their iuſte plagues and
puniſhments for the ſame. And laſtly, the hope
of pardon, and reſtoring to their countrey if they
will repent & amende.Verſe. 3. Firſt verſe .3. he vpbraideth
them that they are ſo Degenerated frō the
ſteppes of their firſt parents Abraham & Sarah,
as they are not worthy to be accompted of their
ſede and poſteritie: But rather that they deſcended
of the Amorites and Cethites, beyng wicked
and Idolatrous people of Chanaan, whoſe maners
and conditions in all abhominable naughtineſſe
they followed. To like purpoſe Iohn
Baptiſt calleth the Phariſeis,
                  Mat. 3. b. 7. 
                  Adders broode.
                  Joh. 8. f. 44. And
Chriſt himſelfe ſaithe They had the Diuell to their
Father, bycauſe they did Imitate him in malice
and miſchiefe.
               Afterward the Prophet vnder the Similitude
of a Poore babe new borne, without helpe or
ſu
                     •
                  o
                     ••
                  r, ſetteth forthe the miſerable caſe that
they were in In Egipte, when God caſt firſte his
mercifull eyes vpon them. When a woman is
deliuered of a Childe, as midwiues and other
women know, firſt, with great care they cut the
nauell ſtring & make it vp, otherwiſe of neceſſitie
bothe mother and Childe woulde periſhe.
               Secondlye, with warme water they waſhe awaye
the vncleane and blouddie moyſting that

the Childe is imbrewed withall. Then they
cubbe it with ſalt, that the dryneſſe thereof may
cauſe the ſkinne to grow to ſome moderate hardnes.
Laſtly they wrappe it vp in ſwadling bands
that the limmes may growe ſtraite. But ſayeth
God to the Citie Heruſalem and Nation of the
Iewes, when thou waſt borne there was no perſon
to pitie thee, nor to do any of theſe thinges
to thee, but thou waſt lefte as a thing deſolate
and forlorne, and moſt aſſuredly ſhould haue periſhed,
if I had not hadde compaſſion on thee.
This God meaneth of their miſerable condition
in Egypt, where they ſeemed to be borne, bycauſe
in that place they firſte grewe vnto a people,
beeing before but one familie.Ex. 1. a. 6. 11. For after Ioſeph
was dead, and they encreaſed to ſome number,
the Egiptians helde them in miſerable bondage
and moſt greuous oppreſſion, as well ſundry
other ways, as by killing their yong infāts.
So that their life might ſeeme to be vnto them
a perpetuall death. And yet God caſting his
mercifull countenance vpon them, in the middeſt
of their enimies and in deſpite of all theyr
indeuours, did cheriſhe them, & Euen when they
were in their birth bloude, that is, in the Filthy
ſtate of their bondage, did multiply them and
made them to growe and encreaſe to the full ſtature,
beauty, and ſtrēgth of a people.Gen. 46. 6. 26 * For wheras
they were but .66. perſons when Iacob came
into Egypte, in the ſpace of .250. yeares they
grewe to* 600000. beſyde Children,Nu. 11. c. 23. notwithſtanding

ſtanding the Cruell murdering of their menne
Children.
               This is it that he meaneth when he ſaieth,
Thy breaſtes are fashioned, thy heare is goodly grovvē,
that is, thou art growē to the ſtate & beautie
of a ſtrong people, as a maiden is growen to
full age, whē thoſe parts are ſo faſhioned in her.
               When they were come to this ripeneſſe,Verſe. 8. God
ſhewed more liking to them, and ſente Moyſes
& Aaron by his mightie workes to diliuer them,
which was as a manner of woeing them to be
his people, and an hiding of their diſhoneſtie and
reprochefull ſtate that they were in. Not long
after in Mount Sinay, giuing them his lawe, by
his contracte and Couenant,Exo. 19. b. 6 he as it were,Jere. 13. b. 11. *diſpouſed
them to himſelfe as a peculiar People:
ſo that they became his people, and he their
God. After the knitting and ioyning vnto God
by his Couenante, whiche was as a kinde of
mariage, he did defende and proſper them, and
beſtowed his manifolde giftes and bleſſinges
vpon them, as wealthe and abundance of all
thinges, victorie againſte their enemies, and
happie ſucceſſe in their doynges, and aboue all
this their beautie of his true knowledge and
worſhippe,Exo. 20. a. 1. his holie Law and ordinances, his
Tabernacle, and the Arke and Teſtimony of his
preſence. So that they became a more honorable
and famous people than any was in the
worlde.Deu. 4. b. 7, For there was No nation that had God
ſo nighe vnto them as they had.
               
               
                  
This is mente by the riche clothing and decking
whiche is ſpoken of verſe. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.Verſe. 10. &c.
Hitherto they are put in minde of their owne
baſe ſtate that they were in, and of Gods mercifull
and vndeſerued goodneſſe toward them.
               But thou haste put thy confidence in
thine owne beautie and plaide the.Verſ. 15 &c. &c.
               The chiefe cauſe that moueth light women
to Adultrie and Lewdeneſſe, is to muche liking
of themſelues & confidence in their owne beautie
and gayneſſe. For thereby▪ lothing their
huſbandes, and forgetting that by this benefite
they came to the good ſtate that the 
                     •
                  are in, they
beginne to phantaſie other, and to make themſelues
familiar with them in whome they haue
better liking. And as this kinde of women is
verye euill: ſo muche worſe are they, that waſt
vpon their louers and adulterers the good and
liberall giftes of money, Iewels, or apparell,
that there huſbandes of good will and honeſt
meaning haue deſtowed vpon them. As it
is euill for a woman to yelde vnto the motions
of wicked adulterers: ſo to woe them and to
hire them with money and giftes, is an aſſured
tooken of a minde deſtitute of all feare of
God, and withoute hope of amendement giuen
ouer to naughtineſſe. In this manner
dealte the Nation of the Ievves wyth GOD

their Lorde and redeemer. For they throughe
wealthe and proſperitie in which God had ſet
them, beyng puffed vp with confidence of them
ſelues, forgatte both what they were once in Egipte,
and howe great benefites God had from
time to time beſtowed vpon them. And thinking
they had come to it by their owne induſtrie, began
to lothe the true worſhippe of God, that by
his lawe and Couenante they were appointed
vnto,Japi. 14. b. 12 and *ſoughte forthe newe worſhippinges
of their owne deuiſes,Exo. 32. a. 1. yea and *acquainted them
ſelues with ſtrange Goddes of other Nations,Nu. 25. a. 3.
& by that meanes committed ſpiritual adulterie
with them, yea, and like wicked women raging
in the heate of Incontinencie,Eze. 7. f. 20. they *waſted vpon
their falſe Gods ſuche bleſſings of wealth and
riches as God of his goodnes had giuen them.
For ſuche is the nature of them that are giuen
to ſuperſtition that they thinke nothing enough
that is beſtowed to beautifie and maintaine the
ſame.
               The highe places that are here ſpoken of,
and, that they ſo ſumptuouſtye dreſſed, were
Chappels and Aulters builded on hilles or in
vpper roomes of houſes, but in ſuche ſort, that
they were in ſight of the People. In thoſe they
did Sacrifice, ſometime to the liuing God but
not according, to his woorde, ſometimes to Idoles
and falſe Goddes after the maner of the
Aegyptians, Aſſyrians, or other people with whō
they were in league or frendſhip.
               
                  
Of al other the moſte Deteſtable and horrible
was the ſacrificings of their owne children to
Idols which God ſeuerely prohibiteth Leui. 18.Leui. 18. c. 21
                  &.
                  Leui. 20. a. 4 20.Deu. 12. d. 31. 
                  Deute.
                  Jere. 7. g. 29. 12. In Ieremie cap. 7. We reade that
not farre from Hieruſalem, in the tribe of Beniamin,
in the valley of Hinnon, there was a Chappell
and Alter in whiche they offered their children
to the Idole Moloch. This Idoll, as ſome
of the Hebrewes write, was of braſſe & hollowe,
in which, being glowing hote with fire, they encloſed
their Children to be ſlayne with a Miſerable
death, and in the meane time, that the crying
of the childe might not be hearde to moue any
pitie, they made a noyſe with Tabrets and
drummes, whereof that place was called Tophet.
Other opinions there are of the maner of
this offering of Children, which all declare it to
be a wicked & a diueliſh vſe, and ſuch as is to be
wondered howe it ſhould take place among the
People of God.
               But what Idolatrie or erroure is ſo groſſe,Rom. 1. c. 23.
whereinto mans corruption deſtitute of the
Grace of God will not eaſily bee caſte by example,Sap. 14. c. 21. 27. 28. &c.
or any other lighte occaſion. It is not
to bee let paſſe that God calleth the Children
whythe they had begotten, His Children, bycauſe
they were partakers of the promiſes, and
ſigned with the ſeale of his couenaunte. Wee
therfore that be Chriſtians, muſt know that our
childrē are alſo the children of God, & partakers
of thoſe bleſſings, that are promiſed to vs in

                  Chriſt Ieſu our Sauiour, & therfore that we do
Iniurie to God himſelfe, whoſe Children they
are,Eph. 6. a. 4. if we doe not ſee them* Carefully brought
vp in his feare. And muche more, if we, as before
tyme we haue done, Bequeath them, and
in a maner Conſecrate and Sacrifice them to
the Seruice of men, by thruſting them into Abbeyes
and Monaſteries, there to Remayne in
perpetuall bondage of Errour and ſuperſtition.
               Thou hast committed fornication with
the Aegiptians thy neyghbours.Verſe. 26. &c.
               There are two kindes of Spirituall fornication,
the one conſiſteth in Superſtition and
Falſe woorſhipping of God, contrarye to his
woorde, or in Sacrificing to Falſe gods.
In which kind God before hath noted,Verſe. 28. 29. that his
People were vnſatiable, and Faſhioned themſelues
to the Seruice, not onely of one or two,
but of a number of Idolatrous gods, and builded
chapels for them in euery corner, much like
to that maner, whiche in many places of Chriſtendome
is yet to be ſene, how they haue done
for their peculiar Sainctes.
               The other Fornicatiō is vnlaufull Ioyning
in league with Infidels and Idolaters, therby
to haue their ayde and defence, whithe God ſeuerely
in many places* forbiddeth.2. Par. 19. a. 2 For by that
meanes his people are diuers tymes caryed away
from his true Seruice to Idolatrie,Deut. 7. a. 2. and

the Woorſhipping of their Gods, with whom
they are in League and frendeſhippe: by Conſente
in Religion, thynking to haue their Fauour
more aſſured.
               Thus did the Iewes committe Fornication
with the Aegyptians, and leauing to putte
theyr Truſte in the Lorde their God,Eſai. 30. a. 2. &c. *deſired
their Helpe againſte their enimies: And in like
maner had they Doone at other tymes with
the Aſſyrians, and other People bordring vpon
them. For whiche they are here ſharpely Reproued.
Our truſte and Confidence ſhoulde bee
tyed to GOD* alone in all our Trouble and diſtreſſe:
and if wee doe imparte it to other,Jere. 17. a. 5. and
ſeeke Helpe at any other than at God,Pſa. 145. a. 4 we committe
Fornication with them, and are as Adulterers
in his ſighte.
               Therefore heare the worde of the Lord,Verſe. 33.
O thou Harlot. &c.
               In this thirde parte of the Chapiter, God
declareth their Puniſhemente, and as it were
pronounceth the ſentence of his Iuſtice againſt
them. And bicauſe he is Determined to Iudge
that Citie and countreye as an Adulterer and
breaker of Wedlocke, and of that Couenaunt
that was betweene Him and them: he noteth
them by the name of An Harlot.
               
               In theVerſe. 36. .36. Verſe he briefly knitteth together
the cauſes of their Condemnation & puniſhmēt.
               
                  
                  Bicauſe (ſayeh he) thou haſte poured oute thy
braſſe. &c. that is, Bicauſe thou haſt plentifully
layd out thy money, riches, and treaſure by preſentes,
to purchaſe vnto thee, and as it were, to
wowe new Louers & frendes of ſtrange Princes,4. Re. 16. b. 7 2.
in whom thou mighteſt put thy truſte,Par. 19. a. 2 and
haue ſuccour at thy neede,Exo. 34. b. 12. *contrarie to my cō
                  maundement:
and therby Diſcouereſt thy filthyneſſe,
and ſhe weſt plainly, that thou haſte in thy
hearte forſaken me thy Lord, and adulterouſly
haſte coupled thy ſelfe with other, and in them
delighteſt and putteſt thy confidence.
               And bicauſe thou haſte doone this, not onely
with wicked and Heathen Princes, but alſo
with a number of Idolatrous gods, and offred
the. Innocent bloud of thy Children to them:
Therefore I ſay beholde I will Greeuouſly punishe
thee. &c. The maner of the Puniſhemente is,
that God will bring agaynſte them bothe their
Frendes with whome before tyme they haue
ioyned in league,Eſay. 20. b. 6 as the Aſsyrians, Chaldeis, and
Aegyptians, and alſo their Auncient enimies the
Philiſtines, Idumeans, and other, & al they gathered
together, ſhal behold their Nakedneſſe and
filthineſſe, & rewarde them as Louers do their
old Strumpets, that they Loth & be weary of.
               When Harlots be grown in age, or touched
with ſome foule diſeaſe, their cuſtomers begin
to deteſt & ſhun them, & vpon any light occaſion
wil beate them & taking from them al their gay
Iewels and gorgious apparel, will turne them

out of the doores naked, that all other may See
what they are. Euen ſo God ſignifieth that the
Chaldees and Aſsirians ſhall do by the Iewes.
                  Verſ. 39. They
ſhall Waſte their countrey, Deſtroy their citie,
Pull downe their temple, and other places of
Sacrifice alſo, carie away into Babilon the golde
and ſiluer and coſtly veſſels belonging vnto the
ſame, which things were as the apparell, ornaments,
and iewels, wherewith Hieruſalem was
decked, and ſo ſhall they turne the Iewes out of
their Countrey Naked, that all men may ſee theyr
Filthineſſe, and conſider howe Vnfaythfully they
haue delt towarde their Lorde and God.Verſ. 41. By this
meanes and by extreeme Pouertie, God ſayth he
will make them to leaue their Idolatrie and enterteyning
of foreyne Princes, becauſe they ſhould
not be hable through their Miſerie to beſtowe any
more coſt vpon them.
               Then ſhall his wrath rest and his iealeouſie
and anger depart from them.Verſ. 42. &c.
               So long as a man hauing an Vnfaythfull woman
is in any hope by meaue correction or iealeous
carefulneſſe to bring hir to amendment, his
minde cannot well be Quiet. But when he is paſt
hope, and ſeeth her vtterly deſperate, and alſo hath
ſeuerely puniſhed her for the ſame, he layeth aſyde
all trouble of minde, and iealeous care that before
he had for hit, and letteth hir go like a Naughtie
packe into the wide world. And ſo GOD ſayeth
he will deale wyth the Nation of the Iewes.
               
               
               Beholde,Verſ. 44. 45. all they, that vſe common Prouerbes,
ſhall vſe this Prouerbe, &c.
               When the Prophets of God did threaten grieuous
Plagues to come vpon the Iewes, they in
their heartes thought they had not deſerued any
ſuche thing, but Gloried and made auaunt of the
Holineſſe of their Forefathers (as many Chriſtians
doe at this day.) Therfore God in diuerſe maners
amplifieth and ſetteth foorth their Wickedneſſe,
and in this place he noteth, that for all theyr
*Glorying,Io. 8. e. 39. they are not the True children of Abraham,
the Patriarkes, and the olde Saintes of God
that folowed them, But rather the Baſtard babes
of the Idolatrous Chananites, whoſe maners they
doe ſo liuely expreſſe, that it may, as in a common
prouerbe, be verie well ſpoken of them, That they
are theyr mothers owne children, that is, the chilof
the olde Strumpet Chanaan, which did alway
filthily rage in the foule luſt of ſpiritual Adulterie.
               Yea and they had to their Siſters two other,
as bad or Worſe then the mother her ſelfe, that is,
Samaria, and Sodome. So that they are here compared
with three exceeding Wicked Nations or
people, which for their grieuous and Deteſtable
offences hadde alreadie ſuſtayned iuſte Puniſhment
at the hande of God, and thereby they
are aſſured alſo to looke for the like or worſe, becauſe
their ſinnes for diuerſe reſpectes were greater
and more Grieuous in his ſight. The like
maner of teaching,Mat. 10. 11. 12 Chriſt himſelfe vſeth, Math. 10.

11. & 12. willing the people to Beware by the Example
of other. It ſhall be good therefore for vs
alſo to conſider the maner of the enimies of Gods
truth, and in time to take heede that we vſe not the
like, leaſt that fall vpon vs, that the Prophete here
Threatneth to the Iewes. The Chananites as appeareth
in the Law & Prophets were Idolaters,
Cruel, Lecherous, Prowde, Couetous, Falſe and
Deceytfull:Oſe. 12. b. 7. 
                  They are lyke to Chanaan, ſayth Oſeas,
in whoſe handes the balances of deceyte are, and hee
loueth to oppreſſe.
                  Leuit. 18. d. 24 And.Leui. 20. d. 23 
                  Leuit. 18. & 20. In all thoſe
things the Nations are defiled, which I caſt out before
you,
                  Num. 33. g. 52. that is, the Chananites. Their Idolatrie is
noted Num. 33. and in many other places.
               By Samaria the Prophete meaneth the Iſraelites,
and the Kingdome of the tenne Tribes, which he
calleth the elder Siſter, becauſe their Dominion
was greater then the tribe of Iuda. And Sodome he
calleth the yonger Siſter, becauſe the Kingdome
was leſſe, otherwiſe Sodome was in time long before
either Samaria or Iuda. The children of Samaria
are the Townes and Cities belonging to it.
Howe by meanes of Ieroboam the Iſraelites fell
from the True lawe of God to the worſhipping of
golden Calues, and howe obſtinately without repentance
they continued in the ſame, and added other
Heathniſh Idolatrie to it: we may read abundantly,
in the firſt and ſeconde of the kinges, and in
the latter booke of the Chronicles, beſide many of
the Prophetes.Verſ. 49. The wickedneſſe of Sodome is
deſcribed.Gene. 19. 
                  Gen. 19. and afterwarde here, are more

particularly ſpoken of.
               The Prophete verie bitterly vpbraydeth them,Verſ. 47. 48.
that they haue not followed the Corruptions of
Sodome and Samaria a little, but that in all wickedneſſe
and Abhomination they had done Worſe,
and farre paſſed them, ſo that in compariſon of the
Iewes, the other might ſeeme almoſt Iuſte men.
For ſo meaneth he when he ſayth,Verſ. 51. 
                  Thou haſt iuſtified
thy Siſters in all thy abhominations which thou
haſt done.
                  Verſ. 52. Therefore God ſayth by the Prophet,
that they ſhall beare the Shame and rebuke of
their naughtie doynges, and he will Grieuouſly
plague them with Deſolation as before to theyr
Example,Verſ. 53. &c. he had done the other. And he will Reſtore
their Captiuitie, when he reſtoreth the captiuitie
of Sodome and Samaria, that is, Neuer.
               The ſinnes of Sodome mentioned Verſe. 49. are
theſe,1 Firſt Pride and arrogancie, with which
whoſe mindes are once poſſeſſed, they can neuer
Submit themſelues to the Worde of God, nor to
the Calling of his Prophets, but go on ſtill and do
all thinges according as liketh themſelues beſt.
The next is Fulneſſe of bread,2 that is, Gluttonie,
Riote, and Dronkenneſſe: which doth not onely
ouerwhelme all good motions of the Spirite of
God, but confoundeth and aſtonieth the iudgement
of common Senſe and reaſon. Therefore
Chriſt gaue a good warning when he ſayd,Luc. 21. g. 34. 
                  Beware
that your heartes bee not oppreſſed vvith ſurfeting
and drunkenneſſe. &c. ſignifying that nothing did
more Hinder men from all Godlineſſe, or made

them more ſubiect to the tentations of the Deuill
then that did. God had giuen the Sodomites a
verie Plentifull and wealthie Country,Gen. 13. b. 10. *called the
Paradiſe of the Earth, which thing they abuſed to
Luſt and wickedneſſe. So Corrupt we are that
when GOD giueth Wealth and plentie, we can
hardly ſtay our ſelues from turning it to ye Maintayning
and feeding of Riote and Exceſſe.
               3 The thirde vice was Securitie, and Idleneſſe.
Long peace and quietneſſe is the great bleſſing of
God, but we ſee it come to paſſe, that they on whom
he doth beſtowe it, doe commonly ſo fall to Idleneſſe
and Securitie, that they almoſt forget God,
and will hardly by any meanes be brought to the
remembrance of their Duetie vntil God hath touched
them with ſome Grieuous plague. 4 The
fourth is Crueltie and vnmercifulneſſe towarde
the poore and needie, which as it is in all men a
great fault, ſo it is ſpecially in them on whom God
had emploied ſo ample benefits of Plenty, Welth,
Peace, and quietneſſe, as he had done on them of
Sodome. 5 The fift and laſt is that which of all
other is moſte Abhominable and ſprang out of
Theſe vices, as out of moſt naughtie and contagious
rootes, that is, Filthie and vnnaturall Luſt,
without all Shame and moderation, as you may
ſee more largely.Gen. 19. a. 1. &c 
                  Gen. 19. redde in the Church on
the Sunday Sexageſima. In all theſe deteſtable
vices, the Prophet ſayth that the Iewes did farre
paſſe the Sodomites, and therefore that gods
Iuſt plague muſt needes come vpon them.
               
               Thy Siſter Sodome was not hearde of by
thy reporte in the day of thy pride,Verſ. 56. 57 &c.
               That is, when thou waſt aloft in Honour and
proſperity, thou wouldeſt neuer call to thy remembrance
the horrible Puniſhment which they by
Gods Iuſtice ſuſtayned, that by their example
thou mighteſt haue learned to feare hys iudgementes,
and terrible plagues: vntill thine owne
Wickedneſſe was diſcouered, & God had brought
vpon thee moſt dreadfull puniſhment, and cauſed
thee to be an open Reproch to all yt be about thee.
               By this place let vs learne whyle God dealeth
Myldely and mercifully with vs, that we dyligently
call to our remembrances, and ſet continually
before our eyes the Examples of ſuch puniſhmentes
as God hath ſhewen vpon other for
their Sinnes, and ſo amende our lyues, and bridle
our affections with the feare of Gods Iuſtice,
leaſt, at the length when it ſhall be to late, we be
driuen by extreame Miſeries to ſee and feele the
lyke in our ſelues. When the Prophet ſayth, According
to the time of the reproche of the daughters
of Aram or Syria: Some doe expounde it of that
Calamitie that came vpō the Iewes by the Syrians,
2.2. Chr. 28. a. 5 2. 
                  Chron.
                  Reg. 16. a 1 28. 2. Reg. 16. in the reigne of the wicked
king Achas, at which tyme not onely the Syrians
made a great ſlaughter of them, but alſo the Edomites
and Philiſtines inuaded them. Of which time
theſe wordes may be well interpreted, but farre
better if to that alſo we conſider, that the Prophet

wrappeth with it that Plague and Reproch which
at this time was at hande to be brought vpō them,
and ſpeaketh of it as of a thing paſt. When God
doth grieuouſly puniſhe any perſon for his ſinnes,
His wickedneſſe is ſaid To be diſcouered, which before
might ſeeme to lye hidde. For God neuer plageth
but Iuſtly, and therefore all other may know
and vnderſtande by the ſight of his plagues, that
thoſe perſons haue bene offenders againſt hym.
               I might by right deale with thee,Verſ. 5
                        •
                     . as thou
haſt done, which haſt deſpiſed the, &c.
               The Prophetes alwayes vſe to their ſharpe
Threatnings to adde Sweete promiſes and comfortes,
leaſt ſuch as haue ſome feare of God and
ſenſe of his iudgement, ſhould be driuen to deſperation,
and thinke that the Promiſe made vnto
them in the Meſsias and bleſſed ſeede of Abraham
ſhould be taken from them. Therefore God here
affirmeth that he will not deale with the remnant
of the Iewes according to their deſeruings, but
vpon their repentance will be Reconciled vnto
them. The moſt part of the people were euill and
wicked, and when the Prophetes threatned the
wrath of God and their deſtruction, they would
obiect for their defence the couenant that God had
made with them, as to be Their God & Their Defender,
and therefore eſteemed they all the preaching
of the Prophetes to be vayne, becauſe they
thought Deſtruction could not come vpon them by
that God, to whome they were ioyned as His people.

This promiſe firſt begonne to Adam,
                  Gen. 3. c. 15. and being
after confirmed to Noah and Abraham,
                  Gen. 9. b. 9. on
Mounte Sinay by Moyſes was throughly eſtabliſhed,Gen. 12. a. 3.
at which tyme the people alſo yeelded to the
ſame,Exod. 19. b. 8. 
                  All things, ſay they, that the Lorde hath ſpoken,
we will doe, and will be obedient to them. This
Othe and Couenant the Iewes had wholy Broken,
and reiected his lawe and true Worſhip therin
contained. God therefore telleth them, that it is
vaine for them to ſtay vpon the Bonde of the couenant,
ſeing they themſelues had firſt broken it, ſo
that he by good right might deale otherwiſe wyth
them. But for ſo much as the Whole Multitude
were not reiected, but God had ſome Remnant of
Faithfull, and ſuch as had feare of his name, and
remembrance of their othe and couenant (as may
appeare by Ieremie, Ezechiell, Baruch, Daniel, Tobie
and others:) to their great comfort, he ſaith, that he
will Remember his couenant made with them In
the dayes of their youth, that is, in Egipt, and at
Mounte Sinay, when they were but a yong people.
For although the Greater number were vnfaithful,
yet their doings ſhould not cauſe him to breake
promiſe with the reſidue, but rather that he would
eſtabliſh with them an Euerlaſting couenant, that
no time ſhoulde weare out. And this is the Couenant
that he ſpeaketh of Hier.
                  Ierem. 31. f. 31. 31. Beholde, ſayth he,
the daies ſhall come that I will make a new couenant
wyth the houſe of Iſrael and the houſe of Iuda, not
after the couenant that I made with their fathers, &c.
vvhich couenant they brake, &c. But this ſhall be the

couenaut that I will make with them, I will plant my
lawe in the inwarde partes of them, and will write it
in their hartes, &c. In which wordes the Prophet
deſcribeth the euerlaſting couenant made in Chriſt
Ieſu the true Meſsias, and the confirmation of the
ſame, by the ſending of his Holy ſpirite into their
heartes, to direct them to the obſeruation of his
Law and bleſſed Will. In all the great Troubles
that were towarde the people of God, the Prophets
vſed to erect them with the Promiſe of the
true Sauiour that was to come Chriſt Ieſu, and ſo
doth Ezechiell in this place. For all other particular
comfortes had their force and ſtrength in him.
               Then ſhalt thou remember thy ways,Verſ. 61. and
be aſhamed when thou ſhalt, &c.
               God ſaide he would Remember his Couenāt
made with them, therfore he would haue them alſo
To remember their wayes,
                  Ezech. 36. f. 31 that is,Iere. 31. d. 19. their Idolatry
and Wicked life,Rom. 6. d. 21. and to be * aſhamed of them,Ezech. 43. c. 11 and
earneſtly from their harts Repent, that they haue
done ſo vnfaithfully towarde ſo gracious and louing
a God. When God ſayth, He will gyue their
yonger and elder Siſters for daughters to them, He
ſpeaketh not onely of Sodome and Samaria, which
before he mentioned, but of all the Nations of the
Gentiles, which by the preaching of the Goſpell
ſhould be brought to the knowledge of God and
faith in Chriſt: and ſo be made in deede the true
children of Abraham, and brothers and ſiſters to
them that deſcended of the Promiſed ſeede. The

Goſpell proceeded out of Ieruſalem as Eſay ſayth:
A lavve commeth out of Syon,
                  Eſa. 2. a. 3. 
                  and the vvorde of the
Lorde out of Ieruſalem, Therefore the Gentiles
might well acknowledge it, in that reſpect to be
their Mother, & they to be her ſonnes and daughters.
               
            
         
         
            The .17. Sunday after Trinitie,
at Euening prayer.
            Ezech. 18.
            
               
                   THe worde of the Lorde came vnto me, ſaying.
               2 What meane ye by this common prouerbe,
that ye vſe in the lande of Iſrael, ſaying: The fathers
haue eaten ſowre grapes,Iere. 31. e. 29. and the childrens
féeth are ſet on edge? 3 As truely as I liue, ſayth the Lord
God, Ye ſhall vſe this byworde no more in Iſrael.
               4 Beholde,Pſal. 24. a. 1. all ſoules are mine: like as the ſoule of the
father is mine, ſo is the ſoule of the ſonne mine alſo: the
ſoule that ſinneth, ſhall die it ſelfe.
               5 But if a man be iuſt, and doe that which is lawfull and
right. 6 And hath not eaten vpon the hilles, he hath not lift
his eyes to the Idols of the houſe of Iſrael, neyther hath
defiled his neighbors wife, neither hath come neare a woman
remoued:
               7 Neyther hath oppreſſed any man, but hath reſtored to
the detter his pledge: he that hath not ſpoyled any by violēce,
hath giuen his bread to the hungrie,Eſay. 58. b. 7. and hath clothed the naked.Deut. 23. c. 19.
8 And hath not gyuen forth vpon vſury,Pſal. 15. a. 6. neither taken
any encreaſe, he hath withdrawne his hande from iniquitie,
and hath executed true iudgement betwéene man and man.
               9 And hath walked in my ſtatutes, and kept my iudgementes
 to deale truely: this is a righteous man, he ſhall
ſurely liue, ſayth the Lorde God.
               
                  
10 If he nowe get a ſonne that is a robber, a ſhedder of
bloud, and doe any one of theſe things,
               11 Though he doe not all theſe things, but eyther hath
eaten vpon the hylles, or defiled his neighbours wyfe:
               12 Or hath oppreſſed the poore and néedie,Leuit. 18. c. 20 or ſpoyled by violence,Leuit. 20. c.
or hath not reſtored the pledge, or hath lift vp his cies
vnto the Idols, or hath committed abhomination.
               13 Or hath giuen forth vpon vſurie,Pſal. 15. b. 6. or hath taken encreaſe:
Shall this man liue? he ſhall not liue: Seing he hath done
all theſe abhominations he ſhall die the death, his bloude
ſhall be vpon him. 14 Nowe if this man get a ſonne alſo,
that ſéeth all his fathers ſinnes which he hath done, and feareth,
neyther doth ſuch like: 15 (Namely) that hath not
eaten vpon the hilles, neyther hath lift vp his eyes to the Idols
of the houſe of Iſrael, nor defiled his neighbours wyfe:
               
               16 Neyther hath oppreſſed any, nor hath withholden the
pledge, neyther hath ſpoyled by violence: (but) hath gyuen
his bread to the hungry, and hath couered the naked wyth a
garment. 17 Neyther hath withdrawne his hande from
the afflicted, nor receyued vſurie nor increaſe, (but) hath executed
my iudgements, and walked in my ſtatutes: this man
ſhall not die in his fathers ſinne,Rom. 10. a. 5. but ſhall liue without fayle.
               18 As for his father, becauſe he hath cruelly oppreſſed
and ſpoyled his brother by violence, and hath not done good
among his people, lo he dyeth in his owne ſinne.
               19 And yet ſay ye, Wherefore then ſhould not this ſonne
beare his fathers ſinne? Becauſe the ſonne hath done iudgement
and righteouſneſſe, he hath kept all my ſtatutes and
done them: therefore ſhall he liue in déede.
               20 The ſame ſoule that ſinneth ſhall die,Deut. 24. c. 16 4. Reg. 14. c. 6. 2. the ſonne ſhall
not beare the fathers iniquitie,Chr. 25. a. 4 neyther ſhal the father beare
the ſonnes iniquitie: the righteouſneſſe of the righteous
ſhall be vpon him, and the wickedneſſe of the wicked ſhall
be vpon hymſelfe alſo. 21 But if the vngodly will turne away 
                  
from all his ſinnes that he hath done, and kéepe all my
ſtatutes, and doe the thing that is iudgement and right,
doubtleſſe he ſhall liue and not die.
               22 As for all his ſinnes, that he did before, they ſhall not
be mentioned vnto him: but in his righteouſneſſe that he
hath done he ſhall lyue.2. Pet. 3. b. 9. 23 For haue I any pleaſure in the
death of a ſinner ſayth the Lorde God?Ezech. 33. b. 11. ſhall he not lyue if
he returne from his wayes? 24 Againe, if the righteous
turne from hys righteouſneſſe, and doe iniquitie, and ſhall
doe according to all the abhominations that the wicked man
doth: ſhall he lyue? All the righteouſneſſe that he hath done
ſhall not be remembred, but in his trāſgreſſion that he hath
committed, in his ſinne that he hath ſinned, in them he ſhal
dye.Eccl. 33. d. 20. 25 And yet ye ſay, The waye of the Lorde is not indifferent.
Heare therefore ye houſe of Iſrael, is not my
way equall? or are not your wayes rather vnequall?
               26 When a righteous man turneth away from his righteouſneſſe,
and committeth iniquitie, and dyeth in the ſame:
in his iniquitie which he hath committed ſhal he die.
               27 Againe, when the wicked turneth awaye from his
wickedneſſe that he hath done, & doth iudgement and right,
he ſhall ſaue his ſoule aliue. 28 Becauſe he ſéeth and turneth
away from all hys iniquitie that he hath committed, he
ſhall ſurely liue, and not die. 29 And yet ſayth the houſe
of Iſrael, The way of the Lorde is not equall. Are not my
wayes equall O ye houſe of Iſrael? are not your wayes
rather vnequall?Eſay. 55. b. 6. 30 Therefore I will iudge you,Math. 3. a. 2. euery man
according to his wayes, O ye houſe of Iſrael ſayth the Lord
God, returne and bring againe others from al your wickedneſſe,
ſo iniquitie ſhall not be your deſtruction.
               31 Caſt away from you all your tranſgreſſions whereby
ye haue tranſgreſſed,Ezech. 11. c. 19 and make you a newe hart and a new
ſpirite: for why will he dye O ye houſe of Iſrael?
               32 Seing I haue no pleaſure in the death of hym that dyeth

ſayth the Lord God, bring agayne your ſelues then, and
ye ſhall lyue.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xviij.
Chapter of Ezechiel.
               The woorde of the Lorde came vnto mee
ſaying,Verſ. 1. what meane ye by this, &c.
               
                  THe Prophetes often Preached
vnto the Iewes, that it could not
be but God would grieuouſly puniſh
them becauſe they Continued in the
ſinnes of their forefathers, and that
he had long time of his Pacience borne with the
offences of them both, and therefore of Neceſſitie
Gods Iuſtice muſt nowe be executed. Vpon this
occaſion the Waywarde people eaſily beleeuing
their fathers offences, and hardly brought in perſwaſion
of their Owne, blaſphemouſly murmured
agaynſt God, and in their heartes condemned
him of vniuſtice, becauſe the puniſhment of their
fathers offences ſhould light vpon them. And to
note this their Meaning, they vſed this common
prouerbe: The fathers haue eaten ſower grapes, and
the childrens teeth are ſet on edge. By Sower grapes
they vnderſtood Idolatrie, ſinne and wickedneſſe,
as appeareth Eſay.
                  Eſay. 5. b. 7. 5. which their fathers had committed,
and by Teeth on edge, the griefe and paine
of the puniſhment. So that, as I haue ſayd, their

meaning was, that God Iniuriouſly ſpared their
ſinfull fathers, and puniſhed the Innocent children.Iere. 31. e. 29.
In Hieremie alſo Cap. 31. it may appeare they
vſed the ſame prouerbe. Wherefore the Prophete
Ezechiel in this place defendeth the Iuſtice of God
agaynſt their blaſphemous Obloquie, & ſheweth
yt as the wiſdom of God might haue other reſpects
in their puniſhments, then they were hable to conceyue:
ſo they could not Rightly quarrel with God
in that poynt, becauſe beſide their fathers Wickedneſſe,
Euery man had his Owne ſinnes, for which
in Iuſtice he might be Condemned and puniſhed.
And the Prophet to this purpoſe vſeth fiue eauſes.
               1 The firſt is, that the Iuſt man continuing in
his Iuſtice, and doing in all thinges rightly ſhall
proſper and not be puniſhed. This doth he in the
5.Verſ. 5. &c. 6. 7. 8. and. 9. verſes. Wherein alſo by particular
properties he deſcribeth a Iuſt man.
               2 The ſecond is, if that Iuſt father beget a Wicked
ſonne,Verſ. 10. &c. his fathers Iuſtice ſhall not helpe him,
but he ſhal be puniſhed for his Owne naughtines.
               3 The thirde,Verſ. 14. &c. if the Wicked man be getet a Iuſt
ſonne, who ſeeing his fathers euill doings feareth
God, and liueth Vprightly, he ſhall not die in his
Fathers ſinnes, but liue & be in y• fauour of God.
               4 The fourth, if the vngodly man will Turne
from his wicked wayes,Verſ. 21. &c. and keepe the lawes and
ſtatutes of God, his ſinnes that he did before ſhall
not be Mentioned vnto him nor he puniſhed for
them. 5 If the righteous turne from his righteouſneſſe
and fall to Iuiquitie,Verſ. 25. his righteouſneſſe

ſhall not be remembred, but he ſhall be plagued
for his Tranſgreſſion wherein he continueth. For
ſomuch as there are ſundrie places of the Scriptures
that in words ſeeme contrarie to the ſayings
of Ezechiel, there may iuſtly ſeeme ſome Doubt to
riſe thereof.Exod. 20. a. 5. 
                  I will (ſayth God) requite the ſinnes of
the fathers vpon the ſonnes to the thirde and fourth
generation.
                  Deut. 28. b. 15. And againe. If thou wilt not heare the
voice of the Lorde, &c. curſed ſhall be the fruite of thy
wombe, and thy ſonnes and thy daughters ſhal be deliuered
to ſtrangers.
                  Exod. 34. b. 7. The like we haue.Iere. 23. b. 10. 
                  Exo. 34. and
Hier. 23. and in many other places. For Chams offence
towarde his father, the Curſe and puniſhment
lighteth vpon Chanaan.
                  Gene. 9. d. 25. 2. Many thouſandes
periſhed for Dauids ſinne.Reg. 24. c. 15 At Sodome and in all general
plagues,Ge. 19. a. 1. &c the yong children that neuer in Act
offended, were partakers of the puniſhment. &c.
Theſe things may ſeeme repugnant to Gods iuſtice
here defended by Ezechiel. And this was it
that the Iſraelites and Ievves did finde themſelues
Grieued withall,3. Reg. 21. a. 3. 
                  Ieroboam ſayd they, did ſet vp the
golden Calues,4. Reg. 21. a. 3. and Manaſſes mainteyned Idolatrie
and corrupted the law of God, but the puniſhment
falleth vpon vs. To this we haue to anſwere
that, when God ſayd, Exod. 20. That he vvoulde puniſhe
the ſinnes of the fathers. &c. vnto the thirde
and fourth generation, he added, of them that hate
me. If the children hate God, and Followe theyr
fathers Idolatrie and ſinfulneſſe, although God
of his mercie Spare their fathers in Wordly puniſhment:
he will plague them, and ſo muche the

more, Becauſe they would not beware by their fathers
offences, and conſider Gods goodneſſe towarde
them in graunting them Time and Space
to repent. But ſome will aſke whie God ſayth, he
will puniſh The ſinnes of the fathers vpon their children,
ſeeing the children haue their owne ſinnes,
for which they are iuſtly puniſhed? It may be anſwered,
Becauſe if their Fathers had not ſo grieuouſly
offended, their Puniſhment might haue
bene longer Deferred. As God is mercifull, ſo he
is Iuſt, and forſomuch as his pacience and mercie
hath Long borne with their wickedneſſe, and looked
in vaine for their repentance, his Iuſtice muſt
needes take place and at Length light vpon them,
with due puniſhment. So that they are the Sooner
and more Grieuouſly puniſhed for their wicked
Parents, and yet not without their Owne iuſt
deſertes and euill doings. Wherefore to conclude
with Ezechiel, the Iewes in their lewde Prouerbe,
did blaſphemouſly depraue Gods Iuſtice, ſeeyng
their owne vniuſt doinges in Following the foote
ſteppes of their ſinfull Fathers did pull his iuſt
wrath vpon them. And yet it cannot be denied but
that God Sometimes doth puniſhe ſome for the
cauſe,Gen. 12. c. 10. or by the occaſion of other. Abraham and Iacob
felt the ſmart of famine and hunger, euen as
Sinfull men did,Gen. 20. d. 17. and they of the houſe of Pharao,
and Abimeleck, were plagued for their Princes
cauſe. But beſide that which is ſayde before, that
no man is ſo Righteous in the ſight of God, but
that he Iuſtly deſerueth puniſhement: we muſt

moreouer conſider, that Gods Scourges are not
alway, nor to all perſons of One ſort, Towarde
the wicked they are Plagues of his Iuſtice, towarde
the Godly they are Exerciſes and Medicines
by which he healeth their corruptions,Iudith. 8. d. 22 practiſeth
their fayth, and Stirreth them vp the more
earneſtly to call vpon him. So that he maketh it to
them as a Schoole of diſcipline to retaine them in
more Feare of his name,Heb. 12. d. 11. that they be not caried away
with the wicked Allurements of the worlde,
as the vngodly are. We may not therefore thinke
God to deale vniuſtly, when ſometimes we ſee him
to wrappe good men in thoſe plagues, wherewith
he puniſheth the Vngodly.
               In thoſe Properties of a Iuſt man which are
recyted and ſundrie times repeated in this Chapter,
the Prophete may ſeeme to omit and leaue out
many workes of Iuſtice, but in one general clauſe
he comprehendeth all other. As when he ſayth:
And hath walked in my ſtatutes and kept my iudgements.
                  Verſ. 9. 17.
If there had beene any ſuch Iuſt man among
the Iewes, he might with ſome countenance
haue quarreled with GOD,Iob. 15. a. 15. Iob. 14. a. 4. Pſal. 13. a. 4. Ro. 3. b. 10. 19. Pſal. 142 a. 2. Luc. 17. c. 10. Pſal. 50. b. 6. puniſhing him being
Innocent, for his fathers offences: But there was
neuer yet any that * perfectly fulfilled the Statutes
and lawes of God. Therefore all mens mouthes
are in that caſe ſtopped. There hath beene many
good men, whoſe vnperfite obedience, it hath pleaſed
God in reſpect of the Promiſed ſeede and Sauiour
of the worlde to accept as Iuſt, and ſo to account
them before him. But otherwiſe neyther

the childe this day borne, nor the Angels in heauen
are pure in his ſight.
               The Prophete vndoubtedly reciteth theſe Properties
and workes of Iuſtice eſpecially, becauſe
men in them moſt commonly and Notoriouſly in
thoſe dayes offended: ſo that he choked them from
their blaſphemous Obloquie by the teſtimonie of
their owne Conſciences, which tolde them, that in
theſe poyntes they were not innocent, but iuſtly
ſuſteyned Gods Plague euen for their Owne ſinnes,
and not for their Fathers onely.
               And hath not eaten vpon the hilles,Verſ. 6. he
hath not lift vp his eyes to the Idole, &c.
               He meaneth Sacrifycing and keeping of their
holy Feaſtes,3. Reg. 3. a. 
                        •
                     . 3. Reg. 12. g. 31. 2. Par. 21. b. 11 2. Par. 33. c. 17 in the highe Places ſo often mentioned
in the bookes of Kings and the Chronicles.
For as the Gentiles and Heathens were wont on
Hilles to haue Chappels and aulters for their
Falſe Gods: euen ſo the Iewes and Iſraelites after
their Temple buylded, & appointed place choſen,
did make Aulters on high places, and therin worſhypped
ſometime the lyuing God, but diſorderly,
ſometyme Idoles and falſe Gods by the imitation
of the Gentiles.
               Neyther hath come neere a woman remooued,Verſ. 6.
&c.
               He meaneth a woman hauing hir naturall and
Monthly Diſeaſe, becauſe to ſeeke the companie
of a woman at that time is lothſome to nature,

and a token of immoderate luſt and affection.
               But hath reſtored the detter his pledge,Verſ. 7.
he that hath not ſpoyled any, &c.
               The Prophet meaneth the Pledge or gage of a
Poore man, which hath borowed any thing of him.
The Lawe is,Exod. 22. d. 26 
                  Exod. 22. If thou haue taken the garment
of thy neighbour to pledge, before the ſonne
go dovvn thou ſhalt reſtore it to him, and he addeth,
Becauſe hee hath nothing elſe to couer hym, &c.
Whereby it maye appeare, he ſpeaketh of a Poore
man.Deut. 24. c. 12 And Deut. 24. the matter is made more
plaine: For after a larger declaring of this lawe
of Charitie, he ſayth, If he be a pore man, thou ſhalt
not ſleepe vvith his pledge in thy houſe.
               
               If this man get a ſonne,Verſ. 14. that ſeeth all his
fathers ſinnes, &c, and doth not, &c.
               Our fathers are to be folowed, but only in thoſe
things that be good, but if they ſhall eyther giue vs
example of that which is Contrarie to the wyll of
God, yea eyther commaunde vs to doe it, ſurely
they are not to be obeied. And yet in theſe days we
haue manye, that wyll Tye themſelues verye
ſtreightly to Follow their Parents Religion, but
if there were any Example in them of vertuous
and Honeſt lyfe, that they neuer remember. Such
perſons imbrace in their Fathers that is euill, and
neglect that is good.
               
               If the vngodly will turne awaye from all
his ſinnes that he hath done,Verſ. 21. &c.
               Of this place maye be taken a ſingular Comfort
for all them that are tormented in their conſciences,Ierem. 3. a. 1. Ier. 18. a. 8. 2. Par. 6. g. 36. Sap. 11. d. 24 2. Par. 24. c. 19 Luc. 5 f. 32. Luc. 15. b. 7 1. Iohn. 2. a. 2. Math. 11. d. 28 Rom. 2. a. 4. Mich. 7. d. 19. Eſay. 49. d. 15. Pſal. 102. c. 12. Eccle. a. b. 11. 2. Pet. 3. b. 9 Rom. 11. d. 32.
for the heauie burden of their ſinnes. For
God here * proclaymed Mercie and forgiueneſſe to
all that Repent them of their former wickedneſſe,
and ſayth it ſhall not be Mentioned vnto them be
it neuer ſo great. It is a great craft of the Deuill,
firſt by all Flattering allurements of the worlde
to cauſe men grieuouſly to offende, and when they
haue done, to Laye their ſinnes before their eyes,
that he may driue them to Deſperation. But here
God ſayth. If the vngodlye wyll turne from their
ſinnes, they ſhall neuer be mentioned vnto them.
               
               If the righteous turne from his righteouſneſſe,Verſ. 24.
and doe the thing, &c.
               It is not ſufficient for a man to beginne well in
godlyneſſe and vertue, and after to reuolte from it
to wickedneſſe again: But he muſt continue in his
well doing.Math. 10. c. 22 Luc. 9. g. 62. 
                  Happie is he, ſayth Chriſt, that contynueth
to the ende. He that ſetteth his hande to the
Plough and looketh backe, is not meete for the kingdome
of God. It was not ſufficient for Loths wife
to depart out of Sodome,
                  Gen. 19. e. 26. her looking backe againe
did turne her into a ſalt ſtone.Apoc. 2. c. 10. 
                  Be faithful vnto death
ſayth God, and I wyll giue thee the crowne of lyfe.
               
               Out of this Chapiter we may obſerue theſe neceſſarie
pointes.
               
                  
Firſt, that God is Iuſte and doth iniurie to no
man: And as the ſonnes of the children ſhall not
hurt the father, onleſſe they grewe by the fathers
occaſion, ſo ſhall not the ſinnes of the father hurt
the ſonne, if he doe not followe the fathers ſteps.
               Secondly, we ſee that there were in thoſe dayes
many which carped and cauilled at the preaching
of the Prophets, and made matter of ſcoffing and
ieſting at it. No meruaile therfore if we ſee the like
in theſe dayes, but their ieſting tauntes will in the
ende fall vpon their owne heades.
               Thirdly, we may learne the corruption of our
owne nature. For as theſe Iewes would ſeeme
innocent & in no wayes acknowledge their offences.
So doe we eyther denie our ſinnes, or wyth
fayre pretences extenuate them, and caſt the fault
vpon other. Many that cannot be perſwaded that
God gouerneth all things, yet when they ſinne, to
excuſe themſelfe, they impute the blame to the
prouidence of God. Oh ſay they, it was my deſtenie,
I thinke God did worke me this ſhame to doe
it. So Adam at the begynning layde the fault to
the woman which God had ioyned to hym, and the
Woman turneth ouer the blame to the Serpent
But neyther did wyth humble harts acknowledge
their diſobedience. Thys Propertie ſticketh in the
Nature of all the children of Adam.
               
            
         
         
            
            The 18. Sunday after Trinitie,
at Morning prayer.
            Ezechiel. 20.
            
               
                   IN the ſeuenth yere the tenth day of the fift Moneth,
certaine of the elders of Iſrael came for to aſke
counſayle at the Lorde, and ſate downe before me.
               2 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me,
ſaying, 3 Thou ſonne of man, ſpeake vnto the elders of
Iſrael, and ſay vnto them, thus ſayth the Lorde God, are ye
come to enquire of me? As truely as I liue I will not be
ſought of you, ſayth the Lorde God.
               4 Wylt thou not iudge them ſonne of man, wilt thou not
iudge (them?) cauſe them to vnderſtand the abhominations
of their fathers. 5 And tell them, thus ſayth the Lord God,
In the day when I choſe Iſrael,Exod. 3. b. 8. Deut. 7. b. 6. and lift vp mine hande vpon
the ſéede of the houſe of Iacob, and was knowne vnto
them in the lande of Egypt, yea when I lift vp my hande ouer
them, and ſaide, I am the Lorde your God.
               6 Euen in the day that I lyft vp mine hande vnto them,
to bring them out of the lande of Egypt into a lande that I
 had prouided for them, which floweth with my like and honie,
and is pleaſant among all other landes.
               7 Then ſayde I vnto them, Caſt away euery man the abhominations
of his eyes, and defile not your ſelues with the
Idols of Egypt: for I am the Lorde your God.
               8 But they rebelled againſt me, and would not hearken
vnto me, they did not caſt away euerye man the abbominations
of his eies, neither did they forſake the Idols of Egypt:
then I ſayde, I woulde powre out mine indignation ouer
them, and accompliſhe my wrath vpon them, yea euen in the

midſt of the lande of Egypt. 9 And I wrought for my
names ſake that it ſhould not be polluted before the heathen
among whome they were, to whome I was manifeſtlye
knowne, in bringing them forth of the lande of Egipt.
               10 Nowe when I had cauſed them to go out of the lande
of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderneſſe.
               11 I gaue them my ſtatutes,Rom. 10. a. 5. Gala. 3. b. 12. and ſhewed them my iudgementes:
which who ſo doth, ſhall liue in them.
               12 I gaue them alſo my Sabbath daies to be a token betwixt
me and them,Leuit. 18. a. 5. and thereby to knowe that I am the
Lorde which halowe them.Exod. 20. b. 8. 13 And yet the houſe of Iſrael
rebelled againſt me in the wilderneſſe, they would not walke
in my ſtatutes, they haue caſt away my iudgementes:
which who ſo doth, ſhall liue in them, and my Sabbath daies
haue they greatly polluted:Num. 14. b. 12 then I ſaid, I would powre out
mine indignation vpon them, and conſume them in the wilderneſſe.
14 And I wrought for my names ſake, leaſt it
ſhould be defiled before the heathen, in whoſe ſight I brought
them out. 15 Yet neuertheleſſe I lift vp my hande vnto
them in the wilderneſſe, that I would not bring them into
the lande which I gaue them, that floweth with milke and
hony, and is a pleaſure of all landes.
               16 And that becauſe they caſt away my iudgements, and
walked not my ſtatutes: but haue defiled my Sabbathes: for
their heart was gone after their Idols.
               17 Neuertheleſſe mine eye ſpared them, ſo that I would
not deſtroy them, not conſume them in the wylderneſſe.
               18 Moreouer, I ſayd vnto their ſonnes in the wylderneſſe.
Walke not in the ſtatutes of your fathers, kepe not their
iudgementes, and defyle not your ſelues with their Idols.
               19 I am the Lorde your God,Exod. 16. a. 6. walke in my ſtatutes, kéepe
my iudgementes, and doe them.
               20 Halow my Sabbathes, for they are a token betwixt me
and you: that ye may knowe how that I am the Lord your

                   God. 21 Notwithſtanding, their ſonnes rebelled agaynſt
me alſo, they walked not in my ſtatutes, they kept not my
iudgementes to fulfill them,Leuit. 18. a. 5. Gala. 3. b. 12. Rom. 10. a. 5. which he that doth ſhall lyue in
them, they prophaned my ſabbath dayes, & I ſaide, I would
powre out myne indignation euer them, and accompliſh my
wrath vpon them in the wilderneſſe.
               22 Neuertheleſſe I withdrewe my hande, and wrought
for my names ſake, leſt it ſhould be defiled in the ſight of the
heathen, before whome I had brought them forth.
               23 I lift vp my hande to them alſo in the wilderneſſe, that
I might ſcatter them among the heathen, and ſtrawe them
among the nations. 24 Becauſe they had not kept my
iudgements, but caſt aſide my ſtatutes, and broken my Sabbathes,
and their eyes were after their fathers Idols.
               25 Wherefore I gaue them alſo ſtatutes that were not
good, and iudgements wherein they ſhould not liue.
               26 And I defiled them in their owne giftes,Exod. 13. a. 2. in that they
cauſed all that openeth the wombe to paſſe, that I myght
deſtroy them, that they might knowe howe that I am the
Lorde. 27 Therfore ſpeake vnto the houſe of Iſrael thou
ſonne of man, and thou ſhalt ſay vnto them, thus ſayth
the Lorde God, Yet in this alſo your fathers haue blaſphemed
me, and grieuouſly tranſgreſſed againſt me.
               28 For after I had brought them into the lande, for the
which I lifted vp my hande to giue it vnto them, when they
ſawe euery high hill, and all thicke trées, they offered there
their ſacrifices, and there they preſented their offering of
anger, there alſo they made their ſwéete ſauours, and powred
out their wine offerings. 29 And I ſaide vnto them,
What is that high place wherevnto ye reſort? and the name
of it is called Bamah vnto this day.
               30 Wherefore ſpeake vnto the houſe of Iſrael, thus
ſayth the Lord God, Are ye not defyled in the waies of your
fathers, and commit ye not whordome after their abhominations?

31 For when ye offer your giftes,Ierem. 19. a. 5. Deut. 12. d. 31 2. Par. 33. a. 6. and make your
ſonnes to paſſe through the fyre, you are polluted with all
your Idols vnto this day: ſhall I anſwere you when I am
aſked, O houſe of Iſrael? As I liue ſayth the Lorde God,
I will not be ſought of you.
               32 And (that vvhich) commeth into your minde ſhall not
be at all, which you ſay, We will be as the Gentiles, as the
kinreds of Countreys, to ſerue wood and ſtone.
               33 As truly as I liue ſayth the Lord God, I my ſelfe will
ru
                     •
                  e you with a mightie hande, with a ſtretched out arme,
and with indignation powred out ouer you.
               34 And I will bring you from the people, and gather you
out of the countreys wherein ye are ſcattered, with a mightie
hande, with a ſtretched out arme, and with indignation
poured out. 35 And I will bring you into the wilderneſſe
of the people, and there I wil be iudged with you face to face.
               36 Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderneſſe
of Egypt: ſo will I pleade with you alſo, ſayth the Lord God.
               37 I will cauſe you to paſſe vnder the rodde, and I
will bring you into the bonde of the couenant.
               38 And I will purge out of you the rebels, and them that
tranſgreſſe againſt me, and bring them out of the lande of
their habitation: as for the lande of Iſraell they ſhall not
come in it, that you may know how that I am the Lorde.
               39 As for you O houſe of Iſraell,Ezech. 14. a. 4 thus ſayeth the Lorde
God, Go you and ſerue euery man his Idols, ſéeing that ye
obey not me: and pollute no more my holy name with your
giftes and your Idols. 40 For vpon my holy hill, euen vpon
the hie hill of Iſraell ſayth the Lorde God, ſhall all the
houſe of Iſraell, and all that is in the lande worſhip me: and
in the ſame place wil I fauour them, and there wil I require
your heaue offeringes, and the firſtlings of your oblations,
with all your holy thinges. 41 I will accept your ſwéete
ſauour, when I bring you from the Nations, and gather you

togither out of the landes wherein you haue bene ſcattered,
that I may be hallowed in you before the heathen.
               42 And ye ſhall know that I am the Lorde, when I ſhall
bring you into the land of Iſraell, into the land for the which
I lift vp my hande to giue it vnto your fathers.
               43 There ſhall ye call to remembraunce your owne
wayes, and all your workes wherein ye haue bene defiled,
and ye ſhall be cut of in your owne ſight for all your wickedneſſe
that ye haue done. 44 And ye ſhall know that I
am the Lord, when I deale with you for my names ſake, and
not after your wicked wayes, nor according to your corrupt
workes O ye houſe of Iſraell, ſayth the Lorde God.
               45 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, ſaying.
46 Thou ſonne of man, ſet thy face towarde the way
of Themanah, and drop (thy vvorde) towarde the ſouth, and
prophecie towarde the forreſt of the ſouth fielde.
               47 And ſay to the forreſt of the ſouth, Here the worde of
the Lorde, thus ſayth the Lorde God, Beholde I will kindle
a fire in thée, that ſhall conſume all the gréene trées, with all
the drie: the continuall flame ſhall not be quenched, and euerie
face from the ſouth to the morth ſhall be burnt therein.
               48 And all fleſhe ſhall ſée that I the Lorde haue kindled
it, and it ſhall not be quenched. 49 Then ſayd I, Ah Lord
God, they ſay of me, Doth not he ſpeake parables?
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xx.
Chapter of Ezechiel.
               In the ſeuenth yeare,Verſ. 1. the tenth day of the
fift Moneth, certaine of the elders, &c.
               
               
                  THe Iewes as is ſayde in the
former Chapter, quarreled with God
and thought it extremitie that theyr
Fathers wickedneſſe ſhoulde be puniſhed
in them. Wherfore in this place
the Prophete declareth, that as there fathers were
euill and rebellious againſt God, ſo were the children
and poſteritie alſo, and therefore that they
were iuſtly plagued by him in reſpect of themſelues
as well as of their fathers. In the verie enterance
of this ſpeech, he ſheweth at what time, and
by what Occaſion he preached this vnto them. In
the ſeuenth yeare, ſayth he, &c. that is from the captiuitie
and baniſhment of Iechonias in Babilon. For
from that time, as it appeareth in ſundrie places
they began their account, partly to call to remembrance
the Heauie iudgements of GOD agaynſt
them for their ſinne, partly to Comfort themſelues
with the promiſe of deliuerance after .70. weekes,
or yeares prophecyed vnto them by Hieremie and
Daniell.
                  Dan. 9. f. 24. The occaſion of this ſpeach of Ezechiel is
the ſame that was inEzech. 14. a. 1 .14. Chapter, that is the comming
of the Elders of Iſrael vnto him to haue anſwere
from God of their eſtate and captiuitie that
they were in. They pretended to reuerence the
Prophete as a father and inſtructer, and that they
were deſyrous to learne at his hande what they
ſhould hope or what they might doe; but meaning
nothing leſſe then ſyncerely to follow his teaching:
For if they had ſo purpoſed, they woulde long before
haue left thoſe things, with which God by his

Prophets declared that he was greatly Diſpleaſed.Ier. 42. a. 1. &c
With like affection came they to Hieremie to
conſult of their fleeing into Aegypt, but when hee
had tolde them Gods will, they would not beleeue
him,Iere. 37. c. 16. Ier. 38. d. 14. but followed their owne phantaſie. * Sedechias
alſo coniured the ſame Hieremie to tell him plainly
the will and purpoſe of God, but when he heard
it he made no account of it, but by the motion of his
Nobles caſt him into priſon.Mat. 22. d. 34 Luc. 20. d. 20 Iohn. 18. g. 38. With like affection oftentimes,
the Prieſtes, the Scribes, the Phariſeyes,
the Saduces, the Herodians, came vnto
Chriſt, but neuer ſoundely to learne, but rather
take him in trip, and thereby to worke him daunger.
In like ſort many at this day pretende with
fayre face a Loue of the truth, and a Fauour of the
Religion publiſhed according to the worde of God,
and therefore will come to Sermons and to ſeruice,
and, when it ſerueth for their purpoſe, will
Speake agaynſt Papiſtrie, and with wordes vpholde
the truth, but, with howe ſounde minde and
conſcience, their other dealings doe euidently declare.
I would to God there were not many ſuch
euen in the Boldmes of Godly men. But I truſt
God will detect them as he doth here to Ezechiel,
and to their ſhame and rebuke teach his ſeruants
to Beware of them. For as they may Diſſemble
with the worlde, and Abuſe ſome true and honeſt
meaning men, ſo they cannot deceyue God, who
ſeeth the be
                     •
                  wels and Secretes of their heartes,
and will vſe them accordingly.
               
               Wilt thou not iudge them,Verſ. 4. O Sonne of
man, wilt thou not iudge them, &c.
               This place is diuerſly tranſlated and enterpreted:
I thinke the playneſt ſenſe to be this. O
ſonne of man enter not into diſputation and reaſoning
with them, and be not carefull to aunſwere
all their arguments and pretences. For they Will
not be taught of thee, And therefore ſimplye and
plainely to their iudgement and condemnation tell
them what maner of men their fathers haue bene,
and what yet they remaine ſtill themſelues, beginning
euen at that time when I beganne firſt
to bring them out of Egipt, and ſo contynuing vnto
this preſent day, that they maye thereby knowe
themſelues.
               In the day when I choſe Iſrael,Verſ. 5. and lift vp
my hande vpon the ſeede, &c.
               This faſhion of ſpeaking To lift vp the hande,
doth ſignifie ſometime, to Sweare or take an oth,
becauſe the Ceremonie or geſture of lifting vp the
hand to heauen in taking an othe, did ſignifie that
they called God to wytneſſe, that they Concealed
no truth, nor Vttered any falſhood: or if they dyd,
they deſired the ſame God to be Reuēged of them.
And in this ſignification of Swearing, it is to be taken
in this place, becauſe God in his concnant, by
othe did binde himſelfe to be their God and to delyuer
them. Somtime To lift vp the hande, ſignifieth
to ſhewe his Power or ſtrength, eyther in Deliuering

or Puniſhing, or in Hurting and Stryking,
which ſignification maye alſo well ſerue in
this Chapiter.
               A lande which floweth with milke and
honie,Verſ. 6. and is pleaſant among, &c.
               In manye places of the Scripture, the lande
of Chanaan is mentioned to flow with Milke and
Honie, that is, to abounde with all things Neceſſarie,
not onely for ſuſteynance, but alſo for Delight
and pleaſure. For in thoſe dayes there was
no more delectable feeding then Milke and Hony.
               S. Hierome who lyued a long tyme in that
Countrie, wryteth that it was a verie Delectable
and fruitfull place, but yet can we not thinke that
it was then any thing in compariſon of that it was
before, ſo long as they were the people of God,
and remayned in his obedience, keeping his lawes
and ordinances. For when they had reiected the
ſonne of God and promiſed Meſsias, it is likely the
land it ſelfe alſo was ſtriken for their wickedneſſe,
and thereby farre decayed from that it was in
times paſt.
               But they rebelled againſt mee,Verſ. 8. and would
not harken to me, they did, &c.
               It is a teſtimonie of the great goodneſſe & mercie
of God, that he calleth earneſtly to repentance
before he ſtrike and puniſhe his people for their
ſinnes. And ſo did he then to the Iſraelites, but
they would not harken vnto him, nor did caſt away

                  The abhominations of their eyes, that is, their
wicked Idoles on which they dyd caſt their eyes
with great delight: euen as they that be in vnchaſt
loue be alwaye deſirous to ſee and beholde them
that they loue. Vndoubtedly Idolatrie was vnpleaſaunt
to Ioſeph and the other Patriarkes in
Egipt, and they did exhort their children to remain
in the True worſhip of the liuing God. Yet many
of them, as borne and bredde in Egipt, were corrupted
and fell to Idolatrie by the Imitation of
that People. Then were Moyſes and Aaron ſent
from God vnto them, and yet contynued they ſtill
in Idolatrie. Whereby we may gather what was
the Cauſe why God did ſo long ſuffer his people to
continue in ſo miſerable oppreſſion in Egipt, and
did not ſooner turne his mercifull continaunce towarde
them. And that was, becauſe they had almoſt
Forgot him and his true Worſhip deliuered
them by their Fathers, and were gyuen to the
worſhipping of ſtraunge Gods. And yet GOD
would not euen Then poure out his wrath vpon
them, although they had iuſtly deſerued it, but
for his Owne name ſake, and for the Couenant
that he had made with Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob,
with his mightie hande, he Deliuered them.
               I wrought for my names ſake,Verſ. 9. that it
ſhould not be polluted before, &c.
               I ſtayde my ſelfe, ſayth God, from Extremitie
of my wrath, and from working vtter deſtruction,
not for my people ſake, which in deede had iuſtly

deſerued it, but for my Names ſake, that it might
not be diſtained, and euill ſpoken of among the
Egiptians, Amalechites, and other Heathen Nations
in whoſe ſight my great works were wrought
and which had Hearde of my purpoſe to delyuer
my people, And therefore would haue ſayde that
I had neyther beene hable nor willing to doe that
which I had promiſed, and therby to haue thought
of me no otherwiſe then they dyd of their owne
Falſe Gods. This cauſe in this Chapiter ſo often
repeated, maye bring a ſinguler Comfort to the
godly in time of affliction and trouble. And therefore
Moyſes and other holy men haue alway ſtaied
moſt vpon that in their earneſt prayers vnto God,
when he hath threatned or begunne any priuate or
common plague, deſiring him, that he would ſpare
his people, & holde his mercifull hande ouer them,
though not for their Owne ſakes, which in no wiſe
they haue deſerued, yet for his promiſe ſake, and
for his Owne Names ſake, that the enemyes
might not reioyce in the confuſion of his people.
And theſe praiers haue euer taken good effect with
God.
               Nowe when I hadde cauſed them to go
out of the lande of Aegipt,Verſ. 10. &c.
               Hitherto the Prophete hath declared how their
Fathers behaued themſelues in Aegypt Before
their deliuerance. Now he ſheweth how after his
great benefites they Rebelled and murmured againſt
him in the wilderneſſe. As when Moſes was

in the Mountaine they made a golden calfe,Exod. 32. a. 1. Exod. 15. d. 25. Exod. 16. a. 2. Exod. 17. a. 3. Num. 11. a. 1. Num. 14. a. 2. Num. 16. a. 1. Num. 20. a. 3. when
God tried them with Want of meate and drinke,
they murmured. They repined often againſt their
gouernours, and accuſing them of treaſon, and of
a meaning to deſtroy the people, were readie to
haue ſtoned them. The Hiſtories are Exod. 15. 16.
and 17. Num. 11. 14. 16. 20. and 21.
               The Sanctifying of the Sabboth mentioned
verſe .12. was a token that God had ſanctifyed the
Iſraelites euen as he had ſanctifyed the Sabboth,
and had choſen them * as his peculier people and
holy Prieſthoode,1. Pet. 1. c. 15. which ſhould preſerue and keepe
his promiſes vntill they were fulfilled in Meſsias
Chriſt Ieſu, who was the appoynted Sauiour of
the worlde.
               And that becauſe they cast awaye my
iudgements,Verſ. 16. 17. and walked not in my, &c.
               By this place and the like often vſed in this
Chapter, we haue to learne what be the Cauſes
that mooue GOD to minde and purpoſe the vtter
Deſolation of anye people,Ier. 9. d. 12. that is, * becauſe they
Breake the lawe of God, Caſt awaye his iudgementes,
and Contemne his worde. Yet is God of
long pacience and ſlow to wrath, euer trying all
means of amendment before he come to extremitie,
and euen then alſo ſometime he reſpecteth not
the deſertes of men; but the Glorie of his owne
name.
               
               Moreouer,Verſ. 18. &c. I ſayd vnto their ſonnes in the
Wilderneſse, Walke not in the, &c.
               In the ſpace of fortie yeares well neare all the
Fathers which came out of Aegypt were deade,
partlye by Gods plagues for their diſobedience,
partly by his iuſt iudgementes otherwiſe: ſo that
but two of them came into the lande of promiſe.
Therefore God by his ſeruant Moyſes exhorted
their ſonnes not to followe their fathers ſteppes,Deut. 6. c. 16. Pſal. 77. a. 10. Pſal. 94. b. 10. Zach. 1. a. 4. Heb. 3. b. 9.
but to cleaue to the law and ordinances of God, as
it appeareth well neare in the whole booke of Deut.
But they were no more obedient thā their fathers
were.
               God forbade the people to follow the ſtatutes
and Traditions of their fathers. Therefore the
holy ghoſt confuteth them which in matters of religion
and holineſſe will pretend to follow the Example
of their fathers, and not meaſure their faith
by Gods worde and his holy ſcriptures. The authoritie
of fathers ought certainly to be great with
their children in all thinges that are not Repugnant
to Gods will, which is ſafely and ſurely vnderſtanded
by his worde only, and not by example
of Ancetours or predeceſſours. For it hath beene
a common thing among the people of God, as it
appeareth in this place & a number mo that Ancetours
haue Erred in Gods cauſes, and therefore
can they be no ſure ground of conſcience.
               
               I gaue them alſo ſtatutes that were not
good,Verſ. 25. and iudgements wherein they, &c.
               All the lawes and precepts of God were pure,Deut. 30.
holy and good, therfore the meaning of theſe words
is, that forſomuche as in no caſe they woulde be
brought to keepe the Good and wholſome lawes of
God,Rom. 7. c. 12. by his iuſt iudgement he gaue them ouer to
their owne Phantaſies, & ſuffered them to vſe the
wicked and Superſtitious ordinances of the heathen
to their owne further condemnation. And the
ſame meaneth he by this ſaying.Rom. 1. d. 28. 
                  I defiled them in
their owne giftes, and gaue them vp to a reprobate
ſenſe, that they might deſtroy the firſt borne of their
owne children in ſacrificing them to the Idoll Moloc.
                  2. Theſ. 2. c. 11
The like to this Paule alſo threatneth that ſhall
happen vnto men in the latter dayes, and in the
times of Antichriſt, that forſomuch as they will not
loue the truth, God will bring vpon them an effectuall
illuſion, that they may beleeue lyes, to the ende
that all may be iudged, which would not giue credite
to the truth.
               
               After I hadde brought them into the
lande,Verſ. 2. 
                        •
                     . for the which I lifted vp. &c.
               Nowe followeth howe Waywardly and diſobediently
their Fathers behaued themſelues after
they came into y• land of Chanaan. For the greater
benefices that God of his goodneſſe had beſtowed
vpon them, the more readie were they to Fall from
his true worſhip to the Idolatrie and ſuperſtition

of the Gentiles. They ſerued the Lorde Truly all
the dayes of Ioſuah, and of the Elders that followed
him,Iudic. 2. b. 7. as it is written in the ſeconde of the
Iudges, But in the next generation the children of
Iſrael dealt wickedly in the ſight of the Lorde and ſerued
all maner of Idols. The whole Booke of the
Iudges is nothing but as it were a Regiſter of
their inconſtancie and light flitting from the True
ſeruice of God, notwithſtanding that he did ſundrie
times of his great mercie Rayſe diuerſe Gouernours
to deliuer them. And afterwarde did they in
like maner in the Reigne of many euill kings both
of Iſraell and Iuda.
               
               And I ſayd vnto them,Verſ. 29. what is that high
place wherevnto you reſort, &c.
               The Patriarkes and Saintes of God did alway
Sacrifice vnto God, as appeareth by Abell,
Noah, Abraham, and other: Which were not therefore
acceptable and pleaſant vnto god becauſe they
were full Satiſfaction for ſinnes, but rather partly
as Thankeſgiuing for his benefites, partly as
figures of the true Redemption and Satiſfaction
that ſhoulde be made by the oblation and Sacrifice
of Chriſt Ieſu vpon the Croſſe.
               Afterwarde God by Moyſes diſtincted thoſe
Sacrifices into ſundrie ſortes, and appointed one
Place where he would be ſerued, that is, at his tabernacle,
before the time of Salomon, and in his
temple of Hieruſalem after it was by him builded.
But the Iſraelites, making ſmall account of this order

and appoyntment of God, builded aulters in
euery high place, and on the ſame offered Sacrifice,
not onely to the liuing God pretending the imitation
of the Patriarkes againſt the preſcript of
Gods worde: but alſo in the like places offered to
Idols and ſtraunge Gods, according to the imitation
of the Gentiles, as in diuerſe Chapiters before
I haue noted.
               Thus ſayth the Lord God,Verſ. 30. 31. are you not defiled
in the wayes of your fathers, &c.
               After that God hath layde before them the rebellious
wickedneſſe of their Fathers in Aegypt,
in the wilderneſſe, and in the land of Chanaan, that
they might not * glorie in the holineſſe of their fathers,Mat. 3. b. 9. Io. 8. e. 33. 39.
as ſome time they were woont to do, he now
commeth to themſelues, and declareth▪ that, whatſoeuer
by Hypocriſie they pretended, yet in deede
and in truth they were as euill and wicked as
they in all kinde of abhomination and ſpirituall
whoredome. And in one example eſpecially he maketh
proofe of the whole, reciting that which of all
other was moſt Horrible, that is, the Offering of
theyr children vnto Idols. Wherefore he ſayth he
will not anſwere them to their queſtions, nor
will not be ſought vntoby ſuch Hypocrites as they
are.
               And that which commeth into your minds
ſhall not be at all,Verſ. 32. which you ſay, &c.
               Theſe Elders came to the Prophete vnder

fayre pretence to Learne at his hande, howe they
might behaue themſelues, and howe long the captiuitie
ſhoulde endure, but in the meane time they
reuolued in their mindes howe they might haue a
reaſonable colour and pretence cleane to reiect the
law of God, and to ſerue Idols of wood and ſtone,
euen as the heathen did. Happily they ſurmiſed
that the Prophete would haue tolde them,2. Par. 36. d. 21 Ier. 29. c. 11. Iere. 29. b. 10. Dan. 9. a. 2. that the
*captiuitie ſhould endue. 70. yeares, as it was then
commonly ſpred from the mouth of Hieremie. And
then would they haue anſwered, that ſeeing it was
ſo, that they ſhould tary ſo long in Babilon, it ſhould
be beſt for them to applie themſelues to the Religion
and maners of the people of that Countrey.
Otherwiſe, if they did ſticke to ſtifly to their former
Religion, and ſo much differ from the Babilonians,
they ſhoulde be ſure to finde them the more grieuous
Lordes and Maiſters to them. But God detecteth
this their vnhappie purpoſe, and ſayth they
ſhall haue due correction for it.
               As truely as I liue ſayth the Lord,Verſ. 33. I my
ſelfe will rule you with a mightie, &c.
               I know (ſayth God) this your trayterous and
rebellious deuiſe of your heartes to reuolt wholye
from my ſeruice, to the Idoles of the Gentiles among
whom you are. But ſurely I will ouerſhwart
you, and though you doe make the Babilonians
more fauourable to you, I my ſelfe will bee
your Aduerſarie, and by mightie hande and extremitie
of puniſhment will force you, whether you

or no, to acknowledge me your Lorde and God.
It ſhall not come to paſſe as you thinke, that you
ſhall *quietly ſerue ſtocks and ſtones with Idolators,Iudic. 2. c. 14. Iudic. 3. a. 8. Iere. 2. d. 19.
I wil not neglect fugitiue ſeruants as ſlacke
mayſters are woont to doe. Seeing that I haue
once taken you into my couenant, I will by ſharpe
puniſhment, And by my indignation powred out
vpon you, make you deſirous and glad to come againe
vnder my obedience.
               I will bring you from the people,Verſ. 34. &c. and gather
you out of the countrie, &c.
               God ſignifieth that he will not breake couenant
with them, but as he had promiſed by his Prophets,
ſo would he doe in deede, that is, he would
bring them from among thoſe Countries, wherin
they are ſcattred, but in ſuch ſort as the godly only
ſhould haue comfort thereby, and the wicked no
cauſe at all to reioyce. He threatneth to deale with
them, as he did with their fathers in the wilderneſſe
of Egipt. For in Egipt he declared his iuſtice
by ſundrie kindes of puniſhment. When they murmured
againſt God in the wylderneſſe, manye of
them he conſumed with fyre:Num. 11. a. 1. 
                  Num. 11. When Dathan
and Abyram roſe againſt Moſes. 250. periſhed
with fyre, and the reſidue the earth ſwalowed vp,
yea and the next day again, 14000. and 700. were
deſtroyed Num. 16.Num. 16. c. 35. 49. When they ſpake againſt Moyſes
at an other time, a great nūber were ſlaine by
Serpentes Num. 21.Num. 21. b. 6. In this ſort of iudgement
God here Proteſteth that he will deale with the

wicked Iſraelites, and by ſuch meanes, as it were,
cull out and purge away the obſtinate and rebellious
tranſgreſſours from the other, ſo that they
ſhall neuer enioy the lande of Iſrael agayne wyth
comfort and quietneſſe.
               As their fathers which God brought out of Egipt,
                  Num. 14. e. 30 Pſal. 94. d. 11. Heb. 3. d. 18.
becauſe of their often Diſobedience * neuer
came into the lande of promiſe: euen ſo the Prophet
ſayth thoſe euill children, that without repentance
continued in their abhominations ſhould neuer
haue the quiet fruition of their Countrie againe.
Notwithſtanding that for his promiſe ſake
he would deliuer & bring home the Reſidue which
eyther by teaching of his Prophets or by puniſhment,
or any other meanes, did forſake their wycked
wayes, and turne againe to the obedience of
his lawe.
               As for you,Verſ. 39. O houſe of Iſrael, &c. Go you
and ſerue euery man his Idoles, &c.
               Forſomuch as they would not yeelde to obey
God and to follow his law, with ſcornefull reproch
he biddeth them go on, & according to their owne
fantaſies wholy to ſerue euery man his Idoles,
and not to mixt withall the Title of his name, and
ſo diſtaine it. By which wordes, we may perceiue,
that God will not be matched with other, but haue
worſhip done wholy to himſelfe.1. Reg. 18. d. 21 
                  Hovv long, ſayth
Elias, halte you on both ſides? If the Lorde be God
follovv him,
                  2. Cor. 6. c. 15. 
                  If Baal, go after him. VVhat agreement
can there be betvveene Chriſt and Belial, ſaith Saint

                  Paule.
                  Math. 6. c. 24. And our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth vs That
vve cannot ſerue tvvo mayſters, We muſt therefore
learne alſo to ſerue Chriſt wholy, and not to mixt
Idolatrous Superſtition wyth the truth of his
Goſpell.
               For vpon my holy hill,Verſ. 40. euen vpon the high
hill of Iſrael ſayth the Lorde, &c.
               Theſe wordes that follow may be literally vnderſtanded
of ſuch of the Iſraelites brought out of
Captiuitie as by manifold plages did repent and
learne to worſhip God ſincerely, not after their
owne deuiſes, as they dyd before in their highe
places, but according to the preſcript of Goddes
worde. And therefore being reſtored into their
Countrie, God ſignifieth their deuotion ſhould be
acceptable vnto him, and all their Sacrifices pleaſant.
And for ſomuch as the Prophets doe oftentymes
breake out from thinges of preſent ſtate in
the worlde, vnto the bleſſing to come in the promiſed
ſeede and Sauiour: this place maye alſo verye
well be interpreted of the ſpirituall Iſrael, that is
the Church and people of God vnder Chriſt. For
by the Holy hill and highe mountayne of Iſrael, or
Sion, is vnderſtanded the Church, becauſe the Apoſtles
were firſt ſent from thence to preache the
Goſpell in all the worlde. Of this hill ſpeaketh
Eſay.
                  Eſa. 2. a. 2. Mich. 4. a. 
                        •
                     . 2. cap. and Micheas. 4 cap. The hill of the Lords
houſe ſhall be prepared in the height of the mountaines,
and all Nations ſhall preſſe vnto him. The
* Sacrifices of Chriſtians which are acceptablePſal. 4. b. 6.
                  
vnto God, & the * ſacrifices which he wil require of
them,Pſal. 49. c. 15. Pſal. 50. d. 1. 8 Pſal. 106. b. 22 Pſal. 140. a. 2. Eccl. 35. a. 2. 4 Phil. 4. d. 18. are earneſt prayer, & thankeſgyuing for his
benefites, the ſacrifice memorial of the Lords ſupper,
*charitable reliefe of their poore brethren, and
their owne ſoules and bodies conſecrated to his
ſeruice. In theſe will he delight, and theſe ſhall be
to him as A ſvvete ſauour.
               
               There ſhall you call to remembrance your
owne wayes,Verſ. 43. 44. and all your workes, &c.
               The Repentant Iewes after Captiuitie ſhall
call to remembrāce, ſayth the Prophet, their owne
naughtie wayes and workes againſt the lawe of
God,Dan. 9. b. 7. 1. Eſdr. 9. d. 15 and with heauie harts being ſorie and * aſhamed
of them, ſhall acknowledge and * confeſſe that
euen by their owne iudgements, they were worthy
by Gods iuſtice to haue bene cleane cut of from
him, and that it is of his onely mercie and goodneſſe
that he hath wrought otherwiſe. And that
for his owne names ſake, and for his owne glorie
in performing his couenant, he hath reſtored them
into their Countrie againe. In like maner chriſtian
men by the free mercies of God being deliuered
from the captiuitie of Sinne, Satan, and Death,
and broughte home into holye Mount Sion the
Church of God and heauenly Hieruſalem, doe call
to remembrance their olde wickedneſſe and abhominations
wherein they lyued to the diſhonour of
God and reproch of the worlde,1. Cor. 15. b. 9. Luc. 15. c. 21. Rom. 6. d. 21. Luc. 18. c. 13. and therefore are
*aſhamed of them, and * confeſſe in their harts that
they were worthie of ye wrath of God, & by perpetuall

damnation to be cut from his preſence. And
in that it is otherwiſe done, that it proceedeth of
the Riches of his goodneſſe towarde mankynde
layde out aboundantly vnto them in Chriſt Ieſu
our Sauiour.
               
            
         
         
            The 18. Sunday after Trinitie,
at Euening prayer.
            Ezech. 24.
            
               IN the ninth yeare, in the tenth Moneth, the tenth 
day of the Moneth, came the worde of the Lorde
vnto me, ſaying: 2 O thou ſonne of man, wryte
thée the name of this daye, yea euen of this preſent
day: for the king of Babylon ſet himſelfe againſt Ieruſalem
this ſelfe ſame day. 3 And ſhewe the rebellious houſe
a Parable,Ezech. 17. a. 2. and ſpeake vnto them, thus ſayth the Lord God,
Prepare a pot, ſet it on, and powre water into it.
               4 Gather the péeces thereof into it, euery good péece,
the thigh and the ſhoulder, and fill it with the chiefe bones.
               5 Take one of the beſt ſhéepe, and burne alſo bones vnder
it: let it boyle well, and let the bones thereof ſéeth well
therein. 6 With that ſaide the Lord God on this maner,
Wo vnto the bloudy citie, to the pot whoſe ſcumme is therin,
and whoſe ſcumme is not gone out of it: bring it out péece
by péece, let no lot fall vpon it. 7 For her bloud is in the
middeſt of it, vpon a high drye ſtone hath ſhe powred it: and
not vpon the grounde, that it might be couered with duſt.
               8 That it might cauſe wrath to ariſe, & take vengeance:
I haue ſet her bloud vpon a highe (drye) rock, that it ſhoulde
not be couered. 9 Wherefore thus ſayth the Lorde God,
O wo be vnto the bloudthirſtie citie, for whom euen I my

ſelfe wyll make a great fyre.Nahum. 3. a. 1 Abac. 2. a. 8.
               
               10 And heape on much wood, and kindle the fyre, and ſéeth
the fleſhe, and ſpice the pot, ſo that the verie bones ſhall be
brent. 11 Moreouer I will ſette the pot emptie vpon the
coales, ſo that the braſſe thereof may be hot and burnt, and
the filthineſſe of it may by molten in it, and the ſcumme of
it ſhall be conſumed. 12 She hath wearied her ſelfe wyth
labour, yet her great ſcumme is not gone of her, in the fyre
her ſcumme (muſt be conſumed.)
               13 In thy filthineſſe is wickedneſſe: becauſe I would haue
purged thée, and thou waſt not purged from thy filthyneſſe,
thou ſhalt not be purged any more, till I haue cauſed mine
indignation to reaſt in thée. 14 Euen I the Lorde haue
ſpoken it: yea it is come thereto all readie that I will doe it,
I will not go backe, I will not ſpare, I will not repent: but
according to thy waies and imaginations ſhall they iudge
thée, ſayth the Lorde God. 15 And the worde of the Lorde
came vnto me, ſaying. 16 Thou ſonne of man, beholde I
will take awaye from thée the pleaſure of thine eyes with a
plague, yet ſhall thou neyther mourne nor wéepe, neyther
ſhall thy teares run downe. 17 Mourne in ſilence, make
no mourning of the deade, binde the tyre of thy heade vpon
thée, and put on thy ſhoes vpon thy féete, couer not thy lips,
and eate no mans bread. 18 So I ſpake vnto the people
betimes in the morning, and at euen my wife died: then vpon
the next morowe I did as I was commaunded.
               19 And the people ſaide vnto me, Wylt thou not tell vs
what this ſignifieth toward vs that thou doeſt ſo? 20 I anſwered
them, The word of the Lord came vnto me, ſaying:
               21 Tell the houſe of Iſrael, thus ſayth the Lord God, Beholde
I will pollute my ſanctuarie, euen the glorie of your
power, ye pleaſure of your eyes & your harts delight: & your
fou
                     •
                  es and daughters whome ye haue left, ſhal fall through
the ſworde. 22 Lyke as I haue done, ſo ſhall ye doe alſo:

ye ſhall not couer your lips, ye ſhall eate no mans bread.
               23 And your tyre (shalbe) vpon your heades, and your 
ſhoes vpon your féete: ye ſhall neyther mourne nor weepe,
but ye ſhall pine away in your iniquities, and mourne one
towardes another. 14 Thus Ezechiel is your ſhewtoken:
according to all that he hath done, ye ſhall doe: when it commeth,
then ye ſhall knowe that I am the Lorde God.
               25 Alſo thou ſonne of man, ſhall it not be in the day when
I take from them their power, the ioy of their honour, the
pleaſure of their eyes, & the lifting vp of their ſoules, their
ſonnes and their daughters? 26 In that daye ſhall come
one that is eſcaped, vnto thée, (and bring it) to the hearing
of (thine) eares. 27 In that day ſhall thy mouth be opened
to him which is eſcaped, that thou mayſt ſpeake & be no
more dumbe: yea thou ſhalt be their ſhewetoken, that they
may knowe howe that I am the Lorde.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .xxiiij.
Chapter of Ezechiel.
               In the ninth yeare, in the tenth Moneth,Verſ. 1.
the tenth day of the moneth, &c.
               
                  THe Prophete being in Babilon,
foretelleth the time in which the
Citie Hieruſalem was beſieged, and
by an allegorie of a potte ſet ouer the
fire, declareth how the Iewes for their
obſtinacie ſhould be puniſhed.Iere. 25. b. 8. Iere. 26. a. 6. Iere. 28. b. 8. Iere. 35. d. 17. Whereby we alſo
haue to learne what ſhall * happen to Kingdomes,
Cities, Countreys, and priuate men alſo, which

contemning the worde of God, and often calling
by his miniſters, remaine Obſtinate and go on ſtil
in their former wickedneſſe: that is, that by Gods
iuſtice they ſhal come to vtter confuſion. Though it
be a time deferred by Gods pacience and long ſufferance
* alluring to repentance:Rom. 2. a. 4. yet after ſundrie
warninges at length it falleth in deede, and then
heape they vpon themſelues greater wrath in the
day of wrath.Rom. 2. a. 5.
               
               Firſt, the time and verie day is noted, which was
the ninth yeare of the captiuitie of Iechonias, or the
reigne of Zedechias, the tenth moneth anſwerable
to our December, in the tenth day of the moneth,
on which the king of Babilon came to the ſiege of
Hieruſalem,
                  Iere. 39. a. 2. 2. Reg. 25. a. 1. &c. as appeareth, Hier. 39. & .2 Reg. vltīo.
cap. The Prophete wrote this in Babilon a great
number of miles from Iewrie, therefore it maye
ſeeme a great thing in the Prophet, that in ſo large
a diſtance of places, before any meſſenger coulde
bring worde thereof, he was hable to ſay in truth,
This day Hieruſalem is beſieged.
               
               As touching the expoſition of the allegorie or
figuratiue ſimilitude: The Potte is the citie Hieruſalem,
The preparing of the pot to the fire, is the
comming to the ſiege thereof. The Powring of the
water, is the aſſault thereof continuing two yeres.
For it was firſt beſieged in the ninth yeare, and taken
in the eleuenth. The calamitie, affliction and
trouble is The fire that maketh this pot boyle and
bubble. The Bones that in ſteede of wood nouriſheth
this fire, is partly the death and ſlaughter of

many Innocentes whoſe bloud was ſhed before
time in that cruell Citie, and cryed now to God for
vengeance,Gen. 4. b. 10. as the * bloud of Abell: partly the multitude
of all their other ſtubburne wickedneſſe inflaming
the fire of Gods wrath againſt them. The
chiefe and principal Peeces of fleſh caſt into the pot,
are the Princes and chiefe men of greateſt eſtimation,
not onely of that Citie, but alſo of all the countrey
about, which fled thither for feare of ſpoyle before
the ſiege. The Chiefe bones, are the ſtrength
of the principall Souldiours there appoynted for
the defence of the Citie. The VVell ſeething or boiling,
is the long continuing in the trouble of the
ſiege, in which time both ſtrength of Souldiours,
and might of Princes within the Citie ſhoulde be
conſumed. The Fome remayning ſtill in the pot, is
the filthie froth of wickedneſſe and abhomination
yet in all the boyling of this trouble remayning among
them, euen to the ſight of all men, and not
Scummed away by Repentance.
               When the Prophete ſayth, Bring it out peece by
peece, he ſignifieth that they ſhal not Al together be
taken out of the pot to be deuoured and conſumed
by death: But ſome at one time and ſome at another.
Some by plage, ſome by famine, ſome by the
ſworde, and yet that aſſuredly they ſhould All periſh,
and no ſtate and condition be ſaued. For that
he meaneth by theſe wordes, Let no lot fall vpon it,
that is, let no choyſe be made for the ſauing of ſome
and deſtroying of other.
               
               For hir bloud is yet in it,Verſ. 7. vpon an high dry
ſtone hath ſhe poured it, &c.
               Dne great cauſe of deſolation often mentioned
of the Prophetes,Eſay. 26. d. 21. Ioel 3. d. 19. Nahū. 3. a. 1. 2 is the cruell * murther and killing
of Innocents: wherewith God in this place
heauily burdeueth the Citie Hieruſalem. When one
poureth the bloudde of ſuche as be ſlaine vpon the
ground, and doth couer it with duſt: he ſeeketh ſo
neare as he can to conceale and hide it, but when
he poureth it vpon an high drye ſtone, he layeth it
open to the ſight of all men, as beeing nothing afrayde
or aſhamed of it. And by that forme of ſpeech
God here noteth the bolde and ſhameleſſe crueltie
that in the ſight of the worlde that Bloudie Citie
had vſed towarde poore Innocentes, and therefore
cryed for the wrath of God vpon them. God therefore,
as it were, in the heat of his diſpleaſure breaketh
out and cryeth,Verſ. 9. 
                  VVo to that bloud thirſtie Citie,
affirming that He himſelfe will worke in this
reuengement, that He will make and kindle the fire,
put vnder wood, ſeeth the fleſh, and ſpice the potte, ſo
that the verie bones ſhall be burnt.
               
               In that God threatneth that he himſelfe will do
it, he taketh from them all maner of hope, eyther
that they ſhal eſcape the extremitie of this miſchief,
or that it ſhall not at all come to paſſe. For they had
* falſe Prophetes among them,Iere. 28. d. 15. Ier. 29. e. 21. 31 which did put them
in comfort that the Citie ſhould not be beſieged, or,
if it were, that it ſhould not ſo be takē, but that they
ſhould eſcape. Fleſh dreſſed with ſpices is the more

pleaſant, and eaten more greedily. Therefore God
threatneth He will ſpice the pot, that is, by the continuance
and lingring of the ſiege, he would ſet the
Souldiours in ſuch a wrath and anger, as, when
they had taken the Citie, they ſhoulde with more
greedie ſtomackes put them vnto the ſworde.
               I will ſet the pot emptie ouer the coales,Verſ. 11. &c. ſo
that the braſse thereof may be hote, &c.
               When the fleſh and bones be conſumed, ſayth
God, that is, when the Princes, people and Souldiours
are periſhed and ſlaine, I wil cauſe the pot,
that is the Citie it ſelfe, to be ſet on coales & burnt
with fire, that the filthie ſome of wickedneſſe which
by no affliction could be taken away, may be conſumed
with the vtter deſtruction of thoſe perſons
which mainteyned it.Iere. 7. f. 24. Ier. 1. d. 16. 17 Baruch. 1. a. 3. Ezech. 
                        •
                     . a. 3. God firſt *ſent his Prophets
by inſtruction and teaching of his holy will to call
them from their abhominable Idolatrie and ſinfull
life, Then he caſt vpon them ſome light and
meane puniſhments to chaſten them. But ſeeing
that foule and ruſtie pot would not by any meanes
be ſcoured from the burnt froth, that it was defiled
with, he ſayth here by his Prophete, there is no other
remedie but vtter diſſolution and conſuming
by his wrath which in earneſt maner he proteſteth
he will not fayle to doe, ſaying:Verſ. 14. 
                  I will not go backe,
I will not ſpare, I will not repent.
               
               Thou ſonne of man,Verſ. 16. beholde I will take away
from thee the pleaſure of thine, &c.
               
                  
God by an other parable ſetteth forth his iudgements
to the Iewes, which partly were alreadie
in captiuitie in Babilon, partly as yet remayned at
Hieruſalem. The Parable is this, that God telleth
the Prophete before hande of the ſodaine death of
his wife whiche he loued moſt tenderly, and yet
commaundeth him in any wiſe not to bewayle her
death. And if the people did aſke him, whie he did
not lament the death of her yt he eſteemed ſo derely,
that he ſhoulde anſwere them, it was done as a
ſign or token, agaynſt them. Becauſe the deſtruction
of the Temple, and the loſſe of their wiues and
children, at the taking of the Citie ſhould be ſuch a
coroſiue to their heartes, as for extremitie of ſorow
they ſhould not be hable to weepe any more then he
did. For extremitie of griefe ſometimes vtterly
drieth vp teares & maketh that one cannot weepe.
God calleth his wife The pleaſure of his eies, becauſe
he aboue all worldely thinges delighted in her.
Moreouer when people mourned at the death of
their friendes, the maner of the Countrey was to
lay away the ornament or attyre of their heades, to
put of their ſhooes, and to go barefooted, to couer
their face, and ſpecially the nether part thereof vnder
their eyes, to faſt & not to eate meate or drinke
wine, or if they did, it ſhould be none other but ſuch
as was ſent them by other.Verſ. 17. But God willeth Ezechiel
at the death of his wife to vſe none of theſe
ceremonies, nor to ſhew any outward token of lamentation
for his wife.Verſ. 18. In the .18. verſe, the Prophet
declareth, that he did as God had bidden him.

In the morning of that day, in which his wife died
at night, he tolde the people that his wife ſhoulde
die ſodainly, whome all they knewe he loued very
earneſtly, and the next day he came abrode among
them, not vſing any ceremonie of mourning.
               And then the people ſaide vnto him,Verſ. 18. wilt
thou not tell vs what this ſignifieth, &c.
               To lament the death of a mans wyfe, his children
or deare friendes, is not onely a thing vſuall
with men, but alſo ſuch as nature it ſelfe doth allowe,Gen. 23. a. 2.
and Gods lawe not forbid. Abraham mourned
for his wife Sarah.
                  Gen. 50. a. 1. 3. And Ioſeph bewailed the
death of his father. When a deere friend is taken
from a man, he remembreth the benefites & pleaſures
that he receyued by him, and maye hardly
forbeare euen the outwarde ſhewe of his ſorrow.
Wherefore the people of the Iewes, ſeing Ezechiel,
to behaue himſelfe otherwiſe, thought there
was ſome Straunge matter in it, and deſired to
knowe what it ment. The Prophete anſwereth,
that he did it not of himſelfe, for that his nature
might hardly beare it, but by the commaundement
of God, thereby to ſignifie to them the great ſorrow
that ſhould come vnto them. The temple was
called the * Sanctuarie of God,3. Reg. 8. b. 10. Deut. 26. d. 15 Pſal. 72. c. 17. wherein he eſpeciallye
ſhewed his preſence. Therein the Iewes dyd
eſteeme their greateſt glorie to conſiſt, that the lyuing
God had the Seate of hys preſence among
them, as a teſtimonie of the couenant betweene
him & them. So that it doth in ſundrie places appeare

they did put their greateſt confidence in that
outwarde token,Iere. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . a. 4 as in Hier. They cried The temple
of God is with vs, the temple of God is wyth
vs. And as well for this cauſe, as alſo, that the
temple was ſo * gorgeouſly buylded by Salomon,
                  3. Reg. 6. a. 2. Marc. 13. a. 1.
they delighted in it in their hartes, and deſired ſtill
to beholde it with their eies. Wherefore the Prophet
here ſayth, that not only this Temple wherin
they had ſo great pleaſure, ſhould be deſtroyed:
but their wyues, ſonnes and daughters cruelly
ſlayne with the ſworde, and thereby ſo great griefe
riſe vnto thē as for very extremitie of ſorow, they
ſhould not be hable to weepe, but to pine away in
the iniquitie of their harts.Verſ. 24. And ſo Ezechiel ſhould
be a ſhewe or token vnto them, that euen as he
had done, at the death of his wyfe whome he loued.
So ſhould they doe at the deſtruction of the
Citie and Temple,Verſ. 25. in which they did eſteeme all
their power, their honour, their ioy, the pleaſure
of their eyes, and their verye hartes delight to
conſiſt.
               In that daye ſhall come one that is eſcaped,Verſ. 26.
vnto thee, and bring it to the, &c.
               The Prophet ſignifyeth, When this ſhall be
performed, that one which hath eſcaped from Hieruſalem,
ſhal come into Babylon, and in the hearing
of Ezechiel, ſhall tell vnto the Iewes all that hath
happened to the Citie and to the temple. At which
tyme God wylleth the Prophets mouth ſhould be
opened to tell them againe of theſe things, when

that they were done: that they might vnderſtande
by the truth of the euente, that it came not to paſſe
by the might of the enemies, but by the iuſt wrath
of God for their offences. For before, they were
caryed away with falſe Prophetes, and would not
beleue Ezechiel.
               
               They ſayde that there were many other Prophets
which taught the contrarie, and affirmed
that they had the ſpirite of God as well as he, for
proofe hereof,Iere. 28. c. 11. we reade Hier. 28. that Ananias a
falſe Prophet ſaide euen in the hearing of Hieremie,
and that with great Boldeneſſe, that God
would breake the yoke of Nabuchodonozer, and
delyuer the Iewes within the ſpace of two yeres,
vtterly contrarie to that which Hieremie had ſpoken
before. Wherefore we maye learne the Deuill
hath no readier meanes to keepe the wicked in
errour, then to raiſe vp falſe teachers to impugne
and diſcredite ſuch as be Gods True meſſengers
in deede.
               In the 33. cap. of Ezech. verſ. 21. the effect of this
Prophecie is fulfilled,Ezech. 33. e. 21 and declaration made that
the 12. yeare of the Captiuitie, the tenth Moneth,
and fift day of the Moneth a meſſenger came, and
tolde the lamentable tydings of the deſtruction of
the Citie and temple. What therevpon followed,
you may reade in the place.
               Forſomuch as all thoſe thinges came to paſſe
moſt truely, of which the Prophets ſo oftentimes
forewarned the Iewes, let vs take heede that we
doe not contemne ſuch profitable admonitions and

exortations as by the Preachers are taken out of
the ſame Prophets of God, leaſt to our great euill
and griefe, we feele the truth of them perfourmed,
as the Iewes in like caſe did. The things were ſo
ſpoken to them particularly, that notwithſtanding
generall doctrines are to be taken out of them to
be applyed to Perſons and Tymes, wherein the
lyke obſtinacye and impenitencie is vſed that then
was.
            
         
         
            The .19. Sunday after Trinitie,
at Morning prayer.
            Daniel. 3.
            
               
                   NAbuchodonozor the▪ king made an Image of golde,
which was thréeſcore cubites hie, and ſixe cubites
thicke: he ſet it vp in the plaine of Dura, in the prouince
of Babilon. 2 Then Nabuchodonozor the
king ſent forth to gather together the Dukes, Lordes, and
Nobles, the iudges and officers, the deputies and ſhirifes,
with all the rulers of the prouinces, that they might come to
the dedication of the Image which Nabuchodonozor the
king had ſet vp. 3 So the Dukes, Lordes, and nobles, the
iudges and officers, deputies and ſhir
                     •
                  fes, with all the rulers
of the prouince, gathered them together vnto the dedication
of the Image that Nabuchodonozor the king had ſet vp, and
they ſtoode before the Image which Nabuchodonozor had ſet
vp. 4 Then an heralde cryed aloude, To you it is commaunded
O people, nations, and languages,
               5 That when ye heare the noyſe of the cornet, trumpet,
harpe, ſhawme, pſalteries, dulcimer, and all maner of inſtruments
of muſicke, ye fall downe and worſhip that golden Image

that Nabuchodonozor the king hath ſet vp.
               6 Who ſo then falleth not downe and worſhippeth, ſhall 
euen the ſame houre be caſt into the middes of a hote fierie
fornace. 7 Therefore when all the folke heard the noyce
of the cornet, trumpet, harpe, ſhawme, pſalteries, and all inſtruments
of muſicke, then all the people, nations, and languages
fell downe and worſhipped the golden Image that
Nabuchodonozor the king had ſet vp.
               8 Now were there certaine men of the Chaldées, that
went euen then, and cried out an accuſation of the Iewes.
               9 They ſpake, and ſayd vnto the king Nabuchodonozor,
O king, liue for euer. 10 Thou O king haſt made a decrée,
that euery man that ſhal heare the ſound of the cornet, trumpet,
harpe, ſhawme, pſalteries, dulcimer, and al inſtruments
of muſicke, ſhall fall downe and worſhip the golden Image.
               11 And who ſo then fell not downe, and worſhipped not,
that he ſhould be caſt into the mids of an hote fierie fornace.
               12 Now are there certaine Iewes, whome thou haſt ſet
ouer the charge of the prouince of Babilon:Dan. 2. g. 49. (namely) Sidrach,
Miſach, and Abednego: theſe men O king, regarded
not thy commaundement: yea they will not ſerue thy gods,
nor worſhip the golden Image that thou haſt ſet vp.
               13 Then Nabuchodonozor in his anger and wrath commaunded
that Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego ſhoulde bée
brought vnto him: ſo theſe men were brought before the king
               14 Then Nabuchodonozor ſpake vnto them, and ſayde, Is
it true O Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego, will not you ſerue
my Gods, nor worſhip the golden Image that I haue ſet vp?
               15 Nowe therefore be readie when ye heare the ſounde of
the cornet, trumpet, harpe, ſhawme, pſalteries, dulcimer, and
all inſtruments of muſicke, to fall downe and worſhip the
Image which I haue made: for if ye worſhip it not, ye ſhall
be caſt immediately into the mids of a hote fierie fornace: for
who is that God that can deliuer you out of my handes?
               
                  
16 Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego anſwered the kinge,
and ſayde, O Nabuchodonozor, we are not carefull to anſwere
thée in this matter. 17 Beholde our God whom we
ſerue, is hable to deliuer vs from the hote fierie fornace: and
he will deliuer vs out of thy hande O king.
               18 And though he will not, yet ſhalt thou know O king,
that we will not ſerue thy Gods, nor worſhip the golden Image
which thou haſt ſet vp. 19 Then was Nabuchodonozor
full of indignation, ſo that the countenance of his face
chaunged vpon Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego: therefore
he charged and commaunded that they ſhould heate the fornace,
one ſeuen times more then it was woont to be heat.
               20 And he charged the moſt valiant men of warre that
were in his armie, to binde Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego,
and to caſt them into the hote fierie fornace.
               21 So theſe men were bound in their ceates, hoſen, heade
attire, with their other garments, and caſt into the mids of
the hote fierie fornace. 22 Therefore becauſe the kinges
commaundement was ſtrayte, and the fornace was excéeding
hote, the men that put in Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego,
the flambe of the fire deſtroyed them.
               23 And theſe thrée men Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego,
fell downe in the mids of the hote fierie fornace bounde.
               24 Then Nabuchodonozor the king was aſtonied, and
roſe vp in all haſt: he ſpake vnto his councell, and ſayde, Did
not we caſt thrée men bounde into the mids of the fire? They
anſwered and ſayde vnto the king, It is true O king.
               25 He anſwered and ſayde, Lo I ſée foure men loſe, walking
in the mids of the fire, and they haue no hurt: and the
fourine of the fourth is like the ſonne of God.
               26 Vpon this went Nabuchodonozor vnto the mouth of
the hote fierie fornace, he ſpake alſo and ſayde, O Sidrach,
Miſach, and Abednego, ye ſeruants of the hie God, go forth,
and come hither. And ſo Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego,

came forth of the middes of the fire.
               27 The Dukes, Lordes, and Nobles, and the hings councell
came together to ſée theſe men, vpon whome the fire had
no maner of power in their hodyes: inſomuch that the very
heare of their heade was not burnt, and their clothes vnchaunged,
yea there was no ſmell of fire felt vpon them.
               28 Then ſpake Mabuchodonozor and ſayd, Bleſſed be the
God of Sidrach,Pſal. 34. c. 17. Act. 12. b. 11. Miſach, and Abednego, which hath ſent his
Angel, and deliuered his ſeruants that put their truſt in him,
and haue altered the kings commaundement, and ieoparded
their bodyes, rather then they woulde ſerue or worſhip any
God except their owne God onely.
               29 Therefore I make a decrée, that euery people, nation,
and language, which ſpeake any blaſphemie agaynſt the god
of Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego, ſhall be drawne in péeces,
and their houſes ſhall be made a ſakes: becauſe there is no
God that can deliuer after this ſort.
               30 So the king promoted Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego
in the prouince of Babilon.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the thirde
Chapter of Daniel.
               Nabuchodonoſor the king made an Image
of golde,Verſ. 1. which was 60, &c.
               
                  THe Prophet Daniell in this
hiſtorie ſetteth forth a Iyuely Image
of the contentiō betweene the Church
of God, and the Sinagoge of Satan,
betweene the True worſhip of God,
and the wickedneſſe of Idolatrie and ſuperſtition.

Firſt, we haue to obſerue in what things the falſe
worſhip of God conſiſteth, that is in Images and
other externall ceremonies,Leuit. 26 a. 1. Deut. 5. a. 8. Pſal. 96. a. 7. Leuit. 19. a. 4. which God in his
Scriptures expreſſely, oftentimes, and moſt * earneſtly
prohibiteth, as that thing, wherewith his
true religion cannot ſtande. And therfore it maye
iuſtly be meruayled, howe, of late yeres, they that
haue had the ſcriptures of God among them, and
profeſſe themſelues to be pillars of Gods people,
could fall to ſo Groſſe errour in Religion, as that
they durſte bring the worſhipping of Images into
the Church of God, againſt his expreſſe commaundement
to the contrarie,Exod. 20. a. 4. ſaying. Thou ſhalt
not make vnto thy ſelfe any grauen Image, &c.
               
               Next haue we to conſider, Whence Idolatrie
and falſe worſhipping of God eſpecially taketh authoritie
and credite, that is, partly, from the Founders
and erectours thereof, great Emperours,
Kings, Princes, and perſons of Honour: partly,
from the richneſſe of the matter, cunning workmanſhip,
and glorious pompe in the face of the
worlde, by which meanes it caryeth with it commonly
the multytude & the countinance of worldly
power.
               The charges of making this Image of Golde,
ſo high and ſo thicke, may ſeeme huge, monſtrous
and almoſt vncredible. But therin is to be learned,
both what exceeding riches that Empire had gathered
by the ſpoyle of the worlde, and alſo howewaſtfully
men giuen to errour can * poure out their
treaſures and ſubſtance towarde the maintenanceExod. 32. a. 2. Eſa. 46. b. 6. Dan. 14. a. 2.
                  
of Idolatrie and ſuperſtition. Whereas to finde
the Miniſters of Gods true Religion, or to relieue
their poore chriſtian brethren, they will grudge to
giue a ſmall portion, yea, or any thing at all: but
rather ſeeke to take that from them that by order
they haue alreadie. Are there not, thinke you in
Englande, that, when tyme was, could be contented
to giue fortie ſhyllings towarde the gylding of
a gaie Image, or twentie Nobles to bye a ſute of
Copes, that nowe will not wythout murmuring,
giue ſixe pence to bye a Byble, or other Booke of
ſeruice?
               Then Nabuchodonoſor ſent forth to gather
together the Dukes,Verſ. 2. &c. Lordes, &c.
               In theſe verſes following is declared the dedication
of this Idolatrous Image, wherein Daniell
verie liuely painteth forth, both howe Idolatrie
taketh credite of the glorie and maieſtie of the
worlde: and alſo how readie and obedient all ſorts
and ſtates of men ſhewe themſelues to the furtherance
of the ſame. Here wanted nothing that could
giue continuance to this Idole, or cauſe the people
to haue it in admiration. The richneſſe of the matter,
the ſtraunge and monſtrous biggeneſſe of the
Image, the Kings authoritie, the ſtraightneſſe of
the charge and great penaltie, the conſent and aſſemblie
of Dukes, Lordes, noble perſons, Iudges, Officers,
and Shiriffes, the noyſe of Cornets, Trumpets,
Harpes, Shalmes, Pſalteries, Dulcimers,
and all maner of muſicall inſtruments. To all this

commeth the exceeding readie Obedience of all the
multitude of ſubiectes. And ſurely it is much to
be marueyled, that in ſo great a number of Noble
men of ſo great wiſedome and experience, & ſuch
a multitude of people there ſhould not ſo much as
one riſe vp & ſay. VVhy ſhould men endewed with
reaſon and vnderſtanding,
                  Gene. 1. d. 27. Pſal. 113. a. 6. Pſal. 134. d. 16 Sapi. 15. d. 15. Eſa. 43. b. 12. 21. Gen. 1. d. 28. 
                  and made to the * Image
of God, fall downe and vvorſhip a dumbe and vnſenſible
Idol, that hath * eies and ſeeth not, that hath eares
& heareth not, that hath a mouth & can not vtter one
worde? VVhy ſhould he that is by Gods ordynance
Lorde and maiſter of all earthly creatures, crouche
dovvne to an Idole made of mettall digged our of the
grounde, and framed to a faſhion by mannes hande?
But ſuch, Men are, when Gods ſpirite doth forſake
them, that no errour can be ſo groſſe, but they
will readily encline vnto it. Seing then ſo foule a
wickedneſſe was here approued by ſo generall cō
                  ſent
of all ſtates: we muſt by this Example take
heede howe in matters of holyneſſe we grounde
our conſciences vpon the authoritie and conſent of
men, ſeeme they in the worlde neuer ſo great of
power, neuer ſo wiſe, learned or ſkilfull by experience.
But the worde of God onely muſt be the
foundation & grounde of conſciences, in all things
that appertaine to the worſhip of God.
               Nowe weare there certaine men of the
Chaldeis,Verſ. 8. 9. &c. that went euen then, &c.
               It may verie well be thought, that this Erection
of the golden Image, and the charge and worſhipping

of it, was a cunning deuiſe, put into the
Kings head, and wrought by ſome of the Nobles,
of purpoſe to intrap Sidrach, Miſaach, and Abednago,
becauſe they, being ſtraungers, were in ſo
great fauour of the Prince,Dan. 6. a. 4. as in the ſixt Chapiter,
we ſee, they did worke againſt Daniell. Such
fetches & cunning deuiſes haue the wicked of the
worlde to bring the innocent ſeruants of God into
daunger, when otherwiſe for diſobedience to their
Prince in matters lawfull, or for any other diſhoneſtie
or vngodly lyfe, they are not hable to faſten
any lykely accuſation vpon them. When Daniel
ſayth, They cryed our accuſation of the Iewes, he noteth
their hatefull and eger mindes againſt them,
comming to the king, as we ſay, with open mouth,
and leauing nothing vndone or vntold that might
aggrauate their fault, or pull them into diſpleaſure.
The extolling of the kings ordinance and decree,
the ſtraite charge that he gaue to haue it obſerued.
That they which diſobeyed, were Iewes, that is,
Straungers, and in deede of themſelues odious,
as captiues. That they ſhewed themſelues vnthankfull
to the king, who had ſet them in place of
hononr, and made them great Rulers in his Prouinces.
That they ſhewed contempt and diſdaine
towarde the lawes of the Countrie, wherevnto
all the reſidue of his Subiectes with great reuerence
did obey.
               By this part of the hiſtorie we are taught, that
the ſeruauntes of God, and thoſe that will truely
worſhip him, ſhall not wante in this worlde accuſers

and Malicious perſons, that with all Spite
ſhall draw them into daunger, & ſeeke their confuſion.2. Tim. 3. c. 12.
                  They that will liue godly in Chriſt Ieſu, ſayth
Paule, ſhall be ſure to haue perſecution. Satan the
Prince of the worlde will alwaye raiſe his Miniſters
to vexe and trouble the members of the
Church of God, and that commonly vnder the
* colour of their holyneſſe and religion conſiſting in
outward ſuperſtition and Idolatry.Math. 9. b. 11. Luc. 13. c. 14. Is there any
greater matter at this day, wherefore the enemies
of the Goſpell doe perſecute the Profeſſours of
Gods true worſhip, then becauſe they will not acknowledge
a peece of breade to be God, nor will
not worſhip their Images ſet vp in the Churches,
nor runne on Pilgrimage to ſtockes and ſtones,
wrought with mans hande, and other lyke Idolatrous
and ſuperſticious wickedneſſe? Therfore
good men haue by this example great occaſion to
comfort and ſtrengthen their fayth, that it be not
ſhaken with the terrour and feare of their cruell
dealings. This alſo is here to be obſerued, that
onely Three poore Iewes to the maintenance of
Gods true worſhip doe ſet themſelues and haſard
their liues, againſt the King, his Nobles & Commons,
& all the power of ye Babilonicall Empire,
Which manifeſtly declareth howe little credite in
matters of Religion ſhould be gyuen to the reaſons
of Multitude, Number, and Generall conſent.
For commonly the greater part in the world
is the worſe, & Gods Church is but a ſmall flocke.
Elias ſtoode alone againſt Achab and all Iſrael.3. Reg. 18. d. 21 So

did Micheas againſt all the falſe Prophetes.3. Reg. 22. d. 23 The
Prophets onely againſt the whole Church of the
Iewes. Chriſt & his Apoſtlēs againſt the Scribes
and Pharaſeis, and all the learned Philoſophers
and mightie Princes of the worlde.
               Then Nabuchodonoſor in his anger &
wrath commaunded that Sydrach,Verſ. 13. &c.
               
                  Nabuchodonoſor is greatly mooued to ſee his
ordinance and decree diſobeyed, and therefore maketh
ſtreight inquiſition vpon the offenders. In
which he vſeth all meanes that maye be to perſwade
them: Firſt, with curteous wordes, he
ſignifieth, that he could ſcantly beleue any ſuch vnthankfulneſſe
or Diſobedience to be in them, and
therefore willeth them, againſt a time appointed,
(ſeing he had ſet them in place of ſo great honour)
to declare themſelues to be ſuch men as will not to
the euill example of other, diſobey his lawes. Or,
if they would not conſent to the worſhipping of the
Image which he had made, that they ſhould immediatly
be caſt into an hote fierie Furnace, and
thereby be made a Terrour to all ſuch as woulde
with contempt diſobey his authoritie. In the ende
he added words of prowde blaſphemie, That there
was no God that coulde delyuer them out of hys
handes. Whereby it maye appeare how Mutable
Princes are, and howe ſoone they are caried by the
glorie of the worlde from the true feare and honour
of God.Dan. 2. g. 47. In the .2. Chapiter, when Daniel
by the ſpirite of God interpreted the dreame which

aſtonied all the wiſe men and Soothſayers of his
Countrie, Daniel was then greatly eſteemed, Sidrach,
Miſach & Abednago by his counſaile, were ſet
as Iudges in the Prouinces: and Daniels God
was declared to be The God of Gods, the Lorde of
Kings, and the reuealer of ſecreates. But nowe thorowe
the incenſing of wicked enimies, the lyuing
God is diſhonoured, an Idoll is ſet vp to be worſhipped,
and the ſeruauntes of God and his owne
faithfull Officers are brought to the fierie Furnace
to be burned. Such doting chaunges oftentimes
hapneth to them, that ſet their eyes onely
vpon the power and glorie of earthly kingdomes.
               Sidrach,Verſ. 16. &c. Miſach and Abednago anſwered
the king and ſaide, &c.
               The temptation of the Faithfull Encreaſeth,
and the ſtrength of Gods ſpirit encreaſeth in them.
Wherefore there followeth now in this great danger
a bolde and conſtant anſwere made vnto the
King, without flatterie or diſſimulation, without
hypocriſie or worldly pollicie: onely made in ſimplicitie
and conſtancie of fayth. As if they had ſaid:
In all things lawfull, we euer haue and will vnfaynedly
obey thee as the Miniſter that is appointed
by God to gouerne vs, but if thou ſet vp thy
ſelfe againſt the lyuing God, who hath aduaunced
thee to this great power, and ſeeke by thy authoritie
to drawe vs from his true worſhip to the honouring
of Idols and falſe Gods, he thou aſſured
O king,Act. 5. e. 29. that we will not in that obey thee. * For

we are taught in matter of faith and holyneſſe to
* obey God and not man.Act. 5. e. 29. And we know right wel
that that God whom thou bewitched with the glorie
of thy worldly power doeſt blaſpheme, can deliuer
vs out of thy handes & from all thy ſtrength,
if he ſee it to be to the glorie of his name. But if his
wiſedome thinke it not meete ſo to doe (for he will
not doe alway that he can doe:) we let thee vnderſtande
without diſſimuling or flatterie, that we wil
not ſerue thy Gods, nor worſhip thy goldē Image.
               Then was Nabuchodonozor full of indignation,Verſ. 19.
ſo that the countenance, &c.
               Here let vs conſider what ſtormes of affliction
the true profeſſours of the ſyncere worſhip of God
doe ſuſtaine,3. Reg. 22. b. 8. 3. Reg. 18. b. 10 3. Reg. 19. d. 2. at the handes of cruell perſecutors.
               Firſt they fal into the high indignation of Princes
with whom they were before in great eſtimation.
Secondly, when they come to puniſhment, they
are more cruelly vſed then any other offenders.
               There were in the kingdome of Babilon, theeues,
robbers, adulterers, murtherers, extorcioners,
drunkardes, and other like, and yet we read of verie
ſlacke puniſhment that they had. But the ſeruants
of God, which neuer offended the king in any
worldly Iuſtice, but had bene his faythfull and
profitable officers, onely becauſe they will not offend
the liuing god, and worſhip a golden Image,
haue the kings rage ſo greatly agaynſt them, that
the fornace is cōmaunded to be made ſeuen times
Hoter then it was woont to be for any other, that

they ſhould be bounde hand and foote and caſt into
it, and that with ſo great haſt and furie, that they
might not tarie to put of their garments, but to be
caſt in clothes and all, &c.
               The flame of the fire deſtroied them that
put in Sidrach,Verſ. 22. &c. Miſach, and, &c.
               Hitherto God might ſeeme to neglect the defence
of his ſeruants, and to ſuffer Tyrannes and
Tormentours to vſe all extremitie towarde them.
But when mans helpe is paſt, then God ſheweth
his power, and deliuereth his faythfull with the
dread
                     ••
                  ll puniſhment of the wicked. The ſame
God that made the fire hurtleſſe to his ſeruants in
the middeſt of the fornace, cauſeth it with ſuch violence
to burſt out at the mouth of the ſame, that it
deſtroyed the greedie tormentours, which to ſatiſfie
the Princes furious tyrannie, ſhewed themſelues
verie readie to the execution thereof. Wherby
we may learne that God can, and doth vſe his elementes
to the defence of his faythfull, and to the
puniſhment of his enemies.Exod. 14. c. 22 Ioſua. 10. c. 13. 4. Reg. 20. c. 11 Eſay. 38. b. 8 The running ſtreame
ſhall ſtay and deuide it ſelfe, the Sunne in the firmament
ſhall ſtande in his courſe and not go forward,
Fire ſhall waxe colde and temperate, Wilde
beaſtes ſhall become tame and gentle, and all naturall
powers ſhall be cleane altered, rather then
good men ſhall lacke defence, or wicked perſonnes
puniſhment, when God ſhall ſee it to make to his
glorie. God here ſendeth downe his Angell to
comfort his ſeruants, to abaſh his enimies, and to

make his glorious name and power to be knowne
in the worlde, and confeſſed euen by the mouthes
of them that before with all endeuour ſought to
oppreſſe the ſame. The King is aſtonied, his Nobles
flocke together to beholde the thing, All the
multitude woonder to ſee the Merueylous woorke
of God.
               Then ſpake Nabuchodonozor and ſaid,Verſ. 28. 29.
bleſsed be the Lord God of Sidrach, &c.
               Nowe followeth the conuerſion of Nabuchodonozor
and his repentance, making open confeſſion
of the glorie of GOD, and as a good conuert
ſhewing the fruites of repentaunce. He prayſeth
God, who had ſo merueylouſly deliuered them,
that put their truſt in him. He extolleth Sidrach,
Miſach, and Abednego, that did with ſuch conſtancie
withſtand his Authoritie, and rather haſarde their
liues, then they would commit Idolatrie. And becauſe
the office of a Prince is not onely himſelfe to
acknowledge the true worſhip of God, but alſo to
ſet the ſame forth * to the ſubiects,4. Reg. 23. a. 3. Ioſua. 24. f. 25 4. Reg. 17. e 27 Nehe. 8. a. 3. 9. and to the vttermoſt
of his power to ſuppreſſe the contrarieꝭ: He
publiſheth a decree, That whoſoeuer did worſhip any
other then the lining God, which now had deliuered
Sidrach, Miſach, and Abednego, ſhould be drawne
in peeces. This dreadfull and terrible puniſhment
here appoynted to driue men to the true worſhip
of God may be an anſwere to them, that call it crueltie,
when Superſticious perſons are by ſtraite
lawes Brideled, and ſay that fayth cannot be forced,

but that it may ſeeme ſore dealing to conſtrain
a man to that which is agaynſt his cōſcience. They,
ſayth Nabuchodonozor, that ſpeake anye blaſphemie
agaynſt God, ſhall be drawne in peeces, and theyr
houſes ſhall be made as a Iakes. If Nabuchodonozor,
an Heathen prince by this one miracle was ſo
mooued, as in his whole domination he would not
ſuffer one without puniſhment to blaſpheme the
name of God: What ſhall we think of them, which
profeſſing themſelues to be Chriſtians, haue hard
the voyce of the Goſpell, theſe many yeares ſounding
throughout all Chriſtendome, and haue ſeene
great & ſtraunge workes of God to the aduauncement
of the ſame, and yet remain both themſelues
obſtinate, and cauſe their ſubiects for the profeſſion
of Gods Truth cruelly to be Murdered?
            
         
         
            The 19. Sunday after Trinitie,
at Euening prayer.
            Daniel. 6.
            
               
                   IT pleaſed Darius to ſet ouer his kingdome a hundred
and twentie gouernours, which ſhould be ouer
the whole kingdome. 2 Aboue theſe he ſet thrée
princes, of whom Daniel was one, that the gouernours
might giue accountes vnto them, and the king ſhould
haue no damage. 3 Nowe this Daniel was preferred aboue
the princes and gouernours, for the ſpirite (of God)
was plenteous in him: ſo that the king was minded to ſet
him ouer the whole realme. 4 Wherefore the rulers and
gouernours ſought an occaſion agaynſt Daniel concerning

the kingdome, but they could finde none occaſion nor fault:
for he was ſo faythfull, that there was no blame nor fault
founde in him. 5 Then ſayde theſe men, We ſhall finde
none occaſion againſt this Daniel, except we finde it againſt
him concerning the lawe of his God.
               6 Vpon this went the princes and lordes together vnto
the king, and ſayd thus vnto him, king Darius, liue for euer.
               7 All the rulers of thy kingdome, the officers and gouernours,
the councellours and dukes, haue conſulted together
to make a decrée for the king, and to eſtabliſh a ſtatute, That
who ſo deſireth any petition eyther of any God or man within
theſe thirtie dayes, except of thée O king, he ſhall be caſt into
the Lions denne. 8 Nowe O king confirme the decrée,
and ſeale the writing, that it be no chaunged, according to
the lawe of the Medes and Perſians which altereth not.
               9 Wherefore king Darius ſealed the writing and decrée.
               10 Nowe when Daniel vnderſtood that he had ſealed the
writing, he went into his houſe, and the windowes of his
chamber towarde Hieruſalem ſtoode open, there knéeled he
downe vpon his knées thrée times a day, he made his petition,
and prayſed his God, as he did afore time.
               11 Then theſe men aſſembled, and found Daniel making
his petition, and praying vnto his God.
               12 So they came to the king, and ſpake before him concerning
his commaundement, ſaying: O king, haſt thou not
ſealed the decrée, that within thirtie dayes who ſo requireth
his petition of any God or man, but only of thy ſelfe O king,
he ſhall be caſt into the denne of Lions? The king anſwered
and ſayde, yea it is true according to the lawe of the Medes
and Perſes that altereth not. 13 Then anſwered they, and
ſayde vnto the king, This Daniel which is of the children of
the captiuitie of Iuda, O king, regardeth neither thée, nor thy
decrée that thou haſt ſealed: but maketh his petition thrée
tymes a day 14 When the king hearde theſe wordes, he

was ſore diſpleaſed with himſelfe, and ſet his heart on Daniel
to deliuer him, and he laboured till the Sunne went
downe to deliuer him. 15 Then theſe men aſſembled vnto
the king, and ſayde vnto him, Knowe this O king that the
lawe of the Medes and Perſes (is) that the commaundement
and ſtatute which the king maketh may not be altered.
               16 Then the king commaunded, and they brought Daniell,
and they caſt him into the Lions denne. Now the king
ſpake vnto Daniell, and ſayde, Thy God whom thou alway
ſerueſt, euen he wil deliuer thée. 17 And there was brought
a ſtone, and layde vpon the mouth of the denne, this the king
ſealed with his owne ring, and with the ſignet of his princes,
that the purpoſe concerning Daniel ſhould not be chaunged.
               18 So the king went into his palace, and remayned faſting,
neither was there any inſtruments of muſick brought
in before him, and his ſléepe went from him.
               19 But betimes in the morning at the breake of the day, the
king aroſe, and went in all haſte vnto the denne of the Lyons.
20 Nowe as he came nie vnto the denne, he cryed
with a piteous voyce vnto Daniel, yea the king ſpake and
ſayde vnto Daniel, O Daniel, thou ſeruaunt of the lyuing
God, is not thy God whome thou ſerueſt alway hable to deliuer
thée from the Lyons? 21 Then Daniel ſayde vnto
the king, O king liue for euer. 22 My God hath ſent his
angel,Dan. 3. f. 28. Heb. 11. f. 34. which hath ſhut the Lions mouths, ſo that they might
not hurt me, for mine vngiltineſſe is founde out before him:
and as for thée O King, I neuer offended thée.
               23 Then was the king excéeding glad for him, and commaunded
to take Daniel out of the denne: ſo Daniel was
brought out of the denne, and no maner of hurt was founde
vpon him, for he put his truſt in his God.
               24 And as for thoſe men which had accuſed Daniel,Dan. 14. g. 41. the
king commaunded to bring them, and to caſt them into the
Lions denne, them, their children, and their wiues: ſo the

Lions had the maſtrie of them, and brake all their bones aſunder
or euer they came at the ground of the denne.
               25 After this wrote king Darius vnto all people,Dan. 14. f. 42 nations,
and tongues that dwelt in all landes. Peace be multiplied
vnto you. 26 My commaundement is in all my dominion
and kingdome, that men feare and ſtande in awe of
Daniels God: for he is the lyuing God which abideth euer,
his kingdome ſhall not fayle, and his power is euerlaſting.
               27 It is he that deliuereth and ſaueth,Dan. 14. f. 45. he doth wonders
and meruaylous workes in heauen and in earth, he hath preſerued
Daniel from the power of the Lyons.
               28 So this Daniel proſpered in the raigne of Darius,
and in the raigne of Cyrus of Perſia.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the .vj.
Chapter of Daniel.
               It pleaſed Darius to ſette ouer his Kingdome
an hundred and twentie,Verſ. 1. 2. 3. &c.
               
                  WE ſee it daylie to fall out in
experience to truly, that the excellent
vertue of good and godlye perſons,
hath alwaye, * to their great trouble
and daunger, the ſpite and enuie of
* ambicious worldlings following it:Heſter. 3. b. 5. And eſpecially
in the ſtate of gouernment, and in the Courts
of kings and Princes. For thyther often reſorteth
ſuch perſons as haue not the true feare of God
before their eyes, and therefore delight not in ſinceritie
and faythfull dealing, but in the pompe and

glorie of the worlde: and to mainteine the ſame
by flatterie and diſſimulation ſeeke to worke their
owne benefite and aduauncement. If they ſee any
eyther in reſpect of his vertue, or any other conſideration
to creepe betweene them and their ambicious
purpoſes, or by anye meane to hinder the
ſame: him they ſeeke to ſupplante, and by all cunning
practiſes to bring him to Diſcredite, fall and
ruyne. Example hereof Daniel in this place declareth
in his owne perſon, and teacheth all good men
to conſider,Num. 16. a. 3. what be the fruits and works of cankred
Enuie.
               This Darius that is here ſpoken of, was the
ſonne of Aſtiages, and vncle vnto Cyrus, to whome
alſo he gaue his daughter in mariage, and in Zenophon
is called Cyaxares, he raigned not paſſing
one yeare after the conquering of Babilon: and
maye ſeeme to haue bene a Wiſe and Politique
Prince. By the aduice of Daniel, as it maye be
thought, he had ſet a verie good order of gouernment
in his kingdome. He deuided his whole dominion
into .3. partes or Prouinces, and in eche
of them had ſet fortie Iudges or Gouernours, ſo
that the whole number came to ſixe ſcore. And ouer
them had appointed three Lieuetenants noble
and wiſe men, which might haue a diligent & carefull
eye into their doings, and take a iuſte reckening
or accompt of them for all things. One of
theſe three was the Prophet Daniel, whome he
* brought with him out of Babilon at his returne
into Medea.
                  Dan. 1. b. 6. In him he ſawe ſo great Wiſedome,

ſinceritie, faythfulneſſe, and diligence aboue all the
other, that he minded to ſet him ouer the whole
Realme. And this was the cauſe of that canckred
roote of enuie, that grewe in the hartes of the other
Princes and Nobles againſt him.
               Wherefore the Rulers and Gouernours
ſought an occaſion againſt Daniel,Verſ. 4. 5. &c.
               The kingdome of the Medes,
                  Dan. 3. g. 96. was in great towardneſſe
of good gouernement, but Satan the
common diſturber of mans life could not abide it:
knowing, that by the continuance therof his kingdome
would be diminiſhed, and Gods glorie and
truth encreaſed. Therefore, he pricked forwarde
his Miniſters and Inſtruments to worke trouble
to Daniel the chiefe cauſe therof, and by al meanes
that might be, to bring him to confuſion. And here
I praye you conſider the nature of * enuie.Pſal. 9. b. 10. Prou. 24. b. 15 They
looke into his doings with al diligence, whether he
did anye thing ambitiouſly towarde the atteining
of the kingdome, or at the leaſt wiſe, that might
be ſo interpreted. They conſider whether he dealt
vntruely in his accomptes of the kings treaſure,
or otherwiſe ſlackly and negligently in any thing.
But the innocencie and faithful diligence of Daniel
in all pointes was ſuch, as his verie enimies ſaide
of him, That they ſhould neuer finde matter agaynſt
hym, vnleſſe they did entrappe him by the lawe and
worſhip of his God, from which they were well aſſured
he would not ſwarue. The conſideration of
this mans ſinceritie, being ſo Curiouſly ſcanned

euen by themſelues, ſhould haue moued them to
haue imbraced and loued him. But malice and enuie
is alwaye ſo blinde that it doth neuer conſider
any good gift or well doing in a man, but onely to
peruert it to an euill purpoſe.
               Vpon this went the Princes and Lordes
together vnto the king and ſayde,Verſ. 6. &c. &c.
               Now followeth the wicked practiſe of the enimies
of Daniel, turning that, by ſiniſter meanes,
vnto his daunger, that of all things was worthy
greateſt praiſe in him, that is, his faithfull conſtancy
in the true worſhip of God. From which neither
the loue of worldly honour, nor the authoritie of
the Prince, nor the daunger of his life could moue
him.Heſter. 3. c. 8. Malicious enuie eſpyeth all oportunities to
worke miſchiefe. The king, although wiſe & well
enclyned, yet was he of nature glorious, and deſirous
to haue his honoure aduaunced, as it maye
appeare in Xenophon. This occaſion doe they take,
and pretende, that nowe at the beginning of his
raigne, this their deuiſe would ſtrike a greater admiration
and Reuerence of his perſon, into the
mindes of his Subiects, and cauſe them thereby
to be more readie to obey him, and the more afraid
to diſpleaſe him. They omit not the authoritie of al
their conſents: whereby they might ſeeme euen to
force the Prince to a thing ſo profitable as they
pretended this to be. By which allurements, the
glorious Prince was eaſilie wonne to conſent: not
knowing the ende of their malicious meaning.

And yet were they not content with this, but they
would haue it ſo confirmed, that the King might
not after, vpon repentance, reuoke the lawe. And
therefore doe they burden him with the authoritie
of the Medean lawes, which are neuer altered, they
knewe how he liked Daniel, & therfore they would
preuent it.
               Now when Daniel vnderſtood,Verſ. 10. 11. that he
had ſealed the wryting he went, &c.
               In Daniel all men that feare God haue an example
howe to behaue themſelues in like diſtreſſe
and daunger, that is, firſt with earneſt and often
prayer to call vpon God for the aſſiſtance of hys
helpe and grace. And then conſtantly, and without
all cloking or diſſimuling of worldly Policie, to
ſtand to the confeſſion of Gods true and holy worſhip.
Some woulde by friendſhip or perſwaſion,
haue wrought with the king to alter the lawe,
which he well vnderſtoode was made as a trappe
only to take him in and bring him to danger. Or if
that might not be, they would haue thought thus
with themſelues, what? I may pray to God in ſpirite
and hart, why ſhould I neede anye externall
bowing of my bodye or kneeling, why ſhoulde I
raſhly caſt my ſelfe in daunger? and hurt my ſelfe
and all my Countriemen that are nowe in Captiuitie?
One Moneth ſpace may quickly be paſſed
ouer, and then I may freely ſerue my God againe.
But Daniel would take none of theſe deuiſes, but
ſhew himſelfe ſimplie and plainely what he was,

not for any feare diſſimuling or altering any of his
cuſtomable maner in praying to God. Where it is
ſaide, that he prayed looking towarde Hieruſalem,
that maner he and all the Iewes vſed by the Authoritie
of Salomon in his prayer vnto God.3. Reg. 8. e. 48. 3. Reg. 8
If thy people being ledde captiue into a ſtraunge land
ſhall pray vnto thee, looking towarde the citie that
thou haſt choſen, and toward thy temple, that I haue
buylded to thy name, thou ſhalt heare them, &c. The
enemies of Daniel were readie watching for their
purpoſe, and taking him in the deede doing, Preſently
went vnto the king with great complaint,
ſaying,Verſ. 12. 13. 
                  O king, haſt thou not ſealed the Decree that
wythin thirtie dayes who ſo requireth, &c. Marke
you the craft of theſe malicious men, and in them
the * nature and maner of all the enimies of Gods
people.Prou. 29. b. 10. Pſal. 36. d. 34. Firſt they conſpire & conſent togither, and
diſagree not in their wicked purpoſe, that their cō
                  ſent,
being Noble men, might haue authority with
the Prince. Then they wreaſt from the king, before
he vnderſtoode their meaning, a plaine confeſſion,
that he had ratified the Degree. And laſtly open
vnto him the accuſation of Daniel, and that
with ſo much ſpite as poſſibly coulde be deuiſed.
That he was one of the Captiues of Iuda,
                  Dan. 1. a. 6. that he
did not regarde the king, that vpon ſtubburnneſſe
and contempt, to the perilous example of all his
Subiectes he diſobeyed his Decree, and prayed
vnto his God not once or twiſe, but three times
euery day, and that in more open maner, then euer
he did before, that he might ſhewe to all men that

he made no accompt eyther of the King, or of his
lawe.
               When the king heard theſe wordes,Verſ. 14. 15. hee
was ſore diſpleaſed with him ſelfe, &c.
               Nowe at the length the king perceyueth that
he was ouerreached by the * craft and enuie of his
Nobles,Prou. 12. a. 5. to his great miſlyking and diſpleaſure.
Whereby, it may appeare, there was in him a good
inclination of Iuſtice and equitie, but it was ioyned
with time rouſneſſe, and the want of the true
knowledge of God, and truſt in his prouidence. He
feared, if he ſhould haue ſhewed himſelfe more to
eſteeme a ſtraunger then all the Nobles of his coū
                  trey,
and for his cauſe, contrary to the maner of the
Medes, to reuoke a Lawe that he had made, that
they woulde haue rayſed ſome conſpiracie and rebellion
agaynſt him, to his great trouble, & daunger
of his kingdome. Wherefore at the length, after
the ſtay of one whole dayes ſpace, he yeeldeth,
and contrarie to his owne conſcience, committeth
an innocent and faythfull ſeruant into the handes
of his wicked enimies, and to the clawes of greedie
and hungrie Lions.
               Nowe the king ſpake vnto Daniell and
ſaid,Verſ. 16. &c. thy God whom thou haſt ſerued, &c.
               If Darius did thinke, that the GOD of Daniel
would deliuer him from the iawes of the Lions,
whie did he not perſwade himſelfe, that the ſame
God was hable alſo to ſaue his kingdome to him,

agaynſt the endeuours of all enemies or rebelles,
but that through feare thereof he would yeelde againſt
his conſcience to giue ſentence of cruel death
agaynſt an innocent. Surely, if he had had Daniels
fayth, he woulde rather haue haſarded his
kingdome, then ſo to haue tempted God in the vniuſt
puniſhment of an innocent and hurtleſſe man.
But the reſpect of worldlye Glorie oftentymes
drowneth the fayth of Princes. Yet the prouidence
of God ſo worketh by him, that the miracle that he
woulde ſhewe in the deliueraunce of his ſeruant,
might be euident & without all exception or quarreling.
For Darius calleth for a great ſtone, to be
layde at the mouth of the Denne, and cauſeth the
ſame to be ſealed with his owne ring, and with the
ſignets of his princes, which were the accuſers of
Daniel: that there might not be ſo much as a ſuſpition
of any ſiniſter working, by feeding the lions
with meate or otherwiſe. When the king had this
done, his conſcience could not be quiet, for that he
had haſarded the life of ſo godly a man, but went
home with ſorrow and heauineſſe, forbearing his
meate and ſleepe, & ſhunning all occaſion of myrth
and pleaſantneſſe.
               But betimes in the morning at the breake
of the day the king aroſe,Verſ. 19. 20 &c.
               The ſpeede that Darius made ſo earely in the
morning, declareth the care that he had for the life
of Daniell, and could not ſtay his affection, but with
lamentable wordes calleth vnto him. And Daniel,
                  
although his faithfull ſeruice ſhewed to the prince,
was very vnthankefully rewarded: yet with mildneſſe
of ſpirite he aunſwereth. And neyther vpbraydeth
the king with his vniuſt ſentence, nor inueigheth
with one worde agaynſt his accuſers and
cauſers of all his daunger, but ſayth, My God hath
ſent his Angel and ſtopped the Lions mouthes. He
ſayth not, I am aliue, or I am not deade, but that he
may not ſeeme vnthankefull to the authour of his
deliuerance, My God, ſayth he, hath ſent his Angel,
&c. To the confuſion of his enemies giuing the
glory of his deliuery to God alone, that they might
thereby knowe, that they had not ſtryued agaynſt
him alone, but agaynſt the eternall and euerliuing
God. The king reioyſed, Daniel was taken out of
the denne,Pſal. 90. c. 14. and the * cauſe of his deliuerance is declared:
That he did put his truſt in God.
               
               And as for thoſe men which had accuſed
Daniel,Verſ. 24. the king commaunded, &c.
               The king being now by this miracle Encreaſed
in the knowledge of Gods almightie power and
diuine prouidence: ſharpely puniſheth the malicious
accuſers. Leauing herin a notable example to
all princes ſtraightly to puniſh and correct ſuch, as
by craftie meanes ſeeke the deſtruction of the faithfull
Seruants and Saintes of God.
               After this wrote king Darius vnto all
people,Verſ. 25. 26. nations and tongues that, &c.
               The Good king could not ſatiſfie himſelfe, but

that he muſt alſo giue Straite charge through all
his dominions, that no other ſhould be worſhipped
but the Liuing God. As if he had ſayde: let decrees
and proclamations no more 
                     •
                  inde your conſciences,
whether they come from me or from any other,
if they be contrary to the law of Daniels God.
I my ſelfe haue learned howe farre mans lawes
ſhould take place, and when they are to be abrogated.
* It is farre better to obey God then to obey
man.Act. 5. e. 29. Act. 4. d. 19. I am but mortall, duſt, and aſhes, but
the true God liueth for euer. He can puniſh, and
he can rewarde: He therfore is to be feared. They
that put their truſt in him,Pſal. 33. b. 7. 8 Pſal. 9. b. 9. 10 as Daniel hath done, can
not lacke defence. He liueth and is preſent, when
he ſeemeth to be abſent, and to neglect the care of
his people.Act. 12. b. 11. He deliuereth when helpe and ſuccour
is leſt looked for, and in extremitie of daunger, fayleth
not. Wherefore our commaundement is that
you neyther feare nor worſhip any God but him.
            
         
         
            The .20. Sunday after Trinitie.
at Morning prayer.
            Ioel. 2.
            
               
                   BLowe vp a trumpet in Sion, and ſhowte in my holy
hill,Sopho. 1. c. 14. Amos. 5. c. 18. let all the inhabitants of the earth tremble: for
the day of the Lorde is come, for it is nie at hande.
               2 A darke and glomie day, a clowdie and blacke
day: as the morning is ſpread ouer the mountaynes (ſo is
this) populous and ſtrong people, like it there was none
from the beginning, nor ſhall be hereafter for euermore.
               
                  
3 Before him is a deuouring fire, and behinde him a butning
flame: the lande is as a pleaſant garden before him,
and behinde him a waſt deſert, yea and nothing ſhall eſcape
him. 4 The ſhew of him is as the ſhew of horſes, and lyke
horſemen, ſo ſhall they runne. 5 Lyke the noyſe of charets
vpon the toppes of the mountaynes they ſhall ſkip, like the
noyſe of a flaming fire deuouring the ſtubble, (and) as a
ſtrong people prepared to battayle.
               6 Before his face ſhall the people tremble, the countenaunce
of all folkes ſhall waxe blacke.
               7 They ſhall runne like ſtrong men, and clime the walles 
like men of warre: and euery one ſhall march on in his way,
and they ſhall not linger in their pathes.
               8 No man ſhall thruſt another, but euery one ſhall walke
in his path: and if they ſhall fall on the ſworde, they ſhall not
be wounded. 9 They ſhall runne to and fro in the citie,
they ſhall runne vp and downe vpon the wal, they ſhall clime
into the houſes, they ſhall enter in at the windowes like a
théefe. 10 The earth ſhall quake before him, the heauens
ſhall tremble,Ioel. 3. c. 15. the ſunne and the moone ſhall be darke, and the
ſtarres ſhall withdraw their ſhining.
               11 And the Lorde ſhall giue his voyce before his hoaſt, for
his campe is excéeding great, for he is mightie that executeth
his commaundement:Apoc. 6. a. 17. for the day of the Lorde is great and
verie terrible, and who can abyde it?
               12 But nowe ſayth the Lorde, Turne you vnto me with
all your heartes, with faſting, with wéeping, and with mourning.
13 And rent your heartes and not your garmentes,
and turne you vnto the Lorde your God, for he is gracious
and mercifull, ſlow to anger, and of great goodneſſe, and he
will repent him of the euill. 14. Who knoweth whether
the Lorde will returne and take compaſſion, and will leaue
behinde him a bleſſing (euen) meate offering and drinke offering
vnto the Lorde your God. 15 Blowe vp a trumpet in

Sion, proclame a faſt, cal an aſſembly, ſanctifie ye cōgregatiō.
               16 Gather the people, gather the elders, aſſemble the
children and ſucking babes: let the Bridegrome come forth
of his chamber, and the bride out of hir cloſet.
               17 Let the Prieſtes the Lordes miniſters wéepe betwixt
the porch and the aulter, and let them ſay, Spare thy people
O Lorde, and giue not ouer thine heritage to reproche, that
the heathen ſhould rule ouer them: Wherefore ſhould they
ſay amongſt the heathen, Where is their God?
               18 And (then) the Lorde will be iealous ouer his lande,
and will ſpare his people. 19 Yea the Lorde will anſwere
and ſay to his people, Beholde I will ſende you corne, and
wi
                     •
                  e, and oyle, and will ſatiſfie you therewith, and will not
giue you ouer any more to be a reproch among the heathen.
               
                   20 And I will remoue farre of from you the northen
(armie) and I will driue him into a lan̄de barren and deſolate,
with his face towards the eaſt ſea, and his hinder parts
towardes the vttermoſt ſea: and his ſtinch ſhall ariſe, and
his corruption ſhall aſcend, becauſe he hath exalted himſelfe
to doe this. 21 Feare not O thou lande, be glad and reioyce:
for the Lorde will doe great things.
               22 Be not afraide ye beaſtes of the fielde, for the fruitfull
places of the deſert are gréene: for the trée beares hir
fruite, the figge trée and the vine yéelde their ſtrength.
               23 Be glad then ye children of Sion, and reioyce in the
Lord your God: for he hath giuen you moderate raine, and
he will ſende downe for you, the raine (euen) the firſt raine
and the latter raine, and in the firſt (moneth.)
               24 And the barnes ſhall be filled with corne, and the
preſſes ſhall ouerflowe with wine and oyle.
               25 And I will reſtore to you the yeres which the graſhopper,
the canker worme, the locuſte, and the caterpiller haue
deuoured, my great armie which I ſent amongſt you.
               26 And you ſhall eate in plentie and be ſatiſfied, and ſhall

prayſe the name of the Lorde your God, which hath dealt
wonderouſly with you, and my people ſhall not be aſhamed
any more. 27 And you ſhall know that I am in the middle
of Iſrael, and (that) I am the Lord your God, and none
but I: and my people ſhall neuer be aſhamed.
               28 And it ſhall come to paſſe after this: I will powre out
my ſpirite vpon all fleſhe, and your ſonnes and your daughters
ſhall prophecie, your olde men ſhall dreame dreames,
your yong men ſhall ſée viſions.
               29 Alſo in thoſe dayes vpon the ſeruantes and vpon the
handmaydens will I powre out my ſpirite.
               30 And I will ſhewe wonders in heauen and in earth,
bloud, and fyre, and pillers of ſmoke.
               31 The ſunne ſhall be turned into darkeneſſe, and the
Moone into bloud, before that great and terrible day of the
Lord come. 32 But whoſoeuer ſhall call on the name of the
Lord ſhall be ſaued: for there ſhall be deliuerance in mount
Sion and in Hieruſalem, as the Lorde hath promiſed, and
(alſo) in the remnant whome the Lorde ſhall call.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the ſeconde
Chapter of Ioel.
               Blowe vp a trumpet in Sion,Verſ. 1. and ſhowte
in my holy hill, let all the inhabitāts, &c.
               THe Prophet Ioel liued in the
time of Eſay, and taught in Iuda, in
the reigne of Ezechias, not long before
the inuaſion of the Aſsirians,
                  4. Reg. 18. c. 13 vnder
Sinnacherib. For although that
good king to ye vttermoſt of his power had reſtored

the true worſhip of God: yet a great number receyued
it vnthankefully, and both enclined in their
heartes againe to Superſtition, and continued in
moſt Deteſtable and ſinfull liuing.I
                        •
                     . re. 4. d. 18. 3. Reg. 8. e. 46. Deut. 4. d. 26. * Which was
the cauſe that God did ſend the Aſsirians grieuouſly
to plague them. But of his woonted mercies, before
that terrible time of puniſhment ſhould come,
he * ſent his Prophetes to foretell them of it,Iere. 25. a. 4. and
to call them to repentance. Among theſe was Ioel
who nowe vttereth theſe wordes, and purpoſing
to call them to repentance, layeth before them the
terrible puniſhment that GOD will bring vpon
them, if they turned not vnto him. His beginning
is tragicall, Blowe vp a trumpet, ſayth he, &c. Becauſe
their Plague ſhoulde be by inuaſion of euimies
and crueltie of warre, he alludeth to warrefare,
and willeth the Scowtes and watchmen, that
is the Prophetes and teachers to ſound the trumpet
of Gods holy worde, and giue men warning to
prepare themſelues to battaile, that they were not
taken with the plague of god ere they were ware.
This he willeth them to doe in Sion, and in His holy
hill, His choſen Citie of Hieruſalem, that they
might not thinke any holineſſe of place ſhould help
them. Yea and he ſpeaketh to all the inhabitans of
the lande of Iuda, and biddeth them to Tremble and
feare, for that the Lord did not minde to dally with
them, or any longer to put of the time. For ſayth
he, The day of the Lord is come, and is nigh at hande,
and you muſt repent with * ſpeede,Eccle. 5. b. 8. if you will eſcape
it. By The day of the Lorde, he meaneth the time

appointed to Plague them for their vnthankfulneſſe
and contempt of Gods worde, and the calling
of his Prophetes.
               A darke and glomie daye,Verſ. 2. a clowdie and
blacke day: as the morning is ſpred, &c.
               By Glomie, Clowdie, and Blacke, he ſignifyeth
the heauie and ſorowfull time that ſhould be ſo lamentablie
ouercaſt with grieuous afflictions and
calamities, that men ſhoulde not be hable to tell
what to doe, or howe to rid themſelues from them.
Darkeneſſe commonly in ſcripture noteth trouble
and heauineſſe, Light, proſperitie and felicitie. As
the ſpring of the day and morning light ſodainlye
ſpreadeth it ſelfe ouer the mountaynes and cannot
by any meanes be ſtayed: So ſhall this mightye
and ſtrong people of the Aſsirians ſodainely ſpread
themſelues,Iere. 4. d. 13. and ouerwhelme euen the toppes of
thoſe mountaines, that you thinke harde to be paſſed,
and that in ſuch ſort as they cannot be reſiſted.
For ſince the beginning was there neuer Empire
eyther of ſo great force, or of ſo long continuance
of their dominion as this hath beene and is.Verſ. 3. Therfore
they ſhall be to you and to your Countrey as
a raging and conſuming fire. The Land that was
before their comming as a pleaſant Garden or paradiſe,
after they be gone it ſhall be left lamentablie
ſpoyled,Verſ. 4. waſted, and deſolate. Yea they ſhall
come with ſuch fierceneſſe, that with great ſpeede
they ſhall runne ouer the mountaynes and highe
places as it were Horſemen, or chariots in a plaine

field. Your men of warre, Capiteynes and Souldiours,Verſ. 5.
in whom you may ſeeme to put ſome truſt,
at the report of their comming ſhall tremble and
waxe pale and wanne for exceeding great feare.
They ſhal runne againſt you as mightie Gyants,
and aſſaulting the walles of your ſtrong and fenced
Cities: they ſhall doe it not onelye with ſuche
ſtrength, but alſo with actiuitie, nimbleneſſe, and
good order, that one ſhall not be a let or impedimēt
to the other, but euery one ſhall kepe his place and
araye. And when they runne with deſperate courage
euen amonge your ſwordes and weapons,
they will doe it in ſuch maner, that you ſhall not be
hable to hurt them.Verſ. 9. And furthermore, though your
Cities be ſtrongly walled, and fenced with ſo great
munition as they maye ſeeme vnpregnable, they
wil with ſuch facilitie both enter and go to and fro,
as if the matter were to be done in ye plaine fielde,
where no reſiſtance is.Verſ. 10. Finally, their rage & fierceneſſe
ſhalbe ſo dreadfull, that the earth ſhal quake,
the heauens ſhall tremble, the Sunne & Moone
ſhall be darke, the Starres ſhall withdrawe their
light, & all the creatures of God ſhall be abaſhed to
ſee yt God will ſo grieuouſly plage his people. And
therfore, they, as it were, hauing ſenſe of the ſame
before hand, ſhal giue ſtraunge ſignes and ſightes
vnto men, to put them in minde to repent & turne
vnto God, that he may withdrawe this his heauie
hande from them.Verſ. 11. For God it is that worketh it,
and by his voice calleth the Aſsirians, & they do nothing
but execute his commaundement, in puniſhing

your waywarde and ſtubburne vnthankfulneſſe
and contempt of his worde.
               In all this we ſee the Prophete hath done nothing,
but ſignify vnto the Iewes, that no worldly
thing ſhould be hable to ſtay from them, the grieuous
puniſhmentes of God by the Aſsirians. Neyther
the plentifulneſſe of the earth, nor the great
diſtance of the places, nor the difficultie of the paſſages
ouer hilles and mountaynes, neyther the
number of their Souldiours, nor the ſtrength of
their Cities, to the ende, that they ſeeing all worldly
helpe to fayle them, maye the more readily repent
and flie vnto God for his mercie.
               But nowe ſayth the Lord,Verſ. 12. turne you vnto
me with all your hearts with fasting, &c.
               Although the day of Gods wrath be nighe at
hande, yet the Prophete ſignifieth, that there is
time to repent,Ezec. 33. c. 12. becauſe * no true repentance from
the heart is euer to late. And therefore vnder the
perſon of God exhorteth them therevnto, and telleth
them what they ſhall doe, Turne ſayth he: We
muſt in repentance firſt Turne frō wickedneſſe of
minde and diſſolute life, from Idolatrie, Superſtition
and corruption of Gods true worſhip. And
we muſt Turne vnto God, and ſubmit our ſelues to
his merrie, and to be directed by his holy worde.
We are not willed to Turne to Saintes,Eſay. 45. d. 22 to Patriarkes,
to Prophetes, to Fathers, to Apoſtles, or
to any creature, be he neuer ſo holy. No nor yet to
our owue inuentions and deuiſes of holyneſſe,

thereby thinking to raunſome our ſinnes. But
we muſt Turne to the euerliuing God, who is both
willing as a father, and hable as a mightie Lorde
to helpe vs. And this muſt we doe vnfaynedly,
VVith all our heartes, Renting our mindes wyth
ſorow, and not our garments with hypocriſſie and
outwarde ſhewe of griefe and repentance, when
we haue no true ſenſe of Gods wrath inwardly in
our heartes. If renting of Garmentes, and ſuch
other ſignes be vſed as tokens and witneſſes to
the worlde, that we are in deede and vnfeynedly
touched with exceeding ſorow of hart (as Ioſias did
when he heard the threatnings of God read in the
booke of his law:4. Reg. 22. b. 11 2. Par. 34. d. 19) Then are they acceptable vnto
God, and he doth not prohibite them. For to that
ende he willeth them here, To faſt, To lament, To
weepe, thereby to ſhewe the inwarde and repentant
ſorowe of their heartes. That they may in
this maner repent, he declareth by the nature and
properties of GOD, that there is aſſured hope of
mercie in God.Eſay. 30. d. 18. For, ſayth he, God is Gracious, and
of nature more prone to pleaſure then to puniſhe.
He is Mercifull,
                  Pſal. 102. c. 13. as a father mooued with compaſſion
euen vpon the deſerued miſeries of his children.2. Eſd. 9. d. 17
He is of Long ſuffering, and loth to be drawne
to wrath and puniſhmēt. He is of exceeding Bountie
and goodneſſe,
                  Rom. 10. c. 12. 1. Cor. 1. a. 5. & as a plentifull ſpringing fountaine
deſireth ſtill to poure out vpon vs the riches
of his benefites and gracious gifts.Iere. 26. d. 13. Laſtly, He will
repent him of the euill, that is, he will alter his decree,
and reuoke his ſentence of diſpleaſure. For

all the ſentences of puniſhment that god pronounceth
vpon his people are euer ioyned with condition
of repentance, which if they ſhew, he may and
doth without note of Mutabilitie or inconſtancie
chaunge his purpoſe. And therefore it is ſayde
here: He will returne, and leaue behinde him a bleſſing
of meate offering, &c. Whereby he meaneth,
that where they were before oppreſſed with ſuche
ſcarcitie, that they had not beaſtes wherwith to do
ſacrifice to God, nowe he woulde bleſſe them with
Plentie, &c.
               Blowe vp a trumpet in Sion,Verſ. 15. &c. proclaime a
fast, call an aſsemblie, ſanctifie, &c.
               As before the Prophet exhorted them to priuate
repentance and ſorrow of hart: ſo now he willeth
them to declare the ſame by publique and open decree,Ionas. 3 c. 7.
that in a cōmon daunger all generally might
declare their repentant hartes and call vnto God.
In this he ſheweth what the duetie of Rulers and
Gouernours is,Iudith. 6. c. 20 Heſter. 4. d. 16 when there are great tokens of
the wrath of God to hang ouer their Countries
and common weales. The maner of this publique
repentance is here at large ſet forth, and a prayer
deuiſed to the ſame purpoſe. Vnto this muſt all
ſortes of men be aſſembled, olde men, children,
babes, yea, the newe maried man and his bryde
out of the chamber of his pleaſure. But eſpecially
Prieſtes and the miniſters of the Lorde muſt
ſhewe themſelues readie in this and by earneſt
prayer and weeping be as Mediatours betweene

God and his people.
               And the Lord will be ielous ouer his land,Verſ. 18.
and will ſpare his people, &c.
               The Prophet nowe comforteth the people, and
doth aſſure them, what benefite they ſhall haue by
their Repentance, if they turne vnto God. As the
huſbande cannot abyde to ſee his wyfe cruelly vſed
of any other, ſo will the Lorde be ielous ouer the
lande of the Iewes his choſen people.Verſ. 19. Where they
were pinched with Famine and hunger through
ſpoyle of the lande and barrenneſſe, he will nowe
ſende them, Corne, Wine, Oyle, and plentie of all
things neceſſarie for their ſuſtenance.Verſ. 20. &c. He will remoue
from them the power and armie of the Aſſyrians,
that came Northward againſt them, and will
ſo ſcatter them and put them to flight by his* Angell
from heauen,4. Reg. 19. g. 33 Eſay. 37, g. 36. that they ſhall runne Eaſtward
and Weſtwarde, not knowing which waye beſt to
ſaue themſelues,Tob. 1. d. 21. 2. Par. 32, d. 17 yea the prowde and * blaſphemous
ſpeeche of the Capitaine Sinnacherib wherin
he extolled his power againſt the lyuing God of
heauen, ſhal aſcend as a ſtench or lothſome ſauour
to prouoke his diſpleaſure againſt them. Therfore
Be glad ſayth the Prophet, Reioyce, Feare not, the
Lorde will worke great things for you. The beaſtes
of the fielde ſhall proſper, the ground ſhall be fruitfull,
the barnes ſhall be filled, the Vine preſſes
ſhall runne ouer. The Lorde will ſende you ſeaſonable
weathering, the firſt rayne in the ſpring to
make the Corne growe, and the latter raine towarde

the harueſt to fill the eare: yea, he ſhall doe
all things for you ſo fauourably, that you ſhal perceiue
him to be as it were preſent and dwelling in
the middle of you.
               And it ſhall come to paſſe after this,Verſ. 28. I
will poure out my ſpirite vpon all. &c.
               Vpon the occaſion of the declaring of this
comfortable and bountifull promiſe of the fauour
of God towarde his people after their repentance:
Ioel breaketh out to ſpeake of the ſpirituall kingdome
of Chriſt,Iere. 24. c. 7 Ezec. 11. d. 19. 20. & of the *benefits that men ſhould
haue, and the ſtate of lyfe that ſhoulde be vnder
him. This is the ordinarie maner of all the Prophets
to mixe the mention of Chriſt with their other
doctrine of things pertayning to their preſent
ſtate. Hereby ſignifying, that all the benefites and
bleſſings, eyther worldly or ſpirituall, that God
giueth to his people, are promiſed and perfourmed
onely in reſpect of the Sauiour of the worlde, and
that promiſed ſeede Chriſt Ieſu that was to come.
               The Prophet therefore in this place putting the
people of God in minde of the ſpirituall bleſſings
of Meſsias, firſt beginneth with the ſending of the
holy ghoſt, which of all other was the greateſt, and
in deede the ſumme of all the reſidue.Coloſ. 2. a. 2. 3 Io. 3 a. 5. Io. 6. g. 63. Io. 16. b. 13. Rom. 8. e. 26. 2. Pet. 1. d. 21. 1. Cor. 12. a. 10 For albeit
the whole riches, and * treaſures of Gods graces
and goodneſſe are giuen out by Chriſt Ieſu: yet
can we not enioy the ſame * but by the Holy ghoſt.
The worke and effect of whome is * to open vnto
men the will of God, eyther by * prophecie and

foretelling of things to come, by word, by viſions,
by dreames, or by interpretation and opening of
the* miſteries of religiō out of the holy ſcriptures,Io. 14. d. 26. Act 16. c. 14. Ezec. 36. f. 27 Gal. 5. d. 22.
and by * inclyning the harts and willes of the faithful
to the obſeruation of the lawe and commaundementes
of God. This is it that God ſpeaketh of
in Ieremie.
                  Iere. 31. f. 33. 
                  cap. 31. I will plant my lawe in the inward
partes of them, and write it in their hartes, and from
thenceforth ſhall no man teache his neighbour or hys
brother, ſaying, know you the Lorde, but they ſhall
all knowe me from the lovveſt to the higheſt, &c.
               
               And I will ſhewe wonders in heauen and
in earth,Verſ. 30. 31. bloud and fyre and pillers, &c.
               Leaſt, that after the comming of Chriſt into the
worlde, the faythfull ſhould perſwade themſelues,
that all trouble were paſte, and that they ſhoulde
liue in reſt and quietneſſe (as the Phariſeys and
other Iewes did:) the Prophet Ioel here declareth
what a troublous and daungerous State there
ſhoulde bee towarde the ende of the worlde, and
what wonderful * ſignes and ſtraunge ſights God
woulde worke in all the elementes before the laſt
comming of Chriſt to iudgement.Act. 2. c. 19. It maye ſeeme
that Chriſt himſelfe had reſpect to this place when
he prophecied of the ſame matter Math.
                  Math. 24. c. 29 Luc. 21. e. 25. 24. and
Luc. 21. This the Prophete doth not onely to forewarne
the fiathfull people of God, and to ſhake
from them ſecuritie: but alſo to ſtrike a feare in the
heartes of the enimies of Gods people, and of his
Goſpell, that they doe not contemne him, who will

ſend ſo terrible ſignes before his comming. Theſe
things we haue ſeene in theſe latter dayes meruelouſly
fulfilled in all the elements. In the Sunne
and Moone often Eclipſes. In the vpper parte of
the aire blaſing Starres, Swoordes, Pillars of
fire, fire Drakes flying in the Aire, and other like
impreſſions. In the Earth, Earthquakes, and other
ſtraunge alterations. In the Water, many
and exceding great floudes, riſings and ſwellings
to the great griefe and annoyance of Mankinde.
And as there hath bene in all times ſome of thoſe
ſignes: ſo in no age ſo manye as hath bene within
theſe fewe yeares. Whereby we muſt needes gather
that we are fallen into thoſe latter, troubleſome,
and perilous dayes, thathere the Prophete
ſpeaketh of.
               But whoſoeuer ſhall call vpon the name
of the Lorde ſhall be ſaued:Verſ. 32. for. &c.
               The whole ſumme of our* ſaluation conſiſteth
in *calling vpon the name of the Lord,Rom. 10. e. 13. Eccl. 2. b. 12. Act. 2. c. 21. Pſal. 33. d. 22. Iere. 17. a. 7. Iudas. 1. d. 21. and in putting
our* confidence and truſt in his mercy and deliueraunce
wrought for vs by the Sauiour of the
worlde Chriſt Ieſu. Who ſuffred and dyed for vs &
by his reſurrection made perfect the miſterie of
our Redemption At Mount Sion, and in Hieruſalem,
according to the vnfallible Promiſes of Almightie
God.
            
         
         
            
            The. 20. Sunday after Trinitie,
at Euening prayer.
            Micheas. 6.
            
               
                   HEarken ye nowe what the Lorde ſayth, Aryſe thou,
and contende with the mountaynes, and let the hilles
heare thy voyce. 2 Heare O ye mountaynes the
Lordes quarrell, and ye mightie foundations of the
earth: for the Lorde hath a quarrell agaynſt his people, and
will pleade with Iſraell. 3 O my people what haue I done
vnto thée? or wherein haue I grieued thée? giue me anſwere.
               4 I haue brought thée out of the lande of Egypt, and deliuered
thée out of the houſe of bondage, and I made Moiſes,
Aaron,Exod. 14. Num. 22. and Miriam to lead thée. 5 Remember O my people,
what Balach the king of Moab had deuiſed againſt thée,
and what anſwere that Balaam the ſonne of Beor gaue
him, from Sethin vnto Galgal, that ye may knowe the righteouſneſſe
 of the Lorde. 6 Wherewith ſhall I come before
the Lorde, and bowe my ſelfe to the hie God? Shall I come
before him with burnt offerings, and with calues of a yeare
olde? 7 Hath the Lord a pleaſure in many thouſandes of
rammes, or innumerable ſtreames of oyle? ſhall I giue my
firſt borne for mine offences, and the fruite of my bodie for
the ſinne of my ſoule. 8 He hath ſhewed thée O man what
is good, and what the Lorde requireth of thée: (namely) to do
iuſtly, to loue mercie, and to humble thy ſelfe to walke with
thy God. 9 The Lordes voyce cryeth vnto the citie, and
the man that ſhall be ſaued conſidereth thy name: hearken
what is your rod, and heare him that warneth you.
               10 Are not yet the treaſures of wickedneſſe in the houſe
of the wicked, and the ſcant meaſure which is abhominable?
               11 Shoulde I iuſtifie the falſe balances, and the bagge of

deceytfull weightes? 12 For the rich men thereof are full
of crueltie, and th
                     •
                   inhabitants thereof haue ſpoken lies, and
haue deceytfull tongues in their mouthes.
               13 Therefore I will take in hande to puniſhe thée, and to 
make thée deſolate, becauſe of thy ſinnes.
               14 Thou ſhalt eate and not haue inough: yea thou ſhalt
bring thy ſelfe downe in the middes of thée, thou ſhalt flée, but
not eſcape, and thoſe that thou wouldeſt ſaue will I deliuer
to the ſword. 15 Thou ſhalt ſowe, but not reape, thou ſhalt
preſſe out Oliues, but Oyle ſhalt thou not haue to annoynt
thy ſelfe with Oyle: thou ſhalt treade out muſt, but thou
ſhalt drinke no wine. 16 Ye kéepe the ordinances of Amri,
and all the cuſtomes of the houſe of Ahab, ye walke in their
counſels: therefore will I make thée waſte, and cauſe thy
inhabiters to be hiſſed at, and ye ſhall beare the reproche of
my people.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the ſixt
Chapter of Micheas.
               Hearken you now what the Lorde ſayth.Verſ. 1. 2.
Ariſe thou and contende with, &c.
               
                  THe Prophet Micheas blameth
the Iewes for their wickedneſſe, and
declareth to them their puniſhment
for y• ſame. 1 Firſt he noteth their vnthankefulneſſe
for the great benefites
that they haue receyued at his hande. 2 Then he
taketh from them al the confidence that they might
haue had to pleaſe God with their Sacrifices and
external Hypocriſie, and ſheweth what they ſhould

doe to pleaſe God rightly. 3 Thirdly he ſharpely
rebuketh their obſtinacie in contem
                     •
                  ing the worde
of God, and refuſing to heare him. 4 Laſtly, he
openeth ſome of their particular faultes, and denounceth
their puniſhment that God will bring vpon
them. And all this doth he in maner of a pleading
of Gods cauſe before Iudges,Eſa. 41. a. 1. which *maner
the Prophetes diuerſe times doe vſe, thereby to ſet
out the Iuſtice of God and more euidently to declare
that his people, euen by the Iudgement of
men or other common creatures are vnexcuſable,
and by their owne wickedneſſe to pull vpon themſelues
iuſt and grieuous puniſhments. In this
place the Prophete by appointment of God taketh
Mountaynes and Hilles,
                  Irre. 6. e. 18. 19 Eſay. 1. a. 2. and the verie Foundations
of the earth to heare the cauſe and complaint of Almightie
God agaynſt his people of Iſrael. And that
is it that the Prophete vttereth in ye perſon of God,
ſaying, Ariſe thou and contende with the mountaynes;
&c. And then he Obeying the appoyntment
of God ſayth: Heare O you mountaynes the Lordes
quarell, &c. As if he had ſayde: Forſomuch as the
heartes of this people are ſo farre from God, that
not ſo much as one of them will conſider and vnbe

                     •
                  ſtande his cauſe, I appeale to you hilles and
mountaynes, and make the vnſenſible Creatures
Iudges agaynſt them. In this the Prophet both
noteth the hard hearts and the obſtinate contempt
of the Iewes particularly, and alſo generally teacheth
all then which in like maner contemne the
worde of god; that they ſhal by no meanes be hable

to eſcape iuſt iudgement and condemnation.Gen. 1. a. &c. Gen. 2. a. &c. For,
becauſe the *whole world was made by God for
vs, and in all poyntes ſeruing to our vſe perfourmeth
that ende to the which it was made, though
all other Iudges and witneſſes would fayle: the
very partes of the world and the cōmon creatures
will pronounce ſentence againſt vs, if we in our
calling doe ſhewe our ſelues vnthankefull, diſobedient,
and rebellious agaynſt God.
               O my people what haue I done vnto thee?Verſ. 3. &c.
or wherein haue I grieued thee? &c.
               There is no one thing that in the Prophetes
cauſeth more difficultie, then the often and the ſodaine
chaunging of the Perſon, wherefore that is
here alſo to be obſerued. The ſecond verſe was vttered
in the perſon of the Prophet, theſe three verſes
God himſelfe ſpeaketh. Although God were
grieuouſly diſpleaſed with them, yet he calleth them
His people,
                  Deut. 5. d. 29. Eſay 65. a. 2. Rom. 10. d. 21. Eſay. 30. d. 18. therby *ſhewing that he would be readie
to receiue them to Mercie if they would turne
vnto him and repente.
               Then he lamentably vpbraideth them with the
vnthankefull receiuing of his great benefites that
he had done for them. Whereby hee, as it were in
iudgement cleareth him ſelfe, that he neuer hurted
them, neuer wrought trouble & griefe vnto them
whereby they might pretende cauſe to reuolt from
him, but alway hath ſhewed him ſelfe their gracicious,
mercifull, and bountifull Lord, euer readye
to aſſiſte and helpe them, and miraculouſly with

mightie hande to deliuer them. As for example
out of Aegipt from the ſterne Tirannie of Pharao
and his people.Exo. 10. 11. 14 In the wilderneſſe from manye
dangers by the meanes of Moyſes, Aaron & Marie,
their ſiſter indued with the ſpirite of prophecie.
From the wicked deuiſes of Balach,
                  Nu. 22. 23. 24 at which time
he turned the Curſing, that was ſought agaynſt
them into a notable bleſſing. By this wee alſo haue
to take heede that wee doe not contemne the worde
of God and reiect the memorie of his exceeding benefits,
that he hath of late yeares done for vs, leaſt
it be grieuouſly laide againſt vs as the like is here
vnto the Iewes.
               
               Wherewith ſhall I come before the Lord,Verſ. 6. 7. 8.
and bowe my ſelfe to the hye God, &c.
               As the Prophet before made, as it were, God him
ſelfe to accuſe the Iewes: euen ſo here doth he bring
in the people of ye 
                  Iewes cōſulting & aſking by what
meanes, by what ſacrifices, by what ſatiſfactions
they may pleaſe God and appeaſe his wrath and
diſpleaſure. Here is to be noted, that as the faithfull
when they perceiue God to be diſpleaſed, reſort
to his holy worde, and out of that learne what
to doe to pleaſe God: ſo other that are vnfaithfull,
when he hath beaten into their mindes ſome ſenſe
of his wrath, as he had here done to the Iewes,
they cannot aſcende to any higher conſideration
then the wiſedome of the fleſh and of the worlde.Eſay. 1. a. &c. Eſay. 58. a. &c.
And therefore giue themſelues to worke reconſiliation
by externall things, as ſacrifices, outward

kneelings, faſtings, and tormentings of the bodie,
iudging that God alſo maketh great account of
thoſe outwarde thinges, which they themſelues
greatly eſteeme, and wherein they iudge principall
holineſſe to conſiſt.Iohn. 4. d. 24. But God being a ſpirite, ſheweth
himſelfe to delight in that holineſſe only that is
in ſpirite and in truth. And therefore in the 8. verſe
the Prophete aunſwering their queſtion ſayeth,
God hath ſhewed thee, O man what is good, and
what the Lorde requireth of thee. &c. Whereby he
taketh from them their pretence of ignoraunce, or
rather reproueth their obſtinate impudēcie, wherby
they moue ſuch queſtions. As though God had
not by his ſeruant Moiſes,
                  Deut. 4. &c. Eſay. 1. &c. Eſay. 58. &c. and by his Prophetes
declared oftentimes vnto them what true worſhip
he looketh for at their handes, and wherewith his
anger will be appeaſed, that is with repentaunce
and the true fruites therof. Such as are the doing
of iuſtice, when not onely the Magiſtrate dealeth
vprightly in iudgement, but alſo euerye priuate
man according to his office and calling: The loue
of mercie and pitie, conſiſting in all the workes of
Charitie: The humbleneſſe of our hartes ſubmitting
our ſelues to the will and pleaſure of God declared
in his worde. For To walke with God, is to
walke before him according to the appointment of
his holy will and worde.
               The Lordes voyce cryeth vnto the Citie
and the man that ſhalbe ſaued,Verſ. 16. &c.
               In this part of the chapter the Prophete chargeth

them with their ſinnes wherewith they had
diſpleaſed God. The Lordes voyce, is the preaching
and teaching of his worde. You haue heard
ſayth the Prophete,Eſay. 5. a. 4. what *dueties God requireth
of you, neyther can you in this pretende ignorance.
For the Lord doth his part diligently when he ſendeth
his Prophets to you that be of this Citie, and
to all other likewiſe that be in your caſe, and by
them crieth to you that you ſhould repent, and doe
thoſe fruites of repentaunce. And therefore the
faythfull and good man that hath care of his ſaluation
doth conſider it, and feare the name of thee, O
Lorde. But you, O ſtiffe necked Ievves, ſhewe
your ſelues to contemne his voyce, and to neglect
his calling. Therefore, ſeeing you will not heare
that voyce calling you to ſaluation, hearken to this
voyce that aſſureth you of your puniſhment, rodde,
and deſtruction. Then layeth he before them their
grieuous faultes and offences, that is, Riches, vniuſtly
gotten, Falſe meaſures, Falſe waightes and balances,
Crueltie, Lying, Falſehoode and deceyte, as
well in their occupying and bargayning, as in all
other dealing, and for theſe thinges, ſayth he, the
Lorde will take in hande to puniſh them.
               Therefore I will take in hande to puniſhe
thee,Verſ. 13. &c. and to make thee deſolate, &c.
               This is vttered in the perſon of God, I wyll
therefore puniſh thee, ſayth the Lorde, and take all
thoſe my good gifts frō thee which hath made thee
ſo prowde and obſtinate, & not ouely ſo, but bicauſe

thou wilt not repent and turn from thy ſinnes, (O
thou wicked Citie,) I will vtterly deſtroy thee and
make thee deſolate,1 The firſt plague is famine,
and that in a ſtrange maner, that they ſhould haue
to eate, and yet there meate not proſper with them,
               The ſeconde plague,2 that by inward miſchiefe
among themſelues, that is, by diſcorde, diſcention,
or other like meanes by giuing credite to the falſe
Prophetes that were among them, they ſhoulde
worke their owne ouerthrowe.3 The thirde is,
that all meanes of help, ſuccour, and refuge ſhould
be taken from them, and that thoſe whome they
would ſeeke to ſaue, the Lorde would deliuer to the
ſworde.4 The fourth is, that their goodes, and
the fruites of the grounde ſhoulde be ſpoyled and
taken from them, and that they ſhoulde enioy no
part of their labours therein.5 The laſt is, that
they ſhould be vtterly waſted, caried away captiue,
and be a ſcorne and reproch to all people.
            
         
         
            The. 21. Sunday after Trinitie.
at Morning prayer.
            Habacuc. 2.
            
               I Will ſtande vpon my watch, and ſet me vpon the 
tower, and will looke, and ſée what he will ſay vnto
me, and what I ſhall anſwere to him that rebuketh
me. 2 And the Lorde anſwered me, and ſayde,
Write the viſion, and make it plaine vpon tables, that hée
may runne that readeth it. 3 For the viſion is yet for an
appoynted time, but at the laſt it ſhall ſpeaks, and not lye:

though it tarie, waite: for it ſhall ſurely come, and ſhall not
ſtay.Rom. 1. b. 17. Heb. 10. g. 38. Galat. 3. b. 11. 4 Beholde, he that lifteth vp himſelfe, his minde is
not vpright in him: but the iuſt ſhall liue by his fayth.
               5 Yea in déede the prowde man (is as) he that tranſgreſſeth
by wine, therefore ſhall he not endure, becauſe he hath
enlarged his deſire as the hell, and is as death, and cannot
be ſatiſfied, but gathereth vnto him all nations, and heapeth
vnto him all people. 6 Shal not all theſe take vp a parable
agaynſt him? and a taunting prouerbe agaynſt him, and
ſay, Wo to him that increaſeth that which is not his? howe
long? and he that ladeth himſelfe with thicke clay?
               7 Shall they not riſe vp ſodenly that ſhall bite thée? and
awake that ſhall ſtirre thée, and thou ſhalt be their pray?
               8 Becauſe thou haſt ſpoyled many nations, all the remnant
of the people ſhall ſpoyle thée, becauſe of mens bloud,
and for the wrong (done) in the lande, in the Citie, and vnto
all that dwell therein. 9 Wo to him that coueteth an euil
couetouſneſſe to his houſe, that he may ſet his neſt on hie, to
eſcape from the power of euill. 10 Thou haſt conſulted
ſhame to thine owne houſe, by deſtroying many people, and
haſt ſinned agaynſt thine owne ſoule.
               11 For the ſtone ſhall crie out of the wall, and the beame
out of the tymber ſhall anſwere it.
               12 Wo vnto him that buyldeth a towne with bloud,Nah. 3. a. 1. Ezech. 24. b. 9 and
erecteth a citie by iniquitie. 13 Beholde is it not of the Lord
of hoſtes that the people ſhall labour in the verye fire? the
people ſhall euen wearie themſelues for verie vanitie.
               14 For the earth ſhall be filled with the knowledge of the
glorie of the Lorde, as the waters couer the ſea.
               15 Wo vnto him that giueth his neighbour drinke, thou
ioyneſt thy rage, and makeſt (him) drunken alſo, that thou
mayſt ſée their priuities. 16 Thou art filled with ſhame for
glorie, drinke thou alſo and be made naked: the cuppe of the
Lordes right hande ſhall be turned vnto thée, and ſhamefull

ſpuing ſhall be for thy glorie. 17 For the crueltie of Libanus
ſhall couer thée: ſo ſhall the ſpoyle of the beaſtes which
he made afrayde, becauſe of mens bloud, and for the wrong
done in the lande, in the citie, and vnto all that dwell therein.
               18 What profiteth the Image? for the maker thereof hath
made it an Image and a teacher of lies, though he that made
it truſt therein when he maketh dumbe Idols.
               19 Wo vnto him that ſayth to the wood, Awake: and to
the dumbe ſtone, Riſe vp, it ſhall teach (thee:) beholde it is
layde ouer with golde and ſiluer, and there is no breath in it.
               20 But the Lorde is in his holy temple:Pſal. 10. a. 4 let all the earth
kéepe ſilence before him.
            
            
               The Expoſition vpon the. 2.
Chapter of Habacuc.
               I will ſtande vpon my watch,Verſ. 1. and ſet me
vpon the tower and will looke and. &c.
               
                  THe Prophet Habacuc in the
firſt Chapiter had comforted the
Iewes,
                  Haba. 1. a. &c. liuing both in great oppreſſion
vnder the wicked king Manaſſes:
and alſo being ſore afflicted by the
power of the Chaldees. But ſome of the people of
God conſidering the great and *long proſperitie of
the wicked enemies of God beganne to *ſtagger in
their faith,Pſal. 72. a. 2. Iere. 12. a. 1. Iob. 21. a. 7. and halfe to miſtruſt the prouidence of
God, as though he did neglect his people. And for
that cauſe quarelled with the Prophet, and deſired
ſome reſolution of their doubtfull mindes herein.

Therefore in the beginning of this Chapiter he
ſayeth He will ſtande vpon his watch tower, and ſee
what God vvill ſay vnto him, and what anſwere he
may make to them, that did in ſuch manner rebuke
him and quarrell with him. By The watchtower hee
vnderſtandeth a more deepe and earneſt conſideration
and meditation of the miſteries of Gods
prouidence, wherein his minde was lifted vp aboue
the capacitie of mans common reaſon, and
was ſtayed vp by the declaration of Gods holy wil
reuealed in his worde. The Prophet being in this
VVatchtower, ſayth, The Lorde anſwered him, that
is, that God by his holye ſpirite reuealed to him,
that he ſhould VVrite a viſion, and that ſo playnely,
and in ſo great letters, that a man running by in
haſte might reade it. In that the Prophet ſo eaſily
obtaineth anſwere of God, wee alſo are taught
that when with earneſt Meditation and Prayer,
we ſeeke to vnderſtande the will of God, and what
is beſt for vs to doe: He will not faile by his grace
to lighten our mindes to the vnderſtanding therof.
If thou ſeeke vnderſtanding (ſaith Salomon) as ſiluer,Prou. 2. a. 4.
                  and ſearch it out as great treaſure, thou ſhalt vnderſtande
the feare of the Lord, and finde out the knowledge
of God. The ſumme of this viſion is, that
thoſe prowde Chaldies, which did ſo afflict his people,
and glorie in their owne ſtrength, notwithſtanding
that they did ſeeme for the time to proſper
and to be a ſcourge to other, yet, in ſhort ſpace by
Gods iuſt iudgement for their wickedneſſe ſhould
be brought to cōfuſion, and made a laughing ſtock

to the worlde. This anſwere God willeth the
Prophete to Set vp in writing, that all his people
might ſee it and reade it to their aſſured comforte.
When the Prophet addeth The viſion is yet for an
appointed time,
                  Verſ. 3. 
                  but at the laſt it ſhall ſpeake and not
lye, and though it taried yet it ſhoulde aſſuredly come
and not ſtay. &c. He meaneth that the contentes of
the viſion ſhould not forthwith be fulfilled, but after
a certaine ſpace, and therefore willeth them
paciently to abide the time, for that vndoubtedlye
in the ende it ſhoulde come to paſſe. And ſo in deed
was it fulfilled about. 70. yeares after the deſtruction
of Hieruſalem, and leading of the people captiue
into Babilon. At which time Cyrus tooke and
ſpoyled Babilon, and tranſferred the Empire to the
Perſians.
               
               Beholde he that lifteth vp himſelfe,Verſ. 4. his
minde is not vpright in him, But, &c.
               He, ſayth the Prophet, that lifteth vp his minde
vpon confidence & truſt of his owne deuiſes, helpe,
and ſtrength, and thereby thinketh that he ſhall be
ſafe agaynſt all mutabilitie of fortune or other
daunger that maye come: ſhall neuer haue ſure
quietneſſe & tranquilitie of minde, but euer be toſſed
to & fro with newe deuiſes.Iere. 42. b. 15. Pſal. 32. b. 10. Pſal. 55. b. 11. For God will *fruſtrate
the counſayles of ſuch perſons. But the good
iuſt man which with an aſſured fayth* ſtayeth himſelfe
vpon the worde and promiſes of God, in all
daungers both worldely and ſpirituall: ſhall not
fayle of tranquilitie and quietneſſe of minde. For

he hath the vnfallible truth & the almightie power
of God whereon he reſteth. Wherfore by this verſe
the Prophete willeth the people,Pſal. 59. b. 12. Eſa. 20. b. 5. 6 to * lay aſide all
confidence of worldely helpe, and to reſt onelye in
Gods truth and his promiſes. This ſentence is
not onely to be applyed to worldly afflictions and
cares, but alſo, and eſpecially to the tormentes of
conſcience agaynſt ſinne, and Satan, and all our
ſpirituall enemies,Galat. 3. b. 11. and ſo doth Saint Paule vſe,
Galat. 3.
               Yea in deede the prowde man is as he that
tranſgreſſeth by wine,Verſ. 5. therfore ſhall, &c.
               Here the Prophete beginneth to declare what
ſhall come to the Empire of Babilon & of the Chaldees,
together with the cauſes wherwith God was
mooued thereto. The prowde man, ſayth he, that is,
the prowde and ambitious Babilonian, is like to a
drunken man, that hath paſſed all meaſure in drinking
of wine. As in the Drunkarde the vapours of
the wine aſcendinge to the heade ſo trouble the
braine, and taketh away the right vſe of ſenſe and
reaſon, that without ſhame or meaſure he runneth
headlong to all filthineſſe, and the more he hath
powred in, the more ſtill he deſireth to drink: Euen
ſo the prowde and * ambicious ſpirite of the Babilonian
doth ſo trouble his minde with vaine imaginations,Iudith. 1. c. 7
and carieth him awaye with furious luſt
and deſire of larger dominion, That without all
ſhame or meaſure he attempteth anye thing that
may ſerue his pleaſure. And the more he hath gotten

vnder his dominion by violence and crueltie,
the more ſtill he luſteth. Therefore ſayth God, by
the Prophete, He ſhall not endure, he ſhall come to
a fowle ende. For euen as hell mouth, the graue or
the ſepulchre, and Death itſelfe are vnſatiable, and
drawe vnto them yong, and olde, and of all ſortes
and ſtates: euen ſo the outragious luſt of the Babilonian,
not contented with the great Empire of
Aſsiria, ſeeketh by might, violence, and oppreſſion,
by heapes as it were, to pull vnder his ſubiection
all Nations and Countries of the earth. By this
that is here ſpoken of the Babilonians,
                  4. Re. 14. c. 10 Sopho. 3. c. 11. Eccle. 10. b. 7. we muſt
learne what * miſchiefe commeth of pride, and ambition,
and how diſpleaſant it is to God.
               Shall not all theſe take vp a parable againſt
him,Verſ. 6. 7. 8. and a taunting prouerbe, &c.
               The firſt plague that God threatneth to the
Empire of Babilon (for vnder the perſonne of one
Man he meaneth the whole kingdome) and ſayth,
that al thoſe nations that it before had afflicted and
grieued, when they ſawe the ouerthrowe thereof,
ſhould triumph at it, and take vp taunting ſayings
and Prouerbes againſt it. And in reproch of it ſay,
Wo be to this greedy kingdome, yt with vnſatiable
rauine haſt before time increaſed thy Dominion,
with that which by no right belonged to thee, and
loaded thy ſelfe with riches, being none other thing
in themſelfe then Dirt and Clay of the Earth.Verſ. 7. How
long ſhall ſuch wicked violence continue? Shall
not Cyrus with the Perſians, and Medians, ſodainly

come vpon them, when they leaſt thinke of it, and
bite them with lyke ſorowe as they haue grieued
other,Verſ. 8. and in the ende vtterly ſpoyle them? Yea, becauſe
they with exceeding crueltie and bloudſhed
haue waſted other Nations and Countreys, and
done great iniurie vnto Lande, Citie, and inhabitantes:
the remnant of the ſame Countreys ſhall
nowe in like maner ſpoyle them with their Country,
Citie and People. Thus God vſeth to reward
the crueltie of Tyrannes with like crueltie, as they
haue vſed towarde other.
               Wo, to him that coueteth an euill couetouſneſse
to his houſe,Verſ. 9. 10. that he may, &c.
               Nowe the prophete ſpeaketh againſt the couetouſneſſe
and extortion of the Babilonians, Wo be
to thee O Babilon, ſayth he, and to all them which
in like wicked and couetous maner ſtudie to enrich
their children, and ſet vp their houſes and families
aloft, thinking by their great treaſure, power, and
wealth,Verſ. 10. to ſet them out of all daunger of euill: Yea
ſuch perſons as by extortion robbe other poore and
honeſt people, to enrich their familie, to make them
noble perſons & gentlemen, to builde gay houſes,
to purchaſe landes, to procure ſumptuous pleaſures,
doe pull ſhame and perpetuall reproch vpon
their houſes and ſinne grieuouſly agaynſt theyr
ſoules.Verſ. 11. Theſe men thinke that they are ſo highe,
and of ſo great authoritie, that no man dare blame
them, But God wil ſo worke it, that if no man wil,
the verie ſtones of the houſes that they haue builded

by Extortion, ſhall crie againſt them, and ſay,
VVo vnto him that buildeth a towne with bloud and
crueltie,
                  Verſ. 12. And the Beames out of the tymber ſhall
anſwere, And to them alſo that erect a citie in iniquitie.
This God will cauſe euen the vnſenſible creatures
to crie out curſe & wo againſt them. And ſo all
their laboures that they haue taken, god wil make
vaine, as if they were conſumed with fire. And the
worke of God ſhall ſo euidently appere to the comfort
of his people in the puniſhment & deſtruction
of the Babilonians,
                  Verſ. 14. that his glory ſhal be ſpred ouer
all the earth, as the waters ouerwhelme the roome
of the Sea.
               Wo bee to him that giueth his neighbour
drinke,Verſ. 15. thou ioyneſt thy heate, and, &c.
               The next vice that the Prophete doth reproue,
is Drunkenneſſe and quaffing, wherevnto the Babilonians
were muche giuen, and ſpecially vnder
their king Balthaſar, as appeareth. Dan.
                  Dan. 5. a. 2. 5. When
the Prophete ſayth, VVoe to him that giueth his
Neyghbour drinke, he doth not blame them, that
offer drinke in honeſt maner to their gheſtes, or to
relieue the poore.
               But as he expoundeth himſelfe, ſuch perſons
as in the Heate of their drunkenneſſe prouoke other
to quaffing and immoderate drinking, vntill
they haue made them more like beaſtes then men,
diſcouering themſelues filthily, and therein take
they great delight and pleaſure. Wherefore God
threatneth them puniſhment for that wickedneſſe,

and ſayth that they Shall be filled with ſhame in ſtede
of Glorie, For when the Prophet ſayth Thou art,
&c. by the preſent time (as the Prophets often do)
he ſignifieth what ſhall ſo aſſuredlye come vnto
them as if it were now already fulfilled. Then the
Prophet with bitter ſcorne addeth, Drinke thou alſo,
and be made naked &c. As if he hadſayde, ſeyng
it is ſuch a pleaſure and delight to thee, to beholde
the filthy nakedneſſe of other, whome thou haſte
made drunke, thou alſo, will thou nill thou, ſhalte
drinke, and haue thy filthineſſe, thy ſhame and reproche
diſcouered and layde open to all men. For
the lorde by his right hande and mightye power
hath prepared a VVofull Cup of affliction for thee,Verſ. 17.
which when it ſhall be poured vppon thy heade
Shamefull ſpuing, that is, the bewraying of thyne
owne ignominie, reproche, and ſhame, ſhall ouerwhelme
and diſtayne all thy glorye wherein thou
haſt reioiced. Thus bitterly God reproued in them
that foule vice of drunkenneſſe. And he addeth
moreouer the principall cauſe of their vtter deſtruction
to be the exceeding crueltie, murder, and
ſpoyle, that they had vſed towarde the country of
Iury and his people dwelling therin. For that is
it that he meaneth by the Crueltie of Lybanus. By
Lybanus, which is a parte of the lande of Chanaan,
he vnderſtandeth the whole countrie.
               What profiteth the Image,Verſ. 18. &c. for the maker
therof hath made it an Image. &c.
               God, that his people being in captiuitie among

the Heathen, and ſeing their proſperitie might not
attribute the ſame to their falſe Gods, in this place
by his Prophet reproueth the Idolatry of the Babilonians,
and ſheweth that they are not * hable to
helpe them,3. Reg. 18. e. 26 28. 29. or in any reſpect to doe them good. For
they are but ſtockes and ſtones * and haue theyr
ſhape and figure of the workeman,Pſal. 114. a. 4. that maketh
them: Who as an vnreaſonable Creature and as
it were bewitched of his ſenſes * worſhippeth it as
God,Eſa. 46. a. 6. 7 and putteth his truſt in the woorke of his
owne handes. They are ſet as Teachers of lyes,
For they breede opinion that they are the Image
of God, which can be expreſſed by no Image, being
a ſpiritual ſubſtance. They mooue many vaine
falſe & wicked cogitations of God, in the minds of
men, and leade them into errour. They corrupt
and ouerthrowe the true worſhippe of God, and
cauſe it to be tranſferred to creatures. And what
greater Lye can there be then this, to induce men
to * attribute diuine power to that,Eſay. 44. c. 17 which hath not
ſo much as any thing like to a mortall man, more
then the dead figure and proportion.
               This place let them conſider which before time
haue taught the people of God that Images are laye
mens bookes. In deede bookes and teachers they
may well be called, but as the Prophet here ſayth,
to teach them Lyes, and errors touching God and
his worſhippe. Therefore the People that haue
bene ſo lamentably miſſledde, may well ſay, woe,
woe, vnto them that haue brought vs to ſo palpaand
groſſe errour as to forget the eternall, true,

and liuing God,Eſay. 44. d. 24 * who made vs, who preſerued,
and by his ſonne redeemed vs, and knéele downe
to dumbe ſtockes, and ſtones, and in our
greateſt neede and diſtreſſe to call
to them for helpe, and to
put our chiefe truſt,
and confidence
in them.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
               ❧
               Imprinted at London by Henrie
Denham for Rafe Newbery dwelling
in Fleteſtreete a little aboue
the Conduite.
            Anno. 1573.
            
         
      
   