
      
         
            
               
               
               
               
               AN EXORTACION TO CHARITE, very needefull at this tyme for eche man and woman to inbrace, Compyled by Wyllyam Conway.
         
         
            
            
            The contentes
            
               
                  
                     CAſtificantes animas veſtras in obediencia charitatis, infraternitatis amore ſimplici, ex corde inuicem diligite attencius, renati, non exſemine corruptibili, ſed incorruptibili, per verbum dei viui: et per manentis ineternum. Petri. Epiſto i. Capi. i.
                  
               
               
                  CHaſtyce your ſoules in the obedience of loue, euen in brotherly loue, with out faynyng, erneſtly loue ye one an other, euen frome the harte, beynge regenerate not of corruptyble ſede, but incorruptyble. And by the lyuely worde of God euerlaſtyng. Petri. Epiſ. i. Chap. i.
                  
               
            
            The contentes of this treatys.
            IN this lytel volume is conteyned a mirror for ſome menne to beholde, wherein when they haue loked, I wold that they ſhulde vſe one condycyon, that I eſpye, ſome Maiſtreſſes of Lendon, with other Bentylwomē vſe. And that is, when they loke in theyr glaſſe they haue a wete ſpong redy, that ſo ſone as euer they eſpye a blot or ſpotte vpon theyr face, by and by with the ſame they make it fayre and cleane.
            
               
So lykewyſe (in good fayth) I wold that the readers heareof, as ſoone as euer they eſpie theyr fautes in this myrror or glaſſe, by and by wolde I that they ſhulde amend and clenſe away the ſame blot, or els were it as good that they loked not in this atal. But this treatyſe moſte chefely in deede tendeth to charitie, it entyceth and prouoketh euery man to charitie, in whiche is conteyned all other vertues, for yf men be charytable they ſhall not onely loue God feare God, and ſerue God aboue all other creatures, but alſo ſhal helpe, forther ſucker and ſuſtayne theyr poore neyghbours, with all theyr ſtrength and myght, ſo that charitie good reader, is euen the hole content of this lytell worke. And in dede to my iudgement charitie is a thyng moſte neceſſary in this preſent tyme to be treted on. (:)
         
         
            
            TO AL THE GENTYL readers of this treatyſe gretyng in our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               FOraſmuch (good reader) as the moſte thyng that we good Chryſten men ſhulde looke for nowe in this age, beynge fyxed faſtened, and rooted in the faith of Ieſus Chriſt this. xv. C. and .l. yeres is charitie, whiche bryngeth with hym in company all other vertues. And maketh a perfecte full and ſuffycyent faythe to the ſaluacyon of man. For as holy Writ ſaytk, and al holy Doctors, and as the Catholyke Churche teacheth, fayth without charytye auayleth no more the ſoule, then the ſape of ſoure onions auayleth ſore eyes. Yf fayth I ſay then be nothynge without charitie, for gods ſake let eche man that hath fayth vſe therwiih charitie. Now what charytie is anone by gods grace, I wyll ſhewe you. And in the meane tyme (good reader) Let vs ſomewhat talke of fayth. And how many faythes as I perceyue and all men ſhall knowe, that wyl not be dombe when

they ſhulde ſpeake, death when they ſhuld heare, and blynd when they ſhuld ſe, there is nowe vſed fayth faynte, fayth fayned and faythe faythfull. Nowe howe theſe kyndes of fayth are vſed, hereafter ſhalbe declared. This I knowe wel and am aſſured, and thou reader knoweſt ſo wel as I, that eche man in this realme hath faythe, or at the leaſte wyſe ſobre fayth. And I thynke in lyke maner, that eche man ſuppoſethe hym ſelfe to haue a ryght and a good fayth: yet in deede it is not ſo: For as ſaynt Iames ſayth. Cap. ii. The Deuyll hath fayth. But nowe to ende this preface. Fyrſt I ſhal deſyre al men of pardon, yf by my ſchaunce any thyng ſhal eſcape me the auctour hereof, for as it is cō
               monly ſene, a ſtraunger ſhal eſpye a faute in a mans houſe ſooner then he hym ſelfe ſhall. And ſo I thynke a man ſhal quyclyer eſpye a faute in this worke, then I my ſelfe, wherefore yf there be any man that ſhall ſo do, moſte hartelye I requyre hym for to mende it. Secondly I ſhall deſyre the good reader not to be diſcontented with me for any thynge herein wrytten. Leaſte thereby thou ſhake of cleane all the fruytes of my boke which tendeth chefely to charytie, perhappes I wyll ſaye ſomewhat that ſhall touche ſome men, wherefore
            
               〈1… pages missing〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
then full worthy art thou to be called charitie or a charytable man. This that I wryte good reader is true, wherfore I exhorte the to followe it, yf thou denye the folowyng therof, thou art no Chriſtē man thou art neyther good nor vertuous. For that I hearein teache is charitie, and if thou haue no charitie, thy fayth is nought and of no value. There be now a dayes as me ſemeth. iii. kyndes of fayth vſed. The fyrſt is fayth faynte, and that is he which I talke of euen nowe, for he hath fayth but it is not a ryght fayth, and ſo it ſemeth by his behauour, for he takethe ſo feruente paynes in perſecutyng his brother, that he waxeth ſo faynt he may no lenger bere any goodnes or charite, but like a faint mā fayntly letteth all fall from him. Some other haue a fayned fayth, that is to preach one thyng and beleue an other, I pray god we haue none of theſe Anabaptyſtes, Lybertynes, Arryans, and Maris aduerſaris, of which ſorte laſt reſyted we had one not longe ſynce. A great aduerſary to that moſte bleſſed and pure vyrgyn, and not onely to her, but alſo to her ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, and to vs his members. I praye God I ſay that we haue no more of theſe hereſyes raynyng, I feare leſt many may be lykened to an aple which is fayre with

out and rotten within: Yf there be any ſuche faynyng people: I pray god ſone open theyr hartes, leaſt they ſhulde infecte ſimple ſoules: and make them lyke to their ſelues, paſt al remedy, then there is fayth faythfull, and thoſe be they. Math. v.
            Qui perſecutionem patiuntur propter iuſticiam.
            Whiche ſuffer perſecution for a iuſte and ryght cauſe, of them I wyll not muche ſpeke, for although ſome haue ſo done, yet not ſo many as ought, the more pytie, and all for lacke of charitie. For yf they hadde loued Chriſte, ſo wel as Chriſt loued them they wolde not haue ſtopped: but wyllyngly with all theyr harte, haue ſuffred ſome payne for his ſake, that payed ſo greate a pryce for theyr redempcion, this charite is good loue, and good loue is none other thing but charitie, for whether it be loue to god or to thi neighbour, ſo thy loue be good it is charitie it ſelfe. But yf it be a fayned loue, or a noughty loue, then may it in no wyſe bare the name of charitie, for this worde loue, without any other conſequence or matter folowyng, is a worde indyfferente bothe to good and bad as in example. I haue harde a man ſaye to his wyfe, wyfe I loue the, to whome ſhe aunſwered agayne and ſayd, ye mary huſbād

but your loue is ſo lytell, that I can neyther fele it nor ſe it. Nowe (quod he) thou haſt iudged as iuſtly as though thou haddeſt knowen my meanyng, for in deede I ſayde that I loued the, but I tolde the not howe, nor after what faſhyon, ſo that I ſay, yf loue be lefte alone, ſhe may chooſe whether ſhe wyll loue well, or loue yl, but yf charitie be once named it can none otherwyſe be vnderſtanded, but of good loue, without which a mans fayth is nothyng worth, as wytneſſeth with me the bleſſed apoſtle ſaynte Paule wrytyng vnto the Corinthyans. Epiſt. i. Chapi. xiii. On this wyſe. Yf I haue all fayth ſo that I may remoue moūtaines, and haue therwith no charitie. I am nothyng, that is to ſay, my fayth is nothynge, ye heere nowe this lyttell peece of ſaynte paules Epiſtle telleth you what your fayth is without charitie, wherefore ſtyll I deſyre you contynually to call for charitie, and to vſe charitie, as nedefull it is nowe to preache charite, as it was in the premityue church to preache fayth, ſyth faythe is no faythe without charitie. But a lacke who ſhall preache charitie, oure preeſtes? Nowe in good fayth it greueth me ſomtyme to here charitie ſo ſcante amonge them, ſome of thē be not ſo charitable as I wold wyſhe

them, for one preacheth agaynſt an other, one deſpyſeth an others promocyon, one an others learning, & one an others belefe: ſo that a man can not well tell howe to auoyde the venemus enuye of this worlde, but yet I wolde aduyſe eche preſte to loue other, conſyderynge that all the Epyſtles ſaynte Paule wrote almoſte, he hath in them a treatynge for vnitie. Saynte Iames in his Epiſtle wylleth that yf we fall at varyaunce we ſhulde reconcyle our ſelues one vnto an other, and open our ſinnes before god, he wylleth vs alwaye to loue one an other, he ſpecyally there putteth ryche men in remembraunce of theyr dutye towarde theyr poore neyghboures. Saynte Peter alſo gyueth greate comfort for one to loue an other, declaryng to eche man his dutye towarde maieſtrates, for where diſobedience is, there is no charitie. Saynt Iohn in his epiſtles feruently doth declare what charitie is, fyrſte exortynge all men to kepe gods commaundementes, declaryng that yf they do otherwyſe charitie and feruent loue to god is excluded, he ſheweth the loue that god bare towarde vs, whē he ſent downe his onely begotten ſonne to ſuffre death for our ſynnes: and he concludeth of charitie, ſayenge, that who ſo hath charitie hath god: and who

ſo loueth not his brother, hath no charitie in hym. Our ſauyour Chriſt ſayth alſo to his Apoſtles Iohn. Chap. xiii.
            
               Diligite inuicem, that is to ſaye. Loue ye together, and then afterwarde he tellethe them how they ſhuld loue together ſaieng. Sicut dilexi uos. That is euen as I haue loued you. Nowe howe Chriſt loued vs to eche man it is knowen, parte therof might herein be expreſſed but for tediouſnes, it is omytted, wherefore let vs all vſe charitie and eſpecially I ſay▪ to you that be preſtes ſhewe charitie one vnto an other, remembryng that Chriſt our mayſter ſayth vnto you. Math. v. Let your lyght ſhyne ſo before men that they maye ſe your good workes and gloryfye your father whiche is in heauen. Nowe ſyth you ſhulde be a lyght to the worlde, for gods ſake let charitie be vſed amonge you, that other men may the rather through your good enſamples learne to lyue charytably: then ſhall eche man louyngely lyue in this worlde, then ſhall ſedcyyon ceaſſe and charitie floryſhe: then brotherly loue ſhalbe amonge vs. And without this as I haue alredye tolde you, your fayth is nothyng worthe, yf you lyſte not to beleue me, looke what ſaynt Paule ſayth in his fyrſt epyſtle, and xiii. Chapiter to the Corinthyans, reade

forth that charitie and then ſhall you ſone ſe what fruites charitie bryngeth forth. Agayne I ſay that fayth and charitie ſo charyſhe one an other, that the one in no wyſe can be without the company of the other. Wherefore ſtyll I crye after one ſorte and maner, for Goddes ſake let eche man endeuour hym ſelfe to attayne charitie, and then vſe it and loue God (as I knowe no good Chriſten man dothe otherwyſe) aboue al thinges and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. Mary there be ſome that ſhewe ſmale loue towardes hym, for they feare not to blaſpheme him, to ſweare and ſtare by hym, as though he were more vyler then anye creature that lyuethe, his woundes, his ſoule, his harte, his bloude, his ſydes, his nayles, ſo that frome the crowne of the heade to the ſole of the foote, they leaue not one member of Chriſte vnrecyted, ye and for a moſte common othe they take his hole precious body and make it theyr ſweryng ſtocke, ye and this is done in the moſte exceſſe of fylthynes that they vſe, for when they are moſte dronke, then ſwere they moſt, when they are moſte angry then they ſwere and teere Chriſt in peeces. But O wycked people, O blaſphemers of God, O tormenters of Chryſte, O ye worſe then beaſtes, what

ſhall I call you, what ſhall I ſaye vnto you, ye feareleſſe people, ye ſhameleſſe people, haue you no regarde of nature, haue you no reſpecte to Chriſt? Knowe you not what you are, what you were, and what you ſhall come to? O thou earth and aſhes wylte thou blaſpheme hym ſo rygruſlye, whiche came downe from his maieſtye to delyuer the, whome the Deuyll faſt hadde bounde in the chaynes of ſyn? Thou arte muche lyke vnto the Adder or Serpent, of whome Yſope telleth a prety fable, a huſbande man founde this Adder in the colde ſnowe, and of his gentylnes broughte her home, and layde her by a fyer, where ſhe was wel recouered and rendred to her former ſtate agayne. (But nowe marke the gentylnes of this Adder) when the good huſband man came to her and touched her, to ſe howe ſhe fared, for his kyndenes ſhe caught holde aboute his boddy and ſtonge hym ſore, wherewith the good man beyng vexed (and not without greate cauſe) toke his Axe in his hande and cut her in peces. Euen ſo our mayſter and ſauyour Ieſus Chryſt, perceyuyng vs vyle and poyſoned wretches, lyeng and quiuering in the cold ſnowe of ſynne: to our euerlaſtynge comforte, he diſcended from his hyghe trone, noryſhinge vs with the hot fyer of feruent

loue, in preachyng and workynge for our behoofe, and waſhynge vs in the ſwete bathe of his moſt precyous bloud, through the warmthe and ſwetenes whereof, we were brought agayne into the fauoure of God, for which kynde acte and vnſpeakable benefyte, we tormente hym a freſhe, we do our dylygent to vexe hym, we blaſpheme hym: we ſette his moſte precyous body in the fore fronte of al our marchaū
               dyſe, we are moſt redy to do thoſe thynges whiche moſte erneſtly he dothe forbydde. Beware beware, beware be tyme, beware leſt by your importunable vexyng of God throughe your venemus and blaſphemus othes and abhomynable lyuyng: without eyther vertue, ſhame or feare, he ſodaynely with his axe or ſwerde (the ſharpnes wher of can not be expreſſed) cut and ſouder you from the lyuely members of his myſtycall body, and caſt you into the deepe Dongeon of hel, where ſhalbe wepyng and gnaſſhyng of tethe, where you ſhal ſuffer eternall payne, where you ſhall contynually blaſpheme, and neuer ceaſe thoughe you wolde, and yet ſhall you alway ſuffer the tormentes due for the ſame, I thynke yf you loued god, you wolde not on ſuche wyſe blaſpheme hym, you wold I thynke feare ſomewhat the punyſhemente dulye

ordeyned for ſuche blaſphemers. Are you paſte feare? remember ye not that the begynnynge of wyſedome, is feare of oure lorde? Wherefore wyſely loke vppon your ſynfull ſoule: and loſe not wylfully that thyng whiche Chriſt ſo derely bought, but leaue your ſweryng, leaue your blaſphemyng. Ywys you learne it not in the new Teſtamente, for I am ſure that our ſauyoure and redemer Ieſus Chryſte ſayth. Math. v. Thou ſhalt not ſwere by heauen for it is the ſeate of God, neyther yet by the earth, for it is his foteſtole. Nowe in this worde heauen, is comprehended all thynges therein contayned, and lykewyſe by this worde earth, is vnderſtanded euerye thynge conteyned within the ſame, ſo that Chriſt leaueth you nothyng to ſwere by, as appeareth by his wordes folowyng in the ſame Chapiter where he ſayth, lette your cōmunicacion be ye ye, and nay nay. O my lorde & God where be they that kepe thoſe ſayenges? verelye neuer ſo fewe in England, and agayne I thynke that there was neuer ſo many that red theſe ſaiengs But nowe we maye ſe that there be many readers and fewe folowers. What, nowe there maye not a boy tell a tale but or he come to the ende thereof, he muſte other ſwere by Chriſt or by ſome member perteynyng

to his moſte bleſſed body, nor nowe a woman can not ſel a poore pot with ale, but ſhe muſt ſwere ſome othe to ſet it forth withal, ye, euē though it be ſtarke nought. O good God what meane theſe people? thinke they to haue here (Eternam mencionē
                an eternall reſtyng place? Wyll they be of the Adders kynde we ſpake of euen nowe? Wyll you ſo vncurteouſlye handell hym that ſo gentely ordered you? I muſt nedes ſay you loue not Chriſte, for he ſayth hym ſelfe. Iohn. xiiii. Yf ye loue me kepe my commandementes. Nowe you breake his commaundementes, wherof it muſt nedes followe, that you loue hym not, and in that you do not loue him, you commyt ſin. And Stipendium peccati mors. The reward of ſynne is death. Rom. Cap. vi. wherfore for gods ſake loke well vpon your ſelues. But ye dryue of the tyme tyll the houre of death, or at the leaſte tyll ſyckenes or ſome other grefe happen to you▪ and then wyll you crye. Eſcchyel. Cap. xviii. Thou wylt not lorde the death of a ſynner, but rather that he ſhulde lyue and mende. But yf you wyll folowe my councell, reſte not to much vpon that poynte, for there is nothynge more certayne then death, neyther any thyng more vncertaine then the houre of death. Remember, remember wel theſe

wordes ſpoken by the Prophet Eſcchyell. Cap. xviii. Turne vnto me, and you ſhall be ſaued. Here Chryſte by ddeth you turne vnto hym, and the forme howe you ſhulde turne vnto hym, is wrytten by the holye Prophet Iohell, loke vpon it, and turne to Chryſt, whyle you haue tyme, turne from your blaſphemyng and ſwerynge, frome your periury and euyll lyuyng, gyue your perfecte charitie vnto god. Louynge hym and fearyng hym with all your harte. Yf you turne vnto Chriſte on this wyſe, leauyng your former lyuyng, and applyenge your ſelfe to followe goddes commaundementes: I doute not but God of his infynyte goodnes wyll loke vppon you, refreſhe you, and ſaue you, becauſe he wylleth not the death of a ſynner, but rather that he ſhulde lyue and mende, ſuch is the mercy of God towardes man. But euer take heede of boldenes, bolden not your ſelues ſo much vpon his mercy, to leaue al his cōmaundementes vnfulfylled. For yf you runne ſo far at rouers, lyke wantons and vnbrydeled coltes, he muſte needes ſcorge you, and beate you, wherefore I ſay playe not the parte of blynde bayerde. But gyue all honour, prayſe, glory, feare and loue, to god aboue al thynges heauenlye and earthly, for he is to be loued aboue

eyther Saynt, ſoule, Emperour, Kynge, Father, Mother, Wyfe, Chylde, or any other creature. And alſo beare feruent loue and charitie towardes thy neyghbour, of whiche charitie I haue ſomewhat ſpoken before, and wylmore heareafter by gods lycence takyng by the waye theſe wordes of Criſte. Math. xix. Si uis ad vitam ingredi ſerua mandata. Yf thou wylt entre into lyfe kepe the commaundementes. Nowe who ſo endeuoreth not hym ſelfe with all his power to folowe and fulfyl the commaundementes of god, can not claime any intereſt or tytle iuſtely in the kyngdome of heauen, and al the .x. commaundementes receyued of vs Chriſten men reſteth onely in this worde charitie, the one towardes god, and the other toward our neyghbour Well then ſyth without kepynge of the commaundementes. a man can not enter into heuen. I feare ſore leaſt our Baſmongers ſhall not entre into heauen, our rayſers of rentes, oure vſerers with ſuche lyke, as they that bye theyr neyghboures houſes ouer theyr heedes. O ye Moules ye may wel be lykened to theſe ryche men, ye caſt vp the earth hurtyng the good garden herbes. and the earth ſo caſte vp you lette it lye, and putteth it to no good vſe, but you go further and ſcrapes vp more,

in whiche doynge is muche hurte, but at laſt commeth mayſter Moulecatcher with his ſpade and caſteth you vp pre
                  •
               ely, and then deſtroy you. Euen ſo thoſe ryche men caſtethe and ſcrapeth vp the gooddes of this worlde, whiche is the carthe of man, and hurdeth it on heepes profytable, neyther to them ſelues nor other men (but rather hurtefull.) And at the length cōmeth deathe and catchethe the moules by the backe and then the deuyl deſtroyeth them. But O ye Leaſemongers, ye vſerers, ye rayſers of rentes aboue the value of that you ſet it, and ye that bye your neyghboures houſes ouer theyr heedes, gyue eare a lytell to Saynte Paule, and to the charge that he gaue vnto Timothe. The Byſhoppe commaundynge hym to charge other therewith ſayenge. Timothe.
            Epiſt. i. Cap. vi. Charge thou the ryche men of this worlde not to be hyghe mynded neyther to truſte in the vncertentie of ryches but in the lyuyng god whiche gyueth vs all thynges aboundantely to do good, to be ryche in good workes, to gyue with a good wyl &c. Let this one peece of ſaynte Paules Epiſtle be marked amonge our ryche men, and then ſhall they ſoone knowe whether that they do well in heapynge theyr goodes and truſtyng in theyr

ryches or no. But I pray you to what vſe do they kepe and ſtore them vp? Uerelye euen to bye theyr neyghbours houſes ouer theyr heedes, whiche is a thynge very deteſtable: and the ſmoke of ſuche mennes doynges aſſendeth vp to the trone of God, and there ſtynketh odiouſly before the face of his deuyne maieſtie▪ wherfore take good heede in tyme, leaſte God ſodeynely plage you. O ye wycked and vncharitable men, that do bye your neyghboures houſes ouer theyr heedes, wyl you for the entryng into a wretched houſe heare in earth, exclude and banyſhe your ſelfe from the euerlaſtynge kyngedome of heauen, ſuerly in thoſe your doynges, you tranſegreſſe ſore the commaundementes of God, and ſhewe your ſelues to be bothe vnfaythfull and vncharitable, in handlynge your neyghboures ſo vncharytably, whom you ſhuld loue & fauoure as your owne ſelfe. Remē
               ber that your lyfe flyeth as a ſhadow, and neuer abydeth in one ſtate and place, wherfore moſte hartely I beſeche euery good man and womā to loke vpon their ſelues: And euen as they wolde other men ſhulde do to them, ſo wolde I thē to do vnto their neyghboure, callynge vnto theyr mynde, that hence they muſte departe, but howe ſone, howe early, or how late they knowe

not, therefore (as the common prouerbe goeth) lyue to daye, as you wolde dye to morowe. Shake of your olde man, purge your ſower leauen: put not ſwete wyne into muſty bottels: ſuffer not the deuyl to rule you any longer: playe the man accordyng to the promes that you made at the fonte, which was to forſake the deuyl and all his workes, goo not backe frome thy worde, but lyke a good Chriſten man take for thy defence the buckler of fayth, and to fyght with, take the ſwerde of Goddes moſte holy worde, ſtande manfully that thou mayſt ſay with ſaynt Paule. Timo. Epiſto. ii. Cap. iiii. Bonum certamen certaui. I haue fought a good fyght. Good reader this mayſte thou do through the grace of God, for whiche I pray the cal, that thou mayſte ouercome the temptacyons of the deuyll, whiche is a thynge ſoone doone of a good wyllynge man, for as ſaynt Paule ſayth. Phil. Cap. iiii. Omnia poſſum in eo qui me conferrat. I can do althyng through hym that comforteth me. Wherfore I ſay once agayne, ſtande ſtedfaſtly agaynſt the deuyls temptacyons, and blaſpheme not our ſauyour and redemer Ieſus Chriſt, at the hearyng of whoſe name: al the deuyls in hell do tremble and quake, and all the Angels in heauen gyue reuerence to it: on

the other ſyde be not rygorus and cruell to thy neyghbour, conſyder that he is thy owne brother, a Chryſten man as thou art and bought with as great a pryce as thou waſt, although thy houſe be full of golde and ſyluer, and his body full of ſcabbes, thoughe there be as muche difference betwene you two as was betwene poore Laſarus and the ryche man, yet at the daye of Iudgement God wyl regarde that ſelly ſoule with all his ſcabbes vpon his body as muche as he wyll do you with all your golde and ſyluer, ye and may fortune more to, onles you occupy it wel whyleſt you be heare. Thus far good reader, haue I ſayd my mynde, becauſe I wolde you ſhulde beare a feruent loue to God: and charitie towardes your neyghboure, in the doyng whereof you ſhall not onely pleaſe God moſte hyghely, but alſo ſhewe thy ſelfe a good ſtewarde and baylye ouer that God hath lefte to the in cuſtody whiche is thy fayth. And now I wyl leaue the, truſting that thou wylt followe this lytell leſſon, by me ſet forth for thy furtheraunce in grace, remembryng that the chefe poynte thereof is for the augmentyng of charitie, and increaſe of good loue, whiche ioyned with fayth, and ſo vſed catholykely, bringeth eche good manne and woman (after

theyr progreſſe in this worlde) to the euerlaſtyng kyngdome of heauen, there perpetualy abydyng in ioy, whereas with moſt melodius armony Aungels contynually ſynge without ceaſſyng, Gloria in excelcis. to whiche moſt glorius tabernacle and celeſtyal kyngdome, our Lorde for his painfull paſſyon and incogitable loue towards vs borne, graunte the, the reader, and me the wryter to come. Amen.
            
               DEcetero fratres, quecunque ſunt uera, quecunque pudica, quecunque iuſta, quecunque ſancta, quecunque amabilia, quecunque bone fame, ſi qua virtus, ſi qua laus diſcipline, hec cogitate, quae et didiciſtis, et accepiſtis, et audiſtis, et vidiſtis in me, hec agite, et deus pacis eritvobiſcum. Phil. Cap. iiii.
            
            BRethren as for other thynges, what ſo euer be true, what ſo euer be ſhame faſte, what ſo euer be iuſte, what ſo euer be holy, what ſo euer are to be loued, what ſo euer be of good reporte, yf there be any vertue, yf there be anye prayſe of learnyng, be myndefull of thoſe thynges, and al whiche you haue learned and receyued, and harde, and ſene in me, thoſe thynges do you, and the god of peace ſhal abyde alway with you.
         
      
      
         
            
               
¶ Imprynted at London in Fleteſtrete at the ſygne of the Gedrge, nexte to ſaynt Dunſtones church by Wyllyam Powel.
            
               ¶ Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
            
         
      
   