
      
         
            
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE VNITING OF THE KINGDOM OF PORTVGALL TO THE Crowne of Caſtill: Containing the last warres of the Portugals against the Moores of Africke, the end of the houſe of Portugall, and change of that Gouernment. The deſcription of Portugall, their principall Townes, Caſtles, Places, Riuers, Bridges, Paſſages, Forces, Weakeneſſes, Reuenues, and Expences. Of the Eaſt Indies, the Iſles of Terceres, and other dependences, with many battailes by ſea and lande, skirmiſhes, encounters, ſieges, orations, and ſtratagemes of warre.
            
               Imprinted at London by Arn. Hatfield for Edward Blount. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST NOBLE and aboundant preſident both of Honor and vertue, HENRY Earle of Southampton.
            Right honorable and moſt woorthy Earle,
            
               IT is not my fortune to be ſo infortunately read, as to begin (after the common ſtampe of dedication) with a grai-headed Apophthegme, or ſome ſtraied ſentence out of Tully, but in ſuch proper and plaine language, as a moſt humble and affectionate duetie can ſpeake, I do heere offer vp on the altar of my hart, the firſt fruits of my long-growing endeuors; which (with much conſtancie and confidence) I haue cheriſht, onely waiting this happie opportunitie to make them manifeſt to your Lordſhip: where nowe if (in reſpect of the knowne diſtance, betwixt the height of your Honorable ſpirit, and the flatneſſe of my poore abilities) they turne into ſmoake and vaniſh ere they can reach a degree of your merite, vouchſafe yet moſt (excellent Earle) to remember it was a fire that kindled them, and gaue them life at leaſt, if not laſting. Your Honors patronage is the onely obiect I aime at; and were the worthineſſe of this Hiſtorie I preſent, ſuch as might warrant me an election out of a worlde of Nobilitie; I woulde ſtill purſue the happines of my firſt choiſe; which hath ſince beene confirmed to me by my reſpected friend the tranſlator, a Gentleman moſt ſincerely deuoted to your Honor: For the ſubiect it ſelfe I dare ſay nothing; ſince it is out of my element to iudge. But I haue heard others report it (and ſome of them alſo iudicious) to be a thing firſt and excellently written in Italian; then tranſlated into French, and generally receiued in both thoſe toongs through all chriſtendome for a faithfull, elegant, ſinewie, and well digeſted hiſtorie: what the beauties of it are now in this Engliſh habite, I make your Honorable Lordſhip the firſt and moſt competent Cenſor; wiſhing that before you begin to read farther, you could but reade my ſilence.
            
               By him that wants much to expreſſe his dueties to your Honor, EDW. BLOVNT.
            
         
         
            
            The Authors Apologie vnto the Reader.
            
               IF it argues guilt to be accuſed, no man ſhall be innocent; he is therefore blameleſſe, that being charged, defends himſelfe: Gentle Reader, the firſt impreſsion of this historie of Portugall, came no ſooner foorth, but many (greedie to detract from anothers glorie) did therein bitterly wrong me, accuſing me to be ill affected to the Portugall nation in generall, and a ſeuere cenſor of the priuate actions of great perſonages, and of the officers of that crowne. And albeit it behooueth him that ſhall write of late accidents, in the Theater of this vniuerſall worlde, to beare the malice and follie of many; beſides that, he ſhall hardly ſatisfie all; yet were it more tollerable, if ſome (content wrongfully to backbite me,) were not ſo tranſported with their owne paſſions, as to labour to haue the vſe of this Booke forbidden throughout all Spaine; notwithstanding it had beene allowed by the Inquiſitors: Albeit I knowe well that many men of iudgement, and louers of truth, haue ſhewed themſelues fauorers of this worke: yet haue I thought it fitte in this ſecond edition briefly to make my innocencie knowen. And although they haue inuented many more to theſe two ſlanders, yet will I ſatisfie euery point I thinke neceſſarie, with this ſuppoſition for a firme ground, that the truth and diligence of a hiſtorie, be the qualities that giue it ſpirit, and life, the which by no meanes can be infringed, without conuerting the moſt graue and profitable manner of writing, into the moſt vaine and preiudiciall of all others: So as if my accuſations grow from the truth and my diligence, I will not yeeld my ſelfe guiltie, ſeeing I cannot amend them without errour. But let them vnderſtande that I write onely to thoſe Readers that can iudge of the truth of a historie and the newtrallitie of the writer: First of all, they must conſider it was my chance to write the actions of that realme, which hapned in thoſe fower moſt vnfortunate yeeres, which ſucceeded that of 77. ſo as there is no reaſon that ſuch as report I was enclined to diſgrace the Portugals, ſhoulde from the qualitie of the time, ſiniſterly iudge of the diſpoſition of the writer; neither let them hold him partiall in the conquerors behalfe, ſeeing that in accidents of warre, they can hardly honour him that fals, but he that ſuffereth himſelfe to be vanquiſhed, must with his loſſe, willingly beare the blame that growes thereby: The which the ancient writers could ſo well obſerue (whoſe example I do willingly imitate) that if Titus Liuius had begon and finiſhed his historie in the courſe of Hannibals victorie, he had been held for a Carthaginian; and Ioſephus in deſcribing the calamities of the Iewes, and the triumphs of Titus, ſeemed a Romaine: If I writing of two battailes, where in the one, the Portugals loſt their king; in the other their kingdome; beſides that at ſea, and the loſſe of the Terceres; what

offence is it, if I ſeeme not a Portugall? ſeeing that if I were one, I ſhould not ſeeme to be ſo: or how is it poſsible to conuert this mornefull historie into praiſes, making him ſeeme valiant that looſeth? without doubt, if it had fallen to my lot, to write the deeds of that nation, whereby they made ſhew how apt they were to armes, and to noble attempts, as the victories they got of Castile at Aliubarotta, and at Trancoſa, the conqueſts they made in Affrick, their woonderfull nauigations and happie ſucceſſe in Aſia, touched in this hiſtorie, as occaſion required. I had not then beene more faithful then now I am, though more acceptable to Portugals, yet men of iudgment do with one minde feele both gaine and loſſe, praiſe and diſpraiſe, when they be truely related: So as without doubt we may conclude, that no man ought to cenſure the inclination of the writer by the matter he treates of, be it either in fauour or blame of the nation of which he writes; but onely of the truth and indifferencie he profeſſeth. My accuſers must alſo vnderſtand, that a Hiſtoriographer doth not wrong any nation, in deſcribing the qualities which the heauens that couer them, doe infuſe vpon them, the aire they breath, and the water they drinke, eſpecially when thoſe properties be not baſe but exceſſes of vertue: As for example, if a man ſhould (imitating Iulius Caeſar) write, that the French are in the beginning furious, and in the end, faint; he ſhoulde not for this ſhew him ſelfe an enimie, nor diſgrace that mightie and warlike nation: And who ſhould ſay that the Spaniards are proud, ſhould he therefore impugne their reputation publiſhed through the worlde? neither ſhould he offend the Portugals, that ſhould ſay they are naturally preſumptuous, ſeeing they neither can deny it, nor do ſeeke to hide it; yea themſelues are woont to ſay, that they liue by opinion, that is, they ſupport themſelues more, with that they imagine themſelues to be, then with what they are in effect: my accuſers ſhoulde likewiſe conſider, that I offend not the Portugals, in ſaying, that the ignorant regard not dangers a farre off, and feare them neere, if they meane not to ſeparate them from the condition of man, and againſt all reaſon make equall ignorance with knowledge. Moreouer I would gladly knowe why it were not lawfull for me without offence, to relate with truth the misfortunes and calamities of the Portugals, and the altered forme of their realme, as well as for ſome of the ſame nation to write many of their actions blame woorthie, and yet not helde diſcourteous: The entrie which Henrie the baſtard, king of Caſtill made armed into Portugall, running from the confines of Gallitia, vnto Lisbone, where he lodged, forcing obedience in all places, was it not more diſhonorable then any thing I haue written, king Ferdinand not being able to make any reſiſtance? Read the Chronicles of Iohn the ſecond their naturall king, being quiet and peaceable, what conſpiracies were practiſed against him by the nobilitie of his realme, ſo as he was forced to ſeeke reuenge by ſtabbing, and to behead ſome of the chiefe publikely, is not this a reprochfull thing? Although ſome alleage, that the king exceeded in the execution, & that by nature he was a ſeuere man, and full of reuenge, yet there want not others that do number him amongſt the ſaints; but be it as it may, it lies not in me to iudge, and yet this booke is Printed and ſold in Lisbone, whereas my booke (that treates not of matters of ſo great doubt) is mightily abhorred. As for the priuate perſonages of the realme, neither haue they reaſon to ſurmiſe that I haue ſpoken of them, either with paſsion or immodeſtlie, the which I beleeue themſelues haue founde, if they haue had any leiſure to read this hiſtorie with iudgement, or haue any perfect knowledge in the Italian toong. But relying vpon the report of ſuch as (enclined to flatter) reprooue all writings,

that are not corrupted with flatterie, it is no woonder, if they be induced to beleeue, that I haue written diſcurteouſly of them and with paſsion: But to make knowne the contrarie, they muſt vnderſtande, that of vices which are common to ſtates, and to mens priuate humours, we may ſaie the like as hath beene ſaide of thoſe that are commonly incident vnto nations, that they blemiſh not ſo much as they ought to be concealed, but march alwaies vnited to the ſtate and qualitie of the perſon. For example, he that talking of a yoong gentleman, ſhoulde ſay, that he were phantaſticke, cholericke, amorous, arrogant, for all this he doth him no wrong; for beſides they are no baſe affections, they are commonly incident to youth and nobilitie: In like ſort, an officer reſpected by his prince, or any fauorite whoſoeuer, ought not repine, if he be deſcribed to be tealous, circumſpect, ambitious, a temporizer, carefull in his owne cauſes, and careleſſe of others, being qualities that do accompanie princes fauours: ſo as when I touch any one with ſuch like, no man of iudgement ought to greene more, then if I ſhoulde terme him cholericke or flegmatike, being certaine naturall qualities, as the humours and inclinations: Notwithſtanding when I particularly note ſuch points as ſeeme blame woorthie, although they be publike and apparant, yet doe I ſuſpend my iudgement, attributing the faults to the emulation of courts, and the ambition of competitors: And ſuch as will not be ſatisfied with this exception ſhewe plainly they deſire to be flattered; but they ſtriue in vaine, for I eſteeme flatterie in a writer, to be like the ſinne of idolatrie. Some haue beene ſo ſenſible as to note for an exceſſe (ſpeaking of any officer) to ſate couertly, that men tranſported ſlander him with ſome ſecret action, to ſuch I can make no anſwer, ſeeing they are not content that I tearme them paſsionate that blame others, that I reprehende ſurmiſes that I call in queſtion that which others affirme for certaine, excuſing in a manner the accuſed.
            Others haue laboured to publiſh vnto the world, that in my relation touching the title of the realme, I haue ſhewed my ſelfe partiall for the Catholique king: To ſuch I can not ſay any thing, but wiſh them to be aduiſed, they accuſe not the diuine prouidence as partiall, which depriued of life twentie ſucceſſors of that crowne, all preceading the ſaide king. But I woulde haue theſe men to tell me if in this historie (where I coulde not alleage Bartoll nor Bald) I haue omitted any one point of importance, which hath beene alleaged by the pretendents, and haue not ſet euery reaſon downe as their owne aduocats did plead it: Let them conſider if there be any thing omitted touching the repreſentation of the Dutcheſſe Katherine, of the tranſmiſsion of Rainucius Farneſe, of the precedence of Phillibert duke of Sauoy, in caſe that Henrie had out liued Philip, of the election the people pretended, of Antonie his grounds, and his pretended legitimation; and to conclude, if there were anything defectiue of that which Queene Katherine of Medicis alleaged against the eleuen kings of that realme: Now if all theſe reaſons which I haue ſo largely ſet downe, can not hinder the king of Spaine from being the eldeſt kinſeman, that Henrie left when he died, a male, and legitimate, what faulte is there in me? If men will not beleeue that Katherines prerogatiue by her father be of more vertue and efficacie then Philips owne right, and that the imperfection deriued from his mother doth more preiudice the king, then that of the Dutcheſſe which remaines in her owne perſon, how can I helpe it? It is most manifest, that ſuch onely as are partiall

haue held me partiall in relating plainely, this title with the reſt, without giuing mine owne iudgement, and the rather for that they ſee ſuch as are indifferent, doe happily eſteeme it better then the reſt: I may not be more tedious in this reſpect, hoping it ſhall ſuffice for euerie man of a free iudgement to diſcerne mine innocencie, from the malice or ignorance of mine aduerſaries. But moreouer I entreate them that know me to be a writer not accustomed to lie, to conſider that I haue written to Italians in the Italian toong, who coulde not perfecty vnderſtande the ſubſtance of this historie, if I had giuen them leſſe knowledge of men whom they knew not: And to verifie this, let a Portugall writer in Italy deſcribe in his owne toong, vnto his owne countrimen the tumults of any of our cities, he ſhall well finde, (if he deſire to be vnderſtoode in Portugall) whether he may forbeare to ſpecifie much more then I haue done, of the humours of the head and principall members of that prouince whereof he writes. But if all this ſufficeth not to iuſtimine me; I make God iudge of the ſinceritie of mine hart, and the indifferencie I haue ſtrictly obſerued.
         
         
            
            
               THE GENEALOGIE OF THE Kings of Portugall from the beginning of that Kingdome, vnto the ende of the houſe of Portugall, with the pretendants to that Crowne.
            HENRIE iſſued from Beſançon, firſt Earle of Portugall, married with Theraſie daughter to Alphonſe the ſixt, King of Caſtile, about the yeere of our Lord 1090. by whom he had

                  
                     Alphonſe Henrie, which was the firſt king.
                  Theraſie Henrie, and
                  
                  one other daughter married to Ferdinand Mendes.
                  
               
            
            1. Alphonſe Henrie, firſt Duke and King of Portugall, ſonne to the ſaide Henrie, he ſucceeded his father about the yeere 1112. he tooke vpon him the title of King about the yeere 1139. he raigned in all about 72. yeeres: he married with Malfade Manrique de Lara, by whom he had iſſue

                  
                     Sanches, who was after King.
                  
                     Vrraca, Queene of Leon.
                  
                     Theraſie, Counteſſe of Flanders.
                  Malfade.
               
            
            2. Sanches the firſt, ſonne to the ſaid Alphonſe, about the yeere 1184. he raigned 28. yeeres: he married Aldoncia, daughter to Count Raimond Berenger of Barcelone, by whom he had

                  
                     Alphonſe, King.
                  
                     Ferdinand, Earle of Flaunders.
                  
                     Peter, Earle of Vrgel in Arragon.
                  Henrie.
                  
                     Theraſie, wife to Alphonſe of Leon.
                  
                     Malfade, Queene of Caſtile.
                  
                     Sanches, a Nunne.
                  
                     Blanche, and
                  Berenguela.
               
            
            3. Alphonſe the ſecond, ſonne to Sanches, the yeere 1212. he raigned 11. yeeres, and married Vrraca of Caſtile, daughter to Alphonſe the noble, by whom he had

                  
                     Sanche, King.
                  
                     Alphonſe, King.
                  Ferdinand.
                  
                     Leonor, Queene of Denmarke.
               
            
            
               
4. Sanche the ſecond, called Capello, ſonne to Alphonſe the ſecond, the yeere 1223. he raigned in troubles vnto the yeere 1257. he married Mencia Lopez, by whom he had no children: he died in Caſtile incapable to rule.
            5. Alphonſe the third, called the Braue, brother to Sanche the ſecond, of a regent he made himſelfe King about the yeere 1257. & raigned 22. yeeres: he married with Matilde Counteſſe of Boloigne in Picardie, by whom he had Ferdinand or Peter, & Robert: in her life time he married with Beatrice, baſtard daughter to Alphonſe the 10. called the wiſe King of Caſtile, by whom he had

                  
                     Denis, King.
                  Alphonſe.
                  
                     Blanche, a Nunne.
                  Constance.
               
            
            6. Denis, ſonne to Alphonſe the third, the yeere 1279. he raigned 48. yeeres, and was married to Iſabella, daughter to Peter King of Arragon, by whom he had

                  
                     Conſtance, Queene of Caſtile.
                  
                     Alphonſe, who was after King.
                  
                     Peter, Earle of Portalegre.
               
            
            7. Alphonſe the fourth, ſonne to Denis, in the yeere 1325. he raigned 32. yeeres, and married Beatrice of Caſtile, by whom he had

                  
                     Peter, that was King.
                  Marie.
                  Alphonſe.
                  Denis.
                  Iean.
                  
                     Eluira, Queene of Aarragon.
               
            
            8. Peter, called the cruell, ſonne to Alphonſe the fourth, the yeere 1357. hee raigned 10. yeeres, and married Blanche, daughter to Peter King of Caſtile, whom he put away, and after married with Conſtance daughter to Iean Emanuell, by whom he had

                  
                     Lewis, who died yoong.
                  
                     Ferdinand, King.
                  
                     Marie, wife to Ferdinand of Arragon.
                  
                     Beatrice, died yoong.
               
            
            And of Agnes de Castro, a ſuppoſed wife, he had

                  Alphonſe.
                  Iean.
                  Denis.
                  
                     Beatrice, Counteſſe of Albuquerque.
               
            
            
               
And by Theraſie Gallega his concubine, he had

                  
                     Iean, who was King.
               
            
            9. Ferdinand, ſonne to Peter, the yeere 1367. he raigned about 17. yeeres, and married Leonor Telles de Meneſes, by whom he had

                  
                     Beatrice, Queene of Caſtile.
               
            
            10. Iean, called of good memorie, ſonne to the ſaid Peter, the yeere 1383. he raigned about 49. yeeres, and married with Philip, daughter to Iean of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter, by whom he had

                  Blanche.
                  Alphonſe.
                  
                     Edward, King.
                  
                     Peter Duke of Coimbra, who had by Iſabell of Arragon his wife,
                  
                     Peter that was Conſtable; Iean, King of Cypres; Iſabell, Queene of Portugall; Philip, a Nunne; Ieams, a Cardinall; Beatrice, wife to the Lord of Raueſtein.
                  
                     Henrie, Duke of Viſeo.
                  
                     Iſabell, Dutcheſſe of Burgundie.
                  
                     Iean, maſter of Saint Iaques.
                  
                     Ferdinand, maſter of the order called d' Auis, or Saint Benet.
                  
               
            
            11. Edouard, ſonne to Iean, the yeere 1433. he raigned 5. yeeres: he married Leonor of Arragon, daughter to Ferdinand the 1. by whom he had

                  
                     Alphonſe, King.
                  
                     Ferdinand, Duke of Viſeo, who had by his wife,
                  Philip.
                  
                     Leonor, wife to Frederike the 3. Emperour.
                  Catherine.
                  
                     Iean, Queene of Caſtile.
                  
                     Beatrice, wife to Iean, Maſter of Saint Iaques.
                  
                     Leonor, Queene.
                  Dominique.
                  
                     Emanuell, King.
                  
                     Iſabell, Dutcheſſe of Bragance.
               
            
            12. Alphonſe the fift, called the Affrican, ſoone to Edward, the yeere 1438. he raigned 43. yeeres: hee married Iſabell, daughter to Peter Duke of Coimbra his vncle, by whom he had

                  
                     Iean, who liued but a while.
                  Ieanne.
                  
                     Iean, King.
               
            
            13. Iean, the 2. ſon to Alphonſe the 5. the yeere 1481. he raigned 14. yeeres, and married Leonor, daughter to Ferdinand Duke of Viſeo, by whom he had

                  
                     Alphonſe, who died before his father.
               
            
            
               
14. Emanuell, ſoone to Ferdinand Duke of Viſeo, borne in the yeere 1468. began to raigne in the yeere 1495. and raigned fiue yeeres: he died at Liſbone the third of September 1521. he married Iſabell the eldeſt daughter of Ferdinand and Iſabell, King and Queene of Caſtile, by whom he had Michaell, who died yoong: and to his ſecond wife, he tooke Marie ſiſter of the ſaid Iſabell, by whom he had

                  
                     Iean, who was after King.
                  
                     Iſabell, wife to Charles the 5. Emperor, of whom is iſſued Philip, King of Spaine.
                  
                     Beatrice, wife to Charles the third Duke of Sauoy, from whom iſſued Emanuell Phillibert, father to Charles Emanuell now Duke of Sauoy.
                  
                     Lewis, father to Anthonie the Baſtard.
                  
                     Henrie Cardinall, King.
                  
                     Alphonſe, Cardinall.
                  Katherine.
                  Ferdinand.
                  
                     Edward, husband to Iſabell, daughter to Iean Duke of Bragance, by whom he had Marie, wife to Alexander Farneſe Prince of Parma, father to Rainuce now Duke of Parma; and Katherine wife to Iean the ſecond Duke of Bragance, ſonne to Theodoſe.
                  
                  
                     Anthonie, who died ſoone after his birth.
               
            
            And of Elenor, daughter to Philip Archduke of Auſtria, ſiſter to Charles the fift, he had

                  
                     Charles, who died yoong.
                  
                     Marie, who died a maide of the age of 56. yeeres.
               
            
            15. Iean the third, ſonne to Emanuell and of Marie his wife, borne the 7. of Iune 1502. he began to raigne the 15. of December 1521. and raigned 36. yeeres; he died the 27. of Iune, 1557. and married with Katherine ſiſter to Charles the 5. Emperour, the 5. of September, 1525. by whom he had

                  Alphonſe.
                  
                     Marie, the firſt wife to Philip the ſecond King of Spaine, of whom iſſued Charles that is dead.
                  Katherine.
                  Beatrice.
                  Emanuell.
                  Philip.
                  
                     Iean, Prince of Portugall, who had by Ieanne daughter to Charles the fift, Emperour, Sebaſtien, who was King.
                  Anthonie.
               
            
            16. Sebastien, ſonne to Prince Iean, borne the 20. of Ianuarie, 1554. he began to raigne the yeere 1557. and raigned 21. yeeres; he died in the battell againſt the Moores the 7. of Auguſt, 1578. being vnmarried.
            
               
17. Henrie, Cardinall, and Primat of Portugall, ſonne to King Emanuell by Marie his wife, borne the 16. of Ianuarie, 1512. in the yeere 1578. he raigned about a yeere and a halfe, and died in the beginning of the yeere 1580. he was the laſt of the houſe of Portugall, to whom ſucceeded.
            18. Philip, ſonne to Charles the fift, Emperour, and of Iſabell, King of Spaine, &c. borne the 7. of May, 1527. &c.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE VNITING OF THE REALME OF PORTVGALL TO THE CROWNE OF CASTILL.
            
               The Contents of the firſt Booke.
               The originall of the Realme of Portugall, the deſcription thereof with their newe conquests: The life of King Sebaſtian, his first voyage into Affrick, his enteruiew with the Catholique King at Guadalupa, the preparatiues of warre made at Lisbone for the enterprize of Affrick: the kings departure from Portugall with his armie.
            
            
               I Vndertake the Hiſtorie of the Realme of PORTVGALL; from the time that king Sebaſtian the firſt, paſſed into Affrick with a mightie armie to make warre againſt the Moores, which inhabite Mauritania Tingitana; till that (after many afflictions) this Realme was vnited to thoſe of Spaine, vnder Phillip the ſecond king of Caſtill. A ſubiect of importance for the generall ſtate, by the increaſe of power to ſo mightie a king: yea conſiderable for the diuers accidents hapned in ſo ſhort a time, contrarie to common hope; and profitable, by the examples of the inſtabilitie of this worlde, and the dangers that Princes and people runne into by their ill grounded reſolutions. I hope to relate theſe euents ſincerely with truth, hauing beene preſent at the greateſt part, and receiued the reſt from a faithfull Reporter. I am voide of paſſion, an enimie to the vncorrupt writing of Hiſtoriographers, being neither borne in any of thoſe countries, nor ſubiect or vaſſall to any king or prince. But before I enter into the welſpring of thoſe warres, I haue thought it conuenient to make a briefe relation of the ſtate of the Realme, of the ſcituation, beginnings, enterpriſes, and ſuch like, to the end, that

being to report the fall, we may withall ſee the riſing thereof, by what meanes it encreaſed, and was ſupported, how and when it declined, and finally altered his forme.
            
               The deſcription of the Realme of Portugall.
               
                  POrtugall is a part of Spaine, lying vpon the furtheſt borders of the Ocean. It bordereth vpon the Eaſt with the kingdome of Caſtill, vpon the Weſt with the great Ocean, vpon the North with Gallicia, and towards the South with the Atlantike ſea and Andelouzia. The late writers haue deuided it into ſixe countries, which they call Comarques, that is, beyond the riuer of Tagus, Eſtremadura, betwixt Duero and Minies (and this with the countrie which ſtretcheth to Coimbra is the ancient Portugall) behinde the mountaines Beira, and Algarues, which laſt hath alſo the Title of a kingdome. It containes in circuit 850. miles, whereof 400. run along the Sea ſhore, the reſt is maine land, which maketh it in forme long and narrow: It hath in it eighteene cities, with many great villages and caſtles, in number aboue 470. Three of theſe cities haue Archbiſhopricks, Braga, Lisbone, and Euora: whereof the firſt is Lord both ſpirituall and temporall. Nine haue their Biſhopricks, Coimbra, Lamego, Viſco, Porto, Miranda, Portalegro, Guarda, Leiria and Eluas: the other fiue remaine without dignitie, and thoſe are Bragança, Tauira, Lagos, Faro and Silues: Theſe laſt fower be in the kingdome of Algarues, whereof one Biſhop hath the Title. It is watered with many riuers, whereof two are moſt famous, Tagus and Duero; the firſt runneth by the walles of Lisbone, and ſixe or ſeuen miles off diſchargeth it ſelfe into the Sea; the other doth the like by the citie of Porto, and two miles from thence falleth into the Ocean: from their mouthes vnto the citie they are no riuers, but as it were armes and boſomes of the Sea; and moſt aſſured and capable portes for many great ſhips which may ſaile farre vp againſt the ſtreame, but further in that of Lisbone then of the other, whereas many great veſſels paſſe fifteene or twentie miles vp beyonde the towne: beſides theſe two portes, twentie miles from Lisbone, towards

the South, is Settuual, which hath a ſmall Tower at the entrie thereof, with a port capable of many ſhips. And in Algarues is Tauira, Lagos, and Villeneuue; theſe three are of reaſonable capacitie, the reſt are leſſe, with many pleaſant plaſhes. The ſeate of the countrie is commodious for all partes of the world; being in the middeſt of many great kingdomes, fit for the ancient and later nauigations: For turning towards the Weſt, they diſcouer directly Gallicya, Biſcay, Fraunce, England, Germanie, & the other Northerne Regions. Before them lieth the Iſlands of Azores (otherwiſe called Terceres) the fortunate Iſlands, with the countries called the Weſt Indies. On the left hād lieth Andelouzia, & the Streits of Gibraltar, by the which they enter into the Mediterranean Sea, for the Nauigation of Italie and Greece. And leauing the Streits coaſting Affrick, on the left hand they diſcouer many nations and new people, vnknowne to the auncient, who beleeued that the burning Zone was inhabitable: from which places many ſhips arriue at Lisbone with great riches, chieflie from the Eaſt Indies, the which the Portugalles themſelues (as we ſhall declare hereafter) conquered: beſides their traffiqne with the kingdome of Caſtile, which lieth behinde them.
               
                  The deſcription of Liſbone. Lisbone is the beſt and chiefeſt of all their Cities, on the which the whole Realme dependes: It is verie populous, yea many beleeue that of all the cities of Chriſtendome (except Paris) it containes the greateſt number of people. The aire is verie wholeſome and temperate; diſtant from the Equinoctiall nine and thirtie degrees; and with the ebbing and flowing of the ſalt water (which is great vpon that coaſt) there bloweth alwaies a temperate winde, which doth refreſh it. It is neither wholie plaine nor all mountaines, but deuided into fiue ſmall hilles, betwixt th'one and the other of theſe, the plaine extends vnto the Riuer. It hath beene walled, whereof ſome part continues to this day; but for that it hath beene ſince much augmented, that part without the walles exceedes the other in greatnes: There ſtands vpon an high hill a very ancient caſtell, which hath no other ſtrength in it but his height, nor any guard, but is reſerued as a priſon for noble men. At the mouth of Tagus, on the citie ſide, ſtands a Fortreſſe built after the neweſt manner, which they cal the rocke of Saint Iulian, made to defend the entrie of the Riuer. The fruite it bringeth foorth ſurpaſſeth all their neighbours in bountie: and

although it yeeldeth not corne ſufficient to feede them, yet haue they prouiſion daily out of Fraunce and Germanie. The whole Realme is at this preſent greatly inhabited, being repleniſhed with manie Noblemen and Gentlemen, and much building of ſhips, and veſſels for ſundrie Nauigations: Beſides the order of the knights of Saint Iaques and Alcantara, or of Saint Bennet, which they call d'Auis (of a place ſo named,) theſe carrie a red croſſe, and theſe a greene, like vnto the Knights of Caſtill) when as the Templers were ſuppreſſed, they did inſtitute another order with the ſame reuenewes; which they call the Knights of Chriſt, bearing a red croſſe, and in the midſt a white, the which are bound to goe to the warre againſt infidels, to whome Pope Alexander the ſixth, did ſince graunt libertie to marrie. And their Kings hauing encreaſed their reuenewes, a great part of their Nobilitie affected this order, although they haue many times receiued men baſe and vnworthie. A great part of this Realme was ſometimes vnited to the crowne of Caſtill, but in the yeere of our Lord one thouſand one hundreth and tenne, Alphons the ſixth being King, that part towards the north was ſeparated, giuing it in marriage for a certaine tribute, to Henrie nephew to the Earle of Burgundie, borne at Beſanſon, marrying Theraſie his baſtard daughter: for that comming out of Fraunce with Count Raimond of Tholouſe his vncle, who was after Earle of Gallicia; he went to the warres which the Caſtillians had againſt the Moores that poſſeſſed Spaine. And although ſome deriue the originall of this Count Henrie from Hungarie, others from Aragon, and from other places; yet this is the moſt approoued opinion: But it hapneth in the originall of Kings, as of great riuers, whoſe mouthes are knowne, but not their ſprings.
               
                  The Portugals conqueſts. Portugall was then obſcure, vntilled, poore, and reduced into ſtreight limits, yet Alphons Henry, ſonne vnto this firſt Earle, did greatly augment it by his valiant exploits, taking many places from the Moores by force, againſt whom hauing woone a great victorie, in a pitched battaile, he was proclaimed King by his ſoldiors, in a place called Campo d'Ourique, and following his victorie, woone Saint Arem and Lisbone, remaining peaceable Lord of the Realme; he had the title of King confirmed by Pope Alexander the fourth, for a certaine ſmall tribute. Their firſt king which ſucceeded him, named Alphonſo the thirde, did no leſſe augment it by another meanes:

For hauing (before his comming to the Crowne) married with Matilda Counteſſe of Boloigne in Picardie, being now in poſſeſſion of the Realme, he put her away of his owne proper motion, and without cauſe, taking to wife Beatrice, baſtard daughter to Alphonſo, the tenth King of Caſtill ſurnamed the wiſe, to haue in dowrie with her (as indeed he had) the kingdome of Algarues. So as their lymits being extended as they be at this preſent, and the Moores ſubdued, who kept them in martiall exerciſe, they began ſince to make war with the Kings of Caſtill, although their Dominions were alwaies greater then the Portugals; the which they did ſo often and with ſuch obſtinacie, that theſe nations all of one continent, iſſued from one ſtocke, & of one language, were enflamed one againſt the other with ſo mortall a hatred, that it remaineth euen vntill this daie, but more with the Portugals then the Spaniards. And although theſe late warres did breede them more honor then profit; yet were they not without ſome vtilitie; for that this continuall exerciſe did maintaine them in diſcipline and keepe them from delights and idlenes, capitall enimies to any State. Since which time they haue not remained idle, but (inured vnto war) wonne vnto themſelues ſome honour vnder Iohn the firſt, at the perſwaſion of Henry his ſonne, they laboured to take from the Moores certaine places in Affricke, the which ſucceeded happily. For in time they became Maiſters in Mauritania Tingitana of the townes of Ceute, Tanger and Arzilla, (and this is that auncient Zillia) and other places; which ſince they haue either loſt, or abandoned to the Moores (as they did Arzilla) being of great charge and ſmall profit. They onely maintained and defended the two firſt, and built towards the Weſt, Mazagon, being ſeated at the mouth of Hercules ſtraites; for holding thoſe places the Moores ſhould not harbor ſo neere vnto Spaine, but they ſerue, as a buckler vnto that Prouince. By reaſon of theſe euents they extended their hopes yet further, ſo as the Ilands of Madera, not farre diſtant, and the Terceres, lying from Liſhbone 850. miles, in the fortie degree of latitude (then vntilled and vninhabited) were by them diſcouered and peopled: And not yet content (eſpecially the ſaid Henry, who aſpiring to higher matters, though with leſſe hope then the effect which followed) they began (ſailing through the Ocean) to coaſt Affricke, ſearching new countries and nations: So as

running along that coaſt by the ſpace of many yeeres, they went on ſo far, that comming to the other Hemiſphere, they diſcouered all Ethiopia. And although Alphonſo the fifth of that name, and the twelfth King renewed the war againſt the Spaniard, yet did they not diſcontinue their nauigation, to their great good; but in the end hauing made peace with the catholique King Ferdinand, in the yeere of our Lord 1479. they had more leiſure to think of their new conqueſt. It is worth the obſeruing, that in capitulations then made, it was particularly ſpecified, that the peace was concluded for a hundreth yeeres and one; naming alwaies a certaine for an vncertaine: But this prooued a propheſie: for it continued iuſt a hundreth yeeres & one; for ſo much time paſſed from thoſe wars vnto this which I vndertake to write: if the words of the Treatie agree with the qualitie of the euent. The Realme was greatly ſtrengthened both with people and wealth, and ſince encreaſed more; when as Ferdinand and Iſabell, King and Queene of Caſtill, in the yeere 1482. expelled the lewes out of their Dominions being then in great numbers: they agreed with Iohn the ſecond, ſucceſſor to Alphonſo the fifth, and obtained libertie (paying eight duckats for euerie perſon) to enter into his countrey, vpon condition to depart at a certaine time prefixed, and that the King ſhould appoint them ſhipping to tranſport them. So as vpon thoſe conditions (which were not fully obſerued) there entred about 20000. families, and in euery one ten perſons at the leaſt: the time of their departure expired, and not performed, many remained ſlaues; others either vnwilling to depart, or to looſe their goods were baptized, as the reſt had done that remayned in Caſtill. So as vnder the name of new Chriſtians, the greateſt part remayned in Portugall vnknowen; being vndiſtinguiſhed, and allyed for money with ſome Noblemen of the countrey; they laboured to be admitted for citizens: And although (according vnto reaſon of State) this manner of peopling were not good, being of a nation different in blood and law, the which in multiplying might cauſe an important diuiſion, being many in number; yet brought it great profit to the Crowne. Since in the time of Emanuell the fourteenth King, who began to raigne in the yeere 1495. they continued their new nauigation, with greater feruencie, and more quiet: For the Caſtillians being growen mightier by meanes of the forces annexed to their

Crowne, and hauing by new alliances drawen vnto them the loue of the Portugales, the one durſt no more contend, & the other ſuffered them to liue in peace. His predeceſſors hauing many yeeres coaſted along Affricke, they built a fort at Argin; tooke the Iſlands of Heſperides, which now are called Cape-Vert; fortifyed the Caſtle of Saint George in Ethiopia, which they call Mina; diſcouered the Princes Iſland, and that of Saint Thomas, which lyeth perpendicularly vnder the Equinoctiall, with certaine ſmal Ilands thereabouts, they became Lords ouer all. And paſſing further, they entred into league with the Realmes of Congo, and Angolla, all Moores; hauing paſſed the great Cape ofOf good hope. 
                  Buena Eſperança, and the Iſland of Saint Laurence, right againſt it vpon the mayne land they became Lords of Soffolla, Mozambique, and Melynde: where according to the humours and qualitie of the people; they had won ſome by loue, & ſome by force, although for the moſt part where they ſet footing, they preuailed by Armes. In the time of the ſaid Emanuell they paſſed the mouth of the red ſea, traffiquing at Socotra, & Calahiate, they did run through the Perſian gulph, and (hauing paſſed the mouth of the riuer Indus) they entred into India, where firſt by traffique, & after by force, they landed at Calecut, Cochin, and other places thereabouts; but more ſtrongly then in any other place vnder the conduct of Alphonſo Albuquerque, a famous captaine at Goa, a ſmall Iland in the Realme of Accen, neere vnto the countrey of Idalcan, the which is now a citie with an Archbiſhopricke, chiefe of that State, where the Vizeroy maketh his ordinarie aboad. They haue gone along all that coaſt building ſmall fortreſſes, and hauing turned backe to the mouth of the ſaid gulph, they are become Maiſters of the Ile of Ormus; and along that coaſt haue conquered the cities of Chaul, Damane, Bazain, and Diu. Vpon the point of the coaſt of Mallabar (which they call the Cape of Comery) turning towards the gulph of Gangis, they haue traffique, and fortreſſes in the Ile of Zeilan, which ſome take to bee the ancient Taprobana, where groweth the beſt Cinnamom. And hauing paſſed the ſaid gulph towards the Eaſt, & the mouth of Gangis, they diſcouered the other coaſt, at the point whereof (which the ancient call the golden Cherſoneſſe) they became Lords of the towne of Malaca, fiue and twentie miles from the great Iland of Somatra (held alſo of ſome for Taprobana.) And paſſing on further,

not onely by their traffique, in the Realme of Pegu, and other countries vpon the firme lande; but alſo by their nauigation, they haue diſcouered the greater and leſſer Iaua, the kingdome of China, the great ſea of the Iſles of the Molucques, from whence come all the Cloues and Nutmegs, with many other drugs, the Ile of Iappon: To conclude, they haue ſayled on ſo far as they haue met in thoſe quarters with the Caſtillians that came to the Conqueſt of the Weſt Indies, diſcouered by Christopher Columbus a Geneuoys, in the name of the Kings of Caſtill. Of late daies ſome by theſe two nauigations haue compaſſed the whole world, and ioyned Eaſt to Weſt: They haue alſo in the time of Emanuell conquered (oppoſite to Ethiopia, and to the Cape ofOf good hope. 
                  Buena eſperança) the prouince which they cal S. a Croix, commonly called Brazill, ioyning to Peru, running 1500. miles in length, yet ſtretcheth it not far into the maine land: they haue deuided it into eight parts, which they call Captaineſhips, and haue in a manner giuen it to thoſe that haue conquered it, reſeruing to the King the greateſt part of the iuriſdiction. And although for a time it did ſeeme of ſmall profit, ſo as the criminall Iudges of Portugall did, and doe yet ſtill, confine and baniſh thither theeues, murtherers, and ſuch like malefactors; yet being fertile, it is greatly inhabited, ſo as at this day there are great dwellings and manie buildings for ſugars. The principall townes be the Bay of Alſaints and Pernanbuc: All theſe countries of new conqueſt (whereof we haue made mention) are rich, and of great importance, from thence commeth yeerely (as we haue ſaid) into Portugall, ſhips laden with ſugars, ſpice, drugs, ſtones, with many other precious things and of great value. And to ſay the truth, this nation is woorthie of great praiſe; that hauing but a ſmall and barren countrey, they haue made themſelues equall (by the good inſtitutions, frugalitie, and vertue of ſome of their Kings) not onely to all the kingdomes of Spaine: but haue gloriouſly maintained war againſt Caſtil, a Realme far more rich and mightie, then that of Portugall, and their other neighbours. They haue ſhewed the like vertue, nay rather greater, far from home, as well in Affricke, as at the Indies, hauing not onely perfourmed ſo woonderfull a nauigation, as was held in the beginning by the wiſeſt to be raſh and fooliſh; but alſo giuen ſuch teſtimonie of their Armes in thoſe parts, that the writers hold many of

their deeds to be miraculouſly performed, by reaſon of the inequalitie wherewith they were attempted, hauing ſhewed themſelues in fight at ſea, and defending of forts, more valiant than in any thing elſe. And beſides the conqueſt of ſo great an empire, in ſo long and large a ſea, as we haue written; it hath cauſed an other good of greater importance for Chriſtian religion; the which is now planted in all thoſe countries: So as whole Realmes which were Idolatrous, are now obedient to the Apoſtolique Sea (to the great commendation of the Ieſuits, whom in that countrey they call Apoſtles) who haue and doe ſtill maintaine a ſpirituall war. Notwithſtanding the Portugals who for the ſpace of 460. yeeres had beene buſied in theſe glorious attempts, who had planted their croſſes in the fartheſt bounds of the Eaſt, whereas the name of Chriſt was not yet knowen, they haue not ſince followed the ſteps begunne, but contented with the weake borders of the Indian ſeas, they haue not pearſt into the maine lande, but (corrupted with the pleaſures of the people, and inriched with the traffique of marchandize) they haue beene content to enioy their gettings, not acknowledging the benefite of the giuer of graces: and hauing conuerted the militarie reuenewes of Commandries into pleaſures, they became idle and vaine; attributing to themſelues the honors and ceremonies which faithfull Chriſtians reſerue vnto God: they liued long in this eſtate, yet in good opinion of the worlde. This corruption and weakenes of the Realme brought in by the delights of Aſia, was in the education of king Sebaſtian diſcouered, and reiected by the Ieſuits, who as religious men, deſired and laboured much to reforme it: But they applied not fit medicines for ſo languiſhing a body, not conſidering the impoſſibilitie ſodainly to reclaime a whole people alreadie corrupted with libertie, to the extreame rigor and ſparingnes of theſe Fathers. A hard matter to performe not onely in a kingdome, but alſo in the precinct of their monaſteries: Whereupon they made ſumptuarie lawes, and eſpecially vpon victuals; which the auncient Spartaines coulde hardly haue tolerated: They did ſpecifie what meates were allowed, and what defended, diſtinguiſhed wherein euerie man ſhould imploy his money, taking from them in a manner all that came from forraine countries, were they for profite or pleaſure. So as theſe violent remedies, prooued not onely vnprofitable and ridiculous, but did confirme

the opinion of ſuch, as hold that Clergie men are as vncapable to gouerne in politique affaires, as ſecular magiſtrates be in eccleſicall cauſes: but God (when he meaneth to puniſh (taketh away mans vnderſtanding, and giueth him an ouerweening ſpirit, euen ſo did he with the Portugals, ſending them chaſtiſements for their offences, committed in time of proſperitie; or by his ſecret iudgements, when as they thought themſelues moſt ſecure, their fall was the greater being in their greateſt glorie. For this nation the proudeſt in the world, in this laſt warre of Affrick, became ſlaues vnto the Arabians and Moores; and being free, in a ſhort time by their warre againſt the Caſtillians, were conquered by them, whom they holde for their capitall enimies.
               
                  The life of king Sebaſtian. The afflictions of this Realme tooke their beginning in the twentieth yeere of the age of Sebaſtian, who (borne after the death of his father, & a little before the deceaſe of his grandfather) (by entreaties, and to the fatall ruine of his ſubiects) ſtrong of body, and of a couragious minde, full of ouerweening, (the which is a naturall vice in Portugals, not content with his owne dominions) reſolued (as it were by force) to alter the quiet, which his Realme had ſo long enioyed. And although it ſeemed hard of execution, being inuironed with the territories of Phillip of Auſtria King of Spaine, his deare friend and kinſman, more mightie than himſelfe, with whom he might not contend, nor paſſe by land into any other countrey. But as it is eaſie to periſh for him that is deſperate, he let him vnderſtande the exceſſiue deſire he had to ruine himſelfe & all his. He had firſt plotted a warre againſt the Indians, which his kinſmen and ſubiects woulde not conſent vnto. But as there was ſome difficultie wholie to withdrawe the yoong Prince (who had a warlike ſpirite) from this enterpriſe, ſuch as were neere about him laboured to diuerte him by meanes of an other which they laide before him; turning all his reſolutions vpon Affrick to indomage the Moores which liue in that part which is called Mauritania Tingitana, whereas the Portugals maintaine (to their great charge) vpon the borders of the Sea, thoſe three forenamed fortreſſes, Ceute, Tanger, and Mazagon, the buckler and key of Spaine; by which the Moores haue heeretofore conquered it. But this diuerſion whereunto they perſwaded the King, was cauſe of great ruines, proceeding from want of iudgement; for although it

were hard wholie to diſſwade him from the enterpriſe of the Indies, and therefore conuenient to repreſent vnto him ſome other action; yet ſhoulde they aduiſedly haue foreſeene, not to drawe him from one miſchiefe to thruſt him into a greater. But theſe men diuerted him from an enterpriſe farre off, and of hard execution, by repreſenting vnto him a neerer, eaſier to effect, but more perillous. And although they ſurmized he would not haue vndertaken it but with deliberation, yet ſhoulde they not haue giuen too much confidence to his yoong age, for the which the Ieſuits were greatly blamed, who hauing planted their religion in this Realme more then in any other of the worlde, and with more zeale, as enimies to the enimies of God, they did encourage this yoong Prince (whom Queene Katherine had giuen to them in charge) to this enterpriſe with carefull inſtructions, the which as then they might eaſily effect: But finding the King ſoone after readie to execute it with raſhnes, they had no more the credite to diuert him being in diſgrace. So as this yoonge King bred vp amongſt women, religious perſons, delights and pleaſures, had a more bould and warlike ſpirite, then if he had beene borne and nouriſhed in the middeſt of armies. He raiſed certaine troupes of footemen of his people of Lisbone, whom he did inrowle and traine vp to the Pike and Harquebuſe, ſending them once a weeke to the fielde to practiſe, with intent to vſe them when neede ſhoulde require.
               
                  Sebastians first voyage into Affrick. The which he ſtaied not long to effect: For in the yeere 1574. he aſſembled (againſt the will of the wiſeſt) certaine of his ſouldiers, and with fower gallies and certaine ſhips and caruels paſſed into Affrick, vnder colour to viſite his Fortes; although in his minde he had a deſire to do more then he ſpake, and as yoong and without experience, thought to effect more then he did. Being arriued in thoſe countries, he onely diſcouered, finding his owne weakeneſſe, but in light skirmiſhes, which are made daily vpon thoſe frontires with the Moores▪ he ſhewed himſelfe moſt willing to be in perſon, vexing himſelfe when he coulde not do as he deſired; but as a royall perſon it behooued him to containe himſelfe within the tearmes of grauitie, the which hee often exceeded. Hee returned ſoone to Lisbone, ſtill deuiſing with himſelfe ſome newe manner of warre, and was ſo diſquieted and carefull in his conceite, that he neither ſaide nor did any

thing that tended to other end, deuiſing not as a king, but as a priuate ſouldier, to accuſtome his body to labour, ſeeming vnto him by this meanes to make himſelfe more ſtrong and better able to endure the diſcommodities of warre. This inclination (wherein the heauens had ſome part) was not gainſaid by any of his chiefe Counſell, nor kinſmen of riper age, who might haue diſſwaded him, and drawn him to haue enioyed his Realme: For although the action ſeemed raſh, yet ambition and feare of the Kings diſgrace were of ſuch force, that the Nobles, Magiſtrates, and great perſons (who might haue forced him) durſt not open their mouthes, nor oppoſe themſelues againſt his will: and if any one did mutter or ſpeake to the contrary, they were men of baſe qualitie, and not admitted.
               The Cardinall Henry his vnckle, brother to Iohn the thirde his grand-father, and Queene Katherine (in whom flatterie ſhoulde finde no place) had ſmall credite with the King, neither did they vſe the authoritie they might haue had, both fearing they ſhoulde not preuaile; but looſe (with the Kings diſgrace) the ſmall commandement was yet remaining in them; ſo as by a fatall ſilence they ſuffered this yoong Prince to returne the ſecond time into Affrick, with apparant perill: wherein Peter D'Alcaſoua was a chiefe actor, who hauing before time beene Secretarie of the Realme, and Counſellour of the State, greatly fauoured of King Iohn, and Queene Katherine, was now diſgraced, and put from his places when as the Cardinall Henry gaue the gouernment to King Sebaſtian, the which hapned more by emulation, and for that the Cardinall woulde ſettle a newe forme, and plant newe officers, in the managing of the affaires, then for any faults that were imputed vnto him, were they true or falſe. But in the declining of fauorites it alwaies chanceth, that faults ſerue rather to iuſtifie the ambition of an other then the offenders puniſhment: And in theſe afflictions he had liued content, for being wiſe, and rich, he had borne his aduerſitie with a conſtant courage, ſtill expecting ſome meanes to returne into his place and dignitie; the which fell out eaſily by the practiſe and induſtrie of another. For Martin Gonzales de Camera his competitour, hauing ſucceeded him in his offices, with ſome other depending of the Ieſuites, whom the Cardinall ſought to bring in, they had no leſſe conflict with their enimies then Peter had with his, for that Aluaro de Caſtro fauorite to the king,

of a contrarie faction, with ſome of his friendes (deſiring ſecretly to withdraw the Kings affection from Martin and his partie) tooke occaſion to effect it, when as the King was at Cape Saint Vincent, whether he went in Sommer to ſatisfie the deſire he had to go to ſea, making him beleeue (and it may be not without cauſe) that Martin and the fathers (as men ignorant in matters of State, & of the wealth of Princes) had waſted the treaſure of the Crowne, and cut off the meanes, for all ſuch enterprizes as he might execute, by their lawes made vpon the changes of money: the which if they did not reuoke, it were impoſſible to effect his glorious deſignes. This was a deadly blowe; yet did they adde one more of greater moment, giuing the King to vnderſtande (being yoong and high minded) that he was oppreſſed by them, that they ruled in effect, and he in ſhew; and they paſſed on ſo farre, that they cauſed a Secretarie of the chamber well fauoured of the King, and a great talker, (preſenting him one day with a commandement of ſmall importance to ſigne) to ſay vnto him that he might boldly ſubſcribe it, for that hee was king vntill he ſhoulde returne to Lisbone: ſo as mingling ſport with truth, they drew this yoong Prince from the affection he bare to the miniſters which had beene giuen him by the Queene and Cardinall, and changed the doctrine wherein he had beene nouriſhed. But Peter D'Alcaſoua reapt the whole fruite thereof, for the King being eſtranged from his enimies, and the lawes made by them reuoked, Aluaro de Caſtro the author thereof died, none of his faction remaining ſaue Emanuel Quareſinia, who had the office which they call Dispaccio, of great importance, beeing Controwler of the Kings rewardes, who hauing neither experience, nor authoritie to maintaine himſelfe long in this degree, nor yet iudgement to contend with Alcaſoua, the ſaid Peter laid holde of this occaſion, to recouer his former place: And to effect it the more ſafely, he married Lewes his eldeſt ſonne, with the daughter of Chriſtopher de Tauora, a great fauorite of Sebaſtians. Being thus returned into fauour with the king, he eaſily maintained it, ſeconding his humours, in making the meanes eaſie to recouer money, and vnfolding all doubts for the execution of his enterpriſe: by reaſon whereof he made him Chamberlaine, or rather Veador de Hazenda, a place of greater countenance then the other, imploying him in moſt important affaires. And although his cunning did ſomewhat aſſiſt

the King in his determinations, yet was there another occaſion preſented which made his hopes increaſe, which was this.
               Long time before there died in Affrick Mulei Mahamet Cheriffe, he who had vnited the Kingdome of Feez, Marroc and Turedant, the which he had alwais poſſeſſed, deuided with his brother Mulei Hamet: It ſeemes that theſe (whiles they liued quietly togither) made a law, that al the children that ſuruiued after their deceaſe, ſhould ſucceed in the kingdome before any one of the nephewes ſhould enioy the ſucceſſion; ſo as to the yongeſt vncle ſhould ſucceed the eldeſt nephew: yet after their deceaſe, although they left many children, the greateſt part thereof (euen as it hapned vnto their fathers) died by the ſword, or were ſtrangled in priſon, for the iealouſie of State, by the commandemēt of Abdala, one of the ſonnes of Mahamet, who ſucceeded his father, & raigned xvij. yeres, the moſt happie & peaceable Prince that euer that countrey enioied. This man although he were cruel, yet did he refraine from murthering his three brethren; it may be for that they were very children, when he came to the ſucceſſion; but growing to more yeeres, they fell to diſtruſt him: ſo as two of them fled to the Turke; the thirde tooke his way by lande and went to liue amongſt the Arabians. And although the lawe had decreed that the next brother ſhoulde ſucceed to the Crowne, yet Abdala reſolued to ſweare his eldeſt ſonne Mahamet his ſucceſſour, which being performed, ſodainly this newe Prince practiſed againſt his vncles, ſending a Moore to Tremiſenne to kill the eldeſt, who was deteined by the Turkes, the which he did effect; wounding him with a dart in the Mezquita. This act did greatly trouble the other brother Mulei Moluc, yoong and of great hope, who (remaining at Algier) demaunding ſuccours in vaine from Philip King of Spaine, by the meanes of Rodorike Alphonſo Pimentel, Earle of Benauent, then Viceroy of Valencia; he reſolued to goe ſeeke it at Conſtantinople, where he attended long with patience; exclaiming againſt his kindred, and not obtaining that which he demaunded, till in the end (hauing giuen an honorable teſtimonie of himſelfe in the laſt ſea fight at Nauarin, betwixt the armies of the league and Turke, and at the taking of Golette) he obtained three thouſand ſouldiers of the Turke for this conqueſt; vpon certaine conditions that were not obſerued. With theſe forces and his Moores that followed him, which wanted not in

Affrick, he entred his Nephewes kingdome (for his brother was now dead) and defeated three armies, whereof the laſt (which ſeemes woonderfull) conſiſted of threeſcore thouſand horſe, and ten thouſand foote, and tooke abſolute poſſeſſion of the Realmes, liuing with great reputation both of the Moores and Chriſtians. Mulei Mahamet being in this manner expelled his countrey, he fled to Pignon of Velay, a fortreſſe which the Catholique king holdes in Affrick, and from thence by the counſell (as they ſay) of a Renegado, he ſent his ambaſſadors to the ſaid King, letting him vnderſtand of his diſgrace, and crauing aide to be reſtored to his eſtate. Whereunto the Catholique King hauing made no anſwere conformable to the deſires of the Moore, being gone to Ceuta, he did the like office with King Sebaſtian, ſhewing vnto him, that by this occaſion he ſhoulde eaſilie make himſelfe Emperour of Marocco. The yoong Prince fedde with this vaine hope, ſeemed nowe to haue a lawfull ſubiect to make warre, whereon he reſolued, and to ſuccour the Moore Mahamet. He propounded this to his Counſell, laboring to proue that it was both profitable and honorable, whereunto (although there were ſome of contrarie aduiſe, laying before him that he was without heires, that Chriſtians ſhoulde rather imploy their armes againſt heretikes then Infidels, that his forces alone were too feeble for ſo great an action, ſtrengthning their reaſons with many examples: notwithſtanding as Princes blinded with their owne deſires, will not allow the miſhaps and diſgraces of an other, iſſuing from their ill meaſured Counſell, to ſerue them as examples of better aduiſe, there was neither reaſon nor example could preuaile againſt the Kings opinion, but fortified in his reſolution by many (who either for their owne particular, or for want of iudgement) did counſell him to warre, it was concluded.
               
                  Sebaſtians enteruiew with Phillip at Guadalupa. And although his owne weakenes was vnknowne vnto himſelfe, yet was he aduiſed by others to take a companion, and to drawe the Catholique King into this action, belieuing it were eaſily performed: the State of Affrick being of greater importance for his kingdome which was adioining to it then for Portugall. He deſired greatly to marrie, to haue iſſue (although his Phiſicions feared much he was vnable for generation) and woulde willingly haue taken one of the daughters of the Catholique King, whereof they had giuen him an

aſſured hope: for theſe two cauſes he deſired to enter parle with him, ſending Peter D' Alcaſoua as Embaſſadour vnto him, with commandement to treat of three points, that is, for aide in the action of Affrick; for the marriage of his daughter, and for an enteruiew. The Embaſſador departed, and effected with great diligence the charge his maiſter had giuen him: and hauing attended ſome time in this court, he obtained all three, the promiſe of marriage with one of his daughters, when ſhe ſhoulde come to yeeres, for as yet they were too yoong; That the Catholique King ſhould goe to Guadalupa to meete with King Sebaſtian: And as for ſuccours he ſhoulde furniſh men & galleies, to vndertake the enterprize of Alarache, the which was ſpoken very coldly. For the Catholique King knowing the Portugals to preſume beyond their ſtrength, and holding it nothing ſafe to vndertake this action of Affrick without great forces, he laboured what he could by letters to temper this heate, diſſwading him with many reaſons (if not from the enterprize) at the leaſt not to go himſelfe in perſon: but this yoong Prince reſting immooueable in his counſels, and moſt obſtinate in his opinion, did ſtill importune him by letters. Phillip confirmed the ſuccours of men and galleis, ſo as the Turke ſhould ſende no men into Italy, and that they ſhoulde vndertake Alarache in the yeere 1577. the whole being referred vnto their enteruiew at Guadalupa. The Embaſſadour returnes home more fauoured then euer, ſeeming to haue effected more then was thought or looked for: In both Courts they make no great delaies, but take their way for Guadalupa, where both kings arriue with no great traines, but with the chiefe Noblemen and Gentlemen of their Realmes: There the Portugals (who arriued laſt) were receiued with great ſhewes of loue, finding in all places of Caſtill, where they paſſed, the kings expreſſe commandement to receiue him of Portugall as his owne proper perſon, ſo as at Badagios and in other places, where he paſt, the chiefe men went to meete him, the priſons were opened, and he conducted to his lodging vnder a cloth of eſtate. The Catholique King tooke great pleaſure to ſee yoong Sebaſtian, whom he entertained as his hoſt, laying aſide all tearms fitte for a greater King, entreating each other equally in maieſtie, talking particularly of the warre, being both profitable and honorable for the Realmes of Spaine. The Catholique King did not diſſwade him, yet

he aduiſed him not to goe in perſon, excuſing himſelfe that he could giue no great ſuccour, by reaſon of the continuall charge he was put to in Italy to reſiſt the Turke: but Sebaſtian being fully reſolued to goe, and admitting no excuſe, Phillip deſirous to pleaſe him, accorded with him in this ſort. That the generall opinion being, and eſpecially of the Duke of Alua, that this action woulde require 15000. foote, not Portugals, but of other nations, trained vp in warre, deuided into Italians, Germaines, & Spaniards; that the king of Portugall ſhould entertaine ten thouſand, and the Catholique King fiue thouſand, furniſhing the enterprize with fiftie galleis; (alwaies prouided, if the Turke ſent not an armie into Italy) and thatthey ſhould goe vnto Allarache, without entring into the maine land, and this to be attempted in the yeere 1577 otherwiſe he ſhould not be bound to any thing. This treatie being ended, euery one returned from whence he came.
               
                  Preparation for the war of Affrick. In Portugall they made ſlowe preparatiues to warre, and in the firſt beginning their money failed them, for that the reuenewes of the Crowne are ſmall, and ill imploied. The whole Realme vpon the maine land yeelding but a million, and one hundreth thouſand duckets a yeere: The greateſt part in cuſtomes (the which be vnreaſonable) paying for all things twentie in the hundreth except fiſh, which paieth the one halfe. The new found lands, as Saint Thomas, Myna, Brazil, and the Indies yeeld but a million at the moſt, which makes in all two millions and one hundreth thouſand duckats, which comes to the Crowne: And although the Indies yeelde one other million of rent, yet make they neither receipt nor paiment thereof, being whollie reteined there for the entertaining of armies and garriſons. Of theſe two millions and a hundreth thouſand duckats, there remaines nothing at the yeeres end in Court, and if the King vſe any liberalitie, his charge exceeds the reuenewes; for that they receiue without order, and ſpende without meaſure: For theſe Kings were neuer ſo happie as to be ſerued with men of iudgement, and diſcretion, who could order the reuenewes and expences; but giuing the charge alwaies vnto Noblemen, who were aduanced thereunto by fauour, and not by merite, (an ordinarie cuſtome in that countrey) they ſtudied to maintaine themſelues in that throne by other meanes, letting the reuenewes of the Crowne goe as it woulde. So as what in wages of officers, rents, created, recompence for life, priuiledges (which

they call Giuros) ſold by him, entertaining of Fortreſſes in Affrick, preparation of nauies, and expences of the Court, all is ſpent. They went therefore ſeeking heere and there for money, forcing the people to contribute, and the chiefe Citizens extraordinarily: for although they gathered much by this meanes, yet they did drawe vpon them the curſes and exclamations of the people, being moſt affectionate and obedient to their King; but nothing preuailed againſt the burning deſire of officers. They exacted from the Clergie the thirde part of their reuenewes, whereunto they would not yeeld: yet ſeeing the Pope yeelded vnto the Kings affections, they granted a hundreth and fiftie thouſand duckats. They granted vnto the new Chriſtians paying two hundreth & fiue & twentie thouſand duckats (that which before had been for a time granted & often ſince denied) that for ſinning againſt the Inquiſition they ſhoulde not looſe their goods as they did. They impoſed a newe cuſtome vpon the ſalt, and exacted money from the Nobilitie, and Gentlemen of the Realme, againſt their auncient cuſtomes; many being by this meanes vniuſtly vexed. Amongſt other Noblemen, the King ſent to Frauncis de Melo, Earle of Tentuguel, who excuſing himſelfe, did write vnto the King, with greater libertie then poſſiblie reaſon woulde allowe: For noting greatly the demand of money, which they had made vnto him, as vniuſt, he ſaid, it agreed not with the vertues with which his highnes was indued; neither did it ſeeme reaſonable, that they whoſe fathers had beene helpers to conquer the Realme, ſhoulde be ſubiect to the impoſitions and tributes, which are paid for the warres, where of many of meaner qualitie were exempt. He laide the blame of theſe demands vpon the ſinnes of the Realme, but much more vpon ſuch fauorites as the King had about him, of whom he complained; he produced the example of that fatall chaunce, which hapned at Tanger, to Henry and Ferdinand, ſonnes to King Iohn the firſt, ſeeking to make warres againſt the Moores at the peoples charge, who ought in reaſon to pay rather then Gentlemen: inferring thereby that hee could attend no better ſucceſſe of the action the King now tooke in hand, being at their charge, who had neuer contributed, although the Realme by reaſon of warres had beene ſeene in greater neceſſitie then at that preſent, he concluded (beſeeching the King to conſider better what he did, and to imitate the example of his aunceſtors,

and not to leaue a woorſe of himſelfe to his ſucceſſors.) This letter, which the King read with diſdaine, freed the Earle and many others from the contribution of money, ſeeking by other meanes (but chiefly by the bloud of the poore) to ſupplie their wants. And to the end there might be greater plentie of money within the Realme, he commanded that the Royals of Caſtill, which before were defended, ſhould be now currant, valuing them a ninth part more then they were accuſtomed, which many noted as ominous. The King began now to draw his men oftner to fielde, putting them into ſquadrons, to come to encounters, and to counterfaite all that which is acted in warre, where he himſelfe was often preſent, in danger of his perſon, in the midſt of their harquebuzes, yet had he neither Captaine nor Sergeant that could inſtruct them, onely one Iohn de Gama, who in the habite of an Hermit, became a great maſter of the warre. So as notwithſtanding the great paine they tooke in this exerciſe in manner forced, hauing neuer ſeene any thing, they remained more ignorant then at the beginning. The King gaue himſelfe much to hunting, accounting it a glory to encounter with the moſt furious beaſts, wherein he grew very expert: If he went (as he did often) for pleaſure from one place to another, either by ſea, or vpon the riuer of Tagus, he thought it a ſhame to go in calme weather, but ſtill attended ſome ſtorme whereby it ſeemed that ſome furious deſtinie lead him headlong to his end. But in the meane ſpace time ſteales away, neceſſarie prouiſions want, and all things proceed ſlowly foreward. They muſt prouide money in Italy, to leuie the Italian footemen, and to pay the Germaines: but the Pepper whereby it ſhoulde be raiſed, was come but that ſommer to Lisbone, from whence it ſhould be ſent by the merchants ſhips to Liuorno, there to be ſolde. This enterprize, the which (for that they ſought to do it with little money, we may tearme vndiſcreet) was now almoſt made impoſſible, and Peter D'Alcaſoua (who was Chamberlaine, and had charge of the treaſure) durſt not diſcouer the defects vnto the King, fearing his diſpleaſure, if he ſhould now contradict that which before he had allowed: He did ſtill temporize with hope, that the Catholique King ſhoulde excuſe himſelfe from furniſhing the men, whereunto he was bound, vpon colour of ſending an armie into Italy againſt the Turks, or for ſome other pretext, the which he greatly deſired, that the

whole blame might fall vpon Phillip: neither was he without hope, for the exceptions vnder which he had promiſed, made him beleeue that which fell out otherwiſe. In the meane time Mulei Moluck hearing of theſe preparatiues, fearing the Catholique king ſhould ioyne with the Portugals, ſent wiſely vnto him to will him aduiſe what part of his Territories he pleaſed to haue, the which he would giue to be his friend and confederate. The King preſently let Sebaſtian vnderſtand his offer, aduiſing that it were a matter of conſequence to keepe the Moore in hope and to ſend vnto him to expound his meaning, the which muſt needs be profitable, ſeeing that practizes are no ſuſpenſions of armes, whereof there might grow ſome good effect; for poſſiblie the Moore would neglect his defence, or yeeld that quietly which they pretended to take from him by force: but this yoong King, who knew not how much better an aſſured peace were, then an expected victorie, and who deſired rather to winne by force, then by agreement any place whatſoeuer, preſſed the Catholique King not to treat any accord with Moluck. But Phillip knowing Sebaſtians deſignes ſeeing him neither willing to accord, nor able to perfourme the enterpriſe, the which was likely to be broken, he laboured to effect it himſelfe; and ſeeing ſommer now come, and neither Italian nor Germaine ſouldiers in Portugall, he made offer vnto him by Iohn de Sylua his Embaſſadour, that if he were not prepared for the enterpriſe as it was conuenient, he woulde furniſh both men and ſhipping, ſo as he ſhould pay the two thirdes of the charges, according to the Treatie. But foraſmuch as this offer was farre off from the marke, whereat the King of Portugall ſhot, it was neither heard nor accepted. And although the ſeaſon of the yeare was now farre paſſed, and the preparatiues weake, (matters being concealed from Sebaſtian, who was abuſed by his miniſters) yet he feared nothing, but that Phillip ſhould excuſe himſelfe, and not keepe promiſe on his behalfe, which ſhould make him vnable to performe the enterpriſe, whereof he was ſo deſirous; ſo as he laboured to obtaine of him an aſſured promiſe of aide, without exception of the comming of the Turkes army, the which he ſecretly feared, and his miniſters greatly hoped for, ſo were their mindes diſtracted. The Catholique King being aduertiſed heereof, ſeeming vnto him impoſſible to do any thing that were good, either to ſatisfie, or to withdraw himſelfe from

the promiſe that he made, left it to the iudgement of his Embaſſador, to make offer vnto the King of the fifty galleis lent, & the fiue thouſād foote, to be preſently imploied (if neede were) according to the Treatie; but he ſhould haue a ſpeciall care not offer them, if he did ſee any impoſſibilitie to imploie them, being vnwilling to hazard his forces alone without ſuch as the King of Portugall was bound to leuie: Vpon this offer which the Embaſſador had made, Sebaſtian being come to himſelfe, and caſting vp his reckonings, he found himſelfe vnable that yeere to paſſe into Affrick, by reaſon whereof he cauſed proclamation to be made, that the enterpriſe ſhould be deferred vntill the next yere: Phillip a little before (being mooued with the practiſes of this warre,) had ſent Captaine Frauncis D'Aldana diguiſed into Affrick to viewe the townes and fortreſſes vpon the ſea coaſt, who (being in great danger) returned. This man he ſent to Sebaſtian, who receiuing many fauours, he informed him particularly of the ſtate of Affrick: And although Aldana made the enterpriſe more difficult then he ſuppoſed, yet could he no way diſcourage him; but laying aſide that diſcourſe, he inquired ſecretly of him (as of an expert ſouldiour) of many things touching the gouernment of Armies, wherein Aldana did amply ſatiſfie him. The King now beleeuing he ſhould be well able to execute all he vnderſtood, not knowing the difference betwixt ſaying and doing; the winter come, he gaue Aldana leaue to depart, honouring him with a chaine of gold, of one thouſand duckats, making him promiſe to returne when he ſhould need his ſeruice.
               In this meane time for the yeere following Sebaſtian (by the meanes of Gomez de Sylua, his Embaſſadour at Rome) treated with the great Duke of Tuſcane, to leuie in his Territories three or fower thouſande foote, accepting in part the offer which the great Duke had made vnto him, not long before by his Embaſſadors, but the effect followed not. He ſent likewiſe Sebaſtian de Coſta into Flaunders to VVilliam of Naſsau Prince of Orange (who being choſen head of the Flemmings againſt the Catholique King, commanded in thoſe parts) entreating him to aſſiſt him with three of fower thouſand Germaines: He likewiſe diſpatched fower coronels throughout his Realme of Portugall, to leuie twelue thouſand foote; and thoſe were Michael de Norogna, Iames Lopez de Sequeira, Frauncis de Tauora, and Vaſco de Silueira, the which had neuer beene at the warres. He aſſembled ſome Spaniards

which came at the brute of warres, and of this voyage, whereof he gathered a good number, without the conſent of Philip, and in Caſtill it ſelfe without any noiſe of drum he enrolled many ſouldiers for this warre, which cauſed Philip to puniſh ſome Captaines afterwardes: But notwithſtanding all theſe goodly ſhewes, no man beleeued it woulde take effect, for beſides they did eſteeme the Kings forces, too feeble to attempt any warre, much more beyond the ſea, (whereas the charge woulde be greater) they did conceiue that when the Catholique King, the Cardinall Henry, Queene Katherine, and the people, ſhould ſee all lets taken away, they would not ſuffer the King to go in perſon, which made euery man ſuppoſe that after the expence of much mony, it would vaniſh to nothing, as it had hapned the laſt yeere, and ſome yeeres before, with the armie of Edward the Kings vncle, prepared for the ſame Countries of Affrick, and ſome other enterpriſes. But foraſmuch as we can hardly reſiſt the diuine powers, it ſeemed that all things did ſecond the effect of this enterpriſe: the Queene (a Ladie of bountie and great value) who as well for the loue ſhe bare vnto the King, being bred in her boſome; as to content Philip her nephew, who was the ſonne of her brother, did vehemently diſſwade this enterpriſe, ſhe died. The Pope foraſmuch as this warre was attempted againſt Infidels, giuing ſuccours in time of need, opened his ſpirituall treaſures, granting the Bull of the Croyſada, which till that time was not brought into the Realme. The ſhips of the Indies returned home to a ſafe Port very rich. The Prince of Orange although he were ſufficiently buſied in the low Countries, yet ſhewing how little he eſteemed the forces of the Catholique King, graunted out of his troupes the three thouſand foote, which were demaunded; ſo as all things ſeemed to yeeld vnto the Kings wil. All that time which was the ninth of Nouember, there appeered in the Zodiaque, in the ſigne of Libra, neere vnto the ſtation of Mars, the goodlieſt & greateſt Comet, that hath beene ſeene in many ages, the which happening in the progreſſe of this war, amazed many, who looking to examples paſt, ſaid it was a ſigne of vnhappy ſucceſſe, and that cōming from a corrupt aire, it did endomage the delicat bodies of Princes. And for as much as the auncient Captaines with their diuines, did interpret it to good, not for that they beleeued it, but to incourage their ſouldiers: the Portugall likewiſe taking it for a fauour

ſaid, that this Comet ſpake vnto the King, ſaying, Accometa, which is to ſay in the Portugall toong: let him aſſayle them, not hauing any ſuch beliefe, but for flatterie, fearing more the Kings choler, by reaſon of his rough inclination, then the heauens.
               
                  Philip at that time by a certaine treatie of peace had pacified the war of the Low-Countries, where Don Iohn de Auſtria his baſtard brother was gouernour, who ſeeming not abſolute Maſter of the people, and the Prince of Orange his aduerſarie not well ſatisfied, deſiring rather to be Lord of all, then gouernor of a part, they began new practizes againſt the conuentions agreed on. And Don Iohns letters being ſurpriſed, (the which he had written into Spaine,) by the Lords of the countrey they diſcouered, that vpon the Princes fortifying of ſome places in Holland, he had an other intention then he made ſhew of, who finding his letters ſurpriſed and his purpoſes laid open, deſirous (as he ſaid) to ſubdue them by armes, he thought it not ſafe to remaine vnarmed in thoſe parts: So as one day ſeeming to goe take the aire, he retired himſelfe to Namur, vpon the frontire of Flanders, towards Lorraine, with his greateſt fauorites, and there diſcouering his minde, and diſmiſſing ſuch as he truſted not, he ſuddenly called backe the Spaniſh foot (the which according to the Articles of peace) were departed, and ſcarſe arriued in Italie; and hauing made a newe leuie of Wallons and Germaines, the warre began in thoſe parts more cruell then before, and with greater diſaduantage for the King: for that in the conformitie of the treatie of pacification, they had left all the fortreſſes in the hands of the Flemmings. By reaſon of theſe new broiles, & for that the war of Affrick was deferred a yeere more then was agreed on, the Catholike King framed an excuſe to denie his promiſed ſuccours to the King of Portugall, ſhewing that it behooued him to prouide in Flanders for his honour, and the ſafety of his brother; hoping by this meanes to diuert him from the enterpriſe, but it preuailed nothing: for the other being raſh, reſolued in any ſort to vndertake it, whether he had his expected ſuccours or not, thinking (being yoong) with his owne forces and the Italians and Germanes which hee attended, to bee able to conquer the worlde. This reſolution diſpleaſed Philip and did much afflict him, for being vnable to aſſiſt him, he feared that without his aide the day would be perillous, and ſeeing the danger increaſe, he continued theſe good

offices with more vehemencie, either to breake off the enterpriſe, or at leaſt to diſſwade him from going in perſon: whereupon he did write many letters of his owne hand full of loue; he cauſed the Duke of Alua to write vnto him, and in the end ſent the Duke of Medina Celi (one of the greateſt in Spaine) to doe his laſt endeuour to diuert him; but all was in vaine, he would attempt it at his owne coſt, although the Catholike King ſent him not one ſouldier. And for as much as good deedes are often taken in ill part, ſome ſaide that all theſe demonſtrations of King Philip were but coūterfeit, & that he wiſhed Sebaſtian ſhould go, for howſoeuer it ſhould ſucceed, he ſhould receiue a benefit thereby: if it happened he ſhould take Allarache or any place vpon the coaſt, it were more aduantage to Philip then to him, hauing his Dominions fronting neerer to Affricke then the other; but if he ſhould happen to die in theſe wars, a greater good ſhould come vnto him, being heire vnto the Realme. But to ſay the truth, Philip was mooued to doe this office towards Sebaſtian, both of his owne quiet diſpoſition (beeing no friend to broyles) as alſo for another priuate ſubiect, of no ſmall importance, which was: At that time the Treatie of Truce was reuiued betwixt him and the Turke, whereunto both were mooued for one and the ſelfe ſame reſpect, not to diuide their forces at ſuch time as they had moſt need of them to be vnited; the Turke againſt the Sophi, and the King againſt the Rebles in Flaunders: So as without infringing this Truce, the Catholike King could not ſend any Armie to endomage Affricke, being tributarie to the Turke, and eſpecially of Mulei Moluc his friend and confederate. And this excuſe was ſo much the more tolerable, for that he laboured to comprehend the King of Portugall within this truce, deſiring him to enter into it, but he not onely refuſed it, but alſo anſwered, That he maruelled he would treat a peace for three yeeres with the Turke, to auoide war during that tearme in Italy, being moſt aſſured that Affrick ſhould be repleniſhed with Turkes, and the three yeeres expired, he ſhould haue that war in Spaine, which now he ſought to auoide in Italy: He did aduiſe him not to conclude; or if he would needes, not to comprehend him, to the end he might afterwards ſecretly aſſiſt him againſt Mulei Moluc: by meanes whereof with ſmall charge he might aſſure himſelfe of Italy by the truce, and of Affricke by war in the name of the Portugals. Philip diſallowed of theſe friuolous

reaſons, ſolliciting Sebaſtian to reſolue himſelfe either to enter or be excluded: After ſome delaies he was contented to bee comprehended therein. But as theſe Treaties were in handling, he ſuppoſed it ſhould not any wiſe hinder his enterpriſe of Affricke: And thereforePreparation for the ſecond voyage of Affricke, they armed their gallions at Lisbone, they ſtayed merchants ſhips, they inrolled all their ſhipping throughout the Realme to tranſport men, horſe, victuals, and munition, making readie other preparatiues: Lewis Dataide was named generall of this Action, but he did not exerciſe the charge with the authoritie due to the place, for as much as the King with Peter D'alcaſoua and ſome other his fauorites, reſolued and gaue order for many things concerning the war, which belonged to the Generall to do, or at the leaſt to conſult of. But as he was not greatly pleaſing vnto the King, although he were the moſt renowmed of all the Portugals, ſo did he not follow this enterpriſe being ſent Vizeroy to the Indies: Diego de Soſa was made Generall at the ſea, Chriſtopher de Tauora his Chamberlaine, and maſter of his horſe (whom he loued entirely) was made commander of all the Nobilitie that ſhould go into Affricke, and of many ſtrangers that came by aduenture, giuing him the Title of Captaine of the Aduentures, by meanes whereof he was preferred before all the Nobilitie. And for that he could not make himſelfe equall with the Moore in horſemen; he reſolued to fortific himſelfe better with foote, commanding that no man ſhould furniſh himſelfe with horſe, but ſuch as he ſhould appoint, the which ſhould not be lightly armed, but barded, like to the ancient men of armes, ſo as many gentlemen that prepared to go on horſe backe remained on foot. It was ſtrange to ſee the Portugals furniſh themſelues to war; for being an exerciſe that requireth order & meaſure, all things were there diſordered and confuſed: The faults which were committed in taking of Muſters, giuing of paies, ſuperfluitie in many things, and defect in other, were infinite: The gentlemen after a new prodigious manner attired themſelues like vnto the Caſtillians, in ſteede of ſcouring their Armes, they guarded their habits, for corſlets they prouided dublets of ſilke & gold, they were charged with ſugar and conſerues, in ſteed of water & bisket: The veſſels of ſiluer, & the tents lined with ſilke and ſatten were without number, euery gentleman went furniſhed like a king, and the poore ſouldiers died for hunger: To conclude, it ſeemed they ſuppoſed that hee that

went braueſt and beſt furniſhed with delights, and pleaſures, ſhoulde ſooneſt conquer the enimy; contrary to the opinion of true ſouldiers, who beleeue that when a man goes to the combate clad in gold, and ſilke, he is either ſlaine or returnes home laden with blows; but when he goeth couered with iron, and ſteele, he returnes a conquerour laden with gold. 
                  Sebaſtian was carefull to whom he ſhould leaue the gouernment of the Realme, for that there was none remaining of the bloud Royall, but his vncle the Cardinall, whom (being very old, & not greatly pleaſing vnto him) he woulde not willingly admit to ſo great a charge, yet hauing no other, he went to Euora where he liued, entreating him to take the care in his abſence, the which he would by no meanes accept, excuſing it by reaſon of his age, and indiſpoſition; ſo as he made choiſe of fower gouernours to command in his name, which were George d'Almeda, archbiſhop of Lisbone, Peter d'Alcaſoua, Frauncis de Sada, & Iohn Maſcaregnas, to whom he gaue full power in al things, leauing with thē a Seale which did imprint with inke this word REII, with the which he cōmanded thē to ſubſcribe their diſpatches.
               In the meane time vpon Affrick ſide, the Cheriffe Mahamet did ſtill ſollicite Sebaſtian, by Embaſſadors to make haſte, and by no meanes to abandon the enterpriſe, and with many hopes he gaue him to vnderſtand, that (beſides a good number of ſouldiers, he had already armed) he was moſt aſſured, that vpon the preſent view of the Portugals enſignes in Affrick, being knowne that they came in his fauour, the greateſt part of townes, fortes, and men of warre woulde rebell againſt Mulei Moluc & come to him. It is moſt true he diſſwaded the King for going in perſon, ſaying, it was not neceſſarie, but woulde prooue very hurtfull, alleaging that the Moores (which eaſily would yeeld at his deuotion) ſeeing the King of Portugall there in perſon woulde grow iealous, leaſt he came to ſubdue them to the Chriſtians; and therefore woulde not ſo willingly leaue the enimie. The which he ſaide, both for that it might ſo fall out, as alſo fearing (not without reaſon) that if the King were conquerour, and there in perſon to, he would not leaue him his kingdome free. Al theſe things greatly enflamed Sebaſtian, & the more the Cheriffe diſſwaded his going, the more his deſire encreaſed, ſuppoſing that the Moore grew fearefull that his cōming ſhould depriue him of his kingdome, he did firmely beleeue that he ſhould conquer it: and continued ſo blinde in this deſire, that

he cauſed a crowne to be made and carried with him, with other preparatiues to be crowned King, not knowing in the morning what the euening brings. But it ſeemed to him that fortune began now to ſmile, for that Albacarin the Moore, who commanded for Mulei Moluc, in Arzilla, a towne vpon the borders of the ſea, ſometimes belonging to the Portugals, & voluntarily abandoned to the Moores, by the interceſſion of the Cheriffe Mahamet, had deliuered it to the gouernour of Tanger, whereof the King receiued great contentment, and beleeued now the Moore had ſuch as he ſaide, affectionate to his partie.
               At this time the Iriſhmen rebelled in diuers parts of that kingdome, pretending the libertie of Religion, and complained to Pope Gregory the 13. taking for their leader the Earle of Deſmond and others, as Oneale, and ſome other of the ſauage Iriſh, affirming that if they were aided, they could eaſily drawe the whole Iſland from the Queenes obedience. The Pope did communicate this with the Catholique King, exhorting him to vndertake this action, as moſt godly, & to ſuccour this people, the which they reſolued to do. But foraſmuch as the Queene of England did ſeeme in words friend vnto the king, & did as the Spaniards ſuppoſed couertly vnderhand aſſiſt the Prince of Orange in Flaunders againſt him; the King woulde likewiſe march in the ſame path, and make a couert warre againſt her: they concluded to aſſiſt this people in the Popes name, but ſecretly at the kings charge. To this effect they leuied certaine footemen in the territories of the Church, whereof ſixe hundreth vnder the conduct of Thomas Stukeley an Engliſhman, fled out of England for treaſon; (who a little before had obtained the title of a Marques from the Pope,) were embarked at Ciuitauechia, in a ſhip of Genua, to be tranſported into Ireland, the which arriued at Lisbone, in the time they made preparation in Portugall for the warre of Affrick: the king hearing of their arriuall, and that for want of money he could haue no Italians out of Tuſcane, deſired to ſee them, with an intent to retaine them, & vſe them in the war of Affricke, & hauing cauſed them to diſimbarke, and to lodge at Oeiras neere to the mouth of Tagus, he went one day to view them; and although they were no chiefe men, yet did he admire their order, their ſpeedie diſcharging of their Harquebuzes, their diſpoſition to handle the pike, and their ſtrict obedience: and hauing had ſome conference with the ſaide Stukeley, they perſwaded him to promiſe to goe

with him into Affrick. The Catholique King for that he woulde not ſhew himſelfe a partie, woulde not contradict it. The Pope was ſo farre off, that before the newes coulde come vnto him, he gaue them impreſſe, and they remained for his ſeruice. In this time the foote which were leuied by three Coronels, approched to Lisbone: the fourth which was Frauncis de Tauora, ſhoulde imbarke in Algarues. The three thouſand Germaines (which the Prince of Orange had granted) were (vnder the conduct of Martin of Burgundie, Lord of Tamberg,) arriued within the mouth of Tagus, in Flemmiſh ſhips, and were lodged at Caſcaies, and thereabouts, to the great amaſement of the peaſants, not accuſtomed to the charges of warre. King Sebaſtian before his departure, deſired to ſee the Duke of Alua, whom he ſent vnto, but he excuſed himſelfe vpon the King; and the King at the entreatie of the Duke, vpon the infirmitie of the old man; ſo as his deſire tooke no effect. The Dukes friends tolde him he ſhould haue accepted this fauour; whereunto he anſwered, that hauing knowne by the practiſes and diſcourſes of Guadaluppa, and by the Kings letters, his reſolution to paſſe into Affrick, he thought it impoſſible to diuert him from that opinion, that hauing beene diſcreet in his youth, he woulde not in his declining age make himſelfe author of the ruine, which he did foreſee of a King and kingdome. Sebaſtian without any graue Counſellors, haſtened his departure, impatient of the leaſt delaies, his forces being all aſſembled with the ſhips at Lisbone; the ſouldiors (which were ſcarce nine thouſand) were imbarked againſt their will: The Noblemen and Gentlemen likewiſe had euery one a ſhippe armed, wherein he ſhould imbarque, with thoſe vnder his commaund, but hardly were they drawne from their deere houſes. And although there were a certaine day for their departure appointed, yet was itThe ſecond voyage of Sebastian with his armie into Affricke. not obſerued: So as the King going one morning in great troupe to the cathedrall church, with the Standard he ment to carrie into Affrick, he cauſed it to be hallowed with great pompe, and deliuered it to the maſter of his horſe, and ſo returning (many beleeuing he would haue returned to the pallace) he went directly to the galley wherein he woulde paſſe, to haſten the reſt, ſaying that he woulde preſently depart: And although this were the xvij. day of Iune, in the yeere 1578. yet did he ſtay eight daies in the Port, and neuer diſimbarked, preparing the reſt of the ſoldiours, who were no ſooner

readie then the day after Midſommer: at what time hauing a proſperous winde, the whole armie ſet ſaile, to the great pleaſure and contentment of the King, who yoong and vnskilfull, guided by ſome ſiniſter ſtarre, or by that diuine permiſſion which woulde puniſh this people, went into Affrick, to a dangerous (although a glorious) enterpriſe, leauing the Realme emptied of money, naked of Nobilitie, without heires, and in the hands of ill affected gouernours.
            
         
         
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the ſecond Booke.
               The King of Portugals paſſage into Affricke: his counſell and reſolution to enter into the maine land; the way his armie tooke; the preparatiues for the warre of Mulei Moluc, the qualitie and diſpoſition of his campe, the battaile of Alcazar, the ouerthrowe of the Portugals; the death of King Sebaſtian and of Moluc, and the creation of King Henry.
               
            
            
               THe King of Portugals departure from Lisbone, was ſo mournefull, that it gaue apparant ſignes of euill ſucceſſe, for in ſo great a number of men, and of ſo diuers qualities, there was not any one with a cheerefull countenance, or that did willingly imbarke, againſt the common cuſtome in the beginnings of warre, but all (as it were preſaging of ill euents,) complained they were forceablie drawne vnto it. There was ſuch a deadlie ſilence in the porte, that (during all the time of their abode in ſo great a number of ſhippes) there was neither flute nor trumpet heard. The Kings galley iſſuing foorth, was carried downe with the currant and brake her rudder againſt a Flemmiſh ſhip: a cannon ſhot from the towne ſlew one of his marriners in the boate; ſo as if we ſhall giue credite to ſignes as the auncients did, theſe ſeemed very ominous.

The firſt towne they touched vpon the maine lande was Lagos in Algarues (where did imbarke the regiment which Frauncis de Tauora had leuied in thoſe parts) and certaine other veſſels ioined to the armie, ſo as in all one and other they made neere one thouſand ſaile; but except fiue galleis and fiftie other ſhips, all the reſt were vnarmed, and the moſt of them were barkes to paſſe horſe and munition. They arriued ſoone at Cadiz, whereas the Duke of Medina Sidonia feaſted the King, with chaſing of buls, Iocodecanna, and all other delights that poore Iland coulde yeelde. The Duke laboured to perſwadeThe arriuing of the Portugall armie in Affrick and their proceedings. him not to goe perſonally into Barberie, but he preuailed not, hauing ſoiourned there eight daies like a fleete of merchants, without guard or Centinell, directing their proweſſe towards Affrick, in fewe daies they arriued at Almadraues, betwixt Tanger and Arzilla, where hauing caſt anchors, they ſtaied ſome ſpace. The King hauing then an intention to diſimbarke at Alarache, a ſmall towne of the Moores, lying fifteene miles towards the ſouth, a little before the armie approched the land, being fully reſolued to depart; the King with his fiue galleis and fower gallions (leauing the reſt of the ſhips) went to Tanger, where he made a ſhort abode: for hauing ſent Mulei Cheque ſon to the Cheriffe, of the age of twelue yeeres, by land with Martin Correa de Sylua, and certaine horſemen Moores and Portugals, to the ende they ſhould draw towards Mazagon, and backe the people thereabouts that ſhould reuolt againſt Moluc; he returned to his armie, hauing ſupplied the fortreſſes with freſh ſouldiors, and taking into his ſhips the Cheriffe and eight hundreth Harquebuzers that were at the guard thereof. From the Almadraues, he went to Arzilla with all his fleete, where ſeeing his ſouldiors diſtreſſed for water, he commanded them to lande and refreſh themſelues, meaning to imbarke them againe, or to tranſport them in barkes to Alarache: But wauering in his thoughts, nothing was conſtant, for the ſouldiors being landed with no ſmall confuſion, it was hard to force them to returne, for the ſmall obedience they were in, and for the neceſſitie of water, whereof they muſt make prouiſion, ſo as he continued long irreſolute. The armie was lodged vpon the ſea ſhore, hauing on the one ſide fortified their lodging with rampiers of earth and waggons, on the two other ſides the ſea and the towne ſerued them for trenches: It remained in this eſtate fifteene daies, during which the Portugals

landing with their King, had ſo troubled all the prouince, that the Moores that are neighbours to the ſea townes, as Alarache, Tituan, and others, were reſolued not to make any reſiſtance, but to abandon their townes, and had alreadie tranſported their poore wealth with their wiues to the mountaines.
            But Mulei Moluc being at Marrock, had before both from Portugall, Cadiz, and Arzilla very particular aduertiſement of the King of Portugals preparation, and of the quantitie and qualitie of his men, wherewith he was greatly mooued, ſeeming vnto him that Sebaſtian pretended to depriue him of his kingdome being a Moore, to giue it to another Moore, no more friend to him then he was, without any pretext or iudgement to whom of them the eſtate did iuſtly appertaine. And ſeeing the accord with the Catholique King tooke not the effect he deſired, he reſolued vpon his defence: but weighing how much better an ill peace is then a iuſt warre, and diſcerning well the diſcommodities, great charge, and dangers it drawes with it, he laboured firſt to compound with him, making offer to the King to giue him tenne miles of the countrey lying about his fortreſſes in Affrick for tillage. But Sebaſtian who was of another conceite, made him anſwere that he had beene at great charge in leuying of forreine forces, and therefore he coulde not deſiſt from the enterpriſe, vnleſſe he would yeeld him Tituan, Alarache, and Cape D'Aghero. This demaund ſeemed too exceſſiue to the Moore, and therefore made anſwere that hee muſt pauſe thereon, although the ſiege were before Moroca, and that the King ſhould offer to giue him in counterchange Mulei Mahamet his capitall enimie, That he had conquered thoſe Realmes with his ſword and policie, and ment to defend them with all his forces. He commaunded preſently Rhodeuano his purueyor generall a Portugall Renegado to bring to field all his Tents and Pauillions, the which was perfourmed the next day, beeing in number aboue 4000. The ſixe and twentith of May he went towards Suſe, the chiefe citie being Northward from Moroca, to giue order in thoſe parts for certaine things there concerning the warre. But hauing intelligence vpon the way that the King of Portugall was iſſued out of Lisbone, he returned ſuddenly to Moroca, where hauing left the ſaid Rhodeuano as his Vizeroy, he aſſembled thoſe men of war he commonly keepes in paye in that Realme: he lodged his campe at

Camis, and from thence came in three daies to Temiſnam (townes which lye towards the frontriers of Portugall) where he fell ſicke with great caſtings and a fit of an Ague. There he vnderſtood that Sebaſtian was come to Cadiz: and although he were verie ſicke, yet continuing his courſe, he went to Salé with 14000.horſe, and 2500. Harquebuzers, whereof one thouſand were on horſebacke, & the reſt on foot the moſt part of Andelouſia, & Renegados. Here he vnderſtood the Portugals were arriued at Arzilla, and therefore hauing paſſed the riuer of Marmore at a foord, hauing cauſed ſome quantity of mettal to be brought from Moroco, he caſt fower pieces of great cannon in his campe, three of them with certaine other peeces he drew with him, the other he ſent to Moroco, marching himſelfe towards Alcaſar; Mulei Hemet his baſtard brother, gouernour of the kingdome of Feſſe, was alreadie come to field, by his commandement, as generall of the horſe of that prouince, and hauing aſſembled all the ſouldiers both horſe and foote thereabouts, was come to the place which they call the faire of Thurſday, ſixe miles neere to Alcazarquiuir, where he expected his brother to ioyne their armies togither, hauing two and twentie thouſand horſe, and fiue thouſand fiue hundreth foote. There Moluc arriued the xxiiij. of Iuly ſo ſicke, that he coulde ſcarſe endure on horſebacke, who hauing marched long in his Litter, ſeeing his brother a farre off, he tooke his horſe to meete him, when they approched the one to the other, Mulei Hemet put ſpurres to his horſe, and being come neere his brother, he lighted and kiſſed the ground, in ſigne of humilitie, the whole armie giuing a great volley of ſhotte. His ſicknes encreaſing daily, Mulei Moluc entred not with pompe (as the manner was) into his lodging, but returning to his Litter, ſeated his brother in his place, to effect his entrie, himſelfe going before to take his lodging. And foraſmuch as he vnderſtood, that Sebaſtian had ſent Mulei Cheque with troopes to Mazagon, he diſpatched Mulei Dan his nephew with two thouſand horſe, and ſome foote to make head, leaſt he ſhould indomage thoſe quarters: Toward Cape D'Aghere, and Alarache, he likewiſe ſent men; but hearing that Sebaſtian was diſimbarked at Arzilla, they returned to the campe. Moluc was a man couragious, hardie, and free in wordes, ſeeming to make ſmall account of the Portugals, he ſaide openly, that whoſoeuer went not willingly with him, he ſhoulde retire, ſuffering any

freely to depart that were more friend to Mulei Mahamet then to him, wherein they ſhould do him a fauour; the which he ſpake not to contemne the enimies forces, but knowing how hardly he ſhoulde ſtaie them that minded to leaue him, deſiring rather they ſhould then go, then attend vntill a battaile, or reuolt at ſome other time when they might do him a greater miſchiefe: And therefore to giue them the better meanes to eſcape, he made choiſe of three thouſand, out of ſuch as he ſuſpected, ſending them to diſcouer the Chriſtians Armie, to keepe them buſied with courſes, and to giue them often Alarums, not with any meaning they ſhould do this exploite, but if they meant to flie, they might effect it at their pleaſure. But this meaning vnknowne to that nation, wrought in them a contrarie effect to that which Moluc attended: for hauing conſtrued this commaundement to the fidelitie and truſt he had in them, they meant ſtill to remaine faithfull, ſo as few went vnto the Chriſtians armie: The greateſt part did well performe that which Moluc had giuen them in Charge, for being deuided ſomtimes into 600. ſometimes more, ſometimes leſſe, they ran to the Trenches of the Portugals lodgings, moleſting and ſlaying thoſe they found ſcattering from the Armie.
            
               A light skirmiſh of the Moores againſt the Portugals. In the meane while the Portugals remayning in their lodgings, before they had yet diſcouered the Moores, deceiued with illuſions had twice taken the Alarum in vaine: ſeeing themſelues one day followed at the heeles by 600. horſe, like men that had neuer yet ſeene the enimie neere or far off, although they were in a ſtrong lodging, ioyning to a friend towne, and an Armie at ſea within Harquebuze ſhot: yet ran they fearfully to imbarke, and notwithſtanding that the Enimies (after a light skirmiſh with the Moores of Cheriffe Mahamet who were lodged a little without the trenches) returned preſently, yet the Portugals were ſo amazed, that being kept from imbarking, they fled from the campe going by lande to Tanger, and ſo fell out of one miſchiefe into another, for by the way they were taken priſoners by the Moores of Tituan & other places thereabouts, who lay in waite to robbe and ſpoile. But the King gathered courage by this firſt view of the Moore ſo ſuddenly retyred, for remaining before within the citie, he would now lodge without, to be more neere vnto the skirmiſhes when need ſhould require. The next day diſcouering 2000. of the enimies horſe, the King went to encounter them

with 600. horſe, but the skirmiſh being begunne the Moores retired, wherein the King carried himſelfe more like a valiant ſouldier, then a wiſe Captaine, following Edward de Meneſes Marſhall of the campe, who marched ten miles from the Armie with no ſmall danger, hauing neither footman nor Harquebuzer for his guarde: the ſafetie of his perſon being of great importance to the whole Armie, he ſeemed rather wearie of his life then to doe any acte of a braue minde, who being a King and might liue deliciouſly was pricked forward with the onely deſire of glorie.
            
               The meanes of Moluc to defeat the Portugals. 
               Moluc had newes of this encounter beyond Alcazar where he lodged, from whence he departed not, both for that he expected ſome troupes from Tituan and Mechinee, (places vpon the ſea coaſt,) the which arriued ſoone, as alſo to draw the Portugals into the firme land; for ſo he vnderſtood they entended, yet he feared it could not ſo fall out, doubting they would continue along the ſea coaſt, being moſt conuenient for them. Yet he reſolued if they entred not into the maine, to march towards them withall ſpeed, and before they ſhould attempt any thing, to follow them at their backes; thereby to draw them into the want of many things, not meaning to ioyne battell with them but vpon great aduantage: but if they ſhould enter into the maine land, to ſuffer their paſſage as far as he might with aſſurance, and after cut off their returne to ſea: In this manner he doubted not to obtaine the victorie almoſt without fighting, both for the great number of men he had in his Armie, as alſo vnderſtanding the Portugals were ill prouided of victuals, drawne thither by force, full of delights, and voide of experience.
            
               The counſell and reſolution of the Portugals to enter into the maine land of Affricke. In this time the King of Portugall aſſembled the chiefe of his counſell to reſolue of his departure, demaunding their aduiſe, what courſe they were beſt to take: Many durſt not ſpeake freely; for although they thought the beſt reſolution to goe by ſea to Alarache, yet diſcouering by daily practiſes that the King was otherwiſe reſolued, relying more vpon flatterie then vpon the truth; they choſe rather to counſell him ill and pleaſe him, then to aduiſe him well and contradict him. He was deſirous to goe by land to play both the captaine and the Serieant, not foreſeeing the difficulties the way would bring, nor the danger whereinto he did runne, but as ill aduiſed (hauing no aduertiſement of the enimies Armie) thought with ſecuritie

to ouerrune their countrey, and that the Moores ſhould flie before him as thoſe few had done which appeared at Arzilla. One of theThe Counts of Vimioſo ſeconded the deſ gnes of the King of Portugall. chiefe that did moſt applaud his humour was Alphonſo of Portugall, Earle of Vimioſo, who had beene (in the Kings former voyage into Affricke) Chamberlaine, and had charge of the victuals; wherein he behaued himſelfe ſo ſparingly, as if they had continued any longer in Affricke, or elſe at ſea, they had beene ſtarued, the which his enimies tooke as an occaſion to diſgrace him with the King, whereof he had beene euer ſithens ſecluded. This man (both ambitious and cunning, did ſecond the Kings humours, although he did know with himſelfe they were raſh and hurtfull, and againſt that which he thought conuenient) perſwading him to march by lande for two reaſons: The one to make knowne vnto the King vpon his march the want of victuals there was in his Armie, by reaſon whereof he coulde not proceed: to make his officers odious, and to whip them with the ſame rod he had beene ſcourged before, whereby the voyage ſhould be broken. The other reaſon was to ſhew himſelfe valiant to pleaſe the King and to recouer his diſgrace, ſeeming vnto him that whether he did aduiſe it or not, the King would vndertake it, and ſince that he muſt of force hazard his life, he thought it beſt to make himſelfe Author of the reſolution: if it ſucceeded ill, the loſſe would be generall; if it happened wel, he alone ſhould haue the honour of it, ſeeing that he alone was of that opinion. He ſetled the Kings weake iudgement, and therewithall enflamed this deſire to march, ſaying that this Armie in Affricke being maſter of the field, ſhould not ſhew any feare by imbarking, but turne head whereſoeuer it pleaſed and open all paſſages. And although they were poſſibly inferiour to the enimie in number, yet their valour exceeded them, being well knowne vnto the world how much a Moore was inferiour to a Chriſtian, adding thereunto that to diſimbarke at Alarache it might prooue vneaſie and dangerous; he ſaid that both King Philip and the Caſtilians would report the Portugals durſt not without their aide enter one foot into Affrick, that they had diſimbarked raſhly & had retired like cowards. Lewis de
               The aduiſe of Lewis de Silua concerning this voyage. 
               Silua one of the Kings chiefe fauorites ſpake his mind freely vpon this point, ſaying, there was no reaſon for an Armie to march by land, that went to a towne adioyning vpon the ſea, hauing ſo goodly a Fleete, which might eaſily be furniſhed with freſh water for ſo ſmall a voyage,

which was their onely want. He alleaged that it was moſt eaſie to goe by ſea ſtanding in no feare of any enimie, moſt profitable, for that the way ſhort and the deſcent eaſie, vnderſtanding that there was no reſiſtance: contrariwiſe it was moſt dangerous to march by land, being ignorant where the enimie did lie, & what forces he had: So as ſuppoſing him to be far off, he might be at their backs, and hauing any wants which happen often in an Armie, being far from the ſea, they ſhould hardly be ſupplied; that betwixt Alarache and them did run the riuer of Lixe (called by Ptolome Lixos) vpon the left bank whereof ſtandeth the towne, that hauing neither bridge nor barkes to paſſe, they muſt (leauing the ſea ſide by a long courſe ſeeke a foorde, or the Moores bridge, whither being come, it were doubtfull to know with what facilitie they ſhould paſſe it, being likely the enemies would fortifie the paſſage. Betwixt theſe two contrarie opinions the one by ſea, the other by lande, the thirde was ſpoken of, the which was to march along the ſea ſide in view of the Fleete, with their Chariots vpon the left hand in ſteed of Rampiers, and being come to the mouth of the riuer to paſſe them with their barkes, but this opinion (which ſeemed to be leſſe hurtfull) was not liked of by the King; although the reſt that would haue gone by ſea gaue eare to it moſt willingly; yet thoſe that did contradict it, although they were more in number, yet being of leſſe authoritie (the King being of the other partie) the worſt of all three (which was to goe by lande) preuayled.
            
               Mulei Mahamet ſeeing the King ſo hot in this action grew daily into new feares, hoping of no good ſucceſſe, he doubted before, that if the King ſhould haue the victorie, he would charge him with too heauie a yoke, but hauing viewed the Armie, he loſt all hope of victorie if they ſhould fight, and therefore thought it moſt conuenient to aduiſe the King to goe by ſea to Alarache, hoping he ſhould eaſily win that place and returne into Portugall with that victorie, leauing hisThe counſell of Mulei Mahamet to the King of Portugall. Armie in Affricke, by meanes where of he hoped to win ſuch credit that they ſhould abandon Moluc and flye vnto him; & yet if he would fight to do it with more facilitie and greater iudgement then it ſeemed to him Sebaſtian would. But his counſell preuailed no more with the King then the reſt, ſo as commaunding Diego de Soſa to attend him with the Fleete at Alarache, he marched with his whole Armie

to Alcaſarquiuir, being the direct way vnto the bridge, hauing butThe Armie of the Portugals and their quality 13000. foote, and 1500. horſe; that is 8000 Portugals, 3000. Germaines, 1000. Spaniards, and 600. Italians, with twelue peeces of Artillerie: but the more they aduanced into the firme lande, the more their feare increaſed, and chiefely of them that perſwaded to goe by ſea. And although ſome did againe ſhew vnto the King, that Errors in war cannot be repaired, that it would be too late after to change his reſolution, and that he ought to haue great care in the execution of thoſe things that cannot be redreſſed, beſeeching him not to caſt himſelfe into ſo dangerous an enterpriſe, and aboue all not to leaue the ſea, laying before him the perill, the ſmall gaine, the want of victuals, and the little or no experience of the ſouldiers: yet nothing preuailed, but as it often happeneth that we reape a bad recompence for good counſel, being diſcōtented with thoſe he ſhould haue fauoured, he would ſcarſe heare thē.  The reſt knowing by this proofe he would accept of no counſell, durſt not aduiſe him for feare of his diſgrace. The Armie had no chiefe leaders able to commaund, and therefōre could neither march, lodge, nor fight in order: For although the King ſerued as Generall, Edward de Meneſes Marſhall of the Campe, with ſome others of leſſe qualitie, yet they wanted experience: for although the ſtrangers had their commanders of more experience in actions of war then the Portugals, as the Marques generall of the Italians, the Lord of Tamberg of the Germaines, and Alphonſo d' Aguilar of the Spaniards, yet for that none of them was Generall, and being ſtrangers they might not diſpoſe of the Armie, ſo as none of the Portugals knew his charge. The King the 29. of Iuly made his firſt lodging at the Milles three miles from Arzilla; the ſecond at Menera; where he had aduertiſement that Moluc approched. From thence he wrote his letters to Lisbone to Peter d Alcaſoua briefly, but ful of ouerweening, in the which he ſaid he vnderſtood that Moluc drew neere him, and if he eſcaped not he woulde ioyne battell with him. At that time arriuedThe arriuall of Aldana in the Portugall campe. Captaine Frauncis d'Aldana who had promiſed to ſerue the King, and for that effect had obtayned leaue of the Catholike King, (which no man elſe could do): as a man expert in war hauing viewed the ill diſpoſition of the Campe, began to execute all the greateſt charges, diſpoſing the ſouldiers in the beſt order that he could, although being a ſtranger and of no credit with the Portugals, he

could not effect all he vnderſtood: In this ſort they marched ſlowly lodging alwaies in places of aduantage, by the induſtrie of the ſaide Aldana and of Philip Terzy, who ſerued as Ingener; although they diſcouered ſome horſe, yet knew they not for certaine what Moluc
               Letters and a Preſent from the Duke of Alua to the King of Portugall. pretended: Aldana brought vnto the King letters from the Duke of Alua, with preſent of a headpiece which was the Emperours Charles the fifth, and a caſſocke of white taffetie, with the which the ſaid Charles entered conquerour into Tunis: He ſaid vnto ſome, that he had beene ſorrie the King ſhould attempt any thing in the firme lande of Affricke: But hearing by his owne letters that he would onely goe to Alarache, he did receiue great contentment, and did commend his reſolution; being in the meane time come into certaine ſmall hils which they call Cabeza d' Ardana, they tooke their third lodging, from thence they went to Bercain, but to come to the fifth they muſt paſſe the ſmall riuer of Mucazen at a foord, the which fals ſomewhat lower into Lixe.
            
               Moluc aduertiſed of the Portugals courſe, hauing made longer ſtaie at his lodging beyond Alcazar then he ment, to giue the enimie better meanes to approch, his troupes being ioined, he diſlodged the ſecond of Auguſt, marching towards Alcazar: The day following he went directly towards the bridge, which the Portugals ſought for, and being paſſed did ſtrongly encampe themſelues towards the ſea, not meaning to paſſe any farther: the waies being full of hils, though eaſie to mount and to paſſe with carriage and artillerie, yet not commodious to giue battaile where the armie conſiſted moſt of horſemen. The ſame day the Portugals had paſſed Mucazen, and come to their fifth lodging, they were in doubt whether to encampe on this ſide or on the other ſide of a ſmall riuer, which beginnes in the mariſhes of Alcaſarquiuir, part of the armie hauing paſſed the water, they turned head, reſoluing to lodge on this ſide: there they vnderſtoode that Moluc approched, making ſhew to fight; and if it had not growne late the armies might haue diſcouered each other. Moluc grew then extremely ſicke, without hope to liue many daies, not forbearing to command and diſpoſe of all things that were neceſſarie with great reſolution: and ſeeing the enimie to draw neere, he firſtMolucs ſpeech to his brother. called his brother vnto him ſaying. That although he did not thinke him to haue the ſpirite and courage fit for the place, he woulde giue

him; yet being his brother, he made him generall ouer all the horſe, that he might fight, conquer, and die with them, aſſuring him that if he were noted with the leaſt ſhew of cowardiſe, he himſelfe would ſtrangle him with his owne handes, and iſſuing foorth of his tent, he put his armie into battaile, going himſelfe from ranke to ranke in a ſmallThe qualitie of Molucs armie. litter carried by men, executing the office of a Sergeant. His armie conſiſted of many nations, there were three thouſand Moores of Andalouſie, as well on foote as horſebacke vnder the conduct of Doali Algori and Oſain their Commaunders, valiant men, which are thoſe that paſſed into Affricke from the warres of Alpuſſarres or the mountaines of Grenado; he had alſo three thouſand foote, and twentie fiue thouſand horſe, with a thouſand Harquebuziers on horſebacke, the moſt part of them Renegados and Turkes, all of them men of warre, entertained daily in paie: and this was the principall force of his campe. He had about ten thouſand horſe gathered togither, & fiue thouſand foote, ſo as in all he had about fortie thouſand horſe, & eight thouſand foote, beſides a great number of Arabians and aduenturers that were come vnto him. Moluc had no great confidence in the hirelings or Arabians, eſteeming the firſt fearefull, and the laſt inconſtant. Amongſt his entertained bandes, he had likewiſe three thouſand horſe, which (as is ſaide) he ſuſpected to be friends to Mulei Mahamet, and not greatly fauouring his rule. But the Portugals who for their honour do willingly augment their number, affirme that the Moores were threeſcore and ten thouſand horſe, and twenty thouſand foote, and the Moores (who do encreaſe their owne actions) doe report their number to be very great: but it is verified by men without paſſion, that although Moluc coulde haue aſſembled threeſcore thouſand horſe, and more footemen then he did; yet had he no more in his armie, then we haue ſpecified, with thirtie and fower peeces of artillerie. Moluc kept to himſelfe the title of Generall, he gaue to his brother (as is ſaide) the charge of all the horſe. Oſarin of Raguſe was Colonell of all the Harquebuziers on horſebacke: Mahamet Faba of the Renegados: Doaly of the Andaluſians, the reſt were vnder men of leſſe qualitie, euery one commanding his nation: & Muſa was captaine of his guard. The ſame day towards night Moluc ſent Soliman the maſter of his horſe, a Renegado of Cordube, with certaine horſe to view the enimies armie, and to diſcouer if

they were in battaile, who deſcrying the Portugals that had paſſed the riuer to returne againe; did not beleeue it had bin done to leaue the riuer betwixt the two armies, but imagined they had retired▪ he returned to the campe with this falſe newes that the Portugals fled; wherewith the Moores being mooued, woulde haue purſued and not let them depart without ſome domage: but Moluc woulde not ſuffer them, and as a wiſe Captaine who pretended onely to defende himſelfe, and to make a bridge vnto the enimie if he woulde flie, ſaide, Let them goe in a good hower, I will not runne after them; ſodainly he altered the diſpoſition of his armie, not for that he beleeued the Portugals were retired; but being informed by Mahamet Taba Colonell of the Renegados, that there was treaſon in his campe, foraſmuch as there were three thouſand Harquebuziers Moores, that had neither powder nor bullet, ſodainly he cauſed to be proclaimed, that whoſoeuer wanted munition ſhoulde repaire vnto the Purueior, and he ſhould furniſh him, and euery Harquebuzier that ſhould be found the next morning without fiftie bullets, and two pounds of powder, ſhoulde be corporally puniſhed: He called vnto him likewiſe all the Captaines (and to be more aſſured of their fidelities, and to take from them all meanes to effect any treaſon they might haue practiſed) he changed euery mans charge, and made one Captaine of an others companie, without leauing any man of qualitie in his accuſtomed place.
            This night paſſed with more quiet then the neerenes of the armies did threaten: And although Sebastian had proclaimed that no man ſhoulde ſhoote at any Moore, that ſhoulde willingly retire himſelfe into their campe, but receiue him; yet there came not any one, either for that they bare no ſuch affection to Mahamet as he made a ſhew of, or for that they kept ſo ſtrict a guard in the Moores campe, that none coulde iſſue foorth, as indeed they did. It preuailed little for Mahamet to plant his colours in the head of the armie, as it were calling them, for no man ſtirred. And the day being come the Portugals held a Councell what to doe? The King became more milde, hauing aſſembled the chiefe, heard with greater patience the opinions ofThe conceit of the Portugall to fight. ſuch as would not haue proceeded ſo farre. They propounded either to retire backe, or to march againſt Alarache, & to paſſe the riuer at the mouth: but the moſt expert in warre, thoſe that had diſſwaded

the courſe they had taken, and laboured by al meanes to flie the ſight of the enimie, helde that they muſt fight; the reſolution being too late nowe to auoide the battaile, and to turne head: for to retire they could not without great loſſe: to ſtande ſtill, want of victuals would not ſuffer them: and to continue their vndertaken way, they coulde not without the hazard of a battaile: that it was better to encounter the enimie valiantly, then to giue him courage by a retraite, or by ſhunning the way. The Cheriffe Mulei Mahamet, although his hopes to recouer this kingdome were grounded vpon the onely victorie of a battaile (and that the King being maſter of Alarache and the ſea townes, he ſhoulde reape no profite thereby) yet did he all he coulde to diſſwade him from fight, eſteeming the Portugals to be inferiour, perſwading them to keepe cloſe togither, and to ſeeke meanes to retire although it were with ſome loſſe. And although Sebastian were ſome what tempered, yet was he not amazed, like to all the reſt, but with great courage deſired the combate, not eſteeming the enimies forces ſo great as they were: No man durſt contradict him, both for that (as it is ſaide) many thought it neceſſarie to ioine battaile, as alſo for that the Portugals doe generally thinke it cowardiſe to diſſwade from fighting, holding it more honourable to looſe a battaile with raſhnes, then to conquer with cunning and iudgement, without fighting. For this reaſon it was reſolued (after great contrarietie of opinions) to march againſt the enimie, although ſome practiſes of peace were yet in hande, but with weake hopes: So as the ſame morningThe order of the Portugals armie. they diſlodged, hauing deuided their armie into three ſquadrons, the one following the other immediately, and almoſt vnited togither; that in the front, was in a manner diuided into three, for in the middeſt the aduenturers were led by Aluaro Pirez, brother and Lieutenant to Christopher of Tauora: on the left hande were the Caſtillians led by Alphonſo d'Aguilar, lined with Harquebuziers of the ſame nation, commanded by Lewis d'Godoy: and the Germaines were on the left hande vnder the Lord of Tamberg, intermixed with Harquebuziers Italians, and thoſe Portugals that vſed to be at Tanger, commanded by captaine Hercules d'Piſa: euery nation was ſet in long rankes with their Commanders in the front. In an other ſquadron which did ſecond this, were the Portugals of Michell de Norogna and Vaſco de Sylueira, with harquebuziers in flanke: and in the other which

ſerued for the rereward, were the Portugals of Diego Lopez de Sequeira and Frauncis de Tauora (although that Sequeira remained at Arzilla,) for the guard whereof beſides two wings of ſhot, there were three hundreth Harquebuziers in the rereward: on both ſides of the armie were their horſemen deuided being in all fifteene hundred, placed in triangles, whereof the right wing was commanded by George d' Alencastro Duke d'Auero: on the left ſide was the ſtanderd Roiall, Iean de Sylua, Embaſſadour for the Catholique King, and yoong Theodoſe Duke of Barcellos, (for ſo they call the eldeſt ſonne of the Dukes of Bragançe) and on the right hande a little ſeparated, were about two hundreth horſe, of thoſe which liue commonly on thoſe frontiers, which they call Affricans: not far from them were the Moores, of the Cheriffe Mahamet, but fewe in number: In this order they marched with their baggage in the midſt betwixt their horſe and foote on the right winge, leauing a ſpace on both ſides betwixt their ſquadrons to retire if need were.
            
               The diſpoſition of Molucs Armie. 
               Moluc who loſt no opportunitie, had now put his armie in battaile; he placed his footmen (which were all Harquebuziers) in forme of a creſſent; the firſt rank were of Andaluſians; the ſecond of Renegados, and the laſt of Affricanes placed expreſly in this ſort, for that one nation being enimie to an other, they might preſſe forwarde their contraries, and not ſuffer them retire: vpon the two hornes of the creſſent, he planted two ſquadrons of ten thouſand horſe in each; and behinde (as it were in the rereward) followed in equall diſtance, all their horſe in ſmall troopes, reſoluing (if they ment to fight) with ſo great a number of men to compaſſe in the Portugals armie, and charge them on euery ſide. But in the meane time his ſicknes encreaſed, feeling himſelfe die by degrees: and although his Phiſitions vſed all their skill to ſuccour him, yet decaying howerly, they founde he coulde not liue two daies. He felt a double death by reaſon of the time wherein he died, and not being able to execute his reſolution in this warre, he doubted that he ſhoulde not leaue any one that could effect them. For although hee were then in battaile, yet had hee no meaning to fight at that inſtant, foreſeeing (after that hee vnderſtood the Portugals did march into the maine land with their baggage) if they ſought to delay the battell, they were all vndone, and that without the loſſe of any one man he would take them all

priſoners, by reaſon of the want they ſhould find in that poore countrey of Affricke: But ſeeing this reſolution (which required time and could not bee effected in haſte) would not ſucceed by reaſon of the ſhortnes of his life, he was much troubled. He thought it not conuenient to diſcouer his conceit vnto his brother, that ſhould ſucceede him, both for that he much doubted of his iudgement, and knowing aſſuredly that if he died before the victorie, the Moores would flie, and rebell againſt his brother, and yeeld to the Portugals, chiefely by the pretence of Mulei Mahamet, and in this manner the kingdome would be loſt. Afflicted with theſe cares, ſeeing the enimie neere with ſo great an Armie, and his death approaching, he reſolued not to truſt his heire, but leauing his firſt reſolution, rather during his life to hazard a bloodie and doubtfull battell againſt all Reaſon of warre, then to die with feare of the loſſe of his Realme, the which he knew aſſuredly would happen after his death: being reſolued to fight, all practiſes of accord diſmiſſed, he aſſembled the chiefe commaunders of the Armie, and ſpake vnto them in this manner.
            
               Molucs Oration to his Armie. Your valour (ſouldiers,) and the iuſtice of the cauſe which hath put Armes into your hands, will not ſuffer me to ſpeake much to encourage you to fight: For you are thoſe who vnder my command, haue alwaies brought to happie ende euerie enterpriſe were it both difficult and dangerous. The enimies which you haue in front, are the ſame Portugals, which in times paſt, your fathers and your owne right hands haue often vanquiſhed and ouercome. The Italians and Germans, which are come to their ſuccours (more terrible in name then in deed) ſhould not any thing amaze you, being men without experience, and in ſmall numbers. And as for me who haue ſometimes made tryall of them, I take vpon me the charge to yeeld them ſubiect to your forces. And if reaſon preuaile any thing in battell, ſhal not the victorie be on our ſide? We liued quiet in our houſes, without vexing or moleſting any one, content with our fortunes, not practiſing againſt the wealth and proſperitie of any other: And a nation by nature our enimies, differing in law, comes from a far countrey, not onely to pull from me my Crowne, but alſo to ſpoile you of all your goods, to depriue you of your libertie, and to rauiſh your liues: You perchance ſuppoſe, that in this wicked people, pietie hath ſo much force, as to plant Mahamet in the kingdome (a ſtranger, contrarie

to their Religion) whoſe friendſhip and bountie is vnknowne to them; they ſhould vndertake this paines to hazard themſelues to death. It is the thirſt of gold, and of your blood, with the deſire to rule, that hath brought the King of Portugall hither, ſupported not by his owne forces, but with the hopes he hath to deceiue you, vnder this fained ſhew of pietie, to this Infidell Mahamet; who if he had any feeling of a man, ſhould be rather contented, to liue ſubiect to my Empire, according to our lawes, then (inuading my Realme by force) procure the deſtruction of his owne blood, the ruine of his countrey, the ſlaughter of you all, and the ſlauerie of himſelfe. But the deceit is apparant to you all, there remaines nothing but that you oppoſe your valour, which ſhall fight in a moſt iuſt cauſe: You ſhall repell iniuries from your families, maintaine your liberties, preſerue your liues, and win honor, and conquering, or dying in what ſort ſoeuer, you ſhall gaine Paradiſe. 
               Moluc would haue ſpoken more, but his ſouldiers interrupted him; crying, that he ſhould preſently lead them againſt the Portugals, whereupon he held his peace, retyring himſelfe into his Littor in the midſt of the circle of his Armie, where were his colours and his guard.
            In the meane time the Chriſtian Armie marched on, and approached neere the enemie, in an open Champion, (which the Moores cal Tamiza.) When as Moluc halfe dead, viewing this weake Armie approach in ſo ſmall a number, being not aboue 12000. foote, he gaue order they ſhould not flie, as he had reſolued before, that ſeeming aſſuredThe beginning of the battell. of the victorie there might few eſeape: And therefore extending the hornes of his croiſſant and the troupes of his horſe, he drew them into a large circuit, keeping his men rounde, about a cannon ſhot from the enimie, he inuironed all the Portugals campe, ioyned the two hornes at the backe of the rereward, making it an ouall circle: hauing thus inuironed it, he then ſtraitened it, drawing his troupes more cloſe togither (ſo cunning were theſe barbarous people) ſo as the Chriſtians Armie being compaſſed in of all ſides with their horſe, the Moores footmen ſtood in front to ſtop their paſſage: They continued long in this eſtate, the Moores diſcharged their artillerie at a reaſonable diſtance, the which though it did a little indomage them (ſome bullets paſſing thorowe the rankes) yet did it no great matter of importance. The Portugals fearfull and amaſed (imagining vpon

the firſt moouing of the Moores, that they diſlodged to depart) ſeeing thēſelues inuironed, did likewiſe diſcharge their cannon, but with ſo great diſorder, and ſo much out of ſeaſon, as it did ſmall hurt. And foraſmuch as the Moores (hauing charged their cannon againe, began to play, although to ſmall effect) yet the Portugals were ſo much terrified, that vpon ſight of the fire, they fell all to the ground: wherewith the King (leaſt the artillerie ſhoulde any more annoy the Portugals, and augment their feare,) gaue ſigne to the battaile: whereat the ſquadrons of the auantguard and of the horſe, did iointly mooue with woonderfull force and great valour: then their footemen encountred the Moores, who came to it reſolutely, for that the Andaluſians, (deſirous to reuenge olde wrongs) did their beſt endeuors: The auantguard did ſo withſtand their force, that although the fight was in equall ballance whileſt the ſhot plaied, yet when they came to handie blowes, the Moores had the woorſt, for they were thrice broken and put to flight, with the loſſe of their colours: But for that their number was great, the battaile was ſtill renewed by their Commaunders, with freſh troupes and newe order. In the rereward they likewiſe charged Frauncis de Tauora, with the regiment of Diego Lopez de Sequiera, where for a while they reſiſted weakely: Thoſe in the middeſt were the laſt that fell to armes: But Moluc gaue them no long time of reſt, for he ſent to aſſaile Vaſco de Sylueire, and Michael de Norogna, on both ſides, ſo as at one inſtant they fought on all partes: Theſe made weaker reſiſtance then the reſt, for that ſome of them caſting cowardly away their armes, and falling on their knees, yeelded to the diſcretion of the Moores, who for the moſt part deuided their heads with their Cimiters, in recompence of their baſe yeelding. The combate being hot on all ſides, the circle of the Moores horſe, & their ſquadrons that were behinde, drew neere, and firſt charged the auantguard, where they found their ſuccours were more neceſſarie then in any other part; (for that the Italians and Caſtillians had cut in peeces a great number of the Moores, and of their beſt men,) preſſing the Chriſtians armie on all ſides they coulde approch, without any diſorder of their owne, who nowe growne fearefull, began toThe Portugals haue the aduantage of the Moores. looſe grounde, and to ſhrinke togither, to the great diſcontentment of the King, who for any labour of his, coulde not containe them in their rankes. As theſe Mooriſh horſemen began to mooue, the Portugals

horſe that were accuſtomed to liue in thoſe frontiers, the Moores of the Cheriffe Mahamet, and the Duke of Auero with his triangle did valiantly march towards them, charging the firſt they mette, & greatly endomaging them, and put their horſemen on that ſide to flight. This happie beginning of victorie laſted little: for whileſt the Duke who commanded the greateſt number, did fight hand to hand, he diſcouered on the one ſide not farre from him, a great troupe of the enimies horſe, the which he durſt not attende, doubting his owne ſtrength, but turning head, followed expreſly the chaſe of thoſe that were before him, thinking to returne to the fight with greater aduantage, as indeede he did: for turning his horſe, he went to charge them that came to encounter him in flanke; but finding him ſelfe ouercharged on euery ſide, wanting courage to withſtand them, and turning his horſes violently, preſſed by the enimie, he found no place of retrait among the ſquadrons, but ruſhing through the rankes of the Germaines, ſome part of the horſe entring amongſt the foote, bredde a great confuſion; and being vnable to relieue themſelues, they wrought no other effect, but diſordered their friends, who were after leſſe able to reſiſt the enimies horſe and foote, that came to charge them: On the other ſide of the armie, where ſtoode the Standerd roiall, and the reſt of the horſe, which ſet forwarde ſomewhat ſlower, they made a great ſlaughter of Moores, (although the King were not preſent, being gone towarde the vanguard) whom they purſued euen vnto their artillerie: But being ſuccoured by one of the ſquadrons that were behinde them, the Moores returned furiouſly vnto the fight, ſo as in ſhort time it hapned vnto the Portugals that were in that part, as to their other horſe, whoſe ſucceſſe was ſo much the woorſe, for that on the outſide they were charged by the Moores, and within, their foote were diſordered by their horſe, who had the charge on the other ſide, and all amazed, fledde; ſo as in a moment all was confounded, the Portugals horſe remained diſordered, and diſperſed, ſhewing ſmall courage, and leſſe diſcipline: for although it were full of Nobilitie, and men of reſolution; yet were there many yoong men ſent by their fathers, who not expecting they ſhoulde come to fight, were the cauſe of this diſorder: ſo as in one place you ſhoulde ſee men of one ſquadron both fight valiantly and flie away cowardly not being purſued: yet the Commaunders of the

horſe, and ſome others, turning face to the enimies, they both by words and effect encouraged the reſt, and ſlewe ſome that fled: But as their number was ſmall, and the amaſement great, they preuailed little. In the vantguard (where the King was a looker on) they made great reſiſtance, killing aboue two thouſand Moores, but they were in ſo great numbers, that the Italians and Spaniards who fought on that ſide (not being ſuccoured by any others) after they had encountered the enimies with their daggers, were in a manner all flaine, not ouercome, but wearie with killing. The ſmall order they obſerued to inueſt the enimie, was hurtfull vnto them; for the front being compoſed of diuers nations, who contented to make ſhewe of their valour, they did not one ſtay for another, and the Germaines more flegmatike, remained behinde; ſo as their forces diſmembred, wrought not that effect they had done vnited: yet notwithſtanding the valour of thoſe men, the firſt charge of the horſe, eſpecially of the Affricanes, commanded by Edward de Meneſes, ſtrooke a great terrorMolucs feare. in the beginning vnto Mulei Moluc; for ſeeing his men flie (although he were ſicke to the death) mounted to horſe in choler, going towards them that ranne away, to ſtaie them, and encourage them. And although the preſſe encreaſed, and the ſhot of the Chriſtians drewe neere, he made ſhewe to march himſelfe foremoſt, either to retaine his men by ſhame, or by the hazarde whereunto hee ſhoulde thruſt himſelfe: But his greateſt fauorites came about him, ſome holding him by the ſtirrops, ſome by his gowne, and ſome by the raines of his bridle, beſeeching him not to hazarde himſelfe. But he perſiſting his reſolution, and they to ſtay him, he growe in choler, laying holde of his ſworde to diſperſe them, at what time being ſeaſed with a cruell fit of his diſeaſe, he ſwouned, and had fallen from his horſe; but being taken downe by them about him, he was laid in his Litter, where putting his finger vnto his mouth in ſigne of ſilence, ſodainely, or (as ſome report) before he was laide downe,Molucs death. he gaue vp the ghoſt. The Renegados which remained neere about him, kept his death ſecret, with great care, hauing ſo formerly appointed if he ſhould die; an argumēt of great magnanimitie in this Barbarian, who meaſured his counſels with the hower of his life, and prouided that death ſhoulde not depriue them of the victorie. The Litter being ſhut, they placed at the doore a wittie yoong childe, who

being inſtructed what he had to doe, making ſhewe to ſpeake vnto him, and receiue his anſwer, tolde them his pleaſure was, they ſhould paſſe forwards. This ſecret was of great importance to the Moores,The Arabians ſpoile their friends for without doubt if his death had beene diſcouered, they had all fled. The Arabians who were not come with any intent to fight, but with a deſire to ſpoile the conquered, hauing firſt viewed ſome Moores runne away, that their Mercenaries grew fearefull, who kept their lodging, doubting ſome ill ſucceſſe; they fell vpon the Moores baggage, and ſpoiled it, putting to flight ſuch as kept it, who running euen vnto Feez, with many others of the campe, gaue out that the Moores had loſt the fielde: ſo dangerous a thing it is in an armie to conduct a nation light and vnconſtant, who vpon the leaſt contrarie euent falles vpon his friendes. But fortune who had hitherto beene doubtfull, although it ſeemed more to fauour the Moores then the Portugals, after the Italians and Caſtillians were defeated, remaining yet a good number of Germaines and aduenturers diſordred, did now ſhewe it ſelfe apparant in fauour of the Moores, and the victorie aſſured, hauing gotten their artillerie: For the Renegados who were in the ſecond ranke of the Moores, their orders being open, did without any confuſion receiue the Andaluzians, and all thoſe that had beene broken by the vanguard and fled, who returning a freſh to charge the aduenturers and Germaines, they founde but weake reſiſtance. The arriuall of certaine Renegados that fled from the enimies preuailed but little, bringing newes of the death of Moluc: For although ſome went vp and downe crying victorie, and publiſhing that Moluc was dead, thereby to encourage the ſouldiers; yet was there no meanes to draw the Portugals to imitate the example of the ſtrangers; but all fearefull without any courage, retiring themſelues, they ſtill loſt of the fielde: The ſquadrons of the maine battaile did not yet mooue, but vnfurniſhed of ſhot (who without keeping their places were crept foreward) did ſtande firme without ſuccouring of their friends, ſaying, that ſuch was the Kings commandement, and therefore charged by the Moores ſhotte on horſebacke, were miſerablie conſumed, when as their commanders finding their errors wouldFrauncis de Tauora ſlain in the battaile. haue drawne them forwarde, the ſouldiers were ſo amazed, that they coulde not doe it. In the rereward Frauncis de Tauora was ſlaine with a ſhotte, hauing long by his valour withſtoode the Moores

charge; but being dead his men grew more amazed then before, crying for mercie without fighting, & flying away without any reſpect of the King, who was come thither from the vantguard: they retired of all parts ſo farre backe, with ſo great a confuſion, and without conſideration whither they went, that all the ſquadrons in a confuſed order came cloſe togither on all ſides; ſo as the horſe, ſouldiers, chariots▪ munition, tents and pauillions, with their other baggage, came all confuſedly togither on a heape, and in ſuch a ſtraite, that many were troden downe in the preſſe, and ſmoothered vnder the horſe and chariots: So as this armie which did containe aboue three miles in compaſſe, was in a moment conſumed by the ſworde, and did ſo reſtraine it ſelfe through feare, that a ſmall roome might containe it. The Duke of Auero, Embaſſador for the Catholique king, Aldana and ſome other chiefe men, hauing gathered togither ſome horſe, charged the Moores firſt on the one ſide, and then on the other, where they did ſee greateſt neede, but being diſordred and fewe in number, if they preuailed on the one ſide, they receiued hurt on the other: For at the ſame inſtant when as certaine of them attended the King towardes the rereward, whereas there needed ſuccours, there came a great number of Arabians againſt the vanguard, who according to their cuſtome, to fall vpon thoſe, whom they ſee in route, charged that part with ſuch furie, that they ſlewe almoſt all the Germaines with their Captaines, and many men ofThe death of the Duke of Auero, and of Aldana, and the impriſonment of the Prior. account: There the Duke was ſlaine with a ſhot, Aldana died likewiſe: the Embaſſador of the Catholique King was hurt and taken priſoner, ſo was the Prior and the Marſhall of the field. Theſe being diſmounted, euery man fled; the Moores entring into the ranks of the Chriſtians, with their Cymiters cut them miſerablie in peeces: Whileſt this was a dooing, the fire fell by chaunce into the Portugall munition, which did endomage them no more then the Moores: for as they entred among their baggage, it conſumed manie of them. The circle of the Barbarians horſe did no way guarde the paſſage towards the ſea, ſo as the Chriſtians that ment to flie that way, might eaſily doe it, but ſuch as thought to returne to Arzille were either ſlaine or taken priſoners; for ſuch as eſcaped the Moores, being ignorant of the waies, and paſſage of the riuers, were either drowned, or fell into their handes, who made them ſlaues:

There were many drowned, deceiued with the riſing of the riuer, & ignorant of their former paſſage; for whereas the riuers (and particularly Mucazen) doe ebbe and flowe, like the Ocean by the courſe of the Moone, filling it ſelfe with ſalt water, when the armie paſſed they were almoſt dry; but in their returne, the Tide (as they cōmonly ſay) being full the riuers were greatly riſen, wherof the Portugals being ignorant, and vnskilfull of the Ford, fearefull, and chaſed by the Moores, they were ſwallowed vp; ſo as of a great multitude of Chriſtians, which were in this battaile, there eſcaped but one hundreth, ſo well coulde the Barbarians execute their reſolutions. The King (who in the beginning when as Molucs artillerie firſt plaied, went through the armie in coach with Chriſtopher de Tauora) tooke his horſe, and as they ſay, went couragiouſly toward the vanguard, where remaining a while a looker on, ſending firſt one, then another, to commaund what he thought was neceſſarie, he was lightly hurt with a ſhot in the right arme towarde the ſhoulder, whereof making ſmall account, he went ordering thinges in all parts of the armie, leauing the triangle of horſe where his Standerd remained. But for that he was yoong, and depriued of the greateſt treaſure that Kings can enioy, I meane a wiſe man neere him in whome he ſhoulde truſt, when he did ſee his men begin to breake, and the Duke of Auero to go forward and retyre backe, he came furiouſly with certaine Gentlemen that were about him, to fight among the ſouldiers, encouraging his men valiantly by the effects, but withThe King of Portugall fights valiantly, but is vanquiſhed. fewe words. Thoſe that behelde him fight, woondered at his courage, for although that they ſlewe three horſe vnder him, without any whit daunting him, yet was he neuer wearie to charge, ſtrike, and ſuccour all partes of the armie, where was greateſt daunger: But being but a man, aided by fewe, he cannot reſiſt the enimies furie; nor make his friends partakers of his valour. Manie of the Nobilitie which remained yet on horſebacke, ſeeing the armie in route, ſought the King in all parts to helpe to ſaue him: but the Standard which was carried before him as a marke to knowe him, was now taken, and the bearer ſlaine; and being deceiued with another ſomewhat like vnto it, which Edward de Meneſes carried, they followed the one in ſteade of the other; ſo as the King remained as a man loſt, with ſome of his moſt truſtie ſeruants about him, and

one Renegado, who laboured to ſaue him: Hauing in vaine ſought to fly, being aduiſed to yeeld with his armes, he would by no means agree vnto it. One amongſt them holding vpon the point of his ſworde a white napkin in ſigne of peace, went towards the Moores, as an Embaſſadour for the reſt to yeelde: but they either barbarous, or wrathfull, tooke the meſſenger priſoner, and charged the reſt, who being fewe in number, wearied, & without courage, they were all ſlaine. Some ſay, there grew a controuerſie amongſt them about the Kings owne perſon, and for that occaſion they ſlew him: They ſent after to ſecke his bodie, and by a notable example of theThe King ſlaine by the Moores, and carried to Molucs tent. inconſtancie of this world, they carried it naked vpon a ſaddle pommell, into the roiall tent of Moluc, where letting it fall to the ground, it was carefully viewed by the Nobilitie that was there preſent, & a publike certificate made that it was he, keeping it aftewardes at Alcazer-Quiuer. Such was the death of this vnfortunate King, wherein chaunced all things that might make him lamentable, his yoong age, the expectation of his vertues, the want of ſucceſſion, his violent death, and the impriſonment of his bodie. He was indued with excellent qualities, but nothing profitable vnto him, wanting by reaſon of his vnripe yeeres, that predominante vertue of our actions: For all his reſolutions that did guide him to ſo raſh an end, were grounded vpon his magnanimitie, zeale to religion, liberalitie, thirſt of militarie glorie; of the diſpoſition of his body, and the vigour of his courage. It ſeemes that we may well ſaie of this vnfortunate yoong Prince, that which was ſometimes ſpoken of Alexander the Great; That Nature had giuen him vertue, and Fortune vices: For in truth Sebaſtian had his vertues of nature, and his vices from his education. 
               Mulei Mahamet eſcaped his enimiesMulei Mahamet drowned. hands, but his too great haſte to paſſe Mucazen, and to recouer Arzille, was the cauſe he was drowned in his paſſage. Thoſe whome idlenes had made curious, did note the diuerſitie of theſe Princes deathes, for being all loſt in one battaile, within the ſpace of ſixe houres, the one died of his naturall death; the ſecond by the ſword; the thirde was ſmothered in the water. When as Hamet ſee the battaile wonne, he ranne towardes his brother, thinking to finde him aliue, and to reioice with him: but being come to his litter, they enformed him of his death. And although Moluc had left one ſonne,

               Hamet proclaimed king of the Moores. yet did they ſalute Hamet as their King, running through their campe with enſignes proclaiming of his name, according to their cuſtome: And for that according to the conformitie of the grandfathers will, the eldeſt (as it is ſaide) of the nephewes ſhould ſucceede, therefore Hamet was ſworne Prince. The Moores fell to ſpoile, and take priſoners, making a very rich bootie, by reaſon of many precious things the Portugals had brought with them into the campe; but eſpecially for the priſoners, which were in great number, and of great importance, for their wealth and nobilitie: beſides that the Moores make more account of one Portugall priſoner, then of any other nation, for that being delicate and not able to ſuffer, they redeeme thēſelues for great ſums, as theſe gentlemen did afterwards; who by an example of ſmall patience, ſet themſelues at ſixe thouſand duckats a peece and more. This day was famous by the deathA battaile famous by the death of three Kings. of three Kings; that is, Sebaſtian, Mulei Moluc, and Mulei Mahamet, by the impriſonment of all the Nobilitie of a Realme, & of ſo many ſouldiers; a thing ſeldome or neuer hapned; and alſo for the importance of Sebaſtians death, in the other affaires of the worlde. The number of the dead, was not ſo great as of the priſoners; but for that the truth is hard to be verified, it hath bred diuers opinions in the Portugals: Some haue reported that the enimies were infinite in number; others haue bin more moderate; yet haue they augmēted this point: Notwithſtanding there died three thouſand Moores, and as many Chriſtians, or more; amongſt the which were ſomeThe names of the chiefe ſlaine in the battaile. men of account: For beſides the Captaines of the ſtrangers, and the Duke of Auero, there was ſlaine Alphonſo of Portugall, Earle of Vimioſa; Lewes Coutigno, Earle of Rodondo; Vaſco de Gama, Earle of Vidiguera; Alphonſo of Norogna, Earle of Mira; Iohn Lobo, Baron of Aluito; Aluara of Melo, ſonne to the Marques of Ferrara; Rhoderick of Melo, eldeſt ſonne to the Earle of Tentuguel; Iamie brother to the Duke of Bragance; Iohn de Silueira, eldeſt ſonne to the Earle of Sorteglia; Chriſtopher of Tauora; and manie other of account, ſo as ſome noble families were there wholie extinct. Arias of Silua, Biſhop of Porto, and Emanuel of Meneſes, Biſhop of Coimbra, died likewiſe: The Duke of Barſellos, with Anthonie Prior of Crato, were taken priſoners. The newe King hauing gathered togither his armie, and the greateſt number of

priſoners he could get, reſolued to returne to Feez; where he entered in great triumph: For beſides the colours taken, and the number of Captiues he led with him, he cauſed the bodie of Mulei Mahamet to be founde out, and hauing flaied it, and filled the skin with ſtrawe, he carried it in triumph, to take from the Moores al the hope they had conceiued in him. After he ſtudied carefully to diſcouerThe couetouſnes of Hamet. the Gentlemen that were priſoners, taking them from the Moores and Iewes, who had bought them for a ſmall price, to drawe from them a greater raunſome, as indeede he did: Whereupon hee was noted by ſome to be more couetous then valiant, ſeeming a great indiſcretion, that after ſo great and abſolute a victorie, remaining no reliques of an enimies armie, he ſhoulde ſo ſodainly betake himſelfe to reſt. They woulde (being but twentie and fiue miles from the fortes which the Portugals held in Affrick) he ſhould preſently haue laboured to force them, and haue freed the Prouince from ſuch a curbe (being the opinion of the moſt expert) that if he had aduanced his campe, he had ſoone forced them, vnfurniſhed both with men and munition; and the Portugals that were there in guard remaining ſo aſtoniſhed, for the death of their King, that they could hardly haue made defence, and ſo much the leſſe hauing ſmall hope to be ſuccoured out of Portugall, Sebaſtian hauing carried with him all the Nobilitie which were woont to defende thoſe places. So as vpon this diſcourſe, many ſaide, as was ſpoken to Hannibal of the ſame nation, that the Affricanes although they knowe ſometimes how to vanquiſh, yet coulde they not vſe the victorie: But all well conſidered, the Moore proceeded in this action, with more iudgement, then others beleeued, for not ſuffering himſelfe to be carried away with proſperitie, hauing aduertiſement that the Realme of Feez (the which they had receiued from ſuch as had eſcaped the day of the battaile the handes of the vanguard of the Chriſtians and of the Arabians) was ſomewhat altered, ſeeing himſelfe newly King, he thought it more conuenient being armed to goe pacifie his people, and take aſſured poſſeſſion of the Realme, then to buſie himſelfe with newe conqueſts, and leaue the certaine in doubt for the vncertaine: Beſides, hauing well conſidered the conqueſt of theſe fortreſſes of the ſea, he did not eſteeme them eaſie, but of hard attempt: for beſides they wanted no garriſons, and that Portugall

was not yet ſo vnpeopled, but that it might ſoone be ſuccoured, he held it for moſt certaine, that King Philip for his owne priuate intereſt would defend them with all his force, the which he might eaſilie effect by reaſon of the great number of galleies hee had prepared readie in Spaine, fearing perchance that which had happened. And for that he doubted the Andaluzians might haue ſome intelligence with the Turkes, and practiſe ſome treaſon againſt his perſon, hee cut off the head of Doali and ſome other Commaunders, and of ſome others of his traine. By this meanes Hamet got the name of a wiſe and conſiderate Prince, the which he preſerued, gouerning himſelfe with iudgement.
            
               The Portugals armie at ſea returnes to Lisbone. 
               Diego de Soſa Generall of the armie at ſea, who as we haue ſaid, remained neere Alarache, hearing the noiſe of the artillerie, and the brute of the two armies, moſt aſſured they were in fight, he knew not what to doe: for although his commiſſion was there to attende the King, yet he doubted leaſt the viewe of the enimie might force him to change his reſolution, or that the way ſhoulde be ſtopped, and that he ſhoulde expect him in vaine, not reſoluing whether it were more expedient to returne to Arzille, or attend in that place: He made likewiſe a queſtion, whether he ſhoulde batter Alarache, (whereunto he was enclined) thinking by his cannon to giue the King a figne of his being there, and to trouble the minde of the Moore, while he was in fight; but he reſolued not any thing, deteined by his blinde commiſſion, and the aduiſe of ſome other Capteines. The armie being broken, he receiued letters from Peter de Meſquita, gouernour of Arzille; and withall, newes of the ſucceſſe, in part falſe, writing vnto him that he ſhoulde returne with the armie to Arzille, and that King Sebaſtian came thither to imbarke. And although this letter did not eaſilie mooue him, doubting that Meſquita, demaunded the armie more for his owne aſſurance then otherwiſe; yet being certified of the Kings death, he ranne alongſt the coaſt vnto Tanger: ſeeking to gather vp the remainder of the armie, and ſo after returne to Lisbone.
            Theſe thinges paſſed in Affrick, the news came (but without good aſſurance) to the Gouernours the fourteenth of Auguſt, which did ſo amaze them, that for a time they knewe not what to determine, yet they kept it ſecret, reſoluing in the meane time to call the

Cardinall Henrie (who they ſaide) ſucceeded directly to the crowne, he a little before not greatly pleaſing nor agreeable to his Nephew, in a manner retired himſelfe in the Abbey of Alcobaſſa, to whome with great diſſimulation they ſent father George Serrano, of the order of the Ieſuits, to declare vnto him the ſucceſſe, and to beſeech him to come to Lisbone, to receiue the Scepter; although on the other part ſome reported that Peter d'Alcaſoua had ſecretlie aduertiſed the Catholique King of all things, beginning to yeelde obedience, as to him whom he did foreſee woulde be future Lorde of the Realme, if this were not a practiſe of his enimies to make him more ſuſpect vnto the Cardinall Henrie: generally through the Realme they knewe nothing of aſſurance, for all paſſengers were ſtaied by order from the Gouernours; all letters that came from forraine parts were taken, giuing the people to vnderſtande a thouſand fables, doubting perchaunce, that if the people knewe themſelues to be without a King, they woulde attempt ſomething. The Citie of Lisbone, as alſo all the reſt, were in great garboile, vnderſtanding that there was a Carrier come with ſuch newes, as had greatly altered the Gouernours, not knowing what it was, ſeeing the Councell daily aſſembled, the letters retained, to vnderſtande that they had ſent both into Caſtill, and to the Cardinall, to heare that both the Chriſtians and the Moores campes were approched, helde the whole Realme in feare of ſome ruine. There was none in Lisbone but had ſome intereſt in this warre, who ſo had not his ſonne there, had his father; the one her husbande, the other her brother; the traders and handie-crafts men who had not their kinſemen there (and yet many of them had) did venture their wealth in it, ſome of them for the deſire of gaine, and others for that they could not call in that which they had lent to Gentlemen, and ſouldiers: by reaſon whereof all were in heauines, euerie one ſeemed to foretell the loſſe of ſuch friends, and goods he had in Affrick: and although they ſtoode yet doubtfull, yet might you vnderſtand their ſecret ſighes.
            
               A meſſage ſent to the Cardinall Henrie by the Catholique king. The Catholique King, aduertiſed of the ſucceſſe of Affrick, and of that which was treated in Portugall, ſent thither preſently Chriſtopher de Mora, a Portugall; at that time a Gentleman ſewer, one of thoſe which went into Caſtil with the Princeſſe mother of Sebaſtian:
               
He carried with him two Commiſſions: the one was to viſite Henrie, and to let him vnderſtande the King woulde preſently ſende to him another perſonage for the ful perfourmance of that office: The other was to ſounde the harts of the Portugals, for the which hee was thought beſt able, being there borne, and well vnderſtanding the ſtate of the Realme. They gaue him not the title of an Embaſſador, for that being doubtfull of the life or death of Iohn de Sylua▪
                (who was in Affrick with that charge) the King woulde not yet appoint any other. Mulei Hamet, before his going to Maroc, deſirous to make the Catholique King his friend, ſent to that effect, to preſent him the ſame peace, that had beene betwixt Moluc and him, offering him in gift the bodie of King Sebaſtian, which he helde priſoner. This Embaſſadour being arriued in the Court of Caſtill, theAn embaſage from Hamet to the Catholique king. King heard it willingly, and although he accepted the deliuerie of his Embaſſage, yet woulde he not receiue the Kings bodie, but appointed it ſhoulde be conſigned to the Portugals, and therefore Andrew Gaſper Corſe, in the name of the ſaide Cheriffe, did conſigne it by publike act, to the gouernour of Ceuta, for the Catholique King: who at the ſame time (to requite the Moores bountie) ſent Peter Venegas of Cordube for his Agent into Affrick, with a preſent of ſtones, valued at a hundreth thouſand duckats, as well to continue the treaties of peace, as to demaund the Duke of Barcellos, the which he graunted, and ſent him after free to the frontiers. In this time the Cardinall came to Lisbone, at whoſe arriuall they publiſhed this heauie newes, ſo as this inward and generall ſorrow, which was ſuppreſſed by the vncertaintie of the report, encreaſed andThe Portugals ſorrow. burſt foorth into teares, and lamentations: I cannot well deſcribe the generall ſorrow, how all things were filled with ſighes, how euerie man was ouerladen with mourning: It was a pitifull thing to heare the women (whereof the moſt noble in their houſes) from whence you might heare the noiſe, and the reſt in the ſtreetes, powring foorth their cries and teares vnto heauen, the which they redoubled ſo often, as the newes was confirmed by any newe aduertiſement: And as it often happens that mindes ſuppreſt doe oftentimes turne to ſuperſtition, ſo they and likewiſe many men did not beleeue what was ſaide; but hoping beyond all hope, and truſting more then they ſhoulde (although it were verified vnto them that

their husbands and kinsfolkes were dead, yet woulde they haue them ſtill liuing,) and deceiued by ſorcerers and witches, but moſt of all by their owne deſires, remained long without their widdowes habite, expecting in vaine newes of him which was paſſed into an other life. Many men complained, and ſome curſed the King, and ſuch as ſuffered him to goe into Affrick, one blames the King himſelfe, an other his fauorites, ſome the Cardinal, and ſome the Chambér of Lisbone, who had not hindered ſo fooliſh a reſolution; ſome did ſee that Portugall was neere her laſt period, and with their own miſerie lamented their countries. The Gouernours yeelded theirCardinall Henrie ſwerne King of Portugal. gouernment to the Cardinall, who by the Nobles and Magiſtrates was ſworne Gouernour and future ſucceſſour to King Sebaſtian; The which was done to quiet the people, expecting a better confirmation of this newes from Affrick, which ſtaied not long but was verified from all partes. And therefore they reſolued to finiſh the ceremonie which they haue accuſtomed in bewailing their King dead, and to breake their Scutchions, which was this: There parted from the Magiſtrates houſe, a Citizen on horſebacke, couered himſelfe and his Horſe all in blacke, with a great Enſigne in his hande likewiſe of blacke, bearing it vppon his ſhoulder that itThe ceremonie of the Portugals in bewailing their King dead. might traile on the grounde: After him followed three olde men on foote in mourning weedes, with three ſcutchions in their hands, like bucklers or targets, bearing them high vpon their heades, without any figure of them, but all blacke: Then followed ſome Citizens of the ſame Magiſtrates, and other inferiours in great numbers: All theſe went through the principall ſtreetes of Lisbone, and comming to the ſteps of the Cathedrall Church, which is neere to the place from whence they parted; thoſe which holde the ſcutchions, mount vp certaine degrees, and one amongſt them lifting vp his target, cries with a loude voice, People of Lisbone, lament your King Sebastian, who is dead: Then all the people weepes and cries: Hauing ended his words, he breakes his Scutchion as a fraile thing, ſtriking it on the place where he ſtandes: Then proceede they on, and being come to the newe ſtreete, aſcending the ſtaires of the little Church of our Ladie of Oliuera, an other of them which carries the Scutchions, pronounceth the ſame wordes the former had done, and breakes his Scutchion in the ſame manner: The like is

done by the thirde, vpon the ſtaires of the Hoſpitall: So as all the three Scutchions were broken in theſe three places, and then they returne from whence they came. At this time Chriſtopher d' Mora arriued at Lisbone, who deſirous to deliuer his Embaſſage from the King vnto the Cardinall, was not permitted; for Henrie (I know not the reaſon) would giue him no audience, before he was ſworne King: Therefore they made haſte to performe ordinarie ceremonies, which done, the King did heare him louingly, and he remained in the Realme, executing the charge his maſter had inioynedThe ceremonie of the Portugals in ſwearing their King. him: The forme of the oath was done in this manner: The xxv. of Auguſt the Hoſpitall Church of all Saints was hanged with tapeſtrie of ſilke, in the which they erected a little ſcaffold, on the which they placed a ſeate of cloth of golde; thither came the King in the morning, in the habite of a Cardinall; going from the pallace there marched before him eight Attabales, or drums on horſebacke, after the Moreſco manner, and nine Harolds all on horſebacke, carrying vpon their cloakes their coates of Armes: after followed on foote, almoſt all the officers of the Courte, thoſe of the Chamber, and other Magiſtrates; behinde them was the Duke of Bragance on horſebacke bare headed, bearing in his hande a ſworde, with a ſcabberd of golde as Conſtable: a little after came the Cardinall vpon a Mule, the which Aluaro de Silua Counte of Portalegro Lord Steward of his houſhold, ledde by the reines; there followed after many Noblemen and Gentlemen on horſebacke, with much people on foote: The Cardinall inuironed with a great multitude aſcends the ſtaires of the hoſpitall, being entered the Church, hauing heard Seruice, and ended his praiers, he ſeates himſelfe in the chaire prepared on the ſcaffolde, where preſently Frauncis de Sada (one of thoſe that had bin gouernours) put the Scepter in his hand, and Michell de Mora Secretarie, ſtanding a little off, ſaid, (reading it with a loude voice,) that King Henrie, by the death of King Sebaſtian, did ſucceede in the Realme, and therefore they had deliuered him the Scepter, and that he was come to take the accuſtomed oath, to maintaine and obſerue vnto his people, and to any other all liberties, priuiledges, and conuentions, graunted by his predeceſſours: which done, the Secretarie kneeling before him with an open booke, the King laide his hande thereon, ſwearing ſo to do:

then did the Attabales ſounde, euery man crying Reale Reale, for Henry King of Portugall: this done he riſeth, & with the ſame companie holding alwaies the Scepter in hande, he returned to the pallace, the Attabales ſounding, and the Herolds crying from time to time as before.
         
         
            THE THIRDE BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the third Booke.
               The deſcent of the Kings of Portugall; The pretendants to the ſucceſsion; The reſolutions of King Henrie; And the peoples demaunds; The voyage of the Duke of Oſſuna into Portugall, and other Embaſſadors from the Catholique King; The impriſonment of the Duke of Alua: The Catholique Kings letters to them of Lisbone: The States of Portugall: The grounds of the pretendants to the ſucceſsion; The ſentence of Henry against Anthony Prior of Crato, vpon his legitimation by vertue of the Popes Briefe: The reaſons of the Catholique King to the Realme againſt euerie one of the pretendants: The preparatiues to warre of the Catholique King against the Realme of Portugall; The ſuſpenſion of the briefe; The ſecond ſentence of Henry against Anthonie; The alteration of King Henry his will concerning the ſucceſsion; And the Popes offers to the Catholique king.
            
            
               
               MOſt men from all the noted parts of the worlde, had their mindes and iudgements turned vpon Portugall; both for that hitherto the affaires of Sebaſtian were worthie attention, as to ſee nowe Henry come to the Crowne, who was olde and without ſucceſſour; which made all Princes doubte that the ſucceſſion of this Realme might trouble the publike quiet: for the Pretendants were diuers, their actions differing, all allied, and all with groundes: And although their forces were vnequall, yet were they made equal by certaine reſpects: But to the ende we may the better vnderſtand the groundes of euery one of the pretendants, I will make a little digreſſion to report brieflyThe deſcent of the pretendants to the Crowne of Portugall. the deſcent of theſe Kings. And although from the firſt vnto Henry there raigned ſeauenteene, yet doe I not thinke it neceſſarie to take their beginning but frō 
               Emanuel forward who was the fourteenth, who began his raigne in the yeere of our Lord 1495. for that of his onely progenie is iſſued the number of Princes that pretended to the Crowne. This man had three wiues: of the firſt which was Iſabell, daughter to Ferdinand King of Caſtill, widow to Alphonſe, ſonne to Iohn the ſecond of Portugall, he had no other children, (for ſhe died in childbed) but Michael, who died in the cradle, who had beene (as they ſay) the pillar and corner ſtone to vnite it and Spaine togither: But by his death the Portugals loſt the kingdomes of Caſtill and Arragon, whereof Emanuel and Iſabell his wife were ſworne Princes; the iſſue male of the bloud roiall, being extinct in Caſtill. His ſecond wife (which was Marie ſiſter to Iſabell, third daughter of the ſaide Ferdinand) brought him many children, vz. ſixe ſonnes; and two daughters, Iſabel was married to Charles the fifth Emperour; Beatrice to Charles the thirde Duke of Sauoy; Iohn did inherite the kingdome; Lewes died without marrying, leauing behinde him Anthony his baſtard ſonne, he (who as you ſhall heare anon) was the cauſe of great miſerie to his countrey, by reaſon of his pretention to the Crowne: Ferdinand deceaſed without heires; ſo did Alphons who was Cardinall, called by the title of Saint Blaiſe; and Henry of the title of SaintOf fower Crownes. 
               Quatre Coronez, this outliued all the reſt, and it is hee of whom we ſpeake: Edward tooke to wife

               Iſabell daughter to Iaime Duke of Bragance, by whome he had Marie, which afterwardes was married to Alexander Farneſe Prince of Parma; and Katherine, at this preſent wife to Iohn of Bragance; he had likewiſe a ſonne, the which being borne after the death of his father (who liued but fower yeeres in matrimonie) was likewiſe called Edward, This is he who disfauoured by Sebaſtian died at Euora, in the yeere 1576. of his thirde wife, which was Leonora daughter to king Philip the firſt of Caſtill, archduke of Auſtria, who was after married to Frauncis, the firſt king of Fraunce; he had none but Charles who died yoong, and Marie, who being about ſixe and fiftie yeeres olde, died a maide at Lisbone, in the yeere 1578. But returning to Iohn, the thirde ſonne of the ſecond wife, who ſucceeded Emanuel in the kingdome, he contracted marriage with Katherine, ſiſter to the Emperour Charles the fifth, and had iſſue Marie, who after was the firſt wife of Philip the ſecond king of Caſtill, now raigning, from whom iſſued Charles, who died yoong; the which if he had liued, without doubt had preceaded the Cardinall Henry in the ſucceſſion of the crowne. The ſaide Iohn and Katherine had many male children which died yoong, one onely outliued the reſt, named Iohn, who (as ſome ſay) died yoong with exceſſiue loue of his wife, ſiſter to the ſaide Philip, leauing her great with childe, and after deliuered of Sebaſtian, during his grandfathers life, who ſoone after paſſed to an other worlde, and this is that Sebaſtian which died in Affrick.
            
               The pretendents to the Crowne of Portugall. Let vs now come to the pretentions: The Catholique King, as it is ſaide, put himſelfe foremoſt, being borne of Iſabell the eldeſt daughter of Emanuel: And although as a Caſtillian, he was naturally hated of that nation, yet he ſuppoſed that being mightie, compaſſingThe King of Spaine. in the Realme with his dominions, and the Portugals vnexpert, he ſhoulde ſoone either by loue or force become maſter thereof: Iohn Duke of Bragance challenged the Realme as the right of Katherine
               The Duke of Bragance. his wife, alleaging he was neerer to the ſucceſſion then the Catholique King, being (although a woman) daughter to the ſaid Edward, brother to the ſaide Iſabell. And foraſmuch as the Duke is the greateſt perſonage of the Realme, and his ſubiects moſt warlike, truſting on the fauour of Henry; who did then grace him, and hauing ſmall experience, in the affaires of the worlde, he held himſelfe

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
halfe in poſſeſſion. Alexander Prince of Parma, ſonne to Octauius
               The Prince of Parma. 
               Farneſſe, did pretend it for his eldeſt ſon Rhainucius, as male, iſſued from Marie, the eldeſt daughter of the ſaide Edward, ſiſter to the ſaide Katherine. And although his territories were farre off, yet beſides that ſome ſuppoſed the Church ſhoulde fauour him, it ſeemed the Portugals woulde be pleaſed to haue a yoong king, whom theyAnthonie Prior of Crato. might breede vp after their owne manner. But Anthony Prior of Crato, ſonne of Lewes, who was brother to the ſaide Henrie, ſought the Crowne, but with more vehemencie, ſaying, he was legitimate, and no baſtard, as it was ſuppoſed: And although he were without lands, and diſgraced by Henry, yet being fauoured by the people, he ſuppoſed that Henry dying, he ſhoulde in deſpight of all the reſtThe Duke of Sauoy. be crowned. Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy, although ſonne to Beatrice, yoongeſt ſiſter to the Catholique Kings Mother, and yoonger then the ſaide King, did not yet leaue off his pretentions, but with greater modeſtie: And for that amongſt the pretendants ſtraungers, the Portugals were more inclined to him, then to anie other, it was ſuppoſed he woulde not let ſlippe the occaſion: And this inclination proceeded from the opinion they had, that in regarde of the qualitie of his perſon, he ſhoulde be fitter then anie other to defende them from their enimies, and if neede were, hee might vigorouſly reſiſt King Philip if he ſhoulde ſtirre, both by reaſon of his valour, and for the meanes he had to moleſt him in his Duchie of Millaine, ioyning vnto Piedmont, vſing chiefly the allianceThe people of Portugall. and neighbourhoode he had with Fraunce. The peoples pretention was not vnconſidered, for that the iſſue male of their Kings failing, they pretended the election to belong to them: they grounded it, that women did neuer ſucceed, but in an interreigne, a woman was excluded; and Iohn the firſt, the tenth king of this Realme, choſen by the people: It ſeemed that this pretention ſhoulde not onely be contrarie to all pretendant ſtrangers, but alſo might breedThe Queene mother of Fraunce. a diuiſion within the Realme. Katherine of Medecy (widdowe to Henry the ſecond King of Fraunce) did likewiſe pretende, ſaying that ſhe was before all others, by an action fetched a farre off, but fortified with liuely reaſons by her Embaſſadors. The ground was, That when as Sanches the ſecond raigned in Portugall, whom they called Cappello of the habite which he did vſe, Alphons his brother

married with Matilda then Counteſſe of Bulloigne in Picardie: And that after by the weakenes of Sanches, the people with the conſent of Pope Honorius the thirde, then raigning, called in Alphonſe to be as tutor and gouernour of the Realme (a teſtimony of the auncient Religion of this nation) who euen in temporall matters did flie vnto the Pope: And although at his cōming he did but vſurpe, yet ſoone after the King dying without heires, the Earle did lawfully inherite the Crowne; hauing had before by his French wife ſome children, who vnderſtanding her husband to be King, and not to returne any more to Bulloigne, hauing prepared certaine ſhips ſhe went to him into Portugall: But for that Alphonſe being now King did treat a marriage in Caſtill, to haue the Kingdome of Algarues in dower, as he after had, without the conſent of the Pope, ſhe was neither ſeene nor receiued by him: So as all the other Portugall Kings which haue ſucceeded, haue drawen their originall from this Alphonſe, and the children of his Caſtillian wife: The Queenes Embaſſadours ſaid, That all the Kings which had ſucceeded him, and his children, had (as Baſtards) vniuſtly inherited, and that the kingdome ought to returne by direct line, to the heires of the lawfull children of the ſaid Alphonſe, and the Counteſſe of Bulloigne, whom they ſaid to be Queene Katherine of Medicy, mother to King Henry the third, daughter to Laurence of Medicy, and of Magdalen of Bulloigne, the onely remainder in direct line of that houſe, and heire to that County; the which although ſhee did not then poſſeſſe, being incorporate by the Kings of Fraunce, as a matter of importance, ſeated vpon the limits of Flaunders and England, yet they gaue vnto the Queene in recompence the EarledomThe Pope pretends the election. of Lorangueil which ſhee now inioyeth. They did likewiſe affirme (but with ſmall reaſon) that the Pope did pretend, alleadging that the Realme was not onely the ſpoile of the Cardinall, but when as Alphonſe, who was the ſecond Earle of Portugall obtained of the church the Title of a King, hee bound himſelfe to pay certaine markes of gold for a Tribute. But heere of they made ſmall reckoning. Theſe pretentions did much afflict the mindes of Princes, and made the people feare ſome broyles, vnderſtanding that both the Queene of England was diſpleaſed againſt the Catholike King for the affaires of Ireland, and that the King of Fraunce, and the

Turke, were not contented to ſee King Philip become ſo mightie, conquering a kingdome of ſo great importance: On the other ſide, Philip would not indure that any other but himſelfe ſhould become Lord, for the neighbourhood of their countries, ſuppoſing the leaſt inconuenience that could happen, was the ciuill warre betwixt the Duke of Bragrance and the Prior.
            
               The deliberations of King Henry at his comming to the Crowne. But returning to the Cardinall Henrie, being ſeated in the royall throne, although he were of 67. yeeres of age, and not healthful, yet he looked about him, and (as it were determined from aboue, that Portugall ſhould fall by degrees to his declining) hee did not prouide for the ſtate, according to the opinion that was conceiued of him: but the Realme by reaſon of their miſeries paſſed, remayning as a bodie emptie and afflicted, which needed a wiſe Phiſition to reſtore it. But as one miſchiefe comes not alone, the new King did more torment it; for although many ſuppoſed, that hee being olde, a prieſt, and of an exemplarie life, hee ſhould lay all paſſions aſide, and be more carefull to ſettle the ſtate of the common wealth, then he had found it, yet notwithſtanding he could not temper himſelfe with ſuch diſpoſition as was fit for his yeeres and degree: But as it often happens to ſuch as haue beene oppreſſed, who comming to rule, ſeeke reuenge of their enimies, euen ſo did he (not imitating the example of Lewis the 12. King of Fraunce, who diſdained to requite the wrongs done him being Duke of Orleance) hee reſolued to reuenge the iniuries done him being Cardinal, if they may be wel termed iniuries, when as Princes be not reſpected of their inferiors as they ought: For being not greatly fauoured by the King his predeceſſor, the miniſters and fauorites of his nephewe did not reſpect him as was fit, not conceiuing (being ſo old and Sebaſtian ſo yoong) that euer he ſhould haue attained to the Crowne: By reaſon whereof he depriued almoſt all the officers of the court, and ſome of them that did mannage the Kings Treaſure of their offices, and aduanced his owne ſeruants. The firſt on whom he diſcharged the heat ofPeter d' Alcaſoua in diſgrace with King Henry. his choler was Peter d' Alcaſoua, for that he did deteſt him from the time he was Secretorie, and he Gouernor of the Realme, during the nonage of Sebaſtian: as alſo for that he thought to haue reaſon to puniſh him, hauing beene an actor in theſe warres, and ſeconded the Kings will, and as one of his Chamberlaines had had the greateſt

charge to make the preparatiues for the war, hee did ſuſpend him from all his offices, and proceeded againſt him by way of Iuſtice: And although all his faults were reſtrained to this, onely to haue counſelled, or at leaſt not diſſwaded the king from the warre of Affricke, yet his proceſſe being verified, he ſuffered condemnation by the Iudges, to looſe all his offices, priuiledges, and recompences, which had beene giuen him in the end of Sebaſtians life. It preuailed not for his iuſtification, to alleage, that if the Cardinall himſelfe did not perſwade the enterpriſe, yet at the leaſt he did conſent vnto it, and approoue it, which fault was greater in him, then in any other, that his perſwaſions ſhoulde be of more importance with the king, then all mens, ſeeing that for the preheminence of his place he alone might ſpeake cleerely, and force him, which others could not doe, fearing as ſubiects (and with reaſon) the indignation of a yoong king; the which (they ſay) he ought not to haue feared, both for his qualitie and his age, which ſhould neither yeeld to feare nor hope. He tooke the ſame courſe againſt Lewes de Silua, and many others that came out of Affrick, whereby it was apparent the King knew not abſolutely how to vſe clemencie, nor wrath: for neither did he pardon as a man of the Church, nor reuenge as a diſpleaſed Prince. This bredde an alteration in all the affaires of the Realme, neither was it ſufficient that ſuch as were aduanced to theſe newe offices, were men without experience, who by their ignorance did mightily trouble ſuch as did treate with them, but for that we eaſily encline to the woorſt, ſome of them vnder colour to ſeeme affectionate ſeruants to their king, not onely prouided for that which paſſed their charge, but examined the actions of their predeceſſors; finding therein a thouſand cauils, and preferring the appearance of the kings profite, before iuſtice, they diſannulled conuentions and lawes, to the great trouble and damage of many, and ſmall honour to themſelues, and then did they ſeeme to doe beſt iuſtice, when they did moleſt moſt, ſuch as Sebaſtian had fauoured, and wrought quite contrarie to that which had beene formerly done: Notwithſtanding, if any thing were done by them that was abſolutely good, it was the diſannulling of the impoſt of ſalt, which Sebaſtian had impoſed.
            Whileſt theſe things paſſed in Portugall, the Catholique King

               Sebaſtians obſequies at Madrill. hauing ſent Chriſtopher de Mora thither, & Peter de Venegas into Affrick, he perfourmed the funerals of Sebaſtian, in the Church of Saint Ierome at Madrill, although it was ſecretly muttered that the Duke of Alua ſhoulde ſay, the King ſhoulde haue perfourmed it in Portugall, in our Ladies Church of Belem, where the other Kings are accuſtomed to be interred, inferring it may be, that Philip was ſucceſſour to Sebaſtian, or at the leaſt ſhoulde aſſure himſelfe by force of the ſucceſſion after Henry, cauſing himſelfe to be ſworne Prince. The report of the Dukes words, did greatly mooue Ferrant de Silua, Embaſſadour for Portugall, and all the Portugals, being a ſpeech that did pearce their harts, proceeding from a perſon whom they helde enimie to their nation, for the olde grudges betwixt him and Ruigomes de Silua, a naturall Portugall, in great credite with Philip; beſides that, being a principall man of account, they feared leaſt he ſpake it with participation of the Kinges minde, and tookeThe diſcord that fell out for that one ſaid Philip did preceade Henrie. it as a declaration of his meaning. In this time they ſpake diuerſly of theſe affaires: For although amongſt the Caſtillians, the Duke himſelfe, and one or two other principall perſons, had this conſideration, yet in generall they did not beleeue it, neither had they conſidered that Philip ſhoulde inherite this Realme, but they ſuppoſed it did of right appertaine to the ſonne of the Duke of Parma. But the Portugals (who had better conſidered thereof, and whoſe lawes were more in fauour of Philip then thoſe of Caſtill) were amongſt themſelues better reſolued: neither was the Catholique King long vnſatisfied; hauing both in his owne Countries, in Portugall and other places cauſed learned men diligently to examine who was by right & equitie the true ſucceſſour of this Realme, he began now to conceiue that after Henry the ſucceſſion appertained vnto himſelfe: And nowe he founde, that it was not onely the generall opinion of the Doctors, but ſome amongſt them, yea of the Portugals thēſelues, did maintaine that the King did preceade the Cardinal, and that theſe Realmes did appertaine to the Crowne of Caſtill. They alleaged (but with the authoritie of fewe Doctors) that the lawes of Portugall, and the Ciuill likewiſe, ordaine, that in caſe of Realmes, the inheritance ſhall goe to the neereſt kinſemen of the laſt poſſeſſour, prouided alwaies, that he be iſſued from the ſame ſtocke: That Sebaſtian being the laſt, the Catholique King was the

neereſt kinſeman he had, and of the ſame race; for beſides that he was the eldeſt of the Nephewes of King Emanuel, he was brother to the Kings mother deceaſed, and preceaded the Cardinall a degree, being brother to his grandfather. They did likewiſe renewe the auncient pretention of the Caſtillians, ſaying, that by right the Realme appertained vnto them, for that King Alphonſe the ſixth, coulde not by generall conſent, nor with any reaſon diſunite it from the Crowne; neither Alphonſe the tenth giue the Algarues to his daughter in dowry, nor free it of the tribute whereunto it was bounde. And although this laſt pretention to preceade Henry, ſeemed to the King and his miniſters of force, yet he reſolued onely to follow the firſt, and to ſucceede the Cardinall, for deſiring to enioy the Realme with peace, Henry being already proclaimed king with the conſent of the people, he ſuppoſed he coulde not without offence, or without forces take poſſeſſion thereof: beſides the reſpect he bare vnto his vncle, and the hope of his ſhort life. Heere may be noted the hazard (if we may ſo tearme it) whereunto the King (if he had intereſt by his affinitie) did thruſt his heires, by the concealing of his right, fearing to offende that nation. For beſides that during the life of Henry, the Portugals ſhoulde haue leiſure to prepare againſt him, if they were not diſpoſed to yeelde to his ſubiection, and if he ſhoulde die before the Cardinall, his ſucceſſors were excluded from this great inheritance, and Emanuel Phillibert Duke of Sauoy did preceade all the reſt.
            While theſe things were conſulting in Caſtill, the King of Portugall ſomewhat ſetled in his Throne, and the heate of his firſt inclination tempered, all the States of the Realme entreated him to prouide, that before his death a ſucceſſor were declared, that after his deceaſe they might not liue in ſuſpence: And therefore the Magiſtrate of the Chamber of Lisbone, being ſuperior to all others of the Realme, made great inſtance vpon this point, and one day all the officers being aſſembled, they went to courte, where one of them in the name of the reſt ſpake thus vnto the King; YourThe demands of the people of Portugall. Highnes ſhall vnderſtande, with how great deſire and affection his people of Lisbone, beſeecheth the Lorde to graunt him a long life, for thereon depends all our good, hoping that in time it may alter many things which nowe holdeth vs in carefull conſideration:

The wounde of afflictions, which this Realme hath ſuffered, is yet ſo greene and ſo lamentable, as we will not at this preſent make mention thereof; It ſufficeth they are ſuch, as the memorie will neuer be extinct whileſt the worlde continueth: and although we be bound to lay the fault vpon our owne offences, yet may we attribute a parte to the negligence of the people, and of ſuch as at that time did gouerne the common wealth: But being expedient not to heape error vpon error, it ſeemes we ought with a liuely voice, and due humilitie, cry vnto your highnes, that (as a iuſt and holy king,) you woulde preuent the miſeries that hang ouer vs: It cannot enter into our thoughts to mooue you to marriage, being no iudges of your conſcience, and diſpoſition; but we may well ſay, if theſe two cōſiderations do allow it, why do you ſuffer the delay of one day? If you be reſolued not to marry, your Highnes ought with the like care to ſay vnto ſuch as pretend to the ſucceſſion, that within a time prefixed they ſhoulde come to deliuer their reaſons; that if the ſucceſſor be a naturall borne, the people ſhal haue ſome breathing from the afflictions they ſuffer; if he ſhall be a ſtranger, it ſeemes conuenient they ſhoulde know it, and haue leiſure to aduiſe what to do: For if our ſinnes permit that the Lorde ſhall call away your Highnes, being in the ſtate we are now, what ſhall become of vs? being moſt apparant that all ſuch as pretend to haue any title, do conſult, arme, plot, and meaſure their forces, while the people remaines doubtfull, not knowing with reaſon vnto what part to incline: Your Highnes dying in this time before the deciding of the cauſe, we beſeech you to cōſider the oppreſſions they ſhal ſuffer, the ſpoilings, the murthers, the diſhonoring of women and holy things, and all other exceſſe, which is commonly practiſed in ſuch times, the which may be wholie auoided, by knowing who ſhall ſucceede vnto the crowne. We do ſolicite your Highnes to ſweare a Prince, (for it may be, he that at this preſent hath intereſt to this Realme, God may call him before your Highnes) but the contrary hapning we may plainly knowe who ſhall ſucceed, for heerein conſiſtes the quiet of this Realme: if you do it not willingly, or that there be any let, you ought to conſent that the people declare one, eſpecially they of the citie of Lisbone, vpon whom all Portugall dependes: The holie Ghoſt, who is the guide of kings, inſpire your Highnes,

that by his merits, the anger of God may be pacified, the which he powreth downe vpon vs for our offences, and grant that we may amend our liues, and preſerue your Highnes in health, for which all his people praie. In this manner the officer of the Chamber ſpake in vaine, but foraſmuch as it ſeemed vnto the king (ouer ruled in this reſpect by the diuine power) that the remedie was not ſo eaſie, nor the matter ſo ſoone decided, as they ſuppoſed; he made anſwere, that it was a care grauen in his hart, the which he woulde effect with all poſſible ſpeede, reſoluing to haue regard vnto it.
            But this ſucceſſion gaue greater cauſe both to thinke, & talke ſecretlie, and openlie in Caſtill then in anie other place; for the King reſoluing by all poſſible meanes to vnite Portugall, with his other Kingdomes, the Nobilitie did not willingly entertaine it, but did ſeeme that the greateſt from Charles the fifth forwards, had not taſted the greatnes of the King, leſſe reſpecting them, then had done the auncient Kings of Caſtill, making them march in one degree of equall iuſtice with their inferiours. The other Gentlemen and common people were nothing enclined to this vnion: Saying, that if this Realme were not ſeparated from the reſt of Spaine, they ſhoulde haue no meanes to marrie their Kings daughters, but into other prouinces, which were dangerous both for that the women did not inherite, and for the hereſies wherewith the northren Regions bee at this preſent infected: Manie and of all qualities, (who holding Portugall as the Sanctuarie of Caſtill) were content with the ſeparation, remaining as an aſſured retreate for offenders. It ſeemed to the King that hee ſhoulde not onely ſend a ſufficient man thither to performe that office, but alſo that it was neceſſarie, that one of the chiefe of Spaine, and beſt acquainted with the affaires of State, ſhoulde goe to propound the cauſe of ſucceſſion: For this occaſion they named as it is ſaid Gaſper
               Councell vpon the Embaſſage the King ſent to Henry. 
               Quiroga, Cardinall and Archbiſhop of Toledo: Ferdinand Aluares of Tolede, Duke of Alua; Anthony of Toledo, Prior of the order of Saint Iohns, maſter of the Kings Horſe; Frauncis Pacheco Cardinall of Burgos, all principall perſonages: Quiroga was thought verie fit by reaſon of his dignitie and wiſedome, togither with the experience he had gotten in the court of Rome, hauing beene there long Auditor of the Rota: The Duke of Alua for his authoritie, experience,

and wiſedome, was thought the better, for beginning to feare they ſhould come to armes, it ſeemed that he beſt could treate of the ſucceſſion, and withall ſounde the Portugals forces, and what ſuccours they might drawe vnto them, and afterwardes if neede required, being a great captaine, coulde by his aduiſe vndertake the warre with greater aſſurance. Manie did approoue Anthony of Tolledo, for beſides the opinion, they had of his wiſedome, he was accounted godly, religious, and otherwiſe vertuous, the which they ſuppoſed woulde make him more pleaſing vnto Henry. But in the iudgement of the moſt aduiſed, they preferred the Cardinall of Burgos, for beſides thoſe other good parts which he enioied with the reſt, he was thought moſt able to treate the matter of State; beſides that, being a prieſt, and a Cardinall, they ſhoulde ſeeme toThe Duke of Oſſuna ſent to Henrie. ſende vnto Henry a companion. But notwithſtanding, there was not in Spaine any greater perſonages of like experience vnto theſe, to mannage a matter of ſo great importance, being the greateſt that euer was preſented vnto this crowne; yet the preferred Peter Girone Duke of Oſſuna; and although his qualitie (being great among the greateſt of the Realme) was woorthie of anie charge, accompanied with manie vertues, and ſome other particularities, that were neceſſarie for the voiage; notwithſtanding, ſome did attribute this election to the ordinarie diſeaſes of the court, and to the reſpects which Kings Councels doe commonly vſe, inferring thereby that therein he was extraordinarily fauoured by Peter Faſſardo, Marques de los Veles his kinſman, at that time fauoured by the king. Some ſaid alſo (and it may be not without grounde) that it was not conuenient to ſende anie perſonage into Portugall, whoſe wiſedome, and iudgement were knowne vnto the worlde, to the ende the Portugals ſhoulde not feare to treate freely with him of all matters, but it was neceſſarie they ſhoulde eſteeme him affable and curteous, to diſcouer eaſilie vnto him their minds; of which humour the reſt were not. And although on the one ſide the Cardinals did ſeeme fitteſt to treate with a king, who was alſo a Cardinall; they did thinkThe impriſonment of the Duke of Alua, and the cauſe. on the other ſide that Henry might take it ill, to ſende one vnto him, who was equall with him in dignitie. There hapned at the ſame time a matter which bred no ſmall woonder in this court, and in others likewiſe, the which for that it chaunced to a perſon of whom

we are often to make mention, although it be ſomewhat from our purpoſe, we will not leaue to report. The Duke of Alua was baniſhed by the kings commandement, to Vzeda, fiue and twentie miles from the court, for that Fredericke his eldeſt ſonne, being taken at Tordefillas, a village of that Realme, for that he refuſed to marrie with one of Queene Iſabella of Valoys her maides, to whom (as ſhe ſaid) he had promiſed, whileſt the king was entreated by her friends, to force him to marrie her, he by the aduiſe of his father, brake priſon, and was gone to Alua, to marrie with Marie de Toleda his coſen, daughter vnto Garcie, he which was Generall at ſea, the which hee effected, returning preſently vnto the ſame priſon. The Duke bare this affliction with great humilitie and conſtancie, ſo as all hatred ceaſing, his verie enimies did pittie his miſerie. This baniſhment was remarkeable, both for his eſtate, age, and the notable ſeruices he had done vnto this crowne, as alſo to ſee the integritie of the king, who notwithſtanding the neceſſitie he ſeemed to haue of his perſon in matters of importance, that drewe neere, could not cauſe him any thing to diſſemble the execution of that which he thought fit for iuſtice, or his reputation: It was alſo remarkeable for the great offices, which ſome Princes did in his fauour; but moſt of all his holines, who did inſtantly ſollicite his deliuerie by the meanes of his Nuncio, ſaying, that although he coulde not preſume of the kings iuſt intention, but that the Dukes impriſonment proceeded from ſome great cauſe, yet he coulde not in duty but performe this office: It was ſaide, this good will of the Pope towards the Duke, proceeded from the ſeruice hee had done vnto the Apoſtolique ſeate, hauing made long warre againſt the Infidels and heretikes, and alſo for that which he had done againſt the Church it ſelfe, effecting that which was conuenient to his king, whileſt as enimie hee was contrarie vnto it, as he did defende it, being a friend, binding vnto him, not onely Paule the fourth, who was then Pope, but alſo his ſucceſſors. And it ſeemes ſtrange that the greateſt loue they ſay the Church had vnto him, ſproong from the warre which he made againſt it: The Deputies of Caſtill which were then in court, laboured for him, and although the king ſent them worde they ſhoulde be contented, and not ſue vnto him, for that he woulde not refuſe anie thing they ſhoulde demaund, yet this manner of demaunding

and denying ſerued for a great office. The King from the beginning, was in hope to make himſelfe peaceable Lord of the Realme of Portugall, although he were not ignorant of the ſmall inclination the Portugals had vnto him, but hee let paſſe nothing which he thought fit to gaine their loues; and to this effect he did write to all the chiefe cities of the Realme, his pretention, offering and threatning; but in the greateſt part his letters were not receiued in publike. To the citie of Lisbone, he did write in this manner: MoſtPhilips letters to the citie of Liſbone. noble, and our welbeloued, although I haue appointed Chriſtopher de Mora to ſaie vnto you ſome things, which you ſhall vnderſtande from him, yet woulde I giue you to knowe by my letters, that there is no man in this world (more then my ſelfe) that hath felt the loſſe of noble king Sebaſtian my nephew, and of his men: The reaſons for which I ought to haue this iuſt feeling, are eaſie to be conſidered, hauing loſt a ſonne, and a friend, whom I loued tenderly, and in the ſame degree I held and hold all thoſe that are loſt with him, for I doe cheriſh and loue all them of this Realme as my owne ſubiects: And I thinke it is not vnknowne, the great diligence I vſed to diuert his iourney, as well perſonally my ſelfe at Guadalupa, as alſo before and ſince by my miniſters, whereof many of the principall of this Realme are good witneſſes: But not to reuiue ſo great a griefe, let vs lay apart the things which cannot be remedied, fixing our eies on the true conſolation, which is, that thoſe afflictions were giuen by the hande of God, and ſuffered by the greatnes of his prouidence: we ought likewiſe particularly to comfort our ſelues, that in this wretched and miſerable age, this Realme hath gotten for their Gouernour ſo Chriſtian and wiſe a Prince, as is the king mine vncle, whoſe rare vertues, and exemplarie life, giueth vs cauſe with reaſon, to expect that he will ſettle the preſent affaires in ſo peaceable an eſtate, that we ſhall proceede in all things with the mildenes and gentlenes I wiſh, for the loue I beare to all, and ſingularly for the degree of amitie, and affinitie, which hath alwaies beene betwixt theſe two crownes, and betwixt my ſelfe and the Lords of the ſame Realme, being all of one bloud, and my ſelfe and my children, nephewes of noble king Emanuel, being nouriſhed and brought vp by the Empreſſe, and Ladie my Mother. For theſe cauſes and conſiderations, I haue as great reſpect to the king mine vncle, and

as great cauſe to wiſh him a long and happie life as your ſelues: But the affaires of the ſucceſſion of this Realme, being in the eſtate you know; I haue with great conſideration, and due aduiſe examined the right, which it hath pleaſed God by his ſecret iudgments to giue me: And cauſing this action to be viewed by men of great learning, and conſcience, both within mine owne Realme, and without; all doe finde, that without doubt the ſucceſſion thereof doth rightlie appertaine vnto me; and that there liues not any at this day that can with reaſon contradict me, by manie and cleere grounds, being a male, & the eldeſt, as it is apparently knowne. And hauing reſolued to make this point knowne to the noble King mine vncle, with loue and due reſpect, I haue earneſtly entreated him, that it would pleaſe him preſently to declare it, as he is bounde, for the diſcharge of his conſcience, and for the bond he hath to doe right and iuſtice; but moſt of al for that it concernes the preſeruation, peace, reſt, augmentation, and proſperitie of theſe Realmes, and of all the ſubiects thereof, the which hee ought both chiefly to care for, and to procure, ſeeing that beſides the ſaide effects, it ſhall cauſe an other of greater importance, which is that which concerneth the ſeruice of God our Lord, & the aſſurance & encreaſe of our holy Catholike faith. I thought good to doe the like office to this citie, hauing regard vnto the fidelitie, whereof it hath alwaies made profeſſion, & being the chiefe of theſe Realmes, aſſuring you therwithall, that he that ſhall inherite, is no forreine king, but a naturall borne, as I haue ſaide before, ſeeing that I am nephew and ſonne to your naturall Princes, iſſued of the ſame bloude, and will be alwaies a father to euerie one of you, as you ſhall finde when it ſhall pleaſe God: But at this time I will entreate you, that with your wiſedome, and great experience, you woulde conſider and note wherein I may honour and fauour you, not onely to conſerue your liberties, and priuiledges both ingenerall, and particular, deſiring that all other cities of the Realme, ſhoulde vnderſtande the ſame, whereof I praie you to giue them notice, being requiſite that euerie one ſhoulde know the loue and affection which I beare to all, and it ſhall be iuſt, that in knowing it, you conforme your ſelfe to that which is the will of God, whoſe iudgements and determinations no man may reſiſt, but we ought to beleeue that what he determines is for the beſt: So

as truſting, that both this citie, and the reſt, when time ſhall require, will doe that whereunto they are bound: I haue nothing to ſay, but that beſides the feeling which I haue had of miſeries paſt, I haue beene in particular grieued for the loſſe of ſo great numbers of the Nobilitie and Commons of this Realme, whereof that battaile was the cauſe: And therefore I require you to aduiſe, what I may do for thoſe that remaine yet ſlaues, and write vnto me: for although I both haue, and daily had that care, I haue thought fit and couenient, yet ſhall I be glad to vnderſtande your aduiſe, that all thinges conuenient might bee performed for their deliuerie, and reſt aſſured that whatſoeuer ſhall concerne you, I will deale in it with the loue of a father, as you ſhall know more particularlie by the effects, when as occaſion ſhall ſerue to make triall thereof, the which you ſhall vnderſtande by Chriſtopher de Mora, to whom I referre you.  The Catholique king ſent this Letter by the ſaide Mora, to be deliuered to the Magiſtrate of the Chamber, who going for that intent preſented it vnto them: But being troubled, they doubted that in receiuing thereof, they ſhoulde offende againſt the Crowne, ſo as refuſing it, they willed him to take it with him, and deliuer it to the King, the which Mora denying, it remained ſtill with them vnopened: And leaſt they ſhoulde be ignorant of the contents, he drewe a copie out of his boſome, and read it vnto them publikely, diſperſing ſundrie copies throughout the citie. The orignall was by the Vereadures carried to the king: This did ſmally further Philips affaires, but rather hinder him, and was by the wiſeſt both of Spaine and Portugall, and alſo by ſome of the Kings Counſell, helde as a remedie not fitting the Portugals humour; who generally hating the Caſtillians, being newe and rude in this matter, it was not probableThe deliuerance and returne of Iohn de Silna, Embaſſador for Philip in Portugall. they ſhoulde yeelde vpon a ſimple Letter. At this time there came intelligence, that he who had the charge of Embaſſadour of Portugall, was not onely liuing in Alcazerquiuir (although ſore hurt) but that the Cheriffe had releaſed him, & was comming with the bodie of King Sebaſtian to Ceuta, and from thence within fewe daies (being at Chriſtmas, in the yeere 1578) they vnderſtoode he was arriued at Ciuill, his comming was (by the beſt acquainted with the affaires of Portugall) held verie profitable, for returning to his charge, he ſeemed more ſufficient then anie other to treate of ſo

weightie a cauſe, being indued (beſides his good iudgement) with many other good parts, neceſſarie for the mannaging of ſuch a buſines. For beſides that he had good experience of King Henrie his diſpoſition, and the humour of the Portugals, he was verie pleaſing vnto them, it may be, for that he was of the houſe of Sylua, who being verie noble in Portugall, paſſed into Caſtill, during the controuerſies betwixt king Iohn the firſt, and the maſter of the Auis, and being borne of a Portugall mother, they helde him for their countreyman: Beſides that, with the fauour of King Sebaſtian, he was married in Portugall with Phillippa de Silua, heire to Aluaro de Silua, Earle of Portalegra, Lord Steward of the Kings houſe, and one of the principall Noblemen of the Realme: But whileſt that euerie man expected his preſent departure from Ciuill to Portugall, the King called him to Court, ſaying, that he woulde firſt inſtruct him by mouth, of his intentions, and of the preſent occurrents. In theThe Duke of Oſſuna arriues in Portugall, and his proceedings. meane time the Duke of Oſſuna arriued within the Realme, who ſeeming to be ſent onely to performe complements with the king, he was lodged, and roially entertained at the charge of the Court, where hauing deliuered his ſimple legation, he went to Settuuall, to viſite Magdalen Girone, his ſiſter, widow to George d' Alencaſtro, Duke of Auero, but hee returned ſodainly, making ſhewe he had newe commiſſion to treate of the ſucceſſion, wherewith king Henrie was greatly diſcontented, being vnwilling to haue the preſence of a perſonage ſo qualified, on the behalfe of Philip as it were a witnes of his actions, the which did likewiſe diſpleaſe all the Portugals, the rather for that (with Mora) he began to ſolicite the King to declare Philip ſucceſſour of the Realme, ſhewing vnto him formerly by many reaſons that his title was iuſt.
            Nowe did King Henrie at the great intreatie of his ſubiects reſolue to ſet the beſt order he could touching the queſtion of ſucceſſion, and to content them: For this cauſe remaining greatly in ſuſpence, hauing conſulted the matter with fewe, but of his greateſt fauorites, they concluded after much counſell, infinite opinions and many diſputations, that it was not conuenient at that time to declare any one Prince: The reaſon was, that the neereſt heire vnto the Realme, they ſuppoſed to be the Catholique King, whom they hated moſt, and therefore ſought by all meanes poſſible to flie his

commād, thinking nothing more fit to effect it, then to protract the nomination of the Prince, not meaning to ſpecifie any: For naming any other they ſhoulde procure his indignation againſt them, and giue him occaſion or his heires that ſhould ſucceed him, to attempt an action better grounded, whereas by delaying it, there ſhould remaine vnto them (at the leaſt) this weake hope, that the Catholique king (although yoonger, yet mortall) might die before olde King Henry, which hapning they ſhoulde be freed from the Caſtillians, and then ſhoulde ſucceed (as it is ſaid) the Duke of Sauoy, of whom they had no ſuch feare, but woulde more willingly yeeld to his ſubiection.King Henry inclined to the pretence of the Duches of Bragance. The King ſuppoſed that Katherine Dutches of Bragance, preceaded all other pretendents, except the Catholique King, aided (as it may be) by his owne naturall inclination, he conuerted all his thoughts in her fauour, and (if it were poſſible) to giue her the crowne, writing to the vniuerſitie of Coimbra, many allegations in her behalfe: To effect this, it was thought neceſſarie to cite all the pretendents, to appeere and produce their reaſons, the which was ſodainly put in execution, although in the iudgement of many it was thought out of ſeaſon, ſeeming more conuenient firſt to conclude it in parliament, and then to effect it, whereby it was apparant that the king did gouerne himſelfe daily without order, or any conſtant reſolution what he woulde doe: He did yet foreſee, that dying before Philip as it was likely, the Realme ſhould remaine confuſed, and without a Gouernour which ſhoulde rule the Realme, during the interreigne, and that the Noblemen and Commons ſhoulde preſently ſweare obedience vnto them, and after examine the reaſons of the pretendents. And although they feared that King Philip woulde be diſpleaſed, yet they hoped to ſatisfie him, promiſing it ſhoulde no way preiudice his title, nor any thing delay it, but onely to proceede with more grounde, as it was conuenient, giuing out, that King Henrie woulde marrie, and ſend to Rome for a diſpenſation, being a Prieſt, ſo as being capable of iſſue, it was not expedient to ſweare a Prince: This matter being concluded amongſt fewe, and of the chiefeſt, within fewe daies after (leaſt it ſhould not ſeeme to be done in priuate, but with a general conſent,) and to chooſe gouernours Henrie called to Court the three eſtates of the Realme, that is, the Clergie, the Nobilitie, and the Deputies of the cities,

and townes, the which aſſembled the firſt day of Aprill, in the yeere 1579. in the great hall of the pallace at Lisbone, the King hauingThe States of Portugall at Lisbone. before him nine Herolds, accompanied with the Duke of Bragance, and many Noblemen, he went in the ſcarlet habite of a Cardinall, retaining nothing of a king but the ſcepter, being mounted vpon a ſcaffold of wood prepared at the vpper end of the hal, fower ſteps higher then the Deputies, he ſeated himſelfe in a chaire prepared for him, couered with cloth of gold vnder a cloth of eſtate of the ſame: Euerie one being in his ranke according to their ancient degrees:A ſummarie of the Oration made at the aſſemblie of the eſtates. 
               Alphonſo de Caſtelbianco a prieſt ſtood vp, (by the Kings commandement) at one of the endes of the ſcaffold, who with a long ſpeech, after he had a little renewed the ſorrowes of their forepaſſed miſeries, and mittigated them with hope of a future good, hee forgot not to praiſe the King, with all vertues, adding, that being weake, he did not ſpare his life, imploying it to what was profitable to the Realme; he compared him in his gouernment to the King of heauen, in his loue, iuſtice, pitty, and ſacrificing himſelfe for his people; he commended this aſſembly, reſembling it to the Councels, and ſaide it coulde not erre: he concluded the king had there aſſembled them to propound what was conuenient for the Realme, & to prouide for it with their aduiſe. The firſt acte being ended, it was decreed, that daily the Clergie, the Nobilitie, and the Deputies of the Realme ſhoulde aſſemble a part, the which they effected, where they found diuerſitie of opinions, and very different one from an other: ſome of them (friendes to the concluſion) woulde ſodainly haue it determined to whom the Crowne appertained, without hearing the pretendents allegations; others held the parties ſhould be cited, and that they ſhoulde proceed with deliberation to ſentence, after inſtruction of the proceſſe; many enclined to haue gouernours; others would not heare ſpeake of them, euery one taking the courſe neuer to agree. The king hearing of this, hauing called the chiefe of his Councell one after one, and acquainting them with his reſolution, he ſhewed vnto them, that it was ſo conuenient for the libertie of the Realme, ſo as all difficulties accorded, they concluded not to make any election of a Prince at that inſtant, but the pretendents being heard, the King ſhoulde iudge to whom the Realme belonged, that he might be declared after his death: And

although God did ſuffer (it may be for a puniſhment to the Portugals) that the King held this Councell for the beſt, yet experienceAn Embaſſador choſen to goe to Rome, to obtaine diſpenſation for Henrie to marrie. did ſhewe, that it was the woorſt courſe they coulde haue taken, for to put the cauſe in proceſſe, did breed vaine hopes in ſome of the pretendents, which after were cauſes of great ruine to the crowne. And to the end the motion of the kings marriage ſhoulde ſeeme to be ſpoken with ſome grounde, they named vnto the eſtates Edward de Caſtelbianco to goe to Rome, and treate with the Pope for his diſpenſation:The nomination of 5. gouernors, & of the iudges of the ſucceſſion. they did chooſe fifteene gentlemen vpon the backe of the rowle, whereof the King with his owne hand ſhoulde write fiue of them, which ſo choſen, ſhoulde gouerne the Realme, vntill it were decided who ſhoulde be King. There was alſo about this nomination of the Gouernours, no ſmall controuerſie betwixt the King and his Councell of eſtates, for that the king would abſolutely name the fiue, the Councell woulde not conſent vnto it, but they would do it: And when they were agreed that the Councell ſhould name fifteene, and the King chooſe fiue of them, there grew a newe diſcord among them; for the Councell deſired to know who ſhould be theſe fiue; ſome woulde not onely haue them publiſhed, but alſo during the Kings life put in poſſeſſion of the gouernment, that after they might be the better obeied: but notwithſtanding, they reſolued to keepe it ſecret, yet generally they coniectured (and truely) who they were. They choſe alſo fower and twentie Iudges vpon the backe of the rowle, of theſe the King did name eleuen, to iudge the cauſe of the ſucceſſion, if he ſhoulde not determine it before his death: This was held, and chiefly by the Caſtillians a fault of importance, the king ſhewing himſelfe to be ignorant, that his roiall iuriſdiction did end with his life, and that this naming of Gouernours was to rule after his death, whereof they had an example with them, of Elizabeth Queene of Caſtill, who in vaine preſcribed lawes for the gouernment of the Realme after her deceaſe. In this ſorte the States ended, and ſoone after the Duke of Bragance, with the Nobilitie,The oath to obey the elected Gouernours. and the Deputies of the Realme, ſware obedience to ſuch as the king had choſen Gouernours, and to him that ſhoulde be declared king. It would not be forgotten the manner of oath the Prior tooke, for being called before the king, and commanded to ſweare to obey the forme aforeſaid, he anſwered that he would firſt ſpeake

vnto him: The King replied, that there was no neede, but that he ſhoulde ſweare, the which he refuſing to doe, the king grewe in choler; whereupon caſting his eies vpon his friendes, that were about him, as who ſhoulde ſay, that he was forced to lay his handes vpon the Euangeliſt, againſt the opinion of many, who beleeued he ſhoulde rather commit ſome diſorder then ſweare. The Rowle of the Gouernours with the nomination vpon the backe of it was locked vp in a coffer, and deliuered to the keeping of the Magiſtrate of the Chamber of Lisbone, the people whereof were male content, fearing it had beene giuen to the Caſtillians: The whichThe diſcontentments of the people of Lisbone. was apparant, for that a little before there came boldly to the aſſemblie of the Nobilitie, before the whole Councell, two mechanick officers, of thoſe that repreſenting the people, are imploied to the Magiſtrate of the citie. The one of them crauing audience, ſaid, they had vnderſtoode, that ſome of the chiefe of that aſſemblie, neglecting their dutie and honour, had ſpoken ſlaunderouſly, and wrought againſt the publike good, and ſuretie of the Realme, which like good Portugals they reſolued to preuent, as before the inhabitants of the ſame citie had done in the times of king Iohn the firſt, and of other kings: And therefore they required the whole Councell, (as the chiefe and principall member of the common wealth) to aide and ſupport them, that they might not looſe their honor and priuiledges, thorough partialities and priuate reſpects: They ſaide alſo that for this effect, and for the defence of iuſtice, and to chaſtice ſeditious Portugals, they were readie, with fifteene or twentie thouſand men, betwixt the citie and the countie, which they woulde aſſemble if neede were, in two howres, to burne the houſes of ſuch as ſhoulde ſpeake too boldly, or treate againſt the publike good and quiet of theſe Realmes, the which they would not put in execution, hoping to ſee them puniſhed, and the matter redreſſed by ſome other courſe: He concluded, that he thought it their dutie to giue this aduertiſement, that with more aſſurance, they might all treate of the common good, without feare of violence, or any preiudice, and to ſtop the mouthes of thoſe, (who ſuſpected in ſuch a cauſe,) make all things impoſſible, without ſeeking or procuring of any remedie. Hauing ended this ſpeech, one of the wiſeſt of the aſſemblie made anſwer, that this counſell was acceptable, for the loue and affection

they had to the common good; but there was not any one amongſt them which did not deſire it with the like zeale, and therefore they ſhould reſt aſſured, that all things ſhould be handled with good order & carefully: but notwithſtanding this anſwere, they returned with threatning. This aſſembly diſcouered to the Catholique King, not onely the intention of the Portugals in theſe affaires, but alſo ofHenrie deſired to marrie. King Henrie himſelfe, for that it ſeemed vnto him, they rather held a forme of conſpiracy againſt him, then a councell of the ſtates. Henry encouraged by his followers, for a time intended to marrie, dayly conſulting with his phiſitions to ſee if he were apt for generation, which ſeemed ſtrange to all ſuch as had knowen him; for euerie man beleeued (conſidering the chaſt life hee had alwaies led) that although he had come yoonger vnto the Crowne, he would not haue taken any wife; and now talking of it being decrepit, of age, and a Prieſt, it ſeemed, the deſire to exclude the Catholique King, from the Realme preuailed ſo much, that it did eſtrange him from his ancient diſpoſition. But honors breed in men alteration of manners, although his age made men thinke his inclination was rather forced in him then voluntarie: Some of the wiſeſt ſaid that the Catholique King ſhould haue a ſpecial regard, leaſt he were abuſed in this marriage; for although the age and diſpoſition of the ſaid Henrie might well aſſure him, yet the matter being of ſuch importance, he ſhould ſuſpect ſome ſuppoſed or adulterate childe, or ſome ſuch like deceit: But hauing (poſſibly) laboured at Rome that no diſpenceThe Catholique King ſends a lacobin into Portugall. ſhould be graunted to Henrie, he ſent into Portugall Fryer Ferrant of Caſtillio, of the order of preaching Friers, and an eloquent diuine, the cauſe of his voyage being vnknowne, I my ſelfe being vnable to ſearch the ſecret: It was generally thought he went to diſſwade the King from marriage, with many reaſons, and eſpecially ſaying, that in ſo dangerous a time by reaſon of the Heretickes which did raigne, when as Heretickes did tolerate marriage in men of the Church, if he now did it, being Prieſt and King, he ſhouldThe predendents to the Crowne of Portugall, cited to declare their reaſons. giue them a verie ill preſident; and this conceit of his going was confirmed to be true, hauing vnderſtood he was neither willingly heard nor preſently diſpatched. The pretendents had beene cited, which were the Catholique King, the Dutcheſſe of Bragance, the Duke of Sauoy, the Prince of Parma, and Anthonie Prior of Crato

to ſend & ſhew their reaſons. The Catholike King did not anſwere in forme, although Henrie had written vnto him with his owne hand, but onely ſent a certificat with a Secretarie to his Ambaſſador in Portugall, that he had beene cited: Many diſallowed this diligence, and all agreed that the King, cauſing the Duke of Sauoy and the Pryor to be cited, had not dealt therein iudicially, ſaying, it was a meane to breed contention, the Prior being manifeſtly a baſtard, and the Duke apparantly after King Philip.
            
            
               Philip frames a counſell of the affaires of Portugal. Who being cited, framed a new Councell of ſome of the Lords of his Counſell of State, of his Confeſſor, one other Diuine, and fiue Doctors of the Councell roiall, which he called the adioining of the ſucceſſion of Portugall, they were twelue in number, and did onely treate of thoſe things that did concerne that point. At this time Iohn de Silua arriued at Madrill, from Ciuill, to be enformed of matters cōcerning his charge, who, although he were graciouſly receiued of the King, and did often enter into Councell, both to giue his aduiſe, and to take his inſtructions, yet did they delay his diſpatch, ſometimes with one excuſe, and ſometimes with an other: And although he did earneſtly ſollicite that he might enter into the mannaging of ſo great an action, as was the vnion of this Realme, and after ſo many trauailes paſt, goe comfort his friendes with his preſence, yet in this particular, he had either many croſſes, or ſmall good fortune. For being priſoner in Affrick (although it ſeemed toIohn de Silua ſolicites to be ſent backe into Portugall. theſe Counſellors, that this charge (as his) ſhoulde not be otherwiſe diſpoſed of, vntill they had certaine newes of his life or death:) yet notwithſtanding it ſeemed, that both the Kings meaning, and the diſpoſition of his miniſters, were enclined to diſpoſſeſſe him, not onely when he was preſent, but euen then when he had moſt reaſon to beleeue it, for that the King, hauing alreadie diſcouered himſelfe in ſecret matters to Chriſtopher de Mora, woulde not peraduenture reueale them to any other, whereof they were apparent ſignes, ſome curriers comming out of Portugall directed to other miniſters, then to thoſe that did handle the matters of ſucceſſion: Beſides the Duke of Oſſuna (to whoſe will both the Cardinall Archbiſhop of Toledo, and other counſellors did conforme themſelues) hauing entered into great familiaritie with Mora, recommending him to the King, laboured that no other ſhould be ſent to treat of this

buſines, ſeeming as it may be vnto him (as ſome did ſuppoſe) that he would not ſo eaſily agree with Sylua, being more haughtie: He anſwered to theſe obiections, offering not onely to agree with the Duke of Oſſuna, and with all thoſe that ſhould be ſent, but if it were not their pleaſure he ſhould deale with thoſe cauſes of the ſucceſſion, he would willingly deſiſt and onely treat of that which did ſimply concerne the charge of an Ambaſſadour, and after retire himſelfe if neede were: But this modeſtie made him more ſuſpect, for thereby they might iudge he deſired nothing more then once to haue an entrie, and after to make himſelfe Patrone of the wholeChriſtopher de Mora called againe, and ſent Ambaſſadour into Portugall in ſteede of Iohn de Silua. cauſe. At that time Chriſtopher de Mora was called to court, who treated ſecretly with the King of many things concerning the Realme, he laboured to be ſent backe with the Title of Ambaſſador, yet many ſuppoſed his commiſſion being ended, he ſhould not returne: But being accounted, (as he was indeed) confident, iudicious, and diligent, although of no great experience in matters of waight, being made gentleman of the chamber, he was ſent backe with the Title he deſired, & to keepe Sylua from returning into Portugall, all his hopes being fruſtrate, they ſtayed him, ſaying it was conuenient the King ſhould retaine him neere about him, to iudge the better of what ſhould be written out of Portugall. And hauing reduced the number of twelue coūſellors of the ſucceſſion to fower, he commaunded he ſhould be one, the reſt being the Cardinall of Toledo, Lewis Manriques Marques of Aguilar both of the councell of State, and Anthonie of Padiglia, Preſident of the councell of millitarie orders: The generall diſcourſe concerning the election of the one for Ambaſſador, and the excluſion of the other was diuers, but when as the excluded could not preuaile (according to the counterfeit ſhow of the court) he tooke all for a fauour.
            Whileſt theſe things paſſed in Caſtil, the pretendents in Portugal both naturall borne and ſtrangers called by citation, framed their reaſons, and euerie man laboured to make the King capable of his right: The Duke of Oſſuna pleaded for King Philip: Charles de la Rouuere for the Duke of Sauoy, Ferrant Farneſe Biſhop of Parma for Rainucius Ferneſe. The Queene of Fraunce was not cited, yet did not ſhe deſiſt from her pretention, by the meanes of Vrban of Saint Gelais Biſhop of Cominges, who had ſome difficultie to be

admitted. The King ſeemed long doubtfull in this point; for on the one ſide with the inclination he had to the Dutcheſſe, he would exclude al others, & with the deſire he had to fruſtrate Philip, he labored to admit all that did pretend: In this point hatred preuailed before affection: Enduring this infamous allegation of the Queen, who ſaide that Henry (of whom ſhe demaunded iuſtice) and eleuen other Kings his predeceſſors, had beene all baſtards, and vnlawfull, for that was her plea: And although he doubted of the Biſhops procuration, after ſome difficulties, promiſing to ſatisfie him within a limited time by an other commiſſion, he was receiued to plead, appointing him an aduocate in the cauſe. The principall groundes of the pleaders were theſe: Anthonie at the end of fiftie yeeres wouldThe grounds of the Prior. be admitted for lawfull, hauing neuer before pretended it, and therfore vndoubtedly the ſucceſſion of the Realme did appertaine vnto him, for that as a male iſſued from a male, he ſaide, with the qualitie of his father, he did ſurmount his age, wherein Philip did ſurpaſſe him: that being a male he was before the Dutcheſſe, and did vanquiſh Rhanucius by his age and neerenes. Phillibert Duke of Sauoy,Of the Duke of Sauoy. did not wholie deceiue himſelfe, for as he aſſiſted not for any other ende, but to ſhewe that as the neereſt of kinne he did preceade the Prince of Caſtill, in caſe that Henry outliued Philip heOf the Duke of Parma. was leaſt importune. They did pleade vehemently for Rainucius Farneſe, and in his fauour, the Doctors of the Vniuerſitie of Padua had written, and to confute the reaſons of proximitie, wherein the other competitors did ſurmount, they alleaged that conformeable to pure and ſimple lawe, ſo many ſonnes as Kings haue, ſo many heires of inheritance they do frame, whereof the firſt line doth inherite whileſt it remaines, which being extinct; the ſeconde doth ſucceed it, and ſo conſequently in order. That Edward the Grandfather by the Mothers ſide, of the ſaide Ranucius, was chiefe of the ſecond race of the children of King Emanuel, whereof the firſt being vtterly extinct in Sebastian, the line of the ſecond ought to ſucceed, vntill it were likewiſe extinct, where by deſcending from braunch to braunch, it came directly to the ſaide Ranucius. And although Philip and Phillibert were pretendents male, and lawfully iſſued from an elder feminine ſtocke, whileſt there was remaining any heires deſcending from the elder feminine males (as he was) they coulde

not inherite, and that the Dutcheſſe who was a woman, and Anthony vnlawfull, ought not to take it from him, although he ſucceededOf the Dutcheſſe of Braganca. them all. The Dutcheſſe with more liuely hope both of her iuſtice, and of the Kings fauour, had cauſed to be written in the Vniuerſitie of Coimbra, a long & curious allegation, & the Doctors (who are the learnedſt of the Realme) hoping to pleaſe the King, handled the cauſe with all poſſible care: She laboured to prooue, that they ſucceed in Realmes by the inheritance of the laſt poſſeſſor, and that in this kinde of ſucceſſion, the lawes allowe the benefite of repreſentation: and in the difficultie which the Doctors mooue in the deciding, whether this priuiledge be allowable to the Nephewes, when they do not ioine with the Vncle, in the inheritance, they ought to follow thoſe which holde the affirmatiue, and that the women doe not onely repreſent the degree of the predeceſſors, but alſo the ſexe: She therefore repreſenting Edwrad her Father, ſonne to King Emanuel, and brother to king Henrie, woulde precead all the other pretendents, both the Catholique king, for that he iſſued from a daughter, Anthony being a baſtard, Ranucius as being neerer vnto Henry, admitting neither degrees, elderſhips, nor repreſentations, alleaging for that purpoſe infinite authorities of Doctors. Theſe her allegations were imprinted, and ſent to the Pope, and to all the Princes in Chriſtendome, hoping thereby to make a great breach inOf the Catholike King. their harts. The Catholique king ſaide he was the eldeſt, and lawfulleſt Nephew male of king Emanuel then liuing, and that not any one of the others, being not able to make themſelues equall vnto him, they ſought to helpe themſelues with fixions and repreſentations, the which he woulde prooue by ſome lawes, were not to be admitted in this caſe, nor amongſt theſe perſons, for that going before them all ingeneral by age, he did ſurpaſſe them in particular one after an other. Anthony by legitimation; the Ducheſſe by ſexe; Ranucius by nearenes; & the Duke of Sauoy by the age of Iſabell Auguſta his mother, elder then Beatrice, Mother to the ſaide Duke. TheThe ground of the people. people alleage that the iſſue male of their Kings failing, in that caſe the election appertained to them; fortifying this reaſon by the example of the election which was made of their King Iohn the firſt:The Queen Mother of Fraunce. but of this pretention being generall, they made ſmall account. The Queene Mother of Fraunce, with a ſtrange grounde, to the

diſhonour of ſo many kings, woulde come by direct line to the ſucceſſion of the Realme, offering to prooue by writing out of the auncient Regiſters of Fraunce, and by the auncient poſſeſſion of the Earle of Bulloigne, that ſhe was lineally deſcended from Robert ſonne to king Alphonſo the thirde, and of the Counteſſe Matilda, his firſt and lawfull wife, and that from that time to this, all the deſcendents of Beatrice the ſecond wife of Alphonſo haue vniuſtly reigned, from whom all the pretendents to the ſucceſſion drawe their beginnings; and therefore they coulde haue no better intereſt then their predeceſſors. King Henry ſeemed nowe more colde to determine the queſtion of ſucceſſion, then the importance of the cauſe, and the ſhortnes of his life required: He was greatly preſſed by the people, (who be naturally hard to pleaſe) ſeeing his ſlow proceedings, complainedThe peoples complaint againſt King Henrie. by words and writings diſperſed without authors, and were well content their griefes ſhould come to the kings eares: They inferred that the loſſe of the warre of Affricke, partly reſtored by his comming to the Crowne, was nowe reuiued, ſeeing their hopes that he ſhoulde preuent their imminent dangers, ſucceeded vainely: They complained that the time which ſhoulde be wholie imploied to decide the ſucceſſion was ſpent in accidentall things, contrarie to their dutie, hauing no other care but to drawe into queſtion ſuch as the king hated, to ſearch by iuſtice things of ſmall moment, to borrowe money of the merchants to redeeme the Portugals that were in Affricke, to treate of newe impoſitions, to the oppreſſion of the people and ſuch like (ſome whereof, as the redemption of priſoners and that which concerns iuſtice, they could not reiect as euill) they blamed the time, and the meanes that was ſpent in them: Paſſing from this diſcourſe, & hauing as it were a deſire to ſpeake ſlaunderouſly, they touched the miniſters of iuſtice to the quicke, inferring they had corrupt conſciences, that the poore were perſecuted, the rich fauoured, that all puniſhments were pecuniarie or barbarous, expreſly inuēted to moleſt the poore innocents, & giue autority to the rich culpable, who are ſeldome puniſhed: They ſhewed againe how much a briefe deciſion of the ſucceſſion did import, and that it was no ſound aduiſe to cite the pretendents, & aſſemble the States, being tedious matters, alleaging that if the king to receiue the ſcepter had no neede of theſe things, neither had his ſucceſſour, but that

he ought to decide this cauſe by himſelfe, with the aduiſe of learned and confident Doctors, and according to that which he ſhoulde finde conuenient treate the accordes and capitulations, with the greateſt libertie of the Realme he coulde, giuing contentment to the excluded, and making of many members one body, thereby to auoide the bottomleſſe gulfe of ciuill warres. And in truth this was the wiſeſt and moſt Chriſtian reſolution of all others: They did not allow of the making of Gouenours, tearming them bodies without a head, ſaying, they coulde not after the kings deceaſe, effect any good, iudging there woulde be amongſt them diuerſitie of opinions, the people woulde be altered, the great woulde diſobey, and euery one of the pretendents woulde call himſelfe king, they did foretell the Realme woulde be deuided in factions, that one would follow one party, the other an other party, & in the meane time the ſtrongeſt woulde preuaile by armes. The moſt aduiſed feared the forces of the Catholique king, being neere, and alwaies readie, and although ſome truſting in his modeſtie, beleeued after the death of Henrie he ſhoulde peaceably attend the ſentence, yet ſuch as (more practiſed in the affaires of the worlde) knewe that the encreaſe of kingdomes had neither end nor meaſure, that they be neuer giuen or taken away by the opinion of Doctors, they feared moſt of all; they termed it, a diueliſh temptation of thoſe, that perſwaded Henry to take a wife, or once to ſpeake of it, ſaying, they were not woorthie that God ſhoulde nowe worke miracles for the loue of them. The king mooued with theſe reaſons, which were partly deliuered vnto him, began more vehemently then accuſtomed, to treate of theſe affaires. And foraſmuch as the Prior, hauing taken his oath to obey the Gouernours, was retired to Almada, a citie vpon the riuer of Tagus, right againſt Lisbone, where he made his vſual reſidence, the king doubting, that remaining there, and comming ſometimes to the citie as he did, he might encounter with the Duke of Bragance, and that as concurrents in one action, and competitors in preſent, there might growe ſome perillous contention, the which was doubted, hearing there was hatred betwixt them, for this cauſe he commanded the ſaide Prior, to retire himſelfe to his ſaid Priorie of Crato, the which he did, and likewiſe to the Duke (though ſomewhat later) to withdrawe himſelfe: The Prior was there cited, not

(without permiſſion) to come perſonally to the court, but to ſendeThe letters of the Prior to Henrie. his Attourneies, wherewith being grieued, he did write vnto the king, thanking him that he had admitted him to plead, and complaining that he was in a manner baniſhed. He ſaid, that he ought not to forbid him to aſſiſt in his owne cauſe, when as the Duke of Oſſuna Embaſſador for the Catholique king, and the Duke of Bragance were preſent at their pleas: For beſides the diſcommoditie hee ſhoulde haue in deliuering his reaſons, whoſoeuer ſhoulde ſee him baniſhed from the Court, whileſt they treated of ſo weightie a cauſe, woulde ſuppoſe him ſo farre in the princes diſgrace, as he ſhoulde not dare to maintaine his title: But all this preuailed not, for the king woulde neuer ſuffer him to depart from Crato, and although he did obey with difficultie, going often from place to place, yet would he neuer admit him to Court. The firſt proceſſe the king put vppon the file, was touching the ſatisfaction the Prior pretended to giue for his legitimation, wherein he had ſecretly all the pretendents oppoſite, deſiring to haue it tried firſt (as indeed it ought to be) for vpon proofe of his legitimation, he was either to be admitted or excluded from the ſucceſſion. And foraſmuch as Princes doe commonly execute that carefully which they do affect, for this reaſon and to the ende the ſentence he ſhoulde pronounce thereupon, ſhoulde remaine firme, he had obtained ſecretly at Rome a briefe from the Pope, by the which he gaue him authoritie, abſolutely to iudge the cauſe of legitimation, without any forme or proceſſe, accordingThe ſentence of King Henry againſt the Prior touching his legitimation. to the truth thereof: So as hauing ſtrictly examined the witneſſes, he allowed ſome reaſons, and reiected others, and duely weighed the proceſſe. Finally, he came to ſentence, framed by vertue of the Popes owne motion, wherein was reported in a manner the whole proceſſe. The depoſition of the witneſſes which were fowre, two conuinced to be falſe, for they recanted, confeſſing they had beene ſuborned by Anthony, and the other two were ſuſpected, being neere kinſemen, and diſagreeing betwixt themſelues: The words of the teſtament of Lewes, father to the ſaide Prior were annexed, wherein he called him baſtard, with many other reaſons, whereby he concluded, that he declared Anthony, (theſe be the proper wordes of the ſentence) not lawfull, but illegitimate. And touching the pretended marriage and legitimation, hee impoſed him

perpetuall ſilence, ſtill reſeruing to himſelfe power to proceede againſt the witneſſes, and himſelfe as he ſhoulde thinke conuenient: This ſentence being pronounced, the king ſent Edward de Caſtelbianco chiefe of the Sergeants to Crato, with commiſſion to apprehende the Prior priſoner: But ſome imagined this was rather a ſhew of the king to amaze him, then for any other effect, iudging as it hapned, that he would not be found.
            
               The reaſons of the Catholique king against the pretendents. Nowe was the Catholique king more effectually ſatisfied touching the intereſt he had to this Realme, for although in the beginning the Doctors had reſolued him that the ſucceſſion appertained vnto him, yet deſirous to know with more grounde, the opinion of learned men of other prouinces, eſpecially of Portugall, who waighing and diſputing the reaſons of euery pretendent, with their contrarieties and tearmes, had reſolued amongſt them that Philip was vndoubtedly the ſucceſſour, being the eldeſt kinſman that Henry had a male and lawfull, and that with theſe qualities he did ſurpaſſe and exclude all the competitours, one after an other. They heldeAgainst the Prior. 
               Anthonie directly to be vnlawfull, hauing alwaies liued in that opinion, and was ſo held by his Father Lewes at his death (as it appeered by his teſtament) that although he had demaunded his legitimation at Rome, and had obtained it, yet coulde not any roiall or pontificiallAgainst the Duke of Sauoy. legitimation ſerue for the ſucceſſion of a kingdome. They diſcharged themſelues of Phillibert Duke of Sauoy in fewe words, ſaying onely that he was yoonger of yeeres, and ſonne of a yonger ſiſter then the Empreſſe, Mother to the Catholique King. They deniedAgainst the Duke of Parma. the reaſons of elderſhip, whereon Rainucius did ground himſelfe, ſaying moreouer, they might well graunt it without danger, for that the ſame Doctors which fauoured this lawe, do not vnderſtande it ſhoulde take place, if the ſame perſon, from whom they woulde tranſport it did not enioy it. And foraſmuch as Edward was deceaſed many yeeres before Henry ſucceeded, or euer thought to come vnto the Crowne, he could haue no intereſt nor any conſiderable hope that might come to his deſcēdents; ſo as they made ſmall account of al that Rainucius could alleage, touching the linnage, elderſhip, imaginary degrees, and tranſmiſſions, ſaying, that ſuch as groūd thēſelues moſt vpon theſe ſubtilities, do leane ſtil vpon repreſentations, without the which they are of ſmal moment, prouing that

               Rainucius coulde not aide himſelfe with repreſentation, being out of the degree wherein the lawes allow it, and therefore remained inferior to Philip. Againſt the Dutcheſſe, they alleaged that kingdomesAgainst the Dutcheſſe of Bragance. appertaining to the ancient lawes of nations, the ſucceſſion ought not to be ruled by the Ciuill lawe full of fictions and ſubtileties, the which were framed by the Emperours many yeeres ſince: And although ſouereigne Princes did bring them in for the good gouernment of their ſubiects, yet had they not altered the ſimple naturall rules of the ſucceſſion, the which they affirmed ſhoulde be obſerued in this caſe, as it had beene before the birth of Iuſtinian, who was the author of theſe repreſentations. And although ſome Doctors woulde raſhly make the ſucceſſion of Realmes, ſubiect to ciuill inſtitutions, yet according to this conſideration they made Philips title vndoubtfull; and thoſe which helde this opinion were learned men, and more curious of antiquitie then are commonly our ordinarie Lawyers. But leaſt they ſhoulde ſeeme to take that courſe to auoide the lawes, they woulde alſo withdrawe themſelues within the tearmes of the Ciuill lawe, as if it were a matter in controuerſie betwixt two perſons for a priuate poſſeſſion. There did they prooue that in Realmes more properly then in any other thing, they ſucceeded by right (as they call it) of conſanguinitie, that is to ſay, hauing regard vnto the firſt inſtituter, and that following this law, they ſhoulde conſider the perſons of the pretendents, by themſelues without repreſentations or reſpect of their fathers, as if they were childrē of the laſt poſſeſſor, in which ſort Philip remained in ſtead of the eldeſt vnto Henry: They ſaid alſo, that if they ſhould yeelde that which the Dutcheſſe pretends, that they ſucceede not in Realmes by right of conſanguinitie, but by that which they call inheritance, hauing regarde vnto the laſt poſſeſſor, yet coulde ſhe not be equall vnto Philip, for that the repreſentation where with ſhe pretends to helpe herſelfe, doth not extend to the Nephew, but in concurrents with the ſame vncle, according to the moſt auncient, moſt approoued, and moſt grounded opinion. They added moreouer, that the ſucceſſion of kingdomes, not onely by the right of nations (as is formerly related) but alſo by the ſame Ciuill lawe, is exempt from al repreſentations, being not brought in by cuſtom: And although the Dutcheſſe may repreſent the degree of her Father,

notwithſtanding it were impoſſible ſhe ſhould repreſent the qualitie of a male, being a harde matter that a woman equall onely in degree, and in all other things inferiour, ſhoulde pretend to be preferred before a man in adminiſtration of Realmes, and that her priuate defect ſhoulde hurt her leſſe, then to Philip that of his Mother: It was therefore reſolued, that of all the Nephewes of king Emanuel, he that ſhould be founde to be eldeſt, a male, and lawfull, ſhoulde precead the reſt, and this was the Catholique King. AndAgainst the people. although the pretention of the people, and of the moſt Chriſtian Queene were held vaine, and onely mooued to trouble Philip, yet did they anſwere them formally. Againſt the people they ſaide, that they had no greater priuiledge of election within this Realme, then in the reſt of Spaine, the which all fall by ſucceſſion, when there is any lawfully deſcended of the bloud royall: And that in Portugal they haue leſſe libertie then the reſt, growing from the gifts of the kings of Caſtill, and from the conqueſt of the kings of Portugall: And foraſmuch as the people hath not giuē the realme to their firſt kings, there could not any thing chance whereby they ſhould name or chooſe one. And for that which they alleage of the electiō of king Iohn the firſt, they anſwered that not onely this reaſon did not ſerue them, but thereby it did appeere that the realme in that caſe was ſucceſsiue, hauing (leauing apart, that it was rather a violent crie of cō
               quering Partizants, then a free election) themſelues ſecretly confeſſed, that they had no right to chooſe, whileſt there remained any one lawfully deſcended of the Roiall iſſue, inferring that Beatrice Queene of Caſtill was a baſtard, and that the Realme was in the ſame eſtate, wherein other Realmes of ſucceſſion may chooſe their King, all the kinſemen of the laſt deceaſed being extinct. TheyAgainst the Queene mother of Fraunce. pleaded againſt the moſt Chriſtian Queene, that her pretention was improbable, and preſcribed, ſeeing that the ſucceſſours of the Earle of Bulloigne, had neuer made any mention thereof, neither is it credible that ſince this pretention was incorporate to the crowne of ſo mightie a Realme, ſuch wiſe and mightie Princes, as were Frauncis the firſt, and Henry the ſecond, woulde haue forgotten to haue called it in queſtion. But the truth was, the Counteſſe Matilda left no children as it appeeres in her Teſtament, in the publike Regiſters of Portugall, making therein no mention to leaue any by

king Alphonſe, nor to haue had any, and viewing the antiquities of the Realme, they ſaide that a writer was abuſed, who reported that a yoong childe buried in the church of Saint Dominico in Lisbone, was her ſonne; and though it ſhould be ſo, yet doth it not contradict, ſince ſhe doth not affirme ſhe had any children, but that he died yoong. They did likewiſe prooue that Matilda had not any, by a formal requeſt found in the ſame regiſters, by the which all the Prelats of the Realme did beſeech Pope Vrbane, that it would pleaſe him to diſanull the curſe which he had laide vpon the Realme; and that he woulde approoue the marriage of Beatrice the ſecond wife of Alphonſe, that he would make their children legitimate, that there might be no hinderance in the ſucceſſion of this Realme; whereby they concluded, that if there had beene any lawfull children of Matilda, they coulde not haue perſwaded the Pope to preferre the baſtards of Beatrice. They added that theſe reaſons were not vnknowne in Fraunce, and that of late there had beene a booke printed of the genealogie of the houſes of Medicy, and Bulloigne, continued vnto Katherine the moſt Chriſtian Queene, whereby it did cleerely appeere, that Matilda had left no children by Alphonſe her ſecond husband, hauing beene formerly married to Philip, ſonne of Philip Auguſtus king of Fraunce, by which marriage ſhe had one daughter named Iane, who ſucceded not her mother in the Countie, dying before her without iſſue: So as Robert ſonne of Alix, ſiſter to Matilda came to the ſucceſſion, and this is that Robert from whom they would drawe the deſcent of the Queene Mother, being the Nephew, & not the ſonne of Matilda. So as not being prooued by any meanes that Alphonſe the thirde had any children by his firſt bedde, but the contrary by many reaſons; they ſaide the Queene had no reaſon to pretende, neither had ſhe done it in time. Philip
               Philip ſendeth to ſignifie his right to Henry. therefore being grounded in this action, ſendes into Portugall for aſſiſtants to the Duke, Rodorik Vaſquez, and Lewes de Molina, Doctors of the law, and Auditors of his Councell roiall, with the title of Embaſſadors, to ſignifie vnto the King, and to his Councell his apparant iuſtice, with aduertiſement not withſtanding that they ſhould do no acte, whereby they might inferre that they acknowledge any iuriſdiction in the king: Being arriued, and all the Agents of the Catholique King conſulting togither, they propounded the matter

of ſucceſſion in forme as they were commanded, deliuering in writing vnto the king an ample allegation of the reaſons of Philip: But for that in the beginning they had founde the kings thoughts bending to the Dutcheſſe of Bragance, they laboured long in vaine to make him capable of the iuſtice of their king. They vſed all meanes they thought conuenient, and heere in Mora perfourmed great offices, not onely with the King, and his fauorites, but with the Gentlemen and Noblemen of qualitie: ſo as many with liuely reaſons, giuing to one, offering to an other, by effects, wordes and writings, he drew all he coulde to the Catholique Kings deuotion: It ſeemed that this manner of ſounding the Nobilitie with money, and promiſes,Philip prepares for warre againſt the Portugals. did then ſerue to purpoſe. And although the courſe which the king helde, for the attaining of his pretention, ſeemed vnto him expedient, yet did he not ſo relie thereon, as (knowing the Portugals to be reſtie) he woulde omit force, for that ſeeing the indiſpoſition of Henry, he ſought to winne time, and ſo to prepare himſelfe, that if he ſhoulde chaunce to die, at ſuch time, when as the Portugals woulde not yeeld him the Crowne quietly, he might ſodainly take poſſeſsion thereof by force. But hauing learned by experience in the warre of Granado, the loſſe of Golette, and the defence of Malta, that one nation alone ſheweth not ſo great a courage, as vnited with another, this competencie ſeruing as a ſpurre to animate them, he reſolued to prepare to warre, with the forces of diuers nations, as if he had beene certaine, that of neceſsitie he muſt winne this Realme by conqueſt. And although the generall opinion were, that fewe men woulde ſerue againſt the vnexperienced Portugals, and that he ſhoulde not finde any reſiſtance againſt his force, yet knowing that there is not any humaine force but may be vanquiſhed, hee reſolued to make an armie of fortie thouſand foote, conſidering, that although the Portugals were ſuch as it was ſaide, yet being at home, and by reaſon of the hatred and furie of the whole Realme, they might in one day drawe togither aboue ſeuentie thouſand men for any expedition, and therefore it behooued him to be ſtrong. He therefore commaunds Inico Lopez de Mendoſa, Marques of Moundegiar, then Viceroy at Naples, to keepe in a readines his Spaniſh foote, with the ſhips and munition for Portugall, he leuied nine thouſand Italians, vnder the commaund of Peter de
               
               Medicy, brother to Frauncis the great Duke of Tuſcayne, hee brought downe ſixe thouſand Germaines, with Counte Ierome of Lodrone: and although he might haue raiſed in Spaine a great number of men of all ſorts, yet truſting onely to his entertained ſoldiers, he leuied the greateſt forces he coulde, purpoſing to ioine to thoſe Spaniards that were but freſh water ſoldiers, ſome of thoſe that had beene in Italy, and ſuch as were come from the warres of Flaunders: But theſe things were effected with more eaſe and leſſe nombers then were appointed. For although the Viceroy of Naples did in the beginning very carefully prouide for it, yet after hee grew colde, abandoning all, hauing intelligence that the King had choſen to ſucceed him in his charge Iohn de Suniga, great commander of Caſtill, and that he ſhoulde returne into Spaine: yet the ſoldiers were inrolled and conducted with armes and munition to Gibraltar, and other places of Andelouzia thereabouts, from whence they marched after to the confines of Portugall, the number chiefly of Italians, being greatly diminiſhed, with hunger, and other diſcommodities, not without conſideration that nine thouſand men ſeeme much in Spaine. And although they arriued a yeere later then the king had commanded, yet came they ſooner then neceſſity required: for Henry yet liuing, they were long idle. But this preuention was done like a valiant and wiſe Prince, maintaining an armie vpon the confines of his owne Realme, without vſe thereof, during a mans life, attending his naturall death, when as no man is yet ſo neere death, but may liue ſome yeeres.  The Catholique King preferring the danger to be vnarmed, and Henry deceaſing before his expences, gaue this teſtimonie, not onely of his wiſdome, but of the great deſire he had to be aſſured of this Realme, wherein he did ſurmount his owne nature, and the cuſtome of the Spaniſh nation, who by their long delaies, doe often faile in their enterpriſes: The galleies and ſhips which had tranſported theſe men, went to Saint Marie Porte, where the whole nauie by ſea ſhould aſſemble. 
            
            
               Henry was ſtill diſcontented with Anthony, who (notwithſtanding the Kings late commandement not to approch within a hundreth miles of the Court) wandered from place to place, drawing the peoples harts vnto him. The King was deſirous to finde ſome meanes to puniſh him, with a more rigorous ſentence. But the Prior

when as the cauſe of his legitimation was in queſtion before the King, by vertue of his holines briefe, miſtruſting what hapned, had by the counſell of Alexander Formento, then the Popes Nuncio in the Realme, ſent to Rome, complaining vnto the Pope of the hatred his vncle did vniuſtly beare him, beſeeching him to reuoke the cauſe vnto himſelfe, and to be the onely iudge thereof, for that the King was ſuſpect vnto him: By reaſon whereof, the Pope ſaying that hisThe ſuſpenſion of Henries briefe. firſt intention was not to make Henry abſolute iudge to giue ſentence incluſiue; he write vnto him by an other briefe, with defence not to proceede in the cauſe, for the which he appointed as newe iudges the ſaid Nuncio, & George de Almada, archbiſhop of Lisbone, but not with authoritie to giue ſentence, but after due information of the proceſſe, to ſende it to Rome. This briefe was ſent to the Nuncio, that he might deliuer it vnto the King, the which he did, by an apoſtolike Notarie, fearing he ſhould haue refuſed it. Henry was greatly mooued that the Pope had reuoked the cauſe vnto himſelfe, both for that the execution of the ſentence did import, as alſo imagining he was wronged by taking the cauſe out of his handes, whereof before he had made him iudge. So as greatly diſcontented with the Pope, and his choler encreaſing againſt his Nephew, he woulde now vſe his roiall authoritie, and leauing to proceede as the Popes ſubſtitute; he began as King to proceed againſt the Prior. And although the Nuncio (it may be by the Popes commandement, or rather by his own inclination) was fauourable vnto him, ſhewing himſelfe very oppoſite to the Catholique King: yet Henry left not daily, yet coldly, to continue the cauſe of the ſucceſſion; for hauing cited him to courte, and he not daring appeere, he cauſed his edicts and proclamations to be ſet vpon the pallace gate, whereby he was cited to appeere within twelue daies. The Prior (who had ſoone a copie of this edict from his agents) was greatly diſpleaſed, to ſee the courſe the King held againſt him, yet durſt he not appeere, fearing if he fell into the kings hands, the hatred he did beare him woulde drawe him to ſome ſtrange concluſion; he reſolued therefore to abſent himſelfe labouring to appeaſe his wrath by letters, which he did write vnto him, complaining of the manner of his proceedings inThe Priors letters to Henry con
                his behalfe, ſtriuing to make knowne his better deſeruing. He ſaide that he ioyed in his afflictions, calling him in his edicts Nephew, as

indeed he was, and ſonne to that his brother, to whom this Crownecerning his rigor. hauing ſo great a bond, he did not beleeue he ſhould ſo ſonne forget it, although his ill deſeruings had bin greater then his fathers merits: He remembred the reſpect the King himſelfe, and his predeceſſors had vnto his father, and the amaſement they ſhould haue to ſee him thus by him vniuſtly perſecuted: He did not attribute the blame of the kings inclination to the king himſelfe, but to the ſinnes of the Realme, and to the ill diſpoſition of ſome fauorites, ſhewing on the one ſide, that he bare with patience, what it ſhoulde pleaſe God to impoſe, and on the other ſide complained of his vncle, that he did execute againſt him the paſſions of priuate men: And foraſmuch as when he returned from priſon out of Affrick, ſome had giuen out that he had fledde from the battaile, and was not taken priſoner, he touched likewiſe this point, lamenting to be ſo ſlaundered: He complained of the King, ſaying, that to the ende no man ſhoulde haue compaſſion on him, he was forced to leaue the Court by night, hauing only had ſome ſpeech of his legitimation, ſhewing he was not woorthie of any brotherly reprehenſion. He did aggrauate his baniſhment with no ſmall preiudice to his credite, at ſuch a time as his competitors were fauoured, inuironed with their kinſemen, and demaunded iuſtice face to face: He alleaged that his holines briefe which the king had obtained againſt him, was ignominious and full of diſcurteſies, nothing agreeing to the honor of his father: And although he had obtained an other contrary thereunto, whereby his holines had reuoked to himſelfe the knowledge of the cauſe, yet was he reſolued not to alter any thing, but to paſſe his daies in miſerie and ſorrow, whileſt the euill deſerued paſsion of the king ſhoulde continue: He lamented to haue beene forced to giue in his proofes within two daies, much more time being granted to any other that pretended; and that they had giuen no anſwere to many things he demanded. He complained grieuouſly of the ſentence and commandement, to apprehend him for ſubornation of falſe witneſſes, the which he denied, although he ſaide that in the kings publike ſeate of iuſtice, ſuch as had produced falſe witneſſes, were not greatly puniſhed: He ſeemed to be greatly greeued to be called diſobedient, & a troubler of the publike quiet of the realmes, excuſing himſelfe with moſt vehement wordes: He lamented that

the Realme was ruined, which his predeceſſors had woone, defended, and maintained: He made no mention of appearance, but ſaide it was lawfull for him as to theeues, to hide himſelfe and flie the face of iuſtice, adding, that if the faults wherewith hee is charged were ſuch, as the lawes of the Realme command the Church to redreſſe, for that he hath no ſure acceſſe, it woulde pleaſe his highnes to graunt that Crato ſhoulde ſerue as his ſanctuarie. And although (if his ſinnes ſo required) that being Nephew to the king, the firſt perſon of the Realme, his humble and obedient vaſſall, it coulde not mollifie his vncles hart, he woulde craue at Gods hands, remedies for his afflictions: He required with humilitie that it might be lawfull for him to appeale from his edicts vnto the king himſelfe, better inſtructed, demaunding copies thereof to contradict them, concluding that if it might not be graunted, yet at the leaſt his letter might be annexed to the proces, for if due reſpect would haue ſuffred him, he woulde haue cauſed it to be ſet vp in the ſame place of the edicts, for the diſcharge of his honor, and to make knowne to the worlde that he was vaſſal, nephew, & faithful ſeruant vnto the king.  This letter did nothing mooue the kings hart, but wrought the ſame effect with his choler, as a little water doth to a great fire: For being more incenſed againſt his Nephew, he proceeded ſtill againſt him. So as within ſhort time he pronounced a newe ſentence, not as a Iudge, ſubſtitute by his holines, but as an abſolute king, that it might not be ſubiect to any appeale, ſuppoſing by this meanes (ſeeing hee coulde not caſt him into priſon) he ſhoulde baniſh him the Realme.Henries ſecond ſentence againſt the Prior. Wherin repeating his faults, his abſence, his contumacy, his diſobedience, with the premiſſes (as was) that he had made to drawe the Nobilitie & people to follow his faction; he depriued him of all his iuriſdictions, preheminences, honors, prerogatiues, liberties, graces, and what other recompence ſoeuer he had from the kings his predeceſſors, commaunding he ſhoulde be raſed out of the bookes, and not paide any thing, not holding him for a naturall borne, but a forraine to theſe Realmes. He pronounced the like againſt ſuch as ſhoulde aide him, lodge him, or any way treate with him: He commaunded him to depart the Realme within fifteene daies, ſaying, it was expedient for the ſeruice of God, of him, and the peoples quiet. But notwithſtanding this ſentence ſo ſeuere, yet was it not of

force to expell the Prior, for being wel beloued of his friendes, and common people, he remained ſafely in ſecret: And although for a ſhew onely he had retired him ſelfe into a monaſterie of Caſtill, yet he ſtaied not long there, onely to procure a certificate (as he did) of his departure: whereof king Philip being aduertiſed, he was aduiſed by ſome to take him priſoner, both to be aſſured of him, & to pleaſe Henry; but he thought it not then conuenient, whereof after he repented him, for Anthonie being returned againe into Portugall, it was generally thought that he was ill affected, and grieued with the king, for the ſentence he had pronounced againſt him. Henry grew fearefull he ſhoulde attempt ſomething againſt his perſon, which ſo encreaſed, that (beſides his ordinarie guard) he raiſed certaine cōmpanies of ſouldiers for the aſſurance of himſelfe, and his Courte, a thing at any time vnſeene in that Realme. At this time the EmbaſſadorsHenrie changeth his opinion to the benefit of Philip touching the ſucceſſion. of Philip had made Henry capable of his title: hauing laide before him, both the good and euill which might enſue, by giuing and taking from him the crowne; who being enclined to do iuſtice, mooued therewithall, & with the feare of war, hauing wel conſidered the matter, and laid aſide all affection which made him inclinable to Katherine, he reſolued with all his power to giue it vnto Philip, by the beſt meanes he coulde deuiſe. And hauing imparted this his meaning to the Duke of Oſſuna, and Chriſtopher de Mora, he ſaid he woulde ende the cauſe by way of compoſition betwixt Philip and the Realme, without proceeding vnto ſentence: Prouided alwaies that the Catholique king ſhoulde graunt certaine priuileges; not diſpoſe the offices of gouernment and iuſtice, but vnto the naturall Portugals, and giue certaine graces & exemptions, to the generall good of the Realme. Heere plainly appeered the errour of Henry, who hauing cited all the pretendents, and brought the matters to tearmes of iuſtice, thought it after wards more conuenient to come to compoſition with Philip, which ſhoulde haue beene formerly done, if it were to be done. Theſe capitulations were ſent vnto Philip, to Madrill, whom Henry entreated to keepe them ſecret, as one that feared a contrarie diſpoſition in the people. And although hee were not ignorant, howe hard the quiet execution of this his will woulde be, by reaſon of the people, and ſome Gentlemen of contrary faction; yet commaunded he it ſhoulde be propounded

to the ſtates, with all the mildenes it might be. Some hold that father Leon Anriquez, of the order of Ieſuits, the kings Confeſſour, was rather the cauſe of this his vnexpected reſolution, then the practiſes of the Catholique kings miniſters, and that from him (in whom the King did greatly truſt) proceeded his firſt inclination to the Dutcheſſe of Bragance, but fearing the indignation of Philip, he turned the thoughts of Henry to fauour his title. By means whereof in October 1579. he called againe the deputies of the Cities, and other eſtates, vpon colour to impart vnto them a matter of importance. Philip diſallowed this reſolution of Henry, to aſſemble the States, for being aſſured of the ſmall affection the Portugals bare him, he was moſt aſſured that aſſembling them togither, they woulde neuer agree to yeelde him the Crowne, and therefore hee aduiſed the King, without any other aſſembly, to declare a ſucceſſor, ſeeing in the laſt Eſtates held at Lisbone, the whole Realme had giuen him full power, the which if he would vſe in this controuerſie of the Realme, and not make any new conuocation of Deputies, he ſhoulde write to euery citie in particular his intention, and aduiſe, thinking it more eaſie to perſwade them deuided, then vnited in one body: But Henry not daring effect it, did ſollicite the comming of the Deputies. In Italy (ſeeing the Catholique King a little before aſſemble ſo great forces) they made diuers coniectures thereof, they furniſhed the places of ordinarie ſuſpect, with newe garriſons: ſome beleeued he that had entred league with the Cheriffe, Mulei Hamet, that both iointly togither would attempt Alger, ſuppoſing the Moores had propounded this enterpriſe for feare of the Turkes, and that the king with his aide woulde expell them from thence, being ſo necre neighbour vnto Spaine. The Pope vnderſtanding the contrarietie in Portugall, ſeeing the Catholique King prepare ſo greatly to armes, he commaunded Philip Sega his Nuncio in Caſtillia to ſay vnto him, that although he knewe theſe preparatiues of warres, were againſt Infidels; yet ſeeing the eſtate wherein Portugall ſtoode, it might bee ſuppoſed it was intended againſt thatThe offers of Pope Gregory. 13 to the Catholike King. Realme, and being dangerous to come to armes, and to ſtirre vppe the humours which cannot be ſetled at pleaſure, hee offred himſelfe to be a mediatour betwixt him and Henry, and to ſettle this buſines peaceablie. The king accepted the Popes offer in generall words,

entertaining his Nuncio with delaies, without giuing him any reſolute anſwer, for that (as it was ſaide) many things did trouble his minde concerning this action. He conſidered of the one ſide that being of good yeeres, and his heires but yoong, enioying (except the ſtate of Flaunders) all his countries quietly, it was not fitte to ſtirre vp humours in Spaine; beſides, being fearefull to other nations, they woulde not willingly ſee him augment his dominions, he doubted (that in buſying himſelfe in Portugall) ſome woulde then take occaſion to breede ſome alteration in his territories, and therefore hee willingly gaue eare to any treatie of peace. On the otherſide he was not well aſſured of the Popes diſpoſition, ſeeming he ſhoulde preiudice his title, to put it to compremiſe: beſides, that to former preſidents, he woulde not willingly adde this of new, to acknowledge the Apoſtolike ſeate as a iudge of Realmes. He thought it leſſe danger to attend the ſentence of Henry, then of any other, for pronouncing it (hauing not acknowledged him for iudge) he was not bounde to obey, if it were in his disfauour, retaining ſtill the right of armes; by reaſon whereof in this ſuſpence, he forbare ſtill to giue the Nuncio his anſwere, vntill that being better aſſured of the diſpoſition of Henry, he made anſwere, that his intereſt being ſo apparant, and the King ſo well enclined, there needed not any mediation, the which if it were requiſite, he woulde accept of this office, & of the good zeale of his holines. The indiſpoſition of Henry, and the diſquietnes of his minde, did much afflict him, ſo as he reſembled a lampe neere extinct, the which ſometimes yeelds a great light, ſometimes ſeemes quite out: They feared he ſhoulde die of an accident which hapned, and therefore his Counſell thought good not to attende his death, for the declaration of the Gouernours, but to put them as it were in poſſeſſion, the which was partly executed. For the King being halfe dead, they brought vnto him the coffer wherein the Rowle was kept, with the names of the Gouernours in the great Church of Lisbone, and hauing opened it, they founde them to be George Dalmeda archbiſhop of Lisbone;A publication of the gouernors of Portugall. 
               Frauncis de Sada, firſt groome of the Kings chamber; Iean Tello, Iean Maſcaregnas, and Diego Lopez de Soſa, Preſident of the Counſell of Iuſtice of the citie, who tooke their oathes to gouerne according to the lawes of the Realme, and to the limited commiſſion,

which Henry had particularly ſet downe. This diligence bredde aſwell in the peoples mindes, as in the Catholique Kings, a iealouſie of the kings death, and the rather, for that two daies before, they woulde not ſuffer any to ſee him, ſuppoſing they woulde keepe it ſecret, vntill they had taken counſell, put the Gouernours in poſſeſſion, and prepared for defence: And although it were preſently knowne that the King was yet liuing, and ſo amended, that he had almoſt recouered his former health, yet the generall opinion being, that he coulde not liue long, all mens mindes were in ſuſpence in this Realme.
         
         
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the fourth Booke.
               The Caſtillians and Portugals diſcourſe vpon the ſtate of Portugall; the vehemencie of the plague; the estate of Almerin; the death of King Henry; the Regency of the Gouernours; the practiſe of Anthonie to be choſen King; the Testament of Henry; the diligence of the Catholique King to vnderstande if he might with a ſafe conſcience make warre; the election of the Duke of Alua as generall of the enterpriſe, and the priuileges the Catholique King offered if they woulde deliuer him the Realme.
            
            
               THe Catholique King in the meane time kept his armie togither in Spaine, with greater paines, and more charge, then he had done elſe where; for the countrey being not greatly fertile, he was enforced to fetch victuals from other parts, being then about the ende of Nouember, 1579. there was then no aſſuraunce of things, whereby they might either diſmiſſe their armie, or imploy it. For although king Henry was yet

liuing and well affected, yet the Portugals being moſt obſtinate againſt the Caſtillians, he deſired not to liue any longer doubtfull of the ſucceſſion, as well for the charge as for the euent; and therefore he ceaſed not continually to importune Henry to declare him Succeſſor, obiecting many reaſons, why he was bound to do it, and propounding many inconueniences which woulde follow, not doing it, the which was ſpoken in doubtfull tearmes; whereby it ſeemed he woulde make the equitie of his cauſe apparant by force: And although this entreatie ſeemed ſomewhat to threaten, yet did it nothing diſpleaſe Henry, ſuffering it expreſly to bee publiſhed, that the people might beleeue, he was forced to this declaration. The whole Realme was diſcontented to ſee Henry dying, the Catholique King armed, and the ſmall remainder of time ſpent in matters of light importance, whereof their diſcourſes and opinions were as diuers, as they were different in paſſions.
            
               The diſcourſe of the Portugals vpon the ſtate of the Realme. The Priors partiſans being in a manner all of baſe qualitie, hauing their reaſon darkned, and not ſetled in opinion, ſaide, that he was legitimate, and that the Crowne appertained vnto him; but that the king of his abſolute authoritie, hating him woulde depriue him; and that all his fauorites did concurre in this reſolution: For the King hauing alwaies perſecuted Anthony by their aduiſe, they feared that he comming to raigne, woulde take ſuch reuenge as they deſerued, and therefore preferring their owne ſecuritie, before the libertie of their countrey, they woulde take the Realme from him and giue it to a ſtranger. Many others alleaged, that although hee were a baſtard, yet they ought to giue him the Realme, being the neereſt allied of the bloud royall: Others in whom hatred to their neighbours preuailed more then any other inclination, ſaide, that whoſoeuer had intereſt to the Realme, yet ſhoulde they by no meanes giue it to the Catholique King, but rather come to armes, vaunting themſelues to be valiant. They added moreouer that they woulde demaund aide from Fraunce, and England, whereof they were aſſured, and hauing them, they doubted not to ſeate a King, at their pleaſures: There were ſome, yet fewe, but of iudgement, who comparing the forces of Portugall with Caſtill, founde they coulde not flie the yoke of the Catholique King, and although with great griefe, yet they hoped it might prooue a gentle amitie, and that

theſe Realmes vnited togither, Portugall might reape great profit, by the commerce & traffique. Many ſpake after their owne humors, ſaying, that Anthony leauing the habite of Saint Iean ſhoulde marrie with the daughter of the Duke of Bragance, and being vnited togither, they needed not to feare. Others gaue out, that the Catholique King woulde be contented to giue his ſeconde ſonne to the Portugals, for their king, to be brought vp amongſt them, the which they ſhoulde accept, for were it whoſoeuer, it were ſufficient to haue a King alone. And ſome ſay, that Henry laboured to effect this, but Philip ſoone reſolued him, ſaying, that he coulde not do it, but to preiudice the Prince his eldeſt ſonne, fearing by this meanes to leaue a ſeminarie of diuiſion in Spaine betwixt his deſcendents. The perſwaſion of the Catholique Kings Agents, with the Nobility were of great effect, by reaſon whereof there were few Gentlemen, amidſt this diuerſitie of opinion, but either did willingly encline to the ſaid King, or corrupted held their peace, and retired themſelues from Court, auoiding all occaſion to declare themſelues. Of the fiue Gouernours choſen, three were drawne to the Catholique Kings deuotion; and although we ſhould not be amazed, to ſee the common people (who by cuſtome inconſtant and without iudgement) holde the woorſer part, yet did it breed a woonder in many, that the Portugals in generall, euery one according to his qualitie, framed in their mindes a reſolution, contrarie to that which by reaſon they ought to haue done, in a matter of ſo great importance, in the which they ſhould haue taken greater conſideration: For that ſome diſcourſed without paſſion, that the Nobilitie (accuſtomed to be reſpected of the King) ſhoulde flie the obedience of the Catholique King, being credible, that Philip (according to his cuſtome) woulde with lawes and his power, keepe them vnder, and contrariwiſe, that the people ſhoulde embrace him, whom he doth equally fauour, yeelding them equall iuſtice. And yet notwithſtanding the greater part followed the contrarie, for the Nobilitie did embrace Philip, and the people fled him: For ſatisfaction whereof, and to reclaime them from the opinion they held, the Agents of the Catholique King were deſirous (beſides the diligence they had vſed) to publiſh throughout the Realme the Kings title, and the mildenes of his yoke, ſeeming not ſufficient (for the content of the common

people) to haue priuately imparted it to many. Their aduerſaries (amongſt the which was the magiſtrate of the Chamber of Liſbone) woulde willingly haue taken occaſion to publiſh vnto the worlde their contrarie reaſons, whereon they grounded; but it was not tolerated, neither for the one nor the other, to ſpeake publikely in the aſſemblies of the people: for beſides that it was prohibited, euery one durſt not freely diſcouer his intention: For this occaſion diuers fell to write the grounds of their partie, by diſcourſe and letters. And although writings breede not ſo firme an impreſſion in the minde as the voice, yet their diſcourſe publiſhed, did perſwade with greater efficacie then they had done by ſpeaking; for that writings came to the hands of more men then wordes could haue done, where, reading and examining them, they wrought great effects.
            
               The Caſtillians diſcourſe touching the affaires of Portugall. There were many of theſe letters ſeene without authors, and although ſome were friuolous, and without ſenſe, yet the better ſorte which followed the Catholique kings partie, tended to ſatisfie the people, and to terrifie the motiues thereof by the greatnes of the action, and the perill of warre: They did particularly touch one after another, the reaſons of the pretendents, and refuting them all, ſhewed that the Catholique King did precead. They made no ſmall adoo about the proceſſe of Anthony, ſaying, that he was a baſtard, although he had beene declared legitimate, and to precead Philip, yet ſhoulde they neuer ſatisfie the worlde, but they woulde ſurmiſe ſome coſinage, deuiſed to take the Crowne from him who ought to enioy it. They diſprooued the reaſons of ſuch as maintained the election of the King to be in the people, hauing a lawfull ſucceſſor, bringing in examples of the Popes authoritie in the nomination of Kings, as well of Alphonſo the firſt, as of the Earle of Bulloigne: And if Iohn the firſt were choſen king, it was after a battaile woone; the Portugals affirming, there were no lawfull ſucceſſors, but baſtards & illegitimate: but by their owne reaſon they ſaid it was apparant, there was now no queſtion of the election, ſeeing there remained a lawful kinſeman. They laboured to make knowne that God hauing called vnto him two and twentie ſucceſſors, which did all precead the Catholique king, that his pleaſure was by vniting of Portugall to the Realmes of Caſtill, to fortifie an arme of the Church, to reſiſt all the outragious attempts of infidels and

heretikes. But leauing the iuſtice and will of God aſide, they diſcourſed, examining the honors and blames, the loſſes and profits, which by the one or other meanes, might happen: as for honor, they ſhoulde not take for any diſgrace, and obedience which fell by lawfull ſucceſſion, alleaging that the States of Caſtill, (when as king Emanuell did inherite) being ſtrong enough to defende themſelues if they woulde, receiued him curteouſly. And when as the Archduke of Auſtria, (although a Germaine) did ſucceed him, they did the like. They mocked at ſuch as ſaid that Caſtill ſhould be vnited to Portugall, but not Portugal to Caſtill; proouing, that no Portugall euer came neere this Court, but he was embraced & greatlie honoured; many of the principall houſes of Caſtill being iſſued from Portugall. They did contradict with liuely reaſons, ſuch as feared to be oppreſſed, like to the eſtates of Flaunders, Naples, and Millaine; ſaying that in Flaunders they had alwaies vſed the people with great kindnes, that they had beene gouerned by their owne nation, & that the Spaniards had no charge there: That many of the principall had rebelled againſt the church of Rome, & againſt their king, the which he woulde not ſuffer, that in this enterpriſe (more for that which concerned the good of the Church, then for any other reſpect,) the King had ſpent 50. millions of gold, and that hauing for enimies, both Germany, Flaunders, & England, they could not take theſe countries from the Kings poſſeſſion, but hauing meanes (graunting free libertie of Religion) to be abſolute Lord, and to reape thereby great profit, he would not accept thereof, onely for the remorſe of his conſcience, preferring the ſeruice of God before all other reſpects: They ſaide that the Neapolitanes and Millanoyes had beene conquered by force, weake of themſelues, and enuironed with enimies, that they were not burdened, neither coulde he do leſſe then maintaine garriſons, inferring thereby, that if they were peaceably inherited, they ſhoulde haue libertie like good and faithfull ſubiects, and maintaine with more force that which their fathers had gotten, without feare of any thing whatſoeuer; but if they ſuffered themſelues to be conquered by armes, they ſhould be Neapolitanes, Millanoyes, and poſſiblie woorſe. They commended the Portugals, as faithfull, obedient, and indued with commendable parts, blaming the baſenes of ſuch as were not

aſhamed to thinke, they coulde be ill intreated of any prince whatſoeuer. They ſaid, that ſince Philip was reſolute, and that hee had written to the cities of the Realme the aſſurance of his action, ſeeing that in fourteene yeeres hee had neuer abandoned the enterpriſe in Flaunders being farre off, hauing ſo many kings oppoſite, and the Flemmings ſuing to be ſubiect vnder iuſt conditions, that it is not credible he woulde deſiſt from Portugall being ſo neare, ſo weake without ſuccours, and hauing ſo great an intereſt: they reported with ioy the deeds of the Spaniards, ſaying, that when as Spaine takes armes, he doth impriſon the king of Fraunce, and the greateſt of Germanie; makes the Turke to turne his backe, takes from him Malta, diſſolues his armies, maintaines continually in Flaunders an armie ſounde and luſtie, breaking and diſperſing his enimies, and yet the Noblemen of Spaine remaine quietly in their houſes. From their valour, they came to the conſideration how Portugall woulde reſiſt ſo great a Monarch, entreating them with affectionate words to haue regard thereunto. They ſaide that the comfort of men of iudgement, was to ſee the ſmall force of the Portugals, for if it were greater, they might for a time make ſome reſiſtance, conſidering their obſtinacie, iudging that in the beginning of this warre, the kings of the Indies woulde preſently become Lords of the ſea coaſt, the Moores woulde aſſaile the places of Affricke, the French and Engliſh woulde attempt the Iſlands, ſome woulde vſurpe on one ſide, ſome of another, not onely to the loſſe of the Realme, but of all Chriſtendome. They brought in the example of King Sebaſtian, ſhewing that he was loſt for not meaſuring his forces: And although the conſideration had beene eaſie, many proteſting againſt it, and many foretelling the future euent, yet God tooke from them their vnderſtanding, as he doth from thoſe whom he meaneth to puniſh, and in this manner he hath depriued them of iudgement, who aduiſe to take from the Catholique King the ſucceſſion of the Realme. They compared the amitie of Caſtill with that of Fraunce, reporting the wrongs and pyracies, which the French being at ſea had daily done to Portugall, and the ſmall reckoning was helde of them that had complained, and contrariwiſe the concord and reſt which ſince the laſt peace made with the Caſtillians vntill that day, they had enioyed, without the breach of any one article, blaming

the manner of the French, ſaying that they ſought nothing elſe but to be admitted, and after to become maſters; the which not ſucceeding, they ſtriued to be admitted to plead, the equitie of their Kings cauſe, ſeeking alwaies occaſion to complaine. They added, that if the election were in the people, and that the Catholique king had no entereſt, onely to be free from the French, they ſhoulde vnite themſelues with Caſtill, that they might liue in peace, and bridle this French furie, which hath often throwne the Portugals aliue into the ſea, and ſlaine their gouernors and the Kings captaines, by their Kings commiſſion; for by this vnion, beſides the ſeruice of God, the French would feare and not ſpoile ſo boldly at ſea. They commended king Henry as iuſt and holie, ſaying, that the beſt reſolution they coulde take, was to fall at his feete, beſeeching him that ſeeing the Catholique king was the moſt honorable, the moſt neereſt, and the eldeſt kinſman that he had, that in the name of God he ſhoulde ſweare him Prince, according with him of the moſt neceſſarie points, for the libertie of the Realme, and ſhewing themſelues conformeable to the bequeſt ſometimes made by king Emanuell: That they ſhould not looſe this occaſion during his life, but (laying aſide their obſtinate interceſſions) labour iointly to flie the warre, and not be forced to yeelde to Caſtill at ſuch time, when as it ſhoulde not be acceptable, perfourming the which they ſhoulde not onely preſerue their owne goods, but inherite others, ſeeing the greatnes of Caſtill doth indifferently admit all ſubiects Spaniards, to the greateſt dignities; bringing for examples, that the Archbiſhop of Toledo, and the office of the Preſident of the Councell roiall, which be the higheſt dignities ſpirituall and temporall, were not then enioied by Caſtillians. They proteſted that if they ſtopped their eares to the truth, and did open them to apparant lies, they ſhoulde feele within their owne home warre, with the murthers, ſpoiles, theftes,The Portugals anſwere to the Caſtillians diſcourſe. and burnings it bringes with it. On the other ſide the Portugals made anſwere to their letters, ſaying, they deſired no warre, but woulde defende themſelues againſt any that ſhoulde attempt it: They alleaged many reaſons of their iuſtice and force, with auncient examples of the holie Scriptures, whereas ſmall numbers in a iuſt cauſe haue vanquiſhed a great armie. They refuted that opinion that God by the vnion of theſe Realmes would fortifie in Caſtill

an arme of the church, ſhewing many grounds, wherby they ſhould iudge the contrarie, blaming the ſacke of Rome, and ſome other vnwoorthy actions of the Caſtillians. They laboured much to prooue that the Prior of Crato was legitimate, & that King Henrie had bin a moſt paſſionate iudge in that cauſe. They ſpared not to touch the reaſons of the Dutcheſſe of Bragance, ſhewing that ſhe ought to precead the Catholique King in the ſucceſſion. They condemned the ſaid King, ſaying, that diſtruſting his Title he had prepared to armes: They ſhewed by a long diſcourſe, that the vnion of Portugall would neither breed them profit, nor honour, but loſſe and diſhonour, were the conditions neuer ſo ample and good: drawing examples from Flaunders and Aragon, ſhewing that the behauiour of the Spaniardes in the Low-countries, had beene the cauſe that thoſe people had rebelled againſt God, and againſt their temporall Lord: They did obiect that all nations ſubiect to the Catholique King, were reputed his ſubiects in matters of charge, and burthens of the warre; but in honours, recompences, and exemptions, they were vnknowen: They valued not the Kings forces, ſaying, that if it were fearfull to other Prouinces, yet was it not ſo in Spaine, beeing apparent, that by reaſon of the barrennes of that countrey, he could entertaine no great Armies, neither durſt he for the weaknes of the places draw in mercenarie ſouldiers, bringing for example the war of Granado, where incountring but with fower diſarmed Moores, there was ſo great daunger with the loſſe of ſo many men. They added moreouer that the King had not at this day one Captaine of account, naming a number which were of the Seminarie of Charles the fifth who were all dead, and not any other which had ſucceeded them, imitating the Kings humour who loues reſt more then armes; by meanes whereof he had not augmented his Realme, but loſt Goletta, with the States of Flaunders, and had yet made greater loſſes, had there beene other Kings liuing in this age, but that in Fraunce, England, and Portugall, the Scepters were in the hands of women and children. They concluded that it was not credible, that the Catholique King, notwithſtanding his threatnings, and his prepared forces, woulde take armes in Spaine, for that his forces being vnited (he was in daunger vpon the leaſt contrarie euent) that ſome of his Prouinces would rebell againſt him, and that the French

(being a ſtirring nation) would imbrace this occaſion: beſides that, being now old and the howres of his death vncertaine, hee ſhould conſider, that not inioying the Realme of Portugall in peace, and dying with an Armie in Spaine, hauing no heires but pupilles, hee ſhould leaue them in danger, not onely to be depriued of the poſſeſſion of Portugall, but alſo to be much troubled in Caſtill and his other Kingdomes of Spaine, labouring to prooue, that the Kings were not there beloued as in Portugall. Then began the yeere 1580. a yeere full of miſeries and afflictions for the Portugals, not onely by reaſon of the warre which followed, but alſo for the dearth and plague; for that the ſeaſon hauing beene verie drie, the fruit of the earth was in a manner all loſt, neither had the husbandmen in many places reaped what was ſowne; beſides there came not from Fraunce and Germanie ſuch quantitie of corne as was vſuall: ButThe plague in Portugall, and the proceedings. this miſerie was ſupportable in regard of the reſt, for neuer was the ſcarſitie ſo great, but things neceſſarie would be found for money: That of the contagion was moſt cruell, for hauing runne through Italy, Germanie, England, and a part of Fraunce, it came finally into this Realme, from whence it ſpread throughout all Spaine, but moſt of all in the citie of Lisbone, hauing begonne lightly the yeere before, it increaſed at the entring of this ſpring, and ſo augmented all ſommer, but declined in the fall. This contagious mortalitie (ſuffered it may be of God for our ſinnes) proceeded not from any corruption of the Aire, but from infection; and was brought into the Realme, by men and merchandiſe from countries infected, for the citie being a great part vnwalled, and of great traffique, it could not eaſily be guarded. The naturall inclination of the aire, the filch of the citie, their feeding of fiſh (which all generally do vſe) and the ill order, nay the great diſorder of the magiſtrate of the health, in ſeparating the ſicke from the whole, and in all other things touching his charge, did helpe to increaſe it. The ſuddennes wherewith it did infect and kill in a manner all thoſe that did frequent the ſicke, as fire doth in powder, ſtrooke a great terrour in the citizens, their remedies and diets were moſt vncertaine: for although that many did phiſicke themſelues diuerſly, and were gouerned in ſundrie manners, yet there died infinite numbers of all qualities, experience did teach that the application of lenitiue things, the drinking of Vnicornes

horne, and the Bezars ſtone were moſt ſoueraigne remedies,Bezar ſtone excellent against the plague. yet to manie it did no good. The greateſt part of the Nobilitie, (and of ſuch as had ability to do it) retyred themſelues to their gardaines, and farmes in the countrey, where (although the whole countrey were infected) yet did they ſeeme to liue more aſſured, or at the leaſt out of the infection, & from the horrible ſpectacle of dead bodies, which were howerly ſeene in the citie, where the mortalitie grew ſo great that there was nothing to be ſeene but Beeres with dead bodies, for the buriall whereof (the churchyards being full,) they were forced to vſe the ſtreets and fieldes.
            
               The States of Almerin. At this time were aſſembled in the citie of Almerin where the king remained, all the Deputies of the Realme, being called thither: The citie of Lisbone made election of Emanuell of Portugall, and Diego Salema, who went not, but were reiected of the King, as ſeditious, and depriued of their offices, in whoſe place they made choiſe of Phoebus Moniz, and Emanuel de Soſa pacheco: The ſaid Salema was not beloued of the king, for that before as Vereador of the citie of Lisbone, he ſaide vnto the king, that they vnderſtoode he went about not onely to iudge to whom the Realme appertained, but alſo to make a compoſition, the which he ought not to doe, without hearing the people: whereunto the King hauing anſwered, that the people was not capable of this matter, he replied, that he woondered the king ſhoulde iudge this people incapable, whom he had held to be moſt ſufficient to raiſe him to the crowne, wherewith Henry was greatly mooued. This alteration of Deputies miniſtred matter of diſcourſe vnto the worlde: for it ſeemed the King had declared himſelfe againſt the people, and that not accepting their election of Deputies, he woulde drawe by force from the States what heHenry changeth the Deputies of Lisbone, and the cauſe. pleaſed, but ſuch as knewe the true reaſon, and howe that Emanuell, and all thoſe of the houſe of Portugall, deſerued in this caſe to bee repelled, commended this act: Theſe were ſuſpect, foraſmuch as Iohn of Portugall, Biſhop of Guarda, brother to the ſaide Emanuell, alwaies eſteemed more then he was, woulde not onely precead his equals, but did ſcarce beare any reſpect vnto the Cardinall before he was king, whereof grew a great hart burning; ſo as the Cardinall to debaſe him, hauing drawne foorth a certaine information of his ill behauiour, libertie of life, and ill gouernment in his Biſhopricke,

ſent it to Rome, ſo as the Biſhop (as it were forced) went to his holines to purge himſelfe. Hee was much grieued with this croſſe, for paſſing by the court of Caſtill, the Catholique King being infourmed of his voyage, woulde not ſuffer him to viſite him, although he were entreated: ſo as now although the Cardinall were come vnto the Crowne, their hatred continued, and hauing no other meanes of reuenge, then to oppoſe himſelfe to his reſolutions, ſeeing him enclined to giue the Realme to the Catholique king, he laboured all he coulde to let it, by meanes whereof, he ſeemed at one inſtant to be reuenged of two kings: for the effecting whereof, there conſpired togither the Biſhop; Emanuell his brother; Franncis earle of Vimioſo his nephew, (for the cōtrarieties, that both Alphonſe his father, and he had with the Cardinall) with other their kinsfolkes and friendes, fauouring Anthony Prior of Crato, they reſolued to make him king, truſting to the peoples humors. But King Henry hauing diſcerned the equitie of the Catholique kings cauſe, reſolued, as it is ſaid, to giue him the Realme; & hauing aſſembled the States, he ſent Paule Alphonſe a doctor, in whom he repoſed great truſt, to Villa Vizoſa, whereas the Duke and the Dutcheſſe of Bragance remained, giuing them to vnderſtande that finding the ſucceſſion of the Realme to appertaine to Philip, and that they were vpon the point to pronounce ſentence in his fauour, he did aduertiſe them in time, to the end they might make their compoſition with him: But hauing made ſmall account of this aduertiſement, interpreting it otherwiſe, they did not embrace the occaſion, the which was likewiſe repreſented vnto them by the Catholique king.
            
               The opening of the Eſtates at Almerin by the Biſhop of Leiria. In this time the Eſtates were begun in the pallace of Almeryn, the ninth of Ianuary in the kings preſence, who (being very ſicke) was brought in his chaire, whereas Anthony Pignero biſhop of Leiria, an eloquent Orator, made the oration, enriched with a goodly ſtile, ſaying, That the Kings thoughts were bent to procure the generall good of al Chriſtendome, the preſeruation and encreaſe of our holie Catholique faith, and the peace and tranquillitie of his ſubiects, & for the effecting of that which concernes his charge, & to follow the examples of kings his predeceſſors, & progenitors, conformeable to the actions of his life paſſed, conſidering with ſound iudgement, great experience, & wiſe diſcourſe how much it doth import

the generall good to declare (during his life) to whom the lawfull ſucceſſion of the Realme did appertaine; he did apply all his care to the deciſion of that cauſe, with ſo great ſtudy and zeale, that not ſuffering himſelfe any way to be interrupted with the many graue and extraordinary affaires, nor by the trouble of his long infirmity, he had with the helpe of God brought it to that eſtate, that it might ſpeedily be declared, as they had required, and ought generally to wiſh for: And ſeeing the finall deciſion of the cauſe was brought to that iſſue, it ſeemed conuenient to the king, to aſſemble the States, and to communicate vnto them ſome points of great importance, for the ſeruice of God, and the good and quiet of theſe Realmes, as they ſhoulde vnderſtande, by that which ſhoulde be particularly deliuered vnto them by his commandement: He exhorted them, that vſing the my ſteries, which had been preſented lately to al faithfull Chriſtians, with praiers, ſacrifices, workes of deuotion and charitie, they ſhoulde diſpoſe themſelues to receiue the light of that heauenly wiſedome, which God doth alwaies impart to ſuch, as frame themſelues to receiue it, without the which mans wiſedome (were it neuer ſo ſubtill) coulde not worke as it ought, that dooing ſo, the holy Ghoſt by his grace woulde inſpire their harts, and lighten their vnderſtādings, making their wils conformable to his loue, to the end that all that ſhall be treated of, may bee to the ſeruice of God & his glory, the encreaſe of Chriſtian Religion, and the quiet and profite of theſe Realmes, as he ſtill pretended in all things, and as he doth eſpecially deſire and procure in theſe preſent occurrents, to the hinderance of his health, but with a moſt holy zeale. 
            
            
               The anſwere of Soſa Deputie of Liſbne. Hauing ended this ſpeech, Emanuel de Soſa pachecho, Deputie of Lisbone, roſe vp ſaying: That ſince God by his prouidence, (amidſt ſo many afflictions hapned to the Realme,) had giuen his Highnes for ſucceſſor, (truſting in his vertue,) they did expect from him a remedie to their eminent dangers: That they were moſt aſſured, that for the loue and deſire of his ſubiects peace, he did not ſpare his owne health, for which loue and grace they did kiſſe his handes, offring him all auncient and firme loialty, loue, and obedience, wherewith the Portugall nation haue beene woont to ſerue their Kings his predeceſſors. At the ende whereof, the trumpets ſounding, the King was carried into his lodging: and for that Almeryn is of ſmall

eceipt, all the Deputies were lodged at Arem, which is neere vpon the other ſide of the riuer of Tagus, aſſembling at the conuent of Friers, there to holde their councell. The king laboured all hee coulde to drawe ſome good effect from theſe Eſtates, vſing in one caſe both mildenes and ſeueritie; but he feared greatly the contrarie: for notwithſtanding he ſuppoſed that he had drawne the citie of Lisbone, to chooſe Deputies according to his owne humour, yet coulde he not do the like with other cities, beſides he knew notA mutinie at Coimbra. whom to truſt. And now was there hapned at Coimbra ſome ſmall rumour, being aduertiſed that the Magiſtrate of the Chamber of that city, with ſome other citizens, ſpake too freely in the behalfe of the Prior of Crato, touching the ſucceſſion of the Realme, whither he ſent Martin Correa de Sylua, to pacifie theſe ſtirres, and to puniſh the offenders: But they laughed at him, and hee returned without effecting any thing; neither did it preualie, that the king for that reſpect did impriſon Aryas Gonzalez de Macedo, Deputie of the ſame citie, who was after freely ſet at libertie. The king receiued great contentment by the anſwer giuen him by the Clergie, and the Nobilitie, hauing imparted vnto them the intereſt of king Philip, and propounded that it were conuenient to make ſome agreement with him: they kiſſed his handes, yet was there great diſagreement amongſt the Nobilitie, before they coulde reſolue, for being all reduced to eight and twentie, and thoſe put to voices, the Catholique king preuailed onely with one voice, to the great diſcontentment of the contrarie faction; and heerein the diligence and promiſes of the Catholique Agents preuailed much. But Henry was no leſſe diſpleaſed with the proceedings of the thirde eſtate contrarie to his intent and meaning. It was generally thought that Phebus Moniz Deputie of Lisbone was conformable to the kings will, & was choſen to that intent, yet vpon the firſt aſſembly of the Deputies the thirteenth of Ianuarie, he plainly diſcouered his hart, being all aſſembled, as chiefe of the Councell he ſpake in this manner. ThatThe ſpeech of Moniz Deputie of Lisbone. the Portugall nation was more pleaſed with deeds then words, and for that he was a Portugall, although ſome did beleeue the contrarie, he woulde ſpeake little: I beleeue ſaide he, that euery one of you in the Maſſe of the holie Ghoſt, which hath beene lately celebrated, hath beſeeched God to direct all to his honour and glorie; for it is

that we ought to ſeeke. We haue a moſt holy king, who being ſuch, it is not credible that he hath aſſembled vs heere but to doe vs honor, & for the preſeruation of our publike good: The Realme hath choſen vs for Deputies, all mens eies are turned vpon vs, to view if they haue made a good choice: Let vs giue them to vnderſtande, that they haue attained their deſires, procuring as much as we may the preſeruation of our generall good. It doth not diſpleaſe me to heare ſome ſay that God hath reſerued this cauſe of ſucceſſion to be determined in heauen, let vs imbrace this ſaying: Let vs goe all to heauen to begge mercy at his hands: let vs all make vs readie as at the laſt houre: let vs forget all things below; I will aſſure you on his behalfe that doing ſo, both here & in that heauenly citie he will entreate vs as his beſt beloued: I relie much vpon you, and I beſeech you that if by reaſon of my ſinnes, I decline from the name of a Portugall, you will helpe to ſupport me, that I may not looſe it; I will be alwaies ready to ioine in any reſolution that ſhal pleaſe you. Theſe wordes ſpoken with more vehemencie then eloquence, reuiued the ſpirits of many of the deputies, who doubted of his inclination, ſo that after the creation of the officers, they alleaged: That ſeeing that the citie of Lisbone, hauing propounded to the learned whether the election of the King appertained onely vnto them (as the chiefe citie of the Realme) and finding it was a thing incident to the whole Realme, that it were conuenient, before theThe Deputies of the Realme ſent to Henrie to be admitted to the election of the King with the anſwere. King ſhould ſend vnto them, to demaund permiſſion in the behalfe of the Realme, to pretend the election of the King; being all conformable, they ſent two deputies to deliuer this Ambaſſage, who being ioyfully receiued, and with doubtfull ſpeeches, returned with no other ſatisfaction but that the day following, he would ſende them an anſwere: who being returned to the aſſembly and making report what they had done, Antonio Pignero Biſhop, arriued, ſent from the King, who ſpake thus in his name: That the difficultie in aſſembling the States was ſo great, & the matter treated of, of ſuch importance, that it was fit to touch the point of the concluſion, laying aſide many things which were of no moment: That the Catholique King (ſince that his Highnes had taken the Scepter of theſe Realmes) had preſſed him to declare his ſucceſſor, ſaying, that he was aſſured, both by the opinion of Doctors of his owne Realme, and of others,

that the ſucceſſion appertained vnto him, but that King Henrie made anſwere, he muſt be better enformed, & heare the parties pretending to the ſame ſecceſſion, entertaining him in this ſort vntill he had knowledge vnto whom it appertained by right, and being now ſatisfied, finding there yet reſteth ſome doubt betwixt the Catholique King and the Dutcheſſe of Bragance, he knew that making declaration by way of iuſtice, it might breed many inconueniences and troubles to the Realme, being alreadie expoſed to manie dangers:  And therefore he found no better courſe then to determine the ſucceſſion by way of accord, if he ſhould die before the King of Caſtil, for by that meanes he ſhould prouide for all things fit for the Realme, giuing ſatisfaction to him that ſhould haue the ſtrongeſt pretention: And although the matter were ſtill in doubt, yet the King had thought it the beſt courſe, as they ſhould well finde, and if they would conſider thereof, being of ſuch importance as his Highnes had thought it conuenient to impart it vnto them, and with their counſell to determine what ſhould be moſt neceſſarie, for the ſeruice of God and the profit of the Realme. That hee did recommend it vnto them, that with quietnes of mindes, and the onely reſpect of the diuine ſeruice and the common good, they ſhould treat and conſider of this matter, giuing the King preſent knowledge of their opinions: This Ambaſſage did greatly alter the councell, who expected an Ambaſſage from the King, whether he would admit their demand concerning the election, and ſeeing they treated with them of a matter halfe ended, laying aſide what the Ambaſſador had propounded, they reſolued to ſend backe to the King to expoſtulate an anſwere of their Ambaſſage, which done they profited no more then before: But to Phebus Moniz (one of thoſe which went, who poſſibly ſpake without reſpect) the King made anſwere, with great patience; That he ſhould haue come accompanied with choler; whereunto he replied, that it was reaſonable, ſeeing his Highnes would giue the Realme vnto the Caſtillians: Let him giue it to any Portugall whoſoeuer, they were all contented. The day following the Biſhop returned to the aſſembly, and without any anſwer to the Deputies demaund, hee ſaide vnto them in the Kings behalfe; That his Highnes vnderſtood that ſome of the Councell were miſtaken, ſuppoſing the accord whereof he had made mention ſhould

be betwixt the King of Caſtill, & the Ducheſſe of Bragance; which being contrarie, he thought it good to explaine his meaning, that the accord which he laboured, was betwixt the King of Caſtill and theſe Realmes, and to let them vnderſtande that ſentence was readie to be giuen in fauour of the king of Caſtill, and therefore they ſhoulde conſider how much more fit it were to ende it by accorde then by ſentence, that they ſhoulde well conſider of that which he had ſent to be deliuered vnto them, for being a matter ſo important to the Realme, it was neceſſarie that all ſhould be capable. The Biſhop being departed, many of the Deputies grewe in choler, ſome of them ſaying, that the Biſhop (affected vnto Philip) had forged this Embaſſage of himſelfe, and that it was not credible, the King had deliuered it thus vnto him. Many ſpoke freely, and ſome ſought to interrupt him before hee had ended, ſeeming vnto them that the king not anſwering their demaunde, made ſmall account of this aſſemblie, ſaying, that he coulde be no iuſt iudge of this cauſe, ſeeing he had declared his intention: But weighing better if they ſhould confeſſe that he had pronounced it as a king and iudge, they were bound to obey, they beganne to ſay, he had made no declaration, holding it in ſuſpence. They ſent to the aſſemblie of the Clergie, to let them vnderſtand what had paſſed, and to complaine, and to the King likewiſe, to demaund an anſwer, who (anſwering them that he woulde ſende) did preſſe them to reſt ſatisfied, and to commit the care of this reſolution to ſome fewe of them; whereunto the Deputies woulde not agree, fearing leaſt the authoritie of the pretendents might force them, or corrupt the iudges, proteſting openly that they woulde neither conuent nor accord with the Caſtillians: But King Henry ſeeing the Deputies obſtinately forcing an aunſwere to their demaund, finding he coulde neither drawe them to compoſition, nor to compremit the matter to fewe, fearing if hee ſhoulde pronounce the ſentence, they woulde make ſome exception, reſolued to make ſhort, to graunt that which they demaunded: For which cauſe he ſent backe the Biſhop the thirde time, who with a more pleaſing audience then before, ſaide vnto them in the kings behalfe. That ſeeing the accord he had propounded did not ſeeme pleaſing vnto them as vnto his Highnes, he woulde make no other motion, but woulde admit them to pleade the intereſt they had in

the Kings election, giuing them notwithſtanding but two daies libertie to produce their reaſons; The Deputies glad of this anſwere, ſent to kiſſe the Kings hand for this fauour, crauing leaue to draw ſome auncient writings out of the Records, requiring more libertie of time, the which he would not graunt, referring them to the Soueraigne magiſtrate for the writings. The Portugals were puffed vp with hope, by this permiſſion to elect a King at their owne pleaſure, and therefore many more haſtily then they ſhould, declared themſelues, proteſting they would rather yeeld to any then to the Caſtillians: And not onely the common people, but many of the Nobilitie ſaid the ſame, whereof many ſhewing themſelues too ſeditious, were baniſhed the aſſemblies, whereas ſuch as ſeconded the Kings will (beſides the promiſes of the Catholike Kings Agents) were fauoured and rewarded by Henrie. The pretendents to the ſucceſſion were diſcontented with the Kings inclination, ſome complayned, others diſſembled: The Duke of Bragance relied greatly vpon his wiues Title: The Biſhop of Parma comming to the aſſembly of States, complayned publikely of the King with graue wordes, to whom Emanuell de Soſa made a wiſe anſwere, aſſuring him of the Kings intent to doe iuſtice: whileſt the matter ſtoode vpon theſe termes, the King grew ſo weake as he could not riſe from his bed,King Henry ſicke. giuing ſignes of a ſhort life, yet did he not leaue to the hower of his death to prouide for all things neceſſarie. At that time the Duke of Bragance thought it fit to ſend Katherine his wife to Almeryn to viſite Henrie, & to perſwade him to declare her heire to the Crowne, the which he did, with ſmall content to Henrie to whom ſhe ſpake freely: This her comming (the Archbiſhop of Euora vncle to the Duke, hauing at the ſame time giuen a prebend of the ſame church of great reuenue to Paul Alphonſo) bred matter of iealouſie, in ſuch as were affected to the Catholique King, who not knowing the qualitie of this Doctor, and the obedience, wherewith they keepeThe death of King Henry. the Kings commaundements, charged him not to haue perfourmed ſuch offices with the Dutcheſſe, as were conformable to Henries commiſſion; who drawning neere vnto midnight paſſed into an other life, a thing woorthie to be noted, that he began to die in the beginning of the Ecclipſe of the moone, he died with the end thereof, as if that the celeſtiall ſigne had wrought that effect in him (being

a King of a weake bodie) which it doth not in ſtronger, or at the leaſt, not ſo ſuddenly as Aſtrologians doe write; neither is the hower to be neglected, being the ſame wherein he was borne, 68. yeeres before. The religious which were at his death, ſaide, that he was alwaies talking: About ten of the clocke hee demaunded howe the time went, and being told, he deſired ſome reſt, and that they ſhould call him before eleuen. So as being turned on the other ſide, he remained ſomtime, but being called by the Religious, he asked againe what it was a clocke & being anſwered that it was eleuen, O giue me (ſaid he) that candell, for now my hower is come, and taking it in his hand, died ſoone after, hauing raigned ſeuenteene moneths: This was the laſt King of Portugall, in whom ended the direct maſculine line: And as the firſt Lord of Portugall, although vnder the Title of an Earle was called Henrie, ſo doth it ſeeme the laſt ſhould be ſo termed: He was thin of bodie, ſmall of ſtature, and leane of his face; asThe life of Henry for his wit it was indifferent, indued, (beſides the Latine toong,) with ſome knowledge. He was alwaies held to be chaſt, and did neuer blemiſh this angelicall vertue, but with the deſire of marriage in his latter daies: He was accounted ſparing, giuing rather then denying, for he refuſed ſeldome, but he gaue ſparingly; he was ambitious of all iuriſdiction, as well Eccleſiaſticall, as ciuil, zealous in Religion, and the faith, yet in the reformation of religious perſons, he was more ſtricte then was conuenient. He was Biſhop, Gouernour of the Realme, Inquiſitor Maior, legate Apoſtolique, and King. But the more he mounted, the more he diſcouered his incapacitie; ſuffering himſelfe in greateſt matters to be ruled by his miniſters, not being able to determine the cauſe of the ſucceſſion. Opinions were grafted in him with great obſtinacie, retayning a continuall remembrance of wrongs, ſo as iuſtice was in him but an iniuſt execution of his owne paſſions: and for this cauſe a religious man (whom he had preſſed to take vpon him a moſt ſtrict courſe of life) ſaid vnto him, that he would obey, ſeeing there was no humaine helpe againſt his commandements, ſeeing he had the wil of a man, the authority of a Pope, & the execution of a king. Finally he was indued with great vertues & with fewer & leſſe vices, yet were they equal, for he had the vertues of an Eccleſiaſticall perſon, and the defects of a Prince: during his life, he was feared of many, and beloued of few, ſo as no man

lamented his death, onely ſuch as were well affected (deſiring the cauſe had beene firſt decided before his deceaſe) had ſome feeling. The regencie of the gouernors. Theſe things happened in Almeryn, where ſuddenly the fiue named Gouernours did aſſemble to prouide for that, which ſhould be neceſſarie, tearming themſelues Gouernours and Protectors of the Realme of Portugal: But in this beginning, after the kings death they feared ſome mutinie of the people, both at Almeryn, and at Liſbone; neither did the gouernours themſelues, nor the Catholique Kings Agents thinke themſelues ſecure: They hated the aſſembly of the Deputies of the Realme, which were continued at Saint Arem, both for that they held it as a ſuperiour councell, as alſo fearing it might cauſe ſome inſurrection of the people, and therefore they did ſtill abuſe them with words differing from their meanings: for which cauſe they ſent Martin Gonzalues de la Camera, a gentleman of the church, who in the time of Sebaſtian, held the firſt place in theMartin Gonſalues ſent to the deputies of the Realme. gouerument of the Realme, which he could not continue: for although he were not couetous of riches, but full of integritie, yet was he ſeuere and hard to be intreated, that they held him inexorable: Him they ſent being a popular man and contrarie to the Catholike King, whoſe words they thought ſhould be of more credit then any others: hauing particularly reported the Kings death, hee ſaid that the Gouernours choſen at the laſt eſtates, began to looke vnto the gouernment, and to giue order for things neceſſarie to the Realme: And although the death of King Henrie were a great loſſe, yet being in heauen, he would mediate for them, and that they ſhould reſt aſſured that with the greateſt zeale and loue to their countrey they could, they would indeuour to doe iuſtice, as well to thoſe of the Realme, in the pretention they had to the election, as alſo to the pretendents to the ſucceſſion: That they would deliuer them all writings whereof they had neede, exhorting them to treat with peace, and loue, without cauſing of any mutinie, were it neuer ſo ſmall, in any mans fauour; and for the better ordering of that which concerned the common good, they were well pleaſed they ſhould put them in minde of any thing which they thought neceſſarie. HauingThe deputies aunſwere to Martin. ended this ſpeech, all men keeping ſilence, Phoebus Moniz anſwered that they were all aſſured, that of the fiue Gouernours three were ſuſpect: for when the King laboured to bring the States to make

agreement with King Philip, they were not onely conformable to the will of Henrie, but did vrge them, and commended this reſolution without reſpect of the libertie of the Realme, ſeeking onely to pleaſe the Kings humour, and their owne intereſt: which being, it was not reaſonable to ſuffer ſuch ſuſpected Gouernours, whom they were not bound to obey, and this was the opinion of them all. Martin replied that he was not of opinion they ſhould then alter any thing, for in ſteed of helping, they ſhould heape danger vpon danger, and trouble vpon trouble, that for a while, they ſhould be lookers on, and if in time they ſhould finde the Gouernours not to doe their duety as they ought, they might then helpe with the ſame remedie, ſeeing they had alwaies authoritie to doe it: whereunto, although Phoebus Moniz anſwered, that this remedie could not alwais be applied, for that the councel could not ſtil be vnited, for the great charges they were at; yet the reaſons of Martin Gonzalues were of ſuch force, that they reſolued not to alter the Gouernours, as a matter ſcandalous, but accepting what they had ſent to be ſaid vnto them, that they ſhould aduiſe what they thought neceſſarie, they began ſuddenly to ſet downe in writing ſuch Articles as they wouldThe reſolution of Gonzalues, ambaſſage. haue perfourmed by the Gouernours: The which were, that leauing the aboade at Almerin they ſhould goe to Saint Arem, to be neerer neighbours, more in quiet and in greater ſafetie; that for the auoiding of charge and ſcandall, they ſhould diſcharge the Souldiers as vnneceſſarie: That preſently they ſhould ſende Ambaſſadors to the Catholique King, that as Gouernours of the Realme, they would do iuſtice to the pretendents in the cauſe of ſucceſſion, the which his Maieſtie ſhould beleeue, not ſuffering within his Realme any attempt againſt Portugall: That they ſhould preſently prouide for the fortreſſes of the Realme, as well vpon the ſea, as in other places, ſending truſtie Captaines, garriſons, and neceſſarie munition, and to euerie Prouince men of great authoritie, to force men to defend and ſuccour the weaker parts, that they ſhould ſend ſome vnto his holines, giuing him to vnderſtand the Kings death, their ſucceſſion to the gouernment of the Realme, for the defence thereof againſt any one that would vſurpe it, contrarie to equitie, againſt the ſentence which ſhould be pronounced touching the ſucceſſion, beſeeching him to write to the Catholique King to reſt ſatisfied,

and to be bound to ſtand to iudgement: They did vrge them to take information by way of Iuſtice, againſt thoſe, that in the cauſe of ſucceſſion did ſuborne with promiſes of money & honours, and alſo ſuch as were ſuborned, hauing knowledge that there were many ſuch: Whereunto the gonernors anſwered, that they would preſently depart from Almeryn, but whither; it was not expedient then to ſay, and that it ſhoulde be conformable to the demaund of the citie of Lisbone. They ſaide that they woulde not diſcharge the ſouldiers being leuied by the commandement of King Henry, for the guard of his Court, and of the pretendents: That ſome hauing refuſed to carrie this Embaſſage into Caſtill, yet in the ende they had choſen Gaſpard de Caſale, Biſhop of Coimbra, and Emanuel de Melo who prepared to go: That alreadie they had commaunded al Captaines to remaine in their fortreſſes, & where there were none they were prouiding, as alſo of armes, both in the fortreſſes vpon the riuer, as in all other prouinces: That it ſeemed not neceſſarie to ſend to Rome, but if king Philip made ſhewe to ſtirre, they woulde beſeech his holines, to doe as he hath beene accuſtomed, and that they woulde proceede with all the rigour againſt ſuch as ſhoulde be found culpable in the matter of ſubornation. Now had the Agents of the Catholique king ſent newes into Caſtill, of King Henry his death, and were remaining ſtill at Almerin, fearing ſome alteration: but this people accuſtomed to a heauie yoke, without knowledge of libertie did not ſtirre. The Duke of Bragance ſaide vnto the Gouernours, that he was readie to obey, and that they ſhould proceed to ſentence for the ſucceſſion: He ſent to the Duke of Oſſuna, and the Catholique Agents, willing them not to feare any thing, that he woulde aſſure them from danger, offering them his lodging, the like did the Gouernors.
            
               Anthonies courſe to obtaine the Crowne. Whileſt theſe things paſſed in Almerin, Anthony Prior of Crato, who at the Kings death was not far from thence, ran vnto Lisbone, lodging himſelfe in a garden neere vnto the citie: he did write vnto the Magiſtrate of the chamber, and to many of the chiefe, ſignifying vnto them that hee was there, and that they ſhoulde come vnto him: The which the Magiſtrate vnderſtanding diſdained, ſending him worde that he ſhoulde retire, but making no reckoning thereof, he ſent both into the citie and places of pleaſure thereabouts,

ſome of his followers, who, both in priuate and in publike gaue out, that the king was dead, and that the Prior expected them there, beleeuing by that meanes (for the affection the people bare him) they woulde all iointly proclaime him king: which being done in that citie (which is the principall) all the reſt of the Realme (for he was greatly beloued) would follow their example, yet he was ſoone deceiued. And this may ſerue as an example to thoſe which relie too much vpon the vulgar ſort, for there was not any one that durſt come vnto him but in ſecret; and as for gentlemen there were none by reaſon of the plague: As for the new Chriſtians which are there in great number (whereof a part was likewiſe abroad) they wanted courage, and being rich, feared to doe that which might cauſe the loſſe of their goods. The people (moſt baſe) of themſelues had no commander, that could mooue them or lead them, ſo as hauing labored by diuers meanes to draw men to his deuotion, & finding his practiſe not to ſucceed, hauing ſpent ſome time there, he went to the Monaſterie of Belem, from whence he did write to the CouncelAnthony his letters to the ſtates of Almerin. of States, with words more conformable to the qualitie of time, then his intention; ſaying, That hauing intelligence of the death of the King his Lord, vnderſtanding likewiſe that his bodie ſhould be tranſported to that Monaſterie, and that not to faile of his dutie, he was come thither to attend it, ſeeing he could not be in time to accompanie it, the which he had done that perfourming this laſt office, he might doe them the ſeruice he ought: but vnderſtanding that he was not brought thither, he had aſſiſted the fathers in their ſacrifices and deuotions recommending him vnto God: And as a true Portugall, and mindfull of the bond, which (as ſonne and nephewe to his father and grandfather) he had to the quiet and preſeruation of theſe Realmes, he thought it good to aduertiſe them, that he was readie to expoſe for this cauſe, not onely his life, and receiue the lawes which they ſhould pleaſe to lay vpon him, but alſo in all preſent occaſions to liue in ſubmiſſion & due obedience, not any way tranſgreſſing their commiſſions: He proteſted to ſhew the innocencie of thoſe crymes impoſed vpon him in the ſentences, which it had pleaſed his vncle to pronounce againſt him togither with the intereſt hee had to the ſuceeſſion of the Realme: Hee promiſed to yeeld himſelfe into their hands and protection, relying vpon thoſe

perſons, who by the ſpecial grace of God in ſo afflicted a ſeaſon, had been choſen as a remedie to reſtore this Realme, referring himſelfe for the reſt to Lewis de Brito who ſhould deliuer it by mouth: To this letter the which was receiued in councell, cōtrarie to the aduiſe of ſome who ſaid it ought not to be accepted, Brito added that the Prior would be there with ſpeede, that they ſhould cōmaund whereThe States anſwere to Anthony, and his arriuall. they pleaſed he ſhould lodge: They anſwered that he might come when he pleaſed, yet they would not intermeddle with his lodging, but leaue it to his owne choice: But almoſt all in generall were pleaſed with his cōming. He ſtaied not long but preſently vpon his arriuall, he preſented the Popes Bull contayning the ſuſpenſion of the Kings ſentence, he began to renue the pretention of his legitimation (without the finall deciſion wherof they ſaid they could not treat of the ſucceſſion) wanting no hope to obtaine by the councell of States that which before he did expect from the multitude at Lisbone: The Deputies of the Realme did aſſemble daily at Saint Arem, without effecting any thing of importance: They ſpent ſome daies onely in ſending to viſit the pretendents, and their deputies, & to make vnto them offers of iuſtice, and likewiſe to receiue from them thanks for their good diſpoſitions, wherin all aboured to ſhew themſelues protectors of the libertie of the Realme, and moſt of all ſuch as leaſt deſired it: And for that the going and comming to Almeryn was very incōmodious, being forced to paſſe the water without a bridge, that by this reaſon in communicating the affaires to the reſt of the States, that is, to the Cleargie and nobilitie, & by treating with the Gouernours they loſt much time, it was propounded in councel to reduce all togither, yet could they not effect it, for manie of the Deputies began to want money for their ordinarie charges, deſiring rather to be diſmiſſed, then vnited: They deſired to depart, ſaying, that they were not furniſhèd frō their cities, but as they were not diſcharged, ſo were they not relieued with money: & although Balthaſar de Faria Deputie of Barcellos, the Pryor of Saint Steuens, and the Biſhop of Parma, euerie one apart did offer money to ſuch as wanted, that the aſſembly might not be diſſolued, yet the Deputies vnfurniſhed would not accept thereof, not willing to be bound in their owne proper names, for that their cities were bound to furniſh them: Beſides in this aſſembly the opinions were diuers & few inclined to fauour

the pretention of the Catholike king; many knew not what to reſolue, & a great part were affected to the Prior, but all in generall feared the Gouernors & miſtruſted their proceedings, ſo as beſides the aduertiſements they ſent daily vnto them, they did ſolicite the execution, making new demaunds & preſſing them aboue al to diſcharge the ſoldiers: They demanded a copie of the authority to gouerne left them by King Henrie, & the words of his will which concernes the point of ſucceſſion, the which were wholy deliuered vnto them; his wil was made 8. moneths before, & cōtained theſe words: Seeing at the time of my will making I haue no deſcendents directlyThe clauſe of King Henries teſtament. to ſucceed to the Crowne of theſe realmes, and haue called my nephewes which may pretend, and haue put the matter of ſucceſſion in Iuſtice, I do not at this time declare who ſhall be my ſucceſſor, but leaue it vnto him to whom by right it ſhall appertaine, & him I doe declare my heire & ſucceſſor, except that before my deceaſe, I ſhall name him that hath this intereſt: And therefore I command all men within theſe my realmes of what quality ſoeuer, that preſētly after I or the iudges appointed ſhal haue named him, to acknowledge him for heir & lawful ſucceſſor, & ſo to obey him. There followed many other words in recōmendation of iuſtice & religiō, but they ſerued not to this purpoſe. And although his wil contained theſe words, yet they ſay the King at his death would haue reſourmed it, & declared the Catholike king ſucceſſour of the realme: But the Gouernors deſirous to hold the gouernment for a time in their own hands, did diuert him, ſaying, That whether he made any declaration or not, no other then the Catholike king could ſucceed both by law & force: that it was not expediēt to nominate him, to the end that the realme might with greater aduantage capitulate & agree with him: Many ſuppoſed that they did not diſſwade the king from this declaration ſo much for theſe reaſons, as fearing it would breed ſom popular ſedition to their hurt, being held as autors of the ſaid declaration. The limitation which he had left to the Gouernors contained, that they could not create Dukes, Marqueſſes, Earles, Barons, Biſhops, nor Archbiſhops, nor giue any commandery nor reuenue which paſſed 125. duckats. But in matters of war & reuolutions they might doe & giue any thing with the aduiſe of the councel & not otherwiſe. The deputies being ſatisfied with theſe writings, whileſt they debated the

               The ſpeach of the Deputie of Portalegre. reaſons of their pretended election, Stephen Lopez Doctor & deputy of Portalegré, ſpake publikely amongſt them, who hauing ſhewed how fit it were to giue God thanks for the quiet they now enioyed, ſaid it was not neceſſary to continue ſo many deputies ſtil together, with ſo much trouble & ſo great charge, that they ſhould be reduced vnto few, & the reſt returne to their houſes. And for as much as they were aduertiſed that the Catholique King began to arme, they ſhould ſurceaſe from the cauſe of ſucceſſion, vntill the ſaid King had diſmiſſed his forces, and the preparatiues for war he had made, for by that meanes the free libertie to treat of the cauſe, and for the pretendents to alleage their intereſt was taken away: That by the ſuſpenſion of the cauſe, they ſhall diſcouer the Catholique Kings diſpoſition in laying aſide armes: If he doe it, it ſhall breed theſe good effects: That in the meane time they ſhall haue leiſure to prouide for things neceſſarie, to gather in the fruits of the earth, and the pretendents ſhall liue in peace and quiet: if he refuſe it (which we ought not to beleeue of ſo Chriſtian a Prince) then ſhall they be ſatisfied, and both the States and the pretendents (vnited in one bodie,) may the better defend themſelues, and when as all things were quietly ſetled, then to determine the cauſe, diſabling notwithſtanding before all things, the ſaide Catholique King (who vſing force when as iuſtice is offered him) for being King of theſe Realmes: And this he ſaid was the diſpoſition of the lawe, that in the meane time they ſhould commaund the Pretendents to the Crowne to make their reſidence in diuers places, the one at Elues, and the other at Begia, as fronter townes, ſwearing not to attempt any thing one againſt the other. The reaſons of this Doctor as a man of ſmall account were not followed, but the councell being reſolued with twoThe ſtates ſend to the Gouernors. others of the States to ſend ſix Deputies to Almerin to treat of matters of importance with the Gouernours: Thither they ſent them with inſtructions different from this fourme of ſpeech, videlicet, that the Gouernours ſhould paſſe to Saint Arem, and there make their reſidence to take a view what armes, men, and munition the citie of Lisbone had for their defence, & to ſupply what wanted, to take notice what Captaines be appointed in the fortreſſes vpon the riuer of Lisbone, and being ſuſpected, or not valiant, to place others with men and other neceſſaries: That they ſhould ſend armes to all

cities of the Realme, and traine vp their men with exerciſe thereof; that they ſhould beſeech the Pope by his Ambaſſadours to perſwade all the pretendents to take the courſe of iuſtice, and lay aſide armes vpon paine to looſe the intereſt they pretend, requiring that Emanuell de Portugal purueyor of the fortreſſes of the Realme might be reſtored to the ſame office, whereof the King had ſuſpended him, and that they ſhould do the like to Diego Salema, and to Aluaro de Morais in their offices in the Chamber of Lisbone: And for that they found themſelues tobee vnfurniſhed, they would haue all the ſhips & veſſels ſtaied throughout all the ports of the realme for the conducting of things neceſſarie for the war. The Gouernors made but a cold anſwere to theſe demands, as they had done before to all others, ſaying, that being matters of ſo great importāce they would conſider of them firſt, & then aduertiſe them what ſhould be done.
            The Cheriffe had as it is ſaid before in the life of King Henrie, and at the inſtance of the Catholique King deliuered the Duke of Barcellos, who hauing paſſed the ſtreight to returne into Portugall, being arriued at Gibralter where (as afterwardes at Saint Lucar) the Duke of Medina Sidonia Lord of thoſe places did him great honour, by meanes whereof he ſpent ſometime in ſports: At this timeThe duke of Barcellos detained by the Duke of Medina Sidonia. the newes comming of King Henries death, the Duke of Medina thought it a matter importing the Catholique King, to deteine the ſaide Duke of Barcellos as eldeſt ſonne to the Duke of Bragance, and of Katherine chiefe pretendent to the Realme, vntill the cauſe of the ſucceſſion were decided, ſo as the ſports before ſhewed vnto the ſaide Duke in courteſie were now redoubled for this other intent, detayning him expreſly, vntill he might receiue anſwere from the King, ſo as ſhewing him firſt one place, and then another, this yoong Prince was taken vnawares: But the Duke of Medina hauing ſtaied certaine carriages, vnder colour to ſhew him ſome feaſtes, he then conceiued the cauſe of his detaining, and wrote foorthwith vnto his father in Portugall, that he ſhould not then expect him, and that his detention ſhould not any way preiudice the rights of the Realme, preferring iuſtice before his owne life: This letter being come into Portugall was by the Duke his father ſent vnto the aſſembly of the States, ſhewing on the one ſide a griefe for the detayning of his ſonne, and on the other ſide a contentment,

that in ſo yong an age, he was ſo great a louer of his countries good, offering if need were to ſacrifice him for the ſeruice of the Realme: Yet this feare of the Dukes continued not long, for hauing written to his ſon that he ſhould labour to come away, or they ſhould make declaration of his ſtaie, he was ſuffered freelie to depart; for ſo the King had commaunded. Some ſay that Philip had long before this conſideration, hauing meanes to ſtay him, not onely in Spaine, but alſo in Affrique, but fearing to incenſe the Portugals, and deſirous to make the Duke his friend, he had procured his releaſe in Affrick, and ſuffered him ſafely to depart from Andoluzia into Portugall: yet the ſaid Duke of Barcellos or his father, by whoſe commaundement he was directed, was noted of ſome ingratitude, for being inuited by Philip to paſſe by his court as deſirous to ſee him, the iealouſie of the State of theſe Realmes preuayled ſo much that he did not ſatisfie his deſire, but tooke his direct way to Villauizoſa, fearing perhaps a new detention.
            Theſe things paſſed in Portugall when as in Caſtill the Catholique King beeing aduertiſed by his Agents of the death of King Henrie, of the ſmall affection the Portugals bare vnto him, of the liuely pretention of Authonie and other pretendents, and to whatThe diligence of the catholique King to aſſure his conſcience for the Realm of Portugall. eſtate the matter was brought, was greatly diſcontented, ſeeming he ſhould be forced to take armes for the obtaining of the concluſion of his intereſt. But deſirous to ſatisfie his conſcience in the effecting thereof, he had formerly the aduiſe of Diego de Chiaues of the order of preaching Fryers, being his confeſſor, and of ſome other principall Diuines of that order, and yet not well ſatisfied with their opinions, leaſt he ſhould ſeeme onely to follow the aduiſe of the dominical Fryers; he deſired likewiſe to treat with other orders of religious perſons, and to that intent he ſent one to acquaint the chiefe Deuines in Spaine with the cauſe, and to demaund their aduiſe: This care perfourmed, not only with the chiefe prelates and readers in Diuinitie, but with the Ieſuits and the Fryers of Saint Francis, all agreede that the Kings right being ſo apparant he was not bound to repreſent it otherwiſe then out of iudgement to King Henrie, as he had done, and to make his councell and the reſt of the Realme of Portugall capable thereof, ſuch as with ſinceritie of hart would vnderſtand the truth, and by the mildeſt meanes, procure (as

he had done) that Henry ſhould declare him ſucceſſor, & if theſe diligent proceedings were not ſufficient to perſwade the King and the Realme; that then Philip had ſufficiently iuſtified his cauſe, and that he might aſſure himſelfe by armes, without thruſting the ſucceſſion (which was due vnto him) into euident perill, his perſon being as it is ſaide, ſoueraigne, exempt, and free from all reprehenſion, and onely bound to iuſtifie his right before God, and to ſignifie it to the King and the Realme, ſaying, that this point was now without all doubt, ſince the death of Henrie, no man liuing that could pretend any intereſt in the deciſion of the cauſe. It appertained not to the Pope, being a matter wholy temporall, nor agreeing with the circumſtances, which may giue him any right ouer temporall matters; and leſſe to the Emperour, beeing no way acknowledged by the Realmes of Caſtill and Portugall, and much leſſe to certaine Iudges named by Henrie, for beſides that he could not chooſe any after his death, they were now become the materiall partie, and the thing it ſelfe whereon they pleaded: Beſides that all the Realme was become inſufficient, when as making themſelues a partie, they pretended power to chooſe a Prince, & although all this ceaſed, yet would they prooue that no Portugall but was ſuſpect in this cauſe, & to be excepted againſt for the manifeſt hatred they bare to the Caſtillian nation: They found likewiſe that he was not bound to ſubmit himſelfe to any compremiſe; for beſides the difficultie and impoſſibilitie to finde a truſtie perſon in ſo dangerous and iealous a cauſe as this is, the bond of compremiſe is not incident but in a matter of doubt, and the definition of doubt is when as the aduocate and Doctors conclude, not for any partie finding equiualent reaſons for either: but in this, all being of one agreement, the cauſe is not doubtfull nor to be compremitted.
            
            
               The Catholique Kings preparatiues againſt Portugall. The King being reſolued to take armes (hauing no poſſeſſion deliuered vnto him) prouided for it, for this cauſe he writ to the gouernors, to the three eſtates, and to the fiue principall cities, to all of one ſubiect, but in diuerſe formes; after he had lamented the death of his vncle, he required them to receaue and ſweare him King, as King Henry had reſolued, and declared him to be; he thanked the nobility and clergie for their good affection ſhowne, when as Henrie had ſaid that the ſucceſſion appertained vnto him; he

made offer to all and threatned cunningly; he ſent to the gouernors a copie of the priuiledges which King Henry had required in the behalfe of the Realme, offering to graunt them more amplie then they had bene demaunded, proteſting, if they would not obey to vſe force: But all theſe things were receiued and reiected according to the humors of men. The gouernors made aunſwere they could not reſolue vntill the returne of their Ambaſſadours which they had ſent vnto them: At this time there was readie at ſea as well in Spaine as in Italie about threeſcore gallies, (whereof Aluaro de Baſſan Marques of Saint Croix was generall) the which ſhould ſaileThe duke of Alua choſen generall of the army into Portugall. towards Portugall, as the occaſion of the time ſhould ſerue; there was yet no generall named for this enterpriſe, and euerie man greedilie expected who ſhould be choſen, for that few were thought fit for ſo great a burthen. The Duke of Alua was generallie held moſt ſufficient, yet few beleeued that the King would willingly free him from priſon: the Marques of Mondegiar (who was returned from the gouernment of Naples) affected this charge, & many beleeued he ſhould preuaile, in recompence of the diſcontentment he had to be drawen from Italy: Many beleeued the King would goe to this war in perſon, both for the inclination they ſee in him, as for ſome other ſignes which were apparant, for he not only cauſed his armes and pauillions to be readie, but alſo commaunded Ferrant de Silua Conte de Cifuentes, Guidon Maior of Caſtill with the Standard Royall to furniſh himſelf; the which in that Realme is not accuſtomed to be carried, but in the Squadron where the King is in perſon: but in this caſe it behooued him to remaine irreſolute, and to gouerne himſelfe according to the neceſſitie and occaſions which time ſhouldThe Catholique Kings Letters to the Duke of Alua. diſcouer: In this hope of things the King commaunded a Secretarie of the councell of warre to write to the Duke of Alua, demaunding of him if he were able to ſerue in this enterpriſe, whereunto making anſwere that in that which concerned his Maieſtie, he neuer made reckoning of his health, hee was commaunded to prepare himſelfe within three daies and to goe to the campe, the which he putting in execution, he went to Barrazas, a village ten miles from the court, (which was at Madrill,) hauing no leaue to come thither: but that which cauſed admiration, the king hauing at the ſame time cauſed the Prince Diego his ſonne to be ſworne by all the eſtates in a Chappell,

although with ordinarie ceremonies, yet with leſſe pompe then of cuſtome, did not admit the ſaide Duke to the oath, being ſo neere and ſo great a perſonage: He did neither write vnto him, nor treated with him concerning theſe warres but long after: So as the Duke marching with the armie, finding himſelfe not fully releaſed from the priſon wherein he had beene, ſaide that the King had ſent him to conquer Realmes, drawing after him chaines and fetters; ſuch was the ſeueritie of Philip, and the obedience of ſo great a miniſter. All Spaine was pleaſed with this election, for beſides the deliuery of the Duke which followed, they eſteemed not the valour of their ſoldiers, without a Commaunder to their mindes, and in the Dukes perſon they helde any armie good. The Generall beingThe Catholique King goes towards Portugall. diſpatched, the King prouided all things for his iourney into Portugall, he cauſed a daughter borne at that time, to be ſecretly baptized, and hauing made the ſaide prince of Caſtill to be ſworne (without calling, or the preſence of Ferrant de Sylua, to his great diſcontentment) the King went to Guadalupa, being now the time of Lent, vnder colour to performe the obſequies of King Henry there, and ſo to draw neere vnto Portugall to giue encouragement to his affaires; and thus did he write to all the principall cities in Spaine. He departed from Madrill in coach almoſt all alone without giuing order for the Queenes departure, or for the officers of his Courte, notwithſtanding cheriſhing her dearely. After he had paſſed two daies (ſeeming conuenient, and a great ſigne of amitie that being now to enter into Portugall) he ſhoulde be accompanied with his Queene, he called her vnto him. The Duke was now gone to GlierenaThe Duke of Alua ariues at his Army. where a part of his armie lay, being in farre leſſer numbers then had beene leuied, for that diſcommodities and ſickneſſe had conſumed many, and many places were voide by the Captaines pollicie, being in all but fower thouſand fiue hundreth Italians,The nombers of the Dukes Army. three thouſand fiue hundreth Germaines, and three thouſand Spaniards come out of Italy, and other ſeauen thouſand newly raiſed, with fifteene hundreth horſe, which being a body long before prepared, for a matter ſo well foreſeene, ſeemed to him but ſmall. But the Duke truſting more to the qualitie then the quantitie of his ſoldiers, deſired to haue them fewer, and of more experience, and theſe ſeemed in a manner all without knowledge, and therefore the

King at his entreatie commanded, that all the ſoldiers which were come out of Flaunders into Italy, ſhould paſſe into Spaine, being ſuch whom he knew, and had tried in the warres, yet they arriued not in time but returned backe. The Duke ſaide that ſurmounting the enimie in horſe, he would vndertake this warre with twelueThe comming of the Ambaſſadors from the gouernors to the Catholique King, and their negotiation. thouſand foote well experienced, neither did he value the great number of the Portugals which aſſembled, as it was giuen out, making reckoning to waſte them by policie, & to conquer them without battaile. The King being come to Guadalupa, there arriued the Biſhop of Coimbra and Emanuel de Melo Embaſſadors from the Gouernours of Portugall. The King with his Councell were doubtfull in what ſort to honor them, ſome would haue them treated like ſubiects, without reſpecting them as Embaſſadors: Others would not haue any thing altered of the ordinarie courſe obſerued in thoſe cauſes; yet not to diſcourage them, it was reſolued they ſhould be heard as Embaſſadors with their heads couered, and that the King ſhould put off his hat, yet the King had written before to the Gouernors, that he would treat with their Commiſſaries as with ſubiects. Theſe laboured by a long ſpeech to perſwade the King to lay aſide armes: they ſaide that King Henry had greatly deſired to end the queſtion of ſucceſſion, by the ordinarie courſe of iuſtice, but that death had preuented him: he had in the States held at Lisbone in the yeere 1579. not onely choſen Gouernors and defenders of the Realme, but the States had alſo named fower & twentie Iudges, (whereof the King had choſen eleuen) to iudge definitiuely the cauſe of ſucceſſion, if he died before the effecting it; the which after hapned, and that the matter being brought to that paſſe, the realme remained quiet and peaceable, reſolute to obey, and acknowledge for their Lord and King, him in whoſe fauour ſentence ſhould be giuen, conformable to the oath which the whole Realme had taken in the ſaid eſtates: the which was after miniſtred to the ſame Gouernors in the great church at Lisbone, when as the coffer (which contained the nomination) was opened, and therefore they were readie to adminiſter iuſtice, and to acknowledge for King, him vnto whom the realme ſhoulde be iudged by right to appertaine: and being thus affected, they beſeeched his maieſty to command his embaſſadors to aſſiſt iudicially to the cauſe in the concluſion thereof:

But the King being aſſured of his right, prouided of forces, and ſeeming no blot to his conſcience, made anſwere that he was well pleaſed with the ſhew of zeale to the publike good of theſe realmes, and that he was perſwaded that what they had propounded, proceeded from a good inclination: that he would haue bin glad their demand had bin ſuch as he might haue ſatisfied them, the which he wil do alwaies in matter that ſhall be iuſt, & tending to the generall or particular good of theſe realmes. But the equitie of his cauſe being ſo apparant to the world, & remaining no lawfull or competent iudge, they neither ought nor could performe the oath which they ſaide they had taken, ſeeing it were an apparant preiudice to his title, and a domage to his owne realmes: and therefore he entreated them preſently to reſolue, to receiue and ſweare him for their king and lord, as God would haue it, they themſelues knowing (chiefly touching this matter) what king Henry thought, determined, and had reſolued, and the bond where by they were tied to obey his will: in dooing whereof he woulde grant vnto the realme not onely the priuileges which he had ſet downe (the which the Duke of Oſſuna ſhould offer in his name) but any other they ſhould require, being iuſt and reaſonable, & hoping they woulde take that courſe which was to be expected from wiſe men, and Chriſtians, he would continue his determination. The Embaſſadors ſeemed not ſatisfied with this anſwere, but demanding leaue to impart it to the Gouernors, they accompanied the king vntill he came to Merryda.
            
               The concluſion of the States at Almeryn. Now were the Gouernors in Portugall (wearied with the Councell of the States) deſirous to diſſolue them, and hauing firſt required a prolonging of the gouernment the King had left vnto them, and not obtaining it, they did ſignifie vnto them that the States were ended, & that the Deputies might returne to their houſes, leauing only ten of them to treat of matters which ſhould fal out, for ſo ſmall a number might lodge any where, being now forced to leaue Almeryn, and to take ſome ſmall place neere the citie of Lisbone, being greatly entreated thereunto: but the Deputies (who had ſent Iohn de Noghera to the Vniuerſitie of Coimbra, to ſtudie the point of their pretēded election) hauing receiued anſwer that the election belonged to the States of the realme, they woulde by no meanes be diſſolued, perſwaded thereunto by the biſhop of Parma, the

Prior, the chamber of Saint Arem, and many particulars, offring money to ſupply their wants: but they oppoſed in vaine. For although they had ſent to the Gouernors to alleage their reaſons in law, labouring to prooue that the States were not to be diſſolued, & that their procurations were offorce; yet the Gouernors did againe diſable them, ſaying, their authorities were of no force, ſo as many began to ſeparate themſelues, and returne to their houſes. TheThe Gouernors prepare for defence. Gouernors prepared to defend themſelues, for although the greateſt part of them were not of that opinion; yet to content the people, and to pleaſe the other Gouernors and gentlemen of the popular faction, it behooued them ſo to do. For this cauſe they armed their gallions, they brought armes from other countries, they muſtred men for the warre, they ſent gentlemen throughout all the prouinces of the realme, and laboured to imploy ſuch as (contrarie to the Catholique Kings faction being preſent) hindered their reſolutions, who willingly accepted of theſe charges, ſeeming to haue greater confidence in them then in any other. Diego de Meneſes was ſent into the prouince beyond Tagus; Iohn de Vaſconcello; into Beira; Emanuel of Portugall into the mouth of Tagus; and many other to diuers parts of the Realme: George de Meneſes had charge of the armie at ſea; ſo as they were all diſperſed, and the Gouernors had good meanes to effect their deſires: yet Martyn Gonzalues de la Camera, no leſſe popular then the reſt, remained in court, of whom the Gouernors grew iealous, that hauing imploied him as a mediator betweene them and the States of the realme, he was become a ſuperior. But the prouiſion and preparatiues that were made (although ſome vſed all care and diligence) ſeemed rather done for ſhew and faſhion ſake then to any effect.
            
               The manner of the enterpriſe of Portugall. In Caſtill they diſcourſed vpon the manner of this enterpriſe, ſeeming, impoſſible vnto the Duke to gather togither ſo many carriages as was neceſſarie for the conduct of victuals and munition, and therefore deuiſed to tranſport his forces by ſea: He determined with few men to keepe them buſied in Extremadure to diuert them, and vnder colour to haſten the armie, to march towards Andelouzia, and ſpeedily to imbarke his ſoldiers at Saint Marie Port, to aſſaile the entrie of the mouth of Lisbone, in deſpite of all the fortreſſes that were there: making account to looſe ſome ſhips

which ſhould by chaunce touch. But receiuing certaine aduertiſement, by men expreſly ſent into Portugall, that there was aboue ſix thouſand chariots to be founde, he left this dangerous reſolution, more for the regard of the ſea then the enimies. He determined to march to Settuual thinking it neceſſary to win a port of the ſea of ſo great importāce, for the harboring of the nauie: for cōming thither laden with victuals, & he not able to carrie with him by land aboue a moneths prouiſion, it ſeemed neceſſarie to ioine the forces & prouiſions of the ſea to them of the land, and that therein conſiſted the victorie: with this reſolution he went to Merrida, where the King remained, of whom being receiued with a cheerefull countenance, they treated what courſe the armie ſhould take. There grew ſome diuerſitie of opinion betwixt the Duke and ſome others, who (perſwaded by ſome confident Portugals) would haue the armie march to Almeryn, and there paſſe Tagus at a foord, or at Saint Arem vpon bridges: that they ſhould force that place being but weake, and ſo they might paſſe ſafely to the wals of Lisbone, the which without attending any batterie would yeeld preſently, or (it may be) before their arriuall: for taking from them the victuals from the plaines of Saint Arem, they ſhould not onely beſiege them by famine, but they ſhoulde ſo furniſh their armie with corne, that they ſhoulde haue no neede of prouiſion from the fleete, the which they ſhould better receiue at Lisbone then at Settuual, without hazarding the entepriſe, and the armie by the dangers of diſimbarking, which (going to Settuual) they muſt be forced to do againſt the forts vpō the mouth of the riuer, and with loſſe of time in winning of them: This opinion ſeemed ſo grounded, that it required no leſſe authoritie or arte to diſprooue then the Dukes, who being chiefe of this enterpriſe, and to hazard his reputation, drew the King to his opinion. Philip had likewiſe enuironed (as a man may ſay) all the realme of Portugall with armes, though not with mercenarie ſoldiers, yet with ſuch as they coulde aſſemble togither; he commanded all Noblemen, whoſe liuings ioined to the confines of this realme, that hauing enrolled the greateſt number of their ſubiects able to beare armes, they ſhoulde be readie at his commandement, yet in the meane time they ſhoulde receiue gently in his name the cities and ſubiects of Portugall that woulde obey him. In Gallicia Peter de
               
               Caſtro Earle of Lemos, and Gaſpard de Fonſequa Earle of Monteré had the charge: againſt the prouince behinde the mountaines, Iohn Pimentel Earle of Benneuent, and Diego de Tolledo Earle of Alua: In Eſtremadura, Beltramo dela Cueua, Duke of Albequerque, and Ferrant Anriques Marqueſſe of Villa Noua: againſt Vera, Iohn Pacheco Marqueſſe of Seraluo; and in Algarues, Frauncis de Suniga
               The ſtate of the Duke of Alua his armie. Duke of Beſar, and Alonſo de Guſman of Medina Cidonia. In the armie where the Duke of Alua was commander of all, both at ſea and at land, the places were thus deuided: The Italians had three coronels, Proſper Colonna, Vincent Caraffa, and Charles Spinelli, hauing for Generall Peter de Medicy, brother to Frauncis the great Duke of Tuſcaine, with whom was ſent by the ſaide great Duke Lewes d'Ouara, whom the King had made one of his Councellers at warre. Sanches d'Auila was Lord Marſhall of the field: There was no commaunder of the horſe, the Captaines being all Noblemen and men of account, they could not conueniently make them ſubiect to any one of their companions, the place requiring a man of ſuch qualitie, as he coulde not be inferior to the Duke, and ſuperior to the ſaide Captaines, although after in time of neceſſitie Ferrant of Tolledo, ſonne to the ſaide Duke, was made their leader: Count Ierome of Lodron commaunded the Germaines, Frauncis d'Allaua had his ordinarie charge as Generall of the artillerie, but although the preparations were brought to this point, yet the King daily proteſted by his miniſters to the Gouernors, of the inconueniences of the warre, if they deliuered not the realme in peace vnto him; neither did they ceaſe to treate many things in Portugall concerning an agreement, & for that the King rather deſired to ſhew his forces, then to vſe them, to conquer by gentlenes then by rigor, he offred vnto the realme many graces and priuileges deliuering him peaceable poſſeſſion, and the Gouernors (the greateſt part whereof enclined thereunto) had alreadie debated with the Agents of the Catholique King, what conditions the King ſhoulde graunt vnto the realme, the which were publiſhed by the Duke of Oſſuna, and ſigned with his hand, offring that the King ſhould graunt them, inThe conditions that the Catholique King offred if they would deliuer the realme quietly. giuing him the crowne, and they were theſe: That the King ſhould take a formall oath to obſerue all the cuſtomes, priuileges, and liberties, graunted to theſe realmes by the Kings his predeceſſors:

That when there ſhall be neede to aſſemble the States for the affaires of Portugall, it ſhall be done within the realme, and that in no other aſſemblie of States whatſoeuer: They ſhall neither propound nor reſolue vpon any matter concerning theſe realmes: That appointing a Viceroy to gouerne, or any perſons with what title ſoeuer, they ſhall be Portugals. The like is to be vnderſtood in ſending of a Viſitor or Iudge, with this condition notwithſtanding, for as much as concernes the authoritie of the realmes, and to do them a greater fauour, his maieſtie and his ſucceſſors may ſend for Viceroy or Gouernour one of the bloud royall, be he ſonne, vncle, brother, coſen, or nephew to the King: Beſides, that all ſuperior officers or inferior, belonging either to iuſtice, or to the reuenewes of the crowne, ſhall be diſtributed to Portugals, and not to ſtrangers: That all offices which haue beene in the times of former kings both of the court, and of the realme, ſhall be beſtowed vpon the naturall borne, ſuch as ſhall deſerue the ſame when as his Maieſtie or his ſucceſſors ſhall enter into the realme: And the like is to be vnderſtood of all other dignities of what qualitie ſoeuer, either at ſea or lande, which are at this preſent, or ſhall be heereafter created: The garriſons which ſhall remaine in any forts, ſhall be Portugals. Moreouer they ſaide that the traffike of the Indies, Ethiopia, and other places, appertaining to theſe realmes, being diſcouered, or to diſcouer, ſhall not be diſmembred from the ſame, neither ſhall there be any other alteration made then is at this preſent: And that the officers and their ſhips which ſhall be emploied in theſe traffikes, ſhall be Portugals, and ſhall ſaile in the ſhips of Portugall. That the golde and ſiluer which ſhall be coined in theſe realmes and their dependancies, and all that which ſhall come from thoſe prouinces, ſhall be coined with the armes of Portugall without any other addition. That all Biſhopricks, abbeies, benefices, and penſions ſhall be giuen to Portugals: And the like is to be vnderſtoode of the office of Inquiſitor, Maior of commaunderies, of the offices of militarie orders, of the Priorie of Crato: and finally of all other eccleſiaſticall liuings, as hath beene formerly ſpoken of the temporall. He did yeelde there ſhoulde be no thirds exacted of eccleſiaſticall goods, neither ſubſidies nor croyſades, and that for any of theſe cauſes they ſhould procure no buls: That they ſhoulde not giue either citie, towne,

place, iuriſdiction, nor roiall prerogatiue to other then to Portugals: And falling any vacancie of the liuings of the crowne, his Maieſtie nor his ſucceſſors ſhould not reteine them for themſelues, but giue them to the kinſeman of him that did enioy him, or to other Portugals that ſhall deſerue them: Prouided alwaies that the Caſtillians and ſtrangers which now liue in theſe realmes, and haue beene ſeruitors to the Kings deceaſed, ſhall not be excluded: That in militarie orders nothing ſhal be altered of the ſtate it now ſtands in: That gentlemen ſhall be paide their penſions amounting to twelue yeeres, and that his Maieſtie and his ſucceſſors ſhall yeerely entertaine into his ſeruice two hundreth Portugals, to whom he ſhal giue that paie which they call Moradia; and thoſe which haue no title of gentlemen ſhall ſerue in the warres of the realme: That when his Maieſtie or his ſucceſſors, ſhall come into thoſe realmes, they ſhall not take vp their lodgings as they vſe in Caſtill, but ſhall obſerue the cuſtome of Portugall. Moreouer his Maieſtie in what place ſoeuer he ſhall be, ſhall carrie with him a man of the Church, a Superintendent of the reuenewes of the crowne, a high Chauncellor, and two Diſambarcadours of the court, which iointly ſhall be called the Councell of Portugall, by whoſe meanes all matters ſhall be diſpatched, with them ſhall go to clarkes of the reuenewes, and two of the chamber, for all occaſions incident two their charge, all ſhall bee written in the Portugall toong, and all ſhall be Portugals: And when his Maieſtie or his ſucceſſors ſhall come into Portugall, he ſhall retaine the ſaide Councell and officers, which ſhall be vnited to ſuch as ſhall treate of the gouernment of the realme: That all correctors and other officers of iuſtice, with all other inferior offices, ſhall in the Kings abſence be diſpoſed of in the realme, as they be at this preſent: & the like ſhall be vnderſtood of the officers of purueyors, auditors of the reckonings, and others of the like qualitie, concerning the reuenewes of the crowne: He declared likewiſe, that all cauſes and charges appertaining to iuſtice of what qualitie or ſumme ſoeuer, ſhould be definitiuely ended and executed in theſe realmes, as they be at this preſent: That his Maieſtie and his ſucceſſors ſhall entertaine a chappell in manner and forme as the kings of theſe realmes haue formerly done, the which ſhall be reſident at Lisbone, that the diuine ſeruice may be

continually celebrated with the accuſtomed ceremonies, except the Kings perſon, or in his abſence the Viceroy or gouernour ſhall make his reſidence in ſome other part of the realme, and woulde haue there the ſaide chappell remaine: That his Maieſtie ſhall conformably admitte Portugals to the offices of his houſe, according to the cuſtome of Burgundie, without any difference betwixt them, the Caſtillians, and his ſubiects of other nations. That the Queene ſhall likewiſe entertaine into her ſeruice, Noblemen, and the chiefe Ladies of Portugall, whom ſhe ſhall fauour and recompence, marrying them in Portugall or in Caſtill: That for the good of the people and generally of theſe realmes the encreaſe of traffique, and the good correſpondencie with thoſe of Caſtill, his Maieſtie ſhall be pleaſed to open the barred hauens on both parties, that the marchandize may paſſe freely, as it hath formerly done before the impoſitions of ſuch cuſtomes as are nowe paide: That he woulde commaund that all curteſies poſſible may be done for the bringing in corne into Caſtill for the prouiſion of theſe realmes: That he ſhall commaund to be deliuered three hundred thouſand duckats to be imploied for theſe cauſes following: Firſt ſixeſcore thouſand for the redemption of captiues, at the diſpoſition of the houſe of Pittie at Lisbone, the one halfe to be imploied for the redeeming of poore gentlemen, and the other halfe for ordinary perſons, all Portugals: one hundreth and fiftie thouſand to make the ground of a ſtocke to be lent without intereſt whereas neede ſhall require, as it ſhall be diſpoſed by the magiſtrate of the chamber of Lisbone, and the thirtie thouſand remaining, to cure the infirmitie that now raignes, which ſhall be diſtributed by order from the Archbiſhop and chamber of Lisbone. They ſaide likewiſe that touching the prouiſion which ſhall be made for armies ſent to the Indies, the defence of the realme, the puniſhment of pirats, and defence of the frontiers of Affricke, his Maieſtie ſhall take ſuch reſolution as ſhall be conuenient within theſe realmes; although it be with the helpe of his other countries, and the great expence of his roiall treaſure. That in recompence of the loue, which the naturall borne of theſe realmes do beare vnto their princes, it would pleaſe the King to make his ordinarie abode there: And although the gouernment of his other realmes which God hath ſubiected vnto him,

hinder the effect of this his deſire, notwithſtanding he promiſeth to make the moſt aboad he can in this realme, and hauing no cauſe of hinderance, he will leaue the Prince in his place, that being brought vp amongſt the Portugals, he may knowe, eſteeme, and cheriſh them as his Maieſtie doth. This role was publiſhed throughout all the principall cities of the realmes, by the miniſters of the Catholique king; adding thereunto, that if the Portugals deſired more, the king would grant them anything, ſuppoſing that as Chriſtians they would require nothing but iuſt and godly things, inferring (it may be) ſecretly, that they would not yeeld to points of the Inquiſition and of iuſtice.
         
         
            THE FIFTH BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the fifth Booke.
               The fortification of the Driehead, the confuſion of matters within the Realme, and of the Gouernours: The Catholique Kings anſwere to the Ambaſſadours of Portugall, his expedition in the Ʋniuerſitie of Alcala touching his entrie into the Realme: The contrarietie of opinions whether the King ſhould march with his armie in perſon or not: The recouerie of Eluas and of Olliuenza: The creating of Antonie for King: The Gouernours flight: The embaſſage of the Duke of Bragance to King Philip, and his anſwere: The taking of Villauizoſa: The entrie of the Armie into Portugall: The yeelding vp of Stremos.
            
            
               
               THe Portugals did not generally accept the offers made by the Catholique King: for although three of the Gouernours, the Nobilitie, and the Cleargie, did in their harts like of them, yet the thirde eſtate did blame them, ſaying, it was a rowle of deceipts, and a diſcouerie of Philips ſmall force: And that ſuch as had framed theſe cōditions, were more inclined to their owne priuate profit then the good of the realme; deſiring ſtill the cauſe might be ended by iuſtice. The Gouernours therefore ſtilThe Gouernors ſollicite their defence. continue the preparation for defence, and had ſecretly ſent Francis Barretto into Fraunce, to let the Chriſtian King vnderſtand their right, and the wrong the Catholique King did them, ſeeking to poſſeſſe the Realme by force, and to demaund the ſuccour of ſix thouſand foote, giuing commiſſion to Barretto to goe from thence to Rome to beſeech the Pope, to mediate with the King a ſuſpenſion of armes, and to binde himſelfe to iudgement. They ſent Elizee of Portugall into Germanie, to ſatisfie the Emperor, and other princes touching their defence, with manie iuſtifications, ſuch force had their deſire to chooſe a king after their owne humour, that ſeeking ſuccours from forreine princes, it was the greateſt care they vſed to ſhake off Philips yoke, for that (the which would ſeeme incredible) euen in the life of king Henrie, ſome gentlemen that were priſoners in Affrick, had required aide of victuals and men from the Cheriffe, although there were no likelihood he ſhould graunt it, ſeeing that (beſides the diuerſitie of lawes) there was no amitie, nor other reſpect of ſtate whatſoeuer could binde him vnto it. For although the vnion of theſe Realmes vnder Philip diſcontented him, yet being wiſe and of iudgement, it was not likely he ſhould diſcouer himſelfe againſt ſo mightie a neighbour, nor truſt to the weake Portugals, being offended, and (as a man may ſay) hauing their hands yet died with their bloud: They proceeded ſlowly with the preparation of their armies and fortifications both for want of money, and for the often diſagreement of their miniſters: And Lewes Caeſar chiefe purueior, enclined to Philip, cared not greatly to haſten the affaires, yea expreſly (ſometimes with one let, ſometimes with an other) delaied them, ſo as they onely repaired the fortreſſes vpon the mouth of

the riuer of Tagus, and made new rampiers, in places where they might deſcend, putting greater garriſons in all places then was accuſtomed, and throughout all the citie of Lisbone, they began to build many platformes, to plant artillerie, for the defence of the ſea, making readie their gallions, and ſuch other ſhips as they had: Yet Emanuel of Portugall either not well ſatisfied with theſe fortifications, or being naturally enclined to ſeeme to haue more knowlegde then the reſt; reſolued (againſt the opinion of many well skilled in that acte) to builde a forte in the midſt of the riuer, at the mouth thereof; for that being large in that place, ſhips ſhould notThe Drie head, fortified. paſſe but within ſhotte of their artillerie: it ſeemed vnto him that he had good meanes to effect it, for that neere to the place whereas it runs into the ſea, there riſeth a ſmall flat hill of Sand, but little diſcouered of the waters, the which they call Cabeſaſecca, the which deuides the nauigation or entrie thereof into two parts, the one lying betwixt the Iland and the left ſhoare (hauing but a ſhallow chanell) is not nauigable but at a full ſea, and with ſmall veſſels: but the other which lies betwixt the Iland and the banks on the right hand, is likewiſe deuided into two chanels by a ſhelfe which they call Cacippo: That which lieth betwixt the right banke and the ſhelfe, is defended by the rocke or caſtell of Saint Iulian: the other which is betwixt the ſhelfe and the ſandie hill, which they terme La Carriera d'Alcaſoua, is not defended by any forte, neither can the artillerie of Saint Iulian reach ſo farre. Emanuell woulde builde a forte in the Iland to defend this paſſage: And although hauing digged deepe in the ſand, he coulde finde no firme ground to ſettle his foundation, yet woulde not Emanuell deſiſt from his opinion, but hauing no meanes to builde it of ſtone, he raiſed it of woode, filling it with earth, the which he ſupplied with artillerie, and many other things neceſſarie, yet coulde he hardly furniſh it with water, for that his caske burnt with the ſunne and the reuerberation of the ſands, (which is vehement in thoſe partes, although they were coueredA confuſion of the affaires of Portugall, and the Gouernours. with ſailes) did breake, and woulde holde no water. At that time the Gouernours did an acte of great conſideration to animate men to the defence of the Realme, for by a newe and dangerous example, they vſed religious men as inſtruments to execute their intention: commaunding all religious houſes that they

ſhould not onely in their ſermons, but alſo in their confeſſions, commaund their preachers and confeſſors, to animate the people to defence, in that ſort as they preach the Croiſado againſt infidels: And for that the Portugals are too ambitious of honor, they commaunded them to vſe this encouragement, that ſuch ſhould be moſt honoured, who did moſt readily prepare for reſiſtance, ſo as their preachings which ſhould haue beene religious, were become furious orations of ſoldiers: This was greatly blamed by the good and wiſe, and was the cauſe of great hurt to the whole Realme, for beſides the imploying of prieſtes in a prophaned action, they did animate the poore people to this defence, the which afterwardes did thruſt them raſhly into armes. It was likewiſe very hurtfull to the religious houſes: for as it is dangerous to ſtirre vp the mindes of religious perſons, theſe being by the death of king Henry growne more then before, adding thereunto this other libertie to ſpeake publikely; whileſt they did animate others, it bred in themſelues warlike affections, ſo as hauing paſſed the limits of their profeſſion, in a manner all the Eccleſiaſticall ſtate ran into mightie abuſes and diſorders, as we ſhall hereafter ſee: There wanted money to furniſh the charge for this defence, and therefore they deſired to borrowe one hundreth thouſand duckats of the marchants, the which (although they would not agree vnto) they were forced to pay: Theſe things were practiſed at Lisbone more then in any other parts of the Realme. In the meane time the Gouernours were in diuiſion, and irreſolute, looſing ſtill of their reputation: For the Prior continuing ſtill in the cauſe of his legitimation, and ſeeming daily a more obſtinate pretendent, threatned ſuch as ſhoulde contradict him: The miniſters of iuſtice began to decline from their accuſtomed authoritie, and euery man preſumed to ſpeake and do what he pleaſed, ſhewing well that it was a realme without a king, the which was remarkable in two points, which then hapned, as well amongſt the religious as the ſecular. The one was that the religious of theThe diſorder of the religious of Belem. order of Saint Ierome in our Ladies monaſterie of Belem, being deſirous to recouer their libertie which the king had taken from them, who with conſent of the Pope, and of his authoritie had bound them (notwithſtanding the rules of this religion) to chuſe ſuperior officers at his pleaſure; that is, one of the fower or fiue religious men

that he ſhould name to euerie office: Frier Emanuel d'Euora being then Prouinciall, all the Religious went vnto him, ſaying; That he was not iudicially choſen to that charge, and therefore he ſhoulde renounce his office, and they would chooſe another according to the Statutes: The Frier (to whom this ſeemed of harde digeſtion) oppoſed himſelfe to their demaund, with many reaſons, and multiplying many words, both of the one ſide and of the other, they did forceably put the Prouinciall priſoner in a Seller, vſing him ſomething hardly in their choler: The kinſmen to the Prouinciall hearing of this diſorder, ranne for remedie to Alexander Formento then Nuncio for his Holineſſe in that Realme, who vnderſtanding the reaſons of both parties (although the Religious proteſted he was not their Iudge) yet he commaunded the Prouinciall ſhould be deliuered, and reſtored to his charge, citing ſome of the Religious men of the Monaſterie before him as ſeditious: The Friers (to whome this ſentence was ſignified by a publike Notarie) would not obey; So as the kinſmen of the Religious priſoner, crauing aide from the ſecular power, the Gouernours ſent the officers of iuſtice of the citie of Lisbone to the Couent, with three Enſignes of ſoldiers, to ſee this ſentence put in execution by force, who being come to Belem, the Friers ſhut their gates, leauing the Church open; where notwithſtanding the grate of wood which ſhuts vp the great Chappell and the Sepulchres of kings was cloſe, they went into the quire ſinging their Letanies: But after the officers of iuſtice had knocked a while at the Couent gate, and no man opening it, entering into the Church they burſt downe the grate of wood, ſo as the ſoldiers comming into the Cloiſter of Friers, they laide hold of ſuch Religious perſons as they met, with ſmall reſpect of their prieſtly order: And although the elders came with their Croſſes, Buls, and excommunications, it nothing preuailed, for they muſt of force deliuer the Religious man, and reſtore him to his former eſtate, the which they did, proteſting they had vſed violence, and that they woulde complaine to the Apoſtolique ſeate. The other caſe was that Fernand de
               Doctor Fernand de Pina ſlaine. 
               Pina a Doctor and Citizen, being choſen in the place of Diego Salema (whome Henry had depoſed) Vereador of the Chamber, which is the higheſt degree of magiſtrate, that hath charge of the citie; he was at noone day in the market place, wounded in the

head with a Curtelax, by Anthony Soarez, whereof he died ſoone after: the which the Prior had cauſed to be done, for that Pyna in his office, had not onely ſpoken ill againſt him, but alſo laboured to draw the officers, and all the Councell of the Chamber, to the Catholique Kings deuotion: Anthonie deſired to reuenge himſelfe in this manner; and the offender (who knew better how to ſtrike then to flie) being hurt by the Sergeants, and retired into a Church, without the citie, was taken priſoner by the Iuſtice, and after ſome daies of impriſonment was hanged, and quartered, the which execution was done with trouble and feare, leaſt the people ſhoulde deliuer him: For the authoritie of the Gouernours declining, the miniſters of iuſtice were not reſpected: And for that they knew this murther was committed by the commaundement of Anthonie, the people were inclined to ſaue him. The Religious for the like reſpect (alleaging, that the ſecular power could not iudge him being taken in the Church) came running likewiſe to the place of execution to ſuccour him: And had not Damain D' Aguiar (a ſeuere and reſolute officer) had the charge thereof, who ſuddenly put this ſentence in execution, there was ſo great a concourſe of people, crying, and of religious men with their croſſes, and excommunications, that the offender had been eaſily reſcued. Theſe diſorders diſpleaſed the louers of religion, and quietnes, who blaming ſomewhat the Friers, for not ſuffering their Prouinciall, quietly to ende the terme of his charge, yet did they attribute more fault vnto the gouernours, for ſuffering in ſuch a ſeaſon ſo publike and rigorous an execution, againſt the religious, and chiefly vpon a Monaſterie ſeated vpon the banks of Tagus, ſaying, that if for no other reaſon, yet ſhoulde they haue forborne, in reſpect that many Engliſh and French ſhips anchored there, whoſe men infected with hereſie, would reioyce to ſee the religious in the hands of Sergeants. The death of Pina was held for an indiſcreet and cruell reſolution of Anthony, for being but a matter of ſmall moment, to be reuenged by ſo foule an example, vpon an olde man, alawyer, and of meane condition, he had thruſt himſelfe into an exigent either to be held vnthankfull in ſuffering of Soarez to die as he did, or elſe to doe violence vnto iuſtice. But for that princes hate the executioners of their follies, for in their life doth liue the remembrance of their errors; euen ſo the Prior

hated this man, after the offence committed, neither did he labour to ſaue him, although his death made him contemptible to the people. The ſaid prior was thē at Almerin, laboring the cauſe of his legitimation, & ſolliciting the iudges to decide the ſame, who excuſed themſelues that they could not do it, (obſeruing the lawes of the realme) if he retired not himſelfe 25. miles from the Court, that in ſo doing they would looke into the cauſe: But for that the Duke of Bragance and the Ambaſſadors of other princes were there preſent, he would not depart, & for this reaſon the matter ſurceaſed: at this time Emanuel of Portugall, who remained at Belem, laboured ambitiouſly that Iohn Teglio, one of the gouernours, his brother in lawe, conformable to himſelf in opinion, (principally in the excluſion of Philip,) ſhould be ſent to Belem, with authoritie from the other gouernours to prouide by his preſence for all things neceſſarie, ſeeming a matter hard to effect at Almeryn: The other gouernours deſirous to be rid of his companie, and not daring to contradict any thing that ſeemed to concerne the defence, gaue him authoritie, and ſuffered him to goe to Belem: There he conſulted with Emanuel, and receiuing with ſome difficultie, the money borrowed of the merchants, he reſolued (for the gathering together of a greater ſumme) to ſell the iewels of the Crowne, the which were there, and therefore cauſing them to be brought foorth, he dealt with ſome merchants vpon the price. The Duke of Oſſuna was then returned into Caſtill, leauing Mora in Portugall, with the other Ambaſſadours that were Lawyers, who vnderſtanding the iewels were vpon ſale, the ſaide Mora in the name of the Catholique King, required the ſaid gouernours not to ſell them, as appertaining to the King, proteſting both againſt them and the buiers, that they ſhould be bounde to reſtore the price at their owne charge, ſo as they found not any that woulde deale with them.
            
               Philip being at Merrida as it was ſaide, hauing by a long proteſtation required the gouernors to deliuer him the poſſeſſion of the Realme: The Biſhop of Coimbra and Emanuel de Melo returnedThe anſwer of the Catholique king to the Portugals. the ſecond time, making the like propoſition to the King as they had done at Guadalupa, offering to put the cauſe to arbitrement, and complaining he had giuen them too ſhort a time to reſolue: But Philip being now well reſolued what he would doe, and infourmed

of the aide the Portugals demaunded from other princes, he made them the like anſwere as before: Many iudged the propoſition of thoſe Ambaſſadours to be ill grounded, ſaying it was an vnſeemely thing to require the King to make himſelfe ſubiect to the iudgement of nominated iudges, ſeeing that King Henry himſelfe (who with more appearance of reaſon, might pretend to be lawfull iudge in this cauſe) did neuer require the King to acknowledge him for iudge, neither did he euer declare him contumax, in the cauſe debated with the pretendents for not acknowledging him.
            The Catholique King came to Badagios the 20. of May, where the Portugall Ambaſſadours laboured to perſwade him, making ſuite, that before the taking of armes he ſhould admit an aſſemblie to the eſtates, but they were no more admitted to audience; the king reſolued to ſend his anſwere vnto the gouernors, and to publiſh it throughout the whole realme in the name of his Councell, the which he did as followeth: That experience had taught that by two examples of the eſtates laſt held at Lisbone, and at Almerin, they wrought no good effect, in fauour of the apparant right of his Maieſtie, but in the one, and the other, they had ſtill laboured to trouble it, ſeeking lets, and delaies, which might haue bred the loſſe thereof, and therefore it ſeemed a treble error to attend againe a new aſſemblie of theſe eſtates: That they haue no reaſon to complaine that his Maieſtie had giuen them too ſhort a time to reſolue, accounting from the day of the receipt of his letters the xiij. of March, (by the which he required them to ſweare him) ſaying they made no good computation, if they ſuppoſed he were diſpoſſeſſed of the realme, but from the time that he demaunded it, appertaining vnto him from the hower of King Henries death: but that his Maieſtie had expreſſely contained himſelfe a moneth and a halfe without making of any motion, to the ende they ſhould not looſe the thanks, by calling him to the ſucceſſion whom God had called; and might haue leiſure amongſt themſelues to make cleere this bond by which they were tied, and giue ſatisfaction, making the pretendents capable of reaſon, to the ende they ſhould not hinder the publike quiet, and that they might be interceſſors for them and for the realme, which courſe the king himſelfe had taught them: That their excuſe might be taken in two ſenſes, ſaying, they coulde not

receiue his Maieſtie but in a generall aſſemblie of eſtates, their meaning is, either that they cannot doe it by right, or that they may not doe it, for that they dare not: In the firſt caſe they are deceiued, for there needes no aſſemblie of eſtates, when a king makes his entrie vnto the realme, although he ſucceede not to his father, but to his kinſeman; neither were they neceſſarie when as Henry ſucceeded to his nephew. In the other caſe that they cannot doe it, becauſe they dare not; the excuſe is good, but not to binde the king, neither in iuſtice, nor conſcience, to deſiſt from taking the poſſeſſion of his goods, if the delaies make the meanes difficult. That this deceit ſhould grow from the opinion they haue conceiued, that in the end, all that they can doe for his Maieſtie, is to conſigne him the realme by accord and compoſition; not remembring that he receiued it not from their hands, but from God and by his owne right, ſo as theſe words of capitulations, tranſactions, and accords be neither proper, nor fit; for if they looke vnto the preſeruation of their ſtatutes, and priuileges, they ſhould not be called accords, but bonds, the which his Maieſtie muſt accompliſh, as lawfull king of Portugall: And if they referre it to that which is newly to be graunted them, much leſſe doe they deſerue that name, but rather of the liberalitie, greatnes, and meere grace, whereunto his Maieſtie, for the bountie and loue he beareth them will binde himſelfe, with all the aſſurance they can demaund, ſo as the eſtates were neceſſarie, when as the realme might diſpute vpon theſe graces, and chooſe another king whom they pleaſed; but hauing no authoritie, but to intreate for the augmentation of theſe fauours, the eſtates had nothing to doe with his entrie: That they deliuered all theſe things onely to make plaine the matter, with the rigour of truth, without any meaning of his Maieſtie, to refuſe ſuch graces, as had beene offered on his behalfe, or to giue the aſſurance they ſhould require for the accompliſhment thereof; neither doth he ſtande vpon the meanes, termes, or words which ſhall be requiſite, to giue full contentment to the realme, although they be in effect the ſame with capitulations and accords: That as the inconueniencie they alleage wants ſubſtance and reaſon, ſo thoſe which are preſented in his Maieſties name were ſo preciſe and neceſſarie, as they admitted no more delay, although that he deſired to ſatisfie their demaunds, as he alwaies

ſought to doe by effect in any thing he could. That it is apparant, the armie now marching and approching ſo neare, it cannot turne head, nor entertaine it ſelfe, for that the victuals in the countrey are conſumed, and that which they haue in ſtore would be ſpoiled; beſides it is a dangerous matter to entertaine an armie obedient ſo long time at ſea, and therefore were moſt reaſonable to diſcharge them of this burthen: That although his Maieſtie be eaſily perſuaded that the greateſt part of thoſe which require him to ſtay, doe it with a good and ſincere intention, yet can they not denie but another ſort of people deſire and labour to hinder him by the accidents that may happen, and to cauſe him to looſe the opportunitie, wherein he might imploy his galleys vpon the coaſt of Portugall, knowing the ſeaſon for veſſels that goe with oares to bee quickly paſt: That ſince his Maieſtie came from Madrill, he hath ſought all poſſible delaies, hauing (as they know) ſpent three monethes in his voyage, to the end they ſhould want no time, to vnderſtand, agree, and accommodate themſelues; but although the time had beene continued a whole yeere, it is apparant the buſineſſe had beene nothing aduaunced, hauing ſpent ſo many daies in ſuperfluous replyings, during which they might haue aſſembled their eſtates, and forgotten them: And whereas on the one ſide they offer to holde them with breuitie, on the other ſide (being now the moneth of Iune) his Maieſtie vnderſtandeth, that neither the Prelates, the Nobilitie, much leſſe the Deputies of townes are arriued, and that the elections are not yet made in many cities, hauing intelligence that they delay them by cunning and ſubornations; whereby it is apparant, that theſe eſtates would rather breede a confuſion, then any good effect: And although the ſmall fruit they may hope for hereby, be euident; yet doe they not beleeue his Maieſtie will hinder them vntill his entrie into the realme; but being entred, hee will ordaine that which ſhall ſeeme fit for the ſeruice of God, of himſelfe, and of the generall good of this crowne, bee it by meanes of the eſtates or otherwiſe, ſeeking alwaies the moſt profitable, for the naturall ſubiects of the ſame realme: That his Maieſtie cannot (although he ſhould ſhut his eies) reſt fully aſſured of their propoſitions, ſeeing his good ſubiects in theſe realmes, oppreſſed and afflicted, vnder colour of an vniuſt reſiſtance, which they cal defence,

and thoſe onely perſecuted, and ill intreated, which follow his partie, and acknowledge the truth of his Title, whereas contrariwiſe thoſe which are paſſionate and ſlanderous perturbers of the peace, good and publique quiet, are fauoured: That to conclude, his Maieſtie would haue their workes conformable to their wordes, for otherwiſe they cannot blame him, if he proceede cunningly: And that they may vnderſtand with how great reaſon he diſtruſteth their delaies, he did ſignifie vnto them, that he had certaine and late aduiſe from many prouinces, that at the ſame time when as they intreated him with faire words to ſtay and attend, they did with great inſtance demaund ſuccours from other nations, making ſecret practiſes moſt hurtfull to the good of the Church, and the peace of all Chriſtendome, although God would not ſuffer them to trouble it: That although with the helpe of God his Maieſtie would ſoone enter into Portugall with mightie forces, yet ſhould they not beleeue that he came to make warre againſt them, but would labour all he could that none ſhould receiue hurt, but ſuch as did oppoſe themſelues obſtinately to his iuſt poſſeſſion, hoping they would not any waies hinder him, but would willingly make eaſie all difficulties, to the end that by their good ſuccours, his Maieſtie might this ſommer turne his force againſt infidels.
            
            
               The gouernours inconſtancie. The gouernours viewing this graue and wiſe anſwere with the kings reſolution, by the which the whole realme was aſſured to haue warre, both within and round about, being odious vnto the people, who blamed them for the ſlacke and euill execution of all matters, and of the weake reſiſtance they prepared, they were doubtfull what to doe: They would haue left Almerin, for the plague beginning to raigne, and the ſeaſon hot (the place being ſandie) woulde not ſuffer them to ſtay: And hauing intelligence that Anthonie animated the people againſt them in his fauour, they deſired to retire into ſome place of ſtrength, as well to aſſure themſelues againſt the riſing of the people, as for the warre, for that Almeryn was without walles. They iudged Settuuall (whither they had called the eſtates, although with ſmall hope to holde them) more fit then any other, being a walled towne and a port of the ſea, and therefore deſired to withdraw themſelues thither: They had deuiſed (at the leaſt three of them) to aſſiſt the Catholique King, for his entrie into the realme,

in deſpite of ſuch as ſhould prepare for the defence, eſteeming this ſtrong place fit for that effect, there to bring in the kings armie at ſea, and ſo to fruſtrate the fortification which Emanuel of Portugall had made in the mouth of the riuer of Tagus: but they could not bring their purpoſe to paſſe, for the deputies of the laſt eſtates remaining, diſcouering their intention, ſaid, it was fit they ſhould all ſtay at Saint Arem, ſo as fearing to giue greater cauſe to ſuſpect, they coulde not depart: They added moreouer, that leauing the Prior there with the deputies, in a time when as the Catholique king ſhould begin to take armes, they might in their abſence vnder colour of defence erect a tyrannie. So as ignorant what courſe to take, or how to redreſſe things, they did (being friends) by their irreſolution more hurt to the Catholique king, then they coulde haue done being enimies: for the king (hoping theſe woulde haue deliuered him the crowne) proceeded ſlowly with his armie. At that time it chanced that Iohn Gonzalez de Camera, Earle of Caglietta, died of the plague at Almeryn, ſo as the Gouernors tooke this occaſion to depart from thence, and went to Settuual, with the Duke of Bragance, the Agents of the Catholique King, and others of their faction; for hauing created captaines, & placed a garriſon, they cōmanded the gates to be guarded. The Catholique King hauing aſſembled his armie neere to Badagios, & receiued aduertiſement that his nauie was at Saint Marie porte, ready to ſet ſaile, before they ſhould enter into Portugall, not yet well ſatisfied with the diligence he had vſed (as it is ſaide) with many Diuines; deſired to conſult againe in the Vniuerſitie of Alcala, where the profeſſion of Diuinitie flouriſheth moſt in thoſe realmes, vpon his entrie in armes into the realme, and the propoſition made by the Portugall Embaſſadors: And to that effect hauing aſſembled all the doctors, being in numberThe diligence of the Catholique King vpon his entrie by force into Portugall, made by the Diuines of Alcala. aboue thirtie, hauing made their praiers and ſupplications vnto God, in their ſacrifices; and the matter conſidered by euery one apart; it was diſputed of in three ſeſſions: For although the matter were not hard to decide, yet was it graue and new: All, without any diſagreement, concurre in opinion with the firſt, with whom the King had conſulted, & without viewing of their reaſons, they ſent a publike decree vnto the King. There was propounded vnto them three articles: I he firſt, that the King being certaine to ſucceed by

right, after the death of King Henry to the realmes of Portugall: whether he were in conſcience bound to ſubmit himſelfe to any tribunall iudge, or arbitrator, who might adiudge him the realmes, or put him in poſſeſſion thereof. The ſecond was, that the realme of Portugall refuſing to acknowledge him for their Prince, vnleſſe he woulde firſt ſtande to iudgement with the pretendents: Whether he may of his owne authoritie, take poſſeſſion thereof by force, againſt ſuch as ſhall make reſiſtance, preſuppoſing that there is no doubt or ſcruple of conſcience in his title whatſoeuer? The thirde was, that the Gouernours of Portugall, alleaging that they and the whole realme, haue ſworne not to receiue any for King but him that ſhoulde be iudicially ſo declared, and that they may not receiue the King otherwiſe, the rather for that the pretendents complaine and offer to ſtande to iudgement: He deſired to know if the ſaide Gouernors, and the whole realme, may pretend this oath for an excuſe not to receiue him for King. To the firſt they anſwered, that the King was not bound in conſcience, to ſubmit himſelfe to any Iuſtice or arbitrement, ſeeing that he had of himſeife priuate authoritie to adiudge vnto himſelfe thoſe realmes, and to take poſſeſſion: They excluded (eſpecially from this authoritie of iudging,) all Princes, and ſuch as might pretend to take any knowledge thereof. And firſt humblie ſaluting the Pope, and the Apoſtolike ſea, they denied, that this iuriſdiction did appertaine vnto him, the cauſe being meerelie temporall, and nothing concurring where by his holines ſhould vſe that indirect authoritie which he hath in temporall cauſes, ſo farre foorth as they concerne the ſpirituall good: They ſhewed he was not bounde to the cenſure of the Emperour, for that the Kings of Spaine were ſoueraignes, not acknowledging the Emperour in any thing, and much leſſe to any other King. They prooued he was not ſubiect to the common-wealth, nor the realmes of Portugul, ſaying, That when as common wealthes doe chooſe their firſt King vpon condition to obey him and his ſucceſſors, they remaine ſubiect vnto him to whom they haue transferred their authoritie, no iuriſdiction remaining in them, either to iudge the realme, or the true ſucceſſor, ſeeing in the firſt election, all the true ſucceſſors were choſen: Being therefore moſt apparant there is a true ſucceſſour; it followeth that the common wealth of Portugall hath no iuriſdiction to

iudge of him that doth truely ſucceede, and that the King hath as great a warrant not to be ſubiect to the cenſure of this common wealth, as he hath to be true ſucceſſour. And as touching the eleuen perſons of the fower and twentie which King Henry had named; they ſaide that Henry himſelfe coulde not be iudge of him that did ſucceede after him, for that after his death the office of adminiſtring iuſtice was expired, and all his authoritie and iuriſdiction paſt vnto his lawfull ſucceſſor. Againſt arbitrators they ſpake little, onely that the bond of cōpremiſe had no place, when as the equitie of the cauſe was not doubtfull, as it was ſuppoſed. They anſwered them which ſaide, that the King had no intereſt to the realme of Portugall as King of Caſtill, but as kinſeman to King Henry; by reaſon whereof, he coulde not in this caſe challenge the preheminence he hath as King of Caſtill, ſaying, that this imaginarie diuiſion cannot bee made in the perſon of the King, for it is ſo annexed to the dignitie royall, that his perſon cannot be wronged, but the dignitie woulde ſuffer. And ſeeing the Prince may lawfully make war vpon an other Realme, for iniuries done to his brothers and friends confederats, with greater reaſon may he do it, in taking poſſeſſion of a Realme which appertaines lawfully vnto himſelfe. They made anſwer to ſuch as ſaid, that (obſeruing the ciuill & canon law) a matter litigious, ſhould be iudged where it happeneth, and therfore this ſhoulde bee decided in Portugall, ſaying, that theſe deciſions ſpeake of particular perſons, who haue their ſuperiour Iudges, and not of ſoueraigne Princes and their dependancies. To the ſeconde article, they anſwered with more reaſons then vnto the firſt, ſaying, the King was not bound to any thing but to ſignifie vnto the Gouernours his Title and certaine intereſt to the Crowne, and if notwithſtanding this demonſtration, they ſhould make reſiſtance, then the King by his owne authoritie might take poſſeſſion of the Realme, (vſing if neede required) force of armes, for that in this action it can not bee termed force, but a naturall defence of the Realme which is his owne, and a iuſt puniſhment of Rebels. To the third, they ſaid that this oath could not binde them that had vndertaken to obſerue it, ſeeing it is moſt certaine, that neither in Portugall nor elſe where, any iudge may determine this cauſe with the King. Moreouer, that this oath is to the preiudice of his prerogatiue

royall, and as this oath did not binde ſuch as had taken it, ſo coulde it not excuſe them from the bonde by the which they were tied to receiue him for King; and that the allegations of the pretendents, and their offer to ſtand to iudgement did not binde the KingThe Catholique King takes poſſeſſion of Portugall. to acknowledge for iudge, ſuch as were not.  The Catholique King, hauing viewed theſe reaſons, reſolued to ſtay no longer frō taking poſſeſſion of the Realme, and therefore he cauſed his whole Armie to march to Cantigliana three miles from Badagios, there to paſſe into Portugall, where hee himſelfe with the Queene woulde ſee it lodged; for which effect he commaunded a ſcaffold to be made in open field, where being mounted, he ſet downe all the orders, directedA queſtion whether the Catholique King ſhould go with the armie in perſon. by the old Duke of Alua in the habit of a yoong ſouldier: And although it ſeemed the King had reſolued to ſtay at Badagios; yet this matter was diſputed amongſt the curious with diuers reaſons; and beſides the generall opnions of ſome, who did maintaine that Kings ought to be perſonall in their enterpriſes, they did alleage ſome other ſpeciall reaſons, which did binde the king to goe with his armie: They diſtinguiſhed three qualities incident to the enterpriſe, whereby the King ſhoulde go in perſon: that is, the importance of the pretention, the hope of happie ſucceſſe, and the difficultie to execute it by a miniſter: ſhewing that all three did concurre heerein, ſeeing it was a queſtion for a realme of importance, rich, and bordering vpon his other countries, head of many rich eſtates, and then in the way of greatnes. That the hope of victorie was in all humaine conſideration certaine, both in regard of his iuſtice, and force, as alſo for the weakenes of his aduerſaries: That the difficulty to vndertake it by a miniſter was great, and proper in that caſe; the King not entering into Portugall to ſubdue cities, but to winne their harts; not playing the part of a conquerour, but of lawfull Prince; who entreth with neceſſarie forces to ſuppreſſe the ordinarie alterations of realmes, newly gotten, as he had proteſted to the Gouernors and eſtates of the realme; that ſuch offices for ſo important cauſes coulde not be committed but to the perſon of the eldeſt Prince, being a commiſſion vnfit for any childe or nephew, much leſſe for a captaine Generall, being a Caſtillian of nation, moſt imperious both by nature, and for the great and important affaires which he had mannaged; beſides being for his owne particular hatefull

to the Portugals: They ſaide it was moſt certaine if the King entred the realme in perſon, of friends he ſhoulde make faithfull ſubiects, of newters friends, and of enimies newters; where as contrariwiſe, the Duke woulde make his friendes newters, his newters enimies, and his enimies obſtinate rebels: With theſe reaſons and others, ſuch as iudged the Kings preſence neceſſarie in the enterpriſe, fortified their opinions: On the otherſide it was ſaide, that when the reſolutions of the one ſide haue ſo great difficultie, as they draw neere to impoſſibilities, there is no diſputing what is conuenient, but of force they muſt obey neceſſitie: that the queſtion of the Kings entring into Portugall was of this nature, ſeeing that by diuers accidents the ſtrength of the armie was ſo weakened, that it was both in quantitie and qualitie moſt different from that which had beene ſet downe, for there wanted aboue ſixe thouſand ſouldiersThe Kings army waſted. of them which had been leuied, the number of the Spaniards which came out of Italy was greatly diminiſhed, and there wanted halfe of thoſe that were new raiſed, and the bands that came from the lowe Countries could not arriue in time. If theſe which were the ſtrēgth of the armie had beene ioyned, and the number appointed in the beginning aſſembled, the King might wel haue perfourmed the enterpriſe in perſon, for then had he made the way open for the ſuccours of men & munition, from the frontiers vnto Settuual, leauing garriſons in al places to receiue & conduct them. But wanting horſe and foote neceſſarie for the action, there was no other remedie but to runne the fortune of two great daungers: The one was to conduct all the victuals with the armie, which would cauſe a new and monſtrous forme of Campe, wanting horſemen to couer their carriages: The other of no leſſe importance was, that the life of theſe men depended vpon the inconſtancie of the ſea and winde, which ſhoulde conduct the armie from Andelouzia to Settuuall, with the other victuals and munition to ſerue the want of thoſe whom they tranſported. And although the Duke contented himſelfe with the number of his ſoldiers, he did it truſting to his owne dexteritie, and the ignorance of his enimies: And if he hoped to ſurmount theſe dangers, he grounded his opinion vpon the Portugals vnskilfulnes to preuent him, entertaining him behinde with continuall skirmiſhes to conuoy him, the which if they could effect

were dangerous, for there by they ſhould force him to turne backe and fight with diſaduantage of the place, where they might be defeated, or ſtaied from paſſing the armie ouer the riuer of Tagus, the which were to put a battaile in compremiſe, for the humours which might daily ariſe; beſides there were ſome difficultie to ioine the two parts of the armie, the one being at ſea, the other at land, & vneaſie to ioine thē at a limited time, & the delay of 20. daies would hinder the effect for a yeeres imploiment; ſo as they concluded that neither by reaſon of war, nor of ſtate, the King ought to hazard his perſon in this enterpriſe, for that neither induſtrie, nor fortune be ſufficient warrants for the ſafety of Princes, who ought not to ground their reſolutions vpon an others weakenes, but vpon their owne proper forces.
            
            Whileſt that matters in Caſtill ſtoode on theſe termes, and that the Portugals grew daily more arrogant and confuſed, it was apparant with ſmall inſight how this realme ranne headlong into ruine:Confuſion in Portugall. For al being confounded with vanitie, no man knew what he would do, no man was reſolute what he ſhoulde execute, and if any were yet blinded, they knewe not what courſe to take: The Gouernours being at Settuuall, aſſembled the eſtates, being amazed to vnderſtand the Duke of Alua was in fielde, reſolute to inuade the realme preſently: On the otherſide that Anthony was at Saint Arem, incenſing the Deputies, that they ſhoulde not go to the Eſtates, practiſing the diſorder which hapned after. The Duke of Bragance preſſed them, ſhewing his griefes in publike, it may be for not proceeding according to his humour. The Embaſſadors of the Catholique King gaue them no time to breath. Iohn Teglio was at Lisbone, preparing for defence, with whom they had no good intelligence: They deſired to content all men, yet feared the peoples furie; they laboured much and prouided for nothing. The cities cried for armes to defend themſelues, or to haue permiſſion to yeeld; they anſwered in generall tearmes without any effect; they receiued letters from the Duke of Alua, who accuſed them of crueltie, ſaying, they obſerued not the cuſtome of all nations, which is, that when an armie enters maſter of the field, they commaund all places which cannot defend themſelues, to yeeld, to the end they may auoide the violent courſe of warre, to ſlaie all ſuch as make reſiſtance,  whereas not vſing of

this rigour they ſhall be forced to bring the cannon before euerie cottage, and make the warre perpetuall, & yet this letter neuer induced them to ſet a reſolute order to any towne. They were wel reſolued to giue the realme to the Catholique King, yet coulde they not conclude for the effecting thereof. They feared in a manner to be ſtoned if they diſcouered this intention, and therefore they woulde not hazard themſelues, looſing daily all hope to bring the matter to that paſſe, that the King ſhould acknowledge the crowne from them as they pretended: Beſides the King being wholie of an other minde, they knew not what they could do, if they had would. The people (who flatter themſelues much and endure little) ſuppoſed the defence was eaſie, euery man ſhewed himſelfe a lion, for the defence of his owne houſe▪ yet woulde they not go armed to fielde. Thoſe of the houſe of Portugall, and the other aduerſaries to the Catholique King, were in no leſſe confuſion then the Gouenours; for hauing beene obſtinate in their opinions, they found they had mooued the indignation of Philip againſt them without profite: And although they were more confident in the defence then they ought to be, yet did they feare the kings proteſtations, by the which demaunding poſſeſſion of the realme, he threatned ſuch as ſhould withſtand him▪ The Agents of the Catholique King laboured to ſuborne thoſe as they had the reſt, yet it preuailed not, for being in the beginning obſtinate, confident in the midſt, and diſtruſtfull in the end to obtaine pardone, they woulde neuer agree:  yet left they not to hope, that the more they proceeded in the defence, the better they ſhoulde let the King vnderſtand their forces, and might compound with greater aduantage: And for that the warres continued, the Gouernors ſuppoſed, that in this forte the King ſhoulde acknowledge the crowne from them: But he being well enfourmed of all theſe matters, and hauing treated with many frontier townes of Portugall to yeeld, hauing imparted vnto them the equitie of his cauſe, by ample allegations, entreating them not to be the cauſe of the ruine of the realme, hauing cauſed Peter de Velaſco, ſoueraigneThe taking of Eluas. iudge of Badagios to write to ſome particulars, he firſt attempted Eluas as neereſt vnto him: The Citizens fearing they ſhould either in deed or worde be firſt ſet vpon, attended daily this Embaſſage; They were deuided as it often happens into two contrarie factions;

the one enclined to the obedience of Philip; the other, vnder colour of liberty, & fidelity to the Gouernors, would by no meanes receiue him for their Lorde. The heades of the firſt partie were George Paſſano, and Iohn Rodrigo Paſſano brothers, followed by many Citizens, whom they call Eſquires: On the other ſide was Anthony de Melo captaine of the citie, whoſe opinion was followed by the greateſt part of the Nobilitie, but in farre leſſe nnmber then the reſt, whereas euery man ſpake his minde openly. Diego de Meneſes had beene there a little before to fortifie the citie, and ſeeking to enlarge their ditches, he found it a matter of ſome difficultie, ſo as he departed without effecting any thing, ſaying, that he would returne with armes, which the Gouernours ſhoulde ſende; whereof failing, the Citizens knew well they coulde not reſiſt. True it is, that the King had long before prepared their mindes by the meanes of Frier Vincent of Fonſeca, a preaching Frier, kinſeman to the Paſſani, a noble familie, and well followed, enclined from the beginning with al their followers to the deuotion of Philip: he vſed all meanes to drawe the reſt vnto him; yet the day of Th'annunciation of the bleſſed Virgin, this religious man preaching, labouring to perſwade the people to the Kings obedience, they did not willingly heare him: So as now when he ſought to take poſſeſſion thereof, hauing diſpatched many meſſengers to the Biſhop, and Anthony de Melo, in the ende he ſent Peter de Velaſco with letters to the principall of the towne, and procuration to receiue this citie to his obedience. Being arriued at Eluas the xvij. of Iune, with eighteene men vnarmed, although the gates were ſhut by reaſon of the infection, yet was he preſently let in by the iudge of the towne, and going to the church of pittie, he cauſed the Biſhop, the Magiſtrate of the chamber, and the Nobilitie to be aſſembled, to whom he deliuered the letters which theThe Kings letters to them of Eluas. King had written, containing in ſubſtance, that the matter being apparant that the ſucceſſion of the realme belonged vnto him, he had ſent the ſaide Peter with procuration to receiue it vnto his obedience, if they woulde yeeld it, adding vnto his kinde wordes many offers: And although the Biſhop, Melo, and the Magiſtrate of the chamber, receiued theſe letters and read them, yet the Nobilitie did not accept them ſo eaſilie, for that ſome feared to commit an errour, and others debating who ſhoulde receiue them, they did

not accept them, yet they agreed that Frier Anthony de la Cerda, Prior of the Monaſterie of Saint Dominick ſhoulde receiue the letters for the Nobilitie, and bring them to the cathedrall church; ſo as all letters being read, Melo and the Magiſtrate (who preceaded the reſt) demaunded eight daies libertie to conſult, and to giue their anſwere, intending in the meane time to ſende to the Gouernours: the which Velaſco would not graunt, but ſaide vnto them, that he woulde preſently returne, wiſhing them to aduiſe, and not to cauſe the armie which his Maieſtie had ſo neere to march to their loſſe: yet they ſent Gaſpar de Britto to Stremos, where Diego de Meneſes generall of that prouince remained, to aduertiſe him of what had paſſed, remaining thus in ſuſpence vntill the next day. When as the Paſſani enformed of Melos intention, contrarie to their will and authoritie, reſolued to kill him, if he refuſed to yeeld, and had alreadie incenſed the people againſt him, cauſing many to giue out publikely, that they woulde be Caſtillians: Velaſco went after to the caſtell to perſwade Melo in priuate, to make the matter more eaſie, and not to ſhewe himſelfe (without reaſon) enimie to the King: But it was in vaine, for he ſaide, that he had receiued this place from the Gouernors, and that he woulde not yeelde it to any man without their commandement: If it were adiudged to appertaine vnto the King, he woulde preſently yeelde. Standing vpon theſe tearmes, there appeared by the commandement of Velaſco about the towne ditches, neere ſixe hundreth horſe armed, who ſeaſed vpon the wels and conduits of water, which ſerued the inhabitants for their watering, putting the Portugals into great feare; ſo as nowe the women began to crie, and to curſe Melo, and all thoſe that woulde not yeeld obedience vnto the king. Some yoong men induced by Philips partiſans, ſeeing into what danger the captaine had brought the ſafety of the citie, reſolued to kill him: and going to the Cathedrall church where they were all aſſembled, they attended at the doore to effect it when he ſhoulde come foorth; but diſcourſing with the Biſhop who perſwaded him, ignorant of the danger wherein he was, a nephew of his named likewiſe Anthony de Melo, vnderſtanding in the caſtell in what danger his grandfather was, came foorth with certaine Harguebuſiers to his ſuccour, and came in time before he was yet iſſued out of the church: Old Anthony, ſeeing this

yoong man enter armed, was amazed, not knowing the cauſe, but vnderſtanding it afterwards, and withall the hazard whereunto he was brought by ſuch as did watch for him, he ſent to Velaſco that he ſhoulde compound with the magiſtrate, that as for him he was content to yeeld obedience to king Philip, by meanes whereof all was pacified, for the Magiſtrate had alreadie yeelded: At the taking of their oathes the Citizens (ill aduiſed) required Velaſco that in the Kings name, hee ſhoulde graunt vnto the citie many priuileges and exemptions of cuſtomes and impoſtes, throughout the realme, with many other things of importance: And hee liberall of that which he could not giue, graunted all that was demaunded, but theſe promiſes were not obſerued by the King, ſaying (as it was true indeed) that Velaſco had exceeded his commiſſion. Theſe things ended, they were aduertiſed that Gaſpar de Britto whom the citie had ſent to Diego de Meneſes was returning with three hundred men, horſe and foote, ill appointed, to guard this place; to whom they preſently ſent word that he ſhould turne back, and hauing diſcouered the Caſtillian horſe of himſelfe, he fled with al his troupes. The day following (the vſuall ceremonies perfourmed) in proclaiming a newe King, Velaſco returned, hauing ſtaied there but three daies: The principall of Eluas went after to Badagios to kiſſe the Kings hande, of whom they had better reception then he is accuſtomed to giue vnto ſuch people, ſending Garcia de Cardenas nephewe to the Duke of Alua, to the citie, to thanke the Citizens for their good wils.
            Eluas being reduced, Peter Velaſco for the ſame intent tooke hisThe reduction of Oliuenza. way towards Oliuenza, whither he had before written, labouring that Nugno Aluares, ſonne to the Earle of Tentuguell, being captaine of the place, ſhoulde depart, the which he eaſily obtained: for the Citizens who had their affections enclined to the Catholique King, were reſolued to yeelde vnto him, hauing entreated the King that it woulde pleaſe him not to make this place the firſt whereof he ſhoulde take poſſeſſion, ſeeing that he had woone their harts, deſiring rather to deſerue leſſe by obtaining late, then to be accuſed of inconſtancie by haſtening much: For this cauſe they not onelie thruſt foorth Nugno Aluarez, but alſo Diego de Soſa, a knight of the order of Saint Iohn, who had ſucceeded in his place.
            
               
The newes of all this and of the ſucceſſe of Eluas came preſently to Saint Arem, whereas Anthony remained, labouring with the people to be proclaimed King: He was alwaies impatient in his pretention, notwithſtanding the perſecutions that king Henry inflicted vpon him, labouring ſtill by all meanes poſſible to aſpire to the crowne, intreating, threatning, and ſuborning. He treated by his Agents with the Catholique King, in diuers manners: Sometimes he ſeemed iealous of the Duke of Bragance, and would ioine with the King againſt him: Sometimes he treated to reſigne his intereſt to Philip, if he would make him a good compoſition, carrying himſelfe as his hopes increaſed or diminiſhed: So as it hapned vnto ſuch as mannaged his affaires with the king, when they found themſelues to haue concluded a matter, they found their authoritie reuoked. The King in the end, cauſed Chriſtopher de Mora to talke with him, and to make offer of all he ſhould demaund, for the great loue he bare vnto him, without naming either ſumme or any thing elſe whatſoeuer, but for that he hated Mora, he would not by his meanes treate of this matter of agreement. Notwithſtanding when as the Duke of Oſſuna deliuered vnto the Gouernors a copie of the kingsThe Catholique king his letter vnto Anthonie. minde, as is before ſet downe, he deliuered vnto Anthony a letter from the King, wherein he did write vnto him: That foraſmuch as he was not ignorant many yeeres ſince of the good will he had alwaies borne him, the which he had laboured to make ſhewe of in all occaſions, he was aſſured he woulde not prooue ingrate, but ſhew himſelfe anſwerable vnto that whereunto reaſon did binde him, & the neerenes of bloud that was betwixt them: He ſaid moreouer, that hauing vnderſtoode the right and apparant title hee had to the realmes of Portugall, he entreated him moſt hartely to ſhew himſelfe one of the firſt to receiue, and to ſweare him for his King and naturall Lord, as God had appointed; that by his example the reſt might do that whereunto they were bounde, aſſuring him that for his owne particular, he woulde holde that regard of him, to recompence and grace him, as was conuenient, referring the reſt to that which the Duke of Oſſuna and Mora ſhoulde deliuer vnto him. But this letter wrought no effect, for he then ſaide vnto the Duke, that he woulde neuer agree, making anſwere vnto the King that he could not ſatisfie him, for that being vnder the peoples protection,

he muſt gouerne himſelfe according to their mindes; and therefore vnderſtanding that the Caſtillians began to enter within the realm, he made haſte to diſpatch this buſines with the people & the Deputies; and making his profite of the poſſeſſion the King tooke, ſeeing the neceſſitie they had of a commaunder to make reſiſtance, he inducedAnthonie proclaimed King of Portugall. them to chooſe him Protector, or King: And although this reſolution was made by the moſt ſeditious and arrogant, who by force ſeeke to execute what they pleaſe, who woulde needes proclaime him King, yet were there many that woulde not yeeld vnto it, many helde it more fit to call him Protector. The Prior himſelfe was not well reſolued of this point, ſuffring himſelfe to be ledde (as in all other his actions) by the greateſt number, and his moſt fauorites; who to induce the people to performe this acte, in deſpight of ſome that woulde not aſſent, being then in queſtion to builde a fortreſſe a little without Saint Arem, where there ſtandes a ſmall chappell dedicated to the inuocation of the Apoſtles, they ſpred foorth a rumour that Anthony ſhoulde go thither the 19. of Iune, to lay the firſt ſtone, and that all the people ſhoulde worke in that fortification, labouring in ſuch an aſſembly to effect their deſires. But there needed no great arte, for the people deſirous of innouation, ranne all thither that morning. The Biſhop of Parma being innocent, and he of Guarda ofſet purpoſe, came to the chappell where maſſe was celebrated, in the midſt whereof they exhorted the aſſemblie to defence, and with darke ſpeeches to make an election: But Anthony arriuing ſoone after, making his praiers a little without the doore of the chappell, the two Biſhops went out to meete him, with their Rochets to hallow the foundation of the fortreſſe, but the ceremonie was no ſooner begun, but that Anthony Barachio an impudent fellow, (holding a handkerchiefe vpon the point of his ſword) proclaimed Anthony King, being followed with great noiſe, and acclamations almoſt of all the companie, who to aſſure themſelues of ſuch as were not of that faction, or to ſhew a certaine valour drewe their ſwordes: At that time Anthony faining a certaine modeſtie, or thruſt forwarde by his owne irreſolution, cried no, no, and ſtept forward as it were to ſtay the people. Peter Coutigno, captaine of that place with choler woulde haue ſtopt their cries, ſaying that the Prior deſired not to be called king; but this preuailed nothing, for

               Baracchio bending his piſtol againſt the captaine, put him to ſilence; by reaſon whereof he departed. 
                  Anthony whether it were for feare to ſee ſo many naked weapons about him, or that raiſed by ſuch a meanes to that dignitie, bringes feare with it, he was amaſed and trembled, giuing notable ſignes to his followers, who helping him to horſe at the firſt ſteppe he ſtumbled and almoſt fell, in ſigne of preſaging ill.  All the Nobilitie that was preſent followed him on foote, bare headed as King: And although a great part of the people were vnaduiſedly come thither, yet all followed him: From thence the Prior went to the church, and from the church to the houſe of the Magiſtrate, where finding the gates ſhut, he brake them open, and was there ſolemnly confirmed King, with ordinarie actes and writings, the which were ſigned by all the Gentlemen Portugals that were preſent, and Emanuel de Coſta Borges with a ſtanderd in his hande, pronounced with a loude voice theſe wordes, Reale, Reale, as their cuſtome is: Being then returned to his lodging, he prepared to go to Lisbone, there to be proclaimed King, as the principall place of the realme.
            In the meane time Velaſco was come to Oliuenza, where entering without ſtay by night the xix. of Iune, he was lodged by Diego de Vaſconcellos at the requeſt of the Paſſani of Eluas, and hauing the day following, requeſted the magiſtrate, and the Nobilitie, to aſſemble themſelues in the Church of Pitie, there to receiue certaine letters from the king, being all aſſembled, he deliuered them; the which were publikely read, finding them full of curteſies: The concluſion was to ſweare him king; Velaſco preſſed them to anſwere briefly. But as of light occaſions ſometimes grow important matters, ſo did it here, for the Nobilitie of this place being diuided into two contrarie factions; the one was called Loby and Gama, the other Matt s; it chaunced that the letters which the king had written vnto the Nobilitie, were by meere fortune firſt deliuered into the hands of the Loby, whereof the contrarie faction made a ſiniſter conſtruction, and the rather for that Velaſco was lodged in the houſe of one of that faction: They reſolued to contradict all, their aduerſaries ſhould propound: And for as much as at that inſtantTwo contrarie factions in Oliuenza. there were more of the familie of the Matti in office, then of the Loby, ſeeing their enimies inclined to giue place vnto the king,

they began to oppoſe themſelues, and without making anſwere to the letter, they ſent with all ſpeede to the gouernours, and preſently after going to the lodging of Velaſco, they ſaide vnto him, that they could not giue anſwere, in a matter of ſo great importance, without good aduiſe and aduertiſing of the gouernours, demaunding fower daies libertie, whereunto Peter anſwering, that he could giue them no longer time then the next day morning, they departed vnſatisfied, ſaying that they feared nothing, for that God would ſuccour them: where with Velaſco diſcontented, woulde haue ſent Fratyn, an Italian Ingeneur (who was then with him) to the Duke of Alua to requeſt him to ſende ſome troupes of ſoldiers within the view of the place to terrifie them; yet being aduiſed by his friendes that were Portugals, and finding the people affected to the king, he ſtaied: The faction of L
                     •
                  by with all their followers ſeeing the contradiction of the magiſtrate, aſſembled themſelues in councell, making an acte in writing, ſigned by them all, whereby they proteſted that they were readie to obey the king. In this time Marke Anthonie Iuſtinian a gentleman of Genoa, friend vnto Velaſco, and kinſeman to the L
                     •
                  by, aduiſed him to leaue his lodging, and to talke to the people in the ſtreetes, winning them with faire words, the which hauing effected, and gathering a great multitude about him, hee made vnto them a long diſcourſe, ſhewing the profit they ſhould receiue, in yeelding obedience vnto the king, and the hurt in following the opinion of the magiſtrate, ſeeing there was a mightie armie ſo neare them, wherewith the people who were eaſily changed ſeemed content, and following him to the Church of the holieThe Catholique king ſworne at Oliuenza. Ghoſt where the Nobilitie was aſſembled, Velaſco entred and ſaide vnto them: My maiſters what ſhall we doe? To whom Frier Aluaro in the name of the whole aſſemblie anſwered, that they were readie to ſerue his Maieſtie: Then Iustinian (raiſing Velaſco from the ground) proclaimed the kings name, the which was followed by the whole Nobilitie, and likewiſe by the people, who going to the houſe of the magiſtrate, they called for the Iudge and the Vereadors vpon great penaltie, who vnderſtanding the people was mutined, and that Philip was proclaimed king, they were afraide, and went to yeeld their obedience, the which the caſtell did likewiſe, perfourming the ordinarie actes and ceremonies; Velaſco offering

in the kings name many exemptions: In this manner but more quietly in other places, all this frontier did yeeld as Serpa, Mora, Campo maior, Arronghez; Portalegre, and in other places about the realme, they vſed the like diligence.
            At this time Anthony was gone from Saint Arem to Lisbone: the Gouernors ſeeing that ſucceed which they had long foretolde, did fortifie at Settuual, with the Duke of Bragance, and the EmbaſſadorsThe gouernors neglect the defence of Liſbone. of the Catholique King, fearing the new King would march to them. They neglected the defence of Lisbone, ſuppoſing that Peter de Cugna, captaine thereof, and Iohn Teglio, who as is ſaid, was at Belem with their procuration, woulde prouide for it, as they had commanded them, and had ſent two officers of Iuſtice, to perſwade the Citizens to make reſiſtance: But the ſaid Teglio (who it may be with greater zeale then iudgement) was one of thoſe that woulde haue the cauſe determined, vnderſtanding that Anthony was proclaimed king, was greatly diſcontented, for that of force hee muſt leaue the gouernment, and make his peace with King Philip, with greater difficultie, if he ſhoulde now ſeeke it: Beſides that, Anthony did not acknowledge the crowne from him, and therefore greatly mooued, ſeeming alſo vnto him, that as Gouernour he did wrong his companions, (they being at Settuual and he at Belem) to ſuffer the Prior ſo eaſily to become Lord of Lisbone without blowes; he treated touching the defence thereof, being perſwaded thereunto by the Magiſtrate, who requeſted him to enter the citie to that end, proteſting that if the Prior tooke poſſeſſion it ſhoulde not be their fault, which coulde not hinder it, but his who could and would not: By meanes whereof, although but coldly, he aſſembled many companies of peaſants thereabouts, the which he ſent for the guard of the citie, and to hinder the Priors entrie. He commaunded Peter de Cugna to take care for the defence thereof, being reſolute not to enter himſelfe, and hauing called to Councell, the Gentlemen that were preſent, they reſolued to ſend with ſpeed to Anthony, Diego de Soſa, and Frauncis de Meneſes, entreating him not to enter into Liſbone, nor to call himſelfe King, but onely Protector, being a name more fit for all occaſions that might happen: And although they went with this commiſſion, yet many aduiſed Teglio, that notwithſtanding all theſe demonſtrations, he ſhould not hinder the courſe

of the Priors good fortune, ſo as wauering in his opinions, not reſoluing in any thing, he was cauſe that the ſouldiers or peaſants that were raiſed about the citie, hauing neither order nor commiſſion from the Gouernors, knew not what to do, whether to accompanie the Prior, or hinder his entrie; for that Emanuel of Portugal who had proiected to make the Prior King, laboured to preuent all their reſolutions, and hauing reſolued, he purpoſely made their executions vaine. Peter de Cugna ſaide, that if Iohn Teglio woulde not oppoſe himſelfe in perſon, that he woulde not accompliſh it being his inferior; whereunto Teglio replied, that it was the captaines dutie, either of them excuſing themſelues vpon the other, both with ſeuerall intents.
            The Prior drew neere to Lisbone, but he was in danger neuer to come there, for neere to Sacaben which is ſixe miles from the citie, ſtaying in the fielde to ſpeake with Frauncis de Almeda his friende, there was a Harquebuſe diſcharged at him, wherewith Frauncis was ſlaine, and no man able to diſcouer from whence it came, they ſuppoſed it was intended againſt the Prior himſelfe. Soone after he arriued at the citie with a ſmall troupe, eſpecially of the Nobilitie, hauingAnthonie arriues at Liſbone, and proclaimed King. fewe other with him but Diego de Soſa, and Frauncis de Meneſes, and therefore they ſuffred him freely to enter, being of al thoſe that mette him proclaimed king. There were fewe at that time within the citie, both by reaſon of the plague, and for that many helde not themſelues in ſafetie, ſeeing the realme in diuiſion, on the one ſide the Catholique king entred with a mightie armie, on the other ſide were the Gouernors in a manner conformeable to the ſaide King▪ laſtly was the Prior being poore alone, & ill aduiſed, made King, by a handfull of the baſe people: So as there was not any of the Iuſtice or Nobilitie that went to viſite him, and of the ſuperior magiſtrates there was but one Vereador to be founde, the reſt being hidden: Notwithſtanding, he went to the pallace vpon the riuer, wherof he tooke peaceable poſſeſſion, as alſo of the Arcynal and ſtorehouſe of armes, he created a newe purueior, and newe officers of Iuſtice, and newe Vereadors, ſupplying all other offices that were voide: From thence he went to the Towne-houſe to be proclaimed King with ordinarie ceremonies, all the principall of the citie being aſſembled, to whom Emanuel Fonſequa Nobrega, a doctor of a bolde

ſpirite ſpake in this manner.
            
               The ſpeech of Fonſequa for the creation of Anthonie. I ſee grauen in your countenances the ioy and content which is conceiued in your harts, hauing attained to this ſo happie a daie, wherein you ſweare him king whom you ſo much deſire: I account all words friuolous to animate you thereunto: I may ſpeake vnto you with courage, for that your deſires exceede my eloquence: I know that euery ſmall delay doth not onely grieue you, but alſo greatly diſpleaſe you, that any other ſhoulde effect that firſt, which you haue ſo much wiſhed, and which was fitte you ſhoulde haue done, ſeeing that from this citie as principall, the reſt of the realme ſhoulde take their lawe. But be as ioyfull and willing to this acte as you pleaſe, be my wordes neuer ſo ſuperfluous, yet encouraged by dutie and loue, I muſt briefely deliuer vnto you my aduiſe; I will not make any particular repetition of his afflictions, nor with what iudgement he hath ſurmounted them being infinite, and the time ſhorte: Let it ſuffice you to vnderſtande as you doe, that by a fatall deſtinie he hath alwaies encountred againſt the proud arrogancie of this world: For as vertues be (by reaſon of our ſinnes) moſt commonly hatefull to princes in this age, and vices cheriſhed, as vertuous and nobly minded, he hath alwaies beene hated and oppreſſed: So as ſometimes tearming him a baſtard, ſomtimes preferring thoſe whom he ſhoulde precead, they laboured by all meanes to blemiſh that glory that did ſhine in him. I will lay aſide the diſgraces he ſuffred with king Sebaſtian, at his departure for Affricke, which others woulde haue taken for an excuſe to ſtaie, yet acquainted with the frownes of fortune, although he did iudicially foreſee that he went to his ruine, he choſe rather (with ſo great danger of his perſon, following the raſhnes of an other) to remaine a ſlaue vnto the Moores, then to blemiſh his honour with any reproch, how ſmall ſoeuer. He remained priſoner as he had foreſeene in that vnhappie day; King Sebaſtian his nephew died, before whom many other princes all heires to the crowne were deceaſed, there remained none but Cardinall Henry, who for the ripenes of his age, and indiſpoſition of his body, was thought to be of ſhort life, ſo as the realme was in a manner without heire. But the King of kings although he ſeemeth ſometimes ſlacke, yet doth he equally weigh and execute al things, prouiding ſo, that whileſt king Henry enioied

the realme, in thoſe fewe daies of his life which remained, he miraculouſlie deliuered from the hands of the Moores, him whom he intended ſhoulde be our true king: I ſay miraculouſlie, for in truth it ſeemed impoſſible that mans wiſedome coulde deliuer him, as it followed, for that according to the cuſtome of thoſe infidels, he being a prince, he ſhoulde haue beene preſented to their prince, and there kept in perpetuall priſon, or at the leaſt redeemed for the exchange of cities and fortreſſes, or for ſome great ſumme of money, yet (ſee if this were not a miracle) in ſhort time he was deliuered, and without raunſome. He returned into the realme, where fortune not yet wearie of him, croſſed him with a thouſand afflictions, all which he hath ouercome and ſurmounted by his vertues: behold him now heere, and although he ſeeme to be inuironed more then euer with enimies, yet doth he relie vpon your valour, and I in his wiſedome, that he will vanquiſh all things: Reioice then that he doth accept of this ſcepter, againſt his competitors, for the loue of you doth more encourage him thereunto, then the deſire of rule, offring to entreat you perpetuallie not as a King, but as a father, and brother to you all: Whom doe you eſteeme him to be, to whome this day we giue the empire ouer vs? It is the true ſtocke, the lawfull line, and the onely plant which remaines of our Kings, he is nephew to king Emanuel of famous memorie, borne of Lewes his ſonne, the greateſt and firmeſt pillars, that euer Portugall had, to him theſe realmes appertaine by right: but if it were not ſo as it cannot be otherwiſe, yet ſhoulde we, flying the reſt, caſt our ſelues into his boſome, for by that meanes we ſhould haue aſſured libertie, and by the reſt a moſt certaine bondage and tirannie. At the end of this ſpeech, there was great reioicing, and all cried out, a King, deliuering into his hands the ſtanderd of the citie: Emanuel Fonſeca pronounced from the windowes theſe words, as they were accuſtomed to doe, Reale, Reale, for don Anthony king of Portugall, the which was accepted by the people with great ioy: And hauing made declaration in writing of this acte, the Prior returned to the pallace, where ſoone after taking the ordinarie oath to obſerue the priuileges, and liberties of the realme, and all that other princes were woont to doe, he diſpatched his meſſengers with letters to all other cities, and places, commaunding them to ſende vnto him to yeelde

their obedience. He made many offers to the Duke of Bragance, and to the Marques of Villa Reale, entreating all other Noblemen to come vnto him to conſult of matters concerning the realme: But the Duke perſwaded likewiſe by the Deputies of the realme, to compound with Anthony, woulde not do it, the Marques went not,The flight of Teglio. and fewe others did acknowledge him. But Teglio ſeeing the Prior now become king without his helpe, making ſhe we to go from Belem (where he remained) to Lisbone to kiſſe his hands, and hauing agreed with Diego Lopez de Sequeira, captaine of three galleyes that were in the riuer, he imbarked himſelfe in one of them with the Biſhop of Leiria, Anthony de Caſtro, Lord of Caſcaies, Martin Gonzales de Camera, Emanuel Teles Barretto, Frauncis de Meneſes, Lewes Caeſar purueior of the Arcynal, with ſome others, carying with them fortie or fiftie thouſand duckats in golde, which he had cauſed to be brought from the minte at Lisbone, vſurping them from Iaques de Bard, a Florentine merchant, who was the owner. And in his departure, whē moſt men beleeued they ſhould go to the citie, they tooke their courſe towards the ſea, and went to Settuual, where the reſt of the Gouernours remained: yet two of the three galleis diſobeying their captaines, woulde not followe the foremoſt, but went to the citie. Teglio being arriued with his galleis at the mouth of the forte of Settuual, the guard of the towne woulde not ſuffer him to enter, but kept him off with their cannon, being diſimbarked a little on the one ſide, he went by land towards the Gouernors, to diſcharge himſelfe, but he was not receiued nor acknowledged of them as a companion, who both in their writings, and their ſpeeches with him, vſed him as a priuate Gentleman, and not as a Gouernour, for puniſhment of that which he had done at Belem, and at Anthony his entrie at Lisbone: And this was the only thing wherein the Gouernors ſhewed their authoritie, for in all other things they diſcouered their feare and inconſtancie. The Prior ſeeing theſe men, whereof he helde ſome of them to be his confident friendes to flie, to carrie away the money, and to ioine themſelues with the Gouernors his aduerſaries who began to fortifie Settuual, diſcouered plainly that they had intelligence with the Catholique King: that they woulde entertaine themſelues in that place, vntill the galleis of Italy, which they vnderſtood had beene trimmed at Saint Marie Porte, ſhoulde

arriue in thoſe quarters, to giue them entrie at Settuual, whereby might enſue his ruine, for that the Catholique King entring there with a great armie, the citie of Lisbone ſhoulde be in a manner beſieged, and therefore hauing firſt impriſoned ſome that were ſuſpected vnto him, and demaunded money in loane from the merchants, he reſolued with what ſpeed he could to recouer this place, either by loue or force, induced to make this haſte by the proceeding of Triſtan Vaz de Vega, captaine of the fortreſſe of Saint Iulian, at the mouth of Tagus, to whom hauing written, he made anſwere that he coulde not conſigne him the caſtell, nor hold it in his name, alleaging that he had taken an oath not to deliuer it but to ſuch as had put it into his hands, which were the Gouernors; ſo as Anthony reſeruing this for a ſecond enterpriſe, hauing haſtily and by force aſſembled the peaſants about the citie; the artiſans, ſlaues, and other people gathered togither, which in all came not to fifteene hundreth, he tranſported them to the other ſide of the riuer: but before he himſelfe would paſſe, he ſent Frauncis of Portugal, Count of Vimioſo to Settuual, to treate with the Gouernors, and to perſwade them to yeelde to his obedience; to whom he did likewiſe write, that they ſhoulde not diſhonour and vndoe themſelues, ſeeking rather to giue the crowne to a ſtranger, then to him who was their countreyman, that they ſhould come vnto him, and he would freely forgiue all things: But the Gouernors truſted neither to this letter, nor to the wordes of the Earle, being greatly bounde to the Catholique King, whereof ſome of them as fauorites to king Henry had aſſiſted to the ſentences that had beene pronounced againſt him: Therefore conſulting with the Embaſſadors of the Catholique King, they reſolued to defend themſelues vntill the comming of the kings armie, the which they expected howerly. But this practiſe ſucceeded not, for the windes were ſtill ſo contrarie, that the galleis coulde not arriue, the which the Duke of Bragance conſidering he woulde not attend but departed: The Counte of Vimioſo, deſirous to expell them from thence, hauing incenſed the people to ſedition, & aided by the guard of Halberdiers of the court, he tooke armes, and became maſter of the Porte, many ranne armed to the GouernorsThe flight of the gouernors. lodging, threatning with iniurious words to kill them: wherewith being feared and amazed, not onely the Gouernors, but likewiſe

the Embaſſadors of the Catholique King, and all the Nobilitie of the citie, which followed Philips faction, ſome fledde ſecretly out at the windowes, ſome by ſea, ſome by land, except the Archbiſhop of Lisbone, and Iohn Teglio, who onely remained, the one truſting in his calling, the other in the workes which he had formerly done in fauour of the Prior, and in his kinſemen. The Embaſſadors retired themſelues the next day into Caſtill. This act in truth was full of compaſſion, for although the Gouernors for their irreſolutions and priuate intereſts deſerued puniſhment, yet mens harts were mooued to ſee theſe graue olde men, in whom not two howres before the roiall authoritie remained, faſtned to ropes creepe out at windowes, to auoide the furie of a yoong licentious man, who had mutined the people, and the guard it ſelfe againſt them: Such of the Nobilitie as abandoning their houſes in thoſe partes, retired themſelues, were Fernand de Norogna, Peeter de Meneſes, Edward de Caſtelbianco,
               Anthonie arriued at Settuual. 
               Diego Lopez de Sequeira, Anthony de Caſtelbianco, Lewes Caeſar, and ſome others. Anthony hauing aduertiſement of their departure, paſſed the riuer, and went thither: Where he was receiued vnder a cannapie with ſignes of great ioy, & hauing giuen order to the fortification, & guard of that place as it ſeemed neceſſarie, he returned to Lisbone, againſt the aduiſe of ſom, who perſuaded him to aſſemble his forces to reſiſt the enimie, & not to repaſſe Tagus: But he did it not, ſaying, he woulde returne preſently, fearefull (as many ſuppoſed) and not holding himſelfe aſſured on that ſide the riuer: Caſcaies and the fortreſſe of Saint Iulian, did not yet obey him, yet vnderſtanding that Anthony was poſſeſſed of Settuual, the wife of Anthony
               Caſcayes & S. Iulian yeelde to Anthonie. 
               de Caſtro went from Caſcaies, after whoſe departure the citie yeelded, and the captaine of the fortreſſe of Saint Iulian, being written vnto by Anthony, that he woulde giue him fower thouſand duckats a yeere rent, made anſwere, that ſeeing the Gouernors had abandoned the realme, and that he was proclaimed king, he would hold it at his deuotion: By reaſon whereof, Baſtien de Britto, who ſerued as ſergeant maior of the citie of Lisbone, in the place of Peter de Cugna, turned head, who with certaine men gathered togither, went by the commaundement of Anthony to encampe about this fortreſſe, ſo as all places of importance about Lisbone, remained at his obedience: So did all others in thoſe parts except the

citie of Porto, which obeied not yet.
            The Duke of Bragance hauing foreſeene the ſedition which was practiſed at Settuual, being departed as it is ſaide, a little before the Gouernors flight, and gone to Portel, a place belonging vnto himſelfe, neere the frontiers of the realme towards Caſtill, ſeeing iuſtice reduced to armes, and himſelfe diſarmed, he thought it noweThe Duke of Bragance ſendes to Philip. high time to treate with the Catholique King: He ſent therefore a Gentleman to repreſent vnto him, howe peaceablie he had alwaies caried himſelfe in the perſuite of Iuſtice for Katherine his wife; that he had neuer troubled the publike quiet, nor in any thing ſurpaſſed the ordinarie tearmes of Iuſtice and reaſon, and if he had not compounded with him, the cauſe was, for that he vnderſtood his reaſons were great, neither had he meanes to do it, by reaſon of the people who woulde haue withſtoode him: Notwithſtanding he was nowe reſolute, if his Maieſtie woulde make him a good compoſition, to yeelde vnto him all the rights of the ſaide Katherine, and that being agreed, he woulde publikely ſende one to treate with him: He alleaged that his ſubiects being the thirde part of the realme, he coulde make eaſie, or greatly hinder the enterpriſe. He ſaide that the Deputies of the realme had made offer vnto him, that they would procure Anthony to leaue the title of King, and vnite himſelfe with him, for the defence of the crowne, and that in the end they ſhould agree: And that the ſaid Anthony had ſent to make great offers vnto him, the which he woulde not accept, not ſeeming reaſonable vnto him. He requeſted his Maieſtie to commaund the armie not to endomage his countrey: Heerein he ſpake truth, for although he were a quiet and religious man, yet the Philipins ſaide, that although he had beene otherwiſe, the King had no cauſe to feare his forces, for albeit he had many ſubiects, yet were they not all obedient vnto him. That the Nobilitie abhorred his rule more then any other, and that ſome of his kinſemen did him more hurt then good, by reaſon of the emulation amongſt the Nobilitie. He relied much on the equitie of his cauſe, yet feared he to bee forced by the kings power, which he ſaw prepared, ſuppoſing he would not receiue iudgement in the cauſe from any man. This feare had induced him to write to all the great Potentates in Chriſtendome, ſhewing his reaſons, and demaunding ſuccours. The like office had he done with ſome Cardinals

at Rome. He had ſent into Fraunce diuers copies of his allegations, to the end they might be diſperſed into England and other places, making great inſtance to the two Queenes to ſuccour him with mony, munition, & captaines: But his weakenes being knowne to both, although hee gaue them to vnderſtande he went to ioine with the Gouernors in defence, they returned him nothing but curteous words. And ſome ſay, that not content to vſe this diligence, to ſuch as were enuious of the kings good, he did likewiſe write to his enimies and rebels, deſiring to treat with the Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Alançon. Theſe things cauſed him more loſſe then profite, as it happens commonly to thoſe that will contend with mightie Princes, and builde their foundations vpon the ſuccours of their enimies ill willers, who wil not commonly declare themſelues, except their companion be ſtrong. Heereupon it grewe, that the King returned to the ſaide propoſitions ſo ample, and artificiall an anſwere: for (as it was reported) ſome of his letters had beene ſurpriſed by the Agents of the Catholique king, and ſome other, eſpecially thoſe he had written to Rome, were ſent to the King by them, to whom he had written them. He anſwered, that he reioiced, thatThe Catholique kings anſwere to the Duke of Bragance. in time he had auoided the ſedition at Settuual, being troubled with the danger and indignitie he might haue ſuffred: That he knewe it to be true that in the perſuite of the right of Katherine, he had carried himſelfe with due modeſtie, but by refuſing to agree with him were growne the inconueniences wherein now they were, the which he would gladly they ſhould rather haue foreſeen, then haue made triall of, with ſo great diſquietnes, and diſhonor vnto themſelues, for the which he was ſory in regarde of the neerenes of bloud, and affection, he bare vnto the ſaid Katherine; That his offer to yeelde him his right was acceptable vnto him, but he woulde haue them to vnderſtand that there was no neceſſity, to adde new actions to thoſe which God had giuen him, apparant to all the worlde. That he had then wiſhed for two reaſons they coulde haue accepted of his liberalitie, in recompence of their pretention: The firſt was, that he hoped by this meanes, he ſhoulde not haue beene forced to enter armed into the realme, and to make warre vpon his owne ſubiects, which is one of the things that doth moſt trouble him: But that good which might haue beene reaped by compoſition, was nowe

extinct by their ſlacknes, ſeeing that his armie was alreadie entred the realme: The ſecond reaſon was, the deſire to encreaſe and proſper his houſe, to do good to his children, to auoide the ruine of the eſtate, and the hazard to ouerthrow it, whereof there was yet ſome remedie, for being ſo deſirous of his good, that onely was ſufficient to mooue him to doe them good: He ſaid moreouer, that he was much amazed to heare him confeſſe with his owne mouth, that they had daily practiſed with Anthony, that they treated with a rebell who had committed ſo horrible a crime, aduiſing him in ſigne of loue, heereafter to abſtaine from all ſuch treaties, ſo contrarie to that fidelitie whereunto they were bounde, and ſo vnwoorthie of their authoritie and reputation, ſhewing likewiſe, that he marueiled they woulde ſuffer themſelues to be informed from the Deputies, who promiſed to cauſe Anthony to forſake the title of a king, which he hath vſurped, as if it were an offence capable of repentaunce, whereas they ſhoulde well vnderſtand, that they be ordinary practiſes and diſcourſes of rebels, to deceiue them as they had formerly done: And whereas the Deputies call it an accord or vnion for the defence, let them take heede that it prooue not a league, and a conſpiracie, framed to make him partaker with Anthony his offence, from the which God had yet preſerued him: He concluded that he would alwaies giue a gentle audience to that which ſhoulde be propounded on his behalfe, with intention to doe him all the grace and fauor poſſible in his demaunds. This anſwere being receiued, the Duke ſent certaine gentlemen to treat an agreement with the king, the which continued long, making vnſeaſonable demaundes on the Dukes behalfe: Notwithſtanding the King deſiring that before they proceeded further, he ſhoulde acknowledge and ſweare him for his Lorde: The matter remained in ſuſpence with ſmall content to the Duke, who found not onely the hope of his Iuſtice to fall out vaine, but likewiſe not to be fully reconciled to the king, who tooke poſſeſſion of his countries, hauing alreadie loſt Villauizoſa, one of his chiefe places, and of great importance, where hee made his aboad, although he had well fortified it.
            The which hapned preſently after the reduction of Eluas, by the meanes of a Caſtillian whom he had left within the caſtell, either truſting in him, or neglecting of it. This man hauing intelligence

with captaine Ciſneros, who was in the Dukes campe, treatedThe taking of Villauiſoſa. to deliuer vnto him in the night, one of the gates of the caſtell, the which deſcends into the ditch, thereby ſecretly to bring in the kings forces, the which he did effect. The night appointed for this enterpriſe being come, the Duke commanded Sanches d'Auila, to go with the ſoldiers he had about Eluas, and take poſſeſſion of the fortreſſe, who hauing taken their Harquebuſiers behinde them, marched ſo that night, that in the morning they came to Villauizoſa, and approching the gate that was promiſed them, they founde that although it were open, yet coulde they not enter, for that being farre from the ground, the ladder which they had brought was too ſhorte, and coulde not reach vnto it, ſo as in diſpaire to put it in execution, the day growing neere, they were readie to returne, fearing to be diſcouered. But as many times thinges are fitted to the violent courſe of fortune, the Caſtillians founde within the caſtell ditch an other ladder, which the ſoldiers within the forte had by chance left there, the which bounde to that they brought, reached vnto the gate, ſo as all the ſoldiers entred the caſtell, without being diſcouered, hauing neither guard nor centinell, but were all laide to ſleepe, hauing a mightie armie of enimies within tenne miles of them, ſo as in this manner the Duke of Bragance loſt the beſt and ſtrongeſt furniſhed place he had.
            Many were then of opinion, the King ſhoulde not go in perſon with the armie, for although ſome helde it was neceſſarie he ſhouldReaſons why the King ſhould not goe in perſon. goe, alleaging the former reaſons, yet ſuch as helde the contrarie opinion, added vnto their reaſons, that throughout all the way vnto Lisbone, and in the citie it ſelfe, they died moſt violently of the plague, although the aire did not ſeeme corrupted, that it was not conuenient to hazard the life of a Prince, who was a pillar of the Church, and Lord of ſo many Realmes. That they might anſwere vnto the reaſons of conueniencie, which was ſpoken againſt this opinion, that it was like vnto all other humane things which haue two reaſons, for waighing the one it importes much, and regarding the other, they ſeeme light: The importance of the enterpriſe is verie great, conſidering the valour of the realme, and his intereſt; but if you conſider that they oppoſe againſt the perſon of ſo mightie a king, that of Anthony a rebell, who doth ſcarſe deſerue the name

of a tirant, and that with the Duke of Alua, and ſo many Noblemen, Italians and Spaniards, you compare the Count of Vimioſo, yoong, without experience, and all the reſt of their traine, and that againſt ſo valiant ſoldiers of all nations, there come peaſants gathered togither from the villages about Lisbone, and the ſlaues of Ethiopia, you may eaſily iudge the great indignitie the king ſhoulde ſuffer being preſent in this expedition. They alleaged the like reaſon againſt the hope of good ſucceſſe; for although it ſeemed a matter eaſilie to be effected, conſidering the qualitie of the enimies, yet regarding the difficulties alleaged, the matter was in ſuſpence, remembring the examples of King Iohn the firſt of Caſtill, & Alphonſe the fifth of Portugall, either of them entring at diuers times with an armie, into other countries, and both returned flying and broken. As for the ſweete content it ſeemed the Kings entrie ſhould bring, and contrariwiſe the ſharpenes of the Duke of Alua, they ſaide it was well conſidered; yet the King remaining at Eluas, or in any other place vpon the frontiers, hee ſhoulde giue a generall content. This opinion ſeeming the better, and with moſt grounde, not onely pleaſed the King, but bred ſuch an impreſſion in the mindes of many, that it paſſed the limits, for that the cōſiderations of ſafety are limited with feare, ſo as they began to apprehend too much, ſaying, the king was not ſure at Badagios, and that he ſhoulde retire himſelfe to Ciuill, vnder colour to diſpatch away the armie, ſeeing it had already entred the realme:  for the Duke marching from the frontier, the King ſhoulde lie open to all attempts of the Portugals, who might make their courſes euen vnto the walles of the citie. That Anthony ſeeking to make this diuerſion, he might eaſilie effect it with ſo great force, as the king ſhoulde be conſtrained to retire himſelfe with ſmall authoritie, and recall his armie, although it were about the wals of Lisbone; yet woulde not the king by any meanes heare ſpeake thereof, but perſwaded ſuch as were of that opinion, that for a worlde, no, for his owne life, he woulde not retire a foote backe, but was reſolued to ſtaie in Portugall, in ſome place of the frontiers, which ſhoulde be thought moſt conuenient, and for thatThe Kings army entred into Portugall. effect reteined certaine troupes for his guard.
            The Duke of Alua who had aſſembled his armie at Cantigliana paſſed the 27. day of Iune, by the kings commandement, the ſmall

of Caya, which diuides the two realmes, entring into Portugall with great quantitie of munition and baggage, by reaſon wherof, he carried with him aboue ſixe thouſand chariots, and fiue and twenty peeces of canon, and paſſing vnder the walles of Eluas, there was nothing to be done, being already yeelded: In three daies march he came to Stremos, receiuing all places thereabouts to obedience, which might be amazed at the bruite of the armie: But for that he laboured to aſſure the kings perſon aboue all, being entred two daies iourney within the countrey, he ſent backe Peter Manrique de Padilla a knight of account, and well experienced in the warre, with two companies of men at armes, and Peter d' Ayala Marſhall of the field, an old ſoldier, with a regiment of Spaniards, who lodged at Eluas, aſſuring thoſe quarters from all reuolutions that might be feared: within Stremos was captaine Iohn Dazeuedo
               The taking of Stremos. Admirall of the realme, yoong and hardie, who put himſelfe in defence, and was cauſe that the armie made longer ſtay there, then at any other lodging: He (whē as the gouernors were yet at Almeryn) had obtained by the meanes of Martin Gonzales de Camera ſomewhat allyed vnto him, the Captainſhip of that place, and after being written vnto by Anthonie as king, he would not obey him, ſaying that he did not acknowledge any other ſuperiour then the gouernours, to whom he had giuen his oath: At this time the Duke being arriued, he ſent vnto him Peter de Luna a captaine of horſe, with letters from the king, requiring his obedience, but he refuſed to yeeld it, for the ſame reaſons he had giuen to Anthonie; he truſted more to the defence of the place, then the force thereof would warrant; and the rather for the diligence of Diego de Meneſes, who when he had ſpeech of the fortifying of Eluas, ſeeing it could not be effected, he had retired himſelfe to Stremos, thinking there to make head, and hauing animated the people to defende it, he promiſed them great ſuccours; ſo as all agreeing with the Admirall, they were reſolute to fight. At this time Chriſtopher de Mora, who went from Settuual to Badagios, paſſing through the citie, he perſuaded the Landini, chiefe citizens to yeeld obedience vnto the king, and for that it was eaſie for them to turne the people as they pleaſed, they induced them ſoone to obey: So as the Admirall remained alone in his obſtinacie, within the caſtell with ſome of his friends and

familiars, and although they laboured to bring him to obedience, yet would he not yeeld, excuſing himſelfe, that it appeered not vnto him, that the king was heire to the realme; neither did the comming of the Prior Ferrant de Toledo ſonne to the Duke of Alua preuaile; who diſcouering him to be a man of ſmall conſideration, made offer vnto him, that the Duke ſhould be bound, that whenſoeuer it ſhould appeere that the realme appertained not vnto Philip, hee ſhould reſtore him to the place he now enioyed: neither preuailed it to let him vnderſtand that he could not reſiſt, making anſwere obſtinately, that when he had done his laſt endeuour, hee woulde abandon the place with the loſſe of his life, ſeeming that he coulde not otherwiſe ſaue his honour. But this reſolution laſted little, for diſcouering from the caſtell, that the Duke had already planted his artillerie, that thoſe of the citie which had promiſed to defend him, were all againſt him, and that ſome Caſtillian ſoldiers were entred the citie, being all amazed, he reſolued to retire himſelfe, and leaue the fortreſſe, wanting courage to defend it; but in iſſuing foorth the Caſtillians tooke him priſoner, and led him to the Duke, who was in doubt whether he ſhould puniſh him corporally, to terrifie the reſt by his firſt example; but he pardoned him, and ſent him priſoner to Villauizoſa, writing vnto the king, that he tooke pitie of him, being yoong and without experience. When the magiſtrate and the citizens had taken their oath, and done the accuſtomed ceremonies to obey the king, the armie marched towardes Mounte maior by the way of Arraialos, leauing Euora on the left hande, a citie of importance, but then greatly afflicted with the plague: But to the ende it ſhoulde not remaine behinde vnyeelded,Euora yeelded. the Duke ſent thither Henry de Guzman with twentie horſe to take poſſeſſion thereof, both for that hee knewe it was vnpeopled, as alſo vnderſtanding that Diego de Caſtro (who was Captaine there) and the principalles of the citie (who were retired to their gardens thereabouts) deſired to yeeld their obedience, by reaſon whereof, the ſaide captaine and Magiſtrate being aſſembled togither a mile from the citie vnder the Portall of our Ladies church, there Conſtantine de Brito a Notarie, receiued a publike acte, whereby they deliuered the citie to his Maieſties obedience, the which they all aſſigned. The Duke beeing now arriued, in fower

daies march at Mount Maior the new, where hauing found no reſiſtance,The taking of Mount Maior▪
                although the Counte Vimioſo had beene there a little before, taking poſſeſſion thereof, he came within fower daies to Settuual, without waſting the countrey as is vſuall in warre; for he neither ſlewe nor ſpoiled the inhabitants of townes, nor ſuffered them to tread downe the corne which was then ripe: It ſeemed that Diego de Meneſes had not ſhewed the fruits, that were expected of his valour within that prouince, nor of that heate wherewith hee vndertooke the defence, hauing for that cauſe refuſed the place of Viceroy of the Indies, which is the greateſt charge giuen in that realme: For hauing firſt from the Gouernours, and after from the Prior, receiued charge to defend the ſaide prouince, hee not onely neglected the defence, but alſo retired himſelfe. He excuſed this weake reſiſtance, ſaying, that the Gouernors had deceiued him, in not furniſhing him with armes, and other things neceſſarie, and that hauing no other armes with the people, but wordes, he was enforced to retire himſelfe. But whatſoeuer the cauſe was, all that part beyond the riuer of Tagus, which is the moſt fertile within the realme, remained diſarmed and in pray to the enimie.
            
               Anthony his entrie into Lisbone. 
               Anthonie being returned from Settuuall to Lisbone, he was receiued with great ioy, being the firſt time he had entred as king: And although the infection with the diuiſion of the Nobilitie had much vnpeopled it, yet made they deuiſes with great ſhewes of ioy. I will not leaue to report as a thing remarkable, that there was a cōpany of poore women which ſell thinges in the market place, the which marching in order like ſoldiers with their armes, ſhe which was their captaine in ſteade of a Halberd carried a fire panne, ſeeming to remember the auncient battaile of Algibarotta, betwixt the Caſtillians and the Portugals, where theſe being conquerors, they vaunted that a Bakers wife had ſlaine ſeauen Caſtillians with a fire panne. The Gouernors who were fledde from Settuuall to a caſtell, whereas Ambroſe de Aguiar was then captaine, imbarqued ſecretly, and their feare was ſo great, as not holding themſelues aſſured in any part of the realme, they were conducted to Ayamont, a citie belonging to the Catholique king vpon the frontiers, where being better aduiſed, they returned into the realme, putting themſelues in Caſtromarin with great diſcontentment: There they made a decree

repeating the deedes of Anthony, from the time of king Henry vnto that day, confirming the ſentences which the ſaid Henry had pronounced againſt him, calling him rebell, and troubler of theThe decree of the Gouernors. publique quiet. They declared (giuing teſtimonie of the intention of King Henry) that king Philip was the true ſuccuſſor. They commaunded all cities, places, Noblemen, and miniſters of iuſtice, to obey him, reſigning all their authoritie vnto him: And although it ſeemed that all Iuſtice was now reduced to armes, and that the King had no neede of this decree, yet was it of great importance both to iuſtifie his cauſe with the people, as alſo for that it made many cities to yeeld.
            
               Anthonies preparation for the defence of the kingdome. But Anthony made no reckoning of this ſentence, preparing for defence vpon the right ſide of the riuer of Tagus, hee had yet no other nation but Portugals, and ſuch as he coulde gather togither, where with he could not frame a campe vpon any neceſſitie; for that the peaſants and the people, which were not entertained for the warre, coulde not abandon their trades to goe to fielde, and therefore he deſired to haue mercenarie ſoldiers, and finding that Frauncis Baretto ſtaied long to bring any from Fraunce, he diſpatched Peter Dora, then Conſul of the French in that realme, into Fraunce, giuing him money to leuie two thouſand men, he named Diego de Meneſes, his Lieutenant generall, and gaue the charge of his armie at ſea, to George de Meneſes: He vnderſtoode well the courſe of the Catholique armie, but truſting as well in the people as to the paſſage of the riuer, he ſeemed to be well able to defend himſelfe: Hee grewe doubtfull (being ill aduertiſed) that whileſt the Duke marched by ſmall iourneies towardes Settuuall, ſeeming to go thither, he ſhould take the way to Saint Arem as ſome would ſuppoſe, there to paſſe the riuer of Tagus with more eaſe, being narrow, and after to march by land againſt Lisbone, without regard of ſmaller towns; Hauing therefore grounded a great part of his hopes vpon the defence of the paſſage of the riuer, being amazed with this newes, he ſent to furniſh it with men and armes: But vnderſtanding afterwards that the Duke was in truth approched to Settuual, that he had taken Alcazar, which is neere vnto it, he called back the men which he had ſent to Saint Arem, and with ſome others which hee had forceablie gathered togither, he ſent them to Settuual, forcing the Gentlemen

one after an other, and all in generall to go thither, ſometimes with puniſhments, ſometimes with entreaties, and ſometimes with promiſes of exemptions and priuiledges: But for all this no man went willingly, and ſuch as were forced complained greatly. The Nobilitie was ſmall in number, and ſuch as were there, nothing reſolute, the people eaſie to change vpon euery light occaſion, were ſlothful, hauing conceiued an opinion that it was not lawfull to fight againſt Chriſtians, ſo as ſome fled, ſome hidde themſelues, and ſome complained. The kings miniſters being newe, men ill affected, and not faſhioned to commaund, as thoſe which had the reines at libertie, did tyrannize with abſolute authoritie, forcing al men with an vnaccuſtomed rigor, to fight againſt their wils. At that time they did tollerateDisorders at Lisbone. within the citie infinite diſorders, and thefts to draw money from the marchants: they impriſoned ſome which woulde not preſently paie that which was demaunded of them; If any tooke horſe to goe out of the citie about their buſines, ſodainly they ſaide they fledde into Caſtill, and with this ſlander they ſeaſed vpon their perſons and goods. Hee was vnhappie that did commend the Catholique kings forces, for he was either ſtoned, impriſoned, or condemned in a great ſumme of money, they tooke from all men by force their horſe and armes, who ſo had little credite or no acquaintance with theſe new officers, were ill aſſured: Such as had reckonings to make with the Courte were in ill caſe, for they were forced to paie what they did owe, without compenſation of what was due vnto them: For this cauſe, and for that they ſeemed friends to quietnes, ſome of great meanes, and verie honorable were impriſoned. The barbarous decrees, the commaundements that were made to ſurceaſe the paiments and rents, to binde euerie man to retire into the citie, and ſtande to the defence, the opening and ſpoiling of houſes that were ſhut vp were infinite, there was nothing but rigour, and rudenes, and all was executed by men who with their ignorance & bad inclination, expreſly to cauſe diſorders, made commaundements inobſeruable, the croſſes of militarie orders, eſpecially thoſe which carrie the title of knights of Chriſt, ſometime held in reputation, were now giuen to many baſe and vnwoorthie perſons, by the interceſſion of one or other. The new Chriſtians who were neuer admitted to theſe orders, nor to the degree of Nobilitie, nor to any

royall offices, were ſodainely by the fauour of this man mounted to what degree they pleaſed, not for that he was beholding to anie that had ſuccoured him in the time of his neceſſities, but for that he was eaſily perſwaded by whōſoeuer. The black Negroes to whom (for the great number there is of them in the citie of Lisbone) armes were defended, were ſodainely all armed, and as it were free, commaundement being made, that all ſuch as woulde ſerue in this warre vnder captaines, likewiſe Moores aſſigned for that purpoſe, might do it againſt the will of their maſters, and without paying; for which cauſe, all the ſlaues being aſſembled, and conceiuing the Kings commaundement to be more in their fauour then it was, ſhaking off the yoke, leauing their patrons, they ranne vnto the citie, where taking horſe and armes by force where they found them, they committed a thouſand inſolencies. They coined money in the name of Anthony, a quarter leſſe then it was woont to be, the reuenew of the crowne was waſted, for beſides that he extorted from the treaſurers what he coulde, he laide handes vpon the iewels of the crowne, and vpon that moſt renowmed (by the Portugals) ſaddle and furniture for a horſe, inriched with ſtones brought from the Indies, which was of great value. The money which Henry had gathered togither for the raunſome of the Portugals, which were ſlaues in Affricke, was conſumed and wholy ſpent: And this liberty proceeded ſo farre, that they ſought into religious houſes, for the money which they thought had beene there laide in guard, and hauing founde ſome, although it appertained to friendes, and faithfull perſons, to orphans, and pupils, yet was it ſeaſed on, without number or weight, togither with the ſiluer veſſels of the ſame churches, the which was violently carried away in ſome places, and in other places with the conſent of the religious men themſelues: Neither were the iewels and treaſure which Marie the couſen of the ſaid Anthonie left, more aſſured, being giuen to godly vſes, for the good of her ſoule: For notwithſtanding he were greatly bound vnto her, yet he tooke them, & conuerted them to his own vſe. They gaue libertie to religious men to arme themſelues, imploying them in militarie charges, to the ſcandall of the people, and all good and religious men, and without any fruite. Many of the better ſort remembring the time paſt, and that wherein king Sebaſtian raigned blamed themſelues,

for then they complained of the arrogancie of his fauorites, who they ſaide had neuer done any harme. They bleſſed king Henrie ſaying, that although he knew not, in the ſmall time of his raigne how to gouerne himſelfe as hee ought, yet did hee neuer erre in will, or ſuffred himſelfe to be ſo eaſily ſeduced by any to the hurt of another. They curſed the Gouernors who had beene ſo ſlowe to reſigne the gouernment, concluding that raſhnes had raigned with Sebaſtian, irreſolute arrogancie with Henry, confuſion with the Gouernors, and iniuſtice with Anthony. Some excuſed this laſt with weake reaſons, ſaying, there was nothing done amiſſe by his commandement, being curteous & wel enclined; but that the greedy couetouſnes of many of his followers cauſed this exceſſe, who hauing long ſuffred whileſt he was perſecuted, cōming now to rule they ſatisfied thēſelues, making things vnlawful tolerable, & that the Prior durſt not deny their demaunds, nor puniſh the offenders, both for that the time was vnfit, as alſo to auoid the name of vnthankfull, in puniſhing ſuch as had aided and ſuccoured him, when he was abandoned of all the world, for the ſeuere ſentences of King Henry.
            
         
         
            THE SIXTH BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the ſixth Booke.
               The conquest the Catholique King made of Settuual, and of the fortreſſe: The arriuall of his ſea-armie, there: The thoughts of Anthonie: The voiage of Cardinal Riario into Spaine: The paſſage of the armie from Settuuall to Caſcayes, And the retraite of Diego de Meneſes, with his Portugall ſoldiers: The confuſion of things in the citie of Lisbone: The taking of Caſcayes, and of the Castell: The death of Diego de Meneſes: Anthony Marcheth with his troupes to Belem, & to Alcantara: Apardon ſent by king Philip vnto the Portugals to draw them vnto him: The treaties of Pacification: The deliuerie of the rocke of

Saint Iulian, and of the fort: Of Cabeſa Secca being abandoned, & the taking of the towre of Belem.
            
            
               THe Duke of Alua drew by ſmall iourneies neere vnto Settuual with his armie, marching with ſmall order, and without feare, as they are accuſtomed to do in their friends countrey: But approching neere, calling the chiefe commaunders he ſaide vnto them; That although they had hitherto neglected all militarie diſcipline, being ſo farre diſtant from their enimies, now approching neere vnto them, they ought not to contemne them, chieflie hauing Settuual ſo neere, a citie of importance, wherein it was likely, there was a great garriſon: and therefore that euery one heereafter ſhoulde carefully doe his dutie, lodging his campe within the gardens on the north ſide. He preſently ſent a trumpet to ſignifie vnto them of the towne, that he was come in the name of the Catholique king to take poſſeſſion thereof as his owne, that they ſhoulde open him the gates, threatning them if they did otherwiſe, with all the miſeries that did followe warre, offring both to the inhabitants and to the ſouldiers, to leaue their perſons andThe taking of Settuual. goodes free, if they would obey. Thoſe within irreſolute and deuided, demaunded time to aduiſe: And for that we doe vſually regard our owne priuate profite more then any otherthing; the Citizens viewing from the wals, the ſoldiers to cut their vines, and ſpoile their banks of ſalt, whereof there is great aboundance in that place, would preſently haue yeelded vpon any cōdition. The marriners & ſome few ſoldiers made a cold ſhew of reſiſtance: Yet Frauncis Maſcaregnas who was captaine of the city, & Diego Boteglio the yonger, who commaunded the ſoldiers, (hauing well conſidered the weakenes of the wals, and fearing the enimie neere, whom they little regarded a farre off) were more enclined to yeeld then to anie thing elſe, neither did it behoue him to linger long vpō this reſolutiō: For Lewes Douara had practiſed with a Frenchman, who was captaine of a cōpanie within the citie, to deliuer him in the night, the gate which he had in guard, the which he had performed, but the citizens being formerly reſolued, ſent Simon de Miranda vnto the Duke, to offer him obedience, but he could not execute his Embaſſage: for the ſoldiers

of the citie, who were priuie to the reſolution of the commaunders, being iſſued foorth to go to Lisbone, they found the ſaid Simon without the gates, & ſaying that he had betraied them, they led him by force to Anthony, who kept him in priſon; notwithſtanding preſently after, the ſoldiers of the armie were brought in without condition or order. It is true that in this time the Duke had planted his cannon, & was reſolued to batter it, & for a puniſhment of the ſlack reſolution of the inhabitāts to yeeld, their ſuburbs were ſpoiled, ſo as we may well ſay, that one of the moſt important cities of the realme was taken by threatnings, neither did the wars ſeeme yet to haue any beginning. The Portugal ſoldiers (as I ſaid) departed free, only Diego Boteglio not truſting to the Duke, or ſeeming to be one of thoſe that had actually ſerued Anthony, would haue fled ſecretly by ſea, but he was taken & kept priſoner. The towre which keepes the entry of the Port, remained yet in the hands of the Portugals: The which, for that it was a place of hard acceſſe, & vneaſie to bring the cānon to it, although it were ſmall and weake, yet was it held by the Portugals to be ſtrōg, the rather being backed towards the ſea with three gallions armed, which had beene ſent from Lisbone, vnder the commaund of Ignace Rodrighez Voloſo: And although it were manned with few ſoldiers, yet had it no need of any great number, not being capable of many: It was well furniſhed with Cannoniers, ſufficient artillerie, and a captaine, who amongſt the Portugals was counted valiant. They attended at Settuual the armie at ſea with great deuotion: For beſides that the ſhort ſeaſon for galleies to liue in that ſea began to weare away, if they had made any longer ſtay, the armie at land had preſently fallen into great want of victuals and munition: For this reaſon the Duke deſired to make himſelfe with all ſpeede maſter of the fortreſſe, & therefore he greatly entreated Mendo de la Mota, (for ſo the captaine was called) to conſigne it vnto him; the which he refuſing, the Duke added ſome promiſes in the KingsThe arriuall of the Marques of Saint Crux, with the armie by ſea. name, but they preuailed not: And for that Aluaro de Baſſan Marques of S. Crux, captaine of the ſaid Catholique armie by ſea, being departed from S. Marie Porte, hauing run all the coaſt of Algarues, and reduced many cities of that countrey to the kings obedience, was now arriued in this ſea, with threeſcore galleis, and ſome round veſſels, to the great contentment of the campe. The Duke was forced,

hauing with great labour made his platformes, to plant fower peeces of cannon, and to lodge his footemen for the force thereof, to the end the galleies hauing no other porte of retreate, ſhould not be forced by the windes to runne any other courſe, whereof he gaue the charge to Proſper Colonna: But the artillerie was no ſooner planted, whereas it might annoy one of the gallions, that was approched neerer land then the reſt, the which being ſubiect to the Caſtillians cannon, which ſlew three or fower of their men, they preſently hoiſed ſailes, entring the porte to yeeld, where they were in great danger; for thoſe within the tower ſeeing them goe to the enimie, diſcharged all their artillerie againſt them: Colonna turnedThe yeelding of the fortreſſe. the artillerie againſt the forte, and beginning to batter, the aſſieged fainting, chiefly hauing viewed the armie at ſea, yeelded, vpon condition to depart with their liues, and bagge and baggage, the which were ſtricter conditions then had beene formerly offered. But the Duke although hee were well pleaſed with the ſucceſſe, yet did he not ſeeme to allow that Proſper ſhoulde receiue it with theſe conditions, ſeeing they had indured the cannon, ſeeming that the aſſieged that had not obeied vpon the firſt ſhotte of the cannon were not woorthie of pardon: Then the galleies drew neere, and hauing quietly taken the other two gallions, they entred within the Porte.
            They had ſome intelligence at Lisbone of the taking of Settuual, yet not aſſured thereof, but by heareſay and coniectures; ſo ill was the Prior informed, that by this meanes hee was ſubiect to beleeueThree poore women crying to Anthony to ſuccour Settuual. many lies: whileſt he was yet in ſuſpence, three poore women with their haire about their eares, came to the palace, weeping and crying, that for the loue of God he would cauſe their husbands to be ſuccoured, who alone fought vpō the wals of the citie againſt the whole armie of the Duke of Alua, not being reſcued by the ſoldiers, nor any other, being all traitors: And▪ for that we more eaſily beleeue what we deſire (although it be not likely) then what reaſon telleth vs, he beleeued that what theſe women had reported was true, and mooued with their teares and lamentations, turning to theAnthonies care to ſuccour Settuual. Counte of Vimioſo, who had alreadie made offer to goe, without any further aduiſe, hee commaunded him to aſſemble what forces he coulde, and for the honour of the Portugals bloud, goe ſuccour that place. To that end they aſſembled the whole people by ringing

of the bels with other diligence; ſo as they imbarqued ſome by loue, ſome by force, ſome armed, ſome vnarmed, without knowledge who ſhoulde leade them, howe they ſhoulde march, or what they ſhould do: Feare did nothing reteine them, for as yet they had neuer ſeene the enimie in the face, and therefore not onely the youth ranne thither, but old men armed with heades and handes ſhaking, imbarqued, themſelues not preſſed there unto (being freed by their age) but vpon a certaine naturall hatred: Many religious men ranne through the citie on horſebacke with their naked weapons in hande, incouraging the people to imbarque. The women of baſe condition made the aire deafe; the churches were full of ſighings and lamentations, which they powred foorth with their fooliſh praiers, whereby it ſeemed they knewe not what they demaunded, for they praied for Chriſtendome, as if they had beene beſieged by Infidels: It was the 19. day of Iuly, the heate being extreame, and theſe poore wretches who were imbarqued, (attending the courſe of the water, burned with the ſunne, not yet a ſpan from the banke) began to ſuffer thirſt, ſo as many repented, and would gladly haue returned if they could. But they remained in this eſtate vntil fowre of the clocke in the afternoone, reckoning after the French manner: at what time Anthony going alongſt the riuer, reioicing to ſee ſo many readie to do him ſeruice, there arriued a Carauell from Settuual, which brought certaine newes of the ſucceſſe; the which although it pleaſed theſe people, who (halfe dead with ſuffring) diſimbarqued againe, yet it greatly diſpleaſed the Prior, who hauing beene there in perſon, and furniſhed it with armes and munition, as much as he coulde poſſiblie, and as he thought was conuenient, he had conceiued an aſſured hope, that it ſhoulde holde out long, but ſeeing it nowe ſo ſhamefully loſt, he grewe amazed: And althoughThe counſell of Anthonie and his reſolutions. he durſt neither in worde nor deede, make ſhew of any feare, yet as it were foretelling the miſchiefe he was greatly troubled with himſelfe: And for that in the counſels of ſuch as be afflicted, ſuch ſeemes alwaies beſt, as cannot be executed, hauing loſt the occaſion, he began now to conſider, that he had done ill in not following the counſell of ſuch as aduiſed him not to take vpon him the title of King, for with the name of Protector which he might haue taken, it ſeemed vnto him that he might at al times haue made an honorable

peace.  But that nowe being king proclaimed and ſworne with ſubſcribing it in ſo many places, although he had not ſuffered any one to kiſſe his hands, nor taken the ſcepter, it ſeemed vnto him difficult, and almoſt impoſſible to leaue the title but with his life, yet hauing well conſidered by the euents, that his affaires were weake and vnſtable, he found the enimie to be mightie, and ſo farre aduaunced in the enterpriſe, that he had no meanes to ſtaie him, nor make him relinquiſh armes: He founde himſelfe abandoned, as a man may ſay, of the whole realme: For the Duke of Bragance the greateſt of all the nobilitie, hauing made an agreement with the Catholique king, had retired himſelfe expecting the euent: The Marques of Villa Reale, who had giuen him hope to ioine, appeered not, and almoſt all the other great perſonages of the realme, and a great part of the Nobilitie, had followed the examples of theſe, for that ſome went openly to Badagios, to acknowledge the Catholique king for their Lorde; ſome others ſtaied, to ſuite themſelues according to the occurrents, ſo as the leaſt part came to him, and theſe were ſuch men, as neither loue, nor their owne deſires, but feare, ſhame, and their owne priuate conſiderations had drawne vnto him; for ſome filled themſelues with vaine hopes, by reaſon of the great familiaritie they had with him; ſome others being preſent, coulde not but followe him; and others for the rigorous commaundements he had made, that euery man ſhould come and acknowledge him, came fearefully, whereof ſome ſtoode more in awe then others, for ſuch as had their goods and perſons any thing retired, made ſmall account of his commaundement; and ſuch as were neere, as more ſubiect to the execution thereof, came of force, faining great affection: From theſe counterfeit lookes of the rebellion of cities, of the retraite ofAnthonies feare. ſome to Badagios, of the report daily made vnto him, of thinges which bred doubt in him, ſometimes of the fidelitie of one, ſometimes of an other: he grewe iealous that he ſhoulde one day be deliuered into his enimies hands, by ſuch as he fauoured moſt, to warrant their perſons from the great danger wherein they were: And this iealouſie did ſo encreaſe, that he impriſoned George de Meneſes, captaine generall at ſea, hauing wrongfully beleeued, that he had treated to yeelde the armie to the enimies, and to conduct them within the Porte of Lisbone. Heereunto they added that halfe the

realme was loſt, for all that part of Tagus towards Andelouzia was poſſeſſed by the Caſtillians, and if there were any corner thereof where they had not beene, as at Begia, and ſome other places of the realme of Algarues, either they made no reckoning thereof, or they had compounded; and the other moitie of the realme, where the enimies had not beene, was almoſt all in ſuſpence, for the citie of Porto which is the principall, and almoſt all the reſt which lie betwixt the riuers of Doro and Migno, did not yet fully obey, deſiring ſince they were come to armes, to ſee who ſhoulde haue the better, onely Coimbra was more at his deuotion then all the reſt, and ſhewed it ſelfe more of Anthonies faction then the whole realme; for in the beginning of Iuly it began to riſe, at the perſwaſion of Iohn Rodrigues de Vaſconcellos, a gentleman and a prieſt, whom Anthony had ſent thither, expelling Peter Guedez gouernour thereof, who fledde with the Corygidor in great hazard of his life, and if the plague had not then afflicted the citie, the diſorders had beene greater; yet this was but one citie onely: whereas contrariwiſe Saint Arem, the firſt place where he was proclaimed king, beganne to riſe againſt him, for the pacifying whereof, he ſent Emanuel de Sylua, one of the firſt moters of this popular humour which made him King; ſo as he had ſcarce any citie remaining but Lisbone, whereof he had no great confidence, although the common people by their accuſtomed braggings, ſhewed him great affection; in this ſo apparant danger hee founde not any of ſo many Potentates enclined to ſuccour him, who in reaſon ſhould not willingly haue ſeene his enimie aſpire to ſuch greatnes. So as afflicted with theſe thoughts, he hadThe reſolutions of Anthony, and of his counſell. eaſily followed the counſell of an accorde, although the fidelitie of the Portugals, and the name of King woulde not ſuffer him, yet hee had no man about him that coulde perſwade him, but was cured by contrarie remedies: For taking counſell with Diego Boteglio the elder, his familiar, who had followed him in all his diſgraces; and with thoſe of the houſe of Portugall; although his flight, if he would haue attempted it, were ſtopped, and ſmall hope of victory in battaile, yet coulde he not agree and yeeld to fortune, but reſolued toThe Biſhop of Guarda ſeconds Anthony. defend himſelfe: In which reſolution he was confirmed by the Biſhop of Guarda, who as a bolde man woulde haue his opinion paſſe in all things: For he ſaide the Catholique king was not ſo mightie

as was ſuppoſed, that his Spaniſh ſoldiers, were new and vntrained, that he woulde not drawe foorth of Italy his trained men, fearing that being buſied in Spaine, the realme of Naples, or the ſtate of Millaine ſhoulde reuolt: That the Italians and Germaines were few in number, for beſides there were many dead, it was not ſafe to bring any great numbers into Spaine, a prouince that is weake, and hatefull to all other nations: That at this preſent when as the brute ſhould be of his taking armes, the States of Italy, of Nauarre, and of Arragon woulde rebell: That the Turke woulde deſcend vpon his realme of Naples: That Caſtill it ſelfe being greeued and ouercharged with impoſtes, woulde reuolt: That Fraunce, England, and a part of Germany, would come preſently with many men to his ſuccours, or at the leaſt in aſſailing the other prouinces of the Catholique king, diuert the warre, ſaying, it had not yet ſucceeded, the time being too ſhort to giue them notice of his election, or receiue an anſwere: That the realme was mightie enough of it ſelfe to defend it ſelfe, on this ſide the riuer, vntill his friends had meanes to ſuccour him: Theſe things being deliuered vnto him by his friends with ſo great efficacie, and faining to haue receiued aduiſe, they did ſomewhat encourage Anthony, beſides that, the deſire to raigne makes the vnbeleeuing, credulous: Theſe men beſides their aforeſaide priuate paſſions, although they did well vnderſtand the weaknes of the realme, and the lightnes of their reaſons, were blinded with two things, whereby they perſwaded Anthony from compoſition.The counſell of Anthony ill grounded. The one was, that knowing the offence to the Catholique king to be ſo great, that although they ſhoulde obtaine their pardon, yet ſhould they neuer receiue grace nor fauour, but remaine ſtill in feare of their liues: The other was to enioy in the meane time the gouernment of the realme, the which in a manner was all in their hands, attributing vnto themſelues the principall offices, ſo as for the affection they ſhewed vnto the crowne, it ſeemed that Anthony bare them reſpect, and in a manner ſubiection, ſo as the feare of life, and the ſweetenes of rule, made them obſtinate. Amidſt theſe doubts, the Prior was not without hope of ſome ſuccours from Fraunce, for that Frauncis Baretto being firſt of all ſent by the Gouernors, and then the Conſull of the French by himſelfe, with ſome little money, he expected at the leaſt one of them ſhoulde appeare

with men, although the Gouernors had ſent Baretto more to pleaſe the peoples deſire, with this ſhewe, then for any will they had hee ſhoulde worke it in effect, being diſpatched with ample commiſſions, they daily by their meſſengers reſtrained, and in a manner reuoked them, ſo as he effected nothing of importance: And although that Anthony had written vnto him, yet was it late, and the Conſull of the French hauing receiued money, ſtaied ſtill in Fraunce to take his pleaſure, ſo as they expected ſuccours from thoſe parts in vaine, chiefly by reaſon that the Agents of the Catholique king laboured greatly that court, to keepe the Portugals from their deſire. True it is, that when Anthony founde them ſo ſlowe in comming, and that the Catholique Kings galleies were maſters of the ſea, he began to be out of hope. Then grew a confuſion and diſorder in all thinges, and foraſmuch as their mindes were greatly troubled, all without reſt, and all terrified, it chaunced that the night following the daie, when as they had receiued newes of the loſſe of Settuuall, by reaſon of the flight of ſome Caſtillian marchants, who held not themſeluesAn allarum at Lisbone. ſecure within the city, they tooke an allarum, with great amaſement, crying that the enimie entred by many places, and as there was no ordered diſcipline, nor any man that knew what they ſhould vndertake, the feare was ſo great, the confuſion ſuch and ſo vnreaſonable, the running of people vp and downe to demaund what it was, and to ſeeke for flight, adding thereunto the terror of the night, in ſo great and well peopled a citie, that there coulde not be ſeene a greater confuſion. And although at the riſing of the ſunne hauing diſcouered the truth, this feare vanquiſhed, yet did there a greater ſeaze vpon euery mans minde: for vnderſtanding in trutth the Duke to be ſtrong, they began to heare newes of the ſoldiers inſolencies, which disbanded and drewe daily neerer, giuing no ſmall aſtoniſhment to ſee certaine Negro ſlaues returne wounded, who hauing raſhly paſſed with their enſignes to the other banke, were ill entreated by ſome horſe and ſhot of the enimie: They founde that Anthony made no preparation, neither had he any forces to reſiſt, gouerning himſelfe with ſmall iudgement, and therefore he neither knew how to fight, nor which way to flie, neither yet how to yeelde himſelfe: He was daily in counſell with his men, but as he ſuffred himſelfe to be gouerned by many, whoſe authorities were equall,

and their opinions diuers, ſo did he neuer reſolue any good thing,Anthony offers to compound. as it hapneth often in the like accidents. They then propunded more plainly then before the treatie of an accorde, and although ſome, who before did ſeeme braueſt, ſhewed themſelues nowe more milde, yet for that the Counte of Vimioſo being a yoong man, perſwaded to warre, no man durſt contradict him: He affected the charge of generall, but hee knewe not by what meanes to diſplace Diegode Meneſes, who enioied it, ſo as contrarying one an other, they prouided ſlowly for things neceſſarie, whereunto was a great hinderance, the credite that Anthony gaue to Edward de Caſtro, a rich yoong man, to whom he was bounde, hauing furniſhed him with money, who deſirous to ſhew himſelfe valiant, obtained a commiſſion to aſſemble what horſe he coulde vnder his cornet, imploying him in matters of greater authoritie, then was fitte for his baſe qualitie.
            
               Cardinall Riario ſent Legatinto Spaine. His holines hauing intelligence of the refuſall the Catholique king had made, touching his entermedling in the cauſe, doubted leaſt the wars of Portugall ſhoulde alter the quiet of all Chriſtendome. In the beginning hee had ſhewed himſelfe newter to both Kings, ſeeming to bee doubtfull in himſelfe to whether part hee ſhould encline: whether vnto Henry that woulde giue the crowne vnto the Dutcheſſe of Bragance, or to Philip that ſought it for himſelfe; for by reaſon of ſtate he ſhould not be wel pleaſed to ſee theſe two realmes vnited, whereby the Catholique king ſhoulde become more mightie and ſuperior in forces, to all other princes: yet did he not willingly ſeeme to oppoſe againſt him, fearing to diſpleaſe a Prince that had deſerued well of him: But vnderſtanding that the two kings were agreed, and that Henry had changed his minde, and laboured to giue the realme to Philip, he then made it manifeſt that he would fauour Anthony, and the Portugals, the which was more apparant after the death of King Henry, when as hee laboured to haue the cauſe of ſucceſſion ended by ſentence: But Philip in regard of the qualitie of the iudges, deteſted this deciſion. But his Embaſſadors hauing laboured in vaine in this reſpect (Philip growing iealous, and not greatly truſting the Popes good meaning) woulde not put to compremiſe, that which he ſeemed to holde certaine: His holines determined to ſende a Cardinall into Spaine, expreſly

to treat vpon this buſines: Therefore before the Prior was proclaimed king, he diſpatched Cardinal Alexander Riario his Legat vnto Philip, with commiſſion to diſſwade the king from armes, and from thence to paſſe into Portugall, to fauour this buſines, with commiſſion likewiſe to offer himſelfe for iudge in the Popes behalfe vnto all the pretendents.
            
               The diſcourſe of the Spaniards vpon this Legation There were diuers diſcourſes in Spaine vpon the comming of this Legat; and although the Caſtillians feared not his ſentence, ſeeming hee ſhoulde not offer himſelfe alone to determine ſo great a matter in Spaine, if he had no meaning to pronounce it in fauour of Philip; yet they helde it not conuenient to put the matter into his hands, being of opinion that the Pope vnder colour to perfourme the office of a generall father, came (as it is ſaide) to make himſelfe abſolute iudge of realmes:  that beſides the extraordinarie authoritie he ſhoulde draw vnto the Apoſto like ſea, hee ſhoulde binde the king vnto his houſe, by giuing him a kingdome. For this cauſe the King hauing intelligence of his departure from Rome, deſirous to take poſſeſſion of the realme before his arriuall, hee commaunded throughout all Spaine where he ſhoulde paſſe, that he ſhoulde be entertained and receiued with all poſſible pompe, whereof the Legat taking no heede, he accepted of all their kindnes. For this cauſe, and for that the voiage was long, he ſpent much time; being arriued at Badagios, he found that the affaires had taken an other forme then when he was at Rome: For he vnderſtood that Anthony was King, and that Philips forces were entred Portugall, being then at the wals of Settuuall: Finding therefore the matter he had to treate of thus altred, he ſent to his Holines for new direction, being in the meane time lodged without the citie in a cōuent of religious men which go barefoote, he ſent Traian Mario Apoſtolike Prothonotarie, to viſite the King, who receiuing him with great fauor, ſaid vnto him, that he was right ſorie, that by reaſon of his ſicknes he could not go to meete the Legat, as he was bounde; but when God ſhould giue him health he woulde then performe it, ſuppoſing by this meanes to entertaine him the longer, that the Cardinall (deſirous to enter with accuſtomed ceremouies) would attend his recouerie, and in the meane time the Duke of Alua ſhould take poſſeſſion of the realme. But the Legat ſeeing his indiſpoſition, & finding

how much delay did import, craued leaue to come to him by nightThe Legat viſites the King. priuately in coach, the which with great difficultie was graunted, comming vnto him one night, accompanied with the Duke of Oſſuna, and the Earle of Chinchion: But this audience was of ſmall effect, for the Legat by the alteration of the affaires being irreſolute, and the Catholique King moſt reſolute to proceede in this enterterpriſe, truſting more to armes, then wordes, there was no agreement, the king ſaying, that the matter was ſo farre aduaunced, as it coulde admit no treating. The Cardianll was lodged in the houſe of the Marqueſſe D'Oignion, not being receiued at his entrie with the ceremonies accuſtomed for a Cardinall Legat: Hee remained a while without doing any thing, but to effect the Popes cōmiſſion, he would paſſe into Portugall. The King who deſired to ſtay him, entertained him all he could, ſuppoſing that the Legat being within Lisbone, it woulde be ſcandalous to goe againſt him with an armie: Moreouer, he had no great confidence in the Legat, but held him as ſuſpect, for that being before in Portugall with Cardinall Alexandryn, he had entred a ſtrict league of amitie with the Duke of Bragance, one of the pretendents, who had lodged and entertained him: So as to delay his departure, the King being now recouered of his ſicknes, ſent vnto him, that he woulde not haue him take his iourney before he had made his entrie with the ceremonies accuſtomed to a Cardinall Legat; and therefore requeſted him to go out of the citie, and he would meete him with due ceremonies, the which he did: By meanes of which delay, cauſing ſome to aduiſe him not to depart, he entertained him ſo long that he went not.
            The Duke of Alua hauing nowe taken Settuuall, he haſtened forward: for the realme of Algarues and many other cities in thoſe parts, hauing ſent him word that Lisbone being taken, they would obey, he held all that reduced, that lieth on this ſide Tagus towardsThe ſundrie opinions for the paſſage of the army. Caſtill, meaning to paſſe his armie on the other ſide of the riuer, and ſo march againſt Lisbone: He ſtoode in ſuſpence where he ſhould paſſe, whether beneath Lisbone towardes the mouth at Caſcayes, or about againſt Almeryn, and paſſe at Saint Arem, or elſe to ſende the galleis, although with ſome daughter within the riuer of Tagus, coaſting along the left banke, and he himſelfe to goe to Almada or Caſillas, there to imbarque with his armie, and ſo to paſſe to the

other ſide: The paſſage of Caſcaies albeit it were neerer, yet was it more dangerous: For although hee might well paſſe from Settuuall with his galleis, yet was there not any ſhoare, or conuenient place to lande, which was not fortified and furniſhed with artillerie, ſoldiers, and forts, whither the galleis could not approch without great danger; beſides hee was aduertiſed that Diego de Meneſes was there in fielde with many men. To goe to Almeryn hee conſidered that he ſhoulde finde no barkes, being all drawne to the other ſide; if hee carried any with him, they were but few, and to builde them there, it was a matter of long delay, and the largenes of the riuer woulde not ſuffer him to make a bridge: And although poſſible in ſome places hee might wade through, yet the march was long being aboue threeſcore myles, that to doe it in ſo hotte a ſeaſon, in a drie countrie, without water, with a great armie, and much baggage, was a painfull thing: It might prolong the warre, and looſe their reputation by turning backe, beſides they doubted reſiſtance vpon the paſſage in thoſe parts: To goe to Almada and ſende the galleies within the riuer, it was a Counſell approoued of the greateſt part, and eſpecially of Lewes Douara, ſaying, it was a moſt aſſured thing, that from the banke they might batter the enimies armie with their cannon, paſſing their armie eaſily, and ſo become maſter of the citie without any loſſe, proouing that neither the rocke of Saint Iulian, nor the fort of Cabeſa Secca, coulde greatly endomage their galleies. But the Duke preferring the ſhortnes of the perill, enclined rather to paſſe at Caſcaies, then at any other place; and therefore.The armie paſſeth at Caſcaies. hauing taken aduiſe of the Portugals, who had fledde out of Portugall into Caſtil, & were then come with the armie, chiefly of Anthony de Caſtro, Lord of Caſcaies, who knew the countrey well, hauing againe viewed the ſea-coaſt, reſolued againſt the opinion of many to paſſe at Caſcaies, and hauing made ſhewe to march with his armie to Saint Arem to deceiue the enimie, hauing in a manner imbarqued all his foote in the galleies, he tooke that courſe. And for that Diego de Meneſes was at Caſcaies preparing for the defence, the galleies being within view of the citie, they made ſhew to turne their prooes to that place which is called S. Anthonies ſhoare, the which the Portugals had fortified, fearing the enimie would come

thither, as a conuenient place for deſcent: They made this ſhew to draw Meneſes from all other parts to come thither, to make reſiſtance, the which ſucceeded happily for the Duke; for ſuch as wereThe diſimbarking of the Dukes armie. in guard in other places, aſſembled themſelues there: The galleies hauing a while runne this courſe, the caſtell of Caſcaies diſcharging ſome cannon ſhot againſt them, turning their ſtems to the place which they call the old ſhoare, which was rough and vnacceſſible, finding it vnfurniſhed, it was eaſie to diſimbarque; although before hee were in ſome doubt whether he ſhoulde proceede or returne backe, both for that the winde was growne contrarie, as hauing diſcouered vpon the hilles ſome armed men, doubting the ſucceſſe woulde be but badde, yet he reſolued to paſſe on. It is ſaid, that at that time one of the Dukes eldeſt captaines, and verie familiar with him, drawing neere vpon colour of ſome other conference, ſaide vnto him in his eare, that this diſimbarking, was rather fit for a Generall of fiue and twentie yeeres, then for one of his age, who houlding him by the ſhoulder anſwered, that he could not denie it, neither could he omit to do it; not withſtanding his enimies were without experience; when as the galleies diſcharged their artillerie, the place remained without defence, and the armie landed without contradiction.The diſpoſition of the Dukes armie.
            
            The firſt ſoldier that went a ſhoare was a Hargabuſier, who hauing choſen a place of leaſt danger, turned his face to the enimie, leauing behinde him ſufficient ſpace to fourme a ſquadron: Two others which followed him were on each ſide, a little behinde him in equall diſtance, making a triangle equilaterall, beſides theſe two came three others, and then ſixe, and ſo the number ſtill increaſing they went in ranke, the one greater then the other, ſtretching foorth themſelues behind the point of this triangle, making the bodie ſtill greater without looſing the forme, ſo as it grewe to as great a proportion as the place coulde conteine, the which were all put into this forme, after whom the Duke diſimbarked. Before this ſhoare was a mountaine of harde acceſſe, behinde the which lay Diego de Meneſes with his troupes, hauing planted vpon the toppe thereof, and betwixt certaine rockes, ſome ſmall peeces of artillery, to hinder their deſcent, but they coulde not vſe them, for they were not planted in any place to endomage the galleies; the which being

diſcouered by the ſoldiers which landed, ſome of them disbanding from the triangle with their muskets, ſeaſed vpon the cannon, abandoned by their cannoniers, which were retired behinde the mountaine, where the reſt of the Portugals ſtood: The triangle being finiſhed, the Duke thruſt foorth the point thereof, and ſtretched outThey charge the Portugals, who retire. the ſoldiers as well as he could in a ſquare forme to march, hauing aſcended the mountaine by the eaſieſt way, ſeeing the enimie amazed, neither to flie nor to defend themſelues, & without any forme of lodging: He ſent about fowerſcore ſhotte to entertaine the skirmiſh, which followed with great diſaduantage to the Portugals, who being leſſe experienced in ſhooting, and vnfurniſhed of muskets were often and a farre off beaten by the enimie; when as their ſhot could not reach them. So as amazed with the death of ſome of their men, all the reſt began to retire, with no ſmall diſorder towards Caſcayes, from whence Meneſes ſaide they ſhould returne to charge the enimie: by reaſon whereof the Duke remained maſter of the fielde with greater facilitie then he expected; the which was a great ſigne that all the other things ſhould ſucceed fauorably, ſeeing in this of ſo great importance, hee had ſo happie ſucceſſe. Euery man ſuppoſed, (and the Portugals more then all the reſt) that the Duke ſhoulde haue founde more trouble in this paſſage then hee had; for beſides the fortifications made in diuers places, they truſted to the diſcommoditie of the ſhoare, and in the valour of the ſaide Meneſes, 
               Who (hauing beene a captaine at the Indies) had (but moſt by his liberalitie) gotten reputation amongſt this nation. But foraſmuch as the Portugals deceiue themſelues moſt of any nation in iudgement of themſelues, the like hapned in the opinion they had in this their captaine: yet were they not deceiued in their iudgement touching the vneaſie deſcent, for ſo it was; but theſe diſcommodities are eaſily ſurmounted, where there is no reſiſtance. Many Portugals hauing ſeene this vnhappyThe blames of Meneſes, and his excuſes. ſucceſſe, accuſed the captaine of cowardiſe, who durſt not attende the enimie vpon the banke to defende him from the ſhoare, or to aſcend the hill; ſome (ſeeming vnto them impoſſible that a man of that account ſhould haue ſo ſmall valour) charged him with diſloyaltie, ſaying that he would not fight, hauing beene corrupted by the Catholique Kings miniſters. Hee excuſed himſelfe weakely,

ſaying, that the ſoldiers he had, being gathered togither of all ſorts, and fearefull, woulde not fight, but doubting againſt reaſon of his fidelitie did mutine againſt him, and would not obey.
            
               A confuſion in the citie of Liſbone. Theſe things did greatly amaze both the Prior and the whole citie of Lisbone, for Caſcayes being but fifteene miles from the citie vnwalled, and weake, they feared the Duke being maſter of that place, that the enimeis might make their courſes daily euen vnto the pallace gates. And this feare, which often worketh the like effects in cowardes by diſpaire, that inconſideratenes doth in raſh heads being mingled with choler, did ſo trouble Anthony, that hauing rung the bels, and giuen the allarum, with great diſorder and confuſion, he aſſembled the whole people within the pallace yarde, ſome on horſebacke, ſome on foote, ſome armed, ſome vnarmed, ſaying, he would go to field againſt the enimie.  But at the ſame time there arriued at court two religious men, who ſaying they came from thoſe parts, confirmed the enimies diſcent, and with all affirmed that they had bin in skirmiſh, and that the Caſtillians had the woorſt, hauing loſt many of their men, and ſome of their principall captaines: The which being beleeued, turned their ſorrow and ringing of bels, into feaſts, and ſounding of trumpets, and ſhooting of artillerie, the which they diſcharged for ioy: yet ſoone after they vnderſtoode the truth; but for that it was late, they deferred the departure of Anthony with his men vnto the next day morning. In the meane time all things were ſo troubled, and ſo full of libertie, that a falſe bruite being ſpred abroad, how that George de Meneſes (who was priſoner within the caſtell) practiſed to eſcape, all the people armed, yea the women ranne thither, whom if a Iudge had not defended, although they found him there, and not attempting any thing, they had murdered. The day following, returning to aſſemble the people in furie, hauing ſtill newes of the enimie, without conſideration whitherAnthony goes towards Caſcaies. they marched, or what they had to do, Anthony departed with theſe men towardes Caſcayes, but hauing marched three miles, being arriued at Belem, his choler ſomewhat qualified, returning backe to viewe ſuch as followed him, hee founde his number leſſe, and in woorſe order then hee expected; for who ſo had a pike had no ſworde, and hee that had a Harquebuſe, had no match, and altogither were not aboue a thouſande foote, and fiue

hundreth horſe, after the Genette manner: For although they had aſſembled a great number within Lisbone, yet many vpon their departure were retired to their houſes: Standing a while in this eſtate, with the Count of Vimioſo, he called all the nobilitie he had about him to councell, demanding of them what they ſhould do: Sodainly there grewe a mutinie amongſt this people, who cried out that they ſhoulde march on, vowing to kill any that ſhoulde ſpeake of their retraite, before they had gotten the victorie, and chaſed away the Caſtillians: For this cauſe ſome leſſe blinded, who perhaps woulde haue ſhewed the Prior his weakenes, and aduiſed him to retire, durſt not ſpeake: But the ſunne ſetting, neceſſitie made his troupes feele ſome part of thoſe inconueniences, whereof they were yet ignorant, for deſiring to eate, there was not any bread to be found; ſo as the vaine preſumption of this people being vanquiſhed by hunger, in a few howres, they all returned backe full of confuſion.
            
               Caſcaies taken and ſpoiled. The Duke being lodged this night neere vnto our ladies church of Guida, the day following hee went to Caſcaves, which place being vnprouided of defence, was ſpoiled by the ſoldiers, againſt the promiſe which the Duke had made to Anthony de Castro; yet the inhabitants had in a manner abandoned it: There did he paſſe his horſe in galleies from Settuuall, with the reſt of the armie, artillerie,The caſtell taken. munition, & baggage, incamping round about the caſtell of the ſaide towne, into the which Diego de Meneſes had retired himſelfe, vnknowen to the Duke: And although this ſeemed no fortreſſe of defence, yet the Duke hauing ſent a trumpet thither to will them to yeelde, theſe miſerable wretches truſted ſo much in themſelues, that breaking the law of nations, they ſhot at the trumpet, and prepared for their defence, ſaying, that they were all reſolued to die. Sodainly the artillery was planted, and for that the wals were weak, hauing with fewe ſhot made a great breach, they found their owne faulte too late, reſoluing to yeeld: And although they made certain ſignes from the wals, yet thoſe without woulde not vnderſtande them, ſo as lifting vp a white cloth in ſigne of peace, he which helde it, being diſcouered vpon the wals, the ſoldiers that were in guard, made many ſhotte at him, and ſlew him, which gaue ſmall hope of helpe to the aſſieged: Yet making an other ſigne, and ſeeing the batterie

ceaſed not, the which had now made a great breach, diſpairing of pardō, viewing the ruined wals, without any other embaſſage or compoſition, they opened the gates, where the ſoldiers entred without any reſiſtance: There they founde Diego de Meneſes, who with a Portugals confidence, ſuppoſing he had not greatly offended, ſent to tell Anthony de Caſtro who was with the Duke that he was there, that as one gentleman ought to do for an other, he ſhoulde obtaine his pardon, and take him into his charge, procuring him a barke toDiego de Meneſes beheaded, & Henry Pereira hanged. go vnto the Prior. But the Duke had him no ſooner priſoner, but hee cut off his head, and cauſed Henry Pereira captaine of the fortreſſe, with ſome other of the principals to be hanged, to terrifie by this firſt execution the captaines of other forts, that ſhould be obſtinate in reſiſting. The furie and confuſion which the newes of theſe euents cauſed in the citie, was incredible; ſo as, if by chaunce the Peaſants tooke any of the enimies priſoner (as it often happens, with ſuch as for deſire of pillage ſtraggle from the campe) hee was moſt miſerable: for whileſt they ledde him bound, ſuch as were armed with their armes, religious men with their ſtaues, women and children with ſtones, did ſo pitifully handle him, as happie was hee that coulde ſtrike him, and their licentious libertie was ſo great, as it was lawfull for any one (though moſt baſe) and for euery ſlaue to wrong any ſtranger whatſoeuer, to impriſon him, and ſende him to the galleies; for charging him to be an enimie, the whole people at the leaſt motion would riſe and execute what they pleaſed, were it right or wrong.
            
               Anthony ſeeing nowe all hope of defence vpon the paſſage of the riuer loſt, and a mighty enimie ſo neere him, ſought ſome remedie for his affaires. All conditions preſented vnto him, were moſt hard: For to iſſue foorth and fight he iudged it a folly, finding his defect of men to vanquiſh; much leſſe to bring the battaile in queſtion: To defend the citie it was impoſſible, for the greatnes thereof being without wals and weake: His flight by ſea was ſtopped by the galleies, he woulde not hazard to eſcape by lande, being vnable to carry with him many iewels, and ſome money which he had gathered togither; and to compounde with the Duke was brother vnto death: So as wauering in theſe thoughts, the magiſtrate of the chamber of Lisbone went vnto him, ſaying, That ſeeing the enimy

was ſo neere and ſo mightie, they would not bring the ſafetie of the citie in queſtion, nor ſo gouerne themſelues, that being weake it ſhoulde be a praie to the ſoldiers: that therefore hee ſhoulde prepare to iſſue foorth and defend it, the which if he did not, the citie coulde do no leſſe then prouide for her owne ſafetie. He anſwered, that the time was nowe come when as they ſhoulde aide him with men, entertained at their owne charge, which doing, he hoped with many others which hee had aſſembled, God woulde giue him the victorie: but the magiſtrate excuſed they coulde not do it, for the great charge they had beene at by reaſon of the plague; whereunto he replied, that within two daies howſoeuer, he woulde frame his campe, and march againſt the Duke: For this cauſe, hauing letAnthonie marcheth towards Belem with his men conſuſedly. paſſe the fourth day of Auguſt, moſt vnhappie to the Portugals, for the loſſe of the battaile in Affrick, and hauing left ſome of his moſt precious things in certaine religious houſes, he commaunded that all ſoldiers which had beene long before inrolled, and all the people of Lisbone without exception of perſon whatſoeuer, ſhould march towards Belem; the which was executed with great rigour, forcing many to go in perſon: For although the hatred againſt the Caſtillians were in generall, yet the tailor, the ſhoemaker, the handicrafts men, and the peaſants, who bragged, that they alone woulde conquer the whole world, did not willingly leaue their houſes, but fainting daily, they choſe rather to encounter with wordes then bullets, beſides, being accuſtomed to an other trade, and vnfit for warre, they had not beene trained to ſhoote in a Harquebuſe, vnapt to carrie, much leſſe to mannage a pike: So as of this forced and tumultuarie people they had aſſembled eight or ten thouſand at Belem, whither in the ende Anthony went, who ſtill doubtfull, and ill aduiſed, without any reſolution, expecting what time woulde counſaile him. The reſolution whereon he moſt depended was, that if the Duke came againſt the citie, to meete him vpon the waie, with ſome aduantage if he coulde, and giue him battaile, propounding like a deſperate man, either to vanquiſh or to die: yet ſoone after, when the occaſiō was preſented, he could neither effect the one nor the other. His troupes lay not encamped, but were diſperſed heere and there, within the houſes of that ſmall place, vnder the porches of the monaſterie, and other ſuch like, without either forme or

ſtrength of a lodging. He had no captaine of experience, no marſhall of the fielde, nor ſergeant that coulde commaund the ſoldiers, lodge them, and put them in battaile if neede were. Sforce Orſin a yoong man, and valiant, but of no great experience, was come out of Italy, at the brute of theſe warres, yet being a ſtranger and alone, he was not obeied, neither did they greatly truſt him: The priuate captaines of companies had no experience, and there was ſo great want of men, that ſome friers were made captaines of the Moores, and of the ſcum of the people, carrying in one hande their croſſes,Religious men deuided into factions. and in the other their armes. It is not to be forgotten (as a thing not accuſtomed) the mutinies growen in religious houſes, where being deuided into factions, fewe were affected to the Caſtillians, few remained newters, and infinite were thoſe that affected the rule of Anthony, for the fauouring of whoſe cauſe, they committed manie diſorders: The prieſts were no more temperate then the reſt, many whereof hauing left their prieſtly habite, were gone to field armed: In this confuſion Anthony remained three daies at Belem, whileſt the Duke approched ſlowly: The fourth day, hee conſidered that although there came ſtill vnto him ſome ſoldiers which had beene leuied in all the cities of the realme, yet the armie diminiſhed daily, for that the inhabitants of the citie left him, who hauing their houſes neere, not accuſtomed to the diſcommodities of warre, fled from him, therefore he ſent to Lisbone, commaunding vpon great puniſhments to bring vnto him by force, al ſuch as ſhould be found armed, or vnarmed, defending that no man ſhoulde retire to anie other place, but where he was, deſiring that as well the cowardes as the valiant, ſhoulde runne the like fortune with him; ſuppoſing (as king Sebaſtian had done to his loſſe) it were poſſible to force men to fight that were both vnskilfull and vnwilling: And foraſmuch as his onely hope conſiſted in the peoples fauour, to the ende they ſhoulde follow him more willingly, he graunted vnto all (but eſpecially to thoſe of his traine, free libertie, the which carrying with it confuſion, was cauſe of great harme; for as the whole citie was filled with Negroes and Peaſants, the quieter ſorte had more feare of the people thē of the enimy, yet was there not ſeene any one to powre foorth his hate, or commit any priuate reuenge, of ſmall or great importance, not for that there are not many diſſentions and factions

amongſt them, but being more apt to reuenge themſelues by the toong then by ſworde: All rigour to force men to the fielde preuailed little, for feare encreaſing with this diligence, they hidde themſelues the more, the which Anthony perceiuing, finding himſelfe in no aſſurance at Belem, hauing the enimies campe ſo neere, and a conquerour, he was aduiſed to paſſe on, and to lodge about the wals of the rocke of Saint Iulian, ſuppoſing that two good effects woulde grow thereby, the one, that his armie ſhould be more ſafe vnder the fauour of the cannon, and of the tower, the other that he ſhould aſſure this forte, being the only defence of the whole realme. But this aduiſe being diſallowed of the greateſt part, hee retired himſelfe by the counſell of Sforce Orſin to Alcantara, a mileAnthonic retires to Alcantara. neerer the citie, putting a riuer betwixt him and the enimie, the which hauing the banks high on that part, ſerued him as a fortreſſe. And although this retraite was rather cauſed, by the inconſideratenes, wherewith hee went to Belem, then by any newe feare of the enimie, yet was it iudicious, the place being ſtrong by nature, and fitte for Anthonies intent, who deſired not to retire farre from the citie, to keepe it in obedience.
            The Catholique King who remained ſtill at Badagios, vnderſtanding the Dukes proceedings, being on the one ſide glad, and on the otherſide troubled to ſee this people attende the ſcourge of warre, beſides that he did incenſe them againſt him, whom he deſired much to entertaine as friendes, for this cauſe hee ſought all meanes poſſible, as he had euer done, to winne them with the leaſt ſhewe of hoſtilitie; and therefore he thought it good to graunt a generall pardon to all portugals, that had beene imploied in this action againſt him, ſeeking by clemencie to make his enimies friends, the which he publiſhed, being thus in effect: That being informed that in the rebellion that Anthony had raiſed, vſurping tirannouſlie the name of a king of Portugall, many of them which had followed his faction, had done it, being oppreſſed, forced, and deceiued, andThe Catholique kings pardon to the Portugals. that ſeeking to prouide that ſuch ſhould not be puniſhed with offenders, and that the people more eaſie to be abuſed then the reſt; ſhoulde not bee chaſticed with that rigour which lawe doth inflict; his pleaſure was, That al ſuch (as leauing the part of the ſaid Anthony and embracing his, as of their King, and naturall Lorde,) ſhoulde

come vnto his ſeruice within a certaine time prefixed, to that effect by the Duke of Alua, ſhoulde bee freely pardoned all their faultes, whereinto they had runne by taking and following the voice of the ſaide Anthony: He excepted notwithſtanding the Prior and all the ſeductors, and authors of the rebellions, committed at Saint Arem, Lisbone, and Settuual, and all ſuch as had receiued from him any charges, offices, and recompences as King, and ſuch as did ſerue him actually, all which, ſhoulde not enioy the ſaide pardon. And although this latter point was not approoued of all men, yet the reſt ſeemed to be done with great iudgement; for thereby they did not onely diſcouer the kings good meaning, but alſo his great wiſedome, vſing clemencie to pardon, and martiall policie to procure the Portugals to abandon the Prior: But this writing (although there were many copies diſperſed, thorough the realme) wrought ſmall profite to Philip, and little hurt to Anthonie; for neither did any greater number follow the Catholique Kings partie then before, neither did any man for feare abandon Anthonies; his fauorites only were a little greeued, who examining the forme thereof, ſeemed to be excluded, as thoſe that had receiued offices, honors, and recompences: ſo as they did ſee their offences, become daily more capitall, togither with the example they had ſeene by the death of Diego de Meneſes. Many noted in this pardon, that beſides it was written in the Portugall toong, it beganne with the name of King onely, with the ordinarie titles of kings of Portugall, and being accuſtomed to ſigne with theſe words IO EL REY, now he only ſubſcribed REY:: pointed with fiue points, called by the Portugals the fiue wounds, after the ſame manner the kings of Portugall had vſed: ſo as ſome ſaid, that in matters of ſmall importance, he began to ſhewe himſelfe a Portugall.
            
               The Duke marcheth against the rocke of Saint Iulian. The Duke of Alua marched eaſilie towards Oeiras, to the rocke of Saint Iulian, ſeeming ſo to doe expreſſely, that the Portugals might haue leiſure to reſolue: being incamped ſo farre from the fortreſſe as their cannon coulde not annoy them, he preſently ſent a trumpet to demaund obedience: But being the very ſame whom he had formerly ſent to the caſtell of Caſcayes, at whom they had ſhot, he durſt not approch neere to the forte, fearing they woulde doe the like, ſo as onely hauing made a ſigne a farre off, without

attending any anſwere, he returned, ſaying that they woulde not yeelde: For this cauſe hauing planted their artillerie on Saint Lawrence day, they began their batterie with tenne cannons, encreaſing the number vnto fower and twentie: The galleies coulde not approch, for that the forte ſtoode vpon the ſea, and therefore the Portugall gallions drawing neere to the lande, did greatly indomage the Caſtillians with their culuerings and other great artillery, but hauing planted three cannons in the night, they forced the gallions with a fewe volleies, to retire themſelues higher vnto Saint Katherines ſhoare.
            
               Anthony was now at Alcantara vpon a hill, being but fiue miles diſtant from the fortreſſe, where he remained an vnprofitable behoulder of this battery, wheron it ſeemed his whole fortune depended; for that the whole realme of Portugall had no other forte but this, that coulde make any reſiſtance; ſo as looſing it, his greateſt hope was vaniſhed: but for that he might well ſuccour it by ſea, both with men and munition as he did, he hoped well it ſhoulde not be forced; or at the leaſt holde out, vntill that either winter ſhoulde draw on, or ſome prince (taking pittie of his miſerie) ſhould relieue his eſtate, before the winning thereof; without the which he did ſee himſelfe helpeleſſe, and the rather for that he had intelligence that the citie of Lisbone (being grieued with the great inſolencies committed daily by the ſoldiers disbanded from the enimies campe thereabouts,) were reſolued not to giue him entrance within the citie, vnleſſe he returned with victory, or had compounded with the enimie, fearing otherwiſe the Duke woulde be diſpleaſed, and being weake, giue it in ſpoile vnto the ſoldiers. Some were of opinion that the Prior in whom deſire of rule was of more force then religion, or other reſpect whatſoeuer, ſhould (finding al hopes loſt) procure that this citie (which is in a manner the whole realme) ſhoulde remaine as a praie to the auarice and voluptuouſnes of the Caſtillians, deſiring that the Portugals being forced to yeelde, the realme ſhoulde be ſo entreated by the Catholique Kings men, as there might remaine no hope of peace or amitie; to the end, that if heereafter he ſhoulde pretende the recouerie of the realme, the people (in regard of the hatred that ſuch loſſes engender, togither with their naturall inclination) ſhoulde remaine ſtill enimie, and be

more willing to yeeld to his deuotion: For this cauſe he ſought dailie with all his force to reforme the magiſtrate of the chamber, and to place men, in whom he had great affiance, as well to haue entire into the citie if need were, as alſo to diſpoſe of things at his pleaſure: But foraſmuch as the greateſt part of thoſe magiſtrates were mechanicke men, in whom feare hath a more intereſt, then the reſpect of a King, he did not greatly truſt them: When he was proclaimed king, there followed him a gentleman of Caſtill, who ſerued him as the firſt vallet of his chamber, ſeeing the warres to grow betwixt the Portugals and Caſtillians, hee craued, and obtained leaue toA treatie of agreement with Anthony. retire himſelfe into his countrey. This man going to King Philip, made offer (for the great familiaritie hee had with Anthony) to treate an accord with him, being in great hope to effect it; ſo as hee was ſent to the Duke of Alua, with order that he ſhoulde ſuffer him to goe and conferre with the Prior: For the effecting heereof hee came to Lisbone, at ſuch time as the Duke tooke Caſcayes, and hauing diſcourſed at large with the Prior, he enformed him of the Kings forces, and aduiſed him to compound: The Prior gaue eare to this treatie, and Diego de Carcamo, (for ſo this gentleman was called) did greatly preſſe him to giue him a letter of credite vnto theAnthony his letter to the King. king, with commiſſion what he had in charge. That ſuch as had beene their mediators, were the cauſe that he had not ſerued him as he deſired, but as much as the time woulde ſuffer him, he was ready to do it: That if it pleaſed him to ſende any perſon as Embaſſador to the three Eſtates, that hee woulde perſwade them to yeelde him obedience, and that he woulde ſay he had defended them ſo much as poſſiblie hee coulde, but his ſuccours from Fraunce and other Prouinces failing, he could no longer reſiſt, and therefore he aduiſed them to agree. In this letter which he had written to the King, he did ſigne Rey. But repenting him afterwarde, he did write it againe, at the perſwaſion of Carcamo, and ſubſcribed it Anthony: hauing receiued the letter & his charge, he ſeemed to haue ended his buſines; but being with the King, he was returned backe to Anthony, with a reſolutiō which he ſuppoſed ſhould haue ſucceeded; but with certaine letters to the Duke of Alua, whereby he was commanded to gouerne himſelfe as the eſtate of the affaires ſhoulde require. Hee arriued at ſuch time as the Duke was emcamped before the

rocke of Saint Iulian. Now did there lighten foorth a great hope of peace, the which ſoone after vaniſhed away: For although the Duke ſeemed to be well pleaſed with this practiſe, yet may we well ſay, it did not content him, ſeeming happely vnto him, that being ſo farre aduanced, hee ſhoulde haue more honour to conquer it by armes, then by agreement. For which cauſe he returned Carcamo to the Prior with this aunſwer: That he was glad of his reſolution toThe anſwere of the Duke to Anthony. ſerue his maieſtie, but there was no reaſon to ſende an Embaſſador to the States, ſeeing hee helde not the crowne from them but from the people, to whom if hee pleaſed hee woulde ſende, and grant the like graces vnto them, which other cities had receiued by their yeelding. Theſe words were deliuered him in writing, but by mouth the Duke added, that he had beene an affectionate ſeruant to Lewes his father, and that as he had now taken armes to depriue him of the realme; ſo woulde he take them in hande againe to conquer him an other, ſo as it were not any of thoſe that belonged to his King and Lord. 
               Carcamo was not yet without hope to conclude the buſines, but nowe the Spaniſh grauitie hindred the effect of ſo great importance: For the Duke ſuppoſed he ſhoulde not giue vnto Anthony any greater title then Seignory, and hee that was mounted from Excellencie to Highnes, held himſelfe contemned, and ſo much diſdained it, that both for the cold anſwere, & for this reſpect, he was aſſured the Duke would haue no agreement: He therefore made anſwer by mouth, that ſeeing he woulde not agree, if his people would obey him, and be conformable to his will, they would either vanquiſh or all die in that place. Vpon this anſwere, the Duke (repenting his manner of writing, or it may bee, fearing the King woulde not like of this kind of proceeding,) ſent backe Carcamo to ſay vnto Anthony, that he ſhould ſend one by ſea, or by land, and he woulde ſende another, and that in the midde way they ſhould conclude all thinges: But the Prior who had ſmall confidence in the Duke, being greatly mooued, made no other replie; but that Kings were Kings, and captaines, captaines; but that victories came from the hands of God: ſo as the Duke diſpairing of the matter, deuiſed for his diſcharge, that Anthony had ſent him worde, that he deſired to conferre with him by night in a barke; and the better to induce men to beleeue it, he went publikely to lie aboord in a galley, and being

diſimbarked in the morning, he ſeemed diſcontented that Anthony had not come to conference with him, it may be (with this apparant iuſtification) to haue more cauſe to make warre, and not to compounde, and ſo to lay the faulte vpon Anthony, but in truth they did neuer treat of any meeting.
            
               The rocke of Saint Iulian battered, and the aduiſe of the Inginers. Now had they battered the fort of S. Iulian, touching the which there was before growen ſome difficultie amongſt the Inginers, vpon what part they ſhoulde make their batterie: Some woulde haue him plant their cannon at the ſtrongeſt place, but moſt conuenient to giue an aſſault: Others would batter the weakeſt part, although moſt vneaſie to enter; for that their defences being taken away, their place of armes ſhoulde remaine open to their artillerie; wherevpon the Duke to quite this controuerſie, went himſelfe; allowing the opinion of Fratino, and of Philip Terzi, where it hapned that hauing battered neere two whole daies, and made but a ſmall breach, the ſoldiers fainting, (although they had good meanes to entrench themſelues) their armie neere at hand, and the hauen alwaies open, Triſtan vaz de Vega, captaine thereof, was in doubte, whether hee ſhoulde yeelde, or defende it ſo long as hee coulde; but enclining more to yeeld, then to fight, he was in ſuſpence, what meanes to vſe to treate ſecretly, not truſting greatly to ſome that were about him.A poore woman cauſe of the yeelding of Saint Iulian. But fortune made the way for him, for at that time a poore woman neere to Oeiras, hauing her daughter and ſonne in lawe within the forte, amazed with the noiſe of the artillerie, came crying to the Duke, beſeeching him to giue her leaue, to drawe her ſonne in lawe and her daughter out of the forte which he battred: The old Duke who ſought ſuch occaſions, embraced this, and ſaide vnto the woman that ſhe ſhould go in ſafetie, cauſing the cannon to ceaſe in the meane time. He willed her to ſay vnto the captine of the forte, that he had done ill to make ſo ſmall account of the Dukes meſſage, and that he ſhoulde not wilfully caſt himſelfe away; ſhe deliuered her ambaſſage, & being returned with her daughter to the campe, ſhe ſaid vnto the Duke on the behalfe of Triſtan Vaz, that he defended himſelfe, hauing not as yet ſeene any meſſenger from him, whom he woulde haue heard and entertained, and that if he woulde aſſure him vpon his word, he woulde go to the campe to ſpeake with him. The Duke ſent this woman preſently backe to the captaine, ſaying

vnto him, that he might not onely come in ſafety, but if he woulde, he would ſende him hoſtages: But relying vpon the Dukes promiſes, hee went vnto him, and was curteouſly entertained: The captaine excuſed himſelfe for not admitting of the trumpet, ſaying, there had not beene any one with him, nor ſpoke with any one that was within that place, the which if he had done, he would haue made anſwere with that curteſie which was conuenient, by reaſon whereof, the trumpet was in danger of hanging. The Duke exhortedThe rocke of Saint Iulian yeelded. 
               Triſtan Vaz with many reaſons to reſigne the forte, as appertaining to his king, ſhewing vnto him the danger wherein hee was: The matter being a little debated betwixt them, the captaine ſaide vnto him, that if he woulde promiſe in the name of the Catholique king to performe ſuch recompences as Anthony had graunted him, he woulde yeelde it vp; which the Duke freely offring, they were agreed. So as being returned, leading with him ſome Spaniſh captaines & ſoldiers, he reſigned the fortreſſe, where the aſſieged were ſo decaied, as they ſeemed to iſſue foorth of a deadly priſon: And although ſome did eſteeme the captaine for this action to be treacherous, and others a cowarde, yet (as he ſaide) the rocke with ſuch vnexpert ſoldiers, was not defenſible: beſides, the Gouernors had declared Philip ſucceſſour. A little before the yeelding of S. Iulian, the Duke had ſent to Peter Barba, captain of Cabeſſa Secca, willingCabeſſa Secca abandoned. him to yeeld the forte, the which he hauing refuſed, when as he vnderſtood the fortreſſe was yeelded, and that the Duke brought in his galleies he woulde no longer attende, but hauing abandoned the place with the conſent of the Prior, and ſaued certaine artillerie, he fledde to the campe at Alcantara.
            
               The feare of them at Liſbone. By theſe loſſes feare encreaſed in the citie, chiefly amongſt the principals, who fearing to be ſpoiled, were daily more diſpoſed to yeelde to the Catholique King; beſides they did ſee ſmall helpe in the Priors affaires, and they hoped by their yeelding to obtaine ſome priuilege from his Maieſtie, and had before this made offer of themſelues, if the reſpect of the Prior (who was in field and ſo neere) had not deteined them: At this time they had intelligence of the arriuall of fower ſhips at the Ilande of Terceraes, which came from the Indies, very rich, and of great importance for the citie, the loſſe whereof, if the galleies ſhoulde ſeaze on them, woulde cauſe

great hinderance, both in the particular, and generall, and therefore the greateſt part wiſhed that one of the armies woulde yeelde to the other, before the ſhips ſhould arriue: For this cauſe the citie ſent againe vnto Anthony, to ſhewe vnto him the danger, and as it were the ſiege wherein they were, hauing the entrie of the ſea ſhut vp, that the Duke hauing ſo great numbers of men, and he ſo fewe, he ought not (though he might) to hazard the fortune of a fielde with ſo great diſaduantage. They did ſecretly aduiſe him to compound, ſeeming the beſt way to ende theſe troubles, and then the ſhips might ſafely enter: Moreouer they did ſuppoſe, that if in fighting the Duke ſhould remaine victor ſo neere the citie, they ſhould hardly ſaue it from the ſpoile of the ſoldiers: Notwithſtanding Anthony for his ſmall experience being irreſolute, diſdaining the Dukes ſpeeches, and ill aduiſed by his friends, theſe reaſons could not draw him to reſolue; but the next day he ſent to the magiſtrate the Count of Vimioſo, the Biſhop of Guarda, and Emanuel of Portugall, to intreate the citie to defend it ſelfe, and to ſend him more men to the campe, incouraging them, ſometimes deuiſing that the French ſuccours were on the way, ſometimes ſhewing the Priors forces to bee greater then they were, and the enimies leſſe. But as the words of the magiſtrate did nothing mooue the Prior, no more did the ſpeeches of the Prior alter the inward minde of the Magiſtrate, ſo as all remained in ſuſpence, euery man with his owne intentions: True it is, that as well the ſaide Prior as ſome of the magiſtrates, had eaſily agreed with the Duke vpon certaine conditions: But the Priors will was forced by thoſe of the houſe of Portugall, and eſpecially by the Biſhop, and the Citizens, by many new officers, who had their places in perpetuitie; the which were woont to bee graunted but for a time: Theſe men arrogating to themſelues more authoritie then was giuen them, woulde not ſuffer the execution of any thing, but what pleaſed themſelues: But for all this Anthony was not without feare that the citie woulde rebell againſt him to his vtter ruine, truſting in fewe, he coulde finde no better remedie, then to place continually at the gates of the citie, and in the armie at ſea, a number of religious men of diuers orders, to guarde the entrie with the ſoldiers, and to keepe the keies, truſting deſeruedly more in them, then in the captaines that were there imploied: For in the aſſemblies and

counſels of State that were often held, there appeered more hatred againſt the Caſtillians, and more will to fight in the religious men then in the ſecular.
            The Duke was now returned to the ſame lodging of Oeiras, a place both by nature and arte ſtrong: For beſides the great number of artillerie and rampiers, the countrey was rough & ſtony, whereas the horſemen could hardly fight, in whoſe force the Portugals relied much: He made no ſhewe to diſlodge, for ſuppoſing now (as in effect it was) that from thence he helde all the realme aſſieged, and principally with his galleies, hee ſuppoſed that both the Prior and the citie, would ſoone yeelde vnto him: Beſides that, to march on, conſidering his craftie nature and ſlowe diſpoſition, and the Portugals armie being ſo neere, he thought it not conuenient; he laboured with all poſſible deuiſes to be cōquerour without fighting; and had now almoſt corrupted the captaines of the galleies, and of the tower of Belem, who ſhoulde ſoone haue deliuered vnto him both tower and armie; the which had been effected, if Anthony himſelfe had not gone in perſon, who hauing diſpoſſeſſed in a manner all the captaines of their charges, and placed others, without giuing them reſpite to execute their practiſes; but he was nowe growen ſo iealous of euery man, finding in all men ſo great feare, and ſo little faith, that hee knewe not whom to truſt, if he were not a religious man, a marriner, or of the baſer ſort. And for that it ſeemes alwaies to ſuch as feare that they are betraied, it hapned that fire being kindled by chaunce in certaine ſtraw which lay about the caſtell wals of the citie, where his roiall tapeſtrie lay, he grewe ſuſpicious that this fire had beene ſome ſigne vnto the enimies, and that the marchant ſtrangers whom he had placed there in guard, had made it, for that they woulde not goe to fielde to fight, and this feare was ſo violent, that without examining the fact, without conſidering they were Flemmings, whoſe nation for the moſt part were the moſt obſtinate enimies, that euer the Catholique King had, thruſt forwarde by his owne feare, and that of Emanuel Soares one of the newe Veriadors of the chamber, hee diſplaced the ſtrangers from thence, and being not yet well aſſured, hee commaunded that all ſtrangers ſhoulde depart the citie, and ſoone after he decreed, (although it were not executed) that they ſhoulde be ſpoiled. Theſe

two armies remained eight daies in this eſtate, neere one to the other, without moouing, and little skirmiſhing; at the end whereof, the Duke ſent foorth Sanches d'Auila, with a hundreth and fiftie horſe, and ſome fewe foote, to diſcouer the countrey, and plot the meanes to batter the tower of Belem, they were encountred by three hundreth horſe, and fiue hundreth Portugale foote, who without order ranne towards them: But for that the Caſtillians pretended nothing but to diſcouer, being but weakely charged by the Portugals, hauing skirmiſhed a while, with the loſſe of fewe men they returned to their lodging, and the day following, they iſſued foorth with a greater number, and hauing entred skirmiſh of the one ſide, the Caſtillians of the other hauing planted three peeces of artillerie, which the night before they had drawen neere vnto the tower, they forced (after ſome fewe cannonadoes) firſt the armieThe yeelding of the tower of Belem. of galleies to retire to Lisbone, and then the tower to yeelde, by meanes whereof, the kings armie at ſea, might ſafely enter into the port of Belem, as preſently they did.
         
         
            THE SEVENTH BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the ſeuenth Booke.
               The route at Alcantara: The taking of Lisbone: The ſacke of the ſubburbes: The praiſe and diſpraiſe of the Duke of Alua: The ſickneſſe of the Catholique King: The voyage of Sanches d'Auila into the Prouince which lieth betwixt Doro and Migno: The winning of the cities of Auero and Porto: The flight of Anthony: The taking of Ʋiana: The death of Queene Anne: The Kings progreſſe to Eluas: The reſolution of the inhabitants of the Terceraes: The Popes offer to ſend an armie againſt England.
            
            
               
               BEtwixt the two armies there was no other let then the rockes of the brooke of Alcantara: The Duke finding that Anthony ſuppoſing himſelfe in ſafetie, would not come to the field, reſolued; for that he woulde not force him in ſo defenſible a lodging, to ſeeke ſome other meanes to defeate him quite, or at the leaſt to make him diſlodge, and free the citie from ſuch a curbe; the which he vnderſtoode came not to his obedience, for that this armie was ſo neere them. But hauing not yet viewed the enimie, nor his lodging, but from farre, truſting little to the report of others, woulde firſt himſelfe ſee the ſeate, and howe they were lodged, before he woulde attempt any matter of importance, and therefore on Saint Bartholomewes day he iſſued foorth of his lodging with his whole army, onely with an intent to diſcouer: The left banks of Tagus, whereupon theſe armies were encamped, is hilly, but yet eaſie, and is deuided by the brooke of Alcantara, as it were into ſtraight lines; the which takes his name of a ſmall village ſeated vpon the right angle, where it diſchargeth it ſelfe into the riuer: There vpon the brooke is a bridge of ſtone; the bankes of both ſides, beginning from the mouth of the riuer, running a mile vpward, are very high and vneaſie, yet vpwarde there lieth a champion ground, although ſomewhat vneeuen, yet very commodious for lodging; vpon the left banke was the Portugals campe, in a manner vpon the triangle, where the rocke is higheſt fortified toward the enimie with ill faſhioned trenches, and much artillerie: The Duke marched to the right banke, with his whole armie, right againſt the Portugals; where hauing made a long ſtande, conſidering well the ſeate to be naturally ſtrong, but little helpes by arte, he ſee the enimies (perceiuing his approch) to put themſelues into ſquadrons, within their rampiers, ſtanding ſtill, without any ſhew of iſſuing foorth, labouring onely to endomage them with their cannons: So as hauing wel reſolued what to do, after ſome skirmiſh, he returned for this night vnto the place from whence he came, and for the day following gaue this order, that after midnight they ſhould giue a hot allarum on al ſides, to keepe the enimie on foote, to wearie him, and to cauſe him to put his men in order, as hee had

done the day before: He enioyned Frauncis d'Alua, Generall of the artillerie, that before day he ſhoulde plant vpon the hils, which diſcouer the enimies lodging, and their trenches, ſome great artillerie, with ſufficient munition, to batter the Portugals rankes, to ſcoure their defences, and the place where they ſhoulde ſtande to defende the bridge, when it ſhould be aſſaulted: He commaunded to thruſt into the army at ſea a thouſand Harquebuſiers, fiue hundreth Italians, and fiue hundreth Spaniards, with order to the Marqueſſe ofThe Duke of Alua his ſpeech to the ſoldiers. Saint Croix, to charge the enimies when a certaine ſigne ſhould be giuen vnto them: He called all the chiefe Commaunders of the campe, and ſaide vnto them, that he hoped to driue the enimie that day by force from his lodging, that he deſired them to be obedient, to obſerue the directions which he had giuen, and ſhoulde giue, for as by that and their valour, the enterpriſe was eaſie; ſo without order and obedience it was moſt difficult: That one of the chiefeſt points his Maieſtie had commaunded, was to ſaue the citie of Lisbone, the which the king had in ſo great regard, that he had rather leaue to vanquiſh, then by vanquiſhing to ſpoile it: And therefore hee did preſſe them to promiſe, that if they were ſo happy as wholie to breake the enimie, they ſhoulde not onely forbeare to ſpoile it, but defend it from ſuch as would attempt it; aſſuring them that the king would be more pleaſed with the defence thereof, then with the victorie it ſelfe: He added moreouer, and that with great vehemencie; that if his ill happe were ſuch, as that they ſhoulde not ſatisfie him in this, he beſeeched God, that the firſt ſhoote the enimie ſhoulde make, ſhoulde rather depriue him of life, then to ſee a thing ſo much againſt the ſeruice and will of his Maieſtie. Theſe words being ended, and al things executed, the Duke a little before day (leauing in his lodging a reaſonable guard of all nations) marched againſt the Portugals in this order, notwithſtanding ſome of the chiefe were of opinion, they ſhoulde firſt trie this armie with courſes and light charges, being a generall opinion by the aduertiſements they hadThe order of the Dukes armie. receiued, that fewe men woulde put them to flight. The Duke deuided his armie into three bodies, two of foote, and one of horſe, the which marched not one after an other, but as it were in front, as the hilly countrey would giue them leaue: In the middle was the Duke with the greateſt part of the Spaniſh foote, & ſome Germaine pikes,

deuided into fowre ſquadrons, which marched not all in fronte, nor one after an other, but ſcattered as the place would ſuffer them, being in al about ſixe thouſand: On the right ſide were all the Italians, the reſt of the Germaines, & ſome few Spaniards, ordered in three ſquadrons, one, a ſide of an other, by Proſper Colona, which ſhould amount to the like number: On the left hand, which was the thirde body, were their horſemen, cōmanded by Ferrant ſon to the Duke, in the firſt ranke whereof marched their Harquebuſiers on horſebacke, in the ſecond their gennetters, in the thirde their light horſemen, & behinde, their men at armes, where Ferrant himſelfe remained; vpon the riuer which lay on the right hand (the which in that place is about three miles broad) was the Marqueſſe with threeſcore and two galleies, and fiue and twentie ſhips, the which lying but musket ſhot from their foote, ſerued as a wing to the armie on that ſide, to anſwer the horſe which were on the other.
            
               Anthony his preparation againſt the Duke. In the meane while Anthony hauing viewed the enimies the day before, and how little they had effected, beleeued (notwithſtanding the great allarum which he heard in the night) it woulde fall out as the day before; and that after ſome light skirmiſhes, the enimie (he not iſſuing foorth of his lodging) ſhoulde retire the ſecond time; yet deſirous to put his men in order as the day before, he coulde not doe it, for being vnaccuſtomed to ſuffer, wearie with the trauaile of the day, and diſquietnes of the night, they did not execute that which was commaunded; beſides their number was greatly diminiſhed; for many being accuſtomed to lie in the towne all night, and returne in the day, were not yet come, and others amazed, were quite fledde away: And therefore he commaunded the Biſhop of Guarda, who plaied at Lisbone (as a man may ſay) the part of a king, to ſende with all diligence to the campe all ſuch men as were within the citie, who with drums and bels ceaſed not all night to ſound, and with ſerieants armed, to driue the citizens and handy crafts men by force out of their beds, compelling them to go foorth armed, with ſome few whereof, the ſaide Biſhop went to the campe that night. But heereof followed no good effect, for ſuch as were ſent foorth againſt their wils being fearefull, fled to other places, ſo as the Portugall armie neither encreaſed in number nor in order.
            
               
The Duke in the meane time preſented himſelfe on the right banke, oppoſite to the Priors armie, vpon the hils where hee had planted his cannon; where viewing the Portugals ſcattered in their lodging, hee founde himſelfe deceiued in his conceaued opinion, that vpon the allarum giuen they ſhoulde ranke themſelues into ſquadrons: Hee now perceiued that this intent to batter their rankes with his artillerie could not ſucceed, as hee had preſuppoſed, and diſordering them to charge them on all ſides, ſuppoſing in this manner he ſhould eaſily breake them: But hauing changed his reſolution, according to the occurrants▪ being willing to hazard a battaile, he did endomage them all he coulde with his cannon, and ſo did the Prior likewiſe on his part: He commaunded Proſper Colona to attempt the bridge with his men, that were in the ſquadrons on the right hand, ſtriuing to paſſe it, and to winne as much ground as he could: He gaue order to Sanches d'Auila with two thouſande Harquebuſiers, which he had drawne out of his middle Battalion, hauing paſſed the brooke aboue whereas the bankes are loweſt, and eaſieſt to aſcend to draw the enimie to combate, with all the aduantage he could: charging them in flanke euen vnto their trenches: He gaue commiſſion to Ferrant his ſonne, who taking a greater compaſſe, ſhoulde paſſe the brooke, whereas the bankes were not high, vnto the other ſide with his horſe, and go againſt the enimie, but if he ſhoulde not iſſue foorth of his lodging, as it was ſuppoſed, they ſhould then aſſaile them on all parts at one inſtant, hee remaining behinde with the reſt of the foote, to ſuccour where need ſhould require, in a place more eminent then the reſt, from the which he might diſcouer both armies, where hauing left his ſquadrons a little behinde him, he ſate him downe, viewing howe the aſſault woulde ſucceed, & making neceſſarie counterſignes: Proſper Colona came to the bridge before that either Sanches d' Auila, or the horſemen could attaine to the other banke, it may be for that it behooued them to make a longer march, or for that the Italians (as the Duke ſaid) to winne honor, made too great haſte: They found it not vnfurniſhed, for the Portugals had there planted their ſouldiers of moſt eſteeme, who at the firſt aſſault made great reſiſtance: For although the Italians fought valiantly, yet was it long ere they preuailed any thing; for the place being narrowe, defended and

guarded in flanke with ſome Harquebufiers which had fortified themſelues within a mill, to the which they coulde not approch by reaſon it was inuironed with water, they came to fight with great diſaduantage, ſo as hauing in a manner wone it, they were repulſed with ſome loſſes. But Proſper hauing cauſed his ſoldiers to moūt vp on a narrow cauſway, which kept the water of the mill, by the which they might (though vneaſily) come vnto the houſe, hauing with the loſſe of ſome fewe aſſaulted it, thoſe within were all cut in peeces, ſo as ſuch as guarded the bridge, wanting their ſuccours in flanke, being endomaged from the ſame mill, by the Italians, Colona charging them with greater force at the ſame inſtant on the bridge, he woone it, and paſſed to the other banke, wherein Lewes Douara did good ſeruice, who ſeeing the Italians repulſed, hee cauſed them to be ſuccoured, almoſt againſt the Dukes will, with ſome Germaine pikes, the which he obtained from the Generall: There did they long endure a hot fight, for the Portugals being as yet ignoraunt that they were charged in any other other part, all the force of the armie with the Prior himſelfe ranne to the bridge, where Prosper repeld them valiantly, and put them to flight: The Duke behelde what Sanches d' Auila ſhoulde do, being moſt aſſured that if he obeied him, all the enimies campe were broken, but he feared, that ſeeing the Italians in fight (being cholericke) he ſhoulde be impatient, to take ſo long a courſe as to go charge them in flanke, but woulde aſſaile them at the firſt encounter, the which he eſteemed dangerous, but ſeeing him obedient, he helde the battaile woone, ſo as comming to the other bank with his Harquebuſiers, and Ferrant with his horſemen, they founde no reſiſtance: For although that Anthony being ſcarce arriued at the bridge, came to this other ſide, the Portugals beginning now to vnderſtande the ſucceſſe of the bridge, being fearefull, preſently fled towards the citie. At this inſtant the Duke gaue ſigne vnto the galleies, who without their maſters rowed towards the citie with the reſt of their armie, diſcharging their artillerie againſt the Portugals fleete, the which being a little retired, without any place to flie vnto, ſet ſaile, but without any reſiſtance they became a pray vnto the enimie.
            
               The flight of Anthony towards the citie, his defeate and hurt. 
               Anthony being vnexpert, neuer ſuppoſed the Duke woulde charge him within his lodging, ſeeing himſelfe at one inſtant ſo

much endomaged with the artillerie, the bridge to be forced, which he held for very ſtrong, his men to flie, and their horſemen to make way to cut off all way of retreat, he grewe amazed: Notwithſtanding, being accompanied with Counte Emanuel of Portugall, with Diego Boteglio the elder, & Edward de Caſtro; he fledde likewiſe towards the citie, without order, or without any reſiſtance, amidſt the preaſe of his people, where at the entrie of the ſuburbes, he was hurt in the head by a ſoldier on horſebacke, and if he had ſtaied but a little longer, or the horſemen made more haſte, hee had beene taken priſoner, by ſome Italian aduenturers, who were aduaunced verie farre. In this haſte hee paſſed with the reſt of his broken armie through the citie, whereof a part, yet the leaſt, following him, entred by one gate, and went foorth by an other; and the other parte which was the greater, hauing caſt away their armes, hid themſelues in their houſes, where they had their wiues and children, and ſuch as were come from other parts of the realme, aſſembled themſelues in churches with great feare: In paſſing he commaunded the priſons to be opened, ſo as with a great number of offenders that were deliuered, there came foorth ſuch as were committed, as affected vnto Philip.
            
            The Dukes men hauing ſlaine many of theſe miſerable wretches with their ſhot and launces, who fledde by fower and ſixe togither, making but a weake and vnprofitable reſiſtance, came to the citie; Ferrant de Toledo as chiefe, marching before the reſt, vnder whoſe authoritie the whole armie was gouerned, ſeeing the battaile woone, fearing the ſoldiers furie ſhould do more hurt then he wiſhed, did expreſly keepe them backe, cauſing them to ſtay, ſuppoſing there might remaine yet ſome men to conquer; and being come to the gates of the citie, hee ſtaied to parley with the Magiſtrate of the chamber from the wals, who was come thither to that effect: But their treaties were ſhorte, and little diſagreeing, for the Portugals ſeeing themſelues before the Caſtillians ſoldiers, their miſerable king hurt and fled, and their army in route, they ſeemed to be now reduced to their laſt exigent: And Ferrant (although a conquerour) yet deſirous (according to the kings meaning) to ſaue the citie from ſpoile, they ſoone agreed: Ferrant demaunded the citie, the Portugals deſired to know in what ſort, and although ſome

anſwered at diſcretion; yet the Magiſtrate offring to yeeld as otherThe yeelding of Lisbone. cities had done, it was graunted they ſhoulde haue their liues and goods ſaued, leaſt by longer ſtay the ſoldiers ſhould haue occaſion to cōmit ſome diſorder. Notwithſtanding ſome of the Magiſtrates being let downe from the wals, were carried behinde ſome Caſtillian Caualiers to the Duke, who granted them their demaunds with better acception, and more freely. Then began the ſoldiers againſt the Dukes will to disband and ſpoile that part of the citie, which is without the wals, the which is greater, nobler, and fairer, then that within, and is ſo ſpatious, as many great cities are not comparableThe ſpoile of the ſuburbs of Lisbone. vnto it: So as although this body in the midſt of Lisbone was not ſpoiled, yet the ſuburbes were and all places thereabouts; and likewiſe ſome houſes within, the which vnder colour to appertaine to rebels, were giuen in pray to the ſoldiers, whom they coulde no otherwiſe withſtand, ſeeing they had ſufficiently obeied, in preſeruing the citie from ſpoile three daies: Many innocent citizens loſt their moſt precious mooueables, the which by reaſon of the plague which then raigned greatly in the citie, they had tranſported to their farmes, and other poſſeſſions neere thereabouts, where they were ſpoiled. The extortions the ſoldiers committed were not great, but the riches that fell into their hands were infinite. The galleies did great harme, for beſides the ſpoiling of the bankes of Tagus, and the ranſacking of all the ſhips within the Porte, where they founde infinite ſtore of merchandiſe; they ſerued like wiſe vnto the ſoldiers that were on lande, as a meanes to hide and carrie away all things were they neuer ſo great, not being forced to diſcharge themſelues of their baggage, to ſell them at lowe prices vpon the place, as it often hapneth. The cuſtome houſes, that is to ſay the generall, and that of merchandiſe of the Indies, alwaies full of pretious wares, although they were without the citie gates, yetwere they not ſpoiled: For by reaſon of their great riches, Alonſo de Leua Generall of the galleies of Sicily, ſent a guard of priuate ſoldiers to haue care and defend them: The religious women, whoſe monaſteries were all without the wals, were preſerued; and withall much wealth that was kept there, yet much of that which was left in the houſes of religious men was ſtolen away; but moſt of all in that of Saint Rocke, whereas the Ieſuits remaine; for certaine Italian

ſoldiers being firſt entred, were expelled by the Spaniards, who being ſent thither by their commaunders, vnder colour to preſerue them being friends, they committed greater exceſſe then the other, being enimies, would haue done; for the Italians being departed, the Spaniards hauing ſearched out the moſt ſecret things, and finding them, they carried them by night into the galleies, and into their houſes. The diuerſitie of nations which were at the ſpoile, cauſed more reſpect to the women, and holy things then had beene otherwiſe; for the Spaniards moſt inſolent in other countries, were here againſt their nature very continent, leaſt by their example the Italians and Germaines in Spaine ſhoulde grow woorſe. The bootie of mooueables and other precious things, which this citie in ſo many yeeres peace, and by the traffique of the Indies had gatheredThe number that were ſlaine in the battaile. togither was infinite. The number of ſuch as were ſlaine in the battaile was ſmall, in regard of the little defence they made, notwithſtanding there died not aboue a thouſand of the Portugals, and not aboue a hundreth of the Dukes armie, of ſo ſmall force were the peoples armes, ruſted with eaſe. The Duke when the citie was yeelded, came himſelfe in perſon for the defence thereof; where hauing made ſome ſtay in one of the houſes neere the ſuburbes, hee returned to lodge from whence the Portugals were departed. Anthony hauing dreſſed his wounde at Sacabem, ſixe miles from Lisbone, marched eaſily toward Saint Arem: The Duke ſtanding doubtfull whether he remained ſtill within the citie, or were fled, for that the Portugals for his better ſafetie gaue out falſe rumours. This victorie was of great importance, and had beene greater if the Prior had beene taken priſoner, for in his ſafetie, the realme (which ſhoulde haue beene in quiet) remained in ſuſpence, all men ſuppoſing that he ſhould repaire his forces, and trie his fortuneThe Duke blamed. a newe. The Duke was blamed of many for not vſing of greater diligence, ſaying, it was a great errour, in all other things to haue ſet ſo good an order, and to haue omitted it in this of ſuch importance, ſome did attribute it vnto negligence, others vnto malice, eſpecially for that Anthony had made ſo great a ſtay betwixte Sacabem and Saint Arem; ſo as he might eaſily haue ſuppreſſed him, and this was the iſſue of the battaile of Alcantara.
            In the meane while the ſhips which came from the Indies, were

diſanchored from the Ilands of Terceraes, & ſailed towards Portugall, ill aduertiſed of what had paſſed. And for as much as they had former intelligence of their arriuall at the Ilands, it was thought good they ſhoulde ſtaie there, being valued at three millions, many doubted they ſhould be loſt: For on the one ſide the Duke had ſent ſome ſhips armed to ſeeke them, on the other ſide the Prior had ſent certaine carauels with aduiſe to go to Penichie, a place vpon the coaſt twentie miles from Lisbone, towardes the north, and therefore it was feared they coulde not eſcape the one, or the other, either to be taken by the kings ſhips, or to follow the direction of Anthony, and in what ſort ſoeuer, they ſhoulde bee loſt: For falling into the hands of the Caſtillians they ſhoulde bee ſpoiled, and going to Penichie, the Prior woulde become maſter of priuate mens goods, and imploy them for the neceſſitie of the warres. And ſome ignorant of Anthonies commiſſion, ſuppoſed they ſhould either go to Fraunce or England, and that the Prior (finding the weakenes of his force, by the euent of this battaile) ſhoulde followe them; notwithſtanding fortune did ſo ſecond the beginning, that two daies after the battaile, they appeered in ſafetie, without any intelligence of theſe troubles within the realme, or any encounter vpon the way; ſuch was the Catholique kings good fortune, that they arriued ſafe at Lisbone; where he receiued what appertained to the crowne, and deliuered to euery priuate man his owne.
            All this while they were in ſuſpence at Badagios, expecting whether this enterpriſe ſhoulde be ended by armes or agreement, and ſo doubtfull euery man was, for that there appeared on either ſide great difficultie; the rather, for that the Duke could not ſtay long from entertaining one of theſe parties ſo different. But the xxvj. day of Auguſt, in the morning, there arriued a Spaniſh merchant without any letters from the Duke, who brought newes of the ſucceſſe: This man following the Spaniſh campe, when he ſaw the Priors armie in route, preſently paſſed the riuer in a ſmall barke, and tooke poſte before him that brought aduertiſement from the Duke, who preſenting himſelfe vnto the King, deliuered what hee had ſeene, whereof he receiued ſuch contentment as may bee ſuppoſed: This newes was preſently ſpred throughout all the court, with the incredible ioy of all men, and to the great honour of the Duke, and with

ſuch kinde of commendations, as the force of truth doth vſually draw vpon the ſodaine, euen from the mouth of enimies: But the confirmation of theſe newes, ſtaying longer then was conuenient for the neerenes of the place, and the importance of the action, they began to doubt with ſo great perturbation, that there was no leſſe ſhewe of their generall deſire, then of their receiued content: The which was after confirmed by the Arriuall of Ferrant de Toledo, the Dukes nephew, whom he had diſpatched with a priuate relation, not onely of the ſucceſſe, but alſo of the reaſons which had induced them to fight, and his direction giuen vnto the captaine,The commendations of the Duke of Alua. the which was generally approoued of all, with no ſmall honour to the Duke, ſaying, that he had now ſatisfied mens mindes, who held him alwaies to be too cunning and watchfull, to aſſure his enterpriſe by aduantages of lodging, and ſtratagems, auoiding the battaile by all meanes poſſible without great aduantage, following amongſt the auncient Captaines Fabius Maximus, and amongſt the later Proſper Colonna the elder, whom he ſought to imitate: And this cō
               mendation of the Dukes proceeded from his two reſolutions: The one to paſſe from Settuual to Caſcaies, and the other to fight at Alcantara, ſeeing in the firſt he alone did contradict his counſell, and conteſted both againſt ſea and enimie: And in the ſecond he reſolued to fight dangerouſly with the Portugals, within their owne trenches, hauing a well peopled citie behinde them; and againſt the aduiſe of ſome of the principall of the armie. They did highly commend him to haue kept Lisbone from ſpoile; and at one inſtant to play the conqueror and protector, attributing vnto him for this reſpect more honour, then to haue retired his armie from the wals of Rome in the yeere 1557. hauing not fought there, vnto the gates of the citie, as he did at Lisbone.
            But theſe reaſons with other, were daſhed by a ſodaine cruell accident, which ſo troubled the mindes of all men, as there was no time to thinke nor ſpeake of any thing, the which was that vpon the newes of this happie ſucceſſe, the king fell moſt dangerouſly ſicke, the which ſo encreaſed, being brought to that point, that there was ſmall hope of his life, and euen his Phiſitions themſelues almoſt gaue him ouer: vpon this ſubiect was all their diſcourſes, for the king dying, it was ſuppoſed that the protector of Chriſtendome

ſhoulde faile, and if there were any doubt, that his death in time The Catholique kings ſicknes and the diſcourſe vpon it. might cauſe any alteration, it was then moſt of all to be feared: for beſides that the affaires of Flaunders were troubleſome, the humors of the French ill diſpoſed, Portugall yet in ballance to incline to a contrarie partie, and the reſt of Spaine was not well aſſured: The opinions were diuers what courſe to take, but all was confuſed, and all full of feare. The Duke of Alua whoſe opinion many of the better ſort did follow, thought it fit, that the king dying, the Queene with the prince ſhould preſently enter into Portugall, and goe to Lisbone, thinking by this meanes with the forces he had there readie, not onely to keepe the realme in peace, but alſo to aſſure the other eſtates of Spaine: He now laboured to ſtabliſh the affaires, for depriuing from the office of the magiſtrate of the chamber of Lisbone, ſuch as had been inſtalled by the Prior, he reſtored ſuch as had bin before; calling them vnto him, he ſaid; it was now time that in the cities behalfe, they ſhould ſweare obedience vnto the king, and proclaime his name in the publique ſtreetes, with accuſtomed ceremonie; whereunto they willingly offered themſelues, demaunding leaue for this cauſe to make publique feaſtes, and that withall, the priuileges of the citie might be confirmed: Whereunto he anſwered,Lisbone ſweares obedience to the king. that there was then no neede, but they ſhould reſerue it, vntill the prince were there preſent to be ſworne, whome his Maieſtie had reſolued to ſend vnto the citie to be bred vp amongſt them; and as for their priuileges, they were very ſmall, that he woulde graunt them more amplie. So as the eleuenth day of September in the Dukes lodging, they tooke their oath in forme, and the next day after dinner, the magiſtrate going thorough the citie with the ſtandard and their Attaballes, they proclaimed the name of King Phil p after the accuſtomed manner; yet with a weake voice, and ſmall aſſemblie of people. And as in the proclaiming of other kings there appeered nothing but feaſts and ioy; here was nothing to be ſeene, but ſecret ſighes and hidden ſorrow with flatterie: The Dukes armie was lodged vntill the tenth of September betwixt the citie and Alcantara, at the ſame lodging where the Portugals had lodged, without any reſolution what to doe, ſtill expecting ſome newes of the Prior. At which time there grew (as a companion to warre) notA contagious Catar. onely in the campe, but likewiſe in the citie a contagious infirmitie

of Catarre, ſo dangerous, that it did no leſſe harme then the peſtilent contagion; few were free from this diſeaſe, and many of them died, eſpecially of the ſoldiers, for that to a new diſeaſe, ordinarie remedies helpe little: Anthonie ſoone after arriued at Saint Arem, where the magiſtrate of that place, (being the ſelfeſame,) who a little before with ſo great ioy had proclaimed him king, would not giue him entrie, ſo are mens mindes turned with fortune; yet hauing promiſed to depart preſently, they ſuffered him to enter vpon that condition, and the day following, he went towards Coimbra.
            
               Saint Arem yeelds obedience. Soone after the citie of Saint Arem ſent to yeelde their obedience, and whileſt they expected that Coimbra ſhould doe the like, they had newes that the Prior was there, that he fortified himſelfe in thoſe partes, that he repaired Mount Maior the olde, and brake the bridge vpon the riuer of Doro: And although there were no doubt, that he could aſſemble men ſufficient to terrifie the Duke, yet hereby they vnderſtood that the warre was not ended, and that they could not diſmiſſe any part of the armie, which they had reſolued to ſend backe, with the galleies of Italie; ſo as by a little ſtay, they loſt the ſeaſon of ſailing in that ſea with their galleies; but for that the countrey is not fruitfull, and that victuals grew very deere within the citie, they lodged the Germaines at Settuuall, reſoluing to ſend the Italians to Saint Arem: But hauing the newes confirmed, that the Prior aſſembled forces, the Duke woulde not ſeparate his troupes ſo farre from him, but lodged the Italians and Spanyards in the ſuburbs of the citie (which place had beene ſpoiled) to defende them from the daily raine which began to fall.
            
               The Prior aſſembles new forces. At this time the Prior with his traine tormented the inhabitants of the prouince betwixt Doro and Mignio, aſſembling men of warre by force, and for that many (doubting ſiniſter euents) feared that in ſauing of him they ſhould preiudice themſelues, he forced obedience vpon greeuous paines, which he impoſed vpon ſuch as followed him not: So as ſome for feare of their perſons, others of their goodes, came vnto him; yet were there others, who of their naturall inclination would not leaue him vntill death: In this ſort, he gathered together fower or fiue thouſand men, with the which he held the citie of Coimbra in awe, ſo as it could not yeelde to the Catholique king: Hee went with them to Auero, where hauing

found ſome reſiſtance, he vſed his greateſt force: For hauing with ſome ſmall peeces of artillerie battered the wals, he gaue a confuſedAuero taken. aſſault; but profiting little, his friends within did ſo weaken the defence by words and force, that the Priors men entred: The ſuccours which Pantaleon de Sada brought from Porto, comming too late: There he impriſoned diuers perſons, he ſlew, ſpoiled, and ruined all he could: By theſe actes (which ſeemed vnto them moſt glorious) his peaſantlie ſoldiers were growne to that arrogancie, that armed with hookes, and ſtaues, they threatned to goe to Lisbone, to free the realme from the hands of the Caſtillians: And this fooliſh preſumption was not a little furthered with the newes, that Anthonie had of the kings ſickneſſe, whome they gaue out to be dead, being attired all in blacke the better to perſwade them.
            The Duke was well aduertiſed of all theſe things, finding ſtill more plainly of what importance the flight of Anthonie was: There wanted not ſome that charged him to haue forborne too long, in ſending men after him, yet hauing care to aſſure that which did more import; he would not deuide his forces, vntill he did ſee an end of the kings infirmitie, who hauing long laboured in the extremities of death, he began with an vniuerſall ioy to recouer, and encreaſing daily the ſignes of health, he grewe well; wherewith feare which troubled the mindes of men being taken away, they began to talke againe of the victorie, and of the Dukes actions: But this commendation which was attributed vnto him (as it hapneth in all worldly actions) continued little, and rarely ſhall you finde ſo apparant an example of the inconſtancie of the people, and the force of enuie as this was: for ſodainly his praiſes were turned into murmurings, and open ſlaunders, ſearching ſo many reaſons to deface the Dukes merits, as two daies before they had alleaged to extoll his actions. The Dukes reprehenſions grew from the proper miniſtersThe Duke blamed. of this warre, or from ſuch as followed the enterpriſe, who offended with him for the diuerſitie of their opinions, or for their own priuate practiſes, or elſe (as ſome would haue it) deſirous to creepe into the kings fauour by like reports, did write that the ſacke had beene very great, and freely ſuffred for three daies, whereunto they woulde attribute the Portugals diſobedience, and their diſcontentment againſt the Caſtillians, labouring to prooue, that if the Duke

had pleaſed, by his authoritie hee might haue ſtaied it, but being partaker with his kinſemen (who were more imploied to ſpoile then to fight) of a good part of the bootie, hee did tolerate it; leauing outrages and thefts vnpuniſhed, although complaints were made vnto him. That the termes of conqueſt, taking of cities, and route of armie, were vaine and vnproper, ſeeing that in no place they had founde any reſiſtance; and that this multitude of Portugals, as ſimple people (deceiued by their prieſts in confeſſions and preachings) could not be termed an armie, nor their route called a victorie: And ſo blinde is enuie, that two armies encountring with many peeces of great artillerie, fighting on the one ſide for the paſſage of a bridge, on the other ſide in their trenches, the Portugals foote and horſe broken, the enimie put to flight, the ſtandard roiall taken, with many other coulors, and aboue a thouſand men ſlaine, and yet they woulde not haue this a battaile: Some which did charge him with negligence ſaide, that ſeeing hee had an intention to diſlodge this armie (after he had attempted the bridge & the trenches) he ſhould haue ſtretched foorth his horſemen further on the left hande, to cut off the enimies way, and to take him priſoner, if he woulde flie; but to keepe himſelfe ſo farre off as he coulde not ouertake him, was an vnexcuſable faulte in ſo great a captaine: Others ſaide, that it was not credible, but he ſhoulde haue taken him, if hee had pleaſed to place his horſe in a conuenient place for that purpoſe, which euerie ignorant captaine woulde haue conſidered, but that hee willingly ſuffered him to flie; that by meanes of Anthonies libertie, the warre ſhoulde not ſeeme to be ended, a thing which captaines doe commonly wiſh, preferring their owne authoritie, and their priuate reſpect, before the publike good: Others did adde that if hee would haue taken him after his flight, and the battaile woon, hee might well haue done it, for making no haſte to flie, he might ſo ſpeedily haue followed him with his horſe as the importance of his perſon did require.
            
               The Dukes excuſes. Amongſt ſo many accuſations, fewe durſt ſpeake for the Duke, yet ſome of his friendes laboured to iuſtifie him, ſaying, that time, place, and deſire to aſſure the victorie, doth often hinder the execution of thoſe things which the captaine wiſheth: That it was not then conuenient to follow the Prior: For conſidering the ineuitable

diſorders of the ſoldiers, in ſending many, hee had contrarie to the kings pleaſure waſted the countrey, and if hee had ſent fewe, they had not beene ſafe; and therefore he deſired to temper this heate of victorie in the ſoldiers mindes, meaning after to ſende a part of the armie in good order, but when as hee ment to effect it, the Kings ſicknes hapned, whereof he deſired firſt to ſee the iſſue, before he woulde bee vnfurniſhed of his forces. That touching the inuironing of the enimies campe with his horſe, beſides that they had no ſufficient number to do it, it had not beene the reſolution of a wiſe captaine to make a fearefull enimie deſperate; and to force him either to fight or become a priſoner. Touching the ſacking of the ſuburbes, they ſaide it was no ſmall good happe to haue ſo many houſes without the wals of the citie; for otherwiſe they ſhould hardly haue kept the ſoldiers from ſpoiling it, and that it was in a manner neceſſarie for the ſauing of the citie to haue ſomething 
                  •
               o quench this deſire, which they had brought with them. And as there was ſome difficultie to ſaue the citie from the ſacke, ſo was it impoſſible to keepe the ſuburbes from ſpoile, ſeeing the battaile was giuen within the limits thereof. They laughed at ſuch as ſaide the Duke was partaker of the ſpoile, ſeeming vnto them a matter farre from his qualitie. They ſhewed that although they woulde not haue it ſaide that the battaile were glorious, but vnwoorthie, againſt a ſmall number of ſeditious monkes, apoſtates, and fugitiue ſlaues, yet coulde it hardly be concealed, for it coulde not be denied but that Anthony had a great number of men in a ſtrong lodging, amongſt the which were many of the Nobility, and that which moſt ſupplied their want of experience, paſſionate againſt the Catholique king, and moſt affectionate to the Prior; that in armies where ſuch things happen, it is not credible they ſo eaſily yeeld or flie of themſelues, if they be not encountred with a captaine that is both valiant, & of iudgement, who by force or cunning doth breake them & put them to flight. They did prooue by liuely reaſons that it was not credible that the Duke with a reſolution ſo hurtfull to his king, ſhould prolong the enterpriſe & ſeeke to continue his commaund, by meanes of the warre, ſaying, that although in auncient common wealthes, noble citizens were deſirous to be imploied in expeditions, and gouernments of armies, to free themſelues from the ſubiection of the

Senate; yet was it not ſo in the gouernment of later princes; whereas ſuch as be neere the king haue more authoritie, then ſuch as bee retired. They added vnto theſe reaſons, the conſideration of the Dukes age, fidelitie, and experience, with auncient and newe examples; concluding it was likely, that without any priuate ſubiect, hee had laboured with his beſt endeuour wholie to ſerue the king: But although he were vehemently defended, yet could they not wholy roote it out of the mindes of men; ſo is the chance of this worldly Tragedie toſſed vpſide downe, that the captaine which the weeke before had beene triumphant and glorious, lay now in his bed ſicke with ſorrow, ſlaundered with his Prince, and his armie halfe defeated, languiſhing with hunger and want, infected with the plague, infamous for exceſſe and violence; ſome part whereof was true, and ſome falſe: ſo as the ſoldiers were troubled, melancholy, and angry; and although with the inſolencie of conquerors, yet ſeemed they like men vanquiſhed: They commaunders of the armie were likewiſe in diſpaire to reape any recompēce of their ſeruice, ſo as the captaines which reſolued to plant them ſelues in Portugall, and receiue great recompence by confiſcations, were deceiued of their hopes: For the King who had an other meaning, reſolued to forget all the wrongs the Portugals had done him, and not onely to pardon their diſobedience, but alſo reward and cheriſh them as his children. It was generally ſpoken, that vpon the Priors defeate and yeelding of the citie of Lisbone, the King ſhoulde preſently go thither in perſon, and by graunting rewardes and pardons, labour to winne the Portugals loues, and to qualifie that bitternes which the ſpoile and inſolencie of the ſoldiers had bredde. But although there had beene already ſpeech of his going to Eluas, and that he deſired to make his entrie as king of Portugall; yet did he not effect it, for that as it is ſaide before, the plague was diſperſed into many parts of the realme. He laboured to become maſter not onely of all places within the realme, but alſo of all others that depended thereof: when as the armie began firſt to enter the realme, he had ſent into Affrick to demaund obedience of thoſe places, but for as much as Anthony had preuented him by former letters vnto the captaines, his buſines being in better eſtate, then they prooued afterwardes, the inhabitants woulde not agree to acknowledge Philip; by reaſon

whereof, the battaile being woone, he ſent againe vnto them; forThe yeelding of the places in Affricke which the Portugals held. being of great importance for Spaine, he feared, that remaining vnder the Priors commaund, he ſhoulde raſhly diſpoſe of them ſo as promiſing recompence to the captaines, they did acknowledge him for their Lord, but with greater facilitie in one place then in an other; ſo as without any innouation, hee confirmed the ſame captaines, and the ſame garriſons.
            
               The Terceraes. The Ilands of Terceraes were not neglected by the Duke, the aſſurance whereof ſeemed greatly to import, and therefore vpon the brute of the victorie, hee ſent a meſſenger thither, with letters from the king, and the citie of Lisbone: but the matter being firſt well debated at Badagios, it was ſuppoſed by the Councell, the Portugals alone to be more fitte to mannage that buſines, then if the Caſtillians ſhoulde entermeddle; and therefore the King did write vnto Lisbone to Edward de Caſtelbianco, that conferring with the Duke as a Portugall, he ſhould go thither: But he reſolued not, for being newly created officer of the chamber, he founde that Edward Borges whom the Duke had appointed to ſende, remained accountable to the crowne for certaine money, ſo as hee thought not good to imploy him, nor to chooſe any other in his place. The Duke vnderſtanding of the Kings recouerie, leauing the care of the Ilands to him that had it, would no longer delay to ſend againſt the Prior, and although the time was vnfitte; yet the xxij. of September he diſpatched Sanches d' Auila into thoſe parts with fower thouſandSanches de Auila againſt the Prior. foote, and ſower hundreth horſe, who marched directly towards Coimbra, but vnderſtanding ſoone after that many of his ſoldiers died by the way, that many fledde into Caſtil, and that with great difficultie, (by reaſon of the great aboundance of raine), he ſhoulde conduct fower peeces of artillerie, the Duke ſent after him other fifteene hundreth foote, vnder Diego de Cordoua, and prouided ſhipping to ſende the cannon by ſea: Sanches d' Auila tooke his firſt lodging at Loures, from thence he marched to Torrez Vedras, where hauing broken one of his carriages, he was forced to leaue a peece of artillerie there, from thence he went directly to Coimbra, paſſing by Gibarotta, where hee did ſee the ſpoiles of that famous victorie, which the Portugals had againſt the Caſtillians; from thence hee ſent two companies of horſe to Coimbra, the which

               The yeelding of Coimbra. vntill they had diſcouered them woulde not yeeld their obedience; yet vpon view of the horſe, they mette them with the keies of the citie, and Emanuel de Soſa Pacheco, commiſſarie general of the campe, entred to receiue their allegeance. The Prior hauing newes of theſe things at Auero, woulde not attende Sanches d' Auila, remaining in ſuſpence, whether he ſhoulde imbarque himſelfe, and abandon the realme; but hauing receiued letters from ſome of Porto, who promiſed to obey him, he marched thither wardes with all the troupes he could make, whereof hauing yet made no mention, being a place of importance, we will digreſſe a little to reporte the eſtate thereof, during theſe troubles.
            
               The eſtate of Porto and the reduction. The inhabitants thereof doe account themſelues the wiſeſt amongſt the Portugals, who hearing the Catholique king began to arme, and that the Gouernours did rule, ſent to court, demaunding armes and munition for their defence if neede were: But their Embaſſadors arriuing at Almeryn, they founde the Gouernours were retired to Settuual, and that the Prior was proclaimed king; ſo as the Embaſſage they had in charge to impart to the Gouernors, they deliuered to the newe King, without warrant from their ſuperiors, who gaue vnto them ſuch artillerie and munition as they required: The Embaſſadors being returned therewith to Porto, there grew a diuiſion amongſt the Citizens, for ſome (affected vnto Anthony) approoued the Embaſſage; others being more ſeuere ſaid, that being ſent to the Gouernors, and deliuering their Embaſſage to the Prior, they were woorthy of blame: So as one part woulde receiue the munition, and artillerie, and vſe it at their neede, ſaying, that they ſhoulde receiue it, although it came from their enimies; the reſt woulde by no meanes accept it, ſeeming that thereby they did acknowledge him for king, and make themſelues ſuſpect to the Catholique king; the which they woulde by no meanes do, but entertaine themſelues as newters and lookers on: but the pluralitie of voices refuſing to accept the armes, the Embaſſadors (by the aduiſe of Pantaleon de Sada, Ferrant Nunes Barretto, and Iohn Rodrigo de Sada, who were the moſt famous men that gouerned the citie) left the artillerie and munition within the caſtell of Fiera, a little from thence, leauing the citie vnfurniſhed. But the Duke diſimbarking at Caſcaies before the battaile of Alcantara, they ſent to yeeld their

obedience. When as the Prior came into theſe quarters he ſeazed on this artillery and munition, and therewith battered Auero; from thence he went to Porto, where although ſome had giuen out moſt ſlaunderous ſpeeches againſt him, ſo as it was likely they woulde haue no agreement nor conuention with him, yet the greateſt part, enclined to obey him: hee was ioyfully receiued of all vnder a cannapie: and Pantaleon de Sada with his companions, (foreſeeing the humour of the people) without ſeeking of any remedie, excuſing themſelues, if they were not obeied, woulde not ſtay there but imbarking themſelues in a carauell they went into Gallicia, and from thence to Lisbone.
            The Prior ſtaied tenne daies in this citie, ſpoiling ſome priuate mens houſes, that were his enimies: he tooke ſugars and other merchandiſe from the merchants, and ſent them into Fraunce; hee demaunded to borrow one hundreth thouſand duckats of the people; and being aduertiſed that Sanches d' Auila approched, and that Coimbra, Mounte Maior, and ſome other places, had deliuered vp their keies, he ſent the Biſhop of Guarda to Viana, and to Ponte de Lima, to aſſemble more forces, and to ſtoppe the paſſage of the riuer.
            
               The Portugals and Caſtillians diſagree. The Duke of Alua was now at Lisbone with a troubled mind, for ſeeing the Portugals become more inſolent then before, & to diſagree with the Caſtillians; he had no authoritie frō the king to puniſh them, or to do ſuch execution as was conuenient, and had beene accuſtomed to do in other places; that the Prior yet kept the field with his forces; that daily there grewe quarrels within the citie, betwixt the Caſtillians and the Portugals; and that the nations were ſo incenſed one againſt an other, that it was to be feared it would breede ſome great diſorder. And although the Caſtillians had expreſſe order to endure all things, yet had they not the patience: For this manner of the Dukes proceeding, (miſconſtrued by the Portugals to proceed from feare) growing daily more proud, they forced the Caſtillians to quarrel with great diſcourteſie: For redreſſe whereof, the Duke hauing ſomewhat fortified the caſtell, which is ſeated vpon a ſmall hill neere the citie, a moſt auncient building, drew thither the greateſt number of his ſoldiers, artillery, victuals, and munition, taking them from the guard of the citie gates, where they grewe

odious; by meanes whereof he was more aſſured, and leſſe hatefull, and the Portugals choler ſomewhat qualified.
            
               The yeelding of Auero, and other exploites of Sanches d'Auila. At this time Sanches d' Auila, approched neere to Auero, where hee was mette without the wals by the principall of the citie, who wept for ioy, but chiefly amongſt the reſt, ſuch moſt reioiced as had beene kept in priſon, in danger to looſe their liues for reſiſting the Prior. Hauing there receiued the oath of fidelitie from the Magiſtrate, vnderſtanding that Anthony was gone to Porto, hee followed after, deſirous to encounter him with all the ſpeede he could: Diego de Cordoua being now arriued at the campe, with troupes which the Duke had ſent after him; the which by death and the flight of many were diminiſhed to fiue hundreth: Hee made diuers lodgings, moleſting the countrey little, being arriued at Rifana of Santa Maria, the which is fifteene miles from the left banke of the riuer of Doro, vpon the right banke whereof, Porto is ſeated, hee deuiſed by what meanes hee ſhoulde paſſe the riuer; ſuppoſing hee had no greater difficultie then this to vanquiſh the enimie: Hee knewe it was verie violent, running betwixte high mountaines without anie forde; hee carried with him vppon carts, ſome ſmall boates to caſt into the riuer; the which although they were fewe in number, yet did hee meane to runne alongſt the ſhoare, and to take others; but the ioints thereof were ſo ſhaken and open with the waie, and carriages, that hardly could they ſerue: Hauing therefore paſſed the monaſterie of Griſo, towardes the riuer, hee ſent to the ſhoare to ſearch for other boates, but hee founde not any; for beſides the Priors commaundement, that no barke ſhould paſſe from the right ſhoare, three or fower being armed ſcowred the riuer vp and downe, to hinder their paſſage; whereupon he ſent with great expedition, as well to places neere, as a farre off, to ſearch for ſome, whereof he failed not, for although there were none neere the citie, yet in places further off vp the riuer, where the Portugals ſuppoſed the Caſtillians would not come, they founde and tooke many; whereunto ioyning thoſe of Maſſarellos (a place vpon the left banke) the inhabitants whereof (diſcontented againſt theThe ſtatagem of Anthony Serrano to recouer aboate. Prior, who had burned their houſes for not duly obeying his commandement) were fled with their wiues and boates vnto the Caſtillians campe. It did alſo ſome what helpe, that Anthonie Serrano one

of the captaines which Auila had ſent to diſcouer, hauing runne almoſt to the mouth of the riuer, and not found any, diſcouering one, whereunto he durſt not approch, putting his men in Ambuſcado, ſtripping himſelfe halfe naked, ſeeming to haue been robbed by the Caſtillians, and calling the water men to him by the voice of a Portugall ſpie, which he had with him, he cauſed the boate to draw neere, and being entred into it, he diſcharged a piſtoll, which was hidden vnder him, by meanes whereof he did not onely amaze the marriners, but gaue ſigne vnto the ambuſh, which diſcouering itſelfe, the boate was preſently taken, with two or three others (although but ſmall ones) that were thereabouts; ſo as all togither made fiue and thirtie, with the which he ſuppoſed to paſſe a good part of his armie. Sanches d' Auila deſired much to haſten his paſſage, ſuppoſing that he had men ſufficient, but this reſolution was helde raſh, by the captaines that were about him; ſeeming vneaſie to paſſe with boates any where but at Pietra Salata, where lieth the ordinary paſſage, the which was fortified; for in other places the ſteepeneſſe of the banks would not ſuffer it, ſo as they could not deceiue the enimie, as they doe commonly, making ſhew to paſſe in one place, and goe to another. They obiected there were few barks, and ill prouided with marriners, and although they would containe a great part of the footemen, yet could they not hold the horſe, the which they muſt leaue behinde them, which was not thought conuenient; foraſmuch as on the other ſide, they did not onely ſee the place of their diſimbarkment fortified with artillerie, and rampiers, but alſo the banks repleniſhed with foote, and good ſtore of horſemen; ſo as it ſeemed they coulde not attempt this paſſage, without great loſſe, ſaying that it was better to ſeeke meanes to prouide victuals, and to behaue themſelues more diſcreetly vpon the paſſage, ſeeing that their ſafetie was of more importance to the king, then their ſpeede. Sanches d' Auila waighed well all theſe inconueniences, yet two things preſſed him greatly to paſſe; the one was want of victuals, and the difficultie to recouer them, the which encreaſed daily: the other was to vnderſtand that Edward de Lemos, Martin Lopez d' Azeuedo, and Anthony de Souſa Coutigno, who followed the Prior in this prouince, had aſſembled men to come to his ſuccour, the execution whereof they ſought to impeach; adding to this the ſmal

account he held of the Portugals by his experience informer actions,Sanches D' Auila paſſeth the riuer of Doro, at Auintes. reſolued in any ſort to paſſe: for this cauſe hee approched with his armie neer the riuer, where the Portugals hauing fortified themſelues within a forte, which is aboue the citie of Gaija, hee thought it ſhould be neceſſarie to batter it, and there to make ſome ſtay. But it fell out more eaſie then he expected, for hauing ſent Peter de Soto the elder, with ſome horſe to diſcouer it, they within (hauing once diſcharged their harguebuſes againſt the horſemen) abandoned the forte, and retired to the citie; ſo as remaining no defence on that ſide, he deuiſed by what meanes he ſhoulde paſſe with the leaſt loſſe. He himſelfe ranne vp againſt the ſtreame, to ſee if he coulde diſcouer any other paſſage; but finding all rough and ſteepe, he ſaw no other place conuenient, but Auintes, two miles from the campe, where (although vneaſily) both on the one and the other banke, they might imbarke and deſcend: There he reſolued to paſſe, for this cauſe (being returned to his lodging) he publiſhed his intent, but ſome of the armie being of a contrarie opinion, hauing aſſembled them all together, he ſaid vnto them: It will ſeemeThe ſpeech of Auila to his ſoldiers. ſtrange vnto you, that I haue reſolued to morrow to paſſe this riuer with the whole armie, ſuppoſing, it may be, that it is vneaſie and dangerous, for the ſeaſon being vnfit, the banks ſteepe, the enimie vpon the other ſide, armed and fortified, ſhoulde make you doubt the victorie; eſpecially being in greater number then we are: But for as much as where the feare is leaſt danger, I would let you ſee that there is no cauſe to feare any perill, but an aſſurance of honour and profite: Theſe doubtes (if you haue any before your eies) be all vaine, for the ſeaſon doth not offend vs, ſeeing that the waues are calme, the banks giue vs ſufficient roome, and our enimies fortifications are as weake, as their reſiſtance hath been hitherto: Remember that comming from Settuuall with the galleyes, you deſcended at Caſcayes, where the ſame enimies vnder the moſt famous Captaine of Portugal had their armie, & yet they neither hindred our landing, or ſcarce endured our ſight; for in a manner without ſeeing vs, they did abandon the moſt important place of the realme. Call to minde that all Portugall, being aſſembled with their counterfeitking, lodged at Alcantara, a place by nature moſt ſtrong, furniſhed with artillerie and other armes, in their preſence,

we battered the rocke of Saint Iulian, and forced it to yeelde, not daring once to ſuccour it, or iſſue foorth to any ſmall skirmiſh: and thinke you that the weakeſt part of this armie, and the moſt timerous, being retired on the other ſide of this riuer, ſhall make a greater reſiſtance, then it did vnited? In this action we ought to ſtriue for two things; the kings ſeruice, and our owne honours and reputations; the which fortune ſeemes to frame, as is moſt conuenient for vs: For if the enimies we haue in fronte, were ſo lodged, that there remained no let betwixt vs, we ſhould doe the king ſmall ſeruice, and winne our ſelues little honour by the conqueſt; but our good fortune will haue it ſo, to the ende our praiſe may be the greater, that Anthonie had taken (as a buckler againſt vs) this riuer and theſe bankes, and that there he ſhoulde ſhewe vs his forces; that the generall opinion is, that there hee may trouble his Maieſtie in the iuſt poſſeſſion of the realme, ſo as chaſing him, wee ſhall deſerue the greater recompence, by performing an enterpriſe that ſeems vneaſie, the which in my iudgement wil prooue no more difficult, then the reſt of this realme hath beene, if you be the ſame men you were few daies ſince: Yet ſuppoſe not that I acknowledge theſe victories wholie from your valour, for I thinke I may attribute it better to his Maieſties right, & the iniuſtice of Anthony. Who is he but knoweth that the realme appertaineth by iuſt title vnto our king? what iudgment ſeate is there in the world which hath not of themſelues giuen ſentence in his fauour? And contrariwiſe, who is ignorant that Anthony hath tyrannouſly vſurped the title of a king, that he hath neither right nor title to the realme? that hee is a baſtard, inſufficient, and vncapable of this degree; which things are knowne to all men, and therefore the iuſtice of God will make vs inſtruments to puniſh him that deſerues it: So as neither rampiers, riuers, nor fortreſſes, can ſerue him that is in the wrong, for that a guiltie conſcience, not onely weakens the hart, but makes all forces vaine. The equitie of the kings cauſe, and your valour, are not to bee encountred by ſo weake enimies, but will ſurmount greater difficulties then this, as you haue ſeene, and ſhall ſee tomorrowe, if it pleaſe God.  Theſe words with the authoritie of the captaine moſt renowmed amongſt theſe ſoldiers, made all men iudge that his reſolution was well conſidered, and therefore Sanches d' Auila for the night and the day

following, did thus order the armie: He cauſed them to plant vpon the banke, directly againſt the towne, ſuch artillerie as he had, in a place conuenient, both to ſcoure the paſſage, & to endammage the other ſide; leauing his lodging guarded with Germaines and Spaniards, he tooke the thirde parte of his foote, his boates and horſemen, & went by night vnto the paſſage, where he had been, there to imbarke & paſſe to the other banke, meaning to charge the enimie in flanke; the other two thirds of the armie vnder the charge of Rodorick
               The ſtratagem of Auila to paſſe the riuer. 
               Sapatta ſhoulde imbarke at Pietra Salata, in the reſt of the barkes, and draw after them ſo many horſes as they coulde, tied by the reines, making ſhew to paſſe there, to the end to keepe the enimie buſied with this feare; yet commaunding them not to paſſe, vntill they ſhoulde ſee the enimie charged by the other thirde part, which had beene tranſported at the other paſſage. All theſe things were duly executed; for the Portugals being vnexperienced in warre, coulde not prouide for ſo ordinarie a ſtratagem; ſo as Sanches d' Auila being come to the towne ſide, he founde ſo weake reſiſtance, that although ſome companies of ſoldiers were runne thither, yet he landed eaſily: And whereas their boates were not able to tranſport all their ſoldiers togither, the firſt which landed, hauing entred skirmiſh with the Portugals, before the comming of the reſt, hauing ſlaine tenne or eleuen of them, they put them all to flight.
            The Prior beleeued not the Caſtillians ſhoulde ſo ſoone haue paſſed, but vnderſtanding what they had done, and the ſmall reſiſtance of his men, being not yet generally publiſhed, hauing aſſembledThe oration of Anthony to his ſoldiers. many and of the chiefe, he ſpake thus vnto them: Tyrants vſe in their pretentions, when they diſtruſt their right, to flie vnder other colours, to force, vſing this in ſteede of iuſtice, to obtaine their deſires; but iuſt and louing Princes, not onely ſubmit themſelues to iuſtice, but do continually ſtriue to be conformable to the will of their ſubiects: As for me, at ſuch time as the ſucceſſion of this realme failed, I was reſolute to obey him, that by right ſhoulde bee declared king: I remained quiet, vntill that Philip diſpairing of his iuſtice, and taking armes, it pleaſed you to name mee your king and protector: I accepted this burthen more (as God ſhall preſerue our libertie) not ſeeing any one that coulde gouerne you with true

loue, then for any deſire to rule: howe I haue behaued my ſelfe, how euery thing hath paſſed, you knowe, who haue beene alwaies, and in all things, not my ſubiects but my companions: want of time woulde not ſuffer vs to prouide many things neceſſarie for the warre; for I was no ſooner named king, but the enimie prepared, hauing before plotted many ambuſhes, and reſolute what to doe, inuaded vs with his forces, the which was cauſe that the munitions appointed & the ſuccors promiſed by Chriſtian princes, could not come in due time; the which hath made our ſucceſſe vnhappie: we haue (in a manner diſarmed) already tried the hazard of a battaile, if you thinke good to aduenture it againe, againſt an enimie that followeth vs, do as you pleaſe, but I am not of that opinion, for hauing hitherto aduentured my perſon, and made this breaſt a buckler, I am not now reſolued, except you do otherwiſe aduiſe me, to thruſt both you and my ſelfe to the hazard of a doubtfull battaile; by the victorie whereof, although it ſhoulde remaine on our ſides, there could not ſucceed the intention we haue, to expell the enimie out of this realme, & by looſing it, I ſhould be fruſtrate of the hope I haue conceiued, to free you ſoone from the yoke which hangs ouer you. God is my witnes, that al which I haue done, and ſhall do, neither hath beene, nor ſhall be to any other ende, but for the loue of you, and to make equall this ballance of iuſtice, the which is now forced by the might of the greateſt enimie that euer Portugall had. I know well you will beleeue me, but if any amongſt you doth diſtruſt my words, let him conſider, that if I had not regarded your profite, but mine owne priuate intereſt; I had beene now quiet, rich, and reconciled with the Catholique king, who hath often ſought me, by offers, and large promiſes; and you had beene tyrannized ouer, and in a manner ſlaues, as thoſe be that haue no kings of their owne countrie: But God forbid that euer I ſhoulde preferre mine owne profite before yours, or mine owne benefite before the realmes, whoſe people haue ſo much loued my progenitors: I may well at this time, yeeld vnto the vniuſt forces, that doe oppreſſe me, yet will I neuer renounce the realme, nor my title, but with newe armes and new force, I hope againe to trie mine action; ſo as this ſorrow which I now ſee in your faces, ſhall be ſoone turned to ioy; thoſe armes, that munition, thoſe men, which are not now arriued in

time, ſhall ſerue hereafter: And if it be a humaine thing to take compaſſion of the afflicted, I hope, being ſo vniuſtly moleſted, to moue pitie, not only in the moſt pitifull, but alſo in the cruelleſt nations of the world. I knowe that this loue which you haue alwaies borne to me, and my predeceſſors, ſhall no waies be diminiſhed by any ſiniſter euent, and I am ſo well aſſured, that although we ſhall be now ſeparated one from another, that ſhortly we ſhall be aſſembled againe to your great benefite and profite, and to the ſhame and diſhonour of our enimies. Theſe words did mooue the harts and eies of many, no man anſwering him a word; ſo as being retired with his faithfull followers, he departed as it were in ſecret, withoutThe flight of Anthony to Viana. publiſhing his departure, and going to the Monaſterie of Aronca by the vnknowen way of Vairam and Barcellos, hee came to Viana.
            
               Sanches d' Auila hauing paſſed all his troupes, and put the Portugals, that kept the paſſage to flight, he came againſt the towne, the which being ignorant of the Priors intent, manned with many ſoldiers, reſolued to defend themſelues, keeping the Caſtillians all they could from approaching with their artillerie: Being come to the enimies cannon, Rodericke Sapatta arriued at the ſame inſtantThe flight of the Portugals. with his boates, who landed without any contradiction, but the Portugals preuented them with their flight; ſo as there remained not any one: Sanches did long purſue ſuch as fled, and cauſed his horſe to followe them; but the rainie day and the diuerſitie of the waies, gaue them good meanes to eſcape; ſo as the Caſtillians returnedThe citie of Porto yeelded. with the ſlaughter of few. The conquerors beleeued, that the Prior was yet remaining in the citie, ſeeing them make ſhew of defence, and continually to play with their artillerie, the which did ſmall hurt: But whileſt that Sanches looked about who made reſiſtance, and ſought out the fitteſt lodging to force the towne, the citizens diſcouering the Priors flight, changed their reſolutions, making a ſigne of peace with a white cloth from the wals, which was an aſſurance of the victorie, and of the Priors flight; by reaſon whereof, diuiding his horſemen into two parts, he cauſed them to purſue him, by two diuers waies, and the magiſtrate of the citie, iſſuing foorth, yeelded his obedience, who offering to open the gates, Sanches commaunded him to the contrarie for feare of the ſoldiers,

who were greedie of the ſpoile: But notwithſtanding this order from the captaine, the city was in danger to be ſacked; for remaining yet within ſome of the Priors ſoldiers, as ſome of the chiefe of the Caſtillians entred by one of the gates, the inhabitants let foorth the Portugals by an other; the which they coulde not do ſo ſecretly, but they were diſcouered by ſome of the companies, that lay abroad, who ſuffring them to paſſe, entred by the ſame gate, and began to ſpoile ſome houſes, on that ſide of the towne, and ſo had continued with the reſt, if before the arriuall of the other companies, Sanches d' Auila hearing the noiſe, had not runne in perſon with the officers, and ſtaied them by his authoritie.
            In the meane time the Prior entring Viana, finding he coulde no longer make reſiſtance within the realme, reſolued to imbarke and ſaile into Fraunce, and for that cauſe did furniſh a ſhip; but forbore to imbarke, by reaſon of the contrarie winde. At this time there arriued at Viana one part of thoſe horſe which perſued him, hauing intelligence of his being there, againſt whom the citie put themſelues in armes: But the captaine ſaying vnto them, that if they refuſed to obey, they ſhould be ſpoiled by the armie which approched, and would arriue that day or the next, they grew amaſed, and yeelded vpon condition, to haue their liues and goods ſaued. Vpon the view of theſe horſemen, the Prior finding himſelfe in ſoThe taking of Viana. great danger, in a place of ſmall truſt, and diſarmed, reſolued rather to conteſt againſt the waues, and windes, then againſt the enimie; and therefore he imbarked with the Biſhop, and ſome other of his traine, hoping, that whileſt the citie made reſiſtance, hee lying there concealed, ſome ſmall winde woulde driue them from the lande: But fortune (to ſpeake after the common phraſe) ſeemed not yet wearie of him, for the ſea ſwelled more, and the windes encreaſed, and continued ſo long, that the Caſtillians being entred, and demanding for him, they had intelligence he was in the ſhippe, making preparation to go take him, wherof they ſeemed to be aſſured. But the Prior vnderſtanding thereof, ſeeing into what danger he was now brought, hauing deuided his treaſure (which was not great) to ſuch as were about him, hee attired himſelfe like a marriner, and accompanied with the Earle and Biſhop, and ſome of his other fauorites, with the moſt pretious things that he had, he tooke

boate in great danger of drowing, landing vpon the other banke of the riuer of Minio, the which is directly againſt the citie. The which the Caſtillians diſcouering, made haſte to purſue him: ButAnthonie ſaues himſelfe on the other ſide of the riuer Minio, in danger to be taken. for as much as the riuer is not to be paſſed there, before the Caſtillians could embarke, he had time to ſaue himſelfe, looſing all his ſeruants, and ſome things of price, yet had hee all his moſt precious iewels ſowed in his garments. True it is that ſince there was found in Caſtill ſome peeces of the rich capariſon, where of I made mention, in a ſouldiers poſſeſſion, who ſaid, he had then taken it from one of the Priors ſlaues; but the King ſuſpicious that Anthonie had beene his priſoner, and deliuered for that ranſome, kept him long in priſon. It ſeemed that Fortune did accompanie the Prior to preſerue him, it may be for ſome greater affliction for this Realme, for at the ſame inſtant he left his boate, and went to lande, there arriued on the ſame ſide that other troupe of horſemen that purſued him, who had eaſily taken him, if they had once ſuſpected he had beene there; but diſcouering on the other ſide a troupe of horſe, imbarking to paſſe the riuer, not able to diſcerne (by reaſon of the diſtance) whether they were friends or enemies, nor for what reaſon they paſſed, they were in doubt what to doe, during which time the Prior retired himſelfe: And although by their approch they found by their colours who they were, yet before the one could vnderſtand the others reſolution, the time was ſpent and they effected nothing.
            The king did now beginne to recouer his health, after ſo dangerous a ſickneſſe, at which time Queene Anne his wife fell ſicke of aThe death of Queene Anne. rotten feuer, the which in few daies brought her to another life; wherewith the king was much grieued, being a Ladie wholy conformable to his humour, and indued with ſingular bountie. Hauing recouered his former health, forbearing to enter the realme, vntillThe King enters into Portugall by the citie of Eluas. all were reduced to his obedience, ſeeing now the Prior to be defeated, and to hide himſelfe, he went to Eluas the firſt citie of the realme, where the Portugals receiued him with great ioy; for that in this citie and others, bordering vpon Caſtill, their hatred is not ſo mortall againſt the Caſtillians, as in other places: There he did open the barred hauens, that is, he diſanulled the impoſts, which were paied, as well in Caſtill, as in Portugall, of all ſuch merchandize

as paſſed from realme to realme; the which amounted yeerely to 150000. duckats; he ſet a tax of 80000. duckats vpon the Priors perſon, as a rebell and diſturber of the quiet of the realme: He proclaimed a parliament at Tomar, the fifteenth day of Aprill, where he would aſſiſt in perſon, with the generall opinion and great hope of all men, that all Portugals that had offended, ſhould there receiue their pardon, and the obedient haue reward; and that to all in generall, he would giue great recompences, graunting to the cities of the realme whatſoeuer they demaunded. There remained neither citie nor place, within the maine land of Portugall, that had not yeelded their obedience to the king of Spaine: For after the Priors flight from Viana, all was in the Caſtillians power; the places of Affricke were obedient, and ſo was the Iland of Madera; as for the places further off, time would not yet ſuffer them to haue any certaine newes.
            
               The deſcription of the Ilands of Terceraes and the inhabitants thereof. There remained the ſeuen Ilands of Terceres, which had not yet made their ſubmiſſion, hauing aduertiſement that (only S. Michaels excepted) all the reſt refuſed to obey; and for as much as they were of no account, this diſobedience made them famous: Although they be ſeuen in number, yet are they for the moſt part ſmall and ill peopled: That of Saint Michael (a hundreth miles neerer Spaine then the reſt) is the beſt: There the Biſhop of all theſe Ilands hath his reſidence: They call their principall towne Punta Delgada, the next vnto it is called Tercere, whereof all the reſt take their name: This is fertill, and by nature more ſtrong then the reſt: Angra is their greateſt dwelling, whereof the ſaide Biſhop taketh his name: The reſt, as Saint Marie, Fayale, Pico, Coruo, and Flowers, be leſſer, and ſome of them wholy vnpeopled: The inhabitants of all in generall be ſuperſtitious, and vaine, grounding their diſcourſes vpon fancie; for ſince the battaile of Affricke, they would neuer beleeue that king Sebaſtian was dead: And although this opinion was helde long through out the Realme, yet hath it beene more confidently beleeued there then in any other places; for notwithſtanding they had ſeene the innouations which happened in the time of King Henrie, and of the Gouernours, yet did they ſtill hope he ſhould appeare: But when the Prior was proclaymed King, it ſeemed they were ſomewhat ſatisfied; for hauing preſently ſent vnto theſe

Ilands to take poſſeſſion, with letters vnto all the Magiſtrates; hee was there ſworne and willingly obeyed: and to performe this Acte of obedience, they ſent as Ambaſſadors vnto him, Stephen Siluera and Fryer Melchior of the order of Saint Frauncis, who arriuing at Lisbone, could not execute their charge; for being defeated at Alcantara hee was fled towards Porto, yet making no account of the enimies victorie, they followed the Prior, & there in the name of all the inhabitants of theſe Ilands yeelded him obedience. After in the month of Nouember in the yeare 1580. they returned to Tercomes, giuing an account of their charge, adding that notwithſtanding Anthonie had beene broken at Alcantara, yet he began in the Prouince betwixt Doro and Mynio with 30000. men, to be reuenged vpon the Caſtillians: And although they had after intelligence of Philips abſolute victorie, and of the flight of Anthonie, yet they continued firme in their opinions, wherein they were daily confirmed, for that (as it is ſaid before) the Kings miniſters had neglected to ſend vnto them; whereas contrariwiſe Anthonie and the Earle of Vimioſa did ſtill ſolicite them by curriers and letters to continue firme: the ſaid Earle, hauing ſent Anthonie Scalyn a Frenchman vnto them with letters, whereby in the Priors name hee did commende their good affection; they ſo far paſſed the bounds of ioy, as they receiued him into Angra in proceſſion, and vnder a cannapie, conducting him to the Church of pitie, where the ſaide Fryer Melchior preached, applying their intentions to the will of God: and Fryer Blaiſe Camello did ſing Maſſe, who in his prayer, with a lould voice praied for two Kings, that is, Sebaſtian and Anthonie, ſaying vnto the people which demaunded newes of Sebaſtian, that the fourth of Auguſt he would ſatisfie them. The inhabitants of the Iland of Saint Michaell, which had no ſuch ſeditious firebrands, as that of Tercera, beeing by nature more peaceable, furthered by the Biſhop who followed the Kings party, did not runne into ſo great diſorders, but ſhewed themſelues daily more obedient vnto Philip, who hauing intelligence of all theſe things, deſired to trie if hee could by gentle meanes draw this rebellious nation to his obedience, and at the laſt, remedie the error of his miniſters; for to conquer them by force was ſuppoſed difficult, the Terceraes being naturally ſtrong, and inuironed with high rockes, beſides the ſea going ſo high in

thoſe parts, as no ſhips can liue aboue three or fower moneths in the yeare: This enterpriſe was then ſuppoſed to be of more importance then it had beene, not ſo much for the qualitie of the place, as for the ſituation, beeing an vnauoydable paſſage for the ſhips that come from the Indies, and the new found lands, as well from the Eaſt as from the Weſt, where the Frenchmen harbouring, they might greatly endomage Spaine: for this conſideration the King ſent Ambroſe d' Aguiar, with a letter and ample pardon in a manner to all offendors, if leauing the part of Anthonie, they would followThe reſolution of the inhabitants of Terceraes his. But arriuing neere vnto Angra and ſending his letters to land, the Iſlanders tooke counſell what to doe; but the people being then mad and without gouernment, did not approoue the opinion of this counſell. The richer ſort regarding their priuat profit would obey, for hauing all their rents in corne, the which they commonly ſend vnto the realme, they could not make ſale in any other place; but being few, and not daring to ſpeake their mindes, they deliuered it doubtfully: The poore, (who finding the leſſe corne were tranſported from the Ilands, the better cheape they ſhoulde buie it,) not caring to haue any trafficke with Portugall, would by any meanes follow the voice of Anthonie. Many kindled with rage, aduiſed they ſhoulde ſuffer Ambroſe d' Aguiar to enter the citie, and after caſt him in priſon and puniſh him as Ambaſſador to a Tyrant. Some held they ſhould ſend him away without anſwere: Some of the chiefe (who feared they were not comprehended within the pardon) did what they could to preiudice the Kings part, for diſpairing to obtaine it, they laboured that no man ſhould follow his voice, but ſo to wrong Philip as they ſhould loſe all hope euer to bee reconciled: wherein they preuailed ſo much, as that Ambroſe d' Aguiar (who was appointed to be Gouernor of the Iland of Saint Michaell) was ſent backe. They cauſed a Maſſe to be ſaide, where all the people did ſweare to die for Anthonie: In which humor they were ſtill confirmed by falſe reports that were blowen abroad: For although the Prior were yet hidden in Portugall, yet the ſhippes which came from Fraunce, and England, to trafficke at the Ilands, to the end they might be the better fauored and receiued, brought newes that he was in their countrey, raiſing a great Armie. The people being in this humour eaſie to take any impreſſion, there ſuddenly

ſteps vp a Smith of the baſeſt ſorte, who followed by the multitude, plaied the Southſayer; ſaying that the tenth of March without all doubte, King Sebaſtian ſhoulde come into that Iland. The day being come, with great expectation of the people, there appeered a great ſhippe at ſea, the viewe whereof, did ſo much alter this people, that the Smith crying, this was the ſhippe wherein the King was; euery man ranne to the ſhoare to ſee him, as as it were expecting Sebaſtians landing. But although the ſhippe followed an other courſe, not drawing any thing neere to the Iland, yet the people left not their vaine hope, but ſome of them affirmed, that the ſhippe had put three men into their cockboate, the which were entred into the couent of Saint Frauncis, ſuppoſing it ſhoulde be King Sebastian, Christopher de Tauora, and the Cheriffe. And although this lie might eaſily be deciphered, yet their offences would not permitte it, but running from one ſcruple to an other, it ſeemed they were deſtinate to liue in ſuſpence: for theſe friers of Saint Frauncis, againſt the truth of prieſthoode (vnderſtanding the peoples opinion, that the King was in their couent) did confirme it, giuing them to vnderſtand it was true, and the better to induce them to beleeue it, ſeeming on the one ſide to keepe it very ſecret; on the other ſide ſhewing they had gueſts of importance, they demaunded ſecretly (but ſo as it might be knowen) to borrow beds of ſilke, ſiluer veſſels, and other things fit for a kings ſeruice: They cauſed alſo garments to be made, and kept their gates more ſtrictly then of cuſtome, ſaying in their ſermons, that they would giue them two naturall kings; and ſome hearing them in their maſſes to praie for Sebaſtian and Anthony, ſuppoſed he was in their monaſterie, and not Sebastian, ſeeing that ſince his departure from Viana, there was no certaine newes of him. In this Iland Ciprian de Figueredo (ſometimes ſeruant to the Counte of Vimioſo) being ſent thither for iudge, was become ringleader of all the reſt: This man (being contrary to the Caſtillians, and agreeing with the monkes) did countenaunce their practiſes, remaining in their couent, from morning vntill night: He confirmed the people in their fooliſh beliefe, that the King was there. This nation was not well ſetled in matters of religion, for growing inſolent by their libertie, ſome preachers attributing vnto themſelues more authoritie then they had, promiſed abſolution,

and many things which they ought not, making ſhewe they would builde a church after their owne faſhion, and for that the leſuitesThe Ieſuits walled vp at the Terceraes. had oppoſed themſelues, or at the leaſt were not of one conſent, they were walled vp within their monaſterie.
            And although theſe Ilands were not al obedient, being a ſlow enterpriſe, yet the warre ſeemed as then in a manner ended, that Philip hauing great forces in Spaine, knew not how to imploy them; & foraſmuch as the ſoldiers (returned from the warres in the lowe Countries) were now vpon the way, comming from Italy towards Portugall, with ſome others newly leuied, they ſaide the King (adding ſome fewe forces thereunto) might raiſe a great armie to bee imploied vpon that occaſion, for the which they vnderſtoode the Pope as carefull of his charge, had renewed the practizes to bende theſe forces againſt England, the which woulde not obey the Romiſh ſea, and therefore hee propounded to king Philip, that if heeThe Popes offer against England. woulde leuie an armie and ſende it to this conqueſt, he woulde aſſiſt him in this enterpriſe with the treaſures of the church; offring to graunt vnto him Croiſades, exemptions, and ſubſidies, and to acquite him of a million of golde, which hee ſaide was due vnto the church, for the reuenewes he had receiued of the Archbiſhopricke of Toledo, by title of ſequeſtration, when as the Archbiſhop was ſuſpended from his charge. But the King hauing newly taken poſſeſſion of the crowne, ſeeing the Portugals not well quieted, ſought firſt to pacifie the realme, before hee woulde vndertake any other enterpriſe: Notwithſtanding at the Popes motion, who ſaide, that arming in thoſe parts, hee ſhoulde not onely keepe Portugall in awe, but all Spaine and Fraunce likewiſe. It may be he woulde not haue refuſed to ſend a good part of his forces, if not into England, yet into Ireland, if the Popes miniſters had beene more reſolute, or had beene furniſhed with a more ample commiſſion; but the ſufferance of the foldiers, and the great charge, admitting no delay, Rome being ſo farre off, they agreed not, but the King diſmiſſing the Italians, cauſed the foldiers vpon the way to returne backe, and deuided his armie into garriſons.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the eight Booke.
               The ſoldiers complaints: The Catholique King viſites the Ducheſſe of Bragance: The Kings voyage to Tomar: The generall pardon: The estates wherein they ſware fidelitie vnto the King, and vnto the Prince Diego: The demaunds of the estates: The kings entrie into Lisbone: The vnhappy ſucceſſe of Peter de Baldes his men, at the Ilands of Terceraes: Anthonie his departure out of the realme, and his arriuall in Fraunce: The arriuall of Lopez de Fegueroa at the Ilands, and his returne without effect: The preparation of the Jlands: The eſtate of the affaires of Fraunce, and of the lowe Countries: The recompences which the King gaue vnto ſuiters: The opinions of the manner of giuing them: The enterpriſe of the Ilands: The preparation to warre by King Philip and the French, and the departure of their armies at ſea towards the Ilands both from Fraunce and Portugall.
            
            
               IN theſe warres, amidſt the cares of the realmes diſquiet, and imminent perils, Frauncis de Villafagna, doctor of the lawes, and Auditour of the Councel royall of Caſtil, which is the ſoueraigne ſeate of that realme, came to Lisbone; ſent by the King with letters vnto the Duke, whereby he was commaunded to fauour him in the execution of his commiſſion; the which being preſently publiſhed, containing no other matter of importance, but a ſimple commaundement, with the reſt of

the ordinarie officers, to examine the accounts of the armie, and to ſigne the warrants for paiments, it ſeemed a ſleight charge for ſo great a perſonage; the which miniſtred matter of ſuſpect, that vnder ſo ſimple a ſhewe, there was hidden ſome myſterie of importance; and the generall opinion was, that he came to cenſure both the armie, and the Duke himſelfe: And although the Duke ſhould haue beene beſt informed, yet he made no ſhewe to know it, but fauoured the Doctor, admitting him to the Councell of warre, and to other graue matters, which did not concerne him: The reſt of the Captaines & Spaniſh ſoldiers, which could leſſe diſſēble, ſpake with more libertie, and leſſe patience then the Duke; ſaying it was a newThe complaint of the Dukes ſoldiers. manner of Iuſtice, neuer heard of; ſeeing that of neceſſitie the controuerſie muſt bee betwixt the captaine generall and his armie; or betwixt the armie and the enimie, not able to diſcerne which ſhould be the contrarie parties, for it ſeemed the ſoldiers, neither could nor ought to make themſelues parties, againſt their Commaunder, neither ought the enimies to be admitted againſt a conquering armie. And if ſo ſtrange a thing ſhoulde happen, it might likewiſe be ſuppoſed, that the enimie ſhoulde be declared faithfull, and the armie which had conquered the realme pronounced rebels. They inquired wherein the Duke had offended; if as a Gouernour, or as a captaine; for ſaide they, he coulde not erre as a gouernour, hauing neuer reſolued the ſmalleſt matter, without the kings aduiſe, beſides that hee had not gouerned aboue two moneths: If as a captaine, what had lawes to doe with armes, and the militarie ſtile with the ciuill? But for all this diſcourſe, they did not greatly weigh the Dukes offences, ſuppoſing in the ende that his greatnes and innocencie ſhoulde protect him: Their owne priuate intereſt did moſt of all trouble them, looſing all hope of recompence for their former ſeruices, ſaying, that for this laſt and notable exploite, they did rather ſee puniſhment prepared then rewards: They imagined the king did not well conceiue howe they had conquered him a kingdome in eight and fiftie daies, after the ſame manner (to followe their owne phraſe) as the kingdome of heauen is woone, that is to ſay, in faſting, with bread and water, and without taking from any man; the which they ſaid, being furniſhed with nothing but bisket, & hauing no libertie to ſpoile any towne: They could not endure to

be ſlaundered by idle courtiers, and bachelors, (for ſo the ſoldiers in hate and deriſion of lawes & iuſtice, terme the greateſt Doctors of the Councell) ſaying, that thoſe men remained at Badagios to drinke coole in ſommer with ice, ſcorning thoſe that ſuffered theſe dangers. They remembred their labours ſuffred at ſea, comming out of Italy; the famine of Spaine; the intolerable heate of Eſtremadura; the plague of Portugall; the ſeuere diſcipline of the Duke, and the gibbets ſet vp for euery ſmall diſorder: they added, that to the end the victorie gotten at Porto ſhoulde not remaine vnpuniſhed, the King (to ſpeake plainly) had ſent another Doctor againſtThe auditor of Gallicia ſent to Auilas campe. 
               Sanches d'Auila, and that part of the army which had made an ende, and aſſured him the realme. And it was true that Frauncis Tedaldo Auditour of the ſeate of iuſtice, which remaines in Gallicia, was ſent thither, who did ſtrictly informe of all manner of exceſſe imputed either to Autla or his ſoldiers: They ſaide it was apparant in this courte, howe much, letters were preferred to armes, ſeeing that all ſuch as followed this action vnarmed, had wreſted from the ſoldiers the fruites of their labours, and the price of their blouds; ſeeing the King had ſatisfied their deſires in the greateſt meaſures they coulde wiſh, not giuing any recompence vnto others; the which they prooued in ſetting downe particularly, the offices the King had giuen to the Duke of Oſſuna and other Embaſſadors; for they did aſſure, and it is true, that the greateſt in Spaine aſpire to no other charge, then to be Viceroy of Naples, whereunto they labour to come by many degrees, and that the King had reſerued this for theThe Councell of the Kings chamber. Duke of Oſſuna.  As for other Noblemen and Gentlemen, they ſought for nothing more then to be of the Kings chamber, which place he had giuen to Chriſtopher de Mora, togither with the beſt offices of the realme of Portugall. They touched likewiſe the Lawyers which be of the Kings Councell, ſaying, they coulde not aſpire higher then to be of the Councell of the Chamber, the which is a tribunall of three or fower Doctors elected, who determine with the King of pardons, and other matters of grace; and that this office which Rodorique Vaſques enioied, he had likewiſe giuen to Lewes de Molina, preferring him before his auncients. Theſe ſpeeches with others more inconſiderate, were ſpred amongſt the ſoldiers, with a ſoldier-like libertie. And although they erred not much from

the truth, yet men without paſſion, iudged that this aggrauating was vniuſt and ſlaunderous; being no great maruaile, that a King, who ought to haue regarde to infinite matters the which paſſed the conſideration of priuate men, ſhoulde giue eare to the many complaints that were made againſt this armie, and force them to their purgation; and that it was not likely that Villafagna, or Tedaldo, had power to iudge in this caſe, but onely to examine the truth: That whereas Villafagna had in a manner carried his commiſſion ſecrete, it was an argument of the Kings reſpect, and modeſtie, who ſought to proceede with the more mildenes, and without any blemiſh to the Duke, or his captaines, although it was not reaſonable the ſoldiers ſhoulde treade this realme vnder their feete, as the rebellious countrey of Flaunders, or of a King that were an enimie; or giue vnto the Portugals the odious titles of rebels and diſloyal, although they deſerued well the name of troubleſome and tranſported ſubiects, vneaſie to yeeld vnto this new yoke. This mutinie continued long, but for as much as the Commiſſioners did not puniſh any, nor as I beleeue, made any triall, their humours grewe more calme, wherein the wiſedome of Villafagna preuailed much, togither with the ſmall ſubiect they founde, when as they came to examine the truth of ſuch complaints, as had beene made to the King.
            Now the day appointed by the King, for the aſſemblie of the States grew neere; but before he ſhoulde goe to Tomar, the placeThe King viſites the Ducheſſe of Bragance. appointed for their aſſemblie, he ment to viſite Katherine Ducheſſe of Bragance, who for that cauſe was come from Villauizoſa, to Villa Boim, whither he went to her, accompanied with all the chiefe of his Courte; and hauing ſtaied with her halfe a day in great familiaritie, he returned to Eluas, and from thence departed towards Tomar: He did not there ſo ſodainly diſpoſe of rewards as the Portugals expected; hauing (as it is ſaide before) made a Councell for Portugall, of ſpeciall men, to whom he referred all matters, not admitting the Caſtilliās, to entermeddle with any cauſe of the realme; no man was heard nor diſpatched as he pleaſed, for the King made no haſte, & his miniſters were confounded in the quantitie, & qualitie of their requeſts; not able to reſolue in ſo intricate a buſines, ſo as the care of expedition was delaied; by reaſon whereof the Portugals ſaide, that although the King, in his letters, words, and habite,

ſeemed curteous, & altogither enclined to Portugall, & had promiſed great rewards; yet in particular (whether it were his fault or any others,) they yet ſee no recompence. To the Duke of Bragāce who aſpired to great matters, as then they gaue nothing, being exceſſiue in his demaunds, he had onely confirmation to be Conſtable of the realme, they gaue him the order of the golden fleece, and the King fauoured him extraordinarily, taking him to maſſe with him behinde the curtaine, without any other recompence, which might eitherThe King ſworne at Tomar, and the Prince Diego. breede him profite or power. Before the entrie of the Parliament, the ceremonie of ſwearing the King was perfourmed, and ſoone after, of the Prince in the monaſterie of religious men of the order of Chriſt (a religion which is not any where elſe) where he was lodged in the ſame ſorte, as was ſaide of King Henry, but with more pompe, being in an aſſemblie of eſtates, and with leſſe noiſe being done with leſſe loue; yet was it woorth the ſight, both for the great number of the Nobilitie, and the goodly repreſentation of the King, in his habite of cloth of gold, which Henry had not, beingThe kings pardon to the Portugals. a Cardinall. There he graunted the pardon expected with ſo great deſire, the which although it had the name of generall, yet was it helde by the Portugals to be limited artificiall, and conditionall: It did pardon generally all ſuch as had beene imploied for the Prior againſt him, but particularly he did except many, and namely two and fiftie, the chiefe whereof was the Prior himſelfe, the Counte of Vimioſa, and the Biſhop of Guarda: hee pardoned no religious man; he made all ſuch as had ſerued the Prior, receiued honor from him, profite, charge, or office whatſoeuer, vncapable euer after to beare office, or to exerciſe thoſe they had enioied before;  ſo as they ſaide, this pardon ſerued none but ſuch as had made light faults, or had nothing to looſe. This did much incenſe the mindes of the Portugals, who found themſelues deceiued of the hope they had conceiued by this pardon all to remaine freed; the which although they much diſliked, yet could they not get it refourmed; but ſoone after all ſuch were cited by proclamation as were not pardoned, to theThe beginning of the parliament at Tomar. end their proceſſe might be made: The Deputies of the realme being now aſſembled, the Eſtates began the xix. day of Aprill, where Anthony Pignero Biſhop of Leira, made an oration before the king, ſaying, Firſt, that the Eſtates, ſeeming to haue the aſſiſtance of the

holie Ghoſt, by the profite which ſhoulde redounde to the ſubiects, that Philip following the cuſtome of former Kings, had aſſembled them, to the end that with wiſedome, loue, and fide litie, they ſhould repreſent vnto him, what they thought conuenient for the generall good of theſe realmes: He did greatly amplifie the graces done by his pardon, terming it the fruits of his clemencie, he did ſhew, it was a ground of hope of greater good: he concludes, noting the greatnes of the Kings loue & goodnes, promiſing to encreaſe al their honors, recompences, & fauours conformable to the loialtie and obedience they ſhoulde carrie to his ſeruice: Whereunto was briefly anſwered by Damian d'Aguiar Doctor, one of the Deputies of the citie of Lisbone, ſaying, That in the cities behalfe, and of the whole realme, he did thanke his Maieſtie, both for the grace of his pardon, as for aſſembling the Eſtates, offering him obedience: All the Deputies both in generall and particular demaunded what they pleaſed, to whom they graunted many things, as titles of knighthoode, rents for life, offices, and to ſome preſent money: there were eight or tenne of the meaneſt gentlemen, choſen of the order, and enobled with ſuch other like things, the which was done rather according to the vſe of Caſtill, then after the manner of Portugall; for in this realme it is not the cuſtome to giue any thing to Deputies: He gaue greater recompences to the whole realme in generall, graunting in a manner al thoſe, former things mentioned, which the Duke of Oſſuna had promiſed the Gouernors in the Kings name, if the realme ſhoulde yeelde peaceably (except it were to the garriſons) libertie to ſaile to America, and the weſt Indies, and to participate with the affaires of Caſtill, as if they were borne there; ſaying, that it was conuenient, before hee ſhoulde graunt them, to impart them to the Eſtates, being preiudiciall vnto them. The Deputies deliuered vnto the King a liſte of what they demaunded, and aduiſed touching the gouernment; whereof the principall were, that the King ſhoulde take a Portugall borne to wife; that he ſhoulde ſende the yoong prince to bee brought vp within the realme: that theThe demands of the Eſtates. States of Portugall ſhoulde be ſeparate from them of Caſtill, with their coine apart; and many things touching the abatement of impoſtes, the diſplacing of garriſons, the ordering of iuſtice, and ſuch like, whereof fewe were graunted at that time of any importance;
               
and to all the reſt, they made anſwere with doubtfull hopes: The Nobilitie, the greateſt part whereof (not hauing borne armes againſt the King) ſuppoſed to haue deſerued much, appointed thirtie amongſt them to make petition vnto the King, for manie things, in the name of the whole Nobilitie: Firſt, that hee ſhoulde graunt them iuriſdiction ouer their ſubiects: That ſuch Doctors as had beene imploied in matters of iuſtice ſhoulde not bee cenſured but by gentlemen: That the King ſhould make no man noble, but for the good deſerts of ſome notable ſeruice, and that it ſhould not paſſe vnto his heires, but vpon ſpeciall grace: That the chiefe offices of the realme, as the chiefe Captaine-ſhips, the three Purueiors of the Arcinall, the ſtore-houſe of the Indies, and of the cuſtome houſe, with ſuch other like, ſhoulde not bee giuen but vnto Noble men, whereof nothing was graunted.  Many did not attribute this refuſall of their demaunds vnto the kings owne nature, nor vnto the iniuſtice of their requeſts, but moſt complained of thoſe Portugall fauorites which gouerned.
            
               Touching the Vniuerſitie of Coimbra. Many were of opinion the King ſhoulde ſuppreſſe the Vniuerſitie of Coimbra, and thought it neceſſarie by all reaſon of ſtate, ſaying, that it was not ſafe in a realme newly incorporate, to ſuffer an aſſemblie of three or fowre thouſand yoong men, in a manner exempte from the iuriſdiction royall, the which might wel be called a Seminarie of ſeditions, and Anthony his diſciplined ſoldiers, readie to follow any other naturall rebell of the realme whatſoeuer: That the auoiding of this euill ſhoulde cauſe a greate benefite, that the Portugals ſhoulde go ſtudie in the Vniuerſities of Caſtill, where paſſing the heate of their youth, and growing familiar with the Caſtillians, they ſhoulde returne into Portugall more roially affected, and more ſufficient to adminiſter iuſtice then they were: They alleaged moreouer that thoſe lawyers had both by wordes and writings, wilfully oppoſed themſelues againſt the Kings right, chiefly when as Henry was enclined to the Dutcheſſe of Bragance; that ſome of them tranſported with this paſſion, had in their publike letters wreſted againſt Philip, not onely the imperiall lawes, but alſo the holie canons, interpreting them contrarie to their true ſence, and contradicting themſelues, and therefore they were woorthie of puniſhment. But although this opinion ſeemed grounded and

confirmed by many Portugals; yet the King either by his bountie, or the aſſurance of his iuſtice, or of his abſolute authoritie, or elſe, withhelde by the naturall inclination, hee ſeemed to beare to the Portugall nation, not onely preſerued this Vniuerſitie, but alſo tooke it into his protection, confirming their liberties and priuileges; hee not onely receiued the Doctors which had read and writ againſt him, with great mildenes, but alſo with a noble reſolution, confirmed them in their lectures, and preferred others to them that were voide.
            
               The Pope ſeemes content with the ſucceſſe of Portugall. In the meane time the Pope diſcouering the Priors weakeneſſe to maintaine Portugall, and that there was no meanes of agreement, hauing called home his Legate, he ſeemed well content with Philips ſucceſſe, ſaying, that his onely intention was to auoid wars, ſo as hauing obtained great rewardes for his ſonne or at the leaſt aſſured hopes, he graunted vnto the king, that George de Taida biſhop of Viſeu, who was his firſt chaplaine, ſhoulde be iugde without appeale of all cauſes, concerning the Eccleſiaſticall rebels, and of the proces of their confiſcations; ſo as the Prior, in a manner doomed to ſentence of death, with the Biſhop of Guarda and others, were againe cited by edicts, to be depriued by iuſtice of all ſpirituall liuings they held within the realme. There was yet no newes of him, notwithſtanding the reward promiſed, and the great care the Caſtilians vſed through the realme to finde him, yet were they daily leſſe certaine, for that diſguiſed in a baſe habite, hee went vnknowne oftentimes amongſt thoſe that ſought for him. He had intelligence that the Counte of Vimioſo was come by land into Fraunce, labouring to mooue the French to warre againſt the Catholique King, promiſing great ſuccours by the people in the matters of Portugal: By reaſon whereof, and for the Priors concealement, the King kept in a manner his whole armie diſperſed in the fortreſſes and cities of the realme; and although hee had diſmiſſed the Italians, and ſent the greateſt part of his galleies into Italy, yet they gaue out, that he after repented, the realme ſeeming daily leſſe peaceable; and that the French in thoſe parts might arme a good number of ſhips of warre and more conueniently in that ſea then the galleies, whereof fowre being in Algarues, had taken a French pirate with great ſlaughter, who being a knight of Malta had fought valiantly: By

reaſon of theſe garriſons, of the rigor of officers, of the ſmal recompenceThe Portugals animated, and wherefore. that was giuen them, and of the conceite that the Prior was yet within the realme, the Portugals harts beganne to turne, ſome of them aſſembled at times, lamented the miſerie wherein they ſeemed to be, by their not agreeing to defend themſelues, or not yeelding in time; yet the greateſt part held opinion, that vnited togither they might haue made reſiſtance. They could not endure, that the Caſtillian officers ſhoulde intermeddle in matters of iuſtice as they pretēded to do; neither was the Portugals diſdaine appeaſed, in ſaying, that the King hauing commaunded Iohn Andrew Doria, Prince of Melfy, to conduct the Empreſſe his ſiſter into Spaine, whom he had cauſed to come out of Germany, was for no other cauſe but to leaue her Gouerneſſe in Portugall, and ſo returne into Caſtill, and that as a woman ſhe ſhoulde raigne with greater mildenes then the kings of Portugall had done: for although this was the common diſcourſe, yet many helde opinion that the king ſhould not depart, being conſtrained to keepe garriſons, the which he would not diſmiſſe, vntill he were better aſſured of the Prior, of whom they ſpake diuerſly; for ſome helde, that he was dead, and ſpoiled by the Caſtilians, who for that they woulde yeelde no account of the iewels he had about him, kept it ſecret: Others ſaide, that he had ſent into Fraunce, and England, from whence hee expected great armies, at whoſe arriuall, he would diſcouer himſelfe: Many ſuppoſed that he ſhoulde keepe himſelfe ſecret within the realme vntill the death of Philip, who according to their diſcourſe, coulde not liue long; and yet was there ſmall difference betwixt their ages, at what time ſhewing himſelfe as hee did vpon the death of king Henry, hee ſhoulde againe take poſſeſſion of the realme, the kingdomes of Caſtill remaining in the handes of pupilles. And although ſome beleeued that he was departed the realme, yet the greateſt part helde that he was there yet; labouring to eſcape as couertly as he coulde, fearing to be taken priſoner, the which was true indeede, as it appeared by ſome of his friends that were taken in the porte of Lisbone, who ſought to imbarke with ſome prouiſion of victuals they had made, who confeſſed vpon the racke, that he was in the realme, amongſt which was Peter d'Alpoe Doctor of the lawes, who ſince for that cauſe and others of high treaſon loſt his head at Lisbone.
            
               
The Eſtates were now ended, and the king deſirous to goe to Lisbone, but for that the preparations, and triumphs which the citie pretended, were not yet ready, he went to Almada, which is directly againſt the citie, vpon the other banke of Tagus, to giue them time to finiſh their preparations: At what time the King hauing intelligence that thoſe of the Ilands of Terceraes, notwithſtanding the letters which Ambroſe d'Aguiar, had carried ſtoode firme in their firſt reſolution of defence, hee ſent Peter Baldes with fower ſhips, ſixe hundreth Spaniſh foote, and ſome cannon, with commandement to aſſure himſelfe fully of the Iland of Saint Michaell, which was obediēt; to ſpoile the ſhips which ſhould come from the Indies, & not to attēpt any thing by land vntill he had ſent a greater ſupply of men. The Court was ill appointed at Almada, and the needfull miniſters for diſpatches, could not all bee lodged there. The KingThe Kings entrie to Lisbone. deſirous to enter the citie, would not attende after Saint Peters day, when paſſing the water with his galleies, he lāded in the city, vpon a bridge of wood, framed for that purpoſe, without giuing them time to finiſh their arches, & ſtatues prepared for his entry: But the ſloth and ignorance of the workemen was in parte cauſe, yet did they make a ſumptuous preparation: Vpon the bridge he was met by theThe ſpeech of the Magiſtrate of Lisbone to the king. Magiſtrate of the chamber, where Doctor Hector de Pyna, one of them, ſpake thus in the behalfe of the citie, ſhewing the ioy they had conceiued of his entrie: That as this citie was the greateſt in the worlde, ſo God had deſeruedly giuen them conformeable to their owne deſires, a great monarch to bee their Lorde: Hee excuſed the people ſaying, That if they had no ſooner obeied, it was done rather by errour, then their owne free will; and that remaining in their owne power to chooſe a king, they woulde haue made election of no other then himſelfe. And touching the death of Ferrant de Pyna, hee ſaide that this citie had firſt of all ſhedde bloude for his ſeruice, ſeeing that the ſaide Ferrant when as Anthony cauſed him to bee wounded, was a member of this Magiſtrate: He excuſed likewiſe the ſleightnes of their ioyes, by the afflictions of the warre, the ſpoile of the citie, and the plague, remembring their loſſes of Affricke; concluding that they hoped by his Maieſties fauours, this realme ſhoulde not bee ſaide vnited vnto Caſtill, but that all the other realmes were ioyned vnto Portugall. 
               
Hee then went on horſebacke vnder a canopie of cloth of golde, vnto the Cathedrall church, the ſtreetes being richly hanged, were full of people, who made ſhewe of great ioy for the Kings arriuall, where hauing done his deuotion, hee went in the ſame ſortvnto the pallace, accompanied with all the nobilitie on foote. This realme within the ſpace of two yeeres, had (as a man may ſay) fiue kings, a thing ſeldome or neuer happened in any other place, and it ſeemed that God in ſo ſhort a time had thus altered the ſtate of things for the peoples puniſhment, for all of them waſted their poore ſubiects: Sebaſtian by his raſhnes; Henry by his irreſolution; the gouernours by feare, and their priuate intereſt; Anthonie by tyrannie, and Philip by armes.  But when all was in a manner quiet, he entred this citie, the proper ſeate of their kings: It was ſuppoſed, the ſorrowes and troubles paſſed, ſhoulde now be conuerted into ioy and quietnes; but for that it is an equall puniſhment to a people, either to haue tyrants ruling by force, or to make a bad election ofThe Portugals diſcontented. gouernours: The Portugals were ſcourged with this laſt rod, deſiring rather to be commanded by Anthonie, being of ſo ſmall might, and with all other diſgraces that proceeded from him; then by the great power of Philip, impatient to ſee him ſo ſlacke, in deuiding amongſt them the dignities, commaunderies, and reuenues of the crowne; whereby they grew out of hope euer to draw ſuch recompences from the Court of Caſtill, as they had vſually drawen from that of Portugal. And although he had giuen vnto Frauncis de Sada, ſometimes gouernour, the title of Earle of Matoſignos, to Ferrant de Norogna that of Lignares, which his father enioyed, made as it is ſaid, Chriſtopher de Mora one of his chamber, and eſtabliſhed Peter d'Alcaſoua in his office of Chamberlaine, contrarie to the decree of king Henry, wherein although the king of himſelfe were well inclined, and reſolued to diſpatch euery one, with greater liberalitie, then the kings of Portugall had euer done; yet this diſtribution according to the new decree, appertaining to the Councell of ſtate of Portugall, wherein as it is ſaid, their opinions being diuerſe, and the reſpects of hatred and loue, diuers, nothing was reſolued, and the abundance of petitions cauſed theſe delaies, for that euerie one either iuſtly or without cauſe, demaunded recompence, ſo as the whole realme did not ſeeme ſufficient to content them: the which

being ill conſidered by many, they ſaid he would ſtay from giuing vntill he were aſſured of the Ilands, and of Anthonies perſon. ButThe councell of ſtate of Portugall reduced vnto two. the king finding, that theſe difficulties, and the ſlacknes in proceeding, grew by the exceſſiue number of Counſellors, reſolued (according to the cuſtome of former kings) to referre the diſpatch of ſuch as demaunded recompence, vnto two perſons alone, the which were Anthony Pignero, Biſhop of Leiria and to Chriſtopher de Mora: It may be ſeeming vnto him, that theſe two amongſt the other officers were moſt free from all priuate reſpects, the Biſhop for that he was neere his graue, by reaſon of his age, and infirmitie, although of a ſounde iudgement, and without kinſemen; and Mora being a creature of the kings, bredde in Caſtill, and helde for vertuous, and fearing God.
            The eſtate of the Terceraes grew daily woorſe, with whom all trafficke was interdict, there was newes that this people being verie obſtinate, called in forraine ſuccours, reſoluing in no ſort to obey Philip: They vnderſtood that Peter Baldes was arriued, and that the Kings letters with the rewarde he had carried for that nation, were not receiued but contemned: By reaſon whereof, the King deſirous to ſubdue them, before the ende of this ſommer, and iudging the enterpriſe eaſie, for that they had no trained ſoldiers, armed certaine ſhips, and furniſhed them with ſoldiers vnder the conduct of Lopo de Figueroa, who ſtaied not long before he departed with commiſſion to attempt with Baldes to become maſter of the Ilands: Baldes lay nowe about the Ilands, expecting the Indian fleete, hisBaldes attempt vpon the Terceraes. marriners had often both by day and night landed with their boates to ſteale grapes which were then ripe, & drawing ſometimes neere the rockes, vpon the which the Portugals had planted behinde a ſmall rampire three or fower iron peeces, they parlied often with them; the one not fearing the other: Peter de Baldes finding the Portugals careleſnes, and being aduertiſed that ſome within the Ilands (amongſt a great multitude) were well affected to the Catholique king; had often reſolued to ſende ſome men on lande, to the end that ſuch as followed the kings partie, who were ſaide to lie in the mountaines, might ioine with them, and altogither ſet vpon the citie of Angra, or at the leaſt ſo fortifie themſelues at land, as they ſhoulde not be repulſed: But for as much as this reſolution, with ſo

ſmall a troupe was dangerous, and againſt the Kings commiſſion, the which knowing well he did not execute; yet hauing intelligence that Lopo de Figueroa was to be ſent from Lisbone, to vndertake this enterpriſe with a great number of men, who being arriued, hee ſhoulde be commaunded to obey, he did confidently beleeue that at his comming, either by loue or by force, he woulde be maſter of this Iland, and winne that honour whereunto he aſpired. So as (ſuch force hath the deſire of honour,) hauing ill meaſured his forces, & againſt the Kings commaundement, he made haſte raſhly to trie, whether the reſolution which hee had formerly conceiued woulde ſucceed well, whereunto he was likewiſe perſwaded by ſome of the Iland, who as vnskilfull, had their wils more ready then their power: So as earely on Saint Iames his day in the morning, hauing ſhipped in a manner all his ſoldiers in their boates, hee ſent them to lande, whereas the marriners had beene accuſtomed to go, betwixt Angra and Praia, the which they call the houſe of Salga, where hauing founde ſmall or no reſiſtance, they landed eaſily, and the PortugalsThe preparation of them of Angra againſt Baldes. who had the guarde of this artillerie, fearefully fledde away. The Caſtillians being now become maſters thereof, began to builde a ſmall rampier of ſtone, to the ende they might holde a more firme footing on lande, and retire ſuch as followed the Catholique kings partie; but they had no time, for the inhabitants of Angra, hearing the Caſtillians were landed, had giuen the allarum by bels and other great noiſe, ſo as many of their ſtouteſt iſſued foorth to skirmiſh; and although they did no matter of importance, many returning terrified or hurte, yet did they keepe the enimie from fortifying; who remaining in that place from the morning vntill afternoone, there went not any one Portugall vnto them; for although there were ſome diſpoſed thereunto, yet durſt they not, diſtruſting both the one and the other; being chiefly terrified by the exampleIohn de Betancour affect to the King. of Iohn de Betancour, one of the principals of that place, who hauing conſpired with aboue a hundreth citizens, vpon a certaine day to runne armed through the citie, and proclaine King Philip, he ſuppoſed with his authoritie, and the followers he expected, to mooue the people, againſt Ciprian de Fegueredo, and make himſelfe Lorde of the Iland in the Kings name: But hauing not duely examined the iudgement, valour, and conſtancie of ſuch as he had choſen for his

companions (things neceſſarily required in them that are to execute matters of ſuch importance) being deceiued he did not effect this enterpriſe; for although he had many friends and copartners with him, being at the howre appointed come vnto the place, calling the reſt, and proclaiming the kings name, he was not followed of any man, but was inuironed by the people and beaten, outraged, in danger to be hanged, and therefore no man durſt ſtirre. In this ſpace the number of Portugals, which the Gouernour had aſſembled to goe againſt the enimie, was little leſſe then two thouſand, who treating in what manner they ſhoulde iſſue foorth, they left not to conſider, that although the Caſtillians were fewer in number, yet were they more experienced, and better armed: A religiousA ſtratagem with oxen made by a religious man. man of the order of Saint Auguſtine (for here as well as in other parts of the realme, religious men deale in matters of warre) aduiſed that before their men, they ſhoulde driue a number of oxen, and chaſe them with all force againſt the Caſtillians, the which being put in practiſe, was the ſafetie of the Portugals, and the defeating of their enimies; for that raiſing a great duſt, they were not diſcouered by the Caſtillians; they defended them from their ſhotte, and diſordred the enimie: for the Caſtillians hauing by their long skirmiſh with ſome of the citie, ſpent their ſhotte and powder, being now charged by ſo many, they thought to retire themſelues to their boates, and ſo to imbark, which they reſolued too late: For that the Portugals approching neere, couered, & in ſafetie, hauing the oxen as a rampire, they draue them againſt the enimie with ſuch violence, that they were forced to disbande, and to quite them the place; at what time being charged by the Portugals with fewe ſhot, and many launces, they fought a while with diſaduantage: For the PortugalsThe ill ſucceſſe of Baldes ſoldiers. being many in number, the Caſtillians coulde make no great reſiſtance; beſides that, being minded to ſaue themſelues by their boates, they retired towards the ſea; the which being then rougher then when they landed, their boates coulde not come neere the ſhoare, and the marriners which were in them were likewiſe fearefull to approch, for that the Portugals ſhotte at them from lande; ſo as the ſoldiers to ſaue themſelues, waded vp to the necke in water, and yet hardly could get to their boates, ſuffring the puniſhment of their raſhnes; for the enimy ſeeing them now flie without reſiſtance,

fell to killing, without pardoning of any, and not onely followed them vnto the water, but made an ende of ſuch as being already entred, the ſea had caſt vp againe to ſhoare halfe dead, not hearingThe crueltie of thoſe of Tercera. any that cried for mercy: But the Portugals being nowe growen inexorable, not onely ſlew the ſoldiers, but pages and vallets, ſo as there died aboue fower hundreth, and not thirtie Portugals, (whereof ſome of them were but hurt) in this action; hatred preuailed more then any other reſpect, for hauing reſerued onely two aliue, which termed themſelues Portugals, the extraordinarie rage of theſe men ſhewed it ſelfe, who grieued with thoſe few that were ſaued, turned with crueltie to mangle the dead bodies; for cutting them in peeces, one caried a head in triumph, one, one member, an other, an other, dragging whole bodies through the ſtreetes with a thouſand indignities. The day following, there remained not within the citie, childe, man, nor religious perſon (except the Ieſuits) that went not to the campe to ſee the ſlaughter of the enimies, with inſtruments and dauncing, taking pleaſure to cut and mangle theſe inſenſible bodies; and ſome affirme, that there were of them, who tearing out the harts of the dead, woulde feede vpon them. The Gouernour hauing put the armes of the dead men into wagons, and drawing their colours after him, entred the citie with great ioy of the people: Baldes hauing hitherto beene a better marriner, then he ſeemed now a ſoldier, founde by this vnhappie euent, with how much more iudgement, he ſhoulde haue vndertaken this action: but as one miſchiefe is followed by many, griefe did ſo blinde his vnderſtanding, as hee coulde not ſuccour his ſoldiers as eaſilie he might, and giue them meanes to retire to their ſhips, if drawing neerer to lande hee had diſcharged his artillerie againſt the Portugals, who were the firſt that gaue the name of bloudie vnto this warre.
            
               The defeate of Baldes is preiudiciall vnto the king. This important effect, did greatly preiudice the Catholique kings affaires, for this nation being growen more cruell and more rebellious, founde there was no hope of agreement, nor remiſſion, whereby the King (who liued in ſome hope they woulde be reclaimed) grewe no we wholie deſperate by this vnhappie ſucceſſe: and the rather, for that ſearching the Prior throughout the realme, they had intelligence by letters from Flaunders, that hee was arriued in

England, from whence hee ſhoulde go into Fraunce to demaund ſuccours, vnderſtanding alſo that there was hope hee ſhoulde obtaine them: By reaſon whereof, they did fortifie the ſeacoaſt of Portugall, and eſpecially the rocke of Saint Iulian: And although this ſtorme ſeemed yet farre off, yet they regarded it the more, for that the king was vnfurniſhed of men, and the people generally of the realme, little inclined to his deuotion; ſo as it ſeemed, if the Prior woulde againe hazard his fortune, that at the onely ſight of his colours, the people woulde take armes: There was no reſtraint could hold them, ſeeing the Italians had beene diſcharged, the Germaines and Spaniards, whereof many being dead, and many growing rich, fledde away; there remained in all not aboue fower or fiue thouſand, whereof one thouſand was alreadie imploied with Lopo de Figueroa, who was ſent vnto the Ilands: for although there were fifteene hundreth appointed, yet the Germaines went vnwillinglie; and for as much as the ſhips after their departure, which was in Iuly, returned more then once backe, by reaſon of the contrarie windes, many of them ſtole away, not returning to the armie, the which greatly diminiſhed their number: the reſt were deuided into garriſons, in the Prouince of Doro and Mynio, and other places; ſo as there remained ſcant a thouſand men within Lisbone, which ſeemed a ſmall guard for ſo great a citie. This departure of Anthony
               The Priors good fortune. was in truth ſtrange, and it ſeemed both in this & other like things, that hee was either happie, or had an extraordinarie gift of nature: For remaining captiue in Affricke, after that vnfortunate battaile of Sebaſtian, he was the firſt of ſo many priſoners that was freed, being likely for the qualitie of his perſon, to haue beene the laſt: but he coulde ſo well hide himſelfe, and conceale what he was, that he was deliuered without diſcouerie: And euen when as he departed from Viana in October 1580. vntill Iune, 1581. he remained ſtill within the realme ſo ſecretly, as he was neuer diſcouered, the which is the more woorthie of admiration; for that the diligence the King vſed to finde him out was admirable, for all Iudges, all Captaines, and all ſoldiers, were carefully imploied: And although they had ſometimes aduertiſement of the place of his aboad, and did follow him in a manner by his foote, yet could they neuer finde him. Ierom Mendoſa with the help of Emanuel of Portugal (in whom it was likelie

               Ierom Mendoza treateth an agreement with the Prior. that Anthony ſhould truſt) treating an agreement laboured much to ſpeake with him: But although ſome of his familiar friends came vnto him ſomtimes at Alanquer, ſomtimes at Vidigueira, with hope they ſhould meete, yet did hee neuer diſcouer himſelfe vnto them; but the ſleight execution of the puniſhment inflicted vpon ſuch as did cōceale him, did greatly preiudice their ſearch; for many therby did boldly receiue him. The Duke of Alua his officers, in the end of Lent, had like to haue ſurpriſed him in Lisbon, where the Duke had ſo many ſpies, & corrupted ſo many of his friends, that it ſeemed vndoubtedly he ſhoulde fall into his hands: but when as with greateſt heate he ſhoulde haue purſued it, he grew cold. For vnderſtanding that the king helde ſome regard of Mendoza his practiſe, who with doubtfull hopes gaue him to vnderſtande, that the weeke before Eaſter the Prior woulde caſt himſelfe at the Kings feete, hee feared to amaze him, but the ſaid Mendoza laboured in vaine: For as it happens to him that feares Anthony diſtruſting all men, performed nothing of what he promiſed; neither went hee to any perſon where hee had appointed, ſo as there neither followed the effect that was expected, but they loſt all hope to do any good: Yet was it apparant that the affection which this nation bare vnto him was of great force, for although that fortune preuailed in many more then faith, yet in his afflictions, and hauing ſo great an impoſition laide vpon his perſon, there was neuer any one amongſt ſo many, in whom he muſt of neceſſitie truſt, that euer ſought to betraie him for hope of recompence;  although ſome laboured to ſaue themſelues, amongſt which was Edward de Caſtro. And therefore hee went ſafely throughout all the portes of the ſea, he was at Lisbone as it is ſaide, where the king himſelfe remained, not finding meanes to imbarke; ſome of his men being ſurpriſed, hee went to Settuual, where by the helpe of a woman, hee hired a Flemmiſh ſhip for ſixe hundreth crownes, with the helpe of a religious man, of the order of Saint Frauncis, and with tenne of his faithfulleſt ſeruants, he imbarkedAnthonie arriues at Caleis. by night, and ſo went to Caleis, where wee may truely ſaie, that God had not yet withdrawne his hand frō puniſhing of this nation, and that this was as a ſcourge; for by reaſon of the affection this people bare vnto him, it was neceſſarie to keepe this people in awe with garriſons, to the great hurt and ruine of the ſubiects.
            
               
               The Indian fleete expected, and the diſcourſe of their arriuall. Now was come the yeare 1581. at what time they expected the ſhips from the Indies, Braſil, Saint Thomas, Cape Vert, & all other new found landes, the which ſtaied ſomewhat long, and put them in ſome feare, being looked for with greater deſire, then euer anie were: Some feared they woulde not come, others wiſhed they ſhoulde come, many helde opinion they ſhoulde willingly ſtaie at the Terceres, and from thence go into England, the which if they ſhould not willingly yeeld vnto, touching vnaduiſedly at the Ilands, they ſhoulde bee forced thereunto by the Ilanders. They were wiſhed for, both for the riches they carried, as to vnderſtande by them howe the people of thoſe parts were addicted to the obedience of the Catholique king, whereof many doubted: Such as helde opinion they ſhoulde ſafely arriue at Lisbone, ſaide, that the Indies and other prouinces coulde not maintaine themſelues without Spaine, and ſhoulde bee forced to yeelde obedience to whomſoeuer that ſhoulde be Lorde of Portugall: that they needed not feare the Terceres, although they had ſpoiled ſome ſhips which they had taken, or that had anchored there of their owne free will; yet now the Caſtillian armie being maſter at ſea, vpon their diſcouerie they woulde conduct them to Lisbone, not ſuffring them to approch the lande: Such as ſuppoſed they woulde not come, ſaide, that the ſaide ſhips were departed from Lisbone in the yeere 1580. after King Henries death, during the Gouernours raigne, and that Lewes de Taide Earle of Toghia, Viceroy of the Indies, knowing there was a ſpace-gouernement, with likelihood of warre, woulde attende the euent without yeelding obedience to any, for that he woulde then ſhew it when he had intelligence, who were king, to be the more acceptable vnto him, or hoping that amidſt theſe tumults, there woulde ſomething remaine to his ſhare: But if notwithſtanding he were reſolued to ſende them, hee woulde appoint a captaine of his owne making, and conformeable to his owne will, with commiſſion to obey him to whom he were moſt affected, and that it were hard to iudge whom he wiſhed moſt to be King: beſides that Emanuel de Melo being captaine Generall of the ſame armie when it departed from Portugall, being a deuoted ſeruant to the Prior, and had made ſhew to be of his faction, it was likely that if he returned, & had any intelligēce of the Priors being in England, the which he

might eaſily vnderſtande at the Ilands, that he woulde ſaile thither, the which if he coulde not performe in the ſame ſhips, hee woulde then lande in the Ilands, and after ſaile in other boats, whether hee pleaſed with hope of gaine and bootie: And although it were true that the Indians coulde not maintaine themſelues, yet Fraunce and England might more aboundanly furniſh them, and with greater profite then Portugall. But for as much as in diſcourſing of matters which depends vpon an others will, we cannot cōſider al cauſes of their errors, a matter priuate to the diuine knowledge, it fell out in an other manner then had beene diſcourſed: For the Earle Viceroy of the Indies, hauing by the ſame ſhips receiued letters from the Catholique King, who enformed him of the equitie of his cauſe, and of his intent, with large promiſes, whereunto (and by the meanes of others which he receiued from the gouernors) he gaue credite, preferring them before ſuch as he had receiued from Anthonie, reſolued to obey the King; ſo as the ſhips departed, and being arriued neere to the Terceres, they came ſailing without euer diſcouering of theThe Indian fleete met with a French ſhip neere the Terceres. kings armie; for that Baldes diſcouraged with his ill ſucceſſe at the Ilands could find no fit place to encounter thē. True it is, that after they had remained a whole day amongſt thoſe Ilands, they were encountred by a French Barke ſent from the Terceres, who entreated the Captaines to go to Angra: The Portugals demaunded the ſtate of the realme, that they might thereby know howe to gouerne themſelues, but for that there were none but marriners, they coulde neither perſwade, diſſemble, nor ſpeake the truth; but contradicting themſelues, thoſe of the fleete coulde drawe nothing from them, but was confuſed: For one ſaide that the Catholique king was maſter of the realme, an other, but onely of a great parte of it; and that Anthony with a great armie made warre to expel him, whereby there grew ſome controuerſie in the fleete: For ſome (eſpecially ſuch as had little to looſe) woulde lande in the Iland; others woulde haue them hold togither vntill they had certaine intelligence of the ſtate of the realme; others without expecting any further information, woulde haue them go to Lisbone, and yeeld themſelues to him that were king. The Captaine generall being retired into his chamber to parley with certaine Portugals and French men, entertained them with theſe practizes; but the marriners doubtful of ſome euill,

the rumor being appeaſed, directed their courſe towards Lisbone, where remained their wiues and children, although ſome oppoſed themſelues. It ſeemed that theſe ſhips being of ſuch importance to the Prior and his diſſeines, he ſhould haue vſed more care to intercept them, then it ſeemed hee did; but in truth he omitted no diligence,The diligence of Anthony to haue the fleete. for he wrote vnto the Captaine generall of the armie, that at his arriuall at the Ilands, they ſhould be deliuered vnto him, whereby he entreated him with large promiſes to remaine there, and to conſigne him his armie, and not to the Catholique King. But the too great diligence of the Gouernour, as it often hapneth, did him harme, for hauing ſent foorth a Barke with theſe letters, to attende the ſhips, they did not encounter them, ſo as ſayling towards Portugall, vpon the mid way, they met with the armie of Lopo de Figueroa, who woondring at the negligence of Baldes, whom they denied to haue ſeene, he furniſhed them with water and other refreſhings:The fleete arrtues at Lisbone. They arriued after at Lisbone, to the great contentment of the king, and yet they ſtaied ſo long vpon the way, that it was conſtantly beleeued they were gone into England, and nowe the merchants began to aſſure their goods with the loſſe of the fifth, and the Captaine was extraordinarilie fauoured by the King.
            
               The arriuall of Figueroa at the Terceres, and his returne to Lisbone. In this while Lopo de Figueroa arriued at the Terceres, where he vnderſtands of Baldes his misfortune, hauing viewed the Iland fortified on all parts where he might deſcend, and by nature vnacceſſible, finding himſelfe to haue fewe men, the enimie victorious, and the ſeaſon of the yeere farre aduanced, the ſeas ſwelling betimes in thoſe parts, he reſolued (and with iudgement) to returne to Portugall, without attempting any thing by force. Hee firſt ſent one to aduiſe the citie of Angra, to yeelde obedience vnto his Maieſtie, promiſing them pardons, recompences, and many fauours, but they meaſuring the aſſurance of his promiſes, not by the Kings clemencie, but by their owne merits, arrogantly made him anſwere, that he ſhould ſay in what part hee woulde deſcend, and they would open him the paſſage; by reaſon whereof Figueroa returned into Portugall,Baldes impriſoned in Portugall. with Baldes, whom the King preſently committed to priſon; yet he was after deliuered, ſhewing the inſtructions that had beene giuen him, to be doubtfull, and not to prohibite him to fight. This returne of the armie encouraged the Ilanders, perſwading themſelues

that Figueroa had greater forces, then indeed hee had, and ſeeing him fearefull to deſcend, they ſuppoſed he made great reckoning of theirs. They wrote the newes of all theſe things vnto the Prior being in Fraunce, who thanked them with curteous letters, and ſent them artillerie, harquebuſies, powder, and other munition, promiſing to furniſh them with men: Hee commaunded them to ſeaze vpon the goods of all ſuch as arriued there, being ſubiect to the Catholique king, and ſend them into Fraunce, ſo as they ſent him all the merchandiſe which they had taken in fower or fiue ſhips come from the weſt Indies. And for as much as it ſeemed to many, that this could not continue, that the King ſhould ſend from Portugall a great armie againſt them, ſo as they ſhoulde not bee able toThe preparation of them of Terceres. make reſiſtance, they diſpatched into Fraunce one Anthony Aluarez, and an other baſe officer, to vnderſtande what the Prior did, what forces he had, and what they might expect from thence, who being returned with the orders, the one of Saint Iaques, the other of d'Auis which the Prior had giuen them, they reported, at his entreatie, that he had a great armie readie to deſcend into Portugall, the which in truth was not ſo, bringing letters to the Gouernor, whereby the Prior gaue vnto them likewiſe a coller of the order, with a thouſand duckats of reuenew, the which mooued ſome others to go into Fraunce, from whence, as alſo from England, there came ſome fewe ſoldiers to the Iland in ſhips which ſailed into thoſe parts, yet they were neuer three hundreth in number, being often of opinion to ſende them backe, for that the winter was at hand, and to cal them backe in ſommer, the which the people would not yeeld vnto, ſaying, that ſince the King had ſent them, they woulde entertaine them. The Ieſuits being walled vp within their monaſterie, to whom they gaue meate but twiſe a weeke, greeuing to be thus wrongully impriſoned, vpon a certaine day they opened the doores of the Church, and hauing placed the ſacrament in the midſt, they would trie by this meanes, if they might remaine free: The miniſters of iuſtice went vnto the couent, to demaund the reaſon of this innouation, to whom it was propounded by the fathers, that if their offences ſo required, they ſhould puniſh them, but holding them as ſuſpect, they ſhoulde ſuffer them to depart into Portugall. The reſolution was (after ſome ſpeeches vſed beyond the termes of modeſty) that

the fathers ſhoulde be walled vp againe, and a certaine perſon whoA miracle performed by the Ieſits. ſaid that in iuſtice they ſhould burne theſe prieſts, with their monaſterie, the which they had deſerued for the affection they bare vnto the Caſtillians; he ſtaied not long to acknowledge his error, for departing from thence, he fell ſicke vnto the death, and God woulde haue him confeſſe (as he ſaide) that this griefe hapned vnto him for that occaſion: All the other religious men did what they coulde to wrong theſe fathers, who being of a contrarie opinion, and practiſing profeſſion of war, could not endure that theſe ſhould be Caſtillians in their harts, refuſing to enioy that libertie: They impriſoned the Vicar, who gouerneth the ſpiritualtie in the Biſhops name, which remaineth in the Iland of Saint Michael, and choſe an other after their owne humour. Theſe things did much diſpleaſe the Catholique king, whereupon he reſolued to vndertake this enterpriſe the ſommer following, although hee doubted it for many cauſes, which behooued him to prouide for, togither with the new iealouſies which grew, hauing intelligence that the Turke prepared an armie at ſea, to ſend to endomage Chriſtendome. That Lucciali a famous pirat, and Captaine generall of the Turkes armie, was come from Conſtantinople to Alger with threeſcore and tenne galleies, and although it were to no other end, then to viſite the ſtate of Affricke, and to prouide for it, fearing that the king of Spaine, by reaſon of the newe Acquiſition of Portugall, and the warres wherein the Turks were buſied againſt the King of Perſia, might trouble this prouince; yet he miniſtred matter of ſuſpect, for the Catholique King hauing treated with the Cherriffe to yeeld vnto him Alarache in exchange of Mazagon, and not agreeing, for that the Moores are great deceiuers in their promiſes: It was ſuſpected the Turke vnderſtanding this practiſe, had ſent Lucciali to diuert this exchange, to fortifie Alarache, and furniſh it with Turkes; ſo as being ſo neere neighbour vnto Spaine, and a conuenient port for galleies, it might greatly annoy him: But hee returned after to Conſtantinople, being called backe at the purſuite of his competitours.
            
               The eſtate of Fraunce and Flaunders. The State of Flaunders miniſtred matter of conſideration, for although the Prince of Orenge had long enioyed the greateſt part of thoſe prouinces, yet the king had great hope, eſpecially now vpon

on the conqueſt of Portugall, that this people woulde be aduiſed, and that one day he ſhoulde reclaime them; but this hope ſoone failed, for that Frauncis de Valois Duke of Alançon, brother to the moſt chriſtian King Henry the thirde, being entred with armes into Flaunders, and hauing ſuccoured them that were in Cambrey, he forced the Prince of Parma Captaine generall for the king (being at the ſiege thereof) to retire: And although being maſter of the citie, he preſently returned, yet the ſtate of Fraunce ſeemed troubleſome and readie to attempt ſome newe and important alteration; the rather, for that the French were animated by Anthony Prior of Crato, who was come thither out of England, being embraced by the Queene mother of Fraunce, and viſited by the whole Courte. They had intelligence likewiſe of a practiſe which diſpleaſed them, that the ſaide Duke of Alançon ſhoulde marrie with Elizabeth Queene of England, and for that he had paſſed and repaſſed aboue once into that Iland, it was giuen out the marriage was ſecretly cōcluded, but whether it were ſo or otherwiſe, the death of the ſaid Duke of Alançon ended that combination; but men of the greateſt iudgement, beleeued that her Maieſtie of England was not married to the ſaide Duke, bicauſe ſhe had refuſed ſo many great Kings and Princes in former times, and had liued with the reputation of a moſt chaſte, & vertuous Princeſſe. The Catholique king complained to the moſt Chriſtian king, that he had receiued the Prior his rebell into Fraunce; of the ſuccours giuen to Cambrey, and blamed the marriage with England, labouring to diuert it all he coulde, ſaying, that he ought by no meanes to yeelde vnto it, for the difference of religion. The King of Fraunce, as they ſaid, made anſwere to theſe propoſitions by his Embaſſador: That as for the marriage, he left it to the Duke, who was thereunto enclined, with all the Nobilitie in Fraunce, and that hee was not maſter of their wils: That the Prior had beene receiued by the Queene mother, who being Queene (as ſhe beleeued) of that realme, had receiued this her vaſſall: That he had oppoſed himſelfe to his brother, touching the ſuccours of Cambrey, but his admonitions were of no credite. This anſwere confirmed the Catholique king in the opinion hee had conceiued, that theſe expeditions which had beene made in the name of Alançon, were all lets proceeding from the King, and couered

with this maske, ſeeming impoſſible that the Duke (contrary to the Kings will and pleaſure) ſhoulde raiſe ſo great forces in Fraunce. The which although it ſeemed incredible, yet Fraunce had continued long in ſuch an eſtate, that it was no maruaile, for that King Henry and his predeceſſor Charles the ninth, hauing beene moleſted by their ſubiects vpon the points of religion, all was in diſorder; and although the ſtate ſeemed ſomewhat better pacified, yet their mindes, by the meanes of theſe former troubles, remained ſtill enclined vnto warre: And for as much as Fraunce, Englande, and Flaunders, did ſomewhat aſſiſt in theſe matters of Portugall, for the better vnderſtanding of things that follow, it may be lawfull for me to digreſſe a little to ſpeake ſomething of theſe countries.
            
               The Queene of Fraunce diſcontented with Philip, and the cauſe. In Fraunce liued Katherine de Medicy, mother to the king, whoſe age and valour all Fraunce obeied: ſhe ſeemed to be diſcontented with the Catholique king for diuers reſpects, but that ſhe made moſt ſhewe of, was, that he had taken the realme of Portugall by force, refuſing to ſubmit himſelfe to iuſtice, ſaying, that ſhe had more intereſt then hee; whereupon it was ſuppoſed, that (mooued with this diſdaine) ſhe ſhoulde labour to make warre againſt Portugall: with whom agreed the ſaid Duke of Alāçon her ſon, no leſſe enimy to the Catholique King then the mother, mooued thereunto, for that hauing demaunded one of the daughters of the ſaide King in marriage, he was refuſed, for that he required with his wife, a portion fitte for her qualitie: He was followed by the whole Nobilitie of Fraunce, whom he might eaſily lead where he pleaſed, although it were againſt the Kings liking, the which grewe, for that remaining the third ſonne to Henry the ſecond, with ſmall hope euer to aſpire vnto the crowne, hauing two brothers Charles and Henry his elders, hauing a great minde and ſtirring, he gaue eare to al ſuch as diſcontented with the king, or deſirous of innouation (whereof there are numbers in Fraunce) laboured to alter the quiet of Chriſtendome, with whom he had often reſolued to conquer himſelfe ſome newe eſtate out of Fraunce. Perſwaded to this reſolution by ſuch as were about him, he ſuppoſed for a time, that his brothers were oppoſite vnto him, and that by no meanes they woulde like of his greatnes: ſo as that which was giuen him by the wiſeſt for good counſell, he did interprete to the ill affection they bare him; and that they

ſought to obſcure the glorie whereunto he aſpired: And this iealouſie encreaſed when as his brother Henry was called to the crowne of Poland, by not giuing him preſently ſuch places as hee enioied in Fraunce. By this and ſuch like, thoſe which followed him, tooke an occaſion to ſettle in his conceite, a hatred againſt his brethren, giuing him to vnderſtande, that they deteſted his greatnes, the which they could ſo wel effect, that although the ſaid Henry did afterwards come, by the death of Charles the ninth, from the crown of Poland to that of Fraunce; yet the Duke continued ſtill his firſt deſires, and that with greater traine then before: For ſome conſidered that Henry being ſickly, and without children, he ſhoulde one day be king: It was therefore no woonder, if without the kings conſent, yea contrary to his liking, he attempted many things, although there were ſome ſhewe, that the king his brother had intelligence with him. And although his forces, ioyned with the Queene Mothers, were of importance, & might well cauſe the Catholique king to feare, yet it ſeemed, that thoſe of England woulde likewiſe ioyne with him: For it was giuen out, that Elizabeth doubting the Kings force, and knowing the Popes intention againſt her, hauing ſeene the proofe thereof in the affaires of Ireland, ſought to ſecure hirſelfe, that they might not wrong her, and to that end ſhe entred into an agreement (as it was ſaid) with the Queene and her yoongeſt ſonne, to the preiudice of Philip, whereof the effect was ſoone ſeen.The Duke of Alancon ſworn Duke of Brabant. The ſaide Alançon being returned againe into England, being alreadie agreed with the Prince of Orenge, who was the inſtrument of all theſe practizes, he paſſed from thence to Antwerpe, where the peoples humours being before diſpoſed by the ſaide Prince, he was receiued in all theſe places with great ioy; and the xix. day of Februarie, in the yeere of our Lord 1582. they did ſweare him Duke of Brabant, the which cauſed a generall admiration for many reaſons: It ſeemed ſtrange, that the Prince of Orenge, in a manner abſolute Lord in thoſe countries, the which he had ſo long defended, woulde vpon the end of the worke ſpoile himſelf of the ſtate, & giue it vnto a ſtranger, without conſtraint, without profit, & to the preiudice of his honor: And although it ſeemed he had done the like to Mathias Arch Duke of Auſtria, & afterwards ſent him back into Germany, it was not credible that he hoped euer to do ſo vnto the Duke; for beſides

that he was entred in a manner by maine force; his power, the neernes of Fraunce, & the fauor of England, might wel induce men to beleeue that he woulde ſo eſtabliſh himſelfe, as he need not feare to be expelled. There wanted not ſuch as woulde excuſe the Prince, ſaying, that the people were nowe wearie, and vnfurniſhed of money, by reaſon of ſo great warres, that they coulde not relieue him as hee had neede; and thefore it behooued him to ſeeke ſome one that ſhould aide him againſt the Catholique king, who hauing now recouered the realme of Portugall, ſhoulde bee able with greater eaſe to moleſt thoſe countries, & ſeeing that he was forced to ſeeke for ſuccours, there was no greater perſon then this, making in a manner an muincible vnion of theſe eſtates with Fraunce and England; beſides, the Prince ſhoulde attaine to the wiſhed ende, which was to depriue the Catholique king of the whole poſſeſſion, and many did ſo much relie vpon the Princes foreſight and iudgement, that they ſuppoſed hee woulde like wiſe expell Alançon when hee pleaſed. Many blamed the manner of the Dukes proceeding, who ſought to vſurpe an others patrimonie without any title: others excuſed him, forging lawes of ſtate after their owne humours, ſaying, that the priuileges of the countrey did allow, that if the Catholique King did not obſerue them, they might chooſe a Prince of themſelues, the which the King hauing broken, they had ſought out anPreparation; of the french against the Terceres. other Lorde. The effect of the league was not yet ended in thoſe parts, but to diuert the Catholique King from making warre in thoſe countries, at the mediation of Anthony to trouble the ſtate of Portugal, they prepared a great armie in Fraunce: Some ſaid it was to be imploied againſt the ſame realme, hoping the people woulde riſe againſt the Caſtillians: ſome ſuppoſed it ſhoulde be ſent to ſuccour the Terceraes, the winning whereof, Philip threatned to attempt; and ſome beleeued that they went for no other intent, but to ſurpriſe certaine ſhips that came from the newe nauigations, charged with golde and ſpice. There hapned at that time in Flaunders,The Prince of Orenge wounded by a Biſcaine. a matter of admiration and ſeldome ſeene: For the Prince of Orenge being in Antwerpe, quiet, and in the greateſt fortune that he was euer, was ſhot in his houſe, riſing from his table, in the midſt of all his ſeruants, with a piſtoll, by Iohn Scaurigni, a yoong man, a Biſcaine, mooued thereunto by zeale of religion, as he pretended:

the bullet hitting him vnder his right iawe, paſſed forth through the window; and although he was ſuppoſed to be dead, yet was he cured and liued, and the offender was preſently ſlaine by his guard, and all ſuch as were founde acceſſarie, were executed.
            Whileſt theſe things were determined in Fraunce and the low Countries, the king (who remained ſtill in Portugall) ſought to giueThe kings recompence to the Portugals. contentment to the Portugals, who hauing long, and with importunitie ſought for recompence, were in the ende all in a manner diſpatched, giuing vnto many of them orders of knighthoode, much of the reuenewes, and all the offices that might bee giuen, to the great griefe of the Caſtillians, who ſaide, that this realme with more right appertained vnto Philip, ſeeing he had inherited it, bought it, and conquered it. This diſtribution was made by the two Deputies with great bountie, yet wrought it no good effect in the Kings fauour, neither was it acceptable; for finding two kinde of Portugals, which ſought for reward; that is, thoſe to whom Philip in the time of Henry and the Gouernours, had promiſed money and honors to follow his partie; and ſuch as faithfully without promiſes, yea, refuſing them, had loially ſerued him: It was in a manner impoſſible to equall their recompences, ſo as one of the parties ſhould not be diſcontented; but they proceeded ſo, as ſome were grieued, and others proude: For beſides the errors that were committed by reaſon of the ignorance of the officers, being more eaſie to promiſe then to performe; the kings Agents had made large offers not onelie to ſuch as coulde helpe, but alſo to many of ſmall meanes, and leſſe countenance. The King deſired in any caſe to ſatisfie theſe bonds; and although he woulde haue rewarded the moſt faithfull aboue all others, yet could he not performe it, for that by reaſon of their exceſſiue promiſes, all the reuenewes of the crowne had not beene ſufficient; ſo as it often hapneth in Courts, they gaue not vnto them that deſerued, with the like proportion, as to ſuch as were vnworthie: So as the loue of the ſubiects was nothing encreaſed by this meanes, for the moſt truſty were diſcontented, ſeeming againſt reaſon to bee woorſe entreated then thoſe, which had beene leſſe faithfull, but with rewarde in hande, alleaging alſo that many of them had not performed that, for which they were paide; ſeeming ſufficient vnto many to remaine newters; and to ſome that had

ſerued Anthony, to ſay, that they were forced, and ſuch as were leaſt faithfull (for that their harts were not ſo firmely ſetled to the Kings ſeruice) they ſuppoſed to haue carried themſelues wiſely: They eſteemed euery ſmall matter to be of great importance, and (ſuppoſing the king to vnderſtand wel what neede he had of them,) in contempt of the reſt they grew inſolent. Theſe were the generall cauſes for the which the greateſt diſtribution that euer was within the realme, was not pleaſing; but the nature of the Portugals is vneaſie to content, in this reſpect, for being enuious, they doe feele with greater griefe an other mans profite, then their owne loſſe: Thoſe of the baſer ſort, although they expected no anſwere, hauing enriched themſelues in their trades, by the great multitude of Courtiers; yet coulde they not ſuffer the Caſtillians to be ſuperiors, and as it is vſuall with the common people, they deſired innouations; the which the King diſcouering, did greatly trouble his minde, finding himſelfe to faile in that, which he ſuppoſed ſhoulde haue bred him a quiet enioying of the realme. He did appoint (as it hath beenThe Empreſſe Mary comes to Lisbone. ſaide before) that his ſiſter Marie, widow to the Emperour Maximilian the ſeconde, being then in Germanie, ſhoulde come into Spaine, with Margaret her daughter: And although the diſcourſe of her comming were diuers, for that ſome ſuppoſed ſhe ſhoulde remaine at Madrill, with the kings daughters; others, that ſhe ſhould come into Portugall, where the King woulde leaue her as Gouerneſſe of the realme, to go vnto the States of Aragon, whereunto he was called; yet in the ende ſhe came vnto Lisbone: Notwithſtanding, whether the rumours of Fraunce increaſed, by reaſon whereof the King woulde not depart; or that it was not fitte that of an Empreſſe ſhe ſhoulde become Gouerneſſe of a ſmall realme, the King for that time did not depart, neither did ſhe gouerne at all. True it is that hauing reſolued to leaue Cardinal Albert, Arch Duke of Auſtria, the Empreſſe ſon in the gouernment of the realme, he beganne to acquaint him with the diſpatch of affaires, and hauing one day aſſembled the Councell of eſtate, he ſaide vnto them, that for that hee was burthened with the gouernment of manyThe Cardinall of Auſtria made Gouernour of Portugal. realmes, whereof hee had the care, hee deſired ſomewhat to diſcharg himſelfe; and for this conſideration hauing thought the ſaide Cardinall fitte for the gouernment of the ſaide realme of Portugal,

he would leaue the charge vnto him, and therefore heereafter they ſhould holde their Councell in his preſence.
            
               The Terceres in confuſion. In this ſpace the Portugals of the Terceraes within the city of Angra were in no ſmall cōfuſion, for after they had impriſoned Iohn de Betancour, walled vp the Ieſuites within their College, taken diuers ſhips, and committed extortions vpon diuers Citizens, which followed ſecretly the Catholique kings partie; there grew among themſelues ſome difficultie, for that it ſeemed vnto many that Ciprian de Figueredo, chiefe gouernour, did not continue with that vehemence he had begun. And as it happens to him that rules, all the ſeditious did malice him; ſo as vpon any ſmal matter, they tooke occaſion to ſlander him & acuſe him of infidelitie, although the cauſe may only be imputed vnto him, that this Iland was not obedient vnto King Philip: by reaſon whereof, being deſirous in the beginning of winter, to diſmiſſe certaine ſhips which were there detained, and likewiſe to deliuer the Ieſuits from the priſon wherein they were, all the obſeruers of his actions oppoſed themſelues, and chiefly the other religious men, as thoſe in that place, being more ſeditious then the reſt, feared moſt, and were moſt watchfull of the affaires; ſo as hee that in a manner had beene abſolute Lorde, the people being nowe incenſed againſt him, hee founde that hee coulde no more execute thoſe things, which had beene before tolerable. And although he laboured ſo, as the ſhips were diſmiſſed, yet coulde hee not deliuer the Ieſuits; for hee muſt of force, with greater rigor, trie the peoples inconſtancie, and the diſtruſt of Princes: For hauing aduertiſed Anthony being in Fraunce, of the eſtate of the Iland, and of the authoritie that many tooke vpon them againſt him, demaunding when hee woulde come into the realme, adding withall, that this Iland was ruined, and that it coulde not long continue in this eſtate; Anthony grew in iealouſie of him, furthered by the letters he had receiued from his enimies, the which ſaide plainly that he was a traitor, and therefore he reſolued to ſende from Fraunce, vnto the gouernment of theſe Ilands, Emanuel de Sylua, whom he had newly made Counte of Toreſuedras, one of his chiefeſt fauorites, who arriuedThe cariage of Emanuel de Sylua at the Terceres. there in March, with as ample commiſſion as might be giuen in that place, and hauing diſpoſſeſſed Figueredo from his charge, he began with a barbarous tyrannie to moleſt both friends & foes for

the recouering of money: Before his arriuall, a ſhippe laden with meale departed from Angra, with ſhew to go vnto Brazil, the which being not farre from the Iland, tooke her courſe for Lisbone: Some ſuppoſed that this was a practiſe of Figueredos, and that by this meanes by his letter, hee had demaunded pardon of the Catholique King, and offered to deliuer him the Iland, aduiſing him what courſe to take; for afterwards an other ſhippe departing from Lisbone, it was knowne, they not onely carried the kings letters to Figueredo, but alſo to many of the better ſorte, the which tooke not the effect that was expected; for the ſaide ſhippe arriued after the comming of Emanuel de Silua, ſo as Figueredo being diſpoſſeſſed of his place, coulde not execute his practiſe, if he had any ſuch thing in hande.
            
               The preparation at Lisbone againſt the Terceres, and the aduiſe vpon this enterpriſe. During theſe ſtirres, they made a ſlowe preparation at Lisbone for the Ilands, for that the King was not yet well reſolued to attempt it in the yeere 1582. his Councell varying in their opinions: Some aduiſed him, preſently with all his power to force them, alleaging that the longer he delaied it, the more daungerous the enterpriſe would prooue; for both the French, and Engliſh, who (as it was ſaide) were bounde thither, woulde, if they landed, fortifie, if they had time; ſo as hardly afterwards they ſhoulde finde any entrance: They did likewiſe weigh this enterpriſe with regard of honor, ſaying, that it was a thing of ſmall reputation and diſhonorable, that ſo weake an Iland, ſhoulde dare in the view of Spaine, reſiſt the forces of ſo great a King: They ſhewed of how great conſequence it was, being (as they ſaide) ſeated in a place which was the onely refuge of all the ſhips, which came from the eaſt and weſt Indies, and from all the new nauigations, into Spaine: for although there were other Ilands in this ſea, yet was there not any ſo commodious as this, the reſt being very vnfitte; and if the French and Engliſh became maſters thereof (as it was to bee feared if they protracted time) and lodged their armies there, they might from thence encounter the ſhips of thoſe nauigations, the which by reaſon of their long voiage returne home wearie and torne, and (being of themſelues indefenſible) ſpoile them, to the great loſſe and diſhonour of al Spaine: They made the enterpriſe eaſie, ſaying, that beſides that from Fraunce they had receiued no great prouiſion of armes and munition;

in the Ile it ſelfe, the greateſt part of the Nobilitie, and many other would obey the king, but they were forced by the multitude, and durſt not diſcouer themſelues; yet when the Kings colours ſhoulde with a mightie armie be diſcouered, there woulde appeere in a manner as many friends as enimies: Others, that were of a contrarie opinion, ſaid, that this enterpriſe was woorthie of great conſideration, the which they ought not raſhly to vndertake, for attempting it aduiſedly, it was moſt aſſured; but going to it haſtely, it were dangerous: They ſhewed that the Iland was by nature verie ſtrong, by reaſon of vneaſie landing, beeing of all parts rough and inacceſſible, but in ſome fewe places, which it was likely they woulde fortifie and guard: They ſaide, that the garriſons of ſtrangers which they vnderſtoode were there, were they neuer ſo fewe, with the inhabitants of the Iland, were ſufficient to hinder their landing: They made great reckoning of the roughnes of the ſea, the which commonly ſuffreth not any ſhips to ride there aboue two moneths in the yeere, concluding it was better deferre it, then attempt it in vaine, as they had twiſe done with ſmall honor: They ſaid, that the aſſurance of the enterpriſe conſiſted in delay, for that the Iland ſhoulde bee neither ſtronger nor better furniſhed then it was at that inſtant, ſeeing their ſtrength is by nature, & that a great garriſon cannot long liue there; that by delaying, the inhabitants themſelues will be aduiſed, for (beſides the inſolencie of the French) wanting their traffique with Spaine, they ſhoulde growe ſo poore, as they will ſoone acknowledge their errours: That the ſhips from the Indies made ſo ſmall ſtay at the Ilands, as they had no neede of them, but onely to take in freſh water, wherewith they may furniſh themſelues at Saint Michaels. Theſe reaſons helde the Catholique king in ſuſpence, and for that he was a friend to peace, he enclined to delay: but as the newes from Fraunce, Flaunders, and England, did varie, ſo did they haſten or ſlacke the preparation for the enterpriſe.
            
               The Catholique King armes in all places and the cauſe. In this ſorte, and with no ſmall trouble of minde, the three firſt moneths in the yeere 1582. paſſed away, but hauing intelligence at the ſpring, that they did arme many ſhips, both in Fraunce, Flaunders, and England, and that they were meant for Portugall; that the Turke (notwithſtanding his warre againſt the Sophy) threatned

to ſend forth his galleies; that certaine troupes of foote were come out of Fraunce vnto the Marquiſat of Saluſſes; the King thought it expedient to arme, both to performe this enterpriſe of the Ilands, as for the guarde of many places, where he might be endomaged: He thought it a hard thing, and vnwoorthie, to ſuffer the ſtates of the Low-Countries, to be wreſted from him by the Duke of Alançon, without reuenge: He did foreſee that the charge would bee verie great, and that he was furniſhed with little money, and leſſe credite; for by meanes of the decree he had made againſt the merchants, he was cauſe of more hurt to himſelfe, then to his creditors. The prouiſions it behooued him to make were all forced, for hee could not doe leſſe then prouide for Italy, as well in regarde of the French as of the Turke: Hee muſt of force entertaine an armie in Portugall, for although the Realme were in ſhew quiet, yet the Portugals being of a ſtirring humor, he could not auoide to arme a nauie ſufficient to encounter the Fleete: He thought it neceſſarie to prouide for Flanders, if not wholy to recouer thoſe eſtates, yet for feare he ſhould looſe more. But that which troubled the King more then all the reſt, was the ſhippes which hee expected this yeere from the Indies, and New-found lands; fearing that the French hauing the aduantage of the Ilands, might ſpoile them, finding that ſome Pirat had not onely paſſed into that ſea, but alſo threatned to aſſaile the Iland of Saint Michael, and that of the Maderes: AndThe kings order in preparing. therefore the King began to preuent all theſe dangers in this manner. He muſtred all the foote he could in Spaine, and cauſed them to march towardes Portugall, eſpecially to the Prouince betwixt Doro and Minio, to the gouernment whereof he ſent Ferrant de Toledo, Prior of Saint Iean: He ſent the Marqueſſe of Saint Croixe to Seuille to arme all the great ſhips hee could, and to prepare ſome galleies: In Biſcay he commaunded eighteene Biſcaine ſhips to be furniſhed, to make their randeuous in Andelouzie, where they prepared their galleies, and built a good number of great boats to land their ſouldiers: He wrote into Italy to the Viceroy of Naples, and to the Gouernor of Millaine, that either of them ſhould leuie 6000. Italian foote: He gaue order in Germany to bring downe 10000. Germanes vnder colour to ſende theſe two nations into Flaunders: And for to be aſſured of the Iland of Saint Michael,

although that Ambroſe d'Aguiar were there with one Galeon, hee ſent thither Peter Peixotto with fiue other ſhippes, who arriued there in good time; for certaine French Pirats were aſſembled to aſſaile it, the which they did not forbeare to attempt, for Peixotto with his ſhips lying at anchor, before the city of punta Delgada, three French ſhips leauing other ſixe behinde ſhewed themſelues, ſuppoſing that with his fiue ſhips he would not faile to fight with them three, and as hee ſhould retire the other ſixe comming to ſuccour them, they might conquer them, and after this victoriePeixotto ſent to Saint Michaels, fought with by certaine French ſhips. aſſaile the Iland being weake and vnarmed: But this deuiſe ſucceeded not for Peixotto (who deſired not to fight, but to preſerue the Ilande all hee could) would not come foorth againſt thoſe three French ſhips, the which hee forbare the rather, for that the other ſixe ſhippes which remained behinde, diſcouered themſelues, ſo as the Frenchmen finding they coulde not deceiue the Portugals, and their ambuſh (as one may ſay) being diſcouered, being loath to retire without ſome booty, they reſolued to charge Peixotto as he laie at anchor: But the winde grew ſcant to approch to land, and the artillerie from a certaine weake forte, would not ſuffer them to ioine: But the Captaines ſhippe, being of better ſaile then the reſt, drewe ſo neere, that hee grappled with a Portugall, where they fought aboue three howers, with great ſlaughter on both ſides; but the French had beene victors, if Ambroſe d'Aguiar who was at lande, foreſeeing that the loſſe of the ſhips woulde be the ouerthrowe of the Iland, had not ſuccoured Peixotto by boats, ſending him aboue an hundred & fiftie men, with the which he defended himſelfe, and the French ſhippe, vnlooſing itſelfe, retired to the reſt, woorſe handeled then the Portugall; but it was ſuppoſed that if the winde had beene any thing ſtronger, ſo as the other French ſhips mought haue come vp to the Portugals, they had beene taken in the viewe of all the Iland. And for that ſoone after there arriued eighteene Biſcaine ſhips at Lisbone, which the king had commaunded ſhould be armed in that Prouince; he ſent fower of them with ſixe hundreth men, for the aſſurance of that Iland, the which arriued ſoone after the departure of the French. Sommer was nowe come, and there was ſtill newes from Fraunce, that they made greater preparation for war, arming many ſhips in all their ports at the inſtance of Anthony
               
The Catholique kings affaires went ſlowlier forwardes then the importance of the cauſe required, for that it ſeemed the Spaniards were not yet well aſſured, whether the French woulde turne againſt Portugall, and not goe to the Ilands; yea, ſome beleeued, that making ſhew to do ſo, they woulde take their courſe for Flaunders, ſeeming more to importe wholie to aſſure thoſe countries, and to expell the Catholique Kings forces, then to vndertake an other enterpriſe of greater difficultie: And the aſſurance of this opinion did helpe the Fren̄ch, for it did diuert or at the leaſt deuided the Spaniſh forces, and was cauſe that in Spaine they prepared not their armies with ſuch expedition as was conuenient: But hauing after aſſured intelligence, that the French prepared to encounter the ſhips that came from the Indies, and the newe founde lands, the prouiſion for Flaunders went ſlowly forwarde in Italie: And in Spaine they made greater haſte of their nauie, for the which there was want of ſailers, and other neceſſaries, yet with ſome trouble they had prepared in Andelouzia about twentie ſhips and twelue galleies. The Marqueſſe was returned to Lisbone, giuingThe Marqueſſe of Saint Cruze embarkes for the Terceres. order to the nauie to goe to Cape Saint Vincent, and there to attend their charge: At his arriuall he found within the riuer of Tagus twenty other ſhips ill appointed, comprehending the Biſcaines and ſome Flemmings, hired in a manner by force, where hauing ſhipped ſixe thouſand Spaniſh foote, vnder Lopo de Figueroa, the Marqueſſe imbarked with many noble men, Ferrant of Toledo, going as a priuate ſoldier, with ſome other gentlemen. This was not the kings firſt intention, being reſolued to aſſemble the body of his armie in Andelouzia, whither the ſhips of Biſcay at their departure had commaundement to repaire: but in ſailing, being come to Liſbone, and hauing hired ſome others with the gallions of Portugall, the king ſuppoſed the greateſt number was there, & that he ſhould ſpende time to cauſe one parte of the armie to goe ſeeke the other; ſuppoſing they ſhoulde meete, he commaunded both the one and the other to ſaile towardes Portugall, as they did, labouring to ioine by the way: And although all this was ſlowly executed, yet had it bin more, if the king by his owne preſence had not haſtened their departure, the which was not before the x. of Iuly, in the yeere 1582. ſo ſlow are the Spaniards by nature in the execution of their

buſineſſe: At that time the French armie departed with Anthony, and all his followers, being in number aboue threeſcore and ten ſaile, and ſeuen thouſand foote, whereof Philip Strozzi and Mounſieur de Briſack were commaunders.
         
         
            THE NINTH BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the ninth Booke.
               The deſcription of the Jland of Saint Michael: The arriuall of the French armie there: The arriuall of the Spaniſh armie: The battaile at ſea: The death of Philip Strozzi, and of the Count of Vimioſo: The voiage of Anthony to the Terceres, and his manner of proceeding: The ſentence of the Marqueſſe against the priſoners, and his execution: The death of the Duke of Alua, and his praiſes: The new estates where Prince Philip was ſworne, by reaſon of the death of Prince Diego: And how the Cardinall Archduke of Auſtria was made Gouernour of Portugall.
            
            
               The hopes of the French armie at ſea with Strozzi. 
               WHileſt the French and Spaniſh armies ſailed towards the Terceres, both Courtes were in ſuſpence, and in diuers hopes of ſucceſſe: but in Fraunce they conceiued more aſſurance then in Portugall; for the French not eſteeming the Spaniſh forces, helde themſelues ſuperiours, in number both of ſhips and men, and hauing the Ilands at their deuotion, they ſtoode aſſured that their armie ſhould both ſpoile the Indian fleete, ſacke the Iland of Saint Michael, and ouercome the enimies armie, if they ioined with them: And they relied ſo much thereon, that extending their hopes farther, furthered by the promiſes of Anthony, and of what he ſaid, that he had followers in Portugall,

they hoped to approch the realme, and to put men on lande, and to arme the vnarmed Portugals; for which cauſe they carried great quantitie of armes, and to ſet ſo firme a footing vpon the maine lande, as they ſhould eaſily maintaine themſelues, ſo as with this intention many Noble men and gentlemen imbarked with the Armie, both for that the French are eaſie to mooue, as alſo heereinThe hopes of the Court of Spaine touching the Armie at ſea. to pleaſe the Queene mother. In the Court of Spaine, their thoughts were not all ſo conformeable, nor ſo ioyfull; for the Portugals, being now as contrarie in their humours to the Caſtillians, as they had beene euer, making hope equall to their owne deſires, ſeeing the affaires now in equal ballance, many wiſhed they ſhould make no reſiſtance, and many expected the comming of Anthonie: The reſt of the Portugals, more content with the preſent ſtate of the Caſtillians, ſhewed great hope the warres ſhould now ende, ſaying they were aſſured, they ſhould defeat this Armie, take Anthonie priſoner, and either by loue or force ſubdue the Ilandes; yet inwardly they were not well ſatisfied: For ſeeing their armies deuided, without hope to ioyne, it ſeemed vnto the wiſeſt the victorie was not ſo aſſured as ſome ſuppoſed, and that the Spaniards by giuing battaile ſhould hazard to loſe much and winne little, and contrariwiſe the French to winne much and looſe little; for that the greateſt miſchiefe that coulde ſeeme to happen to the enimies, was the defeating of the Armie, and taking the Ilandes from their obedience, which things although they ſhoud all happen, yet were they not of any great moment to Fraunce; but if contrariwiſe the Spaniſh Armie ſhould be defeated, their loſſe would be equall to the French; for beſides the ſhips, they ſhould with all loſe with the Iland of Saint Michaell, the hope to recouer the reſt, the Indian Fleet withal their treaſure ſhould ſerue as a Pray to the French, and the realme ſhould be ſtil in doubt, ſubiect to all thoſe inconueniences, which ſo great a loſſe ſhould bring with it, chiefly vnto a realme newly conquered. This feare was augmented, for that their Armie, which conſiſted of good ſhips, and was manned with good ſouldiers, was notwithſtanding vnprouided of mariners, and wilde fiers, whereof ſome were drawen by force, and the Marques himſelfe went with ſmall contentment, not for that hee feared, but hauing beene at his departure, ſomewhat diſcountenanced by the King,

blaming him to haue beene too ſlacke in the diſpatch of the Armie; beſides going, in Flemmiſh ſhips, and with Germane ſoldiers, little acquainted with the ſea, increaſed theſe doubts: yet outwardly theſe men ſhewed a great confidence, grounding the reſts of their hopes, vpon the qualitie of the Spaniſh ſouldiers, and the greatnes of their ſhips. Manie woondred how the wordes of Anthonie could ſo preuaile in Fraunce, as in a maner to moue all that Court to vndertake his protection, with ſo great vehemencie as they had done, not ſhewing any pretention he had vnto the Crowne, hauing no great hope to make him Lord, nor to imploy ſuch forces as he pretended to haue, ſeeing, that ſuch as fauoured him were kept vnder in Portugall with great garriſons: And this readines of the French, ſeemed to them the greater, for that before they had ſhewed themſelues more ſlack to ſuccour the Portugals againſt the Caſtillians, when as they had a fitter occaſion and a more grounded hope of good ſucceſſe, then now they could haue; for in the yeere of our Lord 1466. Alphonſe the fifth King of Portugal, going into Fraunce to demaund ſuccours of Lewis the eleuenth, for the warres which he had againſt the Catholique King Ferdinand, he obtained nothing at all, but hauing ſpent ſome time in vaine returned home in diſpaire. But laying aſide all olde examples, it ſeemes that if the French ſhould haue riſen in fauour of Anthonie, either to aide him ſincerely, or to vſe him as an inſtrument, to ſet footing in Portugall, they might haue done it with better meanes in the yeere 1580. when poſſibly they might haue diſquieted Philip in taking of poſſeſſion, or at the leaſt kept him that yeere from paſſing the riuer of Tagus; ſo as it ſeemed ſtrange to ſee Fraunce ſend foorth ſo great an Army out of ſeaſon, in fauour of Anthonie a fugitiue: But the eſtate of worldly affaires conſidered, it ſeemes there are new reaſons, wherby the French ſhould be more eaſily induced then they had beene then; for to haue a brother to the King of Frannce, in a manner to poſſeſſe the ſtates of Flaunders, and the Queene mother to pretend to the inheritance of the Realme of Portugall, and to be mooued againſt Philip, were all ſubiects to draw the French readie againſt this Realme, and diuert the Spaniſh forces.
            
               The arriuall of the French ar
                In this while the French army arriued at the Iland of Saint Michaell the fifteene of Iuly before the Spaniſh, and drawing neere the

village of Laguna there they caſt anchor, and landed aboute twomie at the Ilande of Saint Michael, and the deſcription thereof. thouſand foote. This Iland hath not aboue an hundred miles in circuit, it is in forme ſo long and narrow, that extending it ſelfe from Eaſt to Weſt aboue fortie miles, it hath not aboue twelue in breadth; that part which looketh to the South is moſt fertill, and beſt inhabited; for towardes the North, except one village which they call Riuiera the great, there are fewe dwellings. Vpon that part which is towardes the South, beginning from the Eaſt, and at the Cape which they call Morro, running towards the Weſt, there are diuers habitations: The firſt which is fiue and twentie miles from Morro, they call Villa Franca; wherein there are fiue hundred houſes: The ſecond Acqua de Palo; the third Laguna, all ſmally peopled: The fourth is the towne which they call Punta Delgada, greater then the reſt, the which hath vpon the Weſt a ſmall Caſtle. Betwixt theſe dwellings there runne into the ſea ſome promontories; the firſt before you come to Villa Franca, is called Punta de Garza; the ſecond La Gallea, betwixt the ſaide place and Acqua de Palo; betwixt Laguna, and the citie, there are two others, but leſſe, that is Pugnette, and Teſte de Chien: At the point of Pugnette,Or the dogs head. towardes Laguna, as I haue ſaide, the French landed, and hauing ſpoiled the village, they marched on to ſeeke for greater Pray.
            
               The death of Ambroſe D, Aguiar. A little before Ambroſe D' Aguiar, who had the place of Gouernour, was deceaſed in the towne, and although his wiues ſonne would haue ſucceeded in the Gouernment, yet it ſeemed that Peter Peixotto, Captaine of the fiue ſhips, was amongſt the Portugals of greateſt authoritie; but Laurence Noghera, a man of courage and valour, was Captaine ouer the Spaniſh ſouldiers, in that which concerned matters of warre: All the inhabitants being fearefull, had alreadie tranſported their wiues and goods vnto the mountaines, and hauing diſcouered the Armie, this feare increaſing, the towne remained emptie of all things. The chiefe beeing aſſembled in counſell, they reſolued to run their ſhips on ground, that the enimy might haue no vſe of them, and goe to field with their Spaniſh ſouldiers, with the Biſcayne marrines, and ſuch Portugals as would goe; the which was not fully executed, for the Biſcaines would not ſuffer their ſhips to be broken; and Peter Peixotto was vnwilling to

haue his men defeated; yet the ſouldiers put themſelues in order to march againſt the French, led by Noghera and Peixotto: They had gathered togither aboue two thouſand Portugals, who with the Caſtillian ſouldiers and Biſcaine mariners, made neere three thouſand: but Laurence Noghera being doubtfull of the Portugals, before their departure exhorted them with milde wordes to fight; making ſhew of feare that they would abandon him; but they made anſwere, offering themſelues with ſuch willingnes, and courage, as he hoped to preuaile, and therefore iſſuing foorth againſt the enemie, he hoped to force them to retire.
            The French drew neere vnto him, but hauing intelligence by their auant courrers, they reſolued before they approched neerer to leaue the right way, and goe to the citie and caſtle without fighting, hoping to finde all vnfurniſhed: for this cauſe hauing left the ſea ſhoare, they went more to land, which being knowne to Noghera, altering his courſe he went to encounter them: The skirmiſh beingThe firſt encounter of the French. begun, when as the captaine hoped to vſe his men, hee ſaw his Portugals flie, ſo as being vnable with his Caſtillians and Biſcaines, to withſtande ſo great a force of the enimie, he retired himſelfe to the caſtell being wounded, with the loſſe of ſome of his men, where ſoone after hee died; the remainder being in hope (amongſt the which the Biſhop Peter de Caſtiglia behaued himſelfe wiſely) to be able to defende themſelues, although they had more hope in the comming of the Catholique armie, then in their forces: Peter Peixotto although he were in credite amongſt them, yet fearing that all was loſt, ſtealing foorth by night with a carauell, hee went to Lisbone, to aduertiſe the Marqueſſe; but it was not his happe to meete him; yet was he for all this being a Portugall, fauoured of the king: There appeered at this time, amongſt the Ilands, one of the Indian ſhips, very rich; yet the French were not ſo happie as to meete with it, although it ſailed almoſt in viewe of the Terceres, for hauing intelligence by a French ſhippe of the occurrents of thoſe parts, hee left his right courſe and went to Cape Saint Vincent, & from thence to Lisbone in ſafetie.
            The newes of theſe things which Peixotto brought to Lisbone, did more confirme the hopes of the Anthonians, then trouble the Caſtillians, or their followers; for thoſe varied in their thoughts

vpon euery ſmall euent; and to thoſe who were more ſetled, it ſeemed, that hitherto the French had not onely done any thing of importance, but contrarie to that which good ſoldiers ought to doe, they had aſſailed this Iland: For that it ſeemed their principal intention being to ſeaze vpon the Indian fleete, or to cauſe a tumult within the realme, they ſhoulde not buſie themſelues, and ſpende time in any other action, with ſmall hope of gaine: for that the Iland being weake, and the towne without wals, it was apparant, that to be maſters thereof with trouble, were to labour in vaine; for although they did ſubdue it, yet the weakeneſſe and facilitie of landing will alwaies force them to obey whom ſoeuer ſhoulde bee maſter at ſea: beſides they were in danger, the Spaniſh fleete arriuing, whileſt they were troubled on lande, their armie founde at anchor, might eaſily be defeated; yet the French ſeemed little to feare it, for that they remained long careleſſe at lande, at what time Anthony was lodged in the couent of Saint Rocke neere vnto the armie, labouring both by wordes and threatning to haue the forte, and being after come to the towne, hee wrote generally to all that were within, requiring them to conſigne it into his handes, as his owne, offring to ſuffer them to depart freely; but hauing no anſwere conformable to his deſires, he cauſed ſome peeces of artillerie to bee landed from the ſhips to batter it; but there followed no effect, for the Spaniſh armie arriued.
            
               The arriuall of the Spaniſh armie at the Ilands. Which hauing ſayled eleuen daies with varietie of weather, hauing diſcouered the Iland not being ioyned with the ſhips and galleies, which were parted from Andelouzia, but onely the number which came from Lisbone, whereof there remained fower ſhips and ſome carauels behinde, three of them (let with the tides) could not get out of the riuer of Tagus with the reſt, and the fourth returned backe vpon a great leake, ſo as the Armie conſiſted but of eight and twentie ſhips; for although the other three got foorth the next day, yet they arriued not with the reſt at Saint Michaels, but before them, where hauing intelligence of the French, they went to ſea, without ioyning afterwardes with the armie: The firſt place the Marques diſcouered was Le Morro the one and twentith day of Iuly, and arriued the two and twentith at Villa Franche, without hauing any intelligence of the French Armie: In this arriuall the

Spaniards had ſome diſaduantage, for that the enimies lying cloſe to the land with their ſhips, and in a manner couered, ſawe them come a farre off without being diſcouered by them. The day before the Marques had ſent foorth Captaine Aguirre with two carauelles armed to diſcouer, with inſtructions what courſe he ſhould take, if he found the enimie, to whom he deliuered letters for Ambroſe D'Aguiar, of whoſe death he was ignorant, whereby he did aduertiſe him of the comming of the armie, of the number of men and ſhips he had, and how he did howerly expect the ſhips and galleies prepared in Andelouzia, demaunding newes of the French armie; if it were paſſed, with how many ſaile, and for what place; ſaying, that his intention was to fight with them, and therefore hee ſhould will Peter Peixotto prepare himſelfe with his ſhips to follow him. As the Marques had caſt anchor vnder Villa Franca, one of the three carauels, which had ſtaied behinde and after paſſed them, being laden with horſes came vnto the Captaines ſhip, aſſuring them, that the three ſhips which had remained within the riuer of Tagus, were arriued two daies before at the Ilande, and were returned backe, and that certaine French ſhips had taken two other carauels laden with horſes, and that they did hardly eſcape them. But the Marques gaue no truſt vnto their words, although the French armie were there; he ſent other men to lande, to learne the truth, who returned ſoone without knowing any certaintie, for that their approch to lande being defended, they had contrarie reports made vnto them: Notwithſtanding the Marques did ſtill ſee more apparant ſignes of the diſobedience of the Ilande, eſpecially vpon the returne of one of the caruels of Captaine Aguirre, the which reported that the ſaide Captaine with the other had beene taken by a French ſhip: for this cauſe the Marques called Lopo de Figueroa Marſhall of the field to councell, where they reſolued betwixt them to land ſome men, both to take in freſh water, to haue certaine intelligence of the affaires, and to approch with the armie to ſome more conuenient place for that effect. But they remained not long in theſe doubts, for they had no ſooner appointed ſome to diſcouer ſome better anchoring place, the armie being vnder ſaile, they began to diſcouer towards the towne certaine ſhips, the which increaſing ſtill in number came againſt them, iudging what it was, as in

truth it was the enimy, laying aſide what they had treated of, hauing aſſembled Peter of Toledo, the marſhall of the Campe generall, the Marques of Fauara, Peter Taxis Commiſſarie generall, Frauncis Bouadiglia Marſhall of the field, and ſome other gentlemen and Captaines, they called a new councell, where it was propounded,The Marques reſolues to fight. whether they ſhould fight or take any other partie. The Caſtillian armie had no place of retreat, to returne backe they could not, without great danger, to get the winde of the French there was no meanes, for with their lighter ſhippes, and eaſier to turne into the winde, they might chaſe, flie, fight, and retire themſelues from fight at their pleaſure: So as the Spaniſh Captaines framing their opinions according to the neceſſitie, the matters ſtanding ſo as the free election remained not in them, reſolued to fight: Anthonie hauing (by the letters, which the Marques had written to Ambroſe d'Aguiar, taken in the carauel with Aguirre) intelligence what forces they had, and what they expected, and with all of his intention, for this cauſe he had reſolued with Strozzi, Briſſac, and the Counte Vimioſo, that it was fitteſt to fight with this armie, conſiſting of ſo ſmall a number of ſhips▪ before the other part which they expected ſhould arriue; and therefore hauing imbarqued with all poſſible ſpeed, they came in battell againſt the Marques, hauing firſt laboured but in vaine to take the Caſtel by new threatnings. Then did the MarquesThe Marques order for his battell. appoint what order hee would haue the armie keepe in the fight: Vpon the right ſide of his gallion called S. Martin, he placed that of Saint Mathew, wherein was Lopo de Figueroa; and on the left, that of Frauncis Bouadiglia with fower other ſhips of ſuccour, all the reſt were put in order, onely Chriſtopher d'Eraſſo remained behinde, with a great ſhip of importance, for that hauing his maſt a little craſed, he durſt not vſe any force; ſo as the Marques had but ſeuen and twentie ſhips, in all the which, eſpecially in the two gallions they gaue verie good order for the fight: For hauing deuided the ſouldiers into their rankes, and appointed diuers commanders, they prouided not onely for all neceſſities, but alſo for any thing that could chaunce with great iudgement; but it was in vaine, for at that time the armies came not neere one another, by ſeuen or eight miles, both for that the winde was ſcant, as alſo for that the night approched; ſo as after the Marques had diſcharged a peece of artillerie as

it were in ſigne of Battell; the French bent towards the citie, and the Catholique armie turned to ſea, not hauing any intelligence of what had paſſed at lande, neither ſhould he haue had it ſo ſoone by any other meanes, if the ſame night Iohn de Caſtillio, who had ſucceeded Laurence Noghero in the caſtell, had not aduertiſed the Marques what had happened in the Iland, and aſſured him that the fortreſſe held yet, both to the ende he ſhould haue care to ſuccour it, and to haue ſuccour from thence if need were: For this cauſe he ſent by night one of the patrons of the Biſcaine ſhips in a boate with his letters, aduertiſing him of all the ſucceſſe ſince the arriuall of Anthonie, vntill that time. He ſaide that the enemies armie conſiſted of eight and fiftie ſaile, whereof eight and twentie were great ſhippes, with ſixe thouſand fighting men, that if the Catholique armie were not ſtrong enough to encounter them, he ſhould retire vnder the fortreſſe, where the one might ſuccour the other: The Marques made anſwere vnto him by the ſame meſſenger, that he ſhould be of good courage, that his Maieſties armie was ſtrong enough to vanquiſh the enimie, as he hoped to doe the next day: So as the morning being come, the French came with great ioy to encounter the Spaniards, who for that effect had put themſelues againe in battell, but although the French had both wind and ſun fauourable vnto thē, yet the calme was ſo great as they could hardly approch; ſo as the two armies continued one againſt the other vntil the afternoone, when as the winde growing ſomewhat ſtronger, the French began to make ſhew to charge the Spaniards: But ſeeing them in order without any ſhew of feare, they did not effect it, but continued vntill night, ſayling equally towards the Iland of Saint Marie, fiftie miles from that of Saint Michael towards the ſouth, ſometimes vpon one boord, ſometimes vpon another, the French making often ſhew to ioyne with them, being in their power to doe it, the wind being fauourable to them, and contrarie to the Spaniards: But night being come, the French reſoluing in any ſort to fight, the day following they ſent ten ſhips alongſt the Ile, with intent to follow the enemies armie, and to charge them in the dawning of the day on both ſides, but the winde grew calme and they could not ſayle. The day following, which was the fower and twentith, the Spaniards likewiſe deſired to fight, although it ſeemed with ſome diſaduantage,

wanting that part of their armie, which was prepared in Andelouzia; yet they greeued to haue their enimies before them not being able either to flie or fight but when they pleaſed, the which increaſed their deſire, and thinking it would ſo fall out by changing of their ſailes from one ſide to another, imagining the French would alſo follow the like aduantage: but although the enimie did then make more apparant ſhow to charge them, then before; yet nothing followed, but only the generall ſhips, with others that were neereſt vnto them on both ſides, ſpent many volleies of great ſhot, whereby the French had greateſt loſſe by one of their ſhips which ſunke preſently: Hauing ſpent the whole daie in this ſort towardes the euening, the Marques, to trie if hee could get the winde, commaunded all his fleete, vpon the nights approch, ſhould turne towards the Ilande of Saint Michaell, to get the winde of the enimie, giuing them to vnderſtand that the Admiral ſhip that night (leaſt the enimie ſhould diſcouer their intent) ſhould not carrie his ordinarie light, but about midnight diſcharge a cannon, to draw the reſt of the ſhips neere vnto him: This order was giuen, and duelyThe Marques gets the wind of the French armie. obſerued, by all the fleete except two Eaſterlings, who not being aduertiſed by the negligence of him that had the charge, ſtrayed ſo farre from the fleete, that hauing loſt the ſight they could not recouer it, and hauing within them fower hundred Germaine ſouldiers; it ſeemed this armie decreaſed dayly both in number of ſhips and men: And for that the winde grew ſomewhat high, the Marques thought it conuenient after midnight hauing diſcharged his cannon, to hang out his lanterne as he did, the which ſucceeded well, for the getting the winde of the enimie: yet this deuiſe preuailed little, for vpon the breake of the day, it was the feaſt of Saint Iames the Apoſtle the fiue and twentith of the moneth, whom the Spaniards call vpon in their battels; they diſcouered the French armie ſcattered a farre off, as well to ſuccour the ſhippe that did ſinke, as alſo to repaire ſome other hurts receiued the day before by their cannon: But ſome affirme that the French woulde not willingly fight vpon this Saints day: And although the Spaniards might well haue charged them, yet did they forbeare, for that the ſhip of Chriſtopher D'Eraſſo which had his maſt craſed ſtrooke ſailes, and diſcharged a peece; ſo as finding that it was wholy broke, they were inforced

to enuiron her with the army, leaſt in this danger ſhe ſhould be ſet vpon, whereby the French recouered the winde they had loſt: and the ſhip of D' Eraſſo being repaired, ſo as they might carrie halfe their ſale, the Marques hauing tied her with a cable towed her at his ſterne, and ſo this day paſſed without any other effect, but ſpending of ſome great ſhot.
            
               The French diſagree. Theſe ſhewes of fight, which the French had ſo often made, were not altogither counterfeit, for although the firſt time, and peraduenture the ſecond, they did it onely to ſound the enimies diſpoſition; yet after they reſolued to fight, but their opinions were not ſo conformeable in this Armie, as in the Spaniſh; for although Philip Strozzi, Briſack, the Counte of Vimioſo, and ſome others deſired to ioyne, yet many were loth to ſee it; and therefore ſeeing the Admirals ſhip not to begin the fight, the reſt did not force of it: Strozzi & the Earle, who were both in one ſhip, were more willing then all the reſt, yet had they not charged the enimie; for that the ſhippe wherein they were imbarked, was a woorſe ſailour, then many others: For this cauſe being not able to make ſuch ſpeed as they deſired, they coulde not beginne the battaile, ſo as their friendes which were in other ſhips, ſuppoſed the fault to be in them, and not in their ſhippe, and that they might, if they had would: Which opinion was furthered by the ſmall deſire they had to fight; the which Strozzi finding, hee reſolued to change his ſhippe, and to take an other of more ſpeed; and therefore hauing paſſed with the Earle and his men into that wherein was Monſíeur Beamont, marſhall generall of the campe, being of better ſaile, he reſolued therewith to charge the enimie; the which hee did the day following, being the xxvj. Saint Annes day: vpon the dawning both armies being at calme not aboue three miles the one from the other, and 20. milesThe beginning of the fight at ſea. from Saint Michaels, they ſailed gently towards the Iland, vntill the winde growing ſomewhat freſh in fauour of the French, towardes noone both armies approched, being not aboue tenne miles from the Iland: Being there ſet in order, in the vangard of the French marched the generall ſhippe with Strozzi and the Counte of Vimioſo; the admirall with Mounſieur Briſack accompanied with three Engliſh ſhips, followed by all the reſt of the fleete, ſome neerer, ſome farther off: In the Spaniſh, the hulke wherein was

               Frauncis de Bouadilla, went before the reſt, there followed the gallion Saint Martin, wherein the Marques was, who towed after him the ſhip wherein was Chriſtopher d' Eraſſo, then followed that of Saint Mathew, wherein was Lopo de Figueroa, theſe went before as a buckler to the reſt of the fleete which followed. The French had deuided amongſt them the Spaniſh ſhips, where with euery one ſhoulde grapple, but it was a matter that coulde not ſucceede, for the winde, the ſea, and the order which had beene ſo often altered, hindered that reſolution: The gallion Saint Mathew ſtaied ſomwhat behinde, the which was cauſe it was firſt ſet vpon, for the captaine and admirall of the French, with other three ſhips turning their prooes vpon her, went to charge her, and the captaine with great dexteritie to auoide the ſhotte, ioyned with them towards the prooe, and boorded the gallion from the middle forwarde, leauing place for the reſt to approch, the which inueſted her rounde with a great ſtreame of fire and ſhotte: Lopo de Figueroa being vnder their lee, not able to vſe his ſailes as he woulde, ſeeing ſuch, and ſo great ſhips come to charge him, ſtaied for them. There beganne a cruell fight, their artillerie did much harme, eſpecially the Spaniſh, being the biggeſt, ſo as two of the French ſhips being ſorely beaten therewith, and with their ſmall ſhotte, after ſome fight, fell vpon the gallion, which remained betwixt the captaines ſhip the admirall and an other, who being ſuccoured with freſh men in ſmall boats from the other ſhippes, troubled Figueroa much, eſpecially hauing his ſhippe fired by the enimie in many partes: But being a man of great valour, accompanied with expert ſoldiers, hee made an honorable defence, and with great reſolution preuented all inconueniences. He remained in this eſtate aboue two houres without any ſuccour, at the ende whereof, a Biſcaine ſhip of Peter Garagarza, wherein were two companies of Spaniſh ſoldiers, drawing neere, ſuccoured him much: The Marques ſeeing in what danger this gallion was, would gladly haue ſuccoured it, but he could not ſo ſodainly performe it, as neede required; for being forced to returne backe, and ſaile directly againſt the winde, a matter impoſſible, but by turning on the right and on the left to gaine a little way, hee feared in the meane time ſhe ſhoulde bee vanquiſhed: Againſt the ſaide gallion Saint Martin, wherein the Marques was when as the Saint Mathew was

charged, there came likewiſe two great French ſhips, but they were ſo beaten with the cannon from the ſaide gallion, and from the ſhip wherein Frauncis de Bouadilla was neere vnto the captaine, that one of the enimies ſhips was like to ſinke, & ſo paſſed on, ſo as the Marques being freed, he cauſed all the armie to turne towards the gallion Saint Mathew, and with all poſſible ſpeede drewe neere vnto him; vpon the turning of the armie the areergard fell to be vangard, as it hapneth in the like caſe, ſo as the ſhippes of Michael d'Oquendo, of captaine Villauicioſa, & an other Biſcaine, which were the firſt to ſuccour him, remained in the fronte, and all three inueſted the French admirall, who being ill intreated in this cruell fight, fell from the gallion Saint Mathew. Another ſhippe, wherein was Michael de Beneſa, paſſed on forwarde, and valiantly grapled with the French captaine on the outſide, ſo as the gallion Saint Martin wherein the Marques was, could not approch neere any one of the enimies chiefe ſhips, being enuironed with his friends, ſo as he was forced to turne about and paſſe on: The French admirall defended himſelfe with great courage againſt the three ſhips; that of Villauicioſa which fought in the prooe, did end omage him greatly, but the captaine thereof was ſlaine; that of Oquendo which fought in the ſterne had boorded her, with his men taken priſoners and enſignes, and began to ſpoile: But the captaine finding that his ſhippe by reaſon of a ſhotte, was in danger of ſinking, fell from her to repaire her leake, ſo as being in a manner freed from the enimie, hee tooke hisMounſier Briſac flies. courſe towards Saint Michael, yet hee coulde not get thither, but ſunke by the way, being ſpoiled by the artillerie; and Mounſieur Briſac ſaued himſelfe in a ſmall boat: But theſe two armies did not ſo ioine as it was expected; for that the Frēch army, although they had a full wind, yet would they not willingly grapple with the Spaniards as they might haue done; but many of them ſtoode idle, diſcharging only their great ſhot: And although ſome of them laboured to boord Frauncis de Bouadilla, and Chriſtopher d' Eraſſo, yet the artillerie kept them off, ſo as they durſt not approch: A Biſcaine ſhippe wherein were captaines Michael de Cardona, and Peter Pardo, boorded a French man, which was fallen from the S. Mathew, and forced her to yeeld, being already weake, hauing ſpoiled and abandoned it, ſhe after fledde: Captaine Villauicioſa the elder▪ with his ſhippe

wherein was the company of Lewes de Gueuara, boorded an other, and after a long fight vngrapled herſelfe, and one or two ſhips more boorded her, and the reſt fought paſſing onely by, and diſcharging their artillerie. The gallion Saint Mathew made a great reſiſtance, two of thoſe ſhips which had fallen from her, battered with the cannon, ſunke; and although the generall of the French were ſuccoured with many men, yet was he ſo beaten, that they within began to yeeld, but for that there were many Spaniards dead, and manie hurt, ſo as there remained within the gallion not aboue ſeuentie able men to fight, Lopo de Figueroa would not ſuffer them to enter, & make the victorie abſolute, the which the French finding, and receiuing preſently a new ſupply of three hundred men, they vngrapled hoping to ſaue themſelues: But the Marques who ſtood vpon his guarde, ſayling firſt on one ſide, and then on another, preſſing the enimie with his artillerie and ſmal ſhot, when he ſaw his ſhip fall off, he charged her, and ſo did another Biſcaine ſhip on the other ſide, wherein was Captaine Baſtida and Iohn de Viuero; but the fight continued not aboue one hower, at the ende whereof the Spaniſh generall became Maſter of the enimies ſhip with the loſſe of aboue 300. French: there found they Philip Strozzi, whom preſentlyThe death of Strozzi and of the Count Vimioſo. they tranſported into the Marques gallion, but being wounded to the death, he died preſently, without ſpeech, to the great griefe of all valiantmen: The Counte of Vimioſo was taken priſoner by Coronell Mondenaro an Italian aduenturer, but being wounded vnto the death, he liued onely two daies, embraced by the Marques as if he had beene his kinſman. Such was the ende of Frauncis of Portugall Counte of Vimioſo, more honourable then any one of thoſe which had followed Anthonie vnto this day: He was yoong, indued with good parts, both of bodie and minde, if they had not beene accompanied with a certaine childiſh vanitie, which made him thus obſtinate; beſides ſuch as knew him lamented his death, beeing by nature amiable: There found they alſo with no ſmall admiration foureſcore gentlemen, whereof thirtie were Lords and had their ſubiects, with many other perſons in number aboue three hundred: The fight had continued fiue howers, when as the French ſeeing their generall yeelded, their Admirall loſt, two others ſunke, and many broken with artillerie, they began to flie; but the Marques,

by reaſon of the night, purſued them not, fearing for that they were better ſailers he ſhould not boord them, and being ſeparated hee ſhould be forced to diuide his armie, the which he would not willingly doe; beſides he ſhould be conſtrained to leaue the gallion Saint Mathew behinde him in danger, being vnable to ſayle without tackling, ſailes and anchors, the which the enemie had burnt and throwen into the ſea: There was one thing woorthie the obſeruation, that being within this gallion a Prieſt called Iohn de Iaem Chaplein vnto the Marſhall of the fielde, a man which had ſeeneAprieſt dies for feare. the warres, during the fight being vnder the loweſt decke of the gallion, when he ſaw ſo much wilde fire caſt by the French, hearing their ſhot, and finding the hurt the cannon did, hee died, onely of feare and amaſement, hauing receiued no wound: The Spaniards recouered one of their carauels with horſe which had beene taken, and had taken more of their French ſhips, if they could haue manned them with mariners to conduct them; but for this cauſe the Admirall (which was caſt away) abandoned, and ſome others torne and abandoned by the French were not kept; for this conſideration the Marques burnt two, which had been abandoned and ſomeThe number of the dead in the battel. others ranne vpon the Iland: In this battell the French loſt ſeuen or eight of their beſt ſhips, and there died in the fight aboue two thouſand of their men, with many hurt; as for the Spaniards there died about two hundred, and aboue fiue hundred wounded: The Portugals, pertiſants vnto Anthonie, ſay, that the French fought not at all, for that the Captaines were corrupted by King Philip, andEdward de Caſtro beheaded by Anthonie. this opinion encreaſed, for that after Anthonie cauſed Edward d' Caſtro to loſe his head in the Iland, ſuppoſing him to be the meanes thereof, but they were deceiued; for although that Caſtro had promiſed many things vnto the Kings miniſters, when as they deliuered him out of priſon, whereunto hee was committed when they tooke him flying out of Portugall, yet could he neuer effect any; but the cauſe of his death was for certaine practiſes begun after this defeate, and for that he had committed murther vpon the perſon of Anthony Baraccio a deere friend vnto the ſaid Prior, and one of them that had proclaimed him King. Behold the iſſue of the ſea fight, at the Ilands, which poſſibly is one of the greateſt that euer happened within the bounds of the Ocean; for although in the Low-Countries

there hath beene like factions, in theſe laſt warres, yet were they not truely within the Ocean, but in chanels and riuers neere vnto the Ilands of Holland and Zealand, rather at land then at ſea. But the iſſue hereof beſides the greatnes of it was of more importance then euer any: for beſides that not onely the Realme of Portugall by this victorie remained ſettled, but alſo all Spaine; if the contrarie had fallen out, all had beene full of confuſion, for that the French, purſuing their victorie, might with theſe forces, their good fortune, the preſence of Anthony, and the inclination of the people, renue the warre in a ſuſpended kingdome, more dangerous for the Spaniards then euer, ſeeing the great number of vnexpert Portugals vnited with ſo many French ſouldiers, might giue them great hope of happie ſucceſſe.
            
               Anthony his voyage to the Terceres and his atchieuements there. 
               Anthony who remained in a ſmall barke, light and well furniſhed, the day before the battaile, when as they had reſolued to fight, although his whole fortune depended in a manner on this day, not finding himſelfe ſecure in this place, retired with two other ſmall barkes to the Terceres, where in the citie of Angra, they had prepared for him a ſumptuous entrie, with arches, images, and all triumphes, commonly vſed at the ioyfull comming of Princes: But deuining, it may be the vnhappie ſucceſſe, theſe preparations ſeemed out of ſeaſon; for hauing forborne to paſſe to a bridge of woode, which they had built onely for his comming, whereby hee ſhoulde enter the ſtreets that were garniſhed, he landed farre from thence with ſmall companie and more ſorrow then ioy: There did he howerly receiue ſundry newes of the armie, and by little and little he vnderſtoode the ſucceſſe thereof, with an incredible griefe, the which encreaſed the more by the intelligence giuen him of the death of Strozzi, and the Earle, and now caring for his ſafetie, wauering in his thoughts, hee knewe not howe to behaue himſelfe in ſo rough an accident: for although he relied much in the inhabitants of the Ilands, and in the ſtrength thereof, ſeeming to be ſafe in this place, yet feared he leaſt the Marques purſuing his victorie, ſhould aſſaile him, and that his men hauing their harts vanquiſhed with this loſſe, ſhoulde not be able to make reſiſtance; and therefore he enclined rather to abandon then defend it: He was ſome what aſſured of this feare vpon the arriuall of ſeuenteene French and Engliſh

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſhips to that place, of thoſe that had fledde from the battaile to repaire their hurts receiued, to cure their wounded men, and to take in water: with theſe men he thought himſelfe able to defende it, yet had they all but fewe ſoldiers, hauing in the battaile ſuccoured the Counte of Briſack and Strozzi with all their men; yet there arriued ſtill more, for at that time there returned but eighteene French ſhips into Fraunce, with Briſack, and fiue other Engliſh: Mounſieur de Landes, captaine of nine ſhips flying from the battaile, went to Fayale, where his ſoldiers began to ſpoile, & although it were not his meaning, but hauing auoided the ſacke, retired to Angra, yet for this cauſe they woulde not ſuffer him to enter, or elſe that Anthony doubted his ſafetie.
            The Marques as it is ſaide, the day being ended, reſoluing not to purſue the enimie, he drew neere to the Iland of Saint Michael to repaire his ſhippes, to looke to his hurt men, and to water; but the winde being contrary woulde not ſuffer him, keeping him three daies off at ſea, the fourth he drew neere to Villa Franca, where he landed his hurt men, and prouided what he needed, the inhabitants of all parts of the Ile hauing yeelded their obedience. The firſt of Auguſt Frauncis de Bouadilla landed with fowre companies of ſoldiers, in the middeſt whereof vpon the ſea ſhoare, hee put all the French priſoners, leading them to the market place of Villa Franca,The ſentence of the Marques againſt the French priſoners. vnto a ſcaffolde built the height of a man, where with a loude voice was read the ſentence of the Marques, whereby ſhewing that the Catholique King hauing peace with the moſt Chriſtian King, againſt the ſaide peace publikely ſworne, an armie of many aduenturers was come out of Fraunce in fauour of Anthony Prior of Crato, with an intent to take the Catholique Kings fleete, which he expected from the Indies, and the new founde lands, and to ſpoile the Ilands, as they had already done that of Saint Michaels; and that the ſame armie hauing tried a battaile againſt his Maieſties, the French had beene broken and ouercome; in the which being taken eight and twentie noblemen, and two and fiftie gentlemen, and manie other marriners and ſoldiers, he declared them taken as enimies to the quiet, and publike good; diſturbers of the traffike, and fauourers of his Maieſties rebels; that as ſuch, and as publike pirats hee commaunded the Auditor generall of the armie, that for their

chaſticement, and for the example of others, hee ſhoulde execute vpon them the puniſhment of naturall death, beheading the Gentlemen, and hanging the reſt, which paſſed the age of ſeuenteene yeeres, being ſo conuenient both for the ſeruice of God, and of the two kings. This ſentence ſeemed cruell to all ſuch as heard it, and chiefly vnto the Spaniſh ſoldiers, both for that they feared the likeThe Spaniards diſcontented with the ſentence and the reaſon. might happen vnto thē an other day; as alſo for that they would not loſe the profit which many expected by the raunſome of the ſaide priſoners; or elſe for their owne good inclination, ſo as ſome of the ſoldiers laying aſide all reſpect, ſaide it was not well grounded, for that there was no firme and inuiolable peace betwixt the Catholique King and moſt Chriſtian, but warre, and that thoſe were neither pirats nor theeues, but valiant ſoldiers: That there was no peace, they prooued it by the warres of Flaunders, more hot then euer, where the French did in a manner poſſeſſe all the Catholique Kings patrimonie: And that they were no pirats, they prooued by the letters patents they had from the King, vnder the which the ſhips and ſoldiers were enrolled; beſides, the number and qualitie of theſe men were ſuch, as it appeered cleerely, they woulde not haue attempted it of themſelues, if the king had not ſent them: And although betwixt the two crownes they diſſembled many things, the Chriſtian King excuſing himſelfe ſometimes vpon his mother, ſometimes vpon his brother, that they were all deuiſes of Princes; but for all that, they were not without open warre, the lawes whereof (they ſaide) was not ſo ſtricte, as to commaund them to hang all their priſoners. And this execution did ſo mooue the hearts of manie,The Spaniſh ſoldiers entreat for the French. that ſome of the principall ſoldiers being aſſembled togither, went (with a commendable example) vnto the Marques to make interceſſion for the life of their enimies, who anſwered, that the moſt Chriſtian King had expreſly commaunded, that all Frenchmen that ſhoulde take armes againſt the Catholique King, ſhoulde be corporally puniſhed; ſo as the ſame day theſe Gentlemen with a generall pittie, and great ſeueritie were beheaded vpon the ſcaffolde, and the marriners and ſoldiers hanged in diuers places, andThe French beheaded and hanged. the pittie was the greater, being apparant that they were all not onely valiant ſoldiers, but Catholique and deuout Chriſtians: The blame of this ſeuere execution, was not imputed to the Marques,

ſuppoſing that he had expreſſe commaundement from the King, whom likewiſe they excuſed, for hauing ſo determined, ſeeing it was not to bee preſumed that ſo many perſonages of importance, ſhould come with ſuch an armie and remaine priſoners, eſpecially knowing that Philip by his owne inclination was not cruell: yet on the other ſide, they conſidered, that the King in his minde ſhoulde haue conceiued a cruell diſdaine againſt the French, ſeeing that vnder the ſhadow of amitie, peace and alliance, Kings writing daily one to the orher, greeuing and reioycing at their troubles and contents, did not onely aide his rebels, but alſo tooke his countries, and ſent ſo great an armie to endomage him: And although that Princes do vſually diſſemble, and counterfeit in many things,  yet it ſeemed the French vnder a new kinde of diſſimulation, would make warre, whereby they did inferre that this execution did nothing diſpleaſe the King. The armie being a little repaired here, the Marques went to the Ile of Coruo to meete with the Indian fleete, and hauing paſt in view of the citie of Angra, he put Anthonie and all the people into confuſion: for although the Marques content with the victorie, would not thruſt himſelfe into a new danger; yet Anthonie doubted that in the heat of the victorie, he would purſue and aſſaile the Ilande; in the which although he had men enough both of the nation, and of the French, yet were they fearfull and diſordered; and Anthonie himſelfe at the ſame time prouided a light ſhip to imbarke if neede were. Theſe newes came ſlowly to Lisbone, for the which they were in great care, hauing newes of the fight, by the meanes of aA kinde of ſmall ſhip. Zabra of Biſcay, but a French ſhip which had beene ſore beaten by the gallion Saint Mathew, being fled from the battel, gaue aſſurance of the euent; for beeing arriued diſguiſed at Settuual, he was diſcouered, finding within her ſome Spaniſh ſouldiers dead; in the boſome of one of them was written all that had paſſed in the armie, ſince their departure from Lisbone vntill the time that he was ſlaine: The Marques attended long about the Ilands for the Indian fleete, whereof two being arriued, the ſeas growing high he came with them to Lisbone, to the great ioy of all the court, whereThe carriage of Anthonie after the ſea fight. he was extraordinarily fauoured by the King.
            
               Anthony after the Marques his departure remained more quiet in minde, ſuppoſing that for one whole yeere he need not feare any

enimie: He greatly greeued for the death of the French priſoners, fearing it would preiudice his cauſe in France: But Emanuel de Silua preſſed him to reuenge in hanging about fiftie or threeſcore Caſtillians, which were there taken priſoners at diuers times, the which he woulde not ſuffer, being better enclined: He was ill furniſhed with money, although hee had great ſtore of armes and munition: For this conſideration he daily (all by the inuention of the ſaide Silua) made rigorous commandements to draw money from the people, and from ſuch as did not follow him willingly: He cauſed gold to be coined, which hee valued at fiue and twentie roials, although it weied but eight: He made teſtons of ſiluer, weighing a roiall and a halfe, the which he made currant for halfe a duckat; and the copper money which was woorth three in Portugall, hee valued at tenne: And for that many were retired to the mountaines, to be free from troubles within the citie, hee commaunded euery one to returne, and if any deferred his comming longer then the time limited by his commaundement, they preſently ſeazed his goods: Many for feare of the ſouldiers had carried and hidden their goods without the citie, and therefore he commaunded euerie one to bring them backe againe, whereby he gained much; for he demaunded a loane of money of ſuch as came and brought it backe; and if any one obeyed not, he ſent Souldiers to ſearch their goods, and to ſpoile them, with a thouſand indignities: It was a lamentable thing to ſee how the Church cauſes were handled, for the religious men (except the Ieſuits) imploied in militarie actions, retayned nothing of a prieſt, but the habit, and the name; as for ſermons, confeſſions, and ſuch like things, they came from them, as from men which had not God before their eies: And Anthonie himſelfe during theſe afflictions, had not his minde free from laſciuiouſnes, for the women of honour could hardly be free from his luſtes, hauing too familiar acceſſe into the monaſterie of religious women: amongſt whom, as well as amongſt the men raigned the paſſions of the affaires of the Realme, with no ſmall ſcandall and great diſorder, and many of his, as alſo of the French followed this his example. Anthonie liued this kinde of life vntill the moneth of October, irreſolute what to doe: To goe into Fraunce after the loſſe of ſo great a number of the nobilitie, he helde it not ſafe, neither knew he how he ſhould be looked

on, for he feared as much the diſdaine of particulars, as he hoped in the protection of the Queene mother. To remaine there, he ſaw it a thing not able long to ſubſiſt with ſo great garriſons, not hauing wherewithall to pay the ſouldiers, nor in a manner how to furniſhThe departure of Anthonie for Fraunce. his expences: He reſolued therefore with ſuch ſhippes as he had to depart for Fraunce, but firſt would goe towardes the Madera, and the Iland of Canarie, that by ſpoyling of ſome weake places, hee ſhould content the ſouldiers with ſome weake pray. For this cauſe hauing prepared about thirtie ſaile, he not onely ſhipped his ſouldiers, but with a new deuiſe he commaunded all the citizens which he ſuſpected, and all religious perſons affected to the contrarie partie, as the Ieſuits and others to imbarke, making this commaundement moſt rigorous to thoſe that could leaſt obſerue it, to the ende they ſhould redeeme this voyage with money: But all as vnprofitable in ſea cauſes, excuſed themſelues with liuely reaſons and entreaties; but it preuailed nothing, making anſwere to the yoonger, that he had neede of them for his guarde, and to the olde, for counſell; ſo as many ſought to content him with money as hee deſired, euerie one according to his abilitie, by meanes whereof they were freede from his commaundement. But this inuention was ſoone counter-checkt by another, for many deſired to leaue the Iland & to imbarke, not with intention to follow the armie, but to ſaile into Spaine: Some of the Captaines of the ſhippes, vnderſtanding their mindes, agreede with the Portugals, not to deliuer any money to Anthonie for their ſtay in the Iland, but paying them the like ſumme and much leſſe, they would land them in Portugall, ſo as many truſting to the French, and Engliſh, not paying any thing to Anthonie, imbarked with them, agreeing for a certaine ſumme to be ſet onEmanuell de Silua ſtaies at the Terceres. land. Anthonie departed with this armie from the Terceres, leauing Emanuel de Silua in his place, with fiue hundred Frenchmen vnder the charge of Baptiſte Florentin, and Charles a French man their Captaines: He arriued at the Iland of Saint Michael, where hauing ſtaied long thereabouts, fearing the Spaniſh garriſon there, he durſt not land, being forced to leaue it by a ſtorme that roſe: Then ſome of his Engliſh and French ſhips, left him, keeping promiſe with the Portugals, that were imbarked with them. In the meane time they had newes in Fraunce of the defeat of the armie, and the death of ſo

many priſoners, which cauſed both in court, and throughout theThe French diſpleaſed at their ouerthrow. Realme a great griefe and diſdaine, and enflamed the French to reuenge, and as they had Flaunders neere, and matters in that eſtate (as hath beene ſaid) there they diſcharged their choler; neither did they forbeare, after the returne of Anthonie to treat of a new preparation, of an armie at ſea for the ſommer following.
            It was giuen out in Spaine, that the faction of Anthony and the French againſt Portugall, was daſhed; and that they had weakned their forces, yet did they not diſmiſſe their hired ſhips: At that time two galliaſſes being arriued from Naples, it ſeemed the king would aſſemble a great armie for the next yeere, and make himſelfe abſolute Lorde of the Ocean, both in reſpect of the affaires of Anthony, as to aſſure his ſhips, from the Indies, and newe founde landes, from the French and Engliſh, and to force the Iland. The Catholique King deſired to returne into Caſtill, both for that he was called byThe amplification of pardon towards the Portugals. the ſtates of Arragon, and to finiſh the marriage of his daughter with the Emperour; as alſo for other buſiness of the realme, and was vpon the point to effect it, in Nouember 1582. but he woulde firſt extend his pardon graunted at Tomar to ſuch as had followed Anthony: For this cauſe hauing excepted the religious perſons and tenne others, hee pardoned freely all the reſt that ſhoulde preſent themſelues within a certaine time; but this wrought no effect, for there came fewe, and many ſaid, that the King being yet diſpleaſed, could not make a free pardon. This departure was after ſtaied by the newes of the death of Diego his eldeſt ſonne, who as hee had beene ſworne Prince of Portugall, at the eſtates of Tomar, hee woulde likewiſe that the ſame oath ſhoulde bee made in the perſon of Philip his ſecond ſonne being then ſicke. And for that he had no other iſſue male, the ſucceſſion maſculine of theſe Realmes remaining in the breath of one only, togither with the kings age, and the diſpoſition of the affaires of the world, both the quiet & ſeditious were in care: But for the ſwearing of him he aſſembled the eſtates at Lisbone, in the moneth of Februarie, reſolute to accompliſh this ceremonie before his departure.
            At that time the Duke of Alua (conſumed with a continuall feauer) died, in the pallace of Lisbone, in the Kings owne quarter, being of the age of threeſcore & fourteene yeeres. During his ſicknes

               The death of Duke of Alua & his commendation. he was greatly fauoured of the King, who did viſite him a little before his death: There is no doubt but the King apprehended the loſſe of ſuch a ſeruant, which bred no leſſe diſcontentment in him, then pleaſing to his enimies: But the Portugals obſerued, that the day following he went publikely to maſſe, without any ſhew of diſcontent, contrary to the cuſtome of their kings, who vpon the death of men of leſſe qualitie (hauing done any notable ſeruices to the crowne) retired themſelues for a time; the which ſeemed the more ſtrange, for that King Emanuel vpon the death of a notable Pilote withdrew himſelfe three daies: But the actions of great Princes, are ſo ſubiect to the cenſure of the vulgar, as the wiſeſt miniſter matter of diſcourſe to the curious and malicious to ſlaunder them. With him died (as a man may ſay) all the warlike diſcipline of Spaine, for there remained not any one captaine equall vnto him: He was of a goodly ſtature, of viſage leane and graue; hee had rare gifts of nature, and fortune, the which he augmented much by arte; he was of a noble minde; of a readie and ſubtill ſpirite, aſſured in iudgement, and peaceable: He was not greedy of worldly wealth, ſparing in giuing, but honourable in the expences of his houſe; hee was a great diſſembler of the diſgraces of the Courte, and cunning in their ſecret practiſes, for ſo it behooued him to be, to preuent ſuch as were his competitors▪ He was generally hated, for that he treated proudlie with his inferiors, and his equals hated his greatnes. The ambition to purchaſe the Princes fauour (a ſhelfe wherein proude mindes caſt themſelues) was great in him; for this reſpect it may be, or for the preheminence and greatnes he pretended aboue all other officers, the which made him odious; hee was not much pleaſing to Charles, and leſſe to Philip, although from their birthes vntill their later daies, he had ſerued them 60. yeeres: But Princes loue them better whom they haue rewarded, then ſuch as haue ſerued them.  Hee was greatly enclined to warlike diſcipline, wherein hee was ſo cunning, as there was not any captaine of his nation, in long time comparable vnto him; and to conclude, for his many yeeres, and great experience, there was not in a manner any one in the worlde but yeelded vnto him: He was of great iudgement, and dexteritie, to encampe and make choice of a lodging, ſo as alwaies with leſſe forces then the enimies, he kept them in awe; he was ſo well experienced

as he neuer refuſed battaile whereſoeuer he came: Hee did willingly hazard his owne perſon, but his ſoldiers with greater conſideration, truſting more to policie then fortune: He was a rough & inexorable executioner of the ſeuere lawes of war, of whoſe pittifull crueltie depends the health of armies, and the conſeruation of States: He was by nature enclined to vanquiſh without effuſion of bloud, and was imploied in warres conformable to his inclination; for the greateſt part of them, being defenſiue, wherein a wiſe captaine ſhould rather temporize and ſuffer the enimie to conſume by the difficulties of warre in a ſtrange countrey, then to hazard an eſtate vpon ſo vnequall a game, as is the winning of a battaile againſt him that hath but men to looſe. To this effect hee anſwered the councell of warre, in the kingdome of Naples, in the yeere 1558. when as the Frenchmen being expelled, they woulde haue charged the enimie retiring, hee ſaide, hee woulde not hazarde the realme againſt a caſſock of golde, for ſuch was then the habite of the Duke of Guiſe, Lieutenant generall to Henry the ſeconde King of Fraunce; yet ſome did blame him, to be too warie in the execution of matters of importance in warre: He ſerued his King in greater charges, and with greater authority then euer any of their ſubiects, and it may be, there hath not beene in many ages a captaine, which hath ſo long mannaged armes, nor diſplaied his enſignes in ſo manie countries: For he hath made warre in Italy Spaine and Fraunce, in Hungarie, Germanie, Flaunders and Affrick; although he were accuſtomed to ſay, that he had done nothing, ſeeng that he was neuer ſo happie as to ſee a Turkiſh armie: But the laſt wars of Flaunders did ſomewhat obſcure the glorie he had gotten; for althoughThe blames of the Duke of Alua. as captaine he did warre valiantly, yet he knew not, (as it hapned to him in other places) howe to vſe the victorie, but arrogating too much vnto himſelfe, he cauſed a ſtatue of braſſe to be erected for him in the Cittadell of Antwerpe, which the king cauſed afterwards to be beaten downe. It appeeres that he coulde, better carrie himſelfe in aduerſitie then proſperitie; for in the one he had great force, in the other too much conceite, ſo as he reaped more commendations by afflictions, then by victorie: Hee ſhewed in dying the magnanimitie he had in his life, and that which is of great moment, hee ſhewed tokens of a religious Chriſtian, being happie that Frier

               Lewes of Granata, that famous preacher (whoſe diuine writings are pleaſing to the worlde) was preſent at his death: They did ſubſtitute in his place Charles Borgia Duke of Gandia, a man of greater vertue then experience.
            
               The obſequies of Sebaſtian and other Princes Portugals. The King had cauſed the bones of King Sebaſtian to be brought out of Affricke, the which with King Henries that were at Almerin, he woulde before his departure ſee ſolemnly interred in the church of Belem, neere to the other Kings of Portugall; and for that cauſe remained there three daies: He cauſed alſo to be brought from diuers parts of the realme vnto the ſaide monaſterie the bodies, or at the leaſt the aſhes of his kinsfolkes, the children and nephewes to King Emanuel, who (as a man may ſay) dying, reſigned him the crowne, that they might bee all kept togither: There was made a moſt ſumptuous obſequie, with great ſhewes, and all the religious perſons in the name of Henry were preſent, for the reſt had beene performed before, and in the funerall ſermon Sebaſtians actes were likewiſe touched, and Henry extremely commended, the which was more pleaſing being dead, then the praiſes of Philip liuing and preſent, wherein the Orator dilated much, hauing firſt in particular ſet downe the branches of King Emanuel, and brought the ſucceſſion to the ſaid Philip.
            
            I will not leaue heere to make mention as of a rare matter, althoughA reformation of the Kalendar. it be ſomewhat from our purpoſe, that in this yeere of our Lorde 1582. they did reckon ten daies leſſe then in others: for by the Popes decree, all Chriſtian princes obeying the Romiſh ſea, gaue commaundement to cut off ten daies in the moneth of October, ſo as for the fift day, they ſhould generally write 15. the which was done to fitte the times to the meanes and principall aſpects wherein the heauens were, when as our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt ſuffered, that they might celebrate Eaſter, and the other feaſts vpon their proper daies. The which they had not formerly done; for that the true courſe of the ſunne, which makes the yeere, being certaine minuts of an hower leſſe then the time, which they vntill then had taken for a yeere, it ſeemed that in the courſe of ſo manie yeeres ſo ſmall a difference had mounted vnto ten daies, ſo as by this equalitie, it was made conformable to the time paſt.
            The King beganne to vnburthen himſelfe of the affaires of

Portugall, for to go into Caſtill; and therefore the xxvj. day of IanuaryA new aſſembly of eſtates at Lisbone, where the prince Philip was ſworne. in the yeere 1583. hauing aſſembled the eſtates of the realme, they began in the pallace of Lisbone, where after Alphonſo de Caſtelbianco newly made Biſhop of Algarues, had briefly made the propoſition, ſhewing how much the King was grieued with the death of the Prince, and the neceſſitie there was to ſweare a newe: Melchior d' Amaral, one of the Deputies of the citie of Lisbone, made anſwere in the behalfe of the whole realme, ſhewing the deſire and readines they had to performe this acte: Whereupon the yoong Duke of Barcellos, as Duke of Bragance, beginning (for his father with ſword in hande did ſupplie the office of Conſtable) kneeling downe before the King, held foorth his hande to take the oath after the accuſtomed manner, the which being likewiſe performed by all the reſt, this ceremonie was ended. He procured that the aſſemblie of Deputies for this effect ſhoulde not be called eſtates, to the ende hee might take away all occaſion of demaunding new things, or to redemaund thoſe which had beene required in the former eſtates, and not graunted; and therefore hee had contrarie to the cuſtome ſent into all places, briefes of the procurations the Deputies ſhould bring with them, ſo drawne, as they ſhould not extend further then the ſwearing of the Prince; and although it were ſo executed, yet the eſtates did not forbeare, eſpecially he that was for the Deputies of the realme, to reuiue the demaunds made at the eſtates helde at Tomar, with ſome others; and eſpecially that it woulde pleaſe his Maieſtie to ſhewe magnanimitie and clemencie in giuing a generall pardon to all ſuch as were culpable of Anthonies offence; ſaying, it ſhoulde greatly profite, and do little harme: But whatſoeuer the cauſe was, he neither ſatisfied them in this point, nor in any other of importance. He diſpatched ſome Portugals which ſought reward, for although hee had giuen vnto many, yet were they not content: But notwithſtanding all this care and diligence, whether it were his faulte or his miniſters, or elſe the diſpoſition of the ſuters, or of all togither, there remained many of them diſcontented, part of them for that they were not recompenced, and others for that they did not ſeeme to be recompenced according to their merits. The Duke of Bragance at the aſſembly of the eſtates, hoped to haue receiued recompence from the King, which he ſuppoſed to haue deſerued,

for although hee were rewarded, yet was it not according to his expectation, for aſpiring to greater offices, & greater authoritie then he had, it ſeemed the Kings wil was therein directly contrarie, ſo as, for that the recompences were ſmall in regard of the greatnes of his hope, they were not publiſhed, but hee was ſuffered to replie that they might be after ſpecified. The Marques of Villa Real receiued likewiſe no contentment to his liking, ſo as both remained ill ſatiſfied, and the Duke leauing the Court, being long before ſicke, died ſoone after, although the Portugals ſay, that the griefe he conceiued of the weake recompence hee receiued from Philip, haſtened his daies. The King at the time of his departure reformed the ſtate of iuſtice, publiſhing many newe lawes, ſuffering the Portugals to attire themſelues more freely with ſilke then other kings had done:Cardinall Albert made gouernour of Portugall. He made Cardinall Albert Archduke of Auſtria, gouernour of the realme in his abſence, leauing him notwithſtanding accompanied with three counſellors, that is, George d'Almada Archbiſhop of Liſbone, Peter d'Aſcaſoua, and Michael de Mora, who was Secretorie of the realme newly created Notarie, which they call of the puritie, ſo great a charge as yet had neuer beene giuen, but to the chiefeſt perſonages of the realme, whereunto ſince the time of King Iohn the third, that Michael de Silua Biſhop of Viſeu, who was after Cardinall, went to Rome in diſgrace, there was neuer any aduanced. The King gaue procuration to the ſaid Cardinall, cauſing him to take an oath in the preſence of the councell of State, and of the magiſtrate of the Chamber of Lisbone, to gouerne with iuſtice, and to reſigne him the realme at his returne. The Empreſſe his ſiſter, who was to goe into Caſtill, viſiting firſt the Nunnes of the monaſterie of Santos, who may lawfully marrie, ſhe tooke foorth and carried with her Iulian d' Allan caſtro, of the age of thirteene yeeres, who by the deceaſe of Maudlyn Girone her mother, remained Dutcheſſe of Auero: The Portugals were much grieued with this acte, for although ſhe ſaid, the King woulde prouide ſhe ſhould not marrie but with his liking; yet notwithſtanding ſhe ſeemed to be rauiſhed, and manie feared that he woulde not marrie her in Caſtill.The kings departure from Portugall.
            
            When theſe things were ended, the king departed the eleuenth of Februarie, in the yeere 1583. the which greatly diſpleaſed

the quiet, and did glad the ſeditious; for thoſe feared, leaſt there ſhoulde grow ſome controuerſie betwixt the people and the garriſons; that the ſoldiers ill paied woulde mutine, and that the Cardinals authoritie, was not of ſuch force as the kings preſence, to redreſſe it; and contrariwiſe the reſt hoped, that the kings abſence, the ſmall affection the people bare vnto them, the oppreſſion of the garriſon, and the great dearth, woulde in the ſpring (conſidering principally the army which was prepared in Fraunce) miniſter matter of alteration; although it now ſeemed that things ſucceeded in fauour of the kings intention; hauing intelligence that in Flaunders the Duke of Alonçon ſeeking to aſſure himſelfe of the citie of Anwerp, wherein he was as Lord and Protector, hauing his armie lodged thereabouts, it had not ſucceeded, for forcing of a gate, and hauing drawne in three thouſand French, they were by the great valour of the Citizens repulſed, and the one halfe ſlaine; ſo as it ſeemed the Flemmings would no more truſt the Duke but compound with the King. Such Portugals as had receiued no anſwere to their demaunds, doubted of all diſpatch in the Kings abſence: but this feare was qualified by the opinion which they had conceiued, that the Cardinall remaining gouernour, they ſhould be no leſſe fauored by him then they had beene by the King himſelfe, albeit this hope ſoone vaniſhed after the Kings departure; for the Cardinall did not onely forbeare to vſe the authoritie which hee ſeemed to haue left him, but hee refuſed to ſigne the commaundements or other writings which concerned the affaires of the realme: And although ſome beleeued that he had forborne to do it, for that the king was yet vpon the way, and not out of the realme, vpon a reſpect of ſoueraigntie, yet they were deceiued; for the King being out of the realme, he did not ſigne, the which bred a great diſdaine in the Portugals, who pretended to holde the realme diſtinguiſhed from that of Caſtill, it ſeemed that this manner of gouernment which the king vſed from Madrill was a more ſtrict vnion then they deſired, beſides the troubles of their expeditions for the diſtance of the court: And this diſdaine was much augmented, for that the king had placed in the councell of the reuenewes of the crowne which they terme d'Hazenda, two counſellors, Caſtillians of nation, a doctor, & a merchant, ſaying, that it was vnſeemely & againſt their priuileges.
         
         
            
            THE TENTH BOOKE.
            
               The Contents of the tenth Booke.
               In this last Booke is contained the death of Sanches d'Auila: The ſacke of the Ilands of Cape Vert: The carriage of Emanuel de Silua Gouernour of the Terceres: The preparatiō of king Philip to force the ſaid Ilands: The ſuccours ſent thither from Fraunce: The fortification and the garriſon. The departure of the armie from Lisbone: The deſcription of the Iland of Terceres: The arriuall there of the Spaniſh armie: The aſſault, skirmiſhes and taking of the Iland: The yeelding of the French: The taking of the Iland of Fayale, and the obedience of all the reſt: How that Emanuel de Silua lost his head, and many others put to death: And the returne of the armie to Andelouzia.
            
            
               THE eſtate of the Realme after the Kings departure remained all that winter quiet; and although the people had their mindes yet diſquieted, and ſome of the nobilitie not fully ſatisfied, hauing left the kings court, and the Cardinals likewiſe, retyred themſelues to their caſtles and houſes, yet no man durſt ſhew any diſcontent. The greateſt part, although they loued peace and deſired the tranquillitie of the Realme, yet were they in their hearts contented to ſee the Terceres make reſiſtance, and continue in the deuotion of Anthonie, and the French ſuppoſing that whileſt the King had any warres, he would entreat them better, and beare them more reſpect, then they thought hee ſhould doe, if all were pacified: neither preuailed it, that the Portugalles were made much of in Caſtile, and admitted neere

the King as they had woonte to bee when hee was in Portugall, nor yet that the ſaide King had (it may bee to make the preſent gouernement conformeable to that was paſſed,) obtained from the Pope the authoritie of the Legate, for the Cardinall euen as Henry enioied it, the which bredde a great benefite to the realme: for as it hapneth to paſſionate mindes, they were not remooued from their opinion: for the Cardinall being made Legate for two yeeres onely, they feared that the time being expired, they woulde take an occaſion to recall him into Caſtill, and ſo the Realme ſhould be reduced into a prouince, and that the king remaining at Madrill, ſhoulde gouerne it. At that time Sanches
               The death of Auila. 
               d'Auila died, being ſtroke with a horſe, for that leauing chirurgerie, he woulde be cured by a ſoldier with certaine bleſſings, the which cauſed the Caſtillians to mourne: for although he were but marſhall generall of the fielde, yet remaining, after the death of the Duke of Alua, of greateſt knowledge amongſt the Spaniards, in the arte of warre, there was not any man neere the Duke of Gandia of ſo great experience: Hee was a man without feare, and happie in warre; eſteemed by the Duke of Alua aboue all the ſoldiers of his time; but this life which he had vnto his olde age ſo happily aduentured at the cannons mouth, was nowe taken away by death, vpon a ſmall miſchance.
            In Fraunce it ſeemed that all the French were turned vnto the affaires of Flaunders, affecting them more then Portugall▪ and although there were an intent at the Priors inſtance to ſet foorth ſome ſhips of warre, yet founde they therein coldenes and want of money, whereby it appeered, that whereas they attempted ſomething, it ſhould not be to offend, but rather to prouide for defence: And although they had now intelligence that certaine French ſhipsThe French ſpoile the Ilands of Cape Vert. guided by the Portugals, and eſpecially by one Emanuel Serradas, had inuaded the Ilands of Cape Vert, and ſpoiled ſome part of them, yet they made no account thereof, vnderſtanding they were but ſmall barkes of pirates. At the Terceres Emanuel de Silua wasThe carriage of Silua at the Terceres. ſtill gouernour, who ſhewed himſelfe an obſtinate enimie to the Catholique King, a faithfull miniſter to the Prior, and a cruell perſecutor of the Philippines: Notwithſtanding ill diſpoſed, of ſmall iudgment, and little experience. With theſe his qualities he afflicted the

poore people in diuers manners, for the meanes which he inuented to borrow money, to moleſt and condemne many perſons, were inſupportable: The pride & arrogancie whereunto he was growen, (as it hapneth often in him that is not accuſtomed to commaund) made him ſeeme inuincible, and immortall; the wrongs he committed were ſo infinite, that iuſtice had loſt her place; the libertie his friendes and ſeruants tooke vpon them was without reſtraint; the ſubiection and ſeruitude of thoſe that did not flatter him was ſuch, as the ſlaues were more free. I leaue the executions he committed vpon ſuch as would haue compounded with the Catholique king, and coulde not conceale their mindes; for vſing many ſtratagemes to diſcouer their affections, wherein as he founde any one leſſe obſtinate then himſelfe, hee was miſerable, being cruelly puniſhed both in body and goods: And for this occaſion he cauſed manie to be ſlaine, betraied by one Amador Vieira, who hauing beene ſecretlie ſent into this Iland by King Philip, to continue his followers in their fidelitie, to ſounde the diſpoſition of the people, and to drawe all he coulde to his deuotion; after he had wel executed his charge, he reuealed vnto Silua ſuch as had diſcouered themſelues, by whom they were miſerablie afflicted. And as tyrannie taught him, he daily made newe ordinances and lawes in the name of Anthony; the officers and miniſters of iuſtice in the citie, which were vſually choſen by voices, he alone woulde haue the naming of them. He was not onely contented to obſerue thoſe lawes which treated of high treaſon, but alſo made a new lawe more ſeuere, that ſuch as did but talke of that matter ſhoulde ſuffer death, and that ſuch witneſſes ſhould ſerue, although leſſe in number then the auncient lawes had ordained: He would haue the ſentences in ſuch caſes regiſtred by the Magiſtrate of the citie, for a perpetuall memorie to all to terrifie and tyrannize the more. There was within the Iland little aboue ſeauen hundreth French ſoldiers, one onely company of Engliſh, and about three thouſand Portugals; it was fortified on all partes where they might lande, with aboue thirtie fortes, and many trenches made, with ſuch arte and diligence, as it ſeemed impoſſible to enter, if they were guarded: And although theſe thinges with the other qualities of the place, made it vneaſie to force, yet Silua iudged it ſtronger then it was, and did truſt (as a man of no experience)

more in the defenders then was conuenient.
            
               The Kings preparation against the Terceraes. In the meane time they prepared an armie for ſea at Lisbone, and aſſembled the Spaniſh ſoldiers, to imploy them againſt this Iland, vnder the command of the Marques of Saint a Croix, being more in number, both in ſhips and men, then the yeere before: beſides there was ſpeech to ſende fowre galliaſſes and twelue galleies, for which cauſe they ſhortned their yardes, prouiding ſquare ſailes, and of a thirde maſte which they call the meane. In Spaine thereThe diſcourſe in Spaine vpon this enterpriſe. were diuers opinions concerning this armie, making diuers diſcourſes thereon, both by worde and writing: Such as were not to be imploied in this action, to whom no part of the honour or praiſe did belong, made it eaſie, ſaying, that the people were alreadie ſo wearied, poore, and oppreſſed by the garriſons, as the armie ſhould no ſooner appeere, but they woulde bee at the Kings deuotion: And the cauſe why they did no ſooner yeeld, was the ſubiection wherein they were held, and although they neither would nor coulde come to compoſition, yet were they eaſie to force; for the citie of Angra and all other places being diſmantled and weake, they had no other defence then the landing, the which they ſuppoſed were impoſſible to hinder, proouing by ancient and latter examples, that in warre there was no meanes to ſtoppe the courſe of paſſage of riuers and landing in Ilands, ſeeing that to keepe ſo great a circuit, there was an infinite number of men required; and being once landed all the reſt were conquered▪ On the other ſide, ſuch as imbarked with the armie to make it more glorious whatſoeuer euent were, laboured to make the enterpriſe of greater difficultie then it was, ſaying, that the Iland was little, well peopled, aboundning with victuals, rocked rounde about, and ſeated in the moſt inconſtant ſea that is, where they coulde hardly ride three monethes in the yeere, whereof one part before they could arriue woulde be ſpent, that they had not any port where to retire thēſelues, the which made it eaſie to be defended; adding thereunto the obſtinate diſpoſition of the people, the deſpaire they had of any aſſured pardō, the fortifications made by the French (in that point very diligent) with the prouiſion of munition, ſoldiers, and captaines, made the place inexpugnable: They added, that it was likely the French, (if it were but to diuert the Spaniſh forces, and continue this moate in their eies,) would labour to

ſupport the Iland, which ſhoulde be of leſſe charge to them then to the Spaniards in raiſing their armies to force it.
            But whileſt they prepared this armie in Spaine, and that they diſcourſed vpon the occurrents, Anthony imploied all his forces in Fraunce, ſo to furniſh the Iland as they might bee able to defende themſelues: And although the Queene fauoured him, yet whether the heate of the yeere paſt were growen colde (it may bee through the vnhappie ſucceſſe of the French armie, or that the Prior founde himſelfe bare of money, or whatſoeuer it were) they made a weaker prouiſion then was expected; yet at the Queene mothers inſtance,Mounſieur de Chattes ſent to ſuccour the Iland. Mounſieur de Chattes a knight of Malta, who was gouernour of Deepe, being experienced in theſe later warres, went with fewe more then twelue hundreth French men, although the report was fifteene hundreth: He carried letters to the Magiſtrate of the citie, not onely from the Prior, whereby he did greatly commend and encourage the citizens, ſhewing that on them he did grounde all his hopes to returne into the realme; but alſo from the moſt Chriſtian King, and the Queene mother: The King by his letters reioiced at their conſtancie, ſhewing how much he deſired to aide them againſt thoſe enimies, who ſought to ſuppreſſe the libertie of the realme of Portugall, for the pretention (thoſe be his verie words) that his mother might haue to their conſeruation; and therefore he ſent vnto them this gentleman with ſhips and men, giuing them manie other termes of loue. The Queene referred them to the Kings letters, with aſſurance neuer to abandon them in their iuſt warre, referring herſelfe, and ſo likewiſe did the king, to that which the commander ſhoulde deliuer vnto them. Being arriued and ioined to the reſt, and with the Portugals of the Iland, which in all were neere ſixe thouſand; Silua ſuppoſed that although he had many fortes to keepe, yet ſhoulde he eaſilie defend them, and the better, for that the ſhips which had ſpoiled Cape Vert, were returned and brought much artillery with them, the which ioined with that which Chattes had brought from Fraunce, and ſo much more which they had before within the Iland, both for the guard thereof, and taken in ſhips, which they had ſpoiled, amounting in all to three hundreth pieces, whereof many were of iron and very ſmall: But notwithſtanding all this, and that the Portugals ſhewed their accuſtomed ouerweening,

yet as men that feared, they left not to conduct their wiues and children to the mountaines, and to hide that which they helde moſt precious. Chattes as a warrior, hauing viewed the ſeate of the Iland, the fortifications, garriſons, victuals, and munition within it, doubted of the defence; for all ſeemed ſparingly furniſhed, and the ſoldiers to be fewer in number, and of leſſe experience then the place required; neither was the Iland ſo rockie and inacceſſible as was deſcribed: whereupon being retired with Emanuel de Silua, heA diſcourſe betweene Chattes and Silua vpon the ſtrength of the Iland. deſired to knowe whereon he grounded his defence: But he, whether blinded with the tirannie he there vſed, or elſe with his ſinnes, did ſo augment the number, and extoll the valour of the Portugals, that he woulde haue them not onely beleeue they ſhoulde eaſilie defend themſelues, but that the French were in a manner ſuperfluous. The French man helde not himſelfe for all this ſatisfied, labouring to remedie that which he thought remediable, eſteeming ſtill more of the number and valour of the Portugals then was conuenient: The fortification ſeemed vnto him ill directed, for he perſwaded them to bring into their chiefe caſtell all their munition and victuals, that if the Spaniards ſhoulde chaunce to land in any part, their whole forces might retire thither to make reſiſtance, vntill that winter comming, the armie ſhoulde be forced to retire; for as much as without this retrait, the enimie ſetting foote on land, the towne with all other places being vnwalled were loſt. Silua did contradict theſe reaſons with wordes contrarie to his meaning, ſaying, that when the ſoldiers had a ſecond place of retraite, they woulde make a weake reſiſtance at the firſt, and that the ſhoare was ſo fortified as there was no feare that the enimie coulde lande.  But in truth he made no account of any of the caſtels, for three reaſons: One for that he wanted victuals to furniſh it for any time, and for ſo manie men: The other for that he woulde not willingly ſhut himſelfe into any, hauing a meaning to flie: And the thirde was, that diſtruſting the French, hee woulde not truſt them with any ſtrong forte, leaſt they ſhoulde become maſters: In this ſort the captaines diſagreed, whereupon they not onely ceaſed to treate of this practiſe, but hauing before reſolued to abandon all the other Ilands being weake, and hauing no ſuperfluous men to ſende thither, they tooke a newe reſolution to ſende vnto Fayale, as moſt inhabited, fowre hundreth

French, vnder the conduct of Mounſier de Carle, with the which and the inhabitants of the Iſland, hauing a ſmall caſtell, they hoped to defend themſelues.
            
               The kings armie departs from Lisbone Whileſt theſe things paſſed at the Terceres, they had put the Catholique Kings armie in a readines, the which departed from Lisbone the eeue of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, being in number aboue threeſcore ſhips, beſides Zabres, Carauels, and barkes; for there were twelue galleies, and two galliaſſes, for the other two came not in time from Naples, fiue gallions, and aboue thirtie great ſhips of diuers nations: there were fewe leſſe then ten thouſand ſouldiers, the greateſt part Caſtillians, hauing no other nations but a thouſand Germaines, two companies of Italians, and two of Portugall aduenturers. The Caſtillians were ledde by their marſhall of the field, Lopo de Figueroa, Frauncis de Bouadilla, and Iohn de Sandoal, the Germaines by Counte Ierom of Lodron: the Italians obeied Lucio Pignatello: Felix of Aragon was captaine of the Portugals; and the Marques ouer all had charge at ſea and lande. This armie although it were not verie great in number, yet we may ſay the Catholique king had neuer ſo many trained Spaniards as in this: For beſides that the greateſt part had beene in Italy, ſuch as had beene in the battaile at ſea of the league againſt the Turke, were there, and likewiſe thoſe that remained at the warres of Flaunders. As the fleete went out of the riuer, a ſhippe ſtriking againſt a ſhelfe was made vnfitte to ſaile, and an other hauing not ſailed farre loſt her helme, but hauing tranſported their ſoldiers into other ſhips, they went to harbour. This fleete ſailing altogither, the ſwifteſt ſhippe of ſaile was faine to ſtaie her courſe for the ſloweſt, and the galleies being of all other ſwifteſt, were conſtrained to linger for the ſhippes, but for as much as this was the firſt time that euer theſe kinde of veſſels with oares had beene within the Ocean ſo farre from land; the Marques wiſhed that they ſhould not loſe the occaſiō of faire weather, which they had to paſſe the gulph, fearing, that euery ſmall ſtorme might endomage them; he therefore deſired rather to diſmember them from the armie, then to retaine them with peril: For this cauſe the xxvj. day, vnderſtanding the Patrons deſire to goe before, he ſuffered them to depart alone towards the Iland of S. Michael, with order to attende him there, ſo as ſailing more at eaſe with ſcant

windes, the thirde of Iuly they diſcouered land: And for that the winde woulde not ſuffer the armie to approch, the Marques ſent a Zabre vnto Punta Delgada, commanding Auguſtine Iniquez, coronel of two thouſand Spaniards, which had remained there the yere before for the guard of the Iland, to ſhippe all his men within the galleies, which had arriued there before in ſafetie: he ſhoulde likewiſe take with him certaine peeces of batterie, and moiles to vſe at lande if neede were, with other prouiſions: and therefore ſetting vp all his ſailes, the winde growing ſomewhat better, he drew neere with his ſhips to Villa Franca, and from thence went in a galley to Punta Delgada, where likewiſe a part of the armie had caſt anchor: hee ſet all things in order, but the windes growing contrary, he coulde not depart before the xxij. day, when as ſetting ſaile hee came the xxiiij. to the Terceres.
            This Iland is ſcituated as is ſaid in the fortith degree of latitude, and three hundreth & forty two of longitude; it hath fortie miles in circuite, extending it ſelfe in length from the eaſt vnto the weſt, ſo as it is not much aboue twelue miles broad; & although it be roughThe deſcription of the Terceres. for the moſt part and ſtony, yet is it in a maner all inhabited towards the ſouth, for the commoditie of the ſhoares it is more populous then the reſt, for comming from the weſt, you firſt diſcouer the citie of Angra, a place in a ſmall boſome of the ſea, but not greatly ſecure from the windes, where of it takes the name, for Angra in their language is a boſome: Ioyning to this citie there is a caſtell begun in the time of King Sebaſtian, and made defenſible for the garde of this porte: Sixe miles towards the eaſt, neere vnto a dangerous ſhoare, which they call the port of Mole, is Saint Sebaſtian, a place ſmally inhabited, and three miles farther is that of Piaggia, ſo called being the beſt landing place of all others. This place is neere vnto Punta de la Serra, which is the laſt promontorie towards the Eaſt, behinde the which turning to the North, is another place which they call Agua Alua, ſixe miles from that of Piaggia. This coaſt towards the North, although it be as we haue ſaide, inhabited; yet doth it not containe any places of woorth, being repleniſhed onely with peaſants houſes; neere to the point of the Weſt there is a ſmall aſſembly of inhabitants, which they call the Altari.
            The Marques being arriued at this Iland, he diſcouered within

               The arriual of the kings army at the Terceres and their proceedings. that ſmall boſome of ſea of the citie of Angra, thoſe ſhips which had brought the ſuccours, and ſome others aſſembled for ſpoile, with ſome merchants. He caſt anchor at Saint Sebaſtian, beginning viſiblie to finde, that the Iland was no leſſe fortified then had beene deſcribed vnto them. The fleete lay onely a cannon ſhot from land, ſo as there was many a ſhotte ſpent at them in vaine from the forts, not ſuffering his men to diſcharge one volley (it may be) for that it ſeemed vnto him a vaine diligence, or rather as he ſaide, the better to iuſtifie his Kings cauſe. Hee commaunded fower galleies to lie before the towne, to ſerue as a bridle for thoſe ſhips, and to keepe them from comming foorth, the which was helde too much ouerweening, ſome holding opinion that he ſhould in diſſembling giue them meanes to depart, rather then to force them to diſpaire: Hee ſodainly ſent a trumpet to lande, offering to all ſuch as were in the Iland a generall pardon in his Maieſties behalfe, if they woulde yeeld, but approching to land, he was vnkindly kept backe by their artillerie: The pardon concerned the ſucceſſion of the King to the crowne, the diſobedience of the Iland, and the clemencie of his Maieſtie, he offred vnto all ſuch as were naturall borne, their liues and goods, if they woulde yeelde obedience, and to ſtrangers, ſhips to tranſport them into their countries, with their goods, armes and enſignes: But being not able to publiſh it by this meanes, he ſent two Portugals ſecretly to land, who deliuered a copie thereof to Emanuel de Silua; but making no account thereof, hee concealed it, leaſt others ſhould ſee it, ſuppoſing (it may be) that it was nowe too late to vſe it, and therefore hee not onely refuſed to accept of this pardon, but alſo threatned to hange them that brought it, if they diſcouered the cauſe of their comming, leaſt the Ilanders ſhould likewiſe embrace it. The armie ſpent all the xxiiij. day and the next following in diſcouering the circuit of the Iland, with the places and fortifications, in conſulting where to land moſt fitly, and what courſe to hold: The Marques himſelfe, the marſhals of the fielde, with other of the chiefe commaunders in a ſmall barke ran alongſt the ſhoare, they found they had fortified more carefully then elſewhere, in the citie of Angra, and Piaggia, as places moſt fit for landing, and it ſeemed that the French did watch there with greater care then in other parts: Some Portugals of this Iland, who going to diſcouer

had beene taken priſoners by them of Saint Michaell, and now brought vnto the armie, ſaide, there was no fitter place to land then at the port of Mole, neere Saint Sebaſtian; but whether they ſpake it to deceiue the Caſtillians, the place being more rough then it ſeemed, or that they deliuered their opinion faithfully, the Marques had ſtill his eie vpon that part; for finding it rather leſſe fortified then the reſt, although the ſhoare were not ſo commodious there as in other places, enclining rather to fight againſt the difficulties of Nature, then Rampiers made by Arte, he reſolued with the aduiſe of the greateſt part to bring his armie thither vpon Saint Annes day in the morning, being the ſixe and twentith of the ſaide moneth, happily by reaſon of the victorie the yeere before, ſending in the meane time his galleies and other ſmall barks by night & by day to keepe the enimies in Allarum at diuers places, but moſt of all at Piaggia thereby to diſquiet them, and to draw them thither.
            
               The diligence of the Ilanders for their defence. In the meane time within the Iland, both Mounſieur de Chattes, and Emanuel de Sylua, laboured to deuide the ſouldiers and munition into their ſeuerall places, appointing the greateſt force at Piaggia, ſuppoſing the Marques would lande there as moſt conuenient. Sylua although in ſhow he ſeemed conceited of his forces, yet had he prouided a great barke readie within the port, and ſome boates at Altary, to flie if he found it needfull: Chattes was not yet ſatisfied, for although he had men ſufficient to kepe a great towne, yet hee held them few, for the defence of an Iland with thirtie forts; the one ſo farre from the other, as the firſt could not ſuccour the laſt, nor yet that in the middeſt as well for the diſtance of the way, as alſo for the diſcommoditie and roughnes of their ſituation: He thought it conuenient to haue a ſquadron of men ſo placed, as vpon any accident he might ſuccour where need required, the which could not be effected; for there were ſo many forts and trenches to guarde, that hauing diuided his ſouldiers but ſparingly, there remained none, but rather wanted: He found alſo, that hauing ſufficient for that purpoſe, he had no conuenient place to lodge them, and to ſuccour any place diſtreſſed; for that placing himſelfe in the middeſt, hee were too farre from all quarters, and approching to any fort, it were impoſſible to ſuccour the reſt. To prouide for thoſe defects, according to that which was poſſible, they ſet certaine bels vpon the hils, that

the ſound thereof might be a ſigne of ſuccour, and ſuch as were not charged in their fortes, and trenches ſhoulde repaire thither.
            The Marques hauing now choſen out of his armie 4500. of his beſt foote, amongſt which was a good number of the Germanes, the Italians, and the companie of Portugals, the regiment of Lopo de Figueroa and Augustin Inighez, the night before the ſixe and twentith day he imbarqued them vpon his galleies, and in many other ſmall barkes, being the greateſt calme that was euer, and hauing giuen the allarum in many other places with greater vehemencie then before, he went towards port Mole giuing order that ſooneThe landing of ſome of the Marques his men after the whole armie ſhould follow: He arriued there at the point of day, not being in a manner diſcouered by the Ilanders, for that the darkenes of the night had couered them, where he found they had three forts with their trenches and artillerie, but ill furniſhed with ſoldiers: As the galleies approched, they often diſcharged all their artillerie againſt the defences, to the ende that at the ſame inſtant, the ſouldiers might more ſafely land, the which cauſed more terror then hurt, although they diſmounted one piece of artillerie, which the enemy had often diſcharged: And although they ſhot often from the forts, and that the place was naturally vneaſie and full of rocks, where their diſcent was broken; yet theſe nations one in enuie of another contemning all perill lept to lande, and he that could not eaſily attaine thereunto, caſt himſelfe willingly into the ſea for more haſte, although the ground vpon the ſhore were ſoft, and thoſe fewe Portugals which were there were not the laſt, but in the point ſhewing greateſt courage. There was within the forte (whither theſe men marched) three enſignes of ſouldiers, whereofThe firſt aſſault giuen by the Marques his men. two were Portugals, and one French, which made in all but two hundred men, againſt whom all theſe ſouldiers marched, running furiouſly without order to the aſſault, for that the ſeat and the neernes of the enemy, gaue them neither place nor time to put themſelues in order. The French reſiſted valiantly, but for that they were fewe preuailed little: In the beginning they ſlew a Captaine and an enſigne bearer of them without, with fiue and twentie or thirtie other ſouldiers; but ſome within being wounded, the Captaine of the French ſlaine, one of the cōpanies of Portugals left the

defence, where they had a litle, but fearfully, fought. The other company which remained made ſome more reſiſtance, but hearing the bels ring, & no ſuccors come, ſeeing alſo ſome of their friēds dying, they abandoned the trench, ſo as the French remaining all alone, ſome of them being already dead, they were not able to make reſiſtance againſt ſo many aſſailants; ſo as in leſſe then an hower, the Marques men were maſters of thoſe forts & trēches with ſmall loſſe. The newes of this aſſault being bruted throughout the Iland, the French, the greateſt part whereof remained towards Piaggia, hearing the ſounde of the bels, and viewing the ſignes of fire, ranne to the ſuccour, and were followed by Emanuel de Silua with many Portugals: But the way was ſo long and vneaſie, hauing fower or fiue miles to march, that they were not come halfe way, before the enimies were maſters of the fortes and trenches, ſo as hauing made a ſtande vpon a little hill neere vnto Saint Sebaſtian, they put themſelues in order to march againſt the Caſtillians. But on the otherThe ſecond landing of the Marques with his men and their skirmiſh againſt the French. ſide the reſt of the armie during this aſſault landed, & being mounted to a ſmall hill, they framed a confuſed ſquadron of all nations togither, for the more diſpatch, and to be readie againſt the ſuccours that came, but there was ſmall need; for the French and Portugals would not approch, and ſuch as had abandoned the trenches, turned not vntill they were ioined to the reſt: So as the Marques hauing more reſpite then he expected, changed his eſquadron into a new forme, deuiding euery nation, and hauing marched a little forward, they began the skirmiſh on both ſides with great courage; and fortune after her accuſtomed manner did long plaie her part: For although the French were ſo fewe in number, yet they did twiſe recouer from the Spaniards, their firſt rampiers, & at the third time they came to the ſecond: But the Marques finding that the want of pikes was cauſe of this diſorder, hauing placed ſome Germaines, and encreaſed his ſtrength againſt the French, they did better withſtande their furie, the which notwithſtanding continued not long, for being noone before that Emanuel de Silua had made prouiſion of victuals, they were ſo wearied with the watches of the laſt night, with the way they had marched, and with faſting, that they coulde not continue; yet the skirmiſh laſted, ſometimes with more vehemencie, ſometimes with leſſe, vntill night. Neere vnto them the

Portugals had gathered together aboue a thouſand oxen, thinking to force them againſt the enimie, to breake them, and to make proofe of that which they had tried two yeeres paſt, againſt Peter de Baldes his men: but Chattes did not allowe of this ſtratageme, holding it for a refreſhing to the enimie without any profite; for it was not likely that that which had caſually chaunced againſt ſixe hundreth men, woulde ſucceed in the like ſort againſt twelue thouſand, whereupon they ſent them backe. As the Marques had viewed this troupe of beaſts, hauing reinforced the point of his armie with Germaine pikes, commaunding them, that if they came, they ſhoulde quietly ſuffer them to come on; ſo paſſed this day, the French not ceaſing to diſquiet the enimie with certaine peeces of artillerie, they had planted vpon thoſe hils: Then did Emanuel de Silua reſolue to flie, the which hee coulde not eaſily effect, for that euerie man kept a watch ouer him, and therefore hee cauſed a falſe brute to be ſpredde abroad, that he had threeſcore ſaile of French ſhips at ſea which came to their ſuccour; and ſeeming that he wouldSilua his flight hindred. ſende to meete with them, he cauſed the prepared barke to goe out of the port, that it might attend him at Altary; but when they came at the mouth, the artillerie from the fortes woulde not ſuffer them to paſſe, either ignorant of their intention, or for that the authoritie of Silua began now to decline, ſo as returning backe, the flight of Emanuel was preuented. During this time, the Spaniards were diſtreſſed for water, beeing forced vntill then to furniſh themſelues from their armie, whereof the French had great ſtore, and therefore the Marques conſulted that night to amend (if it were poſſible, the next morning) the ſeate of their lodging, the which was helde ſomewhat difficult; but for as much as both good fortune and badde hath no limits, he found leſſe difficultie then he expected; for the ſame night the greateſt part of the Portugals vnder Emanuel de Silua, terrified with the skirmi&;sh of the day, the number of the enimies ſeeming too great, hauing abandoned the French, retired themſelues confuſedly to the mountaine, although woorthie of admiration; for being the very ſame obſtinate rebels which eſteemed themſelues ſo great warriors, as they would neuer heare motion of accord, peace, nor pardon, it ſeemed ſtrange that now, when as (laying a ſide words) they needed effects, they departed

ſo ſhamefully, and changed their mindes ſo ſodainely; for inThe Portugals abandon the French. their flight they ſaide, that this Ilande appertained to the Catholique king, and that it was reaſon to yeeld it vnto him: But wee ought not to value the conſtancie of the peoples harts, nor their valour. The Generall of the French, ſeeing the Portugals departure, and that Emanuel de Silua (who had ſo highly commended their valour) ſtoode in a traunce, he reſolued to ſaue himſelfe with his men; the day drawing neere, he beganne likewiſe to retire to the mountaine of our Lady of Guadalupa, with hope that Silua had giuen him, that there in a certaine place of ſtrength, he ſhould be able ſo long to defend himſelfe, that the kings armie (winter drawing on) ſhoulde be forced to retire, and that afterwards if they coulde not recouer what they had loſt, they ſhoulde haue an eaſie meanes to returne into Fraunce, but for that the quitting of their lodging was not verie ſafe, fearing leaſt the Marques ſtanding vpon his guarde, ſhoulde charge them, he cauſed as many of his ſoldiers as he could ſpare, to march before, leauing ſome behinde to maintaine skirmiſh with the Spaniards, and to entertaine them a little if they approched. But the Marques hauing ſoone diſcouered the enimies departure,The Marques takes S. Sebaſtian. aduanced with his whole armie, putting thoſe few that remained to flight, he recouered the water, and Saint Sebaſtian with ſome peeces of artillery, where the ſoldiers hauing refreſhed themſelues, and all the French departed, he tooke his way towards the citie of Angra, diſtant about tenne miles, finding no let in his march, for that the enimie fearefully had taken a contrarie courſe. This citie being nothing fortified to the lande lay open, and therefore was abandoned, not onely of the ſoldiers, but alſo of the inhabitants themſelues, who fledde as well out of the caſtell as the towne. The armie arriued there after great labour, for the ſeaſon being verie hot, the countrie drie, not finding vpon their march one droppe of water, the ſoldiers endured much, and ſome of them (eſpecially of the Germaines died for thirſt. Being arriued, the ſpoile of the citieAngra put to be ſpoiled three daies. continued three daies, although the houſes were for the moſt part emptie, ſo as the greateſt number of men that were founde there, were priſoners, whom they ſet at libertie: By meanes of their entrie into the citie, all the other fortes were taken, for being onely made againſt the landing, they were towards the lande open and indefenſible:

As the armie marched againſt the towne, ſo did the galleies in like ſort, againſt thoſe ſhips that lay in the harbour, & drawing neere vnto them, they woulde haue forced them to obey with their artillerie, but they ſhot in vaine; for being abandoned by ſuch as were left in them, there was not any man left to make anſwere,The Portugall ſhippes ſpoiled. which the galleies diſcouering, they boorded and ſpoiled them. The bootie both at land and ſea, was not verie great, for beſides the artillerie they found not any thing of great importance. The ſlaues which were in number aboue fifteene hundred was the greateſt recompence they got: The citie being ſpoiled and other places thereabouts, the Marques deſired that the inhabitants ſhould returne to their houſes; for although the ſouldiers which were retired into ſome place of the mountaines, had carried with them ſome priſoners both men and women, the which after they deliuered freely, yet the greateſt part returned not; and therefore he cauſed a generall proclamation to bee made, that euerie man (ſome excepted) ſhould freely returne vnto his houſe; but the Portugals beeing diſtruſtfull they were few that came at that time, although after by littleThe Marques ſends to Fayall. and little they grew more confident. Things being reduced into this eſtate, although the French remained ſtill in the mountaine, the Marques thought it fit to ſend vnto other Ilands to force them to obedience, eſpecially to Fayale where there remained a garriſon: For this conſideration hauing imbarqued in his galleies and ſome other ſmall veſſels 2500. foote drawen out of all nations, hee ſent them to the ſaid Iland, vnder the conduct of Peter de Toledo.
            
            Whileſt theſe went vnto that other enterpriſe, the French remaining in the Iland of Tercerae, although they had ſomewhat fortified themſelues in the mountaine, being ill prouided of victuals and munition, & woorſe ſuccoured by the Portugals, reſolued withThe French compound with the Spaniards. the moſt honourable conditions they could to make their compoſition with the Marques: Mounſieuer de Chattes remembred that he had knowen beeing in Malta, Peter de Padiglia a gentleman that came with the Marques an expert Marſhall of the Spaniſh campe, to whom (remembring their familiaritie) he did write his minde, demanding free paſſage not only for himſelfe and his troupes, baggage, Armes, artillerie, and enſignes; but alſo would haue paſſage graunted for all Portugals that would imbarke with him. This letter

in ſome ſort pleaſed the Marques, being in hope to come to agreement & to remaine an abſolute cōquerour without effuſion of more bloud, before the ſea ſhoulde grow more rough: But this demaund ſeemed vnto him vnreaſonable, refuſing to heare talke of any Portugals to be tranſported into Fraūce. Amongſt the principal of the armie there were diuers opinions what ſhould be done: Some would preſently haue marched againſt the French men to winne time, & charge them without any further accord or condition what ſoeuer: Others diſcourſed with greater iudgemēt, ſaying, that it was conuenient to make an agreement with the French, both for the ſhortnes of the time they coulde ſtaie there, as for the difficultie they ſhoulde finde to goe vnto them; for they made an account to ſpende fiue daies in that enterpriſe, two in their march, one at the leaſt in conquering, and two in retiring, and that they had no commoditie in the armie to carrie victuals by land for aboue two daies, wanting waggons, bottles, and ſuch other neceſſaries: But theſe difficulties were ſurmou▪nted by the courage of the ſoldiers, who growen proud, could not endure that ſo ſmall a handful of French, being ſo neere, ſhoulde make ſhewe to defende themſelues againſt ſo great a number of old ſoldiers and conquerors, whereupon they did offer to endure all diſcommodities to go vnto them: And although he were not reſolued to do ſo, yet this Brauado cauſed the enimies to haue ſtraighter conditions, then otherwiſe poſſibly theyThe condition of the accorde. had had, the which after long treatie was thus concluded. That the French ſhoulde deliuer vp their armes and enſignes, retaining onely their ſwordes, that they ſhoulde bee lodged in a quarter of the towne: that they ſhoulde giue them ſhippes and victuals to returne into Fraunce: The accorde was no ſooner made, but it was put in execution, for the thirde of Auguſt the French came from the mountaine, and without the citie deliuered vp their armes with eighteene enſignes, their drums; and phifes, as it had beene agreed, and entred diſarmed into the citie, paſſing thorough theChattes doth viſite the Marques. Marqueſſes troupes which were armed and in guard, where the commaunder Chattes with the Lorde of Carrauaca marſhall of the field, and other principall officers did viſite the Marques, by whom they were kindly enterteined.
            In this time the galleies and other veſſels were arriued at Faiall

with the men that Peter de Toledo carried, and paſſing with them Gonçalo Perera a Portugall, who had wife and children in this Iland,They of Faiall kill a trumpet that was ſent vnto them. the ſaide Peter thought it good to ſend him before as a trumpet, to entreat the people to yeeld, ſuppoſing that being of that conntrey, he ſhoulde haue credite amongſt them, to let them vnderſtand the Kings forces, and the dangers that approched, to the ende they might the more eaſilie yeelde obedience: But Anthony Guedez de Soſa, who was captaine of this Iland, neither reſpecting the meſſenger, nor the reaſons which he deliuered, nor yet regarding the example of his ſtronger neighbors, hauing outraged him, both in worde and deed, in the ende he ſlewe him, as if in giuing him this notice he had touched him in his honour. Peter de Toledo ſeeing the meſſenger not returne, ſurmiſing what had hapned, reſolued to diſimbarke his men, and finding the Iland not ſo rockie, and leſſe fortified then the Terceres, the ſecond of Auguſt he landed hisThe landing of Peter de Toledo at Fatal, and the ſacke thereof. men almoſt without reſiſtance, and marching againſt the towne, he was encountred by fower hundreth French, and many Portugals, where the skirmiſh began, the which encreaſing, the French and Portugals were faine to retire into a ſmall caſtel, whereinto they had drawen the greateſt parte of their artillerie and munition,Anthony Guedez de Soſa hanged by the arme, and wherefore. where after they yeelded in the ſame manner as thoſe at the Terceres had done, and Soſa ſuffered the puniſhment of his inhumanitie, being hanged by one arme after his hands were cut off. It is ſtrange to ſee the confidence of theſe men, the which (nothing terrified by examples) did induce them to cruell exceſſe, and yet did not force them to fight it out vnto death: but the Portugals vnexperienced, do not account of dangers they ſee not, and when they ſee them, they feare them more then they are to bee feared. There was no more to be done in this iland; ſo as hauing ſpoiled it, leauing Anthony of Portugall for Gouernour, with two hundreth ſoldiers, Peter de Toledo returned with his galleies and other ſhips to the Terceres, where the reſt of the Ilands of Saint George, Pico, and Gratioſa came to yeeld their obedience. The Marques hauing agreed with the French, cauſed a diligent ſearch to be made for Emanuel de Silua, who intituled himſelfe counte of Torres Vedras, Gouernour and Generall of the Ilands, but being retired to Altary, and finding that ſuch as had the charge of certaine boates, in whom fortune had

more force then loialtie, had broken them againſt the rockes, hee founde all hope vaine for his ſafetie, hauing no meanes to free himſelfe by the French compoſition, being attired in a baſe habite hee hidde himſelfe in the mountaines. But it ſeemed the heauens had decreed, he ſhould ſuffer puniſhment for his offences,  by the hands of his enimies, for that a mooriſh ſlaue, who hoped by that meanes to ſaue himſelfe, diſcouered him to a Prouoſt marſhall, who ſeeing him before his eies, knewe not what he was; ſo as hauing taken andEmanuel de Silua taken, and executed with others. brought him to the citie, he was kept with ſome other of the principall rebels and ſeditious, vntill the proceſſe of their death were made, by the auditour, in the name of the King and the Marques, as generall of the armie, ſpecifying all their faults that were executed vpon the priſoners. The Germaines firſt put themſelues in battaile in the chiefeſt part of Angra, keeping the entrie of euery ſtreete, and there cauſing a fire to be made, they did burne all the money they founde to be ſtamped with the coine of Anthony, the which although it was not little in quantitie, yet was it nothing woorth, being for the moſt part of baſe mettall, with ſmall mixture of ſiluer: After they cutte off Emanuel de Silua his head with a ſworde, after the Germaine faſhion, to the generall griefe of all the aſſiſtants: For being of a louely countenance, and hauing in this laſt houre with great reſolution confeſſed himſelfe culpable, and to haue deſerued this puniſhment; hee demaunded pardon of one after another, of all ſuch as preſent or abſent he thought to haue wronged, ſaying, that he alone had bin the cauſe of the miſerie of this Iland,  & that he alone ought to ſuffer the puniſhment; the which ioined to the contrition he ſhewed, did mooue the harts euen of his enimies: And in truth we may well ſaie that he framed himſelfe to the ſpeech of Dionyſius the tyrant, that to leaue a tyrannie they muſt not ride poaſt, but ſtaie vntill they be forced, for in truth he attended vntill hee loſt his head.  His head was ſet vp publikely in that place, from the which that of Melchior Alphonſo was taken, whom a little before he had put to death, for being affectionate to the Catholique king: And it was obſerued, that being required by the kinſemen of the dead, to take it from thence, he made anſwere it ſhoulde be remooued when his ſtood in the place, which he ment ſhoulde be neuer; thus do men ſodainly foretell their owne miſeries. 
               Emanuel Sarradas,
               
who as we haue ſaid ſpoiled the Ilands of Cape Vert, and Amador Vieira (who with the title of Embaſſador to his Maieſtie, had betraied ſuch as truſted in him, did likewiſe loſe their heads. TheyThe French men ſent to the galleies. did hang many, and many (eſpecially of the French) taken priſoners before the capitulation, were ſent to the galleies: The Marques was commaunded to diſpatch with all ſpeede, and to goe with his armie to Cales, and ſome ſaide the King woulde turne his forces againſt Affrick, and ſeaſe vpon Alarache, and poſſiblie attempt the like vpon Algier, being fitter to vndertake thoſe enterpriſes in Autumne then in any other ſeaſon of the yeere: And therefore hauing left Iohn de Vrbina with two thouſand Spaniſh foote for the guard of the Ilands, he failed with the fleete and the reſt of the ſoldiers towards the porte of Andolouzia: and in the meane time both in Caſtill, and in Portugall, they made greatioy for this victorie, with publike feaſts, but not ſo great as was the griefe of Anthony his followers, whereof many (hoping that the ſtrength of this Ilande ſhould yet be a ſubiect for Anthony to returne into the realme) were diſcouraged, ſo as there remained no grounde, whereon to ſettle their hopes, although many expected that Anthony ſuruiuing Philip, the eſtate of things might ſo change, as they might yet attaine the accompliſhment of their deſires.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table of the eſpeciall matters contained in this Historie.
            
            
               A
               
                  ABdala, ſonne to the Cheriffe, pag 14
               Aduiſe of Iohn de Silua touching the voyage of Africke 35
               
                  Aldana ſent by Philip to diſcouer the fortreſſes of Africke 21. arriues there at the Portugall campe 37. is ſlaine 49
               Aide demaunded by the Portugalles from the French King 139
               Alarum at Lisbone 189
               Ambaſſage from Henrie to the Catholike King 56
               Ambaſſadors choſen to goe to Rome touching Henries marriage 78
               Ambaſſadours for the Gouernours to Philip and their negotiation 130
               
                  Ambroſe d' Aguiar ſent by Philip to the Terceres 241. he dies 281
               
                  Anthony Prior of Crato taken by the Moores 49 pretends to the crowne of Portugall 62. his grounds for his pretention 83. his letters to King Henrie 87. declared illegitimate 89. his courſe to obtaine the Crowne 120. his letters to the Eſtates at Almerin 121. his arriuall there 122. proclaimed King at S. Arem 160. comes to Lisbone and is proclaimed there 164. receiued at Settuuall vnder a cloath of Eſtate 169. receiued into Liſbone with ioy 176. prepares to defend the realme 179. importuned by poore women to ſuccour Settuuall 184. his counſell and reſolution 185. his feare 186. his counſels ill grounded 188. he offreth to compound 190. he marcheth towards Caſcaies 196. he marcheth towards Belem with his men confuſedly 199. he retires to Alcantara 201. his letters to King Philip 204. he prepares againſt the Duke 213. he flies towards Lisbon 215. is ouerthrowne and hurt 216. he gathered new forces at Coimbra 222. his ſpeech to his ſouldiers 234. he flies to Viana 236. he ſaues himſelfe ouer the riuer of Minio 238. his good fortune 259. he arriues at Cales 260. his care to haue the Indian fleete 263. his voyage to the Terceres 293. his carriage after the ſea fight 295 his departure for Fraunce 298
               Angra giuen to be ſpoiled three daies pag. 319
               
                  Anthonic Guedez de Soza hanged by the arme and wherefore 322
               
                  Anthony Scalin a Frenchman receiued into Angra vnder a Canapie 240
               Apparition of a Comet 22
               Armie parts from Fraunce with 70. ſhips and 7000. men 278
               Armie of Spaniards part with 6000. men 277. they arriue at Saint Michaels 283. defeat the French 291
               Arriuall of fower ſhips from the Indies 219
               Auero taken by Anthonie 223. and recouered by Auila 230
            
            
               B
               BAttell betwixt the Portugals and Moores pag. 44. famous by the death of three Kings 52
               
                  Baldes his attempt vpon the Terceres 255. his ſoldiers ouerthrowē there with oxen 257. his ouerthrow preiudiciall to the kings ſeruice 258. impriſoned in Portugall 263
               
                  
                  Bezars ſtone excellent againſt the plague 109
               Beginning of the fight at ſea 288
               Biſhop of Guarda ſeconds Anthonie pag 187
               
                  Briſac flies from the battell 290
            
            
               C
               CAbeſſa Secca fortified 140 and abandoned 207
               Calender reformed 302
               Cardinall Riario ſent Legate into Spaine 190
               Cardinall of Auſtria made Gouernor of Portugall 271. 304
               Caſcaies & Saint Iulian yeeld to Anthonie 169
               Caſcaies with the Caſtle taken and ſpoyled by the Spaniards 197
               Catarre moſt contagious 221
               Caſtillians diſcourſe of the affaires of Portugall 103
               
                  Chriſtopher de Mora ſent into Portugall in the place of Iohn de Silua 82
               
                  Chattes ſent to ſuccour the Terceres 310. he and Silua diſcourſe vpon the ſtrength of the Iland 311. he viſits the Marqueſſe 321
               Conditions of their accord ibid.
               
                  Charles Borgia Duke of Gandia ſucceedes the Duke of Alua 302
               
                  Catherine Dutcheſſe of Bragance viſites King Henrie 116
               
                  Ciprian de Figueredo Gouernour of the Terceres put from his charge pag. 307
               Clauſe in King Henries will 123
               Conditious offred by Philip to the Portugals if they would quietly yeeld the realme 134
               Confuſion of the affaires in Portugall 140. 154
               Confuſion in Lisbone 196
               Coimbra yeelded 228
               Concluſion of the Eſtates at Almerin 131
               
                  Conte of Vimioſo ſeconds the King of Portugals wil 35. he is wounded to the death 291
               Counſell touching the Ambaſſage that king Philip ſent to Henrie 69
               Counſell of the kings Chamber 246
               Counſell of Eſtate in Portugall reduced to two 255
               Crueltie at the Terceres 258
            
            
               D
               DEcree made by the Gouernors for Philip againſt Anthonie pag. 178
               Demaunds of the Eſtates at Tomat pag. 249
               Deſcription of Lisbon 3
               Deputies of Portalegre their ſpeech pag. 124
               Deputies of the realme demaund of Henrie to be admitted to the Election 113. their anſwere to Martin Gonſalues 118
               Deſcription of Portugall 2
               Deſcription of the reuenues of Portugall 17
               Deſcription of Molucs armie 39
               Diego de Meneſes beheaded 198
               
               Diſcontentments of the people of Lisbon 79
               Diſcourſe touching the precedence of Philip and Henrie 66
               Diſorders at Lisbon 179
               Duke of Auero and Aldana ſlaine 49
               Dutcheſſe of Bragance pretends to the Crowne of Portugall 61. her grounds 84
               Duke of Sauoy pretends 62. his reaſons for it 83
               Duke of Parma pretends for his ſonne Rainuctus 62. his reaſons 83
               Duke of Oſſuna ſent to Henrie 66. his proceedings in Portugall 75
               Duke of Barcellos detained cunningly

by the Duke of Medina Sidonia pag 125
               Duke of Alua impriſoned and the cauſe 70. made Generall againſt the Portugals 128. he arriues at the Armie and the number thereof 128. the eſtate of his armie 134. paſſeth his armie at Caſcaies 193. lands there, and the diſpoſition thereof 194. marcheth againſt the rocke of Saint Iulian 202. his anſwere to Anthonie 205. his ſpeech to his ſouldiers 212. the order of his armie, ibid. blamed for ſlacknes 218. his prayſes 220. blamed, and his excuſes 223. his ſouldiers complaine 245. his death, with his prayſe and diſpraiſe 300
            
            
               E
               EDward de Caſtro beheaded by Anthonie 292
               
               Eluas taken 155
               
                  Emanuel de Silua ſtaies at the Terceres 298. his carriage there 307. his flight hindred 318. taken and executed with others 323
               Empreſſe Marie comes to Lisbone 271
               Eſtates at Almerin 109. begon by the Biſhop of Leiria 110
               Eſtate of Fraunce and Flaunders 265
               Euora yeelded 175
            
            
               F
               FActions in Oliuenza 161
               Feare in the citie of Lisbone 207
               Flight of Teglio 167
               
                  Figueroa arriues at the Terceres, and returnes to Lisbone 263
               
                  Fonſequa his ſpeech for the creation of Anthonie 165
               Fortreſſe of Settuuall yeelded 184
               
                  Francis de Tauora ſlaine in the battaile pag. 48
               
                  Francis de Melo Earle of Tentuguell writes to king Sebaſtian 18
               
                  Francis Barretto ſent by the Portugals to the French king for ſuccors 139
               
                  Francis de Valois Duke of Alanſon enimy to king Philip▪
                   and why 266. ſworne Duke of Brabant 268. ſeeks to be maſter of Antwerpe, but in vaine 305
               
                  Francis de Villafagna, Auditor of the Councell of ſtate, ſent to Lisbone by king Philip 244
               French armie arriues at S. Michaels 280. their firſt encounter 282. they diſagree 288. they are beheaded and hanged 295. diſpleaſed with their ouerthrowe 299. they ſpoile the Ilands of Cape Vert 307. they compound with the Spaniards at the Terceres 320. ſent to the gallies 324
            
            
               G
               GAllies arriue at the Terceres in ſafetie 312
               Generals ſhip of the French taken by the Spaniards 291
               
                  George de Meneſes generall at ſea, impriſoned by Anthonies command pag. 186
               Gouernors of Portugal publiſhed 99. they prepare for defence 132. their inconſtancie 148. they neglect the defence of Lisbone 163. they flie from Settuuall 168. their decree 178
            
            
               H
               
                  HAmet proclaimed by the Moores 52. his couetouſnes 53
               
                  Henry Cardinall called to the crowne of Portugal 55. ſworne king 57. his

reſolution comming to the crowne 64. he fauors the Dutcheſſe of Bragance 76. he deſires to marrie 80. his ſentence againſt the Prior touching his legitimation 87. he changeth his minde in fauour of Philip, 97. he falleth ſicke and dies 116. his life 117
               
                  Henry Pereira hanged 198
               Hopes of the French armie at ſea with Strozzi 278
               Hope of the Spaniſh court touching their armie at ſea 279
            
            
               I
               
                  IEan de Betancour affected to Philip pag. 256
               
                  Ieron Mendoza treats with Anthonie 260
               Ieſuits called Apoſtles in Portugall, not able to redreſſe the corruptions of the Portugals 9. blamed as moters of Sebastians voiage into Africke II. walled vp at the Terceres 243
               
                  Iohn de Silua Ambaſſadour for Philip in Portugall, deliuered and returns out of Africke 74. he labours to be ſent backe into Portugall 82
               
                  Iohn d'Austria gouernoūr of Flaunders for king Philip 23
               
                  Iohn d'Azeuedo admirall of Portugall taken priſoner by the Caſtillians 176
               Iland of the Terceres deſcribed 313
               Iland of Saint Michael deſcribed 280
               Inhabitants of Fayall kill a trumpetter that was ſent vnto them 322. are taken 323
               Iriſhmen demaund ſuccours of the Pope againſt their Prince 27
            
            
               L
               LAwes made betweene Mahumet Cheriffe, and Hamet his brother touching the ſucceſſion of the realme 14
               Legate viſites the king 192
               
                  Leon Henriquez Confeſſor to Henrie ſuppoſed to haue drawne him to fauour Philips title 98
               Letters and a preſent from the Duke of Alua to king Sebaſtian 38
               
                  Lewes Dataide Cont of Toghia ſent Viceroie to the Indies by Sebastian 25. obeies king Philip 262
               Lisbone chiefe citie of Portugall 3 yeeldes to the Duke of Alua 217 ſweares obedience to Philip 221
               
                  Lucciali comes to Algier with ſeuenty gallies 265
            
            
               M
               MAgiſtrate of Lisbone perſwades Anthony to compound 208.
               
                  Mahamet ſonne to Abdala kils his vncle 14. is expelled by his vncle Moluc, and ſeekes for ſuccour of Philip and Sebaſtian 15. diſſwades Sebaſtian to go in perſon into Africk 26. deſpeares of the victory 36. diſſwades the battaile 41. is drowned in Mucazen 51. his skinne fleied off 53
               Manner of the enterpriſe of Portugal pag. 132
               Marques of Saint Cruz arriues at Settuuall with an armie by ſea 183. he imbarkes for the Terceres 277. he reſolues to fight with the French, and the order of his battaile 285. he defeats them and giueth ſentence againſt the priſoners 294▪he landeth ſome men at the Terceres 316 his skirmiſh with the French 317. taketh S. Sebastian 319. ſends to Faiall 320
               
                  Martin Gonſalues ſent to the deputies of the realme 118
               Meſſenger ſent to Cardinall Henrie from king Philip 55
               
                  
                  Meneſes blamed and his excuſes 195
               
                  Mulei Moluc prepares againſt the Portugals 31. his meanes to defeat them 34. his aduiſe to the king of Portugal 36. his ſpeech to his brother 38. his armie 39. the ordering thereof 42. his oration to his ſoldiers 43. his feare and death 47
               Mutinie at Coimbra 112
            
            
               N
               NAmes of the chiefe men ſlaine in the bataile of Africke 52
               Number of the Chriſtians & Moores ſlaine in the battaile ibid.
               Number ſlaine in the battaile at Alcantara 218
               Number ſlaine in the battaile at ſea pag. 293
            
            
               O
               OFfer made by Moluc to the kings of Spaine and Portugall 31
               Oliuenza yeelded to the Catholique king 158
               Opinions touching the paſſage of the riuer of Tagus 192
               Order of the Portugals and Moores armie 41, 42
               Originall of the hatred betwixt the Portugals and Caſtillians 5
            
            
               P
               PArleament at Tomar 248
               
                  Peiyoxto ſent to Saint Michaels fought with by French ſhips 276
               
                  Peter d'Alcaſoua ſent ambaſſadour to Philip 16 puniſhed by Henry and the cauſe 64
               
                  Peter de Medici generall of the Italians 134
               
                  Peter Dora Conſul of the French ſent into Fraunce for Anthonie 178▪he remaines there with the money he receiued 188
               
                  Peter de Toledo landes at Faiall and ſpoiles it 322
               
                  Philip king of Spaine meetes with Sebaſtian at Guadalupa 15▪perſwades him to accept of Molucs offer 20. labors to diuert Sebaſtian from Africke 24. accepts peace & Sebaſtians bodie 56. claimes the crowne of Portugal 61. writes to the city of Lisbone 72. ſendes a Iacobin into Portugall 80. erects a councell for the affaires of Portugal 81. his reaſōs againſt the other pretēdents 81 his reaſons for his pretētion 81. he giueth Henry notice of his right 91. he prepares to war againſt the Portugals 92. his care to aſſure his conſcience for the realme of Portugall 126. his anſwere to the Portugals 144. he takes poſſeſſion of the realme 152. his armie is waſted 153. his letters to the inhabitants of Eluas 156. his letters to Anthonie 159. proclaimed at Oliuenza 162. his anſwer to the Duke of Bragance 171. his pardon to the Portugals 201. he falleth ſick 221. he enters into Portugall by Eluas 238. he viſits the Dutcheſſe of Bragance 247. ſworne king at Toruas with the prince Diego 248. his entrie into Lisbone 253. his recompence to the Portugals 270. he prepares againſt the Terceres 273. he armes in all places, and the cauſe thereof 274. his order in preparing 275. he departs from Portugall 304. his armie departs from Lisbone 312. arriues at the Terceres and their proceeding▪ 314
               Plague in Portugall 108
               Places fortified by the Portugals 140
               Portugals conqueſts at the Indies 4. they prepare for the warre of

Africke 25. their armie landes in Africke and their proceedings 30. the qualitie of their armie 37. their conceite to fight 39. the order of their battaile 40. their aduantage of the Moores 41. their armie at ſea returnes to Lisbone 54. their ſorrow 56. their ceremonie in bewailing their king dead 58. they pretend election of their king 62. their demands 66. their reaſons for the election 84. they complaine of king Henrie 85. their diſcourſe vpon the eſtate of the realme 101. they anſwere the Caſtillians 106. they diſagree with them 229. they are diſcontented 252. they abandon the French 319. their ſhips are ſpoiled 320
               Pope pretends election 63
               Pope Gregorie the xiij. his offer to the Catholike king 98. he fauours Anthonie 190 his offer againſt England 243. ſeemes content with the ſucceſſe of Portugall 251
               Porto yeelded 236
               Preparations at the Terceres 264
               Preparations of the French for the Tercer
                     ••
                   269
               Prince of Orange wounded by a Biſcaine 269
               Pretendants to the crowne of Portugall and their deſcent 60. cited to declare their reaſons 80
               
                  Proſper Colonna, Colonell of the Italians 134. he paſſeth the bridge defended by the Portugals 215
            
            
               Q
               QVeene mother of France pretends to the crowne of Portugal 62. her reaſons for it 
                     ••
                   ſhee is diſcontented with Philip, and the cauſe 67
               Queſtion whether the Catholic king ſhould goe in perſon with his armie 152
               Queene Anne died 238
            
            
               R
               REaſon of the Portugals by way of diſcourſe touching their future King 66
               Reaſons and grounds of king Philip to the realme of Portugal 67. examined by diuines 126
               Regencie of the Gouernours 118
               Religious men diuided into factions 200. they holde militarie charges 180. and keepe the keies of Lisbon pag. 208
               Reſolution of Gonſalues charge 119
            
            
               S
               SAint Arem yeeldes obedience pag. 222
               
                  Sanches d' Auila Marſhall generall of the Spaniſh camp 134. he is ſent againſt Anthonie 227. he paſſeth the riuer of Doro at Auintes 232 his ſpeech to his ſoldiers, ibid. his ſtratageme to paſſe the riuer 234. hee dies 307
               
                  Sebaſtian king of Portugal his life 10. his firſt voyage into Africke 11. his enteruiew with Philip at Guadalupe 15. hee is perſwaded to make war in Africke by Mahamet ibid. lands his armie at Arzille 30. hee fights valiantly and is vanquiſhed 50. he is ſlaine by the Moores and carried to Molucs tent 51. his funerals at Madril 66. his obſequies with the Princes of Portugall 302
               Settuuall taken 182
               Summarie of an oration made at the aſſembly of Eſtates 77
               
                  Soſa Deputie of Lisbon his anſwere pag. 111
               
                  
Spaniards diſcourſe vpon the Cardinals legation 191
               Spaniſh ſouldiers diſcontented with the ſentence giuen againſt the French priſoners 295. they intreat for them ibid.
               Spaniards diſcourſe vpon the enterpriſe of the Terceres 309
               Stratagem with oxen diuiſed by a religious man 257
               Stremos taken 175
               Strozzi ſlaine 291
               Suburbes of Lisbon ſpoiled 217
            
            
               T
               TErceres 227. the deſcription thereof 239 the reſolution of the inhabitants 241. their confuſion 272
               Teſtament of King Henrie 123
               
                  Thomas Stukley an Engliſhman with 600. Italians ſerues King Sebaſtian pag. 27
               Tower of Belem yeelded 210
               Tower of Settuuall taken 184
               Treatie of accord betwixt King Philip and Anthonie by the meanes of Carcamo a Caſtillian 204
            
            
               V
               VAlour of the Italians and Spaniards 49
               Valour of King Sebaſtian 50
               Viana taken 237
               Villauiſoſa ſurpriſed 173
               Vniuerſitie of Coimbra 250
            
            
               W
               WOmen at Lisbon arme like ſouldiers 178
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   