
      
         
            
            
               
AN ADMONITION TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND: VVHEREIN ARE ANSVVERED, NOT ONELY THE ſlaunderous vntruethes, reprochfully vttered by Martin the Libeller, but alſo many other Crimes by ſome of his broode, obiected generally againſt all Biſhops, and the chiefe of the Cleargie, purpoſely to deface and diſcredite the preſent ſtate of the Church.
            
               Detractor & libens auditor, vterque
               Diabolum portat in lingua.
            
            Seene and allowed by authoritie.
            
               Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie. 1589.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               
                  I Am not ignoraunt (Gentle Reader) what daunger I drawe vpon my ſelfe, by this attempt to anſwere the quarrels and ſlaunders of late time publiſhed in certaine Libelles, againſt the Biſhops and other chiefe of the Clergy of the Church of England. We ſee the eagerneſſe & boldeneſſe of their ſpirit that bee the authors of them: we taſte alreadie the bitternes of their tongues and pennes. The raging furie of their reuenge vpon all which they miſlike, themſelues diſſemble not, but lay it downe in words of great threatnings. I muſt needs therfore looke for any hurt, that venemous, ſcoffing, and vnbridled tongues can worke toward me. And how ſhould I hope to eſcape that, when the Saints of God in Heauen doe feele it? In the courſe of their whole Libell, when they ſpeake of Peter, Paul, or the Bleſſed Virgin Marie, &c: whome other iuſtly call Saintes, their phraſe in deriſion is, Sir Peter, Sir Paule, Sir Marie. Surely it had becommed right well the ſame vnmodeſt Spirite, to haue ſaide alſo Sir Chriſt, and ſo throughly to haue bewrayed himſelf. Seeing they haue ſharpned their tongues and heartes againſt heauen, we poore creatures on earth muſt bee content in our weakneſſe to beare them. The dartes, I confeſſe, of deceitefull and ſlaunderous tongues, are verye

ſharpe, and the burning of the woundes made by them, will as hardly in the hearts of many bee quenched, as the coales of Iuniper. But I thanke God I feare them not, though they bring mee greater harme, eyther in credite, liuing or life, then I truſt that God that ſeeth, knoweth, and defendeth the trueth, will ſuffer them. Ambroſe beeing in caſe ſomewhat like, ſayeth thus, Non tanti eſt vnius vita, quanti eſt dignitas omnium Sacerdotum. If I therefore ſhoulde hazarde the one for the defence of the other: I trust the godlye woulde iudge that I did that duetie which I owe to the Church of God, and to my brethren of the ſame function and calling.
            What is the cauſe why wee bee with ſuch ſpight and malice diſcredited? Surely, becauſe as the duty of faythfull Subiectes dooth binde vs, liuing in the ſtate of a Church refourmed, we doo indeuour to preſerue thoſe Lawes, which her Maieſties authoritie and the whole ſtate of the Realme hath allowed and eſtabliſhed, and doe not admitte a newe platforme of gouernment, deuiſed, I knowe not by whome.
            The reaſons that mooue vs ſo to doe, are theſe two. First, wee ſee no proofe brought out of the word of God, that of neceſsitie ſuch forme of Gouernement ought to be: Secondly, that by the placing of the ſame, it woulde bring ſo many alterations and inconueniences, as in our opinion woulde bee dangerous to the Prince and to the Realme. Some of thoſe inconueniences I haue in this treatiſe laid downe, and leaue them to the conſideration of them, whom God hath ſet in place of gouernment.
            It may be ſome will iudge that I am wordly affected,

becauſe I ſhewe my ſelfe ſo much grieued with loſſe of our credite, and hinderance of good name among the people. In trueth, although a godly Miniſter ſhoulde haue no wordly thing ſo deere vnto him, as his credite: yet if the hurt went no further then to our ſelues, wee ſhould make leſſe account of it. But, ſeeing by our reproche and infamie, the doctrine which wee teache is greatly hindered, we ought by all lawfull meanes to defend it. Chriſt himſelfe, in this reſpect, anſwered ſuch reproches, as the enemies obiected againſt him. As, that hee vvas a friende vnto Publicanes and ſinners: 
               Matth. 9. 
               That hee vvrought his miracles by the 
               Matth. 12. Iohn 8. 
               power of Beelſebub: That hee broke the Sabbaoth day: That hee was a Samaritane: That hee had a deuill &c. Saint Paul alſo to the Corinthians againſt his Aduerſaries ſheweth, that hee was not a vaine Promiſer: That hee was not light and vnconſtant, and a wauering Teacher: That hee did not teache craftily, or corruptly diſpenſing the worde of God: That hee did not teach ambitiouſly, as ſeeking his owne glorie &c. The like did a nomber of learned Fathers of the Primitiue Tertul. Iuſtin. Melito. &c. Church, at large anſwering thoſe vile and reprochefull Slaunders rayſed againſt the Chriſtians in thoſe dayes. Auguſtine in a whole woorke anſwered Aſſertions falſly fathered vpon him: and ſo did many other. Wee ſeeke not therein our owne prayſe and commendation. If I doe inſert particular prayſes and commendations, I muſt ſay vnto the Libellers, as S. Paul ſayde to the Corinthians, Si inſipiens fui in laudando, vos me coegiſtis. If I haue bene fooliſh in ouermuch praiſing, your immodeſt reproches, vntrueths, and ſlaunders

do driue me to it. In this mine anſwere, I ſeeke not to fatiſfie all kinde of men, but onely the moderate and godly. For the malicious Back-biter & Rayler will neuer be ſatisfied: but the more he is anſwered, the worſe he will be. If my defence may take moderate place with the better ſort, I ſhall be glad: if not, I may not be exceſsiuely grieued with ſorowe, but I muſt ſay with Paul, Gloria noſtra haec eſt, teſtimonium conſcientiae noſtrae. And with Iob, Ecce in caelis teſtis meus. This witneſſe in heauen, and the witneſſe of our owne heart and conſcience, is ſufficient to comfort vs. And for our further helpe, we muſt pray with Dauid, who was lamentably beaten and bitten with viperous tongues, Leade vs, O Lorde, in thy righteouſneſſe, becauſe of our enemies: make thy way plaine before vs. This God I truſt, will deliuer vs from the daunger of euill tongues, and open their eyes and hearts, that they may ſee and vnderſtande what hinderance they bring to the Goſpel of Chriſt, which they will ſeeme to profeſſe ſo earneſtly.
            Amen.
            
               T. C.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents of this Treatiſe.
            
               
                  AN Admonition to beware of the contempt of the Biſhops and other Preachers. Page 1.
               The ende which the enemy of the Church of God reſpecteth in woorking their diſcredite. pag. 23.
               Anſweres to the vntrucths and ſlaunders vttered in Martins late Libell. pag. 33.
               Againſt my Lord of Canterburie. pag. 37.
               Againſt my Lord of London. pag. 51.
               Againſt the Biſhop of Rocheſter, Lincolne, and Wincheſter. pag. 62. 63. &c.
               The cauſes why the Biſhops deſire to maintaine the preſent ſtate of the gouernment of the Church, and what inconucniences they feare vpon the alteration thereof will come to the ſtate of the Realme. pag. 79. &c.
               Anſweres to certaine generall Crimes obiected to all the Biſhops without exception: as firſt, The Crime of Simonie and Couetouſneſſe. pag. 66.
               The diſpenſing with Banes for money. pag. 100.
               The Sale of Chriſtian libertie in Marriages. pag. 103.
               That they make lewde and vnlearned Miniſters for money. pag. 108.
               That they maintaine an vnlearned Miniſtery, & therby be occaſion of Reuoltings, & many other miſchiefs to the Prince and the Common weale: But it is declared that there is no ſuch vnlearned Miniſtery as they pretend, and therefore can not bee an occaſion of Reuolting, or any other like miſchiefes, but that there bee other true and right cauſes to redreſſe, of which it behoueth them that God hath ſet in place, in time to haue ſpeciall regarde, for feare leſt thoſe miſchiefes that be pretended, doe increaſe. pag. 109. &c.
               The Crime of mainteyning Pilling and powling Courts. pag. 135.
               The Crime of abuſing Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline. pag. 141.
               
                  
The Crime of ambition and griedie ſeeking after Liuings and promotion. pag. 144.
               That Biſhops are carnally diſpoſed: which they ſhewe by hoarding vp great ſummes of money, by purchaſing Landes for their wiues and children, by furniſhing their tables with plate and guilded Cups, by filling their purſes with vnreaſonable Fines and Incomes. pag. 148.
               That the Prince ought to take away their great Lands and Liuings, and ſet them to meane Penſions, that in pouertie they may be anſwerable to the Apoſtles. pag. 157. which they take vpon them to prooue by the whole courſe of the Scriptures. pag. 162. The Lawe. pag. 166. The Prophets. pag. 177. The example of Chriſt. pag. 190. and the doctrine of his Apoſtles. pag. 221.
               Anſwere to the preſcription of the old Lawe, vvith the true meaning thereof. pag. 166.
               Anſvvere to the Allegations out of the Prophets, noting hovve abſurdly and affectionately they be abuſed. pag. 177. &c.
               Anſwere to the example of Chriſt, and the true doctrine that is to be taken of the ſame. pag. 191. &c.
               Anſwere to the doctrine of the Apoſtles, declating hovv the ſame is rightly to be vnderſtanded. pag. 221.
               A Declaration, how Miniſters haue bene maintained from the beginning: wherein is ſhevved, that they haue had both Lands, Houſes, Rents, and Reuenues. pag. 231. &c.
               A Declaration, that the wealthie ſtate of the Church vvas not ye chiefe cauſe of ſetting vp Antichriſt in his Throne, as it is pretended: but that the Hiſtories of that time do declare other cauſes of more importance, which alſo beginne to growe among vs, and therefore good heede to be taken in time. pag. 238. &c.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ AN ADMONITION to the Church and people of England, to take heede of the contempt of thoſe Biſhops and Preachers, which God hath ſent to them as meſſengers to bring vnto them the doctrine of their ſaluation.
            
               WHen I call to my remembrance, the loathſome contempt, hatred, and diſdaine, that the moſt part of men in theſe dayes beare, and in the face of the vvorld declare tovvarde the Miniſters of the Church of God, aſvvel Biſhops as other among vs here in Englande: my heart can not but greatly feare & tremble at the conſideration thereof. It hath pleaſed God novv a long time moſt plentifully to povvre dovvne vpon vs his manifold & great benefits of vvealth, riches, peace and quietneſſe, euen in the middeſt of the flames of diſcord, diſſention and miſerie round about vs, yea, and that more is, by the ſpace of theſe thirtie yeeres, by the continual preaching of the Goſpel hath called vs vnto him (as before time he called his choſē people of the Ievves by his Prophets) and yet do vve not only not ſhevv any ſound token, either of our returning to him

that called vs, or of our thankefull receiuing his worde which he hath ſent vs, or of conforming our liues thereunto, as hee willeth vs: but alſo euidently to the eyes and eares of all men, ſhew our hatred and miſliking of thoſe reuerend perſons, whome it hath pleaſed God to vſe as his meſſengers to call vs vnto him, and as his inſtruments to bring vnto vs the glad tidings of the Goſpel, which before with ſworde and fire was taken from vs. For who ſeeth not in theſe dayes, that hee who can moſt bitterly inueigh againſt Biſhops and Preachers, that can moſt boldely blaze their diſcredites, that can moſt vncharitably ſlaunder their liues and doings, thinketh of himſelfe, and is eſteemed of other, as the moſt zealous & earneſt furtherer of the Goſpel? Yea, they thinke it almoſt the beſt way, & moſt ready, to bring themſelues in credite and eſtimation with many. A lamentable ſtate of time it is, wherein ſuch vntemperate boldneſſe is permitted without any bridle at all. What man therefore that feareth God, that loueth his Church, that hath care of his Prince and countrey, can remember this thing, and not dread in his heart the ſequele thereof? When the Iſraelites derided and contemned the Prophets which God 4. Reg. 17. & 18. had ſent among them, his wrath was ſo kindled, that hee brought the Aſſyrians vpon them to their confuſion. When the tribe of Iuda did the like to Ieremie and other meſſengers of God, 4. Reg. 24.
               
they were caſt into the captiuitie of Babylon. When the Iewes reprochefully vſed Chriſt, Matth. 23. Luke 13. and with vvicked ſlaunder perſecuted his Apoſtles that brought to them the light of ſaluation, their Citie and Temple vvas burned, their people ſlaine, and (as Chriſt threatned) their countrey made deſolate, and giuen ouer to the ſpoyle. And ſhall wee thinke that God vvill not remaine the ſame God tovvard vs? Is his minde changed? is his iuſtice ſlaked? is his hand ſhortned, that either he wil not, or cannot reuenge, as he hath bin wont to doe? No (good Chriſtians) let vs neuer deceiue our ſelues with ſuch vaine and godleſſe cogitations. God remaineth alwayes one, and is not mutable. His benefits to the Iſraelites and Iewes were neuer greater, then they novv theſe many yeeres haue bene toward vs: they were neuer more earneſtly, eyther by Gods bleſſings allured, or by preaching called to repentance then vve haue bene. And yet our vnthankefulneſſe, in ſome reſpectes is greater then theirs, and our vncourteous vſing of his meſſengers not much inferiour: yea, if the willes of many were not brideled by Gods ſingular grace, in our Prince and gouernours, it is to bee feared, it woulde ſhewe it ſelfe as outragious as theirs did. We haue iuſt cauſe therefore to feare the like plague, which they in like caſe ſuſtained: And ſurely, it cannot bee, but that it haſteneth faſt vpon vs.
            
               
               Obiection.
But ſome will ſay (I knowe) That I doe great iniury to the Prophets, the Apoſtles, and other meſſengers of God, to compare them with ſuch wicked men, ſuch blinde guides, ſuch couetous hypocrites, ſuch antichriſtian Prelates, ſuch ſymonicall Preachers, as our Cleargie men now are.
            
               Anſwere.
I doe not compare them (good Reader) in worthines of grace and vertue, but in likeneſſe of office and miniſterie. Theſe haue brought vnto this realme, the ſame light of the Goſpell, the ſame trueth of doctrine, the ſame way of ſaluation, that the Apoſtles brought to the people of God in their time. They are the mouth of God whereby hee ſpeaketh to vs and calleth vs to his knowledge, as hee did his choſen by other in the Primitiue Church. And howſoeuer by the libertie of this time, it pleaſeth men in the heate of their ſpirite to boyle out with reprochfull choler againſt them: yet I am ſure, they are not able to vſe more bitter and vncourteous ſpeech, then the like affection vttered againſt the Prophets, againſt Chriſt himſelf, and his Apoſtles, as after more euidently ſhall appeare. I knowe, they being but fraile and ſinfull men in compariſon of thoſe bleſſed Saintes of God beforetime, may giue more iuſt cauſe of reproche, and miniſter more matter to euill tongues, then they did: And yet I doubt not but the tenth part of that euil that vnthankefull

mindes vtter againſt them, ſhall neuer be found to be true. They that haue the feare of God, will not raſhly iudge of other, and chriſtian charitie will hide the blemiſhes and faultes of their brethren, and ſpecially of the preachers of the goſpell ſincerely teaching Gods trueth. Charitie woulde conſider, that the times are dangerous, and that wee are lighted into theſe corrupt and perillous laſt daies, whereof Chriſt prophecied in the Euangeliſts, and therfore may thinke our ſelues thriſe happy, if wee haue tollerable Miniſters, though they bee farre from that rule that Chriſtian perfection requireth.
            Theſe dayes bee like the times Nazianzen 
               Apolog. writeth of. When they heare any thing ſpoken of a Miniſter or Prieſt, they by and by conceiue that of all, which is reported of one. And wee are become a Theater, not to Angels and men, (as that Champion Saint Paul ſaith,) But wee are become a Stage to the most vile and abiect men at all times, and in all places, in the Streetes, in Shoppes, at Tables, at feaſts, at Councels, euen to the very playing ſcaffoldes, which I ſpeake with teares, and are ſcoffed at, euen of the vile and contemptible players, &c.
            
            
               The time was (ſaith Caluine) when no man durst open his mouth againſt the Miniſters or Preachers of the worde: But nowe there is no ſpeech more plauſible. None of theſe baſe perſons would ſpeake a word, if they did not ſee themſelues backed by men of great authoritie, and receiue reward for ſo dealing. Such vntrueths

woulde ſoone vaniſh and bee forgotten, vnleſſe they were nouriſhed by them for whoſe pleaſure they were deuiſed. It may be hardly thought, that the true zeale of God, and loue of his Goſpell is in that heart, that can eaſily breake out to the diſcrediting of the miniſters and teachers therof. They woulde rather ſigh in their hearts and groane in their conſciences, and pray vnto God in the ſpirit of mildenes, to take away ſuch blemiſhes from the face of his Church, and to amende the faults thereof, if not all at once; yet by little and little, as to his gratious prouidence might ſeem beſt. For ſurely where hatred and contempt of the miniſters is, there all goodnes muſt needes growe to confuſion. And that maketh mee to feare, that to our great euil, the ruine of the goſpell is at hand among vs. For where God is loued and feared, there his word is imbraced, and his miniſters reuerenced.
            
               This is the cauſe of all euil (ſayth Chryſoſtome) that the authoritie of ſpirituall gouernours is decayed, no 
               In 2. epiſt. ad Tim. 2. 1. 
               reuerēce, no honor, no feare is vſed toward them. Obey your gouernours (ſaith Paul) and be ſubiect to them. But now al things are ouerthrowen & cleane confounded: Neither ſpeake I this for the gouernours ſake, but for your owne. And a little after, He that honoureth the Priest honoureth God, and hee that deſpiſeth the Prieſt, by little and little falleth to this alſo, that he will vſe reproch againſt God himſelf. He that receiueth you (ſayth Chriſt) receiueth me. And in another place, Matt. 10.
               
ſayth the Scripture, Haue his Prieſtes in honour. Hence commeth it (ſayth Cyprian) that the bonde of the Lordes peace is broken: Hence is it that brotherly 
               De zelo & liuore. 
               loue is violated: Of this cauſe is it, that trueth is corrupted, vnitie is broken, that men leane to Schiſmes: becauſe Prieſtes are ſlaundered, Biſhops are enuied, and euery man, either complaineth that hee is not ordeined rather then another, or elſe diſdaineth to haue another aboue him. &c.
            
            The Iewes were eſteemed to deſpiſe God, becauſe Nom. 16. they made ſo ſmall account of his ſeruant Moſes. And to Samuel (ſaith the Lord) They haue not deſpiſed thee, but me. Yea, if it be an euill Miniſter, (ſayth Chryſoſtome) yet God marketh, that for his ſake thou doeſt reuerence and obey him, that is not worthie honour of himſelfe, and therefore will he pay thee thy rewarde. If he that receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, receiue the rewarde of a Prophet, it cannot be that he that reuerenceth and obeyeth his ordinarie Miniſter, ſhall want his reward. Chriſtians ſhould remember that Biſhops and Preachers are the Angels of God, the Ambaſſadours of Chriſt, the Miniſters 
               Mal. 2. 2. Cor. 5. Epheſ. 2. 
               of our ſaluation, and therefore that they can not be ſlaundered or abuſed, but the reproche muſt touch God himſelfe. Eſay ſheweth, when Eſay. 57. the vnthankeful & diſobedient Iewes did mocke the Prophets, did put out their lips, and lell out their tongues in diſdaine of them, that God was diſhonoured with the reproch there of. Happily it will be doubted, whether our Biſhops & Preachers

bee the miniſters and meſſengers of God, or no. Yea, ſome dare affirme boldly, that indeede they be not. But (good Chriſtians) beware of ſuch cogitations, as diſpleaſant and miſliking affections may raiſe in you. If they be not the miniſters and meſſengers of God, if they bee not ſent of him, then it is not the meſſage of God that they haue brought vs: it is not his worde that they haue taught vs: they be not Gods Sacramentes that they deliuered vnto vs, and ſo doe a great nomber of vs remaine as no Chriſtians. Though they were ſuch vnworthy perſons, as the vnthankfull mindes of many doe imagine them, or as the vncharitable tongues and pennes of ſome of late time haue blazed them: yet bringing nothing vnto you, but Gods will out of his holy Scriptures, (for in deede they haue not done otherwiſe, howſoeuer their doctrine be defaced) you ſhoulde aſſuredly bee perſwaded, that they are the inſtruments of Gods bleſſing vnto you.
            
               Although they that be ſuperiours, ſaieth Chryſoſtome, and Gouernours, were euill, and ſpotted with 
               Chryſoſt. in 2. ad Cor. 
               manye faultes: yet ſhoulde not the Diſciples withdrawe them from their inſtruction. For if Chriſt ſpeaking of the Doctours of the Iewes, that becauſe they ſate in Moyſes Chaire, they were worthie to bee hearde of their Diſciples; although their woorkes were not commendable: what fauour are they woorthie of, which contemne and trample vnder foote (as it were) the Prelates of the Churche,

which by Gods goodneſſe liue moderately? If it bee a foule matter for one to iudge an other, howe much more is it vnlawful to iudge their Maiſters and inſtructers? Baalam was a couetous prophet, and yet by him GOD bleſſed his people. Nowe ſurely, if you haue receiued at their handes the bleſſing of Gods trueth, and the light of his holie worde, as in deede you haue: the cogitation of this benefite ſhoulde moue your mindes more fauourably to thinke of them, and more charitably to iudge of their doinges. Or if you doe not, looke that you leaue not great occaſion to men to thinke of you, that you make light accompt of that doctrine of the Goſpell, which aſwell their predeceſſours as they, haue, and doe daily preach vnto you: and ſo that you bee not thoſe men that you would pretende to bee. For men will thinke this: If theſe perſons did fauour the Goſpell, they woulde rather ſeeke meanes to hide the blemiſhes and imperfections of their Prelates and Preachers, then thus odiouſly to amplifie and paint foorth their diſcredite to their vtter ſhame and reproche in the worlde. For, as much as in them lyeth, through their ſides (in the hearts and mindes of manie) they giue a mortall wound to the doctrine, which by them hath now theſe manie yeeres beene taught in this Realme. For will men iudge (trowe you) that after ſo great darkeneſſe and ignoraunce of Gods woorde, as the Churche of Chriſt is reported by vs to haue

beene wrapped in, that God woulde reſtore and ſende vnto the ſame the light of his trueth, by ſo wicked and naughtie inſtruments, as theſe men be imagined to be? (For they condemne not onelie thoſe Biſhops and miniſters that be now in place, but their predeceſſors alſo, whoſe place theſe men occupie, and whoſe doctrine they confirme.) Men will thinke ſurely, either that that doctrine which we call darkneſſe and errour, was the true light, or that theſe Preachers can not be ſo euill perſons, as malice doth make them. Chriſt would not ſuffer that the deuill ſhoulde vtter any thing to the glorie of God, and will he ſuffer deuilliſh and Antichriſtian perſons to bee the chiefe Preachers and reſtorers of his Goſpell? GOD alwaies hath appointed godlie men to be the teachers and reuiuers of his trueth, as Abraham with the other Patriarches, Moſes, Aaron, Dauid, the Prophets, the Apoſtles. And in our dayes Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Cranmer, Ridley, Iewell, &c. For God is neuer deſtitute of his godly captaines to gouerne his Church, and to ſet foorth his word.
            
               Obiection.
Oh, but our Biſhops and preachers bee couetous: they giue not to the poore: they imbeſill the goodes of the Church: they bee woorkers and clokers of Simonie: they hinder reformation of the Church, &c.
            
               Anſwere.
But how know you that? It were ſafe for your

conſciences firſt to trie and knowe the trueth, before you raſhly, to condemnation, iudge your brother. Common ſpeeches, and coniecturall Chryſ in 2. ad Timoth. collections doe oftentimes prooue falſe. Doe you think that al is true which is ſpoken of your ſelues? I appeale to your owne conſciences. Surely hee muſt bee a very happie man in theſe dayes, of whome ſome euill is not ſpoken, which, in his owne conſcience, hee knoweth not to bee true. Nowe if this may, and doeth happen to moſt priuate perſons, howe is it not likely that it happeneth alſo to Biſhops and eccleſiaſticall Miniſters? Yea, of all other it is moſt like, that they ſhoulde feelethe bitterneſſe of falſe and backbiting ſpeeches: The Miniſters of God haue beene alwayes ſubiect to that croſſe. And in theſe dayes, they haue to doe with ſo manie and diuers kindes of enemies, as it is not poſſible for them to eſcape the daunger thereof. On the one ſide is the Papiſt, whoſe errours they confute, whoſe obſtinacie they puniſh: On the other ſide are the phantaſticall ſpirites of Anabaptiſts, Of the families of the loue, and ſundry others of the like ſort, whoſe wickedneſſe and corrupting of the church, is by our eccleſiaſtical gouernors drawen into the light, reproued, & repreſſed. Yea, & beſide theſe, there are an infinit number of Epicures, and Atheistes, which hate the Biſhops and ſpeake euil of them, and wiſh them to be taken away: partly becauſe they are as bridles to their looſe and wicked life: partlie becauſe

they ſtaye from them, that ſpoyle and praye, which nowe for a fewe yeeres with great hope they haue gaped after, and with much adoe is holden out of their iawes. Moreouer, who knoweth not that they which haue the office of iudging, correcting, and reproouing other, bee their doinges neuer ſo ſincere, ſhall often light into the diſpleaſure and miſliking of manie, and thereby gette miſreport? Therefore ſeeing Biſhoppes, and other chiefe of the Clergie, are beſette with ſo manie difficulties, and lie in daunger ofſo manie aduerſaries: no maruaile though their blemiſhes bee amplified, and (as the prouerbe is) of euery moul-hill made a great mountaine. Yea, no maruaile, though their beſt doinges and ſincereſt meaninges, by miſlikers are depraued, and with hard and vncharitable interpretations wreſted to their reproofe. Wherfore al Chriſtians that haue the feare of God, & loue his trueth, but principally the chief gouernours, that haue authoritie to deale with the Clergie, ought to take great heed, that by ſuch deprauing reports they bee not carried to miſlike or diſcredite them, which neuer iuſtly deſerued ſo great reproofe. Let them diligently conſider what may fall vnto themſelues alſo, beeyng in place ſubiect to like obloquie. What meant Saint Paul, when he ſaide, Againſt an elder, receiue no accuſation vnder two or 
               1. Tim. 5. 
               three witneſſes? Surely he did ſee that the office of teachers and reproouers, iudges and gouernors,

lieth in great daunger of euill ſpeech and falſe accuſations, and therefore would not haue them raſhly condemned, either in priuate or publike iudgement, much leſſe to bee defaced and contemned, to be diſobeyed and reſiſted, yea, though they were more grieuous offenders, then ſtandeth with the worthineſſe of their offices. Aaron had grieuouſly offended, and greatly diſtayned Nom. 16. his calling, when hee was the Miniſter to make the golden Calfe, and to further the peoples horrible and ſhamefull idolatrie. I truſt all the enemies that the Biſhops and Cleargie men of England haue; ſhall neuer bee able to prooue, that in this time of the Goſpell, anie one of them did euer commit an offence either ſo horrible, and diſpleaſant in the ſight of God, or ſo hurtfull and offenſiue to the Church. And yet after that, when Corah, Dathan and other did call him proude Prelate, and ſaide that hee, and his brother vſed tyrannie ouer the people of God, howe grieuouſly God did take it, and howe dreadfull puniſhment came vpon them for miſuſing the Miniſters of GOD, the historie doeth ſufficiently declare: yea, though many of the offenders were of the higheſt ſtate, birth and linage, among the people.
            
               Obiection.
But it is a common Obiection, & many thinke they ſufficiently excuſe their contempt, when they ſay, That our Biſhops & Preachers ſpeake well, and

teach other to doe well, but they followe not the ſame themſelues, and therefore men doe not beleeue them, nor be any thing mooued with their preaching.
            
               Anſwere.
But I ſay vnto you, if you followe any doctrine in reſpect of the perſon that ſpeaketh it, you doe not like good Chriſtians: yea, if Paul ſpeake any thing of himſelfe, you doe not well, if in that reſpect you beleeue him: but you ſhoulde embrace 1. Theſ. 1. his doctrine and followe his teaching, becauſe he is the Apoſtle and meſſenger of God ſent to deliuer his holy will out of the ſcriptures, and as it were from the mouth of God himſelfe.
            
               Obiection.
It will be ſayd that Biſhops ſhould be The light of the world, the ſalt of the earth, patternes and examples Matth. 5. 1. Pet. 2. to the flocke of Chriſt.
            
               Anſwere.
I graunt they ſhould be ſo, and if they be not, the daunger is theirs: but Chriſt is the iudge, whoſe office thou mayeſt not preſume without danger, to take vpon thee, in iudging his Miniſter. If they be not ſuch as they ſhoulde be, wilt Rom. 14. thou headlong therefore runne to thine owne perdition, and caſt thy ſelfe into the danger of Gods wrath and diſpleaſure, aſwell by reiecting the trueth of his doctrine, as alſo by raſhly iudging and condemning his Miniſter? Doeſt thou not remember that Chriſt ſayeth, That men ſhall make an accompt of euery idle worde that they ſpeake? 
               Matth. 12.
               
And ſhall they not make a ſtreight account, thinke you, for their vncurteous and vnſauorie ſpeeches, for their vncharitable and bitter raylings againſt them, by whoſe meanes they haue receiued the doctrine of ſaluation? Who can bee worſe then a Publicane? And yet the Phariſey is greatly reproued, for that he ſpake ſo contemptuouſly of the Publicane, and ſo arrogantly preferred himſelfe before him. The Phariſey 
               Chryſ. in epiſt ad Rom. (ſayth Chriſoſtome) by his euill ſpeech did hurt the Publican nothing, but rather did him good, yea, though the thinges were true that hee ſpake of him. Wee alſo drawe vnto our ſelues extreame euill, by our euill ſpeeches, euen as the Phariſey (as it were) did thrust a ſworde into himſelfe, and receiuing a ſore wounde, departed. Let vs therefore rule our vntamed tongues, leaſt wee alſo haue a like rewarde: for if hee that ſpake euill of a Publican, eſcaped not puniſhment, what defence ſhall we haue, that are wont to raile againſt our fathers? If Marie which once blaſphemed her brother, was ſo ſore puniſhed, what hope of health ſhall we haue, which dayly ouerwhelme our ſuperiors with railing ſpeeches and taunts?
            
            They that haue the right feare of God, looke firſt into their owne boſomes: they bee inquiſitiue of their owne liues: they ſitte as iudges and examiners of their owne conſciences: but nowe a dayes (the more it is to bee lamented) men forget them-ſelues: they looke not into their owne doings: they caſt that end of the wallet behinde

them, wherein their owne faultes are wrapped and be alwayes curiouſly prying into the liues and doinges of other, and ſpecially of Gouernours, Biſhops, and Eccleſiaſticall Miniſters. In them, if they ſee neuer ſo light a blemiſh, if in their face they can finde neuer ſo ſmall a warte, or eſpie in their eye neuer ſo little a moate, they are eſteemed by and by miſſhapen Biſhoppes, blinde guides, Monſters of Antichriſt, not meete for any roome in Chriſtes churche, not to bee ſuffered in any chriſtian common weale. Yea, they loath their doctrine, Counſell and inſtruction, be it neuer ſo true and good: they wil not take anie aduiſe at their hands: yea, they ſaye their teaching can doe no man good. Thus doe they make thoſe men ſtumbling ſtockes for themſelues to perdition, whome God of his ſingular grace and prouidence hath ſent with his worde among them, as Miniſters of their ſaluation.
            Thinke of Biſhops & Preachers, how baſely & vncharitably ſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe you, they are not onely the Surgeons of your ſoules, but your ſpirituall fathers alſo. A naturall childe, though he ſuffer griefe and iniuries at his fathers hande, will not be in a rage againſt him, but will take the hurts patiently and mildely, ſo long as any way they may be borne. Although hee ſee faultes in his father, (as that hee is euill of ſight, or doateth for age, or that he bee weake and ſtaggereth as he goeth, yea, and ſometime falleth to the grounde)

he wil not therefore vndutifully chide his father, but by ſuch meanes as he can will helpe, and with his beſt indeuour, wipe away the filth, that he gathereth by his oft falling: hee will bee mindfull of that good leſſon, Noli gloriari in ignominia Patris 
               Eccle. 3. 
               tui, neque enim tibi tam gloria quàm probrum eſt. So ſurely, thoſe good and kindly children that loue God their great father, wil vſe themſelues toward their ſpiritual fathers in his Church. If Noah happen in his ſleepe to lye ſomewhat vncomely, and leaue open his nakedneſſe, they vvill not follovv the example of curſed Cham, and with deriſion fetch not their brethren only, but their fathers enemies alſo to beholde it, that hee may bee for euer ſhamed, and the aduerſaries mouthes opened againſt him: They will rather with bleſſed and obedient Sem and Iaphet, take the garment of chriſtian charity, and going backvvarde hide their fathers nakedneſſe, yea, and happily with the ruſling of their feet, or by caſting on of the garment, purpoſely wake him out of his ſleepe, that he may vnderſtand hovve vncomely he doeth lie, in the deriſion, not onely of their vnkind brother, but of other alſo that ſeeke his reproche, and by that meanes be taught to take heed that he doe not fal on ſleepe againe in ſuch vncomely maner.
            
               Chryſoſtome complaineth at this vnkindneſſe: Chryſ. in Epiſt. ad Rom. 
               What coulde be more happy then they? What more miſerable then wee? for they gaue their blood, and their life for their Maiſters, but wee will not vouchſafe to vtter ſo much as a few wordes for our common fathers, when 
                     〈…〉
                   them reproched, backebited, ſlaundered,

both of their owne and of others: for wee neither reproue or repreſſe ſuch curſed ſpeakers: yea, I woulde to God we our ſelues were not the firſt accuſers. Surely wee heare not ſuch opprobrious rebukes at the mouthes of Infidels, as wee ſee powred out against our ſuperiours, by them that are of the ſame religion. Thus much haue I ſpoken, and the longer ſtoode vppon this matter (the Lord knoweth) not ſo much to helpe the credite of them that bee blamed, as, if it may be poſſible, to turne away from vs Engliſhmen the great daunger of our vnkindeneſſe in abuſing them, by whome God hath deliuered vnto vs ſo great and ineſtimable benefites.
            
               Obiection.
Some perchance will aske me, whether I entend by this meanes to cloake and hide the corrupt and naughtie life of the chiefe miniſters of the Church, whereby they ſlaunder the Goſpel, deface their calling, and be an open offence to a great number of godly.
            
               Anſwere.
I anſwere, God forbid I ſhould haue any ſuch meaning. Their great offences I greatly reproue, and thinke them woorthy, vpon triall of trueth, not only of blame, but alſo of more ſharpe puniſhment, then any other, for that the offence giuen by them is greater. And we haue a Prince and Magiſtrate, who by Gods lawe, if there be ſo iuſt cauſe, both may, and ought to deale with them, neither can their authoritie bee refuſed, they claime not exemption.
            But as for their ſmaller faultes, Chriſtian charitie forceth me to winke at them, becauſe I know

greater matter in my ſelfe. And I ſee they are men, and no Angels, and they liue in a perillous time, and haue many occaſions to offend, ſo that it is harder for them to ſtande vpright, then for ſome other that are in priuate ſtate. Hee is an Angell that neuer falleth, hee is no man. Men are fraile, and in daunger to ſinne, though they haue otherwiſe great graces. If any of them haue fallen with Aaron, to anie great and horrible offence, I truſt they are with him alſo riſen by repentaunce, and with teares, in the mercie of God, waſhed away their wickedneſſe: Or, if they haue not, I muſt needes ſay with Chriſt, Better it were that a Milſtone were hanged about their neckes, and they caſt into the ſea, then that by their continuance in euil, they ſhoulde bee occaſion that anie ſhoulde fall from God, or reiect his Goſpell. As their vertues are more profitable and beneficial to the Church of God, then the vertues of other priuate perſons: ſo are their vices and faults more hurtfull & daungerous. They ſtande on an high place where all mens eyes are faſtened vppon them: their leaſt faultes cannot be hidde, and the greateſt are of all men abhorred. A wart in the face, and a blemiſh in a Biſhoppe, is no ſmall diſfiguring of either of them. If other mens faults be ſeene, the offence is not accounted great: but if a biſhops be eſpied, it is eſteemed, not according to the greatnes of the thing, but according to the dignitie of the perſon. Hee that knoweth the will of his Maſter and doth it not, ſhalbe beaten with many ſtripes.
            
            
               Sacerdos (ſaith Chryſoſtome) ſipariter cum Subditis 
               In Matt. 8. homil. 27.
               
               peccat, non eadem ſed acerbiora patietur. If a Prieſt ſhall offend as the inferiour doeth, hee ſhal ſuffer not the ſame puniſhment, but farre greater.
            It behooueth them therefore in the feare of God, to looke more diligently about them then any other, and ſpecially in theſe miſerable dayes, vvherein all mens eyes are ſo curiouſly ſet vpon them, that they almoſt cleane forget to looke any thing vpon themſelues, or to finde fault vvith any other, then vvith Eccleſiaſticall perſons and officers.
            
               Obiection.
Heere ſome perchaunce vvill take me in mine ovvne turne, and conclude againſt al that hitherto I haue ſpoken, yea and againſt the vvhole purpoſe of my vvriting: That if Biſhoppes offences be ſo grieuous and hurtfull, more then other mens are, and that our Biſhops and Eccleſiaſticall Miniſters, are ſeene to commit ſo ſoule and heynous faultes: that they are worthie of all that euill that is ſpoken againſt them, and that I cannot iuſtly blame theſe perſons, that with great zeale doe reproue theſe their doings, ſo hurtful to the Church of Chriſt, and ſo dangerous to the people of God.
            
               Anſwere.
Surely, if all bee true that is vvritten and ſpoken againſt them, (as I truſt, and in part I knovve, it is not) I muſt needs confeſſe, and vvere vvicked if I vvoulde denie, that they had iuſtly deſerued vvhatſoeuer euill coulde be vttered of them. For ſure I am, if, as I ſay, all vvere true that is ſpoken, that they ſhould be as deteſtable as any heretikes that euer vvere in the Church, yea, as the Pope and Antichriſt himſelfe, vvhoſe pillars and vpholders,

they are called and accounted vvith many. And yet can I not excuſe them, vvhich in ſuch manner doe perſecute them vvith the bitterneſſe of their tongue and penne, no more then I can excuſe Nabuchodonoſor, or any other tyrant that plagued the people of God, offending againſt his lavve. For vvhatſoeuer God in his prouidence reſpected, they looked onely to the ſatisfying of their couetous, ambitious, cruell and bloody affection: And ſo, vvhatſoeuer God regardeth in chaſtening his negligent Miniſters, or in vvaking them out of ſleepe vvith the ſourre of infamy and reproch: yet by their virulent and vnſeaſoned ſpeeches that are vſed, by the ſcornefull and diſdainefull reproches, by the raſh and vncharitable vntruethes, I feare it may bee too truely gathered, that they vvhich bee the inſtruments thereof, ſeeke to fulfill their enuious, proude and diſdainefull appetites, or the working of ſome other purpoſe, which they looke to bring to paſſe, by the diſcrediting of the Biſhops, and other chiefe of the Clergie, which be as great blockes and ſtops in their way. Qui habet aures ad audiendum, audiat. But let ſuch perſons in time take heede, vvhen God as a mercifull father, hath chaſtiſed his children ſufficiently, and ſtirred them to remember their dueties, that he caſt not the rod into the fire, as before time he hath vſed to doe, and bring the rewarde of their vnchriſtian dealing vpon their ovvne heades. If right zeale, vvith conſcience and deteſtation of euil, vvere the roote of theſe inuectiues, which ſo boyle in loath ſome choller & bitter

gall againſt the Biſhops & other of the Clergie: ſurely, the ſame ſpirit would mooue them to breake out into like vehement lamentations againſt the euils and vices, which ſhew themſelues in a great nomber of this Realme: I meane, the deepe ignorance and contempt of God in the midſt of the light of the Goſpell, the heatheniſh ſecuritie in ſinne and wickedneſſe, the monſtrous pride in apparell, the voluptuous riot and ſenſualitie, the exceſſiue buildings and needeleſſe neſtes of mens treaſures, which bee as cankers conſuming the riches of this Realme.
            What ſhall I ſay of the looſeneſſe of whoredome and adulterie? the wrongfull wreſting by extortion, bribery, and vſury? the crafty coſening for priuate commoditie? the libertie in falſe ſwearing and periurie? with the heape almoſt of all other vices where with mans life may be diſtained? ſo that if ſome ſtay were not by moderat gouernment, and ſome meane number reſtrained in conſcience, by the doctrine of the Goſpell: it were greatly to be feared, that our wickedneſſe would growe in haſte to ſuch perfection, as it woulde preſently pull out of heauen Gods wrath againſt vs. But all theſe thinges are wrapt vp in deepe ſilence among moſt of theſe men, vnleſſe it bee to vpbraid Biſhops as cauſes thereof, and the corrupt gouernment, as it is thought, of this Church, with the rich and wealthy ſtates of Biſhops, pretended to bee the onely cauſe of Gods indignation toward vs. But this is the wicked working of the deuill, to turne mens eyes from their owne

ſinnes, that they may not acknowledge them, and by repentance turne away the diſpleaſure of God and his iuſtice hanging ouer vs, and, if it be poſſible, alſo to deſtroy the courſe of the Goſpell, that hath bene ſo long with ſo ſmall fruit among vs.
            But here I haue to aduertiſe the godly, and chiefely the Prince and Magiſtrates, that they be not abuſed and ledde by the cunning that Sathan hath alwayes vſed, to deface the glory of God, and diſturbe his Church. When Sathan ſeeth the doctrine of Trueth to ſpring vp amongſt men, and ſomewhat to proſper: when hee ſeeth wickedneſſe and vice by diligent preaching to bee repreſſed, and thereby his kingdome of errour and wickedneſſe to decay, and the glorie of God to increaſe: then hee beſtirreth him by all meanes hee can. And if by Gods good prouidence the Princes and Magiſtrates bee ſuch, as by ſword and fire he cannot either ouerthrowe it, or worke ſome miſchiefe againſt it: then ſeeketh hee by lying and ſlander to diſcredit and deface the meſſengers that GOD ſendeth with his worde, and inſtruments that he vſeth to aduance and ſette foorth his trueth, by this meanes to worke hinderance to the trueth it ſelfe. When Ieremie preached the will of God earneſtly and truely vnto the Iewes, were there not falſe Prophets, and other very neere the Prince, which perſwaded him and other rulers, that hee was a naughtie man, not worthie to liue? that hee was an enemie to his Countrey? that hee conſpired with the Babylonians, and was with money

or otherwiſe corrupted by them, to perſwade the people of Iuda, not to refuſe their ſubiection? When God by the Ievves in captiuitie, and by the fauour of the Queene Heſter, began to ſpread Heſt. 3. & 4. his knovvledge among the Gentiles, ſo that their heatheniſh idolatrie vvas ſomewhat blemiſhed, the deuil raiſed vp a fit inſtrument by ſuch meanes as before is mentioned, to vvork their confuſion. For Haman came to king Aſſuerus, and ſaid, There is a people diſperſed throughout all the prouinces of thine Empire, not agreeing among themſelues, vſing newe lawes, and contemning thy ordinances, and thou knoweſt it is not expedient for thy kingdome, that they ſhould bee ſuffered to waxe ſo inſolent. And if it ſhall pleaſe thee to appoint, that they may be all put to death, I will bring in tenne thouſand talents into the kings treaſure. It vvas a ſhrevvd tale to perſvvade a Prince. For he tempered his hateful and ſlaunderous lying with the ſweete ſavvce of gaine and commoditie. The ſubtile Sathan did ſee, that ſometime they which othervviſe are good Princes, vvhen hope of great benefite is offered, vvill be more eaſily perſvvaded to ſome kinde of hard dealing, vvhich othervviſe they themſelues vvould not like. When Iohn Baptiſt was ſent to prepare the vvay for the comming of Chriſt, though hee vvere a man of very auſtere liuing, did not the Phariſees perſvvade the people and chiefe rulers, that hee was but an hypocrite? that he vvas poſſed vvith a deuill, and therfore that his doctrine ſhould not be beleeued? When Matt. 11. Iohn 8. Chriſt himſelfe came, a perfect patterne of all temperance and godly vertue, did they not ſay,

that he was a glutton, and a wine bibber? a Samaritane? a friend of Publicanes and ſinners? a worker with deuils? a ſeducer of the people? &c. and by this means in the hearts of many wrought the diſcredite both of his doctrine, and of his myracles? In like manner dealt Sathan with his inſtruments againſt the Apoſtles and godlie profeſſors of Chriſtian religion in the Primitiue Church, as it appeareth in the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories and auncient Fathers. For malitious tongues and pennes did ſpreade abroade of them, that they Tertull. Apolog in Epiſt. Mar. Collec. apud Euſeb. murdered their children, and did eate them: that vſually at their aſſemblies they committed inceſt: that they worſhipped the ſunne: that they worſhipped an aſſe head: that they were traitours to the Empire: that they were generall enemies of all mankinde: with an infinite number of other like falſe and ſlaunderous crimes, and by this meanes the wicked enemies of Chriſt raiſed thoſe grieuous and terrible perſecutions, wherewith the Church was vexed the ſpace of three hundred yeeres vnder the Emperours. Yea, and this craft of the deuill ceaſed not vnder the Chriſtian Emperours. For then ſtirred hee vp ſchiſmes and factions, errours and hereſies, almoſt in number infinite, and ſtill by backebiters and ſlaunderous inſtrumentes, defaced and brought out of credite the godly and learned biſhops, which were as the pillars of Chriſtian trueth, againſt the enemies of God and his Church.
            
               Conſtantine that woorthie and godlie prince, at the beginning fauoured and furthered all thoſe

reuerend and learned Biſhops that did mainteine the doctrine of Nicene Councell againſt the Arians: but after that Euſebius of Nicomedia, the great patrone of that hereſie, had procured friendes in the court, and therby crept in ſome credite with the Emperour, he, and the reſidue of his ſort, deuiſed ſhamefull ſlaunders againſt Athanaſius and other, that, in the ende, with great diſpleaſure of the Emperour, he was baniſhed into Fraunce, and there continued all the reigne of the ſaide Conſtantine. His enemies with great impudencie, had Theol. lib. c. 26. Athan. Apol. 2. Socrat lib. 1. cap 30. Theodor. charged him with ſhamefull vntruths, as that he cruelly and vniuſtly had excommunicated diuers perſons: that as a couetous extortioner, he had oppreſſed the countrey of Egypt with exactions: that he had committed adultery with a ſtrumpet, who was brought before his face to auouch it to be true: that he had murthered Arſenius, & vſed his arme to worke ſorcery: that he ſent money to one that went about treaſon againſt the Emperour: Socra. lib. 1. cap. 35. that hee had affirmed in threatning wordes, that he would cauſe the citie of Alexandria to ſend no more tribute-corne to Conſtantinople for the Emperors prouiſion, as before time it had vſed to doe. As they dealt with Athanaſius, ſo did they in like manner with Euſtathius, Macarius, and al other godly Fathers which defended the true faith of Chriſt, and ſet themſelues againſt the indeuours of heretikes, and other ſeditious and factious ſpirites. And in like maner were other vſed after that time, as Ambroſe, Cyrill, and Chryſoſtome. It were a matter almoſt infinite to recite the examples

thereof, and to ſhewe how like they are to the attempts of ſome in theſe dayes.
            And although it pleaſed GOD by ſtrange meanes at that time to reprooue ſundrie of thoſe ſhamefull vntrueths deuiſed againſt manie: yet by ſtoute affirmation and colourable proofe, thorow friendſhip, many of them tooke ſuche effect, that ſundrie woorthy and good men were put out of their biſhoprikes, driuen into baniſhment, and put to death, to the great trouble of the Church, and exceeding hinderaunce of chriſtian faith for the ſpace of many yeeres. We reade in hiſtories, that Philip king of Macedony, a ſubtile and politique prince, who is thought to haue conquered more by craft and cunning, then by force of warre & dint of ſworde, minding to bring the Graecians vnder his ſubiection, in concluding an agreement with them, conditioned that they ſhoulde deliuer vnto him their Orators as the very firebrands of diſcord among them, and the onely occaſioners of that diſpleaſure and miſliking, that was betweene him and them. At which time Demoſthenes one of the Orators, ſpeaking for himſelfe, admoniſhed the Athenians to call to their remembraunce, the parable betweene the ſhepheardes and the wolues. The wolues pretending deſire of agreement between them and the ſhepheards, perſwaded them, that all the cauſe of their diſpleaſure, was the vnſeaſonable barking of the dogges: and promiſed great amitie, ſo that they woulde put away their ill-fauoured curres and maſtiues. But when the dogs were remooued, the wolues

tooke their pleaſure in ſpoyling the flocke more cruelly then euer they did before. So (ſayth Demosthenes) this King Philip, vnder pretence of friendſhip, ſeeking his owne benefite, would haue you to deliuer vp your Orators, which from time to time call vpon you, and giue you warning of his ſubtile and craftie deuiſes, to the ende, that when you haue ſo done, ere you bee ware, he may bring you and your citie vnder his tyrannie. And this ſaying of Demoſthenes proued after verie true indeede. Euen ſo (good Chriſtians) the ſubtile ſerpent Sathan, prince of darkeneſſe, ſeeking to bring the Church of England vnder his kingdome againe, from which by the mightie hand of God it hath beene deliuered, indeuoureth cunningly to perſwade the ſhepheardes, that is, the chiefe Gouernours of this realme, to put away their barking dogges, that is, to put downe the ſtate of Biſhops, and other chiefe of the Cleargie, to take away their landes and liuings, and ſet them to their penſions, the ſooner by that meanes to worke his purpoſe. And heere in he turneth himſelfe into an Angel of light, and pretendeth great holines, and the authoritie of Gods word, and the holy Scriptures. For ſuch a ſubtile Protheus he is, that he can turne himſelfe into all maner of ſhapes, to bring forward his deuiſe.
            The craftie enemie of the Church of GOD, doeth well knowe the frailetie and corruption of mennes nature, that they will not of them-ſelues eaſily bende to that is good, vnleſſe they bee allured vnto it, by the hope of benefite. Hee

vnderſtandeth that Honos alit artes, and if he ſhall by any cunning bee able to pull away the reward of learning, hee right well ſeeth that hee ſhall haue farre fewer dogges to barke at him, and almoſt none that ſhall haue teeth to bite thoſe hell houndes, that hee will ſende to deuoure and deſtroy the flocke of Chriſt. Happily there may bee ſome young Spanielles that will queſt lauiſhly ynough, but hee will not feare them, becauſe hee knoweth they will haue no teeth to bite. If the ſtate of the Cleargie ſhall bee made contemptible, and the beſt reward of learning a meane penſion: hee foreſeeth that neither yong flouriſhing wittes will eaſily incline them-ſelues to godly learning, neither wil their parents and friendes ſuffer them to make that the ende of their trauaile. To bring this to paſſe, hee worketh his deuiſes by ſundry kindes of men: firſt, by ſuch as be Papiſts in heart, and yet can clap their handes, and ſet forwarde this purpoſe, becauſe they ſee it the next way, either to ouerthrowe the courſe of the Goſpell, or by great and needeleſſe alteration, to hazard and indanger the ſtate of the common weale. The ſecond ſort are certaine worldly & godleſſe Epicures, which can pretend religion, and yet paſſe not which end thereof goe forwarde, ſo they may bee partakers of that ſpoyle, which in this alteration is hoped for. The thirde ſorte, in ſome reſpect the beſt, but of all other moſt dangerous, becauſe they giue the opportunity and countenance to the reſidue, and make their indeuours ſeeme zealous and godly.
            
               
Theſe bee ſuch which in doctrine agree with the preſent ſtate, and ſhewe themſelues to haue a deſire of a perfection in all things, and in ſome reſpect, in deede, haue no euill meaning, but through inordinate zeale are ſo caried, that they ſee not howe great dangers by ſuch deuiſes they drawe into the Church and ſtate of this Realme. Howe great perils, euen ſmall mutations haue brought to Common-weales, the knowledge of Hiſtories, and the obſeruation of times, will eaſily teach vs.
            
               Obiection.
But in this place mee thinketh I heare ſome crie out with earneſt affection againſt me, and ſay, that I ſhew my ſelfe to bee a carnall man, and in this matter of the Church vſe carnall and fleſhly reaſons out of humaine policie, and doe not ſtay my conſcience vpon Gods word & the holy Scriptures, where unto only, in the gouernment of the Church wee ſhoulde cleaue, though all reaſon, and policie ſeeme contrary.
            
               Anſwere.
If I doe ſtay my ſelfe, and grounde my conſcience vpon humane policie, in any matter of faith and religion, I muſt needes confeſſe my ſelfe to be worthie great blame: But if in ſome things perteining to the externall fourme of gouernement, or the outwarde ſtate of the Church, I haue reſpect to Chriſtian policie, not contrary to Gods word, I ſee no iuſt cauſe, why I ſhoulde

be miſliked, if, in conſideration of the corrupt affection of mans nature, I wiſh the ſtate of a Chriſtian Church & common weale to bee ſuch, that yong and towardly wittes, not yet mortified by Gods ſpirit, may bee allured with the hope of benefite, to the ſtudie of learning, and principally of the holy Scriptures, leauing the ſecret direction of their minde to God. I truſt no man can with good reaſon reprooue this my deſire, and in the courſe of my writing, no man ſhall iuſtly ſay, that either I doe ſtaye mine owne conſcience, or will other men to grounde theirs, vpon reaſon and policie onely, without the word of God. For neither will the feare of God ſuffer mee ſo to deale, in matter of ſuch weight, neither doe I ſee, that by ſuch meanes I can further the cauſe that I write of.
            Many Pamphlets haue bene of late yeres partly written, and partly printed, againſt the whole gouernment of the Church by Biſhops, and thoſe in ſundrie ſortes, according to the nature and diſpoſition of the Authors, but in all, great proteſtation of euident and ſtrong proofe out of the Scriptures, and other writers: But eſpecially there is one which I haue ſeene, the writer whereof maketh this ſolemne proteſtation following.
            That as he looketh to be acceptable to the Lorde, at the iudgemēt of the immaculate lambe, in his accuſation that he maketh againſt the Clergie of this Realme, hee will not cleaue to his owne iudgement, nor will followe his owne braine, nor wil of himſelf inuent ought, nor vntruly blame ought, but will faithfully and vntruly, ſincerely and incorruptly,

rehearſe the holy Scriptures, and the ſentences, actes, and deedes of other learned men, which determine and agree vpon thoſe things, that he layeth downe againſt them.
            You may well vnderſtand therefore, that ſuch an accuſation will not bee anſwered and ſhifted away with humane reaſon onely. The matter muſt haue more pith and ſubſtance in it. But howſoeuer that accuſation will bee anſwered, I woulde the authour had perfourmed his proteſtation as faithfully, as, to carry ſome credite and fauour, he layde it out ſolemnely. Then ſhoulde not his writing containe ſo manie vncharitable, and contemptuous ſpeeches, ſo many ſlaunderous vntruethes, ſo many wreſted Scriptures, ſo many falſe concluſions, ſo many impertinent allegations, as he doth vſe.
            The purpoſe to perſwade ſo great and dangerous a mutation in a common weale, ſhould haue carryed with it, not onely more trueth, and comlineſſe of ſpeech, but alſo more weight of matter, & ſound ſubſtance of proofe. But ſuch is the libertie of this time, and ſuch is the manner of them, that to ſlaunder and deface other, paſſe not what they ſpeake or write.
            I will nowe come to anſwere briefly ſome particular ſlanders vttered againſt ſome Biſhops and other by name.
            
               
               Against the ſlaunderous Libels of late publiſhed vnder a fayned and fonde name of MARTIN MARPRELATE.
               
               OH my good Brethren and louing Countrey men, what a lamentable thing is this, that euen novv, vvhen the vievve of the mightie Nauie of the Spaniards is ſcant paſſed out of our ſight: when the terrible ſound of their ſhot ringeth, as it were, yet in our eares: when the certaine purpoſe of moſt cruel and bloody conqueſt of this Realme is confeſſed by themſelues, and blazed before our eyes: whē our ſighes & grones vvith our faſting and prayers, in ſhevve of our repentance, are freſh in memorie, & the teares not waſhed from the eyes of many good men: vvhen the mightie vvorkes of God, and his marueilous mercies in deliuering vs, and in ſcattering and confounding our enemies, is bruted ouer all the world, and with humble thanks renowmed by all them that loue the Goſpell: when our Chriſtian duetie requireth for ioy & thankeſgiuing, that we ſhould be ſeene yet ſtill lifting vp our hands and hearts to heauen, and with thankfull mindes ſetting foorth the glorie of God, and vvith Moſes and the Iſraelites ſinging praiſes vnto his Name, and ſaying, The Lorde hath triumphed gloriouſly, the horſe and the Rider, the Ships and the Saylers, the ſouldiers and their Captaines hee hath ouerthrowen in the Sea: the Lorde is our ſtrength, the Lorde is become our ſaluation, &c. That euen novve (I ſay) at this preſent

time, vvee ſhoulde ſee in mens handes and boſomes, commonly ſlaunderous Pamphlets freſh from the Preſſe, againſt the beſt of the Church of Englande, and that vvee ſhould heare at euery table, and in Sermons and Lectures, at priuate Conuenticles, the voyces of many not giuing prayſe to God, but ſcoffing, mocking, rayling, and deprauing the liues and doings of Biſhoppes, and other of the Miniſterie, and contemptuouſly defacing the ſtate of Gouernment of this Church, begunne in the time of that godly and bleſſed Prince, King Edwarde the ſixt, and confirmed and eſtabliſhed by our moſt gracious Soueraigne. What an vnthankfulneſſe is this? vvhat a forgetting of our duetie tovvarde God, and tovvarde our brethren? vvhat a reproche to our profeſſion of the Goſpell? vvhat an euident teſtimonie to the Aduerſarie, of our hypocriſie, and deepe malice layde vp in the bottome of our breaſtes, euen in the middeſt of our troubles, vvhen theſe Pamphlets vvere in penning? The common report goeth, and intelligence is ſundry wayes giuen, that the Enemies of this lande haue rather their malice increaſed tovvardevs, then ſuſtained a full ouerthrovve: and therefore by confederacie, are in making prouiſion for a newe inuaſion, more terrible in threatning, then the other. Which may ſeeme more eaſie to them, becauſe they now knowe their owne wants, and our imperfections: For which vndoubtedly, they vvill prepare moſt carefully. For the children of this worlde, are wiſer

in their generation, then the children of God. What then meaneth this vntemperate, vncharitable and vnchriſtian dealings among our ſelues, at ſuch an vnſeaſonable time? but as it were, to ioyne handes with the Seminaries, Ieſuites, and Maſſing prieſtes, and other Meſſengers of Antichriſt, in furthering their deuiſes, by diſtracting the mindes of the Subiects, and drawing them into partes and factions, in increaſing the nomber of Mal-contents, and miſlikers of the ſtate: which make no account of religion, but to make their commoditie, though it bee with ſpoyle of their owne countrey, if opportunitie ſerue? In pulling away the good and faithfull hearts of many ſubiects from her Maieſtie, becauſe ſhe mainteineth the ſtate of Church-gouernment, which they miſlike, and which is proteſted to them, to bee prophane and Antichriſtian.
               There are of late time, euen within theſe fewe weekes, three or foure odious Libels againſt the Biſhops, and other of the Clergie, printed and ſpread abroad almoſt into all Countreyes of this Realme, ſo fraught with vntrueths, ſlaunders, reproches, raylings, reuilings, ſcoffings, and other vntemperate ſpeeches: as I thinke the like was neuer committed to Preſſe or paper, no not againſt the vileſt ſort of men, that haue liued vpon the earth. Such a preiudice this is to the honour of this State and Gouernment, as neuer was offered in any age.

For theſe things bee done with ſuch impudencie and deſperate boldneſſe, as if they thought there were neither Prince, nor Lawe, nor Magiſtrate, nor ruler, that durſt controll them, or ſeeke to repreſſe them.
               The author of them calleth himſelfe by afained name, Martin Marprelate: a very fit name vndoubtedly. But if this outragious ſpirit of boldeneſſe be not ſtopped ſpeedily, I feare he wil proue himſelfe to bee, not onely Mar-prelate, but Marprince, Mar-ſtate, Mar-lawe, Mar-magiſtrate, and all together, vntill hee bring it to an Anabaptiſticall equalitie and communitie.
               When there is ſeene in any Common vvealth ſuch a looſe boldneſſe of ſpeech, againſt a ſetled lavve or State, it is a certaine proofe of a looſe boldneſſe of minde. For, Sermo eſt index animi. that is, Such as the ſpeech is, ſuch is the minde. Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur. It hath alſo in all Hiſtories bene obſerued, that looſe boldneſſe of minde tovvard the Superiours, is ioyned alwayes with contempt: and contemptuous boldneſſe is the very roote and ſpring of diſcord, diſſention, vprores, ciuill vvarres, and all deſperate attempts, that may breede trouble and danger in the State. Yea, and if they be hardened vvith ſome continuance of time, and hope of impunitie, and ſome multitude of aſſiſtāce gathering vnto them: vvhat may follovve, I leaue to the vviſedome and diſcretion of them, that God hath ſet in place of Gouernment.
               Theſe Libellers are not contented to lay downe

great crimes generally, as ſome other haue done, but with very vndecent tearmes, charge ſome particular Biſhops with particular faultes, with what trueth you ſhall nowe vnderſtand.
               They firſt beginne with the moſt reuerend, the Archbiſhop of Canterburie: which crimes and reproches, becauſe they are many, and of no weight or likelihoode of trueth, I take onely the chiefe, and note the pages vvherein they are, ſetting the anſwere after, very briefly.
               But in thoſe that touch my Lord of London, becauſe they are by lewd tongues drawen into more common talke, and his perſon moſt ſlanderouſly inueighed againſt and diſcredited: I thought it neceſſarie the things ſhould bee more fully and amply declared, that the trueth of them might be better conceiued.
               For as much as I haue not bene curious in all my life to examine the doings of other, hauing ynough to do vvith mine owne, I haue in theſe matters vſed the inſtruction of them, whome no honeſt man may in Chriſtian duetie ſuſpect of vntrueth: and therefore in conſcience I thinke the things to be true as I haue layde them downe.
               
                  An anſwere to ſuch things as the moſt Reuerend the Archbiſhop of Canterburie is particularly charged withall in the Libell.
                  
               
               His Grace I warrant you, will carie to his graue, the Libel. pag. 1. blowes &c.
               
                  
God be thanked, hee neuer felt blowe giuen by him or any other in that cauſe, except the blowes Anſwere. of their deſpitefull and malitious tongues, which notwithſtanding, hee contemneth, remembring how true it is that Hierome ſaith, Iſtae machinae haereticorum ſunt, vt conuicti de perfidia ad maledicta ſe conferant. When heretikes are conuinced of falſehood and vntrueths, their ſhift is to flee to railing and ſlandering. And againe, Detractio vilium ſatis hominum eſt, et ſuam laudem quaerentium. To backebite is the ſhift of baſe men, and ſuch as ſeeke their owne praiſe.
               He did indeede peruſe Doctor Bridges booke before it went to the Preſſe, and hee knoweth that the ſufficiencie there of cauſeth theſe men thus to ſtorme, as not being able otherwiſe to anſwere it: which maketh them ſo bitterly to inueigh againſt his perſon, and therefore, Si inſectari perſonam deploratae cauſae ſignum eſt, (as it is indeede) illorum cauſa eſt deploratiſsima.
               
               It is ſhame for your Grace Iohn of Cant. that Cartwrights Libel. Pag. 3. bookes are not anſwered.
               Hee neuer thought them ſo neceſſarie to bee anſwered, as the factious authors of the Libel pretend. Anſwere. And of that opinion are not a fewe wiſe and learned men, that beare good will vnto the party, and with all their hearts wiſh, that God woulde direct him to vſe his good giftes to the peace and quietneſſe of the Church. There is ſufficient written already to ſatisfie an indifferent reader. He that with indifferent minde ſhall reade the anſwere of the one, and the replie of the other, ſhall

ſee great difference in learning betweene them.
               The deſire of diſputation is but a vaine brag: they haue bene diſputed & conferred with oftner then either the worthines of their perſōs or cauſe did require. Wherein their inability to defende ſuch a cauſe hath manifeſtly appeared, as it is wel knowen to very many, wel able to iudge. But what brags are here by the Libeller vttered, which doe not agree vvith the old Heretikes & Schiſmatikes?
               
               His Grace threatned to ſend Miſtres Lawſon to Bridewel, Libel. pag. 10 becauſe &c.
               This is a notorious vntrueth. For neither did Anſwere. he, nor D. Perne euer heare (but of this Libeller) that ſhe ſpake any ſuch vvordes of him. But in trueth, aſvvell for the immodeſtie of her tongue, wherein ſhe excelleth beyond the ſeemelineſſe of an honeſt woman, as alſo for her vnwomanly and ſkittiſh gadding vp & down to Lambehith, & frō thence in cōpany vnfit for her, without her owne husband, he threatned to ſend her to Bridewell, if ſhe reformed not the ſame: which he meaneth to performe, if ſhe continue her lightneſſe. And yet Dame Lawſon ſo notorious, for the vileneſſe of her tongue, & other vnwomanly behauiour, is one of Martins canonized Saints: Quia quod volumus ſanctum eſt, as Auguſtine ſaid of their predeceſſors the Donatiſts. It is likewiſe an vntruth, which is reported in that page of her words ſpokē by M. Shaller. For ſurely if ſhe had vttered them, he would haue ſent her thither without faile. But Dame Lawſon glorieth in her own ſhame, & ſo do her teachers.
               
                  
That vvhich he calleth a Protection, Chard had from the Lords of her Maieſties priuie Counſell, vpon charitable and good cauſes moouing their Lordſhips.
               He ſeemeth to charge the Archbiſhop wish infidelitie &c. Libel. pag. 15
               
               This needeth no anſvvere, it ſhevveth of vvhat ſpirit they are. Anſwere.
               
               Touching the Premunire &c.
               
               The Libeller doth but dreame, let him and his Libel. pag. 21. doe vvhat they can. Anſwere.
               
               The ſame may be anſvvered to their threatning of fiſts &c.
               That which hee ſpeaketh of buying a Pardon &c. as it is moſt vntrue, ſo is it ſlaunderous to the State. If there vvere any ſuch matter, it may ſoone appeare by ſearch: but the impudencie of theſe men is great, and villanous ſlaunder vvill neuer long be vvithout iuſt revvard.
               He ſaith we fauour Recuſants rather then Puritans &c.
               Herein he doeth notoriouſly abuſe vs: though Libel. pag. 22 the Recuſant for the moſt part, behaueth himſelf Anſwere. more ciuilly before the Magiſtrate then doth the Puritane: vvho is commonly moſt inſolent, and thereby deſerueth more ſharpe vvordes and reproofes then the other.
               That vvhich he ſpeaketh of Recuſants threats againſt Puritane Preachers, hath no ſenſe. For how can the Recuſant ſo threaten the Puritane, when he neuer commeth to heare his Sermons? But theſe vvicked Martiniſts account her Maieſties louing ſubiectes, liking and allovving the orders of the Church, and procuring the contrary to be reformed

by authoritie, as Papiſtes and Recuſants. By which ſiniſter practiſe and iudgement many are diſcomforted, and obedience greatly impeached.
               Doth your Grace remember what the Ieſuite at Newgate Libel pag. 23 &c.
               No truely, for he neuer heard of any ſuch matter, Anſwere. but by this lewde Libeller: neyther doeth he thinke that there was euer any ſuch thing ſpoken. Schiſmatikes are impudent lyars, the vvorlde knoweth what he hath euer bene, and vvhat hee is: he doth diſdaine to anſwere ſuch ſenſeleſſe calumniations.
               That which he ſpeaketh of Thackwell the Printer, &c. is a matter nothing pertaining to him. M. Richard Yong, was the dealer therein without his priuitie, who is able to iuſtifie his doings in that matter, and to conuince the libeller of a malicious ſlaunder. The man is knowen and liuing: the Libeller may talke with him, and knowe his owne wickedneſſe. The mouth that lyeth killeth the ſoule. The Lord will deſtroy lying lippes, and the tongue that ſpeaketh proude things.
               
               
                  Waldegraue receiued iuſtly according to his deſerts, hauing founde before that time, greater fauour then hee deſerued, being a notorions diſobedient & godleſſe perſon, an vnthriftie ſpender, & conſumer of the fruits of his owne labours, one that hath violated his faith to his beſt and deareſt friends, and wittingly brought them into danger, to their vndoing. His wife & children haue cauſe to curſe all wicked and vngodly Libellers.
               
                  
The Calumniation touching the Preſſe and Pag. 24. Letters in the Charterhouſe (which preſſe Waldgraue himſelfe ſoulde to one of the Earle of Arundels men, as it is ſince confeſſed) muſt receiue the ſame anſvvere with the other of Thackwell: ſauing that to M. Yong muſt bee added alſo, ſome other of greater authority, who can tel Martin, that his ſpirite is not the ſpirit of God, which is the ſpirit of trueth, but the ſpirite of Sathan, the author of lyes. Charge them, O ſhameleſſe man, with this matter, who are able to anſwere thee, and not the Archbiſhop, vvhome it toucheth not, though it becommeth not euery common & baſe perſon, to demaund an account of the doings of men in authoritie.
               The decree there mentioned, being firſt peruſed by the Queenes learned counſell, and allovved by the Lords of her Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Counſel, had his furtherance in deede, and ſhould haue, if it were to doe againe. It is but for the maintenance of good orders amōg the Printers, approued and allovved by the moſt, the beſt, & the wiſeſt of that company, & for the ſuppreſſion of inordinate perſons, ſuch as Waldegraue is.
               Hee erected no newe Printer, contrary to that decree: but vſed meanes by vvay of perſvvaſion Pag. 25. for that partie, commended to him by his neighbors, to be a very honeſt and poore man, hauing maried alſo the vvidovve of a Printer: and hee did very well like and allovve of his placing by ſuch as haue intereſt therein. Neither did hee euer heare, (but by this Libeller, vvho hath no

conſcience in lying) that hee uer printed any ſuch bookes. This I knowe of a certaintie, that Thomas Orwin himſelfe hath vpon his booke oath denied, that he euer printed, either Ieſus Pſalter, or Our Lady Pſalter, or that hee euer was any worker about them, or about any the like bookes. But the poyſoned ſerpent careth not whome hee ſtingeth.
               
               Whether Waldgraue haue printed any thing againſt the ſtate, or no, let the bookes by him printed, be iudges.
               I doe not thinke, that eyther hee, or any Martiniſt euer heard any Papiſt ſay, that there was no great iarre betweene the Papiſtes and the Archbiſhop in matters of Religion. It is but the Libellers Calumniation. If they did, what is that to him? I thinke Martin him ſelfe doubteth not of the Archbiſhops ſoundneſſe in ſuch matters of Religion, as are in controuerſie betwixt the Papiſts and vs. If hee doe, the matter is not great.
               The Vniuerſitie of Cambridge, where hee liued aboue thirtie yeeres, and publiquely read the Diuinitie Lecture aboue ſeuen yeeres, and other places where he hath ſince remained, will teſtifie for him therein, and condemne the Libeller for a meere Sycophant, and me alſo of follie, for anſwering ſo godleſſe and lewde a perſon.
               It is no diſparagement to receiue teſtimonie of a mans aduerſarie: and therefore if Maſter Reinolds haue giuen that commendation to his booke in compariſon of others, it is no impeachment

to the trueth thereof. I haue not ſeene Reinolds his booke: the Libell is ſo full of lies, that an honeſtman cannot beleeue any thing conteined in it.
               My Lorde of Canterburie woulde be ſorie from the bottome of his heart, if his perſwaſion, and the grounds thereof were not Catholike: he deteſteth and abhorreth ſchiſmaticall grounds and perſwaſions: and thereunto hee profeſſeth himſelfe an open enemie, which hee woulde haue all Martiniſts to knowe.
               That of the Spaniardes ſtealing him away, &c. is fooliſh and ridiculous. I would the beſt Martinist in England durſt ſay it to his face before witneſſe.
               Hee firmely beleeueth that Chriſt in ſoule deſcended into hell. All the Martiniſts in Chriſtendome are not able to proue the contrary: & they that indeuour it, doe abuſe the ſcriptures, and fall into many abſurdities.
               Hee is likewiſe perſwaded that there ought to be by the word of God a ſuperioritie among the Miniſters of the Church, which is ſufficiently prooued in his booke againſt T. C. and in D. Bridges booke likewiſe, and hee is alwayes ready to iuſtifie it, by the holy Scriptures, and by the teſtimonie of all antiquitie. Epiphanius and Auguſt: account them heretikes, that holde the contrary. The Arguments to the contrary, are vaine, their anſweres abſurd, the authorities they vſe, ſhamefully abuſed, and the Scriptures wreſted.
               He hath ſhewed ſufficient reaſon in his booke againſt T. C. why Miniſters of the Goſpell, may

be called Prieſts. The ancient fathers ſo cal them. The church of England imbraceth that name, and that by the authoritie of the higheſt court in England. And vvhy may not Presbyter be called Prieſt?
               
               In theſe three points (vvhereof the laſt is of the leaſt moment) he doth agree vvith the holy Scriptures, vvith the vniuerſall Church of God, vvith all antiquitie, and in ſome ſort vvith the Church of Rome. But he doth diſagree from the Church of Rome that now is in the dregges, which it hath added: as, that Chriſt ſhould harrow hell: that the Pope ſhould be head of the vniuerſall Church: that hee, or any other Prieſt, ſhoulde haue authoritie ouer Kings and Princes to depoſe them, to deliuer their ſubiects from the othe of their obedience. &c. Theſe things haue neither the word of God, nor the decrees of ancient Councels, nor the aucthoritie of antiquitie to approoue them, but directly the contrary. As for the name of Prieſt, as they take it, hee doeth likewiſe condemne in our Miniſters, neyther doe themſelues aſcribe it to them. And therefore the Libeller in theſe poyntes writeth like himſelfe.
               Touching Wigginton, &c. Libel, pag. 26. 27. Anſwere.
               
               That which he ſpeaketh of Wigginton, is like the reſt, ſauing for his ſaucie and malapert behauiour towarde the Archbiſhoppe: wherein in trueth, hee did beare with him too much. Wigginton is a man well knowen vnto him, and if hee knewe himſelfe, he woulde confeſſe that hee had great cauſe to thanke the Archbiſhoppe. As hee was a fooliſh, proude, and vaine boy, a

laughing ſtocke for his follie to all the ſocietie with whome hee liued: ſo doeth hee retaine the ſame qualities being a man, ſauing that his follie, pride, and vanitie is much increaſed: ſo that nowe hee is become ridiculous euen to his owne faction.
               The honeſteſt, the moſt, and the beſt of his pariſh did exhibite to the high Commiſſioners, articles of very great moment againſt him: the like whereof haue ſeldome bene ſeene in that Court. The moſt and woorſt of them are prooued by diuers ſufficient witneſſes, and ſome of them confeſſed by himſelfe, as it appeareth in record. For which enormities, and for that he refuſed to make condigne ſatisfaction for the ſame, and to conforme himſelfe to the orders of the Church, by lawe eſtabliſhed: he was by due order of lawe depoſed from his Miniſterie, and depriued of his benefice, and ſo remayneth, being vnfit and vnworthie of either.
               The tale of Atkinſon is a lowde, notorious, and knowen lie. For neither did he euer ſay ſo to the Archbiſhop, neither woulde hee haue taken it at his handes, neither was that any cauſe of Wiggintons depriuation: but vanitie and hypocriſie cauſeth this man to haue ſo ſmall conſcience in lying, according to that ſaying, Omnis hypocriſis mendacio plena eſt.
               
               That heatheniſh vntrueth vttered diuers times in this booke, that the Archbiſhop ſhoulde accompt preaching of the word of God to be hereſie, and mortally abhorre and perſecute it, is rather

to bee pitied then anſwered. If man puniſh not ſuch ſycophants, God wil do it, to whoſe iuſt iudgement the reuenge of this iniurie is referred. He doth bridle factious & vnlearned Preachers, ſuch as the more part of that ſect are, vvho notwithſtanding crye out for a learned Miniſterie, themſelues being vnlearned, and ſo vvould be accounted of all men, if it were not propter ſtudium partium. I ſay vvith S. Hierome, Nunc loquentibus & pronunciantibus plenus eſt orbis: loquuntur quae neſciunt, docent quae non didicerunt, magiſtri ſunt cùm diſcipuli antè non fuerint. The vvorld is full of them that can ſpeake and talke: but they ſpeake the thinges they knovve not: they teache the things they haue not learned: they take vpon them to teach before they vvere ſchollers to learne. Indeede our Church is too full of ſuch talkers, rather then ſober teachers, vvhome hee profeſſeth himſelfe greatly to miſlike. Othervviſe hee defieth all Martiniſtes in Englande, and doeth appeale vnto the vvhole State of the learned and obedient Clergie for his innocencie therein.
               Touching maſter Euans, &c. Libel. pag. 31 Anſwere.
               
               That of Euans concerning the Vicarage of Warwike, is maliciouſly reported. Hee reiected him for lacke of conformitie to the orders of the Church. If hee haue done him any vvrong thereby, the lavve is open, hee might haue had his remedie. That honourable perſon mentioned by the Libeller, I am ſure, accepted of his anſwer. And I knowe, that according to his honourable

diſpoſition, he thinketh himſelfe greatly abuſed by the libeller in this point. But vvhat careth ſuch a corner-creeper what he ſaith of any man, be he neuer ſo honourable? The reſt of that tale is vntrue, not worth anſwering. And if the relator there of durſt appeare and ſhevv himſelfe, Martin could not bee long vnknovven. If any of his men at any time reported, that hee ſhould ſay, hee vvould not bee beholding to neuer a noble man in this land, &c. he ſhevveth himſelfe to be of the Libellers conditions, that is, a common lyar. For hee neuer ſpake the wordes to any man, neither doeth hee vſe that familiaritie vvith his men. But the Libeller careth not vvhat he ſpeaketh, either of him, or of his men, ſo that he may fill vp his libell with vntrue ſlaunders.
               That vvhich follovveth of the Archbiſhops words to the knight, that he was the ſecond perſon of the land, &c. is of the ſame kinde. The knight I am ſure is liuing, let him be examined of that matter. True it is, that there was a good knight with him, an old friend of his about ſuch a ſute: but that he euer ſpake any ſuch wordes vnto him, as the Libeller vvoulde make the vvorlde beleeue, is moſt falſe: the Knight liueth and can teſtifie the ſame. But the Libeller thinketh all men to be as proude and malapert as himſelfe and other of his faction are, whoſe pride the world ſeeth, and it is vntolerable.
               He was neuer D. Perns boy, nor vnder him at any Pag. 32. time, but as fellow of the houſe where he vvas maſter. Neither did he euer cary his, or any other

mans cloake bagge: Although if he had ſo done, it had bin no diſgrace to him. Better mens ſonnes then the Libeller is, haue caried cloakebags. But the levvde man is not aſhamed to lye in thoſe things, that are open to euery mans eyes: ſuch is his malice and impudencie.
               How Dauiſons Catechiſme was allowed, or how Pag. 34. long in peruſing, I knovv not: ſome paultry pamphlet belike it is, like to that buſie and vnlearned Scot, now termed to be the author there of. D. Wood is better able to iudge of ſuch matters, then either Dauiſon, or any Martiniſt, that dare be knovven.
               Touching the Apocrypha. &c. Libel. pag. 37
               
               He gaue commandement in deede, & meaneth to ſee it obſerued. For who euer ſeparated this Apocrypha from the reſt of the Bible, from the beginning of Chriſtianity to this day? Or vvhat church in the vvorld, refourmed or other, doth yeat at this preſent? And ſhal vve ſuffer this ſingularity in the church of England, to the aduauntage of the aduerſary, offence of the godly, & contrary to al the vvorld beſides? I knovve there is great difference betvvene the one and the other: yet all learned men haue from the beginning, giuen to the Apocrypha authoritie, next to the Canonicall Scriptures. And therfore ſuch giddy heads, as ſeeke to deface them, are to be bridled. A foule ſhame it is, & not to be ſuffered, that ſuch ſpeeches ſhould be vttered againſt thoſe bookes, as by ſome hath bene: enough to cauſe ignorant people to diſcredite the vvhole Bible.
               Touching Doctor Sparke, &c. Libel. pag. 44.
               
               
                  
Their Honors that were thē preſent, can & wil, I am ſure, anſwere for the biſhops to this vntrueth. Anſwere. They made report to diuers in publike place, and ſome to the higheſt, of that cōference, after an other ſort, & to another end, thē the Libeller doth. That ſeely Obiection God knoweth, was ſoone anſwered in few words, viz. That the trāſlation read in our Churches, was in that point according to the Septuagint, & correſpondent to the Analogie of faith. For if the word be vnderſtood of the Iſraelites, then is it true to ſay, that they were not obedient to his cōmandement: but if of the ſignes & wonders, that Moſes and Aaron did before Pharao, or of Moſes and Aaron themſelues, then is it on the other ſide true, that they were obedient to his commandement. This might haue ſatiſfied any learned and peaceable Diuine, & pacified their immoderate contention againſt the booke of common praier. This was then, and is now, the anſwere to that friuolous obiection, and this is the Nonplus that the Libeller vaunteth of. More modeſtie might haue become both D. Sparke, & the reporter, euen conſcientia ſuae imbecillitatis, in that conference.
               Touching Patrike, &c.
               He neuer made Patrike Miniſter, neither intended Libel. pag. 50 Anſwere. to make him, neither was hee of his acquaintance at all in Worceſter. It is vvel knowen that the Archbiſhop hath not ordeined moe, then onely tvvo Miniſters, ſince his comming to this Archbiſhoprike. And therefore this Calumniation muſt be placed vvith the former.
               Thus is this godleſſe Libeller anſvvered in few

words, touching ſuch matters wherewith he chargeth the moſt reuerend father the Archbiſhop of Cant. whereby the world may perceiue, with what ſpirit he is poſſeſſed. The wiſe man ſaith, that deſtruction ſhall ſuddenly come vpon the backebiter and 
                  Prouer. 24. 
                  calumniator. The Pſalmiſt ſaith, The Lorde will destroy 
                  Pſalm. 55. 
                  lying lips, and the tongue which ſpeaketh proude things: and that death ſhall ſuddenly come vpon them, and hell ſhall receiue them. S. Ambroſe ſaith, that Detractors are ſcarcely to bee accounted Chriſtians. And Cyprian ſaith, Non qui audit, ſed qui facit conuitium, miſer eſt. Not he that is railed at, but he that raileth, is the wretched man. The wicked Iewes, when they could not otherwiſe anſwere Chriſt, called him Samaritan, and ſaid he had a deuill, & ſhortly after tooke vp ſtones, and caſt at him. So the Anabaptiſts, within our memory, after ſlanderous and opprobrious calumniations againſt the godly Preachers and magiſtrates then liuing, fell to blowes and open violence. The Libeller in this booke hath perfourmed the one, and threatned the other.
               
                  This haue I layd downe word by word, as I receiued the ſame from my Lorde of London: who deſireth to haue the matter heard by indifferent Iudges, and will ſhewe the Suggeſtions to be very vntrue.
               
               ANd as to Martins lewde exclamation againſt the B. of London cōcerning the cloth thought to be ſtollen frō the Dyars, this is the trueth of the caſe: that vpon notice giuē to the ſaid B. that ſuch like cloth was wayued within his Manor of Fulham, and left in a ditch there, and no owner knowen, hee preſently hoping to take them that brought it thither, or at the leaſt to ſaue the ſame

from purloyning or miſcarying, appoynted the ſame to be watched diuers nights: and in the ende hearing neither of the owners, nor of them that ſo waiued it, willed the ſame to bee brought to his houſe in Fulham, and there to be kept for him or them which by law ought to haue it, were it in reſpect of the firſt property, or of the alteratiō therof by meanes of the liberties. Wherupon, a good ſpace after, the Dyars indeed came to the Biſhop, and claimed the cloth, & ſought by earneſt means to haue it again, without making any proofe, that the cloth was theirs, or that the ſame cloth was it, for which the theeues were executed, or that freſh ſute was made after the ſaide theeues for the ſame. But vpon cōference had with learned Lawyers therein, it was reſolued, that the propertie of this cloth was altered and transferred to the lyberties: and ſo it ſeemeth the Dyars themſelues haue found, els woulde they by lawe haue ſought remedie therefore yer nowe, it being vvell nie tovvards three yeres ſince. Yet neuertheles, ſo farre hath the ſayd Biſhop bene from exacting the extremitie, that offer hath bene made to the Dyars of a good part of the cloth, where in the rigour of law they haue loſt all: And further to reſtore all, or to make ſufficient recompence therefore, if by law it ought to be ſo, vpon the examinatiō of the trueth of the caſe. And as for Martins erronious iudgement, that this is theft, being taken and claymed by right and lawe, as aforeſay de, becauſe the true owners are defeated (as hee ſaith) ſurely, he might knowe if it were matter for his humor,

that the Lawe worketh this in other caſes, as in ſtrayes proclaymed and kept a yeere and a day, according to the law, the propertie is altered, and transferred to the Lord from the true owner: ſo is it for ſtollen cattel, brought bona fide to the ouert market: The firſt owners propertie is gone, and the buyer hath it: And ſo is it for waiued goods, as vvas this cloth. And to ſhewe that the ſayd Biſhop had not ſo great a deſire to detaine the cloth as the Libeller hath preſumed, hee often times asked an officer of his, howe it happened that the Dyars came not for it: for he vvas euer ready, and yet is, to deliuer it to them, or the value thereof, if it prooue to be theirs. And thus much is to be anſvvered to that matter.
               The Libeller obiecteth againſt the Biſhop as a great heinous fault, that of his Porter hee made a Miniſter: which, al things conſidered, he thinketh that doing to be iuſtifiable & lavvfully done, and not to lacke example of many ſuch that haue bin after that ſort admitted, both ſince her Maieſties cōming to the Crovvne, by many good Biſhops, and by ſound hiſtories Eccleſiaſticall, that where the church by reaſon of perſecution or multitude of Hamlets, and free Chappels, which haue commonly very ſmal ſtipends for the Miniſter, honeſt godly men, vpon the diſcretion of the Gouernours of the Church, haue and might be brought in to ſerue in the vvant of learned men, in prayer, adminiſtration of Sacraments, good example of life, & in ſome ſort of exhortation. And this man therefore, when the biſhop founde him by good

and long experience to be one that feared God, to be conuerſant in the ſcriptures, & of very honeſt life & conuerſation: he allowed of him, to ſerue in a ſmall congregation at Padington, where cōmonly for the meanneſſe of the ſtipend, no Preacher could bee had, as in many places it commeth to paſſe where the Parſonage is impropriat, and the prouiſion for the Vicar or Curat is very ſmal. And how this poore man behaued himſelfe there, time and tryall prooued him: for he continued in that place with good liking of the people 8. or 9. yeres, till he grew dull of ſight for age, & thereby vnable for to ſerue any longer. It is to be founde among the Greeke Canons, that in Spaine & Africa when the Goathes & Vandalles had by extreme perſecution made hauocke of the Church men, thoſe fewe that were left there aliue, made their moane to the Churches of Rome & Italy, that their Churches ſtoode emptie, becauſe they could get none to ſerue, no not ſuch as were vnlearned. Whereby it appeareth, that in the time of neceſſitie, and ſuch great want, the Church did allowe of very meane Clarkes, & ſo did they in the beginning of hir Maieſties raigne. But Martin & his complices, hauing a deſire to throwe out of the Church, the booke of common prayer, would rather haue the Churches ſerued by none, then by ſuch as by prayer and adminiſtration of Sacraments ſhoulde keepe the people together in godly aſſemblies. But this Libeller being as a botch in the body, wherunto all bad humors cōmonly reſort, & fewe good, was cōtent to take this report of this poore

man, and not at all to make mention, as he might haue done, of that preciſe & ſtraite order vvhich the Biſhoppe obſerueth in making Miniſters. For moſt true it is, that the ſaide B. admitteth none to orders, but ſuch as he himſelf doth examine in his owne perſon in points of Diuinitie, & that in the latin tongue, in the hearing of many: vvhereby it cōmeth to paſſe, that none lightly come at him, but ſuch as be Graduats, & of the vniuerſities. But Martin neither himſelfe nor his cole cariers ſeeke for any thing that is cōmendable, but like the ſpider that gathereth all that may turne to poyſon.
               Further, for lacke of true matter, M. Maddockes muſt be brought in by the Libeller to furniſh his railing comedy. It were inough to ſay of that thus much, that the moſt reuerent Father the Archbiſhop of Canterburie examining that matter betweene the Biſhop & Maddockes, with ſome other Biſhops aſſiſting him, founde the matter to make ſo ſore againſt the Biſhop, that Maddockes himſelf was content before them to aske him forgiuenes, and to promiſe that hee would euer after haue a reuerent regard of his duetie towards the ſaid Biſhop, as his Ordinarie. For if he ſhould ſo vntruely haue played with the name of Aelmer, by turning it into the name of Mar-elme, hee ſhoulde haue ſpokē againſt his conſcience, as he himſelfe knoweth, and all the Court, and her Maieſtie her ſelfe can teſtifie, that it vvas a moſt ſhamefull vntrueth blaſed abroad by one Lichfield a Muſicion, vvhich is novv departed.
               Heere might bee noted, hovv Doctor Perne,
                  
being at no meane mans table, & hearing of ſuch ſlanderous rayling of felling of the Elmes at Fulham, he asked one of the company being an ancient Lavvyer, hovv long the Elmes of Fulham had bin felled. Said the Lavvyer, ſomehalfe yere paſt. Novv truely ſaide D. Perne, they are marueilouſly grovven in that time: for I aſſure you I vvas there vvithin theſe foure daies, & they ſeeme to be tvvo hundred yeeres old. And maſter Vicechamberlaine at her Maieſties being at Fulham, tolde the Biſhop that her Maieſtie miſliked nothing, but that her Highneſſe lodging vvas kept from all good proſpects by the thickneſſe of the trees. Lo, you may ſee hereby, that the Libeller to ſet out his Paſquil, raketh all things by all reportes from all the Sycophants in the vvorld, and maketh no choiſe of man or matter, ſo that it may ſerue his turne.
               And for any Letter vvritten by the maiſter of Requeſts ſo ieſtingly, as the Libeller reporteth, Maddockes hath deceiued him: for there vvas no ſuch matter, nor the man for vvhom the Biſhop vvrote, vvas none of his ſeruant, nor is.
               Novve commeth in Dame Lawſon to frumpe the Biſhoppe vvith impudent and vnwomanly ſpeech, and vnfit for that ſexe, vvhom Paul vtterly forbiddeth to ſpeake in the congregation. But conſidering the circumſtances of time, place, and perſons, it is to bee thought that Dame Lawſon came at no time to the biſhoppe in that brauerie: for if ſhee had, the biſhop is not ſo ſoft, but ſhee ſhoulde haue felt of Diſcipline, and of the Queenes authoritie. Surely the Biſhop and ſuch

other of the Reuerend fathers that are ſo bitten by this Libeller, may comfort themſelues by the exāple of Athanaſius and others as I before haue ſaid, which vvere moſt ſhamefully accuſed by the heretikes, of murder, robbery, enchantment, whoredome, and other moſt deteſtable crimes, to deface them to the worlde, to the ende that their hereſies might be the better liked of. But Martin remember that ſaying, Vae homini per quem ſcandalum venit, and that Iude ſaith, that Michael when he diſputed with the Deuill about the body of Moſes, the Angel gaue no rayling ſentence againſt him, but ſaid, the Lord rebuke thee, Satā. And if it pleaſed you to remēber that booke that is fathered vpon Ignatius in Greeke which attributeth ſo much to the biſhops, you would be good maſter to biſhops, againſt whom ſo vnreuerently you caſt out your ſtomacke.
               And for your ieſting at the Biſhop for bovvling vpon the Sabboth, you muſt vnderſtande that the beſt expoſitor of the Sabboth, which is Chriſt, hath ſaide, that the Sabboth was made for man, and not man for the Sabboth: and man may haue his meate dreſſed for his health vpon the Sabboth, and vvhy may he not then haue ſome conuenient exerciſe of the body, for the health of the body?
               You vvill take ſmall occaſion to raile, before you will hold your tongue. If you can charge the Biſhop that euer he withdrew himſelf from Sermon or ſeruice by any ſuch exerciſe, you might bee the bolder with him: but contrariwiſe it is wel knowen, that he and his whole familie doeth euery day in the weeke twiſe ſay the whole ſeruice, calling vpon God for them ſelues, the State, and the Queenes Maieſtie, praying for her highneſſe by that meanes deuoutly

and heartily many times: I pray God you do the like. But, oratio animae maleuolae non placet Deo: The prayer of a malicious heart neuer pleaſeth God.
               
                  Martin vvith his bitter ſtile of malicious Momus dipt in the gall of vngodlineſſe, proceedeth in a ſhameleſſe vntrueth touching the Biſhops anſvvere to the executors of Allein the Grocer, as though he ſhoulde flatly denie the payment of a certaine debt, due to the ſayde Allein: vvhich is as true as all the reſt of Martins vvritings is honeſt and ſober. For bee it that at the firſt demaunde, the Biſhoppe vvas ſomevvhat mooued to heare his name to bee in the Merchants bookes, vvhich hee euer ſo preciſely auoyded, that commonly he ſendeth to them vvhom hee hath to doe with, vvarning them to deliuer nothing in his name, without his ovvne hand or ready money, vſed peraduenture ſome ſharpe vvordes in a matter that was ſo ſudaine and ſo ſtrange to him Yet moſt certaine it is, that though not at that time, yet very ſhortly after, the debt was diſcharged, as ſhall be prooued, long before Martins railing booke vvas heard of or ſeene: ten pound excepted, which the ſayde executors for a time reſpited. But this fellovve vvill trauaile farre before he will lacke matter to furniſh a lye.
               Another mountaine that he maketh of molehils (for ſuch is all his blaſphemous buildings) is, that one Beniſon a poore man, vvas kept in the Clincke I cannot tell howe long, vniuſtly vvithout cauſe, &c. The trueth is this: Beniſon comming from Geneua, full fraught with ſtudie of Innouations, and vtterly emptie of obedience, vvhich Beza that learned Father had or might haue taught him, as by his Epiſtles

appeareah, both to the Queene and the gouernors of the Church: ſet vp in London his ſhop of diſobedience, being maried in a contrary order to the booke and vſage of the Church of England, abuſing good M. Foxe as hee himſelfe in griefe of heart after confeſſed. After that, the ſaid Beniſon gathering conuenticles, and refuſing to goe to his owne pariſh church, ſeeking to ſet al in combuſtion with ſchiſme in the Citie, was long before the B. heard any thing of him, called before Sir Nicholas Woodroofe a graue Citizen, & the Recorder: who found him in ſuch an humour, that they meant to haue ſent him to priſon. But becauſe hee was of the Clergie, they thought good to commit him to his Ordinarie, who trauailing with him moſt earneſtly to bring him to the Church and become orderly, when he coulde profite nothing with him, ſent him againe to the Seſſions to the Lord Maior and the Iudges. After they had dealt with him, and could finde at his hands nothing but railing, they ſent him againe to the Biſhop, and he finding him in vnſpeakeable diſobedience to her Maieſtie and her Lawes, offered him the oath, which he contemptuouſly and ſpitefully refuſed. Which being certified according to order, he was ſent to the Queenes bench, & was condemned, and thereupon ſent to priſon. And this is that wonderfull tragedie wherin this fellow ſo greatly triumpheth, wiſhing belike (as his whole Libell ſeemeth to deſire) that no malicious ſchiſmatike ſhoulde be puniſhed for moouing ſedition in the lande. But to this vnbrideled tongue, it may be ſayd as the Pſalme ſayth, Quid gloriaris in malitia tua? &c. Where hee courſeth the Biſhop of London with the lewde lying

Epithete of Dumbe Iohn, fetched I cannot tell from what groſſe conceite, either as willingly ſtumbling vpon Dumbe for Don, or for that he preacheth not ſo oft, as hee and other of his crewe babbling in their verball ſermons vſe to doe, or from whence elſe I knowe not, vnleſſe it pleaſe his wiſedome to play with his owne conceite, and miniſter matter to the Prentiſes and Women of London, to ſport himſelfe in that pretie deuiſed and newe founde name. If the Biſhop ſhoulde anſvvere for himſelfe, I knowe he might ſay ſomevvhat after this ſort: Good charitable Martin, hovv olde are you? how long haue you knowen the man? what reports in the booke of Martyrs, in Maſter Aſkams booke of his Schoolemaſter, and in ſome learned men that haue vvritten from beyond the Seas, haue you heard of him? Maſter Foxe ſaith of him, that hee vvas one of the fiue, and novve onely aliue, that ſtoode in the ſolemne diſputations in the firſt of Quene Mary, with a hundred hauberdes about his eares: (the like whereof you threaten now him and others) in the defence of the Goſpell, againſt all the learned Papiſts in England. For the which hee was driuen into baniſhment, and there continued for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe yeeres, viſiting almoſt all Vniuerſities in Italie and Germanie, hauing great conference with the moſt and beſt learned men 
                     〈◊〉
                   the laſt being ſtayed at Iany an vniuerſitie erected by the dukes of Saxonie, and ſhoulde, if he had not come away, had the Hebrewe lecture, which Snepphinus had, intertained by them to reade in their ſayd vniuerſitie both Greeke & Latin, in the company and with the good loue and liking of thoſe famous men, Flaccus Illyricus, Victorius, Strigellus,

D. Snepphinus, called alter Luther, vvith diuers others, where belike he was not dumbe. And after comming home, was appoynted among the famous learned men, to diſpute againe with the enemies of the religion, the papiſticall biſhops, and like, that if the diſputations had continued, to ſhew him not ignorant in all the three tongues, as he will yet if Martin Malapert prouoke him too farre, not to be dumb. Is he dumbe becauſe he vvas the onely Preacher in Leiceſterſhire for a ſpace, as the noble Earle of Huntington can vvitneſſe? and by their tvvo meanes, that ſhire, God be bleſſed, was conuerted & brought to that ſtate that it is now in? which in true religion is aboue any other place, becauſe they retaine the Goſpell without contention, which fewe other places doe. And in Lincolneſhire did he nothing? did he not firſt purge the Cathedrall Church, being at that time a neſt of vncleane birdes, and ſo by preaching and executing the Commiſſion ſo preuailed in the countrey (God bleſſing his labours) that not one recuſant was left in the countrey, at his comming away to this ſea of London? Is this to be dumbe? howe many Sermons hath he preached at Paules croſſe? ſometime three in a yeere, yea, ſometime two or three together, being an olde man, to ſupply ſome yonger mens negligence.
               It is omitted, that Epiſcopomaſtix had a fling at the Biſhoppe of London for ſwearing by his faith, wherefore he termeth him a Swag. What he meaneth by that, I will not diuine: but as all the reſt is lewd, ſo ſurely herein he hath a lewde meaning. It is to be thought, that the Biſhop will take profite hereby, being a man that hath diligently read Plutarke,

De vtilitate capienda ad inimico. If it bee an othe, as this gentleman hath cenſured it, it is not to be doubted, but that he will amend it: but if it were lawful, as it may be for any thing Martin can ſay, to aske his brotherhood, what Amen ſignifieth, or whether it be an othe: then in his wicked and malicious wiſhes for the ouerthrow of the Clergie, how oft is he to be found to ſay Amen? for in the phraſe of our ſpeech, by my faith ſignifieth no more, but, in very trueth, bona fide, in trueth, aſſuredly, id eſt, Amen.
               
               It is to be thought, that Martin miſliketh to ſay by his faith, becauſe a railing and ſlanderous ſpirite can haue no faith: for where Charitie is away (the ſoule of all good workes) there can be no faith. Read that of Paul, Charitas non inuidet, non eſt ſuſpicax, &c. The contraries whereof ſwell in Martin as venemous humours in an infectious ſore.
               Among other their reproches, they affirme of the Biſhop of Rocheſter, that hee preſented him ſelfe to a benefice. I doe not thinke it to be true, for that I know it can not be good in Lawe. If he hath procured a benefice in way of Commendam (as they call it) it is by lawe allowed, and hath bene done by other.
               The biſhop of Lincolne is knowen to bee learned and zealous in religion. There are few men toward her Maieſtie that haue preached in the court, either oftner times, or with more commendation, or better liking, as well before he was biſhop, as ſince. It is therefore maruaile, that none in all this time coulde eſpie his inclination vnto corrupt and Papiſticall doctrine, vntill the chickens of the ſcratching kite

yong Martiniſts, got wings to flee abroad, & cric out vntrueths againſt euery man that diſpleaſeth them.
               If the Biſhoppe of Lincolne had not euen of late ſhevved himſelfe in the Commiſſion Court, at the examination of ſome of them, hee had now eſcaped this ſcratch of the lewde lying kite Martin Marprelate. What his words were I haue forgotten, & yet I heard them deliuered by a learned man that vvas preſent. For I did not then meane to deale in this cauſe, but they were nothing ſoūding to that which the Libell layeth downe. And the perſon conſidered at whoſe funerall hee preached, hee could not with comelineſſe ſpeake leſſe in her commendation then hee did, vnleſſe they vvoulde haue had him as raſh and furious as themſelues, and to enter into Gods ſecrete iudgement, and openly to condemne her as a reprobate. God may vvorke great matters in a moment.
               THE biſhop of Wincheſter is charged vvith certaine vvordes vttered in two Sermons the laſt Lent: the one in the Queenes Chappell, the other at S. Marie Oueries in Southwarke. The wordes of the challeng are theſe, Like a flattering hypocrite, hee proteſted before God and the congregation, that there was not in the worlde at this day, nay, there had not beene ſince the Apoſtles time ſuch a flouriſhing ſtate of a Church, as nowe wee haue in Englande. Surely, if hee had vttered theſe wordes for the ſtate of the Church appoynted by lawe and order, not reſpecting the faultes of particular perſons, it might in Chriſtian duetie bee well defended. But it was not vttered in this manner, nor for the matter, nor for the time. The firſt part of thoſe wordes hee doth not acknowledge at

all, for they are purpoſely inſerted to ſtirre enuie. Thus in deede it vvas deliuered: As for the trueth of doctrine, according to the worde of God, for the right adminiſtration of the Sacramēts, for the true worſhip of God in our prayer, laide downe in the booke of ſeruice: ſince the Apoſtles age, vnto this preſent age of the reſtoring of the goſpell, there was neuer Church vpon the face of the earth, ſo nigh the ſinceritie of Gods trueth, as the Church of England is at this day. Theſe vvords vvith Gods helpe, he vvil iuſtifie to be true, vpon the daunger, not of his liuing only, but of his life alſo, againſt any man that vvil withſtand it: and yet therein ſhall not ſhew him ſelfe either deſperate Dicke, or ſhameleſſe, impudent or wainſcot faced Biſhop, as it pleaſeth the Libeller to rayle. Neither doth he thinke, that any learned man that fauoureth the Goſpell, though he miſlike ſome things and perſons novv in preſent vſe, vvill reproue it. The Papiſts I knovv in deede doe deteſt the Aſſertion, and thinke their Synagogue blaſphemed by it: No refourmed Church can iuſtly take offence at it. Where the biſhop is burdened by this ſpeeche to excuſe the multitude of Thieues, Drunkards, Murtherers, Adulterers, &c. that bee in our Church: neither did his thought conceiue, nor his wordes include any ſuch matter. But what doeth not malice, enuie, and ſpite vtter againſt the moſt innocent perſon that is? The biſhop of Wincheſter hath openly more impugned the vices of this age heere in the Church of Englande, then the vvhole broode of them that are of the Anabaptiſticall Conuenticles, and the reſidue of theſe Libellers. Woe bee to them (ſaith Eſay the Prophet) that ſpeake euil of good, and good 
                  Eſay 5. 
                  of euill, and put light for darkeneſſe, and darkeneſſe for

light, ſweete for ſowre, and ſowre for ſweete. Dauid had Pſal. 120. great cauſe to crie, domine libera animam meam à labijs iniquis, & à lingua doloſa. And Salomon, cogitatio ſtulti 
                  Pro. 24. 
                  peccatum eſt, & abominatio hominum Detractor. The deuiſe of a foole is ſinne, and all men abhorre the backbiter or Slaunderer. If any man vvill reprooue the Aſſertion before written, God vvilling he ſhall be anſvvered, ſo that he rayle not.
               This may be a ſufficient anſwere to the vntrueth fathered vpon the B. of Wincheſters words, & that hee is not for the ſame iuſtly tearmed Monſtrous and flattering hypocrite, ſpeaking againſt his owne conſcience. But I ſee in theſe wordes the reproch not only of the biſhop, but much more amalicious ſpite againſt this Church of England, and that ſo deepely ſetled in their hearts, that their eares cannot, without griefe, he are any good ſpoken of it. Therefore I thinke my ſelfe in Chriſtian dutie bound, ſomevvhat farther to follovve this matter, and with ſome ſignification of thankefulneſſe, to acknowledge and confeſſe thoſe excellēt bleſſings, which it hath pleaſed God, of his great mercies, to beſtowe vpon the ſame, as vvell in King Edward the ſixts dayes, as much more in her Maieſties reigne that now is: and firſt, to beginne with that which is the principall, that is, the ſinceritie of doctrine, and all branches of true religion receiued, profeſſed, taught, and eſtabliſhed in this Realme. In which point, I thinke it very ſuperfluous & needles for me to recite the particular branches, and to make a nevv catechiſme, or to pen a new confeſſion of the Church of England, ſeeing they both are ſo ſufficiently performed, that (vvithout enuy be it ſpoken) there is none better in any refourmed

Church in Europe. For a Catechiſme, I refer them to that which was made by the learned and godly man Maſter Nowel, Deane of Paules, receiued and allovved by the Church of England, and very fully grounded and eſtabliſhed vpon the vvorde of God. There may you ſee all the parts of true Religion receiued, the difficulties expounded, the trueth declared, the corruptions of the Church of Rome reiected. But this I like not in our Church, that it is lawful to euery man to ſet foorth a nevve Catechiſme at his pleaſure. I read, that in the Primitiue Church, that thing did great harme, and corrupted the mindes of many ſimple perſons, with ſoule errours and hereſies. I ſee the like at this day: for thereby many honeſt meaning hearts are caried avvay to the miſliking of our manner of prayer, and adminiſtration of Sacraments, and other orders: vvhereby it is made a principall inſtrument to maintaine and increaſe diſcorde and diſſention in the Church.
               For a ſound and true confeſſion acknowledged by this our church, I refer them to that notable Apologie of the Engliſh Church, written not many yeeres ſince, by that Iewel of England, late Biſhop of Sarifburie. Wherein they ſhal finde all parts of Chriſtian religion confeſſed & proued, both by the teſtimony of the canonicall ſcriptures, and alſo by the conſent of all learned and godly antiquitie for the ſpace of certain hundred yeres after Chriſt. For the integrity and ſoundnes, for the learning and eloquence ſhewed in the ſame Apologie, they (that contemne that notable learned man becauſe hee was a Biſhoppe) may haue very good teſtimonie in a litle Epiſtle, vvritten by Peter Martir vnto the ſaid biſhop, and

nowe printed, and in the latter edition ſet before the ſame Apologie: where they ſhall finde that hee ſpeaketh not for himſelfe onely, but for many other learned men of the church of Tygure, and other places. Nowe, as this learned Biſhop doeth acknowledge and confeſſe for this Church, all trueth of doctrine: ſo doeth hee reprooue, condemne and deteſt all corruptions brought into the ſame, either by the church of Rome, or by any other ancient or newe heretikes, whome he there particularly nameth: yea, and to the great comfort of all them that are members of the ſame church, and acknowledge the ſame confeſſion, hee prooueth and euidently ſheweth, that the teſtimonies of the Scriptures, whereon that confeſſion is grounded, for the true interpretation of them, haue the witneſſe & conſent of all the learned antiquitie, as I haue ſaide, for certaine hundred yeeres. Which I take to bee a very good comfort and confirmation to all honeſt conſciences in theſe captious and quarelling dayes.
               That which I meane, I will declare by ſome particulars. What is more euident, certaine and firme for the article of the perſon of Chriſt in his Godhead & manhood, then thoſe things that the ancient Fathers decreed out of the canonicall ſcriptures in the Councels of Nice, Conſtantinople, Epheſus, Chalcedon; & ſome others againſt Arius, Samoſatenus, Apollinaris, Neſtorius, Eutiches, and thoſe heretikes that were termed Monotholetes &c? Therefore whoſoeuer do teach contrary to the determination of thoſe councels (as ſome do in theſe dayes) they do not iuſtly hold that principal article and foundation of Chriſtian religion.
               Moreouer, as touching the grace and benefite of

Chriſt, the beginning whereof riſeth from the eternall loue of God toward vs, and from the free election to redemption and eternall ſaluation: and proceedeth to our vſe and benefite, by the diſpenſation of Chriſt once offred vpon the Croſſe, by effectual calling wrought by the holy Ghoſt in preaching of the Goſpell, by our iuſtification, ſanctification, and the gift of perſeuerance and continuance in the faith, thereby in the end to obtaine reſurrection and eternall life: touching (I ſay) this free grace of God (another principall ground of Chriſtian religion) what coulde be, or can bee more certainly or abundantly layde downe out of the holy Scriptures, then was determined in the Councels of Carthage, Mileuitane, Auraſicane &c. againſt the Pelagians, and other enemies of the free grace of God in Chriſt Ieſu our Sauiour? Eſpecially if you adde the writings of Auguſt. and other ancient Fathers for defence of the ſame.
               As to that which is neceſſarie to be knowen touching the true Catholique Church (a matter of great importaunce euen at this day) vvhat can be more copiouſly or with more perſpicuitie declared, then is by that learned father Auguſtine, as well in other places, as principally in his bookes againſt the Donatiſts?
               Likewiſe, for the matter of the Sacrament of the Lordes Supper, (if ſimple trueth coulde content men) what is more euident, then that doctrine, which hath bene laid downe by the ancient Fathers, Iuſtine, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Auguſtine, Theodorete, and a number of other? For proofe whereof, I referre you to B. Iewell, in his worthy booke, wherein he anſwereth Hardings reply againſt his 27. queſtions,

propoſed at Pauls Croſſe, &c. I remēber, touching this matter of the Sacrament, Occolampadius, a man of great reading & godlines, ſaith of S. Auguſt. Is primus mihi vellicauit aurem. He did firſt put me in minde of the true vnderſtanding of this Sacrament.
               Theſe foure principal Articles I haue laid downe for example, that the Chriſtian Reader may the more eaſily perceiue vvhat comfort it is to any Church, to haue the grounds of their faith and religion ſo eſtabliſhed vpon the holy Scriptures, that for the interpretation of the ſame, they haue the teſtimonie & conſent of the Primitiue Church, & the ancient learned Fathers. From which Conſent they ſhould not depart, either in doctrine, or other matter of weight, vnleſſe it ſo fall out in them, that we be forced thereto, either by the plaine wordes of the Scriptures, or by euident and neceſſary concluſions following vpon the ſame, or the Analogie of our faith. Which thing if we ſhall perceiue, we ought, & ſafely may, take that liberty that themſelues, & eſpecially Auguſtine hath vſed, & requireth other to vſe. Nec Catholicis Epiſcopis, &c. Wee muſt not conſent (ſaith De vnitate Eccle. cap. 10 Auguſtine,) ſo much as to Catholike Biſhops, if they be deceiued, and be of opinion contrary to the Canonicall Scriptures. Againe, I am not tied with the authoritie of this Epiſtle. 
                  Contra Creſcon. lib. 2. ca. 31. 
                  For I haue not the writings of Cyprian in like eſtimation, as I haue the Canonicall Scriptures, but I meaſure them by the rule of the holy Scriptures. If I finde any thing in his writings agreeing to the Scriptures, I receiue it with commendation and reuerence: if otherwiſe, with his good leaue, I refuſe it. The like you haue, Epiſt. 48. 111. & 112. In Prooemio li. 3. de Trinitate, and many other places. Otherwiſe, to reiect the teſtimonie of the

ancient Fathers raſhly, is a token of too much confidence in our owne wits. It was noted as a great fault in Neſtorius, and a chief cauſe of his hereſie, that contemning the Fathers, hee reſted too much vpon his owne iudgement. The like confidence drew many learned men, and of great gifts, to be Patrons of ſundry foule and ſhamefull errours. How came it to paſſe, that after that notable Councell of Nice, ſo many deteſtable hereſies aroſe againſt the Deitie & the Humanitie of Chriſt, againſt the vniting of both natures, and the diſtinction of the properties of them? &c. but onely out of this roote, that they contemned the graue ſentences, interpretations, & determinations of thoſe famous Confeſſors and great learned Fathers, as were in the ſame aſſembled, and had too much liking in their owne wits & learning. But woe be vnto them (ſaith Eſay) that are ouerwiſe in their owne conceite. Vigilius in his firſt booke againſt Eutyches ſaith thus. Theſe cloudes of fond and vaine accuſations are powred out by them chiefly, which are diſeaſed either with the ſickeneſſe of ignorance, and of a contentious appetite: and while they being puffed vp with confidence of a proud ſtomacke, for this only cauſe they reiect the rules of faith, laide downe by the ancient fathers, that they may thruſt into the Church their owne wauering deuiſes, which they haue ouerthwartly conceiued. This ſentence, I would our vncharitable accuſers & troublers of the Church would well weigh and conſider with them-ſelues. Therfore (good reader) I proteſt for my ſelfe, and for the reſidue of this church, that we dare not in conſcience, nor thinke it tollerable, with contempt to reiect the teſtimonies of antiquitie in eſtabliſhing any matter of weight in the Church. We leaue that

to our haſty Diuines, that in three yeeres ſtudy thinke themſelues able to controll all men, & to haue more learning then all the Biſhops in England: And for this cauſe vvil they giue no credit to ancient writers againſt their new found equality. For with them, it is a foule fault once in a ſermon to name an ancient father, or to alledge any teſtimonie out of his workes.
               Novve (good Chriſtian Reader) ſeeing by the good bleſſing of God, vve haue all parts of Chriſtian fayth and Religion profeſſed and taught in this Church, and the ſame grounded vpon the canonicall Scriptures, vvith the conſent and expoſition of the Primitiue Church and ancient Fathers: What a vaunting pride is it? (as Cyprian ſpeaketh) vvhat an vnthankefulneſſe to God? vvhat vncharitable affection toward the Church of their naturall Countrey, that they cannot abide any good to be ſpoken of it? pretending nothing but the priuate faultes and vices of ſome men, or the diſagreeing from them in ſome orders and partes of Gouernement, which they vvill neuer be able to proue by the word of GOD to bee of neceſſitie. In other reformed Churches, vvhome they ſo greatly extolle, and vvould make paterne to vs, haue they not imperfections? Haue they not foule faults, and great vices among all ſortes of men, as well Miniſters as others? Surely, their worthieſt writers & graueſt Preachers doe note, that they haue. And if they woulde denie it, the world doth ſee it, and many good men among them doe bevvaile it. I vvill not ſtay in the other blesſings of God, vvhere with he hath adorned this Church. I ſhall haue occaſion to ſpeake ſomewhat more of it hereafter, and God ſend vs grace, that we

may vvith true thankefulneſſe acknovvledge it. But this I may not omitte vvithout great note of vnthankefulneſſe towarde our mercifull God, vvhich hath not onely preſerued, maintained and defended the State, but alſo appoynted this Church to be as a Sanctuarie or place of refuge for the Saints of God, afflicted and perſecuted in other Countries for the profesſion of the Goſpell: for whome I am perſvvaded vvee doe fare the better at Gods hande. And I doubt not but in that reſpect, al reformed Churches in other places, feeling the blesſing of God by vs, thinke reuerently of our State, and pray to God for vs, as all good men vvith vs ought to doe for them, that the true linke of Chriſtian charitie may ſoundly knitte vs together in one body of right faith and Religion. If ſome fevve perſons thinke amiſſe of our Church, I impute the cauſe thereof only to the malicious & vntrue reports made by ſome of our owne Countreymen vnto them. Which perſons, if they did vnderſtande the true State of this our Realme, would thinke farre othervviſe, as diuers of the moſt graue & learned writers haue already euidently declared. This alſo is not the leaſt blesſing of God, as well in the time of K. Edward, as in the reigne of our gracious Soueraigne, that this Church hath had as ample ornamēts of learned men, (Rumpantur vt Ilia Momo,) as the moſt reformed Churches in Europe, & farre more plentifully then ſome place, whoſe ſtate they ſeeke to frame vs vnto. Only I except thoſe excellēt men, whō God had prepared in the beginning to be the reſtorers of his Trueth, & doctrine of the Goſpel in thoſe parts: Namely we haue had B. Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Couerdale, Hooper, & diuers other,

vvhich were no Biſhops, as M. Bradford, M. Sanders, M. Rogers, M. Philpot, D. Haddon, &c. Moſt of vvhich, as they haue left good proofe of their learning in vvriting: ſo did they confirme the ſame vvith their blood in the ende. The like I may iuſtly ſay of them vvhome God hath ſent to reſtore his Trueth ſince the beginning of her Maieſties reigne, (hovvſoeuer it pleaſeth the Broode of the Martiniſts to deface them) as Biſhoppe Coxe, Pilkington, Grindall, Sands, Horne, Iewell, &c. vvhich haue good teſtimonie of their learning giuen them by as graue, learned, and zealous men, as any haue liued in this age, among vvhome for certaine yeeres they liued. A nomber of other haue proceeded out of both our Vniuerſities, vvhich though Martin Momus will ſay the contrary, deſerue ſingular commēdation for their learning, and haue declared the ſame to the vvorlde in anſvvering and confuting the opprobrious writings of the common Aduerſaries. In vvhich their anſvveres (without enuie and diſpleaſure be it ſpoken) there appeareth as ſufficient learning, as doeth in the moſt workes at this time publiſhed by the vvriters of forreine Countreies. If Engliſhmen at this time ſo greatly diſprayſed, vvere giuen vvith like paynes to ſet foorth the exerciſes of their ſtudie and learning, as in other places they doe: they vvoulde dravve as good commendation of learning to their Countrey, as moſt other Churches doe. To vvhich nomber of ours, I adde alſo ſome of thē, vvhom certaine occaſions haue caried away to the miſliking of the preſent ſtate of this Church: vvhich I knowe haue receiued of God ſingular good giftes, which I pray earneſtly they may vſe to his glory, and the

procuring the vnity & peace of the Church, vvhich our Haſtie Diuines of M. M. his brood, ſeeke to breake and diſturbe. This teſtimonie, I thought my ſelfe bounde in conſcience to yeelde to that Church of my naturall Countrey, in vvhich, and by vvhich, through the mercie of our gracious God, I am that I am. The godly, I truſt, vvill interprete all to the beſt: the reſidue I looke not to pleaſe.
               The B. of Wincheſter is further charged in this maner, He ſaid that men might find fault, if they were diſpoſed to quarrell, aſwel with the Scriptures, as with the booke of common prayer. Who could heare this compariſon without trembling? Let the Libellers, whatſoeuer they are, remēber, Os quodmentitur, occidit animam. At that time, in S. Mary Oueries church, in a large diſcourſe, he did anſwere the obiections that many make at this day, againſt the booke of common praier, & towarde the end vttered theſe words, If it could be without blaſphemie, they might picke as many & as great quarrels againſt the holy ſcriptures thēſelues. For euen the beſt writings are ſubiect to the ſlanderous malice of wicked men. This aſſertion was found fault with all, by a Ieſuite or Masſing prieſt at that time in the Marſhalſey, & therfore the B. the next Sunday following, expounded his meaning, and at large ſhevved, that that might be done, which beforetime was done by a great number: and that he was not ſo far beſide himſelfe, as to compare the booke of common prayer vvith the holy ſcriptures in dignity, trueth, or maieſtie: He leaueth ſuch blaſphemous dealing to the Papiſts, the Family of Loue, & ſome other Sectaries: but he compared them in this, (as it is before ſaide) that the Scriptures themſelues vvere ſubiect alſo to ſlaunderous and deprauing

tongues, and yet not therfore to be reiected, wherof he recited ſundry examples. Celſus that heatheniſh Epicure (againſt whom Origen writeth) in his booke Lib. 1. contra Celſum. called Verax, doth powre out many railing & ſlaunderous reproches, not onely againſt the holy Scriptures, but alſo againſt the courſe of Chriſtian Religion: as that they receiued their religion & doctrine of the barbarous Iewes, that is, out of the bookes of Moſes and the Prophets. The like did Porphyrius an other Euſeb. lib. 6. cap. 19. Philoſopher, and in his bookes reprooued the Scriptures in many places: for hee wrote thirtie bookes againſt Chriſtian religion. That ſcoffing ſophiſter Libanius, and his ſcholler Iulian the Apoſtata, Socr. lib. 1. cap. 9. vſed the like blaſphemies againſt the Chriſtian faith, and the Scriptures, out of which it was prooued, as appeareth in ſundrie auncient Writers. Who knoweth not, that ſome Heretikes reiected the moſt part of the olde Teſtament, as falſe and fabulous? The Valentiniane Heretike, ſayeth Tertullian, In Praeſcript. Tertul. Euſebius. Euſeb. lib. 4. cap. 28. Epiphanius. Theodor. 
                  Quaedam legis & Prophetarum improbat, quaedam probat, id eſt, Omnia improbat, dum quaedam reprobat. The Marcioniſts receiue onely the Goſpell of Matthewe, the other they reiect. And likewiſe they admitte but two Epiſtles of Saint Paul, that is, to Timothie and Titus, and (as Hierome ſayeth) to Philemon. Tatian alſo depraueth the Scriptures, reiecteth the Actes of the Apoſtles, and picketh ſundrie other quarrels againſt them. There was neuer any Heretike, but that to giue countenance to his opinion, hee would ſeeme to ground it vpon the Scriptures. And what is that but wickedly to father lies vpon the Scriptures? And for this cauſe you know, the Papiſts thinke it no ſure ground

to reſt vpon the ſcriptures onely, affirming blaſphemouſly, that the Scriptures are darke, vnperfect, and doubtfull, becauſe they may bee wreſted cuery way, like a noſe of waxe, or like a leaden Rule. Wherefore, Chriſtian charitie and modeſtie woulde not thus maliciouſly and ſlanderouſly wreſt and wring the words of the Biſhop, tending to a good and godly meaning.
               Of like trueth it is, that he burtheneth the Biſhop of Wincheſter, to affirme that it was hereſie to ſay, The preaching of the worde was the onely ordinarie way to ſaluation, which he neuer thought, or ſpake, either thē, or at any other time of his life. But in handling of that controuerſie, Penrie ſpake things ſo ſtrangely & obſcurely, that he ſeemed to attribute that effect to the preaching of the word only, & not otherwiſe vſed by reading: And being vrged with that queſtion, by occaſion of reading the Scriptures in Churches, his anſwere was ſuch, as hee euidently ſhewed himſelfe to meane, that that effect of ſaluatiō could not be wrought by hearing the worde of God read, with ſome other wordes, giuing ſuſpition of worſe matter. And then indeede the B. roſe not out of his place, (as theſe honeſt men doe carpe) nor ſpake in ſuch cholerike maner, as they pretend: but quietly ſaid, My Lord, this is not farre from hereſie. What were the words that Penry vſed, & eſpecially moued the B. to ſpeake, hee doeth not at this time remember: but ſure he is, they were as far from that, which is laide downe in the Libel, as falſhoode can be from truth. I wonder that mē which profeſſe God, yea, or that beleeue there is a God, can with open mouth ſo boldely powre foorth ſuch heapes of vntrueths. Detractor abominabilis eſt Deo. The counſell of the

Prophet is good. He that would gladly ſee good dayes, let 
                  Pſal. 34. 
                  him refraine his tongue from euill, and his lippes that they ſpeake no guile. The mouth of a malicious man (ſaith Ambroſe) Epiſt. lib. 7. Epiſt. 44. 
                  is a deepe or bottomleſſe pit. The innocent that is too eaſie of credit, doth quickly fall, but he riſeth againe. But the backebiting railer is by his owne craft caſt downe headlong to confuſion, in ſuch ſort, as he ſhall neuer recouer himſelfe againe. And Bernard, Let not my ſoule be in companie 
                  Super Can
                        •
                      Serm. 24. 
                  of backebiting tongues, becauſe God doth hate them, when the Apoſtle ſaith, Backbiters are odious to God. Euery one that backbiteth, ſheweth himſelfe voyd of charitie. Moreouer, what other thing ſeeketh hee by deprauing, but that he whome he backebiteth, may come in hatred and contempt with them among whom he is depraued? Wherefore the backebiter woundeth charitie, in all that heare him, and ſomuch as in him lyeth, doth vtterly deſtroy him whome he ſtriketh with his tongue.
               
               As for the reproch of want of learning, he will not ſtriue much with them. The Biſhop hath not vſed (God bee thanked) to vaunt himſelfe of great learning. Neither doth he diſdaine to be accounted vnlearned of theſe men, which many yeeres ſince contemned Biſhoppe Iewell as a man of no deepe learning, and euen of late dayes coulde ſay that Eraſmus was no Diuine. His prayer is, that the ſmall meaſure of knowledge, which it pleaſed God to giue him in the continuance of fiftie yeeres ſtudie, may be imployed to the glorie of God, and the benefite of his Countrey. It is knowen fiue and fourtie yeres ſince, that he was Maſter of Art, and Student of Diuinitie, and diſputed in that facultie: ſince which time, hee was neuer drawen from that exerciſe of good learning. This is his greateſt comfort, that ſince he

was a yong man in Magdalene Colledge in Oxford, he hath bene brought vp in the loue of the Goſpel, and was reaſonablie able to confirme his conſcience, & to repreſſe the aduerſary, not only by the holy ſcriptures, but alſo by the writings of the anciēt Fathers, and the beſt authours of this age ſince the renewing of the Goſpell, as hee hath many honeſt and learned men witneſſes yet aliue. M. Trauers, whome they prefere before him, he knoweth not what he is. He neuer ſawe him to his remembrance, but once, and that was at my Lord of Canterburies, in the preſence of ſome honourable perſons: at which time the man ſhewed no great learning. Doctor Sparke is ſo well knowen to the Biſhoppe of Wincheſter, and the Biſhoppe to him, that hee cannot be perſwaded that Doctor Sparke will affirme, that he did put the Biſhop at that time or any other (as they terme it) to a non plus. But vvhatſoeuer hee vvill doe, if the one or the other, or they both, doe make any bragge of a victorie then gotten (as I haue before ſayde) ſurely they doe greatly forget themſelues, and declare that Ladie Philautie did bleare their eyes, and made that they coulde not ſee the right rules of modeſtie: eſpecially conſidering, what the witneſſes were, and what report they haue made thereof to the beſt of this Lande, which hath not bene made vnknowen to the worlde. It is true that Gregorie ſaith, Superbia lumen intelligentiae abſcondit. Pride Moral. 8. Idem. 12. daſeleth the eyes of a mans vnderſtanding. And againe, Superbi &c. Proud men when they thinke them ſelues deſpiſed, fall by and by to railing. Cyprian, that Lib. epiſt. 1. Epiſt. 3. reuerend and learned father, ſayth notably. An high and ſwelling heart, arrogant and proude bragging is not of

Chriſt that teacheth humilitie, but ſpringeth of the ſpirit of Antichriſt. I pray GOD theſe men may remember theſe leſſons.
               AS touching the Gouernment of the Church of England, now defended by the biſhops, this I ſay. When God reſtored the doctrine of the Goſpel more ſincerely and more aboundantly then euer before, vnder that good yong Prince, King Edward 6. at vvhich time not the gouernours onely of this Realme vnder him, but a number of other Noblemen & Gentlemen, were well knovven to be zealous in the fauor of the trueth: by conſent of all the States of this Land, this maner of gouernment that now is vſed, was by law confirmed as good and godly. The biſhops & other of the clergy that gaue their aduiſe and conſent to the ſame, vvere learned & zealous, biſhop Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and many other, vvhich after ſealed their doctrine vvith their blood, all learned, graue and vviſe in compariſon of theſe yong Sectaries which greatly pleaſe themſelues. M. Couerdale & M. Hooper, neuer thought to be ſuperſtitious or inclining to Antichriſtian corruption, were contented to vſe the office, authority, and iuriſdiction of biſhops, the one at Exeter, the other at Gloceſter. Peter Martyr, Bucer, and Iohn de Alaſco, graue men, and of great knovvledge and godlineſſe, did liue in that ſtate vnder the Archbiſhops and biſhops that then vvere, and vvrote to them moſt reuerendly, not refuſing to giue them thoſe Titles, that novv bee accompted Antichriſtian. The like they did to other of late time. Reade the Preface of Peter Martyr, ſet before his Dialogues againſt Vbiquity, & ſee what honourable teſtimonie hee giueth to biſhop Iewell,
                  
and what titles he affoordeth him. To condemne all theſe as Reprobate and Pety Antichriſts, were great raſhneſſe, and ſuch impudencie as ought not in any Chriſtian Church or common weale to bee borne without puniſhment. When God had marueilouſly preſerued for vs our gracious ſoueraigne Queene Elizabeth, & ſet her in her Fathers ſeat, being brought vp from her tender yeres, in the inſtruction of Gods trueth, ſhee tooke aduiſe of her moſt honourable Counſell, Nobles, and learned of the Realme, and eſpecially ſuch as were moſt forward in religion, and with conſent of all the States of this Realme, by law receiued, confirmed and eſtabliſhed the manner of Gouernment, and other orders of the Church now obſerued. The learned men that yeelded their aduiſe and conſent to the ſame, were thoſe reuerend & godly perſons, that came lately out of baniſhment, from the ſchoole of affliction, & could not ſo ſoone forget their Lorde God, and the zeale of his trueth, namely, Maſter Cox, Grindall, Sands, Horne, Pilkington, Iewell, Parkhurſt, and a number of other, vvho vvere after choſen to be biſhops, and executed thoſe offices, without grudging or repining of any, vntill about the tenth yeere of her Maieſties raigne, the curious deuiſes beganne to be more common. Since vvhich time, by the countenauncing of ſome, they haue greatly increaſed in ſtrange aſſertions, & now be come almoſt to the higheſt. The reproches therefore that are giuen to this State by theſe Libellers, touch not onely the Biſhoppes, but the Prince, the Counſell, and the honorable; woiſhipfull, wiſe, and learned of the Realme.
               As for this queſtion of Church-gouernment, I

meane not at this time to ſtand much on it. For let them ſay what they luſt, for any thing that hath beene written hitherto touching it, it is ſufficiently anſwered. Onely this I deſire, That they will lay downe out of the worde of God ſome iuſt proofes, and a direct commandement, that there ſhoulde be in all ages and ſtates of the Church of Chriſt, one onely forme of outward gouernment. Secondly, that they will note and name ſome certaine particular Churches, either in the Apoſtles time, or afterward, wherein the whole gouernement of the Church was practiſed, onelie by Doctours, Pastours, Elders, and Deacons, 
                        •
                     nd none other, and that in an equalitie; without ſuperioritie in one aboue an other. If this bee done ſoundly and truely, without any wreſting or double vnderſtanding of the places of Scripture: I proteſt they will ſhake that opinion that nowe I haue of this preſent gouernement of the Church of Englande. Yet vnder correction (I will not ſay, that I know) but I am ſurely perſwaded, that they will neuer be able to doe it.
               Moreouer, I woulde wiſh them vnfaignedly to declare, whether all the Churches at this day reformed in Europe, where the light of the Goſpell was firſt restored, and ſpecially of Saxonie and High Almaine, haue this gouernement, which by theſe men is nowe required, and none other. If they haue, it is a good preiudice for their cauſe: if they haue not, it is hard, that the example of two or three Churches ſhoulde ouerrule all the reſidue, in which the light of the Goſpell beganne before them. And it may bee well ſayde, Did the Goſpell beginne firſt with you? Wee may not pull downe one Rome and ſet vp an other. Surely as graue learned mē as moſt that haue written

in this time, euidently affirme the contrarie, & do make good proofe of this propoſition. That one forme of Church-gouernment is not neceſſarie in al times and places of the Church, & that their Senate or Segniorie is not conuenient vnder a Christian Magistrate.
               
               In Denmarke they haue biſhoppes both in name, and office, as it appeareth in certaine Epiſtles of Hemingius written to ſome of them. In which hee ſayth: They are greatly troubled vvith continuall viſitation of their Churches. In Saxony they haue Archbiſhoppes and biſhoppes in office, but not in name. For proofe heereof, I alleadge the teſtimonies of that learned man Zanchius in the Annotations vpon certaine parts of his confeſſion. In the Church of the Proteſtants (ſaith he) in deede they haue biſhops and Archbiſhops, which chaunging the good Greeke 
                  Pag. 272. 
                  names into ill Latine names, they call Superintendents, and generall Superintendents, &c.
               
               The ſame Zanchius, in the ſame his confeſsion, hath theſe words, By the ſame reaſon, thoſe thing
                        •
                      that were ordained in the church touching Archbiſhops, yea, and 
                  Pag. 170. 
                  the foure patriarchs before the Counſell of Nice, may bee excuſed and defended. Theſe vvordes and ſome other were miſliked by one famous learned man, who wrote to Zanchius of the ſame. But Zanchius was ſo farre from altering his iudgement, that in the foreſaid Annotations hee writeth a large defence of it out of Bucer, in Epiſt. ad Epheſ. vvhich is alſo found in a little Treatiſe, vvhich the same Bucer hath vvritten▪ 
                  De vi & vſu Ministerij. And Zanchius in the ſame place ſhewed the reaſon why hee is ſo grounded in that opinion. I beleeue (ſaith hee) that thoſe things which were concluded and determined by the

Godly Fathers aſſembled in the name of the Lorde, with common conſent and without contradiction to the Scriptures, proceede from the holie ſpirite of GOD: and therefore I dare not inconſcience improoue them. And what is more certaine by the Histories, Councels and writings of the Fathers, then that thoſe orders of the Miniſters, of which wee haue ſpoken, haue bene receiued and allowed by the common conſent of Chriſtedome? And I pray, who am I, that I ſhould reprooue thoſe thinges, which the whole church hath allowed? Neither durſt all they that bee of our time (hee meaneth the learned men of Germany) reprooue the ſame.
               
               In the foreſaide place of his Annotations, when he hath ſpoken of the gouernement of the churches of Saxony, he addeth touching other places, Euen there 
                  Pag. 273. 
                  where they haue neither the good Greeke names, nor the euill Latine termes: yet haue they certaine chiefe men, in whoſe handes well neere is all authoritie. Seeing then we agree in the things, why ſhould we haue controuerſie about the names and titles?
               
               This man vndoubtedly knewe the gouernement of all the Churches in Germany. For hee had beene a reader and teacher in diuers of them. He had bin in Geneua▪
                   he taught at Argentine eleuen yerees: after at Clauenna foure yeres: Again after that, at Heidelberge ten yeeres: And laſtly, by Caſsimire appointed at his town at Newſtade, where yet he liueth an olde man, if God of late hath not taken him out of this world.
               Thoſe places of high Almaine, wherein moſt zealous preachers and learned men haue remained, & with whome in doctrine wee moſt nighly agree, haue not one maner of gouernment, nor formes of Vide Gualterhm in 1▪ ad 
                        〈◊〉
                      Cor. cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                      5. &c. Diſcipline. In Tyg
                        ••
                     e it is wel knowen, they haue no

Senate of Elders, nor thinke it tollerable vnder a Chriſtian Magiſtrate: nor the Diſcipline by Excommunication, which they more miſlike. I thinke it be not much differing at Berne (one of the greteſt Churches) as I gather by Aretius in ſundry places. At Geneua, and ſome other places, eſpecially ſuch as haue had their beginning from thence, they haue a gouernmēt not much vnlike that platforme, which is deſired to be with vs, and is nowe in Scotland. I might ſay the like for ſome ceremonies & outward orders. In Saxony and at Baſile they kneele at the Lords Supper. At Tygure they ſit, and it is brought to them: In other places they go and receiue it, for the more expedition, as they paſſe.
               The like libertie and diuerſitie vſe they in ſome other externall things, which I am not willing for ſome cauſes to lay downe in writing. All thoſe Churches, in which the goſpell in theſe dayes, after great darkeneſſe, was firſt renewed, and the learned men whome God ſent to inſtruct them, I doubt not but haue beene directed by the ſpirite of God to retain this liberty, that in external gouernment, & other outward orders, they might chooſe ſuch as they thought in wiſdome and godlineſſe to bee moſt conuenient for the ſtate of their Country, and diſpoſition of the people. Why then ſhoulde this libertie, that other Countries hauevſed, vnder any colour bee wreſted from vs? I thinke it therefore great preſumption and boldeneſſe, that ſome of our nation, and thoſe (whatſoeuer they thinke of themſelues) not of the greateſt wiſedome and skill, ſhoulde take vpon them to controll the whole Realme, and to binde both prince & people,

in neceſſity of conſcience, to alter the preſent ſtate, and to tie themſelues to a certaine platforme deuiſed by ſome of our neighbours, which in the iudgement of manie wiſe and godly perſons is moſt vnfit for the ſtate of a kingdome, or to bee exerciſed vnder a Chriſtian Prince that defendeth the Goſpell, as in part, experience already hath taught in ſome. I pray God they looke not further, and haue not a deeper reach, then good ſubiectes that loue their Prince and countrey, ſhould haue.
               Laſtly, I would wiſh them (leauing the long diſcourſes where unto Doctor Bridges was drawen by ſome of their ſtrange and intricate aſſertions) they woulde briefly without corruption lay downe his arguments and allegations, touching the ſupreme authoritie of the Prince, and the ſuperioritie of biſhops, and modeſtly, and ſoundly anſwere the ſame, not reiecting the teſtimony of the ancient Writers and Hiſtoriographers, eſpecially ſuch as were within 400. yeeres after Chriſt, ſo farre as they may bee Teſtes temporum. For if they ſhall otherwiſe deale, and ſeeke to ſhift off the matter with reproches, ſcoffes, and ſlaunders: they wil diſcredit their cauſe, and make good men thinke, that the ſpirite with which they are carried, is not the milde ſpirit of Chriſt, but the ſpirit of him that is condemned for the father of lying, murdering and ſlandering from the beginning.
               The reaſon that mooueth vs not to like of this platforme of gouernment, is, that when we on the one part conſider the thinges that are required to be redreſſed, & on the other, the ſtate of our countrey, people, and common weale: we ſee euidently,

that to plant thoſe things in the Church, will drawe with it ſo many, and ſo great alterations of the State of gouernment, and of the lawes, as the attempting thereof might bring rather the ouerthrowe of the Goſpell among vs, then the ende that is deſired. The particulars hereof in ſome fewe things, in ſteade of many doe here follow, and hath bene opened to you before, if reaſonable warning would haue ſerued.
               Firſt, the whole ſtate of the lawes of this Realme will be altered. For the Canon lawe muſt be vtterly taken away, vvith all offices to the ſame belonging: which to ſupply with other lawes & functions without many inconueniences, wilbe very hard. The vſe and ſtudie of the Ciuil law wil be vtterly ouerthrowen: For the Ciuilians in this Realme liue not by the vſe of the Ciuill law, but by the offices of the Canon law, and ſuch things as are within the compaſſe therof. And if you take thoſe offices and functions away, and thoſe matters wherewith they deale in the Canon Lawe: you muſt needes take away the hope of rewarde, and by that meanes, their whole Studie. And matters of Tithes, Teſtaments, and Matrimonie, iudgements alſo of Adulterie, Slaunder, &c. are in theſe mens iudgements meere temporall, and therefore to bee dealt in by the temporall Magiſtrate onely: Which, as yet haue eyther none at all, or very fewe lawes touching thoſe things. Therefore the Temporall and Common lawe of this Realme, muſt by that occaſion receiue alſo a very great alteration. For it will bee no ſmall matter to apply theſe things to the Temporall lawe, and to appoynt Courts, Officers, and maner of proceſſe and proceedings in iudgement for the ſame.
               
                  
Beſide this, the Iudiciall law of the Iewes, eſpecially for ſuch offences as are againſt the lawe of God, muſt bee brought into this Common weale. For to this opinion doe they plainely incline. For they ſay already flatly, that no Magiſtrate can ſaue the life of a blaſphemer, ſtubborne Idolater, murderer, Adulterer, Inceſtuous perſon, and ſuch like, which God by his Iudiciall lawe hath commaunded to be put to death. The ſame aſſertion muſt haue like aucthoritie for the contrary, that is, that a Magiſtrate ought not to puniſh by death thoſe offences that God by his Iudicial lawe hath not appointed to be puniſhed by death, and ſo may not our lawes puniſh theft by death, nor diuers other felonies: and ſo ſome of them haue openly preached. The lawes alſo mainteining the Queenes ſupremacie in gouerning of the Church, and her prerogatiue in matters Eccleſiaſticall, as vvell Elections as others, muſt be alſo abrogated. Thoſe lavves likevviſe muſt bee taken away, whereby Impropriations and Patronages ſtand as mens lavvfull poſſeſſion and heritage. In theſe Impropriations and Patronages, as I doe confeſſe, there is Lamentable abuſe, and vviſh the ſame by ſome good Statute to bee remedied: ſo howe the thing it ſelfe can vvithout great difficultie and danger be taken away, being ſo generall as it is in the ſtate of this Realme, I leane to the iudgement of the vviſe and godly.
               The lawes of England to this day, haue ſtoode by the aucthoritie of the three Eſtates: vvhich to alter now, by leauing out the one, may happily ſeeme a matter of more vveight, then all men doe iudge it. If there vvere no more then this one thing, vvhich hitherto I haue ſpoken of, that is, the alteration of

the ſtate of all the lawes of this Realme: I thinke there is no wiſe man but ſeeth what daunger may followe in theſe perillous times, not onely by fulfilling the thing, but alſo by offering to doe it.
               It hath beene alwayes dangerous, to picke quarrels againſt lawes ſetled. And I pray God, that the very rumour hereof, ſpread by theſe mens bookes, haue not already bred more inconuenience, then without hurt will bee ſuppreſſed: I may not put all that I thinke, in writing.
               The fourme of finding of Miniſters by Tythes, muſt with the Canon lawe be aboliſhed. For it was not vſed in the gouernment of the Apoſtles time, nor a great many of yeeres after, and therefore may ſeeme Papiſticall and Antichriſtian. There muſt bee ſome other order for this deuiſed. Which, with howe great alteration it muſt bee done, and how hard it will be to bring to good effect, I thinke there is no man but he ſeeth: For the liuings of biſhoppes and Cathedrall Churches, (whereat they carpe) though they were all that way beſtowed, will not ſerue the third part.
               If this gouernment, whereof they ſpeake, be (as they ſay) neceſſary in all places: then muſt they haue of neceſſitie in euery particular pariſh one Paſtor, a cōpany of Seniors, & a Deacon or two at the leaſt, and all thoſe to be found of the pariſh, becauſe they muſt leaue theſe occupations, to attend vpon the matters of the church. But there are a number of pariſhes in England not able to find one tollerable miniſter, much leſſe to find ſuch a company. The remedy hereof muſt bee, to vnite diuers pariſhes in one, wherof this inconuenience will follow, that people

in the countrey muſt come to Church, three, foure, or fiue miles off: whereas now they that dwel in the ſame town, can ſcarcely be forced by any penalties of Law orderly to come vnto the church, to ſeruice or ſermons, ſo that they will growe to barbariſme in many places.
               Whereas it is required, that the people ſhoulde chooſe their Paſtours, Elders, and Deacons: it is greatly to be feared, that it wil be matter of ſchiſme, diſcord and diſſenſion in many places: or that one or two buſie heads ſhall leade the reſidue to what purpoſe they will, to the great diſquieting both of the Church and of the common weale. Examples heereof did commonly appeare in the olde Churches, while that manner of Election did continue, as the eccleſiaſticall hiſtories in manie places doe declare. And that inconuenience cauſed Princes and biſhops ſo much to intermeddle in that matter. The common people through affection and want of right iudgement, are more eaſily wroght by ambitious perſons to giue their conſent to vnwoorthy men, as may appeare in all thoſe offices of gaine or dignity, that at this day remaine in the choice of the multitude, yea, though they be learned.
               Men doe knowe by experience, that pariſhes, vpon ſome priuate reſpect, do ſend their Letters of earneſt commendations for very vnfit and vnable perſons: whereby it may bee gathered, what they would do, if the whole choiſe were in their handes, eſpecially, being ſo backwardly affected toward the trueth of religion, as a great part of men are. They will aunſwere (perhappes) that they ſhall bee ouerſeene by the Paſtours neere about them in a particular

Synode, and forced both to be quiet, and alſo to make more fitte elections. But vvho ſeeth not vvhat matter of trouble this vvil be, vvhen vpon the occaſion almoſt of euery election, they muſt haue a particular Synode? And if the pariſh vvil not be ruled (as ſurely many vvil not) then muſt they bee excommunicated, and appeale made vnto the Prince and Magiſtrate. And that vvhich paſſeth novv with quietneſſe, and vvith a little amendment may bee vvell vſed, ſhal be continuall occaſion of broile and trouble, whereto this nation is more inclined vpon light cauſes, then any other.
               Moreouer, that vvhich is moſt of all pretended for this manner of common Election, that they may knovee their miniſter, and thereby haue the better liking of him, can not poſſibly bee brought to paſſe, vnleſſe they vvill imagine, that euery pariſh ſhall haue within it ſelfe a Schoole or Colledge, where thoſe ſhall bee brought vp, that ſhall bee preferred to the miniſterie among them. But howe poſſible that is to bring to paſſe among vs, let anie man iudge. If their miniſters ſhall come vnto them from the Vniuerſities or other ſchooles, they ſhall haue as little acquaintance with them, as now they haue, and farre greater occaſion of partiall ſutes, then nowe there is. So that inconueniences by this meanes ſhall bee increaſed and not remedied.
               That euery pariſh in Englande may haue a learned and diſcreete miniſter, howſoeuer they dreame of perfection, no man is able in theſe dayes to deuiſe, how to bring it to paſſe, and ſpecially when by this change of the clergie, the great rewards of learning

ſhall be taken away, & men thereby diſcouraged to bring vp their children in the ſtudie of good Letters. Furthermore, who ſeeth not howe ſmall continuance there ſhall bee in the Vniuerſities, to make men of any profound knowledge, whē the very neceſſity of places, ſhall drawe men away before they come to any ripeneſſe? the effect whereof, is partly perceiued at this day already, & much more would be, if their deuiſe ſhould take place.
               Touching the inconuenience of Diſcipline by excommunication onely, which they ſo much crie for, how it will be of moſt men contemned, and of how ſmal force it wil be to bring to effect any good amendment of life, ſome learned men of this age in their workes ſet foorth to the vvorlde, haue at large declared. I let paſſe, that experience teacheth, that men of ſtubburnneſſe vvil not ſhunne the company of them that be excommunicated, and then muſt they bee excommunicated for keeping of company vvith them, and ſo will it fall out, that more vvill be excommunicated, then in Communion: whereof vvhat deformities and inconueniences vvil ariſe, Saint Auguſtine doeth reach vs. The looſeneſſe of theſe dayes requireth Diſcipline of ſharper lavves by puniſhment of body and danger of goods: which they doe, and vvill more feare, then they vvill excommunication. And, God bee thanked, (if men would be contented with any moderation) we haue a very good manner of diſcipline by the eccleſiaſticall commiſſion, vvhich hath done, and doeth daily much good, & would do more, if it were more cō
                  mon, & men would take more pains in it. But this is that which they be moſt grieued with, becauſe they

are not doers in it themſelues.
               The deciding of matters in controuerſie by the Paſtours and Elders of the Church, beſide that it will interrupt the courſe of the lawes of the realme, it will be great occaſion of partiall and affectionate dealing, and thereby of further ſtrife and diſcorde, and a matter of ſchiſmes and diuiſions, as is to bee perceiued aboundantly in the Eccleſiaſticall Writers. For ſome will incline to the one part, and the reſidue ſhall be wrought to fauour the other: which hath beene the principal roote of al ſchiſmes in the Church, yea, and thereby of many hereſies. Wee muſt not onely looke in theſe corrupt times, howe vprightly men ſhould deale, but cōſider by preſent experience of ſundrie perſons and places, howe affectionately they do deale in ſome like matters, and thereby gather what they will doe, when they haue greater authoritie. This order was good, where the church was in perſecution vnder tyrants: but where the aſſiſtance may be had of a Chriſtian Prince, or Magiſtrate, it is neither neceſſarie, nor ſo conuenient, as it may be otherwiſe. Surely common election of miniſters, and this deciding of matters in controuerſie by a multitude, will breede greater ſtrife and contention, then without danger will bee appeaſed.
               Furthermore, their whole drift, as it may ſeeme, is to bring the gouernement of the Church to a Democracie or Aristocracie. The principles and reaſons whereof, if they bee made once by experience familiar in the mindes of the common people, and that they haue the ſenſe and feeling of them: It is greatly to bee feared, that they will very eaſily

transferre the ſame to the Gouernement o of the common weale. For by the ſame reaſons
                     •
                   they ſhall be induced to thinke that they haue iniurie, if they haue not as much to do in ciuill matters, as they haue in matters of the Church, ſeeyng they alſo touch their commoditie and benefite temporally, as the other doeth ſpiritually. And what heereof may follow, I leaue to the iudgement of other. The way hereof is alreadie troden foorth vnto them by ſome that haue written and ſpoken in that matter: Which ſpeeches I woulde bee loath to touch particularly, becauſe I thinke diuers of them not to haue any meaning to indure that ſequell. But men muſt conſider, not onely what they meane preſently themſelues, but what other may gather vpon them hereafter. Cyprian, Hillarie, and other ancient writers, did not meane ſo ill in ſome things that they left written, as ſome Heretikes following did father vpon them, vſing their ſayinges, as the groundes of their falſe and erronious doctrines. The Preachers of the Goſpell in Germanie, at the beginning, were farre from the meaning to mooue the people to rebell againſt their Gouernours: but ſome part of doctrine vndiſcreetely vttered by diuers of them, ſpeaking againſt ſome abuſes, gaue a great occaſion thereof to the griefe of all good men, in ſuch ſort, as they were not able by any perſwaſion to quiet them, vntill it had coſt a hundred thouſand of them their liues. The looſeneſſe and boldneſſe of this time in many, may iuſtly cauſe ſome feare that the like will happen hereafter among vs. Anomber of other like inconueniences I might lay downe in this place, and diuers of them

of as great weight as theſe. By theſe fewe, ſome taſte may be taken of the reſidue. But I will now returne in a word or two to the Martiniſt againe.
               NOw becauſe M. M. is ſo notable a paynter of biſhops viſages, & can purtrey them al with faces of ſeaſoned wainſcot: it were good for him in ſome table to behold his owne ougly ſhape, that he & his children may learne to be aſhamed of themſelues. I ſawe his figure drawen and ſet forth in a table when I was a yong man: the paynter was one very nigh of his kinne: His name was Lucian. The figure vvas this, An ancient man of ſome authoritie ſate vpon the iudgement ſeate: hee was like Mydas that couetous King: for hee had long eares like an Aſſe, and had ſitting on eche ſide of him a woman: the name of the one was Ignorance, the other was called Ielous Suſpition, which two made him very raſh in credite. Then commeth in M. Martin M. otherwiſe called Calumniator, a falſe accuſer, trimmed handſomelie for his better credite, and not a wrinckle awrie in his garment: but ſeemed ſomewhat to halte and not to goe vpright: his eyes and geſture fierce and fierie. In his left hand, he caried a flaming firebrand to note his furie. With his right hand he drewe by the haire of the head a yoong man, his name was Innocencie, who lifted vp his handes to heauen, proteſting before ood that he was giltleſſe in the cauſe. There folowed two or three, much like to ſchollers: their names were Dolus, Fraus, Inſidiae. Theſe clapped their Maſter on the backe to encourage him. And becauſe Maſter Martin will be a Gentleman, he had a treader before him, an olde fellowe: his eies were

fierce, his face thinne & withered, his whole countenance much like to one pined away with melancholy & fretting furie. His name was Liuor, that is, cankred malice, or enuie: A little behinde followed dolefull Dame repentance in mourning apparell, and looking backe with ſhame and teares goeth to meet Lady Truth, comming ſomewhat after. In the toppe of the Table this ſentence was written, Whoſoeuer ſlaundereth honeſt men, ſhall come to iuſt puniſhment. In the lovver part is this, Nothing can bee ſafe from the backbiting tongue. Rounde about was this vvritten, Beware thou neyther ſlaunder nor giue eare vnto the back-biter. Flee ſlaundering both with thine eares, & with thy tongue. He that giueth faire countenance & light eare, encourageth a backebiter. If Martin that delighteth ſo much in himſelf, would diſcreetly behold this table, I truſt he would diminiſh ſome part of his folly. But for that it liketh Martin, not only to be a falſe accuſer, but alſo a raſh & credulous iudge with his long aſſes eares receiuing euery vntruth that is told him, he may behold himſelfe in al the parts of the Table. The beſt aduiſe that I can giue you, is out of Chryſoſtome. Let diſcretion & truth ſit as iudges ouer your owne 
                  Hom. A
                        •
                     . Matth. 
                  ſoule and conſcience. Bring foorth before them, all thine offences. Lay downe what puniſhement is due for euery of them. Say continually this vnto thy ſelfe, How durſt thou do this? How durſt thou do that? &c. If thy conſcience will refuſe this, and prie vpon other mens faults, ſay vnto her, Thou ſitteſt not here as iudge of other, but to anſwere for thy ſelfe. What matter is it to thee, if this or that man offend: looke to thine owne ſteps, blame thine owne doing, & not others. To the deſcriptiō of a detractor or backebiter, are theſe properties. Firſt, he is malicious, and

ſtudieth to hurt others, and ſometimes purpoſely doeth hurt himſelfe, the ſooner to hurt other. Secondly, his ſoule and life is lying. Thirdly, he is an hypocrite and a Diſſembler, and pretendeth a zeale of iuſtice and pietie, to colour his malice. Laſtly, he is a Serpent byting ſecretly, and fleeth knowledge. Theſe properties learne by the complaintes of Dauid in ſundry of his Pſalmes. Deliuer me O Lorde, from the naughtie, and from the wicked man, which deuiſeth euill in his heart. They haue ſharpened their tongues like Serpentes: the poyſon of Aſpes is vnder their lippes. The mouth of a backbiter is full of curſed ſpeaking: vnder his tongue iss ſorowe and griefe. Hee lyeth in wayte in ſecrete places, to deſtroy the innocent. Hee lyeth lurking as a Lyon in his denne, to rauiſh the poore. He falleth downe & humbleth himſelfe, that the poore may fal into his nette. Reade the tenth Pſalme, and diuers other. The reſidue of their malicious & more then ruffiāly raylings, togetherwith Hiſtrionical mockes & ſcoffes, too immodeſt for any Vice in a Play, are not meetefor any honeſt man to meddle with: and therefore are returned ouer to the Libellers themſelues, as vnfallible tokens of that ſpirite, with which they are ledde to theſe outragious dealinges. But it is nowe time to anſwere thoſe quarrels that are made generally againſt all Biſhops.
            
            
               
                  Obiection.
But let vs ſee what is layde downe againſt the Biſhoppes and chiefe of the Cleargie. Firſt is, that The obiectiō of the couetouſneſſe and Simonie of Biſhops. they are exceeding couetous, and ſet to ſale the libertie of the Goſpel, and the vſe and Diſcipline of the Church, like Simoniakes and Prelates of the Church of Antichriſt: yea, that in Simonie and ſale of the Goſpell, they are nothing behinde the Biſhop of Rome.
               
                  
                  Anſwere.
Surely, this is a grieuous and an horrible accuſation in the eares of any chriſtian Magiſtrate: and if it be found true, the offendours not vvorthy to liue in this Common vvealth: Or if it be falſe and ſlaunderous, the Accuſer not meete to eſcape vnpuniſhed. The example of the ſlaundering the Miniſters of the Church, is a matter more dangerous, then in theſe daies it is eſteemed. But as touching the thing it ſelfe, I am of opinion, that no man of meane learning, or any experience, hauing regarde of his credite, vvould vndertake to iuſtifie ſuch an accuſation in the hearing of any honeſt mā. For, this I dare ſay, and vpon hazard of that is moſt deere vnto mee in this world wil proue, that where the ſtate of this our Church of England doeth leaue to an euill diſpoſed biſhop one occaſiō of the practiſe of Simony, & couetous oppreſſion of the people, that the B. of Rome had fourtie. For a taſte hereof, I referre the meaner learned to the common places of Muſcul. cap. Quare 
                  Muſc. de miniſt. verbi Dei. 
                  coniugium miniſtris ademptum. The better learned, I knovve, are better able of thēſelues, to make further declaration out of their own lawes, decrees, & regiſters, commonly read of all them that are deſirous to knovv the trueth, & not by ignorance, to exaggerate infamie, by falſe & vniuſt reportes. Yea, the very hiſtories of this Realme can vvitneſſe, that by Simony & couetous oppreſſion, the biſhops of Rome haue had yeerely out of this Realme more money, then at that time the reuenevv of the Kings crovvne did extend vnto, or at this day (as I thinke) all the biſhopricks in England be worth. For Mat. Pariſ. vvriteth, Matth. Pariſ. that in the time of king Henry the 3. the Pope
                  
had yeerely out of this Lande 60000 markes: vnto which if you doe adde his like dealing in Germanie and other countreys, you ſhall perceiue the value to be ineſtimable. And ſurely I am of that hope, and in my conſcience I think it to be moſt true, that all the Biſhops in this land, by Simoniacal practiſe and couetous oppreſſion, doe not gaine the hundred part thereof. And if it doe riſe to that value, it is a great deale too much: yea, if it be one peny, it is wicked, and by no good man ought to be defended, & much leſſe by them to bee practiſed. I hope well of all, although I wil not take vpon me to excuſe all: But for ſome, I aſſuredly know, & in my conſcience dare depoſe, that ſince they were made Biſhops, they haue not wittingly gained that way, one twenty ſhillings. Therefore in equalling the biſhops of Englande in the practiſe of Simonie vvith the Pope of Rome, there muſt needs be great oddes in the compariſon, and the whole ſpeech may well be called Hyperbole, that is, an vncharitable amplification, ſurmounting all likelihood of honeſt and Chriſtian trueth.
               
                  Obiection.
But ſomewhat to giue countenance to an euill ſlaunder, it will be ſayde, that the Biſhop of Rome practized Simonie by al meanes that he had, & our biſhops, by as many as they haue.
               
                  Anſwere.
Oh, a worthie reaſon. Is this to iuſtifie ſo ſhameful a ſlaūder of the church of God, vnder a chriſtian Princes gouernment? Is that Chriſtian Preacher and Biſhop, (if any ſuch be) that vſeth Simoniacall practiſe in two or three points of ſmal importance, and litle value in grieuouſneſſe of offence before God and the vvorlde, to be equalled to the head of

Antichriſt, and the principall enemy of the Goſpel, practizing the ſame in a thouſande of great weight and vneſtimable value? I cannot but wiſh more charitable hearts to them that will take vpon them the zeale and profeſsion of the Goſpel. Let ſinne be blamed, euen in them that fauour the word, and chiefly the Clergie: but yet ſo, as trueth will beare, and modeſtie with Chriſtian charitie doeth require, leſt in much amplifying of ſmall offences, you become inſtruments not onely to diſcredit the parties blamed, but alſo to ouerthrowe the doctrine that they teach. There ought to be great difference betweene Chriſtian Preachers & writers inueighing againſt Antichriſt and his members enemies of the Goſpell, and zealous profeſſors, blaming & reprouing the faults of their owne Biſhop and Clergie in the eſtate of a Church by authoritie ſetled. The one part is kindled with an earneſt zeale & deteſtation of the obſtinate patrones of errour and idolatrie: the other ſhoulde bee mooued onely with a charitable ſorowe and griefe, to ſee Preachers of the trueth not to declare in life that, which they vtter to other in doctrine. They that by humane frailtie offende in blemiſh of life onely, are not with like bitterneſſe to bee hated, harried, rated and defaced, as they that with obſtinate and vnrepentant hearts, offend both in life and doctrine, and to the face of the worlde ſhewe them-ſelues aduerſaries of the truth. Chriſt after one maner blameth the Scribes & phariſes, & after another he reprooueth the ignorance, the dulneſſe, the ambition and carnal affection of his owne Diſciples that followed him. But I pray you, let vs conſider the particular proofe of this generall accuſation, and

odious compariſon, Surely they are ſo trifling, that I am aſhamed to ſtay vpon them, and yet I muſt needes ſpeake a word or two of them. The Church of England retaineth a good and neceſſarie order, that before the celebration of marriage, the Banes ſhould be asked three ſeuerall Sabboth dayes.
               
                  Obiection.
This order (ſaith the aduerſarie and accuſer) is by The firſt proofe of Couetouſneſſe. Diſpenſing with banes. Diſpenſation abuſed, and by our Biſhops ſolde for money.
               
                  Anſwere.
The order I thinke very good and meete to bee obſerued in a Chriſtian Church, and not without good cauſe to be altered: and yet doth it not beare any neceſsitie in Religion and holineſſe, whereby mens conſciences ſhould be wrung or wreſted. But I will demaund of the accuſer, whether there be not ſome caſes, wherein, the circumſtances being conſidered, this matter may bee diſpenſed withall among Chriſtians? And if there bee (as no reaſonable man can deny) then I aske further, whether there bee any lawe in this Church of Englande, whereby, with the authoritie of the Prince, it is granted, that a Biſhoppe may in ſuch conuenient caſes diſpenſe with this order? And if there bee ſuch lawe of the Church and of the Realme: I marueile, howe it can be counted Simonie, or couetous ſelling of the libertie of the Goſpell, to diſpenſe with it.
               
                  Obiection.
Yea, but if the order be good, why is it not kept vnuiolably? if it be euill, why is it ſolde for money?
               
                  Anſwere.
The order is good, no man can deny it, or without good cauſe alter it: but there is no externall order ſo

neceſſary, but that authoritie may in ſome conſiderations lawfully diſpenſe therewith. It was a good order and cōmandement of God, that none but the Prieſts ſhould eat of the ſhew bread, and yet in a caſe of neceſſitie, Abimelech the hie Prieſt, did diſpenſe 1. Sam. 21. with Dauid & his company in eating the ſame bread. The external obſeruation of the Sabboth day was a good order, and a commandement ſtreightly giuen by God: and yet we read that the Iewes in neceſſitie Maccab. did breake it, and fought on the Sabboth day. And Marke 2. Matth. 12. Chriſt himſelfe defended his Diſciples, that on that day did bruiſe Corne and eate it. Therefore by lawfull authoritie, ſuch orders may bee diſpenſed with, and not deſerue iuſt reproofe, much leſſe the crime of Couetouſneſſe and Simonie.
               
                  Obiection.
Yea, but the diſpenſations are ſolde for money: for ſome haue for writing, and other for ſealing, and my Lord ſo granting &c.
               
                  Anſwere.
By as good reaſon may they excuſe any Iudge, or chiefe officer in this Land of extortion and bribery: becauſe his Clearkes and vnder officers take money for the writing & diſpatch of Proceſſes, Writs, and other like matters, where of happily ſome ſmall portion commeth to the Iudge or chiefe officer himſelfe, and the ſame alſo warranted, and made good by the lawes of this Realme. If either Eccleſiaſticall Miniſters or other officers and Magiſtrates, ſhall by extortion wreſt more, then by order is due: there lieth lawfull remedie and ſharpe puniſhment for the ſame. And in all ſocieties and common weales that euer haue bene, aſwell among Chriſtians as other, it

hath bene counted lawfull, that the Miniſters to higher officers, aſwell Eccleſiaſticall as other, ſhould haue lawfull portions and fees allowed them for ſuch things where in they trauell. Therefore, how this may be imputed to Biſhops as Simonie, and ſale of Chriſtian libertie, I ſee not.
               
                  Obiection.
They will ſay, Diſpenſations for Banes, for greedineſſe of money, are granted more commonly then they ſhould be.
               
                  Anſwere.
If that be true, I praiſe it not, I defend it not, I excuſe it not: and I thinke the fault more in inferiour Officers, then in Biſhops themſelues. But in whome ſoeuer the fault be, that cannot be ſo great and hainous, that Biſhoppes of England may iuſtly bee accounted Antichriſtian Prelates, Petie Antichriſts, Subuice-Antichriſts &c. as ſome in the heate of their zeale, doe tearme them. But God I truſt, in due time, will coole their heate with the ſpirite of mildeneſſe and gentleneſſe. If many Biſhops haue gained by this kinde of Diſpenſatiō, I maruaile. Surely I know ſome, that neuer receiued pennie in that conſideration, but haue giuen ſtrait charge to their inferiour officers, neuer to diſpenſe with that matter, but vpon great and weighty cauſe: & ſuch order is now generally taken. But (good Chriſtians) here is the griefe, that moueth all this grudge: that euill perſons, when, either to cloke their whoredome, or to preuent another of his lawfull wife, or ſome other like purpoſe, will marrie without orderly asking in the Church, they bee for the ſame conuented & puniſhed by the magiſtrate: This they be grieued at, & count it great extremitie:

for, becauſe they ſee the lavvfull Magiſtrate, vpon good conſiderations ſometime to diſpenſe with this order, they thinke it as conuenient for them vvithout leaue, of their ovvne heads to vſe the ſame, to the ſatisfying of their vnlavvfull luſt, or other lewde affection. For ſuch is novv the ſtate of this time, that vvhatſoeuer an Officer, ſpecially Eccleſiaſtical, may do by lawful authoritie, the priuate ſubiect thinketh he may doe the ſame, at his owne vvill and pleaſure. And if he be brideled thereof, why then it is Lordlineſſe, Symonie, Couetouſneſſe, and Crueltie. And I pray God, the like boldeneſſe grovve not tovvard other Officers and magiſtrates of the Common vveale alſo. Surely, vve haue great cauſe to feare it: for the reaſons vvhereon they ground their doings, may be applied as vvell to the one, as to the other.
               
                  Obiection.
Another Argument of couetouſneſſe in biſhops The ſecond proofe of couetouſnes forbidding of Mariage. is farre vvorſe, as it is ſaid, then the former: that they prohibite marriage at certaine times, moſt contrary to Gods worde: that is (ſay they) a Papiſtical practiſe, to fill the Cleargies purſe: yea, it is a doctrine of Antichriſt, and of the deuill him ſelfe, prohibiting Marriage euen in Laye men, contrarie to S. Paules wordes, who ſayth, Marriage is honourable Heb. 13. in all perſons.
               
                  Anſwere.
Surely, for my part I confeſſe, and before God and the vvorlde proteſt, that in my conſcience I thinke, that who ſoeuer forbiddeth Marriage to any kinde of men, is tainted vvith the corruption of Antichriſtian doctrine, and hath his conſcience ſeared with an hot iron, bearing the marke of the beaſt ſpoken of in the Apocalypſe: but I am clearely reſolued Apoe. 13
                  
that the Biſhoppes of Englande are free from any touch of that opinion, and doe account it no leſſe then a token of Antichriſt noted by Daniel, to prohibite lavvfull Matrimonie. Their doctrine openly taught and preached, and the practiſe of their life doth ſhevve it to be ſo, that no man vnleſſe hee bee blinded with malice, vvill impute that errour vnto them. Who ſeeth not, that by exerciſe of mariage in their ovvne perſons, they caſt themſelues into the diſpleaſure and miſliking of a great nomber, in that onely they bee married, contrary to the corruption of the Popiſh and antichriſtian Church? Wherefore, I pray you (good Chriſtian readers) weigh and conſider with your ſelues, what vnchriſtian and heatheniſh dealing this is toward the miniſters of God, of purpoſe onely to deface them, and bring them in miſliking by ſiniſter interpretations, to caſt vpon them the filth and reproche of that corrupt doctrine of Antichriſt, vvhich moſt of all other they doe impugne in their teaching, and withſtand in their doing. Is there feare of God in thoſe hearts that can doe this?
               
                  Obiection.
Why? (they will ſay) It is euident that Mariage is prohibited by them at certaine times of the yere, and thereby occaſion giuen to weake & fraile perſons, to fall into whoredome and fornication, or to burne in their conſciences with great danger of their ſoules.
               
                  Anſwere.
Vndoubtedly this muſt needs be thought a captious and rigorous interpretation, to ſay that a ſtay of mariage for certaine daies and weekes, is an vnchriſtian forbidding of mariage, & vvorthy ſo grieuous

blame, as is caſt vpon biſhops for it. For then it is a Popiſh diſorder alſo, and Antichriſtian corruption, to ſtay marriage for three weekes, vntill the Banes bee asked: for in that ſpace, light and euill diſpoſed mindes, may eaſily fall to offence. And yet this order both is, and ought to bee accounted of them, a godly and neceſſary order in the Church.
               
                  Obiection.
They will anſvvere, that it is Popiſh and ſuperſtitious, to tye the order of Marriage vnto any time or ſeaſon, more then other. For the thing beeing good and lawfull by the worde of God, why ſhould it bee (ſay they) asſigned to any time or place? There is no place more holy then Paradiſe was, nor no time ſo good as was before Adam fell by his diſobedience, &c.
               
                  Anſwere.
I anſvvere, if any man appoynt Marriage to bee vſed at this or that time and place, for conſcience ſake, or for holineſſe, as though the time or place coulde make the thing eyther more or leſſe holy, ſurely I muſt needs condemne him as ſuperſtitious, and cannot thinke well of the doing, though all the biſhoppes in Englande ſhoulde affirme the contrarie. For to make holy, or vnholy, thoſe things that God hath left free, and bee of them ſelues indifferent, is one of the chiefe groundes of all Papiſticall corruption. But I ſuſpect no biſhop in this Realme to be of that iudgement, and I dare ſay there is not. A thing left by Gods lawe free and indifferent, may bee accounted more conuenient, comely, and decent, at one time and place, then at another: but more holy it cannot bee.
               All meats are free at all times by the law of God: for nothing is vnclean that is receiued with thankeſgiuing:

neither doeth any thing that goeth into the mouth defile a man. And yet becauſe it is now a Poſitiue law in this common vveale, not for holineſſe, but for orders ſake: it is not ſo comely and conuenient for an Engliſhman to eate fleſh on Fridayes and Saturdayes, or in the Lent, as it is at other times.
               
                  Obiection.
Heere they will crye and ſay, that both the one law and the other is ſuperſtitious and naught, and proceeded both out of the Popes mint, and there were coyned, and had their beginning, and therefore that the Biſhops doe wickedly, and like to popiſh Prelates, that ſo retaine in the Church and common weale, the dregs of Antichriſtian corruption.
               
                  Anſwere.
This is the voice & opinion of them only, vvhich thinke not any thing tollerable to be vſed, that hath bin vſed in the church before time, were it of it ſelfe neuer ſo good. Theſe vvill haue no Font, but chriſten children in baſons. They wil weare no caps nor ſurplices: many of them vvil not vſe the old pulpits, but haue nevv made: they wil not accept a collect or praier, be it neuer ſo agreeable to the vvord of God. I maruaile, that they vſe the Churches them ſelues, then which, nothing hath bin more prophaned with ſuperſtition and idolatrie. They ſhould do that Optatus Mileuitanus writeth, that the Donatiſts were wōt to do, that is, when they obteyned a Church, vvhich before had bene vſed by Catholikes, they vvoulde ſcrape the walles therof, and breake the Communion tables & cups. But it may appeare, that the learned father Auguſt. vvas not of that opinion. For in his epiſtle vvritten to Publicola, a queſtion was mooued vnto him, whether in deſtroying the idoles temples, or their groues, a Chriſtian might vſe any part

of the wood, or water, or any other thing that did apperteine vnto them: His anſwere was, that men might not take thoſe things to their priuate vſe, leaſt they run into ſuſpicion, to haue deſtroyed ſuch places for couetouſnes: but that the ſame things might be imploied in pios & neceſſarios vſus. But I recite not this, to defend that law, whereby mariage for a time is forbidden. For I thinke it not a matter of ſuch neceſſitie, neither is it ſo greatly preſſed, as they pretend. I thinke there is no lawe remaining, that is ſo little executed, as that is.
               The other law of forbearing fleſh on Fridayes, in Lent, and other dayes, for the ſtate of our countrey I thinke very conuenient, and moſt neceſſarie to be vſed in Chriſtian policie. I woulde to God thoſe men, that make ſo ſmall accompt of this lawe, had heard the reaſons of the graueſt, wiſeſt, and moſt expert men of this realme, not only for the maintenance of this Lawe, but alſo for ſome addition to be made vnto it. How God hath placed this land, there is no reaſonable man but ſeeth: The Sea are our walles, and if on theſe walles we haue not ſome reaſonable furniture of ſhips, we ſhal tempt God in leauing open our countrey to the enemy, and not vſing thoſe inſtrumēts, which God hath appointed. There is no ſtate of men, that doeth ſo much furniſh this realme with ſufficient numbers of mariners for our nauie, as fiſhers doe. And how ſhall fiſhers be maintained, if they haue not ſufficient vtterance for thoſe things, for which they trauell? And howe can they haue vtterance, if euery daintie mouthed man, without infirmitie & ſickeneſſe, ſhall eate fleſh at his pleaſure? They cannot pretend religion, or reſtraint

of Chriſtian libertie, ſeeing open proteſtation is made by the lawe, that it is not for conſcience ſake, but for the defence and ſafetie of the realme. Therefore this crying out againſt this lawe, is not onely needeleſſe, but alſo vndiſcreete and factious.
               
                  Obiection.
But there bee other matters that more nighlie The crime of making vnlearned Miniſters. touch the quicke, and if they be true, can receiue no face of defence. They make lewde and vnlearned Miniſters for gaine: they maintaine pouling and pilling courtes: they abuſe the Churches diſcipline, &c.
               
                  Anſwere.
As touching the firſt, if they make lewde Miniſters, it is one great fault: if they doe it wittingly, it is farre a more heinous offence: if they do it for gaine, it is of all other moſt wicked and horrible, and indeede ſhoulde directly proue deuiliſh ſimonie to be in them. That ſome lewde and vnlearned miniſters haue bene made, it is manifeſt: I will not ſeeme to defend it: I woulde they had had more care herein, that the offence of the godly might haue bene leſſe. And yet I knowe, all their faults in this are not alike, and ſome haue ſmally offended herein. And in them all, I ſee a certaine care and determination, ſo much as in them lyeth, to amend the inconuenience that hath riſen by it. Which thing, with profeſſours of the Goſpell, ſhoulde cauſe their fault to bee the more charitably borne, leaſt they ſeeme not ſo much to haue miſliking of the offence, as of the perſons themſelues, for ſome other purpoſe, then they will bee openly knowen of. But if they ſhoulde doe, as they be (I truſt) vniuſtly reported of, that is, to make lewde and vnlearned

Miniſters for lucre and gaine: truly, no puniſhment coulde be too grieuous for them. Which way that ſhould be gainefull to Biſhops, I ſee not.
               The Clarke or Regiſter, I knowe, hath his fee allowed for the writing of letters of Orders: but that euer Biſhop did take any thing in that reſpect, I neuer heard, neither thinke I, that their greateſt enemies be able to proue it vpon many of them. Therefore this may goe with the reſidue of vncharitable ſlanders. Or if there hath bene any one ſuch euil diſpoſed perſon that hath ſo vtterly forgot his duetie and calling, that eyther this way, or any ſuch like, in making of Miniſters hath ſought his owne gaine and commoditie: it is hard dealing, with the reproch thereof to defame the innocent, together with the guiltie, and to diſtaine the honeſtie of them that neuer deſerued it. There is no Magiſtrate in this land ſo ſincere and vpright in his doings, but that by this meanes his honeſty and good name may be defaced.
               
                  Obiection.
It will bee ſayde that all this is but a gloſe or colour, to hide and turne from you thoſe great crimes that you are iuſtly charged withall. For the worlde ſeeth, and all men crie out againſt you, that you, to the great hurt and hinderance of the Church, vpholde and maintaine an vnlearned miniſterie, and wil not ſuffer any redreſſe or reformation to be made therein. Hereby commeth it to paſſe, that the people of God bee not taught their duetie, eyther to God, or to their Prince: but, by their ignoraunce, are layde foorth as a pray to Sathan. For, by that occaſion, they bee ledde away to euill with euery light perſwaſion that is put into their heads, either againſt God or their prince, ſo that it may bee iuſtly thought that all thoſe miſchiefes that of late haue fallen foorth, haue ſprung out of this onely roote, aſwell in them that haue ſlidde backe and reuolted from religion, as in thoſe that haue

conceiued & attempted the wicked murthering of our gratious Prince, and bringing in of a ſtranger to ſit in her royall ſeate. You are therefore the principall cauſes of all theſe miſchiefes.
               
                  Anſwere.
This is ſurely a grieuous accuſation: but God, I truſt, will iudge more vprightly, and regard the innocencie of our hearts, in theſe horrible crimes laid to our charge. Theſe accuſers, to ſatiſfie their miſliking affection towarde our ſtate, not onely ſuffer themſelues to bee deceiued with falſe and captious reaſons, but dangerouſly alſo ſeeke to ſeduce other. Logicians, among other deceitfull arguments note one principally, A non cauſa vt cauſa, that is, when men, either to praiſe, or diſpraiſe, doe attribute the effects of either part to ſome things or perſons, as cauſes therof, which indeed are not the true cauſes. Which falſe reaſoning hath done great harme at all times, both in the Church of God, and in common weales. After the aſcenſion of Chriſt, whē God ſent his Apoſtles and other holy men to preach the Goſpell of our ſaluation in Chriſt, and the ſame was among men vnthankfully receiued: God did caſt ſundry plagues & puniſhments vpon them, as dearth and ſcarcitie, famine & hunger, the peſtilence, and ſundry other diſeaſes, warre & tumult, earthquakes and great deluges in ſundry places. The cauſes of al this, very ſlāderouſly & blaſphemouſly they imputed to Chriſtian Religion, and therby raiſed thoſe dreadfull perſecutiōs, which at that time were exerciſed againſt the Chriſtians.
               This errour was the cauſe that Saint Auguſtine wrote his notable worke De ciuitate Dei, and that Oroſius, by the counſell both of Saint Hierome and

Saint Auguſtine, vvrote his hiſtorie: vvherein he anſvvereth this falſe argument, and ſhevveth that God in all times, had ſent the like plagues for the ſinnes and offences of mankinde, and for the reiecting of his vvorde and trueth.
               In the fourtie foure Chapter of Ieremie, The Ievves deceiue themſelues with the like argument, to confirme their conceiued ſuperſtition and idolatrie. But we will do (ſay they) whatſoeuer thing commeth out of our owne mouth: as to burne incenſe to the Queene of Heauen, & to powre out drinke offerings vnto her as we haue done, both we and our Fathers, our Kings & our Princes in the Cities of Iudah, and in the ſtreetes of Hieruſalem: for then had we plentie of victuals, & were well, and felt no euill. But ſince wee left off to burne incenſe to the Queene of Heauen, and to powre out drinke offerings vnto her, we haue had ſcarceneſſe of all things, & haue bene conſumed by the ſword and by the famine. In theſe vvordes you ſee, to the hardening of their owne hearts, they attribute the good giftes of God to their idolatrie, and their dearth and trouble to the preaching of Ieremie and other Prophets, vvhich indeede were not the true cauſes thereof. In like maner reaſon rebellious ſubiects in common vveales, when they ſeeke to make odious the Princes & gouernors vnder whom they liue, vniuſtly imputing to them the cauſes of ſuch things, wherwith they finde thēſelues grieued.
               So reaſoned the rebels in the time of King Richard 
                  Walſingham the ſecond, againſt the King, againſt the Counſell, and chiefe Nobilitie of the Realme, againſt the Lavvyers, and all other States of learning, & therefore had reſolution among them, to haue deſtroyed and ouerthrovven them all, and to haue ſuffered

none other to liue in this Realme with them, but the Gray Friers onely.
               Seeing therefore this manner of reaſoning is ſo perillous, it behooueth all them that feare God, and loue the trueth, and will not vvillingly be caried into errour, to take diligent heed that they be not abuſed herewith. And ſo I pray God they may doe, vvhich at this time ſo earneſtly ſeeke to make odious the ſtate of the Clergie of England, imputing to them the cauſes of thoſe things, vvhich they moſt deteſt and abhorre.
               For if they vvill ſee the trueth, and iudge but indifferently, they ſhall finde that there is no ſuch vnlearned Miniſterie, as they complaine of: neyther ſuch vvant of preaching, as may iuſtly prouoke the wrath of God, to ſend ſuch plagues & puniſhments vpon vs, as they recite. This I dare iuſtifie, that ſince Englande had firſt the name of a Chriſtian Church, there was neuer ſo much preaching of the vvorde of God, neuer ſo many in number, neuer ſo ſufficient and able perſons to teach and ſet forth the ſame, as be at this day, hovvſoeuer they be defamed and defaced. There bee, I confeſſe, many vnlearned and vnſufficient Miniſters: but yet I take it to bee captious and odious, in reſpect of them to name the whole Miniſterie vnlearned or ignorant. For the ſimplicitie and charitie of Chriſtian iudgement, doth giue the name of any Societie, according to the better part, and not according to the vvorſe.
               There were in the Church of Corinth, many euill perſons, aſwel in corruption of doctrine, as wickedneſſe of life: and yet Saint Paul noteth that Church to bee a reuerend and holy congregation. The

Church of Chriſt militant heere in earth, hath alwayes a great number of euill mixed vvith them that be good; & oftentimes the worſe part the greater: yet were it reprochfull and ſlaunderous to call the Church vvicked. In like ſort may it vvell bee thought vncharitable, to call the miniſterie of the Church of England ignorant, when that (thenkes be to God) there bee ſo many learued and ſufficient preachers in this lande, as neuer vvere before in any age or time, and the ſame adorned with Gods excellent good giftes, and comparable to any other Church refourmed in Europe. If men would caſt ſo curious and captious eyes vpon the Miniſters of other countreyes, and note the blemiſhes and imperfections in them, as they doe in our owne: I am perſwaded (vnder correction) they would not thinke ſo meanely of the ſtate of the Miniſterie of England, as they doe. But this is the generall diſeaſe of vs Engliſhmen, to haue in admiration the perſons and ſtates of other foreine countreyes, and loath their owne, bee they neuer ſo commendable or good. I ſpeake not this, to note with reproch any refourmed Church in forreine countries, or to diminiſh the commendations of thoſe excellent giftes, which it hath pleaſed God plentifully to powre downe vpon them, as the firſt renuers and reſtorers of the Goſpel in this latter age, to whome, in that reſpect, we ovve great loue and reuerence: But yet they ſee and acknowledge, that they haue imperfections, and cannot haue churches in this world without blemiſhes. Notwithſtanding it is not free among them, no not for the beſt learned, or of greateſt authority, in publike ſpeech or vvriting, to vtter thoſe things vvhich

may tend to the generall reproche of their Church or common weale, as it is commonly vſed vvith vs at this day: Or if they doe, they are ſharpely dealt vvithall for the ſame. For, as vviſe gouernours, they ſee, that ſuch doings is the very ſeede of diſſention, diſcorde, and faction; the very peſtilence of all Churches, common vveales, and ſocieties. Wherefore in moſt Churches, they doe tollerate ſome imperfections ſetled by order, at the beginning, leaſt by change of lavves, there ſhoulde bee greater inconuenience.
               
                  Obiection.
Yea but all their Miniſters are learned and able to teach.
               
                  Anſwere.
Of that I doubt: & in ſome places, by good teſtimony I know it not to be true. That is eaſie to be had in a free Citie, that hath no more congregations, but thoſe that be within the Citie, or within a fevve villages about, vvhich is not poſſible, in ſo great a kingdome as this is, repleniſhed with ſo many Villages almoſt in euery place, as ſcantly you haue two miles vvithout a Towne or Village inhabited.
               And yet, that men doe not conceiue euill opinion of the Biſhops, for that which cannot bee remedied: it behooueth the vviſe and godly to conſider, that the ſtate of this Church is ſuch, as of neceſſitie there muſt bee ſome of very meane abilitie, in compariſon of that perfect rule of a Miniſter that S. Paul requireth.
               It is wel knowen, as it is before recited, that there be a number of pariſhes in this Realme, the liuings vvhere of are ſo ſmall, that no man ſufficiently learned, will content himſelfe vvith them. In ſome one

meane ſhire there bee aboue foure ſcore Chappels to be ſerued, onely by Curates, with very ſmall ſtipends. To place able men in them, is vnpoſſible: For neither ſufficient number of learned men can be had, nor, if there coulde, woulde they be contented to bee to ſuch places appoynted. And to leaue thoſe pariſhes and places vnſerued of common prayer, and adminiſtration of the Sacraments, were an inconuenience as great on the other part: For it bringeth men to an heatheniſh forgetfulneſſe of God. To eaſe this matter by combinations and ioyning of many pariſhes together (as ſome deuiſe) beſides other inconueniences, the thing is not in the Biſhops authoritie, nor poſsible for him to doe, Euery pariſh hath a ſundrie patrone, which wil neuer bee brough to agree to that purpoſe, and to forgoe their patrimonie and heritage. Nowe to attempt the matter, by making a law for that purpoſe, woulde be occaſion of ſo great troubles and alterations, as would draw with them more inconneniences, then would ſtand with the ſafe ſtate of this common weale, as the wiſer ſort doe ſee, and were eaſie for me to declare, if it were pertinent to this matter here to lay them downe in writing. The only remedie that neceſſitie beareth, is, to tollerate ſome of the meaner ſort of Miniſters, hauing carefull conſideration, ſo much as diligence can doe, that the ſame may be of life & behauiour, honeſt, and godly, and ſuch at the leaſt, as may bee able to inſtruct the pariſh in the Catechiſme. And ſurely, I hope, by the care of the Biſhops, that they haue alreadie vndertaken, this thing will be, either altogether, or in a good part brought to effect ere long time paſſe.
               
                  
                  Obiection.
But ſome will ſay, that all this is but a cloake of colourable reaſon to hide an vnexcuſable fault. For that no neceſsitie can excuſe a man, to breake the law of God: and Gods holy commandement is vttered by Saint Paul, that among other properties, 1. Tim. 3. a Miniſter ſhoulde bee Aptus ad docendum, that is, able to teach, and therefore no Biſhop can bee borne with, in making an vnlearned Miniſter. For he may not doe euill that good may come thereof.
               
                  Anſwere.
For anſwere hereunto, it cannot bee denyed, but the rule which Saint Paul giueth, is an exact rule, 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. and ſuch an abſolute deſcription of a Miniſter, as is according to Chriſtian perfection: and therefore that all Miniſters ought to bee correſpondent to the ſame: And ſo much as they want thereof, they lacke of their perfect ſtate. Yea, and eccleſiaſticall gouernours ſhoulde carefully ſee, ſo much as humane frailtie and the miſerable ſtate of this worlde will ſuffer, that al Miniſters of the Church of God be ſuch. And when they doe faile heerein, they offend, and goe from that perfection that the worde of God requireth. But yet I doubt not, but God of his great mercie in Chriſt our Sauiour will gratiouſly conſider, that he hath to doe with fleſh and blood, and that euen his beſt children liue not here in an heauenly ſtate, but in a miſerable and wretched world, and ſpecially when hee ſeeth, that they offend not of negligence or malicious wickedneſſe, but are carried with the neceſſitie of this earthly frailtie. For if GOD ſhoulde meaſure all things done in his Church by the perfect rule of his word, who ſhould be able to ſtand before him? We

may not therefore, either condemne other, or eſteeme our ſelues condemned before God, if through the frailtie of the worlde, we be not able to frame all things in his Church to ſuch perfectneſſe, as his holy word appoynteth.
               As the deſcription of a Miniſter, deliuered by Saint Paul to Timothie and Titus is perfect, ſo doth it containe many branches & properties to the number of (I thinke) twentie or aboue: As, that he muſt bee vnreproueable, the husband of one wife, watching, temperat, modeſt, not froward, not angrie, one that loueth goodneſſe, righteous, holy, harberous, apt to teach, holding faſt the wholeſome worde according to doctrine, able to exhort with wholſome doctrine, and conuince them that ſay againſt it, not giuen to much wine, no ſtriker, not giuen to filthie lucre, gentle, no quarreller, not couetous, one that can rule his owne houſe, keeping his wife and children in honeſt obedience, not a yong ſcholler leaſt hee be puffed vp with ſelfe liking, well reported of, graue, not double tongued, holding the myſterie of the faith in a pure conſcience.
               If they will admit no Miniſters as lawful, but ſuch as ſhall haue fully all theſe properties: Surely they will cut from Churches the greateſt part, or all the Miniſters that they haue. Euen that one propertie which they ſo greatly call vpon, as of all other moſt neceſſarie, that is, that hee ſhoulde be apt to teach: that is, as Saint Paul expoundeth himſelfe, to be ſufficiently able to teach them that bee willing, and to conuince the aduerſarie: If it be preſſed to the extremitie and rigour thereof, it comprehendeth ſo much, as it will exclude a great many of Miniſters

and Preachers, which in their meaſure doe good ſeruice in the Church of God.
               The beſt writers that euer I did reade vpon that, ſay, That to the performance of the ſame, a man muſt haue readie knowledge in the Scriptures, the vnderſtanding of the tongues, the reading of the ancient Fathers, and hiſtories of antiquitie. If a great many of them woulde looke into their owne boſomes, and meaſure themſelues by this rule of ſufficiencie: they woulde not iudge ſo rigorouſly of other, nor be ſo raſh to condemne them.
               Wee ſee in the Scriptures, that God ſometime beareth with breach of his cōmandement, falling by Exod. 29. the neceſſitie of our fraile life. God gaue in charge, as before is ſayde, that none ſhoulde eate of the Shew-bread, but the Prieſtes: And yet in neceſſitie Dauid did eate of it, though he were no Prieſt. 1. Reg. 21
               
               The Machabies fought on the Sabboth day contrary to this commandement, Thou ſhalt keepe holy the Sabboth day: and yet it is not read, that God was therfore diſpleaſed with them, or tooke puniſhment of them, though the Scripture mention, that one without Num. 15. neceſſitie gathering ſtickes on the Sabboth day, was ſtoned to death.
               Chriſt himſelfe may ſeeme to giue the reaſon for their defence, when he ſaith, The Sabboth was ordeined for man, and not man for the Sabboth. 
                  Mar. 2.
               
               Yea, in a morall cōmandement of God touching mariage, we ſee God to vſe a maner of diſpenſation, in reſpect of the frailtie of mans nature. The Scripture ſaith preciſely, Quos Deus coniunxit homone ſeparet: and yet in the lawe, wee finde this diſpenſation Deut. 24 or qualifying thereof. When a man hath taken a wife,

and married her, if ſhe finde no fauour in his eyes, &c. then let him make a bill of diuorcement, and put it in her hand, and ſend her out of his houſe.
               
               Of this mercifull bearing of God with the breach of his commandement, Chriſt ſhevveth the reaſon, Math. 19. ſaying in this wiſe. For the hardneſſe of your hearts God ſuffered you to put away your wiues, but from the beginning it was not ſo.
               
               Heere we learne that our gracious and mercifull God, for the ſhunning and auoyding of a greater miſchiefe among ſtubborne people, ſuffered his ſeruant Moſes to giue foorth a more fauourable interpretation of his iuſt and perfect Lavve, and to ſuffer diuorcements in ſuch caſes, as the right and rigor of his iuſtice in itſelfe, had forbidden.
               This haue I written, not of purpoſe to incourage men to breake and alter the Lawes and ordinances of God, but rather to comfort thoſe conſciences, whith in this caſe may bee troubled, and to put away that opinion, wherewith ſome are led to thinke that that Congregation is not vvorthie the name of a Chriſtian Church, nor meete vvherein a good Chriſtian man ſhoulde abide as Miniſter, where all things are not reformed, to the perfect rule of Gods holy worde.
               Surely the auncient Fathers of the primitiue Church doe not ſeeme to be of that iudgement. For they did all find fault with many enormities in their time, as vvell in outvvarde ceremonies, as corruption of life, yea, & in ſome point of doctrine alſo: and yet it is not read that they did therefore ſeparate themſelues from the Churches, or thinke that they could not as faithfull Miniſters ſerue in them.

Saint Auguſtine ſheweth of himſelfe, & of Saint Cyprian very notably, as in many places, ſo chiefly againſt the Donatiſts who were infected with that errour: Aug. de baptiſ. contra Donatiſt. lib. 4. cap. 9. but moſt plainely of all other places, De Baptiſmo contra Donatiſtas, Lib. 4. Cap. 9. Where at large he diſputeth this queſtion: which place is vvorthie diligent reading and conſideration.
               
                  Cyprian had blamed the Biſhops and Miniſters Cypr. de lap. in his time, of Couetouſneſſe; Extortion and Vſurie. And yet ſaith Saint Auguſtine, Cyprian writeth vnto Antonianus, that before the laſt ſeparation of the wicked and the Godly; no man ought to ſeparate himſelfe from the vnitie of the Church, becauſe of the mixture of euill perſons. What a ſwelling pride is it (ſayeth hee) what a forgetting of humilitie and mildeneſſe, what a vaunting arrogancie, that hee can thinke himſelfe able to doe that which Chriſt woulde not permit to his Apoſtles, that is, to ſeparate the weedes from the Corne? &c. Yea, and S. Paul himſelfe as before I haue ſaide, iudgeth the Church of Corinth, an honorable & bleſſed Church of God, though there vvere in the ſame not onely ſome blemiſhes and imperfections, but many great & enormious faultes. Wherefore, to returne againe to my purpoſe, though our Biſhops through the neceſſitie of time, neither at the beginning had, nor novv can haue perfect good Miniſters in euery pariſh within their charge: I ſee no cauſe, vvhy they may not vſe ſuch as vvith their beſt diligence they may haue, eſpecially if they order the matter ſo, as the fault bee not in their ovvne negligence or corruption. The cauſes why an vnlearned Miniſterie is not the occaſion of backe ſliding &c.
               
               That you may the better conceiue, that an vnlearned Miniſtery for want of preaching of the Goſpel, is not the cauſe of the backeſliding and reuolting of

ſo many in theſe dayes, nor of ſundry other inconueniences imputed to the ſame: you ſhall eaſily vnderſtand, if you will call to your remembrance, that when there were fewer Preachers and leſſe teaching by great oddes, then oflate yeres hath bene, the people did not reuolt as now they doe. There is therefore ſome other cauſe, if we will with vpright mindes looke into it. There were fevver Preachers and leſſe teaching in the dayes of that King of bleſſed memorie Edward the ſixt, and yet did not the people then reuolt, as novv, although the reformation of the Church was then but greenely ſetled. They had the ſame imperfection and want of Miniſters, which wee haue novv, and that in greater meaſure: in ſo much as they were faine to helpe out the want with reading of Homilies, as you knowe. Which deuiſe, although it be greatly miſliked and inueighed againſt in theſe dayes, as intollerable: yet did that reuerend and learned father M. Bucer highly commend the ſame, and ſhewed his good liking thereof, willing moe Homilies to bee prepared for that purpoſe. And vvhat were they that were then Preachers, and in the ſtate of gouernment of the Church? Surely ſuch perſons as did diligently obſerue thoſe orders in outwarde thinges, vvhich the Biſhops now, for feare of further inconuenience, deſire and ſtudie to maintaine. In the firſt ten yeeres of her Maieſties moſt gracious reigne, there was little or no backſliding from the Goſpell, in compariſon of that now is: yet was there not then ſo much preaching, by the halfe, nor ſo many Preachers in the Church of England by 1000. as now there are. And ſince that time (I ſpeake of good experience,

and better knowledge then gladly I would) that in diuers places where there hath beene often preaching, and that by learned & graue men, there haue bene many that haue reuolted, and litle good effect declared among the reſidue. You will aske me then, what I thinke to be the true cauſe thereof? Surely, the cauſes are many: but I will note vnto you onely two or three, that bee of greateſt weight. Firſt, to The firſt cauſe why the Goſpell proſpereth not ſo well here. haue the fruites of the Goſpell ſetled in the conſciences of men, and declared in their liues: It is not ſufficient to haue often and much preaching, but alſo to haue diligent and reuerent hearing. Though the Preachers be neuer ſo learned and diſcreet, if it bee not heard as the worde of God, it is to no purpoſe. But in theſe dayes, as in all other, men be eaſily induced to disburthen themſelues, and lay the whole fault vpon the Miniſters and Preachers.
               
                  Obiection.
Oh, ſay they, if wee had good and zealous Biſhoppes, and godly Preachers, ſuch as the Apoſtles were: vndoubtedly this doctrine of the Goſpell woulde haue had better ſucceſſe, and would more haue preuailed in mens hearts. For they are not zealous, nor ſeeme to bee mooued with the ſpirite of God: therefore it cannot be, that they ſhould moue other.
               
                  Anſwere.
Though this reaſon ſeeme ſomewhat plauſible to ſome kind of men, and to be of great force to excuſe the common people: yet I aduertiſe all them, that haue any ſparke of the feare of GOD in their hearts, that they take heede of it, & beware, that, to their own great dāger, they be not caried away with it. For it hath bene ſeldome or neuer heard or read, that the people of God among whom true doctrine hath bin preached (as the Lorde be thanked it hath

bene with vs) did euer vſe ſuch allegations for their ovvne excuſe and defence. It hath beene alwayes the pretence of the reprobate and wicked, to colour their owne obſtinacie, and contempt of Gods word, vvhen they vvere offered the light of the Goſpell and called to repentaunce. But that theſe kinde of men may not flatter and deceiue themſelues: I let them vnderſtande, that the Scriptures in no place teach them, that the offences and faultes of the Miniſters, are alwayes the onely cauſe, why the word of God doth not take place in mens hearts. It is more commonly, and almoſt alvvaies imputed to the waywardneſſe, vnthankefulneſſe and obſtinacy of the people that heare it. Therefore it vvere good for alſortes of men, of what calling ſoeuer, to looke into their owne boſomes, & carefully to conſider, whether the fault thereof be not in themſelues. For they knowe right vvell, that the maſter may bee learned and diligent, and yet the ſcholler not thriue, by reaſon of his owne dulneſſe. The Phyſition may bee honeſt and skilfull, and the obſtinate Patient make light of his vvholeſome counſaile. The ſeede may be good, and the ſeede ſower a paineful and skilfull husbandman, and yet the fruite not to bee anſvverable to his trauell, becauſe of the naughtineſſe and barrenneſſe of the ground. This our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth vs in the parable of the Seede-ſovver. Matth. 13. The Sower (ſayth he) went foorth to ſowe his ſeede, and ſome fell in the high way, that is to ſay, into the heartes of them that vvere continually trampled vvith vvicked and vngodly cogitations, ſo that the ſeede coulde not ſinke into their hearts, but by thoſe birds of the deuill, vvas caried avvay vvithout fruite.

                  Some fell into ſtonie ground, that is, into ſuch hearts as wanted the good iuice and moyſture of Gods holy ſpirite: and therefore when the heate of perſecution ariſeth, or ſome great temptation aſſaulteth them, their zeale is withered, and they reuolt from the trueth. Some fell into busſhie ground, that is, into the mindes of them, that were troubled with the cares of the worlde, with the loue of riches, and with the pleaſures of this life, which wholly choked vp the good ſeede of the Goſpell of Chriſt, ſo that it could not in any wiſe proſper and bring foorth fruite. Heere you may perceiue, that for one fourth part of good grounde, that yeeldeth fruite of the doctrine of God, there are three greater partes of euill ground, wherein it nothing at all proſpereth. But in theſe our dayes amongſt vs, we haue a fourth ſort of men, which obſtinatly at al refuſe to heare the word of God, and do ſhut vp their eares, not onely againſt preaching, but againſt priuate exhortation alſo. If there were leſſe ſtore of theſe euill groundes in this land at this day, vndoubtedly wee ſhould ſee more ſucceſſe of the Goſpell, and more ample fruite of our teaching then novve wee doe. It were good for men to looke that theſe quarrellings at other mens liues, bee not one of the coardes of vanitie that Eſay ſpeaketh of. Woe be to them (ſaith God by his holy Eſay. 5. Prophet) that drawe on iniquitie with coardes of vanitie, and ſinne, as it were with a Cart-rope, that is, Woe bee to them, that imagine excuſes and coulours, to nouzell and mainetaine them ſelues in contempt of Gods vvorde, and vvant of repentaunce. Let men take heede of ſuch dealing, that ſuch Coardes of vanitie pull not on iniquitie ſo faſt,

that it draw them to the vtter contempt of God and his trueth. Example where of is ſeene at this day, in too many, to the griefe of all good mens hearts: For the ſchoole of Epicure, and the Atheiſts, is mightily increaſed in theſe days. The like effect Eſay noteth to haue fallen out among the Iewes, at that time. For this he maketh them to ſay in deriſion of the preaching of the Prophets, Let God make ſpeede, and hasten his worke, that wee may ſee it. Let the counſell of the holy one of Iſrael drawe neere, and come, that wee may knowe it. And in like manner dealeth the wicked in Ieremie Chapter 5. They haue denied the Lorde, and ſayde, It is not hee. Tuſh, the Sword, and the plague ſhall not come vpon vs, neither ſhall we ſee it. The threatnings of the Prophets are but wind, & the true word of God is not in them. They vtter their owne fantaſies, and theſe things ſhall come vnto themſelues. Euen with like contempt and deriſion, many at this day abuſe the Preachers of Gods worde. When we lay before them the terrible threatnings of Gods wrath and indignation, if they reuolt from the trueth of the Goſpell, or ſuffer the ſame to bee betrayed into the hands of the enemie, ſaying, that God wil for ſake them: that he wil take his defence from them: that he will ſet his face against them: that he will bring ſtrangers vpon them to destroy their countrey and poſſeſse their great landes and goodly buildings: Oh, ſay they, Theſe Preachers make great outcries: they put ſtrange expectations into the peoples heads: they are vndiſcreete: they medle with matters, which doe not appertaine vnto them, if matters goe amiſſe, the greateſt fault is in them: ſelues. But I haue ſufficiently ſpoken of this maner of intertaining of Miniſters alreadie, & ſhall ſpeake of the ſame hereafter.
               
                  
The ſecond, and in deede a chiefe cauſe of backſliding The ſecond cauſe of backſliding. and reuolting, is the ſchiſme, faction and diſſention, vvhich for the ſpace of theſe fifteene or ſixteene yeeres, hath exceedingly growen, betweene the Miniſters and Preachers of England. For the like hath in all ages bene a cauſe to many, of falling, both from the trueth of God, and to wickedneſſe of life. Baſile ſpeaking hereof, ſaith, Ob haecrident increduli, fluctuant qui modicae ſunt fidei, ambigua eſt fides ipſa. The effects of this ſchiſme hath bene (as in part I haue declared in other partes of this treatiſe) Firſt, that not only in ſermons publikely, but alſo in common table talke priuately, yea, and in writing and treatiſes ſpredde abroade into all mens handes wickedly, vehement and bitter inuectiues haue beene made againſt the Biſhoppes and other Preachers of the Church of England, to the diſcredite not only of their perſons, but alſo of the doctrine which they haue taught. Yea, the whole ſtate and gouernment of this church, the Liturgie and booke of Common prayer, and the adminiſtration of the Sacraments eſtabliſhed by Lavve and authoritie, the externall rites and ceremonies layde downe onely for order ſake, haue beene publikely miſliked, depraued and condemned, as directly contrary and repugnant to the worde of God. Men haue not onely deliuered foorth theſe inuectiues againſt the whole ſtate of our Church, and all the partes thereof: but in the face of the vvorlde, againſt Lavve, againſt authoritie, haue taken vpon them to alter all thinges according to their ovvne pleaſure: Which dealing, you may bee ſure, cannot bee vvithout great offence of an infinite nomber, as the worlde euidently

ſeeth it hath beene. Moreouer, many perſons, both vndiſcreete and vnlearned, becauſe they will not bee accompted Dumbe dogs, haue taken vpon them to preach without licenſe or triall: and entring into diſcuſſing of matters nowe in controuerſie betweene vs and the aduerſarie, haue handled them ſo coldly, nakedly, and vnperfectly, that many haue beene grieued to heare them, & ſome brought in doubt of their conſciences, which neuer doubted before. Many ſtrange Aſſertions, either plainly falſe, or as Paradoxes, true in ſome rare and extraordinarie ſenſe, haue beene by ſundry perſons, and ſome of them well learned, vttered and taught, to the troubling of many mens mindes, and ſpecially ſuch as were not able to reach to the depth of them. As for example, that it is a grieuous offence to kneele at the receiuing of the Communion. A gentleman of good countenaunce hath affirmed to my ſelfe, that hee woulde rather hazard all the land hee had, then bee drawen to kneele at the Communion. An heauie burthen to lay vpon a mans conſcience, for an externall geſture. The doctrine of the Lords Supper, hath bene ſo ſlenderly taught by ſome, that a number haue cōceiued with themſelues, that they receiue nothing but the externall elements, in remembrance that Chriſt died for them. And theſe their cogitatiōs haue they vttered to other to their great miſliking. Priuat baptiſm, yea, & publike alſo, if it be miniſtred by one that is no preacher, hath bin ſo impugned, as if it were no ſacrament at all: whereby queſtiōs haue bin raiſed by ſundry perſons, what is become of them that were neuer baptized otherwiſe: Or whether it were not neceſſary, that all ſuch

perſons, as are certainly knovven, not to haue receiued any other baptiſme, thē that was priuatly done, ought not to bee baptiſed againe, becauſe the other is eſteemed as no Sacrament?
               The article of the common Creed touching Chriſtes deſcenſion into hell, contrary to the ſenſe of all ancient writers, hath bin ſtrangely interpreted, and by ſome, with vnreuerent ſpeeches flatly reiected. Theſe and a number of ſuch other, haue vndoubtedly bred great offence, and wounded the hearts of an infinite number, cauſing them partly to reuolt to Papiſtry, partly to Atheiſme, and neglecting of all Religion, as is ſeene by the liues of many, to the exceeding griefe of all them that feare God and loue his trueth. As I haue talked with many Recuſants, ſo did I neuer confer with any that would vſe any ſpeech, but that he hath alleadged ſome of theſe offences to bee cauſe of his reuolting. And ſome haue affirmed flatly vnto me, that in ſeeking to preſſe thē to come to our Church and ſeruice, we do againſt our owne conſciences, ſeeing our moſt zealous preachers (as they be taken) openly ſpeake and vvrite, that as well our ſeruice, as the adminiſtration of the ſacraments, are contrary to the word of God. I beſeech Almightie God of his great mercie, that he vvill open the eyes of them, vvhich thus eagerly haue ſtriuen againſt the preſent ſtate of this Church, to ſee vvhat hurt and hinderance hath come to the profeſſion of the Goſpell, by theſe vncharitable and needeleſſe contentions. And vndoubtedly, if God moue not the heartes of the chiefe Rulers and Gouernours to ſeeke ſome ende of this Schiſme and faction, vvhich nowe renteth in pieces this Church

of England: it cannot bee, but in ſhort time for one Recuſant that now is, wee ſhall haue three, if the increaſe of that number, which I mention, be not greater. For I doe heare and ſee thoſe things, that it grieueth my heart to conſider. What hurt and trouble Satan hath at all times raiſed in the Church of God by occaſion of diſſention and diſcorde, mooued not only by heretikes & falſe teachers, but alſo by them, vvhich othervviſe haue bene good and godly Chriſtians: the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories doe euidently declare. What ſhould I recite the Schiſme between the Eaſt and Weſt Churches, for the obſeruation of the feaſt of Eaſter, vvhich continued a great number of yeeres, and grevv to ſuch bitterneſſe, that the one excommunicated the other? What ſhal I ſay of the Schiſmes and grieuous contentions in the Eaſt Church, and eſpecially at Antiochia, and Alexandria, betweene Paulinus and Flauianus? Lucifer and Euſebius? the Meletians and Euſtathians? all at the beginning good Chriſtians, and imbracing true doctrine? And yet did they vvith great troubles, eſchevve one the others communion, as you may reade in Epiphanius lib. 2. Theodor. lib. 1. cap 8. &c. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 23. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 18. for the ſpace of 80. yeres and aboue. I omit the great ſtrife betweene Chryſoſt. of the one part, and Theophilus, Cyrill and Epiphanius, on the other, for the burning of Origens bookes. They vvere all good and learned biſhops, and vve doe worthily reuerence their memory: yet fel this matter ſo foule among them, that becauſe Chryſoſt. vvould not conſent to the burning of Origens bookes, Theophilus and Cyrill vvould ſcantly euer acknovvledge him to be a lavvfull Biſhop. I mention not a great number

of other like factiōs, vvhich grew in the ſame age, to the trouble and hinderance of true Chriſtianitie, as many godly and learned men did then complaine. And ſundry graue authours vvhich haue written in this our time, and before, iudge, that theſe wayward contentions in the Eaſt Church, vvere the chiefe cauſes that brought vpon them afterward, the heauie wrath of God that tooke his Goſpel from them, and caſt them into the tyrannie of Saracens & Turkes, as we haue ſeene novv theſe many yeeres. A notable example to vs (good Chriſtian Readers) to take heede in time, and earneſtly to pray vnto God, that he will ſo bleſſe vs with his holy Spirite, that wee may be all like minded, hauing the ſelfe ſame loue, being of one minde and of one iudgement, that nothing bee done among vs, through ſtrife and vaine glory, but that in humbleneſſe of minde, euery one will thinke of other better then of himſelfe, that vve may growe together in one heart and minde, againſt the common aduerſarie to the glory of God, and the promoting of his Goſpel, the ſafetie of our gracious Prince, & naturall countrey. Of ſuch diſcord in the church, S. Baſile grieuouſly cōplaineth, When I was growen (ſaith he) into mans age, & often going into ſtrange Countries, fel into troubles, I obſerued and found, that in other Artes there was great concord & agreement betweene them that were the chiefe of thoſe Artes and Sciences: Onely in the Church of God, for which Chriſt died, and vpon which he had plentifully powred downe his holy ſpirit, I ſaw great & vehement diſcord, aſwell among themſelues particularly, as in things contrarie to the holie Scriptures. And that which is moſt horrible, I ſawe them that are the chiefe of the Church ſo drawen aſunder in diuerſitie and contrarietie of opinions,

that without all pitie, they did moſt cruelly teare in pieces the flocke of Chriſt, ſo that if euer, nowe it is verified that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh, From among your ſelues ſhall riſe men ſpeaking peruerſe things, that they may drawe Diſciples to followe them.
               
               The third cauſe and the principall of all other is, The third cauſe of reuolting. 
                  that the ramping & roaring Lion that goeth about ſeeking whome he may deuoure, and watching all occaſions to doe miſchiefe in the Church of God, hath taken the opportunitie of this Schiſme & diuiſion among our ſelues. And therefore euer ſince that began, he hath not ceaſed from time to time, out of his ſcholes and Nurceries, to ſende into this Realme fit inſtruments for that purpoſe, Ieſuites, Maſsing-prieſts, and Seminarie men, & ſuch other of our owne nation, as haue bene purpoſely by them corrupted: which being armed with ſome ſhew of learning, but ſpecially with readines of tongue & boldneſſe of ſpeech, with ſome outward ſhew of holineſſe in words, haue mightily preuailed againſt the ſubiects of this Realme, taking cōmonly reaſons of perſwaſion, frō the diſcord that is among our ſelues, as by particular dealings with thē I haue learned. The indeuours of theſe men haue taken the greater effect, by one perſwaſiō, which they principally haue vſed: which is, that they haue put into their minds a certain expectatiō of a ſpeedy alteration & change to be, not only in religion, but alſo in the ſtate of the realme. Their reaſons haue bin, that al the Princes Catholike in Chriſtendom, were entred into league by al means that might be, to depoſe our gracious ſoueraigne Queene Elizabeth, and to ſet vp in her place the Queene of Scots when ſhee liued: and then woe be to them that ſhould be found

in this lande, to remaine in the fauour and liking of the Goſpell of Chriſt, which they blaſphemouſly call horrible ſchiſme and hereſie, which woulde bee reuenged to the vttermoſt. To worke this deuiſe, they were let to vnderſtand, what plots and meanes were made, howe eaſie, howe likely, how certaine to come to paſſe within few yeeres, yea, moneths, yea, dayes. For they confirmed the hearts of all them that bende to their perſwaſion, with all hope that might be: In ſo much that I knowe ſome, that within theſe two yeeres were very forwarde in religion, and not onely heard Sermons diligently, but alſo were at ſundrie conferences, for their better confirmation: yet within fewe Moneths, with the certaine perſwaſion of this expectation, were cleane caried away, and ſo remaine peruerſe and obſtinate Recuſants, with the example thereof ſhaking the conſciences of many other. In theſe their wicked and deuiliſh practiſes againſt God and his trueth, and againſt the ſtate of this lande, they were not a little imboldened by ſlacke and remiſſe dealing toward them. The lawes were not executed: the aduauntage was giuen to ſome, that did fauourably compound with them.
               Hereby I knowe by good experience, that much harme hath bene done in diuers places. They haue alſo comforted and imboldened themſelues in this, that mercie and fauour ſhoulde bee ſhewed them. For this they can ſay, that Chriſtian Princes and Magiſtrates, eſpecially ſuch as be Proteſtants, by their owne doctrine, ſhoulde ſhewe mercie and clemencie, chiefly in matters of conſcience. But what a malicious hypocriſie is this, to call vpon Chriſtian

Magiſtrates for mercie and fauour, and they themſelues in the meane time, breath nothing but crueltie and blood in their hearts? I graunt mercie becommeth a Chriſtian Gouernour, but not without ſeueritie of Iuſtice. For ſeueritie ſtayeth a greater nomber, then mercie and fauour allureth, (as Auguſt. ſaith) Sicut meliores ſunt quos dirigit amor: ita 
                  De Corre & Grati. 
                  plures ſunt quos corrigit Timor. The greater part is alwayes the worſt: therefore Magiſtrates muſt take heede, that mercie bee not turned into crueltie: For as Auguſt. ſaith, there is Miſericordia puniens & Crudelitas parcens.
               
               
                  Obiection.
Faith (ſay they) is the gift of God, it cannot be forced by any puniſhment: by hardneſſe and extreme dealing men may be made hypocrites, but not religious: yea, they adde further, that the Apoſtles vſed no ſuch helpe of Princes power to bring men to the faith, or to pull them away from errour.
               
                  Anſwere.
But theſe and ſuch other like their Allegations, are contrary to the word of GOD, and iudgement of all the auncient learned Fathers, and ſpecially Saint Augustine, who chiefly dealt againſt the Donatiſts, in this, and other opinions. Reade the thirteenth and ſeuenteenth of Deuteronomie, and ſee Deut 1
                        •
                     . & 17. howe ſtraightly God giueth charge for the puniſhment of them that ſeduce other from the true worſhippe of God. In Exodus hee ſayeth, Qui immolat Dijs alienis, praeterquam Domino ſoli, exterminetur. Hee that offereth vnto any other gods, ſaue vnto the Lord, &c. In the Nombers, he that brake the Sabboth day, was ſtoned to death, that his example might not ſeduce other. Paul in the Act. of the Apoſtles,

by the power of God, ſtrooke blind Elymas the magitian, withſtanding the trueth of God. Auguſt. in the 11. Tract. vpon Iohn, diſputing againſt the Donatiſts, by the example of Nabuchodonoſor, exhorteth Chriſtian Princes to vſe ſharpe puniſhment againſt ſuch perſons, as contemne Chriſt & his doctrine. If king Nabuchodonoſor (faith he) gaue glorie to God, becauſe he had deliuered the 3. yong men from the fire, and gaue vnto him ſo great glorie, that he made a decree throughout all his empire, which comprehended ſo many kingdomes: how ſhould not our kings be mooued, which knowe not onely three yong men to be deliuered out of the fire, but them-ſelues, and all other faithful perſons deliuered from the eternal fire of hell? eſpecially when they ſee Chriſt thruſt out of the minds of Chriſtians, and when they heare it ſaid to a Chriſtian, Say thou art no Chriſtian. Such offences wil they commit, but yet ſuch puniſhments will they not ſuffer. For vnderſtand you what they doe, and what they ſuffer? They kill mens ſoules, but they are afflicted but in body: They worke to other eternall death, and they complaine that they ſuffer temporal death. &c. Againe, the ſame Aug. De vi coercend. Haereticis ad Vincent. Epiſt. 48. writeth in this ſort, My opinion was at the beginning, that none ſhould be forced to the vnitie of the Church, but that we ſhould endeuour to deale by the word of GOD, by diſputation, by reaſoning, and perſwading, leaſt happily of thoſe which we knew to bee open Heretikes, wee ſhoulde make counterfaite Chriſtians: but this mine opinion was not ouercome with the wordes of them that reaſoned againſt mee, but by the experience of them, which ſhewed mee examples to the contrarie. For firſt mine owne Citie of Hippo was obiected againſt mee, which was wholly carried away with the opinion of the Donatiſtes, and yet through

feare of the Emperours lawes was turned to the Catholike vnitie. Which Citie, we now ſee ſo to deteſt that pernitious errour, as if it had neuer bene among them. And likewiſe diuers other cities, were namely rehearſed vnto mee, ſo that by experience I learned, that my former iudgement was not right.
               
               The firſt Chriſtian Emperour Conſtantine vvriting to his Lieutenant Taurus, It hath pleaſed mee (ſayth hee) that in all the places and Cities, all the Temples of the idoles ſhould preſently be ſhut vp, and all wicked perſons forbidden to haue acceſſe vnto them. Our pleaſure further is, that all men ſhoulde forbeare their ſacrifices. If any ſuch wickedneſſe ſhalbe committed, let them be beaten downe with the reuengement of the ſworde, and their ſubſtance to bee ſeiſed vpon, and brought into my Treaſurie: And in like maner the gouernours of Prouinces to be puniſhed, if they neglect to execute the ſame.
               
               But I wil make no longer diſcourſe herein. Such as doe doubt hereof, and deſire to be better ſatisfied, I referre them to a Treatiſe which Maiſter Beza hath writtē for that matter. I haue taried the longer in this part, for that I am deſirous to let the indifferēt chriſtian reader vnderſtand, that it is but an aſſectionate iudgemēt of ſome, when they impute the only cauſe to be in biſhops, why there is in theſe dayes ſo great back ſliding from the Goſpell, & ſo great miſchiefe deuiſed againſt the Prince & the State. It appeareth their mindes are blinded with affection, that they cannot ſee the trueth.
               AN other crime layde againſt Biſhoppes, is, The quarel of maintayning pouling Courts. that they maintaine pilling and pouling, and (as ſome in deſpite terme them) bawdy courts. If they maintayne courtes for the adminiſtration of

Iuſtice, in ſuch thinges as are vvithin their charge: they doe, as I am perſvvaded by Gods law they may doe, and as by the lawes of this Realme, and ſtate of this Church they ought to doe. But if they mayntaine pouling in their Courtes, that (in deede) is vvorthy blame, and by no pretence can bee ſalued. For, as all Magiſtrates ought to deale vprightly, and vvithout corruption: ſo principally, ſuch as be Spirituall, and of the Church of God. But hovv is it prooued, that Biſhops maintaine pouling Courtes? Surely, I knovve not: For they doe not lay it dovvne in particulars. If they did, I thinke the matter might eaſily be anſwered vvith good reaſon.
               It may bee they thinke, the vnder-Officers take money and bribes, where they ſhould not: For that is polling and extortion. If it bee ſo, it is euill, and not to be ſuffered, and vpon proofe, the Lavve appoynteth ſharpe puniſhment. Though it bee true that they ſurmiſe in this caſe, that Officers are ſo corrupt: it is one thing to ſay, The Officers vſe pouling, and another to ſay, The biſhop maintaineth a pouling Court.
               A biſhop may haue an euill Officer, vvhome yet he vvill not maintaine, no nor ſuffer, if he knevve it, and be able to redreſſe it. I am in perſvvaſion, there is no biſhop in this Realme, but if it be complayned of, and proofe made vnto him, that his officers take more then is preſcribed by order and lavv that they may doe, but wil miſlike with the thing, and doe his beſt to ſee it redreſſed: Or if hee will not, I fauour not their State ſo much, but that I could vviſh him to be puniſhed himſelfe. But if a Biſhops Officers ſhall be counted to poule, when they take no more

then the ordinary fees and duties by Lawe allowed, & the biſhop when he beareth with the ſame, ſhall bee called a maintainer of a poulling Court: this is a matter in a ſlaunderer to be puniſhed, and not a fault in a biſhop to bee blamed. By this meanes all the Courtes in Englande may bee defamed, and called poulling Courtes, and the Officers or Iudges, vnder whoſe authoritie they ſtande, may bee reprooued as mainteners of poulling Courtes. Bee it, that there is vnlawfull taking in many Courtes of this Realme, as happily there is in ſome by greedie Officers: were it therefore the duetie of chriſtian & godly ſubiects, to ſpread libels againſt the Prince or chiefe gouernors, as mainteners of corruption, briberie, and pouling?
               An hard matter it is, in ſo corrupt times, for anie magiſtrate, to warrant the doinges of all inferiour officers: I pray God this making of exception to Courtes and officers, goe no further then to the officers of biſhops and of the Cleargie. Whatſoeuer they pretend, the very root of the matter is this: The whole ſtate Eccleſiaſticall, by the looſeneſſe of this time, is growen into hatred & contempt, & all inferiour ſubiectes diſdaine in any poynt to be ruled by them. And therfore when they be called, conuēted and puniſhed for ſuch things, wherin they haue offended, or be brideled of that they would do diſorderly: they grudge at it, their ſtomackes riſe againſt it, and thinke al that is done to be vnlawfull, though it be neuer ſo iuſt. And becauſe they are not able otherwiſe to be reuenged, they crie out, that they be cruel and poulling Courts.
               
                  
                  Obiection.
To cut off the whole matter, it wil be ſaid, that by the word of God it is not lawfull for biſhops to haue ſuch Courtes, nor to exerciſe ſuch iuriſdiction.
               
                  Anſwere.
Yet truly I muſt anſwere, that it is lawful for chriſtian ſubiects to obey it, and vnlawfull for them to kicke and ſpurne againſt it, ſeeing it ſtandeth by authoritie of the Lawes, and of our Chriſtian and gracious prince, by whom God hath ſent to vs, and doeth continue with vs, the free courſe of his Goſpell. But why may not a biſhop exerciſe iuriſdiction, & haue a Court to iudge, determine, and ende matters? Surely, Saint Paule ſayth to Timothie, Againſt 
                  1. Tim. 5. 
                  a Prieſt or Elder, receiue no accuſation, vnder two or three witneſſes. Here is an accuſer: Heere is a perſon accuſed: here are witneſſes examined: heere is a iudgement and deciding of the matter: therefore here is an exerciſe of iuriſdiction, and a manner of a Court.
               They will ſay, It was not Timothies Court onely, but ioyntly exerciſed with the reſidue of the Elders, that had the gouernement.
               Vndoubtedly, there is no ſuch thing there in that place. The words are directed to Timothie only: the adioyning of ſome other, is but the interpretation of ſome fewe: vpon which, to build the neceſsity of a doctrine in the Church of Chriſt, is but hard dealing, and not ſufficient to ground mens conſciences vpon. And yet here note you, that by this place it is euident, that eccleſiaſticall perſons may haue, and vſe iuriſdiction.
               To prooue that biſhops may not alone exerciſe

iuriſdiction, they adde Chriſtes ſaying, Matthew, 18 If thy brother offend thee, go and tel him his fault between thee and him alone. If he ſhal heare thee, thou haſt wonne thy brother: but if he wil not heare thee, take yet with thee one or two: if he wil not heare then, Dic Eccleſiae, Tell it to the Church.
               
               Here (ſay they) we are willed to tel the Church: but the Church cannot be vnderſtāded to be one perſon, as the biſhop or ſuch like.
               Firſt I anſwere, that by the conſent of moſt interpreters, that place ſpeaketh not of the exerciſe of publike iuriſdiction, but of a charitable proceeding in priuate offences. And Chriſtes large diſcourſe, which immediatly following he maketh vnto Peter, touching the forgiuing of them that doe offend vs, doth very euidētly iuſtifie that meaning. If ſome do interpret the place otherwiſe (as I haue before ſaid) Chriſtians ſhoulde not build thereupon a generall doctrine of neceſsitie.
               It will be asked what Chriſt meant when he ſaid, Dic Eccleſiae. As ſome interprete it, he meant, Tell the Gouernours of the Church. After ſome other, Tell it openly in the Church or congregation, as Hierome ſaith, Vt qui non potuit pudore ſaluari, ſaluetur opprobriis, that is, that hee which could not be ſaued by ſhame, might haue his ſaluation wrought by reproch. For a great thing it is to one that hath any feare of God, to haue reproch in the face of the Church.
               And to this interpretation, the moſt of the ancient writers agree.
               
                  Obiection.
They will reply, that at that time there were manie Preſidents as it were, and gouernours of the Church together

with the chiefe Miniſters in euery Congregation.
               
                  Anſwere.
I grant it was ſo: But it doth not follow thereupon, that it is a commaundement, that for euer in all places and times, it ſhould be ſo. I am not of that opinion, nor euer was any of the auncient Writers, no more are ſundry learned men of great credite at this time, Quòd vna ſemper debet eſſe oeconomia Eccleſiae, that is, that the externall gouernement of the Church, ſhould alwayes, & in all places be one, and ſpecially by a college or company of Elders. When Chriſt ſaid, Tel the Church, there was as yet no Chriſtian church eſtabliſhed: but Chriſt took his ſpeech according to the ſtate of the Iewes Church that then was, as in another place he 
                     •
                  aith, If thy brother treſpaſse againſt thee, leaue thine offering before the altar. If they will gather by the former ſpeech, Tell the Church, that of neceſſity, they muſt haue a company of Elders, as then was in the Iewes church: why, let them make like collection of the latter, that of neceſſitie there muſt be altars in the church of Chriſt: the abſurditie whereof will bee greater, then any good chriſtian man will eaſily receiue.
               
                  Obiection.
They will ſay, the Apoſtles afterward, and the Primitiue Church did practiſe the ſame.
               
                  Anſwere.
That is not yet proued: but let thē ſtruggle while they luſt, theyſh al neuer find a commandement in the ſcriptures, charging that it ſhuld for euer be ſo. It were to great a bridle of chriſtiā liberty in things external, to caſt vpō the church of Chriſt. So lōg as the church of God was in perſecutiō vnder tyrants,

might well ſeeme to be the beſt and fitteſt order of Gouernment: But when God bleſſed his Churche with Chriſtian Princes, the Scriptures doe not take away that libertie, that with the conſent of their godlie magiſtrates they may haue that outwarde forme of iuriſdiction, & deciding of Eccleſiaſticall cauſes, as to the ſtate of the Countrey and people ſhall be moſt conuenient. And that libertie haue diuers reformed churches, ſince the reſtoring of the Goſpell, vſed.
               Now, as when other churches in their externall order of gouernment, differ frō ours, we neither do, nor ought, to miſlike with them: ſo if ours differ frō theirs, retaining ſtill the ſinceritie of the goſpel and trueth of doctrine, I truſt they will euen as charitably thinke of vs.
               If any deſire further aunſwere in this controuerſie of church gouernment, I refer them to the reply of D. Bridges, vntill they haue with modeſtie and grauitie anſwered his booke.
               It is obiected alſo againſt Biſhops, that they abuſe The crime of abuſing Eccleſiaſticall Diſcipline. Eccleſiaſticall Diſcipline. I take Eccleſiaſticall Diſcipline to conſiſt in reprouing, correcting and excommunicating ſuch as be offendors in the Church. And I thinke their meaning is here, that biſhops & their officers abuſe Excommunication, in puniſhing therewith thoſe perſons, which obſtinately & with contempt refuſe, either to appeare, when they bee called to aunſwere their offences: or when they appeare, diſobey thoſe orders and decrees by Eccleſiaſticall officers appoynted. Howe this part of Church Diſcipline was abuſed by the Pope, it is well knowen: and that hee made Excommunication
                  
an inſtrument to bring the neckes of Emperors and Princes, ynder his girdle, and to make the whole world ſubiect to him. For this was almoſt the onely meane, whereby he became ſo dreadfull to all men, and got to himſelf ſo great autoritie. The perpetual courſe of the hiſtories, euen ſuch as were written by his owne Paraſites, and chiefly of this Realme of England, declare this to be moſt true. For triall hereof, reade the hiſtorie of Thomas Becket.
               
               But I thinke no man is ſo caried with the miſliking of our Biſhops, that he wil accuſe them, in this ſort to abuſe Excommunication: ſeeing by their preaching they haue binprincipall inſtruments to ouerthrow the ſame in the Church of Rome.
               
               They cannot ſay, that any Biſhop of this church, euer ſince the reſtoring of the Goſpell, indeuoured to excommunicate the Prince and gouernours, of purpoſe to make them ſubiect to their authoritie in the Church. And happily that may bee a fault, yea and a great fault that is founde with them in theſe daies, that they do not ſo, and conſtraine the prince and Rulers to doe that, which by perſwaſion they will not doe.
               But howe expedient this maner of Excommunication is for this time, I leaue to the wiſe and godly to conſider. Sure I am, that ſome of the moſt zealous churches reformed haue it not, nor thinke it tollerable. And yet ſuch a maner of Excommunication it is, Tygure. that many ſtriue at this day to haue brought into the Church, vnder the name of Diſcipline.
               
               But how eaſily it would grow to abuſe, and what danger it might bring in this ſtate of time, I thinke there is no wiſe man that doth not foreſee: vnleſſe

it be ſuch, as to bring their purpoſe to paſſe, and to ſettle their deuiſe in the Church, thinke no danger to be ſhunned.
               As for the Excommunication practiſed in our Eccleſiaſticall Courtes, for contumacie in not appearing, or not ſatisfying the iudgement of the Court: if it had pleaſed the Prince, and them that had autoritie to make Lawes for the gouernment, to haue altered the ſame at the beginning, and ſet ſome other order of proceſſe in place thereof: I am perſwaded the Biſhops and Clergy of this Realme woulde haue bin very wel contented therewith.
               
                  Gualter a learned man of the Church of Tygure, writing vpon the firſt to the Corinthians, hauing ſhewed the danger of this other Excommunication, ſpeaketh of a maner of ciuile diſcommuning, vſed in that Church: Which, or the like good order, deuiſed by ſome godlie perſons, if it might bee by authoritie placed in this Churche, without danger of further innouation, I thinke it woulde be gladly reciued to ſhunne the offence that is taken at the other, and yet ſurely, vnder correction, the Law of alteration woulde breede ſome inconuenience.
               But the perpetuall crying of many to haue a mutation of the whole ſtate of the Clergie, and a number of other thinges in the Church beſide, (which muſt needes draw with it a great alteration in the ſtate of the Realme alſo) maketh the Prince, and other Gouernours to bee afraide of any mutation. For they knowe what daunger may come in theſe perillous dayes by innouations: And if they ſhoulde once beginne, things are ſo infinite,

ſhat they can ſee no ende of alterations. Therefore eeing wee haue a Church ſetled in a tollerable maner of reformation, and all trueth of doctrine freely taught and allowed by the authority of this realme, yea, and the aduerſaries of trueth by lawe repreſſed: they thinke it better to beare with ſome imperfections, then by attempting great alterations, in ſo dangerous a time, to hazard the ſtate both of the Church and of the Realme. And the like toleration in ſome meane things, I vnderſtand, vpon like conſideration hath bin vſed in other churches reformed beyond the Seas.
               
                  Obiection.
An other crime is obiected, not onely againſt iſhops, but againſt all other of the Clergie, that is, The quarrel of ambition, and ſeeking of liuings. Ambition and greedie ſeeking after liuings and promotions. If a benefice fall voyde (ſay they) then rideth hee, then writeth hee, then laboureth hee, then inquireth he, who can doe moſt with the Patrone. And if hee be a Lay-man, then at the leaſt a reaſonable compoſition will ſerue: And if the Biſhop haue the gift, then Maſter Chancellor, or Maſter Steward, or my Lords Secretarie, or my Miſtreſſe his wife, muſt helpe to worke the ma
                     •
                  ter.
               
                  Anſwere.
Doe you not ſee, how this malicious ſpirite paſſeth ouer all the good giftes, that God hath in theſe dayes beſtowed on a number of learned men, to the great ornament of this land? and of purpoſe onely to deface the Church, taketh holde of thoſe imperfections and blemiſhes, which the corruption of mans nature ſpecially in ſo perillous times, and ſo large a Church, muſt needes worke in a number? Well writeth Baſile, Quemadmodum vultures &c. As vultures or carren Rauens flie away to ſtinking carcaſſes 
                  De inuidia.
                  
                  and paſſe ouer many ſweet medowes, and many ſweete ſauouring places: And as the flies ſhun the whole and ſounde places of the body, and reſt only vpon ſcabs and ſoares, out of which they ſuck matter to noriſh them: euen ſo the enuious, malitious, and backbiting ſpirite, paſſeth ouer all the ornaments & worthy commendations of the liues of mē, & carpeth & biteth at thoſe things that he findeth worthy blame.
               
               This Realme of England neuer had ſo many learned men, nor of ſo excellent gift in deliuering the word of God: It is the greateſt ornament, that euer this church had. For my part, ſurely, I do reuerence and maruell at the ſingular gifts of God that I ſee in many. But theſe things bee wincked at, and paſſed with ſilence, and the ambitious doings of ſome few, brought in, as matter to diſcredite the whole number of Preachers.
               
                  Diogenes, ſeeing the cleanly furniture of Plato his houſe, got vp vpon his bed, and trampled on it with his dirtie feete, ſaying, Calco fastum Platonis, that is, I contemne & tread vnder my feet the pride of Plato. True it is, quoth Plato, ſed alio fastu, with another pride worſe then mine. So theſe men, in rebuking ambitiō, reach at an higher authoritie and power, then any biſhop in England hath or will vſe.
               Ambition, I knowe and confeſſe, is very wicked, & hath euer beene a perillous inſtrument of the deuil to make miſchief. By this he drew our firſt parēts to the diſobedience of the commandement of God, perſwading them not to be contēt with that happy ſtate that God had placed them in. By this he incenſed Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with other, to rebel againſt Moſes and Aaron. By this he thought to ouercome Chriſt, when hee ſawe he could not preuaile

by other meanes. By this he hath always rayſed diſcorde, diſſention, rebellion, warre and tumult, not onely to the troubling and diſquieting, but to the ſhaking and ouerthrowing almoſt of all common weales that euer haue beene, and thereby alſo hath wrought the murther and deſtruction of an infinite number of the creatures of God. By this he hath frō time to time raiſed many ſchiſmes & hereſies in the Church of Chriſt. By this, vndoubtedly I thinke he worketh no ſmall euill nowe at this day, in this our Church of England. But what then? Doe they thinke, that if the biſhoppes landes, and the rich liuings of the Cleargie be taken away, that they ſhall extinguiſh Ambition in the heartes of the miniſters? Was there no Ambition in the Church before that biſhops had lands, or before preachers had ſo large liuings? No man can ſo thinke, but they that are ignorant of the eccleſiaſticall hiſtories. What was the firſt root of the troubleſome ſchiſme of the Donatiſts? Whereof ſprang firſt the hereſies of the Nouatians at Rome? What gaue the firſt occaſion of the Optat. Mileu. lib. 1. Euſeb. eccl. hiſt. lib. 6. c. 42. & 43. peſtilent hereſie of the Arians? What maintayned and continued it? was it not Ambition. and ſeeking of preheminence? But what ſhoulde I number vp any more examples? Fewe ſchiſmes and hereſies in the Church, but had their beginning out of this roote. And many knowe, that a repulſe of a dignitie deſired, was the firſt cauſe that our ſchiſme brake forth, & hath ſo eagerly continued. Surely, though I confeſſe, that I ſee and knowe in our church more corruption that way, then I am gladde to beholde, and ſo much eſpecially in ſome kinde of Miniſters, as I praie GOD by ſome ſharpe order may bee

diminiſhed: yet this I dare ſtande to iuſtifie, that all the enemies of the biſhoppes, and better ſorte of the cleargie, ſhall neuer be able to proue, notwithſtanding the daunger of this corrupt time, that there is at this day in this Realme, ſuch heauing and ſhoouing, ſuch canuaſing and working for biſhoprikes and other Eccleſiaſticall liuings, as I will declare vnto them to haue beene in the ancient time aboue a thouſand yeeres ſince, in the beſt ſtate that euer was in the church, from the Apoſtles age vnto this time. That there is no Ambition vſed among vs, (as I haue ſaide) I dare not affirme: but ſurely, if there bee any, there can be no Ambition on the one part, but there muſt bee corruption on the other: therfore let them looke vnto themſelues, that haue authoritie to beſtow the liuings. The beſt ſorte of the eccleſiaſtical liuings are in the diſpoſition of the princes authoritie. And thoſe honorable that haue to doe therein, and are counſailers to her Maieſtie, be not ſo vnwiſe, but they can eſpy Ambition in him that ſueth and laboureth for them. And if they do perceiue it, they are very greatly to blame, if they ſuffer it to eſcape without open ſhame, or other notable puniſhment, and thereby bring ſuſpition, eyther vpon themſelues, or vpon thoſe that be about them.
               As for the corruption in beſtowing other meaner liuings, the chiefe fault thereof is in patrones themſelues. For it is the vſuall manner of the moſt part of thē (I ſpeake of too good experiēce) though they may haue good ſtore of able mē in the Vniuerſities, yet if an ambitious or greedie miniſter come not vnto them, to ſue for the benefice, if there bee

an vnſufficient man, or a corrupt perſon within two ſhires of them, whom they thinke they can draw to any compoſition for their owne benefit, they wil by one meanes or other finde him out. And if the biſhop ſhall make curteſie to admitte him, ſome ſuch ſhift ſhall be found by the lawe, either by Quare impedit, or otherwiſe; that whether the biſhop will or no, he ſhalbe ſhifted into the benefice. I know ſome biſhops, vnto whom ſuch ſutes againſt the patrones haue bene more chargeable in one yeere, then they haue gained by all the benefices that they haue beſtowed ſince they were biſhoppes, or I thinke will doe, while they bee biſhoppes. They haue iniurie therefore, to bee ſo openly ſlaundered in the face of the worlde. If there bee any biſhoppe that corruptly beſtoweth his liuinges by ſute of Maiſter Chauncellor, or Maiſter Steward, or any other: looke what puniſhment I woulde haue any lay-man in that caſe to ſuſtaine, I woulde wiſh to a biſhoppe double or triple.
               
                  Obiection.
But now I muſt come to that which toucheth biſhops The obiection that the Biſhops be carnall and worldly diſpoſed. moſt nighly, that is, that they be carnally diſpoſed, and not euangelically, and this their affection and corruption they ſhew to the world by hoarding of great ſummes of money, by purchaſing lands for their wiues and children, by marrying their ſonnes and daughters with thouſands, by increaſing their liuings with flockes and heards of graſed cattell, by furniſhing their tables with plate and guilded cups, by filling their purſes with vnreaſonable fines and incomes, &c.
               
                  Anſwere.
Wee heare in this place an heape of grieuous offences, & indeed, if they be true, wel worthy ſuch lamentable

outcries, as are made againſt thē. But the godly muſt conſider, that where lauiſhing tongues and pennes be at libertie, to lay forth reproch without feare of correction or puniſhment, that the beſt men in the worlde may be ſlandered and brought in danger, eſpecially where through enuie and malice men haue conceiued diſpleaſure againſt any State.
               
                  Euſtathius, a godly and chaſte Biſhop, by conſpiracie Theod. lib. 1. cap. 20. and falſe ſuggeſtion of certaine Heretikes and Schiſmatikes, was not accuſed onely, but vniuſtly alſo condemned of adultery, and by the Emperour Conſtantine caſt into baniſhment, into a citie of Sclauonie. Cyrillus a good and learned father, Biſhop of Hieruſalem, and an earneſt patrone of the true faith of Chriſt, was by the heretike Acaſius, & his friends Soz. Lib. 4 cap. 26. Socr. Lib. 2. cap. 30. in the Court, accuſed to the Emperor Conſtantinus, that he had imbezeled the church goodes, and had ſolde to a player of Enterludes, a rich garment, giuen to the Church by his father.
               This falſe accuſation ſo much preuailed, that the good biſhop was for it depoſed, &c. I noted you the like before of that bleſſed man Athanaſius and other, Athan. Apol. 2. and might bring a great number of examples, out of the Eccleſiaſtiall hiſtories & writers. For it was the vſuall practiſe of all ſuch as did endeuour to further any hereſie or Schiſmaticall faction, were they of the Cleargie or Laitie, by all meanes they could, through infamie and diſcredite, to pull downe ſuch as did withſtand their euil & troubleſome attempts in the Church, & not onely to raile at them, & to deface them with falſe and vniuſt reports, but alſo to draw to their reproch their beſt and moſt Chriſtian 
                     •
                  oings: as the charitable dealing of Cyrill, was ſo

wreſted, that it brought him to great daunger. And ſurely I cannot but feare, that the deuill is euen now in hatching of ſome notable hereſies, or ſome other hid miſchiefes, which hee woulde bring foorth, and thruſt into the Church of England, & therfore prepareth the way for the ſame, by defacing & diſcrediting the beſt learned of the church, that both would and ſhould reſiſt them. This wee ſee alreadie in that peeuiſh faction of the families of the loue, which haue bin breeding in this Realme the ſpace of theſe thirty yeeres, and now vpon confidence of the diſgracing of the ſtate of Biſhoppes, and other Eccleſiaſticall Gouernours, haue put their heades out of the ſhel, and of late yeeres, haue ſhewed themſelues, euen in the Princes Court. The like I might ſay of the Anabaptiſts and other Sectaries, as bad as they.
               As touching this preſent point of the accuſation of Biſhops, I haue to admoniſh the godlie Reader, that in Chriſtian charitie and wiſedome they conſider, aſwell, what diuers of thoſe perſons which now bee Biſhoppes, haue beene before time: as alſo, in what ſtate they are nowe in this Realme, and howe they are beſet on euery ſide with aduerſaries and euill ſpeakers of diuers ſortes, and then to weigh with themſelues, whether it bee likely that all is true, which is vttered againſt them, or rather that for deſpite and diſpleaſure, many things are ſpoken falſly and ſlanderouſly, and manie other meane and ſmall blemiſhes amplified and exaggerated to the worſt, more then trueth.
               That thoſe which now bee, or of late haue beene Biſhops in this Church, ſhoulde be ſo carnally and groſly giuen ouer to the world and the cares therof,

as they are by ſome defamed: my heart abhorreth to thinke, neither will the feare of God ſuffer me to iudge it to be true. I ſee what they are preſently in all truth of doctrine: I ſee how earneſtly and zealouſly they teach and defend the ſame in their preachings: I ſee howe carefully they beate downe the groſſe ſuperſtition of Antichriſt and his miniſters: I call to remembraunce, that of late yeeres, in the time of perſecution, when the moſt of them were in ſtate wel able to liue, that they were contented for the freedome of their conſciences, and that they might enioy the doctrine and liberty of the Goſpel, to forſake their liuinges, to leaue their friendes, to hazard their liues, to be accompted Traitours, and to ſuſtaine all thoſe miſeries & troubles, that might followe vpon baniſhment, and caſting out of their Countrey.
               And I ſee nothing in them, if God, as wee by our vnthankfulneſſe daily deſerue, ſhould caſt the like ſcourge vpon this Realme againe, but that they would be moſt readie to do the ſame, although happily proſperitie in the meane time may drawe them to ſome offences. May any chriſtian heart then conceiue of them, although there be faults in them moe then the worthineſſe of their office requireth, that they be ſo carnally & fleſhly giuē ouer to the world, as the immodeſt accuſations of many their aduerſaries do make them? Mans nature is corrupt & fraile, and therfore may fal to much euil: but that ſo many learned men trained in the ſchoole of the Croſſe, & continuing in teaching & preaching of the trueth, ſhould bee ſo vtterly caried away from God, I can not beleeue, & I truſt, God ſhall giue ſome enident

token of the cōtrary. If there now be, or before time haue bene ſuch, as haue giuen iuſt occaſion in ſuch things, as they are accuſed of: I cannot but blame them, and wiſhe to the reſidue more feare of God, and care of their calling. I neuer entred into other mens hearts to ſee their conſciences: I neuer looked into their Cofers to ſee their treaſures: I neuer was deſirous to be priuie of their ſecrete doinges. I muſt therfore by that I ſee, heare, & know, iudge the beſt.
               Hee that ſhall charitably conſider the ſtate of Biſhops, as they are by the authoritie of the Prince and lawes of this Realme, will not thinke it impiety in them, againſt the time of neceſſary ſeruice of their countrey, to haue ſome reaſonable ſumme of money before hande, gathered in honeſtie, and iuſt vſing of their owne. But if they hoarde vp heapes, either for greedineſſe and loue of riches, or of perſwaſion to put their truſt in them in time of affliction, as they are reported: ſurely their offence cannot be excuſed.
               As touching their purchaſing of lands, I haue not heard much. The greateſt value that euer I heard of, doth ſcant amount to one hundred pound: & that in very few, ſcarce to the number of 3. perſons. Which in them, that ſo long time haue enioyed ſo large benefit of liuing, may ſeeme no great matter, eſpecially toward the relieuing of their wiues and children.
               
                  Obiection.
They will ſay perhaps, that Preachers ſhoulde not bee ſo carefull for their children, nor Biſhoppes ought not to make their wiues Ladies.
               
                  Anſwere.
If any looke to leaue them like Ladies in wealth

and riches, they are to blame: but moderatly to prouide for their wiues & children, I thinke thē bound in conſciēce, eſpecialy in this vncharitable, vnkind, & vnthankful world. For we may ſee the wiues and children of diuers honeſt and godly preachers, yea, & of ſome biſhops alſo, that haue giuen their blood for the confirmation of the goſpell, hardly to ſcape the ſtate of begging, euen amōg vs that profeſſe the goſpell, to our great and horrible ſhame. The ſight wherof, I thinke, doth moue ſome biſhops, & other Eccleſiaſticall perſons, to bee the more carefull for their wiues & childre, that they may haue ſome ſtay after their time, and not to be turned to liue vpon Almes, where charitie and chriſtian conſideration is ſo clean baniſhed. Eccleſiaſtical perſōs are not as other parēts are For ſo ſoon as they depart this life, or otherwiſe be put from their liuing, becauſe they haue no ſtate but for life, their wiues and children without cōſideration are turned out of the doores. And if in their husbandes time they haue not ſome place prouided, they hardly can tel how to ſhift for themſelues. And ſurely experience teacheth me ſo much, that I muſt needs bewaile and lament the pitifull caſe of diuers honeſt matrons, and poore infants, which in my knowledge, at the death of their husbands and fathers, haue beene driuen to great hazard & diſtreſſe. And this cauſeth, that moſt honeſt women, of ſober and good behauior, are loath to match with miniſters, though they bee neuer ſo well learned, becauſe they ſee their wiues ſo hardlie beſted, whē they are dead. They that are not moued with this, haue but cold zeale toward the goſpell.
               And ſeeing the caſe is ſo among vs in this realme:

as he is worſe thē an heathen by S. Pauls iudgemēt, that in his life time doth not prouide for his family: ſo ſurely hee cannot eſcape the blame of an vnkind husbād, or vnnatural parēt, that hath not ſome care of his wife and children, after his time.
               I write not this to defend the peruerſe or couetous affection of any, neither do I thinke that there be many ſuch in this church. Diuers I knowe, that when God ſhall call them, will leaue ſo litle, as their children, as I think, muſt commēd themſelues only to the prouidence of God. And therefore it is not well, that the fault of a fewe (if any ſuch be) ſhould bee taken as a matter, to diſcredite the whole calling.
               But ſurely, they that murmure ſo greatly againſt the moderat prouiſion of the wiues and children of Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and turne that as matter of hainous ſlaunder vnto them: let them pretend what they wil, it may be ſuſpected, they ſcantly think wel of their marriages: Or if they doe, the very Papiſtes themſelues are more fauourable and charitable aduerſaries to preachers, then they are▪ For ſeeing the ſtate of our Church alloweth miniſters to be married, they thinke it to ſtand with godly reaſon alſo, that they ſhould in honeſty prouide for their wiues and children.
               Diuers perſons of other calling, by the exerciſe of an office onely in fewe yeeres, can purchaſe for wife and children many hundreds, and all very well thought of: but if a biſhop, that by ſtate of the lawe hath the right vſe of a large liuing many yeeres, doe purchaſe one hundred markes, or procure a meane Leaſe for the helpe of his wife and children, it is

accompted greedie couetouſneſſe, and miſtruſt in the prouidence of God. I woulde it were not ſpite and enuie, with greedie deſire of biſhops liuings, that cauſed this euill ſpeech, rather then their couetous and corrupt dealing. They feare that all will be taken from themſelues.
               As touching that biſhops are blamed for taking of Of taking of Fines, &c. vnreaſonable Fines, and furniſhing of their Cupboardes with ſiluer veſſel and plate, I truſt euery charitable man, that hateth not the preſēt ſtate, may eaſily ſee what is to be anſwered. To take Fines for their leaſes & lands, is as lawfull for them, by the word of God, & by the law of this Realm, as for any other chriſtiā ſubiect, that hath poſſeſſions. And likewiſe, to haue plate or ſiluer veſſell, their condition beeing conſidered, is a thing indifferent, & not worthy ſo great reproch or biting ſpeech as is vſed. If they had not ſuch furniture, it is likely a great number would thinke euil of it, and in an other ſort blame them as much for it. But if they take immoderate Fines, or let vnreaſonable Leaſes, to the grieuing and burthening of their poore & honeſt tenants: or if they pompouſly auaunce themſelues, & ſet their glorie in the gorgious plate and gay furniture: I am ſo farre from defending that abuſe, that I will be as ready to blame thē as any man. And ſo much do I miſlike ſuch dealing in them, as I would wiſh thoſe that can be foūd faultie in theſe things, by the Princes and Gouernours to be examined and tryed, and vpon iuſt and lawfull proofe of their offences, to be puniſhed according to their demerits: And, ifye weight of matter ſo required, to be depoſed, for the example of other, and better ſet in their places. But if y• trial were

made, as ſome faults perchance might be found vnworthy their calling: ſo I am in hope, they woulde not appeare ſo great & ſo grieuous, as to ye diſcrediting of their doctrine, ſhould deſerue ſo heinous & bitter exclamations, and ſo reprochful libels, as are giuen abroad againſt them. Faults, in all ſtates, and ſpecially of miniſters, woulde bee examined, tried, iudged & puniſhed, by the law and ordinarie magiſtrates: and not an vnchriſtian looſeneſſe and libertie left to vnquiet & vngodly ſubiectes, either by euill ſpeeches, or vncharitable writings to ſlaunder them, & bring them into hatred and miſliking. The example whereof may grow to great daunger, and hath bene counted perillous in al common weales, and much more in the Church of God.
               But, I pray you, what is meant by this diſgracing of biſhops, & other chiefe miniſters of the Church? For what purpoſe are their liues in ſuch ſort blaſed? to what ende are their doings ſo defamed? Why is their corruption, their couetouſneſſe, their Simonie, their extortion, and al other vices, true or falſe, laide abroad before mens eies? Why is the perfect rule of their office & calling, according to the patterne of the Apoſtles time, required at their hands onely? Is God the God of eccleſiaſtical miniſters alone? Is he not the God of his people alſo? doth he require his word to be exactly obſerued of biſhops and miniſters alone? doth he hate vice and wickednes in them alone? Or doth he lay downe the rule of perfect iuſtice to them onely, and not comprehend in the ſame all other ſtates of his people, as well as them? Yes truely, I thinke no Chriſtian is otherwiſe perſwaded.
               
                  
                  Obiection.
Perhaps they will ſay, that all other States do wel, and liue according to their calling. The worde of God is ſincerely euery vvhere imbraced: Iuſtice is vprightly in all places miniſtred: the poore are helped and relieued: vice is ſharpely of all other men corrected: there is no corruption, no couetouſneſſe, no extortion, no Simonie, no vſurie, but in the Biſhops, and in the Cleargie. There are no Monopolies in this Realme practiſed to the gaine of a fewe, and the vndoing of great multitudes, that were wont to liue by thoſe trades. All courtes be without fault, and voyde of corruption, ſauing the Eccleſiaſticall courtes onely. All officers are vpright and true dealers ſauing theirs. None other doe ſo carefully and couetouſly prouide for their wines and children. They onely giue the example of all euill life.
               
                  Anſwere.
I would to God it were ſo: I would to God there were no ſuch euils as are recited, but in them: Yea, I woulde to God there were no woorſe then in them, on condition that neuer a Biſhop in Englande had one groate to liue vpon. The want ſurely of the one would eaſily be recompenſed with the goodneſſe of the other.
               What then is the cauſe that Biſhops and Preachers haue in theſe dayes ſo great fault founde with them? Forſooth it followeth in the next branch of a certaine Accuſation penned againſt them.
               
                  Obiection.
They haue Temporall landes, they haue great liuinges, The principall cauſe why the Biſhops be ſo depraued. They are in the ſtate of Lordes, &c. The Prince ought therefore to take away the ſame from thē, & ſet them to mean penſions, that in pouertie they may bee anſvverable to the Apoſtles, & other holy Preachers in the Primitiue Church: vvhereby the Queene maye bring 40000. markes yeerely to her Crovvne, beſide the pleaſuring of a great many of other her faithfull ſubiects and ſeruants.
               
                  
                  Anſwere.
This is the end, why biſhops and other chiefe of the Clergie are ſo defaced, why their doings are ſo depraued, why ſuch cōmon obloquie is in all mens mouthes vpon them rayſed, that is to ſay, that the mindes of the Prince & Gouernours, may thereby be induced to take away the lands and liuings from them, and to part the ſame among themſelues, to the benefite (as ſome thinke) and to the commoditie of their countrey and common weale. But it behooueth all Chriſtian Princes and Magiſtrates to take heede, that they bee not intrapped with this ſophiſtrie of Satans ſchoole. This is that Rhetorike that he vſeth, when he wil worke any miſchief in the Church of God, or ſtirre vp any trouble or alteration of a ſtate in a common weale.
               Firſt by defaming and ſlandering, hee bringeth the parties in hatred and miſliking, and when the peoples heads be filled therewith, then ſtirreth he vp buſie and vnquiet perſons to reaſon thus:
               They be wicked and euill men: they are couetous perſons: they oppreſſe the poore: they pill other to inrich themſelues: they paſſe not what they doe, ſo they may grow to honour and wealth, and beare al the ſway in the countrey. Therfore bring them to an accompt: let them anſwere their faults: pul them downe: alter their ſtate & condition: let vs no more be ruled vnder ſuch tyrants and oppreſſours: we are Gods people, as well as they. Did not he deale thus in 
                  Nomb. 16. 
                  Corah, Dathan & Abiram? did he not by them, charge the milde and gentle gouernour Moſes, and his brother Aaron, the choſen Prieſt of God, that they tooke too much vpon them? that they lifted themſelues vp aboue the congregation

of the Lord, & behaued themſelues too Lordly ouer his people? that they brought the Iſraelites out of a lande flowing with milke and honie, of purpoſe to worke vnto them-ſelues a dominion ouer the people, and to make them to periſh in the wilderneſſe? By this meanes they ſo incenſed the hearts, not onely of the common people, but of the Noblemen alſo, that they led a great number with them to rebell againſt Moſes and Aaron, and to ſet themſelues in their roomes and offices. In like maner, and by like policie, hath hee wrought in all common weales, in all ages and times, as the hiſtories doe ſufficiently declare.
               In this Realme of England, when the lewde and rebellious ſubiects roſe againſt K. Richard 2. and determined to pull downe the ſtate, & to diſpatch out of the way the counſellers, and other Noble & worſhipfull men, together with Iudges, Lawyers, and al other of any wiſe or learned calling in the Realme: was not the way made before, and their ſtates brought in hatred of the people, as cruell, as couetous, as oppreſſours of the people, and as enemies of the common weale, yea, & a countenance made vnto the cauſe, & a ground ſought out of the Scriptures and word of God, to helpe the matter?
               At the beginning (ſay they) when God had firſt made the worlde, all men were alike, there was no principalitie, there was nor bondage, or villenage: that grewe afterwardes by violence and crueltie. Therefore, why ſhould we liue in this miſerable ſlauerie vnder theſe proud Lords and crafty Lawyers? &c. Wherefore it behooueth all faithfull Chriſtians & wiſe Gouernours, to beware of this falſe and craftie policie. If this Argument paſſe nowe, and

bee allowed as good at this time againſt the Eccleſiaſticall ſtate: it may be, you ſhall hereafter by other inſtruments, then yet are ſtirring, heare the ſame reaſon applied to other States alſo, which yet ſeeme not to be touched, and therefore can be content to winke at this dealing toward Biſhops & Preachers: But when the next houſe is on fire, a wiſe man will take heed, leaſt the ſparkes therof fall into his owne. He that is authour of all perillous alterations, and ſeeketh to worke miſchief by them, will not attempt all at once, but will practiſe by little and little, and make euery former feate that hee worketh, to bee a way and meane to draw on the reſidue. For he ſeeth all men will not be ouercome with all temptations, nor will not be made inſtruments of all euill purpoſes, though happily by his colours and pretenſes he bee able to deceiue them in ſome. The practiſe hereof, wee haue ſeene in this Church of England, to the great trouble and daunger thereof. At the beginning, ſome learned and godly Preachers, for priuate reſpectes in themſelues, made ſtrange to weare the Surpleſſe, Cap, or Tippet: but yet ſo, that they declared themſelues to thinke the thing indifferent, and not to iudge euil of ſuch as did vſe them. Shortly after roſe vp other, defending that they were not thinges indifferent, but diſtayned with Antichriſtian idolatrie, and therefore not to bee ſuffered in the Church. Not long after came forth an other ſort, affirming that thoſe matters touching Apparell, were but trifles, and not worthie contention in the Church, but that there were greater thinges farre of more weight and importance, and indeede touching faith and religion, and therefore

meete to be altered in a Church rightly refourmed: As the booke of Common prayer, the adminiſtration of the Sacraments, the gouernment of the Church, the election of Miniſters, and a number of other like.
               Fourthly, now breake out another ſort, earneſtly affirming and teaching, that we haue no Church, no Biſhops, no Miniſters, no Sacraments: and therfore that all they that loue Ieſus Chriſt, ought vvith all ſpeede to ſeparate themſelues from our congregation, becauſe our aſſemblies are prophane, vvicked, and Antichriſtian.
            
            
               THis haue you heard of foure degrees prepared for the ouerthrow of this ſtate of the Church of England.
               Now laſtly of all, come in theſe men, that make Againſt the rich Liuings of Biſhops. their whole direction againſt the liuing of biſhops, and other Eccleſiaſticall miniſters: that they ſhoulde haue no Temporall landes, or iuriſdiction: that they ſhoulde haue no ſtayed liuings or poſſeſſion of goods, but onely a reaſonable Penſion to finde them meate, drinke, and cloth, and by the pouerty of their life, & contempt of the world, to be like the Apoſtles. For (ſay they) riches and wealth hath brought all corruption into the Church before time, and ſo doth it now.
               
                  Anſwere.
Novv is the enemie of the Church of God come almoſt to the point of his purpoſe. And if by diſcrediting of the Miniſters, or by coumenance of gaine and commoditie to the Prince and Nobilitie, or by the colour of Religion and holineſſe, or by any cunning he can bring this to paſſe (as before I haue ſignified) hee ſo reſeeth that learning, knovvledge of good letters, and ſtudie of the tongues, ſhall decay, aſwel in the Vniuerſities, as other wayes, which

haue bene the chiefe inſtruments to publiſh and defend the doctrine of the Goſpell, and to inlarge the kingdom of Chriſt: And then, of neceſſitie, his kingdome of darkeneſſe, errour and hereſie muſt riſe againe, and leaue this land in worſe ſtate, then euer it was before.
               But to perſwade this matter more pithily, to couer the principal purpoſe with a cloake of holineſſe, it is ſaide, and in very earneſt maner auouched, and that by the word of God, that neither the Prince can giue it them, nor ſuffer them to vſe it, without the danger of Gods wrath and diſpleaſure: nor they ought to take it, but to deliuer it vp againe into the Princes hand, or els they ſhal ſhew them ſelues Antichriſtian Biſhops, vaine glorious, & lucres men, not aſhamed, profeſſing God to continue in that droſſie way, and ſowre lumpe of dough, that corrupteth the whole Church, and brought out the wicked botch of Antichriſt.
               This doctrine (as it is boldely affirmed) God himſelfe hath vttered, Chriſt hath taught, his Apoſtles haue written, the Primitiue church cōtinued, the holy Fathers witneſſed, the late writers vphold, as it muſt forſooth be prooued by the whole courſe of the ſcriptures of the old and new Teſtament.
               But (good Chriſtians) be not feared away with this glorious countenance, and theſe bigge wordes of a bragging champion. I truſt you ſhall perceiue, that this doctrine is neither vttered by God, nor taught by Chriſt, nor writtē by his Apoſtles, nor witneſſed by ancient writers, nor vpholden by learned men of our time: but that it is rather a bolde and dangerous aſſertion, vttered by ſome man of very ſmall skill, countenanced with a fevv wreſted Scriptures, contrary to the true meaning of God the father, Chriſt his ſonne, and of his holy Apoſtles, and a little ſhadowed with vaine allegations of writers, either of no

credite, or little making to the purpoſe. And ſurely, how great and earneſt zeale, how vehement & loftie wordes ſo euer the vtterer of this aſſertion vſeth: it may be ſuſpected, that either he is not himſelf ſoundly perſwaded in true religion, or if he be, that of ſimplicitie, negligence or ignorance, he was abuſed by ſome ſubtile and craftie Papiſt, that woulde ſet him forth to the deriſion of other, to thruſt out into the world, and openly broach this corrupt and dangerous doctrine.
               Wherefore it were good, that they which wil take vpon them to be the furtherers of ſuch new deuiſes, ſhould better looke to their proofe & witneſſes, vnleſſe they wil ſeeme to abuſe al men, & to thinke that they liue in ſo looſe & negligent a ſtate, that nothing ſhalbe examined that they ſpeake, but that al things ſhalbe as eaſily receiued, as they may be boldly vttered. But I truſt, thoſe that haue the feare of God, and care of their ſoules, will not be afraide of vaine ſhadowes, nor by and by beleeue all glorious brags, but take heed that they be not eaſily led out of the way, by ſuch as wil ſo quickly be deceiued themſelues.
               I do not anſwere their vaine Arguments, becauſe I feare that any diſcreete or learned man wil be perſwaded with them: but becauſe I miſtruſt, that the ſimple and ignorant people, or other that be not acquainted with the Scriptures, by the very name and reuerence of the word of God, will be carried away, without iuſt examination of them.
               To deſcend ſomething to the conſideration of the matter, marke, I pray you, the Propoſition that is to be proued. It is not, that they may be good Biſhops and miniſters of the Church, which haue neither

glebe nor temporall landes to liue on: It is not, that there were in the primitiue Church, and nowe are in ſundry places, churches well gouerned, which haue not lands allotted vnto them: It is not, that the Apoſtles had no lands, nor any other a number of yeeres after Chriſt: For theſe poynts, I thinke no man will greatly ſtand with them. But this is the Aſſertion.
               
                  Obiection.
No Prince or magiſtrate by Gods worde may lawfully aſſigne lands to the miniſters of the church to liue on, but ought to ſet them to penſions: Nor any of the Eccleſiaſticall ſtate can by the Scriptures enioy, or vſe any ſuch landes, but ſhould deliuer them vp to the Prince, &c.
               
                  Anſwere.
Looke, I pray vou, vpon this Aſſertion, and conſider it well. Doe you not ſee in it, euen at the firſt, euident abſurditie? Do you not ſee a plaine reſtraint of Chriſtian liberty, as bold and as vnlawfull a reſtraint as euer the Pope vſed any? Do you not eſpy almoſt a flat hereſie, as dangerous as many branches of the Anabaptiſts errors? It is no better then an hereſie to ſay, that by the word of God it is prohibited for Miniſters to marry. It is no better then an hereſie to affirme, that Chriſtian men, by the lawe of God, may not eate fleſh, or drinke wine. Saint Paul doeth conſecrate theſe to be Doctrines of Deuils, and therefore 1. Tim. 9. not of the church of God: and the Primitiue church doeth confirme theſe to bee hereſies in Saturninus, Marcion, Tatian, Montane, and many other. And I Theodoret. Epiphan. Clem. Alex. pray you, what doth this Aſſertion differ from the other, when it is ſaid, It is not lawful for Eccleſiaſticall perſons to haue temporall landes to liue vpon? As mariage is the ordinance of God, and left free by his Gen. 3.
                  
word to al men: As meates and drinkes are the good creatures of our God, and to be vſed of al ſuch as receiue them with thankeſgiuing: ſo are landes, poſſeſſions, money, cattell, the good giftes of God, and the right vſe of them, not prohibited to any of his people: For to their benefite he ordained them, as his good bleſſings. Chriſt by his death made vs free from all ſuch legall obſeruations. Therefore S. Paul Coloſ. 2. If ye be dead with Chriſt to the iudgements of the worlde, why are you ledde with traditions, Touch not, Taſte not, Handle not, which all doe periſh in abuſing? This boldneſſe to bridle Chriſtian libertie, and to make it ſinne and matter of conſcience, to vſe the creatures of God, was the very foundation of al Papiſtical and Antichriſtian ſuperſtition. Vpon this foundation was builded the holineſſe in vſing, or not vſing of this, or that manner of apparell: in eating or forbearing theſe or thoſe kindes of meates: in obſeruing this or that day, or time of the yeere: in keeping this or that externall forme of life, with 1000. like inuentions and traditions of men. Neither do I thinke euer any errour did greater harme in the Church, or brought more corruption of doctrine then that did. Therefore I am ſorie to ſee ſome in theſe dayes, to leane ſo much to that dangerous ſtay, for the helpe of their ſtrange opinions in things externall. For, what doe men when they ſay, It is not lawfull for a Chriſtian man to weare a ſquare Cappe, to vſe a Surpleſſe, to kneele at the Communion? What (I ſay) doe they but bridle Chriſtian libertie, and to the burden of conſciences, make ſinnes vvhere GOD made none? And in like maner, hee that ſayeth, It is vvicked and not lavvfull,

that Biſhops, Preachers, or Eccleſiaſticall perſons ſhoulde haue any temporall landes to liue vpon, hee ſeemeth to finde fault with the creature of God. For, that Biſhops may haue liuing allowed them, is not denied: but to liue by landes, that (ſay they) is ſinne, and prohibited, and therefore the temporall lands and glebe muſt be taken from Biſhops and other Miniſters.
               This doctrine notwithſtanding, muſt bee proued Biſhops muſt haue no landes. and iuſtified by the Scriptures, and firſt by the ordinance of God himſelfe in the olde teſtament. In the Numbers, when God had declared to Aaron what Numb. 18. The anſwere to the obiection of the lawe and ordinance of God. portion he ſhould haue to liue vpon, hee addeth: Thou ſhalt haue no inheritance in their lande, neither ſhalt thou haue any part among them. I am thy part, and thy inheritance among the children of Iſrael. Behold, I haue giuen the children of Leui all the tenth of Iſrael to inherit, for the ſeruice which they ſerue in the Tabernacle. And againe after, It ſhalbe a law for euer in your generations, that among the children of Iſrael, they poſſeſſe no inheritance. And in Deut. 10. the Lorde ſeparated the tribe of Leui, &c. Wherefore the Leuites haue no part, nor inheritance with their Brethren, but the Lorde is their inheritance, as the Lord thy God hath promiſed them. In the 14. Chapter, and in the 18. and in diuers other partes of the law, and in Ioſua 14. Moſes gaue inheritance vnto two tribes and a halfe, on the other ſide of Iordan, but vnto the Leuites hee gaue no inheritance among them. Vpon theſe teſtimonies, the application and concluſion is inferred in this manner.
               
                  Obiection.
Here it may bee ſeene what liuing God appoynted his Prieſtes to haue: not landes and poſſeſsions, but tithes and

offerings. Seing then God denied it to his Prieſtes, it is not lawfull for our Prieſtes. Whoſe Prieſtes are they? If they be Gods Prieſts, it is not there permitted: If they be Antichriſts prieſts, what doe we with them?
               
                  Anſwere.
As this reaſon may haue ſome ſmall ſhew or likelihoode to the ignorant: ſo I am ſure, they that haue trauiled in the Scriptures, & any thing vnderſtand the ſtate of Chriſtianity, vvil marueile to ſee this application of the Texts and the concluſion inferred, Shall the Miniſters of the Church of God, novve in the time of grace, by neceſſitie be bound to thoſe orders that vvere among the Ievves appoynted for Prieſtes and Leuites by Moſes? Will they bring the heauie yoke and burthen of the Lavve againe vpon the people of God, after that Chriſt hath redeemed vs, and ſet vs free from it? Wil they haue Aaronicall and ſacrificing Prieſtes againe to offer for the ſinnes of the people? When it is in deriſion asked, Whoſe Prieſts ours are, if they be not Gods Prieſts? giuing ſignification that they be the Prieſtes of Antichriſt, it may be right vvell and truely anſvvered, that they are the Prieſtes of Gods holy, bleſſed, and true Church, and yet that they are not ſuch ſacrificing Prieſts of God, as are mentioned in thoſe places, nor in any way bound to thoſe things that they were, the morall Lawe of God onely excepted.
               
                  Obiection.
It is obiected to our Biſhoppes and Miniſters, that in their Landes and poſſeſſions, they reteine the corruption of the Romiſh Church.
               
                  Anſwere.
But I marueile to ſee them vvhich ſo boldely

controll other, to builde their aſſertions vpon the ruinous foundations of the Synagogue of Antichriſt. Theaduerſaries build vpon Popiſh foundations. As I noted a little before, that they layde their grounde vpon the reſtraint of Chriſtian libertie: ſo nowe they ſettle it vpon the imitation of the legall and Aaronicall prieſthood, as the Church of Rome did.
               Whence (I pray you) came the maſſing apparel, and almoſt all the furniture of their Church in cenſing and ſinging & burning of Tapers? their altars, their propitiatorie ſacrifice, their high Biſhop and generall head ouer all the Church, with a number of other corruptions of the Church of God, but onely out of this imitation of the Aaronicall prieſthood and legall obſeruations? Surely, while they thus vphold as good, the wicked foundations of the Synagogue of Sathan, they ſhall neuer ſo purely builde vp the Church of Chriſt, as they vvould bee accounted to doe. They may ſeeme to be in a hard ſtreight, that to batter down the ſtate of the Church of England, muſt craue ayde of Antichriſt, to ſet vp a fort vpon his foundation.
               The learned fathers of the primitiue Church, did, ſo much as they coulde, ſtriue to be furtheſt off from the imitation of the Iewes, and of the Aaronicall prieſthood, in ſo much that they vvould needes alter not onely the Sabboth day, but alſo the ſolemnizing of the feaſt of Eaſter: And ſhall the Lawe of the Leuites, and maner of their liuing bee layde downe to vs as a patterne of neceſſitie, vvhich the Prince muſt follovve in refourming her Church, or elſe the prieſtes thereof ſhall not be the prieſtes of God, but of Antichriſt? Is there no more reuerence

and feare of the maieſtie of Gods Prince and ſacred miniſter, then by ſuch groſſe abſurdities to ſeeke to ſeduce her? If this be a concluſion of ſuch neceſſitie, then let them go further: for by as good reaſon they may.
               God ſayeth to Aaron, Thou ſhalt not drinke wine, 
                  Leuit. 10. 
                  nor ſtrong drinke, thou, nor thy ſonnes that are with thee, when ye goe into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, leaſt ye die. Letit be a Lawe for euer throughout your generations.
               
               In an other place commaundement is giuen to Leuit. 22. the Prieſtes, That they may not eate of that which is rent of wilde beaſts. And in the ſame chapter. If the Prieſtes daughter bee married to any of the common people, ſhee may not eate of the hallowed offerings: but if ſhee be a Widowe, or diuorced from her husbande, and haue no childe, and is returned into her fathers houſe againe, ſhee may eate of her fathers meate, as ſhe did in her youth, but there ſhall no ſtranger eate thereof. In the 21. of Leuiticus it is ſayde, Speake vnto the Priests the ſonnes of Aaron, and ſay, Let none bee defiled by the dead among their people. And a little after, Let them not make baldnes vpon their head, nor ſhaue off the lockes of their beard. And againe, Let him take a Virgine to wife: but a widowe, a diuorced woman, or a polluted &c. ſhall he not marry.
               
               Now if the obſeruation of the orders appoynted by God to the Prieſts and Leuites of the olde Law, be a thing ſo neceſſary in the church of God: Why, then the Ministers of the Goſpell may not drinke wine or ſtrong drinke: they may not ſuffer their daughters married forth, if they come vnto their houſes, to eate any of the tenths and oblations, whereby they liue: they may not come nigh a dead body, nor bury it: they may marry no widowes,

but maydes onely. And ſo likewiſe ſhall you bring in by as good authoritie, infinite numbers mo of Leuiticall orders into the Church, and make it rather like a ſuperſtitious Synagogue, as the popes church was, then like a ſincere & vndefiled Church of God, as you would pretend to do.
               But let vs deſcende further into this allegation, and ſee howe they ouerthrowe themſelues in their owne purpoſe. If vpon this proofe it be ſo neceſſarie, that biſhops and other miniſters ſhoulde not liue by landes: then, as the negatiue is neceſſarie in the one branch, ſo is the affirmatiue in the other. When God hath ſayd, Thou ſhalt haue no inheritance in their land, he addeth, Beholde, I haue giuen the children of Leui all the tenth of Iſrael to inherite for the ſeruice, which they doe, &c. Then it is of neceſſitie by the Lawe of God, that biſhops and preachers ſhoulde liue vpon tenths and offerings, neither may this order be altered by any authoritie.
               And here is an other errour of the Papiſts, that tenths and offerings are in the Church Iure diuino, by the lawe of God, and not by any poſitiue Law of the Church. Thus we ſee that theſe men are not able to ſtand to their poſitions, but they muſt ioyne arme in arme with the Papiſts, in their greateſt and groſſeſt errors. And if it be of neceſſitie, that miniſters muſt liue by oblations and tithes, and no otherwiſe: howe can the prince by Gods Lawe take away their Landes, and ſet them to meere penſions in money? Or if princes haue libertie by the Lawe of God, according to their diſcretions, to appoynt the liuings of miniſters, by penſions of money, contrary to the order that God hath preſcribed

to his prieſts in his Law: why haue they not like authoritie by the ſame worde of God, (if they ſee it conuenient for the ſtate) to allot vnto them ſome portion of temporall Landes, and much more, to ſuffer and beare with that order, being alreadie ſetled in the Church? By this it appeareth, that the aſſertion of the aduerſaries doeth not hang together in it ſelfe, but that the one part impugneth and ouerthroweth the other.
               But mee thinkes theſe men deale not directly, but ſeeme to hide and conceale that which maketh againſt them. For in the ſame place of Ioſua, by Ioſh. 14. which they will prooue, that biſhoppes and miniſters may not haue any poſſeſſion of Landes, becauſe hee ſaith, To the Leuites he gaue no inheritance among them, Immediatly hee addeth, Sauing Cities to dwell in, and the fieldes about the Cities, for their beastes and cattell. And in like manner, The Lorde ſayde 
                  Nom 35. 
                  to Moyſes, Commaunde the children of Iſrael, that they giue vnto the Leuites of the inheritaunce of their poſſeſſion, Cities to dwell in. And yee ſhall giue alſo vnto the Cities Suburbes hard by their Cities rounde about them, the Cities they ſhall haue to dwell in, and the Suburbes or fieldes about their cities for their cattell, and all manner beastes of theirs. And the Suburbes of the Cities which you ſhall giue to the Leuites, ſhall reach from the wall of the Citie rounde about outward a thouſande cubites, &c. And you ſhall meaſure on the East ſide two thouſande cubites, and on the West ſide two thouſande cubites, &c. In the twentie one Chapter of Ioſua, The number of theſe Cities is mentioned, And the lotte came out of the kinred of the Caathites, the children of Aaron the Prieſt, which were of the Leuites, and giuen them

by lot out of the tribe of Iudae, Simeon, and Beniamin, thirteene Cities. And the rest of the children of Caath had by lot of the kinreds of the tribe of Ephraim, Dan, and halfe the tribe of Manaſſes, tenne cities. And the children of Gerſon, had by lotte out of the kinred of the Cities of Iſachar, Aſer, Nepthaly, and the other halfe of the tribe of Manaſſes in Baſan, thirteene cities. And the children of Merari, by their kinreds, had out of the Tribes of Ruben, Gad and Zabulon, twelue cities. The whole number therfore of the cities aſsigned to the Leuites in the lande of Iurie, amounted to fortie eight.
               
               Nowe I woulde demaund of indifferent Chriſtians, that vvere not obſtinately ſet to maintaine an euill purpoſe, Whether the ſtate of inheritance without rent, of fortie eight Cities in one Region, no bigger then England, with the fieldes almoſt a mile compaſſe, may bee thought in trueth, to bee temporall poſſeſſions or no? Surely I thinke there is no man ſo wayward, that will denie it to be moſt true.
               Wherefore, eyther the worde of God muſt bee found vntrue, (which is blaſphemie to thinke) or els that boulde aſſertion, that is made of the contrary, is found vaine, and the argument to prooue it, falſe and deceitful. They that had to their portions fortie eight Cities, with the fields thereof, did not liue by tithes and oblations onely.
               You ſee therefore (good Chriſtians) howe they vnderſtand the Scriptures, that in ſuch immodeſt and confident maner take vpon them to be maſters and controllers of other: and by how fleight allegations & abſurde arguments they ſeeke to leade men into error, euen in great & weighty matters, without

feare of God himſelfe, or reuerence of his people with whome they deale. God bleſſe them with more grace of his true, milde, and humble ſpirite, that they runne not ſo headlong, to the daunger of their owne ſoules, and the trouble of the Church of Chriſt.
               And for the better vnderſtanding heereof, let vs conſider, what ſtate the Leuites had in this Lande that was allotted vnto them. They might ſell, and alienate it, but not to any other Tribe or family, but to ſome of the ſame family, whereof they were.
               The Lawe therein ſaith, Leuit. 25. Notwithſtanding, the cities of the Leuites, and the houſes of the cities of their poſſeſsion, may the Leuites redeeme at all ſeaſons. If a man purchaſe of the Leuites, the houſe that was ſoulde ſhall goe out in the yeere of Iubile. But the fields of their Cities may not be ſolde, for it is their poſseſsion for euer.
               
               And yet we read that the Prophet Ieremie bought Iere. 32. a piece of land of Hananael his Vncles ſonne, which I take to bee, becauſe Ieremie was his next of kinne, to whome by Lavve after him it ſhoulde come: So that Hananael ſoulde onely the intereſt of his life time.
               Thus, by the way you may note, that buying and purchaſing of ſuch grounde as was lawfull to them, was not prohibited to Gods Prieſts in the olde law.
               
                  Obiection.
Happily they will ſay, That although they had ſome temporall Landes, yet it was in compariſon of the large inheritance of the other Tribes, but a ſmall portion: And as the Miniſters of God they liued meanely and poorely vpon it.
               
                  Anſwere.
But they that rightly conſider & weigh the quantitie

and largeneſſe of the Lande of Promiſe, not beeing (as I thinke) ſo large as this Realme of England, ſhall perceiue, that the ſame being deuided into twelue partes, according to the twelue Tribes, that eight and fourtie Cities, with the fieldes about them, onely for the tribe of Leui, was a portion, although not ſo big, yet not much inferiour to the reſidue, although the one part had their liuing together, and the Leuites had theirs diſparkled in ſundrie partes of the Countrey. To which, if you adde Gods part, that is, the oblations, the firſt fruits and the tenths of their fruites, and cattell beſide, you ſhall perceiue, that the Prieſts, Leuites, and Miniſters of the Temple of God were not left in meaner or poorer, but rather in as good or better ſtate, then any of the other Tribes. Which thing vndoubtedly God did of his gracious prouidence, nor that his miniſters ſhould by wealth waxe wantō 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   proud, but that by that meanes they might be of more authoritie with his people, and not beeyng drawen away by the neceſſitie of care howe to liue, they might more freely and quietly attend vpon the ſeruice of God in the Temple and other places. Wherefore theſe places of the Law of Moſes, were not fitly alleadged to prooue, either that the Miniſters of the Church ſhoulde haue no temporal poſſeſſions, or that they ſhoulde by ſtipends of money liue in poore or baſe condition.
               It pleaſed God, that the Leuites ſhoulde not haue their portion lying together, as the other had, but to bee ſparkled among all the Tribes of that nation, that they might the better inſtruct the people of all partes, in the Lawe and Ordinaunces

of almightie God; as their office and duetie was. But if the value of their portion, together with the firſt fruites and tenths bee conſidered, you ſhall perceiue it was nothing inferiour to anie of the beſt.
               They that had not ſome peculiar drift and purpoſe in their heades, which by all meanes, right or wrong, they will further and confirme, but did ſincerely, and with good conſcience, ſeeke the true meaning of the ſpirit of God in the holy ſcriptures, out of theſe teſtimonies of the Lawe of God: might haue gathered a right and wholeſome inſtruction, profitable not onely to Miniſters of the Church, but to all other good and faithfull Chriſtians, to whom theſe places appertaine, as well as to biſhops and Miniſters.
               For as Aaron the high Prieſt in the Lawe, was the The right vnderſtanding of the places of the olde Lawe. figure of the true high Prieſt Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour: ſo the inferiour Prieſtes and Leuites ſeruing in the temple of God, repreſent vnto vs all other faithfull and elect of God, whom hee hath choſen vnto him, to ſerue him as his peculiar heritage, & in ſteed of the firſt begotten of mankinde. To this interpretation alludeth S. Peter, ſpeaking, not to Prieſtes alone, but to the whole Church of God, and number of the faithfull. You are (ſaith he) a choſen generation, 
                  1. Pet. 2. 
                  a royall prieſthood, an holy nation. This expoſition S. Auguſt. confirmeth, As for the Prieſthoode (ſaith he) of the Iewes, there is no faithfull man that doubteth, but 
                  Lib. 2. queſt. Euang. c. 40. 
                  that it was a figure of the roiall Prieſthood that ſhould be in the Church. Whereunto all they are conſecrated, which appertaine to the myſticall body of the moſt high and true Prince of Prieſts, as Peter alſo witneſſeth.
               
               
                  
                  Bede alſo writeth very euidently to the ſame purpoſe. By the name of Prieſthood in the Scriptures, figuratiuely 
                  Li. de temp. Salom. cap. 16. 
                  is vnderſtoode, not onely Miniſters of the Altar, that is, Biſhops and Prieſts: but all they which by high and godly conuerſation, and by excellencie of wholeſome doctrine, are profitable, not to themſelues onely, but to many other, while they offer their bodies as a liuely and holy Sacrifice well pleaſing God. For Peter ſpake not to Prieſts only, but to the vniuerſall Church of God. Nowe, if this bee true, the right & ſincere doctrine, that is to be taken out of the teſtimonies of the law of God, is this, that as the Prieſts and Leuites had not a like portion of inheritaunce allotted vnto them, as the reſidue of their brethren had, but God onely whome they ſerued, was their portion: ſo al faithful Chriſtians, being of the true prieſthoode of God, muſt not thinke they haue any allotted portion in this worlde, but God onely is their portion, to whome they muſt cleaue, and heauen to bee their inheritaunce after which they muſt ſeeke, according as S. Paul ſaieth, Heb. 13. 
                  Wee haue heere no abiding Citie, but wee ſeke for one in Heauen. Wee be as pilgrimes and ſtraungers in this earth. Therefore if wee bee riſen with Chriſt, wee ſhoulde ſeeke thoſe things that be aboue, where Chriſt our portion ſitteth 
                  Col. 3. 
                  at the right hand of God the father, and our whole heart ſhoulde be faſtened vpon thinges aboue, and not on earthly things. This inſtruction, as nighly and as deeply toucheth all Chriſtians, as it doth Biſhops & miniſters of the Church of God.
               But countenaunce muſt bee giuen to this quarell againſt biſhops, and this ſtrange Aſſertion muſt bee confirmed by the Prophets alſo, euen as aptly alledged as the other places before mentioned.
               
                  
AND firſt they beginne with Eſay. His watchmen 
                  Eſai. 56. Allegations out of the Prophets for the ſame purpoſe. 
                  are all blinde, they haue altogether no vnderſtanding, they are all dumbe dogges, not being able to barke, they are ſleepie, ſluggiſh, and lie ſnorting, they are ſhameleſſe dogges that neuer are ſatisfied, the ſheepheards alſo haue no vnderſtāding, but euery man turneth his own way, euery one after his couetouſneſſe with all his power. Out of Ieremie alſo are alledged theſe wordes. I will 
                  Ierem. 8. 
                  giue their wiues vnto aliens, and their fieldes to deſtroyers: for from the loweſt vnto the higheſt, they followe filthie lucre, and from the Prophet to the Prieſt, they deale all with lies. The prophet Ezechiel alſo is brought in, to helpe this matter, where hee terribly thundreth againſt negligent, naughty and corrupt ſhepheards, that deuoure the flocke and feed it not. Thou ſonne of 
                  Ezech. 34. 
                  man, prophecie againſt the Sheepheards of Iſrael, woe bee vnto the Sheepheards of Iſrael, that feede themſelues: ſhoulde not the Sheepeheardes feede the flockes? ye eate vp the fat, ye clothe you with the wooll, the beſt fedde doe you ſlay, but the flocke doe you not feede, the weake haue you not ſtrengthened, the ſicke haue you not healed, the broken haue you not bound together, &c. but with force and cruelty haue you ruled them. Wiſe and diſcreete chriſtians, that in iudging of things feare to be deceiued, and looke to the direct proofe of that which is in controuerſie, will marueile to ſee theſe teſtimonies alleadged, to the end before prefixed: that is, that biſhops may not enioy any temporall Landes. For there is nothing in theſe places of the Prophetes that toucheth it. But if the ende were onelie to make an inuectiue againſt the negligent, corrupt, and couetous liues of Biſhops, or other Miniſters: in deede theſe allegations might ſeeme not altogether

to bee vnfit for the purpoſe: And happily that is it that is eſpecially intended, by ſuch meanes to make them contemptible and odious. And yet this is no ſincere handling of the Scriptures, to apply thoſe places to the particular blaming of ſome one ſort of men, which the Spirit of God directeth againſt many. Who beeing acquainted with the Scriptures, knoweth not, that by the words Watchmen and Shepheards, in the Prophets, are meant not only biſhops, prieſts, and Leuites: but alſo Princes, Magiſtrates, and Rulers? Vpon the place of Ezechiel aboue recited, Hierome ſayth: The ſpeech is directed to the Shepherds of Iſrael: by which we ought to vnderſtand, 
                  Hierome. 
                  the Kings, the Princes, the Scribes, & Phariſes, & the maſters of the people. And againe vpon theſe words, The fat they did eate, by a metaphore (ſayth hee) the Prophet ſpeaketh to the Princes, of whom it is ſaid in another place, Which deuoure my people as it were bread. Yea, when God himſelfe ſayth in this ſame place of Ezechiel, 
                  Pſal. 32. 
                  with force and crueltie haue yee ruled them: It may euidently appeare, that he ſpeaketh not there to eccleſiaſtical miniſters only, but to princes, iudges, & rulers alſo, which ſucke the ſweete from the people of God, and do not carefully ſee to their defence, and godly gouernement, but ſuffer them to be ſpoyled of their enemies, and to wander from God, and his true worſhip. But what ſhould I ſeeme to proue that, which all learned knowe to bee moſt true? The Spirite of God ſpeaketh to the ſame purpoſe by theſe Prophets vnder figuratiue wordes, that he doeth by other prophets in plaine ſpeech. O yee Prieſtes (ſayeth Oſee) heare this O yee houſe of Iſrael, giue eare O thou houſe of the King: Iudgement is againſt 
                  Oſee. 5.
                  
                  you, becauſe you are become a ſnare in Miſpath, and a ſpreadnette in Mount Thabor, that is, you as hunters lay wayte to ſnare the people, and to oppreſſe them by couetouſneſſe, extortion, and briberie: and your corrupt manners is as a nette to take other in, by your euill example. And likewiſe ſayeth Micheas. Heare this O yee heades of the houſe of Iaacob, and yee Princes of the houſe of Iſrael: they abhorre iudgements and peruert equitie: They build vp Sion with blood, and Hieruſalem with iniquitie. The heades thereof iudge by rewardes, and the Prieſtes thereof teach for hire, and their Prophets prophecie for money. Theſe bee the ordinarie voyces of the holie ghoſt, vttered by the prophets, in ſharpe and earneſt reproouing, not onely for the people for their wicked reuolting from God, but alſo, yea & that chiefly, for the princes, rulers, magiſtrates, iudges, biſhops, prieſts, miniſters and other, whome God hath ſet in place of gouernement. For God hath appoynted them, as Shepheards, as guiders, and patrons of his people, to direct them, to keepe them, to defend them in his true worſhip, and right ſeruice, and, if they will bee wandering from him, eyther by errour in Religion, or by wickedneſſe in life, to inſtruct & teach them, and by all meanes that may bee, to call them home againe: or if they will not bee ruled, by authoritie to bridle and reſtraine them, yea, and by puniſhment to correct them. Now if the watchmen and Shepheards, that is, the guiders and rulers of the people, whether they bee Ciuill or Eccleſiaſticall, ſhall waxe ignoraunt, and vnskilfull of their dueties, ſhall become negligent and careleſſe of their charge, ſhall be giuen ouer to voluptuouſneſſe and

pleaſure of the world, or to couetouſneſſe, briberie, and extortion, to iniurie, violence and oppreſſion, and in their gouernment ſeeke their owne pleaſure and commoditie, and nothing regarde, either the benefite of the people, or the glory of God: then (I ſay) theſe ſpeeches of the Prophets lie directly againſt them, and may well be vſed to declare the wrath of God towards them. But what maketh this to the purpoſe pretended? howe hangeth this reaſon together? God by the prophets earneſtly reprooueth the Gouernours, aſwell of the Church as of the common weale, for their wickedneſſe, couetouſneſſe, and extortion: therefore biſhops, and eccleſiaſticall miniſters may not by the word of God enioy temporall landes & poſſeſsions. Or this, God blameth the prieſtes of the olde lawe for couetouſneſſe: therefore the biſhops of the church of Chriſt may haue no landes and poſſeſsions. They that wil be perſwaded with ſuch reaſons, wil eaſily be caried away into error. If it were certaine, and did of neceſsitie followe; that all they, which haue great liuings and poſſeſsions, muſt needes be couetous: then happily this reaſoning might bee of ſome force. But I thinke there is no reaſonable man that wil graunt it, and therefore this reaſoning is without all reaſon. The Prieſts & Leuites, as themſelues confeſſe, had no great lands and lordſhips, and yet wee finde them often in the prophets accuſed and blamed for couetouſneſſe: therefore it is not the want of temporall lands and liuings, that can bring Neither doth pouerty bring a contented mind: neither great poſſeſſions cauſeth couetouſnes. a poore heart and contented minde, voide of couetouſnes. Wee ſee often as couetous and greedie hearts in meane mens boſoms, as in the greateſt

landed Lordes in a whole Countrey. And on the contrary part, we find in them that haue very great poſſeſſions, as humble, and as contented mindes, & as farre from the affection of couetouſnes, as in the meaneſt man that is.
               
                  Iob was of great wealth and poſſeſſions, and yet wee reade not that hee was euer blamed for couetouſneſſe: Yea hee beareth witneſſe of his owne free heart and liberalitie, and ſaith, Hee neuer ſet his heart vpon Gold, nor ſaide to the wedge of Golde, Thou art my hope, nor reioyced of beeing rich, nor becauſe his hande 
                  Iob. 31. 
                  had founde abundance, &c. Abraham alſo was riche, and God had bleſſed him with great poſſeſſions, and yet ſurely his heart was farre from the loue of money.
               
                  Ioſeph had no ſmall poſſeſſions, and was in place of honour, and yet fewe in the meaneſt ſtate or degree did euer keepe a more humble heart, or put leſſe delight in honour and riches then hee did. I might ſay the ſame of Dauid, though a king, and of Daniel, though in very high eſtate, and in great authoritie, and as it may bee thought, in liuing proportionable to the ſame. When Chriſt in the goſpell had ſaide, that it was as vnpoſsible for a riche man 
                  Matt. 19. Mar. 10. 
                  to enter into heauen, as for a Camell to goe through the eie of a needle, and his Diſciples had wondered at that ſaying, hee aunſwered: That which is with man impoſ-ſible, 
                  Luke 18. 
                  is poſsible with God. Albeit mans corrupt nature, as it is generally giuen to all ill, ſo it is chiefely inclined to couetouſneſſe, and delight of the worlde: Yet the good grace of Gods holy Spirite doeth ſo guide the heartes of his faithfull, that in the middeſt of greateſt abundaunce of his plentifull bleſſinges,

they can retaine the feare of God, and contempt of the worlde. Wherefore, it is great raſhneſſe and preſumption, to condemne all them to bee giuen ouer to couetouſneſſe and delight of the worlde, whome they ſee by the ſtate of the Commonweale, or by the goodneſſe of the Prince, or by any other lawfull and iuſt meanes to haue landes and poſſeſſions, or wealth and riches, according to their ſtate. Such perſons as ſo raſhely deeme of other, may ſeeme rather to bewray the ſickneſſe and ill diſpoſition of their owne mindes, then to iudge truely of them, whome in ſuch caſe they condemne. It is the pouertie and humbleneſſe of Spirite and minde, it is not the pouertie and baſeneſſe of outwarde eſtate Matth. 5. and condition, vnto the which Chriſt imputeth Gods bleſſings. If couetouſneſſe be a deſire to haue, for feare of want and ſcarcitie, as ſome learned men haue defined it: then is a poore eſtate to a corrupt minde a greater ſpurre to couetouſneſſe, then lands and plentie of liuing can bee. Before that biſhoppes and Miniſters had any Landes aſſigned vnto them, yea, when they were yet vnder the Croſſe of perſecution in the time of Cyprian: wee reade, that he Serm. delapſis. Auguſt. de bap. lib. 2. Not much more then 200. yeeres after Chriſtes alcenſion. findeth great fault with many biſhoppes, which leauing the care of their charge, went from place to place, vſing vnlawful meanes to get riches, practiſing vſurie, and by craft and ſubtiltie getting other mens lands from them.
               In like manner complaine Hierome, Augustine, Chryſostome, Baſile, and other auncient Writers, and Hiſtories of their time. Yea, in the Apoſtles time wee ſee ſome giuen ouer to the worlde, and ledde away with couetouſneſſe, when Miniſters

as yet liued onely vpon the free beneuolence of the people. Wherefore, it is not pouertie, or a lowe and contemptible ſtate in the face of the worlde, that can bring a ſatisfied and contented Spirite. And ſurely I am of this opinion, that a poore and ſtraight ſtate of liuing in the Miniſterie, eſpecially in theſe dayes, woulde be a greater cauſe of euill and inconuenience in the church, and a more vehement temptation to carrie away their myndes from the care of their Office, then nowe their ample and large liuinges are. I could, and will (when God ſhall giue occaſion) declare good reaſon of this my opinion: which for ſome conſiderations I thinke good at this time to lette paſſe.
               If our biſhops and other chiefe of the Cleargie, beeing nowe in the ſtate of our church, by the prouidence of God, & ſingular goodnes of our Prince ſo amply prouided for, be ſo vnthankfull vnto God, and ſo giuen ouer to the worlde, as they are bitterly accuſed to bee: ſurely their fault muſt needes bee the greater, neyther will I, or any other that feareth God, in that poynt excuſe them, but praie to God (if there bee any ſuch) that theſe odious reportes ſpredde vpon them, may bee a meanes to put them in remembraunce of their duetie, and to amend. But vndoubtedly (good chriſtians) I ſpeake it with my heart, me thinketh I doe foreſee at hand thoſe dayes, and that time, when GOD of his iuſtice will both condignly rewarde our vnthankful receyuing of his Goſpell, and contempt of his Miniſters, and alſo giue to them iuſt occaſion to declare vnto their aduerſaries and euill ſpeakers,

that they are not ſuch bond-ſlaues of the world, nor bee ſo lead away captiue with the luſts of the fleſh, as they are defamed. Yea, I thinke, this croſſe of contempt, ſlaunder and reproch, that now is layde vpon them, is Gods fatherly admonition to warne them: and as it were a meane to prepare them to that day that is comming: which day vndoubtedly will bee a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heauineſſe, a day of vtter deſtruction and miſery, a darke & gloomy day, a cloudie and ſtormie day, a day of the trumpet & of the alarme againſt the ſtrong cities. On that day will the Lorde 
                  Soph
                        〈…〉
                     . 1. 2. 
                  ſearch Hieruſalem with Lanthorns, and viſit them which continue in their dregges, and ſay, Tuſh, the Lorde will doe no euill. Therefore their goods ſhal be ſpoyled, their houſes ſhall bee layd waſte, they ſhal build gay houſes, and not dwel in them, they ſhall plant vineyardes, but not drinke the wine thereof. In that day the Lorde will viſite the Princes, and Kinges Children, and all ſuch as weare gay cloathing, and all thoſe that leape ouer the threſholde ſo proudly, and fill their Lordes houſes with robberie, and falſehoode. On that day God will bring the people into ſuche vexation, that they ſhall goe about like blinde men, and all becauſe they have ſinned againſt the Lord, and contemned his worde. Wherefore, I moſt heartily pray vnto God, that we altogether, both Prince and people, honourable and worſhipfull, eccleſiaſtical and lay perſons, preachers and hearers, may ioyne together in the faithfull remembraunce of that day, and to conſider that it can not bee farre from vs, and therefore that it is full time, and more then time, to turne vnto God by hearty repentance, and faithfull receiuing of his worde. For ſurely the ſentences of the Prophets, of ſome men partially and affectionately

applied to the Clergy and miniſters only, do in right & true meaning touch vs al, of al ſtates and conditions. But I will returne to my matter againe.
               The teſtimonie of Malachie vſed of ſome to like effect, as the other before, I haue purpoſely left to this place: becauſe it ſpeaketh particularly of prieſtes, and therefore will they haue it more nighly to touch our biſhops, &c. And nowe O yee Prieſts 
                  Malac. 2. (ſayth the Prophet) this commandement is for you, &c. And a litle after, making compariſon betwene Leui and the prieſts of that time, The lawe of trueth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquitie founde in his lippes, he walked with me in peace and in equitie, and hee turned many from their iniquitie: but yee haue gone out of the way, yee haue cauſed many to fall by the Lawe, ye haue corrupted the couenant of Leui, ſaith the Lord of hoſts: therefore haue I made you deſpiſed, and vile before the people. Theſe wordes of the prophet doe ſo touch our Biſhops and clergie men, if they be ſo euill as they are made, as all ſentences wherein the Prophets blame the Prieſts of their time, doe touch euill miniſters of the Church: but howe they eyther ſpecially nippe our biſhoppes, as it is thought, or any thing pertaine to the proofe of the principall matter, or reproouing of Preachers liuings by Landes, I ſee not. In deede this ſentence of Malachy might bee rightly vſed againſt the pope & his prelates, which neglecting the whole dutie of Gods miniſters, both in preaching and liuing, ſtayed themſelues vpon the authoritie of Saint Peter, and of ſucceſſion, as though the Spirite of God had beene bounde to their ſucceſſion, though they taught and liued neuer ſo corruptly. For ſo indeede did theſe prieſtes

whome Malachie reprooueth: they neglected the true worſhippe of God, and yet woulde they bee accompted his good and true prieſtes, becauſe they were of the tribe of Leui, with whom God had Nom. 25. made his couenant, that hee and his ſeede ſhoulde haue the office of the high prieſthood for euer. But Malachie ſayth they haue broken the couenaunt on their part.
               That our biſhoppes and miniſters doe not challenge to holde by ſucceſſion, it is moſt euident: their whole doctrine and preaching is contrarie: they vnderſtād and teach, that neither they, nor any other can haue Gods fauour ſo annexed and tyed to them, but that, if they leaue their dueties by Gods worde preſcribed, they muſt in his ſight leeſe the preheminence of his miniſters, and bee ſubiect to his wrath and puniſhment. They knowe, and declare to all men, that the couenaunt on the behalfe of Leui, that is, on the behalfe of the miniſters of God to be perfourmed, conſiſteth in theſe three branches: by preaching to teach the right way of ſaluation, and to ſette foorth the true worſhip of God: to keepe peace and quietneſſe in the Church of God: and thirdly, by honeſt life to bee example vnto others.
               Theſe branches of the couenant, if our biſhops and preachers haue corrupted and broken, they haue to anſwere for it before God, and their puniſhment will be exceeding grieuous.
               As for their doctrine, I am right ſure, and (in the feare of GOD I ſpeake it) will hazard my life to trye it, that all their enemies ſhall neuer bee able ſo to prooue it, but that it ſhall bee founde

ſincere and true: ſo that I doubt not, but God him ſelfe will beare witneſſe with them, as hee did with Leui, that Trueth is in their mouth, and (as touching their doctrine) no iniquitie founde in their lippes. For they doe both teach the trueth according to the Scriptures, ſincerely, and confounde the errours of the Antichriſtian Church, learnedly and truely.
               They therfore that ſpeake ſo much againſt them, may ſeeme leſſe to regarde this part of their obſeruing the couenant of Leui, then the duetie of Chriſtians requireth. But I truſt, our mercifull God will fauourably conſider it, and beare with ſome other their imperfections in them. I pray God wee bee not lighted into that time, that men haue itching eares, and can like no preachers, but ſuch as clawe their affections, and feede their fantaſies in vanities and newe deuiſes. The couenaunt of peace they keepe alſo, liuing in vnitie and peace among them-ſelues, and ſtudying (ſo much as they can) by teaching, and by good order, to keepe it among other. And that is no ſmall cauſe of their miſliking at this time, becauſe they, being in ſome place of gouernment, according to their dueties ſtriue to repreſſe thoſe, which by vntemperate zeale ſeeke to diſturbe the Church, and to giue cauſe of faction and diſorder, by altering things externall in a ſetled and refourmed ſtate.
               As touching their liues and conuerſations according to the Lawe of God, (as before I haue ſaid) if I muſt iudge according to that I knowe, I muſt thinke the beſt, becauſe I know no ill. Though there bee imperfections in ſome things: if men woulde

charitablie conſider, in what time wee liue, and whoſe Meſſengers they are, and ſomewhat withall deſcend into their owne boſomes, and lay their owne dueties before their eyes: I thinke ſurely they woulde iudge of them more chriſtianly then many doe.
               
                  Obiection.
But they will ſay, that according to the wordes of Malachie, God ſheweth his iudgement againſt thē for their wickedneſſe, becauſe hee hath made them ſo contemptible, ſo vile and deſpiſed before all the people: for (ſay they) wee may ſee how all men loath and diſdaine them.
               
                  Anſwere.
It muſt needes be true (I confeſſe) that Malachie ſpake of the Prieſts of his time: but I doe not take it to be alwayes an vnfallible token of euil Prieſts and Miniſters, or a certaine ſigne of Gods diſpleaſure towarde them, when the people do hate, diſdaine, and contemne them. I ſee more commonly in the Scriptures, that it is a token of vnthankefull, ſtubborne, and hard-hearted people, which ſmally regarde the worde of God, and therefore alſo miſlike his miniſters. Elias, Micheas, Amos, and other Prophets were ſmally eſteemed, you knowe, among the Iſraelites. Eſay, Ieremie, Ezechiel, were euen of as ſmall credite and eſtimation among the lewes. It may appeare ſo to bee, ſeeing Eſay ſignified, that they lilled out their tongues, in mocking of him, and other of his time. And I am ſure, you knowe the fauour and entertainement that the Apoſtles had alſo among the ſame people. I truſt then you will not ſay it was a token of naughtie and corrupt

Miniſters, or of Gods iuſt iudgement againſt them: for they were the right and true Prophetes, Apoſtles, and Meſſengers of God, and yet were in great hatred and miſliking of them that thought themſelues to be the people of God.
               It may be ſurely, and in deede I thinke it to be very true, that God hath touched our biſhops & Preachers with this ſcourge of ignominie and reproch, for their ſlackeneſſe and negligence in their office: And I pray God they may take this mercifull warning, and ſhunne his greater plagues. But I muſt ſay withall, as Chriſt ſayeth of the Galileans, whoſe blood Pilate mixed with their ſacrifice, and of them Luke 13. vpon whome the Tower of Siloe fell: Doe you thinke, that they onely are ſinners? nay I ſay vnto you, if you do not repent, you ſhall all taſte of the ſame ſharpe iuſtice. If God puniſh his Miniſters, he will not ſuffer the other vntouched. Now the time is come that the iudgemēt beginneth 
                  1. Pet. 4. 
                  at the houſe of God, and if God puniſh thoſe that he ſent with his worde, what will hee doe to them that vnthankfully receiue his worde?
               THAT this matter of Eccleſiaſticall mens liuings Proofes out of the Newe Teſtament againſt the rich liuings of Miniſters. may ſeeme to be of great importance, and ſuch in deede as God hath had much care of in all times: as before it hath beene countenanced by the Lawe and Prophets, ſo muſt it nowe bee drawen alſo through the whole courſe of the nevve Teſtament. Yea, whatſoeuer is vſed, eyther of Chriſt himſelfe or of his Apoſtles, againſt couetouſneſſe, or the loue and care of this worlde, and delight of this life: all that, either by faire meanes or foule, is brought into this fort, to batter and ſhake the lands

and poſſeſſions of Biſhops, and other of the Cleargie.
               And firſt men are willed, to cal to remembrance the example of Chriſt our Sauiour, his birth, the ſtate of his life, the choiſe of his apoſtles, & his perpetuall doctrine, exhorting to pouertie and contempt of the worlde. His parents (ſay they) were poore, and liued by an handie craft, deſcended of a ſtocke and kinred growen altogether out of credite in the worlde: in ſteede of a princely chamber, borne in an Oxe ſtall: wrapped in poore clothes, in ſteede of white and fine linnen: layde in a cribbe for want of a rich cradle: and in place of worthie ſeruitours, hee had the preſence of an Oxe and an Aſſe. And that hee might ſhewe himſelfe to delight in pouertie and contempt of the world, his natiuitie was firſt reuealed vnto poore Shepheards watching their flockes. As hee was borne, ſo was he bredde, in the poore and contemptible Towne of Nazareth, out of the which Nathaniel thought nothing woorthy credite coulde come: in which Towne, as it may bee thought, by the exerciſe of an handie craft, hee liued in obedience of Ioſeph, and of his Mother. Such as his birth and breeding was, ſuch was the ſtate of his liuing, when the full time of his diſpenſation came: for hee was not borne to anie Landes or poſſeſſions, neyther had hee any great wealth and riches to ſuſteine himſelfe, yea, not ſo much as an houſe to put his heade in, but was mainteyned by the almes as it were, and by the charitable deuotion of certayne wealthie vvomen of Galiley, and other godly perſons. His Apoſtles that he choſe to follovve him, and to bee the Miniſters of his kingdome, hee tooke not out of the ſtate of Princes, noble men, or great and rich Lordes, with Landes and dominions: but out of the poore ſtate, and condition of fiſhers, Tent-makers, and toulegatherers. And thus may we ſee our Lorde and Chriſt altogether wrapped in pouertie, and beſette on euery ſide with the baſe and contemptible ſtate of the vvorld.
               But to what purpoſe is all this alleaged? Forſooth,

that wee may vnderſtande, that it is not lawfull for ſuch as bee guides of the Lordes flocke, to liue in any other ſtate, then in that the Lorde gaue example of: For vvhoſoeuer ſeeketh Chriſt (ſay they) in other ſtate and ſort, then hee gaue example of, ſeeketh not Chriſt, but Antichriſt and the pompe of the vvorld So that the ſenſe and effect of the reaſon is this: Chriſt was borne, bredde, and liued in pouertie, and choſe vnto him Apoſtles of poore condition: therefore biſhoppes and Miniſters of the church muſt haue no Landes or poſſeſſions, but ſtay them ſelues in like poore ſtate, as Chriſt and his Apoſtles did. I doe not frame this argument (good Reader) of purpoſe to cauill, but to admoniſh thee of the principall ſtate, and that conſidering the proofe to bee naked in it ſelfe, thou maieſt the better iudge of the ſtrength thereof.
               Surely, I will hencefoorth ceaſe to marueile at the wreſted and violent interpretations that Hermites, Monkes and friers haue made vpon the ſcriptures, to iuſtifie and ſet foorth their ſuperſtitious life of voluntary pouertie and forſaking the worlde: ſeeing profeſſors of the goſpel, to mainteine their new doctrines, take vpon themſelues the like liberty and boldeneſſe, in abuſing the holie Scriptures and worde of God: And yet ſurely it doth grieue mee, and make my heart bleede to ſee it. What ſhall the aduerſarie thinke of our dealing with the Scriptures? Surely, that wee doe in ſo earneſt manner pull them from the interpretation of the Fathers & of the Church, to the ende that by applying them according to our owne fantaſies, we may ſet foorth

and ſeeme to iuſtifie to the worlde, what doctrine ſoeuer we ſhall thinke good our ſelues: And ſo ſhall this bee an occaſion to diſcredite all the particular doctrines of the Goſpell, which hitherto, as well this Church of England, as other churches reformed haue taught. But to vnderſtande the weight of this reaſon before vſed againſt the wealthie liuings of our Clergie, wee muſt trie it by a right and iuſt balance: that is, by the true meaning of the holy Ghoſt. Firſt therefore, let vs conſider the cauſes of Chriſtes pouertie, and of the choyce of ſuch Apoſtles, which in mine opinion are two: The one is The right cauſe of Chriſtes pouertie and his Apoſtles. the neceſſitie of our redemption: the other is an example and iuſt inſtruction ſet foorth vnto Chriſtians. As touching the firſt, when the certaine purpoſe of God had determined that his ſonne ſhoulde come into the worlde, to worke the redemption of mankinde, and his deliuerance from ſinne: neceſſarie it was for him to ſatisfie the iuſtice of God, in ſuſtaining all thoſe difficulties and puniſhmentes, that were due to man for ſinne: that is to ſay, affliction, ignominie, reproch, contempt, pouertie, and all worldly troubles and miſeries, and laſt of all, death. This is that the Prophet Eſay ſpake of long before. Hee is deſpiſed and abhorred of men, hee is ſuch a man as 
                  Eſay. 53. 
                  hath good experience of ſorowes and infirmities: we reckned him ſo vile that we hidde our faces from him. Howbeit hee onely hath taken our infirmities on him, and borne our paines. Yet wee did iudge him as though he were plagued and caſt downe of God. This is that humiliation and debaſing of himſelfe that Paul ſpeaketh of, when hee ſaith, Hee beeing in the forme of God, thought it no 
                  Phil. 2. 
                  robberie to be equall with God, but made him ſelfe of no

reputation, taking on him the forme of a ſeruant, and made in the likeneſſe of men, and founde in figure as a man, hee humbled himſelfe, made obedient vnto death, euen to the death of the Croſſe. Theſe places (good Chriſtians) declare vnto vs, both the pouertie and contemptible ſtate of Chriſt here in earth, and alſo the very roote and principall cauſe thereof: that is, the ſaluation of mankinde. The ſonne of God became the ſonne of man, that he might make vs the children of God: he vvas borne a weake and tender babe, that he might make vs ſtrong men in him: he was tied in ſwadling bands, that he might looſe and deliuer vs from the bondes of the fraile and ſinful fleſh: he was wrapped in poore clowtes, that with the garment of his innocencie, he might hide our nake dnes: he was borne & liued poorly, that he might make vs rich & plentiful in him: he was a ſtranger in the world, & had not an houſe to put his head in, that he might purchaſe for vs a citie & heritage in heauen: he was borne vnder bondage, and payed tribute to Caeſar, that hee might deliuer vs from the tyrannie of Hel: he was debaſed euen to the company of bruite beaſts, that he might bring vs to the glorious company of Angels: he lay in hay in a Crib, that he might procure euerlaſting foode for our ſoules: finally, he was accuſed of ſin & put to moſt cruel death, that we being iuſtified by his merite, might appeare innocent in the ſight of God. Theſe be the ſweet & comfortable cogitations that good chriſtians ſhould conceiue vpon the conſideration of Chriſts poore & baſe ſtate in this life. For pouerty in Chriſt was not ſo much for exāple of life, as to ſatiſfie a puniſhment due to ſinne. Riches is the good bleſſing and gift of God: but pouertie came in

at the ſame doore that death did, that is, by the diſobedience of our firſt father. Wee may not therefore thinke with Monks & Friers, that pouerty in it ſelf is a more holy ſtate of liuing, then wealth & riches is. But of that more hereafter. Novv let vs cōſider what maner of pouerty this was in Chriſt. Chriſt vvas in himſelf exceeding rich, both as the ſonne of God, & as the ſonne of man. As God, he had all things common with his father. All thinges that my father hath 
                  Iohn 16. (ſaith he) are mine. And againe. All thine are mine, and mine are thine. As touching his humanitie, he is likewiſe Iohn 17. of great poſſeſſions. For his Father ſaith vnto him, Deſire of me, & I ſhal giue thee the heathen for thine inheritance, & the vttermoſt parts of the earth for thy poſſeſsiō. 
                  Pſalm. 2. How hapned it then, that Chriſt being in right Lord of ſo great poſſeſſions, became in the time of his diſpenſation, almoſt in the ſtate of a beggar? certainly, quia ipſe voluit, becauſe he would himſelf. For he that filleth heauen & earth, was borne in an Oxe ſtall in Bethleem: he that had al power in the vvhole vvorld, vvas a baniſhed perſon for a certaine time in Egypt: he that feedeth with ſuſtenance man & beaſt, foule & fiſh, partly by labor gat his liuing, partly was fed with the liberalitie of other. He that prouideth apparel foral things, hung naked vpō the Croſſe: he that ſitteth in heauen as his throne, & hath the earth for his footeſtoole, at an other mans charge was buried and layd in a ſtrange Sepulchre. Chriſts pouertie therfore was vvilling, not of any necesſitie of holineſſe, as I haue ſaid, but to beare that vvhich for ſinne was due to vs. Now, I pray you, mark ye ſtrength of the former reaſon. Chriſt, to ſuſtaine the puniſhment due to our ſinnes, liued in great pouerty & humility in this world: therfore biſhops & miniſters of

the Church, of neceſſitie, muſt liue in pouertie, and not haue any wealthy liuings, by lands or otherwiſe. I truſt they that haue care of their conſciences, will not eaſily be led to any perſwaſion by ſuch reaſons. They will ſay, Chriſt did this alſo for our example. I graunt, in ſome reſpect he did ſo: By his example he teacheth vs humbleneſſe and modeſtie, that we may not be loath to doe thoſe things, that he did, for the benefite & commoditie of our Chriſtian brother. If we ſo ſwell with pride, that in reſpect of our Nobleneſſe, or birth, or great eſtate in the worlde, wee diſdaine other, and thinke our poore neighbour doeth vs iniurie, if he in reſpect of Chriſtian brotherhood require of vs a benefit for his better reliefe: then is it time for vs, to behold the Sonne of God lying poorly in a cribbe or manger, betweene beaſtes: who, although he were God eternall with his Father, and by his mother borne of the moſt noble family of many Kings and Prophets: yet for our ſake he did ſo humble & debaſe himſelf, that he came in ſo poore and vile condition before men. Furthermore, Chriſt by his example, hath as it were conſecrated pouertie, trouble, miſerie, and affliction, that they may not be accompted tokens of the wrath of God, or ſuch things as do hinder true pietie & holineſſe, or let the ſaluation of our ſoules. For as mans nature doeth abhorre all afflictions: ſo chiefly do men thinke pouertie and neede, to be not onely one of the greateſt miſeries that can happen to man, but alſo hatefull to God himſelfe. Thus we ſee men cōmonly to thinke of ſuch, as are any way fallen into pouerty & miſery. Let Iob hereof be an example. In this cauſe alſo it is expedient for vs to looke vpō our poore Chriſt, and

to ſet him before our eyes, that wee may both more patiently beare theſe things, vvhen for Gods cauſe they light vpon vs, and more charitably iudge of other, whom God therewith toucheth: yea, it is good to teach vs to pul downe our briſſles, when we waxe proude of thoſe gifts of plenty and riches, that God hath giuen vs. Thus you ſee what profit the example of Chriſtes pouertie bringeth: but I pray you, to whom is Chriſt an example? to biſhops and Miniſters only? did he liue in poore & miſerable ſtate for Miniſters only? did he die for their ſinnes only? God forbid. He was borne, he liued, he died for all mankinde, and all faithfull haue the fruite of this his birth, his life, and his death. Therefore the example of Chriſts life muſt ſtretch further then to Biſhops and Miniſters. It is a farre truer argument to ſay, Chriſt liued a ſimple and poore life, while hee was here on earth: therefore all Chriſtians ought to liue in the ſame maner that he did, then to apply the ſame onely to Miniſters and Eccleſiaſticall perſons. Therefore I will all Chriſtians to beware of this hereticall and Anbaptiſticall aſſertion:
               Whoſoeuer ſeeketh Chriſt in other ſtate and ſort then hee gaue example of, ſeeketh not Chriſt, but Antichriſt, and the pompe of the world.
               For if this ſentence be applied to the example of the poore ſtate of Chriſt, it is the very ground of Anabaptiſticall communitie, and that none can be ſaued, but ſuch as renounce al their goods & poſſeſſions. Albeit the example of Chriſt in this place be applied to Miniſters onely: yet in trueth it appertaineth to all other faithfull, as well to them. And if the Argument ſhalbe counted good now: hereafter,

with as good liklihood, and farre truer interpretation, it may be vſed againſt al that ſhal truely profeſſe Chriſt. As touching that Chriſt choſe ſo ſimple Apoſtles, and of ſo poore eſtate, Saint Paul ſheweth the reaſon and cauſe thereof. Brethren (ſaith hee) 1. Cor. 4. 
                  you ſee your calling, how that not many wiſe men after the fleſh, not many mightie, not many Noble are called: but God hath choſen the fooliſh things to confound the wiſe, and the weake things to confounde the mightie, and vnnoble things of the world, and things that are deſpiſed, God hath choſen, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are, that no fleſh ſhoulde glorie in his preſence. If Chriſt in the entrance of his Kingdome, going about to ſubdue the world to his knowledge, ſhould haue vſed the ſernice and miniſterie of Princes, Noblemen, great, wealthie, and rich men: or of ſuch as hadbene wiſe, learned, and eloquent, and politique: the glorie of his mightie conqueſt would haue bene attributed to the power and might, to the wealth and riches, to the wiſedome and learning, to the eloquence and policie of thoſe, which had bene his miniſters, and ſo the glorie of God in that worke of mans ſaluation, ſhould haue bene diminiſhed. Therefore God, to ſhewe his power in heauenly thinges, ouerthwarted the wiſedome of the worlde, and choſe his Apoſtles poore, vnnoble, ſimple, vnlerned, without eloquence, farre from the cunning, wiſedome, and policie of the world, & by them and by their preaching in fewe yeeres wanne the whole worlde to his knowledge, and defaced the kingdome of Sathan, conſiſting in ſuperſtition, idolatrie, and wickedneſſe. And indeede, this order of Gods woorking by theſe poore and vnlearned

men, preuailed againſt all the Nobilitie, the honour, the power, the might, the wiſedome, the policie, learning, the eloquence of the worlde, ſo that it might bee truely ſayde, Non eſt potentia, non eſt prudentia, non eſt conſilium aduerſus Dominum. But what hereof is to bee concluded to this purpoſe? forſooth, that as Chriſt thought it fitteſt to chuſe onely poore men to his Apoſtles, and ſent them abroade without any ſtay of Lining in the worlde: ſo hee thinketh it meeteſt, that his Miniſters in his Church in all times and places ſhoulde be in poore eſtate, and not to haue any wealth or riches.
               It is good to conſider this reaſon alſo, that you bee not more ledde with it, then the weight & force of it requireth. The office of the Apoſtles was, to goe from Countrey to Countrey, from place to place, to plant Churches vnto God, ſo that they could not haue any certaine ſtay of Liuing: It is not therefore like reaſon, that in a ſetled Church where the Goſpel is receiued, the Miniſters and Preachers thereof may haue no certaine forme of Liuing appoynted them, eyther by land or otherwiſe. As Chriſt choſe his Apoſtles poore, ſo he choſe them ſimple, and vnlearned, without eloquence, or any kinde of knowledge, that his glorie thereby might the more be ſet foorth: Shall wee therefore inferre thereupon, that it is fitteſt alwayes for the Miniſters of the Church, to bee ſimple, without learning, eloquence, and knowledge? It is well knowen that the Anabaptiſts, and ſome other phanaticall ſpirits troubling the reformed Churches beyonde the ſeas, vpon the ſame example of the Apoſtles haue gathered, that learning and knowledge is not to bee reſpected in the choyce of Miniſters: becauſe

God needeth no ſuch helpes to ſette foorth his Goſpell, yea they ſay that learning and eloquence are perillous inſtruments, to corrupt the ſimplicitie of the Goſpell, and to giue countenance to errour. Wherefore ſuch perſons doe vſually admit among them to the Miniſterie handicrafts men, and ſuch as challenge to themſelues the ſpirite of God onely, vvithout further knovvledge. But the godly, I doubt not, vnderſtand that all things neither can, nor ought to bee like in the ſtate of the Church beginning and vnder perſecution, and in the Church ſetled and liuing in peace and quietneſſe.
               The Miniſters and Preachers of our church, beſide the example of Chriſt and his Apoſtles liuing in pouertie, are vvilled diligently to looke into the perpetual doctrine, which Chriſt in all the Euangeliſts doeth teach them, touching the ſtate of their liuing, namely againſt riches, couetouſneſſe, the glorie of the vvorld, & care of this life. To this doctrine apperteineth that vvhich Chriſt teacheth. Matt. 6. That they ſhoulde not hoarde vp treaſure for themſelues 
                  Matth. 6. Luke 12. 
                  vpon earth, where thieues breake through and ſteale them, but that they ſhould lay vp treaſures in heauen &c. That they cannot ſerue two maſters, God and Mammon: That they ſhoulde not bee carefull for their life, what they ſhoulde eate, what they ſhoulde drinke, or what apparell they ſhoulde put on: but cast all their care vpon God, and ſeeke his kingdome, and the righteouſneſſe thereof, for that it is heatheniſh carefully to ſeeke after thoſe other things, which God of himſelfe will plentifully caſt vpon his: that riches, and the pleaſures and cares of this life, are reſembled to thornes which Matth. 13. choake vp the good ſeede of Gods word, and make

that it cannot proſper: That it is as vnpoſsible for a 
                  Mar. 4. Luk. 8. Matth. 19. 
                  rich man to enter into the kingdome of God, as for a Camell to goe thorowe the eye of a needle: That hee cryeth out, woe to them that are full, for they ſhall bee hungrie: 
                  Luk. 6. Luk. 12. 
                  and to them that be rich, becauſe they haue alreadie their comfort and conſolation: yea, he willeth them to ſell all that they haue, and giue vnto the poore, with a number of other places: wherein he inſtructing his Diſciples & followers, vtterly willeth them to renounce this vvorld and the treaſures thereof. Whereupon it is thought it may be very well concluded, that the Miniſters of the Church may not haue any wealthy liuings, and eſpecially by landes and lordſhips: and therefore that our Biſhops be not the true follovvers of Chriſt, but walke in the ſteppes of Antichriſt. Surely our Sauiour Chriſt did ſee, that as the perpetuall enemie of mankinde did continually ſeeke by all wayes to dravve men from God: ſo he did not vſe any meane more commonly, then by honour, glorie, riches and vvealth. And therefore when he ſavv that Chriſt coulde not by other temptations bee ouercome, he aſſaulted him with ambition and deſire of principalitie, honour, and lordſhip. This temptation is therefore the more dangerous, becauſe mans corrupt nature is of it ſelfe greatly inclined to the loue of the world & earthly pleaſures. Wherefore I cannot denie, but that our careful & louing ſauiour did often & in many places warne his diſciples, and by them all vs, to beware of this working of Sathan, and ſo much as they could, to ſhunne his ſnares. But ſhall vvee thinke therefore, that hee condemneth principalitie, lordſhip, dominion, vvealth, riches, landes, in them that bee his true and faithfull follovvers?

No ſurely: for that is the full ground of the Anabaptiſts doctrine, to be ſhunned of alright chriſtians. And yet before I begin to anſwere this, I muſt needes proteſt it is a queiſie & dangerous matter, to ſpeake of wealth and riches of the world, for feare of miſtaking, either on the one part, or on the other. For vvhatſoeuer a man ſhall ſay in that caſe, among the vngodly vvill be dravven according to their priuate affections.
               The rich, when they heare the poſſesſion of riches & the right vſe of them defended, by and by if Gods ſpecial grace ſtay them not, vvaxe more confident and ſecure, and vvith contempt & diſdaine of other, thinke themſelues free maſters and Lordes of Gods giftes, to vſe them euen at their ovvne pleaſure, & to the fulfilling of their ovvne fleſhly fantaſies. On the cōtrary part, when they that be poore & deſtitute of thoſe gifts, ſhall heare the rich blamed for the abuſe of their wealth, & ſignification giuen, that whatſoeuer is aboue the ſufficient maintenance of their own ſtate, is due vnto the poore: they alſo as raſhly enter into iudgement, & condemne all rich men as couetous, as griedy gatherers, as thieues & extortioners, & cruel detainers of that which by Gods law is due to others. Some there be alſo, that thinke all vſe and adminiſtration of riches to be dangerous, & to bring no ſmal hinderance to the ſaluation of mens ſoules. Vnto vvhich perſwaſion, the phanaticall ſpirits of the Anabaptiſts adde more difficultie, not onely taking away all poſſesſion & property, and allowing a Platonicall community of al things: but alſo denying ſuperioritie, and Lordſhip and dominion, and bringing in a general equality, moſt dangerous to the ſocietie

of man. Wherefore, it behooueth me ſo to ſpeake of riches and poſſeſſions, that (ſo neere as I can) none of theſe offences may be iuſtly taken.
               Firſt therefore to begin, vve may not thinke that Chriſt in them that be his, condemneth eyther the poſſeſſion or the right vſe of Lordſhip, dominion, lāds, riches, mony & ſuch like: for they are the good gifts of God, wherwith he bleſſeth his people, as the whole courſe of the ſcriptures declare. The bleſsing of 
                  Pro. 10. 
                  the Lord (ſaith Salomon) maketh rich, and bringeth no ſorowe of heart with it. Bleſſed is the man (ſaith Dauid) that 
                  Pſal. 112. 
                  feareth the Lord &c. his ſeede ſhall be mightie vpon earth, the generation of the faithfull ſhall bee bleſſed, riches and plenteouſneſſe ſhall bee in his houſe &c. And againe, His horne ſhall bee exalted with honour: the vngodly ſhall ſee it, and it ſhall grieue them. Therefore we ſee many of the good Saints of God, that haue bene indued with great riches & poſſeſsions, as Abraham the Father of the faithful, Iob, Ioſeph, Dauid, Salomon, Daniel. And in the new Teſtament, Nicodemus, Ioſeph of Arimathea, Lazarus of Bethania, Mary Magdalene, Sergius Paulus Proconſul of Cypres, the Centurion, and many other. Wee may not thinke therefore, that Chriſt condemneth the giftes and bleſsings of God, or the vſe of them, in his ſeruants. And that the trueth taken out of the Scriptures may be of more authoritie vvith you, I wil let you vnderſtand it by the words of the ancient & learned Fathers: ſo ſhal you perceiue, it is not my interpretation, but theirs. And firſt Hieroms. Ioſeph, which both in pouertie and riches, gaue 
                  Hierom. ad Saluinam. 
                  triall of his vertues, and was both a ſeruant and a maſter, teacheth vs the freedome of the minde. Was hee not next vnto Pharao, adorned in royal furniture? & yet was he ſo

beloued of God, that aboue all the Patriarkes, he was a Father of two Tribes. Daniel, and the three young men, had ſuch rule ouer the power and riches of Babylon, that in apparell they ſerued Nabuchodonoſor, but in minde they ſerued God. Mardocheus and Heſter, in the middeſt of their purple, ſilke, and precious iewels, ouercame pride with humilitie, and were of ſuch worthineſſe, that they being Captiues, bare rule ouer Conquerours. My ſpeech tendeth to this ende, that I may declare that this yong man that I ſpeake of, had kinred of royall blood, aboundance of riches, and ornaments of honour and power, as matter and inſtruments of vertue vnto him. S. Auguſtine diſputeth this queſtion, Epiſt. 89. writing to Hillarius, Thou writeſt vnto me, (ſayeth he) that ſome ſay, that a rich man remaining in his wealth, cannot enter into the kingdome of God, vnleſſe that hee ſell all that he hath, and that it ſhal not profit, though in his wealth he keepe the cōmandements of God. Our fathers, Abraham, Iſaac and Iaacob, vnderſtood not this reaſoning: for they all had no ſmall riches, as the holy Scriptures witneſſe, &c.
               
               And leaſt that ſome might ſay, that thoſe holy men were vnder the old Teſtament, and vnderſtood not the perfect lawe that Chriſt giueth, when he ſayeth, Matt. 19. 
                  Goe & ſell all that thou haſt, and giue it vnto the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in heauen, the ſame Auguſtine addeth, If they will ſay ſo; they may ſpeake with ſome reaſon: but let them heare the whole, let them marke the whole: they may not in one part open their eares, and in an other part ſtoppe them. Hee ſpake that to one that asked him, What ſhall I doe to obtaine euerlaſting life? and Chriſtes anſwere is not, If thou wilt obtaine euerlaſting life, ſell all that thou haſt: but, if thou wilt haue euerlaſting life, keepe the Commandemements, &c. And a little after, our good Maister doeth make

a diſtinction betweene the keeping of the Cōmandements, and that other rule of perfectneſſe. For in the one part he ſayde, If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the Commandements: And in the other he ſayde, If thou wilt bee perfect, ſell all thou haſt, and come and followe me. Howe therefore can we denie, that rich men, although they haue not the perfection, ſhall come into euerlaſting life, if they keepe the commandements, and giue, that it may be giuen vnto them? And in the ende he concludeth his reaſon in this manner, after hee hath ſpoken of the vncharitable minde of the rich glutton. This pride (ſayeth hee) wherewith this rich man did contemne the poore Lazarus lying before his gates, and that truſt that he did put in his riches, whereby he thought himſelfe a bleſſed man, becauſe of his purple, ſilke, and ſumptuous feaſtes, did bring him to the torments of hell, and not his riches. By which wordes of Auguſtine, it may appeare, it is not riches, Landes and poſſeſſions, that GOD condemneth in his ſeruantes, but the euill vſe of them. Wherefore the ſame Auguſtine ſayeth, When the Lorde had ſayde, It is eaſier for a Camell 
                  Pſal 51. 
                  to paſſe thorowe the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God: and the Apoſtles maruailing thereat, anſwered, Who then can bee ſaued? What reſpected they I pray you? ſurely, non facultates, ſed cupiditates: not great ſubſtance, but greedie deſire of them.
               
               Immediately hee ſheweth, that rich Abraham had preheminence in heauen, before poore Lazarus, Reade the Scriptures, (ſaieth he) and thouſhalt finde rich Abraham, that thou mayeſt knowe, it is not riches that is puniſhed. Abraham had great ſtore of golde, ſiluer, cattell and houſholde. Hee was rich, and yet was poore Lazarus

brought into his boſome: the poore man in the boſome of the rich, or rather both rich before God, and both poore in ſpirite &c. Marke this, that you do not commonly blame rich men, or put truſt in poore eſtate. For if a man ſhould not put his truſt in riches, much leſſe in pouertie. To the like effect ſpeaketh Hierome, Is it euill to haue riches iuſtly gotten, ſo that a man giue thankes to God that gaue them? No, but euill it is to put a mans truſt in riches. For in another Pſalme it is ſayde, Ifriches come vnto thee, ſet not thine heart vpon them. A man may haue riches for his neceſsitie, but hee may not poſseſſe them to delight in them. Well therefore ſaith Chriſoſtome, As I haue ſayde, wine 
                  Homil. 2. ad popul. Antioch. 
                  is not ill, but drunkenneſſe is ill: ſo ſay I, riches are not ill, but couetouſneſſe is ill. A rich man is one thing, and a couetous man is another. A couetous man cannot be a rich man. 
                  Homil. 13. ad popul. Antioch. And to the ſame meaning in an other place: Let vs not falſely accuſe either riches or pouertie: for both riches and pouertie are ſuch, as, if we will our ſelues, bring inſtruments of vertue. Let vs therefore ſo frame our ſelues, that we iudge not ſo, as we may ſeeme to blame Gods giftes, but the euill affections of men. The ſame Chryſoſtome, Riches 
                  Homil. ad popul. Antioch. 58. (ſaith he) killeth not: but to be a ſlaue to riches, killeth, and to loue couetouſneſſe. And againe, the rich glutton was puniſhed, not becauſe he was rich, but becauſe he wanted mercie. For it may bee, that one hauing riches, ioyned with mercie, may attaine to all goodneſſe. By theſe teſtimonies of the ancient learned Fathers, grounded vpon the examples and doctrine of the Scriptures, you may perceiue, that riches are the good gift and bleſsing of God: that the Saintes of God haue vſed and enioyed them: that welth & poſſeſsions of them ſelues are not hinderous to pietie & godlineſſe, but rather inſtruments of vertue and meanes to come

to heauen: that God doeth not condemne them in his ſeruants: that it is not a man voyd of lands and poſſeſſion, but a heart voyde of couetouſneſſe that Chriſt deſireth: that it is not riches, but the ſinfull affections of men that he reproueth. How then can it bee prooued by Chriſts doctrine, that any ſtate of his diſciples or faithfull ſeruants and followers, ought not to haue landes, poſſeſſions, or ample and large liuings? or that they be by his word ſo expreſly prohibited, that neither Prince may ſuffer it vvithout danger, nor faithfull Miniſter with good conſcience inioy them? Let vs ſomewhat better conſider the particular places of this doctrine of Chriſt, whereon this aſſertion is grounded. Where Chriſt ſaith, Hoarde not vp treaſures for your ſelues on earth, 
                  Matth. 6. he ſaith not, you ſhall haue no treaſures. To haue treaſures, and to hoarde treaſures, be diuerſe. Hee that hoardeth vp treaſures, ſheweth that hee hath a carefull minde to keepe them: but a man may poſſeſſe treaſures, and yet with free heart bee willing to imploy them to godly purpoſes: like as Iob did, who had his riches alwayes ready to pleaſure other. When Chriſt affirmeth, that where a mans treaſure is, there is his heart: by treaſure, he meaneth not the poſſeſſion of riches ſimply, but hee meaneth that, wherein a man repoſeth his chiefe treaſure and felicitie to conſiſt. And in deede it can not bee, but that hee that eſteemeth his chiefe felicitie in any thing, doeth ſet his heart alſo vpon it. He that ſetteth his felicitie in honour and dignitie, hath his heart poſſeſſed with ambition. Hee that thinketh it to bee in worldly pleaſure, hath his whole minde on playing, banqueting, feaſting

and riot. He that repoſeth his felicitie in building, giueth ouer his cogitations vnto that. So hee that iudgeth his bleſſednes in this life to be in poſſeſſion of riches & lands, vndoubtedly can not but haue his heart faſtened vpō them. And ſeeing that God chalengeth vnto himſelfe all our whole heart, and our whole ſoule and minde, they that ſo do, muſt needes offend God moſt grieuouſly, & make of their riches their God, and ſo as S. Paul ſaith, become very idolaters. Therfore if either Eccleſiaſticall perſons, or lay men, do ſo ſet their minds on riches, this place nighly toucheth them. When Chriſt ſaieth, No man can ſerue two maſters; &c. and ye cannot ſerue God and Mammon, Marke, I pray you, that he ſaith not: No man can ſerue God & get riches. For godly men both haue before time, & now may get lands & riches, procured either by heritage or by gift, or by any other lawfull meanes. Conſider the Patriarch Iacob: who paſſed Gene. 32. 
                  Iordane onely with a ſtaffe in his hand, & in the time of his liuing in a ſtrange Countrey gate ſo great riches, as he returned with two great cōpanies of ſeruants & cattel. And yet vndoubtedly this Patriarch was a good Chriſtian, being ſaued by the ſame religion that his grandfather Abraham was, the father of the faithfull, who with reioycing ſawe the day of Chriſt. Neither doth Chriſt ſay, No man can ſerue God and poſſeſſe riches. For as it is ſaide before, Abraham, Iob, and Ioſeph, poſſeſſed great wealth & riches, and yet vndoubtedly, truely, and ſincerely ſerued God. Riches are the bleſſings of God, neyther may anie more rightly or with better title poſſeſſe them, then the good and faithfull ſeruants of God. What ſaith Chriſt then? forſooth, No man can ſerue two masters:
                  
or No man can ſerue God and Mammon. Getting or poſſeſſing is one thing, & ſeruing is another. Seruing preſuppoſeth a maſterſhip or dominion in him that is ſerued. He that ſerueth riches, acknovvledgeth them to be his Lord and Maſter. Seruitude or bondage hath this condition, that hee wholly obey his maſter: that night and day he doe nothing but that pleaſeth his maſter: that he ſhall be contented to haue the diſpleaſure of all other, ſo that he may haue the good vvil of his maſter: Finally, vvhatſoeuer a ſeruant doth, what labour ſoeuer he taketh, vvhatſoeuer by his paines he getteth, he doth it to the vſe & behalfe of his maſter. Whoſoeuer is ſuch a bond-ſlaue to riches, is a traytour reuolted from God, neither can it be posſible for him to ſerue God. Such a ſeruing of Mammon it is that Chriſt in this place rebuketh, vvith vvhich ſeruice, the ſeruice of God cannot be ioyned.
               But it vvere great raſhneſſe to thinke all that poſſeſſe lands, lordſhips, and riches, of necesſitie to be ſubiect to this ſlauiſh ſeruice of Mammon, as ſome men vncharitably iudge of the Biſhops and Clergie of England. Ioſeph of Arimathea vvas a rich man, and yet in time of great perill did more ſeruice to Chriſt, then all his poore Apoſtles vvhich had ſo little to leeſe. It is vvritten in the Euangeliſts, When Euen was come, there came a rich man from Arimathea 
                  Matth. 27. 
                  named Ioſeph, which alſo himſelfe was Ieſus his diſciple. He went to Pilate and begged the body of Ieſus. Then Pilate commaunded the body to bee deliuered, and when Ioſeph had taken the body, hee wrapped it in a cleane linnen cloth, and layde him in a newe tombe &c. Conſider the circumſtances of the hiſtorie: vveigh the danger

of the time: call to remembrance how many things might haue hindered, and ſtaied Ioſeph from this doing, and you ſhall perceiue that poſſeſsion of landes and riches, may be ioyned with a free & faithful ſeruice, yea, oftentimes more faithful, then pouerty and baſe eſtate in the vvorlde. Good Chriſtians therefore may not condemne as ſlaues & ſeruants to Antichriſt, all ſuch as haue lands & poſſeſsions. Experience in England God be thanked) hath taught, whē a number of poore Prieſts & Miniſters reuolted frō Chriſt to the Mammon their Maſſe, that many which had the greateſt liuings in this lād, were moſt ready not onely to be baniſhed their countrey, but alſo to ſhead their blood, and giue their liues to ſerue faithfully their Lord and maſter Chriſt: and I doubt not, wil doe againe, if euer God giue the occaſion. Iudge therefore more charitably of your Miniſters & Preachers, (O ye Engliſh profeſſours) which haue ſeene theſe things with your eyes, & know not how ſoone, to the ſorowe of your owne hearts, yee may ſee the ſame againe. But they which at this day miſlike the ſtate of biſhops, & do write or ſpeake againſt them, are thoſe perſons, which in the time of affliction, eyther were not borne, or els were very yong, & therefore haue no ſenſe of that temptation, which that perſecution did then bring. As God of his goodnes graunteth vs now ſome Halcion dayes: ſo I beſeech him againſt that day, to giue vs the grace of his mightie ſpirit, ſo that we may haue the like conſtancie.
               It is further alledged out of Chriſts doctrine, that when he anſwered the Phariſees, Mat. 22. he giueth a Matt. 22. plaine commandement, that landes and poſſeſions ſhould be at the pleaſure of the Prince, & that Miniſters

of the church ought to giue them vp vnto him. For this he ſaith, Giue to Caeſar that which is Caeſars, and to God, that is Gods: But (ſay they) all temporall landes are Caeſars, therefore they ought to giue them vnto Caeſar: and our Caeſar is our gracious Prince and Soueraigne.
               Truely it woulde make any Chriſtian heart to lament in theſe dayes, to ſee Gods holy word ſo miſerably drawen, racked, and pulled in ſunder from the true meaning thereof. If the biſhops, and other of the Cleargy of England did grudge or murmure to haue their landes and Liuinges to bee tributarie to the Prince, and ſubiect to all taxes and ſeruices, that by the laws of this Realm may be, either to the maintenance of her perſon, or to the defence of our countrey: Or if they did challenge ſuch an immunitie or exemption from the authoritie of the Prince, as the Pope and his Cleargie did: Or if they did find them-ſelues grieued to bee puniſhed by the Prince for the breach of her Lawes, as the Donatiſts in old time did, and ſome nowe in our age do: If they were ſuch enemies to Princes and Gouernours, as they woulde exempt thē out of the ſtate of true chriſtianitie, & of the Church of God, and make them onely to ſerue their turne in euill affaires: then in deede did this place make ſtrongly againſt them. But I truſt the Cleargie of Englande, are with all good men out of the ſuſpition of theſe pointes. They are as willing and readie at all times to bee contributarie, as any other ſubiectes are: they claime no exemption from her authoritie: they willingly ſubmitte them-ſelues to her correction: they humbly acknowledge their obedience in all thinges, that anie Chriſtian Prince may require: and this doe they principallie

for conſcience ſake, becauſe it is the ordinance and commandement of God: but much mooued thereto alſo, as men, in conſideration of their ovvneſtate, vvhich next vnder God dependeth of her maieſtie. Seeing therfore the hand of God hath more ſtraightly bounde them vnto her, then other common ſubiects: I doubt not, but ſhee vvillingly hath, and ſhall haue all dueties of obedience at their handes, that any Chriſtian ſubiects by the word of God are bound vnto. Neither are they in any feare that her Maieſtie vvill preſſe them to any thing, vvhich ſhall not ſtand vvith the glorie of God, and furtherance of the Goſpel. But hovv theſe vvords of Chriſt before mentioned, do cōmand them preſently to yeeld vp into her Maieſties hands ſuch landes & poſſeſsions, as by the grant of her goodnes, & by the law of this realm they nowe inioy, indeede I ſee not. If ſuch a Prince ſhall com (as I truſt in my daies neuer to ſee) that ſhal put them to this choiſe, either to forgoe their lands & liuings, or to looſe the free courſe of the Goſpell: it is before declared, what their duty is to do therin. And I doubt not, but in the late time of perſecutiō, there were many of them that would haue bin glad with al the veines in their hearts, by that choice to haue enioyed in this Realme the freedom of their conſciences, though they had bin put to as pore eſtate, as poſſibly men might haue liued in. But how that chriſtiā princes are warranted, either by this place of the goſpell, or by any part of the word of God, ſo hardly to deale with the ſtate of the miniſtery, I haue not as yet learned, though it be in theſe dayes by ſome boldly affirmed. Amb. hath a worthy ſaying, wherin he plainly noteth both what a chriſtiā prince may do in theſe

things that appertaine vnto the Church, and howe a godly biſhop ſhoulde in that caſe behaue himſelfe. When it was propoſed vnto me (ſaith he) that I ſhould deliuer 
                  Epiſt. lib. 5. in Orat. contra Auxentium. 
                  the plate or veſſell of the church, I made this anſwere: If there were any thing required that was my owne, either land, houſe, gold or ſiluer being of my owne priuate right, that I would willingly deliuer it: but that I coulde not pull any thing from the Church of God. And moreouer I ſayde, that in ſo doing I had regarde to the Emperours ſafetie, becauſe it was not profitable either for me to deliuer it, or for him to receiue it. Let him receiue the words of a free Miniſter of God. If he will doe that is for his owne ſafety, let him forbeare to do Chriſt iniury. By theſe words ye may perceiue, both that Ambroſe wold not deliuer the church goods, nor that he thought it ſafe for the Emperour to require it. The mening of Chriſt is in thoſe words, to teach his to put a differēce between the duty that they owe to the Prince, & that they owe to God: and to declare, that vvithin their due boundes, they may both ſtand together. Therefore they that wil rightly folow Chriſt in this doctrine, muſt conſider, in what conſiſteth the dutie towards a Prince or Magiſtrate, and wherein reſteth our duetie towardes God. Wee owe to the Prince, honour, feare, and obedience: obedience (I ſay) in al thoſe things that are not againſt the worde of God and his commandements. Thoſe things that God commandeth, a Chriſtian Prince cannot forbid: Thoſe things that God forbiddeth, no Prince hath authority to command. But ſuch things as be external, and by Gods word left in different, the Prince by his authoritie may ſo by lawe diſpoſe, either in cōmanding, or forbidding, as in wiſedome & diſcretion he ſhall thinke to make moſt to the glorie

of God, and to the good and ſafe ſtate of his people. Among theſe things external, I thinke lands, goods, and poſſeſſions to bee, and therefore that the ſame ought to be ſubiect to taxe and tribute in ſuch ſort, as the lawes & ſtate of the countrey requireth: yea, and if there ſhal happen in any country a magiſtrate, which by violence and extortion ſhall wreſt more vnto him of the landes and ſubſtance of the people, then lawe and right requireth: I ſee no cauſe warranted by Gods word, that the inferiour ſubiectes can rebell, or reſiſt the Prince therein, but that they ſhal euidently ſhew thēſelues to reſiſt the ordinance of God. For they haue not the ſword of correction committed into their hand, and oftentimes God by euill Princes correcteth the ſinnes of the people. Wherefore, if ſubiects reſiſt the hard dealings euen of euill Magiſtrates, they doe in that reſpect ſtriue againſt God himſelfe, who will not ſuffer it vnpuniſhed. Wherefore Ieremie willeth the Iewes to ſubmit Ierem. 28. themſelues to the obedience of Nabuchodonoſor, a wicked and cruell king: and Baruch teacheth them Baruc. 1. to pray for the good eſtate of the ſayd Nabuchodonoſor and his nephewe Balthaſar. And Saint Peter and 1. Pet. 1. Rom. 13. 1. Tim. 2. Saint Paul, will Chriſtian ſubiects not onely to bee obedient to the heathen tyrants, vvhich vvere in their time, as Nero, and ſuch other, but alſo to make moſt humble and heartie prayers for them, that his people might liue vnder them a quiet and peaceable life, vvith all godlineſſe and honeſtie. Tertullian alſo ſhevveth the ſame to haue beene Tertull. ad Scapulam. the practiſe of the primitiue Church, euen towarde the enemies and cruell perſecutours of the faith of Chriſt.
               
                  
                  A Chriſtian (ſaith he) is enemie to none, and leaſt of all to the Emperour, whome he knowing to be ordeined of God, muſt of neceſsitie loue, reuerence, and honour, and wiſh to bee in ſafetie together with the whole Romaine Empire. And againe, We pray for all Emperours, that God woulde graunt vnto them long life, proſperous reigne, ſtrong armies, 
                  Tertul. Apolog. 
                  faithfull Counſell, obedient Subiects. &c.
               
               We may learne then by this, that Chriſtian duetie of a ſubiect conſiſteth in louing, in reuerencing, in obeying the Prince and Magiſtrate in all things, that lawfully hee commandeth: and in thoſe things that he commandeth vnlawfully, not by violence to reſiſt him, though the ſame touch our goods, our lands, yea and our life alſo. As touching our duetie towarde God, wee owe vnto him our ſelues whollie, both body and ſoule, and all things and partes to the ſame appertaining, according to that his Lavve requireth, Thou ſhalt loue God with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule, with all thy minde, and with thy whole power. For wee are his creatures, and hee is our Lorde and maker. But foraſmuch as Princes, Magiſtrates, Rulers, Parents, Maſters, and all ſuperiours, haue a portion of Gods authoritie ouer vs, as his officers and Lieutenants in their callings: therefore God doeth permit vnto them ſome part alſo of his honour, but ſo farre, and in ſuch things, and ſuch maner as before is declared, retaining vnto himſelfe our faith and religion, vvith all the partes of his diuine vvorſhippe conſiſting in Spirite and in trueth, the calling vpon his bleſſed name, the confeſſion of his holy trueth, and the obedience of his morall Lavve: vvhich thinges hee doeth not make ſubiect to any Princes authoritie. And if any Prince

or Magiſtrate by violence and crueltie ſhall breake into the boundes of our duetie towardes God, I ſaie not that priuate ſubiects may by violence reſiſt it: but ſurely they may not obey it, but rather yeelde into his handes, goods, landes, countrey, and life too. For ſo did the Prophet Daniel: ſo did the yong men his companions: ſo did the whole number of the martyrs of God, by whome the Church of Chriſt increaſed as Augustine ſaieth, Non reſistendo 
                  Auguſt de Agon. Chri. 
                  ſed perferendo, not by reſiſting but by ſuffering. And Hierome: The Church of Chriſt was founded by 
                  Hierom ad Theophil. 
                  ſuffering reproch, by perſecutions it increaſed, by martyrdomes it was crowned. To this ende, ſaith Tertullian alſo, Semen Euangelij Sanguis Martyrum. This is the true doctrine of the wordes of Chriſt before mentioned, by which wee are taught to put a difference betweene our duetie towards God, and that we owe towarde the Prince, yeelding to each that vvhich is his: A doctrine moſt profitable and neceſſarie to all Chriſtian Churches and common weales. But who can gather of this, that the Miniſters of the Church of Chriſt, liuing vnder a Chriſtian Prince fauouring and defending the Goſpel, muſt of neceſſitie giue vp into the Princes hands thoſe landes and poſſeſſions, which by the graunt of the ſame Prince and the Lawe of the Lande is aſſigned vnto them? For if the land be Caeſars and therefore muſt bee deliuered to Caeſar: then are all goods, Caeſars, and muſt be alſo yeelded into his hands.
               God ſaue vs from Princes that will vſe like violence and tyrannie towarde our Landes, goods, and bodies, as theſe men vſe to the worde of God. I haue not as yet noted vnto you (good Chriſtians)

the very grounde of this corrupt interpretation of the doctrine of Chriſt, and the miſchiefe that is hid vnder it. I pray you therefore conſider, to vvhome doth Chriſt ſpeake in al thoſe places of his doctrine before mentioned? Whome doeth he teach? whom doth he inſtruct, that they ſhoulde not hoarde vp treaſure vpon earth? that they may not ſerue God and Mammon? that they may not bee carefull what to eate and what to drinke? that they muſt ſell all that they haue and followe him? that they muſt renounce all that they haue if they will bee his true Diſciples? And laſtly that they muſt yeelde to Caeſar that which is Caeſars? Are theſe things ſpoken to Miniſters onely? doeth Chriſts doctrine pertaine to Biſhops and Miniſters onely? Is it his will that they onely ſhoulde followe his godly inſtructions and commaundements? Then of likelihoode, as hee came onely to teach Miniſters, and to bee example of life to them alone: ſo hee came to ſaue Miniſters onely. But what a wicked vanitie were it ſo to ſpeake or thinke?
               Now if Chriſtes doctrine bee generall to all the faithfull, as in deede it is: (that beeing the true interpretation that they vvoulde haue to bee) it muſt of necesſitie followe, that no true Chriſtian can keepe landes and poſſesſions, nor abide in any wealthie or rich eſtate: which is the very ground of the Anabaptiſts doctrine, as all learned men do know. In ſo much, that all the famous men, that in this our age haue expounded the Scriptures, or written againſt the Anabaptiſtes, doe note, that by this interpretation of the ſpeeches of Chriſt before mentioned, they doe grounde their communitie, and taking away of proprietie and poſſeſsion of goods,

with ſundry like other doctrines. We may ſee therfore, & it is time to take heed of it, how ſathā, vnder pretences ſeeketh to thruſt the ſpirit of the Anabaptiſts, & the groūds of their learning into this church of England. The inconuenience then of this kinde of reaſoning is, either, that theſe ſentēces of the goſpel touch biſhops and miniſters only, and all other are left free, which is a very great abſurditie: or els that the ſame doctrine gathered out of theſe places in the ſame ſenſe that they vſe, doth belong to al chriſtiās, which with the Anabaptiſts taketh away al proprietie & poſſeſſions of lands & goods, & (as I haue before ſaide) bringeth in a Platonicall community. I ſay not, that they which vſe theſe places do meane it: but ſurely that inconuenience & danger followeth vpon it. Therefore, they that haue any feare of God, ought to take heed, that their immoderat ſtomack & affectiōs againſt biſhops & other miniſters, do not ouermuch blind them, & carry them away, either to the affirming, or to the maintening of corrupt and dangerous doctrines, both to the Church and commonwealth. If this their doctrine ſpread in libels, ſhall once become familiar vnto the commō people of this Realme: it may happily breed ſuch a ſcab and dangerous ſore, as all the cunning in this land will ſcant be able to heale it. God ſend grace, that heede may be taken thereof in time.
               They wil ſay (I know) That this is but a ſhift of Logike that the falſe ſophiſters the biſhops do vſe to turne the matter from themſelues, when they ſay, that this doctrine of Chriſt pertaineth to al Chriſtians, aſwell as to them: & will aske me how they will auoid thoſe plain & euident words that Chriſt ſpeaketh to his Apoſtles and diſciples only, when he ſendeth

them abroad two and two, to preach the kingdome of God. This (ſay they) doth belong to Miniſters and Preachers only.
               
                  As ye go, preach, ſaying, that the kingdome of heauen is 
                  Matth. 10. 
                  at hand: heale the ſicke, clenſe the lepers, raiſe the dead, caſt out deuils, freely ye haue receiued, and freely giue you. Poſſeſse 
                  Mar. 3. 
                  not golde nor ſiluer, nor money in your purſes, nor ſcrip 
                  Luke 9. 
                  toward your iourney, neither two coates, neither ſhooes, nor yet a ſtaffe, For the workman is worthy of his meate. Theſe words, I muſt confeſſe, do not appertaine generally to al chriſtians, no more do they generally to al miniſters & preachers of al times & places. Is it euil in it ſelfe to haue golde or ſiluer? or to haue a ſtaffe on the way to walke with? or to weare ſhoes to ſaue his feet in iourneying? I think there is no chriſtian that will ſo iudge. Chriſt himſelfe had a purſe, wherein Iudas caryed mony for his prouiſion, & he ſuffered certaine rich women to go with him, & to miniſter to him & to his diſciples. Peter alſo bare a ſworde, & ware ſandalles on his feete, when the Angell bade him put on his ſandalles. And Paul writing to Timothie, willeth him to bring his cloake with him, although vndoubtedly hee had an other garment before. We muſt conſider then what it is that Chriſt in this place meaneth, ſeeing neither himſelfe nor his Apoſtles did obſerue it according to the ſtrictneſſe of the letter.
               There be ſome that ſay theſe precepts be perſonall, and for a time onely, not generall or perpetual: for that which goeth before may ſeeme to take away the continuāce of theſe precepts, Go not in the way of the Gentiles, but to the loſt ſheep of the houſe of Iſrael. Which precept the Apoſtles at this time obſerued, but afterward they preached the goſpel vnto al

the nations of the earth: ſo doe they thinke, that Chriſt, for the time of this meſſage only, commanded them to poſſeſſe no gold nor ſiluer, &c. & from thenceforth that this commandement was abrogated. This interpretation I cannot reiect as euill, or not pertinent to the meaning of Chriſt. There bee alſo ſome hypocrites, & Pope-holy perſons, which wil haue theſe precepts perpetuall, and build thereon friery & monkiſh ſuperſtitiō: They wil not touch any money: They wil weare no whole ſhooes: They wil not haue a ſtaffe to walk with, thinking that they ſhew themſelues the holy ſeruants of God therein. To this interpretation very nighly commeth that, which theſe men vſe to proue, that biſhops & preachers may haue no lands nor poſſeſſiōs, nor riches, no nor money, further then will barely prouide thē meat, and drinke, and cloth, & whatſoeuer is aboue, to be of ſuperfluitie. Some other thinke, that Chriſt in thoſe words onely compareth the Ambaſſadors of other princes with his: as if hee had ſaide, I ſend you foorth to preach the kingdome of God: and the ſtate of an ambaſſade or meſſage doeth require, that I ſhould deliuer vnto you money, and all other like things conuenient for this voyage, as Princes vſe to their ambaſſadours: but deceyue not your ſelues: the maner of this meſſage is diuers from ſuch meſſages as ciuill princes vſe. In ciuill ambaſſades, great furniture (I know) is thought conuenient: but this meſſage of mine is ſuch, as nedeth no ſuch matter to ſet it out. For the maieſtie of the thing it ſelfe, & the myracles that you ſhal worke, ſhall ſufficiently giue authoritie vnto it. This interpretation alſo I thinke not amiſſe: but in my opinion, & that by the

iudgement of ſome other learned men, alſo the true & ſimple meaning of Chriſt was, to teach his Apoſtles to put their truſt & whole confidence vpon the prouidence of God only, & for the better perſuaſion, would haue them at this time to make trial therof, and by experience to learne, that though they haue nothing in the ſight of the world to feede thē, to helpe or to defend them: yet that he will ſo prouide for them, if they continue in their vocation & calling faithfully, that they ſhal want nothing: yea, that the fowles of the aire ſhall rather feed them thē that they ſhould lacke ſuſtenance. That this was Chriſtes meaning, it may appeare in S. Luke, where he ſaith to his Apoſtles, When I ſent you forth without wallet or ſcrippe, or ſhooes, lacked you any thing? and they 
                  Luke 22. 
                  ſaid, No. Then ſaid he vnto them, But now he that hath a wallet, let him take it vp, and he that hath none, let him ſell his coate and buy a ſword. The Apoſtles vndoubtedly had great need of this inſtruction, and to be taught to put their whole truſt in the prouidence of God, and to depende vpon that onely. For he did ſee that in the execution of their office they ſhoulde be caſt into all the difficulties of this worlde, which either Sathan or his miniſters were able to raiſe againſt them. This leſſon is very neceſſary alſo for all other chriſtians, but principally for the miniſters & preachers of the Goſpel, whenſoeuer God for the profeſſion & teaching of his trueth ſhall caſt them into the like difficulties. For if they do not reſt vpon that onely, they ſhall finde lands, poſſeſſions, power, authoritie, kinred, friendſhip, & all other helps of this world, to be but as a broken ſtaffe to leane vnto.
               But what maketh this againſt that, that miniſters

of the Church in the calme times of quietneſſe, may 
                     •
                  nioy the benefites and liberalitie of good and gra
                  
                     •
                  ious Princes, whom he hath appointed as foſterers and nouriſhers of his Church and people, wherein ſoeuer thoſe benefites of their liberalitie ſhalbe imployed, be it lands, poſſeſſions, goods, money, or any other maner of prouiſion?
               For further proofe of this matter againſt the wealthy ſtate of the Clergy, the example of S. Peter alſo is broughtin, who ſaieth in the Actes to the poore 
                     •
                  ame man, Siluer and gold haue I none, &c. Loe (ſaie Act. 3. 
                  
                     •
                  hey) S. Peter was a right Apoſtle, & was in ſo poore 
                     •
                  aſe, that he had neither ſiluer nor golde, no not ſo 
                     •
                  uch as hee could beſtowe a meane reliefe vpon a poore begger. His example ſhould our rich biſhops and Preachers followe. And S. Paul to Timothie, Hauing food and rayment, we ſhould therewith be content.
               
               Here we may learne (ſay they) what manner of liuing Miniſters of the Church ſhoulde haue, that is, ſo much onely, as will prouide them meate, drinke, and cloth: whatſoeuer is aboue, that is ſuperfluity, & more then Gods word requireth. Who ſeeth not (good Chriſtians) whereat theſe men ſhoote, and what ſtate of the Miniſterie, this earneſt zeale that now is pretended, woulde ſettle in this Church? that is, more miſerable and worſe prouided for, then any other ſtate of the lande beſide. Thoſe heartes wherein is true deuotion, and the right loue of the Goſpell, are rather ouer bountifull toward the Preachers thereof, then too ſparing. For they are thus affected, that they thinke nothing too deare for thē, yea, if it were poſſible, they would giue their eyes vnto them out of their heads, as Paul ſaith to the Galathians.
               
               
                  
What ſpirit this is therefore that would ſo hard ly pinch & wring the miniſters of the church, it is euidently to be gathered. The principall purpoſe at the beginning was, to proue yt the Miniſters might not by the word of God inioy any temporall lands: but now forſooth, through the goodneſſe of their cauſe, in the vehemencie of their reaſoning, and fulneſſe of their proofe, it falleth out ſo, that Miniſters may not haue ſo much as any peny in their purſe to prouide them ſuſtenance: but muſt liue vpō the charitable almes of the people, & cōtent thēſelues with meat, drink, and apparel onely, as the Apoſtles did. For they are no ſpiritual men (ſay they) that haue temporall liuing. Yea, of the very tithes they ought to claime no more, then may ſerue them to meat, drink, & cloth. And if the ſame be denied them, they may not by law ſue for it. For if their coate be taken from them, they ſhould deliuer their clokealſo. 
                  Matth. 5.
               
               This doctrine doth very wel iuſtifie the couetous and vncharitable dealinges of many Pariſhioners, which partly by violence, partly by craftie meanes detaine from the Miniſters their portiō of tithes appointed by the lawe. This doctrine giueth good countenance to corrupt patrones, who wil not beſtow their benefices, but by compoſition of a good part of the fruits to their owne vſe & commoditie. And when the liuing ſhall be worth 100. pounds by the yeere, they will aske, whether thirtie or fourtie pounds bee not a ſufficient portion for the Parſon? This dealing before time hath bin accounted little better then ſacrilege or ſimonie: but now it may be thought (if this doctrine be good & allowable) that it is lawfully done, and according to the worde of

God: yea, and that the miniſter is a couetous worldling, and worthy great blame, that will not content himſelfe with ſuch a rate, as they willingly ſhall allow him. What care they which thus reaſon haue, I wil not ſay of the preaching of the goſpel, but of the ſtate of learning and knowledge in the Church of Chriſt, all men may euidently perceiue. Either they iudge, as I haue before written at large, that men be Angels without corruption, and will followe the courſe of learning for conſcience ſake, though there be no hope of reward to allure thē: or els they think, that God wil miraculouſly giue knowledge to ſuch as he ſhal incline to the Miniſtery, as hee did in the primitiue Church to his Apoſtles, and other.
               As touching the example of Saint Peter, it is before declared, what cauſe Chriſt reſpected in the chooſing of ſo poore Apoſtles, and leauing them in ſo baſe ſtate and condition of life: that is, that the worke of winning the whole world to the doctrine of ſaluation by ſo ſimple and poore inſtruments, as in the iudgement of men they ſeemed, might bee the greater glorie to God, as Saint Paul ſaith: Eſpecially ſeeing he did ſet them forth, and furniſh them vvith the heauenly riches of his holy ſpirite, that is to ſay, extraordinary knowledge, rare giftes of vertue, and povver to worke miracles.
               But vpō this extraordinary dealing of God in the foūding of his church, to ground a general & perpetual rule, to bind the Miniſters of al places & times, is ſuch maner vſing ye ſcriptures, as muſt needs breed great inconueniences among the people of God.
               As for the words of Saint Paul, there is no man I 1. T
                        ••
                     . 6. thinke, but that hee may perceiue they are ſpoken

generally, and not to Miniſters onely, as they are i
                     •
                   this place applied. Remember the place: viewe the circumſtances: conſider what goeth before, and what commeth after, and you ſhall vnderſtand it to be true. For S. Paul there, ſpeaketh to the ſame purpoſe, Matth. 6. that Chriſt doth Matth. 6. when he willeth mē not to bee carefull what to eate, what to drinke, or what to put on, but that they ſhould ſeeke the kingdome of God and the righteouſneſſe thereof, and al other things ſhould by the prouidence of God bee caſt vnto them. So, I ſay, S. Paul exhorteth men not to be in loue with the riches of this worlde, which they ſhal neuer cary away with thē, that they ſhould not practiſe wicked waies to gaine, but accoūt godlines their chiefe gaine & cōmoditie, holding them-ſelues contented with thoſe things that the neceſſitie of nature requireth, that is, foode, & apparel: For whatſoeuer is aboue that, may ſeeme to be ſuperfluous. This wholeſome doctrine, the ſpirit of God in the ſcriptures doth often caſt vpon the conſciences of Chriſtians, as a neceſſary bridle, to ſtay the wicked affection of couetouſnes & greedy deſire of the world, wherto the corruptiō of our nature is giuen. And yet he doeth not condemne riches, or a more plentifull life, as euill in it ſelfe. It is the heart, the minde, and the affection, that God would haue ſtaied and kept vnder in his obedience, and not the forbearing of the externall creatures as before is at large declared. Iob in the middes of his greateſt wealth had as poore and as contented a heart, as he that had a ſmall liuing, and did no more exceede in gluttonie, or other riotous exceſſe, then hee did, which had not a peny more then to prouide meate,

drinke & cloth. This doctrine, as it doeth generally pertaine to all Chriſtians: ſo I denie not, but it very nighly and chiefly ought to touch Preachers & miniſters of the Church. Wherfore I muſt & do confeſſe, that ſo much as our biſhops and Clergy want of the performance hereof, they want of that perfection that by the word of God they ſhould haue. But how cā it be proued hereby, that they may not haue more ample or large alowance then ſhal ſuffice thē for neceſſarie foode & apparell? In deed that cōtentation of mind they ſhould haue, whenſoeuer God calleth them to that neceſſity, yea & whē they be in their wealthieſt ſtate that any cōdition of a chriſtiā common weale doth giue them, they ought not in thoſe things to exceed, but to keepe that moderation that godlines requireth: & whatſoeuer is aboue that, they are bound in conſcience to ſee godly and honeſtly beſtowed, or elſe they grieuouſly offende God, and giue euil example to other. This rule (as I haue ſaid) pertaineth in like maner to all chriſtians: and therfore it can no more follow vpon this, that the lands & liuings of miniſters muſt be taken from them, becauſe it bringeth ſuperfluitie vnto them, and more then the neceſſitie of nature requireth, then you can conclude the ſame againſt all other Chriſtians that haue more ample lands and liuings then will ſuffice them to the like purpoſe. As I haue ſaid before, ſo ſay I now againe, If our biſhops & other clergy men, imploy the ouerplus of their large and plentifull liuings vnto euill and naughty vſes, neither I nor any other can therein defend them.
               For the better vnderſtanding of my aunſwere to theſe places, and of the imperfect manner of reaſoning

vſed by the aduerſary: it behoueth to conſider, that God in his worde layeth downe a perfect meaſure of his iuſtice, and an abſolute rule of that life that Chriſtians ſhoulde leade. As for example, when he ſaith in the Law, Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God with al thy heart, with all thy ſoule, with all thy mind, with all thy power, and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe: This commandemēt requireth, that al the parts & members of our ſoule inwardly, and our bodie & goods outwardly, ſhoulde bee bent and giuen ouer to the ſetting foorth of the glory of God. Our heart is the roote of our affections: therefore we are commanded to loue or hate nothing, to feare or hope for nothing, to deſire or ſhun nothing, not to be ſorie for any thing, nor reioyce in any thing, but onely in God & his glory. By our ſoule, is meant al the courſe of our life: our infancie, our yong age, our middle age, & our old age. Wherfore in this it is required, that the whole time of our life, from the beginning of our birth to the houre of our death, ſhoulde bee imployed to the ſeruice of God. Our mind comprehendeth our reaſon and vnderſtanding: ſo that by that branch, we are taught that our vnderſtanding, our reaſon, & all the cogitatiōs of our mind ſhould be occupied in nothing, but in the loue of God. Our power noteth al the ſtrength and ſences of our body, and the abilitie of worldly ſubſtance and outwarde gifts of God. So that there is nothing apperteining to vs, either inwardly, or outwardly, (as I haue ſaid) but God wholly requireth the ſame to his ſeruice: and if wee doe faile therein, we offende his iuſtice, and want of that perfect rule of life that is preſcribed vnto vs: Inſomuch, that if the mercie of God in

Chriſt our Sauiour helpe not, wee deſerue for the ſame euerlaſting damnation. To the declaration of the latter part of this rule, that wee ſhoulde loue our neighbour as our ſelfe, appertaineth the doctrine of Chriſt, Matth. 5. that wee ſhould not ſo much as once be mooued with anger toward our neighbour, that we ſhould not looke vpon a woman to luſt after her, that wee ſhoulde not onely loue our neighbour as our ſelfe, but that we ſhould loue our enemies, bleſſe them that curſe vs, doe good to them that hate vs, pray for them that perſecute vs, &c.
               
               As for our money, lands, goods, and poſſeſſions, we ſhould haue our mindes ſo little giuen to them, and our hearts ſo ſmally ſet vpon them, that we nothing at all ſhould care for them further, then that they may be vnto vs, either inſtruments of vertue, or neceſſary helps of our fraile life. Yea, there is nothing ſo nigh, nothing ſo deere vnto vs by Chriſtes rule, eyther eye, or hande, or foote, or whatſoeuer it bee, but we ſhoulde cut it off, and caſt it from vs, if it be a let or hinderance vnto vs to enter into the kingdom of God. Finally, our bodies being here in this vale of miſerie, our minds, and hearts and conuerſations ſhould be in heauen: they that haue wiues, 
                  1. Cor. 7. 
                  as though they had none: they that weepe, as though they wept not: they that reioyce, as though they reioyced not: they that buy, as though they poſseſſed not: they that vſe this world, as though they vſed it not.
               
               To this rule of chriſtian perfection, appertain all thoſe ſentences and exhortations of Chriſt & of his apoſtles, which before you haue heard alledged, tē
                  ding all to this ende, to pull away the hearts of men from the loue of riches and care of this worlde, that they may ſet the ſame wholly vpon God. This rule

is laid down not only for miniſters of the church, as though they only were the ſeruants of God, but alſo for al other faithful Chriſtians, whom it bindeth as ſtraitly as it doth the miniſters. For it is a marke, vnto which they both ſhould direct their whole indeuours.
               They therfore that wil apply this rule to ſome one ſtate of men, and not to other, fall into like error as Monks & Friers did, dreaming a more ſtraite order by God to be appointed to one, thē to another. The Miniſter ſo much as he lacketh of this perfection, ſo much is he indebted and in danger vnto God: And if he flie not to the mercie of God purchaſed by the merite of Chriſt to waſh away that want & imperfection, vndoubtedly there reſteth nothing, but eternall damnation.
               Now, as I haue ſaide of the Miniſter, ſo muſt I ſay of al chriſtians beſide. Therfore out of this doctrine is no particular applicatiō to be made more to one ſtate then to another, but only this, that miniſters, becauſe of their calling, ſhould ſhew themſelues to come neerer to this marke, then other. Where the error in reſoning is, you may now by this perceiue, which conſiſteth in two points. Firſt, that the branches of the rule of chriſtian perfectiō generally giuē to all, are applied only to miniſters of the Church, as ſpeciall precepts to binde them: And ſecondly, that the perfourming of this rule is more imputed (as the monks & friers did) to the outward refuſing of Gods creatures, then the brideling of the affections & hūble contentation of the mind before God.
               By this corrupt maner of reaſoning in theſe days, are framed ſundry daungerous arguments againſt

the ſtate of the Miniſtery here now with vs in England. As for example, Our Biſhops and Miniſters are euill men: they aunſwere not the perfect rule, that is preſcribed vnto them by the word of God: therefore they ſhould be depoſed, their ſtate altered, and their Lands and Liuings taken into the Princes hands, or be otherwiſe imployed as it ſhal be thought good.
               The daunger of this argument will be eaſily perceiued, if you apply the ſame to other ſtates, as thus: Princes, Magiſtrates and noble men are euil, they doe not fulfill that rule of right and perfect gouernment that the worde of God requireth: therefore pull them downe, ſet other in their places, or alter their ſtate cleane.
               This is a ſeditious and perillous argument, eſpecially when common and inferior ſubiects, not hauing authoritie, ſhall take vpon them to bee iudges in ſuch caſes, as nowe they doe againſt biſhops.
               With this manner of reaſoning (as I haue before noted) the Deuill filleth the heads and hearts of his troubleſome inſtrumentes, when hee intendeth to worke miſchiefe, either in the Church of God, or in the ſtate of any common weale.
               This maner of arguments they alwaies vſe, which for priuate reſpects, pretend generall reformations or alterations in the ſtate of a Church or countrey, wherein they liue. Let the Biſhops and Cleargie of England haue ſuch iudges and triall, as the word of God requireth, & euer hath bin vſed in the Church of Chriſt: yea, or ſuch as other ſtates would thinke reaſonable and indifferent for themſelues in their calling: and then, on Gods name, let them abide the hazard of the ſentence eyther with them or againſt them, and the daunger of ſuch penaltie as in iuſtice and equitie may bee aſſigned. Another

daungerous Argument is this: Biſhops & Preachers by Chriſt are commaunded not to be careful for the world, not to hoord vp treaſures in earth, yea to renounce all they haue and follow Chriſt: therfore they ought not to haue any lands or Lordſhips, or great & wealthie Liuings, but to be contented with meate, drinke & cloth. &c. The hardnes of this reaſon will be the better vnderſtanded, if the like be applied to ſome other perſons.
               Noble men and gentlemen, if they wil bee right and true Chriſtians, by Gods worde are commaunded not to be carefull for the worlde, not to hoord vp riches heere on the earth, yea to renounce all that they haue, and followe Chriſt: therefore they may not haue ſo great and ample liuings more then other, but ſhall content themſelues vvith ſuch a moderate portion, as may tollerably maynteine them, in ſeeing the adminiſtration of iuſtice in their countreys, and the refidue that nowe is ſpent in gaming and vnneceſſarie pompe, and vanitie of the worlde, to be imployed to the maintenance of a great nomber of the Princes ſubiects, and people of God, that are not able in meane eſtate to liue. For in ſuch caſe were the noble men and Gentlemen of the Iſraelites called Principes familiarum, the Princes and chiefe of each tribe and familie among the people of God.
               A many of ſuch factious and ſeditious arguments may in like maner be framed, more meet for rebels, then for good ſubiects or faithful chriſtians, which I doe in this place for good conſiderations omitte. For if they ſhoulde bee ſo countenanced with particular allegations of the Scriptures, and furniſhed with ſuch learning and examples of hiſtories, as factious heads are able to deuiſe: happily they would carrie as much credite, and drawe as a great number of followers and mainteiners, as nowe the like

dealing doeth againſt the Clergie. I will not therfore tarrie any longer in this point. I haue ſet forth vnto you an example or two nakedly and barely, to this ende onely, if it might be poſſible, to open the eyes of ſome, which ſeeme in part to be blinded either with affection againſt biſhops, or with a deſire to worke and bring to paſſe ſome ſpeciall drift and purpoſe that they haue deuiſed: for what cauſe, it may be more eaſily by wiſe men coniectured, then ſafely by me laid downe in writing.
               For the further examining of this matter, & that it may be the better vnderſtanded, whether eccleſiaſtical men may with ſafe cōſciences enioy the ſtate How Miniſters were mainteined from the beginning. of their liuings by lands or no, Let vs briefly conſider the condition of the Church, & how Miniſters haue bin mainteined from the beginning, euen to this day. And here I muſt proteſt, that the Hiſtories and writers, eſpecially ſuch as bee of credite, are ſo imperfect in this point, as the trueth muſt bee gathered by coniecture of certaine braunches, rather then by any diſcourſe in their writing.
               For the ſpace of the firſt three hundred yeeres after Chriſt, it is wel known to all ſuch as haue looked into the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, that it was almoſt in continuall perſecution vnder heathen tyrantes, which with all indeuour ſought meanes to oppreſſe Chriſtian Religion, and the true profeſſours therof. Wherefore in all that time it was not poſſible for the church to haue any ſetled ſtate, by Lands or certaine reuenevv to maintaine the Miniſters thereof: but they were ſuſtained onely by the liberal contribution of godly perſons, collected at certaine times for that and other like Chriſtian vſes.
               
                  
For Saint Cyprian ſignifieth, that to certaine perſons appointed to the office of readers, he diſtributed Lib. 4. epi 5. the meaſure of gifts & diſtributiōs, as were aſſigned to the Prieſts. The Canons attributed to the Apoſtles, Canon 5. make mention of oblations and firſt fruites to be brought home to the houſe of the biſhop, beſide ſuch things as were offered in the Church. Origen ſomwhat more ſtraightly ſeemeth to require the tenthes and firſt fruites of ſuch increaſe as Chriſtians haue by the bleſſing of God: his words be theſe. It is comely and profitable, that the firſt fruites ſhoulde be offered to the Prieſtes of the Goſpel alſo, for ſo the Lorde diſpoſed, 
                  Hom. 11. in Numer. 
                  that he that preacheth the Goſpell, ſhould liue by the Goſpel. And as this is good and comely: ſo contrariwiſe, it is euill and vncomely, that one that worſhippeth God, and cō
                     meth into the Church, knowing that the Prieſts attend on the Altar, and ſerue the worde of God, and miniſtery of the Church, ſhoulde not offer vnto the Prieſtes the firſtlings of thoſe fruites that God giueth by bringing foorth his ſunne and ſeaſonable ſhowres vpon them. For ſuch a ſoule ſeemeth not to to me to haue any remembrance of God, or to thinke, that it is God that giueth thoſe fruites.
               
               It may appeare alſo, that euen in this time the Church had certaine houſes allotted to their Biſhops. For when Paulus Samoſatenus after his depoſition, would not depart out of the houſe that belonged to the Church, it was appoynted by the authoritie of the Emperour Aurelius, that he ſhould bee Euſeb Eccleſiaſt 
                        •
                     iſt. lib. 7. cap. 30. remoued from it, and the houſe aſſigned vnto him, to whom the biſhops of Italie did agree in doctrine. Origen alſo mentioneth certaine rentes and reuenues due to the Church. Many of vs (ſayth hee) haue 
                  Orig. tract. in Matt. 31. 
                  neede of this warning, that wee bee both faithfull, and alſo

wiſe, ad diſpenſandos Eccleſiae redditus, to bestowe the rents of the Church.
               
               And one Petrus de Natalibus writeth, that in the time of Vrbane biſhop of Rome, about 226. yeres after Chriſt, the Church firſt began to poſſeſſe landes tovvard the finding of the Miniſters. Certaine it is, that many godly diſpoſed perſons, notvvithſtāding they vvere letted by the crueltie of tyrantes, euen in that time gaue large and ample giftes vnto the Church, not onely in money and plate, but as it is to be gathered, in reuenue alſo. For Optatus Mileuitanus 
                  Opt. lib. 
                        •
                     . vvriteth, that Menſurius biſhop of Carthage before Cecilianus, vvhen hee vvas ſent for to the Emperor, fearing that he ſhould returne no more againe, left in the cuſtody of certain perſons Ornamenta plurima & aurea & argentea, many ornaments of gold & ſiluer. The reſtoring of which ornaments & iewels afterward, was one great occaſion of the ſchiſme of the Donatists, as the ſame Optatus ſheweth. Wherefore it may appeare, the Church was not in thoſe dayes ſo poore & needie, as ſome men would haue vs thinke it was: though it were then vnder heatheniſh & cruel tyrants, with al extremitie forbidding, that any perſons ſhould giue either goods or lands to the releefe of it. Sabellicus writeth, that in the time Ennead. 7. lib. 8. of Maxentius the Emperour, one Lucina a noble and rich gentlewoman of Rome, appointed the Church of Rome to be heire vnto all her ſubſtance & poſſeſſions. Which, whē that cruell tyrant vnderſtoode, he for the time baniſhed her out of the citie. But when Conſtantine that good & firſt Chriſtian Emperour, vndertooke the defence & maintenance of Chriſtian Lib. 1. de ſacroſancto eccleſ. religiō, he not only liberally beſtowed vpon the

Church himſelfe, but by law made it free, to all that would giue any thing vnto the Church, were it in lands or otherwiſe. Which law Valentinianus, Theodoſius, & other afterward confirmed, nor euer was it Lib. 16. Cod. Theod. abridged but by Iulian the Apoſtata. A copy of one decree of Conſtantine is in Euſebius. Thoſe things that 
                  Lib. 10. c. 5. 
                  belong to the right of other, we will not only not to haue retained, but plainly to be reſtored. Wherfore our wil & pleſure is, that ſo ſoone as thou ſhalt receiue theſe our letters, if there be any goodes belonging to the Catholike Church of Chriſtians, either in cities or other places, takē in poſſeſsion by the citizens, or by any other, that the ſame preſently be reſtored in like right, as before they had it. See therfore that all things, either houſes, or gardens, or whatſoeuer, be with ſpeed reſtored to the Church againe. By this meanes, not only the Emperours themſelues gaue both lands & many other rich gifts, but alſo ſundry other rich & godly perſons. Conſtantine gaue lands in the country Sabell. Ennead. 7. lib 8. about Sabine, and an houſe & a garden at Rome. The ſame Conſtan. out of the tribute of euery city, gaue a Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8. portion to the churches for the maintenāce of their Miniſters, & eſtabliſhed thē to cōtinue as a Law for euer. Euſebius writeth, that beſide many other benefites 
                     
                        •
                     uſeb. eccleſ. hiſt 10. ca. 7 (as contribution of corne, building of Churches, &c.) he granted to all Eccleſiaſtical perſons, free immunitie of all ſeruices and taxes, ſauing only for their lands. For the lands of the Church were Lege tertia. Cod. de epiſc. & clericis. ſubiect to tribute, as other were, by an ordinance made by the ſonnes of the forenamed Conſtantine. This may appeare alſo by Ambroſe, writing of the ſecond Valentinian. If he require tribute, we denie it not: 
                  Lib. epiſt. 5. in orat. cont. Auxentium. 
                  the lands of the Church do pay tribute. The church then had lands, and that a good while before Ambroſe his

time, which was about the yeere of our Lord three hundred ſixtie and eight. Yea, Ambroſe himſelfe liued by his owne lands being Biſhop. Therefore it may appeare hee did not thinke it to be againſt the worde of God, for a Biſhoppe or Miniſter of the Church to liue vpon the reuenewe of landes.
               After the time of Conſtantine, the wealth of the Church increaſed, as well in landes as other ſubſtance & prouiſion, not only by the gifts of Emperors, Kings, and Queenes, but partly alſo (as I haue ſaid) by the deuotion of other godly perſons, who oftentimes left to the vſe of the Church, either a Baſil. epiſt. 140. great part, or their whole ſubſtance and poſſeſſions, partly by the gift of biſhops themſelues, partly by other eccleſiaſtical perſōs, which, becauſe they were not married, nor had iſſue or heires, were by order bound to leaue vnto the church, al their poſſeſſions, both lands & goods. Sometime alſo by the puniſhment of offēdors. For it is read, that one Baſſus a gē
                  tleman falſely accuſed Sixtus biſhop of Rome, & whē 
                  Platina. Sabell. ennead. 8. lib. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Sixtus had cleared himſelfe in a ſynode of Biſhops, Baſsus, for his ſlaunderous accuſation, was baniſhed, & his landes giuen vnto the Church. The ſame Sixtus gaue lands vnto the Church himſelfe alſo. Creſcentius a noble man gaue vnto the Church of Rome all his ſubſtance, and a manour in Sicilie called Argianum. Eudotia the Empreſſe, wife to Theodoſius, adorned Nieeph lib. 14. cap. 5. the Biſhops houſe at Conſtantinople, & gaue vnto it a yeerely reuenue. By the counſell at Berythe it may appeare, the Church of Edeſsa had rentes, manours, woods, & plate ſet with pretious ſtones, &c. This ſtate of wealth ye church grewe vnto, not much more then in the ſpace of one hundred yeeres after

it pleaſed God to giue peace vnto it frō outward & Heatheniſh enemies: and yet in the meane time had it other tempeſtes and bitter ſtormes of aduerſitie, that did more hinder deuotion and godlineſſe, then the bloody perſecutions of the Emperours did: as namely the troubles raiſed by the Ariā
                   heretikes, by the ſpace of many yeres, & eſpecially in Aſia, Greece, and al the Eaſt parts of the world. And ſhortly therupon followed the horrible inuaſion of the Goths, Vandals, Herules, & other barbarous people, which as ſwarmes came out of the North parts, & with maruellous cruelty ouerwhelmed all the weſt Countreyes of Europe, to the great hindrance, daunger, & vnquietneſſe of the Church of God. After theſe ſtormes and tempeſts were ſomewhat ouerblowen, the riches of the Church did very much increaſe, both in lāds & otherwiſe, by ſuch means as before I haue rehearſed. And this generally I obſerue in al hiſtories, & in al times, that the wealth thereof vnder chriſtiā princes was neuer diminiſhed, but rather increaſed: nor euer did they murmure at it, or thought it too much, vntill the Pope chalenged his vſurped dominion, & did ſeek to bring the necks of Princes vnder his girdle, & to alter Empires, Kingdomes, & Principalities at his will and pleaſure, ſaying, that he had Ius vtrius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      gladij, the power of both ſwords.
               Here (I know) ſome will ſay, that by mine owne confeſsion, I am fallen to acknowledge that botch that firſt bredde Antichriſt, and ſet him vp into his throne aboue Kings and Princes, that is to ſay, the immoderate wealth of the Eccleſiaſticall men, which then did corrupt religion, and ſo, ſay they, doth it now with vs. No, no (good Chriſtians) they that ſo ſay, eyther are blinded with ignoraunce, or

looke into things with partiall eies, & ſeeke rather a ſecret furthering of priuat purpoſes, thē the knowledge of the true cauſes of that, wherof they ſpeake. For they that will indifferently conſider the ſtates of times, & with true iudgement weigh the circumſtances of them, may eaſily diſcerne, that it was not the vvealth of the Clergy, but other cauſes of greater vveight and importance, that ſet vp Antichriſt aloft in his throne, and wrought him the dominion of the church, which I pray God may be more carefully looked vnto amōg vs, then yet I perceiue that they haue bene: eſpecially if we meane ſo earneſtly to keepe away from vs the returne of his corruption, as many now would ſeeme to do.
               The firſt cauſe that aduaunced Antichriſt, was The true cauſes that ſet vp Antichriſt. 
                  Schiſme and here ſie in the Church, for the ſpace of 200. yeres and more, together with the barbarous irruptions which before I ſpake of. The ſecōd cauſe was, the generall decay of learning, & eſpecially of the knowledge of the Scriptures, and of the tongues. Thirdly, the vſurpation of Eccleſiaſticall Diſcipline, practiſed againſt Emperours and Princes, by which hee conquered more then by all other meanes. The helping cauſes to theſe principall, were theſe two: firſt, the negligence, the vnskilfulneſſe, the vnworthineſſe of many emperors and gouernours, giuen ouer rather to wantonneſſe and voluptuous pleaſures, then to the care of their charge: and ſecondly, the ſuperſtitious deuotion of the people, maintained by corrupt doctrine. But the graund cauſe of al cauſes was, the iuſt iudgement of God, for the generall vnthankfulneſſe of the worlde, in receiuing the knowledge of his goſpell, which he ſent among them.
               
                  
And this cauſe was vniuerſall in all eſtates and kindes of perſons, as well eccleſiaſticall as other. The biſhoppes and Miniſters were giuen ouer to maintaine factions and hereticall doctrines: Princes looked more to their ſenſuall pleaſure, then to the godly gouernment of their ſubiects: the people were bent wholly to ſuperſtition and wickednes of life, ſo that (a ſmal number only excepted) none did ſtudy howe in life and godly conuerſation, to frame thēſelues to the good & wholeſome doctrine of the Goſpel, which at the hand of many godly men, they at the beginning had receiued. Sūdry of theſe or the like cauſes haue we now alſo growing & encreaſing among vs: and therfore haue we great cauſe to feare the like iuſt iudgement of God, that eyther ſhal caſt vs againe vnder the tyrannie of Antichriſt, or bring vpon vs ſome plague no leſſe grieuous then that is.
               Our miniſters and Preachers breake out to Schiſmaticall factions and curious doctrines. The people, in ſteed of ſuperſtitious deuotion, haue conceiued an heatheniſh contempt of Religion, and a diſdainfull loathing of the miniſters thereof. Vice and wickedneſſe ouerwhelmeth all ſtates and conditiōs of men. None almoſt, vnleſſe it bee ſome that God reſerueth to his ſecrete knowledge, ſtudie to ſhew themſelues thankfull to God, and in life to expreſſe that, which in doctrine they will ſeeme to approue. I pray God, that by abuſing this long ſuffering of the Lorde, we heape not vp wrath for our ſelues againſt the day of wrath. God hath dealt as mercifully with this land, as euer hee did with any. I beſeech him, that in time we may repent with Niniue, and turne to him in ſackcloth and aſhes, while hee

may bee founde, and while hee ſtretcheth vnto vs the hande of his gracious goodneſſe, leaſt when it is too late, and hee hath turned his face from vs, we crie vnto him with vaine gronings, and mourne with vnprofitable ſighings. Hee ſent the light of his trueth into this Realme, firſt in the time of King Henry the eight, and brake the power of Antichriſt among vs: but becauſe hee ſawe neyther thankefull receyuing of the Goſpell, nor any thing ſtudied for by men generally, but the benefite of Abbey lands, and poſſeſſions, to enrich them-ſelues: hee by and by cut off the comfortable ſweetneſſe of his worde, with the bitter ſauour of the ſixe articles, and ſharp perſecution of them that profeſſed true religion.
               His iuſtice in deede coulde no longer abide the full ripeneſſe of the ſuperſtition, idolatrie, and wicked life of the Monkes and Friers, and ſuch other ſwarms of Antichriſtian impietie: but our vnthankfulnes deſerued not to haue the ſame turned to our benefite, nor the freedome of his Goſpel to be continued among vs to our further comfort.
               In the time of that gracious Prince king Edward the ſixt, hee gaue vs a larger taſte of his word and a greater freedome of all points of ſound & true chriſtian doctrine, to our vneſtimable benefite, if wee could haue receiued it accordingly. But euen then alſo, hee perceiued, that wee ſought not ſo much the increaſe of his glory, or to frame our liues according to our profeſſion, as wee did ſtudie vnder countenance of religion, by al meanes we could, to worke againe our owne worldly benefit & commoditie. And therefore did hee the ſecond time take from this realme his fatherly bleſſing, & caſt vpon

vs that heauie ſcourge of perſecution, which immediatly followed, keeping vs vnder the rodde of his correction by the ſpace of certaine yeeres.
               Neuertheleſſe, as a mercifull Father, declaring that by his chaſtening he ſought not our confuſion but our amendment, euen for the glory of his names ſake onely, beyond all hope & expectation, he ſhewed vs againe the light of his countenance, and that more fauourably & bountifully then euer he did before, raiſing for vs as it were out of the duſt of death, a noble Queene, a gratious Prince, as a nurſe or protectreſſe of his church: Vnder the ſhadow of whoſe wings, although but a virgine, he keepeth vs in great ſafetie & quietneſſe, againſt al the ancient enemies, both of his church, & of our natural countrey. Notwithſtanding al this, our old vnthankfulnes and forgetfulneſſe of our duetie ſtil continueth, & we ſhew our ſelues the ſame men that euer we did before.
               And therfore beſide the earneſt preaching of his word, calling vs continually to repētance, vvho ſeeeth not, diuers times he hath ſhaken the rod of his diſpleaſure ouer vs? as in the Northren rebellion, & in many ſignes & tokens from heauen, thereby, if it were poſſible, to waken vs out of our ſinful ſecurity, wherein we ſleep ſo confidently? Yea, and the more to keep vs in feare, he hath made vs to nouriſh in our boſomes the apparant inſtrument of his wrath, by whō we could not chooſe but ſee, that in a moment he might haue taken frō vs both the comfort of his Goſpel, & the freedom and happineſſe of our ſtate. Here muſt I put you in mind again of his exceeding mercies ſhewed toward vs euē in theſe few months, deliuering vs frō the bloody cruelty of our enemies.
               
                  
But to what effect, I pray you, commeth all this carefull working of our mercifull God, by fayre meanes and foule meanes thus labouring to drawe vs vnto him? Doth it quicken in vs the care of our ſaluation? doth it increaſe the feare of his diſpleaſure? doth it ſtir vp any more zeale and 
                     •
                  oue of his Goſpell? hath it any thing diminiſhed our uncharitable ſtrife & contentiō? doth it any thing ab
                     ••
                  e the obſtinacie of the aduerſary? hath it any way diminiſhed the looſenes of our liuing? hath it taken from vs our pride in apparell? our daintines in feeding our waſtfull and pompous building? hath it made leſſe any euill among vs, and not rather increaſed euery thing, to an higher degree then euer it was before? Shall we thinke then, that this our vnſenſible dulneſſe and vnthankfulneſſe, can bee without imminent puniſhment? Surely, me thinketh the ſong of Eſay the Prophet painteth out our ſtate and condition with the euent that will follow of it. The Lord 
                  Eſay. 5. 
                  hath choſen this lande, as his beloued vineyard, hee hath mounded it with his gratious fauour and diuine protection, hee hath ſtoned it by caſting out the rubble of the Synagogue of Antichriſt, the broken ſtones I meane, of idolatrie, ſuperſtition, falſe doctrine, and corrupt worſhip of God: hee hath planted among vs the ſweete grape of his moſt wholeſome Goſpel, and the true vine Chriſt Ieſu: he hath ſet vp a watch Tower of Chriſtian gournement, and a wine preſſe of earneſt preaching of repentance, to preſſe and wring mens hearts, if it were poſſible, to yeelde foorth the ſweete iuice of the fruits of the goſpel to the glorie of God. And he long hath looked, (for theſe his great benefites) that wee ſhould haue

brought foorth ſweete grapes, and we haue yeelded nothing but ſowre and ſtinking fruite, diſcord and diſſenſion among our ſelues, couetouſneſſe, oppreſſion, extortion, drunkenneſſe, banquetting, voluptuous pleaſure, whoredome, adulterie, ſecuritie in ſinne, contempt of God, diſdaine of his Miniſter, deſpiſing of his worde, ſelfe-liking in our owne 
                     •
                  oings, confidence and truſt in our owne wiſedome and policie &c. I pray God therefore in time wee may take heede of that heauie iudgement that followeth, I meane, that hee will take away the 
                        •
                     edge, and breake downe the wall of his mightie protection, whereby onely wee haue hitherto remayned ſafe, and that hee vvill lay vs waſte that the beaſtes of the fielde may ouertrample vs: that hee vvill take from vs the teaching and preaching of his Goſpell, vvherevvith in vayne hee hath ſo long digged and delued in our barraine heartes: that hee vvill forbidde the cloudes of his heauenly prouidence to rayne dovvne vpon vs his great and manifolde bleſſings, vvhich beforetime hee hath giuen vs, ſo that wee ſhalbe left as a deſolate ground, breeding nothing but buſhes and brambles of ignorance, errour, idolatrie, ſuperſtition, hereſie and vvicked life, and bee made ſubiectes and ſlaues vnto our greateſt enemies. The Lorde turne away that, which our vnthankfull hearts may iuſtly feare to be at hand. &c.
               By this that I haue written, as I doubt not but the godly may perceiue it was not riches and vvealth of the Cleargie that firſt ſet vp Antichriſt in the vſurped throne of his dominion ouer the Church, but that there vvere other more true and right cauſes

that bredde that miſchiefe: ſo likewiſe that conſcience, that feareth God, and vvithout affection looketh into the ſtate of this time among vs, and rightly weigheth and conſidereth thinges, may eaſily iudge, that it is not the Lands and great liuings of biſhops & Eccleſiaſticall perſons, but other matters, more heynous & more grieuous, that wil haſtē the wrath & diſpleaſure of God againſt this realme, which indeed, it behoueth biſhops principally, and all other in their ſtates and conditions to haue care of, and in time, while wee may, by all godly meanes to preuent it.
               The affection of them, which at this day ſpeak ſo much againſt the Landes and liuinges of Biſhops, and other Cleargy men, is much like the dealing of thoſe perſons, that murmured againſt Marie of Bethania, which in the houſe of Simon the leper, in teſtimonie of her thankfulneſſe, for the great mercies that ſhee had receiued of Chriſt, powred vpon his head the precious oyntment of Spikenarde. For euen in like manner our gracious Queene, vvhen God had deliuered her out of the iawes of the greedie Lyons, and cruell wolues that ſought her blood, and by his mighty hande had ſet her in the throne of this her Fathers kingdome: to teſtifie her thankefull minde, and to ſhewe her liberall and bountifull heart towarde the Church of GOD, ſhee powred vpon it this plentifull gift, towarde the maintenance of the Miniſters and Preachers of his woorde, that ſhee might declare to the worlde, that in imbracing the Goſpel, and reſtoring the ſame to this Realme, ſhee had not that minde and affection, which ſome other haue

ſhewed, that is, vnder colour thereof, to make the increaſe of her owne benefite, and the commoditie of her Crowne. But as then Iudas and ſome other Diſciples murmured at Marie, and vnder pretence of holineſſe and charitie towarde the poore, found great fault with that ſuperfluous exceſſe (as they thought it) euen ſo nowe, many Diſciples among vs, with like colour of religion and holineſſe, and of zeale towarde the perfection of the Church (forſooth) murmure at the liberal benefit of our prince, which ſhe hath beſtowed vpon the Church, & think the ſame a great ſuperfluitie, that might bee better imployed ſundry wayes, to the benefite of the common weale. Whatſoeuer is pretended, I pray God the cauſe of the griefe bee not the ſame that Iohn 
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 12. mentioneth to haue beene that, which firſt began the murmuring at that time. But whatſoeuer is the cauſe of this reproouing of the liberalitie of our gracious prince and ſoueraigne: if the time did now ſerue, I coulde with better reaſon and authoritie prooue the Contrary Propoſition to that which they take vpon them to maintaine: that is, That it is not lawfull to beſtow ſuch liuings vpon Lay men, as are appointed by godly lawes for Ministers and Preachers of the worde of God. But the ſhortneſſe of the time wil not now ſerue to follow that courſe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie. 1589.
            
         
      
   