
      
         
            
            
            THE CHRISTIANS Daily Sacrifice: CONTAINING A daily direction for a setled course of Sanctification.
            
            The third edition corrected and enlarged with a thousand spirituall rules tending to Perfection.
            
            
               Diuided into thre
                     •
                   Bookes by TH. COOPER.
            
               LONDON, Imprinted by N. O. for WALTER BVRRE, and are to bee sold in Paules Church yard at the signe of the Crane. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVELY NOBLE LAdies my very bountifull Patronesses: the Lady LVCIE, Countesse of Bedford, & the Lady HARINGTON, Barones of Exon, grace and peace from God the Father through our Lord Iesus Christ, bee multipleed.
            
               
                  RIght worthie Ladies: As there is nothing that better becommeth the righteous, then to bee thankefull vnto the Lord for his great mercies bestowed vpon vs. So I am perswaded, in nothing more hath our gratious God aduanced his wonderfull goodnesse vnto our sinfull nation: Then in that great deliuerance of our Prince and people, from that hellish

plot of the Gunpowder Treason. For as the Redemption of mankind by the pretious blood of Iesus Christ, hath therefore the priuiledge to be of all other benefits the most excellent, farre exceeding our Creation or any other blessing of God, because thereby mankind was restored to a more excellent estate then it lost in Adam: so how soeuer the Lord in mercie vouchsafed vnto this Nation, as it were a new creation: by the Ministerie of good Queene Elizabeth of happy memory who restoring vnto vs the glorious Gospel of Iesus Christ, we were thereby euen pluckt out of the fiery fornace of Antichrist, and new borne again to the hope of eternall glory: yet because we haue not receiued the loue of the truth, and did not gloryfie our blessed God, in our obedience therunto: therfore did we iustly forfa
                  •••
               te our right in that great blessing, and so deserued vtterly to bee depriued thereof. And was not this our general fere, in those dayes when the Light of our eys grew dimme, and the sunne of our happines was set in these parts, that together

therewith the light of the Gospel also should haue bene taken from vs: surely if the Lord had not them beene on our side, when the arme of the flesh failed vs. If hee had not reserued an 
                  •••
               
               
                  •••
               ly seed to stand in the gappe, wee must needs haue bene as Sodome and Gomorrha.
            But blessed be the name of our God for euer, that in his eternall mercie had reserued a Ioseph for vs, euen a royall Branch of that holy seede to renue and maintaine our glorious light: And haue wee walked worthie of so great saluation, surely if there were nothing else to condemn our vnthankefulnesse for so great a blessing: Euen that accursed Powder Plot in steed of all other arguments is sufficient hereunto. For as the vnthankefulnesse of the Papists was here no
                  •••
               o
                  •••
               iously discouered, that hereby intended the subuersion of the state, which had so gratiously vouchsafed l
                  •••
               fe and peace vnto thē. So did this also conuince the vnprofitablenesse of the Protestant, who, for the abuse of his Talent, was hereby summoned to his account, and

in his owne desert must needes haue beene ouertaken with this iudgment: And therefore was it not the free mercie of the Lord that wee were not vtterly consumed.
            Were wee not plucked euen as a brand out of the fire? were wee not wonderfully redeemed euen by the mightie power of God, from that horrible pit? Did not the Lord thereby raise vp a mightie saluation for vs, euen by his owne immediate arme that he alone may haue the glory? And shal we not thē take vp the cup of saluation, & giue thanks vnto the name of the Lord. Surely as there remaines no more sacrifice for sin, for such that do treade vnder foote the blood of the Son of God. So I am perswaded that if we shall despise so great saluation, and forget this wonderfull worke which our God hath done for vs, we shall in vaine hope of the like deliuerance. The Lord will do no more such great workes among vs because of our vnthankefull and vnbeleeuing hearts And therefore seeing the gratious Lord as he sanctified that deliuerance

vnto me his vnworthie seruant by a speciall deliuerance from the malice of vnreasonable men, which in the verie instant of our reioycing had layde a snare to entrappe my soule: so hee hath hitherto giuen me my life for a pray from many other extremities.
            Can I do better then I haue begun so still to imploy it in the meditation of Gods great mercies? Ought I not do my vttermost to awaken this secure age, and prouoke the Saints to an holy entertainement of so great saluation? Can I do lesse then take occasion hereby to testifie my thankefulnesse vnto those that haue bin instruments for the maintenance of my life and studies? Surely, deare Christiā Ladies, as I must acknowledge my selfe hereby bound for euer vnto your Honours so accept I beseech you this vnfained pledge thereof, and bee prouoked herby to a wise redeeming of the time, that so you may be prepared to a blessed eternitie. Take these holy rules herein contained, as a true guide to leade you safely in all occasions thereunto: and make account of

my best deuotions and endeuour here after to further to the same. And so I commend your Ladiships to the grace of God in Iesus Christ. Resting in him.
            
               To your Honours euer deuoted, TH. COOPER.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface to the Christian Reader describing the occasion and seuerall vses of this Treatise.
            
            
               THE many 
                  Greenham Perkins. Rogers. Downam, and Arthur Dent, &c.
                excellent treatises and larger discourses concerning the power of godlinesse, which it hath pleased the Lord of glory to furnish his Church withal in these later daies, as they haue made good the faithfulnes of our God vno vs of our Church of England, & therein auouched against all schismaticall spirits, that yet there is an holy seed among vs: so if they shall not bee a witnesse against vs, doe they necessarily require

in the right vse thereof, that we be transformed into the same image from glory to glory. And therfore howsoeuer it may seeme both needlesse, and preiudiciall, after so many graue, and experimentall rules concerning sanctification, to adde any more in this kinde: yet seeing it hath pleased God to direct mee to a further labour herein: weigh with me I pray thee in equitie these reasons hereof:
            First, I doe hereby professe my thankefulnesse vnto God for those excellent labors of his Saints, that now rest from their labours and their fruits follow them.
            Secondly, I would haue thee know that I am not ashamed of this foolishnesse of preaching, and practicke Diuinitie, which is such a mystery to the world, and stumbling blocke vnto the wisedome thereof.
            Thirdly, howsoeuer I do professe that I am not able to attaine such perfection, as I haue here in conceiued,

yet I would haue thee know further, that I would rather haue a rule to condemne sinne in the flesh, and so to confound the old man, that thereby the new man may follow hard after the marke: then not to giue testimonie to that light, which hath shined so gratiously vnto me, then to conceale my iudgement, though it may condemne my practise.
            Fourthly, May it please thee to consider with me: Can a man walk in the Sunne, and not bee warme, and where two lie together, will there not be heate? and can the light be hidden, nay, ought it to be hidden? Ought we not, being conuerted, conuert our brethren: doth not the light shine vnto vs, and can we hold our peace? Is not the night coming fast on vs when none can worke?
            5 Can wee doe lesse in these dayes, then conuince a prophane world?
            6 Can we do better, then strengthen that which is ready to die?
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
purging and triall. And is it not more then high time that wee should gather our selues before the decree come forth? Is it not certain that our master wil not lōg deferre his comming and shall not that seruant be blessed, whom his master comming shall finde so doing, euen freeing himselfe and departing from euill. Shal not the wise man see the plague and hide himselfe, & the foole run on & be punished? Shall not the wise virgins prepare oyle in their lampes to meete the Bridegrome, whiles stripes are preparing for the back of the scorner? Behold then the oyle that thou must bee furnished withall. Shall not this be thy store house dayly to furnish thee with meanes whereby thou must walke fruitfully with thy God, in ech dutie of thy calling, whereby thou maist entertaine each seuerall occasion chearefully, that so while thou hast the light, thou maist walke in it, that so thou maist bee found in peace at thy masters

comming. Doe the times require in regard of the continuance of plentifull meanes, that by this time thou shouldest haue bin a teacher of others, and yet art thou to learne the grounds of thy faith? Behold here then the grounds of Sanctification propounded and opened vnto thee: that thou maist be soundly entred into the schoole of Christ Iesus, that thou maist trie thy selfe whether thou hast laide a good foundation or no? hast thou built hay and stubble vpon the foundation? hast thou gone a stray from that perfect rule, and therefore hadst need to returne backe againe?
            Behold, The doctrine of repentance to sustaine thy iudgement aright: here maist thou trie thy selfe, whether thou hast repented or no, hereby maist thou approue thine interest in Iesus Christ. And to this purpose is the doctrine of repentance proposed before the doctrine of faith. Not that it is or can be in nature before it: for how can

the fruite be before the tree? can we loue God vnlesse hee loue vs first? can wee forsake our sinnes, vnles the loue of Christ constrain vs? must we not beleeue sinne pardonable before we can forsake it: Is not our sufficiencie of God through Iesus Christ to subdue iniquitie? Is not Iesus Christ aswel-the authour and finisher of our faith? And is it not sinne before God, though it seeme neuer so glorious among men, whatsoeuer is not of faith? And without faith is it possible to please God? Must we not first be in Christ before we can be new creatures? and do we not liue by faith in the Sonne of God? And doth not the death of Christ daily kill sinne in vs? doe wee not dayly rise vp in him to newnesse of life? And do wee not approue our selues hereby liuing members of his body? Is it any more wee but Christ that now liueth in vs? Is not this to liue by faith in the Sonne of God? Loe here our repentance being a fruit

of our faith in Iesus Christ, is also an euidence vnto our soules, that we are in the faith: and so our faith which in nature is before repentance hath, yet repentāce in order accōpanying the same, and by this liuely fruit is discerned of vs: and thus hast thou in the next place a gratious direction how to discerne and reuiue thy most pretious faith that so thou maist bee sure that thou hast not laboured in vaine.
            Now seeing the work of Sanctification is begun in weaknes, rather in the purpose of the heart, then any constancie of outward practise, and hypocrisie wil be sure to mingle it selfe with our best endeauours if it be possible to blast the the verie blade.
            Therefore art thou informed in the next place how to prepare thy heart in the seruice of God, how to comfort thy selfe in the testimony thereof, notwithstanding thy dayly failings in the practise of weldoing.
            And seeing the heart of man is deceitful aboue al things, & the cause

of all thy failings ariseth from the not guiding of thy heart. Therfore art thou taught how to arme thy heart with that complete armor of a Christian souldier. And so thou art instructed in the vse of each seuerall peece therof, that so thou maist be ready at all assayes.
            To this end in the next place are propounded vnto thee, those two maner occasions and imployments of thy whole life: namely, to prosecute good, and forsake euill: and so thou art instructed how to performe the one, and leaue the other, how to discerne sinceritie in either.
            And because the true Christian life is a continuall growth: therefore art thou further informed how to discerne this growth in grace, thou art furnished with meanes, wherby thou maist grow, and thou art comforted in the weakenesse and hinderances of thy growth.
            And seeing thankefulnesse is a special badge of our loue vnto Christ & a principal means to renue our

right in him, that so from him we may renue strength and supply of grace to grow forward perfection: therefore art thou taught also how to bee thankefull, thou art informed in the truth and right vse of this dutie.
            And as by these meanes thou art hastning to perfection: so art thou further prouoked to constancie & perseuerance. And gratiously informed how thou maist continue to the end, not onely confirmed in thy greatest fayling that thou shalt recouer, but instructed also gratiously how thou maist hold out. Namely,
            By holy watchfulnesse, and iealousie ouer thy heart and wayes, that so thou maist preuent securitie and presumption, and gratiously goe on and perseuere in weldoing.
            And that thou maist not bee ouercome with the cares of the world, not be to seeke at any time of the present assistance of thy God: therefore thou art enformed

aboue all things to make thy requests manifest vnto God, and directed so to aske that thou maist receiue.
            And so thou art informed how to maintaine thy peace with God, and to repose thy selfe sweetly in the bosome thereof.
            And m
                  •••
               ist thou not also learne hereby how to beginne the day with God.
            Art thou not instructed how to sanctifie thy family by holy exercises, how to sanctifie the occasiōs by holy and feruent prayer.
            Art thou not directed how to walke in thy calling? art thou not comforted in the issue there of.
            Art thou not further informed in the right vse of thy diet, that so thou maist eat to liue, and 
                  •••
               e to the glory of thy maister.
            Art thou instructed how to cloth thy selfe outwardly, that thy inward man may stil be decked with grace and holinesse: that thou maist be better fitted to that cloathing vpon?
            
               And seeing thou art naturall sociable, and must of necessitie conuerse with others, therefore art thou also taught how to choose and vse company, that so thou maist not returne vnto them, but cause them to returne vnto thee. And seeing thou must haue occasion sometimes to be alone, therfore hast thou directions how to be solitarie, that so thou maist neuer be excluded the protection of thy God.
            In a word, what estate canst thou be in, wherein thou shalt hence learne true contentment how to behaue thy selfe in euery change how to raise profite to thy selfe from euery alteration.
            Art thou in prosperitie, and so hast need of humbling to preuent pride of wisedome, to manage thy estate, wise by that thou maist lay vp a good foundation thereby against the day of Christ. Make vse then in the name of God of what to this end is here stored vp for thee, and the Lord giue thee

vnderstanding all things.
            Art thou in Affliction and hast neede of comfort to vphold thee, of patience to leade thee through the extremitie thereof, obserue then what is here commended to thee for this vse, and thou shalt blesse God that hee hath accounted thee worthy to suffer with Iesus Christ
            Hast thou still neede of the assistance of thy God? hast thou an account to make for others, as well as for thy selfe? And is thy life vncertaine? thou knowest not when thou shalt be called, and therfore it stands vpon thee to bee readie vpon euery call. Take here then thy direction how to order thy family by that perfect rule that so thou maist giue vp a chearefull account for them. And learne here how to make vp thine owne reckoning wisely, that so when thy maister commeth thou maist be found ready. And canst thou then desire more then to enter into to thy maisters ioy. And shall not

thou be euer furnished for the accomplishment of thy best desires. O then praise God for his mercie that hath renued & incresed vnto thee this light, and increase thy prayers vnto God for the continuance of our common light, that in this light thou maist still see light, and be prepared and hereby translated from this light of grace vnto that light of glory, to raigne with Iesus Christ in eternall happinesse, to whose blessed protection I doe most heartily commend thee, And so do rest
            
               
                  Thine in our common Sauior. TH. COOPER.
            
         
         
            
            The first part of the Dayly Sacrifice is digested into three books. Wherof the first containeth the grounds of sanctification: As describing,
First, The obiect of our obedience namely God. 
            
               WHere first is proued, That there is a God. Chap. 1.
               
               
                  2 How this God is to bee knowne. Chap. 2.
               
               
                  3 Of the seuerall attributes of God. Chap. 3.
               
               
                  4 Of the vnitie of the Godhead. C. 4.
               
               
                  5 Of the knowledge of God in Trinitie. Chap. 5.
               
               
                  6 That this God is to be worshipped. Chap. 6.
               
               
                  7 Of the subiect of diuine worshippe

namely man. Chap. 7·
               
               
                  8 Of mans Creation. Chap. 8.
               
               
                  9 Of mans fall. Chap. 9.
               
               
                  10 Of the redemption of man. C. 10.
               
               
                  11 Of the application of this redemption. chap. 11.
               
               
                  12 Of the guide and special outward helpe for this application, namely the word. chap. 12.
               
               
                  13 Of the power of the word expressed, in a dayly direction and practise to serue God. chap. 13.
               
               
                  14 Of this particular direction, what it is, that it ought to bee knowne, not impossible to be kept, nay most necessary and conuenient, and very profitable, and exceeding pleasant. chap. 14.
               
            
            The second Booke expresseth the practise of sanctification in such dayly duties as belong to a Christian.
            
               Where first of the parts of this Dayly Sacrifice.Chap. 1.
                  
                     Whereof the first is, to bee humbled before the Lord in the sence of sinne. Here
    
                           
                           
                              1 Of the necessity of repentance.
                           
                              2 The conscionable practise thereof.
                           
                              3 Helpes hereunto.
                           
                              4 Markes of repentance.
                           
                              5 And benefits thereof.
                           
                              6 Together with rules to resolue the conscience herein.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  cha. 2. A second dayly dutie is to renue our faith in Iesus Christ.
  
                     
                        1 Where some doubts are answered.
                     
                        2 It is shewed how faith is renued in vs.
                     
                        3 The degrees of this worke are explaned.
                     
                        4 The markes of particular assurance. The Degrees thereof. And here
    
                           
                              1 Of weakenesse of faith.
       
                                 How knowne.
                                 How caused.
                              
                           
                           Secondly, of strength of faith, how discerned and obtained.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  chap. 3. A third duety dayly to be performed, is the preparation of the hart to the seruice of God. 
  
                     The necessity hereof, because the heart is a sleepe. And therfore.
                     The heart is first to be awakened, and  how. Namely by
    
                           
                              1 Resigning it into the hands of God.
                           
                              2 By renuing of our vowes.
                        
                     
                     Thirdly, the heart weakened must be examined and how.
    
                           By a true rule.
                           In an holy mannner.
                           To a right end
                        
                     
                     
                        Fourthly, The heart examined must be established in the true worship of God. And that
    
                           
                              1 By an holy feare of it selfe, of which how it is discerned and maintaind. 
                           
                              2 By entertaining the motions of the spirit, how this is done.
                           
                              3 How we may discerne the spirit to be a sleepe with the remedie.
                           
                              4 How to discerne the beloued sinne, and how to maister it.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  chap. 4. A fourth dayly part, of the Christian Sacrifice, is the arming of the heart Where, of this spirituall armour, the parts hereof. And
  
                     
                        1 Of the girdle of truth and it parts: Which are,
      
                           
                              1 A rectified iudgement.
        
                                 How discerned.
                                 How put on.
                                 
                                    It benefit.
                              
                           
                           
                              2 The sanctified conscience.
        
                                 How discerned.
                                 How obtained.
                                 The benefit thereof.
                              
                           
                           
                              3 The sincerity of the will.
        
                                 How knowne.
                                 How obtained.
                                 It measure.
                                 The benefit thereof.
                              
                           
                           
                              4 The well ordering of the affections.
        
                                 How discerned.
                                 How furthered. And
                                 The benefit of the same.
                              
                           
                           
                              5 The sinceritie of the tongue, wherein it consists, of speech. And
        
                                 
                                    1 Preparation to it.
                                 
                                    2 Matter of speech: here of persons.
          
                                       
                                          1 How to speake of God.
                                       
                                          2 How of our neighbour. What to be auoided and obserued.
                                       
                                          3 How to speake of our selues In Praise and Dispraise.
                                    
                                 
                                 Of things spoken here of the manner speech. And that
        
                                       
                                          1 It must be gratious.
                                       
                                          2 True. Here of the Euidences and Bonds of Truth. As
          
                                             
                                             
                                                1 A Promise.
                                             
                                                2 Oath, here of the
              
                                                   Lawfulnesse.
                                                   Matter.
                                                   Manner.
                                                   Lawfull swearer.
                                                   End of an oath.
                                                   Before whom.
                                                   Where.
                                                   How an oath binds.
                                                   The abuses of an oath.
                                                   Of lying.
                                                   Flattery.
                                                   Concealing of truth.
                                                
                                             
                                             
                                                3 Imprecations, a third bond of truth How to be vsed.
                                          
                                       
                                       A third grace of speech. Reuerence, and that in regard
          
                                             
                                                1 Of God.
                                             
                                                2 Man. Here
              
                                                   To giue 
                
                                                         holy names to Children.
                                                         Reuerence to superiours.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   What to be auoyded.
                
                                                         Blasphemy.
                                                         Abuse of Scripture, and of our selues.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       A fourth grace of speech. Sobrietie. This seene
              
                                             
                                                1 In saluation, where
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                     
                        The vse of this knowledge.
                     How farre sinne hath taken hold on vs.
                     The benefit of this knowledge.
                     Gods prouidence in ordering sinne.
                     And the vse.
                     Sinne how to be auoyded, and
                     Preuented generally.
                     How particularly to be resisted.
                     How to recouer out of sinne.
       
                           
                              1 By viewing sinne in the Law.
                           
                              2 In the Gospell.
                           
                              3 By iudging sinne. 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 6. Of growth in grace a sixt dutie daily to be practised.
    
                     What it is.
                     How furthered.
                     How tried.
                     How discerned.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 7. A seauenth dutie dayly to be performed, is thankefulnesse. Here
    
                     
                        1 Of the vse.
                     How to be practised.
                     What to be auoyded.
                     Helpes hereunto.
                     The benefit therof. 
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 8. Eightly, wee are dayly bound to constancy and perseuerance.  
    
                     
                        The necessitie hereof.
                     Helpes hereunto.
                     Remoueall of hinderances. As
                     The fall of the elect.
                     How farre.
                     Difference herein betweene them and the wicked herein.
                     The vse hereof.
                  
               
               
                  chap. 9. A ninth duty of this dayly sacrifice is watchfulnesse.
    
                     The vse hereof.
                     How performed.
                     The helpes thereto.
                  
               
               
                  chap. 10. A tenth duty constancy to bee performed euery day, is Prayer, both Publicke and priuate.
    
                     Hereof 1. in generall.
                     It conditions.
                     The benefit of the same.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 11. The last dutie dayly to be practised, is, to maintaine peace with God, to rise vppe and lie downe with it. Here of lying downe with this peace.
    
                     It necessitie.
                     How obtained.
                     How performed.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 12. 
                   And so by way of Conclusion.
    
                     Is propounded how we may profit by this direction.
                     Helpes heereunto.
                     Triall hereof: and
                     The benefit of the same.
                  
               
               
                  Chap. 13.
               
            
            The third Booke containeth a direction how to entertaine each seuerall occasion of the Day, where
            
               
                  1 Of preparation to each seuerall occasion. Chap. 1.
               
               
                  2 Of arising with God, and beginning the day with him.
  
                     The necessity hereof.
                     How performed.
                     How furthered. 
                  
                  Chap. 2.
               
               
                  3 Of Family and Priuate Prayer.
  
                     It necessitie.
                     How performed, and by whom.
                     What to be auoyded herein.
                     Direction for the same.
                     The benefit thereof. 
                  
                  Chap. 3.
               
               
                  4 Of Callings and following thereof. heere.
  
                     
                        1 That it is Gods ordinance, And
                     To be expected by ordinary meanes.
                     The right vse especially to be aymed at: And
                     
                        How to vse them aright.
                     How to leaue them.
                     How to intermit them.
                     The benefite thereof.
                     The triall of the right vse.
                  
                  Chap. 4.
               
               Of the right vse of the creatures for food.
  
                     The benefite and
                     Triall thereof. 
                  
                  Chap. 5.
               
               Of Apparell. How to iudge aright thereof: 
  
                     How to vse the same.
                     The benefite thereof.
                     Helpes hereunto. 
                  
                  Chap. 6.
               
               Of Company and it vse, & necessity.
  
                     
                        1 Here first of the profite hereof.
                     
                        2 How to discerne of good and bad company. What company to bee chosen: How to be refused.
                     How to carry our selues in good company, how to sort with euill ones.
                     The benefite of them.
                     Differences of good societies.
    
                           
                              1 Of Saboth societies, and Rules for it, and benefite of priuate exercises.
                           
                              2 Of Publick Thankesgiuings and Rules for them.
                           
                              3 Of Publicke Fast.
      
                                 
                                 The authoritie of them.
                                 The occasions.
                                 Manner of performance.
                                 Time. Ends.
                              
                           
                           
                              4 Of priuate spirituall societies. In Generall.
      
                                 In particular, betweene minister and people.
                                 Inferiour and superiour.
                                 Betweene Equals.
                                 Rules generally for all.
                                 Triall of the right vse▪
                                 
                                 The benefit thereof.
                              
                           
                           
                              5 Of accessorie meetings for religion, as Councels, Synods and their appurtenances, as S
                                 •••
                              hooles and Religious Feasts, Contributions for the poore.
                           
                              6 Of ciuill societie.
      
                                         
                                    
                                       
                                          1 In state Assemblies.
                                       
                                          2 Corporations and brotherhoods.
                                       
                                          3 Contracts and Bargaines.
                                       
                                          4 Suites and controuersies.
                                       
                                          5 Recreations,
                                       
                                          6 Feastings, and with
                                    
                                 
                                 Rules for all in generall.
                                 And triall of the right vse.
                                 Of occasionall meetings.
                                 
                                    How to sort with wicked men.
                                 The vse of euill company.
                                 Rules hereunto.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Chap. 7.
               
               Of solitarinesse.
  
                     Rules hereunto, and
                     Cautions.
                     Triall of the right vse.
                  
                  Chap. 8.
               
               Of prosperitie and it vse.
  
                     Danger thereof in the best.
                     How to vse it aright.
                     Considerations to the end.
                     Triall of the right vse.
                     Helpes hereunto.
                  
                  Chap. 9.
               
               Benefit hereof. Of aduersitie, and
  
                     
                        1.The necessitie of direction herein.
                     Causes of afflictions
                     How to discerne betweene them.
                     That we must be prepared to them.
                     Of voluntarie afflictions.
                     And rules for the same.
                     Helpes hereunto.
                     Triall of the right vse.
                     How to auoyd necessary troubles.
                     How to foresee, and auoyd a plague.
                     How to discerne a iudgement standing at the doore, and escape.
                     The benefits of afflictions.
                     
                        Of familie exercises.
                     The manner of performance, and benefit thereof.
                  
                  Chap. 11.
               
               Of the dayly account.
  
                     Why to be performed.
                     Motiues hereunto.
                     How practised.
                     The benefit hereof, and
                     Trial of the same.
                  
                  Chap. 12.
               
               Conclusion of the whole, with a preparation to such other Treaties as are incident hereunto. Chap. 13.
               
            
         
         
            
            Errata.
            Page 19. line 3. reade of whom. pa. 24. dele and. pag. 26. l. 25. r. they. p. 83 l. 21. r. emplied for implied. p. 87. l. 10. r. rest one for restore. pag 108. l 23. r. immortall for mortall. p. 152. l. 12. r. deserue for defer. p. 172. r. exhibited for inhibited. p. 194. l. 14. r. affectiō for affliction. p. 239. l. 5. r. haue for hearer. p. 367. l. 8. r. enoying for enioying. pag 411. l. 4. r. place for play. p. 415. l. 25. r. stocke for flesh. p. 455. l. 21. sudden quame. p. 447. l. 24. r. ruine for runne p. 510. l. 28. r. for we they.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
               Thirdly, that Hee is to bee worshipped.
            
               CHAP. I. That there is a GOD is manifest:
               FIRST, By the Light of Nature, And that by the goodly frame, and beautifull order that is held in the world,
                     Reasons of 
                           •••
                        he Deity.
                   not possibly to bee begunne, or continued in it constant course, but by a most wise and omnipotent Nature. Psal. 81.9. Act. 1. Rom. 1.
               Secondly, The excellency of the minde of man euinceth no lesse, both in that being so excellent, it must needs proceed from a more excellent cause then it selfe, which must bee GOD, and seeing no earthly thing can satisfie the same, what other center can it haue to rest in, then it blessed Creator. Iob. 32.8. Psal. 94. Act. 17.
               Thirdly, And whence can the notions of good and euill and differences betweene them,

proceed if not by chance, or from sense, or vse? then surely by some intelligent Nature, and perfect Good, Rom. 2.15.
               Fourthly, Nay, haue not all Nations concur'd in this Principle, that there is a GOD?
               1 Both by experience in the conscience,
               2 By publicke confession, and
               3 Generall consent Rom. 1.19. so that what may be knowne of GOD, is manifest to them; and why, euen because GOD hath reuealed it vnto them.
               Fiftly, whence shall the terrors of conscience arise in men, that in regard of their places neede not feare man; if not from a superior Iudge, that both beholdeth the inward man, and smiteth it with this plague? Esay 66.24. Deut. 4.24. Rom. 2.15.
               Sixthly, And are not the Mighty mightily tormented, and singled out in this life to most exquisite and fearefull torments, from an immediate Hand, which can bee

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
yet they would not worship.
               Ninthly, And can wee imagine that the wise and constant Gouernement of Common Wealthes could otherwise bee established and preserued, then by some Diuine Power, seeing Sathan, the author of confusion, hath alwaies oppugned mankind, especially laboured the dissoluing of such Societies, Prou. 8.15.
               Tenthly, What shall wee conceiue of those Heroicall Instincts wherby with extraordinary wisedome, and courage, great businesses haue beene vndertaken, and accomplished, exceeding the common capacity, as namely
               1 The inuention and polishing of Arts and Sciences, by Plato, Aristotle, &c.
               
               2 The finding out of strange deuises, and conceits.
               3 The couragious acting of Great conquests in that speedy and happy manner.
                     Alexander.
                  
               
               Hath not the ground of these beene some Superiour Power,

inspiring and prospering the same? Deut. 31. Esr. 1.1. Iud. 14.19.
               Eleuenthly, And seeing that euen the world hath beene acquainted with the certaine and cleere demonstration of future euents. Could this proceed from any but from the All-seeing GOD, who in mercy hath reuealed these things for the comfort of His Church, and confusion of His enemies? Esay 41.23. Ezech. 12.21.
               Twelfthly, And doe wee not see things graciously and certainely attaine their proper ends and vses, notwithstanding contrary meanes, and strong oppositions: And is there any but the LORD that can bring light out of darkenesse? 2. Cor. 4.6. Is not this to bee ascribed to some supreme Power?
               Thirteenthly, Especially if we consider that the ends of causes and effects are finite, must there not be some First and Principle cause either Immediately or Mediately,

producing the rest on whom all other causes may depend, and to whom, as to their center, they may returne againe, Eccl. 1. euen as the Riuers vnto the sea?
               
                  And therefore
               
               
                  
                     Vse.
                  1 As this shall bee sufficient to make the Athiest without excuse. Rom. 1.20.
               2 So let it teach, not to despise the voyce of nature;
                     Natures vse for the knowledge of GOD. because, though heereby wee shall not attaine to perfite knowledge, 1. yet shall these notions both bridle much euill, 2. and also further the performance of much morall good.
               3 Yea, they shall aduance the Iustice of GOD in the gouernement of the world:
               4 And seeing they are insufficient: therefore shall they prouoke to seeke GOD in the right meanes: And
               5 Hereby shall such as are conuicted, as by a generall consent of witnesses, bee better confirmed

in the truth thereof: And
               6 Lastly, this ignorance shall hereby be acknowledged, and so Gods meere mercy aduanced in sauing his Elect, especially; seeing this knowledge, if it bee not sanctified, is enmity against GOD, leading from obedience of GOD, euen while it leads to the knowledge of Him. Rom. 1.23.24.25. 1. Cor. 1.20.
               3 Let this comfort vs, that what is impossible to Nature, the LORD hath reuealed in His Word, And therefore
               4 Here, let vs search the knowledge of GOD: Let this bee the Touch-stone of all the other meanes, let them all haue their reference hereto, not resting in them, or the effects thereof, but renouncing and condemning vtterly the same, that wee may know GOD alone in IESVS CHRIST, by which wee may attaine Life Euerlasting, 3. Phil. 8.9. Ioh. 17.1.
               5 Discerning herein the Insufficiency
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  
                  And wee must conceiue thus of GOD.
               1 Least wee conceiue that which is vnworthy of his Maiesty
               2 That wee may renounce sence, in seeking of Him, and so
               3 Seeke Him in His Word and Workes.
               4 That wee should not dare to represent Him by any bodily shape.
               5 That wee should not thinke Him sufficiently worshipped with the gestures of the body, or members onely, but with the minde and spirituall motion of the heart. 1. Tim. 4.8.
               6 And seeing the SPIRIT alone proceedeth from Him, therefore 1. Wee should acknowledge the gift both to proceed from Him, 2. Onely seeke the happinesse of the minde, from this Fountaine: and 3. Wholly referre it to His Glory.
               
                  
                     Intelli
                        
                           •••
                        ent.
                  Thirdly, t
                     •••
                  is GOD is, Intelligent; as being:
               1 The cause of the minde of

man, and of all the notions therein: 2. And of that order which is in the nature of things, and Common-wealthes.
               2 All Intelligence or Vnderstanding of the creatures, comes from Him; both Psal. 94.9.
               1 In respect of the Faculty, and also
               2 The operation thereof.
               
                  And this serueth
               
               1 To condemne those that ascribe the variety and order of Nature,
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   and things therein to proceed from it matter, and the inclination thereof to it forme:
               2 To ascribe all knowledge and gifts naturall, to bee the meere gifts of GOD.
               3 And so to vse them for the glory of the Giuer.
               Fourthly, this God is Eternall.
                  
                     Eternall.
                  
               
               1 Neither hauing beginning, Ps. 30.2.
               2 Nor ending, Ps. 48.13.
               3 Giuing eternity to Mankind, and that because Hee is
               
                  1 Absolutely, and Infinitely Perfect, and
               2 Of power accordingly, yea
               3 Infinitely good, and therefore Hee is euerlasting in His Protection, Couenant, Reward, &c.
               
                  And this serueth
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  1 To reproue 1. The doctrine of doubting and despaire: 2. the malice of the world, that thinks to roote out GODS Church, As also Psal. 85.2.
               2 Our infidelity, that complaine as if GOD had forsaken vs: Psal. 22.
               3 It teacheth vs to ground our faith, not vpon present time, or things, but Eternity 2. Pet. 1.8. Heb. 11.26. Ps. 119.
               4 And comforteth vs in our greatest eclypses and decayes, that once loued, and euer loued: Ioh. 13.1. Ioh. 17. 2. Tim. 2.19.
               Fifthly, this GOD is Other from all creatures:
               
               1 Because Hee is the Creator of them.
               
                  2 Hee is of a different Nature without comparison, farre excelling, as being
               1 Perfectly Wise, whereas the world hath many parts vnreasonable.
               2 Indiuisible and Vnchangeable, and therefore Immutable, and dimensiue substances cannot bee deriued out of GOD, being indiuisible.
               3 There can neither bee, nor imagined any similitude of a finite nature, and an Infinite.
               
                  And this serueth
               
               1 To conuince Phylosophy, who will haue Nature,
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   or the world, to bee GOD.
               2 To condemne the Maniches and Seruetus, who hold that the creatures spring from the Essence of GOD.
               3 To exclude all prophane, and idolatrous cogitations of GOD, as if Hee were like the creature.
               4 Heereby wee are resolued
               1 That though all things are

said to bee of GOD, It is not meant of His Essence, but because Hee makes them of nothing. Rom. 11.36. Rom. 4.17.
               2 Though the soule bee said to bee Diuine, and wee pertakers of the Diuine Nature; this is not to bee vnderstood of the communication of the Substance, but of the similitude of Properties, as being adorned with heauenly gifts, being but created qualities, though they be a certaine shadow of the Diuine Nature 2. Pet. 1.3.
               3 So are wee to vnderstand, when the Elect are said to bee the sonnes of GOD, and that it is not so by Propagation of the Essence, but by similitude of the Properties. Ioh. 1.13. & 8.47.
               4 So are wee to conceiue what is ascribed to the Saints, that they are one Spirit with GOD 1. Cor. 6 17. 2. Pet. 1.4. to imply onely our conformity with GOD, and the inhabitation, by Grace, in vs, of His blessed Spirit.
               
                  5 And so when CHRIST is said to bee GOD, thereby is not meant a permutation of the Diuine Nature into the Humane, and so contrary? but an inseparable conioyning of two Natures, reteining their Properties distinct, into one Person, and a glorifying of the Humane Nature, which though it agreeeh to a Nature which is Ruler and Gouernour of all things, yet notwithstanding it is but Made and Created.
               Sixthly, This GOD is incompresible. And that
               
               1 In our cogitation, or the conceite of any creature.
               2 In the vnmeasureablenesse of His Essence, not to bee circumscribed in space or place, or any limits.
               
                  And that
               
               1 Because His Power is Infinite.
               
               2 Hee is euery where, and so must His Substance bee, Ierem. 23.24.
               
                  3 In the Essence of His Diuintty, because there is one and the same whole substance of the three Persons, Ioh. 16.32 & 3.13. & 14.10.
               3 In the Communication of His Essence, seeing the Whole is in such sort common to the three Persons of the Diuinity; as not onely it is in them as in the creatures; But also, is Their very Substance, and yet remaineth still One, and the very same.
               And this condition is proper onely to the Deity, and not to the creature.
               1 Because it is impossible that any creature should bee, or bee made equall to the Creator.
               2 GOD Himselfe by this marke distinguisheth Himselfe from the creatures, Ierem. 23.14.
               3 CHRIST proueth His Diuinity by this argument, Ioh. 3.13. that Hee is in heauen, when His Body is on the earth.
               4 The ancient Fathers haue by this Argument, defended the

Diuinity of the Holy GHOST, because It Substance is not limited as of the creatures; whom though the Angels cannot be circumscribed by place, yet are they limited by the property of their substance: But the Holy GHOST being in many, hath not a limited and finite Substance.
               
                  And this
               
               1 Condemneth those that would haue the Holy GHOST to be a creature.
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  
               
               2 Instructs in the difference between the Spirituall Nature of the Angels, and the DEITY.
               3 Confirmeth our Faith in the Prouidence of GOD, that Hee is with vs in euery place.
               4 Informeth our obedience to doe all things as in His presence, because Hee is incomprehensible.
               5 To moderate our pride of knowledge in searching into that which is incomprehensible.
               6 To comfort our want of comprehension, and weakenesse

of faith, seeing, though the DEITY bee incomprehensible, yet wee doe and shall comprehend, nay wee are comprehended; and so it shall suffice so farre to know, and beleeue, as the Word reuealeth.
               7 Adoring with reuerence what wee cannot conceiue.
               Seuenthly, this GOD is most perfect in Himselfe.
               
               1 Because hee onely hath all things which may be desired vnto perfect felicity.
               2 And that in Himselfe and of Himselfe.
               3 And that with sufficiency also, to replenish all other things.
               
                  And therefore
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  1 Though Hee made all things, yet this was not to aide Himselfe by them, but to communicate Himselfe to them, Prou. 16.2.
               2 Neither doth Hee vse the creature in the accomplishment of this worke, as needing, but honoring the creature therein.
               
                  3 And though we worship and giue Him glory, yet this is our debt, and His due, the issue and benefite being ours alone, nothing hereby being added to His happinesse.
               4 Though Hee reioyce in our obedience, yet it is not as cause, but as an obiect of His reioycing.
               5 And we are bound in Iustice to performe the same.
               6 And therefore are much more bound to GOD to accept our imperfect obedience which otherwise doth dishonour Him.
               5 And comforted, that seeing it is for our good, therfore He wil perfect it, for His Glory.
               Eightly, this GOD is Vnchangeable.
               
               And that, 1. In His Essence, which can neither bee augmented, nor diminished.
               2 In His Will, which cannot bee altered:
               3 In place, because Hee is Immense and filleth all things.
               
                  
                  And the reason hereof is:
               
               1 Because there is neither outward, seeing Hee is the first mouer, or inward cause of His changing, in that Hee is not diuisible.
               2 Hee cannot bee changed neither to the worse, for then He were not perfect; nor better, which is impossible; nor into a like estate with the former, for this is needlesse.
               3 Hee can neither bee made greater, because Hee is infinite; nor lesse because incomprehensible.
               4 Neither can Hee moue from place to place, as a creature, seeing by His immensity Hee filleth all places.
               5 Hee is most Wise, and hath most perfectly, from euerlasting, decreed and fore-seene all things, and therefore they cannot, or neede not, bee changed.
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  And therefore though Hee be said to repent, yet this doth not imply a change of His Will, but

because Hee entendeth the amending of the creature by repentance; and so the LORD assumeth our affectiōs to teach vs the holy practise of them, that hereby wee may bee conformable to GODS reuealed Will and thereby bee pertakers of, His secret Will.
               And therefore though the Promises and Threatning of the LORD, are not performed, yet seeing these imply a condition, either expressed, Ier. 18.28. (which though it bee vncertaine and changeable, in respect of mans will, yet are they certaine in the Counsell of GOD,) or necessarily vnderstood; therefore doe they serue to the accomplishment of His secret Will; Namely, to bestow happinesse, vpon the performance of the condition of Faith and Obedience, or otherwise.
               And though the LORD hath changed many Precepts, and Ordinances, and Workes, as Moses
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
so we may attaine to the end.
               Comforting our selues that we are kept by the mighty power of God to saluation, 1. Pet. 15. And therefore shall vndoubtedly attaine, because this power is made perfect in our weaknesse, 2. Cor. 12.8.
               Tenthly, this God is of euerlasting wisdome.
               1 Both in that hee knoweth all things perfectly in one act and view, for euer, with all circumstances.
               2 And is the fountaine of all knowledge and vnderstanding to all his creatures, Eccles. 3.1. Isa. 44.7. Iob. 5. Psa. 147. Rom. 11.33.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  1 Howsoeuer Phylosophy had some glimpse of this knowledge, yet was it darkned, and maimed; and so must bee renued by the word: And without this heauenly light, howsoeuer thy might apprehend generall prouidence, yet could they neuer conceiue that especiall wisdome, whereby

the Lord saueth his Church, Mat. 11.25.
               2 Blesse wee God for Iesus Christ, the wisedome of his Father; that hath reuealed these hidden things vnto vs, Math. 11. Esay. 9.
               3 And labour we to resemble our heauenly Father in this spirituall gift.
               1 By diiscerning betweene things that differ. Phil. 1.10
               2 Redeeming of time, Ephes. 5.16.
               3 Seeing the plague, and hiding our selues, Pro. 22.2.
               4 Abounding in all good workes. And
               5 Therein watching and waiting for the appearance of our maister, Math. 24. And
               6 Hastning his comming, by conuerting our brethren, Dan. 12. And
               7 Hastning our selues therto, by casting away euery thing that presseth downe, and the sin that hangeth so fast vpon vs. Heb. 12.1.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  Twelfthly this God is righteous and perfectly iust.
               And that
               1 Both in regard of his Generall Iustice and Righteousnesse, whereby he willeth and worketh vnchangeably such things as hee hath commanded in his law.
               2 In respect of Particular Iustice, whereby he immutably disposeth aright rewards and punishments.
               3 He is the Rule and Squire of righteousnesse in his creatures.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               1 Though he doth good to the euill,
                     
                        Ʋse
                   and heapeth euils on the good, yet this is in great Iustice, for the making of the wicked inexcusable, and purging out his childrens corruption; as also to try their faith, and confirme it in them. And this is not alwayes, but for a time, to fit them thereby to their seuerall ends.
               2 Though hee punish not the wicked out of band, yet he deferreth so, as to ripen their sin, that

so they may be prepared to greater vengeance.
               3 And therefore he doth vs no harme when he doth correct vs to make vs better: if wee were perfect we should not be afflicted.
               4 And if he seeme to do somewhat contrary to his law, it is but an abridging of somewhat from his generall will by his speciall will.
               5 Giuing to each, what is no way their due, howsoeuer he giue to men of equall condition, vnequall rewards.
               6 Yea though he hath promised, and promise is debt, and so due vnto thē euen in iustice: yet is he not simply bound by man, but by his owne will; and so, though the promise of creatures may be debt, yet the Creators promise is not so.
               7 And therefore learne we to be iust in all our wayes, as the Lord our God is.
               8 And condemne we all iniustice either in word or deed.
               9 And comfort wee our selues,

that seeing our God is iust, therefore hauing laid the chasticement of our peace vpon his Son, hee hath acquitted vs from the curse of the law, and hauing promised in Christ vnto vs happinesse, hee will performe it, and giue vs patience to expect the same, Heb. 10.
               
                  Thirteenthly, this God is True.
               
               1 Because he hath the true and certaine knowledge of all things. Heb. 4.13.
               2 He neither willeth nor speaketh things repugnant, nor contrary. 2. Cor. 2.19.
               3 He faineth nothing, nor deceiueth any man, Rom. 3.4.
               4 He neuer changeth his mind, Psal. 89.33.34.
               5 He ratifieth his sayings by the euent, Math. 24.35.
               6 He loueth and commandeth truth to be kept in all, Iohn. 14.17.15.26. & 16.13. Pro. 12.22. Math. 24.51.
               
                  And therefore
               
               1 This condemneth Philosophie

that acknowledgeth God to be true, but they are to seeke where to find this Truth.
               2 This resolueth that if God foretell what hee meanes not to do, he doth it not but conditionally. Luke 24.28.29.
               3 If he bee said to deceiue the Prophets, Eze. 14. It is not by infusing any euill quality, but by giuing them vp in iustice to bee deluded by Satan. 1. Reg. 22.22.
               4 And therefore that wee may not be seduced, let vs obey the truth which we know, and cleaue alone to the word for our information therein, comforting our selues.
               3 That if the word bee taken away, yet the spirit shall not bee denied, if we shall waite vpon our God in conscionable obedience, euen to leade and keepe vs in all truth, and howseeuer
               4 The world is full of faire words, yet our God will alwayes ratifie his word by his deedes. 2. Cor. 1. And perfect the worke hee

hath begun in vs.
               
                  Fouretenthly, our God is Chast.
               
               1 Because he is the most pure and vndefiled husband of his Church. Ose. 2.19.
               2 His nature is most pure and free from all mixture.
               3 He is the louer and authour of chastity. Malach. 2.
               4 He doth most seuerely punish all vncleanesse, both inward and outward. Leuit. 18 24.
               5 Hereby hee distinguisheth himselfe from vncleane spiris, & filthy diuels. 1. Thess. 4.
               
                  And therefore this
               
               1 Condemneth the Atheist & filthy person that cōceiues vnreuerently of God, & vnseemly of his word. Psal. 50. So do some of the Canticles, and other places and plaine speeches in the word.
               As also those that iustifie fornication, and condemne chaste mariage. 1. Tim. 4.
               2. It instructeth to imitate God in this holy grace, and to vse mariage as a meanes thereto and

an image thereof.
               3 It con
                     •••
                  meth vs in our neere communion and fellowship with God. Ephes. 5.
               4 And comforteth vs that this bond shall neuer be dissolued. Ose. 2.19.
               5 And withall aduiseth vs to auoide all Idolatrie and spirituall whoredome, whereby especially we violate the diuine chastity.
               6 And resolueth vs why outward fornication and vncleanenesse, do abound, euen because of inward and spiritual whoredoms. Amos. 7.
               
                  Fifteenthly our God is mercifull.
               
               1 In that he will haue all men to be saued, that are saued, and reiecteth none but those that exclude themselues.
               2 And therefore deferreth punishment, and inuites all to repentance. Eze. 33. Exod. 35.
               3 And to this ende applyeth himselfe to our infirmities, both by inward and outward supplyes, as his Spirit, Word, Oathes, Sacraments
                  
and Miracles.
               
               4 Hee embraceth and deliuereth his Elect from sin and troubles. Reuel. 7.17. and 21.4. Isa. 49.15.54.
               5 And to this end, when no other means could be found, gaue his Sonne for vs. Iohn 3.16.
               6 And performeth all his promises freely, notwithstanding our dayly failings. Exod. 33.19.
               7 Yea, he is exceeding compassionate and bountiful euen to his very enemies. Rom. 5.10.
               8 And sanctifieth the affliction of his children to their exceeding good. Rom. 8.29.
               9 Yea, brings light out of darknesse. 2. Cor. 4. turning our very sinnes to profit.
               
                  And therefore
               
               Though this doth not imply any carnall affection in God, but rather an vnspeakeable liking or disliking of the Obiect:
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   yet doth it not chalenge the Lord to bee vnmercifull, because he somtimes is sayd to reioyce in auengement,

seeing he onely reioyceth; not in the punishing of the creature, but in the execution of diuine Iustice. Pro. 1.26. Isa. 1.24.
               And though his Free and Great mercies be denyed to the wicked, Psal. 51.1. Though his euerlasting mercy doth not belong vnto them, yet is he more mercifull then they do deserue, yea, hee is more patient and bountiful then they do desire. Psal. 73.7.
               And howsoeuer hee doth not saue all, seeing he might do it, yet is it his mercy that he saueth any, and his mercy must not hinder his iustice, and therefore he may not saue all. Nay it is his mercy to offer meanes of saluation, though the wicked may refuse them: because, howsoeuer, hereby they shall not attaine saluation, yet shall they bee partakers of such outward blessings whereby they measure chiefly the mercy of God, and wherein they do repose their principall happinesse.
               Againe, though the Lord accept

none into fauour, without the satisfaction of his Sonne, and therefore it may seeme he doth it not freely: yet doth he both freely giue vs his Sonne, and also giues vs faith to beleeue in him, yea, freely continues vs to bring forth more fruite, that we may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
               And therefore seeing our God is thus mercifull:
               1 Let the mouth of iniquitie be stopped that blasphemeth his mercy by conceiuing it to bee vniuersall.
               And reiecteth Gods mercy in reiecting the word, and meanes thereof.
               Or abuseth, and traduceth the mercy of God by presumption, & apish imitation therof, in sparing the wicked, becaue the Lord spareth them.
               2 Let the mouth of misery be opened to praise the Lord, in embracing his mercy in the meanes and that in time when it is offered freely, let him approue himselfe

to haue his portion therein, by louing the Lord, and shewing mercy to his brethren, yet by renouncing his righteousnesse, and so holding meerely of mercy. Let him measure Gods mercy not by time present, but eternity. And so let him forget all present measure, in comparison of what is to come, that so hee may bee partaker of Gods euerlasting mercies. Yea let him freely loue God, as God freely loues him, not as an hireling for his wages, but as a sonne in obedience, not for what God will giue, but what he hath commanded, that so he may rightly intitle himselfe into the mercies of his God when hee preferres his glory, euen aboue his own good.
               3 Comforting himselfe, that he can bee no looser, where the Lord gaines glory.
               Sixeteenthly, our God is bountifull.
               1 Because he createth and gouerneth all things. Psal. 95.
               2 He is the onely fountaine of

all good things, Zach. 13.1.
               3 Euen which befall to all Creatures.
               4 Yea to his enemies. Math. 5.
               5 And that of his owne meere loue, goodnes, and free mercy to the creature.
               6 But especially to mankind.
               7 And among them especially to his Church.
               8 And herein to Angels and the Elect principally.
               9 Yea, euen in his anger he is exceeding good, as ayming onely thereby at the defect and corruption of the creature to amend & purge it, still louing the substance and nature it selfe.
               10 And though he inflict many euils vpon the creature, yet doth he withall sustain it, in those euils, and bestoweth many excellent blessings vpon it to inuite to repentance, and if it do repent remoueth the euils, and perfiteth the good.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               1 This reproueth the prophane

person that despiseth the bounty of God by continuing in sinne: and also.
               2 The proud person that challengeth this bounty as due vnto him.
               3 And is not the weake Christian here taxed that doubts of, and distrusteth this bounty of the Lord, especially in afflictions.
               4 And this condemneth the wicked, that measure Gods fauor by prosperitie. And therefore cō
                  demne the generation of the iust because of their afflictions, as if God had forsaken them. Psal. 71.11. Psal. 7.3.
               5 And also they are here iustly reproued that complain of Gods bounty, and condemne him of cruelty, as if he delighted in their destruction, and made a sport at their torments, laying the falt on God that they are iustly condemned, seeing themselues are the choosers and executioners thereof.
               2 This instructeth to obserue

the bountie of God wisely in all his workes, as not to neglect it in the least, seeing the least may be an hand to lead vs to greater: & therefore we must often meditate on our creation & preseruation, and so especially to take notice of the works of his speciall prouidence in the Church: and so to confirme our faith thereby as that wee rest not so much vpon what is performed, neither measure the fauour of God by any present or particular action, but rather looke forward, yea a farre of, into that which is promised: laboring if by any means we may attaine the resurrection of the dead. Pil. 3.13. 2. Pet. 1.8. Psal. 119.
               3 Hereby we are comforted.
               4 That as all this bountie properly belongs to vs, so wee must liue by faith in the discerning and enioying of the same, preparing our selues thereto, by emptying our hearts of al s
                     •••
                  fe-loue and cō
                  ceite of our owne righteousnes, and assuring our selues then to

haue the greatest measure when we haue haue most need, when the world seekes most to strippe vs thereof.
               
                  Seuenthly our God is most Free,
               
               1 Because his nature is free from all 1. misery, 2. bond, 3. subiection, 4. constraint.
               2 He doth will and execute all things most freely and iustly, when, as much, and in what manner he will.
               3 Neither can hee bee constrained by any law of others, nay his Will is the Rule euen of his owne Law.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               1 Though second causes worke necessarily,
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   yet
               1 Because this necessity is not absolute, but conditionall, according to the good pleasure of God, therefore are they freely ordered from him, though necessarily they worke in themselues.
               2 And though our God himselfe be necessarily good, yet is this necessity not of constraint,

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
our mindes we delight in the law of God: yet in the law of our members we are still led captiue vnto sinne; yet so, as that wee daily discerne the weakning of this body of sinne, and hunger daily the putting off therof, comforting our selues, that our head Christ Iesus is ascended vp on high, and shall in due time drawe vs vp after him, that we may enioy perfect liberty in his glorious kingdome.
               Lastly, our God is a Iealous God, hating sinne, being angry against it, and in his Iustice will certainly punish the same both with temporall and eternall plagues.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               1 Though the wicked cannot discerne hereof,
               1 Because they neither can, nor indeed desire to know sin.
               2 Neither are acquainted with that price of the bloud of the son of God: yet both doe they for the present partake thereof,Rom. 1. in that they are Iustly giuen vp to a

reprobate sence, and to their owne lasts,
                  Psalm. 81.1 to commit sinne with greedinesse, that so they may be prepared thereto, and are not without some present pangues of conscience, and outward plagues concerning their estate; and shall when sin is ripe, drinke the full vials of Gods indignation▪ by the worme of conscience, and those endlesse torments that are prepared for them in hell.
               2 Labour we therefore to discerne the power of this wrath, Psalm. 9.10▪ euen in the death of Christ, that so wee may hide our selues therein to auoyd the same.
               3 And neglect we not the least checks of conscience within, or outward stroakes vpon our selues or others, that so we may auoyde the entrance thereof.
               4 Assuring our selues, that seeing the anger of th'Almighty is spent vpon his Sonne, therefore the waight thereof shall not lie vpon vs.
               5 And therefore comforting

our selues, that though our God may seeme to be angry with vs if we measure him by such outward meanes, as are common to the wicked; yet doth he in anger remember mercy because mercy pleaseth him, yea his tokens of anger are meanes to preuent the same, and so proue occasions to prepare vs to his mercy, to make vs capable thereof.
               6 Yea he doth not in any thing more reueale his loue vnto vs, then by these corrections, which vnto the wicked are messengers of hell, because when we are iudged, we are chastened of the Lord that we may not bee condemned with this wolrd. 1. Cor. 11.31.32.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. Of the knowledge of God in Vnitie.
               THus is Iehoua knowne by his Attributes and hence ariseth this necessary conclusion:
               
                  
                  That there is but one God,
               
               As appeareth not onely by Testimonies of the word, Deut. 6.4. & 32.39. Isai. 44.6. 1 Cor. 8.4. Ephes. 4.5. 1 Tim. 2.5. Deut, 4.31. Psal. 8.31 Isay 37.16. & 45.21. Hos. 13.4. Malach. 2.10. Mark. 12.32. Rom▪
                   3.30. Gal. 3.20.
               But also by such euidences as none else can performe.
               1 As beeing reuealed in the word, to worke miracles, to foretell things to come, which cannot be done by any, but an omnipotent nature, Isa. 44.7. Psa. 86.8.
               2 He alone raigneth ouer all, & alone gouerneth all things, hauing sole and supreme Maiesty; and therefore can bee but one, Esay, 42.8. 1. Tim. 1.17 Reuel. 4.11.
               3 He hath greatest perfection, as hauing the whole, and all alone; and therefore must needes be but one. Psal. 89.7.
               4 Hee is onely Omnipotent: therefore one, Dan. 4.3. Because, were there many, they should

haue power to hinder each other.
               5 Multitude of Gods, either implies that each would be imperfect to rule all; or else, if one will suffice, as being perfect, the rest are superfluous.
               6 There can bee but one Infinite.
               
               7 Neither but one First cause.
               
               8 Neither but one Chiefe good.
               
               
                  And therefore.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  1 As this condemneth the vanity of the Gentiles and Papists, that haue multiplied their Gods, according to their Citties, yea Houses, yea Necessities, yea Sinnes.
               2 So it reproueth our confusion and diuisions in diuine worship; seeing as he is one God, so must he haue one forme of diuine worship for substance;
                     Note.
                   though for outward manner and circumstance, wee may vary according to difference of times, places, occasions, necessities.
               3 As also it condemneth all hypocrisie in diuine worship, when

either the man is diuided, seruing God with the body, and keeping the heart to it lusts; or it is presumed that we may serue God sufficiently with the heart alone, though wee serue the Diuel and the time with the outward man. Or else the heart is diuided in the seruice of God, one part intending Religion, and yet with the other the World is aymed at. And
               4▪ This instructeth to vnity & vniformity in Religion, according to the truth, and to maintaine the vnity of the spirit, in the bond of peace,Ephes. 4. submitting variety of opinions to the rule of the word, Gal. 6. And by variety of circumstance, commending & aduancing the vnity of the Church.
               5 As also it iustifieth the vnity in mariage, that so there might be an holy seed, Mal. 2.7. And so cō
                  demneth Poligamy, howsoeuer it might be tolerated in the Church of the Iewes for some priuate respects which now are ceased.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
our God more easily and freely.
               Especially seeing this God loueth truth in the inward parts; therefore he will accept the purpose of our hearts, not imputing our failings.
               Yea seeing he is one, therefore he will not onely sanctifie the diuisions and differences of the members for the good of the whole; but further also will heale euery member, and cure euery infirmity, that so wee may serue this one God wholly and perfectly.
               And as this one God hath but one people, as one faith, and one baptisme;Eph. 4.1.2. yea one Sauiour for them, and therefore will not giue his glorie to another: so will hee shew himselfe still wonderfull in the preseruation of this his one Doue, his loue, and vndefiled, gathering his stil frō out the cōtagions of the world, & bridling the world that it shall not roote his out; yea, ripening the world to it iust condemnation, that so he

may be all in all in his Saints, and his Saints may bee possessed wholly of their full inheritance.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the knowledge of God in Trinity.
               WEll, thus may wee knowe God by his Attributes,, and so it appeareth that there is but one God.
               Now the second meanes to know him,Sect. 1. What a person is. and whereby hee reueales himselfe vnto vs; is the Distinction of Persons.
               
               Now a Person is a thing▪
               
               [Subsisting] no accident, or cogitation, decree, vanishing sound, created quality, or motion.
               [Indiuiduall] not any generall, but a particular One indiuideable.
               [Liuing] not inanimate without life and vnderstanding, not onely hauing sence.
               [Incommunicable] not the Diuine Essence, which is common to the

three; not the substance of mans nature, or any other thing created, which is communicated to the thing begotten therof, or thence deriued.
               [Not sustained in another] And so it is neither the humane nature of Christ; because, though this be Subsisting▪ Indiuiduall, Vnderstanding and Incommunicable, yet is it no Person, because it is personally sustained in the word; so that it, together with the Word, is the substance of one Christ, & except it were subsisting in the word, should not at all be.
               [Neither part of another] therefore not the soule of man is a person, because it is part of man, though otherwise it be subsisting by it selfe, intelligent, and not sustained by another.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  Hence, first appeareth the difference btweene the Essence of God, and the Persons of the Diuine Essence. As
               1 By the Essence we vnderstand

whatsoeuer is common to the three persons in regard of their nature and absolute being, considered seuerally by themselues, and in themselues.
               2 By Person we must vnderstand that relation which is betweene them, being compared together, and the maner of their existence therein. Briefly thus:
               The Essence signifies that God is, or rather that there is one, and that eternall Deity.
               The person is the manner, by which that diuine Essence subsisteth in each seuerally. As
               The Father is that Essence which is of himselfe, and not of another.
               The Sonne is the same Essence but not of himselfe, but of the Father.
               The Holy Ghost is the same Essence, not of himself, but of the Father and of the Sonne: so that
               The diuine Essence is one & the same, to, and in these three: but
               To be of it selfe, or, of another,
                  
to bee either of One, or of two: that is, to haue that one diuine essence, either of it selfe, or communicated from another; either of one, or two: this is the manner of subsisting, which is three-fold:

                     1 To be of it selfe.
                     2 To be generated.
                     3 To proceede. And by this Are those three persons which are signified by the name of Trinity.
                     
                  
               
               3. The essence is absolute and communicable, but the person is relatiue & incommunicable. And this differēce is to be maintained
               1 That the vnity of the true God be not distracted: or that
               The distinction of persons bee not confounded: or that
               Any other thing be foisted into our beliefe, vnder the name of person, then what the truth of the word doth allow.
               And therfore here first we must beware.
               1 That by the person wee vnderstand not simply either a bare Relation or Office, as Sabellius
                  
dreamed.
               2 Much lesse as Seruetus did, a forme or visible representation of anothers shape and gesture. But by Person
               1 Must bee vnderstood a thing subsisting from others, to which it is referred, distinguished truely from them by an incōmunicable propriety, as 1 begetting, 2 begotten, or proceeding, & not the office or dignity, or degree of begetting, begotten, or proceeding.
               2 The person is not a thing abstracted or separated from the essence, which is common to them; neither is the essence a fourth thing separated from the persons; but euery person is the same entire essence of the Deity, onely the persons are distinguished from each other: the essence is common to the three.
               3 The diuine essence▪ hath not that respect vnto the persons, as the 1 Matter to the effect, because God is not compounded of matter and forme; and therefore it is not

well said, that the three Persons cō
                  sist of one essēce. Neither 2 as the whole vnto his parts; because God is indiuisible, and therefore it is not well said, that the Person is a part of the Essence, or that the Essence doth consist of three persons: for euery person is the whole diuine Essence. 3 Neither as the Genus, or kinde, vnto the Species. For the Essence is not the Genus of the three persons, neither the person the Species of the Essence. But God is a more common name; because the Essence of the Diety is common to the three persons; and may bee affirmed of each alike. And the name of Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost is more straight, because the the persons are truly distinct, & cannot bee affirmed of each other. And therefore it is not well said; the diuine essence is the Father, is the Sonne, is the Holy Ghost. Againe, the three persons are one GOD, or in one GOD. Againe, they are one & the same

Essence, Nature, Diuinty; again, They are of the same Essence, Nature, &c. And yet it is not well said they are of one God, because there is none of these Persons which is not very God, whole and perfect. Wherfore the diuine Essence hath such relation to the persons as it communicateth it selfe after a singuler manner to those vnto which it is common.Trinitie what. So that
               The Trinitie signifieth these three persons distinguished by a threefold manner of existence in one essence of the Deitie.
               And though this name of Trinitie be not expresly in the word yet is the thing 1. there expressed, Math. 28.19. 2. Corinth. 13.13. Math. 9.17.
               2 And the name is not contradicted.
               3 And the sence thereof is expressed so by a necessary cōsequence.
               4 And the word Three, whence Trinitie is deriued is expressed. 1. Ioh. 5.7. And so it is a sound collection

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
of the Deitie, as Eternitie, Immensitie, Omnipotencie, Wisedome, Goodnesse, &c.
               3 All the outward workes of the Deitie respecting the creatures, either wrought in them, or by them as Creation, Conseruation, &c.

                     2 Wherein the person differ:
Namely in the works, which each Person exerciseth betweene themselues,Persons how they differ. as the Father existeth of himselfe and none other, The Sonne is begotten of the Father from all Eternitie, 1. hath his diuine Essence communicated vnto him of the Father wonderfully: and so the holy Ghost proceedes eternally from the Father and the Sonne, that is, Hath the same diuine Essence communicated from the Father and the Sonne, after an vnspeakeable manner, Iob. 1. v. 1.14 vers. 18. Ioh. 15.26.
               
                  3 Hence appeareth the order of the Person.
               
                  The Father is the First Person, because hee is the Fountaine of the Diuinitie, of the Sonne,Order of Persons. and Holy Ghost.
               The Sonne is the Second Person, because the Deitie is communicated vnto him, of the Father by the eternall generation.
               The Holy Ghost is the Third Person, because the Deitie is communicated vnto him from the Father and the Sonne by Eternall inspiration. Matth. 28.19. Ioh. 1.5.7.
               And yet the Father is not before the Sonne, nor the Father and the Sonne before the Holy Ghost in time, but in the manner of existence.
               And so, as is the order of the Persons, such is the order of their outward workes.
               For though they are done by the common will,Order of workes. and operation of the Father, and the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost: yet is

the same order of Persons kept in the doing thereof, which the Persons haue in their existence: So
               The Father is the Fountaine, as of the Person, so of the operation of the Son, & of the Holy Ghost; and doth all things, not as if another wrought by him, as if the will of another went before, communicating power and efficacie vnto him, but as of himselfe as existing, so vnderstanding and working of himselfe.
               Now the Sonne and the Holy Ghost worke not of themselues, but the Sonne of himselfe, so as that the will of the Father goeth before, and the Holy Ghost so of himselfe, as that the will, both of the Father and of the Sonne precedeth. The Father worketh by the Sonne, and holy Ghost; so, as that he sendeth thē, & is not sent of them. The Sonne worketh by the holy Ghost, sends him into the hearts of the beleeuers from the Father, and is not sent of him: but of the Father. The Holy Ghost worketh

and is sent of the Father and of the Sonne, not of himselfe, Ioh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. Ioh. 5.19. Ioh. 8.42. Ioh. 14 26. Ioh. 15.26.
               And yet when the Sonne and Holy Ghost are said to be sent, this is not meant of any locall motion, or any mutation in God. But 1. of the Eternall Will & decree to performe some thing by the Sonne and holy Ghost. And 2. of the Reuealing and execution of that will, by the working of the Sonne and Holy Ghost: so saith the Sonne, That he is sent of the Father into the world, that he came downe from heauen, and yet that he is in heauen, euen when hee was vpon the earth. So is the Holy Ghost saide to be sent vnto the disciples at Pentecost, when as yet he was before, and dwelt with the Apostles. So both are sent into the world; not as if they had receiued their existence elsewhere, where they were not before, but because they accomplished in the world the will of the Father, which was

not done before, and so, according to that will, expressed their presence and effectuall working.
               
                  This is the doctrine of the Trinity.
               
               
                  And it is to bee retained in the Church.
               
               1 For the glory of God, that the true God may be discerned from Idols,
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   and may bee worshipped as he hath reuealed himselfe.
               2 For our comfort and saluation, which ariseth hence, that wee know the Father whom we cannot know, but by the Sonne, Ioh. 1.18. 1. Iohn 2.23. and by confidence in him. 1. Iohn
                  ▪ 5.20. Rom. 10.24. And wee can haue no knowledge of Christ, but by the Reuelation of the Spirit. 1. Corin. 2. neither any sanctification from Christ, but by the Spirit. And therefore wee must beleeue God, as hee is thus manifested in the Trinitie, that wee may be saued eternally.
               3 This serueth, for confutation of all heretickes, that deny the Trinitie,

and the order of Persons &c. and of the Iewes, And
               4 Also for instruction, that wee be acquainted with the scriptures whereby wee may attaine to this knowledge of God, not resting in the light of nature, or Tradition of the Elders.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. God is to be worshipped.
               THus are wee to know God in the Trinitie and this knowledge necessarily inferreth, that
               
                  We must worship this God:
               
               1 Not onely because euen by the light of nature each nation worshipped somewhat in the place of God, after their owne vaine imaginations, which necessarily enforceth that God is to be worshipped.
               2 But the Lord hath commanded that he should be worshipped
               3 Yea, as he is thus reuealed in the Vnitie and Trinitie, he

deserueth to bee worshipped in many respects: As
               First, As he is Iehoua our Lord, so he requireth worship of vs as his seruants; Malach. 1.7. So we are his creatures, and owe him all homage.
               Secōdly, as he is God our Father, so are we his children, and therefore owe him all spirituall loue and holy reuerence.
               3 As he is Redeemer, so he hath both deserued our worship, & enableth vs hereunto, and therfore wee cannot but worship him the Restorer of our life, and Recouerer of our happinesse.
               4 As he is God the holy Ghost, sanctifying, and preseruing of vs: so are we bound to worship him, in Spirit and Truth. So can we not, but glorifie him in our bodies & spirits, because they are his, wee we must needes, being led by the Spirit, abound in well-doing to the praise of our glorious God.
               
                  And therefore
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  1 This condemneth all Athiests,
                  
and prophane beasts, that make no conscience of this worship of the Lord: seeing the Gentiles & the Diuels shall one day condemne them.
               2 As also this reproueth all Ignorant and idle persons, that worship they know not what, nor how, seeing none can worshippe whom they know not, they cannot worship him aright whō they cannot discerne by the Vnitie in Trinitie, and Trinitie in Vnitie.
               3 And so it vtterly condemnes all Popish worships, which is ignorance, and voluntary deuotions, not onely, not from any sound knowledge, but euen in defiance and detraction of it, as if it were the greatest enemy to deuotion.
               2 This instructeth: that wee 
                     •••
                  hould labour after this knowledge of God as he is reuealed in the word, not contenting our selues with generall notions and Traditions▪ concerning the diuine nature.
               3. And so commendeth and enioyneth

that most excellent and necessary dutie of Catechizing wherby we attaine to this particular knowledge.
               4 And withall condemneth the neglect and contempt of this dutie, especially in the elder sort, laying it onely on Children which can yet make little vse thereof, and accounting it their shame to bee taught the grounds of religion, & so dwelling and dying, in palpable and obstinate ignorance.
               5 And comforteth vs, that wee haue both a certaine rule to worship by, to preuent distraction, & so worthie a God to worship, as that we need not bee a shamed, nor repent of his seruice.
               Thus it appeareth, That God is to be worshipped. Let vs now further consider, Of whom hee is principally to be worshipped.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of whom God is to worshipped.
               Howsoeuer the Lord created all things for himselfe: so

that euery inferiour Creature in it place and nature yeeldeth homage vnto the Creator, in doing his will, and by the same attaineth his preseruation and perfection, yet neither is this seruice competent to the nature of God, as being carnall and vnreasonable, neither can it bee accepted of him, as being without Christ, without faith in his blood.
               Onely man is that Creature who as he was 1. Created of God, fit to performe this acceptable worship: so was he 2. restored by Christ to renue and continue the same: and so is 3. kept by the mightie power of God to saluation, that so hee may attaine the benefite of his true and constant seruice.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               Howsoeuer the Angels behold alwaies the face of God, and do perform acceptable seruice vnto him in Iesus Christ, by whom thogh they are not redeemed frō sin into which they neuer fell:Note.
                  
yet are they preserued through Christ in their happy estate: and by him are gathered together and vnited to their head: yet seeing these haue already attained their perfection, therefore as they are aboue the compasse of our direction, so are wee rather to admire and propose them as pictures for imitation then any way to admit them in comparison herein.
               Onely man is that Creature who being redeemed by Christ Iesus, from the guilt, power and punishmēt of sinne, hath yet the tainture and corruption of sin remaining in him.
               1 That the vertue of his sauiour might dayly appeare in the healing thereof.
               2 And the free mercy of his God might be aduanced in the pardon thereof.
               3 That the might be dayly exercised in the worke of repentance, and so haue truely experience of the true worke of grace.
               
                  4 That hee might maintain the fellowship in hauing more compassion of others, out of the sence of his owne infirmities, & so make sure, & encrease his consolation in plucking others out of the fire.
               5 That his corruptions may be a means to quicken and prouoke to the performance of faith, patience, humility, & many excellēt graces, which heerby are maruellously exercised and increased.
               6 That hee might haue experience of the admirable wisedom of God, in turning about al to his good, bringing light out of darknesse. Rom. 8.29. 2. Cor. 4.6.
               7 That the power of God may be manifested and perfited in his infirmities, as preseruing so wonderfully contraries by contraries.
               8 And vsing some corruptions to preuent, or purge out others. 2. Cor. 12.7.8.
               9 That the Lord might haue the onely glory of all his meanes, in the experience of our owne inability and disproportion.
               
                  ence whereby our growing in grace, and following hard after the marke: and thereby hunger more earnestly after perfection.
               11 And seeing in this life wee cannot be perfect, therefore wee might, by the dayly sence of corruption, be weaned from the loue hereof, and so
               12 Prouoked to hunger after our dissolution.
               13 To looke vp still to that Citie which is aboue.
               14 And to prepare therto.
               15 And in all these performe a constant and spirituall worship vnto our God.
               16 Vsing the holy means of the word, and to discouer & conquer such corruptions. And so
               17 Approue our hearty obedience to our God, who hates iniquitie, that we serue him of loue, because wee would not displease him, subduing and weakning sin, that wee might in all things bee conformable to him, then either for feare of any punishment due

to, or any benefite may redound vnto vs for the same; aboue this, that wee endeauour to obey our God in all things.
               18 And so might haue herein experience not onely of the admirable bountie and wisedome of our God in accepting our willing mind, euen aboue our outward abilitie. 2. Cor. 8.12. but also might haue triall of the sinceritie of our obedience, as being rather inward and spirituall in our purpose, and striuing against sin, then any glorious outward shew of perfection which we can attaine vnto.
               Thus hath the Lord disposed of the manner of our sanctificatiō and to this ende haue I framed this daily direction, that wee may the better be led forward in the worke of grace. And seeing to this end the Lord created man euen for his glory. Therefore now in the next place let vs consider of This Creation.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII. Of the Creation of Man.
               AS the Lord created al things for his glory, so especially to this end created hee man,Ends of Creation. as to manifest in him, 1. His free Election, and absolute power, and will Rom. 9. & 11.
               2 To aduance in him the greatnesse of his iustice. So also Rom. 9.
               3 The riches of his mercy, 1. Cor, 10.31. Ephes. 2. in bestowing saluation on him.
               4 And also to aduance his bountie in communicating his goodnesse vnto him. And so
               5 To manifest and reueale his wonderfull wisedome and power and goodnes in the preseruation and gouernment of him, and
               6 Thereby to procure the glory and praise hereof to bee giuen to him alone.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               1 As wee must not thinke that we were made to serue our owne turnes,
                     Vse.
                   to eate and drinke, and

so let vs labour to answer these ends of our creation, 1 in striuing to aspire to our first estate by being recreated in Christ, 2 & sanctifying all things vnto vs by the word, 3 & returning the strength in obedience to our God.
               These were the ends and ca
                     •••
                  ses of mans Creation.
               The manner whereof, was this,
               1 In respect of the workeman the whole Trinitie consulted of, and concurred therein, thereby implying the excellence of the worke.
               2 Concerning the work,
                  Time. consider
               1 The Time euen when God had made all the rest for mans vse, then the Lord made him to partake thereof.
               2 And when he had made him, rested from all his workes of creating any thing anew, that it might appeare, how the Lord would euen repose and quiet himselfe in this worke; and communicate himselfe especially thereto. Pro. 8.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
the world were laid,1. Cor. 2. such as eye neuer saw, neither can enter into the heart of man to bee enioyed of vs in an eternall kingdome.
               And comforting our selues in our choyce of God and heauen (howsoeuer if wee measure it by the present, we may stumble) as looking not onely behind to what was prouided for vs before wee were, but also looking before vs to what we do enioy, nay looking a far off to what is set before vs, that so we may not be weary, nor faint in our minds.
               And so vsing all good blessings in this life, as to lay vp a good foundation by them against the day of Christ.
               Labouring still if by any meanes we can attaine to the resurrection of the dead.
               Thus of the time. 2. Obserue we the Authour of our Creation which was the holy Trinitie, hee it is that made vs: not wee our selues Psalm. 95. no we cannot so much as make one haire of our

heads. Math. 6.
               
                  And this
               
               1 Reproueth naturall wisedome which not apprehēding the omnipotency of God, who could make all things of nothing: out of that false conclusion▪ that nothing could bee made of nothing. inforced a more absurd, that the world and man was eternall, and so denyed the Creation.
               As also the Atheism of the world, which out of these false grounds, place onely happinesse in this life, denying the resurrection and condition of a better.
               2 This teacheth to worship this God alone, and to haue relation & dependance onely to him as being the worke of his hands.
               2 As also to be implyed in our selues for his glory who of nothing made vs for the same.
               3 And so depend vpon him for our preseruation and perfection.
               3 Consider wee the matter of our Creation.
               Which was generally of nothing

such is properly Creation.
               Particularly of nothing, like to what we are (such is properly generation when like begets like) as being made of the
               1 Dust of the earth concerning our bodies.
               2 But touching our soules: the Lord breathed into vs the breath of life, and so man became a liuing soule. Genes. 2.
               And this Composition of both body and soule from
               Such diuers matter,
               Reproueth 1 the Anabaptist, which▪
                  
                     
                        Ʋse
                   vnder pretence of spirituall liberty, denieth subiection to earthly gouernors, seeing, concerning the body, & outward earthly things we are bound to man. As also the
               2. Liberine, that onely dreames of such an vse of the soule which might serue to satisfie the flesh, as if the happines therof cōsisted only in this, as to serue the body for the cōmitting of sin, whereas the

soule was principally created to serue the Lord, and so to informe the body, as that the members also thereof might bee giuen as weapons of righteousnesse to serue the liuing God. Rom. 6.
               2 This teacheth a diuersity of subiection of the same creature; as in regard of the body, and such things as belong thereto, he is, & ought to be subiect to man; but in the soule, onely, and immediately to the Lord; and to man for his sake; and yet so, as these may not be diuided in either respect; wee cannot so giue man the Body, but from, and by the Soule, euen for conscience sake. Neither can wee so reserue the Soule vnto God, but that it obedience must be expressed in, and by the body, Rom. 12.2. least our seruice be plaine hypocrisie: only the mater is, in the diuersity of order & respect, as the body to man, immediatly by the soule: the soule to God, immediatly expressed in the body, yet both immediatly &

intirely from God, and for God, Rom. 11.
               As also this comforteth, in this diuersity of subiection,
               1 That what is yeelded vnto man for Gods sake,Body. is not lost, but safely put to keeping to the Lord, and so by him profited, either here to be restored better, or to be repaied so at length, as to bee onely in subiection to the Lord, to be for euer with him.
               2 What is reserued intirely vnto God in truth, though it be not for the present, answered with that correspondency of the outward man,Soule, yet shall this neither be imputed, if there bee a willing minde, as to challenge the sincerity of the inward man, but rather to try and aduance the soundnesse thereof; and it shall further still be a meanes of more gratious conformity of the outward, that so both at length may concurre in perfect obedience to the Creator.
               
                  Thus of the composition.
               
               
                  Now if we particularly yet further weigh the seuerall matter of each,
               First, that man was made of nothing, that is, of no pre-existent substance. This
               1 Confoundeth infidelity, that we cannot depend on God without meanes. And
               2 Informeth faith, to restore God beyond, without, and contrary to meanes.
               3 Confirmeth the faith of the Resurrection, though all may seeme to bee resolued 
                     〈…〉
                   nothing. And
               4 Instructeth in the discerning of the nature, practise, & growth of sanctification,in regard of the Analogy betweene the Creaation and Regeneration. 2. Cor. 12.11. which as it began of nothing in vs, as of our selues, so it is daily led forward by denying of our selues; that in vs, that is in our flesh, dwelleth no goodnesse; discerning that wee haue, to be as nothing; both in cō
                  parison of what we shall haue, as also in respect of any thing, as of our selues, furthering thereto:

but especially emptying our selues of all confidence therein, or glory thereby, that the Lord alone might bee honoured in his onely worke.
               Secondly, in that man was made of the dust of the earth, we learne,
               1 Not to be puffed vp in regard of nature, seeing it came from no better then the earth.
               2 Neither to despise the most vnlikely & contemptible meanes for our good, seeing the Lord made vs of such.
               3 Neither to seeke after great matters in the world, seeing our originall was so meane.
               4 Neither to set vp our hearts in this life, but rather to prepare to death, seeing to the earth we must.
               5 Comforting our selues, that our misery in this life is not eternall, seeing we are of the earth.
               6 And seeing this corruption must put on incorruption, therefore learne we to follow hard after

the marke, if by any meanes we may attaine to the resurrection of the dead: looking by faith a farre off for the changing of these vile bodies. And comforting our selues in our better part; that the soule is immortall, and therefore labouring to haue our conuersation in heauen, and to be made meete for that glorious inheritance.
               Thirdly, that man was made a liuing soule, immediatly breathed from the Lord, eternally to liue with him.
               This teacheth
               1 That the soule is immediatly subiect vnto God, ought onely to bee bound by him, principally must depend on his blessed will.
               2 That it must be exercised in heauenly things, agreeable to the nature and end thereof.
               3 That it is subiect to eternall punishment for sinne, and therefore ought to saue it selfe from that fearefull vengeance, Matth. 3.
               
                  4 That eternall hapinesse is due thereto for wel-doing; and therefore should not faint, nor be weary thereof.
               5 That as the creation is immediate from God, though the body be from man: so also is the Recreation and Renuing of the soule immediatly from his meere mercy in Christ, without any help or concurrence from man.
               6 And therefore we are not to rest in any naturall faculties of the soule, as if they were sufficient to saluation, or could further thereto: but rather discerne wee wisely, That the wisedome of the flesh is enmity against God.
               
               7 And so let vs deny our selues, that we may be found in Christ, not hauing our owne righteousnesse, Phil. 3.8.9. Yet so
               8 As that seeing we haue freewill in naturall and morall actions, concerning the outward act, though not for the truth, or manner, or end of well-doing; therefore do we what is ours, in entertaining

the meanes of saluation: As, come wee to the word; and though we cannot discerne it naturally, neither propose the right end therein, least if wee forsake God in not doing so farre as wee may, he may iustly forsake vs in denying a blessing to the means, that so our condemnation may be iust and inexcusable.
               9 That the soule was breathed into the nostrels, not into the eares, or mouth, or eyes, this argueth the imbecillity and frailty of our life, as if it depended on our nostrels, Esay, 2 22.
               
                  Thus of the matter..
               
               Fourthly, consider we the manner of our creation, and therein the Excellencie and ends thereof.
               For the manner, we were created in Gods Image, not that either wee were made of the Essence of God, or that God must bee like to vs, hauing humane shape (although if we respect the second person in Trinity, it might

wel be, that as he was to take flesh in the fulnesse of time, so euen at the present when man was made, hee assumed extraordinarily an human forme; and so also after that forme and Archetype made man. But we were created after the Image of God, in holinesse and righteousnesse: that is,
               The soule being breathed into the body from the Lord, was indued with diuine and heauenly qualities. As
               1 Immortality.
               2 Excellent light of reason and vnderstanding, acknowledging God, and his will, discerning the nature and essence of things.
               3 True righteousnesse of the minde and heart, and all the faculties thereof; in which was inflamed true loue, and feare, and confidence in God.
               4 Most absolute consent of the will, obeying the iudgement of right and reason, from compulsion, bondage and misery.
               
                  5 Excellent strength and vigor of body, free from all infirmitie, diseases, troubles, death. And
               6 Admirable glory and maiesty.
               7 Destinated to eternall life in heauen.
               8 Which should haue propagated an immortall kinde, according to the Image of God.
               9 Yet all this mutably,
               1 That so if Man had ouercome the Tempter, his glory had beene the greater.
               2 That way might bee made hereby to the reuelation of the eternall mercy of God to his elect in Iesus Christ, as also of his Iustice in the condemnation of the wicked for the refusall of the Messiah, and in him of their saluation.
               And hence ariseth the excellency of Man; 1 By the consideration of his creation, especially that in respect of the mutability thereof: hee was to be interessed in the Messiah, & so to be restored & preserued by him

vnto saluation.
               Hence also arise the ends of mans creation.
               1 To aduance the goodnesse and bounty of the Lord, in ordaining saluation for him by his sonne.
               2 That the Lord hereby might haue the onely glory of all his mercies.
               3 That Man might haue the dominion ouer all the Creatures.
               4 That also he might bee, as it were, a sweet Companion with the Lord in eternall glory and happinesse. And
               5 That hee might bee made meete hereunto by the knowledge of his Creator and Redeemer, Ioh. 17. And by spirituall and bodily worship, according to his knowledge. 1. Cor. 6.
               Whence we may learne
               1 To admire and conceiue worthily of this loue of God,
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   in making vs thus like vnto himselfe and so to expresse our loue vnto

him, in striuing to bee like vnto him. 1. Ioh. 4.
               2 To magnifie his admirable wisedome in making our estate such, as in regard of our free-will to be subiect to change; and so to rest content with the will of God in things more contrary to nature and vnlikely for our God, seeing the Lord out of this mutable estate raised so much good, euen to aduance his holy sonne Iesus; and in him to renue and establish our formerly mutable condition.
               3 And seeing the Lord did ordaine this condition to be therefore mutable, that so man, being left to himselfe, might bee the chooser and author of his owne fall, therefore learne we to iustifie God, and to condemne our selues, that so we may not be iudged of the Lord.
               Lastly, seeing the Lord, as hee ordained the fall of man mutable, so hee ordained a Redeemer before the fall to recouer the

same. Therefore let this comfort vs in all our troubles, whether vpon vs, or expected, that vndoubtedly we may expect a good issue therein; seeing we were first apointed to glory, & so to deliuerance from thē, and so appoynted to afflictions to make vs sit for glory: And we are here taught to loue the person of man, as bearing Gods Image, though we may hate the sinne.
               
                  Thus of the Creation.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Of the fall of Man.
               WHerein man continued not; as being left to himselfe, and so fell away from God: in obeying the suggestion of the Serpent, and so fell away from his former estate of Innocencie and happinesse, through disobedience of the Commandement, & plunged himselfe and his whole posterity (as hauing receiued en estate for it) into a most fearefull

bondage of sinne, and Satan, and to all such punishments as were due to the breach of the Commandement. The occasion hereto was the righteous law of God, which the more indifferent it was, and easie to be obeyed, did
               1 The more discouer the malice of Sathan against the Commandements: And 2 the more conuince the breach of man: and so 3 aduanceth the more the mercy of God, in prouiding a redeemer.
               The instrument of this fall, and manner therof, was the suggestion of Satan, enuying mans happines, & working in him distrust of the word, tickling him with the outward obiect [the Apple] but especially with a conceit of a more excellent estate. And setting vppon the weaker vessell when she was alone.
               Breeding discontent of the present estate, and hatred of God, as if he did enuy their happinesse, & did not therfore loue thē: so being distracted in their iudgment,
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
               to redeeme vs, Math. 4. Luk. 2.49.
               2 In taking our nature vpon him. Mat. 2, Luk. 1.
               3 To the Law, in fulfilling it perfectly which we had broken, Esay. 53.
               4 In vndergoing the punishment, when hee had fulfilled the Law, Rom. 5.19. & 10.4.
               And by these his sufferings, our redemption was secondly wrought out.
               
                  
                     Sect. 6. 2. By sufferings, where what they were.
                  
                  These sufferings of Christ: were
               
               First, either in the humility of his Natiuity: or his whole life, such miseries as sin had drawne vpon vs, that hee might sanctifie them vnto vs:1 In whole life.
                   as in the body, Hunger, Cold, Pouerty, &c. Heb. 2.18. Heb. 4.15.
               2 In the soule,

                     1 Ignorance, Mat. 11.13. Mar. 13.32
                     2 Tentations, Matth. 22.35. Matth. 4.1.
                     3 Sadnesse, Ioh. 12.
                     4 Ignominies, Mat. 12.
                  
               
               
                  2 In death.
                  Secondly, or at his Death, such

paines as we had deserued: and here he suffered,
               First, in his body,3 In body.
                   as

                     1 Preparations to death,
                     
                     1 Accused of Blasphemy,
                     
                     2 Buffetings by the Souldiers, Mat. 27. & 28.
                     3 Whipping and scourging.
                     
                     4 Crowning with Thornes.
                     
                     5 Carrying of his Crosse.
                     
                     6 Nayling to his Crosse. Ioh. 19.
                  
               
               Secondly, death it selfe: heere consider,
               1 The ignominious manner, vpon the Cursed Tree. Gal. 3.
               2 The cruelty vsed vpon his dead body, as being pierced to the heart by that mercilesse Souldier, Ioh. 10.34.
               3 His ignominious buriall, and detaining for 3 daies in the graue.
               
                  These were his sufferings in body.
               
               
                  Secondly he also suffered for vs in his soule, & that 1. In his whole life.
                  4 In soule.
                  
               
               1 Griefe for the sin of the world, & especially of his own countrymen, who refused him, Ioh. 1.
               2 The mockings of the wicked,

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  7 That by his death hee might ratifie the eternall Testament of grace, Heb. 9.
               8 That hereby sinne and death might be destroyed, and the Diuell that had the rule of death, Heb. 2.14.15. Rom. 6.20.
               9 As also taking away the feare of death.
               10 That sinne might not rule ouer vs: but
               11 That we might die thereto.
               12 That we might liue onely to Christ.
               13 And liue for euer with him.
               14 And lay downe our liues for him.
               Now, because it was not possible that the Sonne of God should be holden of the sorrowes of death; for then had he not been iustified and acquitted from our sins: therfore by the power of his God-head he raised vp himselfe; & so accomplished yet further the work of our redemption.
                  
                     Sect. 7. Conquering and how.
                   
                  Rom. 4.25. Act. 2.24.
               And so Christ Iesus our redeemer obtained a glorious conquest by his

resurrection from the dead: & that,
               First, ouer the law, in abolishing the curse, dominion, & rigor therof.
               Secondly, ouer Satan & hel, chaining vp Satan, & destroying for euer the powers of hell.
                     Vse of his death.
                   1. Cor. 15.57
               Thirdly, ouer sinne, and that
               1 In taking away the sting and guiltinesse thereof.
               2 Abating the rage & fury of the same, Rom. 7.24.25.
               3 Healing in some measure the corrupt fountaine of the same.
               4 Weakning the force, and daily eating out the very corruption thereof, Rom. 6.12.13.
               Fourthly, death is also conquered and subdued; and that
               1 By taking away the sting therof.
               
               2 By destroying the dominion of the same, Rom. 5.14.
               3 Sanctifying it to the Godly, to whom it is the gate to euerlasting life. 1. Thess. 4.
               4 Raising vp our flesh from the graue. 1. Cor. 15.
               And thus by this glorious conquest of our captaine Iesus Christ,
                  
is recouered vnto vs, Heb. 12.2·
               
                  
                     Sect. 8. The benefit of our Redemption.
                  First, the fauour of God our Father, whose children we are now become in Iesus Christ, 2. Cor. 5.18 1▪ 
                  Ioh. 3.1. Col 1.20.
               Secondly, the fruits of this fauour, which are
               1 Faith in the Sonne of God, whereby being iustified before God, we haue,
               2 Peace of Conscience with God and man, Rom. 5.1. Rom. 7.4.
               3 Ioy vnspeakeble in the Holy Ghost. 1. Pet. 1.8.
               4 We become fruitfull in all good works, and so therby become meet partakers of saluation, Col. 1.12.
               The earnest whereof we haue in this life: first, by the inward testimony of the spirit, 2. Cor. 1. Eph. 4.
               Secondly, by our outward similitude & conformity to our head Christ Iesus, being changed into the same Image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18,
               And wee shall fully enioy it in the life to come, where shall be

                     1 Ceasing of all sinne, infirmities &

sorrow. Reu. 7.17.
                     2 Perfect knowledge of God.
                     
                     3 Perfect righteousnesse and holinesse not to be changed, Eph. 5.27.
                     4 Fulnesse of ioy. Psa. 16.
                     5 Excellent glory.
                     
                     6 Immediate fruition of, and coniunction with God. 1. Cor. 13.12.
                     7 Continuall praising of God.
                     
                     8 God shall be all in all. 1. Cor. 15.
                     9 Perfect loue to each other, though in diuersity of glory.
                     
                     10 Knowledge spirituall of each other, as they haue had fellowship in this life in good.
                     
                     11 Triumph ouer all enemies.
                     
                     12 Eternall happinesse and blisse for euermore. 1. Pet. 1.4.
                  
               
               
                  All these hath the sonne of God purchased for vs
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI. Of the Appliclication of this benefit by faith, how it wrought in vs.
               THe meanes whereby all these are made ours.
               
                  This faith is wrought in vs by the preaching of the word, Rom. 10.17. And that first of the Law.
               
               First, discouering our misery vnto vs in particular, both
               
                  1 By sence of our misery, & fall from our first estate.
                  From what a blessed estate wee are fallen, Rom. 3. Rom. 7. as also
               Into what a woful and desperate condition we are now plunged, not onely by reason of our sinne:
               Being able to do nothing but displease God. Gen. 6.5,
               
                  And that in regard
               
               1 Of the trangression of Adam, which lies vpon vs, Rom. 5.
               2 The fruit of this transgression, euen a generall infection & corruption of all the powers and faculties of soule and body.
                     The greatnes therof,
                   
                  1 By sinne.
                   As
               First, the substance of the soule, 1 before being simple, is now become double through hypocrisie. 2 Before being mortall naturally and spiritually, is now spiritually dead. Eph. 2.
               Secondly, the gifts of the soule: As 1 the minde, through ignorance, become vaine in it discourses,

                  Eph. 4. Rom. 2.21.
               2 Of the vnderstanding, filled with blindnesse and darknesse: and not sauouring the things of God, Eph. 4.17.
               3 The Conscience wounded, seared, defiled, neuer soundly peaceable, Tim. 4. 1. Cor. 1.2. Esay. 57.1.
               4 The Memory fit to retaine euill, & to forget good, Heb. 10.22.
               5 The Will captiuated to euill, & yet running headlong thereto: but to choose, or do good, altogether auerse, Rom. 8.5.6. Ioh. 8.39. Rom. 6.16.17.20. & 7.14.
               6 And so the Affections led violently after the sway thereof. As also,
               7 The Conuersation most lothsome to God and Man. 1. Tim. 1.15.
               8 The Thoughts impotent, and vnsatiable to euill, and infinite therein.
               9 The Members seruants of Iniquitie.
               10 His best actions greatest abominations. Prou. 28.9. Io. 3.31.

                  Psalm. 50.16.
               11 His glory also lost, 1. In that he hath lost his soueraignetie ouer the Creatures.
               2 And that reuerend maiestie of his Person.
               A second part of mans misery, is the fruite of his sinne,
               
                  2 By fruite of sin what they are.
                  Namely; that
               First, He is most odious to God and most iustly accursed of him, Col. 1.21. and this curse is mainfest,
               First, vpon his Person which is subiect to all infamy.
               2 Vpon his Body by those fearefull and innumerable plagues, diseases, iudgements of famine, &c. which lie vpon men and consume them in this life. Deut. 28.15. Gene. 3.17.
               3 By that horrible abuse of Gods blessings, which are bestowde on him: making the creature to grone vnder this bondage of corruption, and so to increase the score against the life to come. Ro. 8.19.
               Secondly, Vpon his Soule, and

that first in this life:1 In this life.
                  
               
               1 In being giuen vp to a reprobate sence. Rom. 1.23.
               2 Depriued of the knowledge of God, but so farre as shall make him without excuse. Psal. 49.15.
               3 To bee past feeling through the hardnesse of his heart. Ephes. 4.19.
               4 Thence to commit sin with greedinesse, and so to make vppe the measure thereof.
               5 Thence to fall into wofull and irrecouerable despaire, Gen. 4. and to discouer the same by madnesse, blasphemies, &c.
               
                  Secondly, In the life to come,
                  2 In the life to come
                   by
               1 Vtter separation from the presence of God, and happinesse for euer. 2. Thess. 1.21.
               2 Perpetuall communion with Satan and the infernall spirits: & so of all torments, Esay 34.
               
                  Especially
               
               First,3 Particulars of hell torments.
                   
                  Desperate sorrow for an irrecouerable losse.
               Secondly, Insufferable waight of the wrath of God.
               
                  Thirdly, Sensible torment, yet not to be expressed. Math. 3.
               1 Without intermission, Reu. 14
               2 Without end. Apoc. 20.
               Fourthly, the worme of conscience accusing and gnawing continually, Esay. 66. Esay 50.
               Fifthly, Bitter enuy at the happinesse of the elect, expressed by gnashing of teeth, Mat. 13.22.
               Sixthly, vnsatiable desire of sinne, without hope or ability to commit the same.
               Seuenthly, Restlesse content in this fearfull condition.
               Thus the law discouers to man his misery. And therefore,
               
                  First, it is to be preached to sinners, 2, Tim. 4.2.
               
                  Secondly, Men are to be acquainted with the particulars of it.
               
                  Thirdly, And to yeeld to the power thereof; that so driuing men out of themselues, it may lead them to Christ, who is properly reuealed vnto vs in the preaching of the Gospell, which doth especially beget and perfect the worke of

iustifying Faith, and that
               1 Because the Gospell reueales God in Christ, not as he is in the law, auenging sinne, but reconciling the world vnto him, by not imputing sin thereunto.
               2 Hence a sinner is enabled to iustifie Gods righteousnesse and mercy in pardoning sin.
               3 And so hence proceedeth to apprehend in particular the pardon of his sin:
               
                  And that in this manner,
               
               1 By making vs to beleeue our miserie, through a particular application thereof vnto our selues, Rom. 7.9. Rom. 15.4. Mat. 9.12.
               2 By working anguish and sorrow in spirit for the same. Act. 2.37. Ier. 21.18. Iudg. 2.3.10.
               3 Aduising what to do, Luk. 15.17 Ierem. 8.6.7. and considering deepely what we haue done, Reu. 7.24.
               4 Submitting to Gods will, to be guided hereafter according to the same. Luk. 17.9. Eze. 36.2. Act. 9.6.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  9 Heauenly conuersation, Phi. 3.20
               10 Readinesse and patience, to, and vnder the crosse. Rom. 5. Phil. 1.27
               11 Desire to bee dissolued, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
               
                  Thus is Faith wrought in vs: thus may we discerne the work therof.
               And this is properly iustifying faith, & it differs from all the rest,
               1 Because it onely is the certaine confidence, whereby we apply Christs merites vnto our selues, that we may bee esteemed righteous before God. 1 Cor. 1.11.
               2 It onely concernes spirituall gifts, & such as belōg to saluation.
               3 It comprehendeth all other kindes of faith, but is not comprehended by them.
               4 It only obtaineth the inheritance, which the rest may see, though not apprehend, nor attaine vnto, Rom. 3.28. Rom. 4.5. And this faith is thus effectuall, and discerned by these markes.
               1 Acknowledging what is in the Scriptures to be true.
               2 Finding our selues bound to beleeue them.
               
                  3 Applying principally the promise of grace. Ioh. 8.36.
               4 Boldnesse on this confidence to rely on this present grace.
               5 Ioy in the present blessing, but especially in the saluation to come.
               
               6 Desire to bring forth the fruit of an holy life, whereby wee are made partakers of the diuine nature, and so made meete to that happines, wherinto no vncleane thing shall enter. Iam. 2. 2. Pet. 1.3. Col. 1.11. Reu, 21.27.
               
                  Hence we may learne,
               
               1 That there is no holinesse in nature, and therefore no happinesse from thence, Rom. 3.9.
               2 Though Christ be offred to al, yet all do not receiue him. Rom. 5.
               3 No man knoweth iustifying faith, but he that hath it.
               4 Our righteousnes is of faith, laying hold on Iesus Christ. Phil. 3, 9
               5 Being redeemed by Christ, we must be zealous of good works, which God hath ordained vs to walke in.
               
               6 That wee may not erre in wel-doing, nor be weary thereof,

we must haue a Guide to direct vs therein. Ioh. 11.9.
               7 Certainty, vpon the assurance of Gods promise, that, though his faith may languish, and be ecclipsed, yet it shall neuer faile finally.
               8 And therefore still striuing with doubts and tentation, and getting the conquest ouer them.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. This Guide is onely the perfect word of God.
               1 BEcause it is the briefe of Gods reuealed will.
                     Sect. 1. The word the guide of this direction.
                   
                  Psalme 40.7.
               2 It reacheth not onely to the outward, but inward man also, & is a discerner of the secret thoghts and reins. Heb. 4.12.
               3 It is that will of God, which the Lord would haue to this ende communicated vnto all. Colos. 1.6. Ioh. 5.35.
               4 It is sufficient and absolutely

perfect to accomplish whatsoeuer concernes our entrance or perfection to eternall life. 2. Tim. 3.16.
               5 It is a sure and euerlasting word able to accomplish that which it promiseth or threatneth, and giuing grace to perform that in some measure which it enioyneth. Eph. 6.17. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Pet. 1.19. Psal. 19.7. Psal. 119.93.
               6 It is most plaine and easie to be apprehended, as being a light shining in a darke place. 2. Pet. 1. Pr. 8.2. 2▪ 
                  Cor. 4.4.
               
                  Hence it followeth.
               
               1 That whatsoeuer is not warranted by the word, is sinne,
                     Sect. 2. Apoc. 22 18. Deut. 4.2. Prou. 30.6.
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  
               
               2 That the Law of nature written in our hearts, is no sufficient rule of life. 1. Cor. 2.14. Mat. 16.17. Rom. 2.12.
               3 Much lesse the Lawes of nations are perfect rules to liue by. Deut. 4.6.
               4 No wil-worship is accepted of God. Matth. 15.9. Colos. 2.23. Deu 12.8.
               
                  5 Nither a good intention makes a good action. 2. Sam. 6.6.
               6 Nor an erroneous conscience excuseth an euill fact, or maketh that which is doubtfull good, Rom. 14.23.
               7 No not Ignorant Deuotion auailes in Gods worship. Rom. 10 2. Act. 13.50.51.
               8 Much lesse the lawlesse lusts of our hearts, which tend to the destruction of life, Eph. 1 22.
               9 Neither is the Multitude a iustifiable warrant for our actions. Exod. 23.
               10 No not the examples of any, further then they square with the word. 1. Cor. 11.1.
               11 Neither the word it selfe in the letter, but in the spirituall meaning thereof. Math. 5.
               12 And the meaning of the word to be fetcht not from any other but the Word, comparing spiritual things with spirituall things, 1. Cor. 2.13.
               13 Yea, the true meaning must be appplied by faith, before our

actions can be warranted therby. Rom. 14.
               So doth the word containe a perfect direction of our life.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII. What this direction is namely to serue God daily and constantly.
               THis direction is a daily and constant endeuour to serue God.
                  
                     Sect. 1. And
               1 Because the Lord requires such a dayly and constant course. Philip. 3.15. Gen. 17.1. Iob. 1.5.
               2 The Lord giues grace and appoints means for the performance thereof, as the continuall inhabitation of his spirit, and the fruite therof, the holy seed that remains in vs. 1. Iob. 3.8.
               3 The Saints of God haue practised such a course. Psal. 1. Genes. 18. 1. Cor. 15.
               4 To this ende were we redeemed that we should serue God in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of ous life. Luk. 1.
               5 God doth dayly bestow blessings vpon vs, therefore wee

must dayly serue him. Lam. 3.23. Psal. 103.2.
               6 Christ Iesus maketh continuall intercession for vs: that wee should daily, yea hourely and continually performe acceptable seruice vnto God. 1. Iob. 2.2.
               7 Satan is neuer weary of tempting vs: therefore wee should haue our loines girt, and bee alwaies vpon our watch to resist him. 1. Pet. 5.8.
               8 Wee haue not a daies warrant, no not an houres certaintie of life, therefore we are at no time to be vnprepared, because we know not the houre when our master commeth. Math. 24.
               9 We are pilgrims and trauellers in this world, and therefore wee must trauell each day homeward to our country. Heb. 11.12. 1. Pet. 2.11.
               10 By our calling we are watchmen, souldiers, &c. and therefore we must daily be exercised in this spirituall▪ warrefare. 2. Timothie 2.6.
               
                  
                  Hence it followeth.
               
               1 That to fancie any such seruice out of the word,
                     Sect. 1. 
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   which is not daily and constant, is sinne. Hosea. 6.4.
               2 To thinke that the seruice of the Sabboth is all that God requireth is also sinne. Esa. 1.13.
               3 It is in vaine to serue God at randome, and not in an holy and constant order.
               4 To put off the seruice of God to the end of our life; is most presumptuous. Psal. 95.7.
               5 To thinke I haue any libertie or time to serue sinne; is Atheisticall. 1. Pet. 4.2. Ephe. 5.16.
               6 That it is not wil-worship, to performe this seruice, seeing it is warranted by the word.
               7 That it is no nouelty, to serue God after this manner.
               8 Neither is it precisenesse, to tie our selues hereunto, seeing it is reuealed and therefore beelongs vnto vs. Deut. 29.29. Ephes. 5.15.
               
                  
                  Therefore▪ that we may serue God according to his word, we must perform dayly, and continuall obedience to to him, Coloss. 10.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII. What this dayly course is, namely a constant purpose to serue God, & how
               ANd this is, first, a purpose of the heart, to serue God, as God: wholly and continually. He. 13.18. Act. 11.13.
                     Sect. 1.
               
               2 This purpose is setled and rooted in the heart, and bringeth forth some constant fruit of obedience euery day. Col. 1.23.
               3 It is also sincere, and generall, hauing respect vnto al Gods commandments, in all things desirous to please him dayly, and to bee fruitfull in euery good worke Psa 119.6. Col. 1.10.
               4 It is in wisedome, both auoiding all occasions which may hinder, as also vsing the best meanes may further the execution thereof.
               5 It is constant and earnest, not

giuing ouer though it be preuented, and interrupted, but hereby is more kindled and enflamed, to weldoing.
               Fifthly, it is spirituall, and respects the ends, which are two:
               1 Gods glory, not any worldly or vaine respects. 1. Cor. 10.31.
               2 The eternall saluation of my soule not any trāsitory or outward blessing. Phil. 3.8. 1. Pet. 1.9.
               3 It enioynes these so farre, as God shall inwardly enable; and outward means permit, rather to put vs in minde what we should bee, then what we can bee in this life. 2. Cor. 8.12. Hence it followeth.
               
               First, that though this course were impossible,
                  
                     Sect. 2. This course to be known though impossible to be kept.
                   yet were it necessary to be known, and indeauored of vs.
               1 That it might bee a dayly rule of our life.
               2 That it might continually humble vs vnder the mighty hand of God.
               3 That it may daily driue vs to Christ
               
               4 That it might weane vs from the world, & fit vs to eternal happines
               
                  
                  Hence it followeth.
               
               Secondly, that it is not impossible in some good measure,
                     Sect. 3. It is not impossible to keepe such a course and trade of holines
               1 Because he presumes not absolute perfection; which indeed were folly for any to dreame of in this life, but is onely a following hard to the make, and furtherance to perfection. Phil. 3.13.
               2 It is no harder a taske, then what the Saints of God do desire to attaine, Psal. 90.12. haue voluntarily vndertaken, and in most comfortable measure performed Genes. 5.22.
               3 It may stand well with our ordinary callings. 1. Tim. 4.8.
               4 Neither doeth exclude our lawfull comforts 2. Tim. 4.8.
               
                  Hence it followeth.
               
               
                  
                     Sect. 4. It is necessary.Thirdly, That it is no more then needs must to take this course.
               1 Because hereby we shew our selues obedient to Gods commandement. Gen. 17.1.
               Secondly, Wee do also approoue the soundnes of our obedience: as
               
                  1 That it is hearty, not Hypocriticall.
                  3 To encrease in righteous-
               
               2 Not by halfes but generall.
               
               3 Not temporary, but continuall.
               
               4 Not indifferent, but conscionable.
               5 Not enforced, but free & cheerefull. Deut. 28.47.
               6 Not vncertaine, but constant.
               
               7 Not carnall, but spirituall.
               
               Thirdly, Heereby we increase in righteousnes and holines: as being
               
               First, Confirmed in well doing, and that
               1 By the knowledge of our heauenly thrift. 1. Thes. 4.10. Mat. 25.16.
               2 Thanfulnesse vnto God for it.
               3 Commending the successe to God.
               4 Crauing his further supply.4 To recouer out of euil:
               
               4 Recouered also we shall bee out of euill:
               1 By seeing our escapes. Ieremy 3.13.
               2 Iudging them. 1. Cor. 11.32.
               3 Denying our selues. Math. 16
               
                  4 Casting our selues vpon Christ. Math. 11.
               Fifthly, Hereby also our outward callings are furthered,
                  5 To further our callings.
                   
                  as
               
               1 Being sanctified by this spirituall exercise 1. Tim. 4.5.
               2 Moderated, least we be drunken with them. Deut. 17.18.
               3 Ordered to the right end, least they mislead vs. 1. Cor. 10.31
               4 Seasoned, lest we be weary of them.
               5 Blessed, in seeing a happy returne by them Ps. 128.
               
                  Hence it followeth.
               
               Fiftly, that this duety is most conuenient for all sorts.
                     Sect. 5. It is most conuenient for all sorts.
                  
               
               Both for all persons, as well 1 babes in Christ, as 2 Strong men.
               
               And for all estates, as well in prosperity, as in aduersity.
               
               
                  1 For Babes
                  First, for Babes in Christ: that
               1 They may beginne well.
               2 Th
                     •••
                  y may go forward without griefe, vncertainty, wearisomnes.
               
               3 That they may obtaine a more glorious Crowne.2 For strong men.
                  
               
               Secondly, For strong men and that
               
               
                  1 To keepe them constant from backe-sliding Collos. 2.7.
               2 To make them more able to winne and hold others. Rom. 14.1
               3 To acquaint them with the deepnes of Satan. Apoc. 2.24.
               4 To repaire them to greater glory. Dan. 12.
               5 To humble them in the sense of their extraordinary graces. 2. Cor. 12.
               Thirdly, it is fit for men in prosperitie: and that
               
               1 To preuent securitie. Isa. 5.12.3 For men in prosperity.
                  
               
               2 To humble them in regard of those temporall things. Luk. 22.48.
               3 To teach them how to vse them to Gods glory, their owne and their neighbours good. 1, Tim 6.17.
               4 That they may part with them willingly. Phil. 4.12.
               5 That all may bee counted as dung in respect of heauen Phillip. 3.8.
               Fourthly, This practise also will be very necessary in the time of affliction: And that.
                  4 For the time of offliction.
                  
               
               
                  1 To prepare vs thereuto. Prou· 28.14. Iob. 3.25.
               2 To qualefie the sharpenes and tediousnesse of it.
               3 To sanctifie them vnto vs.
               4 To be conquerors in our trobles, and ouer them. Rom. 8.
               5 To be deliuered finally from them. Psal. 34.
               
                  And therefore though doe what we can,
                  
                     Sect. 6. And profitable. 
                  some corruptions shall still remaine, yet this labour is not vnprofitable:
               1 Because God accepts herein the purpose of our hearts. 2. Cor. 8.12.
               2 The Lord will haue some infirmities still left in vs to humble vs with all 2. Cor. 12.
               3 And so enable vs to make better vse of our society, by walking more tenderly with them & winning them more comfortably. And yet
               4 Our hatred of sinne shall be perfited hereby, though it remain in vs.
               5 The strength of sinne shall

also much he abated in vs.
                     Sect. 7. And pleasant, where
                  
               
               6 Our edge to eternall happi-shall be still sharpened & our desire enflamed to fitte vs thereto. Rom. 7.
               
                  Neither is this labour vncomfortable. For
               1 We increase hereby an assurance of our saluation.
                     The benefite of constant godlines & there in the priuiledge of Christians.
                   2. Peter 1 9.10.
               2 Wee grow more setled, and resolued in godlinesse, and get the maistery of inconstancy. Ephe. 3.18.19.
               3 Wee performe holy duties more constantly, and easily. Ps. 119 32. Ioh. 4.34. Mat. 11.24.
               4 Wee haue more neere and sweete fellowship with our blessed God, and his holy Spirit. 1. Tim. 4.10. Mat 10.30. Ps. 1.3. Rom. 8.31. Ps. 2.12.
               6 Wee preuent many noysome lusts which otherwise would fasten on vs, Ps. 119.10.11. Io. 15.15. Exod. 19.5. Pro. 19.23.
               6 Wee are freed from many temporall iudgements, which vnstaied

soule, are subiect to. Psal. 91.11 Psal. 32.10.11.
               7 Our score shall bee the lesse, and our reckoning more easie at the day of iudgement.
               8 Hereby wee shal haue our cō
                  uersation in heauen Phil. 3.21
               9 We shall labor to a m
                     •••
                  
                  
                     •••
                  e excellent measure then wee lost in Adam.
               10 Our heart & the inordinate lusts thereof shall be kept at a bay
               11 We shall bee armed against al temptations, end secured in the midst of them Ephes. 6.13.
               12 Wee shall bee weaned from the loue of this wretched world.
               13 Yea led forward constantly to obtaine the ende of our faith, which is the saluation of our souls Ephes. 6.2. Tim. 4.
               14 We shall approue our selues not to be of the world, by our contrary fashion to it. Rom. 12.
               15 Wee shall recouer our first Image, in being holy as God is holy. 1. Pet. 1.
               16 And ready to meete our Sauiour

whensoeuer he shall come. Ephes. 6. Math. 24.25. &c.
               17 We shall see out daily weaknesse and inability to serue God, and so acknowledge vnfaignedly our vnworthinesse of the least mercies, and so happily preuent spirituall pride.
               18 We gaine hereby a certaine knowledge of our estate in grace, and by the light hereof wee know whither wee walke 1. Iohn. 3.1.
               19 We shall be raised vp from our falles into sinne, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
               20 Wee shall vse prosperity aright, Iob. 31.24. Ier. 8.4.6.
               21 And ouer-come all troubles. Rom. 8.36.
               22 Yea, we shall bee fitter to winne others. Gal. 6.1.
               23 And so grow forward to perfection, Col. 1.9. Ioh. 7.52.
               24 And happily bee continued to the end.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               acceptable vnto him, Psalm. 51.18.
               3 Hereby wee deny our selues, and daily take vp our Crosse, Math. 16.
               4 We approue our right and estate in Christ Iesus, in that we confesse our selues to bee sinners, and such as haue daily need of his mercie, and so daily fit our selues vnto the same, Math. 11.28.
               5 We iustifie the truth of our Religion against all the imaginary perfection of Popery, and security of Libertines, and Atheists whomsoeuer, and so doe daily giue an account of our Faith 1. Pet. 3.15.
               6 As also wee maintaine the peace of our Conscience, Psalm. 32.5. And so
               8 Continue, and renue the assurance of our saluation, 1. Ioh. 3.10. And so
               8 Proceede, and follow hard after the marke. Phil. 3.13.
               
                  This duty is conscionably performed,Sect. 2. Repentance how performed.
               
               
                  First, by knowledge of sinne, not onely by the law, but also by the Gospell, Psalm. 19.11. Ierem, 3.13.1 By knowledge.
                   And that voluntarily, according to the conuiction of conscience.
               
                  Secondly,
                  2 Sorrow.
                   by mourning before the Lord in the sence of them, Psal. 6. & 38. And that,
               1 Not for a spurt, but euen all our life long, Psalm. 51.5.6.
               2 Neither with a few hypocriticall teares from the eyes, but euen with Deepe sorrow from the heart, expressed euen with plenty of teares, and bitter lamentation, 2. Sam. 7. Matth. 27. Esra. 1.9.
               3 And that not so much for feare of the punishment, as that wee haue offended so good a God, Luk. 15.21.
               4 And not so much, that wee are knowne sinners among men, which happily may

discredit vs, as that we feele not our sinnes pardoned with God.
               5 This is accompanied with an astonishment for sinne, in respect of Gods infinite Maiesty. Esra. 9.4.
               Thirdly, repentance is performed by Acknowledging and confessing of sinne,
                  3 By confession
                   
                  Pro. 28.13.
               
                  And that first for the matter.
               
               
                  1 From the fountaine, which is,

                        
                           
                              In generall.
                           1 Originall sinne, Psa. 51.5.
                        2 Our corrupt hearts, Psalm. 19.12.
                     
                  
                  2 From the streames, both our

                        1 Thoughts, so farre as we may, Esr. 9.
                        2 Our Idle words, Iob. 42. And
                        3 Prophane actions. Psalm. 19.12.
                     
                  
               
               Secondly, for the manner.
               
               1 Aggrauating them against our selues, Lam. 3.43.
               2 Cleering others, as righteous in comparison of our selues, 1. Sam. 14.
               3 Against our selues vnto the Lord, Psal. 32.5. Not

                     1 Excusing. Nor
                     
                        2 Diminishing: Nor
                     3 Posting off to others.
                  
               
               
                  And here, both
               1 What Good wee haue omitted.
               2 What Euill we haue committed.
               3 How wee haue sinned of Ignorance, Psa. 73.22.
               4 How of Knowledge wee haue transgressed, 2. Sam. 24. Luk. 12.48.
               Especially and more particularly, we must confesse,
               1 The sinnes we haue beene subiect vnto, Psa. 51.14.
                     In particular.
                  
               
               2 Those which for the present we grone vnder.
               3 Those which wee feare most. Psalm. 19.13.
               4 The sinnes of our Fathers, Nehem. 9.
               5 The sinnes of the Land, and state where wee liue. Dan. 9.
               6 Those which accompany wel-doing. Math. 8.
               7 Yea such as in particular we know not, wee are notwithstanding to yeeld vp to bee searched by

the Lord: and by his mercie either to be brought to our remembrance, or to be graciously passed ouer, Psa. 19.12.
               
                  4 By iudging
                  Fourthly, wee must proceede to iudgement against sinne: And that,
               1 Remembring and producing the law that conuinceth our sin, Esr. 9.11.12.
               2 Pleading guilty therto, Esr. 9.10
               3 By abhorring of our selues, Iob. 42
               4 Stripping our selues of all comforts.
               5 Imposing volunatry afflictions vpon our selues. Ioel. 2.
               6 Acknowledging our selues worthy to be cut off Eze. 20.
               7 Yeelding to temporal chasticements, 2. Sam. 16.
               8 Iustifying Gods iustice in his former chasticements vpon our fathers for sin, Esr. 9.7.
               9 Feeling our sinne a burthen which we are not able to beare, Act. 12.37. Psa. 38.4. Hereupon,
               
               
                  Fiftly, By faith we flye unto Christ.
               
               
                  5 By flying to Christ.
                  1 Hungring after the least drop of mercy.
               
                  2 Preferring it before all earthly comforts.
               3 Begging it boldly and constantly.
               4 Waiting patiently till the Lord answere.
               5 Meditating on Gods former mercies. Esr. 9.8.5 Forsaking sin, & how.
                  
               
               6 In Christ we gaine strength to forsake sin: And that
               1 In heart, wee throughly purpose neuer to commit the like againe. Esr. 10.3.
               2 To this end we are Fearfull of the occasions, and wisely decline from them.
               3 We bend our strength especially against our beloued sin.
               
               4 We complaine of our Inability, and labour to be strengthned by the Word, Conference, &c.
               
               5 Hereupon we finde our loue encreased to all Gods Comma
                     •••
                  
                  
                     •••
                  dements, and so more conscionably intend the performance of 
                     •••
                  hem.
               6 Especially wee endeauour to bee found in CHRIST, and to

feele the power of his death, and resurrection in the subduing of sinne; and so exercise our meditations more often, and seriously thereon.
               7 And so wee endeuour, that the life of Christ may appeare in our mortall bodies: and that not wee, but Christ may liue wholly in vs, Galat. 2.19. &c.
               
               8 To this end labour wee the practise of some one speciall vertue, to which we find our selues most auerse, and which we see, that we haue especiall need of.
               9 And so by Gods mercy, we attaine such conquest ouer our most grieuous tentations, and former euils, as hatred of the word, and the Saints, &c. as that wee neuer fall into them againe.
               10 And though wee finde aptnesse to fall into some former sinnes, yet wee earnestly striue against them, and grone vnder the burthen of our corruptions.
               11 And so, do hunger and sigh for our dissolution. Rom. 7.
               
                  12 Submitting our selues to the power of the word, to haue corruption discouered and purged out.
               13 Auoiding all occasions that entice to sin.
               Now that wee may the bettter performe this duty of Repentance; consider wee in the third place, these preparatiues and helpes thereto.
                  Section 3. Helpes to repentance.
                  
               
               1 That Repentance is the gift of God, and therefore if we want it, let vs aske it of him in faith, Iam. 1.6.
               2 That by nature wee cannot repent, and therefore wee had more need to renounce our selues, and flye vnto God.
               3 That the time of repentance is this life: and therfore while we may, let vs set vpon it.
               4 The longer we deferre it, the harder, and more doubtfull it will proue.
               
               5 That the fittest time is immediatly after sinne committed, Psal. 95.8.
               
                  6 To this end meditate we on the shortnesse of life, Psalm. 91.12.
               
                  And withall,
               
               7 Weigh wee the greatnesse of our sinne, how infinite in number, how dangerous and deadly to our own soules, how offensiue to Gods children▪ &c.
               8 And submit wee our selues willingly to such rebukes and chasticements, as are laid vpon vs to the humbling of the flesh, Iam. 4.9.10. Iob. 33.17.18. Leuit. 26.41.
               9 Yea, intreat we the Lord to correct vs, Psa. 61. and that the righteous may smite vs, Psalm. 141.5. Psa. 6.1.
               
                  Hitherto serueth further,
               
               1 The due contemplation of the Maiesty of God, whom we haue so highly offended, Psalm. 51.4. Gen. 39.9.
               2 The vilenesse and abiectnesse of Man, that durst commit such wickednesse against God.
               3 How fearefull (by reason of sinne) our condition is vnder Sathan.
               
               
                  4 The dangers we haue incurred hereby, euen all the plagues that are written in Gods Booke, Deut. 29.27.
               5 The riches of Gods mercy, in prouiding so excellent a remedy against sin, as the pretious blood of his onely and deerely beloued sonne, when nothing else in the world was available thereunto, 1. Pet. 1.12.
               6 The effectualnesse of this Sacrifice, daily preuenting sinne, and furthering, yea sanctifying our repentance, and leading to perfection. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Eph. 5.22.23.
               7 The excellency of our estate in Iesus Christ, with the manifold benefites and priuiledges thereof: and so meditate we on his Death, Resurrection, Ascention, &c.
               
               8 Consider wee the end of our Creation, Redemption, Iustification, &c. All which doe call for repentance.
               9 And on the other side, impartially discerne wee our Vnthankfulnesse against the blood of

the Couenant, in not walking worthy of the same. Ephes. 4.1. yea in as much as lieth in vs.
               10 Making the same of none effect vnto vs. Heb. 10.
               11 Adde we hereunto, How we haue grieued the spirit of God, Ephes. 4.30.
               1 And dulled, if not quenched the graces of God in vs, 1. Thess. 5.19.
               13 Consider what dishonour we haue done vnto our God, all this while, that we haue liued in sinne.
               14 And wonder at the patience of the Almighty, that hath spared so long, such notorious rebels, Lament. 3.23. Rom. 2.4.
               15 Consider wee the small number of those that shall bee saued. And
               16 That many shall striue to enter in, and shall not be able, Luk. 13.23.
               17 Treasure we vp the Word in our hearts, which daily prouokes to repentance, Matth. 3.
               
                  18 And meditate wee on Gods Iudgements inflicted on the world for sinne, Psal. 119.
               19 Consider we how hardly, euen the righteous, shall bee saued, 1. Pet. 4.13.14.
               20 Sort wee with the Godly, that so wee may learne their waies.
               21 Enter wee into the house of Mourning, and this will bring sin to remembrance.
               22 And thinke wee often of our ends, and of the day of iudgement, so shall sinne haue little rest with vs.
               And that wee bee not deceiued in the iudgement of Repentance, obserue wee wisely,
                     Sect. 4. Markes of Repentance these Markes, and true Tokens thereof.
               1 Care, not to sinne againe, 2. Cor. 7.11. Luk. 9.
               2 Clearing and approuing of our selues, to the Church of God.
               3 In the euidence of the pardon

of our sinne, being able to make our defence against sin and Satan. 2. Cor. 7.
               
                  And so
               
               4 Giuing the Lord no rest, till by praier we haue obtained this assurance.
               5 An holy indignation, and displeasure at our selues for offending so good and gratious a Father. Psal. 73.22.
               6 A feruent affection to Gods word, and spirituall things, Psal. 51. Psalm. 32.
               7 Zeale of Gods glory; and in regard thereof, a iudging of our best graces, and mourning for our failings in them.
               8 A spirituall execution, and taking vengeance on our selues, by cleering of others in affliction, and condemning our selues, Esay 30.21. 2. Sam. 16.17. Ier. 31.19. 2. Sam. 24.
               9 Yea desirous to bee more vile, 1. Timoth. 1.13.14. and exposing our selues to confusion for the same.
               
                  10 And because wee cannot bee so abased as wee should: Mourning and complaining of the hardnesse of our hearts, Esay. 63.17.
               11 Prouoking deeper sorrow for our owne, by mourning for the sinnes of others, Psal. 119.136. Dan. 9. Eze. 9.
               12 Trembling at the word, and yet louing the sharpest blowes thereof, Psalm. 119.120. And so melting at the sweet promises therein.
               13 Submitting our selues willingly to Gods chastisements, Psal. 39.9. Mich. 7.9.
               14 Labouring vnfaignedly the conuersion of others, Psalm. 51.17. And admonishing them to take heed by our example, Ezech. 18.30.
               15 Shame of humane society, Ezech. 16.61. Ier. 3.3.
               16 Feare of the wrath of God. Psal 119.120.
               17 Strong cryes for mercy, Io. 2.17.
               18 Desire of the restoring of
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
for sin, though we alwayes shed not teares for it.
               4 And though we forsake not sinne wholly, yet out endeuour is accepted with God; so that wee finde the power of sinne weakned in vs, and relapse into former sinnes breed greater feare of our selues and humility.
               5 Considering that our repentance is not to purge out our sinne, or deferre pardon: but onely,
               
                  
                     Vse of Repentance.
                  1 To testifie our thankfulnesse vnto God.
               2 To assure vnto our selues the renued life of grace.
               3 And to proceed and goe forward therein.
               6 As also, resoluing that in all these things, whosoeuer will lead a godly life in CHRIST, the power of God is to bee made perfect by their infirmities, 2. Cor. 12.9.
               7 Comforting our selues, that if being in our wayes, wee bee kept from sinne,
                     Note.
                   this is the mercie of GOD; but if out of

our wayes, we seeme to maister sinne, this is in Iustice, and deceiuable.
               8 As also, beeing assured, that what we faile in at one time, will be supplied at another; and God will accept the measure of his worke in vs.
               9 And lastly, accounting it a good measure of forsaking sinne, if wee see what wee cannot do, and grone vnder the burthen, desirous to bee dissolued, Rom. 7 24.
               And for our further tryall and resolution,Sect. 7. Trial hereof obserue wee these things.
               1 That our sorrow for sinne neither vnfits vs for our callings, nor excludes from such comforts as are tendered in Christ Iesus.
               2 That wee so iudge our selues, that we iudge not either peremptorily of our owne estate, to preiudice Gods mercy, or censure our brethren vncharitably,

who stand or fall to their Maister.
               3 Yet neglect wee not reproofe for sinne, seasonably and conscionably, that either others, or at least our selues, may bee kept from security, and kept in the tendernesse and true iudgement of the conscience.
               4 That wee are more grieued, that wee haue not serued God longer time, then that we haue for the present dishonoured him by sin. And yet
               5 Are more grieued by this, that the name of God is blasphemed, and his spirit grieued by our sin; then that any hurt hath, or for any that shall redound to vs hereby.
               
                  The benefite hereof is as before.
               
            
            
               CHAP.. II. Of the raising vp of a sinner by a true and liuely faith.
               
                  THe soule beeing thus humbled, must bee raised vp againe by

a true and liuely Faith. And this is the second duty daily to be performed.
               
                  Obiect. But cannot we bee truly humbled without faith? Is this a worke of nature, and so a preparation to grace? Or else rather a worke of Sanctification.
               
                  Answer. 1 Some kinde of humiliation and sorrow for sinne,
                     Ahab.
                   may be naturall, as being forced from the conscience accusing naturally,
                     Rom. 2. and furthered by the spirit of illumination. So that
               2 In the outward act, the Hypocrite may bee like the sound Professour: yea, in some measure, in regard of the power of conscience let loose, exceed him in outward humiliation; especially if wil-worship sway for our owne credit.
               3 But the truely humbled Soule, expressed in those Markes and Rules before, is so wrought by faith, apprehending the pardon of sinne in Christ

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
our sinnes.
               
                  This is performed,
               
               1 By a serious meditation on the promise of the Messiah. Iohn 3.16.
               2 By exercising our selues more conscionably in the reading, and hearing of the word taught. Iohn 5.39.
               Secondly, Faith is quickned by reuiuing our apprehension of the promise; and this is is done. 2. Chr. 17. vers 16.17.18.19. and to the end of the Chapter.
               1 By earnest prayer vnto God for the renuing of his Spirit in vs. Psal. 51.12.
               2 By an hearty acknowledgement, that we haue iustly grieued the Spirit of God, and so are deseruedly depriued of the feeling thereof. Psalme 51.4. Lamentation. 3.22, 37.
               3 Meditating of our former comfort and assurance herein. Ps. 77.
               And this reuiuing hath many degrees.
               
                  First,
                     Sect. 2. The degrees of this worke.
                   A liuely sense what need I haue of Christ, and that without him I must certainly perish. Rom. 7.24, 25.
               Secondly, Hope of pardon, whereby though we yet feele not our sinnes certainly pardoned yet we beleeue that they are pardonable; not in respect of thēselues, as if they were lesse heinous, but in respect of God, whose mercies are aboue them. Esay 1.18.
               Thirdly, An hungring and thirsting after grace offered in Iesus Christ. Ioh. 6.35.7.37. Reu. 21.6.
               
                  And this is discerned,
               
               1 By our prizing and preferring it aboue all other comforts. Phil. 3.
               2 By our fainting and languishing after it. Psal. 42▪
               
               3 By our strong cries and endeuours for the same. Psalme 51.12, 13. &c.
               Fourthly, Wee approch to the throne of grace, and flying from the terrour of the law, wee take hold on Christ, and find fauour in

God. Heb. 4.16. Heb. 10.19.
               
                  And this is performed.
               
               1 By an humble confession of thy sinne in particular, wherupon followeth a full remission of them Psalme 32.5.
               2 Crauing pardon of some speciall sins, with vnspeakeable sighs and perseuerance. Luk. 15.21. Act. 8.21.
               Fiftly, Hereupon followeth a particular perswasion imprinted in the heart by the holy Ghost, whereby euery faithful man doth particularly apply vnto himselfe those promises which are made in the Gospell. Mat. 9.2. Math. 15.28. Psal. 143.12.
               This perswasion is discerned by these markes.Sect. 3. The markes of particular assurance.
               
               1 It goes before experience, Mat. 15.23. and so our faith is supernaturall and contrary to all reason. Heb. 11.1.
               2 It holds beyond experience. Iob. 13.15. Heb. 11.1. and is aboue all feeling.
               3 And neuer leaues vs till wee

haue obtained the ende thereof, which is the saluation of our soules. 1. Pet. 1.9.
               
                  This perswasion hath these degrees
               
               First, it takes hold weakely,
                     Sect. 4. The degrees thereof. Weakenesse of Faith.
                   not without doubting, and yet soundly and truely, so that it is accepted of God. Luke 17.5. Mat 8.
               
                  And it is discerned.
               
               1 By an earnest desire and endeauour to obtaine Gods fauour.
                     How knowne.
                   
                  Math. 5.6.
               2 By a continuall complaining of our vnbeleefe, and mourning for it. Marc. 9.24. Yet
               3 By an earnest striuing against it, in vsing all good helps, as prayer, the word, conference, &c. Mat. 8.25. Luke 17.5.
               
                  This weakenesse proceeds.
               
               1 From want of knowledge in the mystery of saluation.
                     The grounds hereof.
                   
                  Rom. 14.2. Math. 16.16. Ioh. 6.69.
               2 For want of application to our selues of the particular promise. 2. Tim. 1.12.
               3 By relying on sense, and submitting faith thereto. Ioh. 20.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
a farre off.
               5 By resting vpon the power of God, and so building on his promises. Rom. 4.21. In
               6 Consideration of our own vnworthinesse, and imperfection, which still sends vs to Christ in whom we are strengthned in faith
               7 By long experience of Gods fauour and loue in many deliuerances. Psalm. 23.5.
               8 By ripenesse and dexteritie in the meanes: as power in prayer, the word, &c. Ephes. 6.18.
               9 Daily examining and trying our selues. Psalm. 4.34.
               10 Renouncing the especiall sinne which hangeth so fast vpon vs. Heb. 12.1.
               11 Renuing daily our couenant with God, and charging a fresh vpon our hearts to constancie.
            
            
               CHAP. III. The preparing and furnishing the heart to the seruice of God.
               
                  AND this is the third duty daily we must performe, namely; to renue

our vowes, and stirre vp our hearts to the seruice of God.
               
               1 Because the hart is that which God principally delights in. Prou. 23.25.
               2 The heart is the fountaine of euery action, if it be cleansed, the actions will be sutable. Luke 8.
               3 The infirmity of the action shall not be imputed, if the heart be ordered aright. 2. Corinthians 8.12.
               4 As the bodie sleepes, so the heart sleepes too, and therefore the one must bee awaked as the other. Esay. 29.10.
                     Sect. 1. The heart a sleepe, and by what meanes.
                  
               
               
                  Now the heart may be cast into a sleepe. 1. Thess. 5.6.
               1 By ignorance of it selfe. Ephes. 5.14.
               2 By selfe-loue, and ouerweening of it owne perfections.
               3 By neglecting the meanes.
               4 By corrupt meanes in stead of the pure fountaines.
               5 By the ceasing of Gods Spirit to worke.
               6 By some grosse sinne committed.

2. Sam. 11.
               7 By securitie in prosperitie and sinne.
               8 By presumption of Gods mercies or it owne merits. Matthew 26.33.
               9 By stupiditie and senslesnesse.
               10 By spirituall blindnesse and hardnesse of heart.
               The preparing of the heart hath these degrees:
               First, it must be awakened and roused vp,
                     Sect. 2· The heart to be awakened, and how.
                   and that
               1 By meditating.
               1 What it was by nature. Ierem. 17.9. Math. 15.19.
               2 What it is now by grace. Rom 6.2. Ephe. 4.23.
               3 How vnsearchable and bottomlesse a gulfe it is. 1. Cor. 4.4.
               2 By yeelding it vp to God, and exposing it naked before him, & that
               1 Both confessing its corruption, and deceitfulnesse.
               2 And also submitting it wholly to his gouernment.
               3 Reforming the occasions whereby

it was laid a sleepe, as
               1 Ignorance, by the glasse of the word. Iam. 1.25.
               2 Selfe-loue, by viewing our selues in the glasse of the conscience examined by the Law. Ro. 7.8, 9.
               3 Vsing the meanes conscionably.
               4▪ Especially not closing with corrupt meanes.
               5 Renue the Spirit by vnfained repentance. Psal. 51.10.
               6 Forsake not onely grosse sins but euen all, yea all apparance of sinne. 1. Thess. 5.22.
               7 Be we alwaies watchfull ouer our selues. Luk. 22.
               8 Auoide wee presumption by meditation of Gods iustice. Iude 5.6.7.
               9 Remedie wee stupidity by quicknesse in apprehension, and forwardnesse to iudge our selues 1. Cor. 11.31.
               10 Breake wee our hard hearts with the hammer of Gods word. Iere. 23.29. 1. Cor. 9.27.
               
                  The heart being awakened, must be throughly sifted and examined, and that
               
               
                  
                     Sect. 3. The heart awakened, must be examined. And how.
                  First, By a true rule.
               
               1 Not by it selfe, but by the law of God. Heb. 4.12.
               2 Neither by the world, but by the conscience informed by the word. Ierem. 6.14.
               
                  1 By a true rule.
                  3 Not by opinion, but by the euidence of the Spirt. Roman. 8.16. Rom. 14.5. Pro. 14.12.
               4 Neither by the lawes of men, but by the rule of faith. Matth. 15 9. Act. 4 19.
               5▪ Neither by the letter of Gods Law, but by the spiritual meaning thereof. Matth. 5.
               6 Not by the outward condition, but by the inward experience Eccles. 9.1. Pro. 14.13.
               7 Neither by outward actions, but by inward purposes. Ierem. 17.10. Ioel. 2.13.
               8 Not by the examples of the most, but of the best. Luk. 18.1. Cor. 11.1.
               Secondly, Wee must examine the

heart after a true and holy manner.
                  2. An holy manner.
                  
               
               Not once or seldome, but dayly Psal. 119.
               Not slightly but seriously, euen from the bottome. Psal. 119.12.
               Not on the oneside, but on both as well what euill wee haue done, as what good. Esay. 1. Psal. 34.
               Neither in generall, but in particular, concerning the chiefe good or euill. Psal. 51.
               And that not partially but conscionably and indifferently, both concerning it weakenesse and also it strength. Psal. 42. & 43.
               Thirdly, We must herein aime at a right ende.
                  3. To a right end.
                  
               
               1 Not vain glory, but the praise of God. 1. Cor. 10.3.
               2 Neither for selfe-loue, but to denie our selues. Mat. 16.22.
               3 Not for loue of the world, but to the renouncing thereof. Rom. 13.11.
               4 Neither for feare of death, but to be prepared to it. 2. Cor. 5.9.
               5 Not to remit of our sincerity, but to increase in holines. Ps. 119.
               
                  6 Not to preferre our selues before others, that are behinde vs but to be humbled in regard of those that haue out-stript vs. Heb. 12.1.
               7 Not to bee approued of the world, but to the conuincing, or conuerting thereof. Gal. 1.9.
               8 Not to make vs distrust God, but to increase our confidence in him.
                     Sect. 4. The heart examined must be established in the worship of God.
                  
               
               9 And so to hunger more constantly after him. Phil. 3.13.
               
                  The heart being thus tryed and examined, must bee established and confirmed in the seruice of God. Psal. 51.12. Pro. 4.
               
                  And that by these meanes.
               
               First, by resigning it vp to the guidance of the Almightie.
                  
                     And how.
                   
                  Psal. 119.
               
                  This is performed, by
               1 Acknowledging him to bee greater, then the heart, who knoweth all things. 1. Iohn 3.20.
               2 Yeelding the heart to bee dayly searched by him. Psalm
                        •••
                     
                   19.12.
               3 And submitting the priuie

corruptions of the heart not onely which we know, but which are hidden from vs, to be iudged of him. Psal. 19.12. Iob. 9.
               4 Doing al things as in the presence of his Maiestie. Genes. 17.
               5 Confessing dayly vnto Him the inward rebellions and deceitfulnesse of the heart, and complaining of it backewardnesse to the worship of God.
               6 And so renouncing the best testimony of it sinceritie, as to be iustified thereby in his presence. 1. Cor. 4.4.3.
               7 And yet comforting our selues in the testimony thereof, so farre, as thereby to haue boldnesse, and assurance before him in Christ. 1. Ioh. 3.20.
               8 And yet submitting, contrary to all carnal wisedome, to his blessed will. Galat. 2.
               9 And so resting on his promises by faith aboue all sence and feeling whatsoeuer. Iob. 13.15 Ion 2.
               10 Not tying the prouidence

of God simply to any meanes. And yet
               11 Not despising the prouidence of God inhibited in the weakest, and most vnlikely means And yet
               12 Depending on the mightie power of God, beyond and contrary to all meanes.
               13 And so dayly labouring to discerne the true estate thereof, by the word.
               14 Deny we our selues, and labour to be found of him onely in Christ Iesus, and so
               15 In Christ offer wee vp our hearts as a dayly sacrifice of obedience vnto his maiestie.
               16 Accounting all things as dung, in regard of his fauor. And
               17 Being ready to forsake all, in comparison thereof.
               18 And so hungring after his glorious fellowship, and communion in heauen.
               19 Prepare we our selues daily to our ends, that we may for euer be with the Lord. Thus shall wee

resigne vp our selues to his holy gouernement.
               Secondly, by renuing our vowes & binding vs to the performance of them. And that
               
               1 By publicke protestation.
               2 By subscribing with the hand Esay. 44.
               3 By solemne and conscionable oaths. 2. Chron. 15.
               4 By the curse of the law. Nehe. 10.31.
               5 Calling others to witnesse, as the Church of God.
               Thirdly, wee must continually feare our selues, and haue a holy iealousie of our best actions. Prou. 28.14.
               
                  And that in regard.
               
               1 Of the maiestie and righteousnesse of God, able to censure, that which wee haue best testimony of. 1. Cor. 4.5.
               2 Of the vnsearchablenesse of our hearts. Ierem. 17.9.
               3 Of the priuie corruptions that do assault vs. Psal. 19.
               4 In respect of the infirmities
                  
that do accompany our best actions. Iob. 4.18.
               5 In respect of the treachery of our flesh, ready to betray vs to euery tentation. Rom. 7.
               6 And the continuall readinesse of Satan to set vpon vs. 1. Pet. 5 8.
               7 As also especially in regard of the presence of our gracious God, beholding, and approuing all our actions. Psalme 33.13.
               
                  And this feare is discerned,
               
               1 By an earnest striuing against our corruptions.
               2 By a desire to approue our selues to the Church of God.
               3 By tendernesse of conscience in all our actions.
               4 By lowlynesse in our carriage, euen towards our inferiors.
               
               5 By an holy care to prepare our selues to spirituall duties.
               6 Making conscience of the least sinnes.
               
               7 Keeping our selues from the occasions, and appearance of sinne.
               8 Restraining our selues in our Christian libertie.
               
               
                  9 By humilitie in the sence of great graces.
               10 Charitable censuring of our brethren and couering their infirmities. And by
               11 A dayly examination of our wayes.
               12 Especially complaining of and striuing against our secret corruptions.
               13 By choyce of our company and care therein.
               14 Meditation of our ende and preparation to the day of iudgement.
               Fourthly, There must be a constant watching ouer the outward man, auoyding both the occasions of euill, & the least appearance therof. Ps. 39.1. Iob. 31.1. of which herafter
               Fiftly, We must moderate our selues in our Christian libertie. Galat. 5.13. and that by these rules:
               1 Of our callings, that wee exceed not them. 1. Corinth. 7.20.
               2 Of the times, that wee bring forth fruite in due season. Psa. 1.3.
               3 Of the place, that in outward

things we cōfirm therto. 1. Co. 9.20
               4 Of the persons, that wee giue no iust offence. 1. Cor. 10.33.
               
                  Here our guides must be.
               
               Loue, which seeks not our own. 1. Cor. 13.
               Wisedome, to become all vnto all. 1. Cor. 13. And our ends.
               
               1 Expediencie, what may bee fitting. 1. Cor. 9.
               2 Order that which may bee seemely. Col. 2.
               3 Edification, that which may benefit our selues and other. 1. Cor. 10.
               4 And principally the glorie of Almighty God. 1. Cor. 10.31.
               Sixtly, We must entertaine, and cherish the motions of the Spirit of God. 1. Thess. 5.19. 2. Tim. 1.6.
               
                  This is performed.
               
               1 By a wise discerning of them. 1. Tim. 4.14.
               2 By an high esteeme of them.
               3 By reioycing in them, as if wee had found the greatest treasures. Mat. 13.44.
               4 By putting them speedily in

execution. Psal. 45.1.
               5 By offering vp an extraordinary sacrifice of praise for them, abasing our selues in regard of such excellent graces, and acknowledgeing the free mercy of God in so gracious a fellowship. Psalme 116.7, 12.
               Seuenthly, If the Spirit of God shall lie a sleepe in vs. Psal. 119.
               
                  This we shall discerne:
               
               1 By great terrours in the conscience.
               2 A kind of loathing of holy duties.
               3 Great coldnes and deadnesse in the vse of them.
               4 Little sensible comfort when we haue performed them. Psalme 77.2, 3.
               5 Much discontentment in the minde, and blindnes in the same. Psalme 6.3.
               6 Aptnesse to rush into the sinnes we haue heretofore conquered.
               7 Vnwillingnesse to die, &c. Here then we must at no hand blesse our soules in this estate, but
               
               
                  First, rouse vp the Spirit, and labor to be quickned, and that by vsing the holy meanes: as
               
               1 The powerfull Ministerie of the word. Psal. 6.6. that so our iudgements may be kept sound.
               2 Priuate and strong crying vnto God. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 40 1.
               3 Crauing the effectuall praiers of the Saints. Iames. 5 15.
               4 Vsing more conscionably their fellowships, and opening our state vnto them.
               5 Racking our hearts by a serious and impartiall examination and committing our most speciall tentations to record.
               6 Promising more faithfulnes for the time to come. Psal. 80.18.
               7 And binding our selues more constantly to the conuersion of others. Psal. 116.18. Psal. 32.8.9. Ps. 34.3.8.11.
               8 Exercising a dayly course of repentance. Psal. 51.4.
               9 Not neglecting also to humble our selues in this behalfe in some priuate fast vnto God Psal. 35. in

our closets or families.
               Eightly, make we some experiment vpon some chiefe lust of the heart, to get the mastery ouer it: for by an experimentall conquest ouer one, we shall learne in time to conquer all the rest.
               
                  Here learne we:
               
               How to know the master and most beloued sinne.
                  
                     How to know the beloued sin.
                   As
               1 That which before conuersion we were most subiect to, that will now hant vs, seeking to re-enter againe.
               2 That we most feare, And
               3 Feele our selues most weak in.
               4 That which most interrupts vs, when we are about to do most good.
               5 That which hath most excuses, & pretences to defend it self.
               6 And also that, which wee can cry most earnestly against in our selues.
               7 And which we most discerne, and condemne in others.
               8 That which we haue most foyled, and gloriously subdued.
               
                  9 That which our carnall affection will be yet most vnto, that so our soundnesse may be approued, especially in the conquest thereof.
               
                  And this must be done:
               
               1 By obseruing the deepnesse of Satan in his varietie of baits,
                     How to conquer it.
                   to draw vs into the snare.
               2 Considering the deceitfulnesse of the heart, how gladly it it would close with Satan.
               3 Remembring our former tripping by the like tentation.
               4 Thereupon confesse wee in humble prayer vnto God that we haue deserued to bee ouertaken with it.
               5 Detest we our selues that sin hath got such ground of vs. Iob. 42.
               6 Hereupon vow wee reuenge against our treacherous flesh. 2. Cor. 7.11.
               7 And practise wee the same by the former rules of humiliation, and such as hereafter shall bee laid downe.
               
                  8 And so being wise to feare our selues in regard of the said tentation we shal happily get the conquest of it, Pro. 14.
               9 We must daily recount how wee haue profited in godlinesse. Psal. 119.
               10 We must prepare our selues continually to afflictions, Luk. 9.23.
               11 Wee must bee plentifull in good workes. 2. Pet. 1.9.
               12 In all our actions, specially extraordinary, we must not trust to that soundnesse of heart which hath beene, but try them by that which is,
                     Sect. 7. Trial hereof
                   that so from the sense of the purenesse of the fountaine the streames may flow more certainly and purely. Luk. 6.43. Matthew. 13.
               13 Though the heart may appeare to bee sound, yet the goodnesse of the action must not so much depend vpon the soundnesse of the heart appearing, as vpon the free mercies of God accepting the same.
               
                  14 Wee must prouide a compleat Armour for the heart, being prepared to preserue it, Ephes. 6.13.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. Of the spirituall Armour, and arming of the Heart.
               
                  ANd this is the fourth duty of necessity to bee performed daily by vs; Namely, to arme our hearts against all tentations. And that
               
               1 Because such an Armour is commended vnto vs in the word. Ephes. 6.
               2 Our enemies are mighty princes, and armed wickednesses. Ephes. 6.16.
               3 The heart without it lies open to all tentations.
               4 By it wee shall bee able to cast downe all strong holds, 2. Cor. 10.4. which stand in our way to happinesse, 1. Tim. 6.11.
               5 And so shall lay hold on eternall life, and finish our course with ioy, 2. Tim. 4.6.
               
                  
                  Here consider these three poynts:
                  
                     1 What this Armour is.
                     2 How it is to be put on.
                     3 How to be kept on.
                  
               
               
                  Thus Armour hath many peeces.
                  Sect. 1. The parts of the spirituall armour; and first of the girdle of Truth. Its parts are:
                  
               
               Fist, the Girdle of Truth & Sincerity, Ephes. 6.14. And this consisteth of these parts:
               The first is a rectified Iudgement, proceeding from an illightned and sanctified vnderstanding, wrought by a liuely Faith, through the Word of God,Sect. 2. 1 A rectified Iudgement.
                   
                  Eph. 4.13.
               
                  And it hath these properties.
               
               1 Is is sound in what it knowes. Coloss. 1.6.9.
               2 It retaineth safely what it knowes. Psa. 119.11.
               3 It is wise to distinguish betweene things that differ, Phillip. 1. And so to try the Spirits, 1. Iohn. 4.1.
               4 It discernes all things. 1. Cor. 2.15.
               5 It comprehends the height, and bredth, and depth, and length Ephes. 3.
               
                  6 It knowes no man after the flesh. 2.5.16.
               7 It knowes but in part, and so is subiect to errour. 1. Cor. 13.
               8 It is not obstinate in errour, but willing to bee reformed in what it hath beene mis-informed. 2. Tim. 2.16.
               9 It is apt and desirous to receiue further illumination. Col. 1.10. 2. Tim. 3.7.
               10 And daily increaseth in this sauing knowledge, Heb. 5.12.
               11 It maintaines perfection of godlinesse, and resolues that we cannot be too righteous.
               12 In our failings of practise, it remaines sound, and giues no warrant to any decay.
               13 And cleaues to the word for it further establishing, howsoeuer wee may bee humbled in our contrary practise.
               14 Yea, it iustifies God, and the truth, though it bee to the temporall confusion of our present practise.
               15 It laboureth to enlighten

and informe others.
               Helpes to put on this Armour are,
               1 A discerning of our owne inward blindnesse, Psal. 119.28.
               2 A daily meditation in the word and workes of God. Psalm. 1.
               3 A faithfull recording and comparing of things past with things present; and so collecting for the time to come. Luke. 2.51.
               And this part of the Girdle seruethThe benefit thereof.
               
               1 To condemne the blindenesse of nature, 1. Cor. 2.14. Matth. 16.17.
               2 To discerne between the light of nature and grace, the illightning and sanctifying Spirit. Col. 1.9. Eph. 5.8.
               3 To direct all our actions: for as wee know, so wee doe. Rom. 14.5.23.
               4 To make triall of them: for if they haue not the light, it is because there is no truth in them. Ioh. 3.21.
               
                  5 To informe and instruct others, Psal. 34.
               The second part of this Girdle is a sanctified conscience: and it is discerned
               1 By this, that it excuseth for all sinnes, as our persons are accepted in Christ,
                     Sect. 3. The sanctified conscience, and how discerned.
                   1. Cor. 4.4.
               2 It checkes for the least sinne, before actuall repentance be performed. 1. Ioh. 5.17.
               3 It feares falling in regard of the weaknesse of the flesh, though repentance be performed.
               4 It endeuours in all things to please God. Act. 20. Heb. 13.18.
               5 It is not suspicious, but iudgeth charitably, where it knowes not the contrary.
               6 It stands only bound by Gods word, and to his glory.
               7 It so stands vpon it cleering, that it relies wholly on Christ.
               8 It applies particular chasticements, to particular and secret sins.
               9 It approues our vpright walking in the whole course of our

life. Act 23.1. Psa. 26.1.
               10 It procures vs peace with God, Rom. 5.1. and with men so farre as it is possible and expedient, Rom. 12.18.
               11 It breedes contentment in the life, and all occasions. Phil. 4.12.
               12 It procures cheerfulnesse in the countenance, and readinesse in all our businesse. Pro. 28.1.
               13 It makes vs couragious for the truth, and willing by all meanes to defend the same. Act. 4.13. Act. 6.15. Act. 18.26.
               14 It makes vs victorious in troubles; and
               15 Ready to yeeld vp our liues to the hands of God, Act. 21.23.
               
                  And it is put on and preserued,
                  
                     How put on
                  
               
               1 By making conscience of all things commanded,, Psa. 119.6.
               2 By keeping it tender and sensible of the least euill, Hebr. 13.18.
               3 To this end view wee it daily in the glasse of the world; that so the iudgement may bee kept

cleere, to preuent security.
               4 Examine we, and censure the daily errors thereof, by calling it before the Lord, to auoid spirituall blindnesse.
               5 Auoid wee, aboue all things, doubtfulnesse and distraction in our actions. Rom. 14.5.
               6 Especially keepe wee our selues from wilfull fighting against the light thereof, in committing grosse and presumptuous sinnes, Psa. 19.12.
               7 Haue wee alwayes more regard of it in the sight of God, then of our owne credit with men. 1. Cor. 4.4. Rom. 2.29.
               8 Flye wee into the bosome thereof when outward things crosse vs Act. 23.1.
               9 Rest we not so vpon the iustification thereof, but that we referre it 
                     •••
                  o the mercie of God, 1. Cor. 4.4.
               
                  The measure of this sincerity is:
               
               1 Because we know but in part, therefore either wee may not make conscience of some things

which others are bound to: and so not only dissent from them for a time, but euen afflict them. Or else,
               2 We may, through ignorance, bee scrupulous, and suspicious in some things wherein others hauing knowledge, are free, and so afflict our selues vnnecessarily in not taking our Christian liberty.
               3 Or because wee know but in part, therefore make we account to be subiect to error, and so to distraction, and anguish of spirit.
               4 As also, to curiousity, and searching after speculations.
               5 And so to pride, and negligence in well-doing.
               6 And so to hardnesse of heart.
               7 And so to fearfull terrors and soundings of spirit.
               The benefite of this part of the Girdle is:The benefit thereof.
               
               1 It procures and maintaines true inward ioy. 2. Cor. 1.12.
               2 Hereby wee haue alwayes boldnesse before God. 1. Iohn. 3.20. to obtaine good things at

his hands, Heb. 10.
               3 And are enabled and furnished against all the reproches and euils of men, Pro. 18.
               4 By this wee are alwayes certaine of the things we do, and the acceptance of them in the sight of God. Psa. 51.6.
               5 Hereby we are comforted in the greatest Buffetings of Satan, and our cowardly and vnbeleeuing hearts, 1. Ioh. 3.21.
               6 We attaine to extraordinary sweetnesse and ioy in the Holy Ghost. 1. Pet. 1.8. Rom. 5.1.2.
               7 And led along in most cheerfull manner throughout all difficulties to the receiuing of the reward. Heb. 11.26.
               8 we encrease in sanctification and holinesse. 1. Tim. 1.18.19.
               9 We put to confusion the pride and practises of our enemies. 1. Sam. 26.21.
               10 we receiue hereby a pledge of eternall life, and haue our conuersation in heauen, Rom. 8.16. Phil. 3.20.
               
                  A third part of this sincerity consists in the will,
                     Sect. 4. The sinceri-of the will. It markes. which discouers it selfe,
               1 By cheerfulnesse in well-doing, not by compulsion, but of a willing minde, 1. Cor. 9. 1. Pet. 5.
               2 Subiecting it owne will to the will of God in all things.
               3 And so yeelding it daily to the information of the word, and binding it thereto.
               4 Aiming at the full accomplishment of Gods will in earth, as it is in heauen. Mat. 6.
               5 Not consulting with flesh and blood in heauenly things.
               6 Nor proposing our owne glory in the performance thereof.
               7 Complaining daily of the rebellions thereof. And so
               8 Resisting sin, and the occasions thereof, Psa. 119.104.
               9 Yeelding to sinne with griefe. Rom. 7.15.
               10 Rising by repentance out of the same. Prou. 28.14.
               
                  The state and measure hereof, is:
                  
                     It measure.
                  
               
               1 That it is not free to good or

euill, but freed to doe good, Phil. 2.13.
               2 And therefore of it selfe can will no good thing.
               3 Yet so freed to good, as that it is in bondage to sinne, Rom. 7.18.
               4 And therefore while we are about any good, euill is present with vs, and we are led captiue thereto.
               Yet so in bondage, as that it striues against that slauery, and gets daily ground thereof. Rom. 7.25. Eph. 2.3.
               
                  The benefit hereof is:
               
               
                  
                     The benefit hereof.
                  1 To enable vs to doe good. Rom. 7.18.
               2 To comfort vs in our outward failings, 2 Cor. 8.12. Rom. 7.19.
               3 To discerne of our state in sanctification. Ephes. 2.3. 1. Cor. 12.2.
               4 To keepe our iudgments sincere and vpright. 1. Tim. 6.5.
               5 To kindle and order our affections in the seruice of God.
               
                  Sect. 5.
                  And this is a fourth part of this

Girdle, euen the well ordering of our affections.
                  
                     The well ordering of the affections, & how discerned.
                   1. Thess. 5.23. Rom. 7.24.
               
                  And this is discerned,
               
               1 By a right mouing of them to their proper obiects. Rom. 7.22.25.
               2 By their contentment in the same.
               3 That what is in the iudgment we haue also in the affection.
               4 In that wee can more ioy or grieue for spiritual causes, then for carnall. Psa. 4. Psa. 119.
               5 That they tend to the crucifying of the flesh, and building forward of the New man. Coloss. 3.1.
               6 That we labour more for affection then for knowledge.
               7 Make wee them as little knowne in company as may be, Genes. 45. especially if the company and occasion be ordinary and ciuill.
               8 Suspect wee our owne affection when the case concerneth vs.
               
                  9 And that our affections can send and encourage vs to spirituall duties.
               10 That indeed by them we are wholly emptied in our selues in respect of God, 2. Cor. 5.16. Gen. 5.22. Rom. 12.1.
               
                  Helpes hereunto are:
               
               1 Knowledge of the right obiect, Mark. 3.5. 2 Cor. 7.
               2 Weaning and abating them from the false. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
               3 Triall of our selues in the practise of some one of our afflictions. Deut. 6.5.
               4 Conscience to vse them in all their seuerall times and measure. Eccles. 3.1. Rom. 12.16.
               
                  
                     The benefit thereof.
                  
                  The benefit hereof is:
               
               1 We shall attaine hereby a gracious conquest ouer our most vnruly thoughts. Eph. 4.25.
               2 Wee shall finde much sweete peace and contentment in our Christian callings.
               3 We shall be more ready prest to good actions, 2. Cor. 7.
               4 And saued from many noysome

tentations, which otherwise would assault vs. 2. Ephes. 4.26. Ioh. 19.12.
               5 We shall haue gracious fellowship with God. Col. 3.1.
               6 And be better enabled to the conuersion of our brethren. Ioh. 21.15.
               A fift part of this girdle is the sincerity of the Tongue:
                     Sect. 6. The sinceritie of the Tongue: Wherein it is seene. 
                  As
               
               1 Being the sterne of the shippe, and the certaine Image of the minde. Iam. 3.5.
               2 In the well-gouerning whereof is the triall of sincerity, Psal. 34. & note of perfection, Iam. 1. Iam. 3
               3 The misgouernment whereof is confusion to the owner, Prou. 18.7.21. and others.
               4 By keeping the same, we auoyd trouble, Pro. 21.23.
               5 And make the world serue our turne.
               
                  And it is discerned:
                  
                     1 In holy speech. Eccles. 3.7.
                     2 In wise and seasonable silence.
                  
               
               Concerning fit and warrantable speech, we are to obserue:
               
                  
                  1 Preparation to speech.
                  2 The matter of it.
                  3 The manner thereof.
                  4 The end of the same.
               
               
                  We shall be prepared to speech,
               
               1 By praier to God to guide our tongue; and that because
               
                  
                     Sect. 7. Of speech, and,
                     
                        1 Of the preparation to it.
                        
                        2 And bee hath promised to blesse this meanes to this end.
                        
                        3 And the Saints haue practised this duty profitably.
                        
                     
                  First, the Lord is Ruler of it. Prou. 16.1.
               Secondly, by an holy consideration of these things,
               1 That we are to speake in his presence. Psal. 33.15.
               2 That there is no liberty for idle talke. Math. 12.36.
               3 That all speech must tend to edification. Ephes. 4.29.
               4 What the matter is we meane to speake of.
               5 That what is once out cannot be recalled.
               6 That we must giue an account for euery idle word. And thus we shall be prepared to speake. Now The matter of our speech concernes either Persons,
                  Sect. 8. The matter of speech.
                   
                  or Things. The persons
               
               1 Almighty God and his workes.
               2 Our neighbour, and what

concernes him.
               3 Our owne persons and occasions.
               In our speech concerning our blessed God, wee are to obserue these Rules:
               1 That we take not the names of Gods Maiesty in our mouthes,Sect. 9. How to speake of God.
                   but vpon most serious and waighty occasions. Exod. 20.
               2 That in the occasion we finde our hearts liuely affected with a true knowledge and holy reuerence of God, before whom wee speake, and before wee vse his great and fearfull name, least otherwise, though the cause be waighty, yet we take it in vaine.
               3 That wee finde our selues comforted and established in our faith, by taking of this great and glorious name, as beeing hereby drawne neerer vnto God, and setled more constantly in our loue to his Maiesty. To this end vse not the name of God without some addition of his attributes, as the Liuing Lord, the

Glorious God, My God, &c. Ephes. 1.3.
               4 Yea, that it may appeare that wee haue not onely knowledge of the Deity, but also experience of his nature and properties, we are to giue him such attributes as concerne the occasion wherof we speake. Genes. 43. Rom. 16. 1. Cor. 16. &c.
               
               5 Take we heed that the name of God become not ordinary, and for custome.
               6 Publish we the works of God not onely for the present, but to posterity.Sect. 4. How to speake of our neighbour.
                   
                  Exod. 14.26.
               
                  Concerning our neighbour, our speech may be either good, or euill.
               
               
                  If wee are to speake good of our neighbour, then we must doe it:
               
               1 Cheerfully, and vpon euery fit occasion. Luk. 5.29.
               2 Wisely, rather in his absence then in his presence.
               3 Indifferently, as well if he bee our foe as friend.
               4 Constantly, maintaining the same testimony without any corruption

or gain-saying.
               5 Truly, that wee giue him no more nor lesse then his due.
               6 Charitably, if the matter bee doubtfull, rather with the better. 1. Cor. 13.7.
               7 Preserue we his good name, by answering for him in a case of slander. 1. Sam. 20.32.
                     Sect. 15. What heere to be auoyded.
                  
               
               8 If he be fallen, raise wee him vp with the spirit of meeknesse, Gal, 6.1
               
                  Here are to be auoided these extreames.
               
               First, those that are in defect: As
               1. Deprauing of the actions of our brethren from the intent. Iob. 1.9.11. as if we knew their hearts.
               2 Extenuating of them in the measure.
               3 Mistaking them in the quality, which is the common practise of the world, to call good euill, and euill good. Esa. 5.19.
               4 Out-facing and bearing men downe in their sincerity, and if it were possible, to driue them from the same. Iob. 4.8.11 &c.
               5 Mis-iudging of it, by the outward

euent. Iob. 27.
               6 Conuincing thereof by false witnesse and periury. 1. Reg. 20. &c.
               7 Disgracing spirituall gifts for want of natures complement. 1. Sam. 1.14.
               Secondly, We must here take heed of the other extreame in excesse: As
               1 Commending them to their faces.
               2 Ascribing that vnto them which is not theirs. Act. 12.
               3 Yeelding more vnto them indeed then is theirs.
               4 Daubing vp their sinnes with vntempered morter. Ezek. 13. as presumption of Gods mercie, or such like.
               5 Crying peace, peace, and putting farre off the euill day. Ier. 6.
               6 Approuing them for the gifts of nature, though they bee not sanctified. Pro., 1.30,
               7 Flattring them, as if what they had came by their owne industry.
               8 Saying as they say, be it true or false. Mich. 2.11.
               
                  And thus is our speech to be ordered when we will speake good of our Neighbour.
               
                  If we haue occasion to speake the contrary of him, let vs consider these bounds:
               
               First, wee must not speake what we certainly know not, but haue by reports, surmises, &c.
               We may speake that to himselfe which we must not speake of him to another. Math. 18.15.
               Secondly, wee must not speake all what wee know, vnlesse wee haue an especiall calling hereunto.
               
               
                  And that is,
               
               1 When the Magistrate requires it.
               2 When his case by admonishment needs it.
               3 When danger to others thereby is preuented, as in case of murther, treason, &c. 2. King. 6.8. Gen. 37.2. Est. 2.
               
                  Hence it followeth,
               
               First, that auricular confession is abominable, which bindeth to the concealement of such wickednes.
               
                  Secondly, that it is sinne to discouer where wee are bound to conceale.
               
                  As in cases hereafter laid downe.
               
               Thirdly, We must not speake that of our neighbour which we know, and is necessary to be knowne to all persons; as neither,
               To the weake, lest they stumble at it; nor to the wicked, lest they insult in the infirmities of others. Gen. 8. 2 Sam. 1.
               Fourthly, Some may speake that euill of their brethren which is not lawfull for others, As the Magistrate, or Minister in reprouing of sinne, may abase the persons with names sorting with their sins, Gal. 4.1. Matth. 3. which priuate men may not do.
               5 If it be thought fit to mention the euil which we know by any mā
                  : here
               1 It must be done onely in a generall manner, the person and all circumstances which will descrie the person concealed. 1. Cor. 6.11. 2. Sam. 12.1.
               2 We must speake of his sinne

not with delight or contentment, but with griefe. Psalm. 119.
               3 Vnlesse we perceiue obstinacy, and scorning of the meanes, then we are in an Ironicall manner to leaue them to their owne lusts. 1. Reg. 22. Eccl. 11.7.
               6 The party also in some cases may be discouered, but yet with a double respect:
               
               First, if his sinne be of infirmity, here we may in some sort conceale the sinne: As
               1 That it might bee mistaken, in regard of the person, Actes 3.17.
               2 That the fact may bee misreported, and falsely conceiued, &c.
               
                  If we see the party ashamed, and cast downe for his sin, here we are bound much more to couer it, And that
               1 From God by hearty prayer, that it may be forgiuen, Actes 7. Math. 27.
               Secondly, from our selues: and that
               1 By not taking notice of it willingly.
               
                  2 Not beleeuing it.
               3 Interpreting it to the best.
               4 Forgiuing it, if it be apparent.
               3 We must also bide the sinne from the sinner. And that
               First, if we see him vnfit to bee reproued for the present, 1. Sam. 25.
               Secondly, if wee see him sufficiently checked already by his cō
                  science, then we must also hide his sinne from him. And that
               
               1 By opposing his contrary intent, Act. 3.17. Rom. 10.2.
               2 Comforting him, with his former course of holinesse.
               3 From the occasion, that it was in his heate, or prouoked thereto in his defence.
               4 From the quality, that it was in ignorance, not wilfulnesse, infirmity, not presumption.
               5 From Gods mercy, which is aboue all his sinne. Rom. 5.20.
               6 Age, that it was done in his youth, Psal. 25.7.
               7 The time of life, that yet there is hope to recouer. Psal, 95.2. Tim.
                  
2.25. & that it was but the first in that kinde.
               8 From the examples of the Saints, the best of whom haue had their slips. Iam. 3.2. Psal. 19.
               9 From his person, opposing other good parts to counteruaile that euill. 1. King. 15.5.
Thus may we hide the sinne from the sinner, and thus also may we hide his sinne from the world.
                  If the sinne bee grieuous, and cannot bee excused, yet here wee must moderate our speech.
               
               1 And prepare mercy for the party.
               2 Acknowledge wee it might haue been our case, if God should haue left vs, and so may be. Gal. 6.1.
               3 Intimating his sorrow and detestation of the fact, as the truth shall be, 2. Cor. 2.6.7.
               4 Recounting circumstances that induced thereunto, though not to excuse altogether, yet to diminish the same, or at lest to make known

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
our selues. 1. Cor. 15.10.
               5 Our speech must rather tend to the defect, then to the excesse.
               6 Wee must do it soberly and sparingly, rather shewing that we are compelled thereunto then of our owne accord. 2. Cor. 11.
               7 We must here especially regard how we are made manifest to the conscience of the Saints. 2. Cor. 5.9.10.
               8 And lastly wee must herein especially aime at Gods glory. 1. Cor. 10.31.
               Thus may we speake good of our selues.
               
                  
                     How to speake in dispraise of our selues.
                  3 We are also bound to speake euill of our selues, in these cases,
               
               1 We must confesse our sinne vnto man, in that hereby we may cleare others, and giue glory to God. Ios. 7.
               2 Hereby also we ease our own soules. Psal. 32.45. Iam. 5.
               3 Wee magnifie the mercies of God in recounting how vnworthy we are. 1. Tim. 1.
               4 We stay vp others that haue

beene ouertaken with the same tentations, &c. 2. Cor. 1.4.
               
                  But here obserue these cautions.
               
               1 We are not bound to accuse our selues to the betraying of our innocency, or the truth of God, or his children. Math. 17.
               2 Wee may not open our infirmitie to the disgrace of our calling, or offence of others.
               3 Wee must take heede of hypocrisie, as if by acknowledging our vilenesse, wee would be counted conuerts, as Esebolius did:
               4 That we labour to hide what we haue laid open, by casting our burthen vpon Iesus Christ. 1. Tim. 1.
               
                  Thus may we speake of the euill that is in vs. And thus much concerning the persons of whom we must speake.
                  Concerning things to be spoken, obserue,Sect. 14 Of things to be spoken
                  
               
               1 That we cannot speake of all, because we know but in part, and thereof it is vanitie to presume thus. 1. Cor. 13.
               
                  2 That we may not speake of al we know: Because,
               
               1 Some things are knowne to vs which are neither fit to be done nor spoken, as the vaine thoughts of our owne hearts. 2. Cor. 12.
               2 Some things are lawfull to bee done, which it is not lawfull to speake of, as the secrets and necessitie of nature. Iudg. 3.24.
               3 Some things are lawfull, but not fit to be spoken: such as either exceed the capacities of those to whom we speake, or are not sutable to them. 2. Cor. 12. Hebrew. 5.11. 1. Cor. 14.
               3 We must speake what we know but with these conditions:
               
                  
                     How to speake of what wee know.
                  1 That wee keepe our selues within the compasse of our callings.
               2 That we speake from the holy purpose of the heart.
               3 That wee labour herein the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.31.
               4 And also the good of our neighbour. Ephes. 4.29.
               5 Yea our owne increase both

in knowledge and holines. 1. Cor. 14 26.40.
               6 Obseruing the fitnes of time, place, persons, &c.
               
                  Thus may we speake of such things as do occurre. And thus farre concerning the matter of our speech.
               
               
                  Touching the manner therof.
               
               First,
                     Sect. 15. The maner of speech, & 1 It must be gratious.
                   Our speech in generall must bee gratious, which is, when the graces of God imprinted in the heart, are truely pictured in the tongue. Col. 4.6.
               
                  Hence it followeth.
               
               1 That all rotten and vngratious speech is disclaimed.
               2 No vice must bee spoken of, but with dislike. Reuel. 2.
               3 No gratious speech, but from a gratious heart.
               Secondly, Speech is then gratious, when it is seasoned with wisedome Act. 2.4
               
                  And this is when our speech is applyed:
               
               1 Fitly to times, places, persons circumstances. Prou. 19.11. Pro. 10.31. Esay. 50.5.
               
                  20 When it profits most to the good of mens soules.
               3 When it turns not to the hurt of the speaker. 2. Tim. 2.16.
               4 When it proceeds from a wise and vnderstanding heart. Eccles. 12.11.
               
                  Hence is disclaimed,
               
               1 All foolish talke, wanting reason and conscience. Eph. 5.
               2 All carnall counsell of worldlings, whatsoeuer shew of wisdom it hath in it. 1. Sam. 17.
               3 All vnseasonable and vndiscreet communication.
               4 All mysticall, or curious conference, &c. 1. Tim. 6.20.
               
                  A second holy property of speech is:
               
               
                  
                     Sect. 16.2 Our speech must be true.
                  1 Truth and fidelitie. Ephes. 4 25. And it is discerned;
               1 When wee know what wee speake vpon a sure ground.
               2 We speake as the thing is, the whole truth, and no more.
               3 And as himselfe thinketh, plainly thereof, not out of others conceits.
               4 And also to the minde and

purpose of him that asketh.
               5 And that to haue the trueth boulted out, not obscured.
               6 When wee stand to that wee haue spoken and promised, which that we may doe,
               Here consider diuers euidences and bonds of truth,Sect. 17. Of the bonds of truth. 1 Euidences As
               First, A simple assertion, which is either,
               1 A simple affirmation, Yea, Yea. Math. 5.
               2 Or, a bare negation, Nay, Nay
               
               
                  Here obserue
               
               1 That in a doubtfull case wee must adde vnto our affirmations (these qualifications: (As I thinke,
                  How to affirme in doubtfull cases.
                   
                  As I take it,) because wordes thus spoken, if they proue true, they shew the modesty of the speaker: If false, yet they saue his credite, as shewing that there is not a purpose to deceiue, but onely that we were deceiued.
               2 Another euidence of Truth, is, an asseueration, wereby we doe vehemently deny or affirme a

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  3 The matter.
                  3 Consider wee the matter of an oath.
               
               1 It must not onely be true, but so knowne to vs. Ier. 4.2.
               2 It must bee honest that wee sweare to.
               3 It must bee a truth of great importance.
               
                  4 The manner.
                  4 Obserue wee the manner of an oath, as
               1 It must be made in the onely name of God.
               1 By inuocation of his name, to witnesse the truth of what wee sweare.
               2 And to blesse vs therein.
               2 By imprecation against our selues, wherby we bind our selues if we deceiue, to the vengeance of God.
               3 It must be done, not rashly, but with great aduisement.
               4 And also with great reuerence and feeling, not without prayer vnto God to guide the heart. Eccles. 9.2.
               Fourthly, The true and lawfull swearer is, indeede
               
               
                  1 The regenerate man, who hath right in this seruice,
                  5 He that may sweare
                   
                  and knowes how to vse it aright. Rom. 2. and none other.
               2 And he must also haue a particular calling to this seruice.
               3 Here learne, that though the party in regard of his generall calling might not sweare, yet his oath being made, is lawfull, if hee haue a ciuill calling thereto, and may be takē, hows
                     •••
                  euer the swearer herein be not iustified.
               6 The right vse & end of an oath is:
                  6 The ende and causes of an oath.
                  
               
               1 To end controuersies between man and man, and free those that are wrongfully accused.
               2 To cleare our innocency before men. Heb. 6.16.
               3 To prouide for the infirmities of men. 1. Sam. 12.5. Gen. 31.53.
               4 To witnesse a truth vnto men And to
               5 Binde our selues more constantly to the seruice of God. Neh. 10.1. Chron. 15.23.6 Before whom we must sweare
                  
               
               Sixtly, Consider we the parties before whom we may sweare, which are;
               
                  1 The Magistrate, who may lawfully exact an oath.
               2 To a priuate man we may also sweare to bind contracts.
               3 The Master may require an oath of the seruant. Genesis 24· and so the father of the sonne, the husband of the wife, &c. one friend of another.
               Seuenth, Obserue we the time of an oath,
                  7 When
                   which is:
               1 In a case of necessitie, when witnesse faile, or words will not be taken.
               
                  Hence it followeth:
               
               
                  8 How an oath binds.
                  1 That we need not sweare when the partie to whom we sweare, is not willing to accept it.
               2 And neither also, if the matter may bee cleared by any other lawfull meanes.
               Eightly, Learne we how an oath binds.
               
               1 If it be imposed by him, that may lawfully giue it.
               2 If it be made of things lawfull.
               3 If it tend to our owne and neighbours good.
               
                  4 When Gods glory also is preserued thereby.
               9 Wisely consider we the abuses of an oath, which are:9 The abuses of an oth
                  
               
               1 Vsurping such attributes as onely belong to God, as: As I liue &c.
               2 Swearing by Images, trifles, Saints, nullities, &c. Zep. 1.5.
               3 Swearing ordinarily, in common speech, or vpon heate in gaming, &c. Ier. 5.7. Mat. 5.
               4 Rash swearing, when we know not the cause, or haue no calling thereto, or aduise not wisely in the action.
               5 Murthering of oathes, when wee say cods for God, fecke for faith, swounds for wounds, &c. where hoping to escape the imputation of swearing, we are more guiltie thereof.
               6 Outragious and blasphemous swearing, the badge of ruffians, & rake-hels.
               7 Cursed swearing, with fearefull imprecations against our selues and others. Mat. 26. Peter.
               
               
                  8 Wicked swearing, when wee bind our selues by oathes to mischiefe. Act. 23.
               9 False swearing, when wee sweare to that ignorantly, which proues false.
               10 Periurie when wee know a thing to be false, & yet wil sweare to it: of set purpose to do mischief Zach. 5.4.
               11 Swearing for hire to any purposes. Act. 6.
               12 When we sweare to impossibilities, as when the Priest is sworne by the Bishop to the vow of continencie, &c.
               Consider wee the danger and punishment of vnlawful speaking as that hereby,
               1 We lie open to Gods curse.
               2 Expose our selues to periury.
               3 Shall not be credited neither for word, nor oath.
               4 Make the land mourne vnder this burthen. Ier 23.
               5 Shall finde our selues disenabled, to take the name of God holily and conscionably.
               
                  
                  Generally here is condemned:
               
               First, al kind of lying, vpon what pretence soeuer: Now a lie is then made,

                     1 When welspeake falsly.
                     2 And are willing so to doe. 2. King. 5.
                           Sect. 21. Of flattery.
                        
                     
                     3 Purpose to deceiue thereby, Act. 5.
                  
               
               
                  Hence it followeth, that all
               1 False speaking of ignorance, is no lie.
               Secondly, Here is condemned all smoothing and dissembling of a matter, with purpose to deceiue. Eeither
               1 By extenuating of it.
               2 By excusing the fact.
               3 By vsing pretexts and shifts to auoyd it.
               4 By mentall reseruation & such like Iesuitical, & Atheistical tricks
               Thirdly, Also, all concealing of truth, when we are bound to speak is here forbidden.
               4 All ambiguous and doubtfull speeches.
                     Sest. 22. Concealing of truth.
                  
               
               5 To speake vntruthes, though

not with purpose to deceiue.
               6 All promise-breaking, when the promise is lawfully made.
               A third bond of truth, is imprecation, that is a binding of our selues to the performance of ttuth by imposing on our selues, for default the curse of the Law. Neh. 10 29. 1. Sam. 25. This now is abrogated because we are not vnder the curse, onely comparatiuely wee may rather wish our selues accursed then God may be dishonored. Rom 9. Wee may confesse we haue deserued the curse that so we may flie to Christ: 3. In stead of the curse we should rather binde our selues by the sweete and sure promises and by our interest therein, as better fitting our condition vnder grace.
               And thus farre concerning the second grace of speech, which is truth.
               
                  
                     Sect. 23. The third grace of speech.
                  A third grace of holy speech is Reuerence. And this is in regard, either of
               First God, of whose name and

titles wee must so speake that wee both,
                     Reuerence, and that 1. In respect of God.
                  
               
               1 Shew reuerence our selues, and▪
               
               2 Mooue reuerence in others Deut. 28.58.
               
                  And this we shall doe:
               
               1 If we know God a right.
               2 And feare him as our father: Malach. 1.
               3 Behold him in his iudgments vpon the wicked. Psal. 119.120.
               4 Thinke often and meditate vpon him.
               Secondly, we must vse reuerence in speech in regard of man, and that either generally,2. Of man.
                   as hee beares Gods image. So we must,
               1 Giue holy names vnto our children: But here with sobriety,
                     Sect. 24. To giue holy names to to our children.
                   not the names of God, as Iesuits, &c. but such as, Michael.
               
               1 May shew our thankfulnesse to God Gen. 41.
               2 May shew our true humiliation vnder his corrections. Ruth. 1.
               3 May put vs in mind of his promise. Israel. Ge. 32.
               
                  4 May remember vs, of our own frailty, and wretchednesse, Adam Gen. 33.
               5 May intimate our true estate and condition in this life. Est. 2.5.
               6 May encourage vs to the hope of the life to come.
               7 May minister comfort in our troubles, and such like.
               2 We must not name professors by the names of prophane men.
               3 We may change names vpon iust occasion, as when any are conuerted frō Gentilism to Christianitie, and so baptized, &c. but
               1 Not not to deceiue withall, neither
               2 To deny Christ in the time of trouble.
               2 We are to vse reuerence in more particular manner vnto man,
                  
                     Sect. 25. Reuerence to our superiour.
                   
                  as he is our superior either in calling or gifts 1. Cor. 12.13. prouided,
               1 That we giue him not the titles of God, as Iehoua, &c.
               2 Giue him the titles of his office, though he bee euill, Acts 26.25.
               
                  3 And yet here so carrie our selues, as that we may humble him in the performance thereof.
               
                  Therefore here is forbidden.
                  
                     Here forbidden.
                  
               
               1 All manner of blasphemy; which is either,1. Blasphemie.
                   First by detracting ought from God.
               2 Or ascribing to him that which beseemeth him not.
               3 Vsing his great and fearefull names in our fumes and rage.
               4 Inuocating him also in slight and customary matters.
               5 Vsing the names of God to sorcery, witch-craft.2. All abuse of scripture
                  
               
               2 All abuse of Scripture: And this is either,
               1 When we haue no calling to vse it. 1. Cor. 14.34.
               2 We speak of the things of God in a prophane and carnall maner. 1. Cor. 2.
               3 When wee make iests thereof.
               4 When wee keepe backe any of Gods counsell, and clip the word of God. Math. 4. Act. 20.
               5 When we vse it to sorcery.
               
                  
                  2. Abuse of our selues.
                  6 And when we reason and cauill about the truth thereof.
               3 All abuse of our selues or others:
               
               Either,
               1 By reuilings and barbarous speeches. 1. Sam. 16. dead dogge.
               2 Cursing or banning. Colos. 3.8.
               3 Scoffing and scorning each other. Psal. 1. 2. King. 2. especially for our profession and religion.
               4 Not vsing titles of honour, &c. Gen. 39. He hath brought in
               5 Not calling by their names, but rather by such attributes as may tend to disgrace. Gen. 39.14. Hebrew seruant. 1. Sa. 25.10. The sonne of Ishay, &c. as by country, base parentage, &c.
               6 Currish & dogged speech, &c.
               And thus farre of the third grace of speech, which is reuerence.
               
                  
                     Sect. 26. A fourth grace of speech Sobrietie, and Modestie.
                  
                  A fourth grace of speech is sobrietie, modesty, or meeknes. And this is seene.
               1 In praising others, and that rather behind their backes then before their faces.
               
                  2 In praysing and dispraysing our selues, as before.
                     And where in.
                  
               
               3 In speakeing of things secret which may moue blushing, fairly Gen. 4.11. 1. Sam. 24.4.
               4 Conferring with inferiors tenderly and humbly.
               5 Saluting kindly and reuerently. And that,
               1 By name. Rom. 16.
               2 By profession. Rom. 16.3.
                     Sect. 27. Of saluatiōs
                  
               
               3 Calling or office.
               4 By the way of blessing. Rom. 16 24.
               5 Praying for the blessing of God vpon them.
               
                  Here obserue,
               
               1 That it is lawfull for children to inuocate the blessing of their paren
                     •••
                  s Gen. 27. Gen. 48.
               2 That wee may salute generally though the person bee euill, so farre as wee may conuerse with him, giuing the titles of his profession, calling, &c. Ge. 34. Act. 26.
               3 That we auoide such blessing and charitable speeches (as we account them) when the cause is

not necessary, as in neesing, &c.
               
                  
                     Popish blessing to bee moderated.
                  4 Whereas it is common with the Popish and ignorant to inuocate the name of God ouer their cattle so often as they speak therof, this is to bee moderated and refrained. And that
               
               1 Because the ground thereof was sorcery.
               2 They vse it more often for their cattle then themselues.
               3 It maintaines that Popish customary abusing of such holy names.
               4 It shewes our infidelity, for if we were perswaded that God hath receiued vs into grace, then surely also all ours; and therfore what neede such often inuocations?
               This meeknes of speech is seen in soft answering.
                  
                     Sect. 28. Of soft ananswering.
                   Prouerbes 15.25. And that,
               Secondly, not a foole according to his foolishnesse. Prouerbes 26.3.
               Thirdly, in a iust defence of our selues. 1. Sam. 1.15. Anna.
               
               Fourthly, commending our cause

to God. Psal. 26.
                     Sect. 28. Of reproofe of sinne.
                  
               
               Secondly, this grace of speech is especially seene in reprouing of sin. Here obserue these Rules.
               1 We must try all other gentle meanes before we reproue.
               1 We must performe it generally, that so the party may willingly acknowledge the particular. 2. Sam. 12.
               3 Wee must doe it in a parable.
               4 By way of exhortation, insinuating an oblique reproofe. 1. Tim. 5.1.
               5 Wrapping vp the reproofe in some sweet protestations of loue and griefe. Gal. 5.9. Rom. 9.
               6 Yeelding vnto them their due, that so they may acknowledge their wants, Act. 25. reprouing in the person of another.
               6 Ioyning our selues with them, and in our own person reprouing their sinne. 1. Corinth. 4.6. Genes. 43.
               7 By preuention; as, Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Iudah sinne, Hos. 4.15.
               
                  8 Wishing that such things bee not found among them. 2. Cor. 12.20.
               9 Speaking to them as considering our selues. Gal. 6.1. That we are in danger of the same tentations.
               10 Framing the reproofe out of the word, that the party may see himselfe rather reproued of God then of vs.
               11 Adioyning to our reproofe holy example of our conscience in the thing which we reproue in another. And
               12 Commending the reproofe to the blessing of God.
               
                  
                     Sect. 30. A fit grace of speech is cheerfulnes and ioy. It conditions.
                  
                  And thus farre of the fourth grace of speech, which is meeknes & modesty.
               
               
                  A fifth grace of speech is cheerfulnes and ioy, when we vse delightfull speech for recreation. Eccles. 3.4.
               
                  Here is to be obserued:
               
               1 That it must be seasoned with Gods feare. Eccles. 2.2.
               2 It must bee with compassion for those that are in affliction. Amos. 6.6.
               
                  3 It must be sparing and moderate. 2. Tim. 3.
               4 It most not be mixt with sin. Heb. 11.25.
               5 It must tend to edification. 1. Cor. 10.
               6 It must bee sutable to the time.
               7 It must also bee fitted to the place, which is either the boord or bed.
               
                  For the boord obserue,
                  
                     How fitted to the boord
                  
               
               1 The intent, the which is to hinder other idle and prophane talke.
               2 To season the company with better.
               3 To preuent gluttony.
               4 A desire to catch spiritually.
               5 To sanctifie the creatures.
               2 Consider the matter of Table-talke. Which,
               1 Especially must bee of religion. Luk. 11.35.
               2 That which is incident herevnto, As
               1 Of our vnion with God: As the meate is made one substance

with vs; so we after an vnspeakeable manner are made one with God.
               2 Of our liberty in Christ, that all is ours, and that we may safely and freely partake thereof.
               3 Of our miserable condition; for were wee not sinfull, we need not eate, nor finde such loathsomnesse, or want of content thereby.
               4 Of our estate in glory, where this Manna shall cease.
               3 Of sobriety, and such examples.
               4 Gods speciall prouidence and bounty in making a dead creature meanes to preserue life. Ioel. 2.26. Haggai. 1.6.
               5 Contentation in our estate, with praier for other that haue fulnesse or want. 1▪ 
                  Tim. 6.
               6 Death, how that we shall be wormes meate.
               7 Of the heauenly food, Ioh. 4.
               8 Misery of the poore, which want in our fulnesse.
               
                  9 Of our life by faith, because both these vnlikely doe nourish, and we weake, vnthankfull, riotous, are nourished.
               10 Change of things and states, but within our bounds. Iob. 1.
               11 The punishment of sin, the case of Diues. &c. Luk. 16.
               For the bed; let these bee the rules of holy mirth.
               1 Wee must conferre of the graue. Act. 7.
                     How for bed.
                  
               
               2 Of the occasions passed in the day. Cant. 3.1.
               3 Of the security of the Church. 2. Cant.
               
               4 And watchfulnesse in the night. 3. Cant.
               
               5 Of the ignorance of the land. And
               6 The continuall night in hell.
               7 Of the Resurrection.
               8 Of worldly occasions, so farre as to humble vs.
               9 In our comforts of our sweete fellowship with Christ.
               10 Generally, not to prouoke, but

to mortifie the flesh. Gal. 5.13.
               
                  
                     Here to bee auoyded.
                  
                  Here is to be auoided generally,
                  
                     1 All offence to the weake.
                     2 All occasion to the wicked.
                  
               
               
                  As in
               
               First, Iesting, which is a quipping of some to delight others,1 Iesting with it bounds.
                   wherein a man had rather loose his friend, then his iest: offend God, rather then not please man.
               This is vtterly vnlawfull, vnlesse,
               1 The matter be indifferent.
               2 The measure modest.
               3 The season conuenient.
               4 Offence remoued.
               5 Our selues and others benefited.
               6 We thereby, when other reproofes will not preuaile, in an holy maner do deride and scorne sinners. 1. Reg. 19. Eccles. 11. giuing them vp to their own councels.
               Secondly, laughter, which though in it selfe it be not simply vnlawfull,2 Laughter
                   yet it is moderately to be be vsed, and seldome; but sorrow

more often, and more plentifully. Eccles. 7.4.5.
               The sixth grace of speech is,
                     Sect. 31. A sixt grace of speech, care of our neighbours good name. 1 How performed. 2 What auoyded.
                   
                  Care of our neighbours good name. Pro. 22.
               This is performed as before, and farther,
               1 By being not suspicious in vnlikely, or vncertaine occasions. Ier. 40.
               2 By priuate reprouing him.
               4 Publiquely answering for him if he be slandered.
               
                  Here is to be auoided,
               
               1 Secret whispering abrode of what we suspect or know, behind his backe. Psal. 50.20.
               2 Adding to, or changing the thing said or done. Mat. 26.60.61.
               3 Open traducing and reuiling to his face. 2. Sam. 16.
               4 Telling that was neuer done. Ier. 37.13.
               5 Colouring their reports with pretences of griefe or necessity, or publicke profit, inioyning secresie by the party to whom hee telles it, &c.
               
                  6 Rash censuring, before euident knowledge.
               
                  Therefore here we are,
                  
                     1 To interrupt such talke.
                     2 To giue no heed to it.
                     3 Not to beleeue it.
                     4 To reproue it.
                  
               
               
                  Sect. 32. The seuenth grace of speech: slownesse & briefnes.
                  The seuenth and last grace of speech is Slownesse and Briefenesse.
               
               Slownesse is seene either in
               First, prouoking; or
               Secondly, answering.
               
                  Herein obserue:
               
               1 That it is better to bee prouoked to speech, then prouoke; especially if wee bee inferiour.
               2 Not to take a Tale out of ones mouth; but to heare it throughly.
               3 To consider whether it be to be answered, or no.
               4 To ponder on it before wee answere, what answere is to bee made thereto.
               5 To answere to the poynts, omitting partiall respects.
               6 To cut off idle interruptions, and vaine cauils.
               
                  7 Not to powre out all our mindes at once, but to keepe some what till afterwards, Prou. 29.
               
                  Here is to bee auoyded.
               
               1 Pride to heare a mans selfe speake.
               2 The fruit thereof, namely:
               First, Obscurity.
               Secondly, Affectation.
               2 We must auoid tempting speeches, whereby wee may si
                     •••
                  
                  
                     •••
                   and vndermine others.
               4 As also, that spirit of contradiction, whereby thwarting oothers and contradicting euery man, Heresie and Atheisme is bred and maintained.
               5 We must also refraine bitternesse, and captious taking vp of our brother, a fault incident to briefenesse of speech.
               6 As also, wee must beware of sottishnes and inconsequence of speech, while happily we thinke to shewe our skill in breuity.
               
                  Hitherto appertaine,
               
               1 Restraining of our passion, by

interrupting our selues, if by course of speech wee grow into an heate.
               2 Correcting our selues by silence wherein we haue mis-said.
               3 Contracting our matter into the briefest forme of words.
               4 Disposing it methodically to the best capacity of the hearer.
               An eighth grace of speech is Wisedome.
               1 That we minister a word in due season, Isa. 50. As, comfort to whom comfort belongs, and when he is fit for comfort, being throughly humbled; and so reproofe.
               2 That we submit subordination to the best ends.
               3 That we affect not words, but labour to expresse our matter in the fewest and plainest.
               4 And also neglect not to ascribe what in ciuility belongs to each. And
               5 In charity ascribe for religion what is outwardly apparent, leauing the heart to God.
               6 Not iudging peremptorily of

any, though his estate bee outwardly desperate.
               7 Neither discouering our owne good or euill, but when, as before, we heare a calling
               Generall Rules to be obserued herein.
               1 That what is here spoken of Speech,
                     Rules herein.
                   is to be vnderstood also of Writing, in which all these graces are to be practised, and vices to be auoyded.
               2 That in all kinde of speech, as well Latine as English, &c. exemplary, as wherein though the phrases of other tongues may leade vs to prophanesses, yet we must auoyd them. As in Grammer, Would God I did, &c.
               
               
                  Hitherto of speech.
               
               
                  Now because wee cannot speake well, vnlesse wee know also how to hold our peace, wee are therefore, in the second place, to consider of silence.
                  Sect. 33 Of silence, and the right vse thereof.
                  
               
               Here obserue,
               1 That the Rule of silence must be Gods word.
               
               2 Matter of silence, concernes

                  God, our Neighbour, our Selues.
               
               3 Persons, before whom.
               
                  
                     Things to be conceald And first, wherein silence is to be vsed.
                  4 The end, wich is,
               Gods glory, ours & others good.
               Things concerning God, are:
               1 His secrets which wee know not, and therefore are to admire them in silence. Deut. 29.29.
               
                  1 Concerning God.
                  2 His strange and extraordinary workes, which wee may not speake boldly of, but rather in silence wonder at. Iob. 36.37. Leuit. 10.3.
               3 We are to conceale the mercy of from God obstinate sinners.
               4 We are to conceale his iudgements from humbled sinners.
               5 We are to be silent at his corrections. Psal. 39. hereby shewing our submission to his will.
               6 Wee are to yeeld to the knowne truth, and in silence to glorifie God. Act. 11.18.
               
                  2 Concerning our selues.
                  
                  Touching our Neighbour, obserue
               1 That we may conceale some truth from him, not being demanded; yea, being question
                     •••
                  d we may conceale either the whole, or part:
               
                  
                  Prouided that it do not.
               
               1 Hinder Gods glory.
               2 Or my neighbours good.
               
                  Truth in the whole is to be concealed:
               
               1 When the speaking of the least word is hurtfull: as for example, the father and sonne lieth sicke at once, the sonne dieth first, the father asketh whether the sonne be dead or no; if it bee said, No, an vntruth is told; if yea, the fathers life is endangered: therefore silence is best. 2. Sam. 12.
               2 When the reuealing thereof indangers the life of the innocēt;3 What to be conceald Aug. lib. ad conser.
                   and therefore I am not to reueale my brethren in affliction, nor to be compelled thereto by oath:
               Prouided, first, that the authority requiring this bee vnlawfull.
               2 The thing I conceale, bee not in it selfe euill; but so mistaken.
               3 That in the concealing of it, I preferre not a priuate before a publicke good.
               Truth in part is to be concealed; when I speake a part of the truth, but not the whole. 1. Sam. 16.1.

23. Ier. 38.24. Exod. 5. Act. 23.6.
               Q. When I am demanded, may I answere in part?
               Yea so,
               1 I purpose not to deceiue.
               2 Content the minde of the answerer.
               Secondly, I am to conceale the infirmities of my Neighbour, vnlesse (as before) we be called of God to speake, Prou. 17.14. Prou. 19.11.
               3 All vnseemely matters,
               4 Such as concerne vs not,
               5 And such as are aboue our reach, are to be buried in silence.
               3 Ministers must conceale the infirmities of their people, vnlesse they be otherwise vnreclaimable.
               4 Magistrates secrets of state, least the enemy know them.
               
                  Concerning my selfe. I am,
               1 To conceale mine owne secrets. Iud. 14. or else, if need be, tell those that are faithfull of silence concerning my selfe.
               2 That which thou wouldst haue no man know, tell no man.
               
                  As for the persons before whom wee must keepe silence:
                     4 Before whom we must keepe silence. 
                  they are
               
               1 The malicious enemies of religion, Mat. 7.6. Mat. 27.14. Ps. 39.2.
               2 Before Magistrates in open Courts, Act. 24, 10. till we be bidden.
               3 In the presence of our elders and betters. Iob. 32.8.
               4 Fooles and pratlers are to bee humbled and conuinced with silence. Pro. 26.
               Thus farre concerning the guidance of the tongue.
               The sixth and last part of this Girdle of truth containes the fitting and conforming our outward actions to the will of God, which is performed
               1 When they proceed from a true ground
               2 And are to be performed true meanes, and a holy manner.Sect.34. Last part of the Girdle: Conformi
                           •••
                        ie of outward actions.
                  
               
               3 When they aime, at a right end. The ground of all good actions is faith in Iesus Christ. Rom. 14. Heb. 11.6.
               1 Assuring vs, that our persons are accepted of God, and so our

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
Gods meere mercy in Iesus Christ. Phil. 3.
               12 That we bee that we seeme to bee.
               13 That wee make conscience of the least as well as the greatest.
               14 That we prouide things honest before men, as well as in the sight of God.
               15 Distrust the goodnes of that worke in w
                     •••
                  ich thou hast not a contrary tentation.
               16 Especially if thou beest not rowsed with an imputation of hypocrisie.
               17 That we measure not the substance of wel-doing by particular actions.
               18 That the rule for approbations of our actions be the acceptance of our persons in Christ, not any perfection that is in thē.
               19 That in all well-doing wee discerne a kind of foolishnesse in regard of the wisedome of the world, and of the flesh.
               1 To be abased in our selues.
               
                  2 To giue God the glory.
               3 To try the sincerity thereof in regard of the opposition of the world. 1. Cor. 3.18.
               
                  The end of our actions is,
               
               1 That whatsoeuer we do,
                     The end what,
                   it be done to Gods glory. 1. Cor. 10.31. and this is performed:1 Gods glory.
                  
               
               1 In sanctifying and auspicating them by prayer & inuocation of the name of God. 1. Tim. 4.
               2 In returning the strength of them to the worship of God, in causing our light to shine before men. Math. 5.20. Prou. 5.10.
               3 In all things, and in euery issue of them, giuing thankes to God the father, through Iesus Christ.
               4 Being abased before the Lord in regard of our vnworthinesse to doe him any seruice, as also of the vnworthinesse of the seruice we doe performe.
               5 Acknowledging that nothing is due vnto vs but shame and confusion of our faces. Dan, 9.
               6 Desiring to be found in Christ, not hauing our owne righteousnesse,

which is of the Law, but that which is by the faith of Christ. Phil. 3.9.
               
                  2 Edification how accomplished.
                  
                  Secondly, we must do all things to edification both of our selues and others. Here obserue:
               1 That the lesse benefite must giue place to the greater.
               2 That in all things next to Gods glory, our chiefe aime must be the saluation of the soule. 1. Cor. 16.
               3 That more regard be had of those which are within, thē which are without, Gal. 6.10. 1. Cor. 6. & yet the good of none neglected.
               4 That of those which are within, we haue more respect to the weake in cases of indifferencie. Rom. 14. Rom. 15.1.
               5 That our conuersation be answerable to our profession. Ephes. 4.1.
               6 That we haue as well strong meat for men, as milke for babes; not sticking alwayes in the infancie of our profession, but growing vp in Iesus Christ, Hebr. 6.1. Hebr. 13.
               
                  7 That we abound in weldoing, and make sure our Election by good workes. 2. Pet. 1.8.9.
               8 That wee as well cast out the hypocrite and stumbling-blocke, as hold on the sound Christian. Ier. 1.
               9 We must bring forth fruit in due season, obseruing the comelinesse of time, place, persons, &c. Psa. 1.3.
               10 That in actions either doubtfull or deceitful, as we haue cause to suspect them.
               1 If they grieue the godly.
               2 If they giue occasion of the wicked to reioyce: so wee may haue comfort if the conscience approue, and the Saints allow, though the wicked condemne. &c
               
                  This Girdle is put on.
               
               1 By continuall setting of our hearts before God,
                     How applied.
                   for the searching thereof.
               2 Trying all our thoughts, words, and actions, by the word.
               3 By continuall watching ouer our wayes.
               
                  4 By earnest prayer to God.
               
                  And it is kept on,
               
               1 By not straining the conscience in the least euill, Hebr. 13.18.
               2 By cleauing to the testimony thereof, and reioyi
                     •••
                  ng especially therein. 2. Cor. 1.12.
               3 By obeying the checkes of conscience.
               4 Conuincing the hollownesse and hypocrisie of the world.
               5 Labouring and aprouing sincerity in others.
               6 Daily fearing our selues, and renuing our couenant with God.
               7 Renouncing daily our selues, and flying to Christ. Phil. 3.12.13.
               
                  
                     Benefite of this part of the Girdle.
                  
                  The vse of this Girdle is:
               
               1 Wee are ready prest to doe Gods will. Reu. 1.
               2 Wee are cleered from hypocrisie, which is the moth of well-doing. Mat. 6. Mat. 23.
               3 Wee auoyd vncertatnty, and dulnesse in good things.
               4 We are preserued from corruption in iudgement, and Apostasie

in life.
               5 All other gifts of God are adorned and approued thereby.
               6 We are enabled to hold out to the end, and so obtaine the Crowne.
               7 As by this rule of our actions, discerning the vnworthinesse thereof.
               8 In the vnworthinesse of the action, discerning the worthines of our persons in Christ, and growing vp in him by faith to perfection.
               9 The other parts of the spirituall Armour are compact in themselues, and fastned to vs by it: The next whereof is the Brest-plate of righteousnes, or Innocency. And this is, 1 An inclination and resolution of the heart to all good.Sect. 35. The Breast-plate of righteousnesse
                  
               
               
                  This is necessary,
               
               1 To iustifie and beautifie our profession, and make sure our election. 2. Pet 1.10.
               2 That we may be freed from many inward pangs, and outward troubles.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  3 By abstaining from the occasions and appearance of euill. 1. Thess. 5.
               4 By iustifying and maintaining the same, with the losse of al in respect thereof. Act. 21. Iob. 2.
               5 By walking conscionably in the duties of our callings.
               6 By trying our faith which is the life thereof. 2. Cor. 13.
               7 Vndergoing continuall troubles for the same.
And to this end serues the third part of this Armour.
                  This is, that our feete be shod with the preparation of the Gospel, that is:
               
                  1. What it is
                  In the assurance of our acceptation into the fauour of God, through Iesus Christ, we are armed and prepared:
               First, to Deny our selues.
               Secondly, to take vp the crosse of Christ and to follow him. Luke 9.23.
               
                  And this must be done.
               
               1 That troubles find vs not vnprepared.2. The vse of this part.
                   
                  Iob. 3 25.
               2 That the feare of them may

not dismay vs.
               3 That we be not ouerwhelmed with the waight of them. 2. Corin. 4.8.9.
               4 That our minds may be quieted in the midst of them. Rom 5.2.
               5 That we may bee more then conqueror in them. Romans 8.24.
               6 That we may comforts others which grone vnder the like burthen 2. Cor. 1.4.5.
               7 And so finish our course and obtaine the crowne. 2. Tim. 4.
               This armour is put on, and so kept:
               1 By dayly reading and meditating on the passion of Christ.
                     How to bee attained, and preserued.
                   
                  Heb. 12.2.
               2 Giuing all diligence to the word preached.
               3 Preferring the fauor of God in Christ aboue all things. Ps. 4.6.
               4 Not depending vpon things seene, but contemplating things inuisible. Heb. 11.1.
               5 Hauing our eye fixed on the recompence of the reward, and comparing the momentany trouble,

with the surpassing weight of glory Heb. 11.26.
               And here the shield of faith, is of speciall vse, which is the fourth part of this Armour:
               
                  
                     Sect. 37. A fourth part of the Armour, the shield of faith.
                  And it is a full and strong perswasion of the loue of God in Christ Iesus, Rom. 8.38. whereby
               1 We beate backe all the fierie darts of the diuell, as carnal confidence, presumption, security, infidelitie, distrust, credulitie, &c.
               2 Prize all things at their true worth and prosecute them accordingly:
               3 Wee preserue the graces of God, and increase them vnto vs.
               4 Wee follow hard to the marke, and attaine perfection. Phil. 3.13.
               
                  This is requisite:
               
               
                  
                     It vse.
                  1 To giue approbation to all our actions.
               2 To giue comfort in regard of their imperfections.
               3 To enable vs in our suffrings Iob. 1.5.
               4 To finish our course and procure

vs the crowne. Hebrew 11.13 2. Tim. 4·
               5 To ouercome tentations, as despaire, & presumption of Gods mercie, &c.
               6 To obtaine a comfortable life
               7 To be prepared vnto death.
This is obtained and preserued as before. Cap. 7,
                     Sect. 38. The fifth part the helmet of hope.
                  
                  A fift part of this Armour is the helmet of hope. This is
               
               1 A constant desire of the promised happinesse. Mat. 5.6. Phil. 1.23. 2. Tim. 4.8.
               2 A chearefull expectation and wayting after the same.
               3 A resigning our selues into the hands of God. Psal. 5.12.
               
                  And it differs from faith:
               
               1 In the maner of apprehending faith apprehends things to come, as if they were present.
               Hope discerneth them as they are in time to bee performed and so waiteth the accomplishment of them.
               2 In the vse, Faith giues a being to things that are not, calling

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
Lord when meanes faile. ibid. 5. & resting in him. Prou. 14.32 Rom. 4.
               5 Reuerent obseruing of the workes of God. Psalme 40.4. Psalm 115.11.
               6 Depending on the trueth of Gods promises, though we see thē not accomplished. Psal. 46.5. Psal. 130.9. Prou. 16.20.
               7 Expecting the Lords leasure, contrary to sense and reason▪ 
                  Psal. 69.4. Esay 26.8
               8 Abasing and renouncing our selues before the Lord. Psal. 131.3 Zeph. 3.12.
               9 Submitting our selues to the ministery of the Gospel. Es. 50.10.
               10 Waiting further vpon God, then this life can counteruaile. 1. Cor. 15.19.
               
                  The last part of this spirituall armour, is the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
                  
                     Sect. 39. The last part the sword of the Spirit.
                   Hebrew 4 Psalme 149. &c
               
                  And this must be had,
               
               First, To discerne:
               
               
                  1. It vse.
                  1 The deceitfulnesse of sinne. Heb. 3.13.
               
                  2 The poyson of error and heresie. 1. Tim. 6.3.
               3 The corruption of our owne hearts. Heb. 12.
               4 The manifold subtilties and deepenesse of Satan. Apoc. 2.24. 2. Pet. 1.19.
               5 The riches of Gods mercie. Eph. 3.18. Ephes. 1.18.
               Secondly, to confirme & maintain
               
               1 Faith against infidelity and discontentment.
               2 Hope against despaire. Ro. 15.4
               3 Truth against error and humane wisedome. Iames 1.18.
               Christ against Antichrist.
               4 God against man.
               Thirdly, To captiuate and subdue:
               
               1 Euery imagination that exalts it selfe against God. 2. Cor. 10.4.
               2 To cut off the power and cords of sinne. Hos. 6.
               3 To repell the impudencie and importunitie of Satan. Mat. 4.
               Fourthly, To purge:
                  
                     1 Zeale, of ignorance & selfeloue
                     2 Religion, of hypocrisie.
                     3 Profession, of vaine glory.
                     
                        4 Weldoing, of wearisomnesse
                     5 Faith of carnalnesse.
                     6 Afflictions, of impatiency, &c.
                  
               
               Fiftly, To confound:

                     1 Satans kingdome. Mat. 4.
                     2 The fleshes tyranny. Tit. 2.11.
                     3 The worlds deceitfulnesse. Ps. 119.95
                  
               
               Our hearts doubtfulnesse. Psal. 73.17.
               
                  2 How obtained.
                  5 Mans inuentions. Psal. 119.113
               
                  This armour is obtained and put on,
               
               1 By prayer.
               2 Studie and meditation. 1. Tim 4.13.
               3 Submitting our selues to the word preached.3 Triall 
                           •••
                        ereof.
                   
                  Iam. 1.21.
               
                  These meanes how wrought effectually:
               
               1 When our vnderstanding is illightened, and delighted with the sauing knowledge thereof.
               2 Our iudgements confirmed, & established in the same. Ep. 1.9▪
               
               3 Our consciences conuinced, and quieted therein. Romans 5.1.
               4 Our wil and affections subdued & captiuated thereto. Ps. 40.6.
               
                  5 Our desire enflamed and vnsatiable thereof. Mat. 5.6.
               6 Our minde satisfied and contented therewith, aboue all treasures. Psal. 119.97. Psalme 19.10.
               7 Our liues reformed & amended thereby. Psal. 119.9.
               8 Our faith quickened, & daily nourished by the same. 2. Pet. 1.
               9 And we enabled to ouercome tentations, & to finish our course with ioy. Psal. 119.7.9.
               
                  And this armour is kept on:
               
               1 By recording and rehearsing the same vnto other:4. How kept on.
                   so to labour their conuersion. Lu 22.23.
               2 By spiritual experience of the power therof in putting our knowledge into continuall practise.
               3 By cleauing constantly to an effectuall ministery. Iohn. 10.5.
               4 By suffring afflictions for the Gospel. Heb. 10. Act. 21.
               5 By labouring to haue it to dwell plentifully among vs, & to haue the power thereof more and more abound in the mortifying of our affections and speciall sins.

                  Col. 3.16. Tit. 2.11.
               
                  Thus farre of the parts of the Christian armour.
               
               Now the necessitie in generall of it, is that without it,
               
                  
                     Sect. 40. The general benefit of the whole armie.
                  First, In respect of our selues,
               
               1 Our whole life must needs be subiect to many feareful breaches and distractions, 2. Pet. 1.
               2 We shall passe it very ildy and vnprofitably.
               3 Wee shall bee deceiued with many false shadowes, and apparances of good, and bee much to seeke in that good which wee doe desire, either in the knowledge of it, or desire to the same.
               4 Our course at the best will be most vncertaine. Iohn 11.10. In regard of others.
               5 Wee shall not so shine before them, as lights by our good examples. Mat, 5.16.
               6 Nay, wee shall necessarily in respect of our euil example be stumbling blockes vnto them.
               7 We shall cause our profession to be euill spoken of. Ephes. 5.4.3
               
                  8 And our God, and his Religion and word blasphemed. Timothie 6.1.
               But with this Armour, we shall be,
               1 Certaine of what we do. Iohn 11.9.
               2 Enabled in some measure to do it. Psal. 119.104.
               3 Strong to encounter all oppositions, and victorious therein. Psal. 119.6.
               4 Assured of the acceptance of what we doe Phil. 1.21, 20.
               5 Ready for all occasions whatsoeuer. Phil. 4.12.
               6 And willing to yeelde vp 
                     •••
                  his due vnto God, when hee shall require it. Acts 7.1. Cor. 7.
               And thus much concerning the spirituall Armour.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the pursuit of God, and the auoyding of euill.
               
                  Now being thus armed, we are prepared to encoūter such occasions as

occurre in the day, which are generally and necessary:

                     1 To auoyde euill, Esay 1.16, 17.
                     2 To prosecute that which is good.
                     
                  
               
               Concerning the auoyding of euill.
               First, we must labor to haue our iudgement rectified.
               
                  Concerning.
               
               1 The euil it selfe.
               2 Our owne estate in respect of it·
               3 God, who hates it and yet orders it.
               
                  That which wee are to be informed concerning euil,
                     Sest. 1. Difference of euill.
                   is, that there is euil.
               1 By nature, and such is whatsoeuer is against or besides the law of God, and this is properly called sinne.
               
               2 By accident, so a good thing may be made euill. Psal. 69.22. Malach. 2.2.
               3 Opinion, so afflictions are counted euils; yea, the trueth and power of good in the censure of the world, vsually is counted euill. Esay 5.20.
               
                  
                  The vse hereof is:
               
               1 That we may discerne things that differ, not stumbling vpon euill in stead of good, nor auoyding good in stead of euill, not fearing afflictions whē they come for good, nor distrusting our goodnesse, though it bee accounted euill. Phil. 1.10.
               2 We must vnderstand the true authour of euil, which is not God, but our selues, that so wee may blame none, but our selues. Iames 1.13
               3 That euill is not only a meere priuati
                     •••
                  n of good,
                     Sect. 2. What the euill of sin is.
                   but a qualitie inherent and defiling the soule. 1. Iohn 3.4.
               4 That it is not only committed in act, but in thought; though consent come not thereto. Exod. 20.
               5 That it is as well committed in omitting what we should do, as in doing what we should not.
               6 That sinne is seene in the least that is forbidden, as well as in the greatest. 1. Iohn 3.4.
               That the least sin breaketh the

law of God, and maketh vs guilty of the whole. Iam. 2.12. Ephes. 5.11.12. Rom. 6.21.
               8 That sinne is filthie and lothsome euen in the greatest pleasure and act thereof.
               9 That the end thereof is bitter and the inward parts most abominable Rom. 6.
               
                  
                     Sect. 3. The vse of this knowledge.
                  
                  And this knowledge serueth.
               
               1 To conclude all vnder sinne. Rom. 3.9.
               2 To lay the fault iustly where it is.
               3 To preuent diminishing and encreasing of sinne.
               4 To auoyde the custome, and punishment thereof.
               Concerning our owne estate in respect of sinne, we are to learne.
               1 That if we neuer committed sin, yet we are not free from it, as being guilta of the sinne of another, & deriuing it from the loines of our parents. Rom. 5.14. Psal. 51.5. Ephes. 2.3.
               2 That hereby our nature is

wholly tainted with corruption, and vncleanenesse. Iob. 14. Psalme 51.
               3 That wee are depriued of all originall, and actual righteousnes.
                     Sect. 4 How farre sinne hath taken hold on man.
                   
                  Ephes. 2. Rom. 6.
               4 And prone, yea desparately set to commit all sinne with greedinesse. Gen. 6.
               5 That we delight in sinne, and repose our chiefe contentment therein. Pro. 2.
               6 That naturally we hate to be reformed and pluckt out of sinne. Rom. 10.21.
               7 That we cannot but necessarily, and yet willingly sinne. 1. Cor. 12.2.
               8 That our best actions are beautifull sinnes. Esay. 64.6.
               9 That in our nature, sinne yet remaineth. Rom. 7.1. Iohn 1.7. And that. Reason
               
               
                  How farre sinne remaineth in the Regenerate, and why
               1 That we might haue dayly experience of the vertue of Christs sacrifice.
               
                  2 As also discerne the worke of sanctification by the contrary tentations.
               3 That by renued repentance we might maintain the assurance of the forgiuenesse of sinne.
               4 That we might be dayly humbled vnder the hand of God.
               5 That we might giue God the glory of his freee mercy, in working wholly our saluation.
                     The benefit of this knowledge.
                  
               
               
                  And this knowledge serueth:
               
               1 To iustifie God in his iudgements. Rom. 3.5.
               2 To confound the goodnesse of nature. Rom. 3.19.
               3 To magnifie the riches of Gods mercy. Ephes. 2.3.7.
               4 To send vs to Christ. Romans 3.22.
               5 To prouoke vs to hunger after heauen.
               Concerning God, we are thus to conceiue of si
                     •••
                  n
                     •••
                  .Sect. 4. Gods ordering sinnes
               
               1 That hee hateth all euill as a righteous God. Psal. 5. and no vncleane thing shall dwell with him. Reuel. 21.
               
                  2 That he permitteth and ordereth euill in speciall wisedome to his glory. Act. 5. As
               1 In that hee presustaineth the subiect of sinne.
               2 Hee denieth or withdraweth his assistance by which necessarily we fall.
               3 He turneth all euill to good.
               3 That he knoweth and searcheth the most inmost closet of sin. Ierem. 17.10.
               4 That he is able to punish, and to take vengeance of the same. Isa 40.
               5 That he punisheth sinne with sinne, and yet most righteously. 2. Thess. 2.11.
               6 That though hee haue laide the chastisement of our peace vpon on his Sonne: yet he will correct vs as his children for sinne. Isa. 53 Psal. 88.89.
               7 That he leaueth to grosse and open sinnes to preuent and purge out spirituall wickednesse in his children.
               8 That he giueth vp the wicked

to spirituall wickednesse, of selfe-loue, pride, hardnesse of heart, security, to preuent hereby for a time grosse euils, which might be a means to bring to repentance, whereby they are detained in a false conceit of their estates, & so are ripened to eternal vengeance
               
                  
                     And the vse
                  
                  And this knowledge serueth:
               
               1 To iustifie the perfect holines of God. Psal. 18.30. Psal. 145.17.
               2 To magnifie his wisedome in disposing of euill. Rom. 11.33.
               3 To giue him his prerogatiue, that he is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the searcher of the heart. Ier. 17.10.
               4 To ascribe vnto him the glory of his power and super excellent greatnesse, that we might be humbled before him. Psa. 86.9, 10.
               5 To worke in vs an hatred of euill, & loue of righteousnes. Gen. 17.1. because god hates him. Ps. 139
               6 To preuent presumption, and cause vs to worke out our saluation with feare & trembling 2. Co. 5.
               7 To trust perfitly in him, that so gratiously orders euil, and turnes

hem about to our good.
                     Sect. 5. How sinne to be auoyded.
                  
               
               Secondly, Our iudgment being thus rectified, we must proceed to the practise of auoyding euill.
               
               
                  And this is seene, either in
                  
                     1 Preuenting sinne, or
                     2 Recouering out of it by vnfained repentance.
                        
                           And first how preuēted 1. generally.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Sinne is preuented either:

                     1 Generally, or
                     2 Particularly: Generally: by
                  
               
               1 A continuall watchfulnesse ouer our heart, and outward man.
               2 A feare and suspecting of our selues, as at all times, so when wee haue most experience of Gods mercy. Prou. 28.14. Iob. 1.
               3 A continuall resigning of our selues into the hands of God.
               4 Walking as alwayes in his presence. Gen. 5.22. Gen. 17.1.
               5 To haue a continuall eye to Gods commandements. Psalme 119.
               6 To meditate on Gods iudgements, inflicted on his deerest children for sinne. 2. Sam. 12.11, 14.
               
                  
                  
                     How to bee imployed in our callings generally.
                  7 Consider the inestimable loue and mercy of God towards vs. Exod. 34 6.
               Eightly, Imploying our selues in some honest calling 2. Thess. 3.11.12. And that
               1 In faith and without distrust of Gods prouidence, with a good conscience. Mat. 6.25. Heb. 13.18.
               2 With cheerefulnesse and contentment, without murmuring & couetousnesse. Heb. 13.5.
               3 Committing the successe to God, and waiting for his blessing, without making haste to be rich, or indenting with God for these outward things. 1. Tim. 6. Gen. 30. 1. Ha. 1.16.
               4 In humilitie, and lowlines, not sacrificing to our net, but giuing God the glory. Gen. 32.10.
               5 In holines sanctifying the same by the word and prayer, and laying a good foundation therby towards heauen. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tim. 4.
               6 In faithfulnes and diligence, redeeming the time, & accounting for it. Eph. 5▪16 Psal. 90.
               
                  Ninthly,
                     How to vse Christian liberty aright
                   
                  learning to vse our Christian libertie a right.
               
               1 Herein not so much to stand on lawfulnesse, as expedience. 1. Cor. 10.
               2 That all things be done to edification, not offence. 1. Cor. 14.
               3 That as wee remit of our liberty in regard of such as are weak of ignorance, so we vse it in respect of the obstinately ignorant, lest we harden them in their sin. Mat. 15.14.
               4 That we vse the things of this life within the compasse of our callings. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 10.
               5 For our recreation that it be in things indifferent. Phil. 4.8
               2 Very spare and sober.
               3 Tending to a spirituall end, not the satisfying of the flesh. Ga. 5.13
               6 That all things be done to the glory of God. 1, Cor. 16.
               Tenthly; By auoyding the occasions of sinne, which are
               1 Euill company. Ephes. 5.11.
               2 Excesse in the vse of the creatures. Luk. 21.34.
               3 Giuing the bridle to the outward

man. Gen. 31.1.
               4 Opportunitie and seasonablenesse. Eccles. 3.1.
               5 Appearance and shew of euill, &c. Thess. 5.22.
               
                  And thus sinne generally may be preuented, particularly, thus, when wee are assaulted by any tentation.
               
               
                  2 How in particular we may resist sinne.
                  1 To mourne at the priuy motions of sinne, and at no hand to set light by it.
               2 To know that I beare a traytor in my bosom, & therfore here here at no hand consult with flesh nor giue away to the temptation. Iames. 1.14.
               3 To choake it by strong cryes and groanes to God. Mat. 6.13.
               4 To put it off by exercising the mind with contrary meditations and affecting the contrary vertue Psalme 1.
               5 Examine thy heart why it is thus, & thou shalt find some cause of this tentation, Psalme 4.
               6 The cause found either,
               1 Want of found repentance for some former sinne.
               2 Security.
               
                  3 Some greater euill like to follow, whereof this tentation is a messenger, or such like negligence, dispose thy selfe accordingly.
               4 Forget not hartily to mourne for thy former yeelding to the like tentations, and so renue thy repentance for former sins. And strengthen thy selfe especially by the meditation of the sufficiencie of thy Sauiour, who now suffers with thee, and in whom thou shalt bee more then a conquerour.
               5 Intend thy calling more carefully and conscionably, Eph. 5.15.
               6 Renue thy repentance and vowes to God more effectually. Psa. 116. for the present motions and prouocations to euill.
               7 Dispute not with Sathan, neither play with the flame; but flye away with Ioseph, though thou leaue thy coat behind thee, Iam. 4.7. Gen▪
                   39.12.
               8 Labour not so much to auoyd the outward act, as to haue thy

heart purged from the euill thought. Psal. 51.2.10.
               9 Esteeme it thy greatest happinesse in this life, to be free from the rage and slauery of sin. And,
               10 Magnifie in thy iudgement their condition who are constantly maisters of their owne corruptions.
               11 Submitting thy selfe rather to any punishment (if it so please God) then to yeeld to the tentation. Mat. 5.29.
               12 Remembring often with feare and trembling, what thou mightst bee brought to by this 
                     •••
                  enta
                     •••
                  ion, if God should leaue thee. And looke for one temptation in the necke of another.
               13 Yet faint not in thy resistance: but perseuer constantly, and by Gods mercy Sathan shall flye away. Iam. 4.7. Mat. 4
               14 Faile not to be thankfull vnto God for euery little occasion of auoyding the tentation, or conquering the same.
               
                  Here at no hand giue way to corruption, or deferre repentance,
               1 Because thou hast no certainty of thy life.
               2 Nor assurance of the renuing and returne of Gods mercy, if once thou refuse it, Pro. 1.24.25.
               3 The sooner thou returnest, the surer will be thy acceptance, and the more sweete and beautifull thy after conuersation.
               4 Yea thou shalt more encrease Gods kingdome, and so gaining God more glory, prepare thy selfe to greater glory.
               If Satan preuaile, and thou are foyled, and therefore now thou must speedily rise againe by repentance.
               
                  To this end consider:
               
               1 Thy estate in grace,Sect. 6 How to recouer out of sinne.
                   which must be renued by repentance. Psal. 51.
               2 Gods mercies, which are aboue all thy sinnes. Psalm. 103.8. Exod. 24.16.
               3 The effectualnesse of Christs

sacrifice; daily cleansing thee from sinne. 1. Iohn. 1.7.
               4 And that still thou liuest by faith, aboue the sence of thine owne present state, Rom. 1. yet stil refreshing thy selfe with
               5 Thy former experience how thou hast recouered, Psa. 77.5.
               And so practise thy raising vp in this manner:
               
                  1 By viewing sin, and that first in the Law.
                  First, view thine iniquity in the glasse of the Law, to bruise thine heart, and there thou shalt finde what an euil and bitter thing sin is. Ier. 2.19.
               2 Secondly hereupon apply that knowledge vnto thine own soule by the power of Conscience, assisted by the Spirit of Bondage: and proceed to iudge thy selfe, concluding that thou art guiltie of eternall death. And hence will follow compunction, and wounding of the heart, Act. 2.37
               3 The heart being thus wounded, that thou maist bee kept from despaire,2 In the Gospel.
                   view thy selfe, secondly, in the glasse of the

Gospell, that the bruised Reede may not be broken; by considering what a bitter, and yet pretious ransome was paid for thy sin. Mat. 20.28.
               4 Hereupon make application vnto thine heart, by the worke of Conscience, renued by the Spirit of Adoption, & raise vp thy selfe with this assurance, that though thou art a sinner; yet Christ is thine, and thou hast pardon of thy sinne, and shalt haue life eternall in him. Mat. 11.28. Math. 5.3.4. Luk. 15.2. Cor. 7.
               This application worketh two contrary effects:
               1 Thou shalt reioyce that thy sinnes are forgiuen thee in Christ Iesus.
               2 Thou shalt be sorrowfull t
                     •••
                  at thou hast displeased so good and gratious a Father.
               
                  And this sorrow is expressed:
                  2 By iudgeing.
                  
               
               First, by iudging thy sinne before God in the Court of thy Conscience.
               
                  And this iudgement consisteth:
               
               
                  1 In conceiuing the foolishnesse of thy sinne, to crosse the wisedome of the flesh, and condemne the same. 2. Sam. 24.
               2 In examining thy sinne, and taking a more particular notice thereof, Psa. 51.4.
               2 Confessing it, Psalm. 32.5. And that,
               
               1 With griefe and detestation. Esay 37.
               2 Particularly, not generally, not onely so farre as thou knowest, confessing herein thy knowledge to be short, and yeelding vp thy vnsearchable heart vnto God, Lord clense me from my secret sinnes. Psa. 19.
               3 Against thy selfe, not excusing or diminishing: not laying the fault vpon God, the creatures &c. but blaming especially that corrupt fountaine of thy heart herein, Psa. 32.5. Psa. 51.
               4 Vnto God, not vnto Angels, or Men, &c. who only is able and ready to forgiue. Psal. 103.
               Thirdly, thou must condemne

sinnne, and this is done;
               1 By acknowleging what is d
                     •••
                  e vnto thee for it, namely shame and confusion of face for euer. 
                     〈◊〉
                   9.6. Da
                        •••
                     .
               
               2 Professing thine owne vilenesse and vnworthinesse of the least of Gods mercies. Iob. 39.16.
               3 Iustifying God in what hee might do, and submitting thy self vnder his mighty hand Ely 2. Sam 2. Dauid, 2. Sam. 16.
               4 Execute vengeance on thy selfe for thy sinne, 2. Corinth. 7. in this manner:
               1 Lie downe in thy confusion, and couer thy face with shame. Ier. 3. Luk 18.
               2 Abhorre and detest thy selfe in sackcloth and ashes, Iob. 42.6.
               3 Haue indignation and zeale against thy selfe for offending so good a God: 2. Cor, 7. Peter wept bitterly. Psal, 73.22. So foolish, &c.
               
               4 Grone vnder the burthen of thy flesh, and desire to bee rid

of it, Rom. 7.21.
               5 Possesse a broken heart for thy sinne, all thy life long, Psalm. 51.17.
               6 Refraine thy selfe from lawfull comforts. Ioel. 2.
               7 Impose all meanes of mortifiing thy rebellious flesh, as feare of thy selfe, lest thou fall againe. Pro. 28.14.
               8 Mingle thy drinke with thy teares, and in thy greatest security let the remembrance of thy sinne awake and rouse thee vp. Psa. 51.
               9 Desire euer after more carefully to please God. 2. Cor 7.
               10 To this end preserue a record of thy sin, and retaine some monument thereof with thee.
               11 Consider often what punishments thou hast felt for sin.
               12 And let the day of thy death, and appearing before the iudgement seate of Christ, bee alwayes in thy minde, make thou sure account of it, and daily make ready for it, 2. Pet. 3.
               
                  13 Cease not crying out against thy corruptions, and complaining vnto God of thy rebellions, that he may strengthen thee against them. Psa. 119.49.
               14 Binde thy selfe by the oath, and by the curse to forsake all sin, and to continue constant in the seruice of thy God, Ezra. 10.3. 2. Chro. 15.
               15 Reproue sinne boldly in others, and plucke them out of the fire: Iude 23. though thou beest scorcht for thy labour.
               16 Suffer affliction as a good Souldier of Iesus Christ, and prepare thy soule vnto tentations. 2. Tim. 2.
               
                  Thus shalt thou cut off sin, and happily preserue thy selfe in a constant course of godlinesse.
               
               
                  For thy better instruction herein:
               
               1 Call to minde what before is deliuered in the sixth part of the Girdle of Truth, concerning Holy Actions; which may helpe thee both in the true knowledge of God, to informe thy iudgement,

as also in the right and holy practise of good things, which must be part of thy Daily Sacrifice.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of growing in grace.
               
                  BEing thus instructed in generall to auoyd euill, and doe good, the next duty that thou must performe, is to grow in grace.
               
               And this duty is necessary: because,
               
                  
                     Resons and motiues hereto.
                  1 We doe approue our right in Gods blessing we haue receiued. 1. Tim. 4.
               2 Wee make them profitable, and durable, Mat. 14.19.20.
               3 Hereby we imitate our Sauiour Christ Iesus, who grew in fauour and grace with God and Men. Mat. 13.
               4 Hereby we weaken daily the old man. 2. Cor. 4.
               5 And draw neerer to the life of glory.
               6 By growing, we haue comfortable experience more and

more of our corruption, that so wee may bee more humbled in our selues, and hunger after Christ.
               7 Hereby we are weaned from the loue of the world, and more eased and freed from distrustfull cares for worldly things, because the more heauenly riches we enioy, the lesse minde haue we, the lesse need do we see our selues to haue of earthly things; yea the experience of Gods mercy encreasing vs in spirituall riches, con
                     •••
                  
                  
                     •••
                  mes our faith more in the prouidence of God for outward things.
               8 And so wee obtaine also by this encrease, more confidence and boldnesse in the presence of God.
               9 Yea wee shall finde our life and power miraculously quickned in holy duties, especially prayer, and zeale of Gods glory, humility, patience, &c.
               10 And whereas before, the least afflictions were Irksome,

now by this increase, wee shall thinke nothing strange, no not the fiery triall. 1. Pet. 4 11. wee shall be more ready to vndergoe them, and haue more comfort in them. As
               11 Hauing by this encrease of grace, more liuely experience of the power of Christ raigning in our mortall bodies; by whom we shall haue strength to perseuere vnto the end.
               12 And this is also the benefite of this growing, euen to assure vs that we shall hold out, and continue vnto the end.
               Thus shall wee bee conuinced, and prouoked to grow in grace.
               Secondly, consider we now in the next place,

                     1 The meanes whereby wee must grow. And
                     2 The manner. And
                     3 The measure. And
                     4 Triall of our growth.
                  
               
               
                  For the meanes, these are:
               
               
                  
                     Meanes of growing.
                  1 The powerfull preaching of the word, as being Gods Instrument

to lead forward as well as to begin the worke. 1. Pet. 2.1.
               2 The daily viewing of the heart therein: for as we discerne corruption, so we desire to grow. Psal. 4.5.
               3 The quickning of our desires and purposes for well-doing: for as we desire and loue, so we shall practise.
               Now our desires are quickned and enlarged thus:Desire how quickned.
               
               1 By retaining soundnesse of iudgement so farre as we know.
               2 Reiecting carnall rules for holinesse, which may coole,
               1 As that we may bee too holie.
               2 That it is enough to be holy as others are.
                     Carnall and false rules.
                  
               
               3 Flesh and blood cannot doe this.
               4 That God is mercifull, and if wee doe our best, what can you haue more?
               5 That we must not presume to bee so holy as Peter and Paul were. 1. Cor. 11.1.
               
                  6 That our fore-fathers were saued with lesse adoe, and lesse meanes; and what need we stand so much vpon it?
               7 That we must liue, and therefore cannot stand vpon heauenly thrift.
               8 Nay, we must be obedient, and therefore doe as the times will beare; go no further then those that are wiser then we.
               Thirdly, labour we to be rooted and grounded in knowledge, that so our desires may be truly enliued. And this is effected:
               
               1 By receiuing the power of the word,
                     Knowledge how to bee rooted.
                   vnto the roote and fountaine of corruption, euen our hearts, not so much beeing humbled with our outward failings, as our inward corruptions, and vnreasonable lusts; labouring more and more to discerne the deceitfulnesse of the heart, and vnsearchablenesse thereof, that so wee may bee more inflamed to redresse the same.
               
                  2 Attempt we no action without particular knowledge both of the thing to done.
               1 With the circumstances of time, person, and place belonging thereto.
               2 As also of our right therein, that so from the certainty of resolution, especially from the comfort of our acceptance, our desires may be quickned.
               3 And so receiuing strength from Christ, our endeuours shall bee quickned and confirmed in wel-doing.
               Fourthly, that our desires may be enlarged, we must be enlarged in knowledge, that so as we know we may affect. Phil 1.9.
               5 And seeing that variety of obiects may stumble and distract vs, therefore we also must labour to grow in spirituall wisedome, discerning betweene things that differ, that so we may know what chiefly is to be followed, what is the time, and meanes, and maner thereof: so shall we be more prouoked

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
yet gone before, that wee may neither thinke our case to bee singular, as if wee alone were put to this hard taske; neither thinke wee haue done enough, seeing those that receiued lesse meanes, yet haue gone beyond vs in obedience, and shall finde the way now much more easie, seeing it hath been so troden and traced to our hands.
               8 And seeing the world will not sticke to hinder our growth by pressing vs downe euen with our owne weight: Therefore though wee haue attained a glorious liberty in Christ to take comfort in things lawfull and necessary, yet let vs take heede that we vse not this liberty as an occasion to the flesh, and so it proue a burthen to presse vs downe. Gal. 5.
               
                  
                     How to mo
                        
                           •••
                        erate in 
                           〈◊〉
                         Christi
                        
                           •••
                        n liberty.
                  To this end moderate we our selues in Christian liberty, by these rules:
               1 That all tend to Gods glory, emptying our selues thereof.
               
                  2 That wee keepe our selues within the bounds of our calling, not onely Ciuil, doing what may stand with the ability and conueniencie, yea decorum thereof, but Christian principally,
               1 What may bee warranted thereby.
               2 What may further the same.
               3 Subordinating the ciuill calling to the iudgement and measure thereof.
               3 That in the vse of our liberty, we containe within the bounds of charity, and that
               1 Towards God, doing all things rather in loue to his Maiesty, and zeale to his glory, then our owne saluation.
               2 And yet so, as that beleeuing his promises, and applying them to our selues, wee make our selues fitter to loue God, by being made conformable to him, and so follow hard after the accomplishment of the promise, by obedience to the Commandement, that so we may expresse

yet more and more our loue vnto God.
               2 That wee may prepare our selues hereby to the full enioying of his loue.
               3 That wee may attaine at length that perfection, when wee shall wholly and fully loue and glorifie our God.
               3 And yet seeing without others we shall not be profited,
                     Heb. 11. therfore in the vse of our Christian liberty we must also shew our loue towards others: And that both first superiours: as

                     1 Magistrates,
                     2 Ministers.
                  
               
               1 Acknowledging the authority of the Magistrate to be of God; howsoeuer the person be.
               2 Obeying that Authority in the Lord: As
               1 To bee restrained thereby in the vse of things indifferent.
               2 To bee ordered thereby for the vse thereof.
               3 To be punished for the abuse.
               
                  4 Yea to bee ordered for the outward circumstances of time, place, decency concerning the worship of God.
               5 And to bee censured for default therein, both in our goods and bodies, enduring patiently, and amending thereby.
               Secondly, in our Christian liberty we must haue regard to the Ministers: As
               1 Being wise to try the Spirits, and so to affect accordingly.
               2 Reuerencing their persons.
               3 Receiuing them as Gods Embassadours, yea as Iesus Christ. Gal. 4. 2 Cor. 5.
               4 Embracing their message as the counsell of God,1 Thess. 2. whatsoeuer the vessell may be.
               5 Yeelding them maintenance cheerefully, and bountifully, 1. Tim. 5. 1 Cor. 9.
               6 And submitting to the censure of the Church with all humility and good conscience, as to bee reformed by the same. 1. Cor. 5.
               
                  Secondly, in our Christian liberty wee must haue respect to our equals, and that to such are equall either in the

                     Ciuill or calling.
                     Christian calling.
                  
               
               Towards our equal in the Ciuill calling, wee are to order our selues thus:
               1 To deale truly and iustly with them in our commerce, that so they may either iustifie and loue religion, or else haue their mouthes stopt, and bee made inexcusable.
               2 We are to communicate vnto them by occasion of worldly commerce, some heauenly riches, labouring to bring them to Christ, Ioh. 4.1. Ioh.
               
               3 To this end faile wee not to conuince and represse knowne corruptions by the word: and to bring forth secret, by searching and launcing, resoluing rather to loose our gaine, then to be partakers of his sin.
               
                  4 And here we must euen refraine in our liberty in diet, apparel being an example of modesty, &c. that so we may weane him the rather from the loue therof, and by our example may iustifie our profession. 1. Cor. 9.
               5 And so with all meeknesse of wisdome and long suffering, wait vpon him if at any time God may giue him repentance, that hee may bee saued. 2. Timoth. 2.24.25.
               6 Choosing to this end what may most edifie, what least giue offence, and exasperate; taking opportunity from his naturall inclination, from his present afflictions and temptations to worke vpon him.
               7 And labouring to roote out Distrust and Couetousnesse, that so setting bounds to his earthly desires, by true cōtentation, he may haue more scope for heauenly.
               Thus are we to order our liberty towards our equall, in his ciuill calling.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                   him to sence of inward corruption, and purge wee out hypocrisie and spirituall pride.
               9 Preparing him to this purpose to endure the crosse.
               10 Informing him to discerne the raigning sinnes of the time.
               11 Especially the corruption that most hangs vpon him, the sin that hee hath or is most subiect vnto.
               12 And so prouoke we him stil to perfection, not to liue by examples, nor to stint himselfe in religion, but to follow hard after the marke for the high price of his calling in Iesus Christ.
               Thus are we to carry our selues in our liberty towards our equals in their generall callings.
               We are also herein to respect our inferiours: As
               
               1 Labouring to be equall with them in affection,
                     To inferiors
                   though superiors in gifts.
               2 Not to despise or disgrace or discourage, or separate from thē: but rather to take vnto vs him

that is weake, and wee which are strong to support him that is weake.
               3 Not contemning or measuring his inward estate by the outward condition, but rather helping the outward estate, that it may further the inward.
               4 Not being aduanced in our selues because we haue more, but rather fearing, because, we haue a greater burthen, a greater account to make, & so easing our selues by communicating vnto oothers, yet correcting our selues by scattring our ouer-plus. Prou. 11.
               5 Yea submitting our selues for the Lords sake vnto meanest conditiō in al lawful things, to bring them vnto Iesus Christ, 1. Cor. 9.21 2. Cor. 11.29.
               6 And as a tender Nurse cherishing and dandling of them, not to pamper them in their weaknes but to leade them on to perfection. 1. Thess. 2. Heb. 6.1.2.
               7 And yet not alwaies enduring

their weaknes, but by seueritie to compell to what lenitie could not perswade vnto, at least to preuent obstinacie, and infection of others.
               Thus are we to vse our Christian libertie, toward inferiors:
               8 And thus behauing our selues in the conuerting of others, wee shall by this meanes encrease Gods graces in our selues.
               9 If we neglect not withal conscionable walking in our ciuill callings. And
               10 Labour to maintaine the fellowship by exhorting & prouoking to loue and good works. Heb. 10.
               11 Not neglecting to take notice of, and offer vp vnto our blessed God, euery mercy vouchsafed vnto vs in a dayly sacrifice of obedience and so renuing our repentance for our failing therein. And
               12 So considering the shortnesse of our liues and sodainnesse of Christ Iesus comming: vse we

all diligence to make our election sure, and redeeme wee the time, because the dayes are euill.
               These are the meanes whereby we may grow in grace.
               Now that wee bee not deceiued nor discouraged herein: obserue we in the next place, the manner of this encrease, which is,
               1 A comming forward in euerie part together,
                  
                     Manner of spirituall groweh.
                   as when the first wheele of a clocke moues, it carrieth about all the rest: so the heart being enlarged, the conscience and wil, and affections, yea the members of the body, in some measure are enliued. As
               2 Yea so, as that this growing is not alwayes sensible, by reason of the different working of the Spirit.
               1 Sustaining and cherishing sometimes inwardly, sometimes putting forth the sap into the branch and bud.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  4 Seeing the power of God must bee made manifest in weaknesse, therefore resolue wee, that the manner of this growth at the best must be in great weakenesse. Yet so
               5 That wee shall by Gods mercie dayly weaken corruption, more clearely discerning it, loathing it more hartily, more meekly groane vnder it, more sighes to be deliuered from it.
               6 And therefore though the grace of God shall not be in vaine in vs for the subduing of corruption: Yet shall our encrease in grace, rather appeare in discerning the greatnesse of corruption, and deceitfulnesse of sin, then in any manifest conquest ouer the same.
               7 And seeing the best wee cancan doe, is subiect to much mixture of corruption; therefore shall wee best discerne the manner of our growth by the right vse of grace: yea herein shall wee haue best euidence thereof, because

we finde aboue the worke of weldoing our persons accepted of our gratious Father in Iesus Christ.
               
                  Thus are wee to conceiue of the maner of our growth.
               
               
                  Now for the measure.
               
               1 Wee are dayly growing vntill the moment of our death.
                     Measure of growth.
                  
               
               2 In holinesse howsoeuer wee may come short of many of the elect, yet we shal exceed our selues yea the most vaine glorious Pharisees in the power and conscience of well doing, though happily not in the shew. Mat. 3.
               4 Wee purpose the most absolute patterne, and not onely for the truth of holinesse, but for such a measure as we are capable of, we follow hard thereafter. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Pet. 1.18.
               5 Though wee faile in practise yet wee stand firme in iudgement what should be done, and iudge our selues, especially for failing herein.
               
                  6 And are so farre from excusing our selues in any such stinted measure as the world approueth: either that wee may not presume to be as such haue beene, or else that it is needlesse, because we haue not the like imployment, or vnreasonable, because wee haue not the like gifts, or it will be sufficient if wee attaine to such a measure, as the time, multitude, examples of leaders do prescribe.
               These leaden rules I say, and carnal pretences, are so far from preuailing with the saints in their measure proposed: that they are bold so farre to endeauour as the meanes are supplyed, though in their practise they are short of their endeauour: and howsoeuer the world shall be contēted with such a measure as may serue to commit sinne more greedily, and hide it more dangerously.
               Yet doth the vpright heart still cleaue to the word, for the scantling of his sincerity, he submits to the word; for his failing therein;

he encreaseth in knowledge, that he may still grow in grace, and so by a further sight of his corruption, is dayly sent out of himselfe, that so hee may obtaine new strength in Christ to goe forward in weldoing.
               And so the child of God growes strong in the grace of God. 2. Tim 2.1.
               1 And that by being dayly broken by the power of the law,
                     Meanes.
                   seeing his damnable estate, and so driuen out of himselfe vpon the meere mercy of God.
               2 By enduring afflictions patiently, that in the experience of the changings in himselfe he may haue more experience of the vnchangeable loue of God.
               3 To this end he must dayly discerne his inabilitie to any good that so hee may interest himselfe in the merit of Christ.
               4 And he must renounce all other strength of wisedome, riches, and that he may finde more comfortably the power of God. Ier. 9.
               
                  
                  And to this end he hath many gratious helpes.
                  
                     Helpes to grow.
                   As especially
               The vertue and power of his head and Captaine Iesus Christ who grew in grace, and is now perfected in glory to make vs perfect. Ioh. 17. Heb. 12.2.
               2 The example and furtherance of the Saints which haue gone before, and do accompany him therein. Heb. 12.1.
               3 The continuall light of the word and spirit, both informing in the present estate, truth of our as also discouering what wee should, and shall be.
               4 The experience of former grace, quickning faith and so sending to Christ.
               5 As also experience of former failings, spurring forward throgh an holy shame and indignation, to recouer and redeeme the time
               6 The time lost before, and therefore now much more to bee redeemed. The time to come not in our power, vncertaine.
               7 The encrease of glory answering

the encrease of grace.
               The triall of our increase of grace is▪
                  Triall of growth.
               
               1 If we haue fully subdued some sinnes, so that wee neuer fall into the purpose or act of them again, as harted of God, expressed by hatred of his word, and Saints, reiecting of Christ, and his merite, and the effects thereof.
               2 If wee finde such sinnes most weakened, vnto which heretofore we haue bene most addicted.
               3 The more we grow, wee shall be sure to haue more tentations, more oppositions of the world.
               4 The more wee discerne and are humbled in the sence of corruption the more wee grow in faith, and so in grace.
               5 The more we are enlaged for the good of others soules, the more is the loue of God shed abroad in our hearts.
               6 The more lowly, and meeke, and patient we are, the more hath the spirit of grace and compassion preuailed in our hearts.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
                  4 That for the vse thereof, wee haue deserued to be vtterly stripped of the blessing. Yea
               To be cut off finally from euer enioying any further mercy of our God. Yea
               To haue deserued all contrary plagues to encrease our damnation.
               Yet still ascribing vnto Iesus Christ the glory of his sacrifice.
               That through him we haue obtained right in all Gods blessings.
               And grace so to vse them, as that in Christ they are accepted.
               That our persons are accepted aboue the worth of our obedience
               That in Christ wee shall grow, and so attaine to perfection.
               This is thankefulnesse. And it is necessarie:Sect. 2. It vse and benefit.
               
               1 To testifie and renue our right in each blessing.
               2 To gaine thereby assurance of heauen:
               3 We condemne the wisedome of the world which thinks it basenes to be thankful, or some imputation

of ill desert & vnworthines
               4 We encrease them, and make them pledges of heauen. Psal. 67.6
               5 We do ease our selues of much begging, and so approch to the life of glory.
               6 We acknowledge God to bee the giuer, and blesser of them.
               7 We do answer the ende, why God bestowed them on vs. Deu. 8.
               8 And do by this duty performe a most principall part of worship & glory to our God, Psal. 50.23.
               9 Security and hardnesse of heart is hereby preuented.
               10 Our faith in God is confirmed and encreased.
               11 Spirituall pride and hypocrisie is ouer-mastered.
               12 The certaintie of our saluation hereby pledged and confirmed.
               13 Wee haue our conuersation in a most speciall manner in heauen.
               14 Our account made readie, and so we prepared to meete the Lord.
               
                  15 It is hardest to be performed and therefore most excellent.
               16 We are hereby humbled, & so fitted for further blessings.
               17 This is the end to which all other exercises of religion are directed.
               18 Hereby wee glorifie God as God. Rom. 1.22.
               19 And so being dayly abased in our selues we are prepared vnto glory.
               
                  And it is to be performed dayly.
               
               1 Because we dayly receiue good at the hands of God. Lam. 3.23.
               2 And by this means shal preuent many euils which daily do assault vs And this duty is performed on this manner.
                  
                     Sect. 3.
               
               First, The heart must be prepared: And that
               1 We must be rauished with the greatnes & goodnes of the Lord.
               2 With sound notice of the blessing, both concerning the truth thereof, as also the woorth of the same, conceiuing more excellently of God then we possible can see

him by his blessings. Ps. 47.7.
               3 True humility for the same, by serious meditation, both of the Maiesty, power and goodnesse of God, and also of it owne vnworthinesse. Gen. 32
               4 As also it must be purged by a setled purpose of not offending so bountifull a God.
               5 And with an holy perswasion, that we haue receiued the benefit in the fauour of God, through Iesus Christ.
               6 And lastly with an holy desire to set forth the glory of God.
               7 As also it must so bee filled with the present blessing, as that still it hunger after greater graces
               
                  2 The mouth must speake of the mercies of God:How to speake of Gods mercies. And that
               1 Reuerently and holily, not lightly or loosely.
               2 Particularly, as neere as wee may recounting the same. Gene. 32.10. And as dayly and howerly occasions are offered, 1. as by deliuerance from euils. 2. Preseruation in good, 3. acceptance of

vnperfect seruice, 4. and renuing encrease of spirituall and temporall blessings, as also 5. preuention of sin, and so suiting, and renuing our thanksgiuing accordingly.
               3 Publikely, euen in the great congregations vnto the Church of God, yea to the generations to come. Psal. 66. and 102. Psal. 34.
               4 Priuately betweene God and our owne soules to auoyde hypocrisie. Mat. 6.
               5 Wisely and orderly for spirituall blessings, and then for temporall. Eph. 1.3.
               6 Faithfully, aswell for blessings promised & to come, as for those we haue receiued. 2. Chron. 6.
               7 Constantly, aswell when God takes, as when he giues. Iob. 1.21.
               8 Humbly, acknowledging our selues to be vnworthy of the least of them. Iacob. Gen. 32. Aswel confessing our wants & desiring supply, as acknowledging Gods graces in vs. Luke 18.
               9 Speedily, if it bee possible to preuent the Lord. Ge. 24. Ps. 59.16.
               
                  10 Continually, euen all our life long. Psal. 75.9. Psal. 79.13.
               11 Charitably prouoking others to the like duty. Ps. 34.3. Ps. 92.18.
               12 Acknowledging Gods graces in others, & without enuy or detractiō aduancing the same Nu. 11
               13 Yea, wishing that all may be partakers of the same graces with vs. Num. 11.
               14 Impartially, aswell for the least, as for the greatest:
               15 Spiritually, referring all present blessings, to the Fountain, our redemption by Christ, and confirming our right, & vse from thence yea from thence, building assurance of perfection.
               16 Sensibly, apprehending Gods goodnes more to vs then to any other. De. 17. receiuing euery present blessing as in our right to heuen. Frequently, remēbring often what God hath done for vs, & by many and diuers words couenanting with our God, to pay this oblation, 1 both to preuent the vntowardlines of our nature, which is so vnwilling.
               
                  2 To this, as also to shame our selues the more, if happily wee grow negligent herein. Psal. 107. Psal. 146. &c.
               3 Wee must praise God in our life and actions.
                  3 Thankefulnes must be performed in life.
                   
                  Here obserue these principall actions of thankefulnesse. Psal. 3.1. Psal. 50.23.
               1 To renue our obedience, and encrease our seruice of God. Psal 116.
               2 Continuall mortification of the old man. Psalme 106.3. Ezra. 10. Rom. 12.1.
               3 Casting out the speciall and beloued sinne. Mat. 5.29.
               4 Making much of the meanes wherby Gods blessings are sanctified, and so continued vnto vs, namely, the preaching of the Gospell, &c. Rom. 10.15.
               5 Labouring heattily the conuersion of others. Psal. 51 Psal. 34.4.5.
               6 Releeuing, and forgiuing, & praying one for another. Eph. 4.
               7 Beleeuing Gods promises, & waiting patiently the full accomplishment

of them. Psal. 40.1. Heb. 11. Psal. 64.10.
               8 Erecting monuments and trophes of Gods benefites to posteritie. Gen. 22.15. &c.
               9 Writing and registring the noble acts of the Lord. Psal 102. Psal 45.
               10 Imposing fit names unto our childrē, in remembrance of Gods mercies. Gen. 41.
               11 Paying our vowes vnto God and men. Psal. 65.1. Ion. 2.9. Ps. 50.
               12 Being content with whatsoeuer God bestoweth vpon vs. Phi. 4. Giuing thanks in al things at al times to God the Father, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ Ephes. 5.20.
               13 To imploy the blessing wee receiue to the best behoofe of our Maister and our owne comfort. Math. 25.26.27.
               14 Confessing the name of God constantly. Psal. 44.
               15 Hatience in waiting the accō
                  plishment of Gods promise.
               16 Seeing by faith into the fulnesse

of happinesse, yea
               17 Apprehending light in darknesse and seeing that to bee good which the world esteemes euill,
               18 And reioycing in a litle good though there be matter of mourning for much more euill.
               19 So honouring the instrument as not to make an Idol thereof.
               
                  Thus are wee to performe thankefulnesse vnto God.
               
               
                  Which that wee may performe more happily:
                  
                     Sect. 3. What euils to be auoided.
                  
               
               First, Let vs beware of these euils which are maine enemies to this duty As,
               
               1 To imagine, that we deserue any thing. Luke 17.10.
               2 That wee haue any thing meerely, by our owne labour and industry. Psal. 127.
               3 That wee harpe more vpon our troubles, then Gods fauors & benefits.
               4 Take we heed that we grieue not immoderatly for euils present for this will steale from vs all remembrance of former blessings.
               
                  5 That we be alwayes begging, but neuer recounting what wee haue receiued.
               6 That we consider what others haue, rather then what we haue need of.
               7 That we be not secure in the blessings of God, but rather feare our estate most when wee haue most fauours. Iob. 1.
               8 That we tie God vnto these outward things, or to the continuance of any particular.
               9 That wee dote and rest vpon these, not rather forget them in regard of the things of the life to come. Phil. 3.
               10 That we conceiue basely & meanly of Gods mercies, and do not see and worship God in the least of them.
               11 Auoid we slauish feare, and desperate pride, as if because we are vnworthy of any, therfore we will acknowledge none.
               12 Nay, lest wee bee accounted hypocrites, wee will not declare what God hath done for vs.
               
                  13 Take wee heede here also of Spirituall pride, that while wee should acknowledge our thankefulnesse for what we haue recieued, we rather repine at our own condition, that wee had neede thereof.
               Secondly, Let vs vse these helpes to thankfulnesse: As
               1 Rest we vpon God, as the giuer of all good blessings.
               
                  
                     Sect. 6. Helpes to thankfulnes
                  2 Vse wee all holy meanes for the obtaining of them.
               3 Leaue wee the successe to GOD, depending on his prouidence.
               4 Thinke we not what God can giue, but what is fit for vs to receiue.
               5 And thinke we not so much on what wee want, as what wee haue, aboue many of t
                     •••
                  e deere children of God.
               6 Yea, consider we not so much what we haue, as how we haue vsed it.
               7 And further, remember wee not so much what wee haue, as

what we may haue, if we doe beleeue, and offer the sacrifice of praise.
               8 Yea, let vs wisely lay to our hearts what we haue lost by our former vnthankfulnesse.
               9 Consider we how small a tribute the Lord requires for all his blessings. Psa. 116.12.
               10 What a prerogatiue wee attaine by thankesgiuing, that God is the receiuer, and wee the giuers vnto God, and how much better it is to giue, then to receiue.
               11 Let the creatures prouoke vs hereto, lest otherwise they condemne vs. Heb. 6.
               12 Let our commodity perswade vs, either if we will haue, or vse, or hold Gods fauours comfortably.
               13 And lastly, consider we the account to be made in the life to come, which is made vp by thankfulnesse vnto God in this life, Ioh. 3.
               14 Labour we in each particular

blessing to see a pledge of heauen, and a step thereto.
               15 And that all the sence and sight of present and future blessings, be swallowed vp in our desire to glorifie God.
               And thus farre concerning thankfulnesse.
               The chiefe vse and benefite thereof, is, to keepe vs in a constant course of obedience vnto God in the enioying of his blessings.
                     Sect. 7. Benefit thereof.
                  
               
               
                  And this is the next duty daily to be performed of vs.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Of Constancie and Perseuerance.
               NAmely, to labour constancy, and perseuerance vnto the end.
               
               
                  Sect. 1. It is most necessary.
                  And that because:
               First, hereby wee approue the soundnesse of our calling and gifts, which otherwise if we faile, were but temporary, giuen rather for others then for our owne good.
               
                  2 We doe vphold and confirme others.
               3 Wee doe also iustifie the power of our profession, and aduance it before all other callings.
               4 We obtaine the promise and the crowne that is set before vs. Heb. 11. which otherwise by falling away we shall lose. Reu. 3.6.
               5 Wee approue the truth of God, and giue him the glory of his faithfulnesse, 1. Thess. 5.24.
               6 We ouercome Satan and all our enemies, Eph. 6.13.
               Grounds hereunto are:
               First, The establishing of our faith,Sect. 2. Grounds of perseuerāce
                   that the children of God shall continue to the end; and that because,
               1 Our God is faithfull and Almighty, Rom. 11. and his gifts are without repentance who hath promised it.
               2 Iesus Christ makes continuall intercession for vs. Luk. 22.33.
               
                  3 The Holy Ghost shall abide with vs to the end of the world. Iohn 16. to preserue vs. Iohn 14.
               4 We are the beloued of God: and therefore,
               1 Whom he loues once, he will loue to the end. Iohn. 13.
               2 Whatsoeuer wee aske in his name, the father will giue vs, if it bee agreeable to his will. 1. Iohn. 5.14.
               3 All things shall turne vnto our good. Rom. 8.29.
               4 Wee are married to him for euer in holinesse and righteousnesse. Ose. 2.
               5 Gods Couenant with vs is euerlasting Ier. 30. Eze. 11. Psa. 89 & Ose 2.
               6 Wee are vnited vnto Christ our head, Col. 2. and giuen to him of the Father: and therfore none shall take vs out of his hands. Ioh. 10. Ioh. 17.17.
               7 Wee haue the Word and Sacraments, which shall continue with vs to the worlds end, to vphold

vs in our righteousnesse, Mat. 28. Eph. 4, 8.
               8 Wee haue strengthning grace to continue vs in wel-doing. Eph. 3.16.
               9 Our slippes and fallings are meanes to perseuerance.
               
                  Here consider:
                  
                     Sect. 3. Remouing the hinderances here,
                  
               
               1 That the childe of God being regenerated, may, and doth fall; and that because,
               1 God leaues him often to himselfe, Ose. 5. Ps. 30. and that1 of the fall of Gods children and the cause thereof.
               
               1 To let him see his owne strength to be humbled thereby. Hos. 14.4.
               2 To driue from that hold, to relye onely vpon God, Cantic. 3.4. Luk. 22.32.
               3 To make him more compassionate and helpfull to others in their infirmities.
               2 Sathan is continually sifting of him. Luk. 22.
               3 He carries about him a Traitor ready to betray him hourely. 1. Pet. 2.11.
               4 His falles may well stand with

his estate in grace, yea do much make for the triall and encrease thereof, 1. Pet. 1.7.
               
                  As in his fall,
               
               
                  2 The benefite thereof.
                  1 He discernes his imperfection, and so is prouoked to take stronger hold. Canti. 3.4.
               2 In his, recouerie hee feeles the vndouted grace of God, Psa. 32.
               3 In both hee hath experience of the combats between the flesh and the spirit, all which are vndoubted signes of regeneration. Luk. 11.21.
               4 He is made more acquainted with the deceitfulnesse of sin, and so more skilfull to preuent the same. Heb. 3.13.
               5 He is shamed by his fall, and driuen from the hold of the world, and such like baits of sin, Hos. 14.4.
               6 He is prouoked more eagerly to follow after the marke, by how much he hath been cast behinde. 2. Cor. 11.
               7 He becomes more fearfull of

himselfe, and will not be so venturous vpon the occasions of sin. Math. 26 75. Consider therefore,
               
               2 How farre a regenerate man may fall.
               
               First, In his Faith, by doubting of Gods fauour and the assurance of his saluation,3 How far the regenerate fall.
                   
                  Psal. 22. Psal. 51. Psal. 77. Hence procedes,
               
               1 Proud and foolish reasonings against God, Ier. 12.1.
               2 Vaine and vncharitable speeches & wishes against our selues. Iob. 3.
               3 Rash and hard censuring of others.
               4 Distasting of the means, and furtherances to saluation.
               5 The graces of God may bee lessened in them. Psal. 51.
               6 They may be couered.
               7 Losse of some graces of God all his life long, as the measure of the comfortable euidence of saluation.
               2 Erring through ignorance in some maine point of saluation, so the Apostles, Act. 1.6.
               
                  3 He may dwel in his ignorance for a time, and maintaine the same. Gal. 2. Peter.
               
               Secondly, in his life. And that,
               1 By falling into some grosse sins. 2. Sam. 11.2. Sam. 24.
               2 To lie a sleepe in them till he be roused vp.
               3 To fall into them againe after repentance, and so may commit rebellion against God. Lament. 3.45.
               
                  Hence will follow:
               
               1 That the light of Gods countenance shall bee taken away.4 Danger of the falles of the Elect.
                   
                  Psa. 51.
               2 The horrours of hell shall assault and buffet him, and so hee may despaire both in himselfe, and also concerning any present feeling of Gods mercy. Psa. 77.11.
               3 Some grieuous outward afflictions shall follow him to the graue. Dauid.
               
               4 His life shall bee a burthen and irksome to him. Iacob. and he shall bee impatient vnder the crosse. Iob. 3.7.
               
                  5 Yea through violence of tenration he may happily offer violence to himselfe. And so
               6 Hee shall cause the name of God to bee blasphemed by the wicked, 2. Sam 12.
               7 His first loue shall be cooled, and zeale in godlinesse abated. Apoc. 2.4.
               8 The weake shall be offended at him.
               9 Gods Spirit shall be grieued. Eph. 4.
               10 He shall feele a weaknesse in him, in regard of such sinnes as haue got strong hold often ouer him. Psa. 6. Ier. 13.23.
               
                  Thus farre may a regenerate man fall, and yet remaine in the state of grace, and differ from a reprobate, or hypocrite, As thus:
               1 The Reprobates temporary faith is the chiefe cause of his falling, and prophanesse of life;Sect. 5. Of the difference betweene thē and the wicked in their falles.
                   but the elects erro
                     •••
                  r in life is the occasion of the decay of his faith.
               2 The hypocrite is vsually

sencelesse in his fall, and so continues, 1. Tim. 4.2. but the regenerate at length hath the true sight of it. 2. Sam. 24.10.
               3 The hypocrite if he fret and grieue, it is for feare of punishment, or losse of the temporall blessing, not for the losse of Gods fauour, &c. Psalm. 51. Gen. 27. But the sorrow of Gods seruant is for the offence against God principally.
               4 They both fall into the same sins againe, but yet the hypocrits after sinnes are committed, with more strength and securitie, those of the regenerate with more resistance, feare, griefe, and in great weaknesse. Psa. 19.
               5 They both are impatient, and speake foolishly against God, but the hypocrite speakes as he thinketh, and wisheth in the aduisednesse and purpose of his heart: the regenerate speakes in folly, rashnesse, not as he thinketh or wisheth; but as his corruption and tentation ouer-ruling him,

doth mislead: and comming to himselfe, condemnes himselfe for it, and cleares the Lord, Psal. 7.3. Iob. 42.
               6 They both decay, and loose their first loue, but yet the hypocrite counts this to be his wisedome, and the true measure of holinesse, esteeming his former zeale to be rashnesse, &c. whereas the regenerate acknowledgeth it was better before then now, and mourning vnder his estate, labours the recouery, and in some measure obtaines it. 2. Sam. 12. Mat. 26.2. Hos 7
               7 They both may refuse the means also, but yet the hypocrite in pride and obstinacie, falles at length, from loose meanes, to none, and so to a despising and persecuting the same: the elect, though he leaue in his heart, yet he returnes with shame, and cleaues more conscionably to the meanes, and is profited thereby.
               8 They both may be loosers by their fall, and not recouer all

their life long: But with these differences,
               
               1 The reprobate looses all graces, and becomes a very beast, Psa. 49. without knowledge, ciuility, &c. The regenerate recouers necessary graces, as faith in some measure of vse and feeling: but that full perswasion, ioy in the Spirit, &c. hee happily recouers not againe, all his life long.
               2 The reprobates losse is without feeling, causing him to set vp his rest more securely in this life, and so prepares him to suddaine destruction: that of the elect, humbles him in all things, causes him to worke out his saluation with feare and trembling; to goe downe with sorrow to his graue, and to bee weary of the world, and to desire to bee with Christ, Phil. 2.12.
               This may wee discerne betweene the falles of Gods children, and the wicked. And this serueth,
               
                  
                     Sect. 5. Vse hereof.
                  1 To preuent wrong iudgement concerning the falles of

our brethren. And so
               2 To labour with all meekenesse their recouery. Gal. 6.1.
               3 To condemne the world that makes no difference herein betweene the Saints and the wicked.
               4 To prouoke the Saints to repentance.
               5 To preuent repining, and murmuring at Gods wisedome, leauing corruption in vs. As also,
               6 To esteeme more highly of Christ our Sacrifice.
               7 To try vs in our decayes, and to comfort vs in the same. Prou. 24.16.
               8 To iustifie Gods faithfulnesse who neuer forsakes his children. 1. Cor. 10.13.
               9 To stop the mouthes of the wicked, who reioyce at our falles. Mich. 7.8.
               10 To assure vs of constancie and perseuerance to the end. 2. Tim. 4.18
               11 And to hunger after heauen.
               
                  
                  Helpes hereunto are,
               
               1 The keeping of the light of iudgment,
                     Sect. 6. Helpes to perseuerāce
                   
                  cleare and sound, Phi. 2.8
               
                  And that because,
               
               1 Hereby the exorbitant practise is eft-soones reformed.
               2 The true state and measure of sanctification is discerned, and so finding our shortnesse, we are prouoked to go forward, Phil. 2.9.
               3 The conscience hereby is assertained of the truth of it well-doing, and so faith is confirmed, and sanctification therby renued.
               4 Repentance also is hereby renued, in that the conscience, by the light of iudgement, discerning it daily failings, is thereby conuinced, and so prepared to repentance.
               
                  
                     And how
                  
                  And this is obtained and preserued,
               
               1 By submitting the iudgement in all things to the rule of the word. Esay. 8.
               2 Hearkning to the voyce of conscience checking for sin, and approuing for wel-doing.
               
                  3 Labouring a daily encrease of knowledge, Philip. 1.9.10. Ephes. 3.
               4 Yet auoyding curiosity, and vnnecessary speculations. 1. Tim. 4.
               5 Submitting to reproofe, and continuall afflictions.
               6 Resoluing that sin is foolishnesse to God, and holinesse foolishnesse to the world.
               
                  A second helpe to perseuerance, is,
               
               The wel-ordering & guiding of the heart (of which heretofore) And
               
                  Thankfulnesse for what wee haue receiued. Col. 1.12.
               A third is, the daily maistering and subiection of our affections. Of which also before.
               
               A fourth is the continuall remembrance of Gods mercies towards vs. Ios. 24.1.2.3.
               A fift is a continuall feare of our selues, Rom. 11.
               6 We must also labour the establishing & confirming of others.
               7 Meditation of the shortnesse of our life, and vncertainty of the

comming of Iesus Christ.
               8 As also waiting patiently the accomplishment of the promises. Col. 
                  
                     •••
                  .
               9 Spirituall wisedome in auoyding troubles, and disposing affaires, Col. 1.9.
               10 consid
                     •••
                  r we the Saints, who haue finished their course, and yet without vs shall not be perfected, Heb. 11.
               11 Look we vnto Iesus the Author and finisher of our faith; who hath finished his course, and wee shall follow him. Hebr. 12.1.2.3.
               12 Comfort wee our selues in our former experience; and if we haue ouercome the Lyon and the Beare, we shal also ouercome the Philistim. 1. Sam. 17. 2. Cor. 1.10. 2 Tim. 4.17.18.
               13 Looke we by faith vnto the recompence of the reward, so shall wee swallow vp and ouercome all difficulties and tediousnesse whatsoeuer. Hebr. 11.25.26.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX. Of Watchfulnesse.
               A Notable helpe to Perseuerance,
                  1. It vse.
                   is Watchfulnesse ouer our hearts, and wayes, that they may continually be acceptable to God. Eph. 6.15.
               
                  And that because,
               
               1 Hereby wee are prepared to tentations. Luk. 21.34. Mat. 13.25.
               2 Enabled to vnder-goe them. Eph. 6.11.12.
               3 And also to haue a good issue out of them, Luk. 21.36.
               4 Without this, our whole life and best actions are either rashnesse, vncertainties, or security, Prou. 28.14.
               5 By it we attaine certainety and resolution in well-doing, Ephes. 6.13.
               6 We preuent some euil which may make all other comforts vnsauoury, which wee are sure to looke for in well-doing, Math. 26.41.
               
                  7 Hereby the other graces of God are much beautified and increased in vs.
               8 And our infirmitie very happily auoided, or couered, Ps. 119.9
               9 The best without it, haue been deceiued, as Adam, Dauid, Gen. 3.6. 2. Sam. 12.
               10 Hypocrisie in well-doing, and spirituall pride is preuented, or maistered.
               11 Dulnesse and wearisomnesse also in good things, is much holpen and preuented.
               12 Especially hereby we are enabled to powerfull prayer, Math. 26.41.
               13 As also kept sober and humble in well-doing. 1. Pet. 5.7.
               14 The whole body of sinne is hereby daily weakned.
               15 The Spirit of God is kept liuely in operation.
               16 And so we prepared happily to perfection.
               Now this Watchfulnesse is performed,
                     2 How performed.
               
               First and principally by obseruing

the heart, and yoaking it.
               2 Keeping vnder also the outward man.
               3 And this not for a spurt, but all our life long, Psal 101. Psal. 119.73. most fearing our abuse of Christian liberty, and so bounding the same within it true compasse, Gal. 5. especially that wee be not brought in subiection to any thing.
               4 And that obseruing and suspecting our greatest strength, 1. Cor. 10.12.
               5 Aiming especially at the sins which we haue most delighted in. Psal. 19. Psal. 25.
               6 Looking especially to the sins that do most annoy vs.
               7 Examining the best graces of God in vs, left some dead flye bee in them. Prou. 28.9. Mat. 6.
               8 Behauing our selues in all things as weaned childrē, Ps. 131.3.
               9 More depēding on the watchfulnesse of our God ouer vs, then in any thing we can do.
               10 And therfore continually renouncing

our selues, and resigneing our selues into the protection of the Almighty.
               11 In performance of holy duties, suspecting especially the shew and colour, watching ouer our naturall corruption, and the sinnes of our Calling.
               12 Also labouring to discouer and conquer the contrary tentation: as in affliction, impatiency, and distrust.
               
                  Helpes hereunto are:
               
               
                  3 Helpes to it.
                  1 Consider wee, that the best doe faile in watching as they should.
               2 That it is no bondage, but a blessed liberty thus to looke to our selues.
               3 Looke we our selues d
                     •••
                  ily in the glasse of the word, Psalm. 119. Heb. 11 6.
               4 Suspect wee also our selues, and feare we alwayes. Pro. 28.14.
               5 Let the feare of God be continually before our eies, 1. Cor. 7.1
               6 Vse we sobriety in our knowledge and vse of outward things.

1. Pet. 4. Rom. 12.3.
               7 Prouoke we each other cheerfully to holy duties, Psal. 122.
               8 Consider wee, how watchfull worldlings are to obey the precepts of men.
               9 If we haue slipped, let vs returne againe in feare and trembling.
               10 Obserue we the checkes of conscience for euery action.
               11 And let not the motions of the spirit be vnrespected.
               12 Extraordinary and speciall mercies of God be we catefull to record.
               13 And tremble we at his iudgments, wisely laying them to our heart.
               14 Let the day of our death be alwayes in our eye.
               15 And make we full account to come to iudgement. 2. Cor. 5.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X. Of Prayer.
               A Further helpe to Constancy, is, Earnest and constant Prayer vnto GOD, to vphold vs by his mighty hand, Ephes. 6.14 15.
               
                  And that,
               
               1 Publicke in the Congregation, Psa. 92. Psa. 122. Mat 6.
               2 In priuate, as well with our families, as in our closets and secret recourse, Mat. 6. Psa. 4.6.
               
                  And this is necessary,
               
               1 Because the Lord hath commanded it,1 It vse.
                   
                  Psalm. 50.15. Matth. 6. Luk. 11. to oppose against our vnworthinesse.
               2 Hereby wee approue our selues to bee louing membes of Christs body; and the truely adopted sonnes of God, Rom. 8.13. Psa. 14.22.
               3 We performe a speciall part of worship vnto the Almighty, Psa. 50.15.23.
               4 We vse the especiall meanes,

whereby all Gods blessings are enioyed, and sanctified. Luke 11.13 1. Tim. 4.5.
               5 And, though the Lord know what we haue need of before wee aske, yet hereby wee acknowledge and discerne the same. Isa. 65.24.
               6 Hereby we are also humbled vnder the mighty hand of God.
               
               7 Wee do also performe thankefulnesse vnto God for al his mercies.
               8 As also we giue vnto God this prerogatiue, that he is the searcher of our hearts, and also
               9 We acknowledg his speciall prouidence, that he careth for vs. Psal. 34
               10 Heerby our faith and patience is gratiously exercised and confirmed.
               
                  Now that we may pray aright:
               
               1 Our prayer must bee in faith without doubting.
                     How performed.
                   
                  Iam. 1.6. to God not to Saints or Angels. Rom. 10.
               2 In loue forgiuing one another, and praying for each other Luk. 1. Math. 6. yea for our enemies.
               3 In wisdome, praying first for the fauor of God, whē we would haue

blessing,
                     Note.
                   and when we would haue any euill remoued, praying for the forgiuenesse of sinne, which is the cause thereof. As also 2. diuiding the times wisely, for prayer, and our callings.
               4 In zeale, and feruency, 1. from the heart, and affections, principally aiming at Gods glory, &c. 1. Cor. 14. Iacob. 5.16.
               5 In constancie and patience, waiting the Lords good leasure. Psa. 40.1. Psal. 135. Psal. 147.
               6 In sinceritie, from our right in Christ Iesus; and out of the holy purpose of our heart denying our selues.
               7 In an holy order, 1. for those that concerne Gods glory: 2. such as concerne saluation: 3. such as respect this life. And so on the contrary, we are to pray against such as crosse these things in their order.
               8 Our minds must be free from all worldly and carnal respects.
               
               9 In humilitie, abasing our selues before the Lord, Dan. 9. Gen. 32.
               
                  10 With thankesgiuing vnto God for all his mercies. Psal. 116.12.
               11 As also, with true repentance renuing our vowes to the Lord. Psal. 26.6. Isa. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.22.
               Thus must our prayers bee made vnto the Lord, and by them we shall be,
               First, Much strengthened in the grace of perseuerance. Luke 22.32. as also.3 The benefit of prayer
                  
               
               2 Kept in the vigor and power of our Christian life. Ephes. 6.
               3 Experienced in our sweet fellowshippe with God. Rom. 8.15.
               4 Our spirituall armour always fitted and exercised. Eph 6.
               5 Our dayly wants supplyed or recompensed. Iames 1.5, 2. Cor. 12.
               6 Tentations conquered; and happily diminished. Mat. 4.
               7 All our occasions well seasoned, and turned to our good. 1. Tim. 4.
               8 Our whole life sanctified, and wee prepared comfortably to a better. Phil. 1.19.
               To this end also serueth another
            
            
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
               omitted or sleightly performed any of these.
               6 Be sure so to performe these as that thou doest not neglect thy calling. 2. Thess. 3.12.
               7 If thou hast performed them in some poore measure, yet rest not in it, but labor more earnestly with God for a further grace. Phil. 3.13.
               8 And yet bee thankefull vnto God for these small grapes and fruits, acknowledging that it is his great mercie, that thou canst doe any thing, and giuing him all the glory thereof. 1. Corinth. 15.10. And thus shalt thou be sure to obtaine this peace of God.
               
               And hauing obtained it, thou must lie downe therewith, and carie it with thee to thy bed.
               1 Because thou knowest not whether thy bed shalbe thy graue 1. Pet. 1.24.
               2 Thy sleepe hereby shall bee much sweeter, and dreames more comfortable. Psal. 4.8.
               3 Thou shalt auoyd nocturnall

pollutions and vncleanesses.
               4 Thy reines shall teach thee in the night season, and the darknesse shall bee as the noone day. Psal. 16.7.
               
                  And this is performed.
               
               1 By resigning vp our selues into the hands of God.3 How performed.
                  
               
               2 Ascribing vnto him the glory of all the good wee haue performed. Psal. 115.1. Esay 26.12.
               3 Acknowledging our selues to bee vnprofitable seruants, if God should enter into iudgement with vs Luke 17.10.
               4 Crauing earnest pardon of our imperfections in Iesus Christ, and laying our selues a sleepe in his bosome. 1. Iohn 1.9.
               5 Comforting our selues if sense of faith bee not present, yet with former experience and inward habit thereof. Psal. 22.10.
               6 Yeelding vp our selues in a willingnesse to death, in ful expectation of the life to come. Phil. 1.20.23. And thus guiding our selues by these former rules, we shall lie

downe in peace, and so shall wee comfortably performe the dayly sacrifice.
               And thus farre concerning such necessarie duties, as wee are bound in some measure dayly to performe.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. How to profit in this direction.
               
                  FOR our better encouragement and furtherance heerein; obserue these rules:
               
               1 That being conuinced in conscience with the necessity of these dueties, we purpose and solemnly vow vnto the Lord the attempting and prosecuting thereof. Psal. 119.206. Psal. 119.7.
               2 That God principally respects the purpose of the heart, & if there be a willing minde, accepts according to what wee haue, and requires not what wee haue not. 2. Cor. 8.12.
               3 That wee giue not eare to the flesh pleading noueltie, impossibilitie,

&c. Gal. 1.16.
               4 That we trie the Lord, who is wonderfull in blessing the vnfained endeauours of his children. Hag. 2. Malach. 3.10.
               5 Then let vs make trial at first in one of these, and grow readie therein, so shall wee with more willingnesse and skilfulnesse proceed in the rest. Iames 2.10. Iames 3.2.
               6 Let vs not faile to meete the Lord with vnfained thankefulnes, when we see him comming effectually in the weake performance thereof. Psal. 81.
               7 And so condemne and prouoke thy selfe, as before, and thou shalt see (by Gods mercy) a good encrease.
               Yea, thou shalt not only be able to performe these dueties with comfort, but also thou shalt be able to entertaine each seueral occasions of the day, to Gods glory thy exceeding profite and benefit of others.
               
                  Motiues and Helpes hereunto thou shalt find,
               
               
                  
                  
                     Helpes thereto.
                  1 A dayly discerning of thine owne inabilitie. And
               2 So renouncing of thy selfe to be found in Iesus Christ.
               3 When thou hast found thy selfe in Christ, yet still to deny thy best righteousnesse, that thou maist wholly liue by and in the life of thy Sauiour: in whom thy person shalbe accepted, aboue all worth of thy seruice.
               4 And meditate often, not so much on the ioy the Saints haue in heauen, as in the matter there, of their constant and free glorifying of God.
               2 Cheering vp thy heart, that thou hast so far communion with them, in that heauenly worship, as that now thou performest that in truth, which they doe in perfection: and so hast thy conuersation also in heauen: yea thou art hastening to that perfection, by dayly denying of thy selfe, and growing in Christ thy head, and hast both their examples to encourage, and prayers to further thee thereto:

yea seeing without thee they shall not be perfected. Therefore thou shalt also aspire to perfection, that so the body of thy Sauiour may be fully compleate. 1. Cor. 1.24. Neb. 11.40·
               6 And seeing all lets shall by Gods mercie proue furtherances hereunto, thy very sins shall prouoke thee, much lesse then affliction shall hinder: therefore learn to liue by faith in the discerning of thy estate, and wrastling with these oppositions; that so not yeelding to tentation, or not lying vnder the burthen thereof, thou maist still goe forward more humbly with thy God, and bee more then conquerour through Christ that hath loued thee. Rom. 8.
               7 Adde hereunto a dayly meditation of the time vnprofitably spent heretofore, and hence wee shalbe prouoked to redeeme it in this constant manner for the time to come. Romanes 6.22. 1. Pet. 4.4.5.
               
                  8 Especially if we weigh withal the wonderfull mercy of our God that hath not yet called vs to an account for our former abuse and vnprofitablenesse, surely if wee make a right vse hereof, wee cannot choose but resolue to answer this loue of God in our more earnest and constant endeauors, for the time to come. Rom. 2.4.
               9 And if we shal now withal wisely lay to heart, what litle assurance we haue of any time to come: how that there is not any howre, nay moment, wherin we shall promise security to our selues, and put the euill day farre from vs, that wee may approach to the seat of iniquitie: whereas we may say to our soule, Now soule cast care away, be bold a litle with God, remit off thy sinceritie, &c. But that, euen in that moment, it may bee said vnto thee, Thou foole, thy soule shall bee taken from thee, surely this would moue vs rather to this dayly and continuall seruing of God, to adde somewhat vpon euery

occasion, to the making sure of our election. Luke 12.21.
               11 Especially, if we consider that our aduersary the diuell goeth about continually to entrap & deuoure vs, 12. and our owne wicked and trecherous hearts are neuer a sleepe to sinne to entertain Satan: ought wee not continually to stand vpon our guard, that so we may resist the diuel, & preserue our soules frō bondage. 1. Pet. 5.8.
               13 Surely if we did but consider that while wee do not serue our blessed God in this holy & constāt maner, we in that meane time are seruants vnto sin: & so both break the peace of our consciences, interrupt & hinder our sweet felowship with our God, grieue his blessed Spirit, & so expose our selues not onely to many secret wounds of conscience, but also to many outward blowes, and reproachfull buffetings, not onely tending to bring some heauie affliction vpon our selues, but especially to lay reproach vppon our

profession, & to cause the name of our glorious God to bee blasphemed. This, if either wee loue our selues, or haue any zeale to the glory of our God, must certainly constrain vs to the conscionable performance of this duty, euen daily to endeauour somewhat to maintain our peace with God.
               14 And had we no other respect but this: how wee might lay our selues downe in peace, how wee should sleep sweetly, how to lay al our cares vnder our pillow, & preuent filthy & fearfull dreams, how to auoide feares of worldly casualties as fire, theeues, &c. Surely we would settle our hearts by this course in the day, that they might not be vnsetled in the night.
               15 Nay must we not be guilty of despising the blood of the couenant, and esteeming of the Son of God as a prophane thing: If, seeing the Lord Iesus makes continuall intercession for vs at the throne of grace, that wee might dayly offer vp our soules and bodies

as a liuing sacrifice in obedience vnto our God, wee shall notwithstanding neglect this holy dutie, & either not serue our God at all, or serue him at our pleasure.
               16 Will not this proue euen plaine wil-worship, and so abominable to God!
               17 And shal we not be condemned of horrible in gratitude, that when our God bestowes such blessings on vs, and renues his mercies euery morning vnto vs: especially reuiues our liues to make vs capable thereof, wee shall yet despise this bountie of our God, and riote out his blessings to the dishonour of the giuer.
               18 See that thou praise God for these, that walke thus constantly, not enuying their strictnesse, but imitating the same, delighting in their company, &c.
               So the Lord giue vs vnderstanding in these things.
               And this shall be thy triall that thou hast profited by this direction.Triall hereof.
               
               1 If thy conceit and iudgement

concerning the excellencie and benefit of a christian life, be more confirmed, and comfortable.
               2 If thou findest more ease and delight in the practise thereof.
               3 And yet by this practise attainest to a greater sense of thy corruption & shortnes of perfection:
               4 And canst go with more boldnesse and assurance vnto thy God to begge mercie and strength against thy corruptions.
               5 If thou canst now more deny thine owne righteousnes, that so still thou maist bee found in Christ Iesus, feeling in him more comfortably, the acceptance of thy person.
               6 And dayly drawing new vertue from him to walke more constantly with thy God.
               7 If thou art desirous to prouoke thy brethren to vndertake this holy taske.
               8 And art weaned more gratiously from the loue of the world, growing more contented with thine outward estate. And
               
                  10 Still hungring more earnestly after the reuealing of the Sonnes of God.
               11 If thou art more faithfull & conscionable in thy ciuill calling.
               12 And art more thankfull vnto thy God for this his gratious assistance:
               13 If now thou canst more reioyce in heauenly dueties and lesse, in such meanes which concerne onely this life.
               14 Yea canst more triumph that thou art growne a master of thy former incōstancie, that thou hast now attained a constāt measure of seruing thy blessed God, then for any recompence that may redound vnto thee hereby.
               15 If yet thou canst be more humbled in the sense of thy wants thē any whit puffed vp with whatsoeuer thou hast already attained.
               16 And so shalt still follow hard after the mark for the hie price of thy calling in Iesus Christ▪ 
                  Phil. 3.
               17 If thou shalt grow more spirituall in the vse of outward comforts. And
               
                  18 Shalt also grow more wise to discerne between things that differ, being able
               19 To trie the spirites whether they be of God or no, and yet
               20 To maintaine the fellowship not iudging any before the time,
               21 And yet reprouing sharpely that they may be sound, and
               22 Yet reioycing in such as are beyond thee in this glorious course.
               23 If thou canst more moderate thy selfe in thy Christian libertie doing not what thou maist do, but what is expedient, not what may respect thy priuate, but the publicke good. And
               24 Aiming at the chiefest good euen the glory of thy blessed God
               25 Preferring the same, euen aboue thine owne saluation.
               26 Comforting thy selfe in the acceptance of the purpose of thy heart.
               27 As that thou neglectedst no good opportunity to expresse thy conscionable endeauours in some one or more of these holy duties,

as occasion is offered.
               28 Examining thy selfe in priuat concerning the performance of them.
               29 And so offering vp each duty in a sacrifice of obedience in thy priuate reckoning, & dayly casting vp of thy account, not enioying,
               30 But esteeming highly of such that haue attained to some constancie herein. And
               31 So following the examples of the best in this holy course.
               By these rules maist thou trie thy selfe, whether thou hast profited by this dayly direction.
               And the benefit hereof will be exceeding great.Benefit hereof.
               
               As hath bin partly obserued heretofore; and further may be discerned in these particulars.
               As first, We shall preuent hereby that secret hypocrisie which accō
                  panies holy duties, & shall attaine to more sinceritie, & plainnes, not onely in all actions towards God, but in our outward dealings towards men: & so shal preuent much

reproach to our profession, and gaine much glory thereto. Yea
               2 We shal be a means, hereby to shine as light in a froward generation, to the encrease of Christs kingdome, and so of our glory.
               3 We shall also by this constant performance of these set and necessary duties, preuent all vnnecessary care & infidelity the roote therof, by keeping our selues with in the bounds of Gods protection, & quickning our faith in this liuely expressing of the fruit thereof.
               4 And so shall be better fitted to performe any extraordinary duty of visiting of thy distressed neighbor; or resisting any violent tentation, or entertaining of some extraordinary comfort of the spirit. Or expressing thy inward wants vnto thy God in prayer, or offring vp thy self, as a sacrifice of thanksgiuing vnto thy God, &c. To these I say, & such like thou shalt be better fitted by this daily sacrifice.
               5 And shall not the mouth of iniquity be stopped by this cōstant

worship, that they shalbe conuinced with the power of godlinesse, they shall iustifie God, and so either brought to embrace him with vs, else fret away at our holy courses, and thereby do lesse hurt to vs, and hasten their owne damnation. Shall not
               6 The comming of Christ be hastened, the means of religion held vp, the estates and kingdomes of Princes preserued hereby. Eccl. 9.
               
                  Conclusion.
               
               The Lord giue vs vnderstanding in these things.
               7 Shall not this constant worship of God, though it be but in few, yea but in some one, keepe out the iudgement from the rest, else bee a means to saue our owne soules from a common desolation Gen. 18.
               8 Shall not the wiseman see the plague and hide himselfe. Prouer. 22.3. Though the foole runne on still and be taken in the trap.
               9 Shall not the Lord thus preserue one in a cittie, and two in a

Tribe, that they may be repairers of the breach, and the restorers of the paths to dwel in, that they may build vp the olde wast places, and raise vp the foundations for many generations. Ier. 3. Isay 58.12.
               10 That so the face of the church may be renued and continued till the comming of Christ. Euen so Lord Iesus allure vs to this holy dutie, and hasten thy kingdome of Grace, that thy will may be done in our perfection to glory.
            
         
         
            
            The third booke of the dayly Sacrifice, Containing a direction how to order our dayly occasions to the glory of our blessed God.
            
               In a Constant worship of his Maiestie.
            And these are,

                  1. A Preparation to each occasion. Chap. 1.
                  2. To arise with God and beginning the day with him of which in the second. Cha. 2.
                  
                     3. The meanes hereto priuate and Familie-exercises. Chap. 3.
                  4. The following of our callings. Chap 4.
                  5. The vse of the creatures. Chap. 5.
                  6. The right vse of Apparrell. Chap 6.
                  7. Of company. Chap. 7.
                  8. Of solitarinesse and it right vse. Chap. 8.
                  9. Of prosperity. Chap 9.
                  10. Of Aduersitie Chap. 10.
                  11. Of the dayly account. Chap. 11.
               
            
            Hitherto we haue spoken of such necessarie Duties,
            Which are dayly in a constant measure to be performed of those that will approue themselues to trauell towards heauen.
            
               Now because there are many other occasions that doe offer themselues (besides these 
                  •••
               et meanes) euen euery day vnto which wee ought both wisely to bee prepared to; as also wee must learne to entertaine them wisely, and profitably to pursue and goe through them, so as to further vs to happinesse.
            Therefore, in the next place, it shall bee necessary, both to lay downe Rules how to be prepared to them: as also to propose a seuerall direction for each, that they may not interrupt, but further our constant course of Holinesse.
            
               CHAP. I. Of preparation to each occasion.
               HOwsoeuer occasions are manifold and contrary, yet shall we be gratiously prepared to thē,
               First, if wee consider, that they are no certaine markes of Gods fauour, neither are we absolutely

to iudge of our estate by them, or in them.
               2 And yet doe resolue, that whatsoeuer befall, yet all shall turne to our good.
               3 And therfore that we set not vp our rest in any one of them, but prepare for such variety and contradiction as our holy God hath appoynted to manifest his more admirable power and wisedome, and to try our faith, and patience, our industry, and wisedome in encountring, our courage in conquering the same.
               4 And so bee daily ready to yeeld vp our selues vnto our blessed God, both resigning our wayes and liues vnto his holy hands. And
               5 Preparing our selues vnto our ends: so shall nothing be strange or vnwelcome vnto vs.
               Thus shall we bee prepared to each occasion.
               And that we be not distracted, and discouraged with the multiplicity & contradictions herein,

know we, that as it were infinite to lay downe direction for each particular; so shall it be needlesse to descend thereto, because what is laid downe for the well-managing of some principall, will giue light to the better ordering of the rest: And therefore my purpose is onely to stand vpon some principals, and the Lord giue a blessing hereunto.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of rising with God, and awaking in his peace.
               
                  And these Principals are,
               
               FIrst, to arise with God,1 The necessity thereof.
                   and as wee laid our selues downe in peace, so to awake with the comfort thereof. Psa. 23.6. Lam. 3.23. Psa. 139.18. Psa. 119.147. The reason whereof is: Because,
               
               1 Wee maintaine hereby constancy in wel-doing.
               2 Wee renue that soundnesse▪ wherewith we lay downe.
               3 Wee preuent that no roote of

bitternesse breake out at the first.
               4 Wee prouide for our more setled courses all the day after, and so beginne a new to liue the daily life of grace.
               5 We make our hearts merry in the Lord▪
               
               6 Wee are made principally more apt to prayer, which is the next occasion to be entertained of vs.
               
                  This is performed,
               
               
                  2 How performed.
                  1 By meditating of the true life of God, and day of the resurrection▪ 1. Cor. 1. and so our arising to iudgement.
               2 By magnifying our sweete repose, and resting in the bosome of Gods protection. Psalm. 3.5.
               3 Taking occasion by the light that appeareth, to consider of the Armour of light, or by the outward darknesse that compasseth, to blesse God for the inward light, and to mourne for the ignorance and blindnesse that is yet in vs and others, yea to resolue

the casting away of the workes of darknesse, &c. Roman. 13 12.
               4 Praising the mercie and patience of the Lord, that yet wee liue to praise him, and are spared to make our Election more sure; and thereto especially meditating on the constancie of Gods loue towards vs. Iohn. 13.1. Psalm. 19.2. Psalm. 102.27. Ieremie Lament. 3.23. as being renued euery morning.
               And this is furthered, if we perceiue dulnesse.
               1 By striuing euen in the night when we awake, to sigh for sinne,3 How furthered.
                   and hunger after mercy. Psal. 16.7. Cant. 3.1.
               2 By opening our hearts (if occasion serue) to our Chamber-fellow, if such fellowship bee enioyed, and so shaming of our selues, Iam. 5▪
               
               3 By auoiding ouermuch sleep, yea scanting & stinting our selues thereof, and rowsing vp our selues from drowsinesse, by checking

our hearts, and complaining of them to our blessed God, Pro. 24, 32.33.
               4 Taking occasion by our dreames, or nocturnall infirmities, to magnifie Gods mercy, that it is not so as we dreamed; or to checke our infidelity, in relying superstitiously vpon dreames, or to condemne our security, and prophanesse in neglecting them vtterly. And if we haue beene assaulted with terrors and corruptions, yet either they haue not preuailed, or shal not be imputed vnto vs.
               5 Calling to minde some place of the word for our better stirring vp, as Rom. 13.11.12.13.14. Eph. 5.14. 1. Thess. 5.4.5. &c. And prouoking our selues by the examples of the Saints, who haue risen early to praise the Lord, Psa. 5.34. &c.
               To this end cut we off all idle, worldly, and contentious speeches.
               1 By conferring of the sweete conferences and accidents that

haue befallen in the night with our blessed God.
               2 Meditating and reioycing together in those gratious victories that wee haue had ouer our secret lusts and corruptions in the night.
               3 Strengthning our faith in the speciall prouidence of our gratious father, in giuing vs such sweet and satisfying rest, &c.
               4 Stirre wee vp each other to the payment of our vowes. And
               5 Put wee each other in minde of our particular corruptions, to helpe each other by prayer, and to maister them. And
               6 Faile we not to record, and so communicate to posterity such extraordinary feelings and accidents of tentations, or deliuerance as haue befallen vs in priuate.
               7 Examining our true contentment in God, and labouring to confirme the same.
               8 Trying our affection to death, euen now our life is renued, that

so wee may beginne to dye daily. 1. Cor. 15.
               9 And faile wee not to satisfie each other in whatsoeuer doubts may distract, or not encrease sound peace to the Conscience.
               And so rising with the Lord, wee shall bee fitted to entertaine the next speciall occasion of the day: which is Prayer.
            
            
               CHAP. III. Of Family and priuate Prayer.
               
                  THe necessity and right vse thereof you haue before;
               
               
                  Onely here obserue these poynts for direction herein: As
               
                  Sect. 1. It necessity.
                  First, that howsoeuer this duty of prayer in Families bee neglected, and not esteemed necessary, yet the not vse thereof at all, argueth irreligion, and contempt of God. Psal. 14.4.
               Secondly,Sect. 2. that not once, but oftentimes in the d
                     •••
                  y wee must

performe the same. Daniel. 6·10.
                     Often to be performed, & by whom
                  
               
               Thirdly, And that not onely in priuate in our Closets, &c. but publickly with our Families. Gen. 18.19. Iob. 1.5.
               Fourthly, that the Maister of the Familie is fittest to bee the mouth of God for his people, as beeing therein their Priest and Prophet. Reu. 1.6.
               Fiftly, that to this end, set times are to be appointed & kept constantly, vnlesse by sicknesse or other more inuincible occasions we be interrupted.
               Sixthly, And that with the soonest, taking the opportunity of the morning, & our reuiuing and quickning ioyes in our conferences with our God, and each other concerning former comforts in the night.
               Seuenthly, that wee keepe our selues in an holy temper,
                     Sect. 3. The maner how,
                   & peace of minde by a constant course, in all occurrents, and so prepare our selues to praier.
               
                  1 Fixing our hearts on God, and meditating of his Power and Maiesty, to worke reuerence in vs.
               2 Looking vnto Iesus the author and finisher of our faith, to breed affiance, Heb. 12.2.
               3 Considering & examining our wants, to breed humility and patience. Psa. 39. Psa. 4.6.
               4 Labouring not so much about the matter of our prayer, how wee are illightned with knowledge, as how we are affected,
               1 With the Maiesty of God.
               2 The sence of our wants.
               3 Benefite by Christ.
               4 Assistance of the spirit.
               5 Excluding worldly cares, which may hinder deuotion. Luk. 8. Mat. 6.
               6 Not fretting at the prosperity of the wicked, Psa. 37.1.
               7 In Patience, bearing the wrongs of enemies, and leauing reuenge to God, Rom. 12.
               8 Doing all things as in Gods presence.
               
                  9 Auoiding euill for conscience sake.
               10 Meditating stil on the day of iudgment, least we be vnfitted or interrupted in prayer. 2. Pet. 3. 2. Cor. 5.11.
               7 Codsider wee the manifold blessings we haue receiued from God to prouoke vs to thankesgiuing, without which our prayers are ineffectuall. Eph. 6. &c.
               8 Here it is requisite that wee also quicken our hearts by Reading and Meditating twice, (or oftner) in the day on some part of the Scriptures, either as
               1 Taking the Scripture in order before vs. Nehemiah 8. Act. 13 Or else,
               2 Vpon extraordinarie occasions, making choyce of fit Scriptures.
               9 Bewaile wee seriously our neglect of closet prayer, and condemne wee our selues for our lippe-labour, and customarie deuotions, our wearisomnesse in well-doing, our contentment

with little feelings.
               10 Renue wee our vowes for more often and conscionable performance hereof.
               11 Rest we especially vpon the continuall intercession of our blessed Aduocate Iesus Christ, who continually maketh intercession for vs, and is now both praying for vs, and ready to present our prayers to the Throne of grace, and to couer all the infirmities and failings of them.
               12 Stirre we vp the blessed Spirit (as before) which may helpe vs with sighes and grones vnspeakeable, Rom. 8.
               13 And be wee well aduised of the particular thing wee desire, that it may be fit for God to giue vs, and vs to aske for the present occasion. Mat. 6. Iam. 4.2.
               Beeing thus prepared, we must powre out our praiers (as before.)
               
               
                  Auoyding here especially:
               
               1 Constraint, and Cerimoniousnesse.
                     Sect. 4.
               
               
                  2 Customarinesse, praying rather for the times sake,
                     Sect. 4. What to bee auoyded therein.
                   then for Gods glory. Psal. 119.108.
               3 Conceit of the wel-doing hereof in regard of the thing done.
               4 Pride and ostentation in the opinion of our wel-doing. Matth. 6.
               5 Lip-labour and idle repetition of words.
               6 Confusion and disorder, praying for earthly things before heauenly. Math. 6.33.
               7 Carnalnesse, when wee pray more for earth then heauen.
               8 Hypocrisie, doing it to be seene of men. Math. 6.
               9 Vncharitablenesse, praying for reuenge, &c. of priuate wrongs. Eccle. 10.20. Iam. 4.7.
               10 Wearisomnesse and dulnesse. Gal. 6. Exod. 15.
               11 Hastinesse and rashnesse, as if we would faine haue done.
               12 Presumption, begging such things as are not seasonable. Luke 9.54. or beseeme vs not.
               13 Impietie, praying for indulgence

in sin; or indenting with God, and limiting him to our wil, to helpe vs at such a time, or in such a manner. Act. 1. Dan· 4.
               14 Infidelity, when wee pray without the assurance of the acceptance of our persons, which is the cause of all Popish deuotion. Iam. 1.6.
               
                  Obseruing well:
               
               
                  Sect. 5. Directions for prayer, and triall thereof.
                  1 That as well for the least blessing, as for the greatest, we sue to God in prayer, and so be thankefull vnto him, lest otherwise wee deny God the giuer, and so hinder our receiuing.
               2 That wee measure not the prayer by the outward successe, because an euill prayer may bee heard in anger, Ose. 13. and a good deferred in mercy: Yea, a good prayer, though in much weakenesse, may bee granted in loue, Mat 6. to keepe vs from despaire; and yet a more strong and feruent prayer may bee denied in greater loue, both to humble vs, that we put not confidence in the

meanes, and to encourage vs to constancie therein, assuring our selues that the issue of our praiers shall be gracious.
               3 That in the greatest feeling of Gods mercy, wee pray against tentations. Math. 16.
               4 That we especially commend vnto God the afflicted state of the Church, and desire our welfare in the prosperity thereof, Psa. 122.6. Psa. 126.
               5 That we redouble our sighes and prayers, not suffering any repulse. Psa. 119.164. Mat. 15. Gen. 32 Gen. 18. &c. Eph. 6.
               6 That wee highly esteeme of the thing wee pray for, Mathew 5.6.
               7 That we finde as much comfort in abiding long at prayer, as at hearing the word.
               8 That we be as ready to praise God for his mercies receiued, as to sue for the obtaining of them. Psal. 116. Luk. 17.12.18.
               9 That wee rebuke our selues in our prayers, and relye onely

vpon Christ. Further triall hereof that wee haue the spirit of prayer.
               1 If we especially aime at Gods glory in doing his will.
               2 That wee especially are affected not with bodily, but sinfull wants.
               3 That vppon good euidences and from infallible grounds wee presse the Lord to bee mercifull vnto vs.
               4 That wee can single out our speciall wants.
               5 And find our zeale encreased in the continuance of prayer.
               6 And yet can so submit to Gods will, as by faith to assure our soules that the Lord will answer, and so quiet our soules in acceptance of our God, and vndoubted expectation of that which shall turne to most good.
               
                  The benefit hereof is manifold:
               
               
                  
                     Sect. 6. The benefit hereof.
                  1 We renue our right in the day 1. Tim. 4.4.
               2 Wee arme our selues against tentations. Ephes. 6.14.15.
               3 Wee are ready for any good

that shall bee offered vs, as consolation of the sicke, conference, &c.
               4 We are prest to doe all things in the sight of God.
               5 And so verie much fitted and furthered to set vpon our callings
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. Of callings, and following thereof.
               
                  ANd this is the next maine occurrent that fals out in the day, euen to following our Callings.
               
               
                  And here obserue:
               
               First, that to walke in a set calling for the common good, is the ordinance of God imposed on euery Christian. 2. Thess. 3.12. Gen. 3.19. Ephes. 4.28.
               
                  And that:
               
               1 To communicate Gods prouidence in the gouernement of the world.
                     Sect. 1. That it is Gods ordinance to walke in a calling.
                  
               
               2 To maintaine a comely order in the administration thereof.
               3 To imploy such varietie of

gifts, as God bestoweth on men aright.
               4 To maintaine humane societies in the bond of peace.
               5 To auoyd idlenesse and curiositie.
               6 To preuent errors and distractions in religion.
               7 To fit vs to the ends of Gods prouidence.
               8 That God may be glorified in ordering such infinite variety of callings, both for the common, & each priuate good, and that especially for the life to come.
               
                  And this serueth,
               
               1 To teach vs to trye our callings,
                     
                        Ʋse.
                   by this, That they haue their warrant from the word of God, and that wee bee fitted thereto, and so to reiect the contrarie
               2 To sanctifie our callings, by bounding them in the Lord, Ephesians 6.1. because they are preserued by the same meanes, by which they were ordained.
               
                  3 To labour in our callings, especially to approue our selues vnto God, Nehem. 13.
               4 To looke for the recompence of our labours especially from the Lord. 2. Timoth. 4. Psalm. 127. Esay. 48.1.2.
               5 To condemne such as vnfit for humane society, that will liue in no calling.
               
                  Secondly, learne we,
               
               That howsoeuer callings be the ordinance of God,Sect. 2. Callings to be expected by ordinary meanes.
                   yet in these dayes we are to expect them,
               1 By the ministery of men. And
               2 By our industry, fitting vs thereto.
               3 Submitting our selues herein to the rule of the word.
               
                  And that because,
               
               1 Extraordinary callings belonged to the infancy of the Church, & times of extremity,
                     And why.
                   &c
               2 We haue a sure word, better then any such extraordinary reuelations. Heb. 1. 2. Pet. 1.
               3 The prouidence of God is subordinate to meanes.
               
                  4 God hath ordained this labor to humble vs, and withall to comfort vs in the right vse of Gods blessings. Eccl. 1.
               
                  And this serueth.
               
               
                  
                     Vse.
                  1 To reproue presumption vpon extraordinary callings in these dayes, and corruption in the obtaining of them.
               2 To teach vs for outward callings to depend vpon the meanes which God hath sanctified threto. Namely,

                     1 The authoritie of the Magistrate.
                     2 Our fitnesse to the calling.
                     3 It fitnesse for vs.
                  
               
               3 To condemne those that vnder pretence of religion reiect humane callings.
               4 As also to reproue such who wander vp and downe, betaking themselues to no calling. And
               5 To conuince also those, that thinke callings are onely appointed to get blessings, whereas indeed they both serue to get, and also to vse a right, those that are

cast vpon vs: Wherein gentlemen are much faultie.
               
                  Thirdly obserue we:
               
               That though it be the ordinance of God to haue a calling:
                     Sect. 3 The right vse of a calling sanct
                           •••
                        
                        fies the same
                   yet it is not the hauing of a calling: but, the right vse thereof: whereby we glorifie God, & further our selues to happinesse. 1. Corint. 9.1. 1. Cor. 7
               
                  And this serueth:
                  
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  
               
               1 For the condemnation of those, that when they are in a calling, make no conscience thereof, esteeming it rather a reward of former seruice, then a place of further seruice.
               2 As also they are here condemned, that rather busie themselues in prying into, and censuring others callings, then walke faithfully in their owne.
               3 This serueth for the confirmation of our faith when wee see our faithful labours blessed of the Lord.
               4 As also wee perceiue hereby

the especiall prouidence of God, and so are led along in a more assured expectation of euerlasting life.
               5 Lastly, wee are here instructed to measure the worth of our callings by the right vse thereof, and onely in the same to expect a blessing.
                     Sect. 4. Callings how to be vsed aright
                  
               
               Now that wee may vse our calling aright, wee are further to obserue these Rules.
               
                  
                     rule 1 First, our iudgements must bee further informed concerning our callings.
               
                  And that by these directions,
               
               1 That each one, by profession, hath a generall calling to bee a Christian, which excludes not, but orders the Ciuill calling. 1, Cor. 2.20.
               
                  
                     rule 2 2 That the calling wich God hath placed vs in, is fittest for vs.
               
                  
                     Vse.
                  
                  And this serueth,
               
               1 Much for the maintenance of order, and the auoyding of confusion in Church and Common-wealth.
               
                  2 To preuent idlenesse and distraction in our callings.
               3 To secure vs of good successe therein.
               
                  Thirdly, learne we,
               
               That all our actions bee warranted by our Callings, as being 
                     rule 3 kept within the bounds thereof.
               
                  And that because,
               
               1 Else they are not done in faith and so cannot please God. Hebr. 11.6.
               2 They are excluded out of the protection of the Almighty. Psal. 91. Math. 4.
               
                  And this serueth,
               
               1 To condemne all busie-bodies,
                     Vse.
                   and presumptuous vsurpers of other mens callings vpon what pretence soeuer. 2. Sam. 6. Iohn. 21.21. 1. Pet. 4.
               2 To discerne of the integrite of our actions: because euen a good Action, not warranted by some Calling, is sinne.
               3 To instruct vs, that though

wee see no likelyhood of doing good, yet we must not draw backe so farre as our calling requireth. Ierem. 1.20.19. Ezechiel 2.5. Esay 6.
               4 To aduise vs, that wee abuse not Gods prouidence: and so expose our selues to his iustice.
               5 To comfort vs in the ill successe of endeauours, that our labour shall not be in vaine. Esay 49.3. 1. Cor. 15. &c.
               
                  Fourthly learne we:
               
               That together with the following of our earthly callings, wee 
                     rule 4 must ioyne the generall calling of Christianitie,
               1 Because we must serue man, in and for God Ephes. 6.1.
               2 And in prouiding for this life, we must also store vp for heauen. Luke 16.
               3 Hereby tediousnesse, and corruption is preuented.
               4 And wee better fitted to returne to them againe.
               5 Ye these things will not prosper,

vnlesse the better plough goe forward. Hagg. 1.9.10. and 2.14.15.
               
                  And this serueth.
               
               1 To condemne those that prophane their callings by not following the most necessary.
                     Vse.
                  
               
               2 As also such who thinke that skill, and diligence in a ciuill calling, either excuseth, or is accepted for religion.
               3 Especially, they are reproued, that will haue no seruants, that are religious, or else giue them libertie of prophanenesse, that they may do them better seruice.
               4 As also they that complaine, how the following of their earthly callings hindereth necessarily their heauenly.
               5 Hereby wee are taught to trie our estate in grace, if our ciuill calling hindereth not the as in spirituall.
               6 This serueth to comfort vs, in our base callings, because God may as well be serued in these, as the greatest.
               7 And hereby we are taught to

haue respect to our brethren, and to prefer their soules before their bodies.
               8 As also we shall be established in our callings, not to be puffed vp when we prosper, neither to be confounded when we are crossed: but to be patterns of the right vse of the world.
               9 Lastly, to humble men in euery calling. The mightie, who thinke their callings either must not stoope to religion or hath no leasure thereto. The Poore, who thinke their want, a priuiledge, from following their spirituall callings.
               
                  
                     rule 5
                  Fiftly, obserue we,
               
               That whatsoeuer shalbe sufficient for the right vse of our callings, shall bee reuealed vnto vs from the word, and thence to bee warranted. Act. 9.
               
                  And that because:
               
               1 God is as well the ordainer of the meanes, as of the end.
               2 And in his loue he will haue vs certaine what to do.
               
                  3 And hereby presumption and destraction are happily preuented.
               
                  And this serueth:
               
               1 To trie the fitnesse, and blessing of our callings.
                     
                        Ʋse.
                  
               
               2 To humble vs in regard of our ignorance and presumption.
               3 To comfort vs if throgh want or ignorance we may fail in some point, because all is not reuealed at once, and to assure vs of good successe therein. Psal. 73.
               4 To prouoke vs to seeke after knowledge, as after treasures. Prouerbes 2.
               5 To teach vs not to presume vpon good meanings or bare intentions. 1. Sam. 13.
               6 To condemne all rash, and licentious actions whatsoeuer.
               
                  Sixtly, we must be resolued.
               
               That our callings are imposed,
                     rule 6 not to merit by them, but to bee humbled, and exercised in them, in thankefulnesse vnto God, for his loue vnto vs in Iesus Christ.
               
                  And that because,
               
               
                  1 Christ Iesus hath sufficiently deserued for vs, and so we shal derogate from his sufficiencie.
               2 God doth not require it at our hands. Esa. 1.
               3 Wee are neuer able to performe it, but when wee haue done al we can, we are vnprofitable seruants. Luk. 17.10.
               
                  
                     Vse.
                  
                  And this:
               
               1 Condemneth all Popish, and voluntarie seruice.
               2 Encourageth vs in our callings seeing God requireth but what we can, nay, what he giues. 2. Cor. 8.12.
               3 It comforteth in our imperfections, and taketh away that slauish feare of hirelings and mercenaries.
               4 And assureth vs of saluation.
               7 Know we that each in regard 
                     rule 7 of the better meanes of his calling, must be more fruitfull, as the minister, rich man, &c.
               
                  And that because:
               
               1 Vnto whō much is giuen, much shall be required. Luke 12.48.
               
                  2 Herebe hee is the better enabled thereto. And this,
               
               1 Condemneth such as thinke their state and play doth exempt them from a ciuil calling, or from the burthen thereof. As Gentl. &c.
               2 Hereby we may trie whether our callings are sanctified.
               3 As also, we are comforted, that god requires no more thē he giues
               
                  Eightly, Learne we,
               That though we faile in the best 
                     rule 8 yet we must not fail to do our best in our callings. And that,
               
               1 By this faithfulnesse we may witnesse that our callings are sanctified vnto vs, in our obedience to God in them.
               2 That they may be meanes of our enioying of heauen. 1. Ti. 6.19
               3 To try and so condemne the vncharitablenes of the world.
               4 That we may be also possessors of greater glory in the heauens. Mat. 25.26. &c.
               
                  And this serueth:
               
               1 To condem al time-seruing & customarines in our callings. Eph. 6.5, 6.
               
                  2 To instruct the poore not to neglect their callings altogether, because they will not maintaine them fully. As also
               3 To trie them whether they wil depend vpō Gods prouidence by vsing lawfull meanes.
               4 Wee are prouoked to striue with the best for the best gaine, & in these things to seeke after heauen.
               
                  And this is done:
               
               By walking in our callings by faith & not by sence, that so both our persons and actions may bee approued.
               
                  And this is knowne:
               
               1 Beeing warranted from the word, in what wee do, or intend. 2. Pet. 1.
               2 Our consciences conuinced from the word to the same: and also
               
                  
                     Sect. 5. Callings how performed a right.
                  3 Witnessing with vs in what we do. And that,
               1 With chearefulnesse, not making hast to be rich, but casting our care vpon God, and committing

the successe to him. 1. Pet. 5. Eccl. 9.9.
               2 With diligence, redeeming the time, and entertaining the means of Gods prouidence, and not being wilfully guilty of the neglect thereof. Eph. 3.16.17.
               3 In wisedome, 1. keeping our selues in our callings within the compasse of our abilitie. 2. Doing the most necessary dutie, 3. submitting alwaies these earthly callings to the furtherance of the heauenly, 4. and expressing our spiritual calling, euen in the vse of this, and 5. so auoyding negligence that wee bee not intangled with couetousnesse.
               4 In loue and meeknes, making others partakers of the benefit of our labours
               5 In patience, not tying God so much to the outward blessing of our labours, as contenting our selues with the testimony of our good conscience therein. Hebrews 13:18.
               6 With conscience, doing that

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  2 If we be not supplyed, we are to yeeld to necessitie, and either
               3 To submit our selues to handy labour, or if we cannot therto, depend vppon the prouidence of God, and so to submit our selues to the reliefe of the Church.
               Thirdly, we must resigne vp our callings. And that.
               
               1 When God cals by death.
               2 When other meanes warranted by the conscience, guided by the word do, require: that
               3 With testimonie of a good conscience. 1. Sam. 12.3.
               4 By giuing vp our account for them vnto the great iudge. Heb. 13.
               Thus are wee to performe our calllings.
               The benefit whereof is exceeding great, for:
               1 Hereby we shall be sure to be fed.
                     Sect. 8. Benefit of callings.
                   
                  Psal. 37. Psal. 33.19.
               2 We shall eate our bread with power and much contentment.
               3 We shall haue to comfort and releiue others.
               
                  4 We please our glorious God and performe a speciall seruice to him.
               4 We shall bee better fitted to our generall callings.
               5 We shall lay vp a good foundation for heauen. 1. Tim. 6.19.
               6 We shall exercise herin many spirituall graces. 1. Cor. 7. as patience, faithfulnesse, &c.
               7 Hereby we shal perceiue Gods power, and holines, euen in these base and meane things, and bee prouoked to seeke him in greater blessings. Mat. 6.
               8 We shall bee humbled, and so prouoked to hunger after our dissolution.
               And thus farre concerning our behauiour in our callings.
               The triall of conscionable performance of our callings▪ Is
               1 If our conscience witnesse with vs,
                     Sect. 9. Triall.
                   that not so much for this life, as to please our blessed God, and further vs to heauen, we haue trauelled therein.
               2 That of all ploughs the spirituall

thriues best.
               3 Our negligence in the ciuill calling, bewrayes some flaw in the generall.
               4 That our walking in the ciuil calling shall end in a fitting, and furthering vs in our Christian calling yeelding some particular matter and occasion to more profitable exercise therein.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the right vse of the Creatures.
               
                  THe next main incident to the day is the vse of the creatures.
               
               
                  And these are of two sorts.
               
               1 Such as serue for the necessary preseruation of life, as foode, apparell.
               
               2 Such as serue especially for the better being of the soule, as company.
               
               Concernig food and sustenance, obserue these rules.Sect. 1. Rules herin
               
               1 That euery creature is good, and that there is no more holines

in the one, then in the other, 1. Tim. 4.5.
               2 Though each Christian hath a right to all the creatures, yet is he to bee restrained in the vse of them.
                     Sect. 1. Rules herein.
                  
               
               
                  And that by these limits:
               
               1 The bond of Religion, which enioynes sometimes an intire abstinence from the creature, that so wee might bee better fitted to spiritual duties. 1. Tim. 5.23. 1. Pet. 5.8, Ion. 3. and teacheth at all times so to vse the food of the body, as that it may quicken the spirituall appetite after heauenly graces, Iohn. 6.27.
               2 The bond of Christian Pollicie may restraine vs the vse of some creatures on some dayes, for the benefite of the Common-wealth, to which wee ought to obey for Conscience sake, Rom 13.5.
               3 The bond of Nature restraines vs that wee may not eate but for necessity, Eccles. 10.16. Math. 12.1.
               4 The bond of Conscience & Equity also enioynes vs, that wee may

not lawfully eate, vnlesse we haue laboured for it. 2. Thess. 3.12.
               5 The bond of our callings binds vs so to eate, as our Christian callings may be furthered & our ciuil callings will maintaine. 1. Tim. 5.8.
               6 The bond of Charity wils vs not to eat our morsels alone, but to prouide and reserue somewhat for the poore. Iob. 29.31. Psalme 16 Neh. 5. auoyding herein all maner of offence. 1. Cor. 8.
               7 The bond of Sobriety restrains vs from faring deliciously euerie day, and from far-fetcht dainties, but to vse our libertie as if wee vsed it not, auoyding vnnecessary prouocations of gluttony. Esay 5.9.10. Luk. 16. 1. Cor. 7.23. And putting our knife to our throates in our greatest libertie, feasting alwaies in feare, & yet with thanksgiuing. Prou. 23.3.
               8 The bond of contentment, which wisheth the seruant not to enuy at the more liberal fare of his master but each to bee content with the portion that is fit for him. 1. Tim 6 6.8.
               
                  Thirdly, wee are to renue our right in the creature,
                     Sect. 3. Of the renuing of our right in the creature.
                   by daily sanctifying them vnto vs by the word and prayer. 1. Tim. 5.1. Sam. 9.13.
               
                  And that:
               
               1 By acknowledging our selues vnworthy of them: Gen. 32.10.
               2 Giuing God the glory of them with thanksgiuing. Mat. 26.
               3 Seasoning them with holy & religious thoughts, and chearfull yet profitable conference. Iudg. 14 Luke 14.
               4 Offring the strength of them vnto God in our callings. 1. Kings 19.8.
               
                  The triall of the right vse, i
                        •••
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               1 If our comforts beneath, descend from comforts aboue.
               2 If in these finite and corruptible things, wee see an infinite & eternall good▪
               
               3 And these earthly things are seales thereof vnto vs, and life vp our hearts thither.
               4 If we find such contentednes in them as alwaies affords desire & fitnesse to spirituall blessings.
               
                  5 If in regard of their shortnes fully to satisfie vs, and our abuse of them and aptnes therto, we see in them our mortalitie, and so hunger after our dissolution.
               
                  
                     Sect. 4. The benefit hereof.
                  
                  The benefit hereof.
               
               1 We shall auoid superstition, and that damnable doctrine of diuels. 1. Tim. 4.2.
               2 We shall be better enabled to spirituall duties. Mat 26.30.
               3 We shall vse the Christian libertie aright. Rom. 14.
               4 Wee shall further nature to grace.
               5 Wee shall eate of our owne, and so be blessed. Psal. 128.1.
               6 Wee shall prouide safely for the time of famine, & eat to liue. Psal. 33.10. Psal. 37.
               7 Wee shall make vs friends of this Mammon of iniquity, & ease our selues well of an heauy burthen. Luke 16.
               8 We shall be ready to die, and prepared to the meate that shall endure for euer. Iohn 6.27.
               
                  And thus much concerning our food.
               
               
                  The like may we conceiue concerning our apparell.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of apparell.
               
                  WHich that wee may the rathe vse aright.
               
               1 Consider we that our clothing is a badge of our sinfull state,
                  
                     Sect. 1. How to bee informed in iudgement.
                   and therefore let vs not reioyce in our sin, let vs not giue strength thereto, by vanitie therein.
               2 That herein wee frame our selues to the guise of the countrie wherein we liue, auoyding the new fanglednesse of other nations. 1. Zeph. 9.
               3 That we be constant in our generall habits, and alter not the same.
               4 That in the vse of apparell we are subiect to the authoritie of the Magistrate. Rom. 13.
               5 That when we put on our apparell, we remember that excellent clothing of Christ Iesus his righteousnes, and the fruit thereof, that clothing vpon in glory, and immortalitie. 2. Ephes. 2. Cor. 5.
               6 That when wee put off our

apparell, we remember also to put off sinne, & so to lie down with peace of conscience, as not to resume sinne againe, together with our apparell.
               7 Be we carefull that we disguise not our selues with the monstrous fashions of the world, lest together with this outward fashion, we pertake with them in their sin, and so share with them in their punishments.
               8 Take wee heed, lest by our shamelesse disguising we so bring it to passe, that the Lord when he comes to iudgement acknowledge not his owne creature.
               
               9 Consider we the prouidence of God herein, that apparel, that hath no heate, should notwithstanding be a meanes to get and maintain the same, that so
               1 Our hearts bee not set vpon the same.
               2 That we labour for that onely which may answere the right end
                  ▪ namely, 1. to procure warmth to the body.
               
               
                  2 To adorne the same.
               3 That we depend vpon the blessing of God therein. Psal, 127.
               4 That in the want thereof, we despaire not of Gods loue: seeing 1. he which makes the cold apparell to be a meanes of heate: can also maintaine the heate of the body without apparell: and 2. no man knoweth loue or hatred by these things. Eccl. 9.1.2.
               5 Learne wee hereby, that the body is better worth then the raiment, and so the soule more pretious then the body. Mat, 6.
               6 And yet presume wee not of heate without the vse of these meanes.
               7 And let this serue to humble vs, that the greatest cause of our pride, we haue from the beasts, & that which hath heate in it selfe doth yet receiue heate from that which hath none.
               8 To confirm vs not to neglect the most vnlikely meanes.
               9 And thus keeping our selues within the bound of necessity, sobrietie,

religion, authority, ou
                     •
                   callings auoyding of offence, &c. we shall by Gods mercy attain to a right vse of these outward blessings and so
               1 Shall reeiue them as pledges of the immortall cloathing.
               2 Shal be assured of Gods mercie in the present vse of them: as being now sanctified vnto vs, &c.
               10 Remember we that sin hangs vpon vs all our life long: and therfore let vs not set it faster on by vanitie in apparell. But rather
               11 Let vs sigh and hunger for that clothing which is aboue, and especially labour to adorne the hidden man in the heart. 1. Pet. 3.
               12 Consider that this glory of apparel is the shame of the wearer causing them to be counted light, wanton, proud, & consuming their outward estates, disrobing the soule of spirituall graces, and exposing to more grieuous tentations as lust, theft, and pride,
               
               
                  Our iudgements being thus rectified and resolued, concerning our

right and vsage of apparell, we may safely vse.
               
               1 Euen the most pretious,
                     Sect. 2. How in practise.
                   as our callings do allow. Gen. 41. Gen. 24. Psalme 45.10. Mat. 6.27. 2. Chro. 9.27. 2. So there be no vanity in them. Esa. 3.
               3 So we remit of our libertie to the more fit worship of God in fasting, &c. Ion. 3. Esth. 4.
               4 So we more especially intend the adorning of the mind. 1. Tim. 2 9. 1. Pet. 3.3.
               5 So we make them not means and ensigns of our pride, lightnes &c. Esa. 3.16.
               6 So that our care be moderate for the same. Mat. 6 28. 1. Tim. 6.8.
               7 As also sutable vnto our seuerall callings and degrees.
               8 Approuing our selues herein vnto the examples of the grauest and most frugall. Phil. 4.9. Mat. 3.4
               9 Especially correspondent to decency and holines. Tit. 2.3.
               1 So that the man must not weare that which belongs to the woman Deut. 22.5.
               
                  2 Our apparell must bee fit to execute our seuerall callings.
               3 As also such as may expresse the seueral vertues of the mind. 1. Tim. 2.9.10.
               Obseruing these ends in the vse thereof.
               1 Necessitie to defend vs from heat and could.
               2 Honestie to couer our nakednesse. Os. 2. Sauing onely the face and hands.
               3 Honour. 1. Cor. 12.23. 1. Thes. 4.4 to adorn our persons and callings.
               4 Contenting our selues with our naturall fauour and complexion. 2. King. 9 30.
               5 Aiming herein at a spirituall vse, as before: especially, our death and resurrection.
               
                  The benefit hereof is,
               
               1 Our outward estate maintained and honoured.
                     Sect. 3. It benefit.
                  
               
               2 The inward beautie and grace of the mind furthered.
               3 Abuse of time preuented, which we must giue account of.
               4 Gods creatures vsed to their

right end, and in an holy manner: whereby not only their groaning is eased. Romans. 8.19. But they fitted as meanes of the worship of God, and so furtherers of our eternall happinesse. 1. Tim. 6 19.
               5 The iudgements of God auoided. Esa. 2.11. Zeph. 3.11.
               6 We better enabled to cloath and comfort others. Iob. 30. & so
               7 Pride exceedingly mastered, and subdued.
               8 Offence of our brother, and scorne of the wicked preuented.
               9 Natures shame couered.
               10 Sinne also dayly set before vs Ps. 55. and so wee prouoked to repentance.
               11 And thereby prepared happily to our ends. In that with apparell we resuming sin, are so prouoked to groane vnder it and sigh for deliuery therefrom.
               
                  Helpes hereunto are:
                  
                     Sect. 4. Helpes.
                  
               
               1 Consideration of our inward nakednes & filthines of the soule, whic
                     •••
                   will withdraw our mindes

from vaine tricking of the body.
               2 Meditation of the inward clothing of Christ his righteousnes; Rom. 13. Gal. 3. As also,
               3 Of that heauenly clothing wherewith we shall be fully inuested in heauen, 2. Cor. 5.1, Cor. 15.
               4 Meditation of the graue, when all this glory, &c. shall bee laid in the dust. &c.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of Company.
               TOuching Company we are to obserue these poynts:
               
                  
                     Sect. 1. 1 Necessary
                  
                  First, that society is most necessary and profitable for vs. As in that
               1 By Nature wee are inclined thereto.
               2 So created of God, as that we haue neede one of another. 1. Cor. 12. Gen. 2.
               3 So disposed in the world, as that wee must needs sort together by reason of our particular wants, and diuersity of gifts.
               4 So vnited in Christ, as that wee are bound to help each other. 1. Cor. 12
               
                  5 So interressed in happinesse, as that wee ioyntly labour together.
               6 Hereby we communicate of the good that God bestoweth on vs, 1. Tim. 6.17.
               7 As also are relieued and comforted in the euill that is laid vpon vs.
               8 We maintaine our right, and pursuite of the heauenly fellowship.
               9 And haue daily experience of our vnion and fellowship with our blessed God. And
               10 Exercise loue with each other.
               11 As also haue experience of his admirable power and wisedome in keeping vs vntainted, and making vs profitable in all company.
               12 Hereby we discerne the vse of the tongue, and attaine to an holy ordering thereof.
               13 Hereby also wee effect the conuersion of others, and so encrease our endlesse glory, and confirme

our present estate, Iam. 5.20·
               14 As also we quicken and kindle the graces of God in each other. Pro. 10.20.
               15 Wee preuent hardnesse of heart, and the deceitfulnesse of sinne, as gaining a more excellent knowledge of our selues.
               16 As also are prouoked to remember them absent, by whom we haue receiued good in company.
               
                  And this serueth,
               
               1 To condemne that monstrousnesse of nature which endures no society.
               2 As also that voluntary deuotion which excludes from society.
               3 To instruct vs to imploy our selues for the publicke and common good.
               4 To prepare our selues, and so to be armed against all company whatsoeuer.
               5 To content vs, whatsoeuer company the Lord shall cast vs vpon.
               6 And also to assure vs of good

successe therein.
               Secondly,Sect. 2. How to bee vsed aright that we may the better profite by all companies, obserue wee:
               1 That wee must feare danger from all: from the euill, by being defiled with them: from the good, by being puffed vp with them.
               2 That wee leaue no ill sauour behinde vs, but walke harmlesly before them, and with them.
               3 That we rush not vnaduisedly into any company. But
               1 Determine before hand to doe them good. Or else,
               2 To receiue good of them, as occasion shall require, and so prepare to question with them accordingly.
               4 Be we resolued that company is not simply necessary to saluation, we are to vse them, if God cast vs vpon them: If otherwise by infirmity, or some outward affliction we are debarred, know we, that in stead of men, we haue the society of our blessed God, and his Angels; yea we can neuer bee depriued

of the company of a good conscience, Pro. 15.15.
               5 Especially prepare wee the the heart by a serious examination. And
               6 Set wee a watch before the doore of our lips, that our tongues may not betray vs.
               7 Remember that God is president in each company, to iudge of our speech, Rom. 11.36. and therefore let all bee done of him, through him, and for him, let him be accounted the best therin.
               8 And consider we, that the Diuill will be one in despite of vs, to write what we say: and therefore entertaine we not him, by vanity, worldlinesse, &c. Iob. 1.2.
               9 Aime we at spirituall peace, and auoyd we brawling, contentions, &c.
               10 And remember we, that heres no liberty for Idle talke.
               
                  Thirdly, obserue we:
               
               The kinds of company, which are,

                     
                        Good,
                     
                     
                        Bad.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Here learne,
               
               First to discerne good and euill company, As thus,
               
               First, they are to be esteemed good. which
               1 Are of the same profession with vs, Eph 5.11. Psa. 15.4.
               2 Who speake with sound iudgment, and power of true knowledge, Col. 1. Phil. 1.
               3 Who labour to holinesse and sincerity of life, Ephes. 5. In all things continually,
               4 Who haue a sight of their inward corruptions, and mourne for them.
               5 Labour to do good to others. Gal. 6.10.
               6 Who suffer with vs for the same profession. Phil. 1.27.
               7 Who loue the word, and Gods children. Psa. 16.2.
               8 Long for the appearance of Iesus Christ, 1 Corinth. 1. 2 Thess. 3.14. 2 Cor. 5.1.2. &c.
               9 Which can endure to bee reproued.
               10 And goe the straight way,

contrary to the world thereto, Mat. 7. Luk. 13. Rom. 12.2.3.
               
                  
                     Sect. 5. Who bad.
                  
                  Secondly, they are to be accounted euill: that
               1 Speake euill of the power of profession, Iud. 8. 2 Pet. 2.3.4.
               2 Despise the word, and meanes of holinesse. 2. Pet. 3.5.6.
               3 Disgrace profession with a prophane life. Ephes. 5.6.
               4 Resolue that we may bee too holy and religious.
               5 Separate themselues from the society of the Saints, Hebr. 10. Esay. 65.5.
               6 Runne the broad way, following:

                     1 Examples,
                     2 Multitude,
                     3 Time.
                     4 Custome,
                     5 Opinion. &c.
                  
               
               7 Who hate to be reproued, and continue obstinate in their sinne, Iohn. 2.
               8 Which decay in sincerity, and grow worse and worse. 2. Tim. 3.13
               9 Who notwithstanding the outward

forme of godlinesse, retaine the fashion of the world, and sauour thereof. Rom. 12.
               10 Who giue occasion of griefe to the Saints, and reioycing to the wicked. Psal. 110.
               11 Which betray and persecute the Saints of God, Matth. 10. Iohn. 16.1.
               12 Who cannot endure reprofe.
               13 Who refuse the crosse, and make choise of the pleasures of sinne for a season, 2. T
                        •••
                     m. 4. Demas Hebr. 11.25.26.
               14 Who are afraid of death, and set vp their rest in this life, Luk. 12.20. Amos 6.3.4.
               
                  Fourthly learne we,
               
               
                  Principally to make choyce of good Company: As,
                     Sect. 6. To choose good.
                  
               
               1 Best agreeing with our qualities.
               2 Those who are knit with vs in the holy and constant bond of loue and religion. Eph. 4.1.
               3 Those of whom wee shall receiue most good, and least hurt.
               4 Those whom wee are most

bound to doe good vnto, Galath 6.10.
               5 As also with whom w
                     •••
                  e shall enioy most constant and perpetuall society. 1. Thess. 4.17. Heb. 12.
               
                  And this condemneth,
               
               1 Those that are indifferent for all companies.
               2 Instructs vs whom especially to sort with. And
               3 Whom to auoyd in our election.
               
                  
                     Sect. 7. Wicked how to be sorted with
                  Fifthly, obserue wee, that we are not to refuse the worst company vpon these conditions:
               1 If thy calling require & allow thee for their good, especially being sought vnto, Mat. 3.5. Luk. 14.1
               2 If vpon occasion thou fall vppon them, or they into thy company. 1. Reg. 18. Act. 17.17.
               3 If they bee in any extremity, thou art to seeke vnto them. Luk. 10.33.
               4 So thou doe not returne to them, but reclaim them vnto thee Ier. 15.19.
               
                  And this condemneth,
               
               
                  1 That scrupulosity that alloweth no society with the wicked.
               2 As also that prophanesse which vpon such pretences are companions with them in euill.
               3 It instructeth vs in the right of our Christian liberty, to become all vnto all, that so we may winne some vnto Christ, 1. Corinth. 9.17.18.
               4 As also comforteth vs, that if wee doe them no good, yet wee shall (keeping these Rules) receiue no hurt; nay, wee shall bee the better by them. Matthew 10.3.4.
               Otherwise wee are not to conuerse with them: Because,
               
               1 They doe not loue vs, Prou. 29.
               2 They will defile vs with their corruptions, and hinder vs in wel-doing.
               3 And draw downe Gods wrath vpon vs. Reu. 18, 5.
               4 They are hated of God, Mat. 9.
               
                  5 And to be secluded the society of the faithfull. 2 Iohn.
               
               
                  And this,
               
               1 Reproueth their prophanesse, who, to choose, sort with the wicked, to make them merry, and reiect the godly, as being melancholy persons, &c.
               2 As also, that for feare to offend the wicked, conuerse & close with them, or to make gaine of them, or by them.
               3 Hereby we learne how to auoyd contagion and confusion euen by forsaking the company of the wicked, Reu. 18.4.
               4 As also hereby we haue a protection from their malice, if wee runne not into the same excesse with them.
               Ninthly, learne we how to behaue our selues in good company.
               Concerning good companie, there are these rules:Sect. 9.
               
               1 We must prouoke each other thereto.
               2 Christian salutation is to begin this society, and greeting each other

in the Lord. Ruth. 2.
               3 To be large-hearted, offering the most pretious pearles vnto them, Math. 13.
               4 To vse among them more cheerefulnesse and familiarity.
               5 Exhortation of each other to constancy.
               6 Reprouing each other for suspected or knowne infirmities, Leuit. 19.17. Galath. 2.11.13. priuately.
               7 Taking occasion by some present blessing or iudgement to prouoke to repentance, or thankfulnesse, Gen. 33.11. Gen. 4
                     •••
                  .9
               8 Ioyning together in prayer at least once before breaking vp, Ephes. 6. Acts 1.
               9 Aduising each other for outward occasions but sparingly, 2. Tim. 4.13.14.
               10 Commending each other to their priuate remembrances, Eph. 6.19. Act. 20.32.
               11 In conference, keeping an holy order, that the grauest, and most experienced may both begin,

and moderate without interruption or preiudice of any other gifts. 1. Cor. 14. Iob. 32.4.
               12 Not wading into matters beyond their skill, or calling.
               13 Bearing with one another, through loue.
               14 Conferring especially of such things as they haue learned.
               15 Reioycing together in singing of Psalmes, Col. 3.15.
               
                  
                     Sect. 10. Benefite of good company.The end and vse of good company is:
               1 To draw vnderstanding out of them by conference, Luk. 24. Ioh. 4
               2 To receiue comfort in our inward and outward troubles, Ruth. 2.13.
               3 To increase spirituall ioy, Psal. 32.11.
               4 To maintaine loue and Christian vnity, Psa. 133.1.
               5 To nourish our hope and vnion in the fellowship which is aboue.Sect. 11. Kindes of good company.
                   
                  Col. 1.5.
               
                  Now good company is either
               
               
                  Set, and appointed: or
               
                  Occasionall.
               
               
                  Set company is either to

                     
                        Spirituall or
                     
                        Ciuill ends.
                  
               
               That which is to spirituall ends is either,

                     
                        Publicke, or
                     
                        Priuate.
                     
                  
               
               The Set Publick meetings of the Saints are of two sorts.
               
                  Principall and necessary,
               
                  Accessory and occasionall.
               The Principall meetings are such which doe immediatly concerne, and so are imployed in the worship of God.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               First, the weekely meetings on the Sabboth.Sect. 12. Of Sabboth societie, and the Rules thereof.
                  
               
               And heerein obserue these Rules:
               First, that wee prepare each other thereto. Eccle. 4.17.
               
                  And that by
                  1 For Preparation.
                  
               
               1 Councell and Instruction.
               2 Encouragement and prouocation by example, &c. reioycing that now we are freed from bodily labour to serue our God more freely.
               
                  3 By examination, and that,
               1 Of sinnes commited, especially such of neglect of Gods worship.
               
               2 Present wants, of knowledge, desire, &c.
               3 What furniture of graces wee are fitted withall, what Faith, Repentance, Ioy, &c.
               4 Especially labouring to bee found in Christ, Phil. 3.9.10.
               5 Praying vnfaynedly for the ministery of the world, Col. 4. Rom. 16. 2 Thess. 3.
               6 Instructing our Families, 2. Thess. 3. Gen 18. Psal. 101.
               7 Condemning our former abuse of the Saboth.
               8 Renuing our vowes for more conscionable obedience for the time to come. And lastly,
               9 Meditating on the eternall Saboth, and so stirring vp our selues in a through emptying of all carnall thoughts, &c.
               Secondly, for the worship of the day.
               
                  2 Practise of they day.
                  1 We are to arise early, to praise the Lord.
               
                  2 To stirre vp our selues & people by reading, meditating and praying, in priuate, and with the Familie.
               3 That we come together to the Assemblies, and not straggle, but that wee may bee partakers of the whole worship of GOD, Actes 13.44.
               4 That wee vse all holy and reuerend gestures to further attention to holy things, as to be bare, to stand vp, to looke vpon the preacher, &c. Luke 4.20. Numb. 23 18.22.
               5 That wee faile not priuately to stirre vp one another (as wee perceiue dulnesse) to watchfulnesse, heede-taking, by iogging, &c.
               6 That we ioyne with the Congregation in such parts of Gods worship, as then are performing, 1 Cor. 14. Act. 20.36.
               7 That wee continue out the performance thereof, waiting for the blessing, vnlesse more vrgent occasion call away, Math. 24.20.
               
                  8 That we conferre with our family and neighbours some fewe together, of such lessons as wee haue publickely heard, desiring to bee satisfied by our Minister, of doubtfull poynts, Acts 17.11.
               9 That we visit the sicke, and relieue the poore, make peace among neighbours, minister a word in due season to them that are weary, Isa. 50. Math. 7.
               10 That wee meditate vpon the Meanes.
               
               1 Accounting with our selues what things either read or preached especially concerned vs.
               2 What especiall comforts and feelings the Lord gaue vs in prayer.
               3 What increase of faith in the promises.
               4 What renuing of repentance, &c.
               11 That wee take a view of the creatures, and stirre vp our hearts in the Spiritual meditation thereof to a greater loue and reuerence

of the Creator. Psalm. 19.1. Psal. 92.4.
               12 That we count this our onely recreation for this day, to build vp the soule in knowledge and holinesse. Esay. 58.13.
               The vse and benefit of the Sabboth is:
                     3 It benefit.
               
               1 We aree better fitted to the daily sacrifice.
               2 And also enabled to walke profitably in our Ciuill Callings.
               3 We renue our heauenly conuersation.
               4 We increase in knowledge, & so are fitted to a further measure of sanctification.
               5 Wee are prouoked to meditate on the worke of our redemption which was the cause of the vnchangeable change of this day.
               6 Wee are more weaned from the world, and setled in our best choyce.
               7 We renue our right, and prosecute our interest in the eternall Sabboth.
               
                  8 We are throughly humbled in the sence of our vnworthinesse, as discerning by the impossibilitie of so keeping in our selues; but that in thought, word, and deede wee haue often transgressed the bounds of this day, how farre we are from perfection, and so are prouoked the rather to hasten thereto.
               
                  Sect. 13 Of thankesgiuings.
                  A second publique meeting for Gods worship, are the Solemnities of Thankes-giuing for extraordinary blessings receiued, Exo. 15.1. Hest. 9. Nehem. 8.
               And these are to bee performed.
               1 By the lawfull authority of the Magistrate. Hest. 9.
               2 They are to bee kept as Sabboths, with
               1 Like preparation,
               2 Cessation from worke,
               3 Contribution to the poore.
               4 Spirituall exercise of the word and prayer, 1, Corinth. 16. Hest. 9.
               
                  
                     Fasting.
                  5 Onely here may be a more liberall

vse of Gods Creatures, in regard of inuitation of the poore, and enlarging of Christian liberty vpon the occasion, 1, Sam. 9.23.24. Gen. 21.8.
               6 And that the memoriall of Gods mercy may continue, we are to set a part solemne daies thereto Hest. 9. Exod. 14.15.
               These are so to be kept, that we be fitted and prepared thereby to other the like duties of thankesgiuing vpon priuate occasions, not that the performance heereof should make amends for, and cut off these, Luke 16. Hest. 1.
               
                  So that wee heerein auoyd,
                  
                     1 Customarinesse, 2 Pet. 2.13.
                     2 Opinion of merit.
                     3 Superstition, Iud. 13.
                     4 Will-worship. Col. 2.16.21.
                     5 Vaine prodigality. &c.
                  
               
               For the matter and Rules of thanksgiuing before.
               A third publique Spirituall meeting is that holy exercise of Fasting and Prayer:
                  Sect. 14. Publique fasts.
                   
                  Luke 5.33. Act. 1. Ion. 3.
               
                  
                  And here obserue,
               
               
                  What fasting is.
               
               
                  1 What it is
                  1 Not what God imposeth, and is not willingly chosen either by the shutting of the heauen, or hardning of the earth, which is properly called famine, Genes. 12.10.41.53.
               2 Neither that hunger which proceedes for want of meate, Act. 27.21 33.
               3 Neither that extraordinary abstinence from meate caused by such strange visions, &c. Act. 9.9.
               4 Neither that miraculous fasting by a diuine power, as that of our Sauiour, Moses, Elias, Math. 4.2 Exod. 34.28. 1 King. 19 8.
               5 Neither that daily sobriety and temperance of Christians in moderate diet and spare, as that of Iohn Baptist, Mat. 3. 1. Pet. 5.8. Gen. 1.29.
               6 Neither that extraordinary sobriety and moderation in our Christian liberty, when the iudgement of famine lies sore vpon the land, to shew our sence of Gods

hand, and to bee better able, by sparing from our former liberty, to relieue others. Nehem. 5.
               7 Neither that superstitious difference of meats, as of fish in stead of flesh, abstaining from white-meates, and on set dayes.
               8 But it is a voluntary abstinence, and extraordinary, taken vp for a religious end.
               Voluntary it is, 1 because the time and manner of fasting is not imposed or determined, but lost free to our owne liberty.
               2 This is to bee vnderstood of priuate fasts, because the publike for the time and outward maner, are at the disposing of the magistrate.
               2 It is an abstinence,
               1 Either of all kinds of meates, wholly for so long time as nature will endure to be fitted to spirituall duties.
               2 Or if it continue any long time, then to receiue sparingly, somewhat to maintaine life, without any daintinesse or excesse to

nourish pleasure. This is also true fasting: so that it bee,
               3 Extraordinary, that is, differ from our ordinary temperance in diet, which is to bee at all times: but this at certaine times, and for certaine occasions. And that
               4 As also to religious ends. Of which hereafter.
               
                  And this condemneth,
               
               1 Blasphemous fasting of such, who in imitation of the diuine power haue presumed▪
                  
                     The vse.
                   to commend vnto the Church, by their wicked imitation, that miraculous fast of 40 daie, as the Montanists, Papists.
               
               2 It condemneth generally all Popish fasting: and that,
               1 Because it consists in the obseruation of set times, vpon paine of mortall sin, Mat. 9.
               2 They make the very abstinence from flesh, a mater of conscience.
               3 They place their abstinence in difference of meats, as if one were more holy then another.
               4 They determine the act of fasting to bee a religious and holy

worke, whereas indeede in it selfe it is but indifferent.
               5 Yea, they make fasting to bee a matter of merite, whereas indeed, at the best, it is but a helpe to a good work.
               2 This teacheth vs to put a difference between religious fasts, and ciuill abstinence from some Creatures vpon certain week daies for the good of the Common-wealth, & mutual vse of the creatures, imposed by the Magistrate, as the moderator of our liberty in these things.
               
               3 As also, wee are hereby taught to discerne of our fasts, whether they bee warrantable or no.
               Secondly, obserue the kindes of fasting, which are:
               1 Priuate, vpon extraordinary,2 Kindes of Fasting.
                   or ordinarie occasions, within the power of each particular Christian to dispose of, either for his own person▪ concerning time, &c. or for his family, where hee is King, Priest, and Prophet.
               2 Publike, which depend on the Authority,
               
                  1 Of the Christian Magistrate.
               2 Are celebrated in a publique place.
               3 Solemnized onely for extraordinary occasions.
               4 Continue either one or more dayes, as the occasion is more vrgent Ion. 3. Esay 58.
               Thirdly, consider the causes and occasions of these publique fasts.
               
               1 The ouerflowing of sin, threatning some grieuous iudgement.
                     
                        •••
                      
                     Causes of 
                           •••
                        ast
                           •••
                        ng.
                  
               
               2 Some iudgement threatned, either by the word, or by some visible signe, 2, Chron. 20. Ioel. 3. Ion. 3. Hest. 4.
               3 Some present iudgment vpon the land. Iudg. 20.
               4 When any especiall good is to be done for Church, or Commonwealth, Exod. 19. Act. 14. Dan. 10.3. Luk. 6.12.
               5 When we feare the remoue all of some principall blessing, as good gouernment, the Word, &c.
               6▪ When we see the like occasions in our neighbors, we are for their sakes also to be humbled, Psal. 35.
               
                  Fourthly, learne we the maner of true fasting, which is:
                     4. Manner of fasting.
               
               1 For the solemnitie of it, it must be kept as a Sabboth. Esa▪
                   58. Za. 7.
               2 There must be an abstinence from all meats, so farre, that the body be afflicted. Ezra· 8.2. 1 Cor. 9
               3 Yet so, as nature bee not destroyed, or vnfitted to spirituall duties. 2. Col. 23. Math. 6.
               4 That wee continue in this abstinence, at the least all the time of the performance of such spirituall actions of prayer and the word: and that, if nature will endure, euen from morning to the euening.
               5 As also, we must abstain from all delights, which either may 
                     •••
                  
                  
                     •••
                  eare nature ordinarily, vnlesse some sudden oppresse it, or may prouoke it to sin. Da. 10.3. Ioe. 2.15
               6 Yea, all persons are bound to the performance thereof, vnlesse by impotency of nature, or inabilitie of spirituall gifts, they are vnfitted thereto: so children sicke and old folkes are excepted: a
                     •••
                  
                  
also such, which by reason of the constitution of their bodies, cannot endure fasting. Rom. 14. Tit. 1.15.
               7 Wee must also come before the Lord in our meanest attire, as a signe of our humilitie. Ion 3. Est. 4.
               8 Here must be a more solemne confession of sins, both in generall and particular, with more strong cries, and grones to obtain pardō for the same, as also a more publike profession of our faith, and apprehension of the fauour of God in Iesus Christ. Dan. 9.6.7
               9 Lastly, concerning plenty of teares and lementation, putting on sacke-cloth, bowing of the body and going crooked, renting of garments, lying in the dust. Ioel 2. Mich. 1. couering the head with ashes, &c. These being rudiments of the Iewish Church, are now left arbitrary in Christian liberty, and are to bee vsed according to the manner of the Churches where we liue. Math. 5.27.
               
                  And this,
               
               
                  1 Condemneth Popish fasting which admitteth delicate and riotous dainties, howsoeuer it denie grosse meats.
               2 As also teacheth vs the true manner of fasting.
               Fiftly, obserue we the right Ends of fasting.
                     5. Ends of Fasting. 
                  Which are
               
               1 To subdue the flesh and bring downe the bodily lusts into subiection to the will of God. Luk. 21.24.
               2 To stirre vp deuotion and attention to holy duties. Luke. 2.37. 1. Cor. 7.5. So did Anna vse it because the heart and affections are lighter and in better order, &c.
               3 To testifie the humilitie and contrition of our hearts namely, our inward sorrow for sinne, and worthinesse to bee cut off by the hand of God. Ioel. 2.12.13. To this end do we deny our selues the vse of Gods creatures▪ to signifie that wee haue deserued death, which would fall vpon vs▪ if we were not nourished by the creatures.
               
                  4 To put vs in minde of our guiltinesse before the Lord, that we are vnworthy to liue, breathe the aire, &c.
               To these wee may adde the notable effects of Fasting,
                     6. Benefits of fasting. which haue beene and are,
               1 Great blessings haue bene obtained: and retayned to the Church.
               2 Grieuous iudgements haue bene kept out and remoued, and turned into blessings. Ion. 3. Iud. 20.2. Chron. 20.
               3 Gods children haue beene confirmed and assured of their saluation. 1. Cor. 9.23. 2. Cor. 6.
               4 And enabled the better to holy duties. Act
                  ▪ 1. Act. 14. and Mat. 17.21.
               5 And the like may the Church and Saints exspect in the conscionable performance of this duty to the worlds end.
               6 Satan this meanes is especially defeated and cast out. Math. 17.21.
               
                  
                  And thus farre of the publicke vse of spirituall societie.
               
               The priuate followeth,Sect. 15. Of priuate Sociceie. which is seene:
               1 In the priuate exercise of religion, in our families, as Prayer Catechizing, reading of the word, Meditation, &c. Of which at large in the second part of the Dayly Sacrifice.
               
               2 In priuate Fasts and Thankesgiuings, for family and personall,
                     Priuate Fasts, &c.
                  , yea, in the failing of the Church, for publike occasions also.
               
                  Wherein obserue:
               
               1 That they are to bee performed by the authoritie of the maister of the familie (it being not lawfull for any priuate person therein, vnlesse hee bee free and at his owne libertie to performe these duties to the hinderance of his ciuill Calling, which is subordinate to the profite of his maister, without speciall licence from him

contenting himselfe, otherwise, with his inward desires and priuate times, which are left him from his vocation: vnlesse his master be meerely prophane, and wil allow no libertie at all to holy duties, then is he rather to submit to the chastisement of a wicked master, then by neglecting holy duties, to incurre the wrath of God. Dan. 6. Eph. 6.1.
               2 These fasts are to be kept as Sabbaoth.
               3 That which is allowable in publik, may here be faulty. Namely, shew and ostentation of that openly, which we doe in priuate. Math. 6.
               
                  
                     3. Holy conferencesThirdly, spirituall societie is seene in holy conferences
               And that
               
                  1. Betweene minister & people.
                  First betweene the Minister and his flocke.
               
               This is necessarie.
               1 To breed acquaintance, and so loue of the minister, and consequently of the word.
               
                  2 To enable vs the better to the vnderstanding of the word.
               3 To the better informing of the conscience, and subduing of the affections thereto.
               4 To acquaint the Pastor with the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of his flocke, that so hee may giue vnto each his portion in due season. Isa. 5.6.
               
                  And this:
               
               1 Condemneth the Pride of Pastors, who (guilty to themselues of ignorance or prophanenesse) refuse to conuerse with, and resolue their people.
               2 As also the pride and security of the people, who either are strange to their Pastors, or rather vse them for worldly respects, as Law, Physicke, Craft, &c. then for the resolution of the conscience.
               
                  Here obserue
               
               1 To auoyde high and curious speculations.
               2 To reason of such things as concerne each others estate.
               3 And that not so much for desire of knowledge as conscience sake.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  1 That we conferre of our owne principally, and not of others estates.
               2 That we auoyd as much as may bee, speech of worldlinesse, &c.
               3 That we conferre of spirituall things seasonably, and within compasse.
               4 Though it be lawfull to speake of things indifferent, yet we make choyce to speake of what directly concernes holinesse.
               5 That we meddle not with state, or secrete domesticall occasions.
               6 That we be not discouraged if wee profite not by conference, contenting our selues in the good purpose of our hearts, that wee haue done the good will of God: and that our labour will returne into our owne bosome: or else we may do good hereafter.
               7 That wee entend the glory of God, and each others profite.
               8 That we be swift to heare, and slow to speake, Iam. 5.
               
                  The triall of holy conference is:
               
               That,
               
                  1 If our desire of profiting others grow cold, through carnal ioy,
                     Sect. 16. Triall of right vse.
                   thē are we to suspect that ioy. Act. 20. Ioh. 4.
               2 That either both depart better hereby, or else, we at least haue the testimony of a good conscience herein, and giue not ouer the hope of good successe.
               3 That wee so part with company, as that wee be fit to be alone.
               
                  Thus farre of the spirituall vse of societie,
                  
                     Sect. 17. Of accessory meetings
                   
                  concerning principally the worship of God.
               
               2 The Accessory meetings concerning religion, follow. Namely, such as tend to the furtherance thereof.
               
                  And that:
               
               1 In the establishing of truth.
               2 Conuincing of error.
               3 As also in the correction of the offend or by the discipline of the Church.
               
                  And these are either more generall.
               
               1 Such as are the generall councelles, Synods, and appointed,1. More generall.
                   and gathered by the Christian

magistrate, for the maintenance of true religion, and the rooting out of heresies.2. Rules.
                  
               
               
                  Here obserue these rules.
               
               1 That the Christian magistrate is the chiefe moderator.
               2 The word of God must bee the rule and Iudge. Mat. 27. Ioh. 7.
               3 The end must bee to mainethe vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Eph. 4.
               
                  2. Lesse generall.
                  
                  Secondly, some are lesse generall. As
               1 The nationall and prouincial Synods of particular Churches to be ordered in the same manner as before.
               2 The more parti
                     •••••
                   Ecclesiasticall gouernments, and Consistories of the Ministery, for the correcting of manners, and due execution of the discipline of the Church.
               
                  Hitherto appertaine:
               
               
                  3. Their appurtenances
                  1 The Schooles of the Prophets as being the nurseries of religion and Seminaries of the Church and commonwealth. Ie. 1.
               
                  
                  Amos 7.14. Act. 6.9. 2. Reg. 2.15.
               2 Religious Feasts tending to nourish the societie of the Saints.2. Feasts.
                   
                  Iud. 12.
               3 Contributions and collections for the poore. 1. Cor, 16.1.3. Contributions.
                  
               
               1 To bee performed on the Sabaoth.
               2 And distributed according to the necessitie of the Churches.
               
                  Thus farre of the vse of spirituall societie.
               
               The Ciuill followeth,Sect. 18. Of ciuill societie. and it is manifold.
               1 State assemblies to determine for the good of the body politick, among which the highest and most authenticall,1. State assemblies.
                   are the Parliaments Next to these the Councell Table. Thirdly, the Starre-Camber. Fourthly, the Exchequer and Kings Bench.
               2 Corporations and Brotherhoods, Cities and Towns concerning the right vse of trades and mysteries.2. Corporations.
                  
               
               3 Thirdly, Contracts and Bargains which must bee with these conditions.3. Contracts
                  
               
               
                  1 That we vse no deceit either in word or deede to entrap or ouer-rate.
               2 That promise be kept vnlesse with consent on each side.
               3 That we sell not time, making more profit in regard thereof.
               4 That we sell what is good and saleable. Amos. 8.
               5 Mercy is to be shewed if wee haue our brother at an aduantage
               
                  
                     4. Suites.Fourthly, Ciuill societie may fall out in suits and controuersies.
               
                  Here obserue:
               
               1 That these hinder not our spirituall societie in the worship of God.
               2 Neither impeach other ordinary kindnesses which ought to passe betweene neighbours.
               3 Yet rather wee should suffer wrong, then fall into these suites. 1. Cor. 6.
               4 Seeke wee all meanes of priuate agreement before wee goe to law.
               5 Delay we not suits to weary out a brother.
               
                  6 Much lesse by bribery seek to ouerthrow a good cause.
               7 But to ouercome euill with good, seeking peace and ensuing it Rom. 12. Psal. 34.
               A fifth vse of societie is for Recreation.
               
                  Here obserue.
                  5. Society in Recreation
                  
               
               1 That we be as carefull to vse recreation a right, as to haue liberty in it.
               2 That we make choyce of a fit time, when we haue need, by reason of wearisomnesse in our callings.
               3 That wee make no ocupation of it, neither labour so much for skill therein, as rather to make vs more skilfull to moderate the same.
               4 Looke we vp still to God for continency in the vse of our libertie.
               5 Our kinds of recreation must be honest and of good report.
               6 We must vse great moderation of our affections therein.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  3 Neither enrage them by vnseasonable & ouer bitter reproofs vnlesse the glory of God presently lie in the ballance. Mat. 7.6.
               4 Take wee heed, lest by labouring in simplicitie to approue our selues vnto them, wee expose our selues as a prey.
               But that wee may benefit them, we are
               1 To conuerse grauely, but yet humbly with them. Neh. 2.12.
               12 To wait some good occasion from their speech, and so to worke vpon it. Act. 16.
               3 To call to mind some present blessing, or iudgement, that so we may put by idle talke. Amos 6.6. Esa. 5.12.
               4 Commend wee what is likely spoken of them, yet with an holy drawing them on to better, by graue exhortations. 2. Tim. 2.24.25.
               5 In all our speech let it appeare that loue is the ground, and the soules good the principall end. Math. 5.44.
               
                  6 Contrary we them not always in their weakenesse, but expound it to the best, vnlesse wee see apparent contempt and desperate scorning. Iudges 22.23. Ro. 14.1.
               7 If we cannot benefit by conference, then let vs take heede, that we do not communicate with them in euill, but rather wisely breake it we off, as Sampson did, by some riddle or such like, as ne
                     •••
                  e as may be, leaue we them with peace that so afterward, there may bee hope to win them. 2. Thess. 3.15▪ 
                  Rom. 12.18.
               
                  Thus are we to behaue our selues in euill company,
                  2. Cautions herein.
                   
                  if by occasion they light vpon vs, &c. But purposely wee are not to make choyse of them.
               
               Either in holy duties concerning the worship of God. Here learne:
               
               1 That wee are to pray for the communion of Saints, and perfection thereof. 1. Cor. 15.
               2 Not to ioyne any otherwise with 
                     〈…〉
                   in charity, partly by our owne experience we hope & guesse their fitnes to our felowship.
               
                  3 If we know otherwise, we are after priuate admonition to make knowne the offence, and our dislike thereof, that we bee not partaker of other mens sins. 1. Tim. 5.
               4 If the partie will not refraine, or by the lamenesse of discipline is not repelled: wee are not to refuse our comfort, because he turns his into poyson.
               5 Yet are we to eate with sowre herbes, euen to mourne, and sigh for further puritie.
               2 Wee are not to admit the wicked to our priuate tables. Psal. 101. and families.
               3 Nor to assume them as partners, in our priuate recreations.
               4 Neither to employ them in our ciuill and domesticall affaires. Gen. 14.
               5 Especially not to acquaint them with our secrets. Iudg. 10.
               6 Generally, wherein it stands with our libertie, and their saftie, we are not purposely to sort with them.
               
                  3. Vse herof
                  The vse of euill company, is,
               
                  1 That wee make more of the better sort.
               2 And labour to make the bad better.
               3 That wee long after heauen, where wee shall finde none but good company. Phil. 1. Heb. 12.
               4 That wee grow more priuate and learne to bee a part with our God. Gen. 5.21.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Of solitarinesse.
               
                  ANd this is the next occasion of the day,
                  
                     Sect. 1. why
                   
                  wisely to be entertained of vs. Namely,
               To order wisely solitarinesse.
               And that because:
               First, now we lie naked and open to spirituall tentations, which are most dangerous, as Pride, &c.
               Secondly, and may with best aduantage & least hinderance, pursue the best things: and so are capable of the greatest good, or subiect to the greatest euill.
               Here therefore obserue these Rules.Sect. 2. Rules therof
               
               
                  1 That though we be from the presence and company of men: yet we haue the presence, and fellowship of the Almighty, and the ministery of his holy Angels, and therefore that now especially, we reioyce in this fellowship. Psal. 16.
               2 Yet so as that wee neglect not our callings, but be sure that wee be kept from idlenesse. 2. Thess. 3.
               3 That we especially call to mind those ill neighbours, which we shall neuer be rid of, so long as we liue namely, our sinnes, and in our greatest freedome of solitarinesse forget not our bondage vnder this tyranny, to pr
                     •••
                  uent spirituall pride and securitie. Rom. 7.24.25.
               4 That we take heed of idle and curious speculations, feeding thereby our melancholy and vaine thoughts, lest Satan take aduantage of our curiositie, and so prouoke vs to schismes and heresies, or else breede fearefull distractions, and defections of the mind Heb. 10.23.
               5 Prouoking hereby to singularity

and so forsaking of the fellowship.
               6 That wee be carefull to order and represse the infinit wandrings of the mind, which at such times is most busie and exorbitant. Gen 6.5. Dan. 4.2. And that
               1 By singling out the most necessary matter that concernes our present occasion.
               2 And prosecuting at once the same, as wee may without interruption.
               3 At lest, if some speciall motion come in the way, so entertaining it, as taking only some brief note thereof to helpe memory, we leaue it to some proper season, & so returne againe to our former subiect.
               4 Not leauing it till we haue driuen it from speculation to particular vse.
               5 And so raise vp, to run our communion with Christ.
               7 Especially that wee be wise to discern Satans deepnes, who now

will vsually most eagerly assault vs either taking aduantage of our securitie, because wee are freede from outward occasions, or working vpon priuatenesse and want of succour. Mat. 4.
               8 That especially wee meditate on heauenly things, comforting our selues with the holy protectiō of Angels, who attend vs, & reioycing in the hope of that blessed fellowship which expects vs in heauen. Gen. 5. Gen 24.63.
               9 At no hand giue wee place to Satan, seeking now to scare or distract vs, but resist we strongly by faithful praier. 1. Pe. 5.8.9.2. Ch. 3.
                     •••
                  
               
               10 Presume not of such solitarines either which hath no warrant, as that of Monks, &c. or when thou art bound to society, for herein thou excludest thy selfe the protection of the Lord. Eccles 4 9.10.
               Thus behauing our selues alone.
               
                  
                     Sect. 3. Benefit 
                           •••
                        ereof.
                  1 We shall neuer want the comfort of sweet communion▪ 
                  Mat. 28. Apoca 3.20. Iohn 14.23.
               
                  2 Ready shall wee bee for such troubles, when we may be driuen to be alone, Apoc. 1.9.10.
               3 Fitter also for the fellowship and communion of the Saints, 1. Tim. 3.4.5.
               4 Strengthned against Sathan, who now will principally assault vs, Mat. 4. Eccles. 4.10.
               5 And profitable redeemers of the time, and purchasers of eternity, Eph. 5.16. Prouided,
               
               1 That wee vex not our selues with sifting,
                     Sect. 4. Cautions to be obserued
                   or enuying others businesse and states, lest thereby wee be made vnfit for our owne, 1. Tim. 5.13.
               2 That we ouer-whelme not our selues with ouermuch thinking of worldly things, especially of the times to come, or things which may happen, least the heart bee drowned with the loue of the creature, or appalled with feare of after-claps, Mathew. 6.34. Luk. 21.34.
               3 In meditation of heauenly things, looke we that our custome

herein cause not a vilifying or loathing of such heauenly mysteries, Math. 6.7. Mat. 15.9.
               4 Take we heed of an ouerweening conceit of our selues, if thou findst a greater furniture of Gods graces, Iohn. 5.53.
               5 Especially bee carefull that while thou meditatest of forsaking sinne, thou beest not intangled with some spice thereof, either presuming further then thy present strength, or by conceit of what thou doest, or by the deceitfulnesse of Sathan, abusing thee with a contrary colour of sin, while thou labourest to preuent him in another.
               6 And then in labouring to resist sinne, see thou beest well armed, and know thy strength too: yet fearfull of thy selfe, and so humbly cast vpon God, that so thou mayest resist in the euill day, Ephes. 6. Prouerbs 28.14. Psal. 16.8.
               Tryall of the right vse is:
               
                  1 That wee find our zeale and comfort in holy duties quickned and encreased.
               2 And yet can stoope more humbly and chifely to the meanest occasions in our calling, and walke more freely, and yet more profitably herein.
               3 And so shall bee more ready to embrace the fellowship, and impart our best treasures thereto.
               4 And shall by experience of such offences, and wants, which wee finde among men, bee sent more often to conferre in priuate with our God, & solace our selues in his presence.
               5 And so bee weaned from the loue of this life, as wee neglect no lawfull meanes for the maintenance thereof to a better.
               6 And yet shall hunger after a better life, and prepare thereto.
               And thus much concerning solitarinesse.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX. Of Prosperitie, and the right vse thereof.
               
                  THe next imployment of the day is how to behaue thy selfe in enioying of good things, & in the right vse of Prosperity: and the knowledge hereof is needfull.
               
               
                  Sect. 1 Necessary to be knowne.
                  First, because the best haue been tripped in this estate, as Salomon, Ionas, &c.
               For first, hereby religious exercises haue been coldly performed and intermitted, Mat. 22.5.
               2 Liberty hath beene giuen to loosnesse, and inward gifts growne cold, Hab. 1.16. Amos 6.5.
               3 Euils that were banished, haue beene recalled againe, as gaming, &c. 1. Cor. 10.7.
               4 They weaken our trust and confidence in God, Hab. 1.16.
               5 With-draw our loue and kindnesse towardes inferiours, with whom heretofore wee haue beene inward.
               
                  6 Breed policy, and so deceite, euen in many professors. Genes. 20.11. And
               7 Cause couetousnesse and loue of this life, Psa. 62.10. Luke 12.19. Amos 6.3.
               8 Yea, breed vnwillingnesse to beare the crosse, and cunning to auoid it, Mat. 26.
               9 Giue occasion to the world to thinke we are hers, and so causing her to presume of vs, makes her hereby, being deceiued, when it comes to the proofe, our more heauy enemy, Gen. 31.
               10 Heereupon also it comes to passe, that the burthen lies heauier vpon the afflicted, euen because of our prosperity, being not carried wisely and tenderly, Amos 6.5. Esay 5.
               11 Yea, it is the occasion that causes vs, many times, to censure those that are afflicted, and to challenge their sincerity, because of their afflictions, Iob. 8. Iob. 4. &c.
               12 And not onely so, but it

causeth iealousie among Professors, and so distrust of each other, when all beare not the same burthen, Rom 15.1. Rom. 12.13.16.
               Secondly, this estate is very slippery, and therefore we had neede to get sure footing, that wee may stand vpright therin. Psal. 73.
               Thirdly, it is most vncertaine and changeable, and therefore it stands vs vppon to make vs friends thereof while wee haue it. Luk. 16.
               Fourthly, the feare of the losse hereof doth much distract, which the right vse hereof will much abate and qualifie, Psa. 112.7.
               It being therefore apparant that the best may and doe abuse prosperity, obserue now how wee may vse it aright:
               
                  
                     Sect. 2. How to vse prosperity aright.
                  First then, let vs consider the ends why the Lord bestow, those outward blessings in this life vppon his children, which are these:
               1 To try whether wee will preferre him before them, and can loue him better then them, Iob. 1.
               
                  2 To make vs his Stewards in an holy dispensation of them to others. Mat. 25.
               3 To be pledges vnto vs, and furtherances of spirituall blessings. Gen. 17.1.
               4 That we may be humbled to giue him the glory of them. Rom. 11.36.
               
                  And therefore,
               
               1 We must not esteeme basely of them,
                     Sect. 3 Vse thereof
                   seing they are the gifts of so glorious a God.
               2 Neither must we be secure in this slippery estate, seeing the same giuer is also the taker away.
               3 Take heede we despise not others in regard of them.
               4 Nor thrust our God, and set them vp in our hearts. Iob. 31.
               5 Wee must not cloy our hearts with them, but keepe them intirely to God. Psa. 62.
               6 We must not be puffed vp with them. Psa. 75.
               7 We must not tye, nor measure God onely by them, Psa. 30.6.
               
                  8 Wee must bee willing, for his sake, to part with them either for the good of others, or to auoid our owne hurt. Mat. 10.37.
               9 And all this, not as if they were ours, but Gods to dispose wholly to his glory, and the good of his Church and Children, Math. 19.29▪13. Col. 3.23. Rom. 12.
               Secondly, because the ouer-high conceit of these things is no small occasion to be-witch our hearts with them, therefore let vs labour to rectifie our iudgments concerning prosperity, that so our ouerweening opinion thereof may bee abated, and our affections rectified therein.
               
                  To this end,
               
               
                  Sect. 4. Considerations to this purpose, that we ouer-rate them not.
                  First, consider that though they are Gods blessings, yet they are giuen, for the most part, to euill men, and become snares and pits vnto them Psalm. 69. And therefore, if there were no other preheminence, euen the wicked in these excell vs. 1. Tim. 6.
               2 Acknowledge we that the best

haue beene tainted, and much defaced by them, and behold wee in their example, what may befal vs. as Salomon and Dauid, 2. Sam. 12. 1. King. 5.
               3 That they neither haue beene, nor shall bee any certaine inheritance to the best, but haue changed their master, according to the good pleasure of the giuer. Pro. 23
               4 That we deserue nor the least of them, and with all our industry, without Gods blessing, cannot compasse them, and when we haue them, they are but lent vs, Psa. 127 Gen. 
                  
                     •••
                  2.
               5 That in the iudgement of the best they are but vanity, and breede vexation of Spirit; Nay, that indeed they are nothing: yea lesse then nothing, Eccles. 1.2. 1. Cor. 7.
               6 That the enioying of them is not simply a note of the loue of God.
               7 Neither when they are taken away, is it an infallible token of Gods displeasure.
               
                  8 That the Lord can supply vs without them.
               9 And he is and will bee better vnto vs infinitely aboue them.
               Thirdly, wee must bee carefull in the right dispensation of them. 1. Cor. 7.
               
                  And that in this manner.
               
               
                  Sect. 5. How to dispense them aright.
                  First, we must principally honor God with our substance, Prouerbes 3.
               
                  And this is done,
               
               1 By acknowledging we haue all of his free mercy. Gen. 32.
               2 Willingly confessing from what a low estate the Lord hath raised vs, Gen. 32.
               3 By thankfulnesse vnto him for the least as well as for the greatest, 1. Tim. 6.8. Eph. 5.20.
               4 By faithfulnesse in a lower estate, that so the Lord may increase vs▪ 
                  Mat. 25.
               
                  And this is performed,
               
               1 By following our Calling, as contentedly and humbling our selues therein, being increased, as when wee began with nothing,

                  Deut. 8.11. Phil. 4.11.12.
               2 We must now much more be open handed, and that especially to the houshold of faith, 2. Cor. 9. Gal. 6.10.
               3 We must not thinke it enough to comfort the body, but wee must also minister to the soule, which few rich men make conscience of, neither indeede are able to performe, Gen. 18.
               2 Wee must honour our selues in God with them, by eating the labours of our hands, Psa. 128. and that not only for necessity, but for ornament also.
               
                  But yet with these conditions:
               
               1 That wee exceed not our callings.Sect. 6. How to moderate our selues in the vse of them
                  
               
               2 That wee remember Ioseph in trouble. Amos. 6.5.
               3 That wee be alwayes fitted to spirituall duties. Luk. 21.34.
               4 And ready to be abased as we haue abounded. Phil. 4.11.
               The triall of the right vse of our prosperitie, is,
               1 That wee haue attained the

same by holy meanes,Sect. 7. To know when we haue vsed prosperity aright.
                   as prayer, &c. Gen. 31. 1. King. 3.
               2 That our heauenly thrift goes forward with our earthly, and exceeds it, 1. Timoth. 6. Mat. 6.33.
               3 That the more wee enioy, of these things, the more wee feare our selues, and keepe a more speciall watch ouer our soules, to preuent pride, and security, and prophanesse.
               4 That these outwarde things weane vs from the loue of the world, 1. Cor. 7.29.30.31.
               5 That we are prepared to suffer afflictions, and to bee tempted of them. Luk. 9.23.
               6 That though wee giue these things their due, yet wee account them all as dung, in respect of Christ. Phil. 3.8.
               7 That wee make them our seruants to our Christian Callings. Luk. 16.19.
               8 And instruments to most good.
               9 That our prosperity bee mingled

with some outward or inward crosses.
               10 Especially, that though wee prosper, yet wee are grieued with the miseries of others.
               
                  Helpes hereunto are,
               
               1 To consider we are but strangers and pilgrimes in this life,Sect. 8. Helpes hereto.
                   and therefore had need to goe lightly on our iourney. 1. Pet. 2.11.
               2 We are but tenants at will, 1. Tim. 6.17.
               3 Stewards for other. Luk. 16.
               4 Must giue vp a large account at the day of Christ Iesus, Luk. 12 48.
               
                  The benefit hereof is:
               
               1 We shall glorifie God herein.Sect. 9. Benefite hereof.
                  
               
               2 Enioy this estate with more comfort and constancy.
               3 Benefit others more gratiously thereby.
               4 As also herein, the heauenly blisse shall be sealed vp vnto vs.
               5 Hereby we shal discern & enioy the right vse of our Christian liberty
               
               6 And by the right vse thereof prepared to a more glorious

measure of happinesse.
               7 We shall also be better fitted to afflictions, to purge out corruption.
            
            
               CHAP. X. Of Aduersity, and the right vse thereof.
               
                  AND this is the next occasion daily occurring,
                  Sect. 1. How necessary.
                   
                  euen to vse Aduersity aright.
               
               
                  A direction very needfull.
               
               1 Because the derest Children of God haue failed herein, Psalm. 73.
               2 Wee profite in nothing more then in an holy vse of afflictions. Psa. 119.71.
               3 God sheweth himselfe in no occasion so maruelous as in this. Psal. 107.
               4 Sathan hopes in nothing to trip vs a herein. Iob. 1.
               5 The world hath no more effectuall means to condemne the generation of the iust, then by their troubles. Iob. 8. Act. 28.4.
               
                  That we may therefore vse aduersity aright:
               First, learne we to informe our iudgements concerning the same: as
               
               1 Concerning the Causes:
               1 That they come not by chance,Sect. 2. How to bee vsed well.
                   but are appoynted of God, & sealed vpon vs, Io
                        •••
                     . 33.15. Amos 3
               2 That they are imposed in loue and of very faithfulnesse, Psalme 119.
               3 That there is some cause of them in vs, though presently not knowne to vs.
               
                  And these causes may be,
               
               1 Either chastisement for some sinne past, or present,Sect. 3. Causes of Afflictions.
                   2. Samuel 21.1.
               2 Preuention of some sin wherin wee are like to fall: as securitie, pride, &c. 2. Cor. 12.
               3 Triall and exercise of some graces of God in vs. 1. Pet. 1.7. Especially of our loue to God. Gen 22. Iob. 1.
               4 Conuincing the world of slanderous imputations, as that wee serue God for these things, Iob. 1.
               
                  5 To draw vs neerer to God, and cause vs to haue experience of his power and goodnesse, Iohn. 11.
               6 Recouery of some graces which by prosperity haue been decayed in vs. Hos. 5.15.
               7 As also for the encrease & perfection of grace in vs.
               8 To separate vs from the wicked in this life.
               9 And so to conforme vs to Christ, Rom. 8.25. 2. Tim 3.5.
               10 Prouoking vs to a daily iudging of our selues, that wee bee not condemned with the world, 1. Cor. 11.30.31.
               11 To weane vs from the loue of this life, and cause vs to long and sigh for our deliuerance, Apoc. 6.10. Apoc. 22.20.
               Secondly, that we may vse afflictions rightly, wee must bee able rightly to discerne of them: As
               
                  
                     Sect. 4. How to dis
                        
                           •••
                        erne affli
                        
                           •••
                        tions.
                  1 That of all, those of the conscience are most fearfull and dangerous, and yet in the issue proue most comfortable.
               2 That in the greatest wee are to

looke for greatest assistance.
               3 Such as proceede from Sathan may be discerned by their violēce and suddennesse, and shortnesse.
               4 Those from the flesh, by their sutablenesse to the complexion, and diseases.
               5 Those from the world by their sorting with our quality, calling, outward occasions, &c.
               Thirdly, that wee may vse them aright, we must be alwayes prepared to them. 1. Pet. 4.12. and that,
                     Sect. 5. Of prepara
                        •••
                     tion.
               
               1 By submitting our wils simply in all things to the prouidence of our gracious father, Math 26.39.
               2 By considering that wee were predestinated and ordained vnto them, Rom. 8.22.
               3 We must in the purpose of our hearts make choyce of this ordinance, Math. 7. and bee ready to vndergoe it. Heb. 11.25.
               4 That this is the narrow way, and straight gate that leades to heauen. Act. 14.
               5 That all the Saints of God haue

haue traced this way before vs. Heb. 1.
               6 That this yoake is easie, and the burthen passing light, as hauing the sting thereof taken away by Iesus Christ, and yet that hee beares the burthen now with vs. Esay. 53 and indeed wholly takes it vpon him. Math. 10.
               7 Feare we alwayes our selues, in regard of sin, and what in this respect may come vpon vs.
               8 That these troubles are enemies to the flesh, and therfore the rather to be vndergone to subdue so treacherous an enemy, 2. Cor. 12.
               9 By imposing voluntary troubles vpon our selues, that so wee may better digest such as God shall necessarily inflict vpon vs, 1. Cor. 9.27.
               
                  And these are,
               
               
                  
                     Sect. 6. Of voluntary afflictiōs & rules for the same.
                  9 Let vs enter into the house of mourning, and obserue the chastisements of the Lord vpon others, labouring to stirre vp our bowels towardes them; and to

weepe with them that weep, Rom. 12.
               10 And at no hand presume we of our strength before the time, but feare wee our selues, and cast wee our selues wholly on GOD. Mat. 26.33.
               11 Discerne wee wisely our fitnesse for troubles and auoyd wee all vnnecessary and vnseasonable afflictions. Iohn. 18.8. Matth. 10.23. 2. Cor. 11.33.
               12 Iudge we wisely of the troubles of others, and take heed wee adde not affliction to their affliction. Psa. 41.
               13 Meditate we often of the former ends and benefites of troubles, which are manifold. Psa. 119.67.
               14 Vse wee an holy moderation in the time of our prosperity in our dyet, apparrell, liberty, &c. 1. Pet. 5.8. And let vs now cut off all heady affections, as anger, griefe, and so in troubles they shall not preuaile against vs.
               15 Maintaine wee especially

tendernesse of conscience, and soundnesse of heart by daily examination, and iudging our selues so shall we be fit for any affliction Cor. 1.12.
               16 If our estate seeme to diminish outwardly, let vs be contented with it, and so shall we by degrees be prepared to further emptying. 2. Cor. 4.16. Especially let vs deny our selues, and our owne wisedome, so shall no crosse bee strange vnto vs.
               17 Consider wee that wee haue our Captaine Christ Iesus to bee our Companion in all troubles, 1. Pet. 4.13. Yea hee hath already trode the wine presse alone, and taken away the sting of our troubles, yea conquered for vs, that so we may not be weary, nor faint in our mindes.
               18 And that wee haue the strength of the holy Ghost to lead vs through them. Phil. 4.13.
               19 And bee wee assured of the protection of Angels to defend vs in the same. Psal. 34.
               
                  20 And let vs be thinking of the shortnesse of life, and so of troubles, and preparing to death, and so no afflictions shall bee vnwelcome to vs. Phil. 1.20.
               21 Forget wee not to meditate often on the ioyes of heauen, that so when afflictions come wee may bee encouraged the rather to vndergoe them in respect of the inestimable reward which is set before vs. 2. Cor. 4.16.17.
               And thus shall we be happily prepared to afflictions, and so make a comfortable vse of them when they are vpon vs.
               
                  To this end consider further,
               
               1 Not what God hath laid vpon vs, but what wee haue deserued,Sect. 7. Directions and helpes hereto.
                   
                  Rom. 6.23. Dan. 9.7. Psa. 119.75. Psa. 103.9.10.
               2 In all our troubles, looke wee not vppon the Instrument that doth chastice vs, as on the Lord that directs and turnes about to good, 2. Chr. 20. Ps. 142. renouncing chance, and trusting onely in the Lord, as the guider of our troubles

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
all vse, discerning the cause, and reforming it, and seeing light in darknesse.
               15 Bee wee thankfull vnto God for them, and reioyce wee vnder the crosse.
               16 If we be buffeted vnder the crosse with impatiency, or such like tentations, let it comfort vs, that feeling these corruptions and acknowledging, yea striuing against them, it is a certaine token of a future victory.
               17 Consider we the euils that are prepared for sinners, that so wee may the better endure light afflictions. 2. Thess. 1.
               18 Forget wee not to compare the present profit in troubles with the sensible losse, that sin is hereby lessened, and the matter of sin weakened. 2. Cor. 4. And rather blesse wee GOD that wee suffer not more troubles then bee grieued for such as are vpon vs.
               19 Liue wee especially by Faith, and not by Sense; beleeuing the

things we see not, and hoping the things that are desperate. 2. Corin. 1. Heb. 11.
               20 That Gods power is more seene in the issues out of trouble then in keeping vs out of them altogether, and therefore this serues to the magnifying of Gods power Psal. 98.1. Which wee must meditate on, remembring when wee suffer most, yet wee suffer as the children of God. 1. Pet. 5.9.
               21 Hereby Satan also is most confounded, that whereby he labours most to ouerthrow the Cburch, and Gods children, they are by the same confirmed and profited. Phil. 1.12. In our particular troubles, reioyce wee for the prosperitie of the Church, and Christians elsewhere.
               22 Promise we to further others in the waies of God. Psal. 51.
               23 Vow wee the praises of God in the great congregations. Ps. 35
               24 Moue we the Lord from the insolency of our enemies. Ps. 119.126. Psa. 41.
               
                  25 As also by testifying our zeale to his glory, that it may not bee blasphemed of the wicked. Num. 14. Exod. 12. Psal. 74. Psal. 80.
               26 Labour we especially to comfort our heart, with the testimony of our innocency, and that good cause for which we suffer. 1. Sam. 24.12. That the seruant is not aboue the maister.
               27 Yet acknowledge we before God that wee are not cleare, and so abhor we our selues in sackcloth and ashes. Iob. 11.
               28 If we suffer as euill doers, yet remember we that the crosse is not so much sent as a punishment for sinne, as a remedie against it. Psal. 119.77. And comfort wee our selues, that the Lord helpeth the abiect and vnworthy.
               29 Moue we the Lord from the senee of our owne weakenes. Iob. 6 & vtter inability as of our selues. Psal. 6.
               30 Protest we our faith in God. Iob. 13.15. and patience in waiting vpon him. Psalme 123.2. Mich. 7.9.

And aboue all things, vse wee feruent prayer. Iam. 5.13. And this shall most steed vs in the time of trouble. And possesse our soules in patience. Mat. 10.
               31 Bind we the Lord to vs from the manifestation, & making good of his fauour in that he suffers not our enemies to triumph ouer vs. Psal 41.11.
               32 Meditate we of the shortnes of life, and so of the end of troubles.
               The triall of our right vse of afflictions. Is,
               1 That the power of sinne bee weakened, and our corruption purged out,
               2 That we be more powerfull in spirituall duties: and yet humbled in them.
               3 And more compassionate towards our brethren, and yet more zealous against sinne.
               4 That wee bee more wained from the loue of the world, and in prosperitie be amended by the afflictions on others.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                   selues, and so submitting to the wisedome of our superiours: yet so
               9 As that we do nothing against a truly informed conscience, lest in seeking to auoyd troubles from men; we cause our conscience to become our scourge: and then God, which is greater then the conscience, shall much more condemne vs.
               10 And yet rest wee not vpon a scrupulous or erroneous conscience, lest hereby, throgh obstinacie, we thrust our selues vpon the edge of authority.
               11 So vsing diligence and con. science in our places, and withall
               12 Labouring to giue mild and soft answers.
               Thus may we preuent vnnecessarie troubles, &c
               And seeing the wiseman sees the plague and hides himselfe. Therefore seeing the Lord wi
                     •••
                  l visite a sinfull nation: so as that hee will reserue a remnant from the common desolation.
               
                  
                  Therefore here,
               
               
                  First learne wee how to foresee a plague.
               
               1 By faith, resting on the word denouncing the same.
               2 By experience, comparing the sinnes present with the sinnes of former ages, and so collecting from the constancie of Gods prouidence, that as he hath punished like sinnes formerly, so will he also meet with like sinners.
               3 By the qualitie and measure of the sinne, we may guesse at the time, and nature of the scourge.
               Secondly. And wee haue also these markes when the plague stands at the doore.
               1 When sinne is ripe, that is:
               1 When the sinner sits in the seate of the scorner.
               2 When he is drowned in securitie.
               3 When hee hath made vp his measure by persecution. Math. 23.32.
               4 Where in his carnall wisedome hee chooseth the rod that

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
Lord, that wee may not be condemned with the world. 2. Cor. 11.31.32.
               7 Hereby wee are kept in the life of grace and power of weldoing: kept gratiously
               8 From securitie, and
               9 Apostasie: as also
               10 From spirituall pride, and
               11 Hypocrisie the causes therof.
               12 By these wee are prouoked to more compassion towards our brethren: and so
               13 To maintaine the fellowship and to auoyd separation. Heb. 10. Gal. 6.1. And are
               14 Deliuered from generall iudgements. Psal. 94.13
               15 And so being fitted for comforts, we are pertakers of them in more aboundance, 2. Cor. 6.7.
               16 And can vse them more spiritually.
               17 Hereby wee are dayly raised out of sinne, and so renue our repentance. Os. 5.
               18 As also are sent vnto our gratious God in prayer, that wee

may be partakers of his assistance Esay 26. Os 5.
               19 And so our Faith is quickened in the expectation of the promises. 1. Pet. 1.5. Iam. 1.
               20 And we more gratiously exercised in humilitie, and patience Iam. 1.2.
               21 And so prouoked to hunger after Christ Iesus, and to wait for the glorious appearance of the sonnes of God.
               22 And being by afflictions dayly scoured and purged, we are made meet partakers of that glorious inheritance with the saints in light. Col. 1.12.
               23 And so are gratiously hereby not onely taken away, that we shal not see the euils to come. Esa. 57.1. as Iosias.
               
               24 But wee are euen taken vp by these, as in a fierie chariot, to partake of that vnspeakeable and eternall weight of glory, which is reserued for vs in the heauens. 2. Cor. 4.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII. Thus are we to behaue our selues in afflictions, and trie our estates thereby.
               ANd to this end, seeing each day as it brings it trouble with it, so it wants not it comfort to sweeten, and season the same. And aboue all, our conscionable performance of family duties and priuate exercise of prayer, and a vaile hereto. Therefore, bee wee carefull to obserue and performe such duties conscionably.
               
                  Which are:
               
               1 Priuate examination & prayer thereupon, to begin the day withall.
               2 Reading of the word to stirre vs vp to
               3 Family Prayer with the household.
               4 Catechising of the Family.
               5 Singing of Psalmes. Gen. 18.
               
                  Of which in particular in the second generall part of the Helpes God willing.
               
               
                  And these are dayly to bee performed.
               1 Because we are yet ignorant of what we should know, and forgetfull of what wee haue knowne. 2. Pet. 1.13.15.
               2 New tentations and occasions require new strength and meanes thereto. Luke 9 3.
               3 Hereby we maintaine the life and power of grace, cherish the spirit and grow dayly.
               4 And are better fitted to the Sabaoth. Act. 13.
               5 And renue and encrease our sweet communion with God. Ioh. 5.39 Gen. 18.17.
               
                  The maner of performance is.
               
               1 Wee must appoint and keepe set times for the same.
               2 Preparing thereto with some premeditation of our owne inabilitie, former abuse, and necessity thereof.
               3 If by ordinary occasion wee haue bene interrupted, or preuented for once, recouer we our selues at the next opportunitie.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                   against the day of the Lord Iesus.
               5 Wee procure stabilitie and constancy for the time to come.
               6 Wee yoake and diminish our dayly tentations.
               7 We keepe sin from sleeping, with vs.
               8 By repentance remouing it, our sleepe becomes more sweete and comfortable.
               9 Our labours afterward proue lesse irkesone.
               10 We walke with God and expresse the true pilgrimes life. Ge. 4
               11 The carnal and worldly minded, will otherwise condemne vs.
               12 And we leaue our hearts to be buffeted with much infidelity and distraction.
               Now that we may the rather performe this dutie. Consider we,
               
                  
                     Sect. 2. Motiues hereto.
                  1 That the very heathen in some sort by the light of nature practised it.
               2 That if trouble here bee, it is to the flesh, to which wee are not debtors. Rom. 8.12.
               
                  3 That it is no more then God commands, and Christianitie requires at our hands. Psal. 4.6.
               4 That when wee haue done all we can, wee are but vnprofitable seruants, & therefore we had need str
                     •••
                  ue to the vtmost. Luke 17.10.
               And for our better direction herein; learne we,
               1 First,
                     Sect. 3. Rules herein
                   that the fittest time for performance hereof is after the euening prayer.
               Secondly, For the manner hereof begin we.
               1 From the cogitations of the first awaking from sleepe.
               2 So proceede we to consider of our morning actions, how wee haue conferred with our God in priuat, how sanctified our families
               3 Meditate wee on Gods patience in sparing vs hitherto.
               4 How wee haue bene humbled in the sence of our own & others sinnes.
               5 Especially how we haue bene employed in the sence of Gods graces.
               
                  
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               27 If thou shalt find the testimony of a good conscience & peace, so reioyce and praise thy God. If thou findest thy failings, so bee humbled and cast thy selfe vppon Iesus Christ in prayer.
               28 Recounting vnto God, as neare as thou mayest thy particular slips, and so acknowledging thy self an vnprofitable seruant, seeke thy peace in the merits of thy Sauiour, and so lie downe in his bosome, and so thou shalt find rest for thy soule.
               
                  The benefite hereof is,
               
               1 We obey Gods commandment and so are kept within his protection for the night comming.
               2 We attaine to the certainty, & true mesure of our estate in grace and so thereby preuent securitie, which carnall rest might cause, & prouoke an hungring after perfection.
               3 Wee are better prepared to death and so to iudgement.
               4 Wee gaine much encrease to

the assurance of saluation, and so 5 Obtain in this life a more sweet and heauenly conuersation. Ph. 3.20.
               
                  And by these rules wee may try whether wee haue performed this dutie conscionably or no.
               
               1 If this casting vp of our account hath cast vs out of our selues, and cast vs wholly vpon Christ.
               2 And herein Christ hath sent vs home againe to our selues, not to riot in sinne, because the score is cleared, but to weaken and diminish sinne, that the new score may be lessened.
               3 And therefore if now we shal bee more fearefull to offend our blessed God, and
               4 More fearefull of our selues euen when wee stand most firmelie.
               5 And yet can take faster hold on Christ, when wee fall, that so we may rise againe, and yet
               6 If our rising shall bee more constant, and our falles more

seldome. And
               7 If wee shall bee more carefull to cleere the score with others, by seeking peace, and maintaining the fellowship. And also,
               8 Shall further helpe others to wipe off the score, both by example and councell, prouoking to repentance.
               9 And still from looking abroade, shall returne home againe, beeing humbled not so much because we can do no man good, as when we haue done our best.
               10 And yet being comforted that our labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord: and therefore,
               11 Shall not measure our payment by what is present, but rather by that which is promised.
               12 And so shall liue by faith in the expectation thereof.
               13 And so shall follow hard after the marke for the high price of our Calling in IESVS CHRIST.
               
                  14 Waiting with patience the accomplishment of the promise. And
               15 Suffering afflictions as the good Souldiers of Iesus Christ, that our patience may be perfited and our faith tried.
               16 And so patience shall bring forth the perfect worke still to humble vs, that we may bee fitted for glory.
               17 And our humility shall bee throughly tryed by our perseuerance in well-doing, in our obedience to our blessed GOD, and thankfulnesse to his Maiesty.
               18 As considering that doe wee what wee can, it can neuer bee sufficient to returne thankefulnesse vnto our God for what he hath done.
               19 And therfore not chalenging what hee will doe: for any thing what we haue, or can do.
               20 But rather accounting our selues, when wee haue done our best, to bee but vnprofitable seruants. Luk. 17.10.
               
                  21 And so esteeming our selues rather much more bounden vnto our God, for accepting that poore and poluted seruice we haue done vnto him, then that our GOD should bee bound vnto vs, to recompence our finite seruice with so infinite a reward, Rom. 8. And yet
               22 Still liuing by Faith in the apprehension of the promise. And so
               23 Giuing glory vnto our God in beleeuing his Word. And so,
               24 Preparing our selues to the enioying of those pretious promises, by hauing our conuersation in heauen.
               25 And so looking for our Redeemer to change these our vile bodies. Phil. 3.20.
               26 And so cleering the eye of our Faith by casting away euery thing that may obscure, or presse downe, that wee may more sensibly discerne the brightnesse of that Glory, and may runne

with more ioy and patience, the Race that is set before vs. Hebr. 12.1.
               27 Looking still vnto IESVS, the Author and finisher of our faith. Hebrewes 12. still returning thankefulnesse vnto him, as the Author, and hoping in him as the finisher of his owne worke. And so
               28 Still resting vpon his Word, for our daily direction, and encouragement therein. And
               29 Maintaining the fellowship by encouraging each other in publique duties.
               30 And yet still labouring especially to preuaile with our gracious GOD in priuate dueties of Prayer, Meditation, &c. Sanctifying and trying the publique by these priuate.
               31 And yet sanctifying both, by labouring to bee found in Christ. And,
               32 Still seeking Christ in the things which are aboue. Coloss. 3.
               
                  33 And yet still labouring to haue our life hid with CHRIST in GOD, more resting on the acceptance of our persons, and endeuours of the hidden man in the heart. And yet
               34 Still liuing by Faith in the Sonne of GOD, aboue all present feeling, that neither present sence of ioy may puffe vp, and so coole and interrupt the current of our faith,
                     Note.
                   nor absence of present comfort may quench in vs zeale of obedience. And yet
               35 Still quenching all strange fire, and carnall mattter which may neither accompany our obedience, or kindle the same, by bounding our selues within our Callings, and CHRISTIAN liberty, and aiming at the right end, the glory of our GOD, and our owne saluation, subordinate thereto: that so possessing our soules in sobriety, and meekenesse, wee may both auoyd vnnecessary troubles, and better

wade through such as necessarily will oppose vs.
               36 And being hereby enabled to be more fruitfull in doing and receiuing good.
               37 Hereby wee shall make sure our Election, with more comfort.
               38 And so bee more ready to giue vp our general account.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII. Containing a Conclusion of the present, and promise of future light.
               AND thus shall wee make Triall of our daily Reckon
                     •••
                  ngs, and so performing conscionably this Daily Sacrifice, wee shall approue our selues right NATHANAELS, and true Israelites.
               And so by the mercie of God,

walking after this Rule, growe in grace, and abound in euery good worke, perseuering with all patience, through the mightie power of GOD, that so hee may perfect the worke which hee hath begun in vs.
               To this end, seeing (according to our necessitie) the Lord hath supplyed vs with many gracious helpes and furtherances to informe and strengthen vs in the worke of grace.
               Therefore hauing now laide downe the true Patterne of Holinesse, and liuelie practise thereof, my purpose is (GOD willing) shortly to furnish thee with such variety of helpes as may serue both to vphold and encrease this blessed condition.
               And seeing wee shall not want many Lettes and Hinderances to interrupt, and so to linger vs in, if not quite to breake off this holy course.
               Therefore (by GODS grace) I doe intend in the third place, to

discouer those seuerall Rubbes and impediments, and withall to instruct how wee may encounter and subdue the same.
               
                  And withall,
               
               As GOD shall lend health and liberty, to adde such motiues and encouragements, both from the present benefites of this constant walking, as also from the future recompence which waits the same, as may throughly settle vs in the practise thereof.
               Meane while, let vs (in the name of GOD) bee faithfull in a little, that so wee may bee fitted to further blessings, being thankfull for the meanes wee enioy to this end; and labouring thereby to serue one another in loue, praying for the peace of Ierusalem, and seeking the same aboue our chiefest ioy, that so in the peace thereof wee may haue peace, euen a gracious liberty to walk with our God in constant obedience, to whom in Iesus Christ,
                  
through the blessed Spirit, bee praise and Dominion in all the Churches, Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   