
      
         
            
            
            YET MORE
WORKE
FOR
A MASSE-PRIEST.
            NVMBERS 25. 16, 17, 18, verſe.
            The Lord ſpake vnto Moſes, Vexe the Midianites, and ſmite
them: for they trouble you with their wiles.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by WILLIAM IONES, and
are to be ſold by William Sheffard at his ſhop
in Popes head Ally. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVL AND
MY MVCH HONOVRED
good friend Sir Tho. Sauyle, ſonne to the
noble and worthy Patriot Sir Iohn Sauyle
of Houly in Yorkſhire.
            
               SIR,
            
            
               THis Booke hath been printed and
reprinted, yet without my name,
though not without the knowledge
of many that it was mine,
who now do father it. Its reported
there is an Anſwer made, or in
making to it. Some tell me, they
haue ſeene it in print: ſome tell
me, it is but yet in writing. The truth is, I hitherto can
learne no certainty: but time will trie the truth. Perhaps
both the reports are like that whereof I am certified by
the Printer, viz. That the Author of More worke for a
Maſſe-prieſt is turned Romane Catholicke. A lie, as
ſhameleſſe as that which is ſpread farre and neare of that
worthy laſt Lord Biſhop of London his reconcilement to
Rome. For diſcouering whereof, I haue added ſomewhat
tending to the further ſhame of Popery, to the former

Impreſsions: which I make bold to dedicate vnto
you, as to the worthieſt of my friends, next vnto the moſt
reuerend Father in God Tobias the Lord Archbiſhop of
York his Grace, and your noble father. To them, I owe
my ſelfe, and more: to you, I owe much for kindneſſes
already receiued, and liue in hope to be further indebted
hereafter, euen in reſpect of the care which, I doubt not,
but you will haue of the common good of the whole country,
and eſpecially of the Pariſh wherein I liue. For I truſt,
that as in time you are to ſucceed your father in faire and
large poſſeſsions; ſo preſently you will ſhew your ſelfe to
be his ſonne, in ſucceeding him in doing iuſtice. Whereof
you haue giuen ſome proofe already, (though yet you haue
but liued a ſmall time amongst vs) gaining much credit
vnto your ſelfe thereby, and putting the country in expectation
of great things, when it ſhall pleaſe God your
priuate occaſions will ſuffer you to ſettle your ſelfe among
vs. Which I pray may be ſhortly. And ſo with remembrance
of my humble dutie and ſeruice, I commend this
little Pamphlet vnto you, and you to the gracious bleſſing
of God, reſting alwayes
            
               Your Worſh. at cōm.
Alexander Cooke. 
               Leeds in Yorkſhire,
April 4.
1622.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            YET MORE WORK
FOR A MASSE-PRIEST.
            
               OVr noble King reports,Premonition to all Chriſtian Monarchs. pag. 33. that
his Mother ſent word to the
Archbiſhop who did baptize
him, to forbeare to vſe ſpittle
in his baptiſme: For ſhe would
not haue a pockie Prieſt to ſpit
in her childs mouth. Your Cardinall
Bellarmine anſwers,Apolog. pre Re
                     ••
                  . ſua ad lib. Iacobi magnae Britann
                     ••
                   R
                     •
                  gis, cap. 7
               Credibile non eſt eam caeremoniam
à Catholica Regina fuiſſe prohibitam: It is not
credible that the Queene his Maieſties mother
required him to forbeare that ceremonie. And his
onely reaſon is this, Non eſt verum ea caeremonia ſaliuam
Presbiteri in os infantuli inſpui: It is not true
that the Prieſts ſpittle vſed in baptiſme, is put into
the childs mouth. Yet we reade in Guido de monte
Rocherij,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Appar. ſacer. verbo. who liued 250 yeares ago, that Sacerdos
mittit digitum in aures eius [baptizandi] & ponit de
ſa
                     •
                  iua in ore eius:
               Guido. 
               & ſignat quod baptizandus debet habere
aures aptas ad audiendum verba Dei & documenta
fid
                     •
                  i:
               Mani
                     •
                  ulus Cisrat
                     •
                  rum. cap. 8. de annexis baptiſmi. Imperſſ. 
               poſitio ſaliuae in ore ſignat, quod debet eſſe promptus
adreſpondēdum & loquendum de fide,
               Iouanij. Anno 1485. 
               quia loquutio
fit mediante ſaliua: The Prieſt puts his finger into

the eares of him who comes to be baptized, and
ſpittle into his mouth: the putting of his finger into
the eares, ſignifies that the partie to be baptized
ſhould haue his eares alwayes open to heare the
word of God; and the putting in of ſpittle into his
mouth, ſignifies, that he ſhould ſpeake roundly and
readily of faith, becauſe ſpittle helps ſpeech. Now
good Sir Prieſt tell me, how your Cardinall can
be cleanly excuſed for calling in queſtion the truth
of ſo great a Kings report, ſo well grounded, not
onely on the certaintie of the fact, but alſo on the
authoritie of their good Maſter of Ceremonies for
the thing de iure.
            
            2 Againe,
                  
                     ••
                  aemo
                     ••
                  tion, &c. ſupra citata pag. 111. our noble King writes, That the title
of Cardinall, Prieſts and Deacons, is reſtrained onely to
the Pariſh Prieſts and Deacons of Rome.
               Apolog. ſupra citata, cap. 4. And your Cardinall
Bellarmine anſwers, Non eſt verum nomen Cardinalis
ademptum alijs & ſolis Romanis reſeruatum:
nam vſque ad hanc diem Eccleſia Compoſtellana habet
ſuos Cardinales: That is not true which our King
writes, for the Church at Compoſ
                  •
               e la hath her
Cardinals to this day. Yet we reade in Moſconius
Vicar generall to the Archbiſhop of Bononia,De maiſtate liccleſ. militantis, lib. 1 part. 1. c. 5 Impreſſ. Venet. that
Pius 5. in ſuo diplomate, Anno 1568. penitus hoc nomen
in omnibus alijs Eccleſiis praeter quam in Romana extinxit,
& ſolummodo Cardinalis nomin
               Anno 1602. 
               competere voluit
Cardinalibus S. R. P. à Papa creatis: Pius 5. by his
Bul bearing date 1568. cried downe the name Cardinall
in all other Churches but in Rome; decreeing
that ſuch onely as are created by the Pope Cardinals
of the Church of Rome, ſhall be called Cardinals.
And doth not this argue your Cardinall

an audacious Prelat, who ſeekes to outface at once
two of his betters, a learned King in his owne book,
and a late Pope in his owne Bull?
            3 Cardinall Bellarmine affirmes,Prafat. incout. 7. 
               Nefas apud eos
[Proteſtantes] quenquam creart Epiſcopum niſi vnius
ſaltem vxoris virum: The Proteſtants hold it an
hainous offence to make any man a Biſhop, who is
not at leaſt the huſband of one wife. Yea, hee affirmes,
that Nulli apud eos [Proteſtantes] continent:
               Lib 2. de Monach. cap. 9.
No man (neither of the Clergie, nor of the Laitie)
among Proteſtants liues continently, that is, according
to his meaning, vnmaried. Yet to omit the ſingle
life of many Laiks,As Grind
                     •
                  ll, Whitgiſt, Bancroft, and now B. Abbot, all Archbiſhops, with aboue 20 other Biſhops vnmaried. it is well knowne that the
more part of our Biſhops ſince the reformed times,
were and are vnmaried men. Deſerues not your
Cardinall, for theſe Cardinall lies, to be rewarded
with a whetſtone?
            4 You all affirme, That all the Apostles were continent
from their wiues after they followed Chriſt, and
we denie it. Now thus I argue for vs, and againſt
you: Saint Peter begat of his wife, after he followed
Chriſt, a daughter called Petronilla. Ergo all the Apoſtles
were not continent from their wiues, after
they followed Chriſt. The Antecedent of which
Argument,Alfonſus V
                     •
                  llegas in the life of Petronilla, May 31 tranſlated out of Span in into Engliſh, and printed 1610. is proued thus: Saint Peter had a daughter
called Petronilla, borne in lawfull matrimonie,
who was ſo faire and beautifull, that Count Flaccus
a man of great account in Rome, and of an high linage,
doted on her, Anno Chriſti 98. which was about
68 yeares after Peter began to follow Chriſt.
For he began to follow Chriſt An. 30. Ergo S. Peter
had a daughter called Petronilla, begotten by him

of his wife after he followed Chriſt. The conſequence
of which Argument is proued thus: Petronilla
in the 98 yeare of Chriſt, could not be ſo faire
and beautifull, that a man of honour and worth
could dote on her, vnleſſe ſhe was begotten by her
father of his wife after his Apoſtleſhip. For in that
yeare, viz. 98. if ſhe had bene begotten by her father
before his Apoſtleſhip, ſhe had bene 68. yeares
old, paſt faireneſſe, paſt beautie. Ergo Saint Peter
had a daughter called Petronilla begotten of his wife
after he followed Chriſt. Anſwer Prieſt, and denie
not the Legends of thy Church, and I will burne
all my bookes but my Bible.
            5 You all affirme,Rhem Annot. in Tit. 1. 6. 
               That if the ſtudious Reader
peruſe all antiquitie, he ſhall finde all notable Biſhops
and Priests of Gods Church to haue bene ſingle, or continent
from their wiues, if any were maried before they
came to the Clergie. And we denie it. Now thus I argue
for vs, and againſt you, in this. If by antiquitie
it appeare, that ſome notable Biſhop had two ſons
by his wife; to the elder of which he ſpake thus
a little before his death:

                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,Nazianz Carm. de rita ſua. Edit Pariſ. in. 1611.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
                  Nondum tot anni ſunt tui, quot iam in ſacris
                  Mihi ſunt peracti victimis, &c.
               
The yeares of thine age are not ſo many as the
yeares of my Prieſthood, &c. Then the ſtudious
Reader peruſing antiquitie, may finde, that all notable
Biſhops liued not continent from their wiues,
whom they had maried before they came to the

Clergie. For how could a notable Biſhop haue the
elder of his two ſonnes by his wife, of fewer yeares
then he had bin in Prieſthood, vnleſſe he begat him
and his yonger brother after he was in the Clergie?
But the Antecedent is true. Ergo the conſequent.
That the Antecedent is true, is proued by
this, That in antiquitie we find Gregory Nazianzen
and Caeſarius were brethren, ſonnes of one Gregory,
a notable Biſhop, by his wife Nonna; and that Gregory
Nazianzen was the elder, to whom his father
Gregory ſaid as is aboueſaid.
            6 You haue ſet vs out at diuers times,Indice
                     •
                   li
                     ••
                   probibitorum. diuers
Indices of forbidden bookes, of which I haue ſeene
three. One made by the Inquiſitors of Rome, and
printed Anno 1559. by the commandement of
Paul 4. Another, made by the Deputies of the
Councell of Trent, and printed Anno 1564. by the
commandement of Pius 4. A third, enlarged by
Sixtus quintus, and reuiewed and printed an. 1594.
by the commandement of Clemens the 8. In the firſt
of theſe Editions, I found forbidden,L
                     ••
                  era l. 
               Abdicis de
vitis 12. Apoſt.
               Ibid. 
               Itinerarium Petri per Clement
                     •
                  m.
               
                  
                     •
                  it. O. 
               Opus imperfectum in Matheum.
               
                  
                     •
                  it. 
                     •
                  . 
               Nicolas Cabaſila.
               
                  
                     •
                  it. 
                     •
                  . 
               Almaricus,
               
                  
                     •
                  it. 
                     •
                  . 
               Gulieimus de ſancto Amore,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Iacobus
Alman contra Thomam de Vio, by whom is meant
Cardinall Caietan; and
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Ioh. Caſae poemata. But I can
not find any of them either in the ſecond or third
Editions. Againe, in the firſt Edition of theſe Indices,
I found Deſiderius
               Tit. 
                     •
                  . 
               Eraſmus Roteradamus placed
in the ranke of writers, quorum libri & ſcripta
omnia prohibentur, whoſe bookes and writings (of
what argument ſoeuer, Religion or humanitie) are

abſolutely forbidden. And I found in the ſame
ranke forbidden,Litera N. 
               Nilus Theſſalonicenſis,
               Ibid. 
               Nicolaus
Clemangis,
               
                  
                     •
                  it. 
                     •
                  . 
               Beatus Rhenanus, and
                  
                     •
                  it. V. 
               Vearicus Zaeſius.
Yet in the two latter Editions of the Indices, I found
all theſe remoued out of the firſt ranke into the ſecond,
which are not ſo ſeuerely cenſured as thoſe
in the firſt. And in the laſt of Clemens 8. I found a
Lit. B. Append. 
               Catechiſme of Charanza Archbiſhop of Toledo forbidden,
which wasHiſtory of the Councell of Trent. lib. 8. pag. 750. approued by the Deputies of
the Councell at Trent, vpon peruſall and relation
made, that nothing worthy of cenſure was found
in it. Now I deſire to know the reaſon of all this
ſhuffling; why Abdias, Itinerarum Petri, Opus imperfectum,
Cabaſila, Almaricus, Gulielmus de S. Amere,
Alman againſt Caietan, and Caſae poemata, which
were forbidden in the firſt Edition, are left out in
the later Editions; ſeeing the leauing of them out
argues allowance of them. And, vpon what conſideration
all Eraſmus works were forbidden, ſeeing
Verſio noui Teſtam. ſome of them were approued by the Bull of Leo
10?Prafix, verſioni noui Teſt. per 
                     •
                  raſm. and why Nilus, Clemangis, Rhenanus, Zaſius and
Eraſmus were remoued out of a worſe ranke into a
better; ſeeing that argues great diuerſitie of iudgement
in Popes. And by what authoritie Charanſaes
Catechiſmes is forbidden, which was approued
by the Councell of Trent? I hope your later Popes
will not diſanull what the Councell of Trent eſtabliſhed:Ioh. Caſae Arch. Beneuent. in tota venetoru
                     •
                   ditiene Pauli Papae Legaius. &c. Vergerius annot. in Indicem Rom. impreſſ. 1599.
and I hope they dare not iuſtifie the books
cried downe by Paulus quartus, eſpecially Iohannis
Caſae poemata, which were written in commendation
of the ſinne of Sodom, though the writer was
Archbiſhop of Beneuentum, and the Popes Legat

throughout the whole eſtate of Venice; nor yet Abdias,
whoſe liues of the Apoſtles, fabulis ſimiliores
ſunt, quàm verae narrationi, are more like to tales of
Robin Hood, then to truth, inDe ſcript. Eccl ſiaſticis verbo Abd
                     •
                  as Babilonius. 
               Bellarmines opinion.
            7 As you haue ſet vs out diuers Indices of forbidden
bookes; ſo you haue ſet vs out diuersIn lices libroiū expurgandorum. 
               Indices
of bookes which ſtand need of purgations, and muſt be
purged before they can be vſed: of which I haue
ſeene foure: the Belgick, publiſhed by
                  Anno 1586. after the originall thereof printed by Plātin, an 1571. 
               Iunius: the
Spaniſh, by
                  Anno 1584. at Mudil in Spaine. 
               Quiroga: the Neapolitan, by
                  Anno. 1588. at Venice. 
               Gregory
Capuccinus: the Romane, by
                  Anno 1607. at Rome. 
               Fr. Ioan. Maria, Maſter
of the Popes Pallace. In one or two of theſe purgatory
Indices, order is taken that theſe and ſuch like
propoſitions ſhall be razed out of the Indices and
margents of S. Auſtin, S. Ierom, S. Hilarie, S. Chryſoſtome,
and S. Epiphanius, viz.Ex quibuſdam In dcibus Trobemani
                     •
                   in opera Ang. delen le ſu. 1 ſubiecta p
                     ••
                  poſitiones Qu 
                     •
                  oga. lib. citat. fol b. Index P
                     ••
                  gic
                     ••
                   fol. 8. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Euchariſtiam non eſſe
ſacri cium, ſed ſacrifi ij memoriam: The Euchariſt is
not a ſacrifice, but a commemoration of a ſacrifice.
Fides ſola iuſtificat Faith onely iuſtifies. Imaginum
vſus prohibitus: The vſe of Images is forbidden.
Machabaeorum liber Apocryphus: The booke of Machabees
is Apocryphall. Matrimonium omnibus conceſſum
qui continere non volunt: Mar
                  •
               age is free for
all who will not liue vnmaried Peccata venalia damnant:
Veniall ſinnes are damnable. Sanctorum inuocationem
praeuenit Iohannes: Saint Iohn preuented
inuocation of Saints.Ex Indic bus in opera 
                     〈◊〉
                  . ad 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſubiecta pro
                     ••
                  ſitiones Qu
                     •
                  roga. fol. 100. 
               Adorare ſtatuas vel imagi
                     •
                  es,
cultores Dei non debent: Religious perſons ſhould
not adore ſtatues or images. Fides ſola iuſtificat:
Faith onely iuſtifies. Opera non iuſtificant: Workes
doe not iuſtifie. Opera ſi iuſtificant, Chriſtus gratis
mortuus eſt: If works iuſtifie, Chriſt died cauſleſly.

               Apoſtoli omnes aequales: All the Apoſtles were equals.
Opera omnia commixta ſunt aliquo errore: Our
beſt actions haue ſome want. Oratio pro viuis valet,
non pro mortuis: Prayer profits liuing men, not dead
men.In In
                     •
                  ice H
                     •
                  larij delcuntur ſequentia, Quiroga, fol. 110. 
               Alienis meritis & operibus nemo iuuatur: No
man is the better for other mens merits and works.
Meritum hominis nullum: Man hath no merits. Non
ex meritis ſalus: Saluation comes not of merit.Ex Indice in Chryſollomum delend
                     •
                   ſubictae propeſitiones. Quiroga, fol. 138. 
               Apoſtolorum
doctrina facilis, Scripturae diuinae omnibus
volentibus peruiae & faciles: The holy Scriptures
are plaine and eaſie for euery man. Confitenda Deo
peccata, non homini: Confeſſion is to be made to
God, and not to man. A Deo ſolo omnia petenda: We
muſt pray for all things to God onely. Eccleſia non
ſuper hominem, ſed ſuper fidem ae dificata: The Church
is built not on Peter, but on Peters faith. Fide ſola
iuſtificari: Faith onely iuſtifies. Coram Imaginibus
procumbere, quanta ſtupiditas: It is a great foolerie
to kneele before Images. Iuſtus ne in operibus confidat,
quantumcunque bonis: Let not a good man truſt
in his goodneſſe, be he neuer ſo good. Mandatis Dei
addere, diaboli eſt conſuetudo: It is the diuels practiſe
to adde vnto Gods commandements. Martyres colere
pſeudo Chriſtianos: Falſe Chriſtians worſhip
Martyrs. Prophetas omnes vxores habuiſſe: All the
Prophets had wiues. Punire pios poſt mortem impoſſibile:
It is impoſſible that godly men after their
death ſhould go to Purgatorie. Sacerdotes etiam
Principibus iure diuino ſubditi: Biſhops are ſubiect
to Princes by Gods law. Sine Scriptura diuina nihil
aſſerendum: Nothing is to be taught without warrant
of holy Scripture. Scripturarum lectio omnibus

neceſſaria: It is neceſſary all men ſhould reade the
Scripture. Scripturas legere, omnibus, etiam mundanis,
praeceptum: Euery man, euen lay men, are bound
by commandement to reade the Scriptures.Ex annot
                     ••
                  . in Epiphan. del antur ſequentia, Quiroga fol. 66 
               Creaturam
non adorari: Creatures are not to be worſhipped.
Mortuis viuorum praeces non prodeſſe: The
prayers of the liuing do not help the dead.
                  See Quiroga, fol. 7. & Ind. impreſſ. Romae 1607. fol. 47. but eſpecially Capuceinum fol. 167. 
               Imagines
damnatae: Images are condemned. Sancti non adorandi:
Saints are not to be adored. Yea, in theſe
Indices, order is taken, that theſe and ſuch like propoſitions
ſhall be razed out of the Indices and margents
of certaine Bibles: viz.Leuit. 21. 5. 
               Sacerdos non radat
barbam: Let not a Prieſt ſhaue his beard.21. 13. 
               Sacerdos
virginem ducat vxorem: Let a Prieſt marry a virgin.
25. 18. 
               Praecepta Dei cuſtodienda: Gods precepts are to be
kept.Exod. 20. 4. 
               Sculptilia prohibet fieri: He forbids the making
of grauen things.Deut. 4. 2. 
               Verbo Dei nihil addendum
aut detrahendum: Nothing is to be added or detracted
from Gods word.1. Cor. 10. 14 
               Idolatria fugienda: Idolatry
is to be auoided.1. Sam. 7. 3. & M
                     •
                  th. 4. 10. 
               Illi ſoli ſeruiendum: Him only
ſhalt thou ſerue.Deu. 12. 8 32 
               Faciendum quod Deus praecepit,
non quod nobis rectum videtur: We muſt do
what God commands vs, and not what ſeems good
in our owne eyes.Pſal. 27. 1. & 61. 3. 
               Salus & ſpes noſtra Deus: God is
our ſaluation and our hope.Pſal 62. 8. 
               In Deo ſpes ponenda:
Our truſt is to be repoſed in God.Pſal. 96. 9. 
               Adorandus
Deus: God is to be worſhipped.Pſa. 119. 18 
               Optat doceri a
Deo: He wiſheth that he might be taught of God.
Rom 3 4. 
               Omnis homo mendax: Euery man is a lyer.1 Cor. 1. 30. 
               Chriſtus
iuſtitia noſtra: Chriſt is our righteouſneſſe.
Exod. 15. 2 
               Deus fortitudo noſtra: God is our ſtrength.Eccles 7. 22 
               Omnes
peccatores: All men are ſinners.Acts 17. 24 
               Non in manufactis

templis habitat Deus: God dwelleth not in temples
made with hands.Iet. 17. 
               Maledicti confidentes in
homine: Curſed are they who put their truſt in men.
Habak. 2. 
               Iuſtus ex fide viuit: The iuſt man liues by faith.
Mat. 23. 10 
               Doctor Eccleſiae Chriſtus: Chriſt is the maiſter of
his Church.Math. 17. 5. 
               Chriſtus dilectus audienaus: Chriſt
the Welbeloued is to be heard.Mat. 19. 17. 
               Mandata Dei obſeruanda:
The commandements of God are to be
kept.Luke 8. 48. 
               Fides ſaluat: Faith ſaues.Act. 20. 34. & 1. Cor. 4. 12 
               Laborat manibus
Paulus: Paul wrought with his owne hands.
1. Tim. 1. 9. 
               Lex non iuſto, ſed impio, data eſt: The law is not
giuen to the righteous man, but to the vngodly.
Deut. 16. 19 
               Reſpectus perſonarum non habendus: There ought
no reſpect of perſons to be had.Heb. 9. 
               Chriſtus pro nobis
mortuus: Chriſt died for vs.Apoc. 19. 10 & 22 9. 
               Angelus non vult
adorari: The Angell would not be adored.Ioh. 11. 26. 
               Credens
Chriſte, non morietur in aeternum: He that beleeueth
in Chriſt, ſhall neuer die.Act. 15. 9. 
               Fide purificantur
corda: Hearts are purified by faith.Eph. 2. 8. 
               Gratia Chriſti
ſaluamur: Wee are ſaued by the grace of Chriſt.
Rom. 11. 6. 
               Gratia Chriſti ſaluamur, non operibus, alioquin gratia
non eſt gratia: Wee are ſaued by the grace of
Chriſt, and not by works, elſe grace were no grace.
Math. 15. 9 
               Hominum mandata docens, fruſtra Deum colit: In
vaine they worſhip God, who teach for doctrine
mens precepts.1. Cor. 7. 1. 2 
               Homini bonum mulierem non tangere;
propter fornicationem tamen habeat vnuſ quiſque
vxorem ſuam: It is good for a man not to touch a
woman; but for auoiding of fornication, let euery
man haue his owne wife.2. Sam. 22. 7 
               In infirmitatibus inuocantibus
Deum ſalus: There is helpe for them who
pray to God in the time of trouble.2. The. 3. 10 
               Qui non laborat,

non manducet: He that will not labour, let him
not eate.1. Co. 10. 25 
               Manducet Chriſtianus quicquid vendi
ſolet in macello: Let a Chriſtian eate whatſoeuer
comes into the ſhambles to be ſold.Rom. 9. 13. 
               Miſeranti
Deo tribuenda ſalus: Our ſaluation is to be aſcribed
vnto Gods mercie.Phil. 2. 13. 
               Operatur in nobis Deus & velle
& perficere: God workes in vs both the will and
the dead.Prou. 16. 6. 
               Miſericordia purgantur peccata: By
mercie iniquities are forgiuen.Ioh, 14. 13. 
               Petentes in nomine
Chriſti obtinemus: We obtaine what we aske
in Chriſts name.Heb. 1. 3. 
               Purgatio peccatorum noſtrorum
facta per Chriſtum: The purging of our ſinnes is
wrought by Chriſt. Though theſe be in ſenſe
and meaning in the currant of the text it ſelfe, and
moſt of them formally, euen in ſo many words, (as
appeareth by the marginall quotations) yet by
commandement of your Church, they are to be
blotted out of the Indices, and Margents of ſuch Bibles
as you allow men to keepe. Now I deſire to
know, what greater harme theſe propoſitions ſet
downe in the Margent and Indices of your Bibles
are like to worke, then the ſame which are read in
the currant of the Text? And why, if you feare any
danger by them, you purge not the Text from
them, as well as the Margent and the Indices? And I
deſire to be ſatisfied in like manner, what greater
miſchiefe might happen by ſuffering the propoſitions
found in the Indices and Margents of the Fathers,
then by the matter in the currant of the Text,
whereunto they haue reference? And why, if any
miſchiefe be feared, the Text of the Fathers is not
purged, as well as the Margents and Indices?
            
            
               
8 There was printed at Bononia in Italy, An.
1590. a booke intitled, Liber conformitatum vitae B.
ac Seraphiti patris Franciſci, written by one Bartholomew
Piſanus, and publiſhed by one Ieremy Bucchius,
of which booke it is affirmed in the Title
page, that it is liber aureus, a golden booke. In this
golden booke ſo lately ſet out, I reade, thatCopia literae à Piſan
                     •
                   gratiali Capitulo directae. ad mitrum lib. Conformitat. 
               Chriſtus
ipſum patrem Franciſcum ſibi per omnia ſ
                     •
                  milem reddidit
& conformem: Chriſt made Frier Francis like and
conformable to himſelfe in all reſpects: and that
Lib. 3. Conformitate 31. fol. 303. ecl. 3. & fol. 306. col. 4. 
               in monte Aluernae Franciſcus cum Deo & Domino
Ieſu Chriſto vnius ſpiritus efficitur: In the mount of
Aluerna, Frier Francis was made one ſpirit with
God the Father and his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus. And,
that Frier Francis ſaid the words of Chriſt,Math. 25. 40. 
               Quod
vni ex minoribus meis feciſtis, mihi feciſtis,
               Lib. 1. fruct. 1. fol. 13. col. 3. That which
you haue done to one of theſe my little ones, you
haue done it vnto me; were ſpoken by Chriſtad literam. 
               literally,
andſpecialiter. 
               particularly of his Frier Minorites. And
thatLib. 3. conformitate 3 
                     •
                   fol. 300. col. 3. 
               B. Franciſcus titulatus fuit titulo Ieſus Nazarenus
Rex Iudaeorum: Frier Francis had the title of Ieſus
of Nazareth king of the Iewes giuen him. And
thatLib. 1. fruct. 1. fol. 13. col. 2. 
               Nemo fuit miniſter & ſeruus Chriſti vt Franciſcus,
& ipſius perfectus imitator: Chriſt had neuer
ſuch a ſeruant as Frier Francis; there was neuer any
man who imitated Chriſt in ſo perfect manner as
Frier Francis.
               Lib. 1. fruct. 9. fol. 112. col. 4. 
               Similis B. Franciſco & ſuo Ordini non
eſt inuentus, qui ſeruauit ad literam legem excelſi:
There was neuer ſuch a peſon heard of as S. Francis
and his Order, who kept Gods law literally.Lib. 2 conformit. 17. fol. 228. col. 1. & conformit 25. fol. 272. col. 2. 
               B. Franciſcus
totum Euangelium ad literam obſeruauit: Saint
Francis kept the Goſpel literally. Nec apicem vel vnicum

tranſgreditur, nec iota: He brake not a tittle of
it, nor a iod. Theſe fooleries and blaſphemies are
in that booke, and no dele ſet vpon them. Yea
though it was wont to be held an hereſie to ſay,
Director. Inquiſit. part. 2. q. 8. teſte Capuccino in Enchirid. Eccleſ. fol. 236. 
               Quod B. Franciſcus eſt ille Angelus, de quo dicitur in
Apocalypſi, Vidi alterum Angelum habentem ſignum Dei
viui; That S. Francis was that Angell, of whom it
is written in the Reuelation, I ſaw another Angell
which had the ſeale of the liuing God: yet ſo much is
written in this booke in theſe words,Lib. 3. conformit. 31 fol. 300. col. 4. ei fol. 301. col. 1. 
               Quod prophetia
Apoc. 7. fuerit ad literam de B. Franciſco, diuinitus
Domino Bonauentura Cardinali fuit, oſtenſum;
and no dele ſet vpon them. Though it was wont to
be held an hereſie, at leaſt an error, to ſay,Capuccinus lib. citato. 
               Quod B.
Franciſcus ſemel in anno deſcendit ad Purgatorium, &
extraxit inde animas illorum qui in hac vita, fuerunt de
Ordine ſuo, ſeu de Ordinibus per eum inſtitutis, & ducit
ad Paradiſum: That S. Francis went once a yeare
downe to Purgatorie, and brought thence all the
ſoules of them which in this world were of his Order,
or any other Order inſtituted by him, and caried
them to heauen with him: yet ſo much is written
in this booke, in theſe words, wherein Chriſt
is brought in ſpeaking to Frier Francis thus:Lib. 3. 
                     •
                  conformit. 31. fol 306. col. 2. 
               Sicut
ego in die obitus mei ad Limbum acceſſi, & meritis ac
virtute ſtigmatum paſſionis meae, omnes animas quas
inuen
                     •
                   extraxi; ſic volo quod & tu, vt ſis mihi conformis
in morte, ſicut es in vita, in die Natalitij tui vadas
quolibet anno ad Purgatorium, & omnes animas trium
Ordinum, ſcilicet, Minorum, ſororum S. Clarae, & Continentium
3 Ordinis quos ibidem inueneris, in virtute
& efficacia tuorum ſtigmatum eruas, & ad gloriam Paradiſi

perd
                     •
                  cas; and no dele ſet vpon them. Though
it was wont to be held an hereſie to ſay,Capuc lib. cit. 
               Quod nullus
poteſt damnari qui deferat habitum B. Franciſci: No
man could be damned who ware the habit of Saint
Francis: yet it is written in this booke, that Chriſt
reuealed it to Frier Francis,
               Lib. 1. fruct. 9. fol. 130. col. 4. 
               Quod nullus qui moreretur
in habitu eſſet damnatus; and no dele is ſet vpon
it. Though it was wont to be held an error,Capuc. lib. cit. 
               Quod
Ordo B. Franciſci in perpetuum durabit; Though Saint
Francis Order ſhould continue till doomes day: yet
Agnoſcente Sedulio lib. 2. Apolog. pro S. Franc. cap. 10 pag. 114 that is in this booke, and no dele ſet vpon it.
            In other of your bookes we reade, that the virgin
Mary promiſed a yong man mariage, ſaying,Caſarius dial. 7 de S. Maria, cap. 33. Diſcip. de mirac. B. Virg. Exempl. 27. 
               Ego
ero vxor tua, accede ad me, & da mihi oſculum, & coegit
eum: I will be thy wife, come and kiſſe me; and
ſhe conpelled him to kiſſe her. And afterwards,
when the youth was ready to take horſe, ſhe held
his ſtirrup, and bad him get vp. We reade,Caeſar. dial. cit. cap. 51. Diſcip. lib. cit. Exem. 59. that ſhe
came to another youth, who ſerued her very deuo
                  •
               t
                  •
               y,
Collum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   brachijs ſuis ſtringens dedit illi oſculum,
and halſing him about the necke kiſſed him.
WeCaeſar. dial citat cap. 35. Diſcip. lib. eit. Exem. 25. reade, that ſhe in an Oratory ſupplied perſonally
the place of one Betris an arrant whore, by the
ſpace of fifteene yeares together, whileſt Betris the
whore came vp and downe after a wh
                  •
               remaiſter
Prieſt, ſo that no bodie knew in all that time that
Betris was miſſing. WeVincent. Spec. hiſt. lib. 7. cap. 86 Diſcip lib. citato. Exempl. 24. reade, that to ſaue the credit
of an Abbeſſe who was with child, ſhe came vnto
her with two Angels attending her, commanding
the Angels to play the Midwiues; and to carry the
child in her name to a certaine Heremite, willing
him to keepe it for her till it was ſeuen yeares old.

WeSee Fox Acts and Monum. iu Edw. 4. ad Ann. 1484 pag. 667. Edit. 1610. reade, that ſhe came to the Cell of one Alanus,
and was ſo familiar with him, that ſhe not onely
eſpouſed him to her husband, but alſo kiſſed him,
and opened to him her paps, and powred great
plentie of her owne milke into his mouth. We
In the life of S. Catharin, written in Italian by D Caterinus Se
                     •
                  cnſts, and tranſlated into Engliſh by Iohn Fen prieſt. printed Anno 1609 part. 2. cap. 16. reade, that S. Katherin intreated Chriſt to take away
her heart, and to giue her a new heart: and that
one day Chriſt came and opened her ſide ſenſibly
with his hand, and tooke out her heart, and ſo went
his way, leauing her indeed without an heart; and
that ſhe notwithſtanding being in prayer, lift vp
her heart to God in prayer: and that as ſhe was going
homeward, Chriſt met her with a heart in his
hand, who opening her ſide, and putting the heart
he had in his hand into her body, ſaid theſe words,
Loe deare daughter, as I did the other day take away thy
heart, ſo do I now in ſtead of it giue thee my heart; and
ſo cloſing vp the wound which was made in her
bodie, went his way. WeGold. Legend in the life of S. Duaſtan. reade that S. Dunſtan
tooke the Diuell by the noſe with a paire of tongs
of iron burning hote; orEngliſh Martyrolog. Sept 7. printed Anno 1608. with a paire of pinſers
by the vpper lip, and held him faſt. WeAntonin, hiſt. part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 4. ſect. 6. ſeu Canus loc com. lib. 11. cap. 6. reade
that S. Dominick cauſed the Diuell to holde him a
candle ſo long, till the diuell burnt his fingers, and
fell on roaring. WeDiſcip ſer. 110 de Tempore. S. reade, that the Diuels for feare
of holy water, ran ſo faſt out of a ſicke mans chamber,
that alter in alterum impingebat, one of them
crowded another, and trod of their fellowes heeles
for haſte. WeDiſcip. in Prom ptuar. Exempl. lit E
                     •
                  exempl. 16, and Tractat de h
                     •
                  rit Canon. cap. 25. reade, that S. Brice ſaw the Diuell
get a good knocke on his pate by the wall which
was behind him, whileſt for want of paper to write
the Friers faults in, he laboured to ſtretch out a paper

with his teeth, as ſhoo-makers do their ouer leathers:
for the paper rending, the Diuels head (ere
the Diuell was aware) flew backward and hit vpon
the wall. WePetr. de Natal. in Catal ſanct. lib. 6. cap. 120. reade, that S. Margret caught the Diuell
by the haire, and caſt him to the ground vnder
feete, and that ſhe ſet her right foote vpon his neck,
and kept him there as long as ſhe thought good.
WeIdem lib. 3. cap. 131. reade, that S. Iuliana caught hold of the 
                  •
               i
                  •
               e
                  •
               ,
and bound his hands behind him, and whipt him
with the chaine that was about him, and draggd
him after her along a ſtreet, making him a laughing
ſtocke to all the boyes in the towne, and at laſt caſt
him into a iakes. WeId. lib. 8. c. 70. reade, that one S. Niceta ſerued
the Diuell much after the like manner, tying
him vp in a dunghill. And
                  Id lib. S. ca. 20. & Gold
                     •
                  n Legend in the life of Lupe or Low. that one S. Lupus ſhut
vp the diuell ſo cloſe in a baſen of water, that the
diuell howled and brayed, but could not get out,
till S. Lupus let him out. AndDiſcip. de mirac B. Virg. Exēp. 58 that S. Peter did driue
away the diuels with a great Key he had in his hand.
WeGabr. de Barale
                     •
                  e ſi
                     •
                  ia S. Hebd 6. An diuites poſſint ſaluars. reade, that S. Zeno following a woman with a
traine gowne, ſaw many diuels lying and ſleeping
on the skirts of her gowne: and that as ſhe was
paſſing ouer a dirtie channell, vpon holding vp of
her skirts for feare of miring, the diuels fell into the
filthy channel; whereat other diuels, who followed
on foote, and S. Zeno, laughed heartily. We reade
in your bookes,Golden Legēd in the life of S. Blaſe, & Leonard de Vtino, ſer. 64. de S. Catharins. Sexto.
                that God promiſed S. Blaſe, whoſoever
deſired his helpe for the infirmitie of the
throate, ſhould be healed. AndGolden Legend in the life of S. Roche. that God promiſed
S. Roche, whoſoeuer prayed in the name of Ieſus
to him, ſhould be preſerued from the peſtilence.
AndLeonard de Vtino loco citato. Pet. de Natal. lib. 6. cap. 120. that God promiſed S. Margaret, whatſoeuer

woman with childe prayed to her in time of her
trauell, ſhould haue ſafe deliuerance. AndPet. de Natal. lib. 10. cap. 111. that
God promiſed S. Leonard, whoſoeuer in priſon deſired
his helpe, ſhould be ſet at libertie. AndAntonu
                     •
                   hiſt. part. 1. tit. 8. cap. 1. ſect. 38. Pet. in Catal. lib. 10. cap. 105. that
God promiſed S. Katharin, whoſoeuer called vpon
her in any neceſſitie, he ſhould be heard. And that
hee promiſed as much to thoſe who called vpon
Pet. in Catal. lib. 5. cap. 137. the 10000 Martyrs, vponIdem lib. 5. cap. 106. 
               Onuphrius the Heremite,
vponEngl. Feſtiuall printed 1521. S. Eraſmus, vponPet. in Catal. lib. 10. cap. 60. S. Venerandus, vpon
Idem lib. 10. cap. 61. S. Veneranda, vponIdem lib. 4. cap. 81. S George, vponHorae B. Virg. ad vſum Sarum fol. 77. S. Chriſtopher,
vponLegend. Lat. in vita Cadoci. S. Cadoc, vponGold Legend in her life. S. Martha, vponPet. in Catal. lib. 8. cap. 70. 
               Niceta,
vponPortiforium ad vſum, Sarum, Oct
                     •
                  b. 9. S. Denis, &c. We reade in your bookes, that
Engl Feſtiuall in the life of S Mathias. 
               Iudas the traitor ſlue his father, and lay with his
mother; and becauſe the fiends might not draw
out his ſoule by his mouth, which had lately kiſſed
Chriſts mouth, his belly burſt, and then the fiends
tooke his ſoule and caried it to Hell. WeGold. Legend in the life of S. Prandon. & Pet in Catal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . cap 117. reade,
that this Iudas hath certaine play dayes, in which
he comes not in Hell; as namely euery Ladies day,
and euery Saturday afternoon til Euenſong be done
on Sunday. AndIbid that ſome of the Angels which
ſtood not in the truth, were neuer adiudged to hel,
but to ſit as birds in a tree, and to ſing Mattens and
Euenſong, and all ſuch ſeruice as Chriſten men vſe
to ſing. We reade,Pet. in Catal. lib. 1. cap. 25. that S. Barbara baptized her ſelfe
in a well of water; and that flying from her fathers
fury, ſhe had paſſage made her by God through a
great rocke, which opening it ſelfe, receiued her in
the foreſide, and let her out on the further ſide:
and that a Shepheard who diſcouered this Barbara
vnto her father who purſued to kill her, was turned
into a ſtone, and his flocke of ſheepe either into

               ſtones or into Locusts. We reade,Goldē Legēd in his life. that S. Patrick
cauſed a ſtolne ſheepe to bleate in his belly who
had ſtolne and eaten it: and that he preuailed ſo
far with God, that no Iriſh man ſhould abide the
coming of Antichriſt. We reade,Diſcip. de mirat. B. Virg. Exempl. 57. that a Souldier
who had no other good propertie, but that he ſaid
one Auc Mary in the morning & another at night,
was ſaued by the meanes of the virgin Mary. We
reade,Gold. Legend in his life. that S. Macarius is commended for that he
repented ſix moneths for killing of a flea.
               
                  Engliſh Feſtiuall, de S. Tho. E
                     •
                  iſc. p. Cant. That
Thomas of Canterbury is commended for wearing
louzie breeches. That S. Francis is commendedAntonia hiſt. part. 3. tu. 24. cap. 2. ſect. 8. for
gathering wormes out of the way, that they ſhould
not be troden on: andPiſan. conform lib. 1. fruct. 10. fol. 140. col. 1. lib 2. confor. 13. fol. 191. col 4. for calling all manner of
beaſts, wolues, Aſſes, &c. his brethren: andV
                     •
                  at Canum los. com. lib. 11. cap. 6. for taking
lice of beggars, and putting them on himſelfe. We
reade,Engl. Martyrolog. 
                     •
                  nuar. 16. that S Henry of Denmark is commended for
that when little wormes crept out of an Vlcer in
his knee, he tooke and put them in againe, ſaying,
Go into your inheritance where you haue bin nouriſhed.
AndS
                     •
                  dul. lib. 3. Apologet. pro S. Franc. cap. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. p. 132. that Frier Ruffin was commended for wiſhing
that he might ſtinke on his deathbed, and be
caſt out without buriall, that the dogs might eate
him. Theſe, and ten thouſand ſuch tales as theſe,
which are partly ridiculous, partly blaſphemous,
many of them (in your owne opinions) falſe, are
read in your Martyrologies, Legends, Seruice books, &c.
Now that which I deſire to know, is, why you
haue not Indices to purge your Martyrologies, your
Legends, your Feſtiuals, your Vincentius, your Antonius,
your Caeſarius, your Diſcipulus, your Peters
Catalogus Sanctorum, and ſuch like, from theſe ridiculous

fooleries, and blaſphemies, and falſities, as
well as you haue to purge Bibles and other good
writers, from much good matter contained in
them?
            9 YouCampian Rat. 5 brag much of the Fathers, as though
they were all as wholy on your ſide, as any of your
later Popes: and you inuey much againſt vs, as contemners
of the Fathers. You would make the world
beleeue, thatDouly in his Inſtruction of Chriſt. Relig. Chap. 8. 
               we deſpiſe all the Churches Doctors, and
ancient Fathers; thatHils Quartern of Reaſons Reaſon 10 
               we make no more account of the
Fathers, longer then wee can wreſt them to ſerue our
turne, then we do of Beuis of Hampton or Adam Bell
ThatSeba 
                     •
                  . Plaskius 
                     〈…〉
                   Cathol. 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  
                
               we make indeed no more account of the holy Fathers,
then we do of the Turks Alcoran or Eſops Fables.
ThatB
                     •••
                  ow Mo
                     •••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               it is well knowne to ſuch as heare our Sermons,
or be in place to heare v
                     •
                   talke boldly and familiarly together
among our ſelues, we are not afraid plainly to
confeſſe, that the Fathers all were Papiſts, ThatAnſw to M. 
                     〈◊〉
                   pref
                     •
                  ce pag 30. 
               though
the ancient Fathers referred all their controuerſies to
the triall of old Doctors which liued before the controuerſies
began,
               Ibid. pag. 23. and that you are willing to do the
ſame; yetIbid pag. 
                     •
                  0. 
               me doe flie the meanes of triall.
               Biſ
                     •
                  op. in 
                     •
                  is 2d. part 
                     〈…〉
                   title or Repe
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  nce, pag 214. 
               We in no
one point will be tried by the iudgement and conſent of
antiquitie. But marke (Sir Prieſt) what 
                  •
                ſay. I am
of
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Scultetus mind, That that great light of Cambridge
D. Whitakers ſpake nothing but the truth,
when in his anſwer to Campian he auouched, Patres
in maximis iudicijs toti ſunt noſtri, in leuioribus v
                     •
                  rij,
in minutiſsimis vestri: The Fathers in the main controuerſies
are wholy ours; in the leſſer, ſome ours,
ſome yours; in ſome trifles yours. Yea I am of the
ſame minde with that other great light of Oxford

D. Rainolds, who in hisCap. 8. ſect. 6. in fine. 
               Conference with your Hart,
ſolemnly proteſted, that in his opinion, Not one of
all the Fathers was a Papiſt. And if you dare put your
ſelfe on the ancient Fathers (which you may not
do by your booke learning, for it is the preſent
Church, that is, your preſent Pope, and not the ancient
Fathers, who by your booke learning is the ſole
Iudge of all controuerſies;) but if you dare put your
ſelfe on the ancient Fathers to be tried by them,
for the diſcouering of your vanitie in bragging; &
clearing of vs from your vniuſt calumniations, I
will name you thirtie ſeuerall points of doctrine,
taught by you, denied by vs, for proofe of which,
I am very confident, you are not able to name
one Father, no not one Father, who liued within a
1000 yeares after Chriſt. And the doctrinall points
I meane are theſe.  You teach, that the vulgar Latin
is to be preferred before, at leaſt equalled with
the Hebrew and the Greeke.  That it is not meete
and expedient, eſpecially at all times, that the Bible
ſhould be tranſlated into the knowne languages of
the common people.  That the holy Scriptures,
though truly and Catholikly tranſlated, may not
indifferently be read of all men, no not of any other
then ſuch as haue expreſſe licence thereunto.  That
the holy Scripture, euen where it ſeemes moſt plain,
is yet ſo hard and obſcure, that it ſtands in need of
a ſet Interpreter, who may opē vnto vs the meaning
of it.  That it is lawfull to make an image of God
the Father.  That Latria may be giuen to Images.
 That there are ſeuen Sacraments, and neither moe
nor fewer.  That the Communion cannot with any

reaſon be called the Lords Supper.  That it is vnlawfull
for the common people to communicate in
both kindes.  That it is vnlawfull for the common
people to receiue the Cōmunion with their hands.
 That a woman may baptize.  That on a faſting day
a man may eate at noone, yea at eleuen or ten of
the clocke before noone.  That on a faſting day, beſides
a noone-dinner, a man may take his part of a
good banquet at night; he may eate apples, peares,
plums, raiſins of the Sunne, figs, ſweet-meate, and
three or foure ounces of bread withall.  That all
ſuch are exempted from faſting as are vnder 21
yeares of age, and aboue 60; all that are ſick or ſore;
all women with child, all that giue ſuck; all beggers
that go from doore to doore; all Maſons, Farriers,
Wrights, Carters, Huſbandmen, and (almoſt) all
Handycrafts men.  That a Prieſt ſinnes more grieuouſly
if he marry, then if he play the fornicator
abroad, or keepe a whore at home.  That a man
who hath vowed chaſtitie, is not guiltie of breaking
his vow by whoring, but onely by marrying.  That
a man may vow to go on pilgrimage to Ieruſalem,
without his wiues conſent, and performe his vow.
 That the name of Pope is to be appropriate to the
Biſhop of Rome onely.  That the Biſhop of Rome
onely is by right to be called Vniuerſall.  That the
Rom. Church is the Lady of all Churches.  That
the Church of Rome▪ is the Mother of all Churches.
 That the Church of Rome fundata eſt à ſolo
               Domino, was founded by Chriſt onely.  That out
of the Church of Rome there is no ſaluation  That
without your Popes leaue, no man may preach to

the Heathen.  That none may diſcutere de fide, determine
a point of faith, but your Pope.  That the
Princes of the world muſt kiſſe your Popes feete,
but no other Biſhops.  That a notorious offender
may be abſolued from his fault, before any penance
be performed by him, or ſo much as enioyned by
him.  That if a poore womans Hen be ſick or loſt,
ſhe may procure a Maſſe to be ſaid for her.  That
the Popes or Biſhops bleſſing will purge a man
from veniall ſinnes.  That holy bread workes like
effect. Theſe points (I ſay) are taught by you. And
yet for all your craking of the Fathers, you are not
able to name the Father within 1000 yeares after
Chriſt, of whom you learned them, no not one of
them: if you can, ſhew your skil; if you cannot, confeſſe
your impudencie.
            10. You brag much of the vnitie that is among
you. You would make the world beleeue, that

                  
                     •
                  ellar. lib. 4. de N
                     •
                  tis Eccleſ. cap. 10. 
               Nunc omnes Catholici toto orbe diſperſi de omnibus
dogmatibus fidei idem ſentiunt: All Catholicks diſperſed
throughout the whole world, are of one opinion
in matters of faith. ThatHils Quartern of Reaſons, Reaſon 3. 
               Whoſoeuer they be,
or in what place or region ſoeuer they remaine in all the
world, if they be Catholicks or Papiſts, they haue all one
faith, one heart and one ſoule. But if this be true, I deſire
to know how it came to paſſe, that Iacobus Almain
a Doctor of Paris writ againſt Cardinall Caietan?
why Soto the Spaniard writ againſt Ferus? and
Medina a Spaniard in defence of Ferus againſt Soto.
Why Guilielmus Occham our countryman writ againſt
Pope Iohn 22. Why Nicolaus de Tudiſco, beſt
knowne by the name of Abbat Panormitan, writ a

booke pro Concilio Baſilienſi, in defence of the Councell
at Baſil. Why Sigebert a Monke of Gemble, writ
one booke againſt an Epiſtle of Gregory 7. and another
againſt an Epiſtle of Paſchalis 2. Why Fiſher
B. of Rocheſter writ a booke againſt Iames Faber:
and Marcus Grandeuallis another: and why Iodochus
Clychtoueus writ againſt Grundeuallis: and Fiſher againſt
Clictoueus. Why Alexander Carerius an Italian
writ a booke de poteſtate Ro. Pont. aduerſus impios politicos,
meaning ſuch as Bellarmine. Why Turrian
writ againſt Pighius. Why Ecchius railed vpon Taulerus.
Why Catharin writ againſt Caietan. Why Soto
writ againſt Catharin. WhyThe booke was printed at Rome 1593. fatente Poſſeuino in Apparat. ſac. verb. Cornel. lanſen.
                
               Didacus Caſtillus writ
againſt Ianſenius. Why your Seminaries writ ſo many
biting books againſt the Ieſuites, and the Ieſuites
ſo many biting books againſt your Seminaries. Proceeded
theſe bookes from men of one faith, one
heart, and one ſoule? or will you denie that they
who writ them were Catholicks? or that the matters
about which they contended were matters of faith,
or bordering thereupon? The men run vnder the
name of Catholicks in all your booke. And if the
points about which they contended doe not concerne

                  ••
               th, why are they ſo earneſt in c
                  •
               nſu
                  •
               ing
one another? As for example, why doth Archbiſhop
Catharin charge Cardinall Caietan with ſuch opinions
touching the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,
                  In his booke 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   per Coli
                     •
                  . 1535. pag. 
                     •
                  . 
               qua
                     •
                  
pijs auribus h
                     •
                  rri
                     •
                  ilia, as are horrible to be heard▪
and with ſuch opinions concerning the Sacramēts,
Pag. 154. 
               quae noua & foeda, & omnino Catholicis auribus abſona,
nec ferenda; as are new and filthy, and not fit to
be heard or tolerated by Catholicks: and with ſuch

opinions concerning the pluralitie of wiues, as are
Pag. 196. 
               prophaniſsima, moſt profane: and with one opinion
touching mariage betweene perſons of different
Religion, which isPag. 225. 
               impium & irrationabile, both
wicked and vnreaſonable: and with another touching
the reſurrection, which isPag. 286. 
               irrationabilis &
contra Scripturam, & indigna vt cadat in mentem Chriſtianam,
an vnreaſonable opinion, contrary to Scripture,
and vnworthy of any Chriſtian: and with other
expoſitions of Scripture,Pag. 298. 299. 
               Quae nouum & infandum
dogma introducunt, & multa falſa & incredibilia:
whereon followes one new and grand paradox,
beſides many leſſer falſities and incredulities.
Yea, why doth Catharin charge Caietan with words
touching the Godhead of Chriſt,
               Pag. 104. 
               quae manifeſte horribilia
& omnium ſententia deteſtanda, which are apparently
horrible, and by common conſent to be deteſted?
and with another opinion, of which he ſaith
thus,Pag. 106. 
               Hanc ego procul dubio vt haereticam & deteſtabilem
toto ſpiritu pronuncio, I do with open mouth
proclaime that this opinion is hereticall and deteſtable.
            Againe, if there be ſuch vnitie among you, as
you brag of, why forbid youIndex Clem. 8. litera A. 
               Maſias Commentaries
vpon Ioſua?
               Ibid. lit D. 
               Didacus Stella his Commentaries
vpon Luke?
               Ibid. lit. I. 
               Ferus Commentaries vpon Mathew
and Iohn?
               Ibid. lit C. 
               Claudus Eſpencaeus his Commentaries
vpon Titus?
               Lit. l. 
               Iames Faber his Commentaries vpon
the Euangeliſts and S. Pauls Epiſtles? Why forbid
youLit. B. 
               Charanza Archbiſhop of Toledo his Catechiſme?
Why forbid youLit. A. 
               Catharinus his two queſtions
de verbis quibus Chriſtum ſanctiſsimum Euchariſtiae

ſacramentum confecit? Why forbid youLit. B. 
               Baptiſtae
Cremenſis workes? Why forbid youIbid. 
               Beatus
Rhenanus his Scholies vpon Tertullian; and his Epiſtle
de primatu Petri? Why forbid youLit. O. 
               Onus Eccleſiae?
andLit. S. 
               Stephen Gardiners booke, de vera obedientia?
Why haue you purged alreadyConfer the Edition 1551. with the Editions 1576. and 1589. & 1610. and the truth of this will appeare. 
               Guitmundus
de Sacramento, who liued ad an. 1070; andThis is confeſſed by Poſſeuin in Apparat. ſac. verbo, Tho. Aquin.
                
               Tho. of Aquins
his ſumme of Diuinitie, who liued ad an. 1240;
andSee edit. 
                        •
                     ran. cofurti 1581, & compared with that An. 1502. 
               Ioh. Petrus de Ferrarijs his practica, who liued
ad ann. 1414. and Bernardinus de Buſti his Mariale,
who liued in Sixtus 4. his dayes, about the yeare
1470? Why haue you purged already Cardinall
Contarenus his works? and Sir Thomas Mores works?
and Viues his Commentaries vpon S. Auſtin de Ciuitate
Dei? Why haue you giuen direction for the
purging of Bertram de corpere & ſanguine Domini,
who liued about the yeare 870? and for the purging
of Antonius Rampegolis, or Rampelogis,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                a great
ſtickler in the Councell of Conſtance, An. 1414. againſt
Iohn Huſs? and for the purging of Antonius
de Roſ
                     •
                  llis, who liued ad ann. 1467. and for the purging
of a ſpeciall booke, intitled Ordo baptizandi,
cum modo viſitandi, printed at Venice, An. 1575. in

                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                this booke laſt mentioned, your Prieſts were enioyned
to aske theſe two queſtions of him that was
ſicke, Credis non proprijs meritis, ſed paſsionis Domini
noſtri Ieſu Chriſti virtute & merito ad gloriam peruenire?
Doeſt thou beleeue that thou ſhalt go to
heauen by the vertue and merit of Chriſts paſſion,
and not by thine owne merits? Credis quod Dominus
noſter Ieſus Chriſtus per noſtra ſalute mortuus ſit,
& quod ex proprijs meritis vel alio modo nullus poſsit

ſaluari, niſi in merito paſsionis ipſius? Doeſt thou beleeue
that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt died for vs? and
that no man can be ſaued by his owne workes, or
by any other meanes then by the merit of his paſſion?
And vpon the ſick mans anſwering, that he
beleeued ſo, your Prieſts were enioyned to tell him
further, Non erit deſperandum vel dubitandum de ſalute
illius, qui ſuprapoſitus petitiones corde crediderit,
& ore confeſſus fuerit: There is no cauſe to deſpaire,
no not to doubt of his ſaluation, who beleeues with
his heart and confeſſeth with his mouth the truth
of the abouenamed queſtions. YetCap
                     •••
                  inus & Quiroga 
                     〈◊〉
                   citatis. by order from
your Church, all this is to be blotted out.
            Againe, if there be ſuch vnitie among you, as
you bragge of; how (I pray you) comes it to paſſe,
thatLib. 1. de verbo Dei cap. 10. 
               Bellarmine holds, Tobith, Iudith, Wiſedome, Eccleſiaſticus,
the 1. and 2. of Macab
                     •
                  es, to be Canonical
Scripture; ſeeing Arias Montanus holds them to be
Apocrypha, ſaying in the title page of his Interlineall
Bible, printed by Plantin at Antwerp, An. 1584.
Huic Editioni acceſſeru
                     •
                  s libri Graece ſcripti, quos Eccleſia
orthodox
                     •
                   Haebraeorum Canonem ſequuta, inter
Apocryphus recenſet: In this Edition you haue the
bookes written in Greeke (meaning Tobith, Iudith,
&c.) which the Catholicke Church following the
Hebrew Canon, reckons among the Apocrypha.
How comes it to paſſe, thatEpiſt. ad 
                     〈◊〉
                   pro Mor
                     •
                  a Eraſmi. Sir Thomas More,
               Lib. 2. de verbo Dei. ca
                     •
                  . 2. 
               Bellarmine,
and many others of you, denie that the
Hebrew and the Greeke are wilfully corrupted either
by Iewes or Hereticks; ſeeing ourPreface to the Engliſh reader, ſet before the Bible printed at Doway, An. 1609. 
               Dowiſts tell
vs, that your vulgar Latin is more pure then the
Hebrew or the Greeke, thoſe Editions being fouly

corrupted by Iewes and Hereticks, ſince the Latin
was truly tranſlated out of them? How comes it
to paſſe, that in Spaine it runnes for currant,Az
                     •
                  r. inſtitut. moral part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 13. pag. 104. 
               That
the Croſſe of Chriſt is to be worſhipped with Latria; and
that yet in France that doctrine is not liked? How
comes it to paſſe,Nau
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  us ad Caput N
                     •
                  uit. Notab. 3. nu. 84. de Iud. that at Rome no man dare teach,
That a Councel is aboue the Pope; and that yet no man
dare teach at Paris, that the Pope is aboue a Councell?
How comes it to paſſe, that yourDialogue between a Secul
                     •
                  r Prieſt and a 
                     〈◊〉
                   pag. 9
                     •
                  . 
               Ieſuits in Scotland
permitted the Catholicks there to go to Church
with Proteſtants: and yet your Ieſuites with vs in
England would not permit your Catholicks here to
go to Church with vs that are Proteſtants? Do not
Rhem. in Ro
                     •
                  . 3. 22. ſome of you teach, That we are iuſtified by the righteouſneſſe
of Chriſt inherent in vs, and not imputed to
vs? and yet do not others of you, as namelyLib. de Iuſtificatione. Cardinall
Contarenus and
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Albertus Fighius teach flat
contrary, euen that which we teach, viz. That we are
iuſtified by Chriſts righteouſneſſe imputed to vs, not inherent
in vs? Do notRhem in Rom. 3. 2
                     •
                  . ſome of you teach, that we are
not iuſtified by faith onely? and yet is it not confeſſed
by
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Alfonſus de Caſtro, that Claudius Guillandius a
learned Papiſt was of opinion, that we are iuſtified
by faith onely? Do notRhem. in Rom. 8. 38. ſome of you teach, that no
man can be ſure of his ſaluation, without ſpeciall reuelation?
and yet did not the ſameComment. in 2. Tim. cap. vlt. c. 
                     ••
                  iliatione 2. 
               Claudius Guillandius
maintaine the contrary, and Catharinus too, both in
and after the Councell of Trent? Did not Michael
Baius,
               Atfonſ de Caſtr
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   citato who was one at the Councell of Trent, and
Deane of the Vniuerſitie of Louaine, and died in
the yeare 1589. teach, Nullum eſt peccatum ex natura
ſua veniale, ſed omne peccatum meretur poenam aeternā,
               
There is no ſinne which is venial of it owne nature,
but euery ſinne deſerues eternall death. And that,
Omnia opera infidelium ſunt peccata, & Philoſophorum
virtates ſunt vitia: All the actions of infidels are
ſinnes, and all the vertues of Philoſophers, vices.
And that, Liberum arbitrium ſine gratiae Dei adiutorio,
non niſi ad peccandum valet: Free will without the
helpe of Gods grace, can do nothing but ſinne. Pelagianus
eſt error dicere, quod liberum arbitrium valet,
ad vllum peccatum vitandum: It is a Pelagian error
to ſay, that by the power of free will, a man may auoid
ſome ſinne. Omnia quod agit peccator, vel ſeruus
peccati, peccatum eſt: All that is ſinne which is
done by a ſinner, or by him that is ſeruant to ſinne.
Ad rationem & definitionem peccati non pertinent voluntariam:
It is not neceſſarie that ſinne ſhould be
defined to be a voluntarie action. Praua deſideria,
quibus ratio non conſentit, & quae homo inuitus patitur,
ſunt prohibita praecepto, Non concupiſces: Wicked luſts,
whereunto reaſon giues no conſent, and ſuch as
man falls into againſt his will, are forbidden by the
commandement, Thou ſhalt not couet. Definitiua,
haec ſententia, Deum homini nihil impoſsibile praecepiſse,
falſo tribuitur Auguſtino cum Pelagij ſit: This definitiue
ſentence, viz. God commanded no man any
impoſſible thing, is falſly fathered on S. Auſtin, for
it was Pelagius, not S. Auſtin. Nemo praeter Chriſtum
eſt abſque originali peccato, hinc beata Virgo mortua eſt
propter peccatum ex Adam contractum, omneſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eius afflictiones
in hac vita, ſicut & aliorum iuſtorum, fuerunt
vltiones peccati actualis vel originalis: No perſon beſides
Chriſt is exempt from originall ſinne; the virgin

               Mary died by reaſon of originall ſinne; and all
the afflictions which ſhe ſuffred in this life, befel her
as then befell to other good men, viz. as puniſhments
either of actuall or originall ſinne. Satisfactiones
laborioſae iuſtificatorum non valent expiare de
condigno poenam temporalem reſtantem poſt culpam condonatam:
The painfull ſatisfactorie workes of ſuch
as are iuſtified, doe not condignely ſatisfie for the
temporal puniſhment remaining after the fault pardoned.
Did not (I ſay) Michael Baius your Deane
of Lonaine teach theſe doctrines, and aboue 70
more, much like vnto theſe, all which are condemned
by
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Pius 5. and Gregory 13. as partly hereticall,
partly erroneous, partly ſuſpitious, partly temerarious,
partly ſcandalous, partly offenſiue? And are
you not aſhamed to brag of your vnitie? Me thinks
your vnitie is like that of the Madianites, who thruſt
euerie man his ſword into the ſide of his fellow.
            11 You brag much of the commendation that S.
Paul gaue vnto the Church of Rome in his Epiſtle
to the Romanes, andRhem A
                     •
                  not. before the Epiſtle to the Rom. pag. 38. ſay, It is much to be noted. And
is it not as much to be noted what commendations
God by his Prophets gaue vnto Ieruſalem,
               Theodo
                     •••
                   hiſt lib 9. cap. 9 
               the mother
of all other Churches? Is it not as much to be noted,
how God by his Prophets affirmed,2 Chron. 6. 6 
               that he
choſe Ieruſalem that his Name might be there, and
               2. Chro 7. 16. 
               that
for euer? How God by his Prophets affirmed,Pſal. 132. 14. that
he meant to dwell there for euer, becauſe he had a delight
therein.
               2. Chro. 7. 16. 
               His eyes and his heart ſhould be on Ieruſalem
perpetually. Ieruſalem ſhould be calledZach. 8. 3. 
               a city of truth,
and the mountaine of the Lord of hoaſts, the holy mountaine.
               
Do not theſe commendations ſurpaſſe thoſe
which are giuen by Paul vnto the Church of Rome
in his Epiſtle to the Romanes? And if the Iewes now,
haue no occaſion to bragge of the commendation
giuen to the Church of Ieruſalem of olde; why
ſhould you ſtand ſo much vpon it, that S. Paul in
his time, gaue commendation to the Church of
Rome in his time? May it not be, that as
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   1. 21. 
               Ieruſalem,
of a faithfull Citie became a harlot: ſo Rome, ſince S.
Pauls time, of a virgin, is become a ſtrumpet? Many
virgin Churches loſt their virginitie ſoone, as you
may ſee by Egeſippus words recorded inHiſt. lib. 3. cap. 32. et lib. 4. cap. 22. 
                     〈◊〉
                   interprete. 
               Euſebius.
Againe, was not the Church of Corinth as much
commended, if not more, by S. Paul in his Epiſtle
written to the Corinthians, as the Church of Rome
in his Epiſtle to the Romanes? The1. Cor. 1. 5. 7. 8. Apoſtle writes
of the Corinthians, that they were rich in Chriſt, in
all kind of ſpeech, and in all knowledge; that they were
not deſtitute of any gift: affirming further, that our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt will confirme them to the end. Which
he writ not of the Romanes. Of the Romanes continuing
in that fame and renown of faith, for which
he commends them, he ſpeakes nothing: and yet
the Church of Corinth hath loſt her maidenhead, and
why not Rome? If the naturall branches, the Iew,
notwithſtanding all their promiſes: and the branches
of the ſame Oliue plant with the Romanes, I
meane the Corinthians, notwithſtanding all the
commendations which S. Paul gaue them, be cut
off, be deceiued: what reaſon haue you, who hold
of Rome, to pleaſe your ſelues with conceits of I
know not what drie Summers, becauſe Saint Paul
               
commended your predeceſſors?
            12 You brag, that the faith which you profeſſe
at this day, is the ſame with that which the Apoſtle
commended in the Romanes in his dayes; and yet
though the Apoſtle in his Epiſtle to the Romanes,
wherein he commends the Rom. faith, comprehends
all kind of doctrines, and handles them very fully and
exactly, asPraefat. Epiſt. ad. Rom. 
               Theodoret witneſſeth, and theAnnot. before the Epiſtle to the Rom. pag. 380. 
               Rhemiſts
confeſſe; he ſpeakes nothing therein of the Popes
Monarchie, of his power to iudge and determine all

                     •
                  auſes of faith, of his calling of Councels, of his Preſidentſhip
in Councels, of his right to ratifie their decrees,
to decide cauſes brought him by Appeales from all
the coasts of the world: of cenſuring Kings, by depoſing
them; on their kingdomes, by interdicting them:
he ſaith nothing herein of his right to bind Biſhops,
Metropolitans and Patriarkes with an oath to be his
faithfull ſubiects: to giue Church-liuings and Offices
to whom he liſt: to breake the bands of all Councels with
diſpenſations. He ſaith nothing of the Maſſe, of the
real preſence, of Tranſubſtantiation. He ſaith nothing
of the vowes of pouertie, of obedience and chaſtitie,
He ſaith nothing of Images, of the Croſſe, of Pilgrimages,
of Iubiles, of pardons, of Purgarori
                     •
                  s, of praying
to the dead, or for the dead. He ſaith nothing (I
ſay) no not a word, not ſo much as in ſhew, for the
proofe of theſe, or any ſuch doctrines as theſe,
whereon ye ſtand moſt in theſe dayes: but on the
contrary, in many places he ſpeakes directly againſt
many of your now-doctrines, againſt many of your
preſent poſitions. As for example, whereas you
both in bookes and windowes paint God the Father
               
in the likeneſſe of an old man, andBellar. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 8. defend it as
lawfull. The Apoſtle in his Epiſtle to the Romanes
teacheth, that it is vnlawfull,Ro. 1. 22, 23. calling them fooles,
who turned the glorie of the incorruptible God,
into ye ſimilitude of the image of a corruptible mā.
Secondly, whereasRhem. Annot. in Heb 11. 21. & in Apoc. 19. 10. you teach, that religious worſhip
is due to creatures, to Angels, to men, to Images,
to Crucifixes, &c. The Apoſtle in this Epiſtle
Rom. 1. 24. 25 ſhewes how grieuouſly they were puniſhed by
God, who worſhipped and ſerued the creature, forſaking
the Creator; implying therein, that it is not
lawfull to giue religious worſhip vnto creatures.
Thirdly, whereasRhem. Annot. in 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. 21. you maintain, that the doctrine
of faith onely iuſtifying, is an old hereſie: the Apoſtle
in this Epiſtle teacheth it for a Catholicke doctrine;
for we conclude (Ro. 3. 28. ſaith he) that a man is iuſtified
by faith without the workes of the law; which is
all one as to ſay, a man is iuſtified by faith onely.
Fourthly, whereasRhem. Annot. in Fo. 5. 14. you teach, that the virgin
Mary was free from originall ſinne: the Apoſtle in
Rom. 5. 12. this Epiſtle writes, that in Adam all men (and by
conſequent the virgin Mary) ſinned; what exception
haue we but Chriſt? Fiftly, whereasRhem, Annot. in hom. 1. 31. you teach,
that ſome ſinnes are veniall, that is, pardonable of
their owne nature, and not worthy of damnation:
the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle teacheth contrary,Rom. 6. 23. ſaying,
The wages of ſinne (meaning euery ſin) is death.
Sixtly, whereasRhem Annot. in Rom. 6. 23. you teach, that euerlaſting life is
a ſtipend: the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle teacheth it is
a gift, The gift of God is eternall life,
               Rom. 6, 22. ſaith the Apoſtle.
Seuenthly, whereasRhem. Annot. in Rom. 7. 7. you teach, that concupiſcence
is no ſinne; and beſides,Non licet nobis ita loqui, &c. Poſſeuin Apparat. ſac. verbo. 
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  es antiqui. that we may not

ſafely call it ſinne: the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle,Idem. ibid. by
your owne mens confeſſion,Rom. 6. 12. calls it ſin. Eightly,
whereasCenſura Colon. dial. 3. you account it hereſie to teach, that a iuſtified
man cannot keepe the whole Law: the Apoſtle
in this Epiſtle ſtands guiltie of this hereſie; for
ſpeaking in the perſon of a iuſtified man, To will
is preſent with me,
               Rom. 7. 18. 19 ſaith he, but I find no meanes to
performe that which is good. for I do not the good thing
which I would, but the euill which I would not, that do I.
Ninthly, whereasRhem. Annot. in Heb 13. 16. & 1. Cor. 3. 8. you teach, that good workes
be meritorious, euen ſo meritorious, that the ioyes
of heauen are a thing equally and iuſtly anſwering
to the time and weight of our workes: the Apoſtle
in this Epiſtle teacheth,Rom. 8. 18. 
               that the afflictions of this
preſent time are not worthy of the glory which ſhall be
ſhewed vnto vs. Tenthly, whereasRhem. A
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  t. in 1. Cor. 9. 27. you crie out
againſt the certaintie of faith, calling it an vnhappie
ſecuritie, preſumption, and a faithleſſe perſwaſion:
the Apoſtle inRom. 4, 20. this Epiſtle commends the
faith that is free from doubting,Rom. 8. 38. 39 profeſſing that he
was aſſured neither life nor death, nor any creature,
was able to ſeparate him from the loue of God which is
in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. Eleuenthly, whereasAntenin. ſunt. Theol part. 3. tit. 13. cap. 6. ſect. 16. you
teach, that Chriſt is vpon euery of your Altars: the
Apoſtle inRom. 8. 34. this Epiſtle teacheth, that ſince his riſing
he is at the right hand of God. Twelfthly, whereas
Rhem. in Act. 10. 2. you teach, that workes done before iuſtification,
deſerue of congruitie at Gods hands the grace
of iuſtification: the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle teacheth
flat contrary,Rom. 8. 7. 8. ſaying, The wiſedome of the fleſh
(that is, a man vniuſtified) cannot pleaſe God.
13. Whereas
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                you teach, that euery creature muſt

be ſubiect to the Pope, and that the Pope is ſubiect
to none: the Apoſtle in this EpiſtleRom. 13. exhorteth
euery creature to be ſubiect to the higher powers,
meaning by the higher powers (as theAgniſcente Bellar. lib 3. de 
                     〈◊〉
                  , cap. 3. circumſtances
ſhew) the Ciuill magiſtrates, and not the Pope.
14. Whereas you
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                teach, that the Clergie is and
ought to be free from whatſoeuer impoſitions of
the Ciu
                  ••
               l 
                  •
               agiſtrate, and that by the lawes of God
and man: the Apoſtle in this EpiſtleRom. 13. 7. perſwades
euery creature, the Clergie as well as the Laitie, to
pay tribute and cuſtome to the Ciuill magiſtrate.
15. Whereas
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   de vita lgnatij 
                     〈◊〉
                  , lib. 5. cap. 4. you teach, that inferiours muſt doe
whatſoeuer ſuperiours command them, though it
be againſt their conſciences, vnleſſe they haue plain
reaſon for their refuſal: the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle
requires,Rom. 14. 5. that men be fully perſwaded in their
mindes of the lawfulneſſe of that which they doe;
meaning they ſhould not onely for beare the doing
of that which went againſt their conſcienes, but
whereof they doubted in their iudgements. Laſtly,
whereasRhem. in Rom. 14 23. you teach, that ſome actions onely
of the Infidels are ſinnes: the Apoſtle in this Epiſtle
affirmes, that all the actions of the Infidels are
ſinnes, ſaying,Rom. 14. 23. 
               Whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne.
Now that which I deſire to know, is, why the Apoſtle
(if the faith of our Romiſh Church now, be
the ſame that it was then when he writ to the Romanes)
ſpake nothing of the principall points of
your now-faith; but many things for vs, and againſt
you?
            YourConfeſſ. Petrikoniae. cap. 48 de ſacr
                     •
                  m. Poenitentiae fol. 127. Cardinall Hoſius, to proue ſatisfaction, alledgeth
theſe as the words of Saint Paul, Rom. 6.

               Exhibeamus membra noſtra ſeruire iuſtitiae in ſatiſfactione:
Let vs exhibite our members to ſerue iuſtice
vnto ſatisfaction. And yourAnſw. to Iuels Apology, par. 2 chap. 16. fol. 117 Doctor Harding
for proofe of the ſame point, alledgeth theſe as the
words of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 7. Let vs cleanſe our ſelues
from all filthineſſe of the fleſh and ſpirit, making perfect
our ſatisfaction in the feare of God. Both of them putting
the word ſatisfaction in place of the word ſanctification,
vſed by the Apoſtle. Was there any great
ſanctitie ſhewed by them in this? or rather, are they
not bound to make ſatisfaction vnto the Apoſtle
for this their bad dealing, thinke you?
            Your Biſhop Gardiner (D. Fulk in his defence of 
                     〈…〉
                   againſt Matt
                     •
                  n. An
                     •
                  w. to the preface. nu. 4 ſome ſay) to proue the
carnall preſence which you maintaine againſt the
truth and vs, alledgeth theſe as the words of the
110. Pſalme, Eſcamſe dedit timentibus eum, He gaue
himſelfe for meate to them that feared him. Was
there any feare of God in your Biſhop to adde the
word ſe. himſelfe, of himſelfe to the text, thinke
you?
            YourLib. 2. de Imag. cap. 12. Cardinall Bellarmine, to proue that holy
things may be religiouſly worſhipped, alledgeth
theſe as the words of God, Exod. 12. 16. Dies prima
erit ſancta, & ſeptima eadem religione venerabilis: The
firſt day ſhall be holy, and the ſeuenth day with
like religion ſhall be venerable; deſcanting vpon
them thus, Hîc vides pro eodem accipi rem ſanctam,
& religioſe venerabilem; yet the word religioſe is not
in the text, but the word feſtiuitate. Now I pray
you, was it not irreligiouſly done of your Cardinall,
to chop into the Text the word religiouſly
falſly?
            
               
YourEpiſt. ad Alho
                     •
                  
                  num de Caelibatu Eccleſ. Col. 75. quae habetur ad finem To. 2. deſen Bell per G
                     ••
                  tſirum. 
               Bernaltus a Prieſt of Conſtance, writing
in defence of Gregory 7. his prohibition of Prieſts
mariage, affirmes, that S. Peter commanded euen
the Laitie (1. Pet. 3.) vt parcant vxoribus ſuis, ne impetrantur
orationes earum, that they ſhould forbeare
companying with their wiues, leſt their prayers
ſhould be interrupted: whereas in Saint Peter there
are no ſuch words as vt parcant vxoribus, they
ſhould forbeare companying with their wiues. Did
not this Prieſt of yours deſerue to be accompanied
with whores, who forged this Text to proue, that
a man may not keepe companie with his wife?
            Your
                  
                     •
                  ib. ſupracit. cap. 58 de ſpe & orat. fol. 189. Cardinall Hoſius, and yourLoc. Com. lib. 7. cap. 3. fol. 232. Biſhop Canus,
in way of proouing that wee may beleeue in
Saints, alledge the words of Saint Paul to Philemon,
Gratias ago Deo meo audiens fidem quod habes in Domino
noſtro, & in omnes Sanctos: I giue thanks to my
God, hearing of the faith which thou haſt in the
Lord Ieſus, and in all Saints; leauing out the word
charitatem, loue or charitie, which the Apoſtle coupled
with the word fidem, faith: meaning, loue or
charitie ſhould be referred to the Saints, as the obiect
of it; and the word faith to the Lord Ieſus, as
his obiect. Was there any loue or charitie in theſe
towards the Apoſtle, who ſuppreſſed the mention
of that loue towards the Saints, which he commended
in Philemon? or is it ſafe, I do not ſay to beleeue
in, but to beleeue ſuch ſaints as theſe, who cite the
Scriptures ſo diuel-like, leauing out, as the diuel did
Mat. 4. what made againſt him?
            YourSeſſ. 11 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 4. Conc. e
                     •
                  t. B
                     ••
                  nianae. pag. 639. Pope Leo 10. affirmed in the Councell of
Lateran, that Chriſt ordained Peter and Peters ſucceſſors

to be his Vicars; who, by the teſtimonie of
the booke of Kings, muſt needs be ſo obeyed, that
he who obeyes them not, muſt die the death. In
what booke of Kings, I pray you, find you this? for
there is no ſuch teſtimonie in thoſe bookes of the
Kings which are in my Bible.
            YourLib. 1. de Purg. cap. 3 Cardinall Bellarmine (to returne to him
againe) in way of proouing Purgatorie, alledgeth
theſe as the words of the Prophet Eſay, Chap. 4. 4.
Purgabit Dominus ſordes filiorum & filiarum Sion, &
ſanguinem emundabit de medio eorum, ſpiritu iudicij &
combuſtionis: Our Lord ſhall purge away the filthineſſe
of the ſonnes and daughters of Sion, and ſhall
wipe away the blood from the midſt of them with
the ſpirit of iudgement and burning. Yet in the
vulgar Latin (which he is bound by oath to follow)
the words lie thus: Si abluerit Dominus ſordes filiorum
& filiarum Sion, & ſanguinem Ieruſalem lauerit de medio
eius in ſpiritu ardor is & iudicij. Why (I pray you)
did he change the word abluerit into purgabit, and
and the word lauerit into emundabit, and the word
ardoris into combuſtionis? was it not for that the
words abluerit and lauerit and ardoris, ſuite not ſo
well with fire, which you maintaine to be found in
Purgatorie; as the words purgabit, emundabit and arderis
doe? or what elſe was the cauſe that he varied
from his Text? And how can you excuſe his from
periurie?
            This ſameLib. 4. de Chriſt. cap. 11. Cardinall of yours, in way of prouing
that Chriſt brought ſoules out of Purgatorie when
he deſcended thither (as you dreame) after his
death, alledgeth theſe as the words of Zachary,
               
Chap. 9. 11. Tu autem in ſanguine teſtamenti tui eduxiſti
vinclos tuos de lacu in quo non eſt aqua: But thou
by the blood of thy teſtament haſt brought out
thy priſoners out of the Lake wherein there is no
water. Yet in the vulgar Latin it is not eduxiſti, haſt
brought forth, but emiſiſti, haſt ſent forth: which
will not affoord the like concluſion.
            Againe, thisLib. 2. de luſ
                     •
                  if cap. 3. Cardinall of yours, to proue that
inherent righteouſneſſe is the formall cauſe of our
iuſtification, alledgeth theſe as the words of S. Paul,
Tit. 3. 5. Cum apparuit benignitas & humanitas Saluateris
noſtri Dei, non ex operibus quae fecimus nos, ſed
ſecundum ſuam miſericordiam ſaluos nos fecit, &c.
When the bountifulneſſe and loue of God our Sauiour
appeared, not by the workes which we had
done, but according to his mercie he ſaued vs, &c.
Yet the Apoſtle ſaith not barely, Not by the workes
which we had done; but, Not by the workes of righteouſneſſe
which we had done: excluding our good
workes, our inherent righteouſneſſe from iuſtification.
And your Cardinall vnrighteouſly leaues out
the word righteouſneſſe.
            
            Your Vicar generall to the Archbiſhop of Bononia,
calledDe maieſtate militantis Eccleſ. l. 1. de batriarch. &c. par. 1. cap. 8. p. 227. 
                     •
                  dit. Venet. 1602. 
               Iſiodorus Moſconius, to proue that all
Biſhops owe extraordinarie obedience to your
Pope, alledgeth theſe as the words of Cyprian, lib. 4.
Epiſt. 9. Epiſcopi, vti qui Apoſtolicae ordinationi ſubiacent,
etiam ei hanc reuerentiam debent, vt ſingulis annis
Apoſtolorum liminibus ſeſe repraeſentent: Biſhops,
as perſons ſubiect to Apoſtolicall ordination, owe
this reuerence to the Pope, that euery yeare they
viſit Rome. But I cannot finde this in any edition

of Cyprian.
            
            
               De Tradit. part 3. tit. de cultu Sanci. fol. 197. 
               Biſhop Pereſius, and the
               An
                     ••
                  dagma Colon. tit. de Innocent. ſanct. fol. 36. 
                     •
                  . 
               Prebendaries of Colen,
to proue Inuocation of Saints, alledge theſe as
the words of S. Auſtin, de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 22. Hec vſu
ab initio traditum tenemus, vt extra orationes quae in
altari fiunt, etiam Deo dilectos ſanctos, contemplatione
vnionis & communionis, quam cum Chriſto & nobiſcum
habent, cum timore & deuotione erga Deum compellemus,
atque vt pro nobis intercedant inuocemus. But I
cannot find this in any Edition of S. Auſtin.
            Your
                  
                     •
                  ib. 2. ſent. d. 11. 
                     •
                  . 
               Peter Lombard to proue That euery man
hath a good Angell to protect him, and an euil Angell
to tempt him, alledgeth theſe as the words of
Gregory, Quod quiſque bonum Angelum ſibi ad cuſtodiam
deputatum, & vnum malum ad exercitium habet.
But I can find no ſuch words in any Gregories
works, not in Nazianzens, not in Nyſſeus, not in
Gregories the Great.
            YourTo. 2. de Sacramen. cap. 83. 
               Waldenſis diſputing about Tranſubſtantiation,
alledgeth theſe as the words of
                  
                     •
                  ib. 
                     •
                  . de corpore & ſang
                     ••
                  e. Domini. 
               Auſtin,
Nec credendum est quod ſubſtantia panis vel vini remanent,
ſed panis in corpus Chriſti, & vinum in ſanguinem
conuertitur, ſolummodo qualitatibus panis &
vini remanentibus: Neither muſt we beleeue, that
the ſubſtance o
                  •
                bread and wine remaineth, but the
bread is turned into the bodie of Chriſt, and the
wine into his blood, the qualities of bread & wine
remaining onely. But I can neither find ſuch words,
nor any ſuch Treatiſe among S. Auſtins words.
            The ſameTo. 2. de Sacram. cap. 82. 
               Waldenſis proſecuting the ſame argument,
alledgeth theſe as the words of Beda in a
Treatiſe de myſterijs Miſſa, Ibi forma panis videtur,

vbi ſubſtantia panis non eſt: There the forme of bread
appeareth, where the ſubſtance of bread is not. But
I can neither find theſe words, nor any ſuch Treatiſe
among Bedaes works.
            Your
                  
                     •
                  ib. 1. de Purg. cap. 6. Cardinall Bellarmine, for proofe of Purgatorie,
alledgeth theſe words of S. Auſtin, de Ciuitate
Dei, lib. 21. cap. 24. Tales conſtat ante iudicij diem
per poenas temporales, quas eorum ſpiritus patiuntur,
purgatos: aeterni ignis ſupplicijs non tradendos: It is
certaine that ſuch men being purged with temporall
paines which their ſoules ſuffer before the day
of iudgement, ſhall not be committed to the torment
of euerlaſting fire. But there are no ſuch
words to be found in the printed copy at Friburge
An. 1494. nor in that of Antwerp 1576. nor in that
of Paris 1586. nor in that of Baſil 1596. nor in any
written copie that I can heare of, either in the Vniuerſitie
Librarie at Oxford, or elſewhere.
            YourProemiall Annot. before the Bible tranſlated by them into Engliſh, printed 1609. Dowiſts to proue Tobith, Iudith, &c. Canonicall,
alledge Concil. Florent. Inſtruct. Armen. Decret.
7. But there is no ſuch Decree to be found in any
Edition of the Councels.
            
               Lib. de F
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  ont part. 1. cap. 1. pag. 22. 
               Iſiodorus Moſconius the Vicar generall ſpoken of
before, to ſet out the greatneſſe of his Pope, tels vs
in ſober ſadneſſe, that In Conc. Nicaeno tempore Conſtant.
mag. fuit terminatum, quod ſolum Rom. Pont. nomen
Pater patrum competeret, & Papae nomen alijs non
conuenire: It was decreed in the Councell of Nice,
in the dayes of Conſtantine the great, that the title
Fathers of fathers, ſhould be giuen to the Biſhop of
Rome only, and that no man ſhould be called Pope
but he. Yet there is no ſuch Decree to be found

in any Edition of the Councels.
            The ſameIbid. pag. 23. Monſieur, handling the ſame argument,
tels vs, that In Concil. Africae legetur quod eo nomine
Principis Sacerdotum ſolummodo Papa vteretur:
It is read in one of the Councels in Africa, that
the Pope onely ſhould be called Prince of prieſts.
Yet there is no ſuch thing to be ſeene in any of the
Councels of Africa, which are in any Editions of
the Councels.
            YourOpuſcul. contra errores Graecorum. 
               S. Tho. of Aquin, to proue that your Pope
hath an vniuerſall ſoueraigntie ouer the whole
Church of Chriſt, affirmes, that in the Councell of
Chalcedon it was decreed thus, Si quis Epiſcopus
praedicatur infamis liberam habeat poteſtatem appellandi
ad beatiſſimum Epiſcopum antiquae Romae, quis habemus
Petrum patrem refugij, & ipſi ſoli libera poteſtate
loco Dei ſit ius diſcernendi Epiſcopi criminati infamiam,
ſecundum claues à Domino ſibi datus: If any Biſhop
be defamed, let him appeale freely to the Biſhop
of Rome, becauſe we haue Peter for a father of
refuge, and he alone hath right with freedome of
power in the ſtead of God to iudge and trie the
crime of a Biſhop defamed, according to the keyes
which the Lord did giue him. But there is no ſuch
to be found in the Councell of Chalcedon, in any
Edition of the Councels.
            ThisIn 4. ſent. d. 24 Act. 2. q. 3. Saint of yours, to proue that one Biſhop
is ſubiect to another Biſhop, etiam iure diuino, by
Gods law, alledgeth theſe as the words of one of the
Councels kept at Conſtantinople, Veneramur ſecundum
Scriptur as &c. ſanctiſſimum antiquae Romae Epiſcopum
primum eſſe & maximum Epiſcoporum: We

define, according to the Scriptures, that the moſt
holy Biſhop of Rome ſhall be the firſt and greateſt
of all Biſhops. But that any Councell of Conſtantinople
did define that by Scripture, the Biſhop of
Rome was the greateſt of all Biſhops, it is not to be
found in any Edition of the Councels.
            YourLib. 1. de Conc. cap. 19. & lib. 2. cap. 11. Cardinall Bellarmine, to proue that your
Popes Legats ſate as Iudges in the generall Councel
of Chalcedon, tell vs that Ipſi ſententiam definitiuam
proferunt in Dioſcorum nomine Papae & totius Concilij
Act. 3. his verbis, Sanctiſſimus ac beatiſſimus Papa caput
vniuerſalis Eccleſia Leo, per nos Legatos ſuos, ſancta Synodo
conſentiente, Petri Apoſtoli praeditus dignitate,
qui Eccleſiae fundamentum, & petra fidei, & caeleſtis
regni Ianitor nuncupatur, Epiſcopali dignitate Dioſcorum
nudauit, & ab omni ſacerdotali opere fecit extorrem:
They in the name of the Pope and the Councell,
deliuered the definitiue ſentence againſt Dioſcorus,
euen in theſe words, Action 3. The moſt holy
and bleſſed Pope Leo head of the vniuerſal Church,
by vs his Legats, with the conſent of the holy
Councel, being endowed with Saint Peters power,
who is called the foundation of the Church, and
rocke of faith, the Porter of heauen gates, hath depoſed
Dioſcorus from his Biſhoprik, and reſtrained
him from all prieſtly functions. Yet there is no ſuch
definitiue ſentence to be ſeene in any action of the
Councell of Chalcedon, wherein Leo is called Head
of the vniuerſall Church, or ſaid to be indowed
with S. Peters power; or wherein Peter himſelfe is
called the foundation of the Church, or Porter of
heauens gate.
            FINIS.
            
            
            
         
      
   