
      
         
            
            
            Certaine Sermons vvherin is contained the Defenſe of the Goſpell nowe preached, againſt ſuch Cauils and falſe accuſations, as are obiected both againſt the Doctrine it ſelfe, and the Preachers and Profeſſors thereof, by the friendes and fauourers of the Church of Rome. (*∗*∗*)
            
               Preached of late by Thomas by Gods ſufferance Byſhop of Lincolne.
            Imprinted at Londō by Ralphe Newbery dwelling in Fleet ſtreet. Anno Domini 1580.
         
         
            
            
            To the Godly diſpoſed Reader.
            
               BEhold (louing Reader) the great goodneſse & prouidence of God towards thee. Theſe ſweet
                  •
                Sermōs, (not for the Elequēce which this Reuerēd Father chalēgeth, but for the inestimable cōfort to all the Godly) as ſweet ſounding Trūpets & in respect therof, may well be called 12. friendly Alarās, to cal & ſommō thee to the knowledge of thy ſelfe and thy ſtate, and to make ready thy Weapons here ſorted out for thee, againſt the common enimye of all quietneſse, the bloody Papiſt: Theſe ſweete warninges I ſay, had well nigh ſlipped thy hands, had not Gods mercifull prouidence prouided thee a remedy, & therefore vſed the meanes of certaine zealous, and Godly Ministers earnestlye to craue and begge, that they mighte be openlye knowne and publiſhed for thy greater benefite, and that they might be as Mithridaticum, or Triacle, in euery mans houſe, a redy remedy for three ſortes of poiſoned infections now abrode. Firſt for the obſtinate Papiſt, neuer in greater expectation for his lōg deſired purpoſe, than euē now. Secondly, for the ſenceles Epicure, or ſecure Worldling, drowned in the cogitatiōs of this world, & in a deepe & profoūd ſleepe of vanity, foreſeing no peril, & fearing no danger, but crying al is wel, al is wel, peace, peace, & is at warre with thē that tel of any danger. Laſtly, for the counterfeit Gospeller, who bearing the name of a ſhepe, is in deede a rauening Wolfe, & lookes but for oportunity, to ioyn with thy cheefe aduerſarie, & to tel thee in vaūting wiſe, that he was neuer other, but one of Machiuels order, a deepe diſsembler: but be thou of good comfort, feare not, ſtay thy ſelfe vpon gods prouidence, & behold here incloſed a preſent remedye for thee, take it, vſe it, imbrace it, bee thankefull for it, and farevvell in the Lorde.
            
               Vale. T. N.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Sermons contayned in this Boke, and in what leafe to finde them.
            
               1 The firſt Sermon vpon the 16. Verſe Rom. 1. Fol. 1.
               2 The ſecond Sermon vpon the ſame Verſe. Fol. 19.
               3 The third Sermon vpon the ſame Verſe. Fol. 46.
               4 The firſt Sermon vpon the 15. Ver. Math. 7. Fol. 67.
               5 The ſecond Sermō vpon the 16. Ver. Mat. 7. Fol. 82.
               6 The third Sermon vpon the 16. Ver. Mat. 7. Fol. 98.
               7 The firſt Sermō vpon the 1. Ver. 1. Cor. 10. Fol. 116.
               8 The ſecōd Sermō vpō the 3. Ver. 1. Cor. 10. Fol. 136.
               9 The third Sermon vpō the 5. Ver. 1. Cor. 10. Fo. 159.
               10 The firſt Sermon vpon the 3. Ver. Math. 13. Fo. 177.
               11 The ſecōd Sermō vpon the 5. Ver. Mat. 13. Fol. 196.
               12 A Sermon vpon the 46. Ver. Ioh. 8. Fol. 207.
            
         
         
            Faultes eſcaped in the Printing of this Boke.
            
               
                  
                      
                     Faultes.
                      
                     Correction.
                     Leafe.
                     Line.
                  
                  
                      
                     Percipitati
                      
                     praecipitati
                     13
                     9.
                  
                  
                      
                     capitaine
                      
                     captiue
                     15
                     7.
                  
                  
                      
                     Saniour
                      
                     ſauo
                           ••
                        
                     
                     33
                     3.
                  
                  
                      
                     poculus
                      
                     poculum
                     34
                     27.
                  
                  
                     For
                     chariſima
                     reade
                     chariſma
                     38
                     3.
                  
                  
                      
                     goly
                      
                     godly
                     73
                     5.
                  
                  
                      
                     do
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        o
                     97
                     15.
                  
                  
                      
                     alio
                      
                     alſo
                     122
                     27.
                  
                  
                      
                     Naſareth
                      
                     Bethlem.
                     198
                     34.
                  
                  
                      
                     vvith triall
                      
                     vvithout triall
                     228
                     15.
                  
                  
                      
                     7. of Chro.
                      
                     2. of Chro.
                     240
                     25.
                  
               
            
            
               In theſe Folios.
            
            For 16. 19. for 56. 58. for 48. 84. for 192. 194. for 193. 195. for 186. 198. for 206. 224. for 225. 223.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Three Sermons made vppon this Text. Rom. 1. 16.
            
               
                  Non me pudet Euangelij, est enim potentia Deiad ſalutem omni credenti. &c. That is: I am not ashamed of the Goſpell of Chriſt, for it is the povver of God to ſaluation, to euery one that beleue. et. c.
               
               
                  THis ſentence that I haue redde (Dearelye beloued) contayneth fewe wordes, great and ample matter: and is of that ſort which Rhetoricians call Enthemematicae, comprehending both parts of a breefe Argument, the Antecedent, and Concluſion. As if S. Paule had ſayd: The Goſpell of Chriſt is the mightie power of God. Therefore I am not aſhamed of it. And theſe two partes of this ſhort Argument, I meane (with Gods aſſiſtaunce) at this time to ſpeake of. Firſt, how the Goſpell is the mightye power of God to ſaluation: and ſecondly, that for that cauſe we ſhould not be aſhamed of it, whatſoeuer carnall wiſedome would otherwiſe perſwade vs, either that the wickedneſſe of this world, or of the Diuill, would intice vs, and ſeduce vs.
               As touching the former parte: In what eſtimation the world had the Goſpell of Chriſt in S. Paule his time, himſelfe1. Cor. 1. 23. in the firſt to the Cor. doth very well declare, where heHovv contemptible Chriſt and his Goſpell vvere vnto the vvorld, in the begynning. ſayth, that to the Iewes it was a great offence, and to the wiſe and learned Grecians, very folly and madneſſe. Both partes were offended, not only with the Doctrine, but with the baſe eſtate of Chriſtes owne perſon: who, as you know in countenance of the world was but meane and ſimple, Ioſeph taken for his Father, being but a poore Carpenter, himſelfe, ſcantly hauing an houſe to put his head in, keping company with the contemned ſort of Publicans & ſinners, In the ende, being put to moſte vile and reprocheful death. And therefore, euen in the time of Auguſtine and Chriſoſtome:
                  
We reade, that if a gentleman, or noble perſon hadVayne opinion of gentilitie may be occaſion of the eternall diſtruction of thoſe which regarde it. bene turned to the Goſpel, his kin and aliance would come vnto him and ſay: What? Tu credis crucifixo? Art thou not aſhamed to hope for ſaluatiō in him, that being put to extreme puniſhment was not able to ſaue himſelfe? And as they were then offended, in y• perſon of Chriſt, ſo in y• doctrine alſo, they thought it great folly, y• learned & wiſe mē, ſhould beleeue thoſe things, that by reaſon they were not able to conceiue: as, y• one perſon ſhould be both God andConſiderations concerninge Chriſt which maketh mans carnal reaſon to contemne him. man, yt the ſonne of God ſhould die, yt he being man, & dead, ſhould riſe againe to life: yt to attaine iuſtice before God, they muſt vtterly renoūce their own iuſtice & good works, & acknowledge themſelues to be moſt heinous ſinners: that they muſt abandon the world & all the pleaſures thereof: yt they muſt for Chriſtes ſake, for go their wife, their childrē, their goods & all that they had: finally yt they ſhould mortifie their fleſhe, take their croſſe, & by ignominie, reproche, & perſecution follow Chriſt. This ſeemed to them not onely a ſhame, and a folly, but an extreme madneſſe alſo. And therefore they had the profeſſors of the Goſpell in no eſtimation, but accounted them fooles, and doating perſons.
               The greater & more famous that the place & citie was,The more excellent men are in carnall reaſon only, the more they contemne Chriſte. the greater & more greeuous, was the contempt of y• Preachers of the Goſpell in it. Wherefore vndoubtedly, this was no ſmall temptation in thoſe dayes, & eſpecially in the Citie of Rome, which then was Ladie and Empreſſe of the world, & ſtoode much vpon their eſtimation of wiſedome & honour, & thought it reproche for them, to admit ſo baſe a ſtate of ſaluatiō, as appeared to be in Chriſt Jeſu. But of this very pretily ſaith S. Hilarie de trinit. 5. O ſtulta mūdi
                     
                        Hilar. 5. de trinit. what eſtimation alway pertayned to Chriſt and his goſpell. 
                     ſapientia, opprobrium Chriſti, non intelligens dei virtutē eſſe: & ſtultitiā fidei, non ſentiens eſſe dei ſapientiā:
                   yt is, O foolishnes of the wiſdome of this world? which ſeeth not, that that which it imagineth to be reproch to Chriſt, is euen the moſt mightie & excellent power of God: & which alſo perceiueth not, that that which it termeth foolishneſſe, in the beleefe, which is in Chriſt, to be euen the great
                  
                  wiſdome of God. Wherfore S. Paul armed wt the ſpirit of God, to ye great cōfort of al Chriſtiās ſaith (as I haue read vnto you) I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell. &c. Whatſoeuer, you doe eſteeme it to be, how reprochfull ſoeuer the world doth account it, although the Epicures do deride it, although y• wiſe politike worldlings, do inueigh agaiuſt it, although ye Jewes be offended, although y• Atheiſtes ſcorne it, although fantaſticall hipocrites do deteſt it: ſure I am y• in it ſelfe, it is ye mightie power of God to ſaluation, of all y• beleeue, & faithfully embrace it. Howe y• mightie power ofVVhat povver is in the Goſpell of Chriſt and hovv it appeareth tvvo vvayes. god doth ſhew it ſelf, in ſubduing y• enimies of our ſaluatiō the good Chriſtian man doth perceiue: who hath learned out of the ſcriptures, to how great enimies, mans nature was ſubiect & in thraldome. Sinne, Sathā, hell, death and damnation, had vs in captiuitie: from ye tyranie of al which we are deliuered by Chriſt Jeſu crucified. Firſt, he ouercame ſinne, whē being y• ſonne of God in ye ſhape of reprochful mā, as an innocent lambe, deſeruing no puniſhment, & yet ſuffring moſt cruel puniſhmēt, & bitter death, gaue him ſelfe a full & perfect ſacrifice for our ſinne. And whē ſinne was by his death & paſſion deſtroyed, death was in ye ſame victorie diſarmed & maimed. For Sin (as S. Paul ſaith) is1. Cor. 15. 56. the ſting of death. And whē death had loſt his ſting, & was conquered in Chriſts reſurrectiō frō death, Satā alſo loſt his ſtrēgth & power: which reſted only on thē, which therough ſin were in daūger to death, for Stipēdiū peccati mors,
                  Rom. 6. 23. 
                  The reward of ſin, is death Finally bicauſe hell onely deuoureth them, yt through ſin, & death, are ſlaues to Sathā, it followeth, yt when ye other three were by him ſo mightily vanquiſhed, hell alſo wt all y• daunger therof, was ſubdued, & we deliuered frō all their tyrannie: as y• reuerend father Zacharie ſaith, Preſtitit iuſiurandū quod iurauit. &c. The
                  
                  Luk. 1. 73. 74. 
                  Lord God of Iſrael hath performed the othe, which he ſware to our Father Abrahā, that he would giue vs, that we being deliuered &c. Now as by his death & reſurrectiē, he hath mightily conquered our enimies: ſo hath he by his aſ
                     ••
                  ntiō, gloriouſly triumphed ouer thē. And therefore

S. Paule ſayth very wel out of the Pſalme, Cum aſcendiſſet
                  Ephe. 4. 8. Pſa. 68. 18 
                  in altū, captiuam duxit captiuitatē &c. When he had aſcended vp on high, he led captiuitie captiue:
                   We then may now ſay triumphantly with S. Paule: Oh Death, where
                  
                  1. Cor. 15. 55. 
                  is thy Sting? Oh Hell, where is thy Victorie? Though Sinne and Death rage neuer ſo like Tyrauntes: though Sathan, roare neuer ſo like a Lyon: though Hell, gape neuer ſo greedily: ſure we are, they cannot preuayle againſte vs, that haue victory ouer them in Chriſt Jeſu. It is GodRom. 8. 33. that iuſtifieth, who is it then that condemneth? it is Chriſt that died, yea, or rather which is riſen again from death, and ſitteth on the right hand of God the Father, as our perpetuall Interceſſour, Who then can hurt vs? Who can pull vs from the fauour of GOD? not Life, not Death, not Sinne, not Hell, not Sathan, not any power or principalitie: They are all in Chriſte Jeſu confounded. This is that mightie power of the Goſpell, that S. Paule ſayth doth bring Saluation to all beleeuers, and whereof he proteſteth, that he is not aſhamed of it.
               But God did ſhew his mighty power to ſaluation of mankinde,2 The power of Chriſt appeareth both in himſelfe, and alſo in his word. not only in the price of our redemption it ſelf, but alſo in the publiſhing and preaching of it, by his Apoſtles, & Miniſters. For to it he annexed ſuch force of his holy ſpirite, that it had greater ſtrength and authoritie, than all the eloquence, than all the Wiſedome, than all the learning, than all the policie and power of the world. For notwithſtanding, that the preaching of the Goſpell was reſiſted by all theſe worldly giftes, and powers: yet had it meruailous ſucceſſe, and did wonderfully increaſe. Demoſthenes, Pericles, Cicero, for their eloquence: Solon, Ariſtides, Caro, for their wiſedome: Plato, Socrates, Ariſtotle, for their learning: Alexander, Pyrrhus, Pompey, for their manhood:Man in his eccellency of carnal wit, is not able to giue any perpe
                        •
                     ui
                        •
                     ie to his diuice. were of power, were of great fame, and able to do muche in the world. But the beſt of all theſe, had much a doe, euen a fewe yeares, to keepe their owne Citizens, their own countreymen, their own ſubiects in obedience, and to cauſe them

to giue place to good and wholeſome counſayle, and to obey orders prouided for their owne commoditie. Yea euery one of them (almoſt) to their own confuſion, proued of how ſmall force, their wiſedome, their eloquence, their power was, and with the ende of their liues, lefte their common weales well neare vtterly decayed and vndone: But contrarywiſe, marke, I pray you in the Apoſtles of Chriſte, and conſider the maruellous power of Gods working. For they hauingThe gouernment and direction by Gods word, preuaileth more than any deuiſe of man. as you know, their beginning of the Jewes, nothing commended, or ſette foorth with any of thoſe giftes and ornamentes, that men ſo greatly doe eſteeme, wente foorth into the world, preaching the diſdayned Goſpell of Chriſt crucified, and by the ſimple doctrine thereof, did in fewe yeares, for the ſtate of religion, change the face of the whole world,Example in the Apoſtles notwithſtanding, that the Empyre of Rome, & other mightie principalities, did to the vttermoſt of their power, reſiſt it, and the reformation, that by the Apoſtles in this manner was begon, continued, and ſpread it ſelfe mightily, and maruellouſly, euen agaynſt the aſſaultes of moſt cruell, and tyrannicall perſecutions, vnder Nero, Domitian, Traian, Adrian, Antony, Diocleſian, and many mo. And vntil ſuch time, as by the ſecrete iudgement of God, the power of Antechriſt began to ſpread it ſelfe againſt it, as well in Aſia, vnder Mahomet, as in Europe vnder the Pope. Neuer any Empyre or Kingdome was ſo largely ſpread, as the Kingdome of the Goſpell, neuer any principalitie, ſo mightilye proceeded and went forward, maugre the malice of all enimies,Tertul cō
                     tra Jud
                        •
                     os. as it hath done. And ſo doth Tertullian witneſſe agaynſt the Iewes, ſpeaking of the Kingdome of Chriſt, and alleaging out of the Pſalme, the words of God the Father, Fortitudines regum diſrumpā, aperiara ante illū portas, & ciuitates non claudentur illi. Whereby he noteth that no power of Prince or citie, ſhould be able to reſiſt the Goſpel of Chriſt, But this conqueſt of the Goſpell, was alway by ſuffering, and not by force, or reſiſting, as S. Auguſtine ſayth de agone Chriſti. Cap. 12. Eccleſia catholica per totum orbem diff
                           •
                        ſa
                     
                     magis magiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         roborata eſt non reſiſtēdo ſed perferēdo.
                   AndAug. de agone Chriſti. another Father ſayth: Sanguis martirū ſemen Euangelij. The blood of martirs is the ſeede of the Goſpell.
                   And Hieron ad theoph. ſaith: Patiendo cōtumelias Chriſti fundata Ecclefia eſt, perſecutionibus creuit, martyriis coronata eſt. By ſuffering all kinde of reprochfull dealing which was giuen forth, and doue againſt Chriſt, the Church of God hath had the more great and large beginninges, by perſecutions hath it increaſed, and with martyrdome it is crowned.
                   In all places haue the Apoſtles and other Preachers of ye Goſpel ſound many bitter enimies, which being armed as well with publique authoritie as priuate malice, greedily deſyred, & ſought how to deſtroy them, & to confound their doctrine. In all places were heard terrible threatninges, and proclamations of Emperours, the gliſtering ſwordes of cruell Tormentours, were alwayes in their eyes: Impriſonmentes, Bondes, Fetters, Roddes, Whippes, Rackes, and a thouſand kindes of cruell tormentes daylye prepared and diuiſed agaynſt them. The very name of a Chriſtian, was ſufficient to bring them to puniſhmente and death. They were accuſed, that they did agaynſte the lawes of the Romaines, that they ſpake agaynſte their God, and olde religions, that they were authours of ſeditions, rebellion, and all miſchiefe. And commonly the beginning of all accuſations was thus: They whicheAct. 17. 6. trouble the whole world are come vnto vs alſo. Yet did the teaching of the Doctrine of our Saluation, by the mightie power of Gods ſpirit, breake through and ouercome all theſe difficulties: And the Goſpell not onely conquered and vanquiſhed all aduerſarie powers, but ſpread it ſelfe in fewe yeares thorowe the whole worlde. As Saint Auguſtine ſayth, de Ciuit. dei li. 22.Aug. de ciuitate dei Lib. 22 
                     Ligabantur, includebantur, c
                           •
                        debantur, torquebantur, & multiplicabantur. i. They were bounde, they were impriſoned, they were whipped, they were tormēted & racked, and yet for all this, they multiplied and increaſed.
                  
The ſame power of God euen in theſe latter dayes, hathExample of late and preſent tones. wonderfully ſhewed it ſelfe, in Furthering his Goſpell. For when the heauenly doctrine of our ſaluation in Chriſt Jeſu, was ſo buried in the darkeneſſe of ſchoole learning, that no man taſted the ſweeteneſſe of it: when Gods holye word lay ouerwhelmed in duſt, and was not read almoſt of any: when the comfortable vſe of the ſacramēts was defaced with wicked ſuperſtition & Idolatrie: when the whole ſtate of religion was turned to an outward ſhewe of geſtures, ſignes, and ceremonies: When Antechriſt in al his pompe, ſate in the Church of Chriſt (as ſayth S. Paule) Auaunting himſelf aboue all that was called God: and2. The. 2. 4▪
                   made Princes and Emperoures to kiſſe his feete: when it was euen death (almoſt) to thinke of the reſtoring of Gods trueh, euen then, I ſaye, by the miniſterye of one ſimple man at the firſte, agaynſt the clamoures of monkes and Freers, againſt the ſcorning of the biſhops, agaynſte the power of the Pope, againſt the aſſiſtance of temporall princes, againſt al torments by fyre, by fagot, by ſword, by impriſonment, God hath ſo publiſhed, & ſpred his Goſpell, as now all countreyes of Europe are partakers of it.
               Wherefore they are dul of ſence, & ſ
                     •
                  antly to be accountedThe power of the goſpel doth moſt manifeſtly appeare in theſe latter dayes. good chriſtians, which in theſe latter dayes are ſo offended with the troubles and dangers that vſuallye followe the Goſpell, that they doe not in the meane time ſee and conſider, how the mighty power of God doth beare rule, euen among the middeſt of his enimies, and doth worke ſafetye for his church and Goſpell, euen in thoſe common weales, and vnder thoſe kings and Princes, which are not onelye farre from the faythfull imbracing of his truth, but euidentlyeThe mightye povver of the Goſpell is no vvhyt to be diſcredyted by afflictions vvhych may follovv it. ſhewe themſelues to bee the profeſſed aduerſaries thereof, euen to the vttermoſte of their power. If any bee of that opinion, that hee therefore thinke the Goſpell to bee weake and contemptible, becauſe it is continually excerciſed with the croſſe of affliction, and trouble of the worlde, in that his iudgemente, hee is

greatly deceiued. For therein principally, it appeareth, thatVV
                        •••
                      kinde of grounde mans policie is to common weales. it is preſerued by ſome diuine power. Neither is it like the vnfortunate ſtate of worldly kingdoms and principalities, which ſeeme to reſt vpon the power and policy of men. For commonly ſuch doe fall to ruine and decay, when they appeare to be ſettled, and in greateſt glorye. For the truth hereof, conſider the examples of all the Kingdoms and Empyres that euer were: the Aſstrians, the Perſians, the Grecians, the Romaines. &c. But contrariwiſe, the Goſpell and Kingdome of Chriſt doth then moſt proſper and preuayle, when all endeuours and powers of Princes are ſet againſt it. The euident proofe whereof, I haue let you vnderſtande before, as well by example of the primatiue Church, as of theſe latter dayes. God doth then moſt ſhewe his power,Hovv GOD c
                        ••
                      shevve himſelf vvh
                        •
                     n all mens deuyſe fayleth, yea, and agaynſt man (alſo) in his cheefeſt povver. when all mans ſtrength and helpe moſte fayleth, as ſayth Tertullian out of the Pſalme, I will breake the power of Kinges, I will open the gates before him, and Citties ſhall not be ſhut againſt him. There is no wiſedome, there is no power, there is no counſayle, agaynſte the Lorde. Though people frette and fume, though Princes rage, though they conſult and aſſemble themſelues togither: yet it ſhall alwayes be true that followeth: He that 
                        •
                     itteth inPſal. 2. 4. Heauen ſhall laugh them to ſcorne, the Lord ſhall haue them in deriſion, and ſhall ſcatter all their deuiſes, and breake all their power. For the Goſpell is the mighty power of God to ſaluation, to all them that beleeue. &c.
               
                  
                     Non me pudet Euangelij.The ſeconde parte. I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell.
                  
                  THe Goſpell hath many enimies, many that cauill at it,Diuerſe ſortes of ennim
                           •
                        es to the Goſpell. and find great faults therwith, to the end that men ſhold be aſhamed, eyther to profeſſe it, or after profeſſion to ſtande conſtantly in it.
                  Firſte, there are Epicures, and godleſſe perſons, thatEpicures. thinke al this whole matter of Faith and Religion, for certayne

purpoſes, to be deuiſed, and fayned of men, and therefore, they maruayle at vs, that we bee ſo earneſt and carefull therein, and offer our ſelues to ſo great daunger for it. Whatſoeuer is ſpoken of God, of the Deuill, of Heauen, or of Hell, theſe pleaſant companyons, deryde and ſcorne, and thinke it of no more weight, then a poeticall fable. And therefore they grunte, with the Pigges of Epicures ſtie, and ſay: Let vs eate, let vs drinke, and make good cheare, for ſhortly we ſhall die, and after death, remaineth no pleaſure.
                  
                  An other ſort of the Aduerſaries of the Goſpel, are the wiſe2 Politikes. politique men of the world, and ſuch gouernors of common weales, as haue not the true ſence of God, and of his prouidence. For they condemn the doctrine of the Goſpell as ſedicious, and daungerous to common weales, and ſtates of Princes, neither do they thinke it, a matter to be ſuffered, that Preachers ſhould note, and openly reprooue, the faults of Princes, Magiſtrates, and great perſonages. For ſaye they, what other thing is this, then to ſhake the ſtate of gouernment, and to ſound a Trompet of diſcord, ſedition, and rebellion. Theſe men, do not acquaynt thēſelues with the vſe of Gods prouidence, whoe, euer from time to time, hath ſente his Prophets, & other Meſſēgers, to reproue y• faults, both of Princes and people, that ſwerue from his law, and reuolt from his true worſhip.
                  The thirde ſort of Aduerſaries are Hipocrites, Monks,3 Hypocrites. Freers, and ſuch as put ſaluation, in the outward obſeruations of mens deuiſes, and deuiſed holyneſſe, beſide the word of God: for they crie, that the doctrine of the Goſpell doth ouerthrow the lawes of God: The holy ordinances of Fathers, doth hinder good workes, and take awaye all deuoti
                        •
                     n. To anſwere all the forged cauils and ſlaunderous obiections, that all theſe men deuiſe, to make vs aſhamed of the Goſpell, were a matter at this time vnpoſſible. But I will touch ſuch as cheefely they ſtand vpon, and moſt are though te to ſhake the conſciences of them that haue any

ſēſe of god. The firſt ſort are hipocrits, & iuſticiaries, whichSixe Obiections made agaynſt the Goſpell, to bryng it into dyſcr
                           •
                        d it, and the anſvvers to them. being puffed vp with confidence in their owne ſtrength thinke eyther whallye, or in a great parte by theire owne Vertues and good workes, to obtayne Gods fauoure, and euerlaſting lyfe. Suche in tymes paſte, were the Phariſeyes among the Jewes, and ſuch in theſe dayes are Monkes, Freers, and others in the Churche of Roome, which pretende miſliking of the Goſpell, becauſe it teacheth that al men naturally are ſinners and the children of wrath, and that they haue grace and free remiſſyon of ſinnes by fayth only, condemning in it ſelfe, all mannes iuſtice and worthineſſe, and declaring that wee haue no iuſtice, but that wee haue in Chriſte Jeſu. Theſe men becauſe they ſtande muche in theire owne lykinges, and greatly ſeeke their owne glorye, are paſſinglye muche greeued, to haue that Doctrine publiſhed, whereby their ſtrength and powers are diminiſhed, their wiſedome defaced, their iuſtice before God condemned, and grace and forgiueneſſe taughte to bee attayned, by Gods free mercy, without any reſpecte of worthineſſe, or deſerte, in our ſelues. This Doctrine (ſay they) is an ennimie to2. Obiection againſt the Goſpel: that it doth not further, but hinder good co
                           〈…〉
                        on all good life: This Doctrine diſcourageth from indeuour of honeſtie and godlineſſe: This Doctrine openeth a wyde gappe to all Diſhoneſtie, and Diſſoluteneſſe. For wh
                        •
                     e will bende himſelfe to Godlyneſſe, when hee is taughte that hee is not hable to doe any thing? Whoe wyll not tumble headlonge into Vyce, when hee vnderſtandeth forgiueneſſe to bee ſo readye? Who will bridle his affections, and puniſhe himſelfe by faſting, praying. and other godlye excerciſes, when hee ſeeth there is ſo eaſye, and lighte a waye to Heauen, by Grace and Fayth onely? Therefore, (ſay they) no maruayle though wee be aſhamed of this goſpell, and miſlyke the Profeſſoures of it. But (dearely beloued) this is no new reproch & ſlaunder,Anſwere. Fathered vppon the goſpell, and Heauenlye Doctryne of our Saluation. You knowe, theſe prowde and

ſelfeliking Phariſies, vpbrayded euen Chriſte himſelfe, that hee preached Gods free grace, to Publicanes, and Sinners. You knowe that they ſayde to Saynte Paule,Rom. 6. 
                           •
                        . ſetting foorth the ſame Doctryne: Why? then lette vs do ill, that grace maye abounde: ſeeing Gods grace is ſo ready, let vs ſtill wallow in naughtineſſe, that it may ſhewe it ſelfe more plentifully. Wherefore agaynſte this temptation, Chriſtian men ſhoulde arme themſelues at this daye: and not thinke that wee teache anye newe Doctrine, but the ſame that Chr
                        •
                     ſte and S. Paule hath layde out before vs. For when wee vtterlye condemne manne in himſelfe, and pronounce him to bee the chylde of wrath and damnation, what other thinge doe wee, then that Saint Paule, in the fyrſte parte of his Epiſtle to the Romaynes at large declareth, whyle he wrappeth all menne, as well Jewes as Gentiles, in the guilte of ſinne, and in the indignation of GOD, And in generall wordes concludeth: Omnes peccauerunt
                     Rom. 3. 23. 24. 
                     & deſtituuntur gloria Dei, iuſtificantur autem gratis per illius gratiam, per redemptionem, que eſt in Christo. All haue ſinned, and are depriued of the glory of God, and are iuſtified freelye by grace, thorowe the redemption that is in Chriſt Jeſus.
                      And agayne, Concluſit deus omnia ſub peccato vt omnium miſeretur. God hath cōcluded al thinges vnder ſinne that he might haue mercye vppon all.
                      And this meaneth hee, not onelye of the groſſe outwarde actes, but of the verye inwarde gilte and corruption of their nature, as in many other places hee ſheweth.Rom. 5. 12. 14. 
                     Vt per vnum hominē peccatū intra
                           •
                        it in mundū, & ꝑ peccatū mors, & it a in ōnes homines mors ꝑuaſit, quia omnes peccauimus. Regnauit mors ab adam vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         a
                           •
                         Moſen, etiam in eos, qui non peccauerunt, ad ſimilitudinem, tranſgreſſionis Adam. As by one man ſin entered into the world, and deth by ſinne, & ſo deth went ouer al men: for ſo much as al men haue ſinned. But Death reigned from Adam to Moyſes, euen ouer them alſo that ſinned not after the
                     
                     
                     like manner of tranſgreſsion of Adam.
                      And to theCor. 15. 22. 
                     Cor. In Adam omnes moriuntur,
                      In Adam all dye.
                  In theſe places he ſpeaketh not only of y• death of y• body, but of y• death of the ſoule. Eramus natura, filij irae, quemadmodum
                     Eph. 2. 3. 
                     et ce
                           •
                        eri, We were by nature the childrē of wrath as wel as other.
                      Whereby it appeareth, that all men in themſelues are the Children of wrath and damnation, ſhutte from the Kingdome of Heauen. Therefore Chriſt in Iohn 3 chapt. ſayth: vnleſſe a man bee borneIoh. 3. 3. agayne from aboue, he cannot ſee the Kingdome of God. In which wordes it is euident that our firſte byrth in Adam, is vtterly corrupt, and ſubiecte to ſinne. SoIob. 14. 4. lamenteth Iob alſo: Who can mak that cleane, which is conceaued of vncleane ſeede? So lamenteth Dauid his owne corruption: Beholde I was borne in iniquitie,Pſa. 51. 5. and in ſinne, hath my mother conceiued mee. Upon which wordes ſayth Ambroſe, Merito Dauid flebiliter deplorauit ipſa inquinamenta naturae, quod pri
                              •
                           s incipit in homine macula quā vita.
                      Vpon iuſt cauſe did Dauid with teares bewaile the imperfections that we haue in nature, for bicauſe corruptiō doth firſt begin in vs, before that we haue life.
                      Seing then our nature is ſo corrupted,Gen. 6. 5. ſeing (as God himſelf ſaith) our hart is bent only to ill, euen from our youth, how can any goodnes proceede from vs, as of our ſelues? howe canne wee challenge power to fulfill Gods lawe, and by our good doinges to be reconciled vnto him? Without mee (ſayeth Chriſte) you canIoh. 15. 5. 2. Cor. 3. 5. do nothing. And, I am not able, ſayth Paule, to thinke a good thoughte as of my ſelfe, but all my ſufficiencie is of GOD. If Saint Paule doth ſo humblye acknowledge his weakeneſſe, why ſhoulde we ſtande ſo proudly in our own conceites? Liberum arbitrium, (ſayethAuguſt. Saint Auguſtine) ad diligenda dei precepta primi peccati granditate perdidimus. i. We loſt free will, to loue and imbrace the cōmandements of God, through the gretneſſeAug. ſer. 2. de verbis. of the ſin of our firſt Father Adam. And, De verbis Apoſt. ſer. 2. Sunt homines ingrati grati
                           •
                         dei▪ multū tribuen
                           •••
                        
                     
                     
                     inopi ſauciae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         naturae. Verum est, magnas arbitrij vires, homo cum conderetur, accepit, ſed peccando amiſit. i. Men are vnthankful,Opinion of freewill is vnthankfullnes. 
                     or vnkind vnto the grace of God, attributing much vnto needy and wounded nature: It is true, man when he was made, receiued great power of frewill, but he loſt it againe, when he ſinned. And Epiſt. 107.Auguſt. 
                     Primus homo ſic factus eſt, vt nihil voluntati eius reſiſteret: poſtquam an
                           •
                        em libera voluntate peccauit, nos in neceſſitatem percipitati ſumus, quicunque ab eius stirpe deſcendimus: that is: The firſte man (Adam) was ſo made, that nothingHow we had freewill▪ And how we haue it not. reſiſted his will, but after thorow freewill he ſinned, We, as many as deſcende from his ſtock, are caſt down headlong into neceſſitie of ſinning.
                  
                  If in the fall of Adam we loſt freewill, to loue and imimbrace the commaundement of GOD, if wee ſhewe our ſelues vngratious to Gods grace, by attributing ſo much to our maymed and corrupte Nature: If by Adams
                     How profitable the doctrine is which is againſte freewill. offence, wee bee caſt into a neceſſitie of ſinning. Lette vs, as the Goſpell teacheth, caſte awaye this confydence of oure owne powers, lette vs ſhake of this ſelfe lyking Hipocricie, lette vs ſubmitte our ſelues vnder the mightye hande of God, and acknowledge our owne infyrmitie, lette vs not kicke at that Doctrine of the Goſpell, that layeth before vs our owne weakeneſſe, and teacheth howe great neede wee haue of the ſauing grace of God in Chriſt Jeſu.
                  As touching that they pretende, the Goſpell, in Preaching free grace by fayth onely, doeth diſcourage men from well doing, and ſette open a wyde Wyndowe to looſeneſſe and naughtineſſe: It is a very falſe and wicked ſlaunder, not bearing any countinaunce or lykelihoodeThe doctrine of iuſtification by faythe only, doth procure good workes and no
                           •
                         hinder them. of truth in it. For the ſame Spirite that is the Spirite of fayth, and perſwadeth our conſciences to beleeue the great goodneſſe and free mercies of GOD toward vs in Chriſte Jeſu, is alſo the ſpirite of loue, and doeth inflambe oure hartes earneſtlye, to loue ſo bountifull

and ſo mercifull a God, that did vouchſafe when we were yet his enemies, to giue his dearely beloued Sonne to death for vs. Nowe then, if by the motion of one ſpirite, we doe by fayth aſſuredly knowe Gods goodneſſe towarde vs, and by the knowledge, and true ſence thereof, doe loue him for the ſame, needes muſt there followe obedience, to hys lawe, and perpetuall ſtudie to pleaſe him. Fayth then of neceſſitie breedeth loue of God, and loue bryngeth foorthe obedience to hys wyll. Qui diligit me (ſaithIoh. 14. 2
                           •
                        
                      Chriſt) Sermonem meum ſeruat. j. Hee that loueth mee keepeth my ſayings.
                      This loue then ſhoulde leade vs to obedience, Thys loue ſhoulde bee the roote of all good dooings, and not a proude hope to merite Gods fauour, and deſerue euerlaſting lyfe by our workes: For whenLuk. 17. 10 wee haue done all wee can doe, as Chriſt witneſſeth, We haue yet not done ſo muche as of duetie we ſhould doe. Euen ſo then as nothing can keepe good children, ſo muche in obedience, as to knowe theyr Parentes goodneſſe towarde them: ſo nothing can more pithylie moue Chriſtian men, to the true ſeruice of God, and keeping of hys lawe, then by the Goſpell to learne hys vnſpeakable goodneſſe towardes vs.
                  Moreouer the ſame Goſpell that teacheth by Chriſtes bloud onely to attayne remiſſion of ſinne, dothe teache vs alſo, that the ende, and cauſe of thys our free redemption, is to lyue in the ſeruice of God, and no more to bee ſubiect to ſinne. Apparuit gratia Dei Saluatoris noſtri omnibus
                     
                        
                           •
                        it. 2. 11. 12 
                     hominibus vt abnegata impietate & mundanis concupiſentijs pie, ſobrie & caste vi
                           •
                        amus in hoc ſeculo. Ipſius ſumus opus conditj in Chriſto Ieſu ad opera bona quae praeparauit deus, vt in illis ambularemus: that is to ſay, The grace of God hath appeared, that wee denying vngodlyneſſe and worldly luſtes, ſhoulde lyue ſoberly, righteouſly, andEphe. 2. 10. godly in this worlde. Wee are (ſayth S. Paule) his workemanſhippe, created in Chriſt Ieſu vnto good
                     
                     workes which God ordayned, that wee ſhould walke in them. Zacharie ſaieth, He hath perfourmed the othe
                     Lu
                           •
                        . 1. 73. 74. 75. 
                     whiche hee ſware to our forefather Abraham, that he woulde giue vs, that wee beeing deliuered out of the handes of our enemyes, myght ſerue him without feare in holyneſſe and righteouſneſſe. &c. No man raunſometh a Captayne, to this ende, that he ſhoulde continue to ſerue his enemie. God by Chriſt, hath deliuered vs from ſinne, and Sathan, and therefore muſt wee nowe, forſake them, and lyue in obedience of hym, that hath ſo mercifully and freely redeemed vs. For this cauſe doeRom. 6. 4. wee profeſſe in our Baptiſme, that wee forſake the Diuell and all hys workes, and as Saint Paule (ſayeth) binde our ſelues, to riſe with Chriſt in newneſſe of life.
                     Eph. 6. 5. &c. Rom. 13. 12. That ſeeing wee bee nowe made by him the children of lyfe, wee haue no more to doe, with the workes of darkeneſſe. This is the true doctrine of the Goſpell: wherefore no good man, hath cauſe to bee aſhamed of it.
                        
                           •
                        an nedeth not by the G
                           •
                        ſpell thinke himſelfe ſo debaſed that he ſhould thereby be any whit diſco
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        aged from good works for he is alſo therby maruellouſly exalted by gods goodnes toward him. 1. Pet. 3. 
                           •
                        . Ioh. 15. 4. 5.
                  
                  It is an impudent cauill, and no true crime, when the aduerſarie pretendeth a ſhame & miſliking of the Goſpel, becauſe in preaching free grace, it debaſeth mans dignitie, diſcourageth from ſtudie of godlynes, and giueth occaſion to continue in ſinne and wickedneſſe. Although it teach you, that of your ſelues, you are the children of wrath, and damnation: yet it telleth you (alſo) that by Chriſt, you are the heires of euerlaſting lyfe and ſaluation. Though it teache you, that of your ſelues you can doe nothing: yet it telleth you alſo, that by the ſpirite of God in Chriſt Jeſu, you maye doe all things. Though it teach you that by your good workes, you cannot merite Gods fauour an
                        •
                      remiſſion of ſinnes: yet it telleth you alſo, that God by faith in Chriſtes bloud onelye, hath ſo taken away yourRom. 3. 
                           •
                        5. ſinnes, and reſtored you to his fauour againe, that you yet to ſhewe your ſelues thankefull vnto hym, are 
                        •
                     ounde to walke in holyneſſe and ryghteouſneſſe,

before him all the dayes of your lyfe. You may therefore, ſafely and boldly ſay with S. Paule, notwithſtanding this ſhameleſſe cauile, That you are not aſhamed of the Goſpell, for that it is the power of God. &c.
                  An other ſorte there is that are aſhamed of the Goſpell cleane contrarie to theſe that before I ſpake of, that is the looſe and ſenſuall Epicure, giuen to the pleaſures of the fleſhe & of the world. For, as the other ſort found fault thatThe ſecond obiection againſt the Goſpell that it doth make this lyfe leſſe pleaſant to vs, then it ſhould be. we make too caſie a waye to Heauen, ſo, theſe accuſe the ſtreightneſſe of the Goſpell, & are offended to heare the Preachers to reproue, not onely their outwarde euill workes, but alſo to require, that man ſhoulde vtterly forſake himſelfe, die vnto ſinne, mortifie the fleſhe together with the luſtes thereof, and ſo wholy to be giuen and addicted to Chriſt, and his holy will, that we ſhould not ſo much as keepe company with the wicked and vngodly. Oh ſaye they, you cleane take away all curteſie, and pleaſaunt life, and bring into the worlde a Monkiſh & Stoicall ſeueritie, and ſolitarineſſe, contrarie to all ciuill faſhion and humanitie.
                  Wherfore when we tell the iolly Gentlemen, and luſtieThe anſwere is anne
                           •
                        ed to euerie perticular part of the obiection Courtiours, that their gorgeous apparell, is but a lewde waſting of their thrift, and a looſe vanitie, that their ydle ſwearing is horrible blaſphemie: that their Dicing, Daū
                     ſing, and dalieng, is wicked ſpending of time, and practiſes of impietie: they miſlike this doctrine, they are aſhamed of this Goſpell, and in their outrage, depraue the Preachers, and ſpeake ill of them. When we tell the fine LadyesEſay. 3. 16. 
                           •
                        c. and Gentlewomen, that their painted coates with gazing colours, their fri
                        ••
                     ed heare, and imbrodered hattes, their 
                        •
                     itle Cappes and light Fethers, are but inſtruments of wantonneſſe, ſnares of ſinne, and open tokens of lightneſſe, they are diſpleaſed with vs. In their brauerie they ſcoffe at vs, they thinke it a ſhame, for them to be taught out of the Goſpell, to goe like graue Ladies, and ſober or ſad Matrons. When we tell the couetous riche men, that

they ſhoulde not heere, laye vp the treaſures of the world,Mat. 6. 19. 20. but ſeeke after euerlaſting ryches, that no ruſt can conſume. When wee tell them, that they brought nothing1. Tim. 6. 7 into the worlde, and as aſſuredly, ſhall carrie nothing out of the worlde: when wee byd them gyue the one halfe of their goods vnto the poore, and reſtore agayne thoſe thatLuc. 19. 8. they haue yll gotten as Zacheus did: They miſlyke our doctrine, they are aſhamed of the Goſpell, they go with heauie heartes from the Sermon, as the yong riche manMat. 19. 22. went from Chriſt. When with Saint Paule, wee tell the riotous gluttons, that they ſhoulde walke ſoberly, as in the daye time, and not pamper vp theyr fleſhe to vice and wantonneſſe, by feaſtyng, by banqueting, by riotous feedyng and drunkenneſſe, but that they ſhoulde put on the Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, and not followe the fleshe by
                     Rom. 13. 13 
                     ſatiſfying the luſt thereof: they thinke it an harde doctrine, they thynke the ſweete of their life taken from them, and therefore are aſhamed in that, to followe the Goſpell.
                  But they that bee the true people of God conſider, thatJoh. 15. 19. as Chriſt ſayth, He hath choſen his out of the world: ſo he requireth that they ſhoulde forſake the worlde, abandon the pleaſures of the fleſhe, and vanitie of this lyfe, die vnto ſinne, and by the ſeede of hys holy Goſpell bee borne agayne to a newneſſe of lyfe. His Apoſtles alſo ſoundyng vppon the ſame ſtring, tell vs that wee ſhould1. Pet. 2. 9. be ſeperated from this naughtie generation, that wee may riſe in Chriſt, to a newneſſe of life, as an holy nation, and ſet foorth his goodneſſe, that hath deliuered vs, from darkneſſe, to light vneſtimable. The ſame Apoſtles crie vnto vs, and by Proclamation (as it were) exclude out of the Kingdome of heauen, Whooremaiſters,1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Adulteres, couetous men, nyce and wanton perſons, drunkards, backbiters▪ contenders, brawlers, idolaters, theeues and extorcioners.
                  
                  Wherefore wee may not chaunge the lawes of the Citie

of God, and make theſe things, to hang on the pleaſures
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         of the anſwere. and affections of men: that Chriſt and his Apoſtles, haue ſo ſtraightly, and ſeuerely forbydden. Therfore, neuer let the pleaſures of the worlde, nor the maiſters, and maintainers of them, pull you from the profeſſion of the Goſpel, but ſtill ſay with Saint Paule, I am not ashamed of the Goſpell of Chriſt. &c.
                  
                  Nowe are wee come to another quarrell, that they make againſt the Goſpell, but as for this and other quarrels that they make againſt the Goſpell, they ſhall afterwarde bee intreated of.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſecond Sermon.
               
                  Non me pudet Euangelij. j. I am not ashamed of the Goſpell of Chriſt, for. &c.
               
               
                  
                     THe greateſt defence that the
                  The thirde obiection againſt the Goſpell. 
                        ••
                     . aduerſaries of the Goſpel haue at this day for themſelues, and agaynſt vs, is the title & authoritie of the Churche: wyth that do they greeuouſly aſſault and trouble mens conſciences, and ſeeke to make them aſhamed of the Goſpell. Oh, ſayeThat we the pretended profeſſors of it, are not of the catholike Churche. they, the profeſſours of the pretenſed Goſpell at this day, are but Schiſmatikes and Heretikes, they are departed from the true and Catholike Church of Chriſt, that hath continued theſe 1500. yeeres, and is confirmed by Vniuerſalitie, Antiquitie, and Generall conſent. This Church ought to be taken of al Chriſtian men, as the pillar and ſtay of al truth, This Church by Chriſtes owne promiſe can neuer erre, This Churche is the houſe of God, This Churche is the onely ſpouſe of Chriſt. Beſide this piller, there ſtandeth no ſounde truth, Out of this houſe there is no ſaluation, They are not the ſonnes of God, which are not the children of the Church. Non eſt dignus deo patre, qui non habet Eccleſiam matrem, i. He is not worthie to haue God for his Father, whiche hath not the Church for his mother.
                   This is a greeuous aſſaulte, this is a ſore batterie, vnto mindes not yet confirmed: this vndoubtedly hathe and dothe ſhake manye a weake conſcience at thys daye. For who wyll not bee afearde to bee out of the Churche of Chriſt, to bee oute of the houſe of GOD, to bee oute of the Arke of Noe? and ſo moſte certayne to bee ouerwhelmed

with the water of deſperation and condemnatiō: But bee you ſtrong in the Lorde, and by the power of hys holy worde, confirme and fortifie your conſciences.
               And firſt that you be not in this poynt aſtonied, and troubledAnſwere. with a falſe alarume, learne you out of the holy ſcriptures, what the True Church of God is, and what are the True markes of it, wherby it muſt be knowne: And then conferre the ſame, with the Church of Rome, that gyueth you thys aſſaulte, and ſee whether you are departed fromThe inuiſible church conſiſting of the electe. Col. 1. 24. the Churche of Chriſt, or from the ſtate of Antichriſt, and ſynagoge of Sathan. The Churche ſometime in the Scripture, is taken for the whole number of the elect of God, that are and haue beene from the begynning of the worlde, in all places and all ages, euen to thys daye. And this is that Churche, that is the pyller of trueth, This is that Churche, that neuer can abyde in errour, Thys is that Churche, that by imputation of Gods mercye, is the immaculate and vndefyled ſpouſe of Chriſt, but this Churche is not alwaye ſeene. This is the inuiſibleRom. 11. 4. 1. Cor. 2. 11. Churche that is knowne to God alone, and is neuer certaynely, and truely, and for the whole, opened to mannes eyes. For they by Hypocriſie maye ſeeme members of thys Churche, whiche in deede are no partakers of it, as appeareth by the example of Iudas. And contrariwyſe, they to mans iudgement maye ſeeme, not to bee of this Churche, which yet in Gods appoyntment, are the certaine members of it, as euidently was ſhewed in the example of S. Paule.
               But the viſible Churche, that is diſcerned of man,The viſible church and by outwarde tokens, is knowne to the worlde, maye in thys manner bee deſcribed to you. It is theThe deſcription of the church. multitude of all them, bee they fewe, or manye, whiche beeing vppon the face of the earthe, and called by the worde of the Goſpell, proteſt to beleeue in our Sauiour Chriſte, looking for ſanctification and ſaluation by hym, and worſhipping him according to his holy word.

That it is the whole multitude of all beleeuers, it is euidentMat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15. when Chriſt himſelfe ſayth: Ite, predicate Euangelium omni creaturae. i. Go ye and preache the Goſpell to all creatures.
                   He excepteth none, and therefore the grace ofThe church of Chriſt is tied to no one place. God, and benefites of his Church, are not tied to anye one place: as to Rome, to Hieruſalem, to Conſtantinople, to Antioche, or any other place.
               That the number of this Church, may be as wel ſmallThe number of the church may be ſmale. Luc. 12. 32. Mat▪ 18. 20. as great, Chriſt himſelfe teacheth, ſaying: Grex meus puſillus eſt. i. My Flocke is verye ſmall. And where two or three be gathered togither in my name, there am I in the middeſt of them.
                   Hereby maye you learne, that the argument of Multitude or great number, is not alwaye ſtrong. For by it the Doctrine of the Prophets, the Doctrine of Chriſt, and of the Apoſtles, mighte be reiected: which vndoubtedly were but few in compariſon of them, that miſliked and reproued it. That this multitude muſtNone are openly of the Church but ſuch as are called theris by the worde of God. Io. 10. 17. 15. be called by the word of the goſpel, S. Paule affirmeth, Rom. 10. Fides ex auditu, auditus per verbum Dei: Et quomodo predicabunt niſi miſſifuerint?
                   that is: Faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the worde of God: And how ſhall they preache, vnleſſe they be ſent? And therefore Chriſt did ſende his Apoſtles, to preache the Goſpell, that thereby they mighte by brought, to the beleefe of the Church. The members of the Church be graffed into itFaith doth in graffe vs into the Church. Act. 37. by profeſſing the beleefe & ſaluation in Chriſt. In the 8. chapt. of the Acts. When the Eunuche deſyred Baptiſme Phillip aunſwered. If thou beleeue with all thy harte, thou mayſt: he aunſwered, I beleeue that Ieſus Chriſte is the ſonne of God.
               
               By this branche of the deſcription, the Jewes and Turkes are excluded, and as many as ſeeke other meanes of ſaluatiō then by Chriſt Jeſus, though yt they pretend to be chriſtians, & though that they pretend to be the church. This church is knowne by certayne markes and tokens.The markes of the church▪
                   Nowe, what they are lette vs conſider. The Gentiles for

the ſtate of their Religion, alleadge Pindarus, and other Poets. The Jewes their Talmud: The Turkes their Alcorane, and all ſorts doe ground their religion vpon ſome authoritie. But God in Eſay to his people ſaith this, Ego
                  Eſa. 59. 
                        •
                     1. 
                  ineo cum his quireſipuerint in Iacob hoc meū foedu
                        •
                     , vt Spirit us meus qui eſt ſuper te, & verba mea quae poſui in ore tu
                        •
                     , non recedant ab ore tuo, neque ab ore ſeminis tui, amodo & vſque in ſaeculum▪ i. I will make this my couenaunt with them, that turne from iniquitie in Iacob: My ſpirite that is vpon thee, & my words which I haue put in thy mouth shal not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy ſeede, from henceforth euen for euer.
                  
               
               Here you ſee that God willeth his church to ſticke vnto his word. And in the 10 of Iohn, Qui ex deo eſt, verbū Dei
                     Ioh. 8. 47. 
                     audit. He which is of God, heareth Gods word. And, Oues meae vocem meam a
                        •
                     diunt. &c. My sheepe heare my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: A ſtranger they wil not follow. &c.
                   True doctrine (then) accordingIo. 10. 27. The firſte marke is Gods word. to the word of God, is one vnfallible token of the righte church of Chriſt. For god by his Prophet, & by his ſonne, witneſſeth, that it is his worde, and that it is his voyce, that his people doe ſtaye vpon. This marke S. Auguſt. acknowledgeth in his Booke Contra litteras Petil. I haue
                  
                  Auguſt. contra litteras petil. 
                  the manifeſt voice of my shepheard (ſayth hee) without all circumſtaunces, declaring, which is his Churche, My sheepe heare my voice, and they follow me. Beholde, we heare his plaine and euident voyce. For how dareth he call himſelf chriſtes sheepe, that doth not vouchſafe to followe chriſte? Let no man ſaye vnto mee, what ſayde Donate? what ſayde Petilian? or Pontius? for wee muſt not conſent to catholike Bishops, if they be in any pointe deceaued, and iudge contrary to the canonicall ſcriptures. &c. And agayn: If thou crie out, & recite vnto me any other thing, vnderſtād then, that after the voice of our sheapherd vttered euidētly vnto vs, by the mouth of the Prophets, by his owne mouth and by the
                  
                  mouth of the Euangeliſts: we will not hearken to your voices, nor giue eare to any thing that you shal ſpeake. Whoſoeuer wil not wāder frō his flock, let him hearken to him, let him folow him. Now as Chriſt y• true ſheapheardThe ſecond marke is the ſacraments. doth call his ſheepe by his voice, & lead them by his word: ſo doth he mark thē by his Sacraments. The Gentiles, the Jewes, the Turkes, haue their ceremonies, but only the church of chriſt, hath the true Sacramēts by him appointed: & diſtributeth the ſame orderly, & lawfully vnto faithfull people, according to his Juſtitucion, for by one ſpirit (ſaith S. Paule) are we al baptiſed into one body.
                  1. Cor. 12. 
                        ••
                      1. Cor. 10. 17. And of y• Lordes ſupper he ſaith. We being many are one bread, one body: becauſe we are all partakers of the ſame bread. By theſe marks thē of baptiſme, & the Lords ſupper, Chriſt doth vnite his flock togeather in one folde, & maketh them known to be his. Now let vs examine theſe tokens, how well they agree to the Church of Roome.
               Touching the fyrſt, how can they haue truth of doctrineThe Church of Roome hath not in it the tokens of the true Church. The written Scriptures only, are and ought to bee ſufficient to trie all truth. Pſal. 119. 105. Ioh. 5. 39. which vſe not that rule of Religion, nor that Touchſtone whereby onely, all truth of faith and holineſſe is tryed? Can that Goldſmith alwaies haue good and pure mettall, that doth not vſe a right, and true Stone to trye it? The right touchſtone, & perfect directory, whereby all trueth in doctrine is known, is The word of God, deliuered in his holy ſcriptures. Therefore ſayth y• Pſalmiſt: Thy word is a lantern to my feete, and a light vnto my pathes. And Chriſt himſelf ſaith vnto ye Jewes: Search the ſcriptures, for they beare witnes of me. He imputeth the groſſe errours of the Saducies to the ignoraunce of the ſcriptures. The Conuerts of Berrhaea in the Acts to trie Paules doctrine,Act. 17. 11. did dayly ſearch the ſcriptures, whether all thinges were ſo, as Paule preached. This is it then wherby preachers and teachers, are diſcerued, This is it whereby the true church of God is tried. This is it, wherby al truth of doctrine is examined. So ſayth Chri. The Lord knowingChriſoſt. the cōfuſion of al things, that would be in the latter

dayes, commaundeth that chriſtians willing to vnderſtand the ſure ground of faith, should haue recourſe to no other thing but to the Scriptures. And agayne in the ſame place. Before time, it was euidēt by many meanes, what the true churche was, and what gentillitie, but now after that hereſie is growne into the church, there is no way whereby it may be knowne, but only by the Scriptures.
               
               Now (Dearely beloued) we ſhunne not this Triall, we deſyre to be iudged hereby, only we ſay with Moyſes, yeaDeut. 4. 2. 31. with God himſelfe, Nothing is to be added or taken away from his worde: We ſay with S. Iohn, 20 chapter, So much is written, that if we beleeue, we ſhall haue ſaluation,2. Tim. 3. 1
                           •
                        . by the name of Chriſt. We ſay with S. Paule: that the ſcriptures can make vs wiſe to ſaluation. We ſay with S. Paule agayne: that the ſcriptures writtenVerſe. 16. by the inſpiration of the holy ghoſt, are profitable to teache, to reproue, to correct, to inſtruct in Iuſtice, and to make a man perfect in all good workes. Finally we ſay with S. Ambroſe: Noua omnia quae Chriſtus non docuit,
                     Ambroſe 
                     iure damnamus: quia fidelibus, vita Chriſtus est. i. All newe Doctrine which chriſt hath not taught, we rightly condemne, becauſe that chriſt, is life to all the beleeuers. Contrariwiſe the aduerſaries of the Goſpell, will not abide
                     Papiſtes refuſe triall by the Scriptures. Three points shevving that Papiſtes vſe not, neyther eſteeme the ſcriptures as they ought, if they vvere the true churche, The firſte point.
                   this triall of their Doctrine, but ſeeke by all meanes they can, to auoide it. I wil not in this place diſcribe their whole practiſe herein, but I will note vnto you three pointes. Firſt, the keeping of the ſcriptures in an vnknowne tongue from the common people, and to make it little leſſe then Hereſie to haue it in their mother tongue. Haue not many good men partly loſt their liuing, and borue fagots, partly bene burned, for no other cauſe? Manye yet aliue knowe it to bee true. But they did not only finde this meanes, to keepe it from the common people of GOD, but brought to paſſe, that it was almoſt out of vſe, euen with the learned ſorte: of which very fewe did reade the Texte

of the Bible, you had almoſt tenne that wrotte vppon the mayſter of the ſentences. The greate heapes of ſchoolewriters declare this to be true.
               Secondly, they doe marueilouſly diſgrace and diſcreditThe ſeconde poynte. the Scriptures, as vnſufficient to ſaluation, and not contayning all neceſſary truth, but that there are manye Articles of neceſſity to be beleeued, whiche are not contayned in the Scriptures. So ſayth Lindan. lib. 1. Cap. 10. The Apoſtles, ſayth hee, Woulde not committe certayne principall pointes of our Fayth, to paper and ynke, thereby to perishe and be forgotten, but they committed them to the faythfull hartes of Chriſtians. As though thoſe thinges remayned more ſure, whiche be committed to the frayle memorye of ſeeble men in this ſinfull world, then thoſe thinges, that by the ſpirite of God, are put in writing. Doe you not ſee howe this maliciousMatters of fayth maye better be preſerued by meanes of writing, then when they are only left to the bare memorie of man. and reuolting Aduerſary, doth ouerthwart the gratious and ordinary prouidence of God, in preſeruing the truth of his doctrine and holy will? When God ſaw that the law written in the heart of man, was in continuaunce of time, by corruption of the world greatly blemiſhed, and almoſte cleare forgotten, then that it might bee renewed, and remayne more ſurelye in the memoryes of men, did hee not by Moyſes, put the ſame in writing? But this is the manner of the olde Heretiques, as Irenaeus ſayeth,The learned Aduerſarye refuſeth to be tried by the Scriptures, becauſe they do manifeſtlye confound all ſuch. 
                  When they are confuted by the Scriptures, they fall to blame and accuſe the ſcriptures, as though they were not in good caſe, and of ſufficient Authoritie, and becauſe they may be diuerſely interpreted: or as though the truth could not be knowne by them, without the knowledge of Traditions. For, ſay they, the truth was not deliuered by them, but by the liuely voice of the ſpeaker. Hitherto Irenaeus.
               
               This was the gappe whereby almoſte all Hereſies, were drawen into the Churche, that eyther they de
                  
                     •
                  ied the Scriptures, or elſe depraued them, as vnſufficient,

without priuate traditions, & reuelations. And ſo theWhy Papiſtes do refuſe triall by the Scriptures. aduerſaries at theſe dayes, ſtrine to keepe the ſame gappe open, as well for the maynteinaunce of their tradicious, as for that they ſee, they are not by them hable to maintayne the moſte of their Doctrines. What ſhall I ſay of them, which, are not contented by theſe means to accuſe and diſcredit the Scriptures, as the old Heretiks did, but giue vnto the ſacred written worde of God, contemptible and blaſphemous titles of reproche, as to call it, A deadBlaſphemies of the Papiſtes agunſt the ſcriptures. writing: A dumbe maiſter, doubtfull, and vncertaine: A black Goſpell, Dead ynke: Ynkie Diuinitie: A Noſe of waxe: A leaden Rule: &c. But the eternall and euer liuing God, whoſe immortall word, & ſcede of life, they ſo reuile, ſitteth in heauen, and ſeeth their wicked blaſphemy howſoeuer conningly, they will ſeeme to cloake their doinges.The thirde poynt. Thirdly, they ſay the ſcriptures take authority of the church, and therfore that the Church is aboue ye ſcriptures, and her authoritie the greater. Sine authoritate eccleſi
                        •
                     ,
                  The authoritie of the word of God is from it ſelfe, and not from the Church principally. ſaith Friar Soto, Scriptura ſacra non habet authoritatem, hoc certiſſime fatemur. i. Without the authoritye of the Church, the holy ſcripture hath no authoritie: This we confeſſe moſt certainly. As though the maieſtie of Gods wiſdome, & the truth contained in the ſcriptures, depended vpon the authoritie of man. For though the Church be neuer ſo holy, yet it conſiſteth of men, which maye, and often times do erre, when they leane not to the word of God. Oh (ſay they) how know you that the Scriptures came from God, but by the church? I graunt (dearely beloued) that the true church, that is, the faythfull people of God, haue the ſpirit of diſcretion, to diſcern what writings are according to the law & Prophets, & which are not. And therfore the Godly Fathers in the primatiue church, partly in the time of the Apoſtles, partlye after, reiected many counterfeyted writinges, fathered by Heretiques, vppon ſome of the Apoſtles, becauſe they agreede not with the lawe, and the Prophets, nor were agreeable to the Analogie of fayth

and truth of Doctrine contained in them: and ſo by their witneſſe, they iuſtifyed the truth of thoſe canonicall ſcriptures, and that no other ought to be Judges ouer them, or in any part of doctrine in them, or to haue authoritie aboue them, or withoute them. When a Prince ſendeth a commiſſion,Howe the Churche maye iudge or vſe the Scriptures concerning their truth. to certayne 
                     •
                  ounſaylers, they may by their ſkil in the lawes in the realme, and practiſe of gouernmente, conſult whether it be a right & true commiſſion, or other wiſe, but when they haue by their iudgement determined, that it is a true commiſſion vnder the Princes hand and ſeale, they take not to them Authoritye ouer it, yea, they ſubmitte themſelues in all thinges to bee ruled by it, They may not be ſo bold to ad, to diminiſh, to change, or to interprete it, further then authority doth warrant thē. SoHowe the Churche of Chriſt muſte preſerue Gods worde and deluer the meaning of it. is it with the church of Chriſt, it muſt ſubmit it ſelfe to be directed by the word of God, it muſt not adde, diminiſh, alter, or change, or otherwiſe by wreſted interpretatiō, draw it to another meaning, then the Analogie of our fayth, and the conference of one place with another place of it, in it ſelf, may warrant. And therefore it is ſtrangely written of Hoſſius, that if a man haue the Interpretation of the Sea of Roome, vppon anye place of the Scriptures, though he knowe not, nor cannot vnderſtande howe it can poſſibly agree with the wordes of Scripture, yet is it (ſayeth hee) the moſte certaine worde of GOD. Yea they ſay that the interpretation of the ſcripture Varyeth, with the practiſe of the Church: ſo that as that changeth, the interpretation of the Scripture chaungeth alſo.
               Of this Vſurpation of authoritie ouer the worde ofGreeuous Faultes in the Churche of Kome, which haue come by their taking of authority ouer the Scriptures. GOD, and of this diſcrediting of the ſcriptures, it commeth not onelye, that they make in manye places, Interpretations repugnant to the Text, as when they interprete, Datur for Offertur, and Facite for Sacrificate: But alſo that the moſte parte of their Doctrines, are contrarye to the expreſſe wordes of GOD, and the Analogie of oure fayth. As by example of a fewe, you

ſhall take the meaſure of the reſidue. As for interpretations:Manifeſt falſe interpretations of papiſtes. when Chriſt ſayth in the matter of the Sacrament, This is my body, that is, ſay they, this is Tranſubſtantiated, or hath the ſubſtance of it, turned into my Body: contrary1 Mat. 26. 26. to all writers, and the nature of al tongues, expounding eſt, the Verbe ſubſtantiue, is, by Tranſubſtantiatur. Let them ſhew eyther any auncient Father, yea, or anye latine writer, that euer did the like, and let them take the victorie. Agayne, where Chriſt ſayth, This is my body,2 Luc. 22. 19. 20. that is Giuen for you, that is ſay they, that is Offered for you. So that, that which he mēt to be giuen to death vpon the croſſe, (as al good chriſtians vnderſtand the place) they (to mayntayne their Sacrifice of the Maſſe) drawe it to this: that Chriſt then preſently, in the time of the Miniſtration, offered his body to God the Father, in waye of a Sacrifice. And ſo for to mayntayne a deuiſe of their owne, they doe robbe the people of God, of that ſweete promiſe, and comfortable legacie, wherein, Chriſte in his laſt will aſſureth them, that his body ſhoulde be giuen to Death, for their redemtion. In like manner when chriſt ſayth, Do this in remembraunce of me, that is, ſay they: Sacrifice3 1. Cor. 11. 
                           •
                        4. this in my remembraunce. Wherein, with as great abſurditie as before, they doe peruerte the meaning of Chriſt. For where his purpoſe was, to giue a warrante to all chriſtian people,, to vſe and celebrate this Sacrament, in remembraunce of his death, they bring it to bee ſpoken to Prieſtes only, wringing them vtterly contrary to that expoſition of Chriſtes wordes, whiche S. Paule1. Cor. 11. 26. maketh, 1. Cor 11. ſaying: So often as you eate this bread, and drinke this Cuppe, you shewe the Lordes death vntill he come.
               
               Nowe, as touching their Doctrines, repugnaunte toDoctrines of papiſtes againſt the ſcriptures i
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     i 
                        •
                     ule
                        ••
                     . Gods word, you ſhall 
                     ••
                  te theſe few examples in ſteede of many mo. The Scripture teacheth, that we haue redemption and iuſtification, by fayth in Chriſtes blood onelye, without the helpe of our owne Vertues and good workes.

For S. Paule ſaith: Therefore we gather that a man isRom. 3. 28. iuſtified by faith without the deedes of the lawe. Andverſe. 8. 9. to the Ephe. 2. Ye are iuſtified by grace, and that not of your ſelues, it is the gift of God: not of works, leaſt any
                  
                  1 Papiſticall iuſtification by vvorkes. 
                  man ſhould boaſt. And yet if wee beleeue not that our workes doe helpe vs, to our iuſtification and remiſſion of ſinnes, the Churche of Rome will condemne vs as Heretikes.Heb. 10. 14 The ſcriptures teach vs that Chriſt By once offering2 Papiſticall dayly ſacrifice propitiatorie. himſelfe on the Croſſe, made perfect all them, that are ſanctified. For ſo ſaith S. Paule to the Hebr. And yet by the Churche of Rome are they horrible heretikes, that ſay there is not daylye ſacrifice propitiatorie for our ſinnes in their Maſſe. The ſcriptures teach vs yt 
                  ChriſtCol. 3. 1. is aſcended into heauen and ſitteth on the right hande3 Papiſticall preſence of Chriſt on earthe. of God the Father, and from thence and no place elſe, he ſhall come to iudge the quicke and the dead: yet contrarie to this article of our faith, and contrarie to the nature of Chriſtes humanitie, if wee beleeue not that Chriſt euen in4 Papiſticall keeping avvay of the cuppe of the Lorde. Mat. 26. 27.
                   his fleſhe is ſtill in earth with vs, yea and that in a. 1000. places at once, we muſt be pronoūced deteſtable heretikes. The ſcripture ſaith in the vſe of the Lordes Supper, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drinke ye all of this.
                   The Churche of Rome ſaith it is hereſie, to affirme that ye lay people ſhould drinke of the Lordes Cuppe. The ſcriptures ſay, Thou5 Papiſticall vngodlineſſe in vvorshipping ſaintes. Exo. 20. 4.
                      ſhalt make thee no grauen image, nor thou ſhalte not bow downe to worship it. The Church of Rome ſaith it is godlye to haue the churche full of Images, to kneele downe before them, to ſet vp candels to them, and with incenſe to honour them. The ſcripture ſaith, In the Church6 Papiſticall abuſe of the ſcripture in a tonge vnknovvne. 1. Cor. 14. 19. it is better to ſpeake fiue wordes vnderſtanded, to edifie, than to ſpeake tenne thouſande, in a tongue not vnderſtanded: yet you knowe the churche of Rome hath defined it, that it is more fruitfull and godly, to haue all the diuine ſeruice, in a ſtraunge and vnknowen tongue. Wherefore howe truely, they can claime to haue this firſt marke of Chriſtes churche, I doubte not, but thoſe conſciences, that

haue the feare of God, can eaſily perceiue.
               As for the ſacraments, it is not onely ſufficient to hauePapiſtes cannot be knowne to be of the true church by their ſacramentes. them, but to haue thoſe that Chriſt appoynted, and to vſe them accordyng to hys inſtitution. Saint Ambroſe ſayth verie notablye, Qui aliter preſumunt accipere, quam Chriſtus inſtituit, deuotus eſſe non poteſt. i. Hee that preſumeth to receaue it
                   (he meaneth the ſacrament of the bodye and bloud of Chriſt) after another ſorte, then Chriſt hath ordained, can not be accounted to be truely deuoute. But howe they haue altered the Sacraments, both in number, and in the right vſe of them, no man almoſt can bee ignoraunt. Where the Scriptures mention but two, they hauePapiſticall number of ſacraments. appointed ſeuen. I will not now ſtand vpon the number of ſacramentes, I will ſpeake only of thoſe which both parts agree, to be ſacraments, Baptiſme, & the Lordes Supper, Firſt, as touching Baptiſme we teache not onely, as ſome falſely father vppon vs, that it is ſignum Initiale, a Signe
                  
                  Fruitfull doctrines of the proteſtantes concerninge Baptiſme. v
                           •
                        . 5.
                   
                  wherby we be firſt conſecrated Chriſtians, but wee adde alſo, that we by faith, and the operation of the holy Ghoſt, doe put on Chriſt as a garment, that is, that wee haue him ſo faſtened and appropriated to vs, that he is ours, and wee his, and that he hydeth and couereth our nakedneſſe, according as S. Paule ſaith: As many as are Baptized,Gal. 3. 27. haue put on Chriſt. We beleeue and teache that Baptiſme is to Chriſtians the Fountaine of life, whereby our ſinnes are waſhed away. So ſaith S. Peter, Baptizet
                        •
                     r
                  Act. 2. 38. 
                  vnuſquiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vestrum in nomine Jeſu, in remiſſionem peccatorū. i. Let euerie one of you be Baptized in the name of Ieſu, for the remiſsion of ſinnes.
                   And Ananias vnto S. Paul,Act. 22. 16. 
                  Ariſe, and be Baptized, and washe avvaye thy ſinnes. Yet doe we not attribute the operation hereof, to the water or outward element, but to the might of Gods word, & ye power of ye holy Ghoſt, working by faith as S. Aug. ſaith, Quomodo fit quod aqua corpus tangat, & cor abluat, niſi faciente verbo, nō quia dicitur, ſed quia creditur. i. How commeth
                  
                  Auguſt. 
                  it to paſſe, that water toucheth the body, & waſheth the
                  
                  ſoule, but by the working of the word, not becauſe it is ſpokē, but becauſe it is beleued▪
                   Where it is to be noted, yt it is not y• ſound of ye words, vttered in yt way of a charme by ye miniſter, but the words beleeued in y• harts of y• faithful, yt maketh y• promiſe of Chriſt & effect of ye Sacramēt, to be fruitful to y• receiuer. We beleue moreouer & teach, yt the ſacrament of Baptiſme is, as it were ye wombe of ye church of Chriſt, where we are newe borne, & become of y• childrē of wrath, ye children of God, & are prepared by this our ſecond birth, to enter into the kingdome of God. Vnleſſe youJoh. 3. 5. be borne again (ſaith Chriſt) by water & the holy ghoſt, you cā not enter into the kingdome of God. And ſaint Paul ſaith, Not by the works of righteouſnes, that weeTit. 3. 5. did, but according to his mercye hath he ſaued vs, thorough the foūtaine of regeneratiō, & innouation of the holy ghoſt. We beleeue alſo & teach as touching this ſacrament, yt not onely we, but our ſeede alſo, hath by it, the benefite of ſaluatiō, & therfore doe we defend y• Baptizing of our childrē, againſt ye wicked hereſie of the Anabaptiſts. They which conſider theſe things ſimply, & with a charitable chriſtiā minde, I truſt wil cleare vs of yt odious report, wherwith our aduerſaries ſlaunderouſly do burden vs, as though we contemned ye ſacraments, & ſleightly taught the fruits & benefites of them. Now on y• contrarie part, let vs conſider how corruptly the Churche of Rome teacheth, as touching this ſacrament, and how horribly they haue abuſedPapiſticall vntruthes and abuſes concerning Baptiſme. v
                           •
                        . 3.
                   it. Firſt, they teache, that Baptiſme dothe conferre grace and waſhe away our ſinnes, Ex opere operaeto, that is, Euen by the verie vvashing only of the vvater▪
                   thoughe there be no good motion of faith or beleife, in the hearte of him that is Baptized. This is the common op
                     •••••
                   of all the Scholemen. And Gabriel Biel ſayth: Si
                        •
                      quod pr
                        •
                     ter exhibitionem ſigni foris exhibiti, non requiritur 
                        •
                     o
                        •••
                      motus interior, ex ſuſcipiente. i. So that beſide the giuing of the outward ſigne, there is no good motiō inwardly required of him, vvhich receiueth it.
                  
               
               
                  What ſhall I ſay of the prophane and wicked abuſing of Chriſtes ſacrament to the baptizing of Bells, the curing of ſickneſſe, and the driuing away of ſpirites and Diuels, with the water thereof. This I may not omitte, that in uſing this one outward ſacrament of Chriſt by water, they practiſed fiue or ſixe, of their owne ordinaunce, without any warrant of Gods worde at al: blaſphemouſly attributing vnto them, the like effectes, that in trueth are gyuen to Chriſtes inſtitution, and to no other. Firſt they addePapiſticall ſacramentes of their own deuiſe. 
                  ſalte with this interpretation, Vt ſapientia conditus, foetore iniquitatis careat, & vltra non putreſcat, vermibus vitiorum. i. That he being ſeaſoned with ſalt, may not haue the filthie ſent of iniquitie, nor any more by rottenneſſe, abound with wormes of vice and wickedneſſe.
                   Next is Breathing, Vt exuffletur & pellatur malignus Spiritus. 
                           •
                        . That the wicked ſpirit may be blowne and thruſt out of the partie. Thirdly the ſacrament of Spittle, Vt tactu ſupernae ſapientia & aures aperiantur, ad verbum dei audiendum, & naris ad diſcernendum odorē vita, That both the eares, may be opened to heare the word of God, and the noſe, to ſent the ſauour of life. Moreouer Annointing of theThres ſortes of Papiſtical annointing. breaſt: Vt muniatur aduerſus hoſtem, ne noxia perſuadere poſſit: that he may be fenced from the enemie, that he may no more perſwade him to doe thoſe things that be hurtfull. Alſo Annointing of the ſhoulders, that he may receiue ſtrength and might, to beare the burden of the Lorde. Likewiſe Annointing on the crowne of the head, that by hauing his portion of the ſpirit of God, he may worthily be called a Chriſtiā, & be made the heire of eternall life by holy vnctiō. &c. What chriſtian heart can heare theſe things without great griefe and horrour? Who can ſuffer, y• the effectuall graces of Chriſtes word, and ſacraments, and the operation of the holy Ghoſt in the heartes of the receauers, ſhall with horrible blaſphemyes, be attributed to the vaine ordinaunce of man, without any promiſe, or aſſuraunce of Gods worde & To take from vs

the rottermeſſe of ſinne, to expell out of vs the wicked ſpirit, to opē our eares fruitfully, to heare Gods word, to giue vs ſenſe of the Sauiour of lyfe, to defend vs from the wicked aſſaultes of Sathan, to ſtrengthen vs in bearing the burthen of the Lorde, to make vs the heyres of eternall lyfe: are the myghtie and moſt gracious workes of the holy Ghoſt, throughe the merite of Chriſt our ſauiour, and not of Salt, not of Breathing, not of Spittle, not of Annoynting, &c. And they are to bee gyuen, and applyed to vs, eyther by the worde of GOD, or by thoſe Sacramentes by hym ordayned, and not by the Deuiſes of men.
               I wyll now paſſe to the next Sacrament: As touchingFruitfull actions and doctrines of the proteſtantes, concerning the Lordes ſupper. vz. 5. 1. Cor. 11. 23.
                   the Lordes Supper, I ſay with S. Paule, That vve haue receiued of the Lord, that doe we deliuer to the people of God. We vſe Chriſtes ſingle Inſtitution, without any addition, diminutiō, or alteration: We vſe it as a feaſt, or ſupper, as it is termed in the Scripture: We take bread, we take the cuppe, we drinke, we ſet forthe the beathe of Chriſt, the vſe and effect of the Sacrament wee declare, to be this. And I deſire all good Chriſtians, to obſerue and note our doctrine, that they may well vnderſtand, that wee teach not ſo ſleightly, or contemptibly of this Sacrament, as our aduerſaries would haue men to beleeue, that we doe. For in deede wee teach & beleeue, that it is one of the ſweeteſt and moſte excellent comfortes, that Chriſte at hys departure, lefte vnto hys people. Yea, I dare ſaye, that, that Chriſtian which with a ſingle and charitable hearte, ſhall vnderſtande our doctrine, wyl conceiue more fruite thereof, than euer he dyd, whyle the doctrine of the Churche of Rome preuayled in hys heart. Firſt, wee teache, that it is a reuerent, and bleſſed memoriall of the deathe of Chriſt, in celebrating whereof, we ſhewe our ſelues thankefull for hys great, and vneſtimable benefytes towardes vs, accordyng to theſe wordes, Doe
                  
                  this in remembraunce of mee. Secondlye, we teache1. Cor. 11. 25. it, to be a cognizaunce or badge of our Religion, whereby, wee bee ſeparated and diſtincte from Turkes, Jewes, and all other Miſcreantes, and by the vſe thereof confeſſe before God; and the worlde, that wee are of the number of them, that looke to bee ſaued by the death of Chriſt. And therefore ſayeth Saint Paule: Yee cannot drinke1. Cor. 10. 21. of the Cuppe of the Lord, and of the cuppe of deuils. Thirdlye, wee teach it to hee a Seale, added to the laſte wyll of Chriſt, to aſſure vs, of all thoſe legacies, that in the ſame hee hath bequeathed vnto vs, and principally, that hys bodye was gyuen to death for vs, and his blood ſhedde for the remiſſion of our ſinnes. Fourthlye, wee teache that it is a linke of vnitie among our ſelues, and a ſpirituall ingraffing of vs, into the myſticall bodye of Chriſt: ſo that as the braunches haue lyfe, and mayntenaunce from theyr roote and ſtocke, ſo haue wee from Chriſt. Laſtlye, wee teache, that it is a ſpirituall and heauenly Feaſt and banquet
                     •
                  , wherein the ſonne of God Chriſt Jeſu, offereth to the faythful hartes of Chriſtians, the heauenly foode of hys moſte precious body and blood, & they therein, receiue the ſame effectuallye, truely, & indeede,Chriſt his body and not ſigne only of his body is receaned. 1. Cor. 10. 16. and not in ſygne onelye: for wee doe from our heartes deteſt that opinion, that Chriſtes body and blood is receaued in the Sacrament onely figuratiuely. For S, Paul ſayth, Panis quē frāgimus nonne comunicatio eſt corporis Christi? & poculus benedictionis cui benedicimus, nonne comunicatio ſanguinis eius est? i. The breade whiche wee breake, is it not the partakyng of the body of Chriſt? and the cuppe of blefsing, whiche wee bleſſe, is it not the partaking of the blood of Chriſt?
                   Wee beleeue therfore, & teach, that the faithfull Chriſtians, are made partakers of the bodye and blood of Chriſt indeede, and of all the benefites, procured vnto mankind by the ſame. And yet wee meane not, this carnally, and groſſely, ſo that the

Reall, and naturall bodye of Chriſte, vnder the ſhape ofThe receuing of Chriſt in the ſacraments is not carnallye to be vnderſtod. Jo. 6. 53. a rounde peece of breade, or his blood vnder the forme of Wine, entreth into our mouth, and deſcendeth into the naturall partes of our bodye. God forbyd. As wee ſay with Chriſt, He that eateth not his bodie, nor drinketh hys blood, hath no life in him: So we ſay with Cyprian, Non acuimus dentes ad mordendum, ſed panem ſanctum, fide ſyncera frangimus. i. Wee ſharpen not the teeth to byte, but wee breake the holy bread, with ſincere faith. And with Auguſt. we ſay. Quid paras dentcm & ventrem, crede, & manducaſti. i. Why prepareſt thou thy teeth, and thy bellie? Beleue, & thou haſt eaten.
                   Faith then, is y• mouth wherby we receiue Chriſt, & ſo, digeſt him into y• ſtomacke of our ſoules. That which Chriſt did (generally) vpon the croſſe, to y• whole world, y• do we thinke, to euery man perticularly, with no leſſe good effect through faith, to be applyed in the Lordes Supper. So farre bee wee from teaching it, to bee a ſigne or figure onely. Let vs nowe continuePapiſticall vntruthes and abuſes concerning the Lords Supper. vz. 5. in the compariſon, & conſider how the church of Rome doth vſe this ſacrament. But Lord God, what a ſea ſhould I enter into, if I ſhould take vpō me, fully to declare their abuſe of this reuerend Myſterie. I will not, I cannot, thys time wil not ſerue for it, yea, diuers ſermons wil not ſerue to deliuer it. Who knoweth not, y• this onely matter, hath occupyed the tongnes and pennes, of all the learned of Europe. I will therefore rehearſe vnto you, onely the titles of the abuſes, reſeruyng the full diſcourſe, to ſome other tymes. Chriſt inſtituted a Supper or holy Feaſt, they make it a priuate repaſt. In a feaſt, there is both the Feaſt maker and the gueſtes, but in theyr priuate Maſſe, one ſupplyeth the perſon, both of the Feaſt maker, and of the gueſt. Chriſt Inſtituted a Sacramente of thankeſgeuyng, as hee ſayeth, Doe thys in remembraunce of mee: They make it a Sacrifice propitiatorie, for the quick and for the dead, hauing not one ſyllable

of Gods worde for it. Chriſt gaue breade, they ſay there is no breade. Chriſt gaue Wine, they ſaye the ſubſtaunce of Wine is cleane vaniſhed awaye. Chriſt ſaid, Drinke yee all of thys: nay ſaye they, none but Prieſtes, maye drinke of it. Chriſt ſayde, when hee gaue breade, This is my bodye, and when he gaue Wyne, This is my blood: They ſaye, when the aue, or the other is gyuen, that it is both the bodye and bloud. I omitte that theyNote. mixed diuers corrupte doctrines, and vnfruitful and daungerous Ceremonies. I omitte that they made it a common Marchandize; to buy ſoules out of Purgatorie. Finally, I omitte that they haue made of this heauenly myſterie, a perpetuall matter of Idolatrie, by leading the people in theyr Eleuations to worſhippe the creature, in ſteede of the Creator. If I ſhoulde enter to declare, how they haue wreſted, and wroong the words of Chriſtes Inſtitution, it myght ſeeme to all men that haue the feare of God, verye marueilous: but this that I haue ſpoken, may ſuffice. Seeyng therfore, they haue not the ryghte vſe of the Sacramentes, accordyng to the Inſtitution of Chriſt, they cannot challenge vnto them the ſecond Note, or marke, of the true Churche of God: but that the ſame remayneth rather wyth vs, then with them. Yea, wyllPapiſtes obiecte Succeſsion as a note whereby to proue themſelues the true church ſome ſay, but they haue one token, wherevppon the olde learned Fathers, dyd ſeeme more to ſtay their conſciences, than al y• reſidue that you haue ſpoken of, & that is, Continuall ſucceſsion of Biſhops, for y• ſpace of. 1500. yeeres. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Auguſtine. &c. and other, when truth was in controuerſie, & heretikes challenged the name of y• Church, did flie to this, as a principall anker, whereby to ſtay them, and their doctrine. I graunt (deerely beloued) that it is true, in ſame reſpect, they did ſo. But I praye you, who were they, agaynſt whom they ſo reaſoned? Forſooth Marcion, Valentinian, and other lyke Heretikes, which did refuſe & reiect, almoſt the whole Scriptures, both of y• olde & newe Teſtament. And ſuch few bookes, as

they admitted, they had corrupted by adding, chaunging, and by pulling out, that theſe learned Fathers were there by forced, to appeale to the Succeſſion of the Apoſtolicall Churches, as well for the triall of the auctenticall Scriptures, alway frō the Apoſtles age left among them: as alſo for the iuſtifying of that doctrine, which they taught out of the Scriptures, and had bene alway obſerued in the ſame. That it was thus, Tertul. himſelfe witneſſeth. Ista haereſis
                  De preſcrip. Heret. (ſayth he) non recipit quaſdam ſcripturas, & ſi quas recipit adiectionibus & detractionibus, ad diſpoſitionem inſtituti ſui interuertit: & ſi recipit, non recipit integras. &c. i. This Hereſie, doth not admitte certain Scriptures, and thoſe that it receiueth by additions, and detractions, it wreſteth to her purpoſe: & as it receiueth certain, ſo it receueth them not wholly. &c.
                   And yet doth Irenaeus confute the ſame Heretiks, by thoſe bokes of holy Scriptures, which they themſelues allowed.
               Now as it was neceſſary in this caſe, for thoſe fathers,How the argument of Succeſsion hath bene vſed by the fathers. for trial of truth, to reſort to the Succeſſion of the Apoſtolicall churches, that the ſcriptures in them reſerued from the Apoſtles time, mighte bee of more authoritie among them, that beleeued not the ſcriptures: So it is not neceſſary, ſo to deale agaynſt them, which willingly and gladly, ſubmit themſelues to all the partes of the Canonicall ſcriptures. Neither do thoſe Fathers ſtay vpō theſe churches, becauſe of their ordinary Succeſſiō, as the patrones of the church of Roome now doe: but becauſe in that ordinarye Succeſſion, the Doctrine of the Fathers was ſtill kept inuiolable, according to the word of God. Whiche thing if the Church of Roome were able to prooue, wee would willingly yeelde vnto it.
               That thoſe learned Fathers did this, it ſhall euidently appeareLib. 4. ca. 43. vnto you, by the verye ſame places, whiche they alleadge for their purpoſe. Irenaeus ſayth, Preſbyteris obaudire oportet. qui ſucceſſionem babent ab Apoſtolis. i. We muſt heare, or giue eare to the miniſters, which haue their ſuc
                  
                  
ceſſyon from the Apoſtles. But he ſayeth not ſo onelye, but immediately addeth: Et cum Epiſcopatus Succeſſione, chariſima veritatis certum, ſecundum placitum patris acceperunt. i. And together with the Succeſſion in their Biſho. pricke haue receaued alſo, the certaine grace of true Doctrine, according to the will of the Father.
                   And in the very next Chapter agayne, after he had giuen certayn Markes of ill teachers, much agreeing to the courſe of the Church of Roome at theſe dayes, he addeth: Of all ſuche
                        Succeſſion is nothing without the doctrine of the Apoſtls. perſons we muſt beware, and cleaue to them, which, as I haue ſayde before, both keepe the Doctrine of the Apoſtles, and togither with the order of Prieſthood, ſhew wholeſome and true teaching, with honeſt conuerſation of life. Neither doth Irenaeus onlye, thus replye vpon the Doctrine of the Apoſtles, but the reſidue alſo of thoſe Fathers, whome they alleadge for the authoritye of Succeſſion. Tertul. ſayth, as he is alleaged by them: LetDe preſcrip. them ſhew the beginninges of their Churches. Let the Heretikes deuiſe ſome ſuch Succeſſion. &c. But marke I pray you, what immediately followeth: For their Doctrine. being cōpared with the doctrine of the Apoſtles, by the diuerſity and contrarietie thereof, wil euidently ſhew it ſelfe, to be the doctrine neither of any Apoſtle, nor any Apoſtolicall man. Doth he not in playne words ſhew, y• Succeſſion without the Doctrine of the Apoſtles is nothing worth? S. Auguſti.
                   likewiſe, againſt the Epiſt.Aug. ca. 4 
                  Fūdamentum. &c. when he hath reckoned vp thoſe things, which moued him to remayne in the church, among which Succeſſiō, is but one, He addeth: No ſuch thing is with you, where is only a promiſe of perſons, teaching the truth, which truth if it were ſo euidently declared, that we might not iuſtly doubt of it, it were to be preferred before all thoſe thinges, with whiche I am kept in the Church. &c. What can be more euident, then that S. Aug.
                  The true Church better proued by Doctrine then Succeſſion and neuer without doctrine. doth attribute more to truth of doctrine, manifeſtly proued by the word of God, then to Succeſſion, or any other token

that can be alleaged? Succeſſion, with continuance of Apoſtolical Doctrine, ought to be of great authoritie, but without it, nothing. It is notable that Tertullian hath in the Boke before alleaged: How commeth it, ſaith he, that Heretikes are ſtraungers and ennimies to the Apoſtles, but only by the diuerſity of their Doctrine, which theywhat Church is moſte likely to haue falle interpretations deuiſe of their own brayn, agaynſt the Apoſtles. Wherfore the corruption of ſcriptures, and the expoſition thereof, is to be thought to be among thē, where diuerſitie of Doctrine contrarye to the Apoſtles, is founde. This is a notable witneſſe agaynſt the church of Roome, whoſe Doctrines be ſo diuerſe, from the doctrine of y• primatiue church. The ſonnes of Aaron, had more allowable Succeſſion from Aaron, than the Biſhops of Rome haue from Peter, and yet becauſe they brought ſtraunge Fyre into the Temple of God, they were reiected, and periſhed. Euen ſo, ſayth Cyprian. Thoſe which in the Churche ofDe ſimplic. Prael. God do imitate them, and contemning the truth deliuered by God, deſire ſtrange doctrines, and bring into the church the inſtruction of humain ordinance, them Chriſt ſharpely rebuketh in the Goſpel, ſaying: You caſt away the commaundement of God, that you may place your own deuiſes. &c. Annas and Cayphas had full Succeſſion from Aaron, yet were it hard, therevpon to conclude, that they had the righte of the true Churche, and Chriſte and his Diſciples, to be Seiſmaticks.
               Though they pretend, to haue the ordinary Succeſſion of Biſhoppes in their Seas, ſure wee are, that wee haue the Succeſſion of the ſincere Doctrine of our ſaluation, which they haue not. For if their Doctrine be cōpared with the Doctrine of the Apoſtles, by the diuerſitye & contrarietie thereof, it will appeare that it is the Doctrine, neyther of the Apoſtles, nor of anye Apoſtolicall men. The Doctryne of the Apoſtles is, that Chriſte is not onelye GOD Eternall with the Father, but that hee is Manne alſo, taking fleſhe of the bleſſed Virgine, in all

thinges like vnto vs; ſinne only excepted, and that in hisPhil. 2. 7. Heb. 2. 17. Act. 1. 11. humanitie, hee is nowe aſcended into Heauen, and ſitteth perpetually at the right hand of the father. But the Doctrine of the Church of Roome telleth vs, that the humanitie of Chriſt, and his very naturall body and blood, are really and carnally not in heauen alone, but in tenne thouſande places alſo on the earth, at one inſtante, the whiche propertye is peculier to God alone. For nothing but God, can be in moe places but one, at once: As the whole ſcriptures declare.
               The Doctrine of the Apoſtles is, that Chriſt is by GodRom. 3. 25. 
                        •
                     . Joh. 2. 1. Col. 1. 20. appoynted, to be our only Mediatour, Reconciler, Aduocate, and interceſſoure, to make attonemente betweene God and vs, ſo often as our ſinne ſhall ſeuer vs from him, and that to that end, he ſitteth now at the right hande of God, that he may appeare before him for vs. But the doctrine of the Church of Roome, putting Chriſt out of office, teacheth vs that beſide Chriſt, we haue an infinit number of Mediatours, and Interceſſours, to procure vs fauoure, and to make reconciliation betweene God and vs, that is, the whole number of the Aungels and Saintes in Heauen.
               The Doctrine of the Apoſtles is, that Chriſt is our onlyAct. 10. 43. Jer. 31. 34. Rom. 3. 25. Eph. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. Redeemer and ſauyoure, and by the price of his blood hath purchaſed for vs, full and perfite remiſſion of ſinne. But the Doctrine of Roome is, that we haue remiſſion of ſins not onely by Chriſte, but by the merites, and prayers of ſaynts, by our own good workes, by Maſſes, by Pardons, by Purgatory, by holy water, & a number of other things: ſo that not without note of blaſphemye, they matche the vayne deuiſes of men, for the remiſſion of our ſinnes, with the Blood of the ſonne of God, the moſt excellente price of our Redemption. The Doctrine of the Apoſtles is, that Chriſt is our onely Prieſt for euer, according to the Order of Melchizadech, that with once offering of himſelfe, hathHeb. .10. 1. 10 for euer made perfecte them, that bee ſanctified. But the

Church of Roome telleth vs, that Chriſte hath a ſtate of Prieſthoode ſucceeding him, which muſt dayly and continually, offer the very natural body and blood of Chriſte, to God the Father, for the remiſſion of the ſins of ye quick & the dead. The Doctrine of the Apoſtles is, that ChriſteJoh. 3. 2. Joh. 14. 26 Joh. 16. 13. is the only Mayſter and teacher of his church, & in his holy word, hath deliuered vnto it al truth: But the Church of Roome teacheth vs, that Chriſt hath not deliuered vnto vs all truth, but that there be many thinges, neceſſarye to be beleeued, which are not contained in the Scriptures, & herevpon doe they ground al their vnwritten verities, and vayne tradicions of men, ſaying, that they are to bee receiued with the like Reuerence, that the written worde1. Cor. 11. 3. Eph. 5. 23. of GOD is. The Doctrine of the Apoſtles is, that Chriſt is the onlye Heade of his Churche, and the Ruler and gouernor of the ſame: but the Church of Rome would perſwade vs, that the Pope & his ſucceſſors, are the heads of the vniuerſall church of Chriſt.
               The doctrine of the Apoſtles is, that Chriſt is the only Foundacion & ground of his Church, wherevpō it reſteth and is ſtayed: for S. Paule ſayth, that No man can lay1. Cor. 3. 11. any other foundacion, then that is layd, Chriſte Ieſus. But the church of Rome teacheth vs, that S. Peter, and his ſucceſſours be the foundation of the Church, and that Hell gates ſhall neuer preuayle againſt that church, that is builded vpon that foundation. This may you ſee very euidently, how well the doctrine of the Church of Roome agreeth wt the doctrine of ye Apoſtles. And therfore though they haue perſonall Succeſſion, neuer ſo muche: yet becauſe they haue not Succeſſion of this true doctrine, that may not iuſtly, be taken for the right Churche of Chriſt.
               Now if they will continue to aſke of vs where oure Succeſſion is? We aunſwere, that whereſoeuer ſince the comming of Chriſt, there hath bene any perſons vpon the the face of the earth, that haue confeſſed this ſincere truth and doctrine: We ſay, that they are our predeceſſors, & we

are their Succeſſors, and with them members of the true Church. Therefore our church is not ſo new a Church, as they would make it, but as auncient as the Doctrine is, which is the moſt auncient Doctrine, yt euer was vpon the face of the earth. But if this, their perſonal Succeſſiō, bePerſonall Succeſſion is no ſure profe for the Romiſhe church that it is the true church. the greateſt proofe of their Church, What will they ſaye of the Grecians? Who, haue hadde Succeſſyon of Biſhops, for as long continuaunce as they haue, and yet did neuer acknowledge the Supremacy of Rome, nor that it was the only Catholike church but a member of it only, as others were. Oh, will they ſay, The Grecyans wereIt is againſt the papiſts that they ſay the Gretians are Sciſmatikes. Sciſmatickes: yea, but they haue cōtinual ſucceſſion of Bishops profeſſing Chriſt. And by what authority proue they that? forſooth becauſe they ſeparate themſelues, from the Apoſtolicall Sea. And is that ſufficient? Why? if the Grecians are to bee counted Sciſmatyckes, becauſe they forſake the ſea of Roome, howe muche more is Roome it ſelfe to be counted no true Churche, whiche hath ſwarued from Chriſte himſelfe, as before I haue declared, both in Doctrine, and in the right vſe of the Sacramentes? Wherefore their alleadging of the name and Title ot the Church is euen a lyke ſhyft, as the Jewes vſed againſt Ieremie, and the other Prophets of God, in old tyme, ſaying: Templum Domini, Templum Domini. i. The Tēple of the Lord, The Tēple of the Lord.
                   Whereas the Lord did acknowledge nothing among them to bee his. So do they now crie, we are the catholique church, We are the catholique Church, and God hath promiſed,Papiſts obiecte the viſible ſtate of their churche to proue it to be the true churche. that he will neuer forſake it, but alwaye aſſiſte it with his holye ſpirite, and therefore hath it proſpered ſo many yeares: Or if the Churche of Roome be not the true Church, there hath bene no church at all for certayn hundred yeares.
               For where was your churche ſcene within theſe fourty yeares before Luther began? What token was there of your Doctrine? had chriſt no church at al? yes truely had

he: God forbid that Chriſt at any time ſhould not haue hisGods true churche may be, and yet not appears generally viſible. true church. But (good people) it is not alway neceſſarie, that the churche of GOD ſhould be Notable, or flouriſhe in the outwarde face of the Worlde, by continuall Succeſſyon of Byſhops. GOD, and the worlde, bee contrary, and therefore often times, the Churche is more notable by contempte of the world, and perſecution, then by great Number, or Power. Yea, ſometime, they whicheThat may ſeame to be the true Churche whiche is not. in the outwarde ſhewe of the Worlde, and by certayne externall Signes, mighte ſeeme to bee the Church, and haue taken vppon them, the name of the Churche, and people of GOD, haue bene perſecutors, and to theire power, the Oppreſſors of the true Churche of God, as it appeareth towarde the Prophets, towarde Chriſte himſelfe, and towarde his Apoſtles. Wherefore, though the heads and gouernors of the church, with the aſſiſtance of the greater number, doe forſake the true worde, & worſhipping of God, doe make new lawes, repugnante to gods word, do bring newe Rites & ceremonies into the church, and vtterly corrupt and deface the righte Sacramentes, and true markes of the Churche: yet GOD reſerueth to himſelfe his true churche, ſending from tyme to tyme, Doctours, and Teachers, to lead them, although the ſame bee not allowed by them, that will bee counted the Ordinary gouernoures of the churche, but eſteeme them as Sciſmatiks, as Heretiques, as diſturbers of the people of God. So were the Prophetes vſed, ſo was Chriſte himſelfe, and his Apoſtles ſerued by the Jewes, that woulde be counted the true churche of of GOD. But this IExamples prouing a Church and yet not viſible as the papiſtes require it. In the time of the prophets. Noe.
                   wil declare vnto you, by particuler Examples.
               
                  Noe had preached (as ſome write) ſixe ſcore yeares, but to howe ſmall effecte, it did afterwarde appeare, when that in the Deluge, eyghte perſonnes onelye of his Familye were ſaued. Conſyder then, what countenaunce the Churche of GOD had in the World, before the Deluge, when it conſiſted onlye in eighte Perſonnes,

and they not the beſt eſteemed, in the time of Abraham, Iſaac, and the Patriarches. In how few and ſmall families, were they diſperſed vpon the face of the Earth, in whome the dignitie of the Church conſiſted? Achas KingAchas. of Iuda, (Vria the high Biſhop, and the other Prieſts not reſiſting him) ſhut vp the Temple of GOD, and tooke away2. Chro. 28. 24. the Chayre, ſo that vndoubtedly the ordinary Sacrifice, and Teaching of Gods Lawe did ceaſe: and yet was there an holy and true Church in the Kingdome of Iuda, where Eſay and other good men did Teach, but extraordinarily.
                     Eſay. Manaſſes.
                      2. Chro. 33. 1. &c. 2. Chro. 34. 1. &c. Ieroboam. 3. Reg. 12. 31. Vnder Manaſſes, the true Doctrine and celebration of the Sacramentes ceaſed, and ſo this Defection continued, vntill it was refourmed by the good King Ioſias: yet notwithſtanding, in that tyme, GOD did ſende his Prophets, and there was a true Church of God in Iuda. In the Kingdome of Iſraell, Ieroboam depoſed the true Teachers of the Lawe, and placed other prophane and vnlearned Prieſtes in their roomes, yea, hee made Temples with Caluiſh Idols, new Alters, & wholy a new worſhipping of God, ſo that in Iſraell, appeared no external token, of the church of God. And yet certainly, it cannot be denied, but God, euen then had his Church in Iſraell, whiche to repayre and mayntayne, he did at ſundry times, ſend his Prophets & Preachers, but how they were vſed and eſtemed, the ſcriptures doe well declare. Achab the moſt wicked
                     Achab. 2. Reg. 16. 33. of al other, who, to the wickedneſſe of Ieroboam, added the deteſtable idolatrie of Baal, and ſo cleane defaced the true worſhipping, that Elias that good Prophet, begā now to loàth that people, in whom appeared no token of Gods true worſhippinge, & therefore fledde into a Caue. And when GOD aſked him what hee didde there? Oh Iorde (ſayde he) thy people haue forſaken thy couenaunt,1. Reg. 19. 10. they haue pulled downe thyne Aulters, they haue killed thy Prophets, ſo that I only am lefte, and yet they ſeeke to haue my ſoule alſo.
               
               What ſhewe had the Churche of God then, when Elias
                  
thought there had beene no moe but hym ſelfe? And yet God aunſwered, that he had left vnto him, euen in Iſrael, a populous Church of. 7000. that neuer bowed their knee to the Image of Baal. This may be a full anſwere to them, that feare, if we ſhoulde not acknowledge the Churche of Rome to be the true Catholike Church, that Chriſt ſhould haue no Church at all. Yes vndoubtedly in the greateſt tyrannie, and corruption of the Churche of Rome, God reſerued to himſelfe, a great and populous Church, and companie of good people, that neuer were diſtained, with the wickedneſſe of that Sea, and ſought to worſhip God truely, according to his holy worde, althoughe in ſome finall errours, they were caryed away, with the blindneſſe of the time. And this could I confirme by very Notable examples, yet remaining in hiſtories, if the time would ſerue. As I haue ſayd of the time of the Prophetes, ſo may I ſay of Chriſtes time, and his Apoſtles. The Jewes wereAlſo in the time of Chriſt and his Apoſtls. then eſteemed the people of God, they had among them the lawe of God, they vſed ſacrifices appointed by God, yet did they put Chriſt to death, yet dyd they perſecute his Apoſtles, yet dyd they endeuour, to extinguiſh both the name of Chriſt, and alſo his religion. Wherefore looke what Defence, or what comforte of conſcience, the Prophets of GOD in olde time had, Chriſt himſelfe at his comming, and his Apoſtles afterwarde myghte haue, agaynſt the Biſhoppes, and Prieſtes of the Jewes, alleaging thatThe iu
                        •
                     iſible ſtate of the Church ſince the Apoſtles doth not proue the Church to be no true Church. they were the Churche of GOD, that they had the temple of God, that at their mouthes, ſhoulde bee fette the interpretation of the law of God. The ſame defence I ſay, the ſame comfort & ſtrength of conſcience, may We haue againſt thoſe at theſe dayes, that aſſault our cōſciences wt the Title of y• church of Rome: ſaying that they are y• Catholike church, that they haue the true doctrine of God, yt they haue authoritie to interprete the ſcriptures, and word of God: and thereby ſeeke to make vs aſhamed of the Goſpel, now preached, &c.
               The end of the ſecond Sermon.
            
            
               
               ¶ The third Sermon.
               
                  Non me pudet Euangelij. j. I am not ashamed of the Goſpell of Chriſt, for. &c.
               
               
                  
                     I Wil now come to thoſe 
                  Rom. 1. 16. that ſeeke to make mē aſhamedThe. 4. obicetion againſt the Goſpell. of y• Goſpell, by ſaying that y• profeſſors thereof, are in life, diſſolute, & licentious, y• they are, in common Weales troubleſome, & ſeditious, y• they are in their doctrine diſagreeing & contentious, with ſuch other quarrels riſing of malice rather then anye good truth. As touching the firſt point, I will be the ſhorter, becanſeAnſwere. Diſſolutsneſſe of proteſtantes lyues doth not make their doctrine errour, or to be hated. I haue ſo much ſpoken of y• thing before, as, y• whatſoeuer by frailtie happeneth among y• proteſtantes, ſure I am, our greateſt aduerſaries cannot iuſtly ſay or ſurmiſe, that our doctrine in it ſelfe, maintaineth any ſuch diſſolutenes of life. I confeſſe vnto them, y• there be diuers, yt turne the grace, & libertie of y• Goſpel, to a licentiouſnes of lyfe, & by their examples, cauſe men to ſuſpect yt our doctrine, as hurtful to good manners, & an enimie to vertuous liuing. This is ſo plaine, I will not denie it, It is ſo euill, I can not defend it: It is ſo grieuous, I may not diſſemble it. Yea, I graunt furthermore, y• among the beſt profeſſors of y• Goſpel, I ſee not that perfectnes, that ſhould be, but ſomtimes euill, and hurtfull examples, our fault (I confeſſe) is the greater, and with heauie hartes, we may acknowledge it to be true. But what of all this? Is that, cauſe ſufficient to feare mē frō our Doctrine? is that ynough, to cauſe

men to be aſhamed of y• Goſpell? God forbyd. The like vndoubtedly were in Chriſtes time, the like were in the Apoſtles time, Yea, among the .xii. there was one wicked Iudas: and yet, thoughe ſome were euill, all were not ſo.Mat. 11. 19. Jo. 8. 48. Act. 21. 28. Act. 24. 5. Chriſt himſelf, was reproued as a drunkarde, or glutton, the Apoſtles were called ſeditious: the fathers, were noted to diſagree among themſelues. What meane thoſe vehement exhortations yt S. Paule vſed, to moue men to puritie & innocencie of life? What meaneth y• terrible threatnings, againſt wicked and vitious liuers? Doe they not euidently declare, that godlynes & innocencie, was more cō
                  temned, wickednes & naughtines more embraced, then dyd become y• true profeſſors of y• Goſpel? And yet could not mē at yt time, take iuſt cauſe, to bee aſhamed of the Goſpell. But this is not a litle to be maruailed at, y• the ſame perſons, that pretend themſelues to be ſo greatly offended, eyther wt the licentiouſneſſe of the falſe Goſpellers, or with the frailtie of them that truely profeſſe it, can winke with both eyes, and without offence, ſuffer in the Cleargie of Rome, ſhamleſſe Simonie, incōtinence, druukennes, Diceplaying,Diſſolutneſſe and wickedneſſe of life hath beene more in the church of Rome then amongeſt the proteſtantes. hunting, Nicromancie, ambition, vriberie, crueltie, couetouſnes, extortion, and open iniurie? I know compariſon is odious, & by example of other I learne, that to make offers in this place is daūgerous. Yet notwtſtanding, this offer will I make, that if all the aduerſaries of the Goſpell. be hable vpon any credible proofe, more than their owne ſclaunderous libells, to ſhewe ſo many horrible examples of all kinde of wicked vices, in the profeſſors of the Goſpell, that haue bene ſince God reſtored to the worlde, the trueth of his worde, as I will ſhewe them, by teſtimonie of theyr owne Hiſtories, and other probable writers, to haue bene in the ſea of Rome it ſelfe, & that among their moſt holy Fathers, and heades of their church, then, I ſay, I wyll openly confeſſe, that theyr lyfe and doctrine, is better then ours. But if they cannot, ſhame it is for them, anye longer to pretende that cauſe,

to bee aſhamed of the Goſpell. I woulde the time woulde nowe ſuffer mee, to giue you a taſte, of that I haue nowe ſpoken: I ſhould then note vnto you, the exceeding contention, ambition, and briberie, that a many of them vſed, about the yeere of our Lorde. 900. & after, of whom Platina in the life of Benet. 4. ſaith thus: 
                     Ʋbi, cum ipſis opibus, laſciuire
                  That the popedome was to begotten by ambition and briberie. 
                  caepit Eccleſia, nullo principe coercente clericorum flagitia, ipſa peccāds licentia, haec monſtra peperit, à quibus, illa fedes per ambitionem & largitionem occupata est. i. When as the Church, through riches, began to waxe wanton, and that no Prince then, corrected the great offences of the clergie: euen then did libertie to ſinne, bring foorthe theſe monſters, who nowe by Ambition, and Briberie doe holde that Sea.
                  
               
               And againe, in the lyfe of Silueſter. 2. Eo tum pontificatus
                     Vertue and learning not regarded in choiſe of popes. And yet worſe then ſo to. &c. 
                     deuenerat, vt qui largitione & ambitione, non dico vitae ſanctitate & doctrina plus poſſit, is tantummodo, bonis reiectis, dignitatis gradum obtineret: quem morem, vtmam noſtra tempora non retinerent, ſed hoc parum eſt, peiorá (niſi Deus auertat) viſuri ſumus. i. To that ſtate then, had the Popedome come, that he which by briberie and ambition (I doe not ſay holyneſſe of lyfe and ſounde doctrine) myght doe moſt, He onely obtained that place of dignitie, thoſe which were good being then reiected: whiche manner and cuſtome, I woulde to God, that our times did not continue ſtill. Yet this is but a ſmal matter, and worſe things then this ſhall wee ſee, if God turne them not awaye.
               
               I ſhouldem oreouer deſcribe vnto you, the outragiousOf horrible cruelties in popes. cruelty of them, that could not be contēted to Depoſe their aduerſaries: But to cut of their noſes, to put out their eies, to take thē out of their graues, & thē to cut off their heads and fingers, to caſt them as dogges, without buriall, into y• ryuer Tyber, To famiſhe them to death, to hang them vp an whole day by the heare of their heades, with ſuch otherA cruell tormentor. practiſes more like y• ſucceſſors of Phalaris, then of Peter.
                  
For teſtimonie of theſe thinges, looke Platina in the lyfe of Stephane. 6. Sergius. 3. Iohn. 14. Boniface. 7. Calixte 2. And beſide Platina, Carſulanus, Vincentius and Stella Venetus, who among other of that time, writeth thus: Onis
                  Time when in ſtate of the popiſhe clergie, vertue ſeemed to be vtterlye decayed. 
                  virtus tam in capite, quam in membris, ex hominum ignauia conſumpta eſt. i. All kind of vertue aſwell in the head, as in the other mēbers, is by mens great ſlouthfulneſſe and ſecuritie, vtterly conſumed and gone.
                   I ſhould beſide this ſet out vnto you y• wicked & deteſtable Sorcerie, NicromanciePopes Sorcerers, Nicromancers, Coniurers, Poisoners. and poiſoning, practized about the yeere of our Lord. 1000. & long after by Silueſter. 2. and a meany of his ſchollers, and ſucceſſors, ſet forthe by Benno a Cardinall, in the life of Hilde Brand, after called Gregory. 7. Which treatiſe he that wyll reade, ſhall ſee ſuche horrible matter, as, I am ſure no Prophane Hiſtorie, mentioneth of any Heathen, or Pagan, that euer was. I ſhoulde declarePopes did greate iniuries even to Emperours. vnto you the monſtrous and vnſpeakeable Iniuries wrought vnto moſte worthie and Noble Emperours by Gregorie the ſeuenth, Adrian the fourth, Gregorie the. 9. Clement the ſixth, & diuers other, which are ſo deſcriued and painted forth by the Abbot of Vrsperge, lyuing about that tyme, and by Hier. Marius, as it woulde cauſe theirOf couetouſneſſe, and extortions in Popes. owne friendes, to deteſt them. Laſt of all, I ſhoulde laye open vnto you, ſuch a bottomleſſe gulfe of couetouſneſſe, and Extortion, as all the wealth and treaſure of Chriſtendome, could neuer to this daye ſatiſfie and content. Of which the Abbot of 
                     Ʋrsperge in his Chronicle ſayth thus, Gaude mater noſtra Roma, quoniam aperiuntur tibi cataracta theſaurorū in terra, vt ad te confluant riui & aggeres nūmorum in magna copia. Jocundare ſuper adiutrice tua diſcordia, qua erupit de puteo infernalis Abyſſi, vt accumulentur tibi multa pecuniarum praemia. Habes quod ſitiſti, decanta canticum, quia per malitiā hominū, non per`piam religionem orbem viciſti. Bee glad our mother Rome, becauſe all the Theſauries of the earthe are opened vvyde vnto thee, that to the maye come ſtreames, and heapes of money, in
                  
                  
                  great and large aboundance. Sport thou thy ſelfe with thy fellow helper diſcorde, whiche hath broken forthe out of the bottomeleſſe pitte of Hell, that there might bee heaped vp vnto thee many rewardes of mony. Now haſt thou that thou diddeſt thirſt for, ſing thou out a loude, for by the wickedneſſe of men, and not by anye good Religion, haſte thou ouercome all the whole worlde. But the time that is appoynted for mee, woulde not be ſufficient in this manner, onely to recken vp theyr myſdoinges, muche leſſe, at the full, to ſet forthe the examples of them. And yet forſooth, it is thoſe men, and their mayntayners, that at this daye, doe finde ſo great faulte with the lyues of them, that profeſſe the Goſpell, and woulde for that cauſe, haue men to be aſhamed of it. Muche lyke is the quarrell of them,Proteſtants not to be hated of papiſtes as ſeditious perſons, which is parte of the anſwere to the 4. obiection. that ſaye the doctrine of the Goſpell dothe diſquiet common Weales, and cauſe Sedition and ciuill warres. This is the complaynte of them commonly that woulde incite Princes, and Noble perſonages, and Magiſtrates, to hate the Goſpell, and to perfecute the Preachers of it. And this theyr complaynt, doe they amplifye and make lykely, by the example of thoſe ſtirres, that haue beene of late yeeres in Germanie, in Fraunce, in Scotlande, in Flaunders, in Englande. As thoughe (forſoothe) thereWars were in time of papiſtrie more then fr
                        ••
                     ce. had neuer beene rebellion, and ſtirre, before the late preaching of the Goſpell. As though, common Weales had neuer bene turmoiled, and troubled, before thys daye. But this Realme of England, may be a very good example of the contrarie, wherein, ſcantly one king, hath paſſed his raygne without rebellion, made by one or other. What a troublous Realme was this, in the time of king Henry the ſecond, when the Wife (after other trouble) did ſet vp the Sonne, againſt the father? What horrible, and grieuous rebellions were their in Henry the thirds raigne, whē after the Slaughter of many thouſandes, the king himſelfe was taken priſoner, and forced to yeelde to the decrees of

his ſubiectes? What ſhall I ſay, of Edward. 2. when bySpenſers. the pride of the Spenſers, the Qneeue hir ſelfe warred againſt hir huſband? And that I may not continue altogether in examples of rebellion, by Noble perſons: This Citie of London, and the Maiors thereof, can bee good witneſſes, what trouble there was rayſed in this Realme, in the tyme of Kichard the ſeconde, by Iacke Strawe, Tom Millarde, Watte Tyler, and ſuch other iolly perſons. I paſſe ouer Henrie the fourthe, and the pitifull raygne of Henrie the ſixth. And euen in the quiet time of Henrie. 7. howe manye attemptes of Rebellion were there, by the counterfaited Sonne of the Duke of Clarence, by Perkin Warbecke and other. Euen in our remembraunce, what rebellions were there, vnder the Noble Prince king Henrie the eyghte, and yet if you conſider the quarrell, nothing at all by the profeſſours of the Goſpell. I could ſay the lyke of Fraunce, Spaine, Flaunders, and Scotlande, but that no man that hath once looked into Hiſtories, can bee ignoraunt of it. But if I ſhould declare vnto you, the manifoldePopes raiſers of war. rebellions, and horrible warres, that haue beene rayſed by the Princes of Papiſtrie, (the Byſhoppes of Rome themſelues) in Italie vnder the names of Gwelfes and Gibilines, in Sicile, Naples, and Arragon, for Titles of thoſe kingdomes in Fraunce and Germanie, for the appoynting of Emperours in all places of Chriſtendome, continually for trifling quarrelles: I doubte not but I ſhoulde cauſe, euen the greateſt fautors of the Sea of Rome, and the verieſt enemyes of the Goſpell, to confeſſe, that notwithſtanding thoſe troubles that wee haue ſeene, yet in compariſon, GOD in theſe dayes hath not onelye bleſſed this Realme with maruailous quietneſſe, but alſo ſuffered other Countryes, to bee leſſe troubled then before tyme they haue bene. This I can not let paſſe, that Vrbane the ſixth, and Clemente the ſeuenthe, two contentious Popes and their ſucceſſours, for the ſpace of fortye yeeres, curſyng and

banning eche the other, did raiſe warres, and ſet all ChriſtendomePopes by their ſtrife & cur
                        •
                     ing one the other ſet all chriſtendome by the eates. together by the eares. Germanie, Hungarie, Italy, Englande and Pannonie helde with Vrbane and were called Vrbaniſtes. Spaine, Fraunce, and Cacelome held with Clement, and were called Clementines. Doe you not knowe that it is one part of their doctrine, that their clergie muſt be exempt from all Princes authoritie? Do you not know thai they haue brought it to paſſe in all Chriſtendome, to haue it ſo? Doe you not knowe, that the Prelates of Rome were neuer quiet, vntill they had made all Princes ſubiect to them? Vntyll they had cauſed Emperours to goe at their ſtyrropes, To kyſſe their ſhoes, To put their necke vnder their feete. Doe you not knowe, that vnder the perſon of Boniface. 8. they made (as it were) open proclamation, that they had the full power, of both ſwordes, and that all Princes of the earth, haue their authoritie of them, and they immediately of God? Nowe, when they had made all ſtates of the earthe to bee ſubiecte to them, and theyr cleargie, to whome then ſhoulde they ſhewe obedience?Meanes for Magiſtrates to iudge what cebellious ſubtectes Papiſts are. Thys onelye thing, if Magiſtrates and Princes, wyll not bee willyngly blinde, may well make proofe vnto them, that all is not Golde that gliſtereth, that all bee not quiet ſubiectes, that greatly wyll pretende ſo to bee. But as for the doctrine of the Goſpell, that it doth not maintaine, eyther diſcorde in common Weales, or contemptThe Religion of proteſtantes maintaineth no 
                        ••••
                     ultes. &c Rom. 13. 1. of Magiſtrates, it is moſt euident. For wee teache continually with S. Paul, That all perſons vvhatſoeuer they be, muſt bee ſubiect to higher powers. Wee teache that kings and Princes haue their authoritie, immediately of God, and by him, are armed with the ſworde, and therefore, if we reſiſt them, that we reſiſt God hymſelf, that ordayned them. Yea, and that wee muſt obey them, not for feare, leaſt they bee reuenged vppon our ſtubbornneſſe, and contumacie, but leaſt wee runne into the anger and wrathe of God, by diſturbing that order, that by him is appointed.
               
                  It is falſe therefore to ſaye that the Goſpell is cauſe of rebellion. It maye perhaps ſometime come to paſſe,The ſtirre following the Goſpell, is not to bee imputed to the Goſpell. that vpon preaching of the Goſpel, ſturre and trouble doth ariſe, but it cannot be more iuſtly imputed to the Goſpel, then the wickedneſſe of them that I ſpake of before, which conuerte the liberty of the Goſpell to a licenciouſneſſe of the fleſhe. Of whome S. Paule ſayth: Eorum damnatio
                  Rom. 3. 8. How ſtirres doe come in the time of the Goſpell. 
                  iusta eſt. i. Their damnation is iuſt.
                   Trouble and ſedition is commonly rayſed by them, that paſſe not if y• Goſpell were cleane confounded, and ouerthrowne: eyther becauſe they feare the hinderaunce of theire owne gaine, (as Demetrius the Vſurer didde) or elſe becauſe theireAct. 19. 24. Superſtitiōs cannot be otherwiſe maintayned, then with the ſworde.
               Some agayne on the other ſyde, be ſo puffed vp, wyth the ſpirite of Ambition, that vnder the pretence of Religion, they will make great ſtyrre and alteration in common weales, to the ende that the lawfull Princes and Magiſtrates being depoſed, they may be aduaunced and ſet vp in their Places.
               Other ſome perchaunce, are ſediciouſly moued, vppon hope of immunitie, and priuate gayne, and therefore will cauſe rebellion, that they may be eaſed of payments, ſeaſinges and tributes, which not only by mans Law, but by Gods commaundement are due to Princes. But to impute theſe faultes of corrupt time, and euill perſons, to the Doctrine of the Goſpel, is verye vniuſt and partiall dealing. In like ſort, did the Princes charge the Apoſtles,Papiſticall ſlaunder of Proteſtants to be ſedicious &c. is no new thing. Preachers, and Fathers of the primatiue Churche, as I could at large declare vnto you, by the Apologies of Iuſtine, Tertullian, Arnobius, and diuers other godlye men. All the Plagues that God ſent among them, all the wars and troubles that were rayſed, they imputed to Chriſtianitie. In ſo much that Oroſius, by the aduiſe of Saint Ierome and other, did write an Hiſtory purpoſely to declare that the like had bene at all times before, yea, and that

more greuous then in thoſe dayes: and therefore ſheweth that they falſely charged the Goſpell with it.
               Wherefore in like manner, when you heare theſe falſe and vayne Crymes fathered vppon the Profeſſoures of the Goſpell, and teachers of Gods holye worde: Let them not diſmay you, but ſtoutly ſay with S. Paule. Non me pudet Euangelij. I am not ashamed of the Goſpell. &c.
                  
               
               I come nowe to that with whiche of all other thingesThe. 5. obiection againſt the goſpell. vs. they doe moſt vpbrayde vs, and moſt greeuouſlye amplify and exaggerate to the defaming of the Goſpell. Oh ſay they, they agree not among themſelues: So manye heades, ſo manye Opinions and Doctrines. Some areThat the profeſſors of it agree not in opinion. 
                  Lutherians, ſome Zwinglians, ſome Caluiniſts, ſome Libertines, ſome Anabaptiſts, ſome Stenkfeldians, ſo yt they haue filled all the world with Sects and diuiſions.
               But (dearely beloued in our Sauiour Chriſt) agaynſte the enuious cauils, and wicked reports blowne abroade, by the enemies of Gods truth, you haue this comfort, that it is no newe thing, to haue the Teachers, and Profeſſoures of Gods worde, to bee thus odiouſlye ſlaundered.
               Thus, their forefathers vſed the Apoſtles: thus theyObiection of diſſention is no new thing. vſed the Godlye, Fathers, and Chriſtians alſo of the Primatiue Church. Clemens Alexand. Srom. lib. 7. ſayeth, with like falſe and odious report, the Jewes and Gentiles were wont to triumphe vpon the chriſtians, in thoſe daies. Oh, ſayd they, you Chriſtians haue many ſects & factiōs and although you wil be al called chriſtiās, yet you impugne, deteſt, and hate one another: Wherfore your religion, is not true, neither commeth of God. For if it were of God, you would agree amōg your ſelues. There were at that time, aboue twenty ſundry Hereſies, the ignominie and reproch of all which, they laid to ye true Chriſtians, to diſcredite them: not conſidering, as Chriſte himſelfe ſayth, that when the good Huſbandman hath ſowed in his Land, pure and good ſeede, the enemye commethMat. 13. 
                           •
                        5. in the nighte, and ſoweth among it Cockell and Darnell:
                  
And yet is not the Huſbandman to bee blamed, for that which the mallice of the enemye hath wroughte.
               Euen ſo nowe in this tyme, when GOD hath reſtoredProteſtants at not to be blamed for the ſectes that happen in the time of the goſpell. the true and pure Seede of his Worde, and caſt it into the worlde by his Preachers, the Deuill hath rayſed vp diuerſe ſectes, and wicked Hereſies, of purpoſe to diſcredite the truth: and yet is neyther GOD nor his Miniſters to be blamed for it.
               If any of them of that ſort haue profeſſed the Goſpell, we may comfort our ſelues as Saint Iohn did in the like matter, A nobis ſayth he, Exicrunt, ſed non erant ex nobis, ſi enim
                  1. Jo. 2. 19. 
                  fuiſſent ex nobis, permanſiſſent vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nobiſcum. That is, They wente out from vs, but they were not of vs, for if they had bene of vs, they had vndoubtedlye remayned with vs.
               
               Happily ſome of theſe came from vs, but they were notSectaries. of vs: they be departed from our Churche: they doe more hate vs, than the Papiſtes. Al the fautors of the ſea of Roome, haue not written halfe ſo much to impugne the wicked Doctrine of the Anabaptiſtes, Libertines, Stenkefeldians, Oſiandriſts, and ſuche other, as the Proteſtantes haue done. Yea, if a man looke thorowlye, into thoſe Sects, he ſhall ſee thē farre better to agree with theSectes do more agree to papiſtes then proteſtantes. Obiection: 
                        •
                      conuince proteſtantes for diſſention in opinions. church of Rome, then with vs. Wherfore, how iuſtly they do vpbraid vs, & defame the Goſpel with y• reproch of their names, let the Godly conſciences be Judge. But happily they will ſay, that euen wee that chalenge moſte of all to haue the Goſpell, and truth of Gods word, do foullye diſagree among our ſelues. For I pray you hath not the controuerſie of the Sacramente, a long time, with bitter conteution, diſtracted the two churches of Wittenberge, and Tigure? Doth not the ſame contention at this day remain amonge vs heere in Englande? Doe wee not euen nowe ſtriue for the matter of Apparell? I woulde to GOD (if it were his holye will) I mighte in this poynte ſaye, as I haue before, that it were not ſo.
               
                  I would I might ſay, that all were falſe, and that they doe therein ſlaunder vs. But it is true, I confeſſe it, and with ſorrowfull hart I doe confeſſe it. But yet neuertheleſſe, (God be thanked) there is no iuſt cauſe, why either I, or other ſhould be greatly diſmayed at it, or for that cauſe, to be ashamed of the Goſpel. It is ſtil the power of God to ſaluation, though by this little ſpotte, in countenaunce of the world, it may ſeeme to be ſomewhat blemiſhed.
               As for the controuerſy of the Sacrament among vs, it is not great, the parties of the one ſyde are but fewe, and yet I confeſſe they are to many. But where the contention is greateſt, the matter is not ſo heynous, nor the diſſencion ſo diuerſe, as Staphilus and ſuch other, of very malice,The diſſencion of the proteſtantes for the ſacrament, is no ſuch greate matter as papiſtes make it. would haue it ſeeme to be. Both parties in the right vſe of the Sacramentes doe well agree: both parts grant that they be Seales to confirme in our harts the promiſes of God, and benefite of our ſaluation by Chriſt Jeſu: both partes graunt that they be Teſtimonies and Pleadges, of his Diuine grace and fauour: both partes graunte, that they be badges and Cognizaunces of Chriſtian ſocietie, to erecte and confyrme our Fayth, and to bynde vs to the ſtudie of honeſtie, charitie, and concorde: both partes graunt that the body of Chriſt, is preſent, yea and that truely, and in dede, ſo yt they be not bare ſignes, but ſuch as effectualy doe bring, to the faithfull harte, the very thinges that are ſignifyed: both partes graunt that the cheefe effecte, and benefit of a Sacramēt, is takē by the ſpiritual eating, ſo yt the bodily eating without yt, is nothing. Only the contentiō, is about the Maner of y• preſence, & eating, while ye one part affirmeth with the Church of Rome, that it is Reall, and Carnall: the other to be only Spiritual, and by Fayth. How this controuerſie may be agreede, and of what force this carnall preſence and eating is, for whiche onelye they contende, if I ſhould now ſtande to declare, I ſhould make to large a digreſſion from my purpoſe, and holde you to long. This only I truſt (for this time) you maye ſee, that

the matter is not ſo greeuous, as it is pretended to be.
               As for the controuerſie of Apparell, as there is in it ſomeThe diſſention among Proteſtants for apparell, is no ſuche great matter as Papiſtes make it. diuerſitie of Judgementes, ſo is there no ſeparation of chriſtian fayth and charitie. For ſure I am y• neither they that do refuſe the appointed apparell, do condemne vs that weare it: (I ſpeake of them that be learned) neither we yt at y• Princes order receiue it, do hate thē that of cōſcience for certayne conſideracions thinke they may not ſafely vſe it. Although in this matter we wiſhe that they would doe as we doe. As for al other p
                     •
                  intes of Doctrine, I wil proteſt my conſcience for my ſelf, & as many other as I knowe, I thinke very well of them, and iudge that for their ſinguler gifts, there may ſome of them be very good inſtrumēts in the church, and we are perſwaded they think euen ſo of vs. Wherfore although there be ſome miſliking of iudgemēts in theſe triſles, & that it pleaſeth the Magiſtrates, and rulers for certaine cauſes by their authoritie, rather to iuſtifie the opinion of the one, than of the other: yet aſſure your ſelues, the iarre in the matter it ſelfe, is not ſo great, as the enimies of the truth would haue it ſeeme to be.
               But be it that the iarre were great, hath not God, IGod ſuffereth diuerſitie of opinions euen in his true Church. pray you, in the moſt pure ſtate of his Churche, for cauſes to his wiſdome known, ſuffered ſuch miſliking & diuerſitie of iudgements, among his holy & bleſſed Apoſtles, & Preachers? perhaps to this end, that they might therby learne to remember, & know their own infirmity. What controuerſy was betwene Peter & Paule, for the eating, or not eating,Gal. 2. 11. in the cōpany of the Gentiles? wherein, albeit Peter were a cheefe Apoſtle, yet God ſuffered him to be ſo caried away with error, y• 
                  Paule opēly blamed him as not rightly pr
                     ••
                  eding in the Goſpel. Was there not much miſliking betwene Paule & Barnabas for the cōpany of Marke, thatAct. 15. 39. they in diſpleaſure parted companies? Were there not, ſo great ſects & contenti
                     •
                  ns among the Cor. that the Lordes1. Cor. 11. 18. 
                        ••
                     . ſupper 
                     •••
                   by thē very 
                     •
                  ull abuſed through the ſame, and yet 
                     〈◊〉
                   n
                     ••
                   their whole doctrine, for that, be condemned.

Did not the Emulation betweene the Jewes & the Gentiles,Act. 17. 5. Act. 21. 27. Act. 15. 6. a great while trouble the primatiue church? Did it not cauſe a coūſaile to be gathered of the Apoſtles, for quieting of the ſame? Immediately after the Apoſtles time, it is euident in Euſebius, and other hiſtories, that the controuerſieDiuerſitie of opinion, which was in the Eaſte and Weſte Church for Eaſter. for the obſeruatiō of Eaſter day, did cauſe great ſtyr betweene the Eaſt and Weſt Church? And yet both of them pretended the example of the Apoſtles: Policrates, and the Eaſt church following Saint Iohn, Victor Biſhop of Roome, and the Weſt Church, alleadging the authoritie of Sainte Peter. Did not this matter fall out ſo bitterly, that the one part did excommunicate the other? What ſhall I ſay of the Sciſmes, and greeuous contencions in the Eaſt churche, betweene Paulinus and Flauianus,Other Sciſmes in the Eaſt church, whiche were Chriſtians. Lucifer and Euſebius, the Meletians and Euſtathians, all good Chriſtians: & yet did they with great troubles eſchew one the others Communion, as you may read in Epiph. li. 2 Tom. 2. Theodo. lib. 1. ca. 8. &c. Soc. li. 1. cap▪ 23. 30 Sozom. 2. ca. 18. the ſpace of 80 yeares or aboue. What ſhall I ſay of the great ſtrife betwene Chri.
                  Chriſoſt. on the one part, & Theophilus, Cyrill, & Epipha. on the other, for y• burning of Origins bookes? They were al godly and learned Biſhops, & we do worthily reuerence their names, and yet fell this matter ſo foule out betweene them that becauſe chriſoſt. woulde not conſente to the burning of Origines bookes, Theophilus and Cyrill would ſcantly euer acknowledge him to be a lawfull Biſhop: & Epiph. in bitter chiding, fell out to ſuch cholar, as he ſaid yt he hoped he ſhold neuer die Biſhop. To whom Chriſo. anſwered, as angerly agayne, that he truſted, he ſhould neuer returne aliue into his countrey of Cypres. Which chiding words were not ſo bitter in ſounde, as after they proued true in deed. For both Epiph. died before he came home to Cypres and Chriſoſt. being put out of his Biſhopricke, ended hys lyfe in baniſhment. I omit the contentious betweene Auguſt.
                  Other Sciſmes of others. and Hierome: betweene Hierome, Vigilātius, Ruffinus
                  
and other, betweene Tertul & the preiſts of Rome, betwene Ciprian & cornelius as wel for other things, as for rebaptizing of Heretiks, whiche things I here recite not, to the diſcrediting of ſo worthy & learned men, as all chriſtendome doth iuſtly reuerence their memorye, but to declare that god oftentimes, for ſuch cauſes as he thinketh good, doth ſuffer the beſt ſort of his preachers, to haue not only diuerſity of iudgemēts, but alſo contention & ſtrife among themſelues. But who I pray you are they that thusPapiſtes com
                        ••
                     e without their owne ſhame obiect ſciſmes to proteſtants. Of multitude of diſſentions amongſt papiſtes. find fault wt our diſſention, & diuerſity of opinirns? forſooth euen they whoſe whole religion, if it be well conſidered, is nothing but a Chaos & confuſe heape of ſects, ſciſmes, & ſeperations of minds, & iudgemēts. And God is my witnes, I ſpeake not this of ſtomake to aggrauate y• matter, but of very cōſcience, finding y• thing to be ſo, am forced to ſpeake it, as a moſt plain and certain truth. And firſt for proofe of this, I pray you cōſider with me, whether among the fautors of the ſea of Rome, euery countrey, Citie, pariſhe, andOf their diuerſitie of helpers. houſe haue not a peculiar patrone, in whom he truſteth, euery man his peculiar Saint, y• eſpecially he worſhippeth, euery diſeaſe, a peculiar helper & Mediatour to cure it. England hath S. George, Fraunce, S. Lewes, Scotlād, S. Andrew, freland, S. Patrike,
                   & likewiſe of other. In Roome, S. Peter, in Milain, S. Ambroſe,
                   in Vienne, S. Stephane,
                   in Coline, y• iii. Kings are worſhipped. S. Appoline for y• teeth S. Roche, for the plague, S. Swithine for the loſt key, is cheefely ſought vnto, euery perſon, & euery thing, had his peculier God. This ſort wold go to heauen by S. Francis
                  Of their diuerſitie of orders & profeſſions whereby to goe to heauen. rule, yt ſort by S. Benedicts, the third by S. Dominikes, the fourth by S. Auguſtines. Some would be S. clares diſciples, other wold be S. Bridgets, And herof came their manifold ſwarms & ſects of religious perſōs, of which ſom were called Frāciſcanes, ſome Dominickes, ſome Auguſtines, ſom clemētines, ſome Iohānites, ſome Ieſuites, ſome Scapucin
                     •
                  s, & I can not tell what: ſo that they would bee called, all things, rather then Chriſtians.
               What other thing is this, then that Chriſt prophecyed,

ſhould come to paſſe in the latter dayes? Loe here is chriſtMar. 13. 21. 
                  Loe there is Chriſte: So that al forſake him, the Lord and only Chriſte, and in euery corner, and Monaſtery, followe their own peculier Sauieur, and Chriſt. S Paule was greued with the Corinthians, for that they were ſo diſtracted in factions, that ſome would ſay, we are Apollos ſchollers other, we are Cephaſes: other, we are Paules. Whē they call themſelues Dominikes, Benedictines. &c. mighte wee not ſaye to them, as Paule ſayd to the Cor. Is chriſt1. Cor. 1. 12. deuided? Was Dominike crucified for you? was Francis or Benet crucified for you? that you chuſe rather factiouſly to beare their names, then with all other yt name of chriſt? I will not ſtand to recite the Repugnancie, and concrarietie,Repugnancie euen in the decres of popes. 
                  
                     ••
                  t the decrees of the Biſhops of Roome, ſeeing that Platina their own hiſtoriographer writeth, that their cō
                  tinal maner was, that one Biſhop diſanulled the decrees of the other. His words are theſe: Magnafuit haec controuerſia & peſſimi exēpli, cū pòſt, ſēper ſeruata ſit haec conſuetudo, vt acta priorū pontificū, ſequentes, aut infringerēt, aut omnino tollerēt. i. Great was this controuerſie, and vnto very ill example when as alwayes after, this cuſtome is continued, that thoſe Popes which followe, doe euer eyther breake, eyther vtterly diſanul the deeds of their predeceſſours.
                   The like he writeth in the life of Romanus of the diſſētiō betweene the Popes. Loke Exaſmus in his annotations,The Scholemen are full of diuerſitie of opinions. vpon the 7 Cor. Who is able to recken vp the infinit diſagreinges of the Scholemen, both againſt y• maiſter of the Sentences, and among themſelues, and that in matter of no ſmall wayght. Do not al the ſcholers, almoſt in ſundrye points ſwerue from their mayſtor, with this clauſe? Hic Magiſter non tenetur. Heare, is not our Maiſter to be holden, and maintained.
                  
               
               The maiſter of y• Sentēces touching Original ſin, ſaith ye
                  
                     Lib. 2. di. 25. For originall Sinne. 
                  mans nature is by it ſo corrupted, that by the power of nature they cā do no goodnes toward god: cōtrariwiſe Scot
                        •
                     , Occā
                   & other a
                     •••
                  rme y• natural mans ſtrēgth, is yet

indifferent, and may apply, and prepare it ſelfe to Grace. The Maiſter of the Sentences, in the vſe of the SacramentesLi. 4. di. 4. reiecteth Opus operatum, i. The deede of receauing,
                   that it in it ſelfe, ſhoulde haue vertue to geue grace, and requireth Panitentiam & fidem. Faith and repentaunce, to be alſo in the Receauer, that ſhall haue benefite by the ſacrament.
                   The other Scholemē, doe erpreſſely,For the vertue of the Sacramentes. and plainely teache, that the Sacramentes, haue power to ſanctifie, Ex opere operato, etiam ſine bono motu vtentis. i. Euen by their being receaued, and that without any good inward motion of the Receauer.
                   But they doe not onely thus runne, from their Maiſter Lomberde, but are foule fallen out alſo betweene themſelues, whyle ſome will be called Terminales, ſome Reales, ſome Nominales,
                  Diuerſitie of titles chalenged of Papiſticall Scholemen. ſome Formales, ſome Thomiſtes, ſome Scotiſtes, ſome Occamiſtes, and ſo forth a many moe. This diuerſitie of profeſſions, could not bee without great repugnancie, in opinions. If I ſhould ſtaye in Examples, they be infinite, & I ſhould holde you too long. A witneſſe or two of approued authoritie, for this, may ſerue. Roffenſis agaynſt Luther: This (ſaith he) I ſpeake for the Fathers, vvhoſe iudgement I had rather follow, then the Schoolemens, for that in this pointe, they bee repugnant one to the other: Eraſmus in his Enchiridion ſayth, Si Turcis, vt
                  Papiſticall Scholemen which deuided themſelues to ſectes and how hurtfull that is to chriſtianitie. The bitterneſſe of the coutention amongeſt the Scholemen papiſtes. 
                  Chriſtum amplectantur Occamos, Durandos, Scotos, Gabrieles, aut Aluaros, propoſuerimus, quid cogitabunt? quid ſentient? vbi audierint ſpinoſas illas argutias de inſtantibus de formal tatibus, de quidditatibus? &c. Praeſertim vbi viderint eos, de his adeò non conuenire, vt frequenter vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad pallorem, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad conuitia, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad Sputa, nonnunquam, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad pugnos in
                        •
                     ucem digladientur. If wee to winne the Turkes, to embrace Chriſt, ſhall offer or alleage vnto them, Durande, Scotus, Gabriel, Aluarus or any their followers, what wyll they thinke? What will they gather, when they ſhall heare thoſe Sophiſticall and contentious ſubtilties, De inſtantibus, de formalitatibus, de quidditatibus, &c. (Whiche are

altogether friuolous contentions, rather for wordes then matter?) But eſpecially when they ſhall ſee theſe men, in ſuch ſorte to diſagree for theſe things, that often they ſtriue, euen till they be pale withall, euen till they fall to chiding, euen till they ſpit one at an other, euen til they fall to blowes together. The like repugnancie, is betweene. Thomas and ſundrie other Diuines. For the Vniuerſitie of Paris, condemneth Thomas, in diuers articles, as manifeſtly erring, in the faith, as it may appeare in certaine additions, ſet to the end, of the maiſter of the ſentences. I omit the contrarietie of Councells, by manifeſt decreesCounſelles to diſagree & differ in opinion. impugning one another. I omit the greeuous contē
                  tion betwene the Councell of Baſill, & the Popes, ſtruggeling, which of them ſhould haue the chiefe authoritie in the Church. I omit the repugnant opinions of Gerſon, & ſundry other Diuines, touching the ſame. I will not ſpeake of the great ſtirre that was betweene the Vniuerſitie of Paris,
                  Diuerſitie of opinion betw
                        ••
                     t the vniuerſitie & the Friers. and the Freers, for the whole ſtate of their religion, and continued many yeeres, vntill the Popes highneſſe, tooke the Freers into his tuition, againſt a great number of learned Diuines, that diſputed, preached and wrate ſharpely againſt them. I will not ſpeake eyther of the diſagreeing betweene the Canoniſtes, & Scholemen, for ſundrye matters, as betweene the Monkes and Freers for the conception of our Lady. Ouely I will in a word or two, put you in minde, of ſome of their chiefe champions, that euen in this age, euen in our dayes, euen in our remembraunce, haue not onely differed, in ſome ſmall pointes, but in chiefe and great articles, one writing againſt another. Yea, and I will note unto you, the Fathers of one onely counſaile of Tridente, that thereby you may take taſte, what agreement is betweene the reſidue, if their doinges ſhoulde bee ſifted.Of late diſſentions in opinion amonge papiſtes. Doth not Catharinus Archbiſhop of Compſane one of the Popes legates, and great Cardinalls, in rigour and fierce manner, impugne the iudgement of Dominicus a Soto
                   
                  
                     •
                   Spaniſhe Frier, of great credite, and one of the Emperours1
                  
confeſſors? & the ſame Soto, as ſharpely write againſt Catharinus? & that in no ſuch ſmall: controuerſies, (as in a trifle, touching apparel:) but De Fiducia hominis Chriſtiani, of the hope of a Chriſtiā, Of predeſtinatiō, of originall ſinne of free will, &c.
                   & belike ech part had his aſſiſtances. For one of their bookes, was printed in Rome, wt the alowance of the Byſhop and Cardinals, the other were printed at Antwerp Cam priuilegio Imperatoris, and the allowance of of the Scholes of Louaine, Colone, & the prelates of Flaunders. The ſame Catharinus, writeth as vehemently againſt2 Cardinall Caietanus, of famous memorie, & a great patrone of the Popes, to his dying day: but in hys workes Katharinus, noteth, 200, pointes of doctrine, erronious, & (as he ſaith) heretical. That booke came forth after Caietanus was dead, or elſe, like it is, that he woulde haue done as much for Catharine as that commeth to. Like contention3 was betwene Catharinus, and Franciſcus Torrenſis, for ye ſingle life of Prieſts, and the reſidence of Byſhops: whiche thing Francis ſayd, were appointed by Gods lawe, but Catharine earneſtly defendeth the contrary. Who is of greater4 credite, in ye Church of Rome, thē 
                  Albertus Pighius? who hath more ſtoutely, or wt more countenance of learning, defended that ſide? And yet in the weightie articles of Originall ſinne, Iuſtification, and Free Grace, beſide diuers other, Ruardus Tapper, Deane of Coleyne, in his. 2. Tome, doth namely & expreſſely write againſt him, & ſay, that hee was deceaued. Becauſe the time doth now cut me ſo ſhorte, I will here end this matter, as hauing giuen you, a ſufficient triall, how the Patrones of the Sea of Rome, agree among themſelues. And yet forſoothe, theſe are they, that fynde ſo greate faulte, wyth lacke of agreement betweene the Preachers of the Goſpell, in theſe dayes, and vppon euerie diuers worde, in the interpretation of a ſentence, will deuiſe the name of a ſect among vs, onely of malice, onely to defame our doctrine, as Doctor Staphilus dealeth with vs in. &c.
               
                  Wherefore when wee heare theſe lying and ſclaunderous repartes, that the Teachers of the Goſpel are licentious, ſeditious, & diſagreing amōg themſelues: let vs conſider, that theſe are the blaſtes of malitious enimies, tenne times more offending, in the ſame things themſelues. Let vs remember, that the Goſpell of Chriſt, is y• true Rule of perfect life, the paterne of obedience, and the aſſured bonde of vintie, peace, and concorde, and therefore ſtill ſay, wyth S. Paule, I am not ashamed of the Goſpell.
               
               Laſt of all, they which depend wholy vpon the iudgemētRom. 1. 16. of men, and eſtimation of the world, and are aſhamed of theThe. 
                        •
                     . obicetion againſte the goſpell. vz. Goſpell, becauſe of the Multitude, the power, the authoritie, and noble eſtate of them, that miſlike the Goſpel: They ſee not onely loſſe of eſtimation, and contempt of the world,That igno
                     
                        ••
                      and perſecution doth followe it. but commonly perſecution alſo, eyther partly annexed, or alway imminent and at hand, to the preaching of the Goſpell, As it is well written, Crux eſt comes Euangely. i. The Croſſe and perſecution, is the companion of the Goſpell:
                   ſo it is as truely proued on the other part, that Senſus carnis crucem execratur & fugit. i. The vnderſtanding of the fleshe, deteſteth and flyeth frō the Croſſe.
                   Wherefore worldly men becauſe they ſee, that the greater part do hate the Goſpel, That fewe Nobles, or great eſtates, doe ſoundly fauour it, That they are diſdayned, and had in contempt, that puerly doe teache it, that there is continuall erpectation of the Croſſe of perſecution, to lyght vpon it: for this cauſe, I ſay, many doe ſhunne it, fewe doe embrace it, all men, euerie hower, ſtande looking, what mutabilitie of time, will bring vnto it. This cauſeth, that in the Vniuerſities,The cauſe of few diuines in vniuerſities of the beſt ſorte of witts. many excellent, and goodly wittes, that myghte bee ſingular ornamentes 
                     ••
                   the Churche, turne their ſtudies, to Lawe, to Phiſiche, and to other purpoſes, and will hardly, be brought to the ſtudde of Diuinitie, but in no wiſe to followe the Miniſterie. But I will not tarrie longer in this matter, althoughe I haue good matter, to vtter in it. The time doth abridge me, I will returne to my purpoſe.

They that are aſhamed of the Goſpell, in reſpect of
                     Anſwere to the 
                        •
                      obiection. worldly diſdayue, and trouble, do not ſufficiently conſider, that Chriſt in the middeſt of hys owne perſecution, and affliction, ſaide, that his kingdome was not of this world. yea, he ſayde the world hated him, becauſe he detected the wickedneſſe of the worlde. They therefore that will bee true followers of Chriſt, may not looke, to haue better intertainment in the world, than Chriſt had himſelfe. If theIoh. 15. 18. world hate you (ſayth Chriſt) you knowe that it hated mee before you. If yee were of the worlde, the worlde would ſurely loue, that is his owne. Becauſe you are not of the world, but I haue choſen you out of the worlde, therefore doth the world hate you. The ſeruant is not aboue the maiſter, If they perſecuted me, they will perſecute you alſo. And all theſe things ſhall they doe forHow god hath bleſſed Englande enen in this late time of the goſpell. my names ſake. And although wee be ſure by Chriſtes promyſe, that the worlde ſhall thus vſe vs: Yet conſider, how gratiouſly and mercifully, he hath in theſe dayes delt with his ſcattered flocke. Though Antichriſt grenne and gnaſhe his teeth at vs, Though the greateſt powers of Europe, be bent againſt vs: yet, as he promiſed by his Prophet Eſay: He hath giuen Kings, to be nurſing Fathers, and Queens, to be nurſing mothers. He hath raiſed to vs, our moſt gratious ſoueraigne, vnder whoſe protection (praiſe be to his name for it) we doe ſafely, and quietly, enioye the preaching of y• Goſpell: yea notwtſtanding ye threatnings, and indeuours of mighty aduerſaries abrode, & ſome great enimies at home. And yet ſtill doth the ſay, as I pray God ſhe may long, & euer from hir heart ſay, Non me pudet Euangelij. &c. I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell.
                   If anyThat princes do reſiſt the goſpel, that is no cauſe of diſcredite vnto it. be ſo affected, that they thinke, the kingdome of Chriſt, and his Goſpell, is but weake, and worthie contempte, becauſe it is commonly toſſed in daūger, and trouble of the world, and hath Princes more commonly againſt it, then wyth it, they are in that point much deceaued. For thereby, it may appeare, that it is preſerued, & kept, by the mightie power

of God, and not by the vncertaine, and brittle Fauour of Princes, and worldly puiſance: which then commonly falleth moſt ſodainly, when it ſeemeth to men, to floriſhe moſtThe goſpell often floriſheth, when it is moſt reſrifted. gloriouſly, & to be in moſt high eſtate & dignitie. Looke in all the kingdomes of the earth, if it hath not bene ſo. But for the Church of God, and Profeſſors of his truth, what a notable example is it of Diuine protection, that when theGod his good prouidence is ſuch to his, that they may hope wel, againſt any force whatſoeuer. whole world periſhed with the Deluge, yet God in y• middeſt of the waters, by the benefite of the Arke, preſerued his choſen ſorte of the houſe of Noah, from all daunger. Likewiſe afterward, Abraham and his poſteritie, was ſafe euen in the middeſt of the Caananites their enimies. In Aegypt, Gods people, although for the time oppreſſed, yet afterwarde myraculouſly were deliuered, to the terrour of all Princes, y• bend their power againſt God. The ſame people, were afterward fedde from heauen in the Deſert, when they deſpaired of foode, and nouriſhment, were planted in the land of Promiſe, in deſpite of al their Enimyes, preſerued from extreame Ruine in great Chaunges, Troubles, and Baniſhments, that the Relictes myght remayne, whereof the Sauiour of the worlde Chriſt Jeſu ſhoulde come. &c. (⸪)
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Certaine Sermons vppon this Texte of the Euangeliſt.
            
            
               Beware of falſe Prophetes, that come to you in ſheepes clothing, but inwardly be rauening Wolues, By their fruites you ſhall knovve them. Mat. 7. 15.
            
            
               
                  AS wee haue nothing (deerelye beloued,) more precious in this worlde, then the bleſſed Word of God, and his heauenly Doctrine taken out of it: ſo haue we not any kinde of perſons, more worthy to bee loued and had in eſtimation, than thoſe whom God ſendeth to impart the ſame vnto vs. Agayne on the other ſide, as nothing is more perilous and pernitious to Gods people, than falſe and corrupt Doctrine, contrarie to Gods holy will reuealed in the ſcriptures: ſo is there no ſort of men more to be ſhunned and taken heede of, than falſe teachers, whom Sathan thruſteth into y• church of God, to corrupt that precious Treaſure & meane of ourMat. 5. 1. &c. ſaluation. Wherefore our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt, after that he had made that notable Sermon in the Mount to his Diſciples, and had ſet forth the true interpretation of the Lawe of God, giuen by Moyſes, and diſcouered the falſe Doctrine and hypocriſie of the Scribes & Phariſies, and had rightly inſtructed his hearers, in the true exerciſe of Almes, Prayer, Faſting, truſt in God, and other workes of charitie, not contented herewith, but knowing the malice of the Diuell, that would leaue nothing vndone, wherby all hys Diſciples myght be ſeduced, from the trueth of his doctrine: In this place he carefully giueth them thys forewarning, that they ſhoulde take heede of falſe Prophetes, that ſhould come to deceaue them, and as rauening Wolues to deuour their Soules. And firſt he deſcribeth

them, what they be, that they may the better take heede of them. Secondly he giueth a note, rule or marke, whereby they may more eaſily be knowne. There was neuer time in which, this warning was more neceſſarie, then in theſe our dayes, when ſo many diuers doctrines are ſpred, & defended, and the one repugnant vnto the other. The patrons of the Church of Rome ſay, that we be ſchiſmatikes, heretikes & falſe teachers, and therefore, doe they will the people to beware of vs. Againe the profeſſors of the Goſpell charge them with the like, and ſay they are thoſe falſe prophets, of whome Chriſt giueth warning. Let vs firſt therefore examineDiſcription of falſe Prophets examined. the deſcription, and afterward come to the rule wherby they may bee knowne: that all men may vnderſtande to whether partie, both thoſe things can be more iuſtly, & aptly applyed. They ſhall come to you (ſaieth Chriſt) inMat. 7. 15. ſheepes clothing, but inwardly, they are rauening Wolues. This deſcriptiō, is more largly declared by S. Paul. Such falſe Apoſtles (ſaith he) are deceitfull workers, and2. Cor. 11. 
                           •
                        3. &c. tranſforme themſelues into the Apoſtles of Chriſt, and no meruaile, for Sathan himſelfe is tranſformed into an Angell of light: and therfore it is no great thing, though his miniſters tranſforme thēſelues, as though, they were the miniſters of righteouſneſſe. &c. And to the Theſſa. The comming of Antichriſt is by working of Sathan,
                  2. Theſſ. 2. 9. &c. 
                  with all power and ſignes, and lying wonders, and in all deceauablenes of righteouſneſſe. That which Chriſt vttereth by a figuratiue ſpeache, (That they ſhould come in ſheepes clothing) that Saint Paule expoundeth, to be their tranſformyng of themſelues, into the likeneſſe of Gods true miniſters, in countenaunce of holineſſe, & miraculous working, and great ſhewe of godlineſſe, and yet in deede be hypocrites and rauening Wolues. But at thys time it is neceſſarie, more particularly to laye downe what thoſe ſheepes ſkinnes are, wherwt theſe rauening Wolues do couer themſelues, to deceaue the people of God.
               
                  S. Aug. writing vpō this Sermō of Chriſt, doth diligētly

and carefully giue warning, that men in any wiſe ſhouldeDiſtinction to be made, betwixt the Cloathinge & the fruites of falſe prophets. learne to diſtinguiſhe the ſheepes cloathing, from thoſe fruites that Chriſt heare ſpeaketh of, Leaſt, ſayth he, the ſheepes cloathing be taken for the fruites, and ſo men be deceaued: for many account as fruites thoſe things that in deede doe appertayne to the ſheepes clothing. And among ſheepes cloathing, he there reckoneth faſting,The fyrſte Sheepes cloathing where with Wolues are cladde. praying, almes deedes, and outward holyneſſe of life. For when ſuch thinges are done ſincerely by Gods true Miniſters, then are they the right clothing of his ſheepe: But when falſe teachers doe put on the ſame, they are counterfayte clokes to deceiue the Simple. Whreby you mayOutward holineſſe, no ſure token of true teachers. perceiue, that outward holyneſſe of life, is no ſure token of true teachers. For if falſe teachers might not vſe the ſame to winne the eſtimation of the people, Chriſt a little before woulde neuer haue blamed the Phariſies, for declaring their Faſting, theire Praying, theire Almes deedes, and other Righteouſneſſe beefore men, that they mightMat. 6. 2. be ſeene of them, and therefore he ſayth, they haue theire rewarde. But what ſhall we ſay? Becauſe falſe teachers and the wicked ſeruantes of Sathan doe vſe this outward ſhewe of holineſſe, and godlye excerciſes, to induce men to their corrupt Doctrine, ſhall the true Miniſters of Chriſt and preachers of his Goſpell caſt away the ſame? and ſhew in their life a diſſolute and looſe behauioure? God forbid.
               Sheepe you know, doe not hate their ſkinnes, nor will caſt them of, becauſe Wolues and Lyons ſometime are wrapped in the like: but they will for that cauſe bee more warye and take better heede, that by the ſhew and reſemblaunce of their ſkinnes, they bee not deceaued, and offer themſelues to be deuoured of the Wolues, that be couered with them.
               Euen ſo the true Miniſters of Gods holy word, wil not therefore deteſte or caſte from them, honeſt conuerſation of life, and holy Chriſtian excerciſes, becauſe falſe Prophets abuſe the ſame to deceaue men, and leade them into errour,

but rather, they will take the more heede themſelues, and call vpon other to doe the like, that they bee not miſcaryed to anye falſe Doctrine, with the fayre countenaunce of their ſeuere and holy life. Although the Miniſters of Gods word, and Preachers of his Goſpell, beeing the cheefe and principall ſheepe of his folde, ought alwaye to haue on them the right cloathing of honeſt and Godlye conuerſation: yet that is no certayne or ſure Token to prooue eyther the Doctrine to be good, or the Preachers to be true meſſengers of Chriſt, ſeeing that the falſe Prophets and Teachers moſt commonly make greater ſhewe thereof in the face of the Worlde, then the true Preachers do. For Chriſt ſayth of the Phariſies, (whiche were Wolues in ſheepes Skinnes,) They doe all that theyMat. 6. 16. maye be ſeene and prayſed of men. Albeit a Wolfe bee wrapped in a Lambes ſkinne, yet if a manne looke circumſpectly vpon him, he ſhall eaſily perceiue him to bee a Counterfeyte.
               There is a prouerbe in y• Latine tongue, y• maketh much
                     
                        •
                      Wolfe in a ſheepes ſkinne is diſcried by his clawes. to this purpoſe, Ex vnguibus Leonē. i. By the clawes, you ſhall eſpie a Lion,
                   what garment ſoeuer he haue vpō him: So theſe ſpirituall Wolues that Chriſt heare ſpeaketh of though they be couered with the cloathing of Chriſts true ſhepe: yet if you looke vpon their clawes, you ſhal quickly eſpye them what they are.
               One of their clawes is Confidence, and Truſt in the holyneſſe
                  The firſt claw where by a Wolfe is knowne, is truſt in holineſſe of life. 
                  of their lyfe: ſo that they doe thereby not only aduance themſelues, as iuſt before God and the worlde, but alſo in cōpariſon of themſelues contemne all other. Suche a claw had the Phariſie that Chriſte ſpeaketh of, Luke. 18. Who in diſdayne of the poore ſinfull, but yet repentante Publicane, maketh his vaunte in this manner. I thanke thee O Lorde, that I am not as other men are, extorcioners,Luc. 18. 21. vniuſt, adulterers, nor as this Publicane is. &c. Such bee thoſe holy religious men, which in theſe dayes make their vauntes, that they are not onelye able, ſo farre to fulfill the

Law of God, that they may be accounted righteous themſelues: but alſo that they moreouer haue works of Supererogation, and merits, which may bee ſolde and applied to the benefite of other. This is knowne to bee the common Doctrine of the Church of Rome at this daye. But contrariwiſe the right Preacher that hath in deede the cloathing of the true ſheepe of God, hath euer humbleneſſe before God and the world ioyned withal, and is ſo farre from diſdaigne of other, that hee charitablye conſidereth theire weakeneneſſe and infirmitie. Iohn the Baptiſt, a right andMat. 3. 4. a true preacher, led a more Godly and ſeuere life, than any of the Phariſies: and yet was he ſo farre from their confident and proude Spirite, that he eſtemed himſelf not worthy, to vnlooſe the Latchet of Chriſtes ſhoe, and wyth his Fynger poynted to the Lambe, that taketh awaye the ſinne of the world. Another Clawe of theſe counterfaytedThe ſeconde Claw to know the Wolfe by, is the holineſſe conſiſting in obſeruation of mens traditions. Mat. 15. 3. Woolues, is a certayne peculier Holyneſſe, conſiſting in the obſeruation of mens Traditiōs, of which commonly they make greater accoumpte, then they doe of the Commaundments of God. Such they were whom Chriſt ſharpely reproueth Mat. 15. ſaying: You caſt aſyde the commaundement of God, to eſtablish your own ordinaunces, as he in the ſame place, largely proueth agaynſt them.
               Such they are, which accoumpt themſelues 
                     ••
                  lier then other, and aboue all other take to themſelues, the goodly cloake of Religious mē, becauſe they liue after the rule of Benedict, Francis, Dominick, Brigit, &c. or becauſe they weare this or that faſhion of Apparell, abſtayne from this or that kinde of meates, obſeruing the choyſe of days, vow of ſingle life, & a thouſand other like Traditions of men,The thirde claw is, the reſpect that the wolues haue more to their owne bellyes then to the glory of god. in compariſon whereof, Gods commaundments are finally amongeſt them eſteemed.
               The thyrd Claw, whereby theſe ſpiritual Wolues may be known, howſoeuer they be couered with goodly ſhew of holye life, is the Ende thereof, that is, that they doe

not exerciſe the ſame to the glorye of God, but to procure their owne benefite, to fill their owne bellies, & to deuoure the ſoules and goods of Gods people.
               And of this deuouring, are they by Chriſt iuſtly called, rauening Wolues. Of this doeth Chriſt ſpeake: WoeMat 23. 14. Luk. 20. 47. be to you ſcribes and Phariſies Hipocrites, that deuour widdowes howſes, and that vnder the pretence of long prayers. For this, ſhall you be the more greeuouſly punished. Such clawes of falſe Prophets are largelye deſcribed by the prophet Ezec. Of the ſame ſpeaketh SaintEzec. 13. 2. Ezec. 34. 2. 2. Pet. 2. 3. 1. 
                  Peter. There ſhall bee, ſayth hee, falſe Teachers among you, which priuily ſhal bring in damnable hereſies &c. and through couetouſnes, ſhal they with fained words, make marchandiſe of your ſoules. &c. The ſame is noted alſo by S. Paule, in way of Prophecie, (as S. Peter doth,) that ſuch ſhould come in the latter dayes in greate number: For of this ſort, ſayth he, are they which crepe2. Tim. 3. 6 into mens houſes, and leade captiue ſimple women laden with ſinne, and lead with diuerſe luſtes. Who ſeeth not in theſe Teſtimonies of the holy Scripture, thoſe religious Wolues deſcribed, whiche in ſwarmes haue ouerwhelmed the face of the earth, and with great ſhewe and pretence of holineſſe, and long prayer, haue ſought (not the glory of God,) but their owne ineſtimable wealth of the world? For by ſelling their Merits, their Prayers, their Maſſes▪ their Pardons, by Pilgrimages, by Purgatory, by abſolutions, by diſpenſations, and a number of other deuiſes, they haue not onely deuoured an infinite number of Chriſtian ſoules, but crepte into mens Teſtamentes, and from wife and children, and kinſfolk, got into their clawes the Wealth and Riches of the world.
               I would to God, this were not ſo notoriouſlye knowne, that it needed no further declaration or proofe. Wherefore when you ſee this Angelicall, or Seraphicall ſhew of heauenly life, in theſe incloſed Wolues, haue not by and by their Doctrine in admiracion, but looke carefullye vnto

their clawes, leaſt they crepe within you, ere you be ware.The ſecond Sheepes clothing where with Wolues do
                        •
                      vſe to couer themſelues. The ſecond ſhepes cloathing, vnder which falſe Prophets do hide themſelues, is Ordinary power and authoritie, Long Succeſsion, and lawful calling to the Miniſterie. And as I ſaid before, of honeſt conuerſation and Goly life, ſo I muſt ſaye of this, that it is and ought to bee, one of the bewtifull Ornamentes of Chriſts true ſheepe, whiche they oughte not to make light accoumpt of, nor wythout it, to thruſte themſelues into the Myniſterye of Gods true Doctrine, as the Anabaptiſtes, and other phanatical ſpirits do. For S. Paule faith, How ſhal they preachRo. 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4. vnleſſe they be ſent. And agayne. No man vſurpeth this honor, vnleſſe he be called thervnto of God, as Aaron was. If it ſhould be lawfull for euerye man, to come into the office of preaching or miniſtering without ordinary caling, there would be broughte into the Church, a marueilous confuſion of all thinges, together with infinite Sects and Erroures. But vnder this fayre Title and bewtifull Garment, haue many Wolues and wicked Heretiks crept into the church, as after you ſhall perceiue.
               And Chriſtes warning in this place, principallye toutheth ſuche: for hee directeth his ſpeeche agaynſte the Scribes, Phariſies, and high Prieſtes, that then were in ordinary Succeſſion, calling, and authoritie. And lykewiſe doth the ſpirite of God, in al the courſe of the ſcriptures, both of the old and new Teſtamēt. Moyſes ſayth, IfDeut. 13. 1. there ſhall riſe among you a Prophet or a Dreamer: In medio tui,
                   ſayth he, euen among you, or in the middeſt of you, He ſayth not a ſtraunger or Forrener, comming frō ſome other place, but among you. And Eſay: His watchmenEſay. 56. 10. are blinde and know nothing. And a little after: Behold, their Sheapheards are voyd of vnderſtanding, They are all gone, euery man after his owne way. And in Hieremie: In the Prophets of Hieruſalem, I ſaw, abhominacion.Jere. 23. 14. 15. &c. Filthineſſe and vncleanes, is proceded from the Prophets of Hieruſalem, ouer the whole earth.
                  
And agayne, My people is become a loſt flocke, theireJer. 50. 6. Sheapheards haue deceiued thē, and made thē to wander in the mountains. And Ezec. Her Prieſtes haue peruertedEze. 22. 26. my law vnaduiſedlye, and haue prophaned myMal. 2. 8. Sanctuarie. You, ſayth Malachi, to the Prieſts, haue gon out of the waye, and haue cauſed manye to fall by the lawe. Nothing can bee more playne, then that whiche Paule ſpeaketh to the Miniſters of Epheſus. &c. I knowe
                  
                  Act. 20. 29. 
                  this, ſayth he, That after my departure, shall greeuous Wolues enter in among you, not ſparing the flock. Of your own ſelues shal men ariſe, ſpeaking peruers things, to draw diſciples after them. And Saint John, From among1. Jo. 2. 19. 
                  vs they came, but they were not of vs. Yea, S. Paule ſayeth, that Antechriſt ſhoulde ſitte, not among2. Theſſ. 2. 4. Heathen perſons, or Infidels, but in Templo Dei, in the Church of God.
                   Wherfore you may not maruell, though we ſay that falſe prophets, & greeuous wolues are his vnder this fayre ſhepes cloathing of ordinary Authority, ſucceſſion, and calling, for the ſpirite of God hath told vs, that it hath ſo beene, and ſhoulde ſo bee to the worldes ende. You may not therefore thinke that Ordinarie authoritie
                  
                     Ordinary authoritie is no iuſt proof
                        •
                      of true doctrin
                        •
                     . and calling, is a full and iuſt proofe of good Doctrine or of true preachers. Wolues haue deuoured the Flocke, vnder that clothing: yea, ſuche they haue beene that haue moſt cruellye perſecuted Gods good prophers, and the doctrine that they haue taught. Who perſecuted Hieremie, and the other Prophets? were they not thoſe that ſayde Templū domini, Templū domini. i. The Tēple of the Lorde,
                  
                  Jer. 7. 4. 
                  The Tēple of the Lord? And Nūquid veritas diſcedet á Sacerdotibus. i.
                  Jer. 18. 18. 
                  Shal the truth depart frō the Prieſts? Were it not they yt ſtroke Micheas, and cauſed Hieremie to bee3. Reg. 22. 24. Jer. 32. 3. caſt into priſon? Who were they that put Chriſt to death, and perſecuted his Apoſtles? Doe not the Euangeliſtes, and Actes of the Apoſtles euidently declare it? Doth not Chriſte giue his Diſciples warning, that it ſhould bee ſo? Theſe things (ſaith he) haue I ſpoken vnto you, that youJoh. 1
                           •
                        . 1.
                     
may not be offended, They ſhall excommunicate you out of their ſynagoges, & al for my names ſake. Were it not they that had ordinary Calling & Succeſſion that hadde Authoritye to excommunicate? Seing then by teſtimonie of the Scriptures we learne, yt it hath alway bene ſo among the people of god, and the Scriptures witnes in way of Prophecie, that in the latter dayes it ſhoulde bee ſo: Why may not the faythfull people of God greatelye feare, that nowe alſo in our age, the falſe Prophettes bee hid vnder the cloake of Ordinary calling, and Succeſſion?True prophers extraordinarily ſet vp by God, to reproue the abuſers of their ordinarie calling. For this Cauſe, did God extraordinarily rayſe, and ſet vp his true Prophets, which might ſharpely blame & reproue thoſe falſe Maiſters & Teachers, yt did abuſe this countenāce of ordinary Succeſſiō & Authority, to deceaue Gods people, & carry thē from the law of god to ſuperſtition & Idolatry. Which prophets of god, not wtſtanding yt ordinary calling & ſucceſſion of the other, in many places do tearme them, Dumbe Dogs, Idle ſheapheards, deceauers, Lions,Eſay. 5
                           •
                        . 10. &c. Wolues, Foxes, Murderers. &c. And for ſo doing, they which were in ordinary authority, did eſteeme thē as factious, ſeditious, ſtubborne, obſtinate & deceauers of yt people. It hath pleaſed the mercifull prouidēce of God, likewiſe in theſe latter days, extraordinarily to raiſe vp, & mightily to defend▪ certain learned men, and Godly preachers, whiche might reueale vnto ye world, & earneſtly reproue & cōfound the great & horrible corruptiō, both of doctrine & māners, y• haue now theſe many yeares, ben brought into y• church, & wt fagot & fyre maintained by thē, yt chalenge to themſelues ordinary power & authoritie, which preachers haue had the very ſame intertainmēt at their hands, y• the ancient Prophets had of y• falſe prophets, prieſts, & Princes of y• people. We muſt not therfore beleue, yt he is a true miniſter of god & a deliuerer of ſound Doctrine, yt is furniſhed wt ordinary authority, & challengeth y• cōmendacion of ſucceſſiō & lawful calling: for the wolues often times be couered, wt that clothing. And I wil note vnto you in this place, one claw,

whereby you ſhall not lightly fayle, to Diſcearne theVnder the cloathing of ordinarie caling, the Wolfe is deſcried by his Claw of crueltie and ſucking of blood. greedy and greeuous Wolfe, that is, Tyranny, crueltie, and blood: for the falſe Prophets are alwayes cruell and bloody. Take Example of the olde falſe Prophets, in the time of Eſay, Ieremie, Micheas, Zacharie and other, and Chriſte himſelfe doeth note that Marke in them, in ſundrye places of the Goſpell. Howe blooddye and cruell Euſebius, and the other Arians, and falſe Teachers were, toward Athanaſius & other Godly, & catholike Biſhops of that time, the eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories doe largely declare, & might be layde down in this place, if time would ſerue. But neuer was ſhewed more notable examples herof, thē in theſe oure dayes by the Popes & their Prelates, which, to extinguiſh y• Goſpell, & the true preachers, & profeſſours therof, haue bene Trompets to mooue Princes to war & murder, & by ſword & fyre haue imbrued the whole earth, with the blood of Gods ſaintes and bleſſed martirs. But cōtrariwiſe, the ſpirit of truth in the right preachers of God, is alway charitable, mild, & merciful: & ſo much as poſſible may be, with the ſafety of the church of Chriſt, deteſting crueltie and blood. Let example bee taken hereofThe mercie of the Prefeſſoures of the Goſpell, Compared with the cruelty of the Churche of Roome. The thyrde Sheepes Skinne, wherein the Wolfe is wrapped. by the practiſe of all the primatiue church, for the ſpace of ſixe hundred yeares, and of all the profeſſoures of the goſpell in theſe latter dayes, in compariſon of the contrarye part. The third Lambes cloathing, wherewith falſe prophets ſeeke to couer and hyde themſelues, is the goodlye name & title of ye Holy, Apoſtolical, & Catholique church, wherewith they ſeeme gloriouſly to aduance & ſet forward themſelues: as though that all their Doctrines, Traditions, & deuiſes of new worſhip, proceded not frō thēſelues, but were eſtabliſhed by the perpetual conſent of y• church, and allowed by the ſentence and interpretacion of the holy counſailes, and ancient learned fathers, & Doctours, and yet whē it ſhalbe rightly & trulye examined, it is nothing ſo. In deede, cōſent of y• church to true & godly Preachers, is not onely a goodlye and bewtifull Garment, but a moſte

neceſſarie Ornament, that men may not faigne and deuiſe Doctrines, opinions and Phantaſies of their owne heads: but profeſſe, beleeue and teache, the conſent of the true Catholike Churche in that doctrine, that was firſt planted in Paradice by God him ſelfe, and after renewed and continued by the Patriarches, and Prophetes, and ſo publiſhed into the whole world, by Chriſt himſelfe and his Apoſtles. The ſumme whereof, is briefely contained in the articles of our faith, teaching vs the vneſtimable goodneſſe of Almightie God towarde vs, as well in making of the world, as in redeeming mankinde by the Incarnation and deathe of hys Sonne. &c. This faith and beliefe ought to be eſtabliſhed and conſerued, by the conſent of the Catholike Churche from the beginnyng. But it is of all Chriſtian heartes to bee lamented, that moſt wicked and rauening Wolues, vnder this cloake of the Churches Conſent, do abuſe the people of God, bring into the Churche, and maintaine ſtraunge worſhipping of God, and what ſoeuer theyThe name of the church abuſed by the wolues. haue newly deuiſed of themſelues, without iuſt warrant of the holy Scriptures: and contrarie to the manifeſt doctrine of the Prophetes, Apoſtles, and auncient Fathers of the Primitiue Church. And by the authoritie of this Title of the Church, doe perſecute and feare men, from embracing the reformation of the Goſpell, and ſtriue ſtill, by violence to keepe them in the blindneſſe of ignoraunce, and errour. But for ſo much as I haue ſufficiently, and at large in another place, ſpokē againſt this Lambes clothing, and haue taught men how by certayne Tokens to eſpie the ſame, I will not ſtande longer vpon it at this time, but will referre the reader hereof to the ſeconde Sermon, made vpon this Text, the briefe ſome whereof was recited in this place.
               The laſt Lambes clothing, that I meane to note vntoThe laſt cloathing wherin the wolues doe lurke. you at this time, is their Vaunting of myracles & wonderous workes, that haue bene done for the confirmation, of their doctrines & Ceremonies, which they haue brought into the Church. For as Chriſt by myracles did confirme

the true doctrine of the Goſpell: ſo doe the ScripturesFalſe Miracles wrought by falſe prophets to deceaue gods people withall. witneſſe, that wicked teachers, & members of Antichriſtes ſchoole, ſhoulde vſe the countenaunce of the ſame, to leade men into errour. For the Diuel doth often, turne himſelfe into an Angell of lyght, and wyll ſeeme to imitate the diuine power of God. That falſe Prophetes doe ſometimes vſe this clothing, to commende themſelues and their profeſſion: it is euident in many places of the Scriptures. Iannes and lambres by this meanes reſiſted Moyſes, andExod. 7. 8. 9. did harden the heartes of Pharao and the Aegyptians, againſt the meſſengers, and people of God. Simon Magus, & Elymas the Sorcerer, by ſuch ſtraunge working ſeducedAct. 13. 8. many. Moyſes giueth warning of ſuch, and wylleth the people of God to take heede of them, ſaying: If thereDeu. 13. 1. &c. ariſe among you a Prophete, or a dreamer of dreames and giueth thee a ſigne or wonder, and the ſigne or wonder that he hath tolde thee come to paſſe, ſaying, Let vs goe after other Gods. &c. Thou ſhalt not harken to the wordes of that Prophete, for the Lord your God doth proue you, to knowe whether you loue him, with all your heart. &c. Chriſt himſelfe ſheweth, that they be not all by and by true Prophetes and ryght teachers, that haue power to worke Myracles: Many will ſay vnto meeMat. 7. 22. in that day, Lorde, Lorde, haue not we in thy name propheſied? haue we not caſt out Diuells in thy name? and by thy name haue done many great workes? But it followeth. Then I will profeſſe vnto them, I neuer knew you, departe from mee all yee that worke iniquitie. Here we ſee, that with wickedneſſe and corrupt doctrine, may be ioyned working of Myracles, and ſtraūge doyngs. And agayne, our Sauiour Propheſying of ye latter dayes,Mat. 24. 2
                        •
                     . ſayeth: Then if one ſaye vnto you, beholde heere is Chriſt, or there is Chriſt, beleeue hym not: for there ſhall aryſe falſe Chriſtes and falſe Prophetes, and ſhall ſhewe great Signes and wonders, in ſo muche (that if it were poſsible) the verie elect of God ſhoulde bee
                  
                  ſeduced, Beholde I haue giuen you warning before. And Saint Paule in lyke manner, giuyng vs warning of Antichriſt and his falſe Prophets, ſayth. Whoſe comming2. Theſſ. 2. 9. &c. is after the working of Sathan, with all power & ſignes, and lying wonders, and in all deceaueableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe, among them that perishe, becauſe they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might bee ſaued, And therefore God ſhall ſende them ſtrong deluſions to beleeue lyes, &c. Thys warnyng principally toucheth vs, vppon whome the latter endes of the worlde hath lyghted, that wee ſhoulde carefullye take heede, that by Wonders and Myracles and Apparition of Spirites, wee bee not Seduced, eyther to beleeue errour, or to refuſe the trueth of the Goſpell offered vnto vs. Chriſt gyueth vs a ſpeciall charge
                     •
                   
                  Beware, ſaithMat. 24. 25. he, I haue tolde you of it before hand. Therefore if you doe not harken vnto him, but yeelde your ſelues by ſuche meanes to be caryed into Superſtition, Errour and Idolatrie, the daunger ſhall bee the greater. And Saint Paule addeth a terrible threatning: Becauſe they receyued not the loue of trueth, God ſhal2. Theſſ. 2. 11. ſende them ſtronge deluſions, that they may beleeue lyes, that all they myghte bee damned whiche beleeued not the trueth, but had pleaſure in vnrighteouſneſſe. Let them looke therefore carefully to themſelues, which, by ſuche Myracles, are Induced or confyrmed to beleeue the corrupte errours, of Pilgrimages and worſhypping of Images, of praying to Sainctes departed, of Purgatorie, of Maſſes and Trentalles, of praying and offering for the ſynnes of the Deade, and ſuche other infinite errours, as hath beene brought into the Churche by Monkes, Fryers, and other falſe Teachers of the Churche of Rome.
               It is a wonder to ſee the Heapes of ſuch Myracles as of late yeeres, haue beene put in writyng by Vincentius,
                  
and a number of other like authors, ſo that to ſuch as feare God, there is ſcant any greater Token, that Antichriſt is come, and hath ſet a long time in the Church, then this is: That their doctrines are altogether confirmed, rather by ſuch Myracles & Apparition of ſpirites, then by the ſcriptures and word of God. When the riche glutton, (as it is mentioned in the Euangeliſt,) deſired of Abraham, that one myght riſe from death to life, and warne hys brethren, that they came not to that place of torment, where he was: Abraham aunſwered, They haue Moyſes and the Prophetes,Luc. 16. 29. if they will not beleeue them, they will not beleeue, though one riſe from death to life. Wherby the 
                     ••
                  lye Ghoſt doth Signifie, that after the true doctrine of Chriſtes Goſpel firſt publiſhed, was throughly confirmed, and b
                     •
                  yng generally receaued, was put in writing, and ſo remaineth as a perfect Teſtimonie of the worke of our redemption: that the prouidence of God, towarde the latter
                     
                        ••
                     y god 
                        ••••
                      not now ſhewe ſuch 
                        ••
                     acles as of 
                        •
                     ld he di
                        •
                     , but 
                        •
                     latly 
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     raineth vs to the written word. ende of the world woulde vſe no moe Myracles, leaſt hee ſhould thereby ſeeme, rather to Diſcredite the truth of his written word, than by ſuch meanes conſerue them. For whoſoeuer wil not beleeue the doctrine of truth, confirmed by the expreſſe and euident worde of God, will not beleeue yt ſame, though they ſawe a. 1000. myracles. Take example hereof by y• Jewes, who continually called for Signes and Wonders, but when they had ſeene many, they neuer the ſooner Beleeued, but ſclaunded the doinges of Chriſt, and ſayd, that he and his Apoſtles wrought by the power of Beelzebub, &c. Chriſtians therefore muſt learne ſomeMat. 12. 14. Rule, wherby they may iudge falſe and deceitefull Myracles, done by the power of the Diuell, from them that bee done directly by the Worde of God in his Saintes. And this rule is the ende, wherevnto myracles doe tende. GodlyThe end whereunto godly miracles do tend. myracles bee alwayes ſhewed by God, to confirme the Diuine nature and office of Chriſt, in the worke of our redemption, and that he is the true and onely Meſsias and Sauiour, or to iuſtifie and proue the doctrine of the Goſpel

to bee good. According as Chriſt ſayth, in the laſt of S. Marke: Goe yee into the whole worlde, and preacheMar. 16. 15. &c. the Goſpell to euerye creature, he that ſhall beleeue and bee Baptiſed ſhall bee ſaued, but he that wyll not beleeue, ſhall bee damned: and theſe tokens ſhall followe them that beleeue, In my name they ſhall caſt out Diuells, and ſhall ſpeake with newe tongues, and ſhall take away Serpentes, and if they drinke any euill thing, it ſhall neuer hurte them, they ſhall laye their hand vpon the ſicke, and they ſhall recouer. &c. Thoſe Myracles then that bee done to this ende, to direct the people to acknowledge Chriſt to bee the only, ful, and perfect redeemer of mankynde, and to embrace the doctrine of the Goſpell, by the holye Scriptures confirmyng the ſame, are good, and godly, and to bee eſteemed true Myracles. But contrariwyſe if they leade men from Chriſt, and directe them to put their truſt of Saluation, & remiſſion of ſinnes,Act. 4. 
                        ••
                     . in any other name vnder Heauen, then Chriſt Jeſu, or to beleeue any other doctrine, than that which by Gods word is euidently confirmed, or to accept any other worſhippe of God, than by himſelfe is appoynted, are falſe Myracles, and deluſions of the Diuel, wrought to deceiue men. Let vs therefore beware of theſe thinges, and looke into theſe myſerable deluſions, wherewith the Diuell and his Miniſters haue bewitched the worlde, nowe theſe manye yeeres, by Spirites, Ghoſtes, Goblines, and many vaine Apparitions and faygned Myracles. &c. (⸪)
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſeconde Sermon vppon this part of the Texte.
               
               
                  Exfructibus eorum cognoſcetis eos. By their fruites ſhall ye knovv them.
               
               
                  IN this place we haue diligentlye to obſerue the great difference, yt Chriſt our Sauiour in this louing and Fatherly admonitiō, doth make betwene the clothing, & the fruits, By their fruites you ſhallMat. 7. 20. know them, he ſaith not by their garmēts, or outward clothing: for wyth that y• falſe Prophets vſe to colour & countenance, all their crafts & deceiptes of corrupt doctrine. Now what theſe fruites be, whereby they are knowne, let vs conſider by yt ſimilitude, or parable, yt Chriſt here vſeth, Do they,
                  Verſe. 16. ſaith he, gather Grapes of Thornes, or figges of Thiſtles? Euery kinde of tree hath fruit, by which it is knowne to be good or bad. The Apple tree by the Apple, the Plumtree by the Plumme, &c. ſo euerie trade, occupation, or ſtate of lyfe hath certaine proper and peculiar workes, by which it is diſcerned either to be good or bad in it ſelfe, or differing from other. The Carpenter by right ſquaring & framing of his Tymber, the Maſon by his buylding, &c. the Lawyer, by his Counſaile, the Phiſition by his cure, is iudged ſkilfull or ignoraunt: euen ſo is the Preacher or Prophet knowē by his doctrine, that proceedeth from him, which is the peculiar worke and ſruite of his trade and occupation.

In all the olde Teſtament, God doth accuſe the falſe Prophetes to bee euill, becauſe they deliuered vnto his people falſe doctrine, & corrupt worſhip, contrarie to his holy will and worde. Heare not, ſaith God by Ieremie, the wordes
                  
                  Ier. 23. 16. 
                  of the Prophets that propheſie vnto you & teach you vanitie, They ſpeake the viſion of their owne heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. And agayne, HoweVerſe. 26. long doe the Prophetes delight to propheſie lyes, euen propheſying the deceipt of their owne hart. And immedately after: Therfore beholde, I will come againſt the prophets that ſteale my word priuily, euery one frō his neighbour: behold I will come againſt thoſe Prophets, that haue ſweete tongues, & ſay, The Lord hath ſaid it: I will come againſt thē, that propheſie falſe dreames, and tell thē out, & cauſe my people to erre by their lyes, & by their flatteries, & I ſent thē not, nor cōmaunded thē, like teſtimonies haue Ezech. Hoſeas, Malachi, & other. But the places be manifold, wherein the ſpirit of God in yt ſcriptures teacheth vs yt lying, falſe doctrine & peruerting of yt word of God, are the fruites of falſe prophets, wherby they may be knowē. Sathā himſelf the father & founder of all lying, & falſe teaching, vſed yt ſame courſe in Paradice. For whē God had ſaid vnto Adā
                   our firſt father: In whatGen. 2. 17. houre ſoeuer thou ſhalt eate of the fruite of this tree, thou ſhalt die the death, The old craftie Serpēt ſeeking to ſeduce man frō God, ſayde: Nay, you ſhall not die theGen. 3. 4. death, but you ſhal be like vnto God. By which glofe & falſe interpretatiō of Gods word, he pulled them cleane frō the obedience of Gods holy will & commandement, to their owne vtter ouerthrow & heauy iudgemēt. By yt like falſehood he tēpted Chriſt, to make him conceiue ouer great cō
                  fidence of yt prouidence of God toward him, Oh, ſaid he, it isMat. 4. 6. Pſal. 91. 11. 12. writtē, that he hath giuen his Angels charge ouer thee, that with their handes they maye ſaue thee, leaſt at any time, thou ſhouldeſt daſh thy foote againſt a ſtone. By like craft of lying, and by falſe Sence peruerting yt words

of God, he from time, to time inſtructeth his meſſengers & falſe Prophets, to abuſe and deceiue the Simple people of God, that bee not well taught by his holy ſpirite, howe to withſtand them. But I will come neere vnto my purpoſe, & by ſome perticular example ſhew, how the worlde in theſe latter dayes hath ben, & in a great part yet, is deceaued by falſe Prophets, & how the ſame may be knowne, examined, & ſhunned. S. Ioh. in his firſt Epiſtle, ſheweth vs a certaineHow falſe prophets are diſcerned by their fruits, & chefly by their doctrin. 1. Ioh. 2. 22. rule, how we may know theſe fruites of falſe Prophetes, and in a manner diſtinctly telleth vs, what they are, and likewiſe the fruites of true Prophets: Who is a lier, ſayth he, but he that denieth Ieſus to bee Chriſt? he is Antichriſt that denieth the father & the ſonne. Whoſoeuer denieth the Sonne, hath not the Father. And agayne, Dearely beloued, beleeue not euerie ſpirit, but trie the
                  1. Ioh. 4. 1. &c. 
                  ſpirites, whether they be of God or no. For many falſe Prophets are gone out into the world. By this you ſhall know the ſpirit of god. Euery ſpirit that cōfeſſeth Ieſus Chriſt to haue come in the fleſhe is of God. And enerie ſpirit, that denieth Ieſus chriſt to haue cōe in the fleſh, is not of God, & this is that (ſpirit) of Antichriſt, of which you haue heard, that he ſhould come, and now alreadie is he in the world, By theſe wordes & ſome other, that S.Three points of doctrine, by falſe teaching whereof, th
                           •
                         teachers of the church of Rome, are found to be falſe pro
                        
                           •
                        h
                           ••
                        es. Iohn in the ſame Epiſtle vſeth, I obſerue three ſundrye pointes of doctrine, touching the very ground of our ſaluation, by which he teacheth vs, to diſcerne true or falſe teachers. The firſt is, what Chriſt is in Perſon & Office, and what it is truely to confeſſe or denie Chriſt. The ſecōd why Chriſt came into the world, what benefites mankinde hath by it, and who it is that doth confeſſe the ſame, or denie it. The thirde howe, or by what meanes we are made partakers of thoſe benefites, and how the fruite of the ſame is applyed to vs. Theſe braunches are not deuiſed by mee, They are layde downe diſtinctly, by Saint Iohn in thys place, and they containe, as I haue ſayde, the whole myſterie of our redemption and ſaluation by Chriſt, that you

may not thinke, I purpoſe to reſt vpon trifles, or matters of ſmall moment, in triall of true Doctours and teachers.The firſte pointe conteining what knowledge of Chriſt we ought to haue, & how we muſt confeſſe him. Iac. 2. 19. Mat. 16. 16. As touching the fyrſt, we may not thinke, that a ſleighte knowledge & confeſſion of Chriſt the ſonne of God, and ſauiour of the World, is ſufficiente: For the Diuels (ſayeth S James) doe beleeue, know, and tremble, yea Mahomet and the Turkes, after a ſort, do acknowledge Chriſt. We muſt ſo know and confeſſe Chriſt, as S. Peter did, ſaying: Thou art that chriſt, the ſonne of the liuing GOD. We muſt deepely pearce, or enter into yt whole courſe of yt ſcripture, and earneſtly conſider by what titles Chriſte is called, and in dede what hee is, both in perſon and Office. To confeſſe that Jeſus is Chriſt the ſonne of God, is as much as if you ſhould ſay, I knowe, confeſſe, and beleeue that Jeſus borne of the bleſſed Virgine, is the bleſſed Sede, & the true Meſſias promiſed by God, by the mouth of all his Prophets, and the eternall and onelye begotten ſonne of God, that is, according to his perſon, very God, & very man, and by his office the true Chriſte, annoynted of the Holy Ghoſte, King of Kinges, Lorde of Lordes, the Highe Biſhoppe, and principall Sheapheard of oure ſoules, our Sauiour, Redeemer, Mediatour, and Interceſſour, the head Gouernour, Ruler, Patrone, & Defēdour of the Church. And we may not thinke yt the eternall prouidence & wiſdome of God, wold prepare ſo precious, high, & vneſtimable a Means, as to ſēd down his ſon, to take the forme of a ſeruant vpō him, in this vale of miſery, to work only ſome parte of our ſaluation, and ſo but in part, to execute the office of a ſauiour. Wherfore we muſt aſſuredlyChriſt onely is all in all vnto ſaluation. Act. 4. 12. know & confes, yt Chriſt is al yt is before ſpoken, wholly, and only, without any part attributed to other. For as Peter ſayth: There is no other name giuen vnder heauen, wherby we ſhalbe ſaued, We muſt therfore beleeue, that Chriſt is our only Redeemer, Mediatour, & Interceſſour, y• only head, ruler, gouernor & defēder of his church, ye only high Biſhop, chefe ſheapherd, maiſter & techer of his flock.

They that beleue, confeſſe, & teach this, be true preachers, and are of God: they yt do not beleeue, confeſſe, & teach this howſoeuer they doe countenance and ſet forth themſelues, are falſe Prophets, & of the Diuel. For ſo ſayth S. Iohn, Who is a lyar, but he that denieth Ieſus to be chriſt, he is
                        
                           •
                        . Ioh. 2. 22 that Antechriſt &c. Now yt profeſſors & teachers of yt goſpell in theſe latter dayes, as wel in this church of England, as other parts of yt world, do confes, teach & preach in this manner: therefore they are true Preachers, and of God. Let all our doctrines be examined, & ſee whether they tend not to this end, yt Chriſt is our only, ful, & perfit Redemer, Mediatour, & Interceſſour, yt he is the only Head, Guide, & generall gouernour of his church: yt he is yt only high Biſhop, maiſter, & teacher of his flock, & yt in theſe offices, none can without blaſphemy be ioyned with him. And I doubt not but our verye Aduerſaries will ſay that this is true in vs, or at the leaſt, they haue no likely pretence in truth, to ſaye the contrarye. On the contrarye parte, the Doctrines of the Churche of Roome, are either manifeſtlye repugnaunte to this confeſſion, in ſunderye thinges, or greatly imparing or diſgracing the ſame.
               Therefore their Preachers are falſe Prophets, and notFalſe prophets are they, that eyther 
                        ••
                      flatt woords deny Ieſus to be Chriſt, or by indirect means, do go about to teach it; ſuch are the teachers of the church of Rome. Ioh. 14, 6. of God, for not only doth he denie Ieſus to be Chriſte, that groſely, in flat wordes ſo ſayth, or he that playnly denieth chriſt to be the ſonne of God, as Cerinthius & other auncient heretikes did: but he alſo that couertly, & vndirectly by falſe doctrines worketh the ſame, & by teaching other men to ſeke other Sauiors, Mediators, Interceſſors, maiſters, and directours to ſaluatiō, beſyde him that ſayth, I am the way, the truth & the life, or which by inſtructing them otherwiſe in Chriſts Sacramēts & other ordināces, thē he himſelf hath cōmāded & appointed. For profe yt the church of Roome doth this, firſt let this Doctrine bee examined, whereby they teach that the very Reall, and Naturall body of Chriſt, is in a thouſand places at once, that is, in ſo many places as there are Oſtes conſecrated.
               
                  This Doctrine impeacheth the principall Article of oure fayth, that chriſt of y• bleſſed Virgine tooke fleſh, and had a very true and naturall body as we haue, Sinne onelye excepted. It is the property of God only, to be in manye places at once. As Chriſtes body is now after his aſſētion glorifyed, and is tranſformed to a greater bewty & brightneſſe, ſo yet it remaineth a very true & ſubſtantiall bodye. And to teach that the body of Chriſt is in manye places, or euery where, as his Deitie is, doeth make an open gappe to the Hereſie of Abbot Eutiches, which taught yt Chriſte his humanitie, was ſwallowed vp with yt Maieſtie of hys Godhead, and ſo became a diuine thing. Furthermore for yt proofe of their errors in this Article, let their doctrine be examined of the Popes Su
                     •
                  remacie, wherby it is taught, that he is the vniuerſall Biſhop, & generall Lord, Maiſter, and Gouernour of the whole catholike church, that he hath authoritie to pardon ſinnes, to deliuer Soules out of Purgatory, to deſtribute the merites of Chriſt & of his Saints, to diſpence wt the ordinances of Chriſt, to alter yt inſtituciō and vſe of his inſtruments, to coyne newe Articles of oure Faith, of neceſſitie to be beleeued, cleane without any Authoritie of Gods word, all which things are only in duetye and in truth to be attributed to Chriſte, and to none other, as before I haue declared.
               The ſecond Article of doctrine is why Chriſte came inThe ſecond poynt of doctrine by which fal
                        ••
                      prophets are diſcearned from true teachers. fleſhe, and what benefite mankinde hath by it. When as Gods iuſt wrath againſt ſinne, committed by our fyrſt parentes was ſo greeuous, that no Creature in Heauen or in earth, was able in anye parte to appeaſe the ſame, by the vneſtymable goodneſſe of GOD, his onlye and dearely beloued ſonne became a ſacrifice to appeaſe his wrath, and diſpleaſure, and to reconcile vs to his Father, and by his death, paſſion, and reſurrection procured for vs recōciliatiō with his father, remiſſiō of ſinne, righteouſnes before god, and eternall life in heauen. Theſe be the Fruites, and benefites that we haue by Chriſts cōming in fleſhe.
               
                  Here agayne, we haue to call to our remembrance, the note that is before ſpoken of, touching the highnes and exellencie of the meane of our ſaluation. For if the ſame, in part or in all, could haue bene wrought by any other creatures, in Heauen or earth, the wiſedome of God, would neuer haue giuen his ſonne to death, to procure the ſame benefites for vs.
               But that he might declare how odious, and diſpleaſaunt Sinne was to God, he let vs by this meanes vnderſtande, that the offence thereof could not be taken away, nor mankinde to him bee reconciled, but onelye by the blood of the immaculate Lambe, Chriſt Jeſus his ſon. Good Chriſtians muſt then aſſuredly perſwade themſelues, that they haue reconciliation with God, remiſſion of ſinne, iuſtification before God, ſanctification of the holy Ghoſt, and the heritage of eternall life, by the excellencye and fulneſſe of Chriſt his death, and paſſyon only, only (I ſay,) and by nothing elſe. For as I haue ſayde, Chriſt is the only full, and perfect meane of our ſaluation, as the whole courſe of the Scripture teacheth vs. Eſay the Prophet, many yeares before Chriſt came in fleſhe, ſignified thus much, and cryeth to all them that hunger and thyrſt after ſaluation, that they ſhould come and receaue it plentifully, and freelye of the mercy of God in Chriſte, and blameth them for ſeeking for ſaluation, and the ſatiſfying of their hungry and thirſtie ſoules, by any other meanes, then y•, O (ſayth he) all ye that thyrſt, come to the waters, and ye that haue no ſiluer,Eſa. 55. 1. come, buy and eate, come, I ſay, bie Wine & Milke, without money. Wherefore do you lay out your ſiluer, for that that is no bread, & beſtow your labor for that which doth not ſatiſfye you, hearken dilligently vnto me, and eate that which is good, and let your ſoules delight in fatneſſe, incline your eares, and come vnto me, heare, and your ſoule ſhall liue. &c. By theſe wordes I haue ſayde, the Prophet calleth vs, to receaue the comfortable water, and ſuſtenaunce of the Goſpell, which offereth

full ſaluation, and ſatiſfying of our hungry ſoules, freelye by Chriſt, and ſharpely rebuketh them, that leauing chriſt, ſeeke after other meanes, by which in deede their hungrie deſyre of Remiſſion, and Saluation, in anye parte cannot be ſatiſfyed: and for that cauſe hee ſayeth, Theire Syluer is beſtowed, and theire Laboure ſpente in vayne.
               
               Chriſt himſelf, may ſeeme to expounde this prophecye, and apply vnto himſelfe in playne wordes, that, whiche the prophet heare, ſpeaketh in a figuratiue & borrowed ſpeech, for he ſayth, Whoſoeuer thirſteth, let him come to meeJoh. 7. 37. Mot. 11. 28▪
                      and drinke. And agayne, Al ye that trauaile & be heauy loden, come vnto me, and I will refreshe you. The Apoſtles do fully in their doctrine, iuſtifye y• ſame. Peter
                  Act. 4. 12. ſayth, There is no ſaluation in any other. &c. Neyther is there any other name giuē vnder heauē, wherbyCol. 1. 19. you ſhalbe ſaued. &c. And S. Paule. It pleaſed the Father, that in him ſhould all fulneſſe dwel, and by him to reconcile all thinges to himſelfe, and to ſet at peace through the blood of his Croſſe, both the thinges in earth, and the thinges in Heauen.
               
               And again, in the ſame Epiſt. In whome are hidde allCol. 2. 3. &c. the Treaſures of wiſedome & knowledge. &c. in him dwelleth all the fulneſſe of the Godhead bodily, & you are complete in him, which is the head of all pricipalitie.
                  Note. Marke that he ſayth, We are complete in him, and therfore neede we no other meanes of ſaluation. And this our ſweete Apoſtles S. John, who teacheth vs this triall of ſpirits ſayth: The blood of Chriſte Ieſus the ſonne of1. Joh. 1. 7. God, doth cleanſe vs from all ſinne.
               
               The ſame Apoſtle maye ſeeme not onelye to haue written hys Epyſtle, but his whale Goſpell alſo, to this ende only and principallye, that Chriſtyans ſhoulde vnderſtand that Chriſt only, and no other thing or perſon, is the meanes to bring to the people of God remiſſyon of ſinne, Juſtification, Redemption, and all the Benefites

and parts of our ſaluation. For in that goſpell Chriſt is declared to be, the Lambe of god that taketh awaye the ſinJo. 1. 29. Col. 2. 9. Jo. 3. 14. Jo. 4. 14. of the world, The fulnes of Gods grace, of whoſe fulneſſe all we take part, The braſen Serpent that only healeth the ſting of the olde Serpent Sathan, The Fountaine of liuing water, of which he that drinketh ſhall neuer thyrſte, The bred of life, which he that eateth, ſhal neuer die, TheJo. 6. 51. true foode and drink of our ſoules, of which hee y• eateth & drinketh, ſhall be ſure to haue eternall life, The Lighte ofJo. 8. 12. the world, which only ſcattereth & diſperceth the clowds of ignorance and errour, & maketh vs to ſee the truth of God,Jo. 10. 11. Jo. 10. 9. and right way of Saluation, The good Sheapheard, that giueth his lyfe, for the benefite of his Sheepe, The onlye Doare whereby we enter into the Church of GOD, and ſo into eternall Lyfe, The very Waye, Truth, and Lyfe,
                  Jo. 14. 6. without which Waye, there is no walking to Heauen, but wādring by wrong pathes vnto the Diuell, without which Truth, there is nothing but falſhood and errour: withoute which Life, there is nothing but death eternal, The true Vine, by which only as branches we ſucke the ſweete, andJo. 15. 1. liuing iuyce of Gods holy ſpirite, and without which, wee are hable to doe nothing, The onelye giuer of the bleſſedJo. 16. 7. comforter, that doth worke the peace of our Conſciences, and direct vs into all truth. &c. What good chriſtian hart waying theſe things, doth not thereof conceaue vneſtimable comfort, and more quietneſſe of conſcience, then in all the heapes of mens deuiſes, which they haue imagined to purchaſe vs the fauour of GOD, and remiſſion of ſinne? Yea what faithfull minde after the vnderſtanding and imbracing of this ſweete Doctrine, doeth not deteſte, as blaſphemous and wicked, all ſuche as directe vs to any other meane of Saluation, then the bloode of Chriſte, onlye? Wherefore the people of GOD muſte bee well aſſured by this ſeconde rule of Saint Iohn, that not onely they are falſe Prophets, Wolues, and of the ſpirit of Antechriſt, that in groſſe tearmes denie Chriſt to haue come in

fleſhe, but they alſo whiche will ſeeme conſtantlye to confeſſe this Article to bee moſte true, and yet in verye deede colourably, and as it were, vnder ſheepes cloathing denie, impugne, and diſgrace the cauſes, Fruite, Profite, and effectes thereof, by attributyng the ſame to other things, than vnto the Death and merites of Chriſt only.
               Now whether the Teachers of the Church of Roome
                  The doctrine of the church of Rome concerning the office & comming of chriſt in the fleaſh, is contrarye to the doctrin of S. John, & therefore the teachers thereof are found to be falſe prophetes. Blaſphemus derogation to the merits of Chriſte. Tho. de Venerab. Sac. altar.
                   doe this or no, let ſuch as haue the feare of god, and care of their ſaluation vnfaynedly conſyder. They teach that Chriſte is not our onlye Mediatour and interceſſoure vnto GOD, or (if they ſay ſo in wordes) in effecte they denye it, when they affyrme that wee haue infinite other, that is, all the Sayntes in heauen, that be our Mediatours and Interceſſoures for vs to directe our praiers to thē, or by them. They teach that Chriſts death is not a full ſatiſfaction for the whole ſinnes of the World or if in wordes they will ſaye ſo, in Trueth they denye it, when they affyrme that Chriſte his bodye was offered vppon the Croſſe, for the debte of Originall Sinne only, and that for oure other daylye Offences, it is offered in the Sacrifice of the Maſſe. Or when they affyrme as Gabriell Biell doeth, That althoughe Chriſte his Paſſion be the principall Merite, for which grace is gyuen, and the Kingdome of Heauen is opened, yet it is neuer the only and whole meritorious cauſe thereof, becauſe there euer concurreth with the merite of Chriſte ſome worke or merite of him that receiueth the grace. They teach that we haue not remiſſion of ſins, & the fauor of god only by chriſt, but partly by the merites of Saynts, partly by our faſting, Almes deeedes, and other good workes: partly by pardons, by Pilgrimages, by Maſſes, by building of churches, erecting of chaunteries, by holy water, and ſuch other thinges.
               Wherefore I may conclude euen by this rule, by whiche S. Iohn. directeth vs to trie y• ſpirits of preachers, whether they be of God or no, yt the teachers & maintainers of

the Doctrine of the Churche of Rome, are not ſuche as Chriſtian men ought to beleeue, and giue credite vnto, but rather to beware of them, and take heede that they bee not ſeduced by them.
               The thyrde poynte of Doctrine is, how we may be partakersThe third point o
                        •
                      doctrine, to trye the teachers whether they be true or falſe prophets. of Chriſte comming in fleſhe, and how the benefites thereof, are truely and rightly applied vnto vs. A doctrine ſurely no leſſe needeful then the two former, for in vayne & to no purpoſe in reſpect of vs doth Chriſt come in fleſh, and ſuffer death, if the benefits therof be not applied to vs, and we made partakers of the ſame. Now what this Mean is, S. Ioh. in the ſame Epiſt. doth euidently declare vnto vs, ſaying: Let that remain in you, that you haue herd frō
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Ioh. 2. 24. the begining. For if that remain in you, that you haue heard at the beginning, you alſo ſhall abide in the ſon, & in the father. What it is to abide in that, which they heard in the beginning, he afterward playnely expoundeth, that is, conſtantly & with ſure fayth, to beleeue y• premiſes of God in his Goſpel, aſſuring vs of Saluation in Chriſtes Sonne. For this he writeth: Euery one that is1. Ioh. 5. 4. borne of God ouercōmeth the world, & this is the victory that ouercōmeth the world, euē our faith. Who is he that ouercommeth the world, but he that beleueth, that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſonne of god. And after. He that beleueth in the ſon of god, hath the witnes in himſelf, he that beleueth not god hath made him a liar, becaus he beleued not in the witnes of God, which he teſtified of his ſon. And this is the record, that God hath giuen vnto vs, eternal life, and this life is in his ſonne. In theſe words, we haue firſt that ſaluatiō & eternall life is ye gift ofHow we are to apply the benefits of Chriſts comming in fleſh euery man vnto him ſelfe. God, & not a thing of vs deſerued. Secōdly y• God the Father by his witnes & promiſe, doth aſſure vs, that we ſhall be partakers therof, for the merite of Chriſte his Sonne only. This life ſayeth hee is in his Sonne. Laſtlye, that the meanes to be made partakers hereof, is aſſuredlye to beleeue the truth of GOD, promiſſing this in his ſonne:

or elſe by infidelitie wee make God a lyer, and leeſe out partes of his promiſe. Chriſt himſelfe alſo beareth witneſſe of the ſame Meanes to apprehend our ſaluation. SoIoh. 3. 16. God loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten ſonne: that whoſoeuer doth beleeue in him ſhould not perishe, but haue eternall life. &c. And agayne, He that beleeueth in him is not condemned, but he that beleeueth not, is condemned alreadie, becauſe he dothe not beleeue in the name of the ſonne of God. And in the 6. Chapter. This is the will of my Father that ſent mee,Ioh. 6. 40. that he that ſeeth the Sonne, & beleeueth in him, ſhould haue eternall life. The full conſent of the Prophets doth iuſtifie this Meane of our ſaluatiō. For as Peter ſayth, ToAct. 10. 43 this all the Prophetes beare witneſſe, that through his name, all they which beleeue in him, ſhal receaue remiſſion of ſinnes. The whole Church of Chriſt beareth witneſſe to this, which in all hir generall councells, doth teach euerie true Chriſtian to ſay, I beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt deſcended from heauen for vs, and for our ſaluation, that he was made man, borne, ſuffered, died, roſe againe, and was receaued into Heauen, &c. And all to this end, that by this Sauiour we myght haue remiſſion of ſinne, Reſurrection of the fleſhe, and euerlaſting lyfe. All theſe things doth yt Euāgeliſt, S. Iohn affirme in one little ſentence: Theſe thinges are written that you may beleeue,Ioh. 20. 31. that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſonne of God, and that in beleeuing, ye might haue life through his name. By theſe wordes wee are taught, why the Goſpell is written and preached to men, that is, that they ſhould beleeue, and iuſtifie God in his promiſe to be true. Secondly that by beleeuing, they ſhould haue the fruites of Chriſtes comming in the fleſh, and therefore faith and beleefe is the Meanes, to apply Chriſt and his benefites vnto vs. Thirdly, that wee haue life and ſaluation, onely by the meere mercie of God in Chriſt, and not by any merite of ourſelues, or other mē, or by the dignitie and worthineſſe of our ſelues, or our doinges

whatſoeuer, going before or comming after. This benefite therefore to applye Chriſtes merites and fruites of hys Paſſion vnto vs, can not in any wyſe bee imputed to any other workes or vertues, bee they neuer ſo excellent, but to fayth onely: and that not for the dignitye of faythe neyther, but for this cauſe onely, for that faythe reſperteth no other thyng, but doth reſt and ſtaye it ſelfe, vppon the ſure and vnfallible promyſe of God, grounded and founded on the grace and merite of Chriſt. This promyſe doth faythe apprehende, as I haue ſayde, and doth aſſure hymſelfe to bee partaker of it, becauſe God is true, and can not deceaue. And thoughe our faythe ſometyme bee weake, and not ſo ſtrong as it ſhoulde bee, yet wee maye not diſpayre for this our weakeneſſe and infirmitie, but wee muſt comforte our ſelues wyth thys ſweete promyſe, that he which paydr the price of our ſaluation, as the Prophete witneſſeth, Doth not breakeEſay. 42. 3. the bruſed reede, nor extinguiſhe ſmookyng Flaxe. Onely let vs ſaye wyth him in the Goſpell, I beleeue,Mar. 9. 24 but O Lorde helpe myne vnbeliefe. And with the Apoſtles: O Lorde increaſe our Faith. For as, Chriſt ſaith,Luc. 17. 5. 
                  If wee haue fayth, no more than a graine of muſtardeMat. 17. 20 ſeede, we ſhall by it worke great things. This doctrine of apprehending the benefites of our ſaluation, and applyingThe Church of Rome impugueth the doctrine of apprehending & applying the benefite of Chriſt his merits by fayth: and therefore is ſeene to harbour falſe teachers. the fruites of Chriſtes Incarnation, death & paſſion, by faith onely, The patrons and teachers of the Church of Rome, haue moſt impugued. Their voyces thereof ring in euery mans cares, their bookes and writings agaynſt the ſame, lye open to all mens eyes, ſo that no man can doubt of it, wherein, their obſtinate blindneſſe doth more than in all other things, too plainly appeare. For whereas they bee great braggers of the generall conſent of the Vniuerſall Church, and by countenance of it, will ſeeme to maintaine their other errours, and corrupt doctrine, yet they reiect this doctrine, that is witneſſed by God the Father, confirmed by the Sonne, eſtabliſhed in the hartes of the faithful,

by the holy Ghoſt, teſtified by all the Prophetes and Apoſtles, and acknowledged by the generall Conſent of the whole Church in their beliefe, and ratified by the ſubſcription of a great number of the auncient Fathers, and Catholike writers: yet, I ſay, they of the Church of Rome doe impugne it, and ſpeake altogether moſt reprochefully of faith, and wrongfully challeng the Preachers of the Goſpell, that by this doctrine of our Juſtification and ſaluatition, by faith onely in the merite of Chriſtes Paſſion, they doe diſproue good workes, and leaue open a gappe to wickedneſſe and Looſeneſſe of lyfe. Which commeth to paſſe becauſe they will not vnderſtand what true Chriſtiā faith is, nor why faith is ſayd to iuſtifie vs before God, that is, becauſe it apprehendeth the mercie of God in his promyſe, aſſuring vs that we ſhall haue remiſſion of ſinne, ſaluation and eternall life, through the merite of Chriſtes Paſſion onely. I neede not therfore to put you in minde what concluſion maye bee inferred vppon the premiſes, againſt the teachers of the Church of Rome, that is, that not the Preachers and profeſſors of the Goſpell, which teach this Article to the full, but they rather of the Churche of Rome, are the falſe Prophets that are couered with ſheepes clothing, becauſe the fruites of their doctrine do plainely proue them to be ſuch. By this that I haue hitherto ſpoken, you mayConcluſion. perceiue that wee doe not ſtriue with the Churche of Rome, nor ſeparate our ſelues from it, for trifles and toyes of no weyght and value, but for matters of great importaunce, touchyng the principall Articles of Chriſtian faythe, and the true meanes of our Saluation. For although Sathan in theſe dayes dothe not ſo commonlye rayſe vp hys Inſtrumentes to impugne the Trinitie, the two natures of Chriſte, or the Diuinitie of the holye Ghoſt, as he did in the Primitiue Churche: yet he is not Idle, but craftely turnyng himſelf into an Angel of light, by ſuch as not onely profeſſe themſelues to be Chriſtians, but take vppon them to bee the principall patrones and directors

of Chriſtian faith, he diſgraceth, and extenuateth the dignitie, and perfection of Chriſtes merite and paſſion. he peruerteth the office of the holy Ghoſt, he abuſeth the name & authoritie of the Catholike Church, and ſetteth vp an other Church, he altereth the principall doctrine of our beliefe touching fayth in our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, and tranſferreth and almoſt bringeth to nothing, the trueth of our iuſtification, and the ende of our fayth. He chaungeth the Sacramentes, and bringing in a new ſacrifycing worſhip, altereth the Inſtitutions and ordinaunces of Chriſt, f
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ly and plainely layde downe in his worde. Wherfore, (dearely beloued) I earneſtly require all ſuch, as haue care of their ſaluation, to remember Chriſtes admonition that he gyueth in this place, when he ſaith: Beware of falſe Prophetes, that come to you in ſheepes clothing. &c.
                  Mat. 7. 15. The firſt way to beware of them, is with earneſt and hartie Prayer to call vppon God, that by his gracious benefit,1 and lyghtning of our heartes by his ſpirit, wee may know the falſe Prophetes, and by his prouidence he wil preſerue vs from them, and ſende out into his harueſt faithfull and true labourers, and that he will by his goodneſſe defende, ſtrengthen, and maintaine the ſame, againſt all aſſaultes, that they may to his glorie performe their worke, whereto he hath appoynted them. For ſo our Sauiour Chriſt willeth vs, to cal vpon the Lord of the Harueſt, that he wouldMat. 9. 38. Luc. 10. 2. ſend forth plentiful ſtore of labourers, to bring in his Harueſt. The ſeconde way to beware of falſe Prophets, is a2 diligent, and continual reading of the Scriptures of God, which as I haue ſaid before, is y• rule of true knowledge, and right doctrine. Herevnto Chriſt exhorteth, when he ſayth: Search the Scriptures, for in them you thinke yeIoh. 5. 39. haue eternall lyfe. And they are they that teſtifie of me. And the Theſſalonians, that did heare Paule at Berrhaea, daylyAct. 17. 11. ſearched the Scriptures: whether things were ſo as Paule preached or no. S. Auguſtine alſo doth exhort vs toAug. the ſame by a very apt ſimilitude: Euen as a Prince or gouernour
                  
                  in time of peace, maketh prouiſion for armour, munition, and all warlike furniture, that when he is aſſaulted by his enemies, he may not be foūd vnprouided: ſo, ſaith he, is it neceſſary that al good Chriſtians ſhould diligently reade, & carefully hearken to the teaching of the word of God, and out of that ſtorehouſe, to furniſh thē felues with all ſpirituall furniture, againſt the aſſaultes of Sathan, & his inſtruments, whether it be in matter of faith and Religion, or behauiour of life. For of all the ſpirituall armor yt S. Paul deſcribeth, aboue all things he warnethEph. 6. 16 to haue yt 
                  Target of faith, & the ſword of gods holy word, By yt weapō only, you know yt chriſt our ſauior droue backMat. 4. 6. &c. yt Deuil, whē he indeuoured to ſeduce him by peruerting yt ſcriptures of God. They therefore yt forbid the people to reade yt ſcriptures, & do hearken to gods word, are to be eſteemed no better thā traitors, yt take frō the people of God their chief defence, & to leaue thē open to yt daunger of their enimies. Or if men be not able to reade yt ſcriptures themſelues, in any wiſe as they haue care of their ſoules, let thē learne to vnderſtand yt generall principles of Chriſtian Religion in their Catechiſme, that is the .x. Commandemēts, the articles of their beliefe, yt right vſe of the Sacraments, & the Lordes Prayer. And this muſt they learne, not as Parrets, to ſound the words, but to vnderſtand the truth of the matter. And then ſurely wt gods aſſiſtance, may they be eaſily able to diſcerne the ſpirites of the Preacher, & tollerably to iudge of his doctrine: as I could by ſome particular examples declare vnto you, if the time would ſerue. But if men will be take themſelues to the Colliars faith, that beleeued generally as the Church beleeued, and knewe not one word what the church did beleeue, or ought to beleeue, they ſhall by ſuch wilfull ignoraunce, lay themſelues open to falſe teachers, that ſhall come vnto them in ſheepes clothing, and ſeeke nothing, but as rauening Wolues, to deuour their ſoules. &c.
            
            
               
               ¶ The thirde Sermon vppon this part of the Texte.
               
               
                  By their fruites ſhall ye knovv them. Mat. 7. 16.
               
               
                  THE Churche of Rome, and the writers thereof doe interprete theſe wordes, not of the fruites of doctrine, as I haue done, but of the fruites of godly and honeſt lyfe, and withall challenge to themſelues a ſingular holyneſſe aboue the Preachers of the Goſpell in theſe dayes. Who, as they ſaye, diſcourage men from vertuous exerciſes of godlye lyfe, and in their owne behauiour ſhew a diſſoluteneſſe and looſeneſſe of life, fo that vice and wickedneſſe, euer ſince the ryſing of thys newe Goſpell (as they call it,) hath increaſed among men. And for this cauſe will they haue vs noted, to bee the falſe Prophetes, that Chriſt willeth men heere to take heede of, and ſay that we are knowne by our euill fruits. Wherefore I thinke it moſt neceſſarie at this tyme, to pull thys Lambes cloathing from them, that the worlde, or at leaſt ſuch as be not too muche affectionate to them, may ſee howThe corrupt lyues & foule vices of the fathers of the church of Rome de
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     
                     ted, in way of anſweare to thoſe that obiect the preaching of the goſpell to breede corrupt mannets in the hea
                        •••
                     s of the ſame. lyttle helpe they haue by this colour, eyther for themſelues, or againſt vs. Neither doe I thinke, that there is any fitter meanes to doe this, than to let men vnderſtand by the courſe of their owne hiſtories, and other credible writers, how great corruption of lyfe, and how foule vices haue ben vſually practiſed, not among common perſons of the meaneſt ſorte, but among the moſt holy and reuerend fathers of the Churche of Rome, the Popes themſelues, that thereby you may gheaſſe, what ſtate of Religion hath moſt preuailed wyth them. For it can not bee, that that place can bee

the ſeate of true Religion and holyneſſe, whiche hath bene alway a ſinke of moſt horrible and foule vices. And here I proteſt vnto you, that I will not ſpeake or alleage anye thing of ſtomacke to aggrauate the matter, but as I finde it in trueth layde downe, in verie credible hiſtories. And firſt to begynne with the moſt notable roote of the corruption & Simoniacall ambition, in aſpiring to that exceedyng power, whiche this manye yeeres they haue vſurped. About the yeere of our Lord. 600. Iohn, Patriarke of Conſtantinople, becauſe that Citie was the Royall ſeate of the Eaſt Empyre, obtayned of Mauritius the Emperour, with intollerable pride to bee vniuerſall Byſhoppe,Gregorie. i. pope condemneth the name of vniuerſal Biſhop. the head, and ruler of al other. Againſt whom Gregorie. 1. at yt time Biſhop of Rome, did write very earneſtly, & reproueth ſharply his exceeding ambition, ſaying, yt whoſoeuer doth ſo aſpire, doth ſhew himſelf to be the forerunner of Antichriſt. And he calleth yt name of vniuerſall Biſhop, a new, a peruerſe, a ſuperſtitious, a prophane, a fooliſhe, a proude, & a wicked name, a name of errour, a name of ſingularitie, a name of vanitie, a name of Hypocriſie, a name of blaſphemie. Notwithſtanding Boniface. 3. y• next Pope of Rome,
                  Ambition in pope Boniface ſucceeding Gregorie nexte ſaue one. ſauing one, wt great ſuite obtained of yt wicked & traiterous Emperour Phocas, yt he & his ſucceſſors might haue that name & Title of vniuerſall Byſhop and heade of the whole Church. This was the firſt open ſtep of their monſtrous & exceeding pride & ambition, which afterward by corruption & briberie, they continually followed, ſtill heaping on wicked practizes euery day more & more, as their owne hiſtories do witneſſe. What ſhall I ſay of Conſtantius yt. 2. who being a lay man, by exceeding ambition, & with great broile & ſtirre obtained y• Popedome, & was after depriued, caſt in priſon, & had his eyes pulled out? What ſhal I ſay of Formoſus yt. 1. which by manifeſt briberie came to the Biſhoprick? I wil come to yt time, wherin their owne ſecretaries Platina and Stella Venetus openly cry out on them, yt is about the time of Benet the. 4. 900. yeeres after Chriſt.

Of which time Stella Venetus ſayth, Omnis virtus, tam in capite quam in membris, ex hominū ignauia conſumpta eſt. i. All vertue as well in the heade as in the members, by mens ſlouthfulneſſe was vtterly decayed.
                   And Platina in the lyfe of the ſame Byſhop ſayth, Vbicum ipſis opibus laſciui
                        •
                     e caepit Eccleſia, nullo principe clericorū flagitia co
                        •
                     rcēte, peccandi mox licentia, nobis haec monſtra ac portenta peperit, a quibus ambitione & largitione haec ſedes occupata est. After that the Church, in their great wealth, beganne to wax laſciuious and wanton, no Prince, no Magiſtrate repreſsing the enormities of the Clergie, ſtraight way this libertie of ſinning brought forth theſe prodigious, Monſters, who, through ambitiō and briberie, poſſeſſed this ſeate and dignitie.
                   What ſtirre was among them at that time for the Biſhoprike, it may appeare by this, that within. 9. yeeres well neare, were. 9. Biſhops. Boniface the. 6. 25. dayes. Stephan the. 6. one yeare, Romanus. 3. monethes, Theodorus 20. dayes, Iohn the 10. 2. yeeres, Benedict yt 4. 3. yeres, Leo the. 5. 40. dayes, Chriſtopher. 7. moneths, and at the length Sergius. 7 yeeres. The charitie of theſeThe popes charitie ſhewed to his predeceſſor. Byſhops was as notable as their integritie. Stephan the 6. ſo deadly hated his predeceſſor Formoſus, that he abrogated all his actes, tooke vp his body, ſpoyled him of al Biſhoplike ornaments, & cutting off his two forefingers, cauſed him to be bur
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   in a lay mans buriall. Romanus that followed diſanalled the doings of Stephan, and confirmed all the Actes of Formoſus. Likewiſe did Iohn the 10. But Sergius that not lōg after folowed, cauſed the body of Formoſus againe to be taken vp, after it had bene 8. yeres buried, and ſetting it in the Biſhops Stall cut of his head, & three fingers of his right hand, that Stephan had left, & caſt his body into Tiber. This is witneſſed by Platina in y• lyfe of Sergius. 3. & in Luitprande de geſtis Imp. lib. 3. cap. 12.
                   I omit Iohn. 11. Benedict the. 5. Iohn the. 14. and diuers other yt were about the ſame time. But perhaps ſome will thinke that at other times there were all good Byſhops: I

wil paſſe therfore, to y• time of Silueſter the 2. & his ſucceſſors, vnto Gregory the 7. after y• yere of our Lord 1000. The moſt of which number, for the ſpace of 80 yeres, came vnto the Biſhoprick, eyther by Nicromancie, or by poyſoningNicromancy & poyſon, ſtepps to tha popedome. their predeceſſoures, as Benno a Cardinall, yt wrote Hildebrande, (called Gregorie the ſeuenth, his life, doth witneſſe. Which Creatiſe, he that will reade, ſhall finde ſuch monſtrous and wicked dealing, as is not read of Hethens or Pagans, in any prophane Hiſtories. Of Gilbert called Sylueſter the ſeconde, and his Succeſſours, this he ſayth: Poſt infoelicē obitum Gilberti, certamen erat inter ipſius diſcipulos, dum quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      anhelaret, ad rapiendum Papatum ſibi. Sedit poſt 
                        •
                     um octauus decimus Iohannes, & quinto menſe Ʋeneno ſuffocatus dicitur a ſuis. Huic ſucceſsit nonus decimus Iohannes, & vix annum peregit, cui ſucceſsit Sergius & ſedit tribus annis. i. After the vnfortunate death of Gilbert, there was ſtrife among his ſcollers, ſo that euerye one of them greedilie laboured, to get the Popedome to himſelfe. For after him ſate Iohn the eighteene, and in the f
                           ••
                        t moneth, it is reported, hee was poiſoned by his own companions. After him ſate Iohn 19. and hee liued ſcarſe a yeare, After Iohn, ſucceded Sergius, and ſate three yeares.
                  
               
               Of Gregory the 7. he ſayth, that he by his meanes, had poyſoned ſire or eyght, to prepare the way for himſelfe to be Biſhop. Of whoſe wicked dealing toward the Emperoure, you ſhall heare more anone: but this at this preſent,The popes treaſon againſt the Emperour. I cannot omitte, that he ſuborned one to ſtand in the roofe of the church, directly ouer the place where the Emperour vſed to ſay his Prayers, and from thence to caſte downe a ſtone of great bigneſſe vpon the Emperour. But God preſerued his Magiſtrate, and turned the plague vpon the worker of it: for he that ſhould haue caſt downe the ſtone, was borne downe with the weight thereof, and bruſed to death.
               By what ambition and bribery Iohn the 18. came to

that Sea, it is euident in Platina, who, for the ſame, & his other naughtie doinges, calleth him Furem & Latronem, Theeſe and Robber. Sylueſter
                   the 3. by like meanes of bribery & ſorcery, was made Biſhop, in whoſe life Platina ſayth this: Eò tū pōtificatus deuenerat, vt qui plus largitione & ambitione, nō dico ſanctitate vitae & doctrina valeret, is tā
                     tūmodo dignitat is gradū, bonis reiectis, obtineret, quē morē vtinā noſtra tēpora non retinuiſſent, Sed hoc parum eſt, peiora, ni Deus auertat, viſuri ſumus. The Biſhoprick then was at that point, that he only which cold do moſt by bribery & ambition, I do not ſay in holines of life & learning, (good men being caſt of) attained to the degre of dignitie: whiche cuſtome, I woulde to God were not to be ſeene in our time. But this is a ſmall thing, wee ſhall ſee worſe dealings hereafter, vnleſſe God turne it away. Otho Friſingenſis & Godfridus viterbienſis,
                   in this maner write, of the tragicall ſtirre and trouble of thoſe days. While Benedict,
                   ſay they, the 9 was biſhop, Sylueſter the 3The church of Rome, a monſter haning 3. heads at once. & Gregory the 6. inuaded the ſame ſeate, & the 7 yeare of the reign of Henrie the 3, three Biſhops occupied three ſeuerall ſeas in Rome, whereof ro
                        •
                     e an horrible ſciſme, & ech of them indeuoured, that he might not bee inferior to other in ſedition, miſcheiefe & wickednes. Benedict
                   had his ſea in yt palaice of Laterane, the one of the other at S. Peters, the other at S. Maryes the greater. I am cō
                  pelled with multitude to let paſſe the notable ſtir betwene Cadolus & Alexander yt 2. which in a full battaile foughtThe popes trie it by the eates, who ſhalbe heade. out yt matter, in a place by Rome called Prata Neronis, wt diuers other more notable broiles thē yt. I wil paſſe to two notable ſciſmes y• were cauſed by yt ambitiō of Popes, one about y• yeare of our Lord 1159, & cōtinued well neare 20 yeares after, yt other about yt yeare of our Lord 1378. & cō
                  tinued 39 yeares afterward. The former was betweene yt proude tyrant Alexander the 3, & Victor, Paſchale, Clement, and Innocent, yt ſucceſſiuely were ſet vp againſt him. The later betweene 
                     Ʋrbane the 6, & Clement the 7. & thoſe that

ſucceded each of them, as I haue ſayd, by the ſpace of 39. yeres, at which time the church of Rome mighte well bee called a monſter with two heads. For the one of theſe Biſhops had his Sea in Roome, the other at Auignion in Fraunce, and ech of theſe, of their Adherents were accounted heads of the church. Germany, Hungary, Englande, andChriſtendome torne by popiſh S
                        ••
                     lines. 
                  Pannonia helde with Vrbane, and were called Vrbaniſts: Fraunce, Spaine,
                   and Cacelome followed Clement, and were named Clemētines, the one of theſe bleſſed Biſhops curſed & banned the other, calling him & his adherents Heretikes, ſchiſmatikes, & rebels. This you ſee yt not only the eccleſiaſtical ſtate, but alſo al the Realms of Chriſtendom, beſyde, by the ambition of theſe Biſhops were brought to hatred, diſſention, and horrible warres.
               Neuer was there like canuaſſing & ſtir, for yt attaining of any principallity, either one or other, as hath bene for the ſea of Rome, as in part you nowe maye perceiue, and I could farre more amplie declare vnto you, but that I feare I ſhould weary you with hearing (as I am now with rehearſing) examples to the profe of the ſame. If any man thinke I ſpeake of affection more then truth is, let him examine the Hiſtories, and hee ſhall find, I haue not ſayde ſo muche by a great deale, as iuſtly I may affirme.
               But what? was this onelye, the Vice that reigned in that holye Sea of Roome? no truelye, their Pryde Crueltie, Couetouſneſſe, and vniuſt dealing, was muche more horrible. I will not offende the chaſte eares of many,The popes whordome paſſed ouer. with ſome other Vyces, onelye I will touche a fewe Examples of theſe thinges I haue named. Was not this thinke you vncharitable, and cruell dealing amonge Prelates of the Church, not only by violence and armes, to depoſe their enemies, but to caſt them in priſon, to putte out their eyes, to pul of their noſes, to famiſh thē to death,The c
                        •
                     ue
                        ••
                     ie of popes taxed. & to cut of their heads and fingers? as they ſerued Conſtantinus the 2, Formoſus the 1. Leo the 5. and diuers other. Such Tyrantes were Stephane ye 6. Iohn the 13.

                  Sergius the 3. John the 14. Boniface the 7. and a number moe.
               Of John the 14. Platina writeth, that when the Emperour had ſubdued an ennimie of the Biſhops one Peter a notable man, and committed the ſame vnto his hande, to vſe him as he thought good: This charitable Biſhoppe, ſtript him ſtarke naked, and hung him vp a whole daye, by the heare of the head. Afterward hee ſette him on an Aſſe with his face backwarde, and the tayle of the Aſſe in hys hande, and ſo led him through the Citie, and they whipped him, and caſt him into baniſhment. Calixt the ſecond, vſed like crueltie toward Gregorie, that was choſen Biſhoppe agaynſt him, and in like deſpight brought him into Rome on a Camels back, wt his face toward the tayle, as Carſellanus, Platina, Stella, and Vincentius, do write. Mighte not theſe heades of the Church, haue learned charitie and mercie of the Pagā 
                  Licurgus, who as Plutarche writeth, was contented gently to remitte and pardon him, that in a ſeditious ſtyrre, had put out his eye. Yea, might not Caligula, Nero, and Phalaris himſelfe haue the commendation of gentlenes, ſeing the Prelates of Religion, the heads of the Church, and the Vicars of Chriſt, doe paſſe them in crueltie? But they vſed not this only among themſelues, or towarde meane ennimies: but towarde Kinges & Princes, toward the head rulers of the earth, & thoſe to whome by Gods lawe, they ought moſt humble obedience, I mean the moſte worthy and noble Emperoures. After there had bene hatred a long time, betweene the Emperour Henrie the fourth, and Pope Gregorie the ſeuenth, & that wicked Tyraunt (as Benno ſayth) moſt vniuſtlye by ſundrye meanes, had wrought him muche trouble: at the laſt, theThe popes pride touched. Carnuſium.
                   good Emperoure, for ſparing of Chriſtian blood, willing to yeelde, and ſeeke meanes of Concorde, in a colde and ſharpe winter, and moſte daungerous paſſage, came with his wife and Children, to Carnuſium, where the Biſhop was, and there being wullwarde, and bare footed, came to

the gates of the Cittie, & by the Biſhops commaundment was kepte out three dayes, in moſte ſharpe cold weather, ere he coulde bee admitted, and then, at the intreatie of a Lady called Mathildis, the fourth day after was let into the Cittie, and had his Pardon, but not before hee had ſworne Obedience to the Sea of Rome, and maynteynance of the ſame, as Platina wryteth. And yet all would not ſerue in the ende, for the wicked Biſhop did ſette vp 3. Rebels agaynſt him, Rodulphe, Harman, & Egberte, all which by the iuſt iudgement of god, came to foule end. Rodulphe in battayle had his right arme cut of, and thereof died, crying out vpon the Biſhoppes, that had incited him. Herman was ſlayne by a woman, caſting downe a greate ſtone, from a Caſtle that he beſteged. Egberte flying into a Mille, was taken and ſlayne.
               Thus God preſerued the good Emperour, maugre the malitious hart of the cruell Biſhop. Of this Gregory the 7. Abbas Vrſpergenſ in his Chronicle writeth thus, Conſtat. Hildebrandum non à Deo electum, ſed à ſe ipſo fraude & pecunia intruſum, qui eccleſiaſticum ſubuert it ordinē, Chriſtiani imperij turbauit regnum, pacifico regi intendit mortē, periuros defendit, lites ſeuit, diſcordias ſeminauit, & quicquid inter piè viuentes rectè ſtare videbatur, concuſſit. i. It is manifeſte that Hildebrād was not choſen of God, but by himſelf intruded, through deceit and money. Who did ouerthrow eccleſiaſticall order, troubled the kingdome of the Chriſtian Empire, practiſed the death of the peaceable king, defended periured perſons, planted ſtrife, ſowed diſcord, and ouerthrew all, whatſoeuer ſemed to be well eſtabliſhed, among thoſe that led a godly life.
                  
               
               How cruelly & vniuſtly Alexāder the 3. vſed the Noble Emperour Friderike, it is wonderful to read in Nauclerus, & Funcius. By miſfortune being takē priſoner of the Venetians, this Emperoure for ſafetie of his Lyfe, was fayn to yeeld, and came to Venice, where the Biſhop was, but could not obtain pardon, before he came to S. Markes
                  
church, and did proſtrate himſelf on the ground before the Biſhop, at which time with exceding pride, he ſet his foote on the Emperours necke, & cauſed this Verſe of the Pſalter to be ſong, Super aspidem & Baſiliſcum ambulabis. &c. Thou ſhalt walke vpon the Lion & the Adder, the yong Lion and the Dragon, ſhalt thou tread vnder thy feete.
                   That verſe yt the ſpirit of god, ment of our Sauiour chriſt, this proud Antechriſt turned, to the aduancing of his own glory, and repreſſing of Gods cheefe miniſter, to whom he had giuē by lawful means, y• thefe gouernmēnt of y• earth. I neede not put you in mind, that they admittted Kinges & Emperours, to go at their ſtyrrapes as footemen. So did Charles the great, King Lewes of Fraunce, and King Henrie of Englande, both at one time. Yea, Adrian the fowerth, blamed Friderike the Emperoure, that comming on foote to meete him, he did ſtay the ſtyrrop on the wrong ſyde, when hee lighted from his Horſe. And at another time impudentlye blamed the ſ
                     ••
                  ne Emperoure, becauſe in the Tytle of his Letters that hee did ſende, hee didde ſette his owne name before the Popes.
               The time wil not ſuffer me, to declare vnto you the intollerable pride and crueltie of Gregorie the 9. & Clemēt the 6. The one of yt which after moſt deſpightful & cruel iniuries, wold not be recōciled to Friderike the 2. before he had paide in way of penance one hundred and twenty thouſand
                     
                        •
                     20000. The popes couetouſnes noted. ownces of Gold, ſo deare is the friendſhip of theſe holy fathers. The other propoſed to Lewes the Emperor ſuch cō
                  ditions, as no bondſlaue-would haue bene contented to admit, that is, yt he ſhould come vnto him within three dayes, forſake the title of yt Empyre, yeeld into his hands himſelf, his wife, his children, and al his goods, neuer to receiue any of them again, but at his pleaſure. Looke Abbas Vrſpergēſ. & Hiero, Marius, & you ſhall ſee thoſe things ſo ſet forth, as it would cauſe any reaſonable hart to abhorr thē. I ſhould hold you to long, if I ſhoulde at large ſette forth, theire vuiuſt dealing, in altering and trauſpoſing Kingdoms,

and continuall indeuour to make all princes ſubiect to them. Firſt, as touching the Empire, where the Emperour of Conſtantinople, had alway his Deputie in Italie, for the rule of the Weſt part, the Biſhops of Roome, by the ayde of the Frenche Kinges, wreaſted oute the Emperoures Deputies, and tourned that whole power to themſelues. Afterward about the yeare of our Lorde 800. contrarye to all right, Leo made Charles the greate, his great Benefactour, Emperoure of the weaſt: and gaue occaſyon of moſt deadly warres, betweene the Emperoures of the Eaſt and of the Weaſt.
               About y• yeare of our Lord 920 they again tranſferred the Empyre of the Weaſt from the French Kinges, among whome it had a good time remayned, vnto the Germaines, where, at this daye it yet continueth. But they vſed not this onely in the Empyre, but well neare in all the Principallities of Chriſtendome. Did not Zacharie moſt iniuriouſly without any reaſonable pretence, tranſferre the Kingdome of Fraunce from Childerike and the ſtocke of Clodouei, wherein it had from the beginning continued, vnto Pipine that had no right vnto it, and without anye quarrel, diſcharged the Frenche men of their othe of allegiance, ſworn to their King Childrike being then alyue? Did not Adrian the firſt, vnmercifully deliuer Bercha the widdow of Charlemaine, & her two ſonnes, heires of the Kingdome, in captiuitie to Charles, the yonger brother, yt had no right vnto it, only becauſe hee woulde not diſpleaſe Charles, but winne him to be his friende, as his Father Pipine had bene? Howe they ſette vp, and pulled downe Emperoures at their pleaſure, howe they altered the Tytle and righte of the Kingdome of Arragon, of Naples, of Sicilie, of Englande, Hyſtories doe largely declare.
               Whenſoeuer they did for any quarrell excommunicate a realme, their penaunce in abſolution was euer, to paye a great ſumme of money to the Sea of Rome, & to make the

kingdome feodable vnto the Biſhop, wherein they ſought to make all Realmes and Princes Vaſſals and ſlaues vnto them. Which was ſo fully brought to paſſe, in the time of Boniface the eyght, that he openly vaunted, that he had the full power of both Swordes, and all Kinges to haue their principallitie at his handes, and hee immediatelye of God, and this doctrine hath bene taught euer ſince by the mainteiners of y• ſea. The time cutteth me of frō matter, y• I haue to ſay in this point, I will gather therefore to a cōcluſion of this part. Seing the Popes thēſelues whomConcluſion vpon al theſe hiſtories of the popes proceedings. they count y• pillers of their religion, y• heads of y• church, y• Vicars of Chriſt, that are lead (as they ſaye) by the Holye Ghoſt, that cannot erre, that haue knowledge of truth, and interpretation of ſcripture in their harts, ſeing I ſay, they are found & proued by their own hiſtories, to be in ambitiō ſo outragious, in vniuſt and wicked dealing ſo horible, in pride and crueltie ſo deteſtable (I leaue their couetouſnes, for that time doth exclude me) what ſhall we thinke of the inferiour ſorte? ſhall we thinke that they did their duety, when the other nothing mynded it? Such as the ſpring and Fountayne is, ſuche is the Water of the Streame, Such as the roote is, ſuch is the Tree & branches, Such as the maiſter is, ſuch are his Schollers, Suche as the head is, ſuch are the members. If the Spring be corrupt, the Roote putrifyed, the Mayſter wicked, the head greeuouſly diſeaſed: we muſt needes haue naughtye ſtreames, putrifyed Braunches, miching Schollers, and ſicke members of the body.
               The holyeſt of that ſorte, were men that were couered vnder the Lambe ſkinnes of Faſting, praying, and forſaking of the world, and yet Vnder theſe Titles had they gotte them the riches of the world, and their liues were ſo notable, that in the common voyce of men, there was no ill tale, but a Freere, or a Religious manne, was at the one end of it.
               Now as touching that the aduerſaries, obiect againſt vs

looſeneſſe of manners and diſſolute life, and with eger ſpirites erie, that ſince our doctrine hath begun in the worlde, nothing hath increaſed but falſhood, craft, deceipt, periurie, hatred, malice, ſtrife, contention, ſedition, warre, and murder: lecherie, wantonneſſe, vncleaneneſſe,, ſectes, diuiſions, and all miſchiefe, and trouble. Oh, (dearely beloued) this is a greeuous and heauy accuſation, that whereas by Gods ſingular benefite, the doctrine of repentance, remiſſion of ſinnes, and newneſſe of life is taught among vs, more diſtinctly, more truely and ſincerely, than euer it was before, yet that godlyneſſe of lyfe, and honeſt conuerſation ſhould not followe. This ſurely ſhould be an heauie corſie to our hartes, if we be true Chriſtians, and in deede fauourNot the goſpell, but out corrupte nature is the cauſe, why our fruites at theſe dais are no better. the Goſpel. For although this ſclaūderous accuſation hath euer followed the Goſpell, euen in Chriſtes owne tyme, and at this daye (God be praiſed) is not ſo iuſt and true, as our aduerſaries would haue it ſeeme to be: Yet wee muſt confeſſe before the face of God and his Angels, and before all the Saintes and Creatures of God, both in heauē and earth, that the doctrine of the Goſpell, hath not brought forthe ſuche fruites of godlye conuerſation as it ſhoulde haue done, and that the bleſſed ſeede of his heauenly worde, through the barraine grounde of our corrupt heartes, hath not ſo proſpered, as our dueties require, that it ſhould haue done. For in deede the moſt part (we confeſſe) remayne in deepe ſecuritie, ouer whelmed with the corruption of thys lyfe and pleaſures of the world. Neither can we denie, that with manye, this wholeſome doctrine hath not onely, not brought forth conuenient fruites: but is vſed as a cloake of licentiouſneſſe and diſſolute libertie, and as a meanes to Spoyle the goods & patrimonie of the Church, which they ſeeke wholly to imploy, to the pampering of their owneThe goſpell euill ſpoken of, becauſe of ſuch as 
                        ••
                     lely profeſſe and doe not li
                        ••
                      after it. pleaſures, & not to the furtherance of Gods ſeruice. Wherfore in the feare of God I exhorte you, that you will continually, and earneſtly call vpon him in your hartie prayers, that by the grace of his holy ſpirit, he will mollifie mens

hartes, and make them good grounde, and beate into their remembraunce, that whatſoeuer colour they caſt vpon them ſelues, by profeſſion of the Goſpell, yet by the teſtimonie of their owne conſciences, they are conuinced within them ſelues, and by their fruites declare vnto the worlde openlye, that they are not good trees, but ſuch as ſhall bee cut downe and caſt into the fire: That by the iuſt iudgement of GOD, if they repent not, they heape vnto themſelues, the iuſt wrath and diſpleaſure of GOD, not onely by plagues and puniſhmentes in thys lyfe, but alſo eternally in hell, wyth the Diuell and his Angells: That by theyr wicked example they offende other, and eyther lead them into lyke euyll doyng, or ſo cauſe them to bee greened in conſcience wyth the ſight of their euyll lyfe, that for the fame they miſlyke the Goſpell, & reuolte from it, and therefore that God will require the bloud of ſuche at their handes, and in the daye of iudgement wyll make it more tollerable for Sodome and Gomorrha then for them. Finallye that by this meanes they open the mouthes of the enimyes to blaſpheme the Goſpell, ſo that the worde of gods trueth is by them yll ſpoken of amonge the Gentiles. As this admonition toucheth all ſtates of men, ſo principally and moſt nyghly it toucheth Noble men and Gentlemen, and ſuche as be in high eſtate, becauſe their doynges are moſt ſeene, and of moſt men followed. Yea Sathan wyll bee more diligent, and hath more meanes to aſſault them, than any other, becauſe hee knoweth the fall and ouer throwe of one ſuche by example and imitation, dothe drawe downe a great number of other. For the inferiours thinke that lawfull and well done, that they ſee practiſed of theyr ſuperiours and betters. The great perſonages therefore offende dubble, firſt in the yll it ſelfe, and ſecondlye in the yll example, wherewith they corrupt other. Wherefore (dearely beloued) let both them and vs, carefully conſider theſe things followyng, that GOD hath performed theLuc. 1. 73. othe of our deliuerance, and by the bloud of his ſonne raunſomed

vs from our ſinnes, not that wee ſhould continue inThe preachers of the goſpel exhort to holy lyfe & godlineſſe, as well in workes as profeſſion. Eph. 2. 10. the ſame, but that we ſhould ſerue him, in holineſſe & righte ouſneſſe all the dayes of our life. That in our Baptiſme we bound our ſelues, and conenaunted with God to forſake the Diuell, and all his workes: That wee be the worke of God, framed in Chriſt Jeſu to theſe good workes, that he hath prepared for vs to walke in
                     •
                   That wee are by Chriſt made the children of God, and therefore that we ſhould beeMa. 5. 48. 1. Pet. 1. 16. Luc. 1. 75. Leu. 11. 44. Eph. 5. 8. Eph. 2. 19. perfect in al goodneſſe, as our father in heauen is perfect, & holye as he is holy, that hath called vs: That wee bee the children of light, and therefore ſhould deteſt the workes of darkeneſſe: That we are of the houſhold of God, and Citizens together with his Saintes, and therfore that our conuerſation ſhould be heauenly, and in heauen, as S. Paule ſaith, Conuerſatio noſtra in caelis eſt. i. Our conuerſation is
                  
                  Phi. 3. 20. Mat. 5. 14. 1. Theſ. 5. 5. 1. Joh. 2. 9. &c. Mat. 5. 16. 
                  in heauen. That wee be now the light of the worlde, and therefore our vertues and good workes, ſhoulde ſhyne before men, that they ſeeyng the ſame maye glorifye GOD our Father that is in Heauen: That wee are the Souldiours of Chriſt, and therefore ought to ſtande valiauntlye againſt all the aſſaultes of the Diuell, the worlde, and the fleſhe, to the ende that when wee haue manfully ended our lyfe, wee maye receaue that immortall crowne of glory, which he hath layde vp, not for vs onely, but for all them2. Tim. 4. 8. that loue his comming. Theſe thinges (deerely beloued) ſhould ſufficiently moue vs y• profeſſe the Goſpel, to remē
                  ber our dueties toward God in honeſt conuerſation, & be as ſharpe ſpurres vnto vs, to prick vs forward to repentance: eſpecially ſuch, as hither to by wanting of their dutie, haue bene ſtumblyng blockes to other. But although the bleſſed doctrine of the Goſpell be deſpiſed of many, which, making ſhewe thereof haue brought forth, either very ſmall fruits or none at al, but haue to their owne condēnatiō, andThe preaching of the goſpell not altogeather fruitleſſe. heauy iudgment wared worſe thē before: yet y• ſame heauē & earth, before whō we confeſſe & acknowledge our faultes, can teſtifie, that there bee many godly hartes, in whom it

hath wrought very good and plentifull fruites, and of drimkardes made verie ſober perſons, of diſſolute Lecherers, chaſte and godly ſpouſes, of couetous cormorantes, liberall diſtributers to the poore, of blaſphemous ſwearers, reuerent rememberers of the name of God, of ruffinlye worldlings, diligent ſeruauntes in the houſe of God. Finally of ſuch as haue bene giuen ouer, to the luſt of the worlde and the fleſhe, it hath made perſons ſo vtterly mortified, as for Chriſt and his Goſpell, they contemne friendſhip, goods, landes, lyfe, and all that this world giueth, though it ſeeme to the iudgement of men neuer ſo precious. Therefore the worde of God, among vs hath not wanted his fruites, although not ſo plentifull as good heartes hath wiſhed, and yet I doubt not, but that there bee many, that the worlde hath not commonly ſeene, nor is able to iudge of. For he that in the corrupt ſtate of the Iſraelites, was able to reſerue vnto himſelfe, 7000. that neuer bowed their knee to3. Reg. 19. 18. the Image of Baal: hath in theſe dayes giuen iuſt fruites to the preaching of the Goſpell, though the multitude of the wicked do ouer ſhadow them, that in the iudgement of men they be not ſeene. As the Raine commeth downe, ſaythEſai. 55. 10 God in Eſay, and the Snowe from heauen, and returneth not againe, but watereth the earth, and maketh it to bring forth and budde, that it maye giue ſeede to the ſower, and bread to him that eateth, ſo ſhall my worde be, that goeth out of my mouth: it ſhall not returne vnto mee voide, but ſhall accompliſh that which is my wil, and it ſhall proſper in the thing whereto I haue ſent it.
                   Though y• aduerſaries of the truth, bitterly and virulentlyThe godlineſſe of the preachers of the goſpel, compared with that of the prelates of Rome. accuſe our doctrine and lyfe, yet (in the feare of God I ſpeake it, and to his name bee praiſe for it) all the aduerſaries that we haue, beſide their owne ſclaunderous and infamous libels, will neuer be able, by any iuſt teſtimonie to proue, the fourtieth part of thoſe wicked vices to be found, among the chiefe Preachers, and profeſſors of the Goſpell, that the whole worlde ſeeth, and witneſſeth to bee in themſelues.

Theſe fruites I dare iuſtifie, hath followed the Goſpell, ſince the firſt preachyng thereof, in theſe latterWhat fruits haue folowed the preaching of the goſpel. dayes: That the Scriptures and holy word of GOD, hath beene made knowne to the people, in their mother tongue, whereby they myght the better vnderſtand, theyr duetie towarde God and their neighbour, whiche before wickedlye, and vngodlye, and to the great daunger of infinite Soules, with feare and tyrannie was kepte from them. That the principles of Chriſtian fayth, are farre more diligentlye taught then before tyme they were, ſo that verie Babes haue ſome ſence of GOD, and are able tollerablye in moſt places, to yeelde an accompt of their faythe, whiche before hearde of nothing, but of Guy of Warwicke, Beuis
                   of Hampton, and ſuche other vayne fables. That Schooles are better looked vnto, then they haue bene, and y• thereby the knowledge of the tongues, and all other good literature, hath more floriſhed, than euer they dyd theſe manye hundred yeeres, and by that meanes it is come to paſſe, that the Texte of the Scriptures is nowe better vnderſtanded, than euer it was in anye age. That ſundrie poyntes of doctrine bee refourmed, without which, men can not poſſiblye haue anye true ſenſe of Chriſtianitie: as the doctrine of Originall Sinne, of the Lavve and the Goſpell, of Repentaunce, of Faythe, of Hope and Charitie, whiche before were maruaylouſlye corrupted, and wrapped in darkeneſſe and errour, Principally, the wholeſome doctrine of the grace and merite of Chriſt, of Remiſsion of Sinnes, of eternall lyfe, receyued by fayth in Chriſt, and Sealed and confirmed by his Sacramentes, doth in theſe dayes bryng vneſtimable comforte to troubled conſciences, as well at all other tymes, as chiefely at the houre of death, when Sathan moſt ſeeketh to ſhake mennes conſciences wyth deſperation. The ſence hereof the godleſſe Epicures and ſecure Hypocrites haue not, but ſuche as feare God,

and haue any touche of conſcience, conceiue exceeding comforte thereby. Men in theſe dayes alſo are better inſtructed to praye, and call vppon the name of God, and indeede doe the ſame more ſincerely, becauſe they vnderſtande what they ſpeake, whereas before, when they were taught to praye in a ſtraunge tongue, it coulde not poſſibly bee, that their heartes and lyppes coulde goe together, which of al other, was a moſt myſerable ſeducing of the people, and as it were a mocking of God and his ſeruice, and a ſingular inſtrument of the Diuell, to keepe the people in errour and blindneſſe.
               Laſtlye (as I haue fayde) reformation of manners and lyfe, in verye many▪ hath beene wrought, and I doubt not but a great deale of euyll, in theſe myſerable and corrupte latter dayes, reſtrayned by the ſincere Preachyng of the Goſpell, and earneſt callyng of men to repentance, whiche otherwyſe ſurelye, according to the infection of this tyme, woulde haue broken out to greates corruption of mannes lyfe. Theſe fruites, and a number ſuche lyke, althoughe the aduerſary
                     ••
                   wyll not acknowledge, I truſt ſuche as feare GOD, and wyll but indifferently iudge of thinges, can not chooſe but perceaue, and wyth comforte confeſſe to bee true. Thus haue you hearde, that externall ſhewe of honeſt lyfe, ordinarie callyng and ſucceſſion, the Tytle and Name of the Catholike Churche, the vſe and workyng of Myracles, bee in deede the clothing of Chriſtes true ſheepe, but yet, that rauening Wolues oftentymes hyde themſelues vnder them, to deceaue Gods people. You haue hearde that the fruites, whereby falſe Prophetes are diſcerned and knowen, is corruption of doctrine, and teaching of errours and lyes. And you haue hearde it euidentlye proued, as well by the teſtimonie of Saint Iohn, as other partes of the Scripture, that thoſe fruites haue beene in the Churche of Rome, and not among vs, whiche ſubmit all our doctrines to the touchſtone

of Gods holye worde. Laſtly, you haue hearde by compariſon, that the good fruites of godly life and deteſting of ſinne, hath more proſpered among the profeſſors of the Goſpell, than among the patrones of the Churche of Rome. The Lorde graunt vs the grace of his holye ſpirite, that to his glorie, vice and wickedneſſe may dayly bee more repreſſed, and vertue and honeſtie more aduaunced. (⸪)
               Amen.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Certaine Sermons made vppon this Text. 1. Cor. 10. 1. &c.
            
            
               Moreouer brethren I would not, that you ſhould be ignorant, that al our fathers were vnder the cloude, and all paſſed through the Sea, and were all Baptized vnto Moſes in the cloude, and in the Sea, and did all eate of the ſame ſpirituall meate, and all drunke of the ſame ſpirituall drinke, for they dranke of the ſpirituall Rocke, that followed them, and the Rocke was Chriſt. But with manye of them God was not pleaſed, &c.
            
            
               
                  SAint Paul (dearely beloued) from the beginnyng of this Epiſtle, blamed the Corinthians, for ſundry faultes, and corruptions among them: As that they had factions and diſſentions, one parte againſt another, that they more eſteemed in their Preachers, eloquence of ſpeeche, then the ſimplicitie of Chriſt crucified, that they made ſmall accompt of him, in cōpariſon of ſome other corrupt teachers, that they ſuffered inceſt among them vnpuniſhed: that they reſorted to Idolatrous feaſts with the heathen, and did eate of thoſe things that were offered to Diuels, contrary to the ſinceritie of true Chriſtians. Now becauſe men are very prone, to flatter their owne mindes by vaine pretences, and to feedeObiection that the Co
                     
                        •••
                     thes might vſe 
                        •••
                     ented. themſelues in euill doing, he preuenteth an obiection or excuſe, y• happily they might make for themſelues. For they might haue ſaid: Sir, we beare y• name of Chriſt, and bee Chriſtians, wee haue his Goſpell among vs, and vſe hys Sacramentes, whereby his merite is ſealed in vs. Therefore wee are ſure, that wee are in the fauour of God, and that his diſpleaſure and plague, ſhal not lyght vpon vs. &c.

To this S. Paule aunſwereth, that this truſt and ſecure confidence in the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, and vſe of the Sacramentes, is but vayne, vnleſſe they approue & make good their fayth, and outward profeſſion of Chriſt, wyth the exerciſe of honeſt lyfe, and Godly conuerſation. This he confyrmeth by compariſon of the Iſraelites. The people of Iſraell, (ſayth S. Paule,) were the choſen people of God, they had his law and Ceremonies among them: yea, they had promiſe of ſaluation, by the ſame bleſſed ſede that we haue, they did vſe in effect the ſame Sacramentes that we doe, they were baptiſed in the Cloude, and in the Sea, they did eate of the ſame ſpirituall meate that we doe, they did drinke of the ſame ſpirituall drinke, that we drinke of, for the Rock that they dranke of, was Chriſte. And yet many of them, by Gods heauy hand, periſhed in the Wilderneſſe. And if you looke into the cauſe, you ſhall fynde it to be nothing elſe, but for y• they were inclinable & proane to the corruption of Idolatrie, that they were giuen to fornication and vncleanneſſe, that they tempted Chriſte, and munnured againſt God, and committed other like naughtineſſe againſt the will of God &c.
               Seing it is ſo, you may be ſure that God is no changeling, but will deale in the ſame manner with you nowe, as he did with his people before time. Now for ſo much as S. Paules reaſon doth principallie ſtand vpon the vſe of the Sacramentes, and that the people in thoſe dayes, were more ſkilfull and better taughte the effecte, nature, and ſtrength of a Sacrament, thē in this time they be (through ſlackneſſe of teaching, and way wardneſſe in learning) before I come to that, which S. Paule principallye reſpecteth in this place, I thinke it neceſſary for your better inſtruction, fyrſt to ſpeake generally of Sacraments, and to ſhew what a Sacrament is, of what partes it ſtandeth, for what cauſes they are ordayned, and what fruite maye be taken of them. Secondly becauſe he ſayth. The Rocke was Chriſt, and that they did eate and drinke of the ſame

Chriſt, I will declare what manner of ſpeethe this is, and ſhew why Chiſt and his blood is called meate and drinke, and how he is to be eaten and drunken in the ſacramente truely, and in deede. And laſtly I will let you vnderſtand, that the bare profeſſyon of Chriſtianitie, the externall vſe of the ſacramentes, and outward exerciſe of praying, and other 
                     •
                  the thinges, are not ſufficient, without the inwarde worſhipping in ſpirite and truth, and chriſtian obedience to the will and lawe of God.
               A ſacrament is a reuerend and holy miſterie ordaynedWhat a Sacrament is. of God, wherin he by his holy word and promiſe, doth both ſtirre vp and practiſe the faith of his people, and by y• operation of the holy ghoſt increaſe his grace in them, & beſto
                     •
                   his benefites and bleſſinges vpon them, & wee on the other part, teſtifye our obedience toward him, & vnity of faith among our ſelues. The authour and ordainer of ſacramētsGod the only author of Sacraments. is none but God himſelf. No Patriarche, nor prophet, nor Apoſtle, nor Father, nor the whole church hath autho
                     ••••
                   to ordayne a ſacrament. Who is authour of Sacraments
                  Li. 4. de Sacramen. (ſayth Ambroſe,) but the Lord Ieſus. Theſe Sacramēts came from Heauen. &c.
               
               A ſacrament is a part of Gods worſhip, but no creature can ordayne any part of Gods worſhip, but himſelf, according to that ſaying of the Prophet: In vaine they worſhipEſay. 29. 13 me, teaching the traditions of men. In the old Teſtament, if a man had offered any ſacrifice not appointed by God, it was eſteemed little better then Idolatrie. It is knowne what happened to the ſonnes of Aaron, for thatLeuit. 10. 1. they brought ſtrange ſyre to the Alter of God: much leſſe may any appoint ſtraunge ſacramentes, not ordayned by the expreſſe word of God in his ſcriptures.
               Sacramentes be ſeales that confyrme Gods promiſes, and looke what a counterfeyted ſeale is to a mannes writing or deede, that is a ſacramente in the Churche, not ordayned by GOD. If this be true, as in deede it is moſte true, what ſhall we ſaye of the Church of Roome,
                  
which hath preſumed not, only to alter thoſe Sacraments that Chriſt appoynted, but alſo to ordayn ſundry other ſacramentes, without any iuſt warrant of gods word, onlye vpō forced interpretaciōs, deuiſed of thēſelues? Penance, Orders, & Matrimony (corrupt Doctrine being taken frō thē) be good things, & to be exerciſed in y• church, & ſo likewiſe are prayer, faſting, and almes deedes, & yet I ſee n
                     •
                   cauſe, why they ſhold be called ſacramēts. Ther is a great differēce betwene a ſacramēt, & an other godly exerciſe cō
                  manded in y• church, as herafter you ſhal better vnderſtād. Seing therfore chriſt is author of ſacramēts, & none other, you may not think thē to be trifles, vaine Ceremonies, and mens deuiſes, y• you may vſe or not vſe at your pleaſures, as you liſt, but you ought to reuere
                     •••
                   thē, as y• ordinance of God, & to receiue thē, euen as at Chriſts own hand. For as whē gods word is taught you, by the miniſtery of men, you muſt not receiue it as mans word, but as the word of1 Theſ. 2. 13 Eſay. 1. 20. 40. 5. 59. 14. God, as it is in deede, and therefore the Prophet ſayd, the mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken it: euen ſo the Sacraments, when you receiue them at the hands of a fraile and mortall, yea and ſometime a ſinfull man, you muſt looke to the Authour, and in your faith ſee the hande of God offeringThe wickedneſſe of the miniſter doth not derogate any thing from the effect of the Sacrament, to the faythfull receauer. the ſame vnto you. The ſacramentes take not their excellencye and worthineſſe of him that Miniſtreth them, though he be neuer ſo holy, neyther. be they diſgraced, or weakened, though the Miniſter be wicked and euill.
               And therfore the errour of y• 
                  Donatiſtes, Anabaptiſts, and ſome other is ſharpelye to bee reprooued, that thinke the ſacramentes of Chriſt to bee of leeſſe value, if they be miniſtred by an euill or ſinfull man. In deede the haud of the receiuer, being withoute Fayth, maketh the ſacramentes, that of themſelues bee good, to bee vnto him of no Force, becauſe of his vnbeleefe: But a wicked Miniſter cannot in anye wyſe make fruſtrate, or deceiue the Fayth of the Godlye Receauer. Iudas was a wicked and falſe Traytoure, and a Couetous naughtys

perſon, al the time that he followed Chriſt, & yet I doubte not but that the baptiſme, that he miniſtred, was as auailable to the faithful receiuer, as the baptiſme of Peter was,Cōtra Petilianū. or of any other of the Apoſtles. S. Auguſt. vſeth the ſame example. Whereas (fayth he) there was great difference betweene Peter and Iudas, yet was there no difference, betweene the baptiſme miniſtred by Peter, & that was miniſtred by Iudas, that was all one, but of the partyes, one was a member of Chriſt, another a member of the Deuill. And agayne he ſayth, Such are the Sacramentes,
                        Lib. 2 con Lit. Petil. The fayth of the receauer, not the life of the miniſtrer doth helpe or 
                           •••
                        der, in the effecte of the Sacrament. as they are, that come vnto them. Whereby one maye profitablely receiue the Sacrament of an ill miniſter, ſo he himſelfe be good. This is a great comfort to the godly, that in receiuing the Sacramēt, they neede not to loke into the life of the Miniſter, but to examine theire owne hartes.
               Now as touching the partes of a Sacrament, you ſhall vnderſtande it conſiſteth of three partes. The fyrſte is theSacraments conſiſt of three partes. externall ſigne, as the Lambe in the Paſſouer, the cutting of the fore ſkinne in Circumciſion, water in Baptiſme,
                     
                        •
                      The outward ſignes and what they ſignifie. bread and wyne in the Lordes ſupper. Becauſe of theſe outwarde 
                     •
                  ignes, a Sacrament is called a ſigne, a Seale, a Viſible word, ſo that it were a Monſter, to haue a ſacrament without an externall ſigne or elemente, to the outewarde ſubſtaunce of it.
               Water in Baptiſme ſignifieth, that as water naturally hath a propertie, to waſh and clenſe the filth frō the body: ſo doth the grace of God through Chriſt his blood, waſh away the gilt and filthineſſe of our ſoules. As breade and wine by naturall effect nouriſheth our bodyes, & ſtrengthneth and comforteth oure ſpirites: ſo doeth the heauenlye foode of Chriſtes body and blood, broken and ſhead for vs vpon the Croſſe, nouriſh our ſoules, and quicken our Spirites to eternall life with God. As the breade is made of many graynes kneaded into one loafe, and the Wine preſſed out of many Grapes into one cuppe: ſo the multitude of

Chriſtians communicating at the Lordes Table, thoughe many in number are ingrafted into Chriſt, & made mēbers of his miſticall body, and ioyned in mutuall loue one with the other, ſo that nowe they liue by the ſpirite of Chriſte, as the members of a naturall bodye lyue, and haue ſence by that Spirite that commeth from the harte, and from the heade. This proportion and ſimilitude betweene the ſignes and the ſpirituall effectes of the ſacrament, S. Cyprian acknowledgeth. As this cōmon b
                        •
                     ead ſaith heDe coena Domini. 
                  being chaunged into fleſhe and blood breedeth life to to our bodies: ſo by the accuſtomed nature of thinges, the weakeneſſe of our fayth being holpen, is taughte in ſenſible argument, that in viſible Sacramentes are the effect of eternal life. Theſe godly inſtructions and 
                     •
                  we
                     •
                  e comfortes, the Church of Roome weakeneth and 
                     •
                  akethThe abſ
                        ••••
                     
                     tie of tranſubſtancia
                     
                        •
                     ion. away, by their monſtrous doctrine of Tranſubſtāciation▪
                   Wherein they teache that the ſubſtaunce of Breade and wyne, is cleane vaniſhed and conſumed awaye, ſo that there remayneth no Bread, nor Wyne in the Sacrament, and that is in effecte to make it no ſacrament. For as I haue tolde you before, there canne bee no Sacramente, without an externall Elemente, to bee the outewarde ſigne thereof. But what externall ſigne canne there bee, when 
                     •••
                  y withoute ſubſtaunce, and accidents, and qualities, nouriſhe the ſubſtaunce of oure bodyes?
               Or if they cannot, howe maye they repreſente vnto vs, that as they nouriſhe oure bodyes, ſo Chriſte his blood nouriſheth our ſoules? yea rather they teach the contrary, that as qualities do
                     •
                   not nouriſhe the ſubſtaunce of our
                     •
                   body, ſo doth not Chriſts body nouriſh our ſoules. Wherfore al good Chriſtians, haue to deteste that blaſphemous Doctrine, broughte in by the Church of Rome, which, as I haue ſayde, taketh awaye the right nature and proportion of a ſacrament.
               By this that I haue ſayd already, you maye perceiue that there is ſome further ende, then the vſe of the ſignes

in the Sacramentes, and that the Externall ElementesThe ſecond parte wherof Sacraments doe conſiſt, is the ſpirituall or inward thing. are not orday
                     •
                  ed for themſelues, but for ſome 
                     •
                  
                  ther purpoſe. In the olde time the ſacramentes and Ceremonies were profytable for the bodilye nouriſhmente, as the water guſhing ou
                     •
                  e of the Rocke, Manna, and the Paſchall Lambe: but in oure ſacramentes God ſmallye conſydereth our bodies, but principallye and whollye the 
                     •
                  eleefe, eaſe, and comforte of our ſoules. Therefore as in the olde Teſtament, ſo now much more in the ſacraments, is to be conſydered ſome ſpirituall & internall thing, to the vnderſtanding wherof, the lykeneſſe of the external ſignesWh
                        ••
                      the internall part of Sacramentes is. doe leade vs: as in baptiſme, our regeneration and new byrth, and the waſhing away of our ſinnes, by the death & p
                     •
                  ſſion of Chriſt, In the Lords ſupper the heauenly foode of our ſoules, with the bodye that was broken, & his blood that was ſhead vpon the Croſſe. Wherfore good chriſtiās in receiuing y• ſacrament, muſt not haue ſo much regard to the ſigne, as to the ſpirituall thing it ſelfe, for which y• outward token was o
                     •
                  dayned. So doeth the Councell of Nice exhorte vs: Lette vs not bende oure cogitation ba
                        •
                     ely to Bread and Wine layde before vs, but lifting vp our mind through faith, let vs behold the Lambe of god taking away the ſins of the world, to be on that table. &c. And Chriſoſt. hom. 7. 1. ad Cor. The heathen perſon
                  Chryſ. hō. 7 
                        •
                     . ad Cor. 
                  when he hea
                        •
                     eth of baptiſme perſwadeth himſelfe that it is water only, but I do not ſimply ſee that I doe ſee, but alſo the cleanſing of my ſoule, by the ſpirite of God. He thinketh my body onelye to be waſhed, but I beleeue that my ſoule is cleanſed and made holy. AndSerm. ad Infant. 
                  Aug. That which you ſee is bread, and the cuppe, as your eyes declare vnto you, but as touching that wherwith your faith is to be inſtructed, the bread is to you the body of Chriſt, & the wine his blood.
                   Wherfore the eſpeciall & principall part of the ſacrament is the ſpiritual and internall thing, as in baptiſme (as I haue ſayd) regeneration and ſanctification, and in the Lords ſupper y• body

and blood of Chriſt. And here (dear
                     •
                  lye beloued) I muſte put you in mind, that they which teache this, doe not ſaye that the ſacramentes are bare ſigns and tokens, as the aduerſaries of the Goſpell doe ſlaunder vs. Our doctrine of the Sacraments, is farre more fruitfull and comfortable then theirs is. For we teach and beleeue that, theſe ſpirituall effectes are as certainely wrought, by the holy ghoſt in the ſacramentes, as we ſee that the externall elementesSacramen
                        ••
                      are ſeales, whereby the letters patentes of ou
                        •
                      Saluation 
                        ••
                      Chriſt, are confir
                        •••
                      vnto vs. haue their operation in the courſe of nature. For the ſacramentes are as the deedes and Seales of almighty god, whereby he doth in deede and verily, not only by ſignification, but effectually conueighe vnto vs, the poſſeſſion of his ſpirituall bleſſinges, and yet do
                     •
                   wee not maynetayne the carnall and Reall preſence of Chriſte his body and blood, within the compaſſe of the Sacramente, ſo that it ſhoulde enter into the 
                     •
                  oundneſſe of the mouth, and deſcende into the naturall partes of our body.
               That groſſe opinyon I leaue to the ſchole of Roome, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   I f
                     ••
                  d it not in Chriſtes inſtitution, nor in the ſ
                     •
                  hole of the holy Ghoſte, that is, the Scripture of God. As a prince in his letters patentes vnder his greate Seale, giueth to a man happily a thouſand pou
                     •
                  de Lande by the yeare, ſo that the partye hauing that deede, may aſſure himſelfe that he hath full right and poſſeſſyon thereof, and as ſurely as it were poſſible, he haue the L
                     ••
                  de i
                     •
                   ſ
                     ••
                  f in his 
                     •••
                  de: yet can he not be ſo ſenceleſſe and fooliſhe, to thinke that he hath the very ſubſtaunce of the Lande in the Bo
                     •
                  e wherein the deede is. So doeth Chriſte in the Sacrament louingly 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the faythfull hart, the poſſeſſion of his body and blood with all the benefits by the ſame procured to mankinde, that he may iu
                     ••
                  lye ſay
                     •
                  , that the
                     •
                   be his, and by the 
                     ••
                  liueth, and is nouriſhed to eternall life, yet he may not be ſo fooliſh, to thinke that he hath not the fruit of it, vnleſſe it goe reallye and Carnallye into his body.
               For Chriſtes body & blood are meat & drink for our ſoule, &

not for our body, to be nouriſhed by, as it is by breade and Wyne. 
                     〈…〉
                  . The thirde part of the ſacramente, is thatThe third parte wherin Sacraments conſiſt, is the worde of Chriſtes inſtitution and promiſe. which giueth ſtrength and effecte to the reſidue, that is to ſay, the word of Chriſtes inſtitution & promiſe, which is as it were the ſoule and life of the ſacramente. For whereto ſerueth a ſeale to a blanke, wherein nothing is written, by whiche wee maye clayme anye Benefyte? whereto ſerueth an externall ſigne, if we haue not a promiſe to attayne a ſpirituall thing? And no mans hande or writing will ſerue to make perfecte this deede: It muſte bee Gods onlye. For he hath only the giuing of ſuch things, wherefore it muſt be Gods word, that muſt aſſure vs hereof. Well (ſayd Aug.) Let the word come to the element,Auguſt. and it maketh the Sacrament▪
                   And agayne: How commeth it to paſſe, that water toucheth the body, & clenfeth the hart 
                        〈…〉
                     t by the power of the word, and that not becauſe it is ſpoken, but becauſe it is beleued? And how can a man beleeue that which he 
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     etl
                        •
                      not, nor vnderſtandeth. 
                  
                     •
                  ereby 
                     •••
                   may conſider 
                     •
                  how 
                     〈◊〉
                   yo
                     •
                   haue bene deceaued by them, which haue 
                     〈…〉
                  ed the ſacramentes vnto you in a ſtraunge and vnknowne tongue that you vnderſtoode not. Theſe comfortable wordes 
                     〈…〉
                   Lordes cuppe, This is my blood which is ſhead for you,Mat. 26. 28. Mar. 14. 24. Luc. 22. 20. and for ma
                        •
                     y for 
                        ••••
                     ſſion of 
                        •••
                     nes, with playn
                     •
                   Sa
                  
                     ••••
                  ege haue they kept from you, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   you not only of the pro
                     ••
                  ſe contayned in the words, but alſo of one part of the ſacrament, for they inimſ
                     •
                  red it vnto you of the lay
                  
                     •
                  ie, alway vnder one kyn
                     •
                  e, y• 
                  
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ as they ſay▪ vnder y• forme of bread onelye, whiche greate 
                     〈◊〉
                   to after both the wordes 
                     •••
                   partes of the Sacramentes▪ is 
                     〈◊〉
                   entelye to bee noted in them, and greatly to be 
                     〈…〉
                  . When we ſpeake therefore of the ſacrament, we muſt ſpeake as it is in it ſelfe, by the force of Gods worde, conſiſting of all three partes, and not as the baldneſſe of men, or the weakeneſſe and imperfection of oure fayth maye make it 
                     ••
                  w vs.
               
                  Nowe let vs conſider the cauſes and endes, for whichWhy Sacramentes were ordained. Chriſtes pleaſure was, to ordaine Sacramentes in hys Church, that we may thereby alſo in part learne what fruit and benefite wee take by them. The firſt cauſe is, partlyOur infirmitie, the firſt cauſe why Sacramentes were ordained. our owne infirmitie and weakeneſſe, beyng dull and ſlowe in the vnderſtanding of heauenly things: partly the great goodneſſe and loue of God, that woulde vouchſafe to attemper himſelfe to our ſimple capacitie, and ſeeke meanes by outward things to eaſe and helpe the ſame. For this cauſe, in the Scripture doth he ſo often vſe parables and ſimilitudes of thoſe things, that are within the compaſſe of our vnderſtāding, by thoſe the ſooner to induce vs to the knowledge of his heauenly doctrines. This cauſe the auncient and learned Fathers did acknowledge in their writinges. The Lord (ſaith Chriſoſtome) geueth vs not any thing, that
                  
                  Homil. in Math. 830. 
                  is ſenſible, but inſenſible things▪ The outward things are ſenſible, but all thinges are to bee vnderſtanded in the minde. In Baptiſme, water is ſenſible, but our regeneration and renewing, is perceiued in the minde. For if thou wert ſpirituall and without a body, he would haue giuen all theſe things to thee naked & bare, but becauſe with thy minde there is ioyned a groſſe body, in things ſenſible he declareth vnto thee things, by thy minde to be vnderſtanded. Like wordes almoſt hath Dionyſius in Caeloſt. Hier. Becauſe of carnall perſons
                   (ſaith Auguſtine)Lib. 3. quest. Vet. & noui. 
                  viſible Sacramentes were inſtituted, to the end that by things, that be ſeene with your eyes, your minde may be tranſformed, to thoſe things that be vnderſtanded. Our vnderſtanding is weake and dull, our memorie is fraile and fickle, and ſoone forgetteth the benefite of God. Both theſe our unperfections, God by his Sacramentes helpeth, our vnderſtanding is 
                     •
                  ed by the ſimilitude, and lykeneſſe of the external ſignes, as before I haue noted. Our Seuces alſo are by the ererciſe of the Sacramentes ſtirred vp, to be inſtrumentes to helpe one mynde and weake faith. Our remembraunce alſo, by the ſame 
                     〈◊〉
                   is marueilouſly
                     •
                  
                  
ſtrengthened. And therefore a ſeconde cauſe or ende of aThe ſecond cauſe why Sacraments were inſtituted, is our 
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     rciſe in the rememberance of Chriſts benefites. Luc. 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 26. Sacrament is, that it maye bee to vs a bleſſed exerciſe, whereby wee call to remembraunce, the benefite of our redemption in Chriſt, and yeelde to him moſt hartie thankes, and praiſe for the ſame, according as Chriſt teacheth vs, in the inſtitution of his laſte Supper: Doe this in remembraunce of mee. And Saint Paule, ſo often as you eate of this bread, and drinke of this cuppe, you ſhall ſet forthe the death of the Lorde, vntill his comming, &c. They therefore which come to receaue the Sacrament, and neuer thinke of this, nor call to theyr remembraunce to prayſe God for this vneſtimable benefite, but thinke that the outwarde vſe of the Sacrament is ſufficient, are among the number of them that receyue vnworthily, and make lyttle accompt of Chriſtes benefite procured for vs. A thyrdeThe thirde 
                        •
                     nd whereunto Sacraments were appointed. cauſe and ende of a Sacrament is, that wee by the practice and vſe thereof, myght bee traded to the obedieuce of Gods holye wyll and commaundementes, thoughe the thinges ſeeme to our ſelues neuer ſo ſimple and mean
                     •
                  : and alſo that thereby wee myght openly before God and the worlde, proteſt and acknowledge that we are his people, and of the number of them▪ that looke to be ſaued, preſerued & defended by the benefite of Chriſt onely. So that the open vſe of the ſacramentes is a parte of that confeſſion, wherevnto S. Paule
                   attributeth ſaluation, when he ſayeth, If thou confeſſe with thy mouth the Lord Ieſus, and beleeue in thy
                        
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        . 10. 9. hart that God raiſed him from the dead, thou ſhalt bee ſaued, for by the heart wee beleeue to righteouſneſſe, and by the mouth confeſsion is made to ſaluation. In the vſe of the ſacramentes, wee confeſſe both by mouthe an
                     •
                   teſtimonie of all the partes of our bodye, that Chriſt Ieſus is our Lorde and ſauiour. A fourthe cauſe and endeThe. 4. cauſe why Sacraments were ordained. of the Sacramentes is, that they myght bee as bandes and linkes of loue, vnitie, and concorde among our ſelues. Therefore Saint Paule when hee exhorted to vnitie and loue, among other thinges a
                     〈…〉
                  th. Wee haue one faith,Eph. 4. 5.
                     
one Baptiſme. And agayne in another place: Wee are1. Cor. 10. 17. one bodye as manye as bee partakers of one lofe. For this cauſe, doth Saint Auguſtine call the Sacrament ofAuguſt. the Supper, Sacramentum vnitatis. i. A Sacrament of vnitie,
                   and teacheth vs (as before I haue ſaide,) that as a loafe of breade is made of manye graynes, and a Cuppe of Wyne of many Grapes: ſo wee, thoughe manye in number, are made members of one myſticall bodye of Chriſt Ieſu. A foule thing it is to ſee the ſeruauntes of one Maiſter, that weare one cognizaunce or liuerie, to fall out among themſelues, it can not bee without ſome reproche of their Maiſter. All Chriſtian men weare one cognizaunce and badge: for the Sacraments are the marks of Chriſtes ſheepe. Therfore not to loue & agree together, is a reproch wrought to our Lord and Maiſter. Wherby in a maner we proteſt to the world, that we be not ſeruaunts of his familie, For in this (ſayeth he) ſhall men knowe you to be myIoh. 13. 35. Diſciples, if you loue one another, as I haue loued you. Hereof doth the right vſe and vnderſtanding of the Sacrameutes, very notably put vs in remembraunce. For it teacheth vs, that in Baptune wee are all newe borne, children of God, and graffed into one bodie, and in the Lordes ſupper fedde and nouriſhed, with one heauenly foode of the body and blood of Chriſt, and therefore that we ſhould with faithfull and vnfained loue hartelie embrace one the other, as the children of one father, the members of one body, and the ſeruauntes of one Maiſter, fed at one table, and nouriſhed with one foode to eternal life. Let them therfore looke, with what conſciences they come vnto the Sacramentes, y• reſerue bytter rancour & malice in their hartes, let them conſider what heauy teſtimony, they giue againſt thēſelues before God & his Angels. The laſt cauſe & end of a ſacramentThe laſt ca
                        ••
                      why Sacramentes were appointed. y• I meane nowe to ſpeake of, is that by thoſe, as by bleſſed inſtrumentes of the holye Ghoſtes working, hee myght imparte vnto vs, and beſtowe vppon vs hys vneſtimable Graces, and benefytes together wyth all the

fruites of our redemption in Chriſt Jeſu. For as his worde is, ſo are his Sacraments, inſtrumentes and Meanes by the working of his holy ſpirite, to bring vnto vs the whole benefite of our ſaluation. And here againe becauſe of our ſclaūderous aduerſaries, I muſt put you in remēbraunce, that we which teache thus, teache not as it is fathered vpon vs, that the Sacramentes are but bare ſignes. For youThe faythful togeather with the outward ſigne receiue the inwarde thing. heare vs teach, and as you loue the ſaluatiē of your ſoules, require you to beleeue, that they be ſignes and figures in deede, but ſuch, as moſt aſſuredly bring vnto the faithfull harte, verily and in truth the ſelfe ſame things, that they ſignifie: ſo that the faithfull Chriſtian receauer, maye aſſure himſelfe, that as truely as God is God, ſo truely he receaueth thoſe things, which the outward Sacrament doth ſignifie. We ought therefore (deerely beloued,) with humble hartes to giue immortall thankes to the eternall God, in our Sauiour Chriſt Jeſus, that he hath vouchedſafe ſo graciouſly, and ſo mercifully, to haue conſideration of our infirmitie, to helpe our frailtie, and as it were to leade vs like children by the hand, and appoint vs whether to goe, and what to doe: and to giue vs thoſe exerciſes to trade vs to the obedience of his will, and confeſſion of his name, to marke vs with his badges and cognizances, that wee may be knowen to be his, to faſten vs together with theſe linkes of vnitie and Chriſtian concorde, and finally to prepare for vs ſuch and ſo bleſſed inſtrumentes, to bring vnto vs hys heauenly bleſſings. Herein alſo we may behold his great wiſedome, that he would not lay forth vnto vs his ſpiritual myſteries and promiſes in wordes onely, leaſt they myght ſlip away and be forgotten, but confirmeth and eſtabliſheth the ſame by his deede and ſeale alſo, as I haue declared, that we might the more aſſuredly embrace them. We reade in Hiſtories, and ſee by experience, that when men make any Couenaunt or bargayne, they either ſhake handes, or vſe ſome other like ceremonie or ſolemnitie to confirme it. In olde time among the heathen, they vſed to kill a hogg
                     •
                  
                  
or a pigge, &c. and to vſe at the ſame certaine proteſtatious and curſes, if they ſtoode not to their couenaunt and league. And euerie matter of conueighance we ſee paſſeth by deede and ſeale. The Lorde when he made his promiſe to Abraham,
                  Gen. 15. 9. willed a Bullocke, a Goate, and a Weather to bee kylled, and the Lorde in forme of a burning lyght paſſed betweene them, by that ſolemnitie aſſuring him, that whatſoeuer he had promyſed, ſhould in truth be performed. The outwarde Circumciſion, the Paſchall Lambe, and all the multitude of Sacrifices of the olde lawe, were nothing but ſeales to confirme the trueth of Gods promiſe of ſaluation, in the true ſacrifice that ſhoulde come. Euen ſo dealeth Chriſt with vs in his Sacramentes, Thoſe he hath ordayned as his deedes, and inſtrumentes, as before I haue mentioned, to aſſure vs of his promyſes. And ſo much are his deedes more ſure, and his promyſes more certaine and infallible, than any mans can bee: as his wyll is more iuſt, to ſtande to that he hath ſayde, and his habilitie to performe it greater.
               Nowe for ſo much as S. Paule in this place maketh compariſon betweene the Sacramentes of the olde Lawe, and of the Goſpell, and ſaith that the Iſraelites were Baptized in the cloude, and in the ſea, and in Manna dyd eate the ſame ſpirituall meate, and in the Rocke drinke of the ſame ſpirituall drinke that wee doe: I thinke it neceſſarie ſomewhatWhat difference is to be obſerued betwixt the Sacraments of the old Iews and the Sacraments of Chriſtians. The old Iewes vndes the lawe had the ſame hope of Saluation by Chriſt, that we now haue. to note, what difference is betweene theyr Churche and ours, and their ſacramentes and ours. And principally I do this, becauſe many through ignoraunce are of that opinion, that the ſaluation of mankinde by Chriſt was neuer hearde of in the worlde, before Chriſt came in fleſhe, and that the Iewes had ſome other meane of ſaluation than by him, and therefore that their ſacramentes and ours are nothing like. But this errour taketh away from all Chriſtians a paſſing great comforte, that is, that Chriſtian Religion, and that Meanes of ſaluatiō, is no new thing, but hath continued euer ſince the beginning of the world, according as it is ſaid

of Chriſt, Agnus qui dccifus eſt ab origine mundi. i. That he
                  
                  Apoc. 13. 8 
                  is the Lambe which was ſlaine, from the beginning of the world.
               
               Firſt therefore you muſt vnderſtande, and the whole courſe of the Scriptures teacheth vs, that there is but one eternall and immutable GOD of both thoſe Churches, I meane of the Iewes before Chriſt, and of chriſtians nowe, whome they both, dyd worſhyppe in ſpirite and in trueth. For Chriſtians muſt bee farre from that dineliſh, and wicked hereſie of Marcion, Valentinian, and other, whiche taught, that there were two Gods, one of the Iewes, another of the Chriſtians, a good God, and a badde, a GOD that created the worlde, and a good God that was Father of Chriſt Ieſu. But this deteſtable hereſie hath beene iuſtly condemned, and caſt out of the Churche manye hundred yeeres ſince. Secondlye, both thoſe Churches haue but one manner of ſaluation propoſed to them in the promyſes of GOD, that is, by the death of Chriſt, the Meſsias and ſonne of God. Thys maner of ſaluation was firſt deuiſed by the wyſedome of God, and layde vp in the ſecrete cloſet of his diuine prouidence, before the worlde was made. So ſaith Saint Paule, Bleſſed bee God the Father of our
                  
                  Eph. 1. 3. 
                  Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which hath bleſſed vs with all ſpiritual bleſsing in heauenly things in Chriſt, as he hath choſen vs in him before the foundation of the worlde. Thys manner of ſaluation God himſelfe firſt vttered and publyſhed in Paradice, ſaying to the Serpent after ſinne committed, I will ſette enmitie betweene thee and the woman,Gen. 3. 15. and betweene thy ſeede and hir ſeede, and thy ſeede ſhall breake his heade, &c. Here is promyſed that one ſhould come of the ſeede of the womā that ſhould breake the ſerpentes heade, that is, vtterly deſtroye the power of the Diuell, and deliuer mankinde from his tyrannie. The ſame promyſe was confirmed to Abraham, and ratified to all the Patriarches in theſe wordes: In thy ſeede all theGen. 26. 4. nations of the earth ſhal be bleſſed. This promyſe ſo much

moued faithfull Abraham, that, as Chriſt ſaith, he greatly longed in ſpirite, to ſee the day of Chriſt, and he ſawe it, andIoh. 8. 56. exceedingly reioyced: and vndoubtedly ſo did the other Patriarches and Prophetes as S. Peter beareth witneſſe hereof. All the Prophetes from Samuel, and thenceforth, asAct. 3. 24. many as haue ſpoken, haue borne witnes of theſe dayes. What ſhall I ſaye of the whole manner of the law, ceremonies and Sacramentes? but that they were Preachings of that redemption, that ſhould be in Chriſt Ieſu? It were infinite to giue you examples in al, I will note vnto you onely two or three. What can bee more euident than the Sacrament of the Paſſouer? That as a Lambe without ſpot was killed: ſo the immaculate Lambe Chriſt Ieſu, ſhould be ſacrificed for our deliuerance, out of the ſpiritual Aegypt of the Diuels kingdome: where vnder the heauie burdens of ſinfull workes, wee were holden thrall and in bondage. And as the blood of the Lambe ſprinkled vppon the poſte, was a token for the Angell of Gods wrathe to paſſe that houſe: ſo as many as by fayth haue the doore poſtes of their heartes ſprinkled with the bloud of Chriſt, the true Lamb, that taketh away the ſinnes of the worlde, ſhall bee ſure to be ſaued from that wrath of God, wherein the wicked and vnbeleeuers ſhall bee wrapped. And becauſe S. Paule ſpeaketh here of Manna, doe you not ſee it a marueilous Image of Chriſt? Manna came from heauen, ſo did Chriſt, Manna was deliuered to all in lyke meaſure: ſo is Chriſt an indifferent and full ſaluation to all men. Manna, was white of colour, and pure of ſubſtaunce: ſo is Chriſt pure and vnſpotted of ſinne and infirmities. Manna, that it myght bee nouriſhment, was beaten and bruiſed in a morter: ſo Chriſt that he myght bee the foode of lyfe was broken and bruſed on the croſſe. Manna was the onely ſubſtaunce whereby the Iſraelites lyued in the wylderneſſe: ſo is, Chriſt the onely foode whereby the true Iſraelites and children of Abraham lyue in the deſert and wilderneſſe of this wicked worlde.
               
                  This ſimilitude vndoubtedly, and many ſuche other in the reſidue of their ſacramentes, the faithfull Jewes before the comming of Chriſt did ſee, although not ſo plainely as wee doe nowe in the time of the Goſpell. And ſo S. Paule ſignifieth in this place, when he ſayth: That they did eate the1. Cor. 10. 3 ſame ſpirituall meate, and drinke the ſame ſpirituall drinke, which they could not poſſibly haue done, if in Manna, & in the Rocke, they had not vnderſtanded Chriſt, for Chriſt was Manna, and Chriſt was the Rocke. For wee maye not thinke that they iudged Manna or the Rocke, or any of their Sacramentes to bee of that price and worthyneſſe, that for the vſe of them they ſhoulde bee ſaued, and in the fauour of God. For God by his Prophetes ſundrye times telleth them the contrarie. Therefore it is not to bee doubted, that in their ſacrifices and ſacramentes they ſawe the true Meſsias and Sauiour, and vnderſtoode that thoſe things were but Sermons and Preachings to direct them to the beliefe thereof. Thirdly, we muſt conſider that both the people of the Jewes before Chriſt, and wee nowe ſince Chriſt, haue but one meanes to apprehende this way of ſaluation, and to apply the ſame vnto them, that is by fayth in the promyſes of God. For as we beleeue to be ſaued nowe by Chriſt that is come, ſo they beleeued to bee ſaued by Meſsias that ſhould come. As we bee ſure of ſaluation by faith in Chriſt, that hath redeemed vs, ſo they were ſure of ſaluation by the ſame Meſsias that ſhoulde worke their redemption. For it is not our owne dignitie in any reſpect, but the aſſured truſt of Gods mercie through Chriſt, that ſaueth vs. Wherefore as the faythfull nowe after their departure out of this lyfe, paſſe to moſt aſſured ioy and comfort, ſo the faithfull departing then in lyke manner paſſed to ioye and felicitie. Therefore the Papiſticall doctrine isA place imagined where the dead did 
                        •
                     eſt before the coming of Chriſte. falſe and wicked, that teacheth eyther Lymbum Patrum, or elſe that Chriſt deliuered the Fathers out of hell at hys deſcendyng thither. Seeyng they had the ſame meanes of ſaluation, that wee haue, ſeeyng then there is but out

God of both theſe people truely to be worſhipped, one maner of ſaluation in Chriſt propoſed to them both, one meanes to apprehende and applye that ſaluation vnto them, one Churche, one ſpirituall baptiſme, one ſpirituall meate and drinke, as Saint Paule here witneſſeth: I ſee not by what authoritie of Gods worde, our Sacramentes canne haue any other difference from theirs, then in the external ſignes and reſpecte of tyme: as that theire SacramentsThe difference that is betwixt the Jewes Sacraments & oures, conſiſteth in the externall ſignes, & reſpect of time. ledde them to beleeue that a Meſſyas and Sauyour ſhould come, by whome they ſhoulde bee delyuered from the bondage of ſinne: and oures leade vs to vnderſtande, that this Sauioure is come, and hath ranſommed and deliuered vs, and maketh vs partakers of the benefite thereof. I knowe what difference the Churche of Roome putteth betweene the Jewes Sacramentes and ours, that is, that the Sacraments of the old law, do but ſignifie and promiſe grace and ſaluation: and ours giue, & exhibite the ſame: Which I thinke they gathered of ſome ſentences of S. Aug. and other Fathers not rightlye vnderſtanded. The Sacraments
                  In Pſ. 73. (ſayth Aug.) of the new law, be more wholeſom & happie, then thoſe that were in the olde lawe: for they promiſe, and theſe giue. But the ſame father, in other placesCō. Faust. lib. 19. cap 14. expoundeth himſelfe, as when he ſayth, The Sacramentes of the olde law, ſignifie before hand: and our ſacramēts declare that is done. And agayne, The ſacramentes of the olde law, were promiſes of thinges that ſhoulde be fulfilled: and ours are notes of things that are fulfilled. I graunt, Aug. and other fathers haue ſaid our ſacraments are more happy, and of more excellente grace and vertue, meaning therby only, that they were more ful and perfect, more euident and playne. In many places Auguſtine notethDe doct. Christ. in Jo. in. pſal. this difference, that our ſacraments are fewer, eaſyer, more bewtifull, more playne and euident, and ſo truelye they are. The ſame Auguſt. expounding this very place of Paule, ſayth in this manner: All doe eate the ſame ſpirituall meate, It might ſeeme ſufficient to haue ſayde: All
                  
                  did eate ſpirituall meate, but he addeth (the ſame) I find not how to vnderſtande it, but the ſame that wee alſo doe eate. But ſome will ſay vnto me, Is Manna the ſame thing that I doe now eate, than nothing is now come, if the ſame were before, and Chriſt his paſſion is voyde? how then, ſaith he the ſame,
                   but that he addeth (ſpirituall) for they that did eate it as meate only to feede theireNote. 
                  Bodies, did not eate the ſame meate that wee doe. &c. Breefely therefore I ſay, whoſoeuer in Manna did vnderſtande Chriſt, did eate the ſame ſpirituall meat that we doe. &c. ſo likewiſe the ſame ſpirituall drinke that we doe, for the Rock was Chriſt: for there was not one Chriſt then, & another now, for thē chriſt was to come, Now he is come. To come & is come, are diuers words, but one Chriſt. In the 26 Tract. vpon Iohn, he hath a likeAugust. Tract. in Joh. 26. diſcourſe to the very ſame purpoſe, touching y• ſame place of Paule. Where he ſheweth, that as many did eate Manna, (& mortui ſunt. i.) and are dead: ſo diuers did eate it, (& mortui non ſunt. i.) and are not dead. Moiſes, Aaron, Phinees did eat it, and died not, becauſe they did vnderſtande the viſible meate ſpirituallye, to the ende they might ſpiritually be ſatiſfyed with it. &c. And it followeth, This bred Manna did ſignifie this bread the Table of the Lord doth now ſignifie. They were Sacramēts in ſigns diuers, in the thīgs that are ſignified, the ſelf ſame. Heare what the Apoſtle ſayth, I would not haue you ignorante my bretheren, that they did eate the ſame ſpirituall meate, for their bodily meate was not the ſame, they did eat Manna, we eat another thing, but they did eate the ſame ſpiritual meat. &c. And ſo they did drink the ſame ſpirituall drinke. They one thing, and we another, as touching the viſible kinde, which yet in ſpirituall vertue ſignified the ſelfe ſame thing. By theſe words of S. Aug. that I haue heare layde downe, and by many other like, that I might alleage, I truſte all ſuche as feare God, and will iudge indifferently, may perceiue, that this

is no new doctrine, which at this time I taught, touchingThe faythfull Jewes did eate and drinke ſpiritually the body & blood of Chriſt, before his reall comming in the fleſh: and ſoe doe we, that ar borne & beleeue, ſince his incarnation, & the conclſion thereupon. the likeneſſe of the Jewes religion and Sacramentes to ours now in time of the Goſpell, Herevnto I muſt add this note by the way. If the Iſraelites vnder the old law, did in their ſacramēts eat y• ſame ſpirituall meat, & drink y• ſame ſpiritual drink y• we do in ours, that is Chriſt, & that effecally and to ſaluation, before Chriſtes natural body & blood were borne, and come really into the worlde: it maye euydently leade vs alſo to vnderſtande, what manner of eating and drinking it is, that we alſo ſhould vſe in our ſacramēts to ſaluation, that is, a ſpirituall eating and drinking of Chriſt, and not ſuch a groſſe, carnall, and reall eating as the Church of Rome now ſtriueth for. But of this I haue to ſpeake in the nexte part. Therefore here I will make an ende. &c.
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſeconde Sermon vpon this part of the Text. 1. Cor. 10. 3. &c.
               
               
                  All did eate of the ſame ſpirituall meate, and all did drinke of the ſame ſpirituall drinke, (For they dranke of the ſpirituall Rocke) and the Rocke was Chriſte.
               
               
                  NOt only S. Paule
                   in this place,Chriſt the food of our ſoules. but the ſpirite of God in ſunderye other Places of the Scriptures teacheth vs, that Chriſte only is the bleſſed and Heauenlye foode of oure ſoules, wherewith we are fed and nouriſhed, to eternall life. Of this meate and drinke Eſay prophecied many yeares before Chriſt came in fleſhe, Oh (ſayd he) comeEſay. 55. 1. all ye that be thirſtie, come to the waters, and yee that haue no ſiluer, come buy and eate, come I ſay, bye wine and milke without money, wherfore do you lay out ſiluer, for that which is no fode, & beſtow your labor for that which cannot ſatiſfye you, harken dilligently vnto me, & eat that which is good. &c. In which words he caled the hungry & thirſtie conſciences of gods people, to that heauenly foode of Chriſt, which in his goſpel is laid before the faithfull, by it to be fedde to eternall life, and reproueth them for ſeeking other foode beſyde Chriſt, becauſe indeed there is none that can ſatiſfie them, but onelye hee. This doth Chriſt himſelf ſeeme to expound, in this maner in the goſpel, when he ſayth, If any man thirſt, let him come toJoh. 7. 37. me and drinke. But moſt euident in John the ſixte, hee declareth himſelfe to be the onely foode of oure ſoules, of which we muſt feede vnto ſaluation. For vppon the occaſyonIo. 6. 26. &c. of the Jewes following him with a carnall affection to haue their bodyes fedde by myracle, as before he had

done, he ſharply reproueth that affection in them, & willeth thē to labour and trauatle, not for the meat that periſheth, but for the meate yt ſhold endure to euerlaſting life, which the ſonne of man ſhould giue vnto them. And after, MoiſesIoh. 6. 32. &c. gaue you not bread from heauen, but my father giueth you the true bread from heauen. For the bread of God is he who cōmeth down from heauen, to giue life vnto the world. And after a few words, he ſayth plainely, I amIoh. 6. 35. the bread of life, he that commeth to me ſhal not hunger, and he that beleueth in me ſhall neuer thirſt. And againe, I am the bread of life, your fathers did eat MannaIoh. 6. 48. &c. in the wilderneſſe and are dead. This is the bread of life, which commeth downe from heauen, of which he that eateth ſhould not die, I am the liuing bread, that came downe from heauen, if any man eate of this bread, hee ſhall liue for euer, and the bread which I wil giue, is my fleſhe, which I will giue for the life of the worlde. &c. Except ye eate of the fleſhe of the ſon of man, & drinkIo. 6. 53. &
                           •
                        
                      his, blood, you haue no life in you. Whoſoeuer eateth my fleſhe, and drinketh my blood, hath eternall life, &c I will raiſe him vp at the laſt day. For my fleſh is meate in deede, and my blood is drinke in deede. &c. Seing then it is very euident that Chriſt is the meate and drinke of all true Chriſtians, it behoueth vs next to learne, why Chriſt is called meate and drinke, for we may not groſelye vnderſtand it as y• 
                  Capernaites did, that it is a Meat wherwith our bodies are to be nouriſhed, as with other natural foode, God forbid. For Chriſt himſelfe a little after ſayth. The words that I haue ſpoken are ſpirite and life: GyuingIoh. 6. 63. vs thereby to vuderſtande, that hee is oure ſpiritual meate, and his wordes ſpiritually to be vnderſtanded.
               This ſpeech then that Chriſt is meate an drinke vntoHow the body and blood of Chriſt are ſaid to hes meate and drinke. Chriſtians, is not a naturall and proper kinde of ſpeaking, but metaphoricall and figuratiue, tranſferred from the bodye to the ſoule, from a worldlye meaning, to a ſpirituall Seuce.
               
                  Which the better to perceaue, you muſt remēber that man conſiſteth not of body only, but of ſoule alſo. And as yt body,Acompariſon betwixte the body and the ſoule. hath his life and death, ſo the ſoule hath her life and death. And as the body hath certayn means to keepe of death, and for the time to mayntayne lyfe, ſo hath the ſoule meanes to preſerue the life thereof, and to put awaye death. The lif of the body is the ioyning of the ſoule and the bodye togither, and the death thereof is the ſeparation of the ſoule from the bodye. The meanes to preſerue the life of the bodye, that is, to continue the bodye and ſoule togeather, is foode and ſuſtenaunce, meate and drinke, for we daylye and howerly doe conſume, and the ſubſtance of our bodies waſteth by the pores of oure skinne, ſo that when Nature feeleth wante of Subſtaunce to ſupplye the waſting of the body, then it is ſayde in proper ſpeeche to hunger, or to thirſt, that is, to deſyre and couette that thing whereby the waute of naturall Subſtaunce and moyſture maye be ſupplyed, leaſt the Inſtrumentes of the ſoule ſhoulde bee made feeble, and ſo the ſoule departe, and the body dye. Nowe looke what the ſoule is to the hedye,What the ſoule is to the body, that is God to the ſoule. that is GOD vnto the ſoule. As the lyfe of the bodye is the ioyning of the ſoule to the bodye (for wythout the Soule there is no life) ſo the life of the Soule, is the ioyning of GOD and the Soule togeather, and the death of the Soule is the ſeparation of GOD from the ſoule, for without GOD, the ſoule hath no lyfe.
               And yet you maye not thinke that the Soule dyeth, after that ſorte that the bodye doeth, by ceaſſyng to haue a beeing, or a continuaunce, but it dreth a ſpirituall death by ſeparation of God from it, ſo that the tyme that it is, and hath a beeing withoute God, is nothing but a moſte horrible tormente, and more greeuous then a thouſande bodilye deathes. Nowe further as the body hath a certayne meanes by foode and Suſtenaunce to preſerue life, that is the ſoule and body togeather: ſo hath

the ſoule a meanes by foode and ſuſtenaunce, to continue GOD and the ſoule togeather, and ſo to preſerue lyfe, and putte away the death thereof. The bodye when it wanteth this ſuſtenaunce is ſayde to hunger and to thirſt, ſo the Soule when it feeleth lacke of that Heauenlye and Spirituall foode, whereby the lyfe therof is continued, it is not in proper ſpeeche but Figuratiuelye ſayde to hunger and to thyrſte, that is, earneſtly to long and deſyre to bee made partaker of that Foode, by the Vertue whereof onely, God and it is ioyned and preſerued togeather. This bleſſed foode is Chriſte himſelfe and none other, eyther thing or perſon, for by him onelye are wee reconciled vnto GOD, and kepte in vnitie wyth him vnto eternall lyfe: and withoute him, wee by ſinne remayne ſeparated from GOD, and ſo in Death eternal, vnleſſe Chriſte doe ioyne vs vnto him. He that hath the Sonne of GOD, (ſayth Iohn) hath life, he that hath1. Io. 5. 12. not the ſonne of GOD hath not life. By this compariſon, I truſt you maye ſee why Chriſte is called the meate and drinke of Chriſtians, that is, of the likeneſſe that hee hath with bodily foode and ſuſtenaunce, that keepeth in life, and preſerueth the Soule and the bodye togeather. Wee haue nowe further to conſyder, not onelyeHow Chriſt was prepared to be the food of our▪ ſoules. Io. 6. 35. that Chriſte is the foode of oure Soules, and why hee is ſo called: but alſo howe hee is made the Foode of oure ſoule. I am (ſayth Chriſte) that bread of Lyfe that came from Heauen, that is, hadde hee not beene GOD as well as Manne, hee coulde not haue beene the Meate of our Soules. We muſt aſcende higher therefore, then to the humanitie of Chriſte, or to his Naturall bodye and blood, and conceaue that it is the bodye and blood of the Sonne of God, and hee too God eternall with the Father, or elſe he coulde not haue wrought the Myſterye of our Redemption.
               There be certayne neceſſary cauſes very profytable and cōfortable to remēber, why Chriſt muſt be both god & man.
               
                  Firſt, it was neceſſary he ſhould bee GOD, that heeWhy Chriſt of neceſſitie was to be both god and man, & firſte why he ſhold be god. 1. Jo. 5. 20. might know the will of God, and reueale the ſame vnto vs For we of our ſelues cannot ſee God and his will, but wee knowe, as S. Iohn ſayth, That the ſonne of God came, to giue vs a mynde to know him that is true. Another cauſe is, that the price of our redemption mighte be equiualent and of like worthineſſe, as the offence was in the ſighte of GOD, which could not haue bene, vnleſſe that perſon that was the ſonne of God, had dyed for vs. For neyther Golde nor Siluer, nor anye other pretious thing could redeeme vs, but the blood of the immaculate and vndefyled Lambe, Chriſt Jeſus. Furthermore if hee had not bene God, he coulde not haue ouercome Death, and y• Deuill, vnder whoſe captiuitie we were holden, and there fore, The Sonne of GOD appeared, that he might diſſolue1. Jo. 3. 5. the Workes of the Deuill. Vnleſſe hee hadde bene verye God, hee coulde not haue giuen vs power to beeJoh. 1. 12. Heb. 7. Ro. 8. 34. made the Sonnes of God, and Heires of eternall lyfe. He could not haue bene Our eternall Biſhop, and perpetually ſitte on the right hande of God, to be interceſſoure for vs. He could not haue bene preſent at all times, and in all places, to gather his church, to direct the harts of the faithfull, to heare their prayers, and to remitte their ſinne. He could not haue rayned the dead to life, aboliſhe Death, exerciſe iudgement, and giue eternall life vnto the FaythfullWhy Chriſt world neceſſarily be man. that loue his comming. There be reaſons alſo why Chriſte muſt be very manne, and as hee came from Heauen as GOD, ſo in Earth to take fleſhe of the Bleſſed Virgine, like vnto oures, Sinne onely excepted. Firſt that the Juſtice of GOD requyred, that as Manne offended, and brake his Lawe and Commaundemente, ſo manne alſo ſhoulde ſatiſfye fullye for the ſame, that his righteouſneſſe mighte iuſtlye bee imputed to other. Secoulye, that the appoynted Meſſias, and Sauiour mighte fuſtaine that puniſhment, which by gods ſentence was due for ſinne, that is death, but god alone could not haue dyed.
               
                  Thirdly, that we myght haue the ſurer comfort and confidence in our neceſſitie, to appeale to the throne of his Maieſtie, ſeeing he being our hygh Byſhop was verie man as wee are, and partaker of our infirmities. Fourthlye, that we myght more certainly be aſſured of our Reſurrection, as alſo that we both in ſoule and body, ſhould enioy eternal life in heauen, ſeeyng Chriſt our ſauiour hauing the ſame fleſhe that we haue, hath raiſed it from death, and caried it wt him into heauen, there as our head keeping poſſeſſion for vs, vntill the time that wee as members of hys myſticall body, ſhall be ioyned to hym. For where the head is, there the members muſt be, as Chriſt himſelfe ſayeth, Where IJoh. 12. 26. am, there my Miniſters ſhall be. Furthermore it was neceſſarie that Chriſt ſhould be man, that we myght haue the more confidence by him in our neceſſitie, to appeale to the throne of Gods mercy, knowing, that we haue ſuch an highHeb. 4. 15. Byſhop, as being in manhood like vnto vs, hath ſenſe of our infirmitie, and hath beene tempted, euen as we are. For the humanitie of Chriſt is, as it were, the Conduite pipe, by which onely the liuing waters of Gods mercie, floweth vnto vs. Laſtly, Chriſt was man that we myght be the more aſſured of our Reſurrection from the dead, and poſſeſſion of eternall lyfe, not in ſoule onely but in body alſo, ſeeing this our ſauiour hauing the lyke fleſhe vnto ours in all thinges, Sinne onely excepted, hath raiſed vp the ſame fleſhe from death, and caried it with him to heauen, there to keepe poſſeſſion of that eternall kingdome for vs. Eſpecially conſidering that he by the price of his blood, hath taken away the guilt of ſinne, from our mortall bodyes. Thus in part you vnderſtand howe Chriſt became the true & liuely foode of Chriſtian people, that is, becauſe by the vneſtimable wiſedome and mercy of God, he was prepared to bee in perſon God and man. All kinde of nouriſhment hath ſome proportion of lykeneſſe with that bodye, which it nouriſheth, and ſo Chriſt the naturall ſonne of God became man alſo, that by that likeneſſe he might be apt and fitte nouriſhmēt,

to preferre vs to eternall lyfe. But this meate, muſt be yet further prepared, or elſe it woulde not ſerue our turne in feeding of vs. Chriſt therefore was prepared and made apte meat for vs to eate, vpon the Aulter of the Croſſe, where his body was broken, and his blood ſhedde, and he offered himſelfe to God the father, a ful & perfect ſacrifice for our ſinne, and afterward raiſed the ſame his body from death to life, y• it might be very true ſuſtenaunce to euerlaſting life, aptly, and truely in all reſpectes prepared to that end.
               Forſomuch as you haue now heard yt Chriſt is the onelyNow Chriſt his body and blood is truly & rightlye to be eaten & drunken as well in the Sacraments as without them. foode of life, why he is ſo called, & howe he was prepared ſo to be, we muſt next conſider how this bleſſed meat is truely & rightly eaten, both in the ſacraments, & without the vſe of of Sacramentes. This queſtion hath vexed all Chriſtendom, nowe for the ſpace of certaine yeres, & hath exerciſed the pennes and tongues almoſt of all learned men of this age, with great vehemencie on eche ſide. But ſurely if they would with ſingle mindes, without heat of contention truely conſider, howe the fruite and benefite of this heauenly foode is receaued, this controuerſie might bee eaſily ended, and many a troubled conſcience quieted, which now almoſt only are by this meanes ſtayed, from embracing the trueth of the Goſpell. They doe not ſo greatly miſlike the other parts of our doctrine, but this ſticketh in their conſciences, that wee denie the body and blood of Chriſt, really and carnally eaten and drunken in the Sacrament. Wherefore I hartely deſire al ſuch, for the time to laye aſide that ſettled perſwaſion, wherewith their mindes hitherto hath beene ſo holden, that they could not abide to heare any thing of the contrarie, and with indifferent and charitable mindes carefully to conſider, that which in parte I haue, and now hereafter ſhall ſpeake touchyng this matter. Firſt, thereforeAgainſt the carnal eating & drinking of Chriſts body and blood. you muſt call to your remembraunce, that Chriſtes bodye, is not carnall meate and drinke for our bodyes, but ſpirituall meat and drinke for our ſoules, and for that cauſe S. Paul in this place ſo calleth it, ſaying, That the olde Fathers
                  
                  did eate of the ſame ſpirituall meate, and drinke of the ſame ſpiritual drinke. And yet I muſt needes confeſſe that this ſpirituall meate is profitable, not to the ſoule onely, but to the body alſo. For Chriſt dyed for preſeruation both of ſoule and bodye. But this benefite of nouriſhment, is not firſt receaued of the bodye, and throughe it paſſeth to the ſoule, for that were monſtrous, but beeyng firſt receaued of the ſoule, it profiteth the bodye. For as Chriſt ſayth, That which entreth into the bodily mouth defylethMat. 15. 11 not the man, but that commeth out of the mouth from the corrupte hearte and mynde. So contrariwyſe not that good thing, that entreth by the bodye dothe profyte the ſoule, but that which entered firſt by the ſoule, and is receaued by it, profyteth alſo the bodye. For the body and bloud of Chriſt, beeyng in deede the true foode of lyfe, when it is ſpiritually eaten by the ſoule, through the operation of the holye Ghoſt, maketh vs apte to Reſurrection, and in due tyme tranſformeth our mortall bodyes, to the lykeneſſe of his glorious bodye. If the ſpirite ofRom. 8. 11. him that raiſed Chriſt from death dwell in vs, he that raiſed Chriſt from the dead, ſhall alſo quicken our mortall bodies, becauſe that his ſpirit, through Chriſt, dwelleth in vs. The better to vnderſtand what it is to eate this ſpirituall foode, and how it is truely & effectually receaued to eternall lyfe: I muſt put you in minde of the compariſon that before I vſed betweene the body and the ſoule. As the bodye is ſayde to eate when it receaueth that ſuſtenaunce, wherewith the hunger thereof is ſtayed and ſatiſfied, and as it is ſayde to drinke, when it receaueth that liquour, wherewith the thirſt is quenched: euen ſo our ſoule is ſayde to eate and to drinke, when it receaueth that heauenly and bleſſed foode of Chriſt Jeſus crncifyed, wherewith the hungry, and thirſtie appetite thereof, that is, the vehement deſire of the fauour of God and ſaluation, is fully ſatiſfyed, and appeaſed.
               As there commeth no benefit to the body, of meat & drinke,

vnleſſe it bee eaten and drunken: ſo the bodye and blood of Chriſt crucified, doth not helpe vs anye thing, if it bee not worthily and truely receaued. The body receaueth hys foode, by the mouth of the body, the ſoule receaueth hirs, by the mouth of the ſoule. As it is not ſufficient to hunger and thirſt, nor to receaue ſuſtenaunce, vnleſſe there be a naturall ſtrength in our bodyes to receaue, concoct, and digeſt the ſame: ſo there muſt be in our ſoules that ſtrength, that may ſurely receaue Chriſt, and wrappe him or embrace him in the bowels of our heart, that he may thereby, as it were, be turned into vs, and wee into him, but that ſtrength is not in our ſelues, but is giuen of God. We muſt therefore haue it from him, from whom all good giftes proceede, that is, From the father of lyghtes. And this gift wherewithIac. 1. 17. Chriſt is truely and effectually receaued, is nothing but faith. For by fayth we receaue Chriſt, and aſſure our ſelues in our hartes, that wee are partakers of that redemption, which by his death he hath procured for vs, and with that firme perſwaſion, lay him vp in the bowels of our heartes, that in all our temptations and troubles, we may feede vpon him, and gather ſtrength and comfort, in the aſſuraunee of Gods fauour purchazed by him: ſo that ſo often as our heartes bee ſhaken with miſtruſt and feare, this faith doth comforte and releeue vs agayne. Nowe that faith is theFayth, the mouth of the ſoule, whereby Chriſte is eaten. mouth and meanes, whereby onely, wee receaue and eate Chriſt to ſaluation: I will let you vnderſtand it both by Chriſtes owne wordes in S. Iohn, and by the iudgement of diuers learned, and auncient Fathers. For Chriſt vſeth theſe wordes indifferently, and as of one force and ſignification, To beleeue in him, To eate him, To drinke him, ToIoh. 6. 29. 33. 35. come vnto him, and doth attribute to eche of theſe, y• ſame effectes. To beleeue in Chriſt is the proper worde, to eateWhat to eate Chriſt is, & what to drinke his blood is. Chriſt or to come vnto him are Metaphores and figuratiue ſpeeches, but all of one force. I am the bread of life (ſaith Chriſt) he that commeth to me ſhall not hunger, and he that beleeueth in me, ſhall neuer thirſt. Marke diligently

(deerely beloued) what Chriſt ſayth, He that commeth to me ſhall not hunger, therfore to come vnto Chriſt, is to eat Chriſt. And againe he ſaith: He that beleeueth in mee, ſhall neuer thirſt, therfore to beleeue in Chriſt, is to drinke Chriſt. To eat and to drinke are meanes to take away hunger and thirſt, but to come vnto Chriſt, & to beleeue in him, as Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, doth take away hunger and thirſt: therefore to come vnto him, and to beleeue in him, is to eate him, and to drinke him. An other out of the ſame place is this, Chriſt attributeth the ſame effectes and fruits to them which beleeue in him, that he doth to them that eate his bodie and drinke his blood: therefore by eating and drinking, he meaneth nothing but beleeuing. His wordes bee theſe Iohn. 6. verſe. 54. He that eateth my fleſhe and drinketh my blood hath eternall life, and I will raiſe him vp at the laſt daye. Note the effectes that he gyueth to eatyng his fleſhe and drinking his blood, that is, to haue euerlaſting lyfe, and bee rayſed at the laſt daye. In the. 40. verſe of the ſame Chapter hee ſayeth: This is the wyll of my father that ſent mee, that euerie one that ſeeth the ſonne, and beleeueth on him, ſhould haue eternall life, & I will raiſe him vp at the laſt daye. Who ſeeth not heere that Chriſt attributeth the ſame force to beleeuing, that in the other verſe he did to eating and drinking, and therfore vſeth y• wordes indifferently, as beyng of one meaning. I myght ſtay vpon many other places, wherein the holy Ghoſt wytneſſeth that we haue eternall life by beleeuing in Chriſt, as in the ſame place, He that truſteth in me hath eternal life,
                  Ver. 4
                        •
                     . but the matter is needeleſſe, and the time will not ſuffer me. Therefore by Chriſtes owne wordes to beleeue in Chriſt is to eat Chriſt. That you may not thinke this is a new deuiſe proceeding from my ſelfe, or from the Preachers of thys tyme, hearken you what S. Auguſtine ſayeth: This is theTract. in Ioh. 26. bread, that came from heauen, that if any doe eate of it he ſhoulde not die, but that ſtretcheth to the Vertue of the Sacrament, & not to the viſible Sacrament. He that

eateth within, not he that eateth without, he that eateth with the hart, and not he that preſſeth it with his teeth. Marke I pray you, y• he attributeth the true & effectuall eating, not to the preſſing with the teeth and bodyly mouthe, but to the inward eating with the hart, and what is that but by faith and beleeuing, ſpiritually to eate him, and ſo he expoundeth himſelfe in an other place. This it is therefore,
                  Trast. 25 fayeth he, to eate that foode that periſheth not, but remaineth to eternall lyfe. What prepareſt thou thy tooth and thy belly, beleeue and thou haſt eaten. And againe, To beleeue in hym, that is it, to eate the bread of lyfe. Cyprian alſo to the ſame purpoſe writeth, Theſe things ſoDe coenae Domini. often as wee doe, wee ſharpen not our teeth to byte, but with ſincere fayth, wee breake and diuide that holye breade. Some happily thinke that this ſpirituall eating by faith, is but a 
                     •
                  leight matter, and of no great weyght, and ſo the teachers of the Churche of Rome woulde perſwade men, but they conſider not the great vertue, power and ſtrength of Faith. By Fayth wee knowe Chriſt, and theThe force of fayth. true meane of our ſaluation by hym. By Faith wee bee graffed into Chriſt, as braunches into the roote and ſtocke, ſo that wee lyue now by him and by his ſpirit, as the braunches doe by the Iuice, that commeth from the bodye of the tree. By Fayth wee bee ſo vnited vnto Chriſt, that we may iuſtly ſaye whatſoeuer is hys, is ours alſo: by fayth we are made the chyldren of God, and heyres of eternall lyfe. By fayth wee haue peace wyth God, and are aſſured of hys fauour in the myddeſt of all our troubles: by fayth wee dare boldly approche to the throne of Gods mercie. This might and ſtrength of fayth they feele not, that thinke it ſo ſimple a matter to eate Chriſt by fayth. Chriſt witneſſeth, ThatIoh. 6. 54. by eating him by faith and beliefe, we haue ſaluation and eternall lyfe, and that hee will raiſe vs at the laſt daye. Wherefore I woulde knowe of them what other eating there is beſide thys, whereby wee maye aſſure our ſelues of Saluation. Truely the Scriptures mention none.

And that carnall eating, for which the Churche of Rome ſtriueth, is ſuche as they themſelues confeſſe, that Iudas and all wicked perſons may vſe, and bee damned. Nowe I appeale to the conſciences of them that feare GOD, and will not willyngly runne into errour, whether wee or they deale with the people of God more ſincerely. They without any euident proofe of the Scriptures contende, as I haue ſayde, for that reall and bodily eating with which damnation maye bee ioyned: wee endeuour to perſwade men that manner of ſpirituall eatyng by faythe, throughe which, by the teſtimonie of the whole Scriptures, wee ſhall be aſſured of eternall lyfe, and with which, damnation can not bee ioyned. Some perchaunce wyll ſaye vntoThe eating of Chriſt by fayth, is no derogation to the dignity of the Sacramente, and profite the
                        •
                      of. mee, or wyll thinke with themſelues in their mynde: If this doctrine bee true, then are Sacramentes needeleſſe. For wee may eate Chriſt by fayth, ſpiritually, in ſuch ſort as you haue ſayd, without any vſe of the Lordes ſupper, and therefore it maye ſeeme ſuperfluous. God forbydde that the moſt perfect Chriſtians and of ſtrongeſt fayth, ſhould once thinke Sacramentes to bee ſuperfluous and needeleſſe. They bee the bleſſed and holy ordinaunces of Chriſt, by his mercy and goodneſſe appoynted for our great helpe and benefite, as I haue in the former Sermon declared. And yet I muſt confeſſe to the great comforte of many godlye perſons, that the faythfull Chriſtian maye, and doth often feede vpon Chriſt to ſaluation, beſide the vſe of the Sacrament. For the ſpirituall grace and benefites, which as I haue ſayd before is the principall parte of a Sacrament, is not of neceſſitie alwaye ſo tyed to the outwarde ſignes, that without them God can not, or doth not ſometime beſtowe the ſame. I doubte not but the Theefe vppon theLuc. 23. 4
                        •
                     
                   Croſſe without vſe of the Sacrament, dyd eate the bodye and blood of Chriſt in ſuch ſort, that he was the ſame day wt him in Paradiſe. We ſee in the Actes of the Apoſtles, thatActs. 10. 
                  Cornelius and hys company was ſealed with the ſpirite of GOD, before the receauing of the outward Sacrament,

in ſuch ſort, that if he had then immediatly departed out of this life, he ſhould haue gone to heauen, which coulde not bee, vnleſſe he had ſpiritually by fayth eaten the true foode of euerlaſting life, that is Chriſt Jeſus crucifyed, which he fed vppon moſt aſſuredly, whyle he heard Saint Peter preach Chriſt. There were in tyme of the Primitiue Churche, great numbers of godly Martyrs ſaued, which neuer outwardly receaued the Sacrament of the Lordes ſupper, and yet fruitfully and effectually did eat Chriſt by faith: And ſo doe many at this daye, which either by ſickneſſe, or by impriſonment, or by any other lyke cauſe of neceſſitie, are tyed from the outwarde vſe of the Sacraments. Yet, as I haue fayde, God forbyd that we ſhoulde thinke the Sacrament of the Lordes ſupper ſuperfluous, but rather exceeding profitable. In the vſe of yt Sacrament there is a double eating, of which one helpeth the other.† As manne conſiſteth of two partes, bodie and ſoule: ſo the bodye feedeth vppon the outwardeIn the vſe of the Sacrament, is a double eating to be noted. Our ſenſes in the vſe of the Sacrament are helpers to our better receauing of the ſame. Hearinge. Ma. 26. 26 Ro. 10. 17. elementes of bread and wyfe, but the ſoule feedeth in deede and truely vpon Jeſus Chriſt crucified. The outward eating by y• inſtrumēts of our body, cauſeth al our ſenſes, our hearing, our ſeeing, our feeling, our taſting to helpe our inwarde eating by faith, & by the ſame quickeneth, ſtirreth, ſtrengtheneth, & increaſeth our faith, yt we may eate yt body and blood of Chriſt more effectually & fruitfully. For when the faithful chriſtian, heareth the wordes of Chriſtes inſtitution ſounde in his eares, This is my body that is giuen for you, & this is my blood that is ſhed for the remiſſion of your ſinnes, it ſtirreth vppe his faith (for faith is by hearing) to lay ſtrong howfaſt vppon this promiſe, & in his hart doth aſſure himſelfe that Chriſt dyed and ſhed his blood, not onely for the redemption of the whole worlde generally, but for hys alſo particularly, and that he vndoubtedly is partaker of that bleſſed worke of our redemption. When wee heare theſe woordes, Doe this in remembranceLuc. 22. 19. of me, our faith is aſſured, yt it is Chriſts commaundement, that wee ſhoulde vſe this Sacrament, to call

to our remembraunce the benefite of our faluation by the death of Chriſt, and in hart and minde at al times, but then eſpecially, to ſhew our ſelues truely thankefull to him for the ſame. When our ſight beholdeth vpon the Table, theSeeing. bread and wyne by Chriſtes ordinaunce broken and powred out for vs to vſe, the Fayth is moued this to thinke: As ſurely and truely as my bodily eyes behould vpon the table of the Lord the Creatures of bread and wine, as the outward parte of his ſacramente, and ſee the ſame broken, and poured out for mee: ſo aſſuredly doe I with the eye of my faith, beholde the body and blood of Chriſt, broken and ſhead for me, vpon the Alter of the Croſſe, and the ſame my Sauiour ſitting now on the right hand of god the father, with the ſame body and blood now gloryfyed, wherewith vpon the Croſſe, he payd the price of my redemption. Whē we ſee the Miniſter offering to vs the bread and the cup,Feeling. and wee receaue the ſame in our hande, and by our ſence feele them: inwardly in our hartes our fayth is mooned to haue this cogitacion: As truely as our Sauioure Chriſte vpon the Croſſe by his body broken, and his blood ſheade wrought our redemption, and offered the benefite thereof, to all that would beleeue generally: ſo truelye am I aſſured that now in the vſe of this holy Sacrament, by his miniſter he offereth the ſame to me, particularly to be applied to my ſelfe. And as ſurely as my hande receaueth the outwarde creatures, ſo ſurelye by my fayth, doe I receyue Chriſt himſelfe, and in my hart feele him, and with my ſpirituall armes imbrace him, as the onely price and meanes of my ſaluation.
               When we eate of the holy breade, and drinke of the reuerendTaſting. cuppe, and by our caſt haue ſence of the ſweeteneſſe of them, and fele them paſſe downe into our ſtomache there to reſt, that they may be according to their nature, meanes to nouriſhe and ſtrengthen our bodie to continue it in lyfe, the fayth is ſtirred vp by theſe ſences thus to thinke: Euen as certainly as my taſte feeleth the ſweeteneſſe of Breade

and wyne, and thereby perceiue in deede, that their operacion is to nouriſh and ſtrengthen my body, and to quicken my naturall ſpirites, which without ſuche nouriſhmente would periſhe: euen ſo the taſte of my faith, and ſence of my hart doth feele the ſweeteneſſe of Chriſte his body and blood, broken and ſhead for mee and all mankinde vppon the Croſſe, and perceiue it thereby to be the onely foode of my ſoule, without which I ſhoulde periſhe both ſoule and bodye Eternallye. And as certainlye as I feele with bodilye ſence, that the Breade and Wyne paſſeth into my Stomache, and there according to their proportion, feede, ſtrengthen, and quicken my Naturall bodye and Spirites: ſo aſſuredlye doe I, with my inwarde and Spirituall ſence, perceiue the bodye and blood of Chriſte, and the whole benefite of his death and paſſiō, to paſſe into the ſtomache of my ſoule, and boſome of my hart, there, through the ſtrength of a true Chriſtiā faith to be laid vp, wrought and digeſted, as that onelye nouriſhmente that keepeth the life of the ſoule, and preſerueth mee both ſoule and bodye to eternall life. They that will Chriſtianlye and charitablely, and in the feare of GOD weighe and conſyder theſe thinges, I truſte will not thinke eyther that wee make lighte accoumpte of the Externall Sacramente, or in oure Doctrine teache a ſyngle and ſleighte manner of eating of Chriſt by fayth, as the fauourers of the church of Rome doe charge vs.
               And I appeale to the Conſciences of all them that followe theire Doctrine, whether euer they were taughte to take ſuche ſweete inſtruction and comfort, in the vſe of that bleſſed Sacrament, or no.
               Theſe good Fruites of that Sacramente are muche furthered and increaſed by ſunderye other Godlye cogitations,Sacraments are badges by which we Chriſtians are knowne from idolaters. which the Scriptures teache true Chriſtians to vſe in the adminiſtration of it. The worde of GOD teacheth that the vſe of the externall Sacramentes, is a manner of confeſſion, whereby men acknowledge themſelues

before GOD and the World, that they are Chriſtians. Therefore the faythfull receauer, when hee commeth to the Sacrament, thinketh this with himſelfe: I by comming to this place proteſte before GOD, and his Angels, and before all the Creatures of Heauen and earth, that in my harte I deteſte the Religion of Jewes, Turkes, Infidels, Heretiques, and all other that denye ſaluation to come by the death of Chriſte: and I acknowledge my ſelfe vnfaygnedlye, to bee of the number of them, that hope to haue the fauoure of GOD, and to bee ſaued by the merite and paſſion of Chriſte onelye. The wordeSacraments are the ſeales wherby gods promiſes are confirmed vnto vs. of GOD teacheth that Sacramentes are, as it were Seales to confyrme the truth of Gods promiſes, and to ſtrength our fayth. Therefore by this ſeale of the Lords Supper, wee aſſure oure ſelues that wee are partakers of all that Legacie, which Chriſt our Sauyour in his laſt will bequeathed to vs, that is, that his bodye was broken vpon the Croſſe for our redemption, and his blood ſheadde for the remiſſion of oure Sinnes. The ScripturesSacraments vnite vs to Chriſte. teache that in the vſe of the ſacramentes through Fayth, wee bee vnited vnto Chriſt, and ingraffed into his Myſticall body, ſo that wee liue nowe onelye by him, and whatſoeuer is his, by the truth of his promiſe, is oures alſo.
               The worde of God teacheth, that the Sacrament of theSacraments are to linke vs togeather in brotherly vnitie. Lordes ſupper is a linke of vnitye, that knitteth vs together as members of one Myſticall bodye, and therefore that wee oughte to bee ioyned in mutuall loue and charitie among our ſelues, and that it is a foule reproch both to Chriſte oure head, and to the whole body, if we hate, hurte or hinder one another. For by the vſe therof, we confeſſe y• we are all members of one bodye, all Seruantes of one Mayſter, all Children of one Father, all Subiectes vnder one Lorde and King, all Partakers of one redemption, all Heires of one Heritage, and Gifte of Eternall Lyfe. And in ſo manye L
                     •••
                  es of Vnitye

to be at diſcorde among ourſelues, is in Gods iudgemente an heauy teſtimouie agaynſt vs in the day of his wrath. Finally the word of God teacheth vs that the Sacrament of the Lordes ſupper, is our heauenlye Feaſte, in whiche the Lambe of God that taketh away the ſinnes of the worlde, is offered vnto vs, ſpiritually to feede vppon in our fayth, that by him, as I haue before declared, we maye be nouriſhed, ſtrengthened, and preſerued to eternall life, and therfore that we ought to bee verye carefull ſo coprepare oureſelues; that we may be worthy Gueſtes for that bleſſed table. Wherefore I thinke it neceſſary in a worde or two to teach you how Chriſtians ſhould prepare themſelues, as worthy gueſtes, to come to this holy Table. But before I come to that, I will fyrſte aunſwere an euell and peruerſe Doctrine broughte into the Church, by the Sea of Roome, and the Preachers and teachers thereof, directlye both agaynſte Chriſtes owne wordes, and agaynſt the doctrine of the auncient fathers, that is, that very wicked mē, and horrible ſinners, as Iudas and other, doe eate in the ſacrament, the very Reall and naturall body of Chriſte, as fully as Peter, or any other Saint of God, or other faythfull Chriſtian hath done, or doth. This Doctrine, as it isBlaſphemus doctriue, of wicked mens eating of the body of chriſt 
                        •
                     efelled. Joh. 6. 56. reprochefull to the body and blood of Chriſt, ſo it is plainly againſt yt which Chriſt himſelf teacheth in Iohn. For there Chriſt ſayth thus: He that eateth my fleſh, & drinketh my blood, abideth in me, and I in him. As the liuing Father ſent me, and I liue by the Father, ſo hee that eateth me, ſhall liue by me. I adde, But the wicked & naugty perſons abide not in chriſt, nor liue by him, therfore ſinfull, and wicked faythleſſe perſons doe not eate Chriſt, nor drinke his blod. In the ſame place Chriſt ſayeth further. Whoſoeuer eateth my fleſhe, and drinketh my blood,Joh. 6. 54. hath eternall life. &c. I adde here likewiſe. But the wicked haue not eternall life by chriſt, nor ſhall bee rayſed to life, but to eternall damnation: therefore it is a falſe and a wicked Doctrine, that Iudas and ſuch other naughtie perſons

doe eate the very true, reall, and Naturall bodye of chriſt, for if they did, they ſhold thē be partakers of thoſe benefits, which chriſt (truth it ſelf) promiſeth to thē yt eat him. Though this their doctrine, to any godly man may ſeeme abſurde in it ſelfe, and Chriſt his wordes againſt it be plain ynough, and will not eaſylye admitte any gloſe, yet if the aunciente Fathers alſo teache not herein, as wee doe, let vs be thought to deuiſe it of oure ſelues. Origin ſayeth this: Theſe thinges haue I ſpoken of the typicall and fyguratiue body. Much alſo may be ſpokē of the word himſelfe, which became fleſhe, whome, whoſoeuer ſhall eate, ſhall ſurely liue for euer, (and he addeth) Whome no euill man can eate. For if it could be that he which cō
                     tinueth euill, did eate the word that became fleſh, ſeing that he is the word & bread of life: it would neuer haue ben writtē, whoſoeuer eateth the bread ſhall liue for euer. Hitherto Orig. And S. Aug. He that diſcordeth frō
                     
                        In Mat. 15. De Trini. lib. 4. Tract. 59. Panē dn̄
                           
                              •
                            Panē. dn̄i. Tract. 26. Chriſt, eateth not his fleſh, nor drinketh his blood, but he receaueth the Sacrament of ſo holy a thing, to the iudgement of damnation againſt himſelfe. And y• ſame father vpō 
                  S. Joh. The Apoſtles,
                   ſayth he, did eat the bred that was the Lord, but Iudas did eate the breade of the Lord, againſt the Lord. But moſt plainly he ſayth in an other place, The ſacramēt of the vnity of the body & blod of Chriſt, is receiued at the Lords table, of ſome to life, of ſome to deſtruction. But the thing it ſelfe whereof it is a ſacrament, is life to euery man and death to none, whoſoeuer ſhall be partaker of it. And in the ſame place. To eate that meate, and to drink that drinke is to dwel in Chriſt, & to haue chriſt dwelling in him. And by that it followeth, that he which dwelleth not in Chriſt, nor hath chriſt dwelling in him, vndoubtedly doth not ſpiritually eat his fleſh, nor drink his blood, although carnally & viſibly he preſſe with his teeth, the ſacrament of the body & blood of Chriſt, &c. Although I might alleage a nūber of other places to yt ſame purpoſe, yet becauſe

theſe fathers vndoubtedly did know the fayth & Doctrine of the church in their time, this may be ſufficient to ſuch, as haue not a minde willingly to abyde in errour. Seing none be partakers of that heauenly foode, laid forth at that holy table, but ſuch as worthily come to receaue the ſame, it behoueth all good Chriſtians, as before I haue ſayde, to learne how to prepare themſelues to the worthy receiuing thereof. And how that may be done. S. Paule in generallHow we ought to prepare our ſelues to the worthy receauing of the lords ſupper. 1. Co. 11. 18. words brecfely ſheweth. Let a man (ſayeth hee) prooue himſelfe, and ſo let him eate of this bread, and drink of this Cuppe. The meanes therefore to come worthilye, is to proue and trie our ſelues, whether thoſe thinges bee in vs, which the worthy Gueſtes of that Table ſhould haue. Firſt therefore we muſt looke vnfainedlye into our ſelues whether we haue an appetite or deſyre to eate of yt bleſſed foode. For a loathing ſtomache neuer perfectly digeſteth any meat, yt it receaueth, but turneth it to the hurt of the body. This Appetite or deſire cannot be in vs, vnleſſe it be wrought by the ſharpe ſauce of ſeuere repentance for our ſinnes, which we ſhall the better prepare, if wee examineHow we are to make trial of our ſelues before we come to the lords table. Deut. 6. 5. our ſelues, by the perfect rule of Gods iuſtice in his law, & conſider how farre we are from the ſame, and what danger hangeth ouer our heads for the wante thereof. God ſayth in his law. Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy god with al thy hart, with all thy foule, with all thy minde, with all thy ſtrength, and thy Neighbour as thy ſelfe. That is, wee ſhould loue, we ſhould hate, we ſhould feare, we ſhold hope for nothing but in God, and to his glory: we ſhould thinke or muſe vpon nothing in our minde and vnderſtanding, but that may make to the honour and glory of god. We ſhould imploye all the powers of our bodye, and of our worldelye giftes to the ſame ende: wee ſhoulde doe nothing to anye other man, which we woulde not willinglye bee contented ſhould be tone vnto vs. If wee examine our ſelues by this rule, we ſhal ſee we be ſo farre from that we ſhould be, that 
                     ••
                  noſ
                     •
                   we haue not one branche thereof in vs, whiche will

more euidently appeare, if wee will trie our ſelues by euery particular commaundemente rightely and truely vnderſtanded. Seing then we be ſo farre from the iuſtice of Gods lawe, the curſe thereof muſt needes be due vnto vs, for God ſayth, Curſed is he, whoſoeuer keepeth not allDeu. 27. 26 thinges written in the booke of his lawe. In this manner if wee examine our ſelues ſincerely, we ſhall throughly know what wee are in the ſight of God, as well by the corruption of oure nature, as by the courſe of our euill and naughtie lyfe, wee ſhall haue ſence of our own ſinne, wee ſhall hate and deteſt it, wee ſhall from the bottome of oure hartes be ſory for it, with trembling mindes we ſhal feare the heauie iudgement of God againſt vs, and ſo will there be ſtirred vp in vs that Godly appetite, and greedye deſyre to eate of that ſpirituall meate, whiche onelye can ſatiſfye our troubled conſcience, and cure our repentaunt and broken hattes. &c. But though the appetite and deſyre bee neuer ſo great, in vayne he commeth to any table, that hath no mouth to eate, nor ſtrength of ſtomache to digeſte. A true and ſtrong Chriſtian fayth, is the mouth of the ſoule, and the power wherewith wee doe receiue and digeſte Chriſt Jeſus crucified, as the foode of our ſaluation. We1 muſt looke therefore to our ſelues, firſt whether we knowe and vnderſtande the miſtery of our redemptiō, that is, that the vnſpeakeable mercy of God ſent downe the ſecond perſon in Trinitie, to take fleſh of the bleſſed Virgine, to lyne in the ſhape of a moſt contemptible man in this worlde, and in the ende to haue ſuffered cruell death for the redemption of mankinde.
               Secondlye whether we feele in our harts a ſtrong perſwaſiō,2 that we alſo through the merciful promiſes of god, are partakers of the ſame worke of our redemption. For a true Chriſtian muſt not only haue a generall knowledge, but alſo by a fyrme faith, hee muſt haue 
                     •
                   particular application of the ſame to himſelfe. Furthermore, as it is3 neceſſarye to haue both a deſyre to eate, ſtyrred by a

ſence and feeling of true repentaunce, and alſo an aſſured fayth to receiue and digeſt this wholeſom and comfortable medicine of oure ſoule: ſo becauſe God beſtoweth not his mercy by his ſonne Chriſt in vayne, or to the end we ſhould ſtill continue in ſinne, we muſt further try our ſelues, whether we feele an vnfained deſire to riſe to a newneſſe of life, and an earneſt ſtudy hereafter to amēd our former faults, and to ſtrayn our ſelues to a Godly and honeſt conuerſation, that God in vs maye bee glorified, and the mouthes of his Ennemies ſtopped. Laſtly, wee muſte examine oure conſciences, whether we haue a feruente and great deſyre, to call to oure remembraunce, the vneſtimable Benefyte of oure Redemption, made by the price of his bodye and blood, and to acknowledge and confeſſe the ſame vnfaignedlye before GOD, and the Worlde, and to yeeld vnto him moſte hartye thankes for the ſame, and the reſidue of his benefytes, not at this preſent tyme onelye, but euer hereafter, vntill the time of his comming.
               This is the Godly and Chriſtian tryall of oure ſelues, which if we vſe, by the grace of Gods Spirite working in vs, wee ſhall becomme eyther worthye Gueſtes, or muche more fytte then other wayes wee ſhoulde bee. &c.
               Happylye ſome will thinke that this Admonition isObiection. a Terroure and tormente to theire conſciences, to feare men from comming to this bleſſed Sacramente, rather than an Exhortation or Incouragemente vnto it. For if the Daunger bee in it ſelfe ſo great, as the vnworthye Receauer eateth Damnation to himſelfe, and the preparation and triall ſo ſtreighte as you haue made it, it were better neuer to come to it. For what one is there among a thouſande, that doth in this manner trye his conſcience? or if he doe, hee muſt needes feele ſo great want and imperfection, either in ſorrow for his ſinnes, or in ſence of Gods wrath, or in weakeneſſe of his Fayth, or in the ſtudie of newe lyfe, or in the Coldeneſſe of his

charitie, or in the feebleneſſe to giue thinkes and ſet forth the glory of God, or in all theſe things, that he muſt needes be ouerwhelmed in conſcience, and feared to make hymſelfe partaker of theſe holy myſteries. But (deerely beloued) letAnſweare. not this feare, ſhake your conſciences, nor driue you backe from this bleſſed table. This e
                     •
                  amination and tryall muſt be within the boundes of humaine frailtie, and God in this, as in all other doynges, for Chriſtes ſake will vſe hys mercie and clemencie. For he knoweth our corruptions &Pſal. 103. 14. imperfections, and will haue regarde of our infirmities. Onely let vs not be ſecure, ſlacke and negligent, but feeling by this triall great want in our ſelues, with lowelye, humble, and confeſſing hartes, let vs acknowledge the ſame and ſay vnto God: I am ſorie O Lorde for my ſinnes, butA breife praier for communicants. not as the greeuouſneſſe of them requireth, Augment O Lord, by thy ſpirit the ſenſe of thy wrath in me. I beleeue and know with other chriſtians that thy ſonne hath ſhed his blood for mee, but increaſe my faith, O God, and helpe my vnbeliefe, I deſire to liue according to the calling of a chriſtian, but the fleſhe and the world maketh this ſtudie cold in me: therefore doe thou ſtrengthen me with thy bleſſed ſpirit. I know it is my bounden duetie to yeelde vnto thee immortall thankes, as well for all other thy benefites, as principally for the whole worke of our redemption by the death of thy deerely beloued ſonne: but I feele this zeale to be ſo faint and feeble, that it is nothing according to my duetie, and for that cauſe I lyft vp myne eyes to the throne of thy mercy, and humbly deſire thee to pardon all my imperfections and to heale all my infirmities. The ſenſe and knowledge of my weakeneſſe may not feare me from this holy cable. For this heauenly feaſt is a medicine for them that bee ſicke, a comfort to them that be penitent ſinners, a free and liberall gift to ſuch as bee poore and haue nothing of themſelues. Chriſt in this feaſt is giuen as meate, without which we know we muſt of neceſſitie periſh. And he is giuē as lyfe vnto vs, and therfore without him we can haue nothing but

death. The beſt worthineſſe that wee can bring to theſe reuerend and holy myſteries, is, that we confeſſe our owne vnworthineſſe, to the end thy mercy may make vs worthy: that we deſpaire in ou
                     •
                   ſelues, to the end thy grace may comforte vs, that we humble our ſelues, to the end thy goodneſſe may raiſe vs vp: that wee ac
                     •
                  uſe our ſelues, to the end thy ſonne by his merite may iuſtifie vs. For though of our ſelues wee are able to doe nothing, yet by hym wee ſhall be able to doe all things▪ &c. Theſe or lyke cogitations if wee haue, in preparing our ſelues to that bleſſed nouriſhment of our 
                     •
                  oules, he that breaketh no
                     •
                   a bruſed 
                     •
                  eede, nor putteth out ſmoking flaxe, will no
                     •
                   caſt aſide our infirmitie, but mercifully receaue vs. The ſorrowfull Father which with care for hys ſonne 
                     •
                  ryed vnto Chriſt, I beleeue Lorde, but helpe thouMar. 9. 24 myne vnbeliefe, thoughe his faith, as it myght appeare, was very weake, yet obtained hys purpoſe at Chriſtes han
                     •
                   to haue his ſonne by myracle healed. If our fayth hee but as a grayne of Muſtarde ſeede, yet it wyll muche preuayle with Gods mercy.
               The Apoſtles of Chriſt which were admitted to his laſt Supper were notwithſtanding weake, and touched wyth many infirmites, althoughe they were not altogether wicked and faythleſſe, as Iudas was. They beleued in Chriſt, they loued Chriſt, and they loued one an other, and yet at the verye table of the Lorde they ſhewed theyr weakenes. Peter not without ſome reproche of the reſidue, preferred himſelfe before them all, Though all other, (ſayth he) bee offendedMa. 26. 33. by thee, yet will not I bee offended by thee. They ambitiouſly contended amōg themſelues, which of them ſhouldMar. 9. 33. bee the greater. I wyll not mention, that immediately after Supper they through timorouſ
                     •
                  eſſe fledde from Chriſt, and for the tyme forſooke hym, whiche was an euident token of the weakeneſſe of their fayth, after the knowledge of his doctrine and experience of many and wonderfull Myracles. Yet it pleaſed the great mercye of our Sauiour fauourably to accept them, and to admitte them as ſingular

inſtrumentes of his grace. Wee may not therefore for our weakeneſſe and imperfection deſpaire, and refuſe the comfort of that heauenly Table. &c.
            
            
               ¶ The thirde Sermon vppon this part of the Text. 1. Cor. 10. 5. &c.
               
               
                  But with many of them God was not pleaſed. For he ouerthrew them in the wilderneſſe. Now theſe are examples to vs. &c.
               
               
                  NOw Saint Paule in theſe wordes vttereth the ſeconde propoſition of hys reaſon agaynſt the Corinthians. Which was this, Our forefathers the people Iſraell were the choſen people of God, and bare hys name. They had the Lawe of God among them, they vſed in effect the ſame Sacramentes that we do
                     •
                  . And yet, ſayth he now, God had no lyking in many of them, becauſe they ſhewed not themſelues in theyr conuerſation, as the people of GOD ſhoulde haue done. Where vppon followeth Saint Paules concluſion, that it was not ſufficient for the Corinthians, nor any other Chriſtians to profeſſe Chriſt, & to vſe his Sacraments and ſeruice, vnleſſe by the fruites of true fayth, that is, godly conuerſation of lyfe, they ratifye and confirme their callyng, and outwarde profeſſion of Chriſt and his Religion, For Chriſtians may not ly
                     •
                  e as Heathens doe, they are called to an holye callyng, to bee the ſonnes of GOD, the chyldren of lyght, Citizens and ſubiectes of the kyngdome of Chriſt, and houſholde ſeruauntes of the familie of God▪ Our lyfe therefore ſhould expreſſe the holyneſſe of our heauenlye Father, the obedience to the Lawes of Chriſtes kyngdome, the orders and ſtatutes of the houſholde of God.

Chriſtians therefore ſhould be ſuch, as they are, to whoſe ſ
                     •
                  
                  cretie by their calling they are ioyned. They are come.
                  Heb. 1
                        •
                     . 22. (ſaith the Apoſtle,) to the Citie of the liuing God, the celeſtiall Hieruſalem, to the company of innumerable Angells, to the congregation of the firſt borne, which are written in heauen, to God the iudge of all, and the ſpirites of the iuſt and perfect men, and Ieſus himſelfe the mediatour of the new Teſtament &c. This ſo bleſſed and high ſtate of calling ſhould be of Chriſtians duely conſidered, that they may ſ
                     •••
                  i
                     •
                   with a
                     •
                   godly i
                     •
                  deuour, to frame themſelues proportionably therevnto, and to ſhunne al thoſe things, whereby the honourable ſtate of Chriſtianitie maye be blemiſhed.
               In theſe wordes of S. Paule here recited▪ I note theſe two things: firſt that outwarde profeſſion of Chriſtianitie and v
                     •
                  e of Sacramentes, and externa
                     •
                   ſeruice is not ſufficient. And ſecondly when God puniſheth and plagueth euill Chriſtians for their wickedneſſe, that it is not only done for them, whom God ſpecially toucheth, but for example and inſtruction of all other that doe the lyke. As touching theMat. 7. 21. It is not ſufficient to ſaluation, to be idle profeſſors of god, but alſo doers of godly deedes. firſt our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, Not euery one that ſayth vnto me Lorde, Lorde, ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of my Father that is in Heauen: Many ſhall ſay vnto mee in thoſe dayes, Lorde, Lord, haue we not propheſied in thy name? and haue we not 
                        •
                     aſt out Diuels by thy name? and by thy name done great Myracles? Then will I proteſt vnto them: I neuer knewe you, depart from me all you that worke wickedneſſe. Marke theſe wordes I pray you, and conſider that Chriſtes meaning can be no other but this, that outwarde profeſſion of his name, and the vſe of e
                     •
                  ternall thinges, can not be ſufficient to keepe the plague of Gods iuſt puniſhm
                     •
                  t from vs: but that wee muſt alſ
                     •
                   in lyfe and beede followe Chriſt and his holy wi
                     •
                  , and the preſcript rule of gods word. Where are then the voyces and cogitations of them, that among Chriſtians and profeſſors of the Goſpel, flatter themſelues

in this manner, when the Preachers threaten that Gods iuſt plagues, wil come vpon them for their unthankfulneſſe, in ſlaundering the Goſpel with their wicked life? Oh, ſay they, we are Baptized in y• name of Chriſt, we eat & drinke at his holy table in the Communion: we beare the name of the true Church of God. We receaue the Goſpell, it is preached in our Churches: it is read in our priuate houſes, it ringeth in euerie mans eares, it is confirmed wt publique authoritie. Will not Chriſt therefore knowe vs, who mercifully receaueth all? wyll he caſt vs of, & make place againe for Antichriſt, or for the Turke? &c. Againſt this hypocriſie & vaine oſtentation of Chriſtianitie, nothing can be more plain thē y• 
                  S. Iames ſaith: Be doers ofIam. 1. 22. &c. the word, ſayth he, & not hearers only deceauing your ſelues. They deceaue them ſelues ſayth S. Iames, y• flatter their owne phantaſies wyth ſuch outward ſhewes, & haue not the ſubſtaunce therof in their hartes, nor declare it wt the proofe of their doings, & this he declareth by a 
                     •
                  erie fit ſ
                     •
                  nilitude. He that heareth the worde, & doth it not, is like vnto one that beholdeth his natural face in a glas, & forgetteth immediatly what manner of man he was. But who ſo looketh into the perfect law of libertie, and continueth therin, being not a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the worke, ſhal be bleſſed in his deed. Chriſtians muſt not learne to know onely, or to ſpeake, but they muſt learne to doe yt, which they know. For Chriſtianitie conſiſteth not in ſpeculation only, but in practize & doyng, & in conſtant abiding therein. And therefore ſaith Chriſt, Bleſſed is he that heareth the word of God, & keepethLuc. 11. 28. it. This doctrine Chriſt confirmeth by ſundry parables, & chiefly by this, Mat. 7. Whoſoeuer heareth theſe words,
                  
                  Mat. 7. 24. 
                  & doth the ſame, I wil likē him to a wiſe mā, that buildeth his houſe on a rocke, & the raine fell, & the flouds came, & the wind blew, & beat vpon the houſe, & it fell not, becauſe it was builded vpon a rock. But whoſoeuer heareth my wordes & doth them not, ſhall bee likened
                  
                  to a fooliſh man, that hath builded his houſe vpon the ſandes. &c By which parable we are taught, y• true chriſtians ſho
                     •
                  ld lay the foundation of their profeſſiō vpon the rock Chriſt Jeſus, not ſleightly heard, & coldly conceaued, but deepely placed, & ſettled in the bottome of their hartes, & then ſhall ſtand co
                     •
                  ſtantly againſt all tempe
                     •
                  ts & ſtormes of temptation, that y• Diuel or the world can worke againſ
                     •
                   them: becauſe they haue the teſtimonie of a good cōſcience, bearing them witneſſe, yt they follow Chriſt, not in wordes onely, but in i
                     ••
                  tation of lyfe alſo. And co
                     •
                  trariwiſe doth it fall out to them that be idle profeſſors, & no godly doers, & moſt of all to them that beſide idle and vaine ſhew of profeſſions, ſcl
                     •
                  under Gods word by their naugh
                     •
                  ie and wicked lyfe, and cauſe it among the aduerſaries, to be euil ſpoken of. We muſt therfore carefully looke & diligently ſtudie, that wee bee not, in the Vineyard of God, vnfruitefullMa
                        •
                     . 11. 13. 
                  
                     ••
                  ggetrees, making ſhewe of Chriſtianitie, with the faire greene leaues of hearing Gods worde, commyng to the Church, vſing of the Sacramentes, talking oftentimes of the Scriptures, &c. But the ſound and true fruites of godly conuerſation we ſhew not. For if we remaine ſuch vnprofitable trees, we ſhall be cut downe, caſt into the fire, and haue our partes with hypocrites, where ſhall bee weeping and gnaſhing of teeth, &c.
               The next note of this text is, that when God puniſhethWicked m
                        •
                     n are plagued of god, for their owne ſinnes to our 
                        •••
                     ngle. and plagueth wicked & naughtie men, for doing contrarie to his will, it is not done onely for them vppon whom the particular puniſhments light, but for the example of other alſo, in al ages & times. Theſe things, ſaith S. Paul, are examples for vs, &c. And afterward, All theſe things came to them as enſamples, & were written to admoniſhe v
                        •
                     , vpon whom the endes of the world are come. The better to vnderſtande this, I will firſt declare vnto you two pointes, the one, that all things that come to man, co
                     •
                  e not by fortune, by chaunce, or by natural courſe onely, but by y• certaine prouidence & appointment of God, & ſecondly for

what cauſes, God moſt commōly ſendeth ſuch plagues vpō men. And then will I adde y• concluſion, y• Chriſtians muſt make applicatiō of ſuch examples to themſelues, and how y• is to be done. As God of his vneſtimable goodnes madeNothing be
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ideth man by fortune, but al thing
                        •
                      by gods direction. the world & all that therein is, for the benefite & commoditie of mā, that he might vſe all the inferiour creatures to Gods glory: ſo doth the ſame Lord & maker, by his almightie power & infinite wiſedome, continue & preſerue y• ſame. My father yet ſtill worketh (faieth Chriſt) and I worke.Joh. 5. 17. Act. 17. 28. Pſal. 104. 29. By him onely we moue, liue, & haue our being, as Saint Paul ſaith, & as Dauid in ſundry Pſalmes wit
                     •
                  eſſeth, whē thou hideſt thy face they are troubled, whē thou takeſt away their breth they die, & are turned into their duſt. whē thou letteſt thy breath go fo
                        •
                     th they ſhal be made, & thou ſhalt renew the face of the earth. That wee callNature what it is. and eſteeme nature, is nothing but the very 
                     •
                  inger of God working in his creatures, much more the alteration of natural courſes & things done extraordinarily. As god made clouds at y• beginning to water y• earth, ſo doth he preſerue them, & by his mightie power holdeth them houering in y• aire, y• they fal not downe immoderatly to drowne y• earth, but ſhedde thēſelues temperatly by drops, & ſweet ſhowers to ſeaſon y• ſame. Wherefore whē raine falleth exceſſiuely to hurt y• earth, or hinder mankinde, as it did in the time of Noah, or whē the clouds be cleane dried vp that there is noGen. 7. 3. Reg. 17. raine at al, as it fell out in y• time of Achab, it is moſt euident to be y• worke of God, according to his iuſtice puniſhing y• breaking of his law, & vnthankfulneſſe of his people. So likewiſe as God made y• aire, ſo it is he y• for lyke cauſes keepeth it in ſeaſonable maner, ſomtime moiſt, ſomtime dry, ſomtime weate, ſometime colde, ſomtime wholeſome, ſomtime infectious & daūgerous, whervpō followeth ſicknes & death of men, & murrens of cattle, &c. In like maner I might ſpeake of y• earth, y• water, y• Sonne, y• Moone, & reſidue of the ſtarres & planets. In all & euerie of which, as it is the finger of God, that keepeth thē in their natural

order, ſo it is his power y• doth alter & chaunge the ſame, & for cauſes to his wiſdome knowē, bringeth out ſuch effects as be hurtfull rather then beneficiall vnto man. Therfore whē we ſee infections, ſickneſſes, diſſeaſes, deathes, murraines, loſſe of corn or hay, deſtructiō of cattle, great fluds, burnings, blaſtings, & a nōber of ſuch like, we muſt looke further then into y• courſe of nature, & vnderſtand y• there is a God, & an ouerruler of nature, y• doth thoſe things. This is not true only in theſe things y• appertaine to nature, but in thoſe alſo y• be done by the will of man, or as we ſay prophanely, by chaunce or fortune. For in deede there is no chāce or fortune. And therfore y• good father Aug. doth renoūceRetract. thoſe heatheniſh names, & repe
                     •
                  ted that euer he vſed thē. That which we call fortune, is nothing but y• hand ofFortune what it is. God, working by cauſes, & for cauſes, that we knowe not. Chaūce or fortune are gods deuiſed by man, & made by our ignorance of y• true, almighty, & euerlaſting God. Are notMat. 10. 29 two ſparrowes ſolde for a farthing, & one of them falleth not to the ground without your father, yea all the heires of your head are nūbred, feare you not therefore, you are more worth then many ſparrowes, The ſenſe of theſe words is, y• the prouidence of God ertēdeth it ſelfe to al creatures, ſo y• there is nothing ſo baſe or ſimple, eyther wtout man or wtin him, which he neglecteth or is ignorant of. Of thoſe things that be without man, nothing almoſt is of leſſe value, or leſſe eſteemed, than a poore ſillie ſparrow, & yet one of them falleth not to the grounde, without our heauenly Father. Of ſuch things as appertaine to mā, nothing is of leſſe price than a heare, & yet one of thē periſheth not, but by Gods prouidence. This doctrine maketh greatly to the aduauncement of the true knowledge of God. For it teacheth vs, as I haue ſayd before, not onelyGod the Creatour, diſpoſer, and preſerner of all. that he is y• maker of heauen & earth, & of all y• creatures in them contained, but alſo that he doth gouerne and diſpoſe them all, & preſerue them that they may continue ſo long, as to his bleſſed will ſhall ſeeme conuenient.
               
                  The ſcriptures in ſundry places witneſſe the ſame, both in the courſe of his doing in ſundrye Hiſtories of Ioſeph, of Iob, of Saule, of Dauid, and in particuler teſtimonles of ſundrye Godly men, and holy Prophets, but noue more euidently and zealouſly, than Dauid in many Pſalmes, but principally in the 104. 107. Vnto which places I referre the Godly hearer, for this time would not ſerue, if I ſholh but meanely declare vnto you the wholeſome inſtructions, and aſſured comfortes that are to be gathered, both by theThe abſurd opinion of thē confuted that imagined god to gouerne great thinges and matters only without prouiding any whitt for things of leue value. examples and particular teſtimonies. Chriſt in the words before recited, extendeth the carefull prouidence of God to Sparrowes, and to the heares of oure heades, to the end no man ſhould thinke or imagine, that it is onelye a generall prouidence, as many doe in theſe days, which as they dare not deny, that the world is gouerned by the wiſedome and power of God, ſo they thinke it an abſurde thing to teach, that God is occupied about all particular Creatures, and ſpecially them that be of the meaneſt ſort. Therefore they expound choſe wordes that Chriſte vſeth here, or the ſcripture in other places, to be ſpoken by Hiperbole, that is, a manner of fyguratiue ſpeeche, paſſing all truth, thereby to ſignifie a meane truth. But I would learne of theſe mē, what it is, that ſauing the nature of his Godhead, maye in this kind of thing be ſpoken of him more then truth, ſeeing he is Omnipotent, of infinite knowledge, and is preſent in al places. So much as they ſhal exempt from Gods diſpoſition in his Creatures, ſo much ſhall they with diſhonour of God, pul from his Almightie power and infinit wiſdome. We may not think it is any diſgracing of y• maieſly of god, to drawe the ſame his prouydence to the preſeruation and direction euen of his meaneſt creatures. For he worketh not as men do with labour and greefe, or torment of mind. His very beck, will, and countenaunce is ynough to doe, or alter all thinges, euen to ſhake Heauen and earth, as the blinde Heathen Poet Homere could ſaye. Yea this is the greateſt profe that can be of his exceeding maieftie, that he

ſeeth all thinges, that he diſpofeth and worketh al things, that he directeth all his Creatures to that ende, for which in the beginning he made them. If this be ſo, ſome wil ſay vnto mee, why then, as God is to be prayſed and thanked, for all that is good, ſo whatſoeuer is euill alſo, is to bee imputed vnto him, and no man or other creature, no nor the Deuil himſelfe to be blamed for any hurt that is done, becauſe it is Gods will and diſpoſition it ſhoulde bee, and agaynſt that, who is able to ſtande? And ſo GOD ſhallGod is not the author of ſinne. be accounted the Authoure of ſinne, whiche is a wicked, and horrible aſſertion. Theſe daungerous cogitations are by Sathan thruſt into the mindes of Chriſtians, purpoſely to make them to murmure againſt God and his prouidēce. And as I am very loth in this Auditory, to enter into the ſearche of Gods ſecrete Judgementes, ſo may I not cleane omit to take away the offence of this vngodlye cogitation. And yet meane I not to doe that deepelye, and with intricate and harde reaſons, but ſuch, as the meaneſt perſon not voyde of naturall vnderſtanding, may ſufficientlye conceaue. Who knoweth not that the end wherevnto anyeEuerie act is to be meaſured good or bad, by the intent of the actor. thing is done, maketh one and the ſame thing eyther good or badde, iuſt or vnuiſte? A Magiſtrate putteth a man to death, not for hatred of the perſon, not for particular reueugement, nor to haue benefite by his goods, and in this he doth well, being the Miniſter of God, by him appoynted ſo to die. A Ruffyan or a Theefe, killeth a man to be reuenged on him, to haue his goods, or to th'end he may auoyde ſome daunger thereby, and in this he ſinneth greeuouſly. And yet to kill a man, or to put him to death is all one act, iuſt and good in the one, wicked and naughty in the other. So GOD by his prouidence, maye diſpoſe thoſe thinges to bee done which wicked perſons, as his Inſtrumentes doe perfourme, & the ſame iuſt in God, in them ſinfull and naught. For God in thoſe thinges reſpecteth his owne glorye, or the puniſhmente of vice and wickedneſſe, without any corrupt affection at all.
               
                  The naughtie men whome the wiſedome of God vſeth as inſtruments herein, haue not the ſayd ends, but with al indeuour ſeeke to ſatiſfye their own ambition, cruelty, couetouſneſſe, pride, or other ſinfull paſſion of the mind, and haue no regarde to the iuſtice of God, and fulfilling of hys holy will, I will vſe but one example, notwithſtanding the ſcriptures miniſter to me a great number.
               God had often times by his Prophets, called his people the Jewes to leaue their Superſtition and Idolatrie, to leaue their wickedneſſe and naughtie life, and to returne to him by repentaunce, and yet they would not: I roſe vpJer. 7. 13. earely, ſayth God by the mouth of Ieremy) and ſent vnto you all my Prophets, and you haue not heard me, nor haue not in cliued your eare vnto mee, but haue done worſe then your forefathers. &c. Therefore he was reſolued according to their deſeruing iuſtely to puniſh them. And who can denye, but this reſolution in God was moſte iuſte. For his Inſtrumente he vſed the Kinge of Aſſiria, aEſai. 10. 5. prowde, a cruell, and a wicked Prince, who came vppon the Jewes and ſhewed toward them all crueltie, and extremitie, in no part reſpecting the ſatiſfying of Gods Juſtice, or the puniſhing of his naughtie people, but the fulfilling of his owne ambitions and eruell affection, wherwith he thought to inlarge his Empyre, and ſo ſette foorth hys owne glory. And who can denie but that this doonig was in the King ſtafull and naughte, and therefore was this enill mind in him, not long after puniſhed by GOD himſelfe. And this maketh verye greatlye to the ſetting foorth of Gods wiſedome, that hee canne vſe naughtie Inſtrumentes,God vſeth naughtie inſtruments to the working of good. to puniſhe naughtye men, and turne the minds and indeuoures of wicked perſons to his glorye, and to the ſatiſfying of his iuſtice, though they in no parte regard the ſame. But I ſee a deſyre to aunſwere the peruerſe cogications of euill mindes, hath drawne mee ſomewhat from my purpoſe.
               
                  Let vs nowe therefore come to the ſeconde note, that is,What the cauſes ate, that moue god to plague men. with what cauſes God is vſually mooued, to worke ſuch plagues and euils to men, & thoſe generally are two. The firſt is, the puniſhment of ſinne, and the tranſgreſſion of hisThe puniſhment of ſin. Leu. 26. 40 commaundementes, as infinite Examples, and almoſte the whole courſe of the ſcriptures teache vs. For their owne ſinnes, ſayth Moyſes, and for the ſinnes of their fathers, ſhall they be plagued to confeſſe theire iniquities. &c.
                   And agayne, If you ſhall leaue the Lorde your God, andJoſ. 24. 20. ſhall ſerue ſtrange Gods, he will turn himſelf and puniſh you. But of al other places moſt plainly, Deut. 21. Leuit.Deutro. 21. 26. ver. 14. Where after god hath ſignifyed what worldly bleſſings ſhould come vnto them, if they did obſerue and keepe his lawes, he addeth: But if thou wilte not obeyeLeu. 26. 14. &c. me, nor doe all theſe commaundementes. &c. then will I alſo doe this vnto you, I will bring vppon you fearefulneſſe, a conſumption, a burning, and the burning▪ ague to conſume the eyes, and make the heart heauie, & you ſhall ſowe your ſeede in vaine, for your enimies ſhal eate it, and I wil ſet my face againſt you, and you ſhall fal before your enimies, and they that hate you ſhal raigne ouer you. I will breake the pride of your power, and make your Heauen as yron, and youre Earth as Braſſe, your ſtrength ſhall be ſpent in vaine, neither ſhall thee Trees of the Lande giue their fruites, I will ſende wylde beaſtes vpon you, which ſhall ſpoile you & deſtroy your Cattell, and make you few in number, for youre highe wayes ſhal be deſolate: I will ſend a ſworde among you and when you be gathered in your Citties, I will ſende the peſtilence vpon you, and ye ſhall be deliuered into the hand of the ennemie. And ſo continueth God to recken vp all theſe miſeries and calamities that anye wayes may come to man, and that he will ſend them. Whereby we are by the mouth of God inſtructed, as well that ſuche plagues and miſeries come (as before I haue ſayde) by the prouidence and appointment of God, as alſo that they are

vſually caſt vpon men for ſinne and wickedneſſe, and for reuolting from his holy will and true worſhip vnto ſuperſtition & Idolatrie. But here we muſt haue in mind yt which S. Paule meaneth in this place, that God ſheweth not his particular puniſhmentes only becauſe of them whoſe perſons they touch, but by their example call other home alſo, that be gone aſtray. And in deede happye is he, that camepuniſhmenes ſent from god for exam
                        •
                     
                     ples ſake. learne to take heede by other mens perill, before y• ſcourge light vpon himſelfe. Our corrupt nature vnderſtanding that God is a iuſt God, and will puniſh ſinne, when wee ſee any notable plague or miſery ſent to a man, by and by with great rigour we condemne him as a uery euil man, though in dede, we neuer knew euill by him. And becauſe God doth not in like manner touch vs, we flatter our ſelues, and perſwade our owne mindes that God fauoureth vs, and is delighted in our manner of life, though it be happily farre worſe thā the other, and ſo do we fede our ſelues in vanity, and continew in wickedneſſe. But S. Paule in this place, and Chriſt 
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Lake teacheth vs another manner of Leſſon. Whēn certaine tolde Chriſt of them, whoſe blood Pilate had mixed with their ſacrifice: Why (ſayth Chriſte)Luc. 13. 2. 
                  thinke you that theſe Galileans, aboue all other were greateſt ſinners, becauſe they ſuffered ſuch puniſhment? Nay, I ſaye vnto you, vnleſſe you all repent, you ſhall in like manner periſhe. Or thinke you that thoſe 18. that periſhed by fall of the Tower of Siloah, were of all other in Hieruſalem, the greateſt ſinners? Nay, I ſay vnto you, vnleſſe ye repent, ye ſhall al in like manner periſh. Here firſt we are taught that not only they, vpō whom the externall puniſhment lighteth are ſinners, but all other, euen y• very child that is this day borne, if Gods iuſtice conſider him in himſelfe: much more ſuche, as in continuaunce of their life, haue heaped on ſinne daily, by wicked thoughts, naughtie wordes, and e
                     •
                  ill doinges, and therefore if God ſhould deale with all according to his iuſtice, it ſhoulde fall to all other, as well as to them.
               
                  This did good and godly men vnderſtande, as Dauid whē he ſayd. Enter not into iudgemente with thy ſeruant OPſal. 543. 2. Lord, for if thou obſerue our iniquities, who ſhalbe able to abide it? And therefore Chriſt our ſauiour teacheth vs dayly to ſay, Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes, &c. There is no mā but he treſpaſſeth, & deſerueth Gods puniſhmēt, whiche thing, if chriſtians would according to duety conſider, vndoubtedly they ſhould be moued both more fauourablye to 
                     ••
                  ge of other mē, & when they ſee their puniſhments, to be afrayd alſo of thēſelues. For this they ſhould certaynly in godly meditation thinke wt themſelues: Seing that al mē are ſinners, if God did not mean by example of ſuch puniſhments to ſtirr vp other, he would ſecretly puniſh thē, & nat to openly ſhew his wrath. Therfore by ſight of ſuch examples, we muſt not only be moued to praiſe God, & to extolle his iuſtice for puniſhing iniquity, but euter depely into our ſelues alſo, & ſearche our own conſciences, liues, & doings; whether there be not as great, or greate
                     •
                   cauſe in vs to pul the iuſt wrath & plague of god vpō our 
                     〈…〉
                  , if we in time repent not, and turne to him for mercie. 
                     •
                  lms muſt we learne to applie to our inſtruction, not onely ſuch exam
                     •
                  
                  ples of Gods iuſtice, as in oure life time wee ſee agaynſte wicked & notorious ſinners, but other alſo yt are recorded in y• holy ſcriptures. For whatſoeuer things are written they are writtē for our inſtructiō, y• they may be exāples for vs, vpon wh
                     ••
                   y• lattes ends of the world are fallen. It is written. Num. 11. That the childrē of Iſraell whom god by Moiſes deliuered out of Egipt, luſted wickedly againſt GOD, ſaying: Who ſhall giue vs fleſh to eate, we remember
                        
                           •
                        um. 11. 4. the fiſhe that we did eate in Aegipt, the Cucū
                     bers & Popons, the Leekes, the Oynons, & the Garlike, but now our ſoule is dried away, we can ſee nothing, but this Māua,
                   They did not only luthe gods good bleſſing towarde them, but alſo longed and luſted, after theire owne groſſe feeding in Aegipt. Therefore God ſatiſfyed their deſyre, and fed them with Duailes, a whole Moneth together,

but their own luſt was their deſtruction, and white the meate was yet in their mouthes, the wrathe of God came vpon them, and deſtroyed a greate number of them.
               This ſhoulde be one Example for vs, that wee doe not in like manner loathe the ſweete and dayntye Foode of the Goſpell and Doctrine of our Saluation by Chriſt, which God myraculouſlye hath reſtored vnto vs, that with murmuring hartes, luſte lewdoly after Oyni
                     ••
                  s, garlike, and other ſtuicking and groſſe feéding, wherewith wee were fedd in Aegipt vnder Antechriſt: I meane Maſſes, Pardōs; Purgatory, Pilgrimages, and ſuch like corrupt foode of our ſoules, that may make vs to ſauour ill in the fighte of the Lord. For if we do, God wil deale with vs, as he did with them: hee win make our ownt 
                     ••
                  ſt to he our confuſion, & the meanes to pull his iuſt wrath vppon vs. It maye be, that heé will ſatiſfye our vnthankefull deſyre, but it will be in ſuch ſort, that they which long moſt greedily for it, wil ſooneſt, be weary of it, & feele the puniſhment thereof moſt bitterlye. It is written Num. 25. That the people defylesNum. 25. 
                        ••
                     
                   themſelues with wkoredom, with the daughters of Moab. and y• for the ſame wicked offence, 24000. were ſlayne, and becauſe the cheefe Ringleaders of that lewdeneſſe, y• gaue example to the other, were Nohle perſons, and the héades and Peeres of the people: god commaunded Moiſes for the more terroure of other, to hang them vp agaynſt the S
                     ••
                  . And ſhall wee thinke in theſe dayes, when Adulterye and whoredome ouerwhelnieth the ea
                     •
                  th, and is of all ſorts almoſt eſteemed a ſmall offence, or none at all, that god will ſuffer the ſame vnpuniſhed? No ſurely, thoughe hys long ſufferaunte to allure vs to repenta
                     ••
                  ce, beareth of for the time the execution of his preſent wrath, when it commeth it will be the greater. It is written Nume. 16. That Corah, Dathan, Abyram, with their confederates murmured againſt Moſes & Aaron the Magiſtrate & Miniſter, by gods ſpeciall prouidence appointed to deliuer his people, & to guide thē through the wilderneſſe, & they ſayd:

                  Ye take to much vpon you, why do you lift your ſeluesNum. 16. 3. aboue the congregation? is it a ſmall thing, that thou haſt brought vs out of a Land, flowing with Milke and Hony, to kill vs in the Wilderneſſe? excepte thou make thy ſelfe Lord and Gouernoure ouer vs alſo? &c. But God declared how greeuous and vnpleaſaunte a thing it is in his ſight, for people to rebel or murmure againſt their ſamfull Magiſtrate, and tooke the reproche thereof vnto himſelfe. And therefore cauſed the earth to ſwallow vp, the cheefe ring leaders of that miſcheefe, and deſtroyed of the reſidue 14700. Hereby they maye learne what is due vnto them, and what wil come vpon them, which not onlye in their harts ſecretly, but openly in their aſſemblies, whē they dare murmure at our gracious Gouernour, whome God hath appointed to deliuer vs out of Aegipt, and by the Goſpell of his ſonne Chriſte, to bring vs into the Lande of promiſe, and cauſe their patrones and defenders in their flaunderous Libels and bookes openly publiſhed, like traitoures to diſgrace her mageſtie with titles of an Vſurper, a ſciſmatike, a feducer of the people from the Churche of God, and they that be at home giue oute the ſame thinges, in their ſecrete ſpeeches. And all as truely and iuſtly, as Dathan and Abyram charged Moyſes with vſurping authoritie ouer them, and with leading of the people purpoſely to deſtroy them in the Wilderneſſe. But I doubt not, the God of truth wiſt (as hither to be hath done) take vpon him the defence, and preſeruatiō of his lawfull Magiſtrate and Gouernour, agaynſt theſe traiterous murmurers, and mutterers, and in the end, vnleſſe they repente, will ſende them their iuſt reward. In the meane time we oughte in our prayers earneſtly to call vpon God, that hee will holde his mercifull hande ouer vs, and that hee will mooue the mindes of oure Prince and Counſaile, to haue a more careful eye to theſe murmurers, which openly ſhewe themſelues by forbearing oure communion in Prayers & Sacramentes, and in the meane time with greedy mynds

luſt & long for that 
                     •
                  ay, in which they may poure out their traiterous malice toward God & their Prince. Moreouer, it is written in Eſay: That euen in the time of that goodEſai. 36. & 37. king Ezechias, who had caſt out ſuperſtition and idolatrie, and very exactly reformed Gods true Religion, accordyng to his: law, yet that the 
                     ••
                  uell Tyran
                     ••
                   
                  Sennacherib & the Aſſyrians entred Jewrie ſpoyled the countrey, deſtroyed all their great Cities, & beſeeged the Citie H
                        •••••
                     alem; & the king himſelf in it, then which calamitie, the people of God had ſcantly at any time felt a greater or more greeuous. And what I pray you might be the cauſe hereof? vndoubtedly becauſe the people did vnthankefully receaue y• godly & happie reformation of Religiō. Some murmured at it, & kept their monuments of idolatrie for a day, ſome receaued it holowly & coldly: either to pleaſe the Prince, & to haue ſome benefite or countenaunce by it, or elſe to keepe themſelues from the penaltie & daunger of the Lawe. The moſt that did ſoundlye embrace it, did not conforme themſelues in life accordingly, but wt little or no amendmēt, continued their old corruption. Some notable faultes were alſo in yt king himſelfe, though otherwiſe a bleſſed Prince. Therefore God vſed that ſharpe ſcourge, as well inſtly to puniſhe the obſtinate, as alſo to bring the repentaunt home to hys mercy & reformation of life. By this we are taught, that 
                     •
                  lb
                     •
                  it it hath pleaſed God by our Prince, to caſt out ſuperſtition and idolatrie, to driue awaye the vſurped power of the Biſhop of Rome, to reſtore true religion, & the right vſe of the Sacraments, & by lawe and authoritie to confirme y• ſame: yet we may not herein flatter our ſelues, as though we were ſafe from Gods diſpleaſure, or greatly in his fauour. For if we doe not thankefully receaue this his vneſtimable benefit, & in lyfe and godly conuerſation conforme our ſelues vnto it, that his name may be glorified in vs: we muſt aſſure our ſelues, that this wil fal to our great iudgement, & that in the time of our Ezechia, he wil plague vs, as he did the Jewes by Sennacherib, in time of their good

king. Thus haue I noted vnto you, three or foure examples, that by them you may know how to apply the reſ
                     •
                  ue. Now leaſt by raſhneſſe and ignoraunce, men vncharitably condemne the 
                     〈…〉
                   and good man, becauſe hee ſeeth him touched with affliction and trouble: I muſt let youAfflictions are laid vpon the righteous to trie them withal. vnderſtand that beſide the iuſt puniſhment of the open and notorious 
                     〈…〉
                   whereof hitherto I haue ſpoken, there is alſo an other cauſe wherewith God is moued, to ſe
                     •••
                   among men myſelfe, trouble, affliction, and griefes of this worlde, that is to trie and proue ſuche as bee good and godlye; that theyr vertues maye more ſhyne among men, to the honour and glorye of God. The fornace (ſayth Jeſus
                  Eccl. 27. 5. 
                  Syrache) tryeth the Potters veſſell, and affliction tryeth the iuſt and godly.
                   And Salomon, As 
                           •
                        iluer andProu. 17. 3. Golde is tryed by fire, ſo doth God proue and trie the heartes of men. Your Fathers
                   (ſayeth Judith) were
                  
                  Judi. 8. 21. 
                  tempted that they myght bee tryed and prooued, whether they truely from their hearte worſhipped God. In this ma
                     •••
                  r GOD tempted and prooued his faythfull ſeruantes, Abraham, Ioſeph, and Iob, that by the tryall of their conſtancie, theyr fayth myght hee the more notable and famous, and both themſelues more in faythe confyrmed, and GOD, as I haue ſayde, by them more glorifyed. When God caſt vppon Iob all thoſe myſeries, which the Scriptures mention, hys vnnaturall wyfe and vnkynde friendes, with raſhe and vncharitable iudgement, woulde needes perſwade hym that it was the anger of GOD, and iuſt puniſhment for hys ſinnes, that brought all thoſe thinges vppon hym. But he ſtayed vppon the teſtimonie of a good conſcience, and the conſtancie of hys fayth, aſſured hymſelfe of the good wyll and fauour of GOD, and therefore hee tooke all patiently, ſaying. The Lorde gaue it, and the Lorde hathJob. 1. 21. taken it awaye, euen as the Lord will, ſo be it. In which wordes wee haue to learne the exceedyng comforte, which the godly take in the myddeſt of their troubles, by the doctrine

of the prouidence of God: whereof I ſpake before. For becauſe nothyng is done wythout hym, by hys onely ſufferaunce Tyrauntes perſetute, they ſpoyle men of theyr goods, they caſt them into baniſhment, into priſon & bondes, they kyll them, and exercyſe all kynde of crueltie agaynſt them. It is his wyll alſo that men bee afflicted wyth ſickeneſſe, wyth pouertie, wyth hunger, wyth colde, with ſclaunder and reproche, wyth loſſe of children and goodes, and with all myſeries that may fall in the lyfe of man. But becauſe the ſame Lorde and God, which as a iuſt iudge ſendeth all theſe thinges, is alſo a moſt mercyfull, tender, and kynde father: vndoubtedly hee wyll not ſuffer any thing to happen to vs, but that ſhall bee profitable, and a furtheraunce to our ſaluation. Wherefore in all troubles, and myſeries, ſeeme they at the beginning neuer ſo greenous and vntollerable), the godlye receaue them, and adyde in them, not onely wyth patience, but wyth ioye and gladneſſe▪ They are perſwaded, as the truth is, That God chaſ
                        •
                     iſe
                        •
                     h euerie ſonne that heHeb. 12. 6. receaueth, and therefore with cheerefull heartes, Rom. 5. 3. 
                  They glorye in their afflictions knowing that tribulation bringeth patience, patience experience, experience hope, and hope confoundeth not, nor maketh aſhamed. This comforte it was that made Iob ſo patiently to abyde loſſe of goodes, the ſpoyle of hys landes and houſes, and the myſerable deſtruction of hys chyldren. The ſame comfort cauſed Ioſeph, wyth lyke patience to endure bondage, impriſonment, ſclaunder, reproch, and daunger of his lyfe. For he was aſſuredly perſwaded that nothyng was done, without the certayne prouidence of hys louyng and mercifull Lorde and God, and therefore was aſſured, that it woulde fall out to the beſt in the end. This if wee ſoundly and truely conſider, wee ſhall neither raſhely condemne other, whoſe ſinnes bee not notoriouſlye knowne, and when any euill happeneth to our ſelues, by this comfort, we ſhall ſuſtayne it patiently.
               
                  Nowe haue I briefely declared vnto you, as you haue heard, firſt that outwarde profeſſion and externall ſeruice,1 and vſe of Sacramentes, is not ſufficient for Chriſtians, but that to the glorie of God, they muſt confirme their calling, with the practiſe of a vertuous & godly life. Secondly2 whenſoeuer miſery or plague happeneth to mā, it commeth not by chaunce or fortune, or by a courſe of nature, as vaine worldly men imagine, but by the aſſured prouidence of God, that ſeeth, knoweth, & worketh all things. Thirdly,3 that God is moued with two cauſes, to caſt ſuch miſeries and afflictions vpon men, ſomtime by iuſt puniſhment of ſinne, for tranſgreſſion of his holy lawe, and ſecondly to trie the faithfull and godly. And laſtly, I haue tolde you,4 what good inſtructions are to be taken of true Chriſtians, in both thoſe wayes. It remaineth that we pray vnto God moſt hartely, that this doctrine may be ſo imprinted in our harte
                     •
                  , as it may bring forth due fruites to hys glorie: to whom bee honour and glory foreuer and euer. So 
                     ••
                   it. ⸪
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Certayne Sermons vppon this Text. Mat. 13. 3.
            
               The ſeede ſower went out to ſowe his ſeede, and ſome fell by the high wayes ſide, and the foules of the aire came and deuoured it vp, ſome fell on ſtonie ground, where it had not much earth, and anone it ſprong vp becauſe it had no deepeneſſe of earth: but when the Sunne roſe, it was burned, and becauſe it had no roote it withered, &c.
            
            
               
                  THe holy ghoſt in the ſcriptures, ſundry times reſembleth God, to a huſbandman. And as there be ſundry kindes of huſbandry, ſo doth he, in diuers reſpectes,Chriſt compareth the church to huſbandry eſpecially in paſturing, vintage, and tillage. Pſal. 23. 1
                        •
                     
                   compare the Churche & people of God, to the partes thereof. Auncient writers, make three parts of huſbandry, Paſturing, Vintage, & Tillage. To al theſe do the ſcriptures compare the Church of God. The Lorde is my ſheepard (ſaith Dauid) therfore cā I lack nothing, He ſhall lead me forth in a greene Paſture. &c.
                   And againe, We are the people of his paſture and the ſheepePſal. 95. 
                           •
                         Joh. 10. 11 of his handes. And Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, I am the good Sheepard, &c, and my ſheepe heare my voice. As touching Vintage, Chriſt ſaith, I am the true Vine, & my fatherJoh. 15. 1. Eſa. 5. 1. &c. is the Husbandman. In Eſay God maketh a long diſcourſe, declaring his Churche & people to be his choſen Vineyard, planted in a very fertile groūd. To which parable Chriſt alſo alludeth in S. Matth. To Tillage he comparethMat. 21. 33 Joh. 4. 35. his Church, in S. Joh. Doe not you ſay, there are foure monethes and then Harueſt commeth? Behold, I ſay vnto you, lift vp your eyes, & looke vpon the countries round about you, becauſe they are white & readie to Harueſt, and he that reapeth ſhall haue his rewarde,
                  
                  
                  that he may gather in fruites to euerlaſting life. And in S. Mat. There is a large harueſt, & few workmen: deſire
                  
                  Mat. 9. 37 
                  the Lord of the harueſt, that he will thruſt forth labourers into his harueſt. But in no place more plainely, than in this parable of the ſeede ſower, which now I haue recited vnto you. This ye ſpirit of God doth of purpoſe, by theſeWhy the Spirit of god doth compare the church to huſbandrie as beforeſaide. familiar ſimilitudes to ſet before our eyes, and to impreſſe more deepely in our min
                     ••
                  s, partly the great goodnes and ſingular care of god toward vs, partly to teach vs our duetie toward him. As the huſbandman trauaileth, and hath great care of his paſture, his Vineyarde, and Tillage, and leaueth nothing vndone, whereby he may further them, ſo ought they to aunſwere his expectation & to yeelde fruit accordingly. But as touching this parable of the ſeedeInterpretation of this parable of the ſeede ſower. ſower, ye haue to note theſe partes. God is the huſbandman, the Preachers of the word are the ſeede ſowers, the ſeede is the worde of God, the grounde is the heartes of men, the duierſitie of the groūnde, noteth the diuerſitie of mens diſpoſitions in hearing the worde of God. If preachersPreachers are authori
                     
                        •
                     ed by god in their calling. 1. Cor. 4. 1. bee the ſeede ſowers, then haue they authoritie frō God, as doyng his ſeruice, and as comming in hys meſſage: and therefore ſayth Paule, Let man ſo eſteeme vs as the ſeruaunts of Chriſt, and beſtowers of the ſecretes of God.
                   They muſt bee heard therefore as the meſſengersWhat 
                        •••
                     mat
                        •••
                      ought to be had of prechers. of GOD, they muſt be eſteemed as hys ſeruauntes that come to ſowe the ſeede of ſaluation in the heartes of men. It is the worde of God that they vtter, and ought to haue the Maieſtie of hys perſon, though it bee vttered by the mouthe of a mortall and fraile man. The Prophets ſay thus: Thus ſaith the Lorde. The mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken, and yet were they men that deliuered the meſſage. So God honoureth his meſſenger, that though he bee couered wyth fraile fleſhe, & ſometime alſo ſtayned with ſinne: yet he maketh hym, his mouth, to open his will vnto his people. When you receaued the worde of me,1. The. 2. 13. you receaued it not, as the worde of man, but as it was

in deede, the worde of God. And to the Galathians,
                  Gal. 4. 14. 
                  You refuſed not my infirmitie in fleſhe, but you receaued mee, as the Angell of God, yea euen as Chriſt Ieſus. And agayne to the Thessalonians, Hee that reiecteth2. The. 4. 8 vs, reiecteth not vs, but God, who hath giuen his holye ſpirite vnto vs.
                   And for that cauſe ſayeth Chriſt, He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that reiectethLuc. 10. 16. you, reiecteth me. And God in his Prophetes, alwayes taketh as to himſelfe, that contempt, or that reproche, that was ſhewen to his Miniſters, whom he ſent vnto hys people, & threatneth for the ſame, moſt greeuous puniſhments. This ſhould they conſider, which in theſe dayes make ſo ſmall accompt of Preachers, and Preaching of gods word, that they eſteeme neither any thing of leſſe price, nor anyHow thoſe are to be thought of who lightlie regard-either preachinge or preachers. perſons of leſſe credite. But therein they ſhew, both howe little regard they haue of their owne ſaluation, and howe lyghtly they eſteeme the glorie and Maieſtie of God, who offereth that benefite vnto them by his Preachers.
               The worde of God by Chriſtes owne expoſition, is the1. Pet. 1. 23. That the worde of god is reſembled to ſeede, and why. Eſa. 40. 6. ſeede: and ſo ſaith S. Peter alſo, You are new borne, not of mortall but of immortall ſeede, through the worde of God, that liueth and abideth foreuer. All fleſhe is graſſe and all the glory thereof as the floure of graſſe, graſſe withereth, and the floure falleth, but the worde of God abydeth for euer, and this is the vvorde which by the Goſpell is brought vnto you. Verie fitly and ap
                     •
                  lye is the worde of God reſembled to ſeede, aſwell of diuers other properties, as principally, that ſeede, is in appearaunce, a ſmall and contemptible thing, but very profitable, and of great ſtrength and vertue, ſo as without it, all kindes of thinges woulde periſhe. Of a little ſeede, you ſee a verie faire and beautifull floure▪ of a ſmall kar
                     •
                  ell, a large and a fruitful tree, of a meane Acorne, a huge and mayne Oke. If you make a ſeede of moſt precious and riche mettall, it can not haue this ſtrength, and grace with it.
               
                  Euen ſo the word of God, in eſtimation of the world is ſimple,The power of the words of god in it ſelfe, and in the eſtimation of the worlde. Rom. 1. 16. What gods worde woorketh in the hear
                        ••
                     s. baſe, & contemptible, but in vertue, power & ſtrength, exceeding great & maruailous. I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell (ſaith Paul) for it is the mightie power of God to ſaluation, of all them that beleeue.
                   By ſecret power y• the ſpirit of God giueth it, it altereth the mindes of men, it lyghteneth their heartes, it engendreth a newe wyll, it bringeth forth godly & holy doings as due fruites thereof, it changeth not only particular men but whole Empires, kingdomes & countries, it worketh y• which in no wiſe can bee wrought by the counſailes, wit, wiſedome, cunning, pollicie, or ſtrength of man. This ſtrength and power of Gods word doth S. Paul ſpeake of. We preach Chriſt crucified,1. Cor. 1. 23. to the Iewes a ſtumbling ſtocke, to the Grecians fooliſhneſſe, but to them both being called, we preache Chriſt the power and wiſedome of God, &c. God hathVerſe. 27. choſē thoſe things, which are fooliſh in the world to cō
                     foūd the wiſe, God hath choſen the weake things of the world to cōfoūd the mighty. The effect of this, appeared immediately after the Apoſtles in themſelues contemptible, & yet vnblemiſhed, who with the deſpiſed and loathed doctrine of Chriſt crucified preuailed, & proſpered throughHow gods worde preuaileth euen againſt mans wiſdome and cunning. out y• world, notwtſtanding the wiſedome, ye learning, ye policie, the power of the world did ſet it ſelfe againſt it: and as a little Muſter ſeede, the Churche of God by the power of the Goſpell proſpered, and grewe to great largeneſſe, ſo that the poore foules of the ayre, that were chaſed out of the woodes, by tyrannie and perſecution, dyd reſt inExample of the Apoſtles time. it, and with quietneſſe of conſcience, though with trouble of the worlde, ſettled themſelues, and builded their neaſtes therein, The lyke hath beene, euen of late yeeres, wherin, it hath pleaſed our mercifull God, to renewe his Goſpell,Example of later, and of theſe preſent times. and to ſende it into the worlde, ſo that the godlye with great comfort ſee, and the whole world may perceiue ye myghtie power of God, in proſpering his Goſpel. What conſpiracies, what edicts, what cruel Maſſakers and murders,

haue bene to ſuppreſſe the Goſpel; all men do knowe, and thoſe that feare God, with pi
                     •
                  ief
                     •••
                   hartes lament it. Euē now are wrought thoſe things, of which Dauid propheciedP
                        •••
                     . 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . many hundred yeres before, Euē now the nations fret & fume, euen now the enimies of God, haue their vain wicked and Diuiliſh deuiſes: euen nowe the Princes of Antechriſtes band, conſpyre and laye their heades togeather agaynſte Chriſte, and agaynſts his worde. Lette vsThe imaginations, pra
                        •
                     tiſes, & meanes of the wicked to withſtand gods worde. breake their bandes aſunder, ſay they, let vs caſte of their yoke, let vs by all meanes we can, ſeeke the confuſyon of thoſe Princes, countreys, Noble men, and other, which in any place mayntayne this new preached Goſpell. Lette it be wrought by policie, by periurie, by craft and diſſimulation, by violence, by crueltie, by miſcheefe, by murder, by any meanes that may be. Let vs roote from the face of the earth theſe Proteſtantes, theſe Hugonotes, theſe Hererikes, which at this day trouble the whole world. If wee cannot worke it by force, lette vs by policie, and vnder colour and pretence of great friendſhip, bring them into oure ſnare, or at the leaſt, with making fayre offers, let vs dally with thē, vntil we may worke that, y• we would do. Sed qui
                  Pſal. 2. 4. 
                  habitat in Coelis deridebit eos, & dominus ſubsānabit eos▪ i. He ſitteth in Heauen that ſhall deride and fruſtrate all their counſailes, with a Rodde of yron,
                   hee ſhall breake & ſeatter their purpoſes: vnto Godly Princes and Magiſtrates which hee hath rapſed, as Nourſes and Foſterers of his Goſpell, he ſhall (I doubt not) as often times he hath done, bewray their diſſimulation, diſplay their policies, ſparcle their conſpiracies, and confound their deniſes, in ſuch ſorte as his holy word and Goſpell, ſhall remayne to the comfort of his Children. Though by all crueltie, to their further condemnation, and to the heaping of greater wrath in the day of Gods wrath, they ſley & kill great numbers of his people▪ yet of the very aſhes of the ſame, and of their blood, he will rayſe vp other to his glory, whiche maugre theire malice, ſhall freely teache and preach his word. A Tempeſt

of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , maye blowe down a 
                     〈◊〉
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,The increaſe of the church by Mart
                        •
                     rdom 
                        〈…〉
                     d in a ſimilitude. but in blowing do
                     •
                  ne one▪ Stalke, it ſhall 
                     •
                  aſt oute 
                     •
                  n hundered Seedes, whiche after ſhall growe and proſper. Euen ſo by extremitie of tempeſtuous perſecution, ſome Preachers and profeſſoures may be murdered, but of their blood other will ſpring. Num Sanguis Martyrum ſe
                        ••••
                      Euangelij. i. For the Blood of Martyrs, is the Seede of
                  
                  What increaſe, only co
                        ••••
                     eth by Mar
                        •••
                     dom. 
                  the Goſpell. Yet am I not of that minde, that the Goſpell▪ in the Worlde ſhall 
                     ••
                   proſper, that it ſhall haue a ſetteledde quyetneſſe. For vndoubtedlye, Antichriſte ſhall not bee vtterlye ouerthrowne before the laſte daye, but continually, betweene this tyme and that, ſhall make warre agaynſt the Sayntes of God▪ and trauayle to ſuppreſſe this happy 
                     •
                  eede of Chriſte his Goſpell, wherewith he his ſo greeuouſly wounded, and his Kingdome ſhaken.2. The. 2. 8. But he ſhal neuer be able vtterly in extinguiſh it. S. Paule ſayth that he ſhall be deadly wounded with the Spirite of Gods mouth, that is, his holy worde: but he ſhall bee taken away by the brightneſſe of his comming. The Juſtice of God, for the vnthankfulneſſe of people, may ſuffer his Goſpell to be oppreſſed in ſome one Countrey, as Englande, or ſome other place, but in other yet, it ſhall proſper and increaſe, norwithſtanding all the indeuours of Antichriſt to the contrary.
               Nexte is, that wee haue to ſpeake of the grounde and the diuerſitye thereof. And here I maye not lette paſſ
                     •
                   a very profitable inſtruction, to be taken out of this parable, agaynſt ye malicious interpretatiō of many in theſe days, & I doubt not but there was the like in Chriſts time, & miniſtred to him the occaſyon to 
                     ••
                  ter this Parable. Whē manyAn obiection made againſt the credit of the goſpell and the preachers of it becauſe it is likened to ſeede ſee the Doctrine of the Goſpel ſo much preached, & beaten into mens 
                     ••
                  res; and conſyder howe ſmall frui
                     •
                  e commeth of it, being ſo many that reiect and contemne it, and ſo few that frame themſelues according vnto it, but y• 
                  
                     •
                  ice & wickedneſſe rather dayly increaſeth: by and by with verye corrupt iudgement, they eyther 
                     〈…〉
                   the Doctrine it

ſelf, or the perf
                     ••
                  s that be the Miniſter
                     •
                   & teach
                     ••
                  s therof. Oh, ſay they, if this were Gous 
                     •
                  ra
                     •
                   word▪ & his right doctrine of the Goſpel, as it is pretended: vndoubtedly, it wold worke in mens ha
                     •
                  tes, alter their minds, and bring foorthe fruit accordingly▪ 
                  
                     ••
                  r as the Propher ſayth: As the ſweetEſa. 55. 10. d
                        ••
                      and 
                        •
                     hower 
                        ••
                     raine returneth not ba
                        •
                     ke in vayne, 
                        •••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     y
                        ••
                     eneth and ſeaſoneth
                        •
                      the earth: ſo gods true worde returneth not in vay
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      but effectually doth that for which it was ſent. Or, if this bee the true goſpell, and right word of God, ſurelye the faulte is in the Miniſters, that bee not ſuch perſons, nor doe not deliuer it ſo zealouſly & ſo ſincerely as they ſhould do▪ & therfore their preaching preuayleth not in the harts of men. And thorow this perſwaſion, their groweth in them, an odyous and vnchriſtyan contempte, and deſpiſing of Miniſters and Preachers, ſo that forgetting themſelues, they caſte faulte of all euill in theſe Dayes, vpon the Miniſters and Preachers. ButAnſwere. with as good right might they condemn, and contemne the Prophets, Chriſt himſelf, and his Apoſtles. Eſay preached among the people of God aboue 60 yeares, or 
                     〈…〉
                   ſome accoumpte 80. Ieremy taught 41 yeres, and other Prophets proportionabl
                     •
                  ly, and I truſt they will not ſay, that eitherSome preachers had but barren ſucceſſe and yet was theire doctrine 
                        ••••
                     he. their doctrine was not right or good, or elſe that they were euill men. Yet with how final fruite they preached, in comparison of the multitud
                     •
                   of euill, the whole courſe of their writings, & their lame
                     •
                  table complaints declareth, and y• euent of Gods iuſt iudgemēt in puniſhing the Jewes, euidently proueth. For that only cauſe that they contemned his worde, and retourned not to him by repentaunce, hee brought vpon them the King of Babilon, who in the ninth yeare of Zedechia, King of Juda, came and all his Hoſte agaynſte Hieruſalem, and Beſeeged it, And in the leuenth yeare of Zedechiah, in the 4 moneth toke it, and ranſacked the Citie. And al y• Princes of the King of Babilō
                   came in, & ſate in the middle gate, the cheefe gate of the Citie, euen N
                        ••
                     egall, Sar
                        •
                     ſer, 
                        •
                     amga
                        •
                     n
                        •••
                     , Sarſ
                        ••
                     him, Rabſari
                        •
                     , Rab
                        ••
                     ag,
                  
with all the reſi
                     •••
                   of the Princes of the King of 
                     〈…〉
                   God thus plaguing the prophane contempte of his worde, when after ſo long Preaching no fruite woulde followe. And yet was not leremie in fault, nor the true Prophets of God for the iu
                     ••
                  ſion of thoſe ſtraungers, for the ouerthrow of this noble Ci
                     •
                  e, or for the greeuous captiuitie of this wofull people ▪ Nay, the looſeneſſe of their owne liues, the ſecure contempt of Gods holy word brought all thoſe plagues iuſtly vpon them, that they like flocks of ſhepe were, after great burly burly in their owne countrey, caryed away captiues into theire enimies Laude. And this ſucceſſe (through their owne ingratitude and other intollerable vices) had the preaching of the Prophets, among the people of the Iewes in thoſe 
                     ••
                  yes.
               In like manner I might ſay of Chriſt, and his ApoſtlesThe like to be ſaide of Chriſt and his Apoſtles. and Diſciples, whiche preached among the Iewes a good time, and in deede with ſmall fruites, in conſideration of the puritye of the Doctrine, the excellencie of the Teachers, and the wonderfull workes and myracles, that were by Gods power wrought for the confyrmation of the Goſpell.
               But in this anſwere I compare not the Perſons, which I cannot do withoute intollerable pryde and blaſphemie, but I compare the cauſes, which are al one with them andThe cauſe of barren ſucceſſe, is all one to the preſent preachers, as was to the prophets, & Chriſt and▪ his apoſtles and yet is not their ſucceſſe the leſſe. with vs. The Goſpell and Doctrine that we preach, is the ſame y• Chriſt, the Prophets. & the Apoſtles taughte before vs, and haue lefte vnto vs, although wee, in compariſon of their worthineſſe, are ſillie and ſinful wormes of the earth. And yet (in the feare of God and himbleneſſe of harte, I ſpeake it) I doubt not, but we are farte from that wickedneſſe, and foule blemiſhes, that partlye open aduerſaries, partly politique and worldly profeſſoures, woulde haue to be noted in many preachers of theſe dayes. They are not able to ſpeake or deuiſe worſe of vs, then the Iewes didde thinke and ſpeake of Chriſte himſelfe, of his bleſſed Apoſtles, and of the holy Prophets of God. Happylyeby oure

infyrmities, they may haue greater likelihoode, but that in thoſe dayes was and now is, nothing but a coloure, and pretence of reprobate mindes, to feede themſelues in the wicked contempte of Gods worde, or to excuſe and flatter themſelues, in not cōforming their liues accordinglye. IHow greeuous it is for preachers to offende. defende not the wickedneſſe of miniſters, God forbidde. It were better a milſtone were hanged about our neckes, and we caſt into the ſea, rather then our lyfe or euill dealinge, ſhould bee an offence to any, or hinder but one man, fromWhy preachers offences are not to be made more greeuous then they are. the true imbracing of the Goſpell. But my meaning is to take from obſtinate and vngodly myndes, ſuch excuſes and pretences, as they make to nooſell themſelues in wickedneſſe. Chriſte by this parable, teacheth them to iudge otherwiſe, and to looke into their owne boſoomes, and to examine themſelues of the cauſe, why his word taketh not place in them. Though the ſeede ſower be neuer ſo honeſt aThe true cauſe why the worde preached doth not allway bringe forth fruite. man, neuer ſo ſkilfull and cunning in his trade, though hee haue made good choyſe of his ſeede, and purged it neuer ſo cleane: yet if the ground be barrayne and noughte, his laboure is loſte, and the ſeede proſpereth not. And on the contrary part, if the ſower bee an euill man, and vnſkilfull in ſowing, and that he doth it negligentlye, and haue ſmall deſyre it ſhould proſper: yet if thee ſeede be cleane, and the ground good, the good Seede will proſper, and come to ſome good fruite. Yea, we ſee ſeede ſalling by chaunce, into good and batteling grounde, to ſpring vp & grow. As the worde of God is the ſeede, ſo is the grounde the hartes of them that heare it. Wherefore lette not men flatter themſelues, and with the cloke of other mens faultes & blemiſhes,The godly do alway take pro
                        〈…〉
                      of the preaching of the worde. hide their own euil nature & diſpoſitiōs. The good mind, though by chance onlye it heare the word of God, or though he heare it red but of a child, or any other perſon, it doth him good, it ſinketh into his harte, & worketh to good effect. The godleſſe hart, though he heare neuer ſo good a man preach, though an Angell from Heauen do ſpeake vnto him, though Chriſt himſelfe ſhould teach him, he woulde

be neuer y• better, or at y• leaſt, the ſede wold not vnto good fruite, proſper in him. But this, chriſt moſt euidētly declareth, by y• harietie of ye ground, which next followeth to be ſpoken of: Some (ſayth Chriſt) fel vpō the high way. The high way reſembleth the mindes of ſuch as be continually occupied, with the trāpling of wicked cogitations, & perpetual vſe of euil doing, ſo yt they war hard & haue no ſence of repētance, nor remorſe of cōſcience, whatſoeuer they heareThe firſt kinde of grounde. or whatſoeuer is ſpoken vnto thē. Therfore y• ſede of gods holy word whē it is preached vnto thē, it lieth in ye top, & as it were, ſwimmeth in ye eare, but it ſincketh not into ye hart, nor can take any roote of godly perſwaſion: and therefore it lieth open to foules of the ayre to take it away, and to deuoure it. The foules that eate vp the ſeede of gods word inThree ſorts of foules vvhich doe eate vp the ſeede of gods vvorde in the heigh 
                        •
                     vaies. the high way, are the Deuill & his Impes, & Miniſters of his own begetting & breding, which be in number infinite, but I will ſpeake only of two or three, which I may iuſtly compare to the rauenous & filthie Harpies, which y• Poets ſpeake of: The firſt is, Worldly Securitie, the ſecōd, godleſſe Gentilitie, the third; Obſtinate Papiſtrie. Worldly Securitie, lulleth men aſleepe in the delights and cogitatiōsOf worldly securitie. of worldly pleaſure, ſo yt they cānot fruitfully heare either yt ſweete ſonges of Gods mercifull prouidence, alluring thē to repentance, or the dreadfull threatninges of his iudgements fearing them from euill doing. But ſtill they lye, as it were be
                     〈…〉
                  ed and ſenceles, in a dull & heauye ſlumber, much like vnto thē yt be taken with ye drouſie ſickneſſe called Lethargus: Speake & crie vnto them as loud as you wil, they heare nothing, nor will ſhew any tokē that they are aliue, if you prick them with a pinne, they will open their eyes, and looke ſternely a little while, but by and by they are aſlecpe agayne, and lye as they weredead. Euen ſo they, whoſe hartes be ouer whelmed with Securitie, if a man preach Gods word vnto them, be it neuer ſo godly or earneſtly done, it nothing moueth them, but if you prick them a little, or pearſe them to the quicke in any matter,

perticularly touching themſelues, they will looke vp ſomwhat ſtearnelye for the time, as though they were angrie with you, but by and by, they are aſleepe agayne, and ſhew no ſence of any good counſayle that you haue giuen them. If we cry generally, to all that profeſſe Chriſtianitie, andThe inconuenience of pre achingi
                        •
                      generalitie. principally to this Realme of Englande, that God of his exceeding goodneſſe, in theſe latter perilous dayes, hath beyonde all our expectations almoſt myraculouſlye reſtored to vs, the truth of his Goſpell, not that we ſhould continue in ſinne and wickednes, to the defacing of his glory: but that wee being lightned with the brightneſſe thereof, ſhould learne that Chriſt Jeſus our ſauiour, hath payd the price of our redemption, & deliuered vs frō the captiuitie of ſinne, ſathan, death, and hel, that We might walke beforeLuc. 1. 74. 75. him in holineſſe and righteouſneſſe all the dayes of our life: If we tell them, yt by their baptiſme they couenanted with God to forſake the Deuil & al his workes, & that theyRom. 6. 3. are baptized into the death of Chriſt, yt as they bee partakers of his death, ſo alſo ſhould they bee partakers of his coſurrectiō, to the end that as Chriſt is riſen from death, ſo alſo we ſhold riſe from y• death of ſiun, to newnes of life: If we preach vnto thē neuer ſo oftē, yt by the benefite of Chriſt1. Pet. 3. 7. Rom. 8. 17. his Paſſion, we are made the heires of God wt him, and the children of light, & therfore yt we ſhould walk, as is worthy our vocation, & not to be partakers of y• workes of darknes, and paſſe our time in ſurfeting, in banqueting, in dronkennes, in chābring & wantonneſſe, in 
                     •
                  ōtention, ſtrife, & Emulation, but yt we ſhould put on Chriſt Jeſus, & not ſatiſfye y• luſts of the fleſh, to the lyking thereof: If we ſay, yt we are by our profeſſion, Citizens of heauen, & of the houſholde ofEph. 2. 19. God, & for that cauſe that our conuerſation ſhould be Heauenly, wt manifeſt declaratiō of y• contēpt of this miſerable world, & the tranſitory vanities therof, yet I ſaye, though we preach this often, though we ſtill cal vpon thē, Security ſo lulleth thē on ſleepe, that they cannot heare theſe ſweete and Godly exhorta
                     •••
                  s. Ye
                     •
                   though we change out copye,

and ringe in their eares the terrible threatninges of God, and declare, that this lamentable vnthankefulneſſe, in receauing the Doctrine, and light of his truth, muſte needes prouoke Gods iuſtice moſt greeuouſly to plague vs: when we in this manner crie out vnto them, it will not waken them. We tel them often, that God muſt be the ſame God toward vs, as he was toward his people of the Iewes, that he muſt ſhew the ſame Juſtice to England, that he didde to Hieruſalem. Vnto Hieruſalem Chriſt with lamētable mind ſayd: Oh Hieruſalem, Hieruſalem, which killeſt the Prophets,Mat. 23. 37 and ſtoneſt thē to death, which are ſent to thee, how often woulde I haue gathered thy Children vnder my winges, as the Henne gathereth her Chickens, & yee would not. Beholde, your habitation ſhall be lefte vnto you deſolate, And to England he now ſayeth: O Englande,
                     How god calleth Engto repentance and without repentance what is like to befall it. 
                     Englande, how often times haue I called thee? how ſundrie wayes haue I prouoked thee? howe aboundantlye haue I powred out my benefites and bleſſinges vppon thee? howe earneſtlye haue I by the mouth of my Preachers, clocked and cried to thee, as an Henne doeth to her Chickens, that thou mighteſt awake out of thy ſecuritie, and by repentaunce, returne vnder the ſhadowe of my wings, there to be ſafe from al the gredy Kites & Eagles, that houer ready to pray vpon thee, & yet thou wilt not: therefore thy houſe ſhal come to confuſion▪ I will take the light of my Goſpell from thee, and giue it to a people, that ſhall ſhew the fruites thereof. Thy eninimies, yea thy auncient enimies, ſhall raigne ouer thee, and kepe thee in ſubiection: The glory and renown of thy kingdome▪ ſhall fall and decay, and thy people ſhall come to deſolation, and al becauſe thou wilt not know the mercifull day of thy viſitation, ſo often and ſo ſundery times offered vnto thee.
               
               Theſe wordes mighte ſhake ſtonie Rockes, and cauſe them to tremble, and yet they wil not moue Engliſh harts, nor wake them out of their Securitie, 
                     •
                  o, although GOD

let them ſee with their eyes, yt the worldly hope of their Securitie, hangeth by a twine thread, I meane y• fraile life of a tender Ladie, after which, they thēſelues, cā looke for nothing, but heapes of miſchiefe and miſerie: and ſo much the ſooner, for that by Gods iuſt iudgement, they nouriſhe in their owne booſoms the inſtrument of their confuſion. The Lord open our eyes, & mollifie our hartes, yt wee may in time ſee, and feele his mercie affected towarde vs, and chaſe out of our mindes this foule Harpie, Securitie, that deuoureth the ſeede of Gods bleſſed word, and will not ſuffer it to bring forth fruite among vs.
               Another birde, is as ougly and lothſome as this, & dothOf heatheniſh Gentilitie and the miſchiffe by it. as much harme, which is Heatheniſh Gentilitie, which raigneth in the hartes of godleſſe perſons, Atheiſtes, and Epicures, which paſſe neither for heauen, nor hell, nor for God nor the Diuell, but thinke thoſe things to bee no better, than Poeticall fables, or (at the leaſt) Bugges, by policie deuiſed to feare Babes. Therefore they ieſt & ſcoffe at all Religion, and make themſelues merie, with talke of Preachers. For they paſſe not which end goe forwarde, or whether Chriſt or Antichriſt preuaile, ſo that they maye ſinge with the Pigges of Epicures ſtie: Edamus bibamus. &c. 
                        
                           •
                        . Let vs eate, let vs drinke and be merie, for to morow we ſhall die, and after death is no pleaſure nor paine.
                   Marke I pray you howe wiſedome vttereth their cogitations, and maketh them to ſpeake in this wiſe: OurSap. 2. 5. &c. time is as a ſhadow that paſſeth away, & after our end there is no returning, come therefore and let vs enioye the pleaſures that are preſent, and let vs fill our ſelues with coſtly vvine, and ointments, and let vs cheerefully vſe the d
                        •
                     eatures as in youthe, and let not the flower of life paſſe by vs. Let vs all be partakers of our wantonneſſe, let vs leane ſome token of our pleaſure in euerie place. For that is our portion, and this is our lot. Let us oppreſſe the poore that is righteous, oh let vs not ſpare the widowe, nor reuerence the white heares of

the aged. Let our ſtrēgth be the law of vnrighteouſnes. Let vs defraude the righteous and godly, for he is not for our profit, he is contrary to our doings, he checketh vs for offending againſt the law, & blameth vs as tranſgreſſors of diſcipline. Out of this ſchoole they came thatHow they are to be accounted of that deride preachers. ieſt at Preachers, & be angrie with them, for inueighing againſt the vanities of this life, & putting them in minde of God, and of heauen: for they thinke, that to bee a bitter ſaying to their pleaſant life. For there is none ſo heatheniſh, but God ſometime ſendeth to his minde, a gnawing corſie, & remorſe of conſcience to trouble him. Out of this ſchole came thoſe ſcorners, which S. Peter propheſied ſhuld2. Pet. 3. 1. &c. riſe in the latter dayes, & liue after their owne luſt, & when they ſhould be taught by Preachers, that y• worlde ſhoulde haue an ende, & they be brought before the iudgement ſeat of God, to aunſwere for their wickednes, would with deriſion and mocking, ſay, Oh where is the promiſe of the Lordes comming to iudgement, and of the end of the world? for ſince the fathers died, all things continue a like, frō the beginning of the creation. Of the ſame ſort are they, that Eſay ſpeaketh of: When they be tolde that God will puniſhe & plague them, not in the world to come but in this world alſo, with ſome notable examples of hys iuſtice, as he did to Sodom and Gomorra and others. &c, Oh, ſay they in deriſion, Let God make ſpeede, let him haſtē
                     Moc
                           •
                        es againſt god & his iudgmentes. his worke, that we may ſee it, and let the counſell of the holy one of Iſrael drawe neare and come, that wee may knowe it. Or at leaſt they ſpeake, as they doe in Ieremie, that denie the Lorde God, and ſay, Tuſhe it is not hee,Ier. 5. 1
                           •
                        . thoſe plagues of ſworde and famine, ſhall not come vppon vs: It is vaine that the Preachers teache, theſe myſeries and plagues ſhal fall vpon themſelues. I would to God there were not too many of this ſorte in Englande. whoſe like contempteous voyce, did ring in many mennes eares, beſide the great number of them, that ſecretely ſaye

in their heart, There is no God, and openly ſhew the ſameHow to trie crulye who do beleau
                        •
                      there is a god, and who not. Contempt of godlineſſe of life, can nor ſtand with the acknowledging of a god. in the whole courſe of their life. For if they beleeued there were a God, they would neuer ſo reprochfully, and ſo obſtinately, reiect & caſt aſide, the word of the eternall and euer liuing God. I aſke theſe godleſſe Epicures, whether they thinke, there is a God or no? If they will ſaye. Yea, why then, the ſame muſt be a iuſt God, for without iuſtice, there can be no Godhead, and if he be a iuſt god then he muſt deteſt, & hate ſinne, and accordingly puniſhe it. For it is the part of iuſtice to giue to euery one that he deſerueth, reward to the good, & puniſhment to the wicked: and by this can they not in iuſtice, eſcape his puniſhment due to their lewdneſſe. If they will ſay with their Maiſter Epicure,We cannot acknowledg a god, but that with all he muſt puniſh
                        •
                      ſinne. that there is a God, but he regardeth not the affaires of the world, & the doings of mē: that, muſt then be, either becauſe he cannot, or becauſe he will not. By the one he ſheweth himſelfe an impotent God, and therefore no God, by the other a negligent or a malicious God, and for that alſo no God. For ſuch paſſions and imperfections, can not lyght into the nature of a Deitie, or Godhead. If they will flatlyAgainſt thoſe that denie god altogeather. Rom. 1. 20. thinke or ſaye: There is no God, I muſt ſpeake vnto them as. S. Paule doth to lyke heatheniſh harts & mindes, and I muſt will them▪ to open their blinde eyes and behold the goodly, beautifull, and maruailous frame, and workemanſhip of the world, the Su
                     ••
                  e, the Moone, the StarresMeanes to make thoſe acknowledge a god which 
                        ••
                      altogethe
                        •
                      deny him. the Planets, the goodly order, the conſtant courſe, y• wonderfull effectes, the notable varietie of times, and ſeaſons, to the benefite of mans life. I muſt byd them looke into the ayre, and conſider what it is, that holdeth vp that huge heape of Cloudes houering without any proppe or ſtaye, and in conuenient time, ſo ſweetely ſheeding downe themſelues, to moiſt & ſeaſon the earth, which if they ſhould fall downe at once, woulde ouerwhelme and drowne the whole earth▪
               
               I muſt further wyſt thē to conſider, yt ſince the naturall place of water, is to be aboue the earth, as verye reaſon

and their owne heatheniſh Philoſophers teache: who or what it is, that holdeth the Sea within a banke of ſande, that it doth not breake ouer, to ſurrounde the earth and occupie his owne place? Or what it is, that cauſeh the dead and dirtie earth, to bring for the ſo beautifull flowers, ſo faire greene graſſe, ſo ▪exceedyng varietie of Beaſtes, Hearbes, Trees, Fruites, Metalls, and all other things, either breeding in the bowells of the earth, or ſhewing themſelues vppon the vtter face thereof? Who it is that created them, or gaue them a beginning, that preſerueth and continueth them in their kindes, that maketh them atThe ſaying of the Heathens that al things ſtand according to the courſe of Nature is to be vnderſtod of god, and how it is ſo. Seneca.
                   ſome ſeaſons of the yeere to die, at another to ſpring and growe againe? Thou wilt ſay happily, all theſe things be by a certaine courſe of nature, and the ordinarie effectes thereof. Why? and what is that which thou calleſt nature? Is ſhe a goddeſſe, or is ſhe a Creature? Hath ſhe a beginning of hir ſelfe, or hath ſhe hir beginning of an other? Seneca an Heathen Philoſopher could ſay, Nature is nothing but God, working in theſe thinges that wee call naturall. But if thou be worthy the name of a man, lookeThe way to acknowledge god in man. into thine owne body, which is called Microcoſmos, A little world,
                   becauſe of marueilous workemanſhip thereof, weigh how it commeth to paſſe, that in thy mothers womb two or three droppes of licour, ſhoulde frame it ſelfe to ſkinne, to fleſhe, to bones, to ſinewes, 
                     •
                  o veines, to arteties, to the principall partes of thy liuing body, the braine, the harte, the ſtomacke, the lyuer, the ſplene, the guttes, and others: howe the ſpirites bee ingendred in the braine, the hart, the lyuer, which bee the inſtrumentes whereby thy ſoule worketh life, and mouing, 
                     ••
                  riſhing & increaſing and growing, ſenſe, will, and vnderſtanding.
               Conſider the other outward partes of thy body, and the proper neceſſarie vſe of them all, the fleakes of fleſh, called muſcles, the bones, and the great varietie, and the marueilous faſhion and ioyning of them together, the wonderfull courſe of the Veines, the Arteries, the ſinewes diſperkling

themſelues to notable vſes into all partes of the body, both inwarde and outwarde. I will not put thee in minde of theWho ſo can not acknowledge god in him ſelf, can not be ſaide to be a man. Properties which can not but be knowen in god if we do
                        •
                      acknowledge him but only in his creatures. ſubſtance, the nature, the power and ſtrength of thy ſoule, which in deede farre paſſeth all the other. For if by conſideration of thy body, thou canſt not learne, that there is a God, which in ſuch wonderfull ſorte, did frame it: thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe not to haue the common vnderſtanding of a mannes ſoule, but art more dull than a brute beaſt. By theſe things which I haue hitherto ſpoken, a naturall man may vnderſtand, that there is a certaine deuine and ſpirituall power, that gaue beginning to all theſe things, and therfore, is of himſelfe Eternall. And becauſe he wrought them of nothing, that he is alſo
                     Eternall.
                   
                  Omnipotent and Almightie: and becauſe they are framed in ſo goodly order, and exceeding varietie,
                     Omnipotent.
                   that he is of Infinite Wiſdome. And forvviſe infinitly. ſo much as he made them in the beginning, and to this day preſerueth them to the benefite of mankind, that he is ExceedingGood exceedingly and liberall and louing. good and bountifull and a louer of man. And becauſe he ſuffereth, euen vnworthy perſons, to enioy the benefite of his creatures, that he is with all very Mercifull.
                  
                     Mercifull.
                   And becauſe with want of theſe his creatures, he puniſheth and plagueth the wicked, hee ſheweth himſelfe Iuſt alſo.
                     Iuſte.
                   Now this diuine and ſpirituall power, that is eternall, almightie,Who or what that God is which is taught to be beleeued. wyſe, good, mercifull and iuſt, is that God which we ſpeake of, whom theſe Godleſſe perſons ſhould learne, thoughe they had no other booke but this, of the frame of the world. But ſeeyng they haue Gods booke of hys holy Scriptures beſides this, they ſhall be vnexcuſable, & heape vnto themſelues wrath, in the day of wrath, if they repent not, and ſhake thoſe wicked cogitations out of their harts, that the ſeede of Gods worde may proſper with them. The thirde euill birde, and cruell Harpie, that deuoureth theOf obſtinate PaPiſtrie in three ſortes ſeede of Gods worde, is Obſtinate Papiſtrie. And of this birde, are three kindes, The open Papiſt which dwelleth among vs, and forſaketh our Communion in prayer, & vſe of the Sacramentes, manifeſtly proteſting that wee be departed

from the Catholike Church, and therefore that they may not in conſcience ioyne with vs. The ſecond ſort are fleeing Papiſtes, which fling ouer the ſea and returne againe, ſecretly bringing with them pardons, reconciliations, ſclaunderous and ſeditious bookes and libels, wt other like things, wherewith they indeuour, not onely to feede other Papiſts in their obſtinacie, but with traiterous meanyng, as much as they can, to ſteale away the heartes of the ſubiectes from the Prince and Magiſtrate, & prepareEngland in moſt daungerous perils by papiſtes. the way to rebellion, and alteration of the ſtate: ſo that thys Realme hath not in the world, ſo deadly and perilous enimyes, as theſe are to y• vttermoſt of their power. Their continuall trauaile is to beate into the heartes of Engliſh men, that our doctrine, our Church, our Prince, our lawe, our whole ſtate is ſchiſmaticall, and hereticall, & that they ought not to obey, either the Churche in doctrine, or the Prince and ſtate in gouernment, but if they rebell, 
                     ••
                  they doe God good ſeruice. To repreſſe or chaſe awaye thoſeThe meanes to remedie ſome kinds of papiſtes. two kindes of Romiſh Harpyes, for ſo much as they wyll neither reade writing, nor heare Preaching, there is none other way, but to claime ayde of the Magiſtrate, that they wyll vſe more ſeuere & ſharpe execution of the lawes, & deuiſe ſome ſtreighter meanes, than hitherto hath bene. For the lenitie of theſe daies hath cauſed the multitude of theſe byrdes, exceedyngly to increaſe, with the perill bothe of Prince and ſtate, which if in tyme they take not heede of, I feare it will be too late. The thirde kinde of theſe ſort of Harpyes, is the Cunning Papiſt, which can hyde hymſelfe vnder the colour of loyaltie, and obedience to y• lawes, and wyll needes be accompted a faithfull, true, and good ſubiect, & yet carieth in his booſome in effect, the ſame perſwaſion that the other doe, and for feare of daunger, or diſcredite, they are contented to obey the law, & in y• meane tyme, are perilous inſtrumentes, to let the other vnderſtand the ſecretes of all thyngs that be done or purpoſed, & wyth friendſhip and money, to helpe them, when any kinde

of daunger is at hand. Theſe men, as they can not by laweC
                        •
                     uſe of care in what places of credite papiſtes are put. be corrected, ſo ſurely haue the gouernours, verye great cauſe to haue a carefull eye vnto them, and to take heede that they bee not brought into place of credite. But for ſo much as all theſe three ſortes of Romiſh Harpyes, not onely deuour the ſeede of Gods worde, and pull it out of thoſe mindes that heare it, but alſo by diſtainyng the ſame, with their foule dung of ſclaunderous reportes, make it to ſauour yll, in the ſenſes of many: it behoueth ſuch as feare God, to be well armed, with ſufficient aunſwere to y• ſame. Namely when they ſay, that the doctrine that we preach, is a new doctrine, and that they wyll beleeue, as their fathers haue done before them: that they are the true Catholique Church, and we are ſchiſmatikes and heretikes, that we diſagree among our ſelues, and they conſent in vnitie, all which their pretences with diuerſe other lyke you ſhall finde ſufficiently aunſwered, in the Sermons vpon this Text, Non me pudet Euangelij, I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell, &c.
                   Thus haue you heard me declare vnto you, what thoſe three principall birdes are, which Sathan in theſe dayes, hath bred in England, to hinder and deuour the ſeede of Gods word, which falleth on the high waye. Nowe it remaineth to ſpeake of the other diuerſities of ground. &c.
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſeconde Sermon vppon this part of the Text. Mat. 13. 5.
               
                  Some fell vpon ſtonie ground, where it had not muche earth, and by and by it ſprang vp, becauſe it lacked deepeneſſe of earth, but when the Sunne roſe, it was burned away.
               
               
                  BEforé, whriſt did ſpeake of them, which all, 
                     〈…〉
                   heare and receaue y• 
                  
                     •
                  ede of Gods holye worde, yet their heartes bee ſo hardned, that it ſinketh not into their mindes, & therefore ye Diuell doth quickly, by his birdes, deuoure it, that it neither cōmeth to good effect, nor giueth any ſhew, or token of likelihood, to prooue well. Nowe in theſe that followe, he deſcribeth them that receaue, and admitte the word of God in ſuch ſorte, as they giue great token at the beginning, that it will proſper and doe good in their heartes, but ſhortlye after, ſome impediment growing, the ſeede fayleth, and bringeth forthe no fruite at all. And firſt he ſpeaketh of them, whom he reſemblethWho thoſe be which are the ſtonie ground. vnto ſtonie grounde, that is, ſuch hartes & mindes of men, which becauſe they be of diſpoſition vehement and hoate, they by and by receaue the worde, and ſhewe themſelues to be delighted therewith, and breake out to earneſt
                     which is the 2. kind of ill ground. praiſes thereof, and ſhewe them ſelues with ſuch cheerefulneſſe to embrace the doctrine of Gods trueth, as they moue great hope to all men, that it wyll take ſucceſſe to great benefite. But in the ende, if any vehement temptatiō,

either of worldly trouble, or otherwiſe happē to them, they waxe faynte and begin to chaunge, and laſtlye cleane reuolte and vtterlye forſake that truth, whiche with great hope in the beginning, they had receaued.
               And of theſe many afterward become enimies, and perſecutouresHow it commeth to paſſe that many ſeame firſt to be glad of the goſpell and yet afterward hate it and helpe to puniſh the profeſſors of it. of the Goſpell. And what, I pray you, may be the cauſe hereof? Surelye this: They lacked Earth and moyſture, to feede the ſeede, that is, they had not the true knowledge of Chriſt, nor of his Kingdome, nor a right and Chriſtian fayth 
                     •
                  reo in them, by the ſpirite of God, but on
                  
                     〈…〉
                  e opinyon conceaued in their own mindes, whiche 
                     〈…〉
                  e were poſſeſſed with a carnall delighte of worldelye pompes and pleaſures, and therefore when the Doctrine of the free mercy of God by faith in Chriſt only, pardoning and forgiuing our ſinnes, is preached, and when they heare ſuperſtition in faſting, praying, & other ſuch things, ſharply reproued, and men exhorted to Chriſtian libertie, they imbrace this Doctrine very greedily, and all becauſe they thinke vnder pretence of Chriſtian libertie, to ſhake of the yoke of Diſcipline, and obedience in Chriſtian exerciſes, and to vſe the cloake of Gods mercy to couer a looſe and licencious life, in the meane time, ſtudying nothing but how they may vſe the countenaunce of the Goſpell, to get Riches, honour, friendſhip, and worldly peace and quietneſſe. But as I haue before ſayd, when the ſtormes of aduerſity and heate of perſecution riſeth, whereof they muſt be partakers, if they will bee conſtante in the Goſpell: and when they heare their wicked and vngodlye doinges, by Preachers ſharpely reproued, and begin to vnderſtand that neytherThe cauſe why many of the Jewes which ſemed to like of chriſt well, did afterward crie crucifie him crucifie him. chriſtian libertie can be any warrant of licentiouſnes, nor Goddes mercye a Cloake to continue in wickedneſſe, they flye from the word of GOD, and betake themſelues wholy to the world. Such receauers of ye word, were many of the Jewes, which dreamed that Chriſte came as an earthly Prince, or Conquerour, that ſhoulde deliuer them from the tyram
                     •
                  y of the Romaines, and make them Lords of

the world. And therefore at the beginning, they flocked to him in great number, and ſhewed ſuch liking of him & his doctrine, that the Phariſies and high Prieſtes, were afrayd to deale with him, as otherwiſe they wold haue done. But when they ſaw him once taken, and in the hands of his enimies, they reuolted, & ſhewed themſelues to miſlike wt him, & in the end cried Crucifige as frankely as y• reſidue, & were cōtēted to haue Barrabas let go, & chriſt to be put to vniuſt & cruell death. I would to God there were not to many ofOf ſome which now profeſſe the goſpell, which peraduenture may diſlike it hereafter, & thoſe alſo that do preache it. this ſort in England at this day, which now ſhew thēſelues, to be hoat and eger goſpellers, either becauſe they hope to haue ſome part of y• ſpoile of Biſhops lands, or eccleſiaſtical liuings, or for ſome ſuch other worldly reſpect, but whē the heate of affliction ſhal come (for our vnthankfulneſſe continually crieth for it, before the ſeate of Gods iuſtice) then, I ſay, I pray god they ſhew but halfe that conſtancie, & good liking of the goſpell, y• becommeth a true Chriſtian. And yt which maketh me, & other to feare thē is, that wt this earneſt pretended zeale, I ſee little amendment of life, or none at all ioyned. The remedy againſt this miſchiefe, and theMeanes to remedie the profeſſors laſt ſpoken of. means to amend this ſtony ground, & to breede more melow earth in their harts, is truely & ſincerely to learn, what the kingdome of Chriſt is, & what they muſt looke for, by ye profeſſiō therof in the world. For ſo ſhal they eaſily put away, that worldly perſwaſion yt maketh them to reuolt from the Goſpell. Chriſt himſelfe confeſſeth y• his kingdome is notOf the kingdom of chriſt, and what is by it to be loked for. Gen. 3. 15. of this world, yea, ye world & Chriſt, are cleane cōtrary, for ye prince of this world is enimy to Chriſt. The enmity was proclaimed by god himſelf in Paradiſe: I will ſet enmitie betweene thee & the woman, & betweene thy ſeede and hers, and her ſeede ſhall breake thy head, and thou ſhalt bruiſe his heele. Therfore ſo ſoone as Chriſt the ſeede of y• womā, had once put his head into y• world, & was born of y• bleſſed virgine at Nazareth, the Deuill raiſed his ſeede, y• wicked tyrant Herode, to perſecute chriſt, and to ſeeke his death: And ſo hath he cōtinued euer ſince, in al times & ſeaſons,

to perſecute Chriſt in his mēbers. This, Chriſt did not hide from his Diſciples & true followers but ſundrye times told thē therof before hād, yt whē it came to pas they might not be offēded. Behold, ſaith he, I ſend you as ſhepeMat. 10. 16. amōg the midſt of Wolues: be wiſe therfore as ſerpents & ſimple as Doues. &c. And a little after, You ſhalbe hated of al men for my names ſake. Here you may vnderſtād,Of worldly inconueniences which commonly follow the profeſſors of the goſpell and why. Joh. 15. 18. what intertainment true Chriſtians muſt looke for, in this world, that is, hatred, diſdaine, cruelty, & ſuch curteſy as ſheepe find among Wolues. The cauſe hereof he ſetteth forth more largely in S. Ioh. If the world, ſaith chriſt, hate you, you knowe it hated me, before you: If you were of the world, the world wold loue that is his own, but becauſe you are not of the world, but I haue choſen you out of the world, therfore the world hateth you. Remē
                     ber the word that I ſaid vnto you, the ſeruāt is not greater thē his maiſter, if they haue perſecuted me, they will perſecute you alſo. Chriſt in another place, reſēbleth hisMat. 7. 24. people to a Houſe builded vpō a Rock, & the raine fell, & the flouds came, & the winds blew, & beat vpō that houſe, and it fel not becauſe it was builded vpō a Rock. By ye rain, y• flouds, & y• winds beating vpō y• houſe, is ment ye ſtorms of afflictiō, trouble, & perſecutiō, & other vehemēt 
                     •
                  ētaciōs, y• ye deuill, & ye world, raiſeth to aſſaulte y• cōſciēces of chriſtiās. But their harts are not ſhakē ther wt, but ſtādWhy true profeſſors of the goſpell cannot by any afflictions be driuen from i
                        •
                     . What the kingdome of god is. In what forte true profeſſors of chriſt, muſt cleaue to chriſt. and for him renounce al things els. cōſtantly in y• truth, becauſe yt foūdatiō of their conſciēce, is ſincerely groūded vpō y• Rock chriſt Jeſus. By this it may appeare yt y• kingdome of chriſt, is not earthly, but a ſpiritual kingdome, by y• power of y• holy ghoſt raigning & flouriſhing in y• harts of mē, & ſetting it ſelf againſt y• works of y• deuil, & of y• world, & for yt cauſe loketh for none other thing at y• worlds hand, thē miſery & trouble. Wherfore the firſt poynt of a true profeſſour of Chriſt & his goſpel is, ſo far as mās frailty cā ſuffer, to renoūce ye world, & all y• affectiōs & pleaſures therof, & with y• comfort of Gods mercy in chriſt Jeſu, to arme himſelf wt paciēce, againſt al miſcheifes yt the

Deuill, or the world canne rayſe agaynſte him. A good Chriſtian according to the counſayle of our Sauioure, maketh this account before hand, and looketh for none other, and becauſe he knoweth the life of a Chriſtian, is a warfare vpon the earth, he vnderſtandeth alſo, that Chriſtes Souldyers, which will profeſſe to fight vnder his Banner, maye not in this life looke for wealth, proſperitie and quietneſſe, eſpecially when he ſeeth y• Deuill, the world, & the fleſh, in armes agaynſt him, and continuallye ready to ouerthroweSuch as doe but a little cloſe with the world are and ſ
                        •
                     and in da
                        •
                     ger of treaſon to Chriſt. him, and bring him to confuſion. Whoſoeuer therefore dallieth with the world, ſheweth himſelfe more then half a Traitour agaynſte Chriſte, muche more they that for the world reuolt from Chriſt. The Godlye when the heate of perſecution riſeth, that they maye not forſake their Lorde and Captayne, vſe to ſheilter themſelues vnder theſe ſhadowes following.
               Firſte, they perſwade themſelues, as truth is in deede,How the godly do ſtay themſelues in afflictions ſo that they may not fall from Chriſt by 2. conſiderations. The firſt cauſe of ſtay. Met. 10. 29. that affliction commeth not to them, by chaunce or fortune, or by the mallice of men, but by the certayne knowledge and prouidence of that God, which is by Chriſt, their Heauenly and mercifull father, who neyther can do it for anye euill vnto them, uor ſuffer them to be further tempted, thā by his grace they ſhalbe able to beare. If a poore ſilly ſparow, as Chriſt aſſureth them, falleth not to grounde, without their Father that is in Heauen, they are perſwaded that they are farre more precious in the ſight of God, than all the Sparowes in the world, and therefore that an heare ſhall not fall from their head, but by his will and pleaſure, Nihil Satan
                        •
                      in ſeruos dei viui licebit, (ſayth Tertullian) nif
                           •
                        
                     
                     Tertul. 
                     permiſerit dominus. The Deuil can do nothing againſt the ſeruantes of the liuing God, vnleſſe the Lord ſhall ſuffer it. The example hereof euidently appeareth in Iob, & in the Apoſtles of Chriſt. The Deuill could not vexe Iob, vntil itIob. 1. 10. & e. Luc. 22. 32. was graunted him by God. Sathan deſyred to 
                     •
                  ifte the Apoſtles, as men vſe to 
                     •
                  ifte Corne, but Chriſte prayed for them, that their fayth might not fayle. Yea a Legion of

Deuils were not able to hurte a heard of Hogges, but by the permiſſion of Chriſt. Therfore very pretily ſayth Tertul. Poſſum dicere p
                           •
                        rcorum ſetas apud deum numeratas, non tantum ſanctorum capillos. &c. I may ſay, that not only the heares of Sayntes, but the briſtles of Hogges, are in a certain accoumpt before God. This comfort neuer fayleth, and whē the godly betake themſelues to this ſheilter, they may be truely ſayde, to reſt vnder the ſhadowe of the wings of y• moſt higheſt. Origen vpon Iob, in zealous maner, breaketh out to the admiration of this cōfort. O bonitas
                  Of gods ſpeciall prouidence for euery thing. 
                  tua Rex. &c. Oh thy exceeding goodneſſe, thou mighty King, oh thy power & magnificence, thou eternal god, how great comfort giueſt thou to them, that flye vnto thee? & hope for aſſured conſtācy at thy hand, that is, that our Aduerſary hath no power either ouer man, or beaſt, or Creature without life, but by thy permiſſion.
                  
               
               The ſecond ſheilter, and ſhadow of comfort, is the ampleThe ſecond cauſe of ſtay. rewarde that Chriſt promiſeth, to them that conſtantly ſuffer perſecution for his names ſake. Bleſſed are they, whoMat. 5. 10. ſuffer perſecution for righteouſneſſe ſake, for theires is the Kingdome of Heauen: Bleſſed are ye, when men reuile you, & perſecute you, & ſpeake al euill againſt you, for my ſake, reioyce and be glad, for greate is your rewarde in Heauen, And agayn he ſayth. Whoſoeuer ſhallMat. 19. 29. forſake houſes or bretheren, or Syſters, or Father, or mother, or wyfe or Children, or Landes for my ſake, he ſhall receaue an hundred folde more, and ſhall inherite euerlaſting life. Bleſſed are you that weepe nowe, forLuc. 6. 21. &c. ye ſhall laugh, and your heauineſſe ſhall bee turned into ioy. They which refuſe perſecution offered for Chriſt hisIoh. 16. ſake, cannot be his true Diſciples, but ſhewe themſeluesMat. 10. 37. to haue bene Hipocrites and Diſſemblers. Hee that loueth his Father or Mother more than mee, (ſayeth Chriſt) is not worthye of mee, and he that taketh not his Croſſe and followeth me, is not fitte for mee. For whoſo denyeth Chriſte before men, ſhall be denyed of
                  
                  him, before our Father which is in heauen. He that hath ſoundly learned Chriſt, & his kingdome in this maner wil not eaſily forſake him, & reuolt frō him in the heate of perſecution, whenſoeuer it ſhal ariſe &c.
               The thirde kinde of euill ground is the buſhie, and thornyeThe third kind of ground. ground, that is, the hartes of them whoſe affections, are ouercome with yt greedy deſyre of Riches, and worldly pleaſures. And very aptly are riches and worldlye pleaſuresWhy riches & pleaſures a
                        •
                     e reſembled to thorns. reſembled to Thornes, for as Thornes haue fayre greene leaues, and bewtifull bloſſomes and flowers, that maye allure a man to reache at them, ſo if hee take holde of them haſtilye, he ſhall be ſure to be pricked, & ſhrewdlye hurte. So there ſeemeth a certayne bewtie and ſweeteneſſe to be in riches, thereby to purchaſe worldelye pompe and pleaſures, but if a man with greedye deſire, reache at them, they will wounde him, and pearſe him to the hearte. For riches and worldlye pleaſures pricke inHow riches 
                        •
                     o hurte. 
                        ••
                     . getting, they pricke in keeping, and they pricke in departing. And commonlye they wounde a man ſo greeuouſlye, that without repentaunce, they kill him for euer. In getting, they prick a mā with lying, with periury, withIn getting. crafte & ſubtel
                     •
                  ie, with ſtealing, with pic
                     •
                  ing, wt extorcion, and oppreſſions, and many other like wayes. In keeping,
                  In keping. poſſeſſing and vſing, beſide the feare of care to ſee
                     •
                  e them, they prick with confidēce and truſt in them, with pride, arrogancye and contempt of other, with oppreſſion of right, and equitie, and with looſeneſſe of life procured by thē. For wealth, feedeth riot and wantonneſſe. In looſing, theyIn looſing. pricke with anguiſh and ſorrow, with weping & lamenting, with curſing & ba
                     ••
                  ing, wt murmuring▪ againſt God, with fury & deſperacion, ſo yt many thereby, fal mad, manye diſpatch themſelues out of life. &c. Rightly therfore are they
                     
                        •
                     hy it is ſo h
                        ••
                     d for a riche man to 
                        ••
                      ſaued. reſembled to pricking and dangerous thorns, yea, there is nothing that doth ſo fully poſſeſſe the minde of man, nor ſo mightily pull it from God, and the care of ſaluation, as the ſtudye of riches, and worldly pleaſures doe.
               
                  Wherfore Chriſt ſayth, That it was as eaſie for a Came
                        •
                     
                     Mat. 19. 24. to pa
                        •
                     ſe through the eye of a needle, as for one, whoſe hart was poſſeſſed wt deſire of riches, to enter into y• kingdome of God. The ſame thing in effect, Chriſt teacheth in the parable of y• rich mā, y• made a feaſt for the Mariage of his ſonne, and ſent his meſſengers, to bide the gueſſe, & they refuſed to come, pretending ſundry excuſes: One ſayde, IMat. 22. 
                           •
                        . &c. Luc. 14. 16. haue bought fiue yoke of Oxen, and muſt needes goe to trie thē, I pray thee haue me excuſed: Another ſayd: I haue bought a farm, & muſt go ſe it, I praie thee haue me excuſed, The third ſayd: I haue maried a wife, I cannot come. By this feaſt is ment the Cōmunion of the goſpel,Interpre
                        ••••
                     
                     on of the parable of the gueſtes bidden vnto a feaſte which came not. & benefit of our ſaluatiō purchaced by Chriſt. To this feaſt, men are called by Gods meſſengers, yt is, his Preachers & miniſters of his worde. The excuſes made, ſhewe what cauſes cōmonly they are, yt wthold mens minds from obeying the word of God, & cōming to the goſpell, y• is, theThe cauſes that with holde men from obedience to gods worde. cares of the world, the ſtudy of riches and the pleaſure and pompe of this life, noted by theſe iii. kind of things whereof Chriſt there ſpeaketh. I wold to God theſe impedimēts had choked the worde of God, and hindered the hearing of the Goſpel in Chriſtes time only, and were not of greater force in the hartes of men, at this daye in Englande. If aThe negligence of 
                        •••
                      daies in hea
                     
                        •
                     inge the worde. Preacher come into a Towne vppon a workingdaye▪ it is a rare place, wherein hee ſhall haue a tollerable Auditorye. But if there be a fayre or a marke
                     •
                  , though there be 5000 in the ſtreates, ye ſhal ſcarcely finde 50 in the church. Yea they will murmure, that the Preacher hath choſen ſuch a time to trouble them, and to hinder their market, though it be of a Sabaoth daye, or other vſuall daye appoynted for prayer.
               And what can be the cauſe hereof? but the care of the world, & loue of riches, which maketh them to haue no regard of the word of God, nor of their own ſaluation. Juſtly therefore ſay
                     •
                  h Saint Paule. They that wil be rich fal1. Tim. 6. 
                           •
                        
                      into tentations & ſnares, & into many foliſh & noiſome

luſtes which drowne men vtterly, in perdition and deſtruction. For the deſyre of money, is the roote of all euill, which while men luſted after, they haue erred frō the fayth, and perced themſelues through with manye ſorrowes. Seing therefore theſe buſhes and thornes are ſo dangerous, that they vtterly choke vp the Seede of Gods holye worde caſt into the grounde of mens hartes: it is neceſſarye that there bee prepared ſome Tooles and Inſtrumentes, ſo much as poſſiblie maye bee, to grubbe them out, that the ground may be made more commendable, and fruitfull. Such Inſtrumentes Chriſte himſelfe hath prepared
                     Tvvo meanes to vvithſtand the miſchifes of Riches and vvorldlye cares. Mat. 6. 19. There is no aſſurance to be had of worldly Riches. in S. Mathewes Goſpell. The fyrſte is, the earneſt conſideration of the vanitie and vncertaintie of riches, and worldly wealth and pleaſure, which paſſe from vs ſodainly by many occaſions. It is vttered in theſe wordes: Lay not vp for your ſelues treaſures vppon the earth, where the mothe & canker corrupt, & where Theues dig through and ſteale: but lay vp treaſure for your ſelues in Heauē, where neither mothe nor canker corrupte, nor Theefe breaketh through to ſteale. &c. By the corrupting of 
                     •
                  anker and moath, and by the ſtealing of Theeues, Chriſte noteth all thoſe meanes, whereby the brickle and frayle wealth and pompe of this world, vpon the ſodayne paſſeth from vs, ſo that we can haue no aſſuraunce of them. Therfore Chriſt iuſtly in thoſe words admoniſheth vs, that wee ſhould not ſet our minds vpon ſo vayn thinges, & for them to forſake the eternal riches in heauē, yt neuer ſhal faile vs. Salomō, who aboue all other had good trial of theſe thingsEcieſiaſtes 2. 4. &c. euidently declareth what vanitie is in them: I haue (ſayth he) builded me houſes, I haue planted vyneyards, I haue gotten ſeruants, & maydes, & haue had children borne in the houſe, alſo I had great poſſeſſions of Beeues, and ſheepe, aboue all that were before mee in Hieruſalem, I haue gathered vnto me ſiluer and Gold, and the cheefe treaſure of Kings & Prouinces. &c. And after it foloweth Then I loked on all my works that my hands had made,
                  
                  and on the trauaile that I had laboured in, and beholde all is extreme vanitie, and vexation of ſpirit, neither is there any profite vnder the Sunne. Loe this is Salomons
                  The eſtimation that is to be had of all earthly things. Eſay. 40. 6. iudgement, that vnder the Sunne, all thinges are vaine & vnprofitable. All fleſhe (ſaith the Prophete) is as graſſe, and all the glorie thereof like the floure of graſſe, the graſſe is cut downe and withereth, and the Houre falleth aud fadeth away. Whereby wee are taught, that as mans life it ſelfe is fraile and tranſitorie, ſo are all thoſe thinges wherin it glorieth, and taketh delyght: Honour, Dignitie, Friendſhip, Riches, Health, Stength, Beautie and ſuch like, which all may bee had, and loſt in an houre.Why we ought rather to eſtee me the goſpel then al earth: ly things. And therefore a great vanitie it were, for theſe ſo vayne, fraile, and brickle things, to ſorſake the doctrine of eternall ſaluation, and the vneſtimable treaſures of the kingdome of God. An other inſtrument that Chriſt in the ſame place, hath framed to grubb vp the cares of the world is,That we muſt reſt vpon gods prouidence in our deſiring thinges of this life. Mat. 6. 25. confidence and truſt in the prouidence of God, wherevppon onely, we ought to depend, for all things pertaining to this lyfe, and therfore to bend al our care and ſtudie to ſeeke the kingdome of God, and the glory thereof. Be not carefull, (ſaith he) for your life, what ye ſhall eat or what ye ſhall drinke, or for your bodies what apparell ye ſhal vſe, &c. But firſt of all ſeeke the kingdome of God, & all things ſhall be aboundantly giuen vnto you. This inſtrumentFovver reaſons Vvhy for things of this life, vve shold euer content our ſelues in and vvith Gods prouidence. is ſtrengthened, with ſundry reaſons as it were bondes to faſten the ſame in our heartes. The firſt is, that he which giueth vs the greater things, and of more price, will prouide for vs, and beſtowe vppon vs thoſe things that bee of leſſe value. God hath giuen a lyfe, and a bodye, which in deede are precious giftes, therefore he will not fayle, to prouide meate, drinke and cloth, ſufficient to maintayne the ſame, if wee call vpon him, and repoſe our truſt in hym for the ſame. The ſecond reaſon, is the example of moſt contemptible creatures, if they bee compared, to the worthyneſſe of mankinde, fouies of the aire, Rauens, & Spar
                  
                     •••
                  es,

& flowers of the fielde, which God feedeth, maintaineth, and preſerueth without any carke, care, or labour of theirs: for they neyther ſowe nor reape, nor ſpinne, nor carde. And ſhall not the ſame good, and mercifull Lorde, prouide for his moſt excellent creatures, his owne people, that depend vpon him, & put their truſt in him? The third reaſon, is, the vnſufficiencie of our labour, carke, and care in theſe things, if God giue not good ſucceſſe therevnto. For what man with al his care and diligence can adde one cubite vnto his heigh? &c. The huſbandman wyth great trouble, and toyle, may till the earth, and ſowe his ſeede, but he is not able to make faire weather, & to giue ſeaſonable ſhowres, to temper the grounde, without which his labour is nothing worthe: much leſſe is he able, to giue that ſtrength, and power, to the ſeede to growe in the earth, for that is the onely finger, and mightie power of God, yt workethOrdinarie courſe of things, maketh vs not to regarde Gods wonderfull work in them. in his creatures. Thoſe things that we eſteeme to be ordinarie workes of nature, are in deede wonderfull and myraculous workes of Gods almightie power, dayly ſhewed among vs, and becauſe they be dayly done, wee make ſmalle accompt of them. The laſt reaſon, is, that God our heauenly father, knoweth that wee haue neede of thoſe things, and therefore, for the tender and fatherly care that he hath ouer vs his children, he will not ſuffer vs to want ſo much as ſhall be neceſſarie, & conuenient for vs. Wherefore we ought to bend our whole ſtudie, to ſeeke the kingdome of God, and the glory thereof, and leaue the cares of this world, and the immoderate deſire of earthly ryches, leaſt the ſame pull from vs and extinguiſh in vs, the happie deſire of hearing the worde, and ſo through the deceiptfulneſſe of Riches, the word of God bee vtterly choked in vs, and we of faire bloſſomes become vnfruitefull hearers, and vnfit members for the kingdome of heauen, &c.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A Sermon made vpon this text, John. 8. 46.
            
               Quis ex vobis arguit me de peccato, Si veritatem dico vobis quare non creditis mihi? Which of you can rebuke me of ſinne, and if I ſay the truth why doe yee not beleeue mee?
            
            
               WHen I was aſſigned to this place, and pervſed the Text of the Goſpell for this day, ſeeing the firſt verſe thereof to bee theſe wordes which nowe I haue recited vnto you, I could not but thinke it, to bee ſome part of Gods gracious prouidence, there-by, to put mee in minde, & giue mee full occaſion, to ſpeakeThe occaſion and circumſtances of this texte preached vpon. of thoſe things, which in conſcience, I thinke moſt neceſſarie at this time, and in this place, to bee vttered. Theſe wordes (deerely beloued) are a parte of that notable conference, which was betweene our Sauiour Chriſt, and the Jewes Ioh 8. Wherein both of them, are ſo earneſt in defence of their part, as hardly the lyke is to be found, in the whole hiſtorie of the Euangeliſtes. The Jewes in defence of their Synagogue, denie Chriſt to bee the light of the world, that ſhoulde open the true way of ſaluation to men, but affirme, that he was an a
                  •
               bitious, and vaine glorious man, bearing witneſſe of himſelfe, for his owne credites ſake: yea they ſay, he is a Samaritane, a worker with diuells, a blaſphemer of God, and therefore (laſtly) take vp ſtones, and draue him by violence out of the place: A verye ryght paterne of the enemyes of Chriſt and hys Church. On the other part, Chriſt in deede mooued wyth the true zeale of Gods houſe, after hee had declared, that hee was the lyght of the worlde, which, hee that followed, ſhould not walke in darkeneſſe, but ſee the truth of euerla▪ ſting life, he euidently proueth, that the Jewes were not, as they pretended to bee, the right ſeede of Abraham, for▪
               
then they would doe the workes of Abraham, nor the children of God, for then, they would haue receaued him, who was ſent vnto them from God, but earneſtly affirmeth, that they are of the ſeede, and ofſpring of Sathan, the father of lying, and vntrothe, and therefore euen by very corruption of nature, they could not abyde the truth. Then Chriſtes knowing, that they woulde obiect againſt him, that they denied not his doctrine, becauſe it was the truth, as he charged them, but becauſe he was an euill man, and a ſeducer of the people, and not like a perſon that ſhould deliuer the truth vnto the people of God. Therefore Chriſt to preuent this obiection, wherewith they went about to deface, and diſcredite his doctrine, ſpeaketh in ſuch ſorte as ye haue heard. Quis ex vobis, &c. Which of you can rebuke me of ſinne, &c.
                In which wordes you ſee Chriſt doth two things. Firſt, he ſtandeth to the integritie of hisThe ſpeciall purpoſe of Chriſt in this text here preached vpon. cauſe, euen as well in the vpright dealing in his office, as in Innocencie of lyfe. Secondly, he iuſtifieth the truth of his doctrine, and therefore requireth them, to beleeue it, if they will ſhewe themſelues to be of God in deede. ThisWhat Miniſters ſhold be able to do when their doctrine is diſcredited by their liues. dealing of Chriſt, all Chriſtians generally, but eſpecially, Byſhops, Preachers, and all ſuch as are called to the miniſterie of the word, ought to ſet before their eyes, as a right paterne of their doyngs, if they will be the true Miniſters of Jeſus Chriſt. And theſe two things, I meane wt Gods aſſiſtaunce to ſpeake of at this time, and in this order. Firſt,
               The diuiſion of this Sermon. I will declare what the office of a Preacher, or Miniſter is, by his calling, and what daunger hangeth ouer them, if they doe it not. Secondly, becauſe men may deale wyth good conſciences, and yet be ſubiect to great infamie, and ſclaunders, for euen Chriſt in this place, notwithſtanding his integritie, heard of hys aduerſaryes, Nonne bene dicimus quod Samaritanus es, & daemonium habes? &c. i. Say we not well that thou arte a Samaritaine and haſt the Diuell?
                Therefore I will let you vnderſtande, what blame they deſerue, and what daunger they are in, that falſely &

vncharitably, defame the Miniſters, & Preachers of Gods worde, and truth, of purpoſe to diſcredite their doctrine. Thirdly, I will prooue that the doctrine of the Goſpell, which we haue preached in this land, theſe. 20. yeeres and more, & which vnder hir Maieſties gracious protection, & authoritie of hir lawes, hath bene eſtabliſhed, is the truth, and no truth of doctrine but that, and therefore yt it ought to be beleeued, receaued, and without exception, to bee confirmed, of all them that be of God.
            As touching the firſt, S. Paul ſaith, Sic nos aeſtimet homo.
               1. Cor. 4. 1. 
               &c. Let a man ſo eſteeme vs, as the Miniſters of Chriſt, & the beſtowers of his myſteries. The myſteries
                of God are the true doctrine of ſaluation in Chriſt Jeſu, and al the other benefites, and commodities of his holy word, mentioned by S. Paule to Timothie. A good Biſhop therefore, and2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. The ſpecialties of a preachers duetie. a right Preacher, muſt out of y• holy ſcriptures, teach true doctrine ſincerely, he muſt confute error, ſuperſtition & idolatrie zealouſly, he muſt exhort to vertue earneſtly, he muſt without reſpect of perſons, reproue vice and wickedneſſe boldly and freely, he muſt comfort the afflicted conſcience ſweetely, and gratiouſly. This is the charge, that God layeth vpon vs in his word, very earneſtly, with greeuous daunger, if we doe it not. In Eſay▪
                God ſpeaketh in thysEſay. 40. 9 wyſe, Get thee vp into the high mountaine, thou that teacheſt in Syon, thou that preacheſt the Goſpell in Hieruſalem, lyfte vp thy voyce with ſtrength, lyfte vp thy voyce, I ſaye, and feare not, tell the Cities, that the Lorde their God commeth. You heare that wee are commaunded, to tell the Cities, that is, the particular Churches of Chriſt, that the Lord their God commeth to viſite them eyther in mercy, offering them his worde, and callyng them to repentaunce: or in iuſtice, to puniſh them,Preachers in deliuering gods will, muſt do it openly, without feare or negligence. for the contempt of his worde, and want of repentaunce. And this wee muſt doe, not in ſecrete corners, but in the face of the worlde, for wee muſt ſtande vppon the toppe of

the Mountaine, that we may bee ſeene, and ſhewe our ſelues not aſhamed of the Goſpell. We muſt not doe it ſlackly, but zealouſly, lyfting vp our voyce with ſtrength, wee muſt not doe it coldly, but boldly, fearing no authoritie of man, to Preache Jeſus Chriſt crucified. Againe, in the ſame Prophet, Crie and ceaſe not, lift vp thy voyce, asEſay. 58. 1. a Trumpet, tell my people their iniquitie, and the houſe of Iacob their ſinnes. So that with like earneſt boldneſſe, are wee in this place, willed to crie out agaynſt ſinne, and wickedneſſe, and to tell men plainely, of their iniquitie. In Ezechiell we are compared vnto watchmen,Ezec. 3. 17. that ſhould alway ſtand in the watch tower of the Churche of God, & if wee eſpie either corrupt doctrine, or falſe worſhipping of God, or wickedneſſe of life by any meanes, eyther openly, or colourably to thruſt themſelues into the Church of God, that wee preſently, ring out the alarme,Ezec. 33. 6
                     •
                  
                & ſound the Trumpet, to giue warning to the inhabitants of the Citie of God, the celeſtiall Hieruſalem, that they take heede, and beware of themſelues, otherwiſe, the blood of other that periſh without warning, will be required at our handes. And that men may not thinke, that this charge belongeth to the Prophetes alone, S. Paule to Timothie, and by hym, of all other requireth the ſame. Preache the2. Tim. 4. 2. worde. But howe? Bee earneſt in ſeaſon, & out of ſeaſon: for no time is vnconuenient to Preach true doctrine. And he addeth, Reproue, intreate, rebuke with all patience and doctrine, ſo that if mens obſtinacie bee ſuch that they wyll not amend, wee muſt leaue it to God, and take it patiently. For wee are but planters and waterers, God muſt gyue the ſucceſſe and increaſe. Nowe if our charge bee thus earneſtlye required of vs, as wee are greatly to blame if we doe it not, ſo they that be of God can not miſlike with vs, when wee doe it, though (happily) their owne perſons be touched therewith. But we muſt not teach onely: but we muſt liue alſo accordingly. We muſt be Exemplaria
               
                  
                     •
                   Pet. 5. 3.
               
               gregis. Be thou,
                ſaith Paule to Timothie, an example
               1. Tim. 4. 12 Tit. 2. 7. Preachers muſt giue good example of life anſwerable to their doctrine. 
               to the faithful in word, in conuerſation, in charitie, in faith. And to Titus, Aboue all things bee thou an example of good workes, with vncorrupt doctrine, with grauitie, with integritie.
                And Chriſoſt. God
                (ſayeth he) will not haue a Chriſtian to be contented with himſelf, but to edifie other alſo, and that not in doctrine onely, but in life alſo. For men looke not onely what is ſpokē, but what is done. As there was neuer time more captious, perilous, and daūgerous, then theſe dayes are, ſo was circumſpect walking, neuer more neceſſarie, yt our enimies take not a pretence, by our blemiſhes, to quarrell agaynſt our doctrine. This if we doe, we ſhal be good Miniſters of Chriſt, we ſhal walke in the houſe of God, wt good conſcience, we ſhal be able for any iuſt cauſe, to ſtoppe y• enimyes mouthes, & force them to praiſe God in the day of viſitation: we ſhall be able for mans iudgement, to ſay wt Chriſt, Quis ex vobis, &c. Which of you cā rebuke me of ſinne?
                But if we doe not this, our conſcience muſt needes be heauily burthened, Gods iudgementes (as he threatneth by his Prophetes) will bee greeuous againſt vs, he will raſe vs out of the booke of Iſraell, he will ſet himſelfe agaynſt vs, he wyll feede vs with worme wood, and giue vs water with gaule to drinke: yea he wyl cry out, Woe and curſe againſt vs, as he doth in Jeremie & Ezechiel. Woe
                (ſaith he)Jer. 23. 1. Ezec. 34. 2. Jer. 25. 34. 
               to theſe paſtors that hurt and deſtroye my flocke. And in Jeremie. 25. Howle ye ſheepards and crie, and wallow your ſelues in the aſhes, yee principall of the flocke, for your dayes of ſlaughter are accompliſhed, the flyght ſhall fayle from the ſheepardes, the principall of the flocke ſhall not eſcape, &c.
                In which words, althoughe the Prophet chiefely doth ſpeake of Princes, Magiſtrates, and gouernous of the people of GOD, yet hee comprehendeth alſo thoſe. that hee hath appoynted to direct them, in doctrine and teaching.
            
               What the Byſhops & Preachers, and y• Eccleſiaſticall ſtate of this Realme, haue deſerued, I knowe not, but what the world ſpeaketh of them, and howe men open their mouthes againſt them, I knowe, and with griefe of myWhat is to be thoughe of Miniſters if they liue offenſiuely and how they are to be ſpoken of, and delt with. Mat. 18. 6. harte, I knowe it, and heare it. If wee bee ſuch horrible offences to the Churches of God, as the common voyce of men doth make vs (as before I haue ſayde in this place) Better it were that Milſtones were tyed about our neckes, & we caſt headlong into the Sea, as Chriſt ſpeaketh of them, that giue offence to yt meaneſt of his churche. If wee bee ſo retchleſſe, and negligent, that when wee bee made Byſhops, and haue gotten the Rochet on our backe, wee forget howe to Preache, if we be ſo giuen ouer to the worlde, as wee haue eyther lyttle, or no care at all of our duetie and calling, (as men ſaye to our faces) our faulte muſt needes bee great, neyther can any excuſe bee made. But if wee bee ſo, wee lyue vnder a Prince and lawes,There is more means amongeſt proteſtantes to reforme the miniſtery then amonge papiſtes. vnder Magiſtrates and gouernours, neyther doe wee challenge any exemption, as the annoynted of Rome did, but let our cauſes and crymes bee tryed, wyth ſuche indifferencie, as other States woulde bee contented to bee iudged by, and then let euerye man carye his owne burthen, according to the weight of hys deſertes. I deſire na fauour, eyther for other, or for my ſelfe, although I knowe more faultes by my ſelfe, then I doe by other. Onely this I require, that gnats, bee not turned into Elephantes, and moulehilles be made Mountaynes, that is, ſmall blemiſhes, no faultes in other, horrible and great crymes in vs, onely of affection to deface our calling,It is an ordinarie way of Sathan to diſcredit true doctrine by the life of the 
                     ••
                  eachers. and to diſcredite the Goſpell which wee Preache. Sathan knoweth ryght well (and I feare his cunnyng bee too well learned) that there is no waye ſo fitte, to deface any kynde of doctrine, as by all meanes that maye be, to bryng the Miniſters and Preachers thereof in diſcredite, hatred, and contempt.
            
               There is in the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorye, a notable exampleA very commendable example of concealing Miniſters falts. of that noble Emperour Conſtantine the greate, who after that he had aſſembled the great Councell of Nice, for the ſuppreſſing of the Hereſie of Arrius, and there were aſſembled to the number of 318 Biſhops, whereof the greateſt number, were men of notable fame, as well for life as learning, yet by humayne frayltie, forgetting themſelues, and the principall cauſe that they came for, they began to offer to the Emperour, Libels, and Bils of complaynt, one agaynſt another, blazing euery man the others infirmities, which thing the Emperour greatly miſliking, and foreſeing the great inconuenience that might come thereby, to the Chriſtian fayth, whiche lately before, hee had excepted into his Empire, he would not ſo muche as once looke into the Bils of complayntes, but wrapped them vp togeather and in theire ſighte caſt them into the fyre, with reuerente wordes exhorting them to forget thoſe quarrels, & to bende themſelues wholye to that matter, for whiche principallye they came. So that the Godlye Emperoure did rather indeuour with Sem and Iaphet, to couer the nakedneſſe ofGen. 9. 23. thoſe reuerend men, then with Cham to blaze their infyrmities, to the diſcredit of that religion, which they taught and profeſſed. And yet is it a wonderfull thing to ſee, howA good example admoniſhing princes to beware of ſecreat dealers againſt Miniſters. that ſame wiſe, noble, and Godly Emperour, was ſhortlye after abuſed by certayne pernicious flatterers, and conning workers about him, in his Court, (which were infected with y• hereſie of Arrius) For they made ſuch ſuggeſtion agaynſt that reuerend and great learned Father Athanaſius, that he ſent for him, and not only condemned him, as an obſtinate and ſtiffenecked man, that woulde yeelde to no conformitie, for quietneſſe of the Church, but alſo caſt him into baniſhment into Fraunce, where he remayned all the time of his Empyre afterward, vnto the very great hinderaunce of true Chriſtian fayth, and to the aduauncing and ſpreading abroade, of that wicked and deteſtable Hereſie of Arrius.
            
            
               A verye not able Example for all Princes to take hede, howe by ſecrete Suggeſtions, they bee caryed to thinke euill, of the Miniſters and Preachers of Goddes truth. Surelye I muſte confeſſe, that the State of the Miniſterye of the Churche of Englande, is not ſo perfecte, by muche, as it oughte to bee, and yet I muſte needes ſaye this, and in the feare of GOD, tell it you playnelye, that ſince Englande did beare the name of a Chriſtyan Churche, there were neuer ſo manye in it, ſo well furniſhed with Gods Giftes, nor ſo well able oute of the holye Scriptures to deliuer the true waye of Saluation vnto his people, as there are at this daye, and I praye GOD make this Lande thankfull for it, otherwiſe, it will fall out to their heauy iudgemente. Neuertheleſſe, I confeſſe that there be ſome that are to bee lamented, ſome that are to bee prayde for, and ſome for whom, men are bounde in Conſcience to giue GOD▪ greate thankes for. And therefore great vncharitableneſſe is it, to wrappeAll Miniſters a
                     •
                   not to be ill ſpoken of, bicauſe ſome deſerue it, and yet though they ſhall be ſo ill delt with, they haue to be patient. them all in one Sentence of Condemnation, and contempte. But the beſt canne looke for no better intertaynemente, in theſe miſerable latter dayes, then beefore them the Prophets, the Apoſtles, and the Reuerende Fathers of the Primatiue Churche, hadde in theyre tyme, whiche doing their duetyes faythfullye, and Godlye, were notwithſtanding, burthened with moſt haynous, and cruel crimes: Yea that immaculate lambe of GOD1. Pet. 1. 19. Chriſte our Sauyour, who in this place did and mighte iuſtlye ſaye. Quis ex vobis arguit me de peccato? &c. Which of you canne rebuke mee of Sinne?
                yet ſcaped not, and was amonge men contemned as a Drunkarde, as a Glutton, as a Friend and fauourer of Publicanes, and Sinners, as a Coniuror, and worker with Deuils, as a ſeducer of the people, as a Samaritane and Enimye to his Countrey, as a Traytor and Aduerſary to the Prince, for, Si hunc dimittis▪ non esamicus Caeſaris: If you let this
               
               Joh. 1
                     •
                  . 12. 
               man go, you are not Ceſars friende.
            
            
               Therefore if they did this to the Maiſter of the houſholde, the poore ſillie ſeruauntes of the Familie, maye not diſdayne, if they haue no better curteſye. And yet the fault of them, that ſo abuſe them, muſt needes bee verye greate, whereof I haue nowe nexte to ſpeake. That is, what blame they deſerue, whiche eyther maliciouſlye, or vntruelye, or vppon anye other ſi
                  •
               iſter affection, by falſe reportes, ſeeke to diſcredite the Preachers of Gods worde.
            And herein I will onelye note vnto you two or three poyntes, wherewith they vniuſtly and maliciouſly burthen Biſhoppes, and other Preachers in theſe dayes, to the diſcredite of the Goſpell. As for priuate & euery ſeueral mens faults, I will not medle withall. If they be true, they muſt needes bee greate burthens to oure Conſciences: if they bee falſe, for my parte, I ſmallye eſteeme them, and ſo woulde I wiſhe the other to doe. Onelye I will touche thoſe things, wherewith the Doctrine is more blemiſhed, then we our ſelues diſcredited. The firſte thing is, thatThe firſt faul
                     •
                   obiected againſt preachers and the anſvvere. they blame vs for that, whiche oughte to bee our greateſt commendation. For if in our Sermons we deliuer the truth of Doctrine vnto the people of God, and entring into anye controuerſie of Religion, ſomewhat zealouſlye reprooue the erroures, ſuperſtition and Idolatrye, of late vſed in the Churche: Oh, ſaye ſome, in ſome places, (and happilye in this place too) What neede this vehemency, in theſe matters? theſe thinges bee baniſhed by Lawe, and by Authoritie of the Prince. No manne dare auowe them, no man thinketh nowe, of the Supremacye of Roome, of praying to Sayntes, of praying for the deade, of Pardones, of Purgatorye, of Images, they are cleane out of mennes myndes: I praye you Sy
                  •
                exhorte to Vertue, and deterre from Vyce, ſo Preache that you maye make vs the better lyuers▪ Nowe GOD for his mercye ſake, giue vs that grace, and poure into our hartes that mighte of his Spirite, that nowe yet at the length

after ſo many yeares, oure wordes maye worke in theire hartes, to that effect. I pray God alſo, that ſuch ſpeeches,Godlineſſe may bee by ſome preten ded who loth true doctrin. as they vſe in this caſe, proceede not rather of a loathing to heare true Doctrine caught, then of a longing to learne better life. For ſure I am there were neuer Preachers in any age, that either more directly, or ſoundly according to the rules of Gods worde, haue exhorted to vertue, neuer more terribly and boldly thundred agaynſte vyce and wickedneſſe, then (God be thanked) a number haue done in this Church, for the ſpace of this 20 yeares. And yet I muſte tell you playnely, I ſee as little fruite of that, as I doe of Doctrine, and leſſe too. For in Doctrine they make ſome pretence, in amendment of life, none at all. And therefore ſeing both zeale of true doctrine decayeth, & ſtudy of Godly life nothing increaſeth, no maruayle though God, eare it be long, ſhew his heauy iudgementes agaynſte vs. And this I muſt ſay farther to them, that deſyre vertue onely toNone can haue good conuerſation which at not ſound in doctrine. Heb. 11. 6. be preached of, and no doctrine, that they ſhall neuer haue that vertuous and honeſt life, that ſhal be acceptable in the ſight of God, vntill the perſwaſion of true fayth, and righte religion be placed in their hartes. For, Without fayth, it is impoſſible to pleaſe GOD, and whatſoeuer is notRom. 14. 23 of Fayth, is ſinne, thoughe it ſeeme neuer ſo goodly, in the ſight of men. Neither is there any other true fayth,Faith foloweth doctrine. then that which is grounded vpon true doctrine, out of the word of God. For, Fides ex auditu, auditus per verbum Dei,
               Ro. 10. 17. 
               Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, But happily theſe loathers of Doctrine, and louers of vertue, be of this opinyon, that if a man liue well, hee ſhallNo man can be ſaued for any good life when he hath not true faithe. bee ſaued, howe ſoeuer hee beleeue, whether hee bee Jewe, Turke, Saraſin, or Papiſte (for ſome there bee that thinke ſo) Quorum damnatio iuſta eſt, Whoſe damnation is iuſt.
                For if that ſhould be ſo, the wiſdome ofRom. 3. 8. God hath greatly ouer reached it ſelfe, the ſonne of God tooke fleſhe and dyed in vayn, the ſcriptures are falſe, our religion is voyde, and our fayth is fruſtrate. But ſurelye

theſe be thoſe dayes, that S. Paule prophecied of. The2. Tim. 4. 3 Contemners of doctrine were foretolde of to come. time ſhall come, fayth he, whē men ſhall not abide ſound doctrine, but hauing itching eares, ſhall frame vnto thē ſelues preachers according to theire owne phantaſyes, and ſhall turne their eares from the truth, For if we doe, as theſe men would haue vs to doe, leaue doctrine, & preach of manners, ſo that it bee done in generalitie, with ſome ſhew of eloquence, and enterlacing of fyne ſhort ſenteuces, it is tollerablye thoughte of, and vſed ſomewhat lyke, as GOD ſpeaketh of to Ezechiell, As a ieſt and ſong of aEze. 33. 32. How little their owne methode would profite them of teachinge manners without doctrine. How the enemies of truth diſlike particuler reprehenſion. pleaſaunt Muſitian. But ſo ſoone as the ſweete tune, and note of the eloquence, is out of their eares, the Dittie and matter is cleane forgotten, and they remayne the ſame perſons, that they were before, bee the thinge neuer ſo good that was ſpoken. But if wee ſpeake of anye matter particularlye, and come ſo nigh them that they feele their conſciences nipped and touched, then are they greued with this diſeaſe, Noli me tangere, Touche mee not.
                Then the Preacher rayleth, hee wanteth wiſedome, hee hath neede to go to a Schoole of Diſcretion: hee medleth with thoſe matters that he ſhould not.
            In deede I woulde not wiſhe, eyther Preachers, or any other Subiectes to enter into Councell Chambers, and openly to deale in the conſultation of Princes, or controuerſyes of the State, ſo long as they bee conſultations, but if any matter breake oute in facte, contrarye to the Lawe of God, eyther in the fyrſte or ſeconde Table, which toucheth eyther religion, and the true worſhipping of god, or the order of iuſtice and charitie among Chriſtians, I ſee not, but that euery good Preacher maye, and in duetye ought to ſpeake agaynſt them, and to denounce the perill thereof, euen to the face of the offendoures, vnleſſe wee will bee contented, that the blood of them that periſh without warning, ſhould be required at our hands, which is too heauy for any mortall creature to beare.
            Therefore ſeeing the mynde of men in theſe dayes bee

ſo ouerthwarte, and waywarde, wee whome GODThe meanes now left to the miniſters to redreſſe the curioſitie and obiection, of hearers, for preaching either of doctrine or manners. hath placed for the Miniſterye of his worde, haue great cauſe to praye vnto him, that hee will aſſiſte vs, not onely with that ſpirite of integritie, as well in office as life, whereof Chriſt here ſpeaketh, that with confidence of conſcience, wee maye bee able to ſaye (for the iudgementes of men) Quis ex vobis. &c. Which of you can rebuke me of ſinne?
                But alſo that he will indue vs with that ſpirituall ſtrength, which in like caſe, he promiſeth to his Prophets Ieremy. and Ezechiell, that is, that he will make vsIer. 1. 18. ſtrong cities, yron pillers, and braſen walles, agaynſt them that oppugne in vs God and his truth: and if they do make ſtiffe their neckes, and harden their faces as ſtones agaynſtEze. 3. 8. the Lord, & his preaching to repentaunce, that he wil make vs alſo, to haue faces of flinte or Adamante, that maye not bluſh or be abaſhed, to let them vnderſtande it. For 
                  •
               urteous talking and ſhame faſt ſpeaking will not ſerue.
            Another crime, that they lay agaynſt vs, and that withThe ſecond crime obiected againſt preachers to diſcredit their doctrine and the anſvvere to it. great daunger is, that wee are ſeditious and contentious men in common weales, daungerous to States and Principalities, neuer contented, but ſtill ſeeking alterations, and ſtudying to bring al ſtates to y• 
               Swizers cōmon weale, & here with charge they not only vs that be Preachers, but alſo all thoſe y• be true & ſincere profeſſors of the Gaſpell. What the Swizers common weale is, I partly vnderſtand, but I neuer yet hearde, nor reade, of any man that was of this opinion, that all principalities ought to bee broughte either to the forme therof, or any one other. Or if there be anye ſuch, out of my knowledge I muſte ſaye vnto him Anathema, if hee were an Aungell in Heauen. For theAll common weales are not to be tied to one forme of gouernement. Doctrine of GOD teacheth no ſuch thing, but that all Chriſtian Subiectes ſhould content themſelues with that forme of gouernemēt, vnder which God hath placed them, and by prayer, and all other honeſt, and Godlye meanes of obedience, ſtudie to preſerue and maintain the ſame. Therfore they that laye this to oure charge, doe deſyre maliciouſly,

to deface the word of God, and his truth. But thisTo be diſ
                     •••
                   bers of common weales &c. is no new ſlaunder no
                     •
                   now firſt obiected againſt gods true miniſters. 1. Reg. 18. 1. Reg. 22. 8. Jer. 38. 4. is the olde meanes where with the Serpent Sathan, by his politique Inſtrumentes, hath alwayes indeuoured, to make odious to Princes and Magiſtrates, the Prophets, preachers, and Miniſters of Gods word. So was it ſayde of Helias, and Micheas, That they troubled Iſraell, that they were enimies to the King, & neuer ſpake any thīg that was pleaſaunt to him. So was it ſayde of Hieremias, That he was a Traytor to his Countrey, that he had conſpired with the Babilonians, and bare no good harte to the Prince. So was it ſayd of Amos, That the earthAmos. 7. 10 might not abide the words, that he had ſpoken to King Jeroboam.
                So was it ſayde of the Apoſtles and Fathers of the Primatiue Churche, in ſo muche, that the name of a Chriſtyan in thoſe dayes, was in that ſtate, as nowe in ſome Countreyes, the name of a Proteſtante or Goſpeller is. That, is a ſufficiente cauſe, to drawe men in daunger of goodes, Landes, lyfe, and al that hee hath, though there bee no other matter in the worlde to charge them. And theſe men ſtudye to make their accuſation probable, by thoſe ſturres, that of late yeares haue fallen out in Germany, Flaunders, Fraunce, Scotland, and (as they ſaye) here in Englande too. But it is a wonderfull thing to ſee, how affection blindeth men, that either they cannot, or will not ſeeContention and warres haue been in other nations before the renewing of the goſpel. the truth. Were there neuer ſturres, rebellions, or vndutifull dealinges towarde Princes, in Flaunders, Fraunce, and Scotlande, before theſe late yeares of the re
                  ••
               ing of the Goſpell? If they thinke ſo, they knowe nothing, and erre of ignoraunce, and by ignoraunce ſeeke to miſleade other: but if they know it to be otherwiſe (as needes they muſte, if they haue reade anye thing) then erre they of malice, and purpoſely ſeeke to deface God his Miniſters, andEngland hath euer bene ſo farre from contentions and warres, as ſince it hath 
                     ••••
                  aſed the late renuing of the goſpel and the wars that haue bene, haue not bene by proteſtants. his truth. As for the Realme of Englande all men knowe, that for the ſpare of theſe fyftie yeares, or more, there hath ſcante bene two Princes ſo happy, as to ſcape wt one Rebellion in theyre tyme. To lette paſſe other, and to

ſpeake of thoſe thinges, that are in oure rememberaunce. Were they Proteſtantes that rebelled in the tyme of king Henrie? Were they all Proteſtantes that rebelled in the time of that bleſſed Babe, King Edwarde the ſixte? Were they Proteſtantes that rebelled in the Queenes Maieſties time, that nowe is? They cannot, nor (I thinke) they will not, ſay it for ſhame. The Meſſengers and ſeditious Fyrebrandes, that inflamed that ſtyrre, are well knowne to be Engliſhe Romaniſtes, and Louaniſtes, as euen nowe they doe indeuour the like. Is it vnknowne to anyA principle of papiſtrie againſt principalities, and which can not but occaſion wars. man, that it is a principle of their Doctrine, that if a Prince be not a friend to the Sea of Roome, be his Title otherwiſe neuer ſo good, yet he is an vſurper, or if any mā be ignoraunt thereof, lette him looke into Saunders Monarchie, and there beſide ſhamefull, and deteſtable treaſon towarde her Maieſties perſon and ſtate, he ſhall finde good ground of that opinyon layde, and yet forſooth ProteſtantsPapiſts and not proteſtantes alter titles of principalities. muſt be the daungerouſts Subiects vnto Princes. I pray you of what profeſſiō are they, that haue altered the title of al the principalities almoſte in Europe? of Arragon? of Na
                  
                     •
                  are? of Italy? of Naples? of Sicyly? of Fraunce? of Germany? of the Empyre both of the Weaſte and of the Eaſte? And what the Pope challengeth at this day for the principalitie of England, & Ireland
                  
                euer ſince King Iohn his time, euery man that hath read the Engliſh Chronicles knoweth. Of what profeſſyon are they that ſay they haue all temporallPapiſts and not proteſtants challenge all temporall power due to princes. power immediatelye of God, and all Princes to holde the ſame as feodaryes vnto them? And therefore haue they exempted their annoynted Clergye, from all ſecular power and authoritie, and haue ſo tyed Chriſtian Princes, that they maye not drawe theire owne Sworde of Juſtice,Moſt vnnatural and vndutifull warres lawfull by papiſts doctrine. nor doe anye thing in theire owne Dominions, but at the becke and appoyntment of the Sea of Roome, and then mighte the Father drawe the Sworde againſte the ſonne, and the ſonne agaynſte the Father, and Brother againſt brother, & finally, all ſubiects againſt their Prince.

Yea in all Countries they did ſet ſhackles and fetters vponHow papiſts do vnlawfully ouerrule and abuſe princes. Princes to bridle them, that they might do nothing, but that was liking to them, I meane, they ſette ſome of theire owne Court, in euery region, (as it were) to keepe vnder the Prince, and to ſee euen into his ſecrete dealings, ſuch as Thomas Becket and Stephen Lancton, were inThe full right of authoritie is only by proteſtants graunted to princes▪ and by them alſo (only) reſtored, being taken away by papiſtes. this lande. Which I doubt not but godly and wyſe Princes, and counſellers will conſider, and ſpecially, call to remembrance, that the honorable ſtate, dignitie, and Maieſtie of Princes, was continually troden vnder foote, vntill it was within this 40. or 50. yeeres, that it pleaſed God, to reſtore into the world, the light of his Goſpel, and by the Preachers therof, out of his holy word, did let the Princes vnderſtand, the right, & authoritie of their dignitie, which before was kept from them. Therefore great iniurie doe they in theſe dayes whoſoeuer they bee, that ſeeke to perſwade Princes, that the Preachers & profeſſors of the Goſpell, be the moſt daungerous ſubiects, and the Papiſtes (or at leaſt the good indifferent men, which paſſe not which way religion goeth, but keepe themſelues ſafe for all chaū
               ges,) to be the beſt, moſt quiet, and aſſured faithfull ſubiectes. But the euent wyll teach godly Princes, and wyſe counſellers, the contrarie. But whatſoeuer others ſhall doe, I doubt not but that mightie, and mercifull God, that raiſed our gratious Soueraigne out of the duſt of death, and pulled hir out of the Lyons deune, and out of y• iawes of hir greedie enimies, gaping for hir deſtruction, & to our vneſtimable comforte, and benefite, ſet hir in the Royall throne of this lande, to the ende that ſhe might bee a nourſing mother, vnto the church of God; and this land a nourſery, for the Goſpell of Chriſt, and a place of refuge, for the afflicted ſaintes of God in theſe miſerable dayes, and for that ende, and purpoſe, hath myraculouſly defended, preſerued, and maintained hir, againſt all the deuiſes, and pollicies of our enimyes, and not onely ſ
                  •
               , but hath made hir, being but a woman, dreadfull to hir mightieſt enimies,

and the eſpeciall worldlye comforte, that the Saintes of God, and the true profeſſors of his Goſpell, haue in theſe dayes, againſt all the daungerous enimyes (then which things, greater honour could neuer be done vnto Prince.) And therefore I ſaye, I doubte not, but that the ſame God wyll alſo at thys time, lighten hir mynde, and direct, and ſtrengthen hir heart, that by no colour of cunning, or flattering counſell, ſhee ſhall be caried away, eyther to forſake3. Reg. 11. hir gratious Lorde God, as Salomon dyd, or conceaue heauie diſpleaſure againſt the Miniſters of Gods trueth, as2. Chro. 24. Good ſubiects haue to pray in this ſorte for hir Maieſtie. vnkinde Joas dyd. And that this may bee ſo, wee haue all great cauſe, moſt earneſtly to deſire it of God, in our continuall prayers.
            A third matter wherwith Preachers be vniuſtly burdened in theſe daies, is, y• they ar charged, not only with theirThe third matter obiected againſt Preachers, and the anſvvere therof. owne ſinnes, and offences (which god knoweth are too many) but with the ſlackneſſe & wickedneſſe of al other. For vpon vs only they lay al the whole fault, of the ſmal fruite y• the doctrine of the Goſpell, hath taken here in this land, now for the ſpace of this twentie yeares. Oh, ſaye they, if we had good and zealous Biſhops, and godlye Preachers, ſuch as the Apoſtles were, vndoubtly, this doctrine of the Goſpel, would haue had better ſucceſſe, and more woulde haue preuayled in mens hartes: For they are not zealous, nor ſeeme themſelues to be moued with the ſpirit of God, therefore it cannot be, that they ſhoulde moue other. O (dearely beloued) though this reaſon ſeemeth plauſible to ſome, yet I aduertice all them, that haue anye ſparke ofGods people do neuer make the want of godlineſſe in the preacher, to be the cauſe that good doctrine ſhold not fructifie in the heaters. Gods feare in their hartes, that they take heede of it, & beware that they be not caryed awaye with it. For I neuer read, that the people of God among whome true doctrine hath 
                  •
               in preached (as the Lord be thanked it hath bin with vs) did euer vſe ſuch allegation, for their owne defence, It hath bene alwayes the pretence of the reprobate, and wicked, to excuſe, and colour their owne obſtinacie, and contempt of Gods word, when they were offered the light of

the Goſpell, and called to repentance. But that theſe men may not flatter, nor deceaue themſelues, I let them vnderſtand, that the Scriptures doe in no place teach them, that the offences, and faultes of the Miniſters, and Preachers, are alwayes, the onely cauſe, why the worde of God, doth not take place in mens heartes. It is more commonly, andWhat the Scriptures ſh
                     •
                  w to be the cauſe moſt commonly, why true doctrine doth not fru
                     •
                  
                  tifie. almoſt alwayes imputed vnto the waywardnes, vnthankfulneſſe, and obſtinacie of the people that heare it. Therefore it were good for all ſortes of men, of what calling ſoeuer, to looke into their owne 
                  •
               ooſomes, and carefully to conſider, whether the fault thereof, bee not in themſelues, for they knowe, the Maiſter may be learned and diligent,The ſame ſhewed by ſimilitudes. and yet the ſcholler, not thriue, by reaſon of his owne dulneſſe. The Phiſition, may be honeſt, & ſkilfull, & the obſtinate patient, make light of hys wholſome Counſell. The ſeede may bee good, and the ſeede ſower a painful & honeſt perſon, & yet the fruite not to bee aunſwerable, to hys trauaile, becauſe of the naughtines, & barrennes of yt ground. This our ſauiour Chriſt teacheth vs in the parable of the ſeedeſower Matth. 13. The ſower
                (ſaith he) went out toVerſe. 3. ſowe the ſeede, and ſome fell in the high way, that is, into the harts of them, that were continually trampled with wicked and naughtie cogitations, ſo yt the ſeede, could not ſinke into their harts, but by thoſe birdes of ye Diuell, was caried away wtout fruit. Some fell in ſtonie ground, that is, into ſuch hartes as wanted the good iuice, & moiſture of gods holy ſpirit, & therfore when the heate of perſecution ariſeth, their zeale is withered, & they reuolt frō the truth. Some fell into buſhie ground, that is, into the mindes of them, yt were troubled wt the eares of this worlde, with the loue of riches, & with ye pleaſures of this life, which wholly chaked vp ye good ſeede of ye Goſpel of Chriſt, ſo yt it coulde not in any wiſe proſper, & bring forth fruite. Here you mayTruth may be preached, and yet three to one, take no fruit by it. perceaue, that for one fourth parte of good grounde, that yeldeth fruit of y• doctrine of God, there are three greater partes of euil ground, wherin, it nothing at al proſpereth▪
               
I would to God there were leſſe ſtore of theſe euil grounds in this land, & then vndoubtedly ſhould we ſee greater ſucceſſe of the Goſpell, & more ample fruit of our Preaching. It were good for men, to looke that theſe quarrellings at other mens liues, be not one of thoſe cords of vanitie that Eſay ſpeaketh of in the. 5. Chap. Woe bee to them, ſaythVerſe. 18. God by Eſay, that drawe on iniquitie with cordes of vanitie,
               
               Of colouring wickedneſſe with other mens faltes. 
               and ſinne, as it were with a Cartrope. That is: Wo bee to them that imagine excuſes and coloures to nouſle, & maintaine themſelnes, in contempt of Gods worde, and want of repentaunce.
            Let men take heede of ſuch dealing, that ſuch cordes ofWhat a mans flattering of him ſelfe in wickedneſſe may come vnto. Eſay. 5. 19. vanitie, pull not on iniquitie, ſo faſt, that it drawe men to vtter contempt, and deriſion of god, and his truth. For ſo it followeth, euen in the ſame place immediately, which ſaye in this manner in deriſon of the Preaching of ye Prophets, Let God make ſpeede, let him haſten his worke, that wee may ſee it, and let the counſell of the holy one of Iſrael drawe neere, and come, that wee may knowe it. And in lyke manner ſay the wicked, and vnrepentant people of the Iewes Iere. 5. They haue denied the Lord, and
               
               Verſe. 12 
               ſaid, it is not he, tuſhe, the ſworde, and the plague, ſhall not come vpon vs, neither ſhall wee ſee it. The threatnings of the Prophetes, are but winde, and the true worde of God, is not in them, they vtter their owne phantaſies, & theſe things ſhall come to themſelues, and we ſhall liue here liuely, brauely, and gallantly, as wee haue before time. Euen with like contempt and deriſion many at theſe dayes abuſe y• Preachers of Gods word. If we exhort Princes, Magiſtrates, and Rulers to frame their purpoſes and deuiſes according to the worde of God, and in Gods cauſes to lay aſide humaine pollicie, (becauſe vnleſſe God builde the houſe, in vaine he laboureth thatPſal. 127. buildeth it, and if the Lorde keepe not the Citie, the watchman waketh but in vaine.) Oh, ſaye ſome of them, theſe Preachers lacke experience and diſcretion, they are fooles,

they are vnſkilfull, they knowe not what pertaineth to the pollicie of gouernment. It is ſufficient for Princes and rulers to ſhewe themſelues Religious, although in deede they bee not. For ſo howled that Monſter Machiuell, the poyſon of Princes Courtes, and noble houſes. If to confirme mē in the defence of Gods truth, we lay before them the aſſured promiſes of Gods aſſiſtaunce, that he wyll not ſuffer a heare of their heades to periſhe, that for their ſafetie, he will cauſe his Angels to campe aboute them, yea thoughe they were in the valley of the ſhadowe of death, yet they ſhoulde not neede to feare, becauſe the Lorde is wyth them, thoughe people frette and fume, though Princes of great power conſulte and laye their heades together agaynſt the Lorde, and agaynſt his annoynted, yet he that ſitteth in heauen wyll defeate their purpoſes, and laughe them to ſcorne (for ther is no power, there is no wyſedome, there is no Counſell agaynſt the Lorde:) theſe ſaye they bee the ſweete dreames of doting Preachers, wherewyth they nuſle Princes in idleneſſe and ſecuritie, and by vayne confidence in the prouidence of God, cauſe them to lay themſelues open to the daunger of their enymyes, as thoughe euen in theſe dayes wee dyd not ſee the defenders of thys their Religion to haue ſuſtayned greate ouerthrowes and ſlaughters, at their aduerſaryes handes. When wee laye before men terrible threatnings of Gods wrathe and indignation, if they reuolte from the trueth of the Goſpell, or ſuffer the ſame to bee betrayed into the handes of the enimye, ſaying, that GOD wyll forſake them, that hee wyll take hys defence from them, that hee wyll ſette hys face agaynſt them, that hee wyll bryng ſtraungers vppon them to deſtroye theyr Countrey, and poſſeſſe their great landes and goodlye buyldynges: Manye crye, that the Preachers bee peeuiſhe, and for feare of theyr owne ſtate raue in follye. For they thinke if Religion bee altered, that they ſhall firſt goe

to wracke, but they haue ſmall care and proſpect, howe to mayntayne the ſtate of their Countrey in ſafetie. Thus doe they continuallye knitte Cordes of vanitie, to drawe them ſelues into iniquitie and contempte of GOD, and all this commeth to paſſe (as I ſayde before) becauſe they looke ſo muche vppon other mennes doinges, that they cleane forget their owne. They ſhall doe well to followe Chriſtes Councell, that they fyrſt Take the beame out of their owne eyes, and then ſhallMath. 7. 3. they better ſee to take the moate out of their brothers.
            
            They maye not thinke that God is the God of the EccleſiaſticallOthers muſt liue well, howſoeuer Miniſters do liue. ſtate onely, or that the Scriptures of GOD, doe preſcribe onelye their dueties, with greeuous threatning if they perfourme it not: Nay, he is the God of the whole people, and of all the ſtates, and conditions thereof. Of Parentes and Children, of Maiſters and Seruantes, of Huſbandes and Wiues, of Lawyers & Counſellers, of Marchants & all other Occupiers, yea he is the GOD of Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, of Lordes and Ladyes, of Princes, Magiſtrates, Rulers, & Gouernours, & all their dueties in his holy worde hee preſcribeth, and againſt all them he ſpeaketh, and with terrible threates in hys Prophetes, he thundreth, as much or more, then he doth againſt euill Miniſters, and Preachers. And more oftentimes, he noteth their vices, & faultes, to bee the cauſe of thoſe great plagues, & vtter deſolations which he threatneth to bring vppon his people. Reade the. 1. 3. 5. 30. Chapters of Eſay. Reade the, 5. 8. 21. 22. 25. of leremie, & almoſt all the parts of the Prophets, and you ſhal perceaue this to be moſt true. I woulde ſtaye vpon ſome examples, but that I myght be thought, to touche ſome things too nyghly. Therefore all theſe ſortes of people▪, as well as the Miniſters of Gods worde for their vocations, ought to bee able to ſaye, wythWhat perfection ſholde be in the life of euery one. and of the application of the text therein.
                Chriſt in this place, Quis ex vobis arguit me de peccato? Which of you can rebuke mee of Sinne?
                Which of you

is able to accuſe vs, that we liue looſely, in chambering & wantonneſſe, or riotouſlye, in banqueting & drunkenneſſe, or contentiouſly, in ſtriefe and enuie, or maliciouſly, ſeeking to ſupplant one an other? Which of you is able to accuſe vs, that wee pull downe Townes, and incloſe whole fieldes, to feede wylde beaſtes, & famiſh a number of Chriſtian people? or that we ioyne houſe to houſe, lande to land, with oppreſſion of the poore, as thoughe wee woulde lyue alone vppon the face of the earth. Which of you is able toThe meanes wherby the wealth of England is waſted. ſaye, that wee waſt the treaſure of the lande, in feedyng three Cankers, riotouſly to conſume the ſame, I meane, Monſtrous Vanitie in Apparell, Needeleſſe pompe in Sumptuous building, and Exceſsiue charge in daintie feeding? Which of you, is able to ſay, that in all our doings, we ſet not the feare of God before our faces, & make not his holy word the directiō of all our deuiſes? Which of you, I ſay, is able to accuſe vs, in any of all theſe things? If all men, in all ſtates and conditions, bee able with good conſcience thus to ſay: Surely this lande is bleſſed. But Heauen and earth ſeeth, and the Lorde knoweth, that it is not ſo in a number, yet God forbyd, for that number, that we ſhould condemne all. God hath his, in euery ſtate and condition of man.
            Nowe come I to the thirde parte, contayned in the ſecond ſentence of my Theame. Si veritatem dico vobis, quare non creditis mihi? If I ſay the truth why doe you not beleeue mee?
                Wherein I promiſed, to let you vnderſtande, that the doctrine of the Goſpell, which we haue Preached in this lande by the ſpace of this. 20. yeeres, and that hath beene confirmed, and eſtabliſhed, by the authoritie of the Prince, & lawes of this Realme, is the onely truth, & that there is no truth of doctrine but it, & therfore, yt you ought both faythfully without exception to embrace it, and conſtantly, wythout reuolting to abyde in it. But mee thinketh I heare ſome ſay: Sir, if you coulde reſolue vs, that it is the trueth whiche you Preache, wee would eaſilye

receaue it, but wee may iuſtly doubt of it. For ye are but men, and ſuch men, as carie their blemiſhes openly in the ſight of the world, ye may be deceaued, and deceaue others. As good Clarkes as you, and as honeſt men, for any thing wee ſee, teache vs the contrarie, and ſay their doctrine is the truth, or at the leaſtwyſe, wee may iuſtly thinke, that thoſe great contentions, that you make againſt yt Churche of Rome, are but for trifling ceremonies, and matters of ſmall weight and importance, and therefore, that Chriſtian Princes, might do ver
                  •
               e well, to ſee ſome order for thoſe matters, and to force you to agree, for the reſidue, whether you will or no, that you may no longer trouble the worlde, as you haue done, theſe many yeeres, with theſe needeleſſe controuerſies. Surely, that they wyll not receaue our doctrine with triall, I can not miſlike it, for S. Iohn in his 1. Epiſt. 4. cap. giueth them the ſame Counſell, DeerelyVerſe. 1. Doctrine is to be receaued vpon triall. beloued (ſaith he) beleeue not euery ſpirit that ſpeaketh to you, but trie the ſpirites whether they be of God or not, for many falſe Prophetes are come into the world. Therefore I would to God all ſortes of men, but chiefely, Princes, Counſellers, and Magiſtrates, would trie our doctrine, by the true touchſtone of Gods word, as thoſe noble Conuerts of Berrhaea did, mētioned in y• 
               Act. 17▪
                  
                whichVerſe. 17. came to heare Paules Sermons, not of cuſtome, and faſhion onely, But dayly ſearched the Scriptures, whether thoſe things were true, that Paule ſpake, or no. If GodHow to perceaue proteſtants to haue truth, and of what weight the matters are wherein they differ from papiſts. would moue them, ſo to doe, they ſhould eaſily vnderſtand, not onely, that our doctrine were the truth, but alſo that the controuerſie betweene vs, and the Church of Rome, is not for trifling Ceremonies (as they ſaye) or matters of ſmall weight, but for the very ſubſtaunce of our fayth, and ground of all Chriſtian Religion, and that there can bee made no more agreement betwene our doctrine and theirs, then betweene light and darkeneſſe, truth and error, God and Beliall, Chriſt & Antichriſt, which thing, it behoueth all Chriſtians, and profeſſors of the Goſpell, deepely to

conſyder. For as before time often, I haue ſayde in this place, ſo now thinke I, the time draweth nigh, that Godds iuſtice, for our vnthankefulneſſe, will pull vs to the tryall of our fayth, and therefore it behooueth vs to vnderſtande, that we contend not for trifles, but for matters of principall importance, as I mean now to declare vnto you. And if ſom perſons ſhall thinke theſe poyntes needeleſſe to be ſpoken of in this place, I humbly craue leaue, that for the confyrmation of mine own fayth, I may declare vnto you y• grounds of my conſcience, that if euer I liue to be tempted, to forſake my Lorde God, and his truth, that this my proteſtation made in this place, may bee a bonde vnto my conſcience.
            The rule that I will vſe to prooue, that our Doctrine is the truth, and not that which commeth from Rome, ſhal be the ſame, that the Scripture of God layeth downe by S.1. Ioh. 4. 1. 
               Iohn, in the place before mentioned, where after he hath, as you haue heard, admoniſhed men to trye the Spirites, whether they be of God or no, hee addeth theſe meanes of triall. Euery Spirite that confeſſeth Chriſt to haue come1. Ioh. 4. 2. &c. in fleſh, is of God, and euery ſpirite, that denieth Chriſt to haue come in fleſh, is not of God, but is the Spirit of Antichriſt, of whome you haue heard howe hee ſhoulde come, and now already is he in the worlde. Nowe that you may vnderſtande, I go not about to deceaue you with ſhewe of eloquence, and Rhethoricall amplifications, and with motions of affections, to leade you into erroure, ear
                  •
                you be ware, I will laye open myne argumente vnto you, nakedly, and barely that you may ſee euery ioynt thereof, and with your ſelues conſyder of what force it ought to bee in any chriſtian cōſcience. And this I ſay euery ſpirit that confeſſeth Chriſt to haue come in fleſhe, is of God, and teacheth you the truth. And euery ſpirite that denyeth Jeſus to haue come in fleſhe, is not of God, but leadeth you into errour, and is that ſpirite of Antichriſt: But wee, and the Preachers of the Goſpell, in all Godly ſence cōfeſſe Chriſt to haue come in fleſhe, and our Aduerſaries of Roome doe

not, therefore we, and not they, haue brought the truth vnto you. The 2. propoſition. I know wil be denied, for both yt parts therof, which I wil proue vnto you, by this meanes. Firſt I will let you vnderſtand the cauſes why chriſt came in fleſhe, and what benefites he procured to mankynde by the ſame. Secondly I will ſhew vnto you what it is to denye Chriſte to haue come in fleſhe. The firſte of theſe two ſhall confirme our truth: The ſeconde ſhall confound their error. As touching the cauſe why chriſt came in fleſh.
            When ſinne had made ſeparation betweene God and man, and the exceding great mercy of God, was not willingThe cauſes why Chriſt came in the fleſhe. vtterly to caſt away man, and to raſ
                  •
                him from the face of the earth, of his infinite goodneſſe, and wiſedome, he deuiſed the ſonne of God, the ſeconde perſon in Trinitie ſhould deſcend from Heauen, and take fleſh of the bleſſed virgine, that ſo being in one perſon, both very God, & very man, he might be a moſt fit Mediator to work recōciliatiō betwene God and man. The cauſe therefore why Chriſte came in fleſh, was to worke the ſaluation of mankinde. For ſo ſaithThe general cauſe. 1. Tim. 1. 
                     ••
                  
                
               S. Paule, It is a ſure ſaying & worthie of all men to be beleeued, that Chriſt came into the world to ſaue ſinners, And Chriſt himſelfe ſayth: that he came to ſaue thatLuc. 19. 10 which was loſt.
            
            The generall worke of our redemption, hath certayne principall branches, whiche are cheefe Articles of oure Fayth and groundes of all Chriſtian religion. Firſte, that he might be the reconciler, and attonement maker betweeneThe particuler cauſes. Verſe. 18. God and vs, as S. Paule witneſſeth, 2. Cor. 5. All things are of God which reconciled vs vnto himſelf in Chriſt Ieſus. And immediately, God was in Chriſt recō
                  cilingVerſe. 1
                        •
                     . Col. 1. 20. the world to himſelfe. And to the Coloſ
                     •
                  . It pleaſed him to reconcile all things, vnto himſelfe by Chriſt, appeaſing by the blood of his Croſſe, all thinges whiche are either in heauen or in earth. God therefore appoynted him for euer to be our high Biſhop, our Mediator, our Aduocate, our Interceſſor which ſhould cōtinualy appeare

before the face of God for vs, and make him fauourable toHeb. 2. 4. 7. 9. cap. 1. Rom. 8. 37. ſinners, that we might haue acceſſe to God by him, & by his interceſſion and merite, obtayne mercy and grace in oure neceſſities, theſe be the wordes of the ſcripture. And hee isChriſt only 
                     ••
                   our aduocate and mediatoure. 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. &. 2. not onely our Mediatour and Aduocate, but Our onelye Mediatour and Aduocate, One God, and one Mediatour of God and man, the man Chriſt Ieſus. We haue an Aduocate with the father, Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our ſinnes. It is hee that aſcended vp to heauen, and ſitteth at the right hand of God the Father, 
                  Ʋt interpellat pro nobis, That he may bee an Interceſſour
               
               Rom. 8. 34 
               for vs. The 2. cauſe of Chriſts comming into fleſh, is, that he might be our redeemer from the tyrannye of the Deuill, and the purchazer of remiſſion of ſinnes. The1. Ioh. 
                        •
                     . 8. Sonne of god appeared to this ende, to diſſolue the workes of the Deuill. And agayne: Yee are redeemed,1. Pet. 1. 18. not with golde and ſiluer, but with the blood of the immaculate Lambe Chriſt Ieſus. And agayne: Beholde theIoh. 1. 29. Lābe of god, that taketh away the ſinnes of the world, And S. Paule: In whome wee haue redemption, and byEph. 1. 7. his blood remiſſion of our ſinnes. We muſt not onlye beleeue that he is our Redeemer, but our Only Redeemer,
               Chriſt only is our redeemer. Act. 4. 1
                     •
                  . and the Only Purchazer of the full remiſſion of our ſinnes. For, Non eſt aliud nomen. &c. That is, There is no other name vnder Heaué, wherin we ſhold be ſaued, but only by the name of Chriſt Ieſus, And S. Iohn. The blood of1. Ioh. 1. verſe. 7. chriſt hath waſhed vs frō al ſinne.
                And S. Paule. He gaue himſelf for vs. that he might redeme vs frō all iniquitie.
                The 3. cauſe of Chriſtes incarnatiō, & y• 2. office of his eternal Prieſthood, is, to offer a ful & perfit ſacrifice to appeaſe y• wrath of God, & to ſatiſfie his iuſtice, & yt not according to y• order of Aaron, which by imperfectiō did nede a Succeſſion, but according to y• order of Melchizedek, & y• for euer. Thou art a Prieſt, ſayth God, for euer, according to theHeb. 6. 20. order of Melchizedek. Therefore it cannot bee borne 
                  ••
                chriſtian religion, that Chriſt ſhould haue any ſucceſſion

in Prieſthood, to ſacrifyce after him. For by one oblationChriſt only is our prieſt to ſacrifice for vs which he hath done once for all. Heb. 10. 14. Heb. 9. 28. Heb. 10. 12. he made perfect all that be ſanctified. And agayne: Chriſt was once offered for the extinguiſhing of the ſinnes of many, And agayne: Hauing offered one Sacrifice for ſinne, he ſitteth perpetually at the right hand of God. And ſundry times elſe where, the Epiſtle to the Hebrues affirmeth, Chriſt Semel, That is to ſay, once, to haue ſacrificed himſelfe.
            The fourth cauſe of his Incarnation, and the thyrde office of his eternall Prieſthood is, that he might be the only Prophet, Maiſter, Teacher, and inſtructer of his people, fully to open to them the knowledge of God, and the true way of Saluation: God, ſayth Moyſes, ſhall raiſe fromDeu. 18. 15. among you, a Prophet like vnto me, him do you heare, according to all thinges that he ſhall ſay vnto you. And God the father himſelf, at the baptizing of Chriſt, did with the viſible preſence of the holy Ghoſt, conſecrate him Maiſter and teacher of his church, which only was to be heard. This is my dearely beloued Sonne, in whome I am wellMat. 3. 17. Mat. 17. 5. pleaſed, him doe you heare. The ſame Conſecration was confyrmed in the Mounte, at the tranſfiguration of Chriſt. And Eſay the Prophet in the 55. chapter, or ratherVerſe. 4. God by Eſay ſayth: I haue giuen him as a witneſſe vnto people: & preceptorem Gentibus, And a Maiſter and inſtructourChriſt is our only Inſtructour. of all nations. And therefore Chriſt himſelfe forbiddeth his Apoſtles to be called Maiſters, for ſayth hee: Ye haue but one Maiſter which is Chriſt.
            
            The fyfte cauſe of Chriſt his comming in fleſh, is that he might be the Lorde of Lordes, and King of Kinges, the onlye head, ruler, gouernour, and defender of his vniuerſall Church, ouer al the partes of the worlde according to the Prophecie of Dauid Pſal. 2. Yet haue I annoynted myVerſe. 6. &c. King, vpon my holy hill of Syon, to whome for his inheritance, he gaue all the Nations of y• world, and for his poſſeſſion, the vttermoſt bounds of the earth. And the Angell at his Conception, ſayde: He ſhall raigne in the houſe ofLuc. 1. 33.
                  
Iacob for euer, and there ſhall be none ende of his kingdome. And Epheſians 1. He hath put all thinges vnderVerſe. 22. his feete, and hath appointed him aboue al things head of his Church. And Coloſſ. 1. He is the head of his bodyVerſe. 18. the Church, which is the beginning, the firſt of them that riſe from death, Vt ſit in omnibus primas tenens. i. That in all thinges hee might haue the preheminence. And Ephe. 5. The Huſband is the head of the wife, asVerſe. 23. Chriſt is head of the Church: But the wife may haue noChriſt is the only head of the church. more heades but her huſband, vnleſſe ſhe will be a wedlock breake
                  •
               , and ſo the Church can haue no other heade But Chriſt, vnleſſe ſhe doe in the face of the whole world forſake hir owne Spouſe, who hath betrothed her to him alone. He is the only Sonne, whiche alone gouerneth the houſe of GOD his father, In all theſe Branches, I adde this worde (Onely) becauſe Chriſt onelye, is alone that that he is: oure onely Mediatour, our onely redeemer, and purchazer of remiſſion of Sinnes, our onelye high Prieſte, to ſacrifice for vs, oure onlye Maiſter and Teacher that inſtrueteth vs, our onely head and gouernour that guideth and defendeth vs. And herevnto I am mooued, not onelye with expreſſe wordes of the ſcriptures, but alſo with conſideration of the high and moſt excellent meanes of oure ſaluation, deuiſed by the wiſedome, and vnſpeakeable mercye of God. For it ſhould greatlye impeache the wiſedome of God, if he ſhould ſend downe his ſonne, the ſeconde perſon in Trinitie, into the vale of miſerye, here to take Fleſhe, and in the forme of a Seruaunt, and abiecte man, to ſuffer moſt vile and reprochfull Death, to bee a partye redeemer, or a partie Sauiour, and to yeelde a great parte of theChriſt hath no partakers in any of his offices. honoure and glory thereof to other. No, no, he is GOD he giueth not his glory to other: He onely (onelye I ſaye hee) is our full and perfecte reconciler, and Redemer, and all the reſidue that I haue ſpoken of before. This is the Doctrine which we teache, this is the Goſpell whiche we preache, and this is no new Doctrine, but that whiche

was conceaued in the boſome of the wiſedome of GODProteſtants doctrine of Saluation is the doctrine of the Scripture. Eph. 1. 4. before the beginning of the Worlde. For wee were choſen (ſayeth Sayncte Paule) in Chriſte, Antequám iacerentur Fundamenta Mundi. i. Before the Foundations of the Worlde were layde. This is that Goſpell, that GOD himſelfe opened in Paradiſe, to our fyrſt Fathers, I will ſet enmitie, ſayeth he, to the Woman, betweeneGen. 15. 3. thy ſeede and his ſeede: and thy ſeede, That is, one that ſhall come of a woman, ſhall breake the Serpents head, That is: ouerthrow the whole power of the Deuil, and delyuer mankynde from ſime. This is that Goſpell that was renued to Abraham, and all the Patriarches: In thy Seede, ſhall all the Nations of theGen. 22. 18. earth be bleſſed. This is that Goſpell, that was fygured to the Jewes, by the Paſchall Lambe, by Manna, by the Rocke, by all the Sacrifices, and Ceremoniall ſeruices of the Lawe. This is that Goſpell, Where vnto all the Prophets beare witneſſe, As SayntActe. 3. 21. Acte. 4. 12. 
               Peter ſayeth, in the Actes: That all they that beleeue in him, ſhall haue remiſſion of ſinnes by his name. This is that Goſpell, that Saynt Iohn the Forerunner poynted vnto, Beholde the Lambe of God. &c. ThisIoh. 1. 29. is the Goſpell that Chriſte himſelfe preached and deliuered to his Apoſtles, and they to the whole Worlde. So GOD loued the Worlde, that hee gaue his onlyeIoh. 3. 16. begotten Sonne, that whoſoeuer beleeued in him, ſhould be ſaued. Therefore as I haue ſayde: Our doctrineThe generall end of the proteſtants doctrine, and what doctrine only they miſlike. is no newe Doctrine, but the moſte aunciente Doctryne, that euer was vpon the face of the Earth, neyther doe wee teache anye other Doctrine then this, and thoſe that doe of neceſſitie depende vppon this, or bee grounded vppon this. Neither doe wee impugne anye Doctrines in other, but ſuche as are repugnaunte to this Fayth, and eyther directlye or indirectlye impeache the ſame. For I proteſt before GOD and his Aungels and in the preſence of this honourable Audience, for my

ſelfe and as many profeſſoures of the Goſpell as I know, that whatſoeuer Doctrine is agreeable to this, wee doe gladly receiue it, and with both armes imbrace it, though it come from the Churche of Roome. And whatſoeuer Doctrine is repugnant to this, and will not ſtande with it, wee doe reiecte it, though it come from an Aungell in Heauen. Seeing then wee haue nowe this 20. yeares taught you this vnfallible trueth, Why doe you not beleeue vs? &c.
            
            Now as touching the ſecond branche, what it is toWhat it is to deny chriſt to haue come in fleſhe▪ and that in two. ſortes. denye Chriſte to haue come in Fleſhe, and who they are that denye it, you ſhall vnderſtande that there bee two wayes to denye Chriſte to haue come in fleſhe. The one flatlye and groſelye, and in playne wordes, as Ebion, Erinthus, Marcion, Valentinian, Arrius, and a number ſuche other, in the Primatiue Churche, whiche denyed eyther the Deitie, or Humanitie of Chriſte. But in them Sathan ſhewed himſelfe in his owne Coloures, like a blacke Deuill, and therefore the Hereſyes beeing ſo groſſe, were ſoone confuted, and confounded in the Churche of GOD. There is another waye more ſubtle, and perilous, vndirectly to denye Chriſt to haue come in fleſhe, in whiche Sathan tourneth himſelfe into an Aungell of lighte, and as Cyprian ſayeth, Vnder the name of Chriſte, confounding the Religion of chriſte. That is, While in wordes they confeſſe the Incarnation of Chriſt, by peruerſe Doctrynes in effecte they deny it, by denying thoſe cauſes, for which the Sonne of GOD was Incarnate, attributing the effect of oure Saluation, to other thinges. And after thisPopiſtes and not proteſtants do deny Chriſt to haue come in the fleſh and how. ſorte, the Teachers of the Churche of Roome, very plainlye and perilouſlye denye Chriſte to haue come in fleſhe, as I wil particularly lette you vnderſtande by the Branches of our ſaluation before recyted. As touching the fyrſt cauſe of Chriſte his Incarnation, that Chriſte is the onelye

reconciler, mediatoure and attonement maker, betweene God and vs, and for that cauſe ſitteth at the right hande ofPraier to Saintes is againſt chriſt his mediatourſhip and aduocatſhip. God, perpetualy to appeare before his face for vs: Againſt this Article they teach blaſphemous Doctrine of Inuocation of Saintes, that they are our mediatours and reconcilers, that by their merites and prayers, we haue acceſſe vnto God, and are for their ſakes, heard, receiued and accepted into the fauour of God agayn, euidently diſplacing the ſon of God, frō the cheefe office of his eternall prieſthood, & ſetting his creatures in his place and dignitie, and yt with out any warrant of ſcripture, eyther by word, or by exāple.Praier to Saints containeth beſides it ſelfe, two other wicked thinges. This Doctrine is ioyned with two other foule erroures: Firſte, that they conceaue of Chriſt, as of a dreadfull God, and terrible iudge, and not as of a mercifull Mediatour, & therefore that wee haue needs of other ſpokeſmen, to make the way to him for vs, though he himſelfe moſt gratiouſly, and mercifully cryeth vnto vs, Come all ye that trauayle,Mat. 11. 28. and be heauy loden, and I will refreſh you. And in ſundry places commaundeth vs to pray vnto God the father in his name, aſſuring vs, that whatſoeuer wee deſire, it ſhallIoh. 16. 23. be graunted vs. And therefore doe they ſhew them ſelues to miſtruſt, the Credite of Chriſt.
            Secondly in this praying to the Saintes, not without great daunger of Idolatrie, they attribute vnto them diuine power. For in their praying to them, they imagine of them, that they bee of Vniuerſall knowledge, and vnderſtanding, not onelye what men ſpeake, but alſo what they thinke in theire hartes. Agayne they attribute vnto them Almightie power, as being able to worke and bring to paſſe whatſoeuer is deſyred of them. And laſtlye, they ſhewe themſelues to beleeue, that they are More merciful, and readye to heare ſinners, then Chriſt himſelf, which is flat Blaſphemy. As touching the ſecond cauſe of chriſt his Incarnation, that he is our onlye redeemer and purchazer of remiſſion of our ſinnes: This ground of our faith they weaken, by a number of corrupt Doctrines.
            
               As firſt, that in parte wee haue ſaluation and remiſſion of ſinnes, by the Merites of Saintes, for thus they praye:
            
               Tuper Thomae ſanguinē quem pro te impendit,
               Fac nos Chriſte ſcandere quò Thomas aſcendit.
            
            
               Graunt vs O Chriſt by the blood of Thomas which he ſhed for thee, thether to goe whether he is aſcended. And to Saint George they pray thus, Hie nos ſaluet à peccatis, vt in coelo cum beatis poſsimus q
                     •
                  ieſcere. Let him ſaue vs from our ſinnes, that we may reſt with the bleſſed in heauen.
                And touching Saint Anne, they ſay thus, Deus qui beatam Annam, matrem tuae genetricis fieri voluiſti, praesta quaeſumus, vt meritis vtriuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   matris & filiae, regna caeleſtia conſequamur. O God, thou which wouldeſt Saint Anne to become the mother of thy mother, graunt we beſeeche thee, that by the merites of the mother and the daughter, we may obtaine thy heauenly kingdome.
                In thys you heare three Sauiours beſide Chriſt, and in like maner doe they acknowledge a thouſande moe. Secondly, theyThe papiſtes will haue Chriſt to be a de
                     •
                  nie Sauiour. ſay, we haue remiſſion of ſinnes and ſaluation, in parte by our owne Merites and good doynges. For this writeth Gabriel Biel: That the Paſſion of Chriſt may be the firſt and principall cauſe, of attaining grace and opening the way to heauen, Sed nunquam eſt totalis cauſa, quia ſemper cum merito Chriſti, concurrit aliquod meritum recipientis gratiam, that is to ſay, But it is neuer the whole cauſe, for that euer there goeth with the merite of Chriſt, ſome merite of him that receaueth grace. What ſhall I ſay of Pardons, of Pilgrimages, of Purgatorie, of holy Water, and a number of other like Superſtitions & falſe errours? by which not without blaſphemie, they matche tranſitorie things and vaine deuiſes of men, with the moſt excellent price of our redemption, the blood of Chriſt Ieſu, ye ſonne of God our Sauiour, exprefly contrarie to the holy ghoſt, thus writing by Saint Peter: Ye are not redeemed with1. Pet. 1. 18. tranſitorie things, as with Golde or Siluer, but with the blood of the immaculate Lambe Chriſt Ieſus. As touching

the third cauſe of Chriſtes Incarnatiō, that he being our only high Prieſt according to the order of Melchizodech, hath once for euer offered himſelf vpon the Croſſe, & purchaſed for vs eternall redēption, they impugne it wyth y• moſt horrible doctrine of the propiciatorie ſacrifice, daily offered in the Maſſe, wherin they teach, that mortall & ſinfull men in a ſtate of Prieſthood ſucceede Chriſt, & continually offer the very reall & naturall body of Chriſt to God the father, for the remiſſion of dayly ſinnes, not only of thē that Cōmunicate, but of them that looke on, & receaue not, yea, and of them that be abſent, and procure the ſame to be made eyther for money or otherwiſe, aſwell for themſelues as other, which is directly contrarie to the doctrine of the holy Ghoſt, in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. Where at large he prooueth, that neither the Prieſthood of Chriſt can haue any ſucceſſiō, nor his ſacrifice any repetitiō, without euident note of imperfection.
            As concerning the fourth cauſe of Chriſtes Incarnation, that he is the only Maiſter and teacher of his Church, and hath reuealed vnto vs the perfecte wyll of God, and true waye of Saluation, ſo that nowe after hym, wee ſhoulde receaue no doctrine, but that is vttered by the voyce of our hygh Sheeparde in his holye worde. Yes, ſayeth the Churche of Rome, there bee many weyghtie matters, of neceſſitie of ſaluation to bee beleeued, which Chriſt in hys written worde hath not deliuered vnto vs, and the ſame to bee receaued wyth lyke reuerence, that the written worde of God is.
            Laſt of all, the fifte cauſe of Chriſtes Incarnation, that he came to be the onely Head, Ruler, Gouernour, and Directour of his Churche, the Patrones of the Churche of Rome manifeſtly denye, ſaying: that Chriſt is in deede the onely heade for ſaluation, but not for gouernment, becauſe the Pope is the Miniſteriall heade and gouernour, and directour of the vniuerſall Churche, wherein they manifeſtly

alter the nature of Chriſtes kingdome. For whereas the kingdome of Chriſt is not of this worlde, but a ſpirituall kingdome, wherein by the word of God, and the power of his holy ſpirite, hee ruleth and raygneth in the heartes of true Chriſtians, the Pope hath tranſferred it to an earthly kingdome and Empyre, by which, as the Vicar of Chriſt he challengeth a vniuerſall gouernment, not onely ouer the Eccleſiaſticall ſtate, but alſo ouer all Princes and gouernours of the earth. This oppoſition and contrarietie of the doctrines of the Churche of Rome, to the doctrine of y• Goſpell, if you diligently marke and obſerue, you ſhall euidently ſee in them the ſpirite of Antichriſt, althoughe not groſſely and playnely, yet vndirectly and colourablye denying Chriſt, to haue come in fleſhe. What ſhall I ſaye, that the doctrine of that Churche dothe not onely diſgrace the office of Chryſt, in the worke of our redemption, but hys perſon alſo, by brynging hys humanitie and the trueth of hys bodye in doubte, whyle they teache, that the verye naturall bodie of Chriſt is really in all places, or in tenne thouſand places at once, that is, in euerye hoſt conſecrated through out the whole worlde? And what Chriſtian knoweth not, that it is the propertie of of God alone, and of no creature, bee it neuer ſo holye, to bee in manye places at once? Finallye I adde, that the Churche of Rome teacheth corruptlye, as touching Originall Sinne, freewill, and the grace of GOD, Faith and Juſtification, good workes and the merites of them, the vſe of the Sacramentes, and almoſt of all doctrines touching Chriſtian Religion. Therefore, I truſt you nowe perceyue both the partes of my ſecond propoſition euidently proued, that is, that we ſincerely confeſſe and teache in all true ſenſe, that Chriſt is come in fleſhe, and they doe not, therefore accordyng to the wordes of my Theame, I ſay vnto you, If we teach you the truth, why doe you not beleeue vs?
               
If it be the onely right way of ſaluation, why is it not fauourably receaued and embraced? If it be the glad tidings of the Goſpell ſent by God vnto you, why are the Meſſengers thereof diſdayned and contemned? People that doe feare God, heare the worde of God with reuerence, and not onely heare it with the eares, but faithfully beleeue it in the hart, and not onely beleeue it, but conſtantly abyde in it, & not onely themſelues to abyde in it, but by all meanes they can to labour to drawe other to it, and to repreſſe all ſuch as eyther reuolte from it themſelues, or ſeeke to diſgrace or diſcredite it in others. God is not more diſpleaſed with any thing, than with the contempt of his word and Miniſters. Thus ſayth the Lord by Ieremie in yt 6. chap. reprouing the obſtinacie of his people, Stand in the wayesJer. 6. 16. and behold, & aske for the olde way, which is the good way, and walke therin, and there you ſhall finde reſt for your ſoules, but they ſaid, we wil not walk therin. Alſo, I ſet watchmen ouer you, which ſaid take heede to the ſounde of the Trumpet, but they ſaid, we will not take heede. But conſider what God addeth immediatly, Heare O earth (ſaith he) beholde I will cauſe a plague to comeVerſe. 19. vpon this people, euen the fruite of their owne imaginations, becauſe they haue not taken heede vnto my wordes, nor vnto my law, but haue caſt it of. And in the laſt Chap. of the. 7. of the Chronicles, it is thus written, The Lord God of their fathers hath ſent vnto them by2. Chro. 36. 15. his Meſſengers, riſing vp earely, and ſending, for he had compaſsion on his people, and of his habitation, but they mocked the Meſſengers of God, and miſuſed his Prophetes, vntill the wrath of the Lord roſe againſt his people, and till there was no remedie, for he brought vpon them the King of the Chaldees, who ſlewe their yong men with the ſworde. &c. God of his great goodnes, hath ſundry times ſent into this land, his Meſſengers and Preachers of his Goſpell, and principally theſe twentie yeeres laſt paſt, in which time, the ſounde of Gods holy

worde hath continually roong in the eares of men, yet was the loue of the Goſpell neuer ſo colde, as euen at this day, nor the hartes of Engliſh men, ſo ready to reuolt from it. It is lamentable to vnderſtande howe in all partes of the Realme, thoſe Papiſtes, whiche before time appeared to be ſomewhat afrayde, and ſought by all meanes to hyde themſelues, doe now openly ſhew themſelues, and deſire to be knowne to be as they are. What their hope or expectation is, the Lord knoweth, but ſurely it is full time, that hir Maieſtie, and hir moſt Honourable Counſell, as they feare God, and loue his truth, doe ſpeedily looke vnto it, otherwiſe vndoubtedly, the inconuenience will be greater, than by authoritie will be eaſily ſtayde. The care hereof, I leaue to them, whome God hath ſette in place of Gouernement, only I thought it my duetye, being appoynted a watchman in the Church of God, to ſounde the Trumpet in this place, and to giue warning, that the bloud of them that periſh, be not required at my hande, and withall, moſte humbly and hartilye praye vnto almighty God, that with the grace of his holy ſpirite, he will ſo direct & ſtrengthen the minds of them, whoſe principall charge this is, that that may be done, which moſte tendeth to the glory of God, and maintenance of his truth, and to the good ſtate and preſeruation of this our naturall Countrey.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The ſpeciall contentes of this Booke of Sermons, reduced into a neceſſarie Table of Common places.
            
               A.
               
                  
                     Acknowledge.
                     THe way to acknowledge God in man.  Folio 192.
                     Meanes to make thoſe acknowlege a God which do altogither deny him. Folio 191
                     Whoſo can not acknowledge God in him ſelfe can not be ſayd to be a man. Folio 193
                     Properties which can not but be known in God if we doe acknowledge him but only in his creatures. Folio 193
                  
                  
                     Afflictions.
                     ¶ That afflictions doe no whitte diſcredit the power of the Goſpell. Folio 7
                     Howe the godlie doe ſtay them ſelues in afflictions, ſo that they may not fal frō Chriſt, &c. Folio 200
                     
                        Afflictions are layde vpon the righteous to trie them withall. Folio 174. 175. 176.
                  
               
            
            
               B.
               
                  
                     Baptiſme.
                     ¶ Fruitful doctrines of the Proteſtantes concerning Baptiſme. Folio 30. 31
                     Papiſticall vntruthes and abuſes concerning Baptiſme. Folio 31
                  
                  
                     Benefite.
                     ¶ How we are to apply the benefit of the comming of Chriſt in the fleſh euery man to himſelfe. Folio 92. 93
                     The Church of Rome impugneth the doctrine of applying the benefites of Chriſts merits by faith. &c. Folio 94. 95. 96
                  
               
            
            
               C.
               
                  
                     Calling.
                     ¶ Ordinarie authoritie or calling is no iuſt proofe of true Doctrine. Folio 74
                     The Prophetes extraordinarily ſet vp by God to reprooue the abuſes of their ordinarie calling. Folio 75
                     Vnder the clothing of ordinarie calling the wolfe is deſcried, and how? Folio 76
                  
                  
                     Christ.
                     ¶ Christ only is our aduocate and mediatour. Folio 231
                     
                        Christ only is our redeemer. Folio 231
                     
                        Christ only is our prieſt to ſacrifize for vs which he hath done once for all. Folio 232
                     
                        Christ is our only inſtructour. Folio 232
                     
                        Christ is the only hed of the Church. Folio 233
                     Why Christ of neceſsitie was to be both God and Man, &c. Folio 140
                     Why Christ ſhoulde neceſſarily bee man 140. Folio 141
                     
                        Christ hath no partakers in any of his offices. Folio 233
                     Suche as doe but a little cloſe with the worlde, are and ſtande in daunger of treaſon to Christ. Folio 200. 201
                     The Papiſts wil haue Christ to be a demi Sauiour. Folio 237. 238. 239. &c.
                  
                  
                     Church.
                     ¶ Chriſte compareth the Church to huſbandrie. Folio 177
                     Why the Spirite of God compareth the Church to huſbandrie. Folio 178
                     The name of the Church abuſed by the Wolues. Folio 77
                     The inuiſible Church conſiſting of the elect. Folio 20
                     Of the viſible Church, and the deſcriptiō of the ſame. Folio 20
                     The Church of Chriſt is tyed to no place. Fol. Folio 21
                     The number of the Church may be ſmal. Fol. Folio 21
                     
                        None are openly of the Church, but ſuch as are called thereto by Gods worde. Fol. Folio 21
                     The corrupt liues and foule vices of the fathers of the Church of Rome detected, &c. Folio 98
                     Faith doth ingraffe vs into the Church. Fol. Folio 21
                     The Church of Rome a Monſter hauing three heads at once. Folio 102
                     The Church of Rome hath not in it the tokens of the true Church. Folio 23
                     What Church is moſt likely to haue falſe interpretations. Folio 39
                     The markes of the Church. Folio 22 23
                     The increaſe of the Church by Martyrdome ſhewed in a ſimilitude. Folio 182
                     Of diſſoluteneſſe of life in the Churche of Rome, &c. Folio 47
                     The Papiſtes obiect the viſible ſtate of their Churche, to proue it the true Church. Folio 42
                     Gods true Churche may bee, and yet not appeare generally viſible. Folio 43
                     That may ſeeme to vs the true Churche which is not. Folio 43
                     Examples prouing a Churche, and yet not viſible, &c. Folio 43. 44. 45
                     The inuiſible ſtate of the Churche ſince the Apoſtles, dothe not prooue the Church to be no true Church. Folio 45
                  
                  
                     Comming.
                     ¶ What it is to denie Chriſtes Comming in the fleſh, and that in two ſorts. Folio 235
                     Papiſtes and not Proteſtants denye Chriſtes Comming in the fleſhe, and how? Folio 235
                     The cauſes of Chriſtes Comming in the fleſh. Folio 230
                     The generall and particular cauſes of Chriſtes Comming in the fleſh. Folio 230
                     The faithfull Iewes did eate and drinke ſpiritually the Body and Bloud of Chriſt before hys reall Comming in the fleſh, &c. 
                           •
                        35
                     A place ymagined where the dead did reſt before the Comming of Chriſt. Folio 132
                  
                  
                     Common weales.
                     All Common weales are not to be tyed to one forme of gouernement. Folio 218
                     To be diſturbers of Common weales, &c. is no new ſlander, nor now firſt obiected againſt gods true miniſters. Folio 219
                  
                  
                     Contempt.
                     Conſiderations concerning Chriſt, which maketh mans carnall reaſon to haue him in Contempt. Folio 2
                     The more excellent that mē are in carnall reaſon onely, the more is theys Contempt of Chriſt. Folio 2
                     
                        Contempt of Godlyneſſe of life can not ſtande with the acknowledging of a God. Folio 191
                     The Contempt of Chriſt and his Goſpell in the beginuing of the world. 
                           •
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               D.
               
                  
                     Deuice.
                     ¶ Man in his excellencie of carnall wit is not able to giue any perpetuitie to his Deuice. Folio 4
                     The gouernemente and direction by Gods word preuayleth more than any Deuide of man. Folio 5
                     Of mans policie and Deuice, and what kinde of grounde it is to Common weales. Folio 8
                     How God can ſhew himſelfe, when all mans Deuice fayleth, &c. Folio 8
                  
                  
                     Diſſention.
                     ¶ Diſſention of opiniōs is no new thing. Fol. Folio 54. 55
                     
                        Diſſention of the Proteſtants about the Sacrament, &c. Folio 56
                     
                        Diſſention among Proteſtants for apparell, &c. Folio 57
                     The bitternes of the Diſſention amōgſt the Schoolemen Papiſts. Folio 6
                     
                        Diſſention about originall ſinne, and the vertue of Sacraments. Folio 60. 61
                     
                        Of the multitude of Diſſentions among Papiſts in ſundrie poyntes. Folio 59. 60
                     Late Diſſentions in opiniōs among Papiſts. Folio 62
                  
                  
                     Doctrine.
                     ¶ Proteſtantes Doctrine of ſaluation is the Doctrine of the Scripture. Folio 234
                     The generall ende of the Proteſtantes Doctrine, and what doctrine only they miſlike. Folio 234
                     Godlyneſſe may be pretended by ſome that loath true Doctrine. Folio 216
                     None can haue good conuerſation which are not ſound in Doctrine. Folio 216
                     Faith followeth Doctrine. Folio 216
                     Contemners of Doctrine were foretold of to come. Folio 217
                     How little their owne methode would profit thē of teaching manners without Doctrine. Folio 217
                     Moſt vnnaturall and vndutifull warres lawfull by Papiſts Doctrine. Folio 220
                     What is the cauſe that good Doctrine doth not fructifie in the hearers. Folio 222
                     What the Scriptures ſhew to be moſt commonly the cauſe why true Doctrine doth not fructifie. Folio 223
                     
                        Doctrine is to be receyued vpon trial. Folio 228
                     How to perceyue Proteſtantes to haue true Doctrine, and of what weight the matters are, wherein they differ from Papiſtes. Folio 228. 229
                  
               
            
            
               F.
               
                  
                     Fayth.
                     ¶ Faith doth ingraffe vs into the church. Fol. Folio 21
                     
                        Faith followeth doctrine. Folio 216
                     No man can be ſaued for any good life, when he hath not true Faith. Folio 216
                     The force and effect of Faith ſet out at large. Folio 146. 147
                     
                        Faith the mouth of the ſoule, whereby Chriſt is eaten. Folio 144
                     Matters of Faith may be better perceyued by meanes of writing, than by mans bare memorie. Folio 25
                     Of the doctrine of iuſtification by Faith only, and what it procureth. Folio 13. 14
                  
                  
                     Fortune.
                     ¶ A definition or deſcription of Fortune declaring what it is. Folio 164
                     God the creator, diſpoſer, and preſeruer of all, and not blind Fortune. Folio 164
                     Nothing betideth man by Fortune, but all things by Gods direction. Folio 163
                  
                  
                     Freewill.
                     ¶ How profitable the doctrine is which is againſt Freewill. Folio 13
                     Opiniō of Freewill is vnthankefulnes. Folio 13
                     How we haue Freewill, and how we haue it not. Folio 13
                  
               
            
            
               G.
               
                  
                     Gentilitie.
                     ¶ Of the vayne opinion of Gentilitie, and the daunger of the ſame, thys toucheth contempt. Folio 2
                     Of heatheniſh Gentilitie, and the miſchiefe by it. Folio 189
                  
                  
                     God.
                     ¶ Certayne notable and excellent titles proper vnto God. Folio 193
                     Who or what God that is whiche is taught to be beleeued. Folio 193
                     Mocks againſt God & his iudgemēts. Folio 190
                     Againſt thoſe that denye God altogyther. Folio 191
                     Meanes to make thoſe acknowledge a God which do altogither deny him. Folio 191
                  
                  
                     Gospell.
                     ¶ Why we ought rather to eſteeme the Goſpell than all earthly things. Folio 205
                     In what ſort true profeſſors of Chriſt & his Goſpell muſt cleaue to him & it. Folio 199
                     How God hath bleſſed England euen in this late time of the Goſpell. Folio 65
                     That Princes do reſiſt the Goſpell, is no cauſe of diſcredite vnto it. Folio 65
                     The Goſpell often flouriſheth when it is moſt reſiſted. Folio 66
                     
                        Howe it commeth to paſſe, that many ſeeme firſt to be glad of the Goſpel, & yet afterwardes hate it, &c. Folio 197
                     Of ſome which now profeſſe the Goſpel, which peradventure may dyſlike of it hereafter, &c. Folio 198
                     Of worldelie inconveniences, which do commonly followe the profeſſors of the Goſpel. Folio 199
                     Why true profeſſours of the Goſpel can not by any meanes be dryuen from it Fol. Folio 199
                     The mercie of the profeſſors of the Goſpel compared with the crueltie of the Church of Rome. Folio 76
                     The Goſpel euill ſpoken of, becauſe of ſuche as ydlely profeſſe and liue not after it. Folio 109
                     The preachers of the Goſpel exhorte to holineſſe of life, to godlyneſſe, &c. Folio 111
                     The preaching of the Goſpel is not altogither fruitleſſe. Folio 111
                     The godlyneſſe of the preachers of the Goſpel compared with that of the prelates of Rome, &c. Folio 112
                     What fruits haue followed the preching of the Goſpel. Folio 113
                     Not the Goſpel but our corrupt nature is the cauſe why our fruits at theſe days are no better. Folio 109
                     Diuers ſorts of enimies to the Goſpel. Folio 8. 9
                     Sixe obiections againſte the Goſpel, to bring it into dyſcredit, &c. Folio 10
                     A firſt obiection againſt the Goſpel, that it doth not further but hinder good converſation. Folio 10. 11. 12
                     A ſeconde obiection againſt the Goſpel, that it maketh this lyfe leſſe pleaſant to vs than it ſhould be. Folio 16. 17 18
                     A thirde obiection againſte the Goſpel, that we the pretended profeſſors ther of are not of the catholike church. Folio 19
                     A fourth obiection againſte the Goſpel concerning the leude lyues of proteteſtantes, &c. Folio 46
                     A fift obiection againſt the Goſpel, that the profeſſors of it agree not in opinion. Folio 54
                     A ſixt obiection againſt the Goſpel, that ignominie and perſecution doth followe it. Folio 64
                     The eſtimation of Chriſt & his Goſpel. Folio 2
                     Of the power of the Goſpel of Chriſt, & how many wayes it appeareth. Folio 3
                     Man needeth not by the Goſpell thinke himſelfe debaſed, &c. Folio 15
                     Of the power of the Goſpell appearing in theſe latter dayes. Folio 7
                     That the power of the Goſpell is no whit to be diſcredited by afflictions, &c. Folio 7
                     Contentions and warres haue bin in other Nations before the renuing of the Goſpell. Folio 219
                     England neuer in ſuch peace, as ſince the embracing of the Goſpell. Folio 219. 220
                     The ſturre following the Goſpell is not to be imputed to the Goſpell. Folio 52. 53
                     How ſtirres do come in the time of the Goſpell. Folio 53
                  
               
            
            
               H.
               
                  
                     Holyneſſe.
                     ¶ Outward Holyneſſe is no ſure token of true teachers. Folio 69
                     The firſte clawe whereby a Woolfe is knowne is truſt in Holyneſſe of life. Folio 70
                     The ſecond claw to know the Wolfe by, is Holineſſe conſiſting in the obſeruation of mens conditions. Folio 71
                     The preachers of the Goſpell exhort to Holineſſe of life, &c. Folio 111
                  
               
            
            
               K.
               
                  
                     Kingdome.
                     ¶ The Kingdome of God, what it is. Folio 199
                     Of the Kingdome of Chriſt, and what is by it to be looked for. Folio 198
                  
               
            
            
               M.
               
                  
                     Martyrdome.
                     ¶ The increaſe of the church by Martyrdome. 
                        182
                     What increaſe only commeth by Martyrdome. Folio 182
                  
                  
                     Ministerie.
                     There is more meanes amongſt proteſtants to reforme the Ministerie, thā among Papiſts. Folio 212
                     What is to be thought of Ministers, if they liue offenſiuely &c. Folio 212
                     Others muſt liue well, how ſo euer Ministers do liue. Folio 226
                     The meanes now left to the Ministers, to redreſſe the curioſitie and obiection of hearers, for preaching either of doctrine or manners. Folio 218
                     What Ministers ſhoulde be able to doe, when their doctrine is diſcredited by their liues. Folio 208
                     A very commendable example of concealing Ministers faults. Folio 213
                     A good example admoniſhing princes to beware of ſecrete dealers againſte Ministers. Folio 213
                     All Ministers are not to be euill ſpoken of, bicauſe ſome deſerue it &c. Folio 214
                  
                  
                     Miracles.
                     Falſe Miracles wroght by falſe prophets to deceiue Gods people. Folio 78. 79
                     Why God doth not ſhew ſuch miracles as of old he did, &c. Folio 80
                     The end wherevnto godly Miracles doe tend. Folio 80. 81
                  
               
            
            
               N.
               
                  
                     Nature.
                     ¶ The definition or diſcription of Nature declaring what it is. Folio 163
                     The ſaying of the Heathens that all things ſtand▪ according to the courſe of Nature, &c. Folio 192
                  
               
            
            
               O.
               
                  
                     Opinions.
                     ¶ God ſuffereth diuerſitie of Opinions, euen in his true Church. Folio 57
                     Diuerſitie of opinions, in the Eaſt and Weſt Church for Eaſter. Folio 58
                     Obiection to conuince proteſtants, for diſſention of Opinions. Folio 55
                     The Scholemen a
                           •
                        e full of diuerſitie of Opinions. Folio 60
                     Diſagreement in Opinions amongſt coū
                        cels. Folio 62
                     Diuerſitie of Opinions betwixte the vniuerſitie and the Friers. Folio 62
                     Late diſſentions in Opinions amongeſt Papiſtes. Folio 62. 63
                     Diſſentiō in opinions is no new thing. Fol. Folio 54
                     The abſurd Opinions of them confuted, which imagine God to gouern great things only, &c. Folio 165
                  
               
            
            
               P.
               
                  
                     Papistes.
                     ¶ The Papists will haue Chriſt to be a demi-ſauiour. Folio 237
                     Of obſtinate papiſtrie, in three ſortes of Papistes. Folio 194
                     England in moſte daungerous perils by Papistes. Folio 194
                     The meanes to remedie ſome kindes of Papistes. Folio 194
                     Cauſe of care in what places of credite Papistes are put. Folio 195
                  
                  
                     Perfection.
                     ¶ What Perfection ſhould be in the life of euerie one &c. Folio 226. 227
                  
                  
                     Pope.
                     ¶ Pope Gregorie the firſte condemneth the name of vniuerſall Biſhop. Folio 99
                     Ambition in Pope Boniface ſucceeding Gregorie next ſaue one. Folio 99
                  
                  
                     Popes.
                     ¶ The Popes trie it by the cares who ſhal be heade. Folio 102
                     The Popes charitie ſhewed to his predeceſſor. 100
                     The Popes treaſon againſt the Emperor. Fol. Folio 101
                     Repugnancie euen in the decrees of Popes. Folio 60
                     The Popes whordome paſſed ouer. Folio 103
                     The crueltie of Popes taxed. Folio 103
                     The Popes pride touched. Folio 104
                     The Popes couetouſneſſe noted. Folio 105
                     A concluſion vppon all the Hiſtories of the Popes proceedings. Folio 108
                     Vertue and learning not regarded in choice of Popes. Folio 48
                     Of horrible cruelties in Popes. Folio 48
                     
                        Popes Sorcerers, Nicromancers, coniurers, poiſoners. Folio 49
                     
                        Popes did great iniuries euen to Emperours. Folio 49
                     Of couetouſneſſe and extortions in Popes. Folio 49
                     
                        Popes ſeditious, and raiſers of warre. Fol. Folio 50. 51.
                     
                        Popes by their ſtrife and curſing one an other, ſet all Chriſtendome by the eares. Folio 52
                  
                  
                     Popedome.
                     ¶ That the Popedome was to be gottē by ambition and bribery. Folio 48
                     Nicromancie and poyſon, ſteppes to the Popedome. Folio 101
                  
                  
                     Prayer.
                     ¶ A brief Prayer for communicants, before they receiue the Lords ſupper. Folio 157
                     
                        Prayer to Saints is againſt Chriſt mediatourſhip and aduocatſhip. Folio 236
                     
                        Prayer to Saints conteyneth beſides it ſelfe, two other wicked things. Folio 236
                  
                  
                     Preacher.
                     ¶ Truth may be taught by the Preacher and yet three to one take no fruite by it. Folio 223
                     Gods people doe neuer make the wa
                           ••
                        e of godlineſſe in the Preacher, to bee the cauſe that good doctrine doeth not fructifie in the hearers. 
                           •••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Preachers.
                     ¶ It is an ordinarie way of Sathan to diſcredit true Doctrine by the life of the Preachers. Folio 212
                     The firſt fault obiected againſt Preachers, and the anſwere. Folio 215
                     The ſecond crime obiected againſt Preachers, to diſcredit their doctrine. Folio 218
                     The third matter obiected againſt Preachers, and the anſwere thereof. Folio 222
                     Howe they are to be accompted of, that deride Preachers. Folio 190
                     The ſpecialties of a Preachers dutie Folio 209
                     
                        Preachers in deliuering Gods will, muſt do it openly, withoute feare or negligence. Folio 209. 210
                     
                        Preachers muſte giue good example of life, aunſwereable to their doctrine. Fol. Folio 21
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        Preachers are autorized by God in their calling. Folio 178
                     What eſtimation oughte to be hadde of Preachers. Folio 178
                     How thoſe are to be thought of, who do lightly regarde eyther preaching or Preachers. Folio 179
                     An obiection made againſt the credit of the Goſpell and the Preachers therof. &c. Folio 182
                     Some Preachers had but barren ſucceſſe, and yet was their doctrine truth. Folio 183
                     The cauſe of barren ſucceſſe is all one to the preſente Preachers as was to the Prophetes, &c. 
                           •
                        84
                     Howe grieuous it is for Preachers to offende. Folio 185
                     Whye Preachers offences are not to bee made more greeuous than they are. Fol. Folio 185
                  
                  
                     
                     Princes.
                     ¶ How Papiſtes do vnlawfully ouerrule and abuſe Princes. Folio 221
                     The full right of authoritie is onely by Proteſtāts granted to Princes, &c. Folio 221
                  
                  
                     Principalities.
                     ¶ A principle of papiſtrie againſt Principalities which cannot but occaſion warre. Folio 220
                     Papiſtes and not Proteſtants alter titles of Principalities. Folio 220
                     Papiſtes and not Proteſtantes challenge all temporall power of Principalities. Fol. Folio 220.
                  
                  
                     Prophets.
                     ¶ Deſcription of falſe Prophets examined. Folio 68
                     Diſtinction to be made betwixte the cloathing, and the fruites of falſe Prophets. Folio 69
                     How falſe Prophets are diſcerned by their fruites, and chiefely by theyr Doctrine. Folio 84
                     Three poyntes of Doctrine concerning falſe Prophets. Folio 84. 85
                     A ſecond poynt of doctrine, by which falſe Prophets are diſcerned from true teachers. Folio 87. 88. 89. 90
                     A thirde poynte of doctrine to trie the teachers whether they are true or falſe Prophets. Folio 92
                     Falſe miracles wrought by falſe Prophets to deceyue Gods people. Folio 78. 79
                     The teachers of the doctrine of Chriſts office and comming in the fleſh, &c. found to be falſe Prophets. Folio 91
                     Falſe Prophets are they that eyther in flatte words denie Ieſus to be Chriſt, or by indirect meanes go about to teach it. Folio 86
                  
                  
                     Prouidence.
                     ¶ Of Gods ſpeciall Prouidence for euery thing. Folio 201
                     That vve muſt reſt vpon Gods Prouidence in our deſiring things of this life. Folio 205
                     Foure reaſons why for things of this life we ſhould euer content our ſelues in and with Gods Prouidence. Folio 205
                  
                  
                     Puniſhment.
                     ¶ The Puniſhment of ſinne. Folio 168
                     
                        Puniſhmentes ſente from God for examples ſake. Folio 169. 170. 171. 172. 173
                  
               
            
            
               R.
               
                  
                     Repentance.
                     ¶ How God calleth England to repent, and without Repentance what is like to befall it. Folio 188
                  
                  
                     Reprehenſion.
                     ¶ How the enimies of truth diſlike perticular Reprehenſion. Folio 217
                  
                  
                     Riches.
                     ¶ Why Riches and pleaſures are reſembled to thornes. Folio 202
                     How Riches do hurt, and worldly pleaſures harme. Folio 202
                     Why it is ſo hard a thing for him that aboundeth in Riches too bee ſaued. Fol. Folio 202. 203
                     Two meanes to withſtād the miſchiefes of Riches and worldly wealth. Folio 204
                     There is no aſſurance to bee had of worldly Riches. Folio 204
                     The eſtimation that is to be had of all earthly things, and conſequently of Riches. Folio 205
                  
               
            
            
               S.
               
                  
                     Sacrament.
                     ¶ What a Sacrament is. Folio 118
                     How the body and bloud of Chriſt are ſayde to be meate and drinke: thys concerneth the Sacrament. Folio 137. 138
                     Againſt the carnal eating and drinking of Chriſt body and bloud in the Sacrament. Folio 142. 143
                     What to eate Chriſtes bodie, and to

drinke his bloud as in the Sacrament. Fol. Folio 144. 145. 146
                     The eating of Chriſt by faith, is no derogation to the dignitie of the Sacrament, and profit therof. Folio 147
                     In the vſe of the Sacrament is a double eating to be noted. Folio 148
                     Our ſences in the vſe of the Sacrament are helpers to our better receyuing of the ſame. Folio 148. 149. 150
                     The diſſention of the Proteſtantes for the Sacrament, is no ſuch greate matter as the Papiſts make it. Folio 56
                     The wickedneſſe of the miniſter doeth not derogate any thing from the effect of the Sacrament &c. Folio 119
                     The faith of the receiuer, not the life of the miniſter doth helpe or hinder in the effect of the Sacrament. Folio 120
                     Fruiteful actions and doctrines concerning the Sacrament of the Lords ſupper. Folio 33
                     Chriſt his body, &c. receiued in the Sacrament of the Lords ſupper. Folio 34
                     The enemie of Chriſt in the Sacrament, is not carnally to be vnderſtoode. Folio 35
                     Papiſticall vntruthes and abuſes concerning the Sacrament of the Lordes ſupper. Folio 35
                     Blaſphemous doctrine of wicked mens eating of the bodie of Chriſte in the Sacrament refelled. Folio 152, 153
                     How we ought to prepare our ſelues to the worthye receiuing of the Sacrament of Chriſts bodie and bloud. Folio 154
                     How we are to make triall of our ſelues before we come to receiue the Sacrament of Chriſts bodie and bloud. Folio 154. 155. 156.
                     A briefe and pithie prayer for communicāts to ſay, before they receiue the Sacrament of Chriſts bodie and bloud Fol. Folio 157. 158
                     The faithful togither with the outward ſigne receiue the inwarde thinges in the Sacrament. Folio 128
                  
                  
                     Sacraments.
                     ¶ The difference betwixte the Iewes Sacrament and ours conſiſteth in externall ſignes, & reſpect of time. Folio 133. 134
                     
                        Sacramēts are badges, by which we chriſtians are knowne from Idolaters. Folio 150
                     
                        Sacraments are the ſeales whereby Gods promiſes are confirmed vnto vs. Folio 151
                     How Chriſtes bodie and bloud is truely and rightly to be eaten and drunken as well in the Sacraments, as without them. Folio 142
                     What the internal part of Sacraments is. Fol. Folio 122
                     
                        Sacraments are ſeales whereby the letters patents of our ſaluation in Chriſt are confirmed vnto vs. Folio 123
                     Why Sacraments were ordayned. Folio 125
                     Our infirmitie the firſt cauſe why Sacraments were ordayned. Folio 125
                     The ſecond cauſe why Sacraments were inſtituted is oure exerciſe in the remembraunce of Chriſts benefits. Folio 126
                     The thirde ende wherevnto Sacramentes were appointed. Folio 126
                     
                        Sacraments conſiſt of three parts. Folio 120
                     The ſecond part whereof Sacraments doe conſiſt, is the ſpiritual or inward thing Fol. Folio 122
                     The third part wherein Sacraments conſiſt is the words of Chriſts inſtitution and promiſe. Folio 124
                     The fourth cauſe why Sacramentes were ordayned. Folio 126
                     The laſt cauſe why Sacraments were appointed. Folio 127
                     God the only author of Sacraments. Folio 118
                     
                        Sacraments vnite vs vnto Chriſt. Folio 151
                     
                        Sacraments are too linke vs togither in brotherly vnitie. Folio 151
                     Papiſticall Sacraments of their owne deuiſe. Folio 32
                     Papiſtes cannot be knowne to be of the true Church by their Sacraments. Folio 30
                     Papiſticall number of ſacraments. Folio 30
                     
                        Sacraments markes of Gods Church. Folio 23
                     
                        What diffeeence is to bee obſerued betwixt the Sacramentes of the olde Iewes &c. Folio 129
                  
                  
                     Saluation.
                     ¶ Chriſtonly is al in al to Saluatiō. Folio 85. 86
                     It is not ſufficient to Saluation, to be idle profeſſours of God, but alſo doers of godly deedes. Folio 160. 161
                     Blaſphemous derogation to the merits of Chriſts working our Saluation. Folio 91
                     The letters patents and ſeales of our Saluation what they are. Folio 123
                     The old Iewes vnder the law, hadde the ſame hope of Saluation by Chriſt, that we now haue. Folio 129. 130. 131
                     Proteſtants doctrine of Saluation, is the doctrine of the Scripture. Folio 234
                  
                  
                     Sciſmes.
                     ¶ Chriſtēdome torne by Popiſh Sciſmes. Fol. Folio 103
                     
                        Sciſmes in the Eaſt Church whiche were Chriſtians. Folio 58
                     
                        Sciſmes between diuerſe of the auntient fathers. Folio 58. 59
                     The Papiſtes cannot without their own great ſhame obiect Sciſmes to Proteſtants. Folio 59
                  
                  
                     Scriptures.
                     ¶ The learned aduerſarie refuſeth to be tryed by the Scriptures, and why? Folio 25
                     Why Papiſtes doe refuſe tryall by the Scriptures. Folio 26
                     Blaſphemie of the Papiſtes againſte the Scriptures. Folio 26
                     The written Scriptures onely are and ought to bee ſufficiente to trye all truth. Folio 23
                     The Papiſtes refuſe triall by the Scriptures. Folio 24
                     Three poyntes, ſhewing how the Papiſtes eſteeme the Scriptures. Folio 24. 25
                     How the Church may iudge or vſe the Scriptures concerning their truth. Folio 27
                     Greuous faults in the Church of Rome, by taking hir authoritie ouer the Scriptures. Folio 27. 28
                     Manifeſt falſe interpretations of Scriptures vſed by Papiſtes. Folio 28
                     Doctrines of Papiſts againſte the Scriptures in ſixe perticulars. Folio 28. 29
                  
                  
                     Sectes.
                     ¶ Proteſtantes are not to be blamed for the Sectes that happen in the time of the Goſpell. Folio 55
                     
                        Sectes do more agree to Papiſtes than to Proteſtants. Folio 55
                     Papiſticall Schoolemen, which diuided themſelues into Sectes, and how hurtfull that is to Chriſtianitie. Folio 6
                  
                  
                     Sinne.
                     ¶ God is not the author of Sinne. Folio 166
                     The puniſhment of Sinne, and what are the cauſes that moue God to plague men. Folio 168
                     We cannot acknowledge a God, but that withall he muſt puniſh ſinne. Folio 191
                     Wicked menne are plaged of God for their owne Sinnes to our example. Folio 162
                  
                  
                     Soule.
                     ¶ Faith the mouth of the Soule, whereby Chriſt is eaten. Folio 144
                     A compariſon betwixte the body and the Soule. Folio 138
                     What the Soule is to the body, that is God to the Soule. Folio 138
                     How Chriſt was prepared to bee the foode of our Soules. Folio 139
                     Chriſt the foode of our ſoules. Folio 136. 137
                  
                  
                     Succeſſion.
                     ¶ Papiſtes obiect Succeſſion as a true note of their Church. Folio 36
                     How the argumente of Succeſſion hathe bin vſed by the fathers. Folio 37
                     
                        Succeſſion is nothing without the doctrine of the Apoſtles. Folio 38
                     The true Church better proued by doctrine than ſucceſſion, &c. Folio 39
                     Perſonall Succeſſion is no ſure proofe

that the Romiſh Churche is the true Church. Folio 42
                  
               
            
            
               T.
               
                  
                     Tranſubstantiation.
                     ¶ The abſurditie of Tranſubstantiation. Fol. Folio 121
                  
               
            
            
               V.
               
                  
                     Vniuerſities.
                     ¶ The cauſe of few Diuines in Vniuerſities of the beſt ſorte of wittes. Folio 64
                     Diuerſitie of opinions betwixt the Vniuerſities and the Friers. Folio 62
                  
                  
                     Vnthankefulneſſe.
                     ¶ Opiniō of fre will is Vnthākefulneſſe. Folio 13
                  
               
            
            
               W.
               
                  
                     Wealth.
                     ¶ The means wherby the Welth of England is waſted. Folio 227
                  
                  
                     Wickedneſſe.
                     ¶ Of colouring Wickedneſſe with other mens faults. Folio 224
                     What a mans flattering of himſelfe in Wickedneſſe may come vnto. Folio 224. 225
                  
                  
                     Word.
                     ¶ The true cauſe why the Word preched doth not alway bring forth fruite. Folio 185
                     The godly alway take profit by the preching of the Word. Folio 185
                     Three 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        tes of foule whiche eate vp the ſeede of Gods Word in the high ways Fol. Folio 186
                     The inconuenience of preaching the Word in generalitie. Folio 187
                     That the Word of God is reſembled to ſeede, and why? Folio 179
                     The power of the Word of god in it ſelf, & in the eſtimation of the world. Folio 180
                     What Gods Word worketh in the hearers. Folio 180
                     How gods Word preuaileth euē againſt mans wiſedome and cunning. Folio 180
                     The imaginations, practiſes, and means of the wicked to withſtand GODS Worde. Folio 181
                     The Authoritie of the Worde of God is from it ſelfe, &c. Folio 26
                     Such are openlye of the Churche, as are called therto by Gods Worde. Folio 21
                     Gods word is a marke of his Church. Folio 22
                     The cauſes which holde men from obedience to Gods Worde. Folio 203
                     The negligence of our dayes in hearing the Worde. Folio 203
                     Of the power of Chriſte appearing in himſelfe and his Worde. Folio 4
                     The gouernement & direction by gods Worde preuaileth more than any deuiſe of men. Folio 5
                     How the church of Chriſt muſt preſerue Gods Word, and deliuer the meaning of it. Folio 27
                  
                  
                     Workes.
                     ¶ Papiſtical iuſtification by Workes. Folio 29
                     The doctrine of iuſtification by Faythe only doth procure good Workes &c. Fol. Folio 13. 14
                     That the Goſpell doeth not diſcourage man from good Workes, & why? Folio 15
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   