
      
         
            
            
            AN APPROVED Medicine againſt the deſerued Plague.
            
            
               ¶Is any among you afflicted?
Let him pray. 
               
                  Iames. 5.13.
            
            ¶JMPRINTED AT London, by Thomas Eſt, dwelling in Alderſgate-ſtreete, at the Signe of the black Horſe.
            1593.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the honorable and vertuous Lady Scudamore, attendant vppon hir Maieſties moſt excellent perſon in hir priuie Chamber, Anthony Anderſon, Preacher of Chriſts holy goſpell, Subdean of hir Maieſties Royall Chappell, wiſheth all honorable encreaſe, and heauenly felicitie.
            
            
               ALthough (Honorable Madame) the matter herewith tendred, be of ſmall worth, to ſome men, & leſſe eſteemed with many, yet ſure I am the right vſe thereof, may aduaile moe, then make accompt of it. If in the daies of health & proſperitie, wee thinck it duetifull to pray the Lord, to continue the ſame, how much more ought wee, in affliction and aduerſitie, to practiſe ſound petition, which godlineſſe hath this riches, that the faithfull by it in Chriſt from God, doth receiue, both temporary good, and eternall comforts. Wee in this Realme, are vnder the rod of affliction, and who doth pray, but thoſe which are taught of God, to vſe it. Amongſt the number of whome, for that in my knowledge, with many others in Court, your Ladiſhip doth dayly vſe and deſire it, and my ſelfe for your good opinion and Chriſtian kindneſſe conceiued and beſtowed on mee, to you greatly boūd, I am bold to patronize my poore indeauors preſent, vnder your Godly protection, aſſured that

both in Court & country, it ſhalbe the more in vſe, which vndoubtedly will counteruaile their paines, if they pray in faith. The cauſe mouing this my boldneſſe, to preſent the Church here with, is, my dutie to the ſame in general, & eſpecially, next to the moſt honorable Court, (whereof I am a poore membre, in hir Maieſties goodneſſe,) to my comfortable charge at Stepney, a people of great import, for Maryne ſeruice, cheefely zealous in God, loyall to hir Maieſtie, well deſeruing of the whole Realme, and now vnder the rod of this ſmart viſitatiō, for whom, I humbly beſech all them, which may or ſhall feele any comfort by this poore tender, that in their feruent prayers, they will effectually commēd vs to the Throne of Gods mercies in Chriſt. And to you good Madame, with the reſt of the honorable and godly Ladies and others at Court, I humbly commend mee, beſeeching God, to graunt vs mercifull deliuerance of this his louing rod, that wee hir Maieſties ſeruants, may thether returne to our boūden dutie, as apertaineth, and ſo humbly I take my leaue.
            
               
                  Auguſt 1. 1593. Stepney.
               Your honors deuote in the Lord, Anthony Anderſon.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶To the humble hearted Readers, in the Lord.
            
               THE Almightie GOD, the Lord of Hoſts (as Father of mercies) deare brethern, for many yéeres paſt, hath ſwéetly called vs to vnfained repentance, by the Miniſtery of his holy woord, but wée haue not hearkened therevnto. Wherefore eftſoones and againe, the ſame mightie God, doth at this preſent, ſommon vs, by his ſmart Preacher,Micah. 6.9. the viſiting rod. Whoſe encreaſing voyce, cryeth to all in the perſons of many, thus. Oh ſinfull earth hearken and giue eare: ſtop thy courſe, ſtay thy race, tourne thy ſelfe to mée, receaue my ſtripes with pacience, and wiſely foreſée the plague and hide thée. For he that ſent mée ſaith farther vnto thee.Pro. 22.3. Zoph. 2.1. O Nation not worthie to be loued, how yet, haue I, loued thee? What ſhould I haue done, that I haue not done vnto thée? I haue giuen thée a wonderfull peace, an inuincible protection, an heauenly doctrine, and the choyſe ſtore, of all earthy treaſure. The gold of Ophir, Salomon ſought after,2. Chron. 8.18. but the Indians gold, I haue powred into thy lap, as vnlooked for. A Prince thou haſt, the holy wonder of the world. Elſe, aſke the Ilands which know not God. Thy Realme and reſt, is kept by mée, the watchman thereof, and when ſoeuer the enimie aſſaileth, I put him back, with great diſgrace. The heauens doe drop the fatneſſe, & the earth doth make thée laugh and ſing, what wouldeſt thou haue more, but a continuance of that ſpirituall comfort, and corporall pleaſures which yet abide with thée, but be wiſe and conſider, ſée how I now begin to beate thée, beware therefore, repent in tyme, leaſt I vtterly remoue,Reue. 2.5. thy Candleſtick from thée, and then who will pittie thy laſt diſſolution? Behold,

and heare my rod,Micah. 6.9. and mée that ſent it. I haue made thée ſick with ſtriking, doe not my percing arrows, ſtick faſt in thée?Pſal. 38.2.5. Are not thy wounds putrified? Doth not haſty death greatly deuoure thée? Mark it well and the cauſe therof. Thy ſinne is the cauſe,Micah. 6.13. thy great ſinnes, and they paſſing accompt.Oſeas. 9.9.17 Turne therefore vnto mée that am in iuſt angre comming vnto thée with a mynde of reuenge: prepare thée therefore to méete mée, before the daye of my decrée come foorth.Pſal. 106. in all. Lucke. 7.38. Ioel. 2.13. Come to mée, not with Iſraells hipocriſie, but with Magdalens teares. Rent your harts, and kéepe whole your garments, for I cannot take pleaſure, in that bodely exerciſe, where the penitent ſpirit, ſpeaketh not for mercie. If any be afflicted let him pray.Iam. 5.13. If many be vnder the rod, let all come together, turne together, mourne together, cry together and ſay: O Lord of Hoſts, in the midle of thy wars thinck vpon thy promiſed mercies. Wée come, no more to fight againſt thée in our ſinfull luſts, but to fall before thée, forſaking & confeſſing our ſinnes, ſwéet Lord haue mercie. And let euery of you,Eſa. 1.5.6. Hoſ. 4.1. Iero. 8.6. from the top to the toe, (for you are ſore from the head to the foote) applying profitably the contrauerſie to your ſelues, ſay: Our ſinnes O Lord, yea euery man ſay, my ſinnes, as our ſinnes are the cauſes of this malady. Our rebellions, preſumptions, ſcorning, Atheiſtical, our Romane ſinnes, our carnall apetites, preſent, paſt, remembred, and forgotten ſinnes. Sinnes without remorſe, without conſcience, againſt all conſcience, euen when ye ſpirit quaketh in dread: euen thē ye fleſh burneth in luſt. Sinnes in Court vnbridled, ſinnes in the Church not repented of, in the country not cared for.Iero. 17.27. The prophanation of the Sabboth day, the abhominations in the wéeke day, no truth, leſſe truſt,Hoſe. 4.1.2. no faith to God, no loue to our brethern, much fayll of loyaltie to the Prince, and ſmall proofe of due obedience, to hir Magiſtrates. But a mightie ſcorne of the Lords Preachers, through an vtter contempt of his woord. Reſolute, in league with ſinne,Eſa. 28. death and hell, and an abſolute diſtruſt, of Gods ſure promiſes, either for mercies, or Iudgement.

And what ſhould I ſay more? Oh how many are the fooliſh wiſe, which ſay in vnpuniſhed boldneſſe, they haue no God,Pſal. 14.1. 
               There is no God. Oh England, O people, why wilt thou dye? Say to thy ſelfe, Oh Soule, repent thée of thy ſinne,Iero. 18.8. &. 26 3. Pſal. 91.4.7. and God will repent him of the plague, will take thée into his protection, and hide thée vnder his wings. They ſhall fall on both ſides thée, but it ſhall not come to thee.
            But if thou wilt not hearken to this his voice, O fleſh, (of what mould ſo euer,) but ſtill wilt pamper thy ſelfe in carnall delights, to a further tranſgreſſion, (which now ought to be feared) then feare, for he hath not ſent this ſcourage for little purpoſe, and be ſure that he hath his ſtore-houſe full, of finall inſtruments, which can and will make quick diſpatch. As cleanneſſe of téeth, barrenneſſe of earth,Amos. 4.6. brought of heauen, deuouring wormes, fierie feauers, burning botch, ſcowring ſword, reuenging axe, hayleſtones and ſtormes of fier, as of Sodome and Gomorrah, to perſecute, to pull downe, to caſt out, and into hell, all thoſe which forget God. Are the treaſures of wickedneſſe ſtill in your houſes, the falſe balance, ſmall waights, naughtie wares, counterfaite lights, ſwéet woords, ſowre déedes?Eccle. 10.16.17 Do your heads eate for luſt, and not for néede, drinck to ſurfet, and not for thirſt, ſend their proud ſeruants, to bring, and neuer ſatiſfied? Are the daughters of Sion proud, as Eſay deſcryes them?Amos 4.1. Eſa. 3.16. Ezech 13.18. Eſa. 28.10. 1. cor. 9.26. & 14.9. Ier. 20.9. Micha. 3.12. Be your Prophets chamber groomes, to lay pillowes, vnder ſinfull elbowes? or doe their tongues cleaue to the roofe of their mouthes? or ſpeake they to the Clowds, or in the Ayre? or is fearefull Ieremy, become an example? Oh for woe. Ah Syon, thou plowed field, ſometime, the bewtie of the world? what is become of thée? Oh England the preſent Bride, beware of widowhood,Pſal. 19.5. Cant. 6.1. the Bridegroome is come out of his chamber, goe foorth to méete him. He is gon into his beds of ſpiceries, ſhall be finde ſtore?Cant. 4.13. He féedeth of flowers, where be his Lillies? Oh thriſe happie land, perceaue thy preſent happineſſe, preuent a futuer horror, pray for the lyfe of thy Princely light, and harden not thy hart,2. Sam. 21.17.
               
being ſtill dayly called in mercie.1. Cor. 11. Lucke. 13.3.5. For this ſinne, many are ſick, and many are dead, let the Remainder repent, leaſt ye all likewiſe periſh. And now my beloued, and important charge,Ro. 12.1. I beſech you by the mercies of God, remember with mee,Amos. 1.2. &. 3.4. there is no plague but for ſinne, and the Lyon roareth not, without his pray. Wée are now vnder this growing plague with others,Zeph. 2.3. lette vs repent effectually as others, which truely,Eſa. 30.22. ſéeke the Lord, Caſt our ſinnes from vs, and draw the Lords mercie to vs. Forget not what godly Sirach ſaith,Eccle. 10.8. becauſe of vnrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceipt, the Kingdome, is tranſlated, from one people,Hab
                     •
                  . 2.9. to an other. Wo vnto the buylder which buildeth with blood. And bewiſe to vnderſtand this. Goods euill gotten, are of no long continuance. Finally let this ſentence ſommon you, before the laſt Tromp, ſound for you. Go to now,Ia 5.1.2 ye rich men, wéepe and howle, for your miſeries, that ſhall come vpon you. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth eaten, your gold and ſiluer is canckered, and the ruſt of them, ſhalbe a witneſſe againſt you, and ſhall eate your fleſh, as it were fier. Ye heaped vp treaſures for the laſt daies. Behold: the hyer of your laborers, which haue reaped your féelds (roomed your ſhippes) which is of you kept back, by fraud, cryeth, and their crye, is entred into the eares of the Lord of Hoſts. Iames, 5.1.2. &c. Lay your ſelues open to the Lord, for all things are apparant vnto him,Pro. 28.13. but he will haue thée to accuſe thy ſelfe, that he may forgiue thée. He that hideth his ſinnes (ſaith Salomon) ſhall not proſper, but he that confeſſeth his ſinnes, and forſaketh them, ſhall finde mercie. Therefore take a good heart to thée, bring repentance with thée, fall on your knées,1. Tim. 2.8. lift vp pure hands, the whole in Church, in our great aſſemblies, the ſick at home, amids their children and families. Take theſe prayers (or ſuch) into your hands, ſend them hartely, vp to God, in Chriſt our onely Mediator, and feare not to finde mercie, with gracious deliuerance, becauſe,Pro. 50.15. he hath ſo promiſed, ſaying: Call vpon mée in the day

of thy trouble, and I will heare thée, and deliuer thée, and thou ſhalt glorifie mee.Math. 11.28. And our ſauiour Chriſt doth tenderly inuite all penitent ſinners thus. Come vnto mée all you that trauell and be heauie loden, and I my ſelfe will eaſe you. To whome with the Father and the holy Ghoſt be alwaies, all honour and glorie, one God euerlaſting. Amen.
            
         
         
            A Prayer to God againſt the Plague.
            
            
               WE proſtrate our ſouls and bodies, before thy mercy ſeate, O Father of mercies, & humbly confeſſe, that we haue moſt iuſtly procured, thy heauie indignation againſt vs. We haue hetherto, ſpent our time in wanton appetites, & careleſſe abuſe, of thy ſinguler bounties, but thou haſt in mercie, curbed the bitte, & ſtraytned the rayne, of our vnbrydled affections, whereby we begin to dread thy threatned Iudgements. Our ſinnes are as manyfold, as manifeſt, (O Lord) we haue dayly heard ye word of our ſauing health, with ye eare of grudge & contempt, either deriding or not caring, but neuer truely repenting, at the cry thereof. Thine aboundant bleſſings erthie, we haue gréedely deuoured, and by our wealth, haue encreaſed our wickedneſſe But O ſwéete Father haue mercie, and pardon our ſinnes, (euen the whole trée, with hir braunching fruits,) which at this preſent, we heartely diſclayme, and wherewith, euen the téeth of the whole Land, hath béene ſet on edge, namely infidelitie, incredulitie, and all impietie. No faith, no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of thée in our

harts, though great pretence of thy Religion in our lippes, but by falſehood, and cunning circumuention, one of another, by lying lips, and decitfull tongues, vanitie, hath béene toſſed, one to another, pryuat pilffrie, and open ſtealth, robbing at home, and rouing abrode, ſwearing, forſwaring, whorring and killing, oppreſſing, & deuoureing, to all our powers and pollicies, euen blood vnto blood, paſſing by pleaſure to pleaſures, from profite to pride, from pride to ambition, and in ambition, to inward contempt, & outward diſdaine, each one of another. Our common peace by thée, hath not yet procured our Godly peace with thée, but rather we haue taken occaſion thereby, to harden our hearts againſt thée, which mightilie hath drawen thée to this great contrauerſie with vs. O Lord vnbend (in mercy) thy bow of ſtrength, for thy ſtéeled Arrows, ſticke faſt in vs, and our putrified wounds, bewray our iniquities. Yea Lord that more is, if we by thée, tourne not ſpéedely to thee, the wiſe in thée, doe behold thy ſharpned ſword, with an outſtretched arme, drawne out againſt vs. O Lord heare vs, and heale vs, for in this our ſickeneſſe and trouble (in our mediator Chriſt Ieſus) we call vnto thée. And Lord it is high time, for our head Citie is ſicke, hir Siſter Cities grone vnder this burden, their neighbor people are turned to their earth, and no part is frée, from the noyſome peſtilence. It flyeth by day, it walketh in the darke, it deſtroyeth at noone tide, & none can reſiſt it, but onely thou O Lord, which ſent it, euen thou onely (if thou wilt) canſt vtterly reſtrayne it. O déere father forgiue vs wretched ſinners, relieue vs miſerable wretches, remember that we are but earth and aſhes, yet in thy mercie thy déere children: deliuer vs from death, and worke life in vs. Let this thy louing rodde, ridde vs, of our carnal ruſt, and quicken vs with thy ſanctifying ſpirit, open our harts to thy holy word, purge our cōſciences from all dead works, and rebuild vs fit, for thy holy ſeruice, giue vs patience in euerie aduerſitie, an humble and regardant eye, in all proſperitie, feruent ſpirits to pray to thée, and now to giue thée

no reſt, till thou vouchſafe to haue mercy vppon vs. Our Prince thine holy Anoynted, prayeth for vs, hir potētates, thy preaching miniſters, and ſanctified people, mourne and lament. Thy wydows, and deſolate Orphanes, yea thy ſmal and tender Infants cry, lifting vp pure hands, ſwéete Lord, (ſay they) haue mercy. And now O Lord both one and all, powring out the teares of our hearts vnto thée, moſt humbly beſech thée, relieue vs, releaſe vs, heare vs, forgiue vs, reuiue vs, preſerue vs, protect vs, deliuer vs from euill, and receaue vs into thy euerlaſting fauor, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord: To whome with thée and the holy Ghoſt, thrée diſtinct perſons and one onely our good God, be all honour and glory, for euer and euer. Amen.
            
         
         
            An earneſt prayer for the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
            
               O Lord God holy Father, infinitly wiſe, omnipotent, and aboundant in mercie, mightie in worke, & iuſt in reuenge, which for the common conuerſe, of all men, haſt planted them plats, & put them vnder ſoueraigne auctoritie, through which good gouernmēt, they might moſt firmely, liue and loue one another, moſt wiſely ordaining each one, to haue mutuall need and occaſioned entercourſe one with another▪ Sondry which Royall ſtaues, of bewtie and bands, eftſoones thou haſt broken into ſhieuers, when by ouermuch prouocation

& contempt, thy awonted long ſuffering, hath bene abuſed: as therby vnder a ſparing chaſtiſement, to reduce them, or by a deadly blow, vtterly to ſubuert them. O Lord magnificent, by thee it is, that Kingdomes are, and Kings doe raigne. Putteſt downe one, & ſetteth vp another, as, where, & when it pleaſeth thee, in all & euery place, vnder the Coape of heauen. Wee thy choſen children and people of England, magnifie thy mercies, and prayſe thy power, for giueing & preſeruing vnto vs, a moſt rare and peareleſſe Queene, our Soueraigne Ladie ELIZABETH, by whoſe ſacred ſcepter, thy holy Church, this common weale, and many other Nations and people haue found, both celeſtiall bleſſings, and terreſtrial comforts. The faithful Proteſtant from wherſoeuer, findeth heere a ſecure & fertile norcery. The wilfull papiſt, ſitteth vnder his Vyne, & the malcontent carnall, hath long laſting fauour, but euery of which by hir, haue from thee O Lord, thy goſpell, to reclayme them, hir Scepter, to protect them, with a ſweet rod, in ſparing hand to refine them. Hir diſloyall ſubiects at home, & hir profeſſed enimies abroad of all ſorts, thou haſt miraculouſly brought vnder, or to vtter confuſion. For the which wee render vnto thee continuall praiſe. And inaſmuch O Lord, as our life, & the light of the land thy golden Candleſtick, is deadly darckned in the want of hir, Lord, ſtill giue vs thy bountifull mercie, and therein preſerue, hir Highneſſe, long to raigne ouer vs. Encreaſe, thy graces in hir, hir goodneſſe to vs, to thaduaunce of vertue, & ſuppreſſion of vice. Keepe thyne anoynted

our Soueraigne, from the trechery of diſſembling ſubiects, and mallice of the forren foe. Hide hir vnder the ſhadow of thy wings, from the noyſome peſtilence, and defend hir againſt the hurtfull ſword: that our ſelues and families, may liue in peace, our land, may yeld hir encreaſe, & that no inuaſion,Pſal. 144.10. may empeach vs, or going out may daunt vs, nor any crying be in our ſtreetes.
            Deare Father graunt hir our Soueraigne, a ſwift eye and ſpeedie reſcue, from the ſubtill ſnare, of euery wily hunter. Giue hir Lord, faſt, and not faylling confederats. Wiſe and faithfull Councellors, loyall and louing ſubiects, and ſo in thy mercie keepe vs from euill, that wee prouoke not, thy iudgements, to depriue vs, of our chiefeſt comfort. Graunt this O Father, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
         
         
            
            The Preface.
            
               MY Father hauing ſpeciall care,
               of Stepny his great charge:
               Hath made ſweet prayers for their cō
                  fort
               their harts to God enlarge.
            
            
               And I deſirous of your health,
               my bretheren, Siſters all:
               Haue ſent you theſe to traine you vp,
               rather on God to call.
            
            
               For th'health and wealth of our parents,
               our ſelues and neighbours eke:
               Pray we to God with one accord,
               for ſo it is moſt meete.
            
            
               And ſo my bretheren fare you well,
               with all my ſiſters deere:
               God graunt that we may giue vnto,
               gods word attentiue eare.
            
            
               Antony Anderſon, Iunior.
            
         
         
            
            A prayer for the infection of the plague. 
               1593.
            
            
               O Lord our God omnipotent,
            of mercy wee thee craue:
            Poure downe thy truth moſt excellent,
            that we the ſame may haue.
            And ceaſe O Lord thy iry rod,
            which doth opreſſe vs ſore:
            And giue vs true repentance Lord,
            that wee may ſinne no more.
            Ceaſe now O Lord thy heauie hand,
            the Father wee entreate:
            And let vs in our harts thy woord,
            full often times repeate.
            From thee O Lord wee cannot fly,
            Thy power doth ſo excell:
            But keepe from vs we thee beſeech,
            thy rod which is moſt fell.
            But giue to vs O Lord of might,
            the pardon of our ſinne:
            And take thy plague from vs O Lord,
            that heere of long hath bin.
            Giue vs O Lord thy holy word,
            which alwaies is moſt true:
            And giue vs grace to praiſe thy name,
            for praiſe to thee is due.
            Remember bleſſed Lord thy flock,
            which elſe is like to pyne:
            And take from vs that heauie clogge,
            which loads vs at this tyme.
            
               Thy will be done O Lord of might,
            as ſeemeth beſt to thee:
            For thou wilt ſtrike where thou thinkſt beſt,
            no man a lette can bee.
            When it ſhall pleaſe thy maieſtie,
            to take this life away:
            Receaue our ſoules vnto thy Throne,
            to liue with thee for aye.
            O Lord preſerue our noble Queene,
            our realme and people both:
            And keep vs from the deadly feare,
            of thyne eternall wroth.
            Graunt our requeſt O Lord of might,
            for Chriſt his ſake thy ſonne:
            And take away thy cruell plague,
            that now is vs among.
            Finis
            
               
                  qd Anthony Anderſon, iunior.
            
            
         
      
   