
      
         
            
            
            THE CONVERTS FIRST LOVE Diſcerned, Iuſtified, Left, and Recouered.
            Reſoluing THE TRVTH OF AN EFFECTVALL CONVERSION: AND Informing THE RIGHT WAY TO PERSEVERANCE and PERFECTION.
            By THOMAS COOPER.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            LONDON, Printed by F. KINGSTON for WILLIAM WELEY, and are to bee ſold at his ſhop in Pauls Church-yard at the ſigne of the white Swanne. 1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VVORſhipfull and religious, Sir Iames Harington, Sir William Dier, Sir William Fairut, Sir Edward Harington, Sir Thomas Fulgeam, Knights, and their vertuous Ladies, grace, mercie, and peace from God the Father through IESVS CHRIST the ſonne of the Father, in truth and loue.
            
               RIght Worſhipfull, and dearely beloued in the Lord, whom I loue alſo in the truth; and not I onely, but they that haue knowen the truth, for the truths ſake which dwelleth in vs, which is profeſſed and maintained of you, and ſhall abide with and preſerue vs for euer. Bleſſed be God, euen the father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who hath reuealed his ſonne vnto you, and hath giuen you a large heart towards his Saints, that your delight is the Law of the Lord, and your affections are to the excellent that are on earth, to conſider wiſely of the cauſe of the afflicted, and to miniſter comfort to the diſtreſſed ſoule. And bleſſed be the name of his Maieſtie for euer, who hath reſpected the baſe eſtate of his ſeruant, and made mee a witneſſe both of your loue vnto his word, and his afflicted members. In

conſideration whereof, as I can doe no more then teſtifie my thankfulneſſe vnto our gracious God, for his mercies beſtowed on mee, not only in deliuering mee from a moſt deſperate ſickneſſe, but in caſting mee graciouſly on ſuch feeling members, who miniſtred ſo abundantly towards my recouerie: ſo I muſt doe no leſſe then to doe my vtmoſt indeuour, that the memoriall of the iuſt may liue for euer, and their righteouſneſſe may be had in euerlaſting remembrance, to their more comfortable aſſurance that their reward is with God; when all will-worſhip and preſumption of merit ſhall be confounded: and to the prouocation of the Saints in theſe daies, wherein charity is growen cold, that they bee not weary of well-doing, as being aſſured that in due time they ſhall reape, if they faint not. And the rather doe I finde my ſelfe obliged at this time to this Chriſtian dutie, becauſe the Lord hauing inabled mee in my great weakneſſe to beſtow a ſpirituall gift vpon the moſt of your worſhips, being graciouſly by Gods holy hand brought together to ſuch good ends: it pleaſed his good Maieſtie, ſo to affect your hearts with that heauenly treaſure, as not only to hearken with all reuerence and attention vnto the wholeſome word of life, but for the further eſtabliſhing of your iudgements, and triall of your hearts thereby, that it might appeare your holy purpoſe was to cleaue vnto the Lord in the obedience of his word: our gracious God, in the riches of his mercie, inclin'd ſome of your hearts (I doubt not, for the behoofe of all) to deſire a briefe of what had beene publikely taught, thereby to trie the ſpirits with the men of Berea, and ſo to hold the truth in conſtancie of well-doing. And could I doe better then, according Act. 1. 7.
               
to my poore ſtrength and memorie, then to leaue ſuch generall and ſhort notes with you, which might in ſome ſort teſtifie my deſire to build you forward in Chriſt Ieſus, howſoeuer they could not ſatiſfie your deſires for the full reſoluing of your conſciences in ſo principall and profitable a point as is the triall and recouerie of our firſt loue?
            And ought I not then to indeuour the further kindling of ſuch ſmoaking flax, ſuch holy and gracious deſires? May I not iuſtly take occaſion in paying a debt vnto you, to make the Church of God become my debtor for this paines, now publiſhed for the generall good, and ſo ingage my ſelfe in a further and more generall debt; both of praier, that the Lord would giue a bleſsing to theſe poore labours; and of further paines, as God ſhall miniſter health, occaſion, and libertie? And ſhall not the Saints alſo become debtors vnto you, by whoſe holy deſires it is, that they now alſo haue this glaſſe, to diſcerne aright their eſtate in grace, to recouer their decaies, and grow to perfection? And is not the Lord indebted vnto vs all, to crowne his owne graces, and recompence the faithfull imploiment of his talents? And hath not our glorious Matt. 25. 28. 29 2. Cor. 12. 8. God thus brought light out of darkneſſe? Will he not perfect his power in weakneſſe, and wiſdome in humane infirmitie? Shall not the dead men liue? Eſay 26. Zach. 3. Shall not they awake and ſing, which haue ſate in the duſt, yea in the ſhadow of death, yea haue beene euen ſwallowed vp of the nethermoſt hell? Shall not the brand be pluckt out of the fire, and the prey out of the teeth? That the glory may be vnto our God, and not vnto men. Behold (ſaith Iacob) I had not thought Eſay 49. Geneſ. 48. 11. to haue ſeene thy face; and yet the Lord hath let mee

liue to ſee thy ſeed. This is the Lords doing, and it is maruellous in our eies. Accept therefore (right worſhipfull) ſome fruit of your deſires, and euidence of Gods power in this weakneſſe of his ſeruant: which the more it appeares, let our God the more haue the only glory both of your deſires and my indeuours, in bleſsing both with conſcionable practiſe in this life, and crowning alſo both with competent perfection and glory in the life to come. This is the fruit of our labours; and for this, is, and ſhall bee, the ſcope and ſumme of my praiers vnto our God for you, that according to his promiſe he would make you perfect in euery good worke, to doe his will on earth, that his will may be done on you for euer in heauen; to raigne with Ieſus Chriſt in that glory, which neuer fadeth. And ſo I humbly take my leaue.
            
               From my poore houſe at COVENTRY, this 10. of April, 1610.
               
               Your Worſhips moſt bounden, for euer in Ieſus Chriſt,
THOMAS. COOPER.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, WISDOME TO DISCERNE HIS Eſtate aright, and grace to grow forward to perfection.
            
               BEloued in the Lord Ieſus, it is a moſt dangerous, and yet very eaſie and plauſible deluſion, to conceit vnto our ſelues an eſtate in grace, when as yet wee remaine the bond-ſlaues of Satan. And it is a very difficult, and yet moſt neceſſarie triall, to diſcerne our conſtant abiding and proceeding in this eſtate of grace. For (to paſſe by thoſe who make a mocke of conuerſion, as being a touch of noueltie, a brand of inconſtancie, and imputation of hypocriſie) who is there almoſt that flatters not himſelfe to be in the fauour of God, and ſo intereſſed in his grace? And hath he not many ſuch pretences and colours heereunto, which may ſo abuſe his iudgement, that hee may thinke himſelfe to be ſomewhat, when he is nothing; 
               Galat. 6. 3. and ſo refuſing to be found in Chriſt, by being loſt and emptied in himſelfe, thereby become worſe then nothing? Better neuer to haue beene borne, then ſo to bee deceiued. Oh how thè wiſdome of the fleſh prooues here enmitie againſt God! Is not this the iudgement vpon the world, that they 
               Rom. 8. 7. Iohn 9. 43. Occaſions to conceiue a falſe conuerſion. 1. Complexion.
                
               which ſee not, might ſee; and that they which ſee might be made blinde? Conſider firſt, I pray you, how nature occaſions this deceit. Is any diſpoſed leſſe euilly by the benefit of his complexion? Is any conſtrained from

               ſome act of euill by natures impotencie and deformity? 
               2. Natures impotencie. Behold, euen theſe to the naturall man prooue very dangerous ſtumbling blockes, to reſt in nature, as affoording ſome ſhew of good, more then is in others of an harder conſtitution, as breaking out leſſe into groſſe euils, then ſuch, who by natures abilitie are more prone and prouoked thereto. And is it not eſteemed a ſufficient meaſure of goodnes, to bee leſſe euill then others, howſoeuer the deſire and fountaine of corruption be the ſame in all? Is not the ſeeming good which by natures benefit ſhewes forth in the world, accounted currant holineſſe, and thereby excludeth the true power of well-doing?
            Eſpecially if to this ſhew of natures righteouſneſſe Education 
               3. Education. be adioined, whereby the minde being informed in knowledge, and reſtrained by ciuilitie, natures euill is heereby more kept vnder, and it ſeeming good ſet out more ſaleable and beautious to the ſiniſter iudgement: howſoeuer now nature hath gained no other then a weapon of vnrighteouſneſſe, to commit ſinne more dangerouſly, by how much it is inabled to couch it more cloſely, and ſmooth it more cunningly; yet this with the world paſſeth for a currant conuerſion, eſpecially if ſome ſuch change now appeare in the outward man, whereby wee may either differ from the ruſticitie and groſſe abuſes of our parents, or differ from the barbarous and deſperate ſprouts of our childhood, and vntamed youth.
            And if now the Lord ſhall giue the wicked their deſire, in 4. Restraining ſpirit. affoording them ſo farre the vſe of his ſpirit, as to reſtraine yet more inward corruption by it power and terrour, that ſo they may be fitter for ſuch outward proſperitie as they haue eſpecially made choice of in this life, and ſo renounced their intereſt in heauen, and withall may frame better to ſocietie, both of the good, to whom now they ſhall doe leſſe

hurt, as alſo of the euill, whom by this meanes they may prouoke to good; that ſo Gods gouernment of the world may be more beautifull and glorious, and his will more iuſtifiably accompliſhed in the elect and reprobate. Is not this reſtraint apprehended, as a great conqueſt ouer corruption; and ſo a conuerſion hence vainly concluded; ſeeing the inward hart is no whit renued, but only the corruption reſtrained from the outward act? nay, is not corruption more inraged inwardly, the more it is outwardly bridled & ſmothered? and ſo ſin made out of meaſure ſinfull: as being more inexcuſable, 
               Rom. 7. the more it is curbed: as breaking out more deſperately, 
               
                  Note.
                when the bridle is reiected: as ripening more dangerouſly, the more it boileth within: and ſo ſealing vp vengeance more certainly, yea more fearfully haſtning it, as proceeding to deſpight the ſpirit of grace. 
               
                  Heb. 10. 27. 28.
            
            And what though the Lord beſtow on the wicked many 5. Spirit of illumination.Matth. 7. excellent graces of his ſpirit, inabling them to teach others, to doe wondrous things, furthering them ſo farre in the ſhew of holineſſe, as that they ſhall ſeeme for a time to outſtrip the ſincere profeſſor? May they not teach other, and yet themſelues be reiected? May they not doe miracles, 1. Cor. 9. Iob 10. Gal. 6. 10. 2. Tim. 3. and yet heare, I know you not? Shall not the candle of the hypocrite be put out? Doth not this faire ſhew in the fleſh deceiue, and prooue deceiued?
            
            What ſhould I tell you of that change that is wrought by 6. Afflictions. afflictions? Will not the wicked in their troubles ſeeke the Lord diligently? Muſt not the vileſt forbeare when they cannot otherwiſe chuſe? And is it any maſterie, not to reuenge, when power is not in our hands? Will not the ſwine that is now cleanſed, returne to the mire againe? Is it charitie, then to forgiue the world, when we ſee no time left for Pſal. 78. 2. Pet. 2. execution of malice? Is it patience, to forbeare when wee can neither will nor chuſe? Is it obedience, to tremble vnder

the whip? to feare God only for his iuſtice, and not to loue him for his mercie?
            Oh but wee are deliuered out of trouble, and reſtored to 7. Proſperitie. 
               great happineſſe. Behold, wee are bleſſed on the earth: and are not we then truly bleſſed? Is not this a marke of holineſſe, to be proſperous in the world? Would God bleſſe our labours, if we did not ſerue him? May not this change from affliction to proſperitie be a certaine euidence of an inward change, from worſe to better, and ſo prooue vnto the fleſh a conceit of conuerſion?
            Surely, if the world bee Iudge, the caſe is quickly ruled. Who is the good man, but the rich man? Either his riches ſhall be the cloke to hide his faults by greatneſſe, briberie, cunning packing, friendſhip, &c. or his euill by the flatterie of the world ſhall be accounted good: hee will not doe ſo for his credit: he needs not ſteale, oppreſſe: he hath wherewithall: his couetouſneſſe is thrift; his pride, cleanlineſſe; his prodigalitie, bountie; his looſeneſſe, libertie and prerogatiue. Hath hee not power of all in his hands? And may he not doe what he liſt? Is not his luſt a law, his example a rule and warrant? He feares no trouble; therefore hee deſerues none. Who can ſay, Blacke is his eie? becauſe, who dares ſay ſo? Nay, who will not ſay, blacke is white, if it may pleaſe him? Thus proſperitie makes a conuert, if the world may giue in euidence.
            Eſpecially if our fulneſſe in the world be graced with ſome 3. Ciuill calling. ciuill calling, whereby wee are honoured of the people, and taken vp with imploiments; is not idleneſſe now much preuented, and ſo ſuch ſinnes as doe accompanie the ſame? Doth not credit now reſtraine, where conſcience cannot? Is there not now a cloake for ſinne, and countenance for iniquitie? What defenſe is fathered hence for neglect of ſpirituall duties? What opportunity offered, to colour oppreſſion

and deceit? What pretence for licentiouſneſſe, and exceſſe in the abuſe of the creatures? What wrapping vp of abuſes, where there is fellowſhip in euill? Is not here a glorious maske for ſinceritie and religion, where outward honeſtie in a ciuill calling becomes a warrant of vprightneſſe, ſeeing our faith is ſhewed by workes? And what more obuious and commendable then our ciuill imploiments, ſo beneficiall to the Common-weale, ſo neceſſarie for our priuate, ſo ſuccesfull in the iſſue, as who (in opinion) more bleſſed? What is it, if not godlineſſe, that is ſo plentifully recompenced in this life? If now the wicked eat the labours of their hands, and drinke their wine in bowles, may they not ſacrifice to their nets? May they not cry ayme vnto their ſoules, Oh well is thee, and happie ſhalt thou bee? Thus ciuill imploiment with worldlings is accounted religion: and to bee morally iuſt and true in contracts and bargaines, goes currant with men for ſtanch and ſound holineſſe.
            But if we enter into Gods ſanctuarie, and by the rule of the word determine heereof; is not the proſperity of the wicked Prou. 1. Pſal. 55. Ier. 48. 11. their deſtruction, and not their conuerſion? Doth not the old ſent remaine in Moab, becauſe he was not changed from veſſell to veſſell, but enioied conſtant proſperity thereby, was ſetled on his l
                  •
               es, and rooted more obſtinately in natures dregges, thereby exerciſed more greedily and deſperatly the luſts thereof? Can the change of the outward eſtate Oſ. 4. 7. Pſal. 78. Oſ. 5. change the inward man from worſe to better? As they were increaſed, ſo, did not Gods people rebell againſt him, who in their afflictions ſought vnto him deceitfully? Is not heere a change from better to worſe? An hypocrite in affliction, as being bridled and reſtrained, prooues a deſperate enemie, when by proſperitie he hath power in his hands.
            As for walking in a ciuill calling, howſoeuer this (being ſanctified by the ſpirituall) may bee a meanes to lay vp a 1. Tim. 4. 5.
               
good foundation againſt the day of Chriſt, 1. Tim. 6. 19. 20. yet to the naturall man there is not a more dangerous outward meanes to exclude grace, then the greateſt meaſure of honeſtie that is ſeene therein. For is it not the grace of this calling to reſt in it ſelfe for good ſucceſſe, without inuocation of Gods aſsiſtance, or reference to his bleſsing? Is not our purſuit heereof a priuilege to exempt from holy duties? We muſt liue, and therefore we cannot be bookiſh. We haue no leaſure to the Church, &c. Nay, is it not a price, propoſed to incourage diligence in theſe worldly buſineſſes, euen licence to prophane the Sabbaths, to deſpiſe the word? &c. And what if men keepe touch and day in paiments and contracts? What if a little eie-ſeruice be vſed in the outſide of their wares? Is it for conſcience to God, to whom they deſire to approoue the truth of their hearts; or only a care for the maintenance of trading, and mutuall commerce, which without this outward equitie muſt needs be aboliſhed? Who will truſt, or ſhall be truſted, if word be not kept? But is it kept any further, then may cleere from touch of mans law? Is promiſe kept heere to our hindrance, ſo we may winde out by the arme of fleſh? Is the ſubſtance of our wares any thing leſſe then anſwerable to the ſhew? Is not God robbed of his glorie, while we ſacrifice to our labour and wit? and Is not this great Babel, which I haue built for the honour of my name? &c.
            Surely as theſe outward things are common to all, ſo no man knoweth loue or hatred, either by proſperity or aduerſitie. Eccl. 9. 1. Well may a good man (by right vſage) make theſe good vnto him; but theſe of themſelues may wel make him worſe: otherwiſe they haue no power inwardly to better him: Only it belongeth vnto God (through the miniſterie of his word) to conuert the ſoule, as tendring (to this end) vnto vs, not Pſal. 19. corruptible things, as ſiluer and gold, which make outwardlie

happie in this life; but the pretious blood of Chriſt, as a 1. Pet. 1. 18. Lambe vndefiled and without ſpot, whereby wee are cleanſed from all our ſinnes, and redeemed from our vaine conuerſation, 1. Ioh. 1. 8. receiued by the tradition of the fathers.
            But hearken, I pray you, vnto a further plea of the hypocrite: 8. Profeſſion. Practiſe. Matth. 7. 
               Haue we not heard thee teaching in our ſtreets? Nay, Haue we not taught in thy name? Haue we not 
               Luk. 8. Mark. 6. 25. 
               receiued the word with ioy, and done many things accordingly? Can the beſt doe more? Doe not wee in many things offend all? Is not this a ſufficient euidence of an effectuall conuerſion?
            Surely where the grace of God, which bringeth ſaluation Tit. 2. 11. to all men, hath appeared effectually, there it teacheth vs, not only to eſchew all euill, in thought, word, and deed; but Matth. 5. on the contrary, to proſecute all good, both 1. inwardly in the Act. 15. 19. heart and minde, as being purified by faith, whereby with conſtant purpoſe we cleaue vnto God, and alſo 2. outwardly Act. 1
                     •
                  . 23. in the word and conuerſation: Iam. 3. 1. Epheſ. 1. Rom. 12. 1. 1. Cor. 6. yea generally and vniuerſally, hauing reſpect to all Gods Commandements: Pſal. 119. 7. 8. and conſtantly alſo continuing and abounding, yea increaſing in grace, and finiſhing our courſe, that no man take away our Crowne: Reu. 3. 1. Cor. 15. 58. Epheſ. 3. Col. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 8. 9. 2. Tim. 4. 3. Phil. 13.
            
            And therefore ſeeing the word of God muſt bee a ſauour of death vnto death vnto ſome who are to be renounced, and 2. Cor. 2. 14. Iohn 15. Pſal. 119. Ezech. 33. 30. 31. Heb. 4. 2. made inexcuſable thereby; hence is it, that though they receiue it 1. with ioy, as being rauiſhed with the ſweetneſſe thereof; yet being not mixed with faith, it becomes vnprofitable, and ſo the ioy of the hypocrite laſteth but a moment. And ſo it commeth alſo to paſſe, that for carnall reſpects, as vain-glory, credit, ſatisfaction of others, whom they deſire to be like, the hypocrite alſo may do many things
               
according to the letter of the word, though not anſwerable to the power thereof; not from the purpoſe of his heart, renued by the holy Ghoſt; but executing therein the lust of his heart, as ſpirituall pride, hypocriſie, &c. Neither ſhall he be able to continue in any ſubſtance of well-doing, ſeeing howſoeuer for his credit and profit hee muſt ſometimes ſhew religious, yet by reaſon of difference of companie, change of times and occaſions, he muſt euen for the ſame ends of credit and profit, caſt off his viſour of holineſſe, and ſo appeare in his true likeneſſe, to the ſatisfying of ſuch to whom nothing but groſſe and deſperate wickedneſſe will giue any contentment. Nay doth not this neceſsity lie vpon the hypocrite, that howſoeuer for a time he muſt gloſe and fawn vpon the truth, while it is his pack-horſe to further him to promotion, riches, &c. yet when by plunging himſelfe into worldly courſes, hee muſt neceſſarily croſſe in his outward actions the power of that truth, muſt he not now for his credit abaſe and vilifie that truth which before hee ſo magnified? as being either too ſeuere and preciſe, becauſe hee cannot reach it: or being fooliſhneſſe and madneſſe; and therefore he is 1. Cor. 1. 21. now more wiſe, more ſober, then to be guided by it: you muſt pardon his former folly and giddineſſe: he will doe no more ſo; he will be more wiſe, moderate, &c. This is the iſſue of an hypocrites ſuppoſed conuerſion, anſwerable euen vnto the meaſure thereof; which being not rooted in the heart, nor aiming at Gods glory, no maruell if the glory of an hypocrite prooue his confuſion. And is hee not iuſtly deceiued in this fancie of regeneration? Is he not heereby excluded from the power of conuerſion, becauſe he reſteth in the ſhadow thereof?
            But to admit a true conuerſion: Is the combate now at an end? or not rather now begun? Is there any place heere for idleneſſe, ſecuritie, remiſneſſe in our calling? Surely though

the foundation ſtandeth ſure in reſpect of God, who knoweth 2. Tim. 2 19. who are his; yet it lieth much in vs, either to make ſure 2. Pet. 1. 10. and beautifie the building, by being watchfull and diligent in well-doing; or elſe by our negligence and ſecurity to deface 2. Phil. 12. Pſal. 51. Pſal. 73. Malach. 3. and interrupt the ſame, yea many times, to our ſenſe and feeling, euen vtterly to ouerthrow the ſame. For proofe heereof, peruſe this treatiſe enſuing: let it be, in Gods feare, a touch-ſtone vnto thee, to make triall of a ſound conuerſion: and take it as a preſeruatiue, to keepe thee in the power of godlines, that ſo thou maiſt not leaue thy firſt loue. If by pride or ſecurity thou haſt beene left to thy ſelfe, and Reuel. 2. ſo haſt left thy former meaſure, view thy ſelfe diligently in this preſent glaſſe, and vſe it as a meanes for thy recouerie and perſeuerance. Expect not what may be ſaid, ſeeing my health and ſtudy affoords only breuity: neither miſconſtrue what may be well digeſted, leſt thou be peruerted by a ſtumbling blocke. Though many are called, yet but few are choſen: and therefore if few digeſt this pill: let them not condemne Matth. 22. 14. the phyſicke, but their owne ill-diſpoſed hearts. Thoſe that can get meat out of the eater, and ſweetneſſe out of the ſtrong, let them praiſe the glorious Lord, who bringeth light 2. Cor. 4. 6. 7. out of darkneſſe; and not ceaſe praying vnto our gracious Father, that he would turne our darkneſſe into light, and Ioh. 12. enable vs to worke while yet we haue the light: that ſo wee may approoue our ſelues the children of the light, and bee prepared to that light which ſhall neuer be changed into darkneſſe. Euen ſo be it. Come Lord Ieſus: Come quickly. (⸪)
            
            
               In whom I reſt thine vnfainedly,
THOMAS COOPER.
            
         
         
            
            DOCTRINES AND OBSERVAtions opened heerein, are,
            
               1 That the beſt haue their infirmities.
               2 The leaſt euill in the Saints cauſeth the Lord to haue a controuerſie with them.
               3 Sinne not to bee ſmoothered, but plainely reprooued.
               4 The godly muſt perſeuere in grace, and grow to perfection.
               5 Euery true conuert hath a firſt loue: where, of the meanes and markes thereof.
               6 The Conuert may leaue his firſt loue: where, of the meanes whereby it is cooled.
               7 Firſt loue may ſeeme to be loſt, when it is not, where diuers falſe imputations are remooued.
               8 The leauing of firſt loue, with the true markes and ſymptomes thereof.
               9 Firſt loue how to bee recouered, and re-gained againe, &c.
               10 How farre the Saints may recouer their firſt loue.
               11 The Saints cannot finally nor wholly loſe their firſt loue: but ſhall in ſome meaſure recouer it.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE CONVERTS FIRST LOVE.
            
               REVELAT. 2. 4.
               Neuertheleſſe I haue ſomewhat against thee: becauſe thou hast left thy first Loue.
            
            
               OVr bleſſed Sauiour, hauing by the Miniſterie of his Apoſtles planted diuers Churches in Aſia: directeth his ſeruant Iohn the Euangeliſt, to write vnto each of them, for their further ſtrengthening in the faith. And, becauſe Occaſion and coherence. the Church of Epheſus, was both famous for the outward glorie, and inward graces thereof, as alſo in a ſort the peculiar charge of the Apoſtle Iohn, therefore doth he firſt Verſe 1. ſend greeting to that Church; giuing very iuſt and true teſtimonie vnto her of the great graces of God beſtowed vpon her, and her profitable vſe of them, in the ſecond and third verſes. And that ſhe might not be ouercome of ſpirituall pride, to which in regard of ſuch excellent graces ſhe might be ſubiect; yea, was ſo tainted therewith, as that it wrought in her ſome ſecuritie, and thereupon remiſſeneſſe: he therefore giues her notice of this her decay and cooling in the fourth verſe: telling her that He had ſomewhat against her, becauſe ſhe had left her first loue; both, therein expreſſing the greatnes of her fall, by the excellencie of the thing wherein ſhe failed, namely, her firſt loue; as alſo, aggrauating this her fall, by the iuſt eſteeme thereof in the iudgement of her Sauiour Chriſt: namely, that it gaue occaſion for him, that was her aduocate, now to come againſt

her, and to haue a controuerſie with her, as an enemie; and Oſe 4. 1. Lament. 2. thereby giuing her to conceiue in what a fearefull caſe ſhe ſtoode, hauing him now to be againſt her; who if he were Rom. 8. 31. on her ſide, ſhe need not feare who were againſt her; who being againſt her, all other things, though with her, muſt neceſſarily ſerue to her further condemnation.
            So that theſe words, doe containe a deſcription of ſome Summe and ſenſe. declination in this Church of Epheſus, with ſome arguments, to lay this her eſtate more cloſely to her heart, that ſo ſhe might by repentance recouer her ſelfe againe.
            Wherein firſt, that this Church of Epheſus, though otherwiſe endowed with excellent graces, and hauing ſo proſpered in the holy vſe of them, that ſhe receiues a teſtimonie from the trueth himſelfe, of ſuch great faithfulneſſe, as to haue endured patiently, and not fainted; is yet notwithſtanding, charged by the ſame Lord Ieſus, to be defectiue, and to haue ſome failings and imperfections in her, wee may learne here this leſſon. That as the beſt Church, ſo the beſt Chriſtian hath, and may haue ſome infirmities 1. Doctrine. The beſt haue their infirmities. and corruptions; as appeareth by theſe places: 1. Ioh. 1. 9. Iames 3. 2. Chron. 8. 36. and by the examples of the beſt: Dauid, 2. Sam. 12. commits murder and adulterie; Peter denies his maſter, Matth. 27. Moſes did not giue glorie to God in beleeuing his word; Noah was drunken, Salomon idolatrous, &c. Numb. 20. Gen. 38. Gen. 9. Thus haue the ſaints of God been ſubiect to infirmities, and that not before their conuerſion only, but euen after alſo; as the Apoſtle Paul in the name of all the reſt, acknowledgeth for himſelfe in the ſeuenth to the Romans 19, 20, 21, 22.
            And ſurely, ſeeing the Lord Ieſus hath ſatisfied the Epheſ. 2. Col. 2. Rom. 5. 1. Iohn 1. 8. Epheſ. 5. 23. wrath of his father for vs, in fulfilling the lawe, and vndergoing the penaltie thereof: and ſo continues daily our interceſſor and ſuertie to anſwere vnto the iuſtice of God for our offences, and to obtaine pardon for them: ſo that there is no neceſſitie that we ſhould be freed quite from ſinne, and ſo perfit, as to fulfill the law of God, ſeeing the Lord

Ieſus hath performed this already, and therefore for vs to vndertake the ſame, were to intrude into Chriſts office, and ſo to rob him of his glorie. Therefore that ſome infirmities Rom. 6. 12. Rom. 8. 1. and corruptions doe remaine in vs, ſeeing now the guilt and puniſhment, yea the dominion and rage of ſinne is taken away by Chriſt. It is very conuenient and profitable, and that firſt:
            1. That Gods free mercie, may be daily aduanced in 
                  Reaſons. Why infirmities remaine in the Saints. Epheſ. 5. 1. Ioh. 1. 8. Rom. 4. the pardoning of ſinne, Pſalm. 51. 12, 13.
            2. That the merit of Chriſt Ieſus, may be glorified, in ſatisfying for ſinne, Iohn 9.
            3. That our ſaluation may be better aſſured vnto vs, in the daily experience of Gods loue, in the forgiueneſſe and healing of our particular corruptions, 2. Pet. 1. 8.
            4. That the graces of the ſpirit may be exerciſed in the daily reſiſting and conquering of ſinne, Epheſ. 6. 11, 12, 13. 1. Pet. 4.
            5. That the power of God may be perfited in weakeneſſe, 2. Corinth. 12. 8, 9. 2. Cor. 4. 7, 8.
            6. And the Lord onely might haue the glorie of his works in vs, Rom. 4. 2. Cor. 12.
            7. That we may be daily humbled in the ſenſe of our infirmities, and ſo preuenting pride and ſecuritie, we may forget that which is behinde, and haſten to that which is before, Phil. 3. 13.
            8. That we might be more compaſſionate towards our brethren, as being ſubiect to like temptations with them, Galath. 6. 1. Geneſ. 38. Iudah.
            9. That ye wicked may hereby take offence, who ſeeing the infirmities of the Saints; and from thence, their chaſticements: take hence occaſion, to condemne the generation of the iuſt, and to ripen their ſinne by adding affliction to affliction, Zach. 1. Pſal. 73. &c.
            That Gods children might daily renounce their owne righteouſneſſe, and flie vnto Chriſt, liuing the life of faith, and contenting themſelues with the ſufficiency of Gods grace: 2. Cor. 12. Abac. 2.
            
               
And ſeeing, that as long as they liue, they ſhal be ſubiect to infirmities: therefore alſo hereby are they weaned from the loue of this life, and the pleaſures thereof, which are no better then fuell to their ſinne.
            And alſo, prouoked to hunger and ſigh after their diſſolution, that ſo they may bee deliuered from this bodie of ſinne: Rom. 7. 24.
            And this ſerueth firſt for reproofe, and that firſt of the 
                  Vſes. 1. Of reproofe: 1. of the Papiſt. Papiſt, that boaſteth of merit and perfect obedience, not acknowledging that to bee ſinne which is, and counting that good which is euill, robbing thereby Chriſt of his glorie, and himſelfe of the aſſurance of his ſaluation.
            2. Of the prophane Proteſtant, that flatters himſelfe in 2. Prophane Proteſtant. his ſinne, with this, That all haue their faults, and the beſt hath ſome infirmities, and therfore he will liue in his ſinne; he hopes to be ſaued as well as others: what need we make ſo much adoe?
            3. The ignorant Proteſtant is heere condemned; who 3. The ignorāt Proteſtant. though in generall hee confeſſe that hee is a ſinner, yet denieth that hee hath in particular broken any of the commandements; he is no whore, no theefe; deceiuing himſelf by the letter of the law, and in truth thereby denying that he hath any ſinne at all.
            4. The carnall Proteſtant is heere alſo conuinced, and 4. The carnall Proteſtant. that in many reſpects:
            
               1. In that he hates to be reproued; whereby hee would be conceiued righteous, and without fault.
               2. That hee will not ſtriue againſt his corruptions, becauſe he cannot wholly be rid of them: pleading it to bee impoſſible, and ſo in vaine to be attempted. Whereas it is:
            
            
               1. The commandement of God to ſtriue againſt ſinne, Sinne to be ſtriuen againſt, though we can not fully and wholly ſubdue it in this life. though it ſtill remaine.
               2. By ſtriuing we conquer ſome groſſe ſinnes, as ſwearing, whoring, &c. ſo that wee neuer fall into them againe.
               3. We by this ſpirituall fight doe weaken and diminiſh the force of all ſinne, and ſo daily get ground thereof.
               
                  
4. We by taming of ſinne, make it ſeruiceable vnto vs; by outward corruptions, purging out ſecret abominations; ſo that all doth turne to our exceeding good.
               5. And ſo continuing in this ſpirituall warfare to the end, wee fight the good fight of faith, and finiſh our courſe with ioy: 1. Tim. 6. 2. Tim. 4.
            
            5. The weake Proteſtant is reproued that eſteemes his 5. The weake Proteſtant. caſe ſingular, when he is ouertaken with any groſſe ſin.
            Secondly, this ſerues for inſtruction, and that many 2. Vſe, of inſtruction.
                waies: as,
            1. To teach vs to reſt wholly on Chriſt in the matter of 1. To reſt only on Chriſt. our ſaluation, and to eſteeme all as dung in regard of him; to deſire to be found in him, not hauing our owne righteouſneſſe, but the righteouſneſſe which is of faith: Philip. 3. verſ. 8. 9.
            2. Wee may hence learne to bee abaſed and truly humbled; 2. To be humbled with inward corruptions. not with our outward afflictions, which may breed worldly ſorrow, but with our inward corruptions, which may cauſe godly ſorrow to repentance: 2. Corin. 2. Iames 4. 8, 9.
            3. And ſeeing the beſt hath his infirmities, here is a notable meanes, to teach the proudeſt to haue compaſſion, to 3. To be compaſſionate to others. put on meekeneſſe of ſpirit, and tenderneſſe of heart; in relieuing and raiſing vp his afflicted brother, that ſo the communion of Saints may be maintained by the vnitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace: Galath. 6.
            4. Here is matter of triall in this ſtate of infirmities, 4. To trie our eſtate in ſanctification by infirmities. which ſeemes common to all; whether yet we are ſuch as are renued in Chriſt, to whom our ſin ſhall not be imputed: namely, If
            
               1. We hate all ſinne indifferently with a perfect hatred.
               2. Striue vnfainedly againſt all ſinnes.
               3. Iudge our ſelues daily for ſinnes particular.
               4. Condemne ſecret corruptions.
               5. Wholly relie on Chriſt for pardon for ſinnes.
               6. Hunger after death in regard of ſinne: Rom. 7.
               7. Endure reproofe patiently, and amend.
            
            
               
Thirdly, this ſerues for comfort, & that many waies. As,
            1. In that God hath left infirmities in vs: therfore haue 3. Vſe. Of comfort. That we haue right in Chriſt. wee hence aſſurance of our right in Chriſt, who came to ſaue ſinners, and ſhall haue experience of the power of Chriſt, in the daily ſubduing, and maſtering of our corruptions. And therefore
            2. Let vs not deſpaire in our greateſt tentations, ſeeing To preuent deſpaire. the greater miſerie the greater mercie. As it is God our father that hath left ſinne in vs, yea in the deareſt, to aduance his free and conſtant loue: ſo hath he giuen his Son to reueale this loue vnto vs by the operation of the Spirit, 1. Ioh. 1. 8. Eph. 5. 19. 20. 21. Rom. 5. 3. 4. Galat. 4. 6. 7. ſhedding it abroad in our hearts, through the daily aſſurance of the pardon of our ſinnes, and continuall enabling to conquer the ſame: Rom. 5. 2, 3.
            3. To this end let vs not thinke our caſe ſingular, ſeeing Not to imagine our caſe ſingular. the beſt haue not been exempted from infirmities, whereby Satan would driue vs to deſpaire; but rather the greater our infirmities are, the greater experience may wee looke for of the mercies of our God, who will lay no more vpon vs then we ſhall be able to endure, 1. Cor. 10. 13: but will giue an iſſue with the temptation, that ſo wee may be able to beare it.
            4. Laſtly, though we haue infirmities; yet let this comfort vs, that our God will not let them feſter in vs, but by That infirmities ſhall not feſter in vs. Iob 33. 15. Act. 2. 36, 37, 38 the power of our conſcience, or miniſterie of the word, by ſome outward chaſtiſement, &c. wee ſhall know our iniquitie; that ſo wee may performe ſeaſonable repentance: and this is the next obſeruation that followeth in the text, out of the practiſe of our Sauiour with his Church; who doth not flatter her in her ſinne, by concealing the ſame, (as a falſe Prophet would haue winked at it, and onely ſtood vpon commendation, yea happily aſcribe that which was not true) but deales faithfully with her. As hee commends her for her good parts: ſo he reproues her for that euill of her decay.
            And this teacheth vs, that 2. Doctrine. Sinne to be reproued. Leuit. 19. 17.
            
            We muſt reproue our brother plainly for his ſinne: ſo doe we teſtifie, and approue;
            
               
1. The faithfulneſſe of our calling and dutie vnto God, Reaſons. in deliuering the whole counſell of God, as well reproofe for ſinne, as praiſe for well doing. 2. Tim. 3. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 2.
            2. Our loue to our brother, both in preuenting Gods iudgements by our reproofes, or elſe ſanctifying them vnto a ſinner. At leaſt wee iuſtifie God, and make the ſinner without excuſe: Ezech. 33. and ſaue our owne ſoules. As alſo hereby we prouoke him to repentance, and ſo by renewed repentance to perfection: Leuit. 19. 17.
            And this 1. condemneth the flatterer, that either will ſee 
                  
                     Ʋſe. 1. Of reproofe to the flattering teacher. no euill in his brother, but is ſtill beating vpon the good that is in him, puffing him vp, with conceit thereof; or if he ſee any euill, will not reprooue him plainely, but either excuſe it or diminiſh it, or daube it vp, hardning him in his ſinne, &c. Ezech. 13.
            2. They are here reprooued, that iuſtifie the wicked and condemne the righteous: Eſay 5. 21. whereas our Sauiour 2. Of the peruerſe and malitious that cals darkenes light, and light darkneſſe. 3. Of the reſpecter of perſons. iuſtifies the good, and condemnes the euill.
            3. As alſo, they that ſtumble at ſtrawes, and make molehils mountaines; omitting the ſinnes of great ones, or the great ſinnes of their brethren: for fauour and affection, but enforcing to the vtmoſt euery light eſcape in the godly, or their enemies, putting more thereto, yea, taking occaſion thereby to diſgrace their profeſſion, &c.
            Whereas our Sauiour Chriſt, heere ſpares not the greateſt and moſt famous Church, and whatſoeuer is amiſſe in her, lets her know plainely of it.
            The people alſo are here condemned, that hate thoſe, that 2. Of the people. 2. Tim. 4. Galat. 4. reprooue them, and rather heape vnto themſelues ſuch teachers as wil flatter them in their ſinne, then intertaine thoſe that deale faithfully in reproouing: Amos 5. 11. Micah. 2.
            Secondly, here is inſtruction, 1. to praiſe God for faithfull 2. Vſe of inſtruction. Hoſ. 6. 5. Eſay 58. 1. Iohn 16. 
                     •
                  . teaching, when God cuts downe by his Prophets, and conuinceth the world of ſin. 2. And alſo to mourne where the church is peſtered with flatterers, that crie all is well, Peace peace; all the congregation is holy: Ier. 6. Numb. 16. Ierem. 28. Ezech. 34. 13. 14.
            We learne here by our Sauiors example how to reproue

for ſinne: namely,
            1. Plainly: Thou art the man, 2. Sam. 12. Sinne how to be reproued.
            
            2. Particularly: Letting him ſee his particular ſinne.
            3. Powerfully: To humble him for his ſin, by denouncing the wrath of God againſt the ſame. I haue ſomewhat against thee: that is, I haue a controuerſie with thee, I am angrie, I will be auenged of thee for it.
            4. Conſtantly and ſeaſonably, not letting him lie in it, taking the fit time, &c. as Abigail did, 1. Sam. 25.
            5. Impartially and ſincerely, not ſparing the greateſt nor deareſt vnto vs; no not the houſe of Iudah, Eſay 58. 1. Amos 7. 8. 1. Sam. 12. 1. Sam. 2. 3. no not the moſt excellent Church; not Dauid, though a King; not our children, not any.
            Laſtly, heere is great comfort, that being reprooued for ſinne, we are iudged in this life; and ſo by the grace of God 3. Vſe, of comfort.
                being brought to repentance, we ſhal not be iudged in the life to come: 1. Cor. 11. 31. 32.
            Thirdly, in that the holy Ghoſt teſtifieth here that Chriſt doth come againſt his Church for this ſin: here we learne, 
                  Doctrine. 3. The leaſt ſin in the Saints is ſufficient to make the Lord to come againſt them as an enemie. That though God loueth alwaies the perſon of his children; yet hee is diſpleaſed with their ſinne: he will come againſt them for it, and chaſtiſe them for the ſame: Pſal. 89. 2. Sam. 8. &c. Ezech. 18. And that becauſe he is,
            1. Righteous, and hateth iniquitie, Pſal. 5. 4. and therefore will not endure it in his owne.
            2. He is mercifull, and therefore will not ſuffer ſinne to dwell in his children: but by his corrections will clenſe them: Eſay 1. 25. Eſay 27. Ierem. 19. Pſal. 89.
            3. The ſinnes of his children doe more grieue him, and indeed are more grieuous: firſt, becauſe
            4. They haue more grace to reſiſt. Secondly, doe giue more offence to the weake. Thirdly, open the mouth of the wicked more to blaſpheme God and his truth.
            5. That the wicked may haue their vengeance hereby ſealed vp, in that the Lord ſpareth not his owne children: Prou. 11. 32.
            6. That his children might not be condemned finally.
            7. That he might weane them from the world, and prouoke

them to draw neere vnto him in prayer, and ſo haue further experience of his loue in the iſſues thereof.
            8. Their ſinne is not theirs, but proceeds from Satan and the old man, which he therefore remoueth by his chaſtiſements, Rom. 7. that ſo he might manifeſt and confirme his loue more and more to their perſons in fitting them to glorie.
            And this ſerueth
            1. To condemne the wicked that flatter themſelues in 
                  Vſes. 1. Of conuictiō to thoſe that by reaſon of proſpe
                     •••
                  y flatter themſelues in integritie. their righteouſneſſe, becauſe they proſper, and are not plagued like others, nor afflicted as the ſinners, ſeeing they are fatted vp hereby to the day of ſlaughter, and the elect by afflictions prepared to happineſſe: Ierem. 12. 3. Act. 14. 23, 24. Iob 21. Pſal. 17 14.
            2. To reprooue the ſinners that prouoke the Lord by their ſinne to become their enemie, and then being afflicted, 2. Thoſe that are impatient vnder the rod deſeruing the ſame. complaine of wrong, and condemne the loue and faithfulnes of God, as if in chaſtiſing them he hated them, ſeeing of very loue and faithfulnes he doth correct them: Pſal. 119. Pſal. 73. Iob 6. 9.
            3. To reprooue the world that iudge of men by theſe 3. Thoſe that iudge peremptorily the eſtates of men by outward things. Vſe 2. Inſtruction how to keepe God our friend 2. To be patient vnder the rod. 3. To trie our eſtate by the vſe of ye croſſe. outward things, ſeeing all things are alike vnto all men: Eccl. 9. 1.
            Secondly, here is inſtruction: 1. To teach vs how to keep God to be our friend: namely, by keeping our ſelues from ſinne, or elſe by renued repentance, daily renouncing, and reforming the ſinne.
            2. To beare patiently the hand of God, ſeeing wee haue deſerued hell; and this affliction which is but for a moment, wil procure vnto vs an ineſtimable weight of glory: 2. Cor. 5. 16.
            3. To trie our eſtate vnder the rod, namely, if wee feele the Lord to be angrie, and ſo feare and depart from euill: Prou. 14.
            And thus doth the holy Ghoſt amplifie the ſinne of this Church, by ſignifying that the Lord is angrie with her for the ſame.
            1. But let vs conſider what this ſinne is, namely, That

ſhe hath left her firſt loue, a ſinne of omiſſion, ſhe hath failed in that zeale, &c.
            
               Quest. But how may ſhe be ſaid to haue left her firſt How the ſaints though leauing their firſt loue, yet may be iuſtified that they faint not. loue, ſeeing ſhe hath formerly the teſtimonie that ſhe endured patiently, and did not faint?
            
               Anſw. She might faile in the meaſure of her loue, though not in the ſubſtance and trueth thereof.
            2. She might faile in the outward action, though not in the inward purpoſe.
            3. She might not be ſo zealous as ſhe was, and yet haue ſo much zeale as not to giue ouer finally; for a time ſhe might be cooled, but not quenched in her zeale, &c.
            Whence we learne, that though the Lord accept the purpoſe of the heart, and will not quench the ſmoaking Doctrine 4. flaxe; yet would hee haue vs grow in grace, and follow hard after the marke; we muſt abound in grace, and be The elect muſt goe forward and perſeuere in grace. plentifull in good works; we muſt thriue in well doing, expreſſing outwardly when we inwardly deſire, and ſubduing the whole man to the obedience of the ſpirit: 1. Col. 1. Pet. 2. 1. 3. Epheſ. 1. Phil. 2. Pet. 1. 8. Pſalm. 92. Iob. 17. 9. 1. Theſ. 5. perſeuering with all patience and conſtancie vnto the end, Epheſ. 6. 13.
            And that, becauſe the Lord hath commanded, 1. That Reaſons. we ſhould be holy, as he is holy, 1. Pet. 1. 13. 14. &c.
            2. Hereby we make ſure our election, and attaine to the certaine knowledge thereof, 2. Pet. 1. 10. Ioh. 7.
            3. Hereby we make vs meete for that glorious inheritance, 1. Col. 11. 12.
            4. Hereby we prouoke others to glorifie God, Matth. 5. 16, 17.
            5. We daunt and confound the enemies of the Goſpell, 1. Pet. 2.
            6. And adorne and beautifie our glorious profeſſion, 1. Phil. 27.
            And this ſerueth,
            To condemne, 1. all thoſe that flatter their hearts 
                  Vſes. 1. Of reproofe to thoſe that deceiue themſelues with good intents and motions. Of ſuch as goe backward. 3. As feare to to be noted of ſingularitie. with good intents, when they are vtterly voide of good fruits, Prou. 3. Eſa. 29.
            
               
2. As alſo thoſe, that vpon preſumption that they are better then others, ceaſe to better themſelues, and ſo ſtanding at a ſtay in religion, goe backward therein, 1. Cor. 4. Reuel. 3.
            3 And thoſe likewiſe, that feare to abound in holineſſe, zeale, &c. leſt they bee accounted ſingular noted men, preciſe, vaine-glorious, &c.
            4. And theſe eſpecially, that haue not onely ſlacked their zeale in religion, but doe iuſtifie this decay, as being 4. Such as iuſtifie decaies. now more wiſe, ſober, &c. in their profeſſion, whereas before they were fierie, raſh, indiſcreet, &c.
            Secondly, here is inſtruction, and that firſt, we muſt labor 
                  Vſe 2. Of inſtruction, how to increaſe. Meanes of apoſtaſie. 1. Corrupt iudgement. to increaſe and grow conſtant in godlineſſe, and that by theſe meanes:
            1. By auoiding the meanes of Apoſtaſie, which are,
            1. Corruption of iudgement, and that
            1. We may be too holy:
            2. That leſſe will ſerue the turne, becauſe many doe leſſe, and we hope are ſaued, Acts 14.
            3. That Gods mercie doth more abound in our failings, Rom. 6. 1.
            4. That we need not to be ſo perfect, ſeeing Chriſt hath finiſhed all for vs: ſeeing Chriſt hath therefore perfited all things that wee might grow to perfection, Hebr. 12. 1, 2. Iohn 15.
            2. Corrupt practize: 2. Corrupt practize.
            
            
               1. When either we liue by examples of the greateſt:
               2. By the letter of the word of God, Matth. 5.
               3. Or by the ſtreame of the time:
               4. Or onely by the lawes of men:
               5. Or follow the moſt in religion:
               6. Or grow ſpiritually proude of our well doing:
               7. Or grow ſecure and dead in the performance of holy duties, performing them for cuſtome, worldly, hypocritically, &c.
               8. Or grow inconſtant in holy duties; intermitting the ſet times, of prayers, hearing the word, &c.
               9 Or grow negligent in conuerting others.
               
                  
10. Or admit of humaine inuentions, with the worſhip of God.
               11. Or proue vnthankefull vnto God for his particular mercies, 1. Rom.
               12. Or fall into groſſe ſinnes, and lie in them without repentance: Pſal. 51.
               13. Or iudge vncharitably of our brethren, withdrawing our compaſſions from them.
            
            Secondly, practiſe we theſe meanes to make vs abound in Meanes whereby wee may attaine conſtancie in weldoing. good workes, and grow conſtant therein.
            1. Remember we the continuall ſeruice of the Saints in heauen, they inceſ
                  •
               antly glorifie God, and alſo continually: 1. Theſſ 4. Reuel. 4.
            2. Conſider we the power of Ieſus Chriſt ſtill remaines to couer our imperfections, and to ſtrengthen vs to perfection: Heb. 12. 1. 2.
            3. Know we that the Comforter doth abide with vs, to lead vs into all truth: and ſo forward in al holines: Ioh. 15. 16.
            4. Conſider we that the righteous can ſcarcely be ſaued, 1. Pet. 4. 15. & what pains the beſt haue takē toward heauē. 1. Peter 4. 15.
            
            5. Remember we yt Ieſus Chriſt hath taken away all the rigour of weldoing, and yet enables vs by his ſpirit, to perfection, accepting our weakeſt endeuors, ſo they be ſound, and enabling of vs to fulfill all his righteouſneſſe in due ſeaſon.
            6. Retaine we ſoundnes of iudgement, concerning the power of godlineſſe.
            7. Doe wee all things from the ground of the heart, as in the ſight of God: 1. Theſſ. 1.
            8. Cleaue wee ſtill to the power of the word, and ſtriue we to encreaſe in knowledge: 1. Phil. 1. Coll.
            9. Practiſe we conſtantly the duties of pietie and charitie.
            10. Watch wee daily ouer our hearts, in a true ſearching and examining the ſame. Pſal. 4. 5, 6.
            11. See that we renue our repentance, as often as we ſin.
            12. Labour wee the conuerſion of our brethren, and iudge we charitably of them.
            
               
13. Walke we alwaies in feare of our ſelues, and ſuſpect we all our workes yea then moſt, when wee enioy greateſt graces: Prou. 28. 13.
            14. Remember wee our ends, and vncertaintie of our life, and the account we muſt make: 2. Cor. 5. 10. 11.
            15. And reſigne we our ſelues daily into the hands of our God, reſting on his prouidence: 1. Pet. 5. Matth. 6.
            16. Entertaine we cheerefully the motions of the ſpirit, and put them in practiſe diligently: Epheſ. 4.
            Thus ſhall wee grow conſtant in weldoing, and perſeuere vnto the end. And,
            3. For our comfort learne we, that our God, that commands perſeuerance, giues grace to the ſame, and therfore we ſhall continue, and not finally decay: we ſhall leaue our firſt loue, but not loſe it altogether: 1. Philip. 6. Iohn 13. Luke 22. 33.
            Wherein note, That euery conuert hath a firſt loue, that 
                  Doct. 5. Euery true conuert hath a firſt loue. Rom. 5. 3. is, when God hath reuealed his loue vnto him in Chriſt, and by the ſpirit of God, it is ſhed abroad in his heart, then is the heart of a ſinner inflamed to loue God againe, then is it inlarged with ioy vnſpeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 17. for ſo great ſaluation: then doth it ſtriue to expreſſe it thankfulneſſe vnto God, for ſo great mercie: then is loue as ſtrong as death, much water cannot quench it: Cant. 8.
            And this is called, his firſt loue: and it is diſcerned by theſe markes:
            1. By his renouncing of all, in compariſon of it, and parting Firſt loue diſcerned by markes. Matth. 13. Ioh. 6. Coloſſ. 3. 1. with the deareſt for the enioying of it: ſo did the Apoſtles forſake all in act: ſo muſt we forſake all in affection and in act too, ſo farre as it may hinder our enioying of Chriſt: Zacheus, Luke 19. 6. 7.
            2. When we endure any affliction for the Words ſake, 1. Theſſ. 1. 9. 10, and that with great ioy in the holy Ghoſt: Heb. 10. Epheſ. 1.
            3. When wee reuerence highly the Miniſters of the Goſpell, Galath. 3 4. thinking nothing too deare for them. Act. 16.
            4 When we cleare our conſcience of all ſinne, by which

our ſweete fellowſhip with Chriſt may be hindred: ſo Zacheus, Luke 19, not being aſhamed to confeſſe our particular ſinnes, and renouncing them vnfainedly.
            5 When for Chriſts ſake we loue his poore members, and 1. Tim. 1. 15 16. 17. impart of our worldly goods bountifully to their reliefe, Luke 19. Zacheus, 1. Ioh. 2. Ioh. 13. Pſal. 16. 2.
            6. When wee continue in the powerfull meanes of the diuine worſhip: Act. 2.
            7. When wee conſult not with fleſh and blood, nor communicate with it, but doe vtterly renounce the ſame in regard of heauen, Act. 9. Gal. 2. Matth. 8 &c.
            8. And being rauiſhed with the ſweetneſſe of the loue of Chriſt, wee inlarge our ſelues to declare the ſame to our brethren, labouring to bring them to Chriſt, by plucking them out of the fire: Ioh 1. 18. Iude 22. Luke 22. 33.
            
            This is our firſt loue, theſe are the markes thereof, and by the ſame it is graciouſly preſerued, and encreaſed.
            1. Whereby all thoſe ſudden flaſhes, and fained and inconſtant affections of hypocrites are reiected: Hebrewes 
                  Vſe. To condemne flaſhes & taſts. 6. 4. and,
            2. We put to the triall, for the ſoundnes of our conuerſion, if we haue found ſuch a loue in our hearts: by To trie our conuerſion. ſuch euident marks.
            3. The world is heere condemned, that boaſts of the fauour of God, when it hath no argument of it conuerſion by this loue: nay, eſteemeth it a wonder, and madnes to be To reprooue the worlds deceit. conuerted.
            4. And the ſaints are comforted, that ſeeing their loue vnto God dependeth on his loue vnchangeable to them: To comfort the Saints. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Therefore as his is vnchangeable, Ioh. 13. 1. ſo ſhall theirs be; well they may leaue it, but they ſhall neuer loſe it. And yet it is a great affliction that they leaue their loue: although of a certaintie,
            The Saints may leaue their firſt loue; ſo did Dauid, Peter, Salomon, &c. Pſal. 51. Galat. 2. 1. King. 11. And the reaſons 
                  Doct. 6. The Elect may leaue their firſt loue. are,
            Becauſe as the fire is ſlacked by two meanes, either by withdrawing fuell frō it, or putting water, or aſhes thereto:
            
               
So there are two meanes, whereby the loue of the Saints And by what meanes. doth decay in them.
            Either when they faile in ſuch meanes as doe nouriſh the ſame: or,
            Doe adde ſuch, as may corrupt, and coole, namely, when Meanes of leauing firſt loue. either they,
            
               1. Neglect the powerfull miniſterie of the word, &c. 1. Withdrawing that ſhould nouriſh it. 1. Theſ. 5. 19. 20.
               2. The conſtant practiſe of priuat, and publike prayer.
               3. Or the fellowſhip of the Saints, Heb. 10.
               4. Or the motions of the ſpirit:
               5. Or neglect to examine their hearts daily.
               6. Or faile in daily repentance, or,
               7. Neglect to conuert others:
            
            Or elſe doe adde that which may corrupt:
            
               1. As ſpirituall pride of Gods graces.
               2. Carnall policie, ſubiecting religion to the ſame. 2. Adding, what may coole and quench it.
               
               3. Proſperitie, and ſetting their hearts thereon through couetouſneſſe: Pſalm. 119. Luke 18. 1. Tim. 6.
               4. Abuſe of Christian libertie, in the enioying of pleaſures, &c. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 8. and vſe of things indifferent.
            
            Concerning ſpirituall pride, as Conuerts are ſubiect hereto, 1. Spirituall pride, an occaſion to leaue our firſt loue, and how. in regard,
            1. That now not being as others, yea, as themſelues were, yea, being in ſome meaſure made partakers of the diuine nature, and aduanced to the hope of ſo glorious an inheritance; may they not hereby be enticed to iuſtifie thē
               ſelues, 2. Pet. 1. 3. and deſpiſe their brethren; to condemne, where they ſhould endeuour to conuert? &c. Eſay 5. 6.
            2. Euen their deſire to keepe themſelues in this eſtate, may be an occaſion to Satan to breede ſpirituall pride in them. As namely, that being now pluckt out of the common condemnation, and ſeparated from the world and wicked ones, by their effectuall calling; may not the Saints vpon pretence to keepe themſelues vnſpotted and vndefiled, grow to ſingularitie, and ſo to ſeparation, which are very dangerous branches of ſpirituall pride?
            
               
3. The execution alſo of their callings is ſubiect to much ſpirituall pride.
            Either they may neglect altogether their ciuill callings as too baſe, and derogatorie from the prouidence of God, and their Chriſtian libertie, which is a fruite of ſpirituall pride, ſeeing the Lord hath impoſed theſe callings to humble them. Or elſe they may ſo carrie themſelues in their Ecccl. 1. 9. Chriſtiā callings, as by their moroſitie, diſcontent, &c. they ſhall not obſcurely diſcouer much ſpirituall pride.
            4. The ſpeciall prouidence of the Almightie, in leading them to perfection, may alſo through the ſubtiltie of Satan be an occaſion of much ſpirituall pride. And that,
            1. Either in regard of ſuch chaſtiſements which the Lord exerciſeth their nature to clenſe the ſame, in the impatient bearing whereof, pride is diſcouered.
            2. Or elſe the proſperitie of the wicked, may bee an occaſion of ſpirituall pride, as being prouoked by Satan to fret and repine thereat: Pſal. 37. 1. Ierem. 12. Iob 1.
            3. Either they may be puffed vp with thoſe wonderfull deliuerances, which the Lord in his mercie beſtoweth on them in their conduction to glorie: 2. Cor. 1. verſes 9, 10. 2. Cor. 12. 7.
            4. Or elſe they may reioyce at the deſtruction of their enemies, and ſo be tainted with ſpirituall pride: Iob 31.
            5. Either they may be hastie, in expecting the reward, and ſo for want of patience, diſcouer ſpirituall pride: Heb. 10.
            6. Or elſe deſire death, in regard of their continuall troubles, and ſo diſcouer their pride, in not waiting the Lords leiſure: Iob 3. Ionas 4.
            7. Either they may be croſſed in their expectations, and ſo preferring their credits before Gods glorie, bewray their pride: Ionas 4. 1. 2.
            8. Or elſe, beyond their hope and expectation, they may be endued with extraordinarie graces, and ſo are ſubiect to be exalted aboue meaſure: 2. Cor. 12 7. 8.
            Thus may the Saints be ſubiect to ſpirituall pride, and ſo thereby giue occaſion of the loſſe of their firſt loue:
            
               1. The Lord reſisting the proud, and bringing low the

mountaines; emptying the high minded, and giuing grace to the humble: 1. Pet 5. 5.
               2. Their pride making them ſeeme vncharitable, and ſo not vſing their talents, they are for a time taken away. Matth. 25.
               
               3. The ſpirit hereby being grieued, ceaſeth to worke in Epheſ. 4. 30. them, nay happily leaues them to grieuous buffetings.
            
            Touching policie by it, I meane, that wiſedome which 
                  
                     •
                  . Policie, a meanes o
                     •
                   cooling our firſt loue. ciuill gouernment diſcouereth in managing it affaires, for the adorning and preſeruing thereof. This, howſoeuer it may be an handmaid to religion, yet carrieth ſome ſway in the manner thereof: as,
            
               1. In ordering the time, and place, and outward decencie Policie, how a friend to religion. for the diuine worſhip.
               2. In compelling the outward man, to the outward forme and meanes of religion.
               3. As alſo, in executing the holy cenſures of the Church, vpon the refractarie and obſtinate.
               4. And in protecting the innocencie and vprightnes of the Saints, from the rage and wrongs of the wicked: and,
               5. Puniſhing the enemies of the Church.
            
            Yet may it alſo proue an enemie to ſinceritie, and ſo bee an occaſion (if wee be guided thereby) to leaue our firſt loue, and that in theſe reſpects: As,
            Firſt, when it vndertakes to iudge and authoriſe the rule How an enemie, and 
                     •
                  o a meanes fleauing out firſt loue. of religion: namely the word of God.
            2. When it adioynes to the ſame, the inuentions of man, making it equall with the word of truth.
            3. When it ſtands more vpon the forme then the power of godlineſſe.
            4. When it excludes the ſubſtance of religion for the outward complement thereof.
            5. When it becomes a meanes to iuſtifie the wicked, The practize of pop
                     •
                  rie, in maintaining their religion. and condemne the righteous: Eſay 5. Matth. 27.
            6. When it preſumes to limit ſinceritie to times, perſons: and,
            7. When it inſulteth and lords it ouer the conſcience, by inquiſition into the ſecrets of the heart, and violent forcing

the ſame, contrarie to the tendernes, and true information thereof.
            Thus may Policie bee an enemie to religion, and ſo a meanes of the leauing of our firſt loue.
            And ſo may alſo Proſperitie:
            1. If either hauing much, wee ſet our hearts vpon it: Proſperitie an occaſion to coole our firſt loue, and how. Pſal. 62. 10. and ſo are withdrawne to execute the luſts of our hearts:
            2. Or meaſure our eſtate in grace by our proſperitie.
            3. Or, are not willing to be abaſed, as we doe abound.
            4. Or grow ſecure, and vncharitable hereby, either deſpiſing our poore brethren, or inſulting ouer thē: 1. Pet. 5. much leſſe being inlarged in compaſſion of their affliction, or open handed to relieue them: or promiſe conſtancie of this tickliſh eſtate vnto our ſelues. Pſal. 30. 6.
            
            5. And ſo alſo by abuſe of our Chriſtian libertie wee may leaue our firſt loue; as hereafter ſhall more fully bee declared.
            Thus may we leaue our firſt loue; by theſe meanes may And ſo our abuſe of Chriſtian libertie. our zeale be cooled and abated.
            And this ſerueth,
            1. For our triall whether euer we had any firſt loue, or 
                  Vſes. 1. Of triall. no: namely, if wee ſhall finde that by theſe meanes wee haue been cooled therein.
            2. And ſo for our comfort and ſound direction, that if 2. Of comfort. we euer had this firſt loue, we ſhall recouer it againe: and,
            3. That wee may know how to recouer it, by vſing aright 3. Of inſtruction to recouer. ſuch meanes, as being abuſed, haue been the occaſion of this decay: the manner whereof is laid downe hereafter.
            And this ſerueth further,
            1. For reproofe of our times, who may be iuſtly charged 4. Of reproofe. to haue left our firſt loue, by trying our ſelues by the former meanes, whereby this firſt loue is ſlaked.
            2. And for our further inſtruction herein:
            1. Know we, that we may be ſubiect to a falſe imputation of leauing our firſt loue, in many reſpects.
            
               
As, 1. when vpon the iuſt conſideration of the nature of The ſaints may be vniuſtly charged to haue left their firſt loue, and how. Matth. 2
                     •
                  . And that, firſt in the true diſcerning and vſe of our chriſtian libertie, whereby we ſubmit our ſelues to lawfull authoritie. 2. In that wee are endowed with outward proſperitie, our Chriſtian libertie, as being ſpirituall, we limit our zeale within the bounds of our callings: ſo giuing vnto God the things that are his, that we denie not alſo vnto Caeſar that which is his. This moderation, howſoeuer with the Anabaptiſts it be traduced as luke warmneſſe, and temporizing with the world, to auoid affliction: yet indeed it is an holy rectifying and ordering of our zeale by humilitie and wiſdome, that ſo it may hold out, and be perfited through patience, and that from the commandement of the Lord our God: Rom. 13.
            2. We may be falſely charged to haue left our firſt loue, when wee are outwardly encreaſed with temporall bleſſings. As if becauſe proſperitie is apt to coole, by making vs ſecure, and forgetfull of our God: therefore it muſt needes follow, that whereſoeuer there is outward abundance, there is inward leannes and barrenneſſe: Pſalme 106. 15. Which imputation is hereby proued to be moſt vniuſt.
            1. Both becauſe the Saints of God haue increaſed outwardly, and thriuen inwardly too; as, Abraham, Dauid, &c.
            2. The vertue of that promiſe makes hereunto: That if all things (then ſurely outward bleſſings) ſhall worke together for the good of the elect, Rom. 8. 29. eſpecially ſeeing the Lord giueth grace to vſe theſe gifts aright.
            1. And ſeeing godlineſſe hath the promiſe of this life 1. Tim. 4. 8. 2 aſwell as of a better; and the more ye Saints partake of the mercy of God, ye more their thankfulnes & obedience doth encreaſe; and being knit vnto the Lord with more bonds, 3 4 5 6 1. Iohn 4. 20. Gen. 20. 7 8 9 2. Cor. 1. 7. 8. 10 
               ſeeing the more they receiue, the more they feare themſelues, and ſo by imparting liberally vnto others, doe eaſe themſelues of the burthen; and approue their loue vnto God, by their vnfained loue vnto his Saints: as hereby they are more deeply intereſſed in ye prayers of the Saints, ſo is heauen more inlarged to the increaſe of their loue. The Lord heares the prayers of the poore, and inlargeth the hearts of his ſtewards, to loue yt God more ſeruently, that ſo inables thē to comfort others. And ſo being faithful in a little, they are ſtill increaſed: vntill being full of grace and

abounding in euery good worke, they are made meete partakers See the daily ſacrifice for the right vſe of proſperitie. 3. Spirituall wiſedome in auoiding of troubles, an occaſiō to charge vs with loſſe of firſt loue. of that glorious inheritance: 1. Coll. 12. Matth. 25. 1. Cor. 15.
            And may not our ſpirituall wiſedome in auoiding of vnneceſſarie troubles, expoſe vs ſometimes to this falſe imputation that we haue left our firſt loue?
            1. Yea ſurely, if either by wiſe and modeſt anſweres we auoid troubles:
            2. Or by concealing of that truth, which wee are not bound in conſcience to diſcouer, we ſo eſcape.
            3. Or by auoiding the rage of our enemies, when our time is not yet come, we are yet freed from troubles by remouing from our habitations.
            4. Or by changing our habits and features we ſo auoid the furie of the aduerſarie: if by any of theſe, through the bleſſing of God wee eſcape ſuch troubles, which others, for want of this wiſedome, are ouertaken with; preſently wee are charged with want of zeale; we are condemned to be luke warme, to haue left our firſt loue: and, &c.
            5. Eſpecially if wee vſe our goods, as a meanes to redeeme the bodie from trouble, oh this is cenſured as vnlawfull; and ſo auoiding troubles as by vnlawfull meanes, we are challenged of cowardize, want of zeale, corruption, &c.
            An imputation: how vniuſt and vncharitable it is, may appeare by theſe circumſtances:
            1. Becauſe we are not bound to giue an account of our faith to euery priuate man, but only to the Magiſtrate, and And cleered from this imputation. Faith how, and to whom to be giuen account of. 1. To the Magiſtrate and Miniſter, and why. whomſoeuer hath lawfull authoritie to require it at our hands, as the Miniſter, and ſuch as haue charge ouer vs. And that, becauſe
            Hereby they may haue comfort in diſcharge of their dutie, that they haue not laboured in vaine: or,
            2. May be humbled in our want of profiting and growing in knowledge, and ſo encreaſe their paines and prayers for vs.
            3. They are in Gods ſtead, and in refuſing to giue an account vnto thē, we deny and renoūce euen God himſelf.
            
               
4. They may be prouoked hereby, to perſeuerance and maintenance of the truth.
            5. Though they muſt not be Lords ouer the conſcience, to make, or alter the truth, yet they are witneſſes vnto the conſcience concerning the trueth, yea they are appro
                  •
               ers and maintainers thereof, to the comfor
                  •
                of the beleeuer and furtherance of his faith. And therefore,
            Though we giue not account of our faith either
            1. To the ſcorner, that hereby will take occaſion to inſult Faith to whom 
                     〈…〉
                   be giuen account of. and blaſpheme our God and his ſacred truth.
            2. Or to the open enemie, that as he hath no calling to require, ſo we haue warrant to conceale it, as being bound to preſerue life, and not to caſt pearles to ſwine.
            3. Or to the ignorant, that deſireth not information thereby, leſt we beate the aire, and runne before we are called, expoſe our profeſſion o contempt, &c.
            4. Or to the priuate Chriſtian, otherwiſe then in a caſe of neceſſitie on our parts, to remoue a falſe imputation; and on his part, to guide him that is in darkneſſe, and deſires our helpe.
            Yet doe we not herein betray our faith: but rather wiſely maintaine the honour, and preſerue the vertue thereof, both in defending the ſame from the reproches of the wicked, as alſo in reſeruing the vſe thereof to it fit ſeaſon and occaſion, when our God ſhal be beſt glorified, our profeſſion iuſtified, and brethren informed and confirmed thereby. And this is,
            1. When we haue an eſpecial calling to witneſſe a good profeſſion, as being inwardly furniſhed with gifts, and outwardly led foorth by the Spirit, to maintaine the cauſe of Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour.
            The one of theſe we ſhall diſcerne:
            1. By ſound knowledge of ye cauſe in particular, which How to diſcern inward ſufficiencie to make open pro
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  
                  ſion of faith in the time of trouble. we are to make good by whatſoeuer ſufferings, ſo that our iudgements are throughly informed, and ſo our conſciences conuinced with the trueth, doe finde reſt and comfort therein: Epheſ. 
                  •
               . Phil. 1.
            2. By our ardent loue vnto that truth which wee haue

apprehended, and heartie deſire that by any our neuer ſo great affliction, it may bee glorified in the hearts of the Saints.
            3. By our eſpeciall apprehenſion of Gods ſingular mercie towards vs, in accounting vs ſo worthie as to make profeſſion of that truth. 1. Phil. 27.
            
            4. Hence wee euen long and deſire to taſte of that cup which the profeſſion of that truth may coſt vs.
            5. Yet ſo, as that our moſt ardent deſires are ſubiect to contrarie buffetings of feare of our owne inabilitie in our Iohn 19. ſelues: and therefore,
            6. Rather deſiring the grace of the Spirit ſo to conduct vs in the combat, that Gods cauſe may be honoured in our conſtancie therein; then we in any ſort magnified thereby, nay that wee ſhall haue in reſpect of the fleſh, any good iſſue out of them, howſoeuer we haue many gratious promiſes, yea likelihoods for the ſame.
            7. And therefore ſimply ſubmitting our ſelues to the will of our gratious Father, rather to vndergo any the moſt grieuous extremitie, then the leaſt diſparagement may redound vnto his glorious truth.
            8. Finding in our ſelues a gratious contentment in our God, ariſing vpon long experience of the deceitfulneſſe of the world, and faithfulnes of our gratious Father: and,
            9. So diſcerning in our ſelues a readines to death, as being prepared thereto by daily mortification, and experience of our ſweete ſocietie with our bleſſed God:
            10. As that withall wee eſpecially for this end deſire life, euen to witneſſe a good profeſſion, and giue glorie vnto our God, in auouching and ſealing vp his eternall truth, with our momentanie ſufferings. To this end,
            11. Finding in our ſelues an abilitie of faith, relying rather on Gods promiſe to guide vs with his counſell, then our owne experience, to wade thorow the affliction.
            Thus may we diſcerne inward ſufficiencie to make profeſſion of our faith.
            And for outward calling, and leading forth by the Spirit thereunto, there are theſe markes of it:
            
               
Firſt, in reſpect of vs: as that, How to diſcern an outward calling to make publike pro
                     •
                  eſſion o
                     •
                   faith in troubles.
            
            1. We haue alreadie publiſhed and declared that truth, and ſo now much more (it being called in queſtion) are to iuſtifie the ſame.
            2. Are alſo prouoked by our people, that haue depended on vs, to make good the ſame for the eſtabliſhing of their faith; leſt our ſuppreſſing, or deniall, may ſhake, and make ſhipwrack thereof.
            3. Are eſpecially called thereto by the Magiſtrate, who may require a reaſon thereof, and forced by the gainſayings of the enemie, to defend the ſame.
            Secondly, in reſpect of the truth. And that,
            1. When it is openly reſiſted and gaineſaid of a peruerſe generation, not onely priuately and indirectly: and when
            2. By the ſuppreſſing thereof the glorie of our God is neceſſarily impeached, the power of religion vndermined, &c. otherwiſe in matters
            1. Of difference, which reach not thus farre, we may be ſilent, reſpecting the peace of the Church, and dealing rather Wherein we may be ſilent. with our God in prayer for the reformation of ſuch breaches, and by all priuate and peaceable meanes, rather enduring an inconuenience or couering an infirmitie, then by any publike oppoſition, making a rent and diuiſion in the Church of God:
            2. As alſo, if our perſons rather in malice are aimed at, then the truth oppugned, we may auoide the rage, by flying, concealing, &c.
            3. At leaſtwiſe, though we be not altogether ſilent: yet ſo farre we may conceale the truth: 1. As it is not demanded: 2. And may ſatisfie the honeſt purpoſe of the Queſtioner: 3. Yea, may happily, by ſtumbling of him, and turning his edge vpon another; ſo thereby diuert his malice from our ſelues. So did our Sauiour put the Phariſies and Sadduces together, and thereby eſcaped. So did he for a time goe aſide, and walked no more openly, neither Ioh. 7. committed himſelfe vnto them, becauſe his time was not come.
            
               
Nay, may wee not ſhape ſuch an anſwere to our aduerſarie, not onely to conceale part of trueth, as Samuel did, 1. Sam 16. but euen to giue vp the wicked to their owne counſels, that will not obey the truth; bidding them goe vp and proſper, as Micha
                     ••
                  h did, 2. King. 22? yea in an holie diriſion, vpbraiding their carnall confidence: Reioyce oh young man, and take thy fill? Eccl. 11. And ſeeing they will not be reclaimed, and hate to be reformed; may not the prudent keepe ſilence in ſuch euill times? 2. Chron. 2. Amos 5. Or ſo only ſpeake, as to leaue the incorrigible to their luſts, ceaſing to rebuke a ſcorner, that we may wiſely Prou 9. auoid his hatred, and ſo pronouncing the wrath of God againſt him, in yeelding him vp to his owne luſts; as that he may bleſſe his ſoule in this fearfull libertie, and wee by thi
                  •
                wiſedome may maintaine our holy libertie. Oh that we were wiſe to conſider of theſe things and to whom the arme of the Lord ſhall reueale them. For the waies of the Lord are righteous, and the iuſt ſhall walke in them, but Oſe 14. the wicked ſhall fall therein.
            As for the changing of our features and habits for a Names and habits whe her they may be changed, and how farre. time, to auoid vnneceſſarie trouble herein, I take it, wee may thus farre be iuſtified. As though
            1. Not to change our names. And that becauſe they are of a diuine inſtitution, as well as ciuill, impoſed not only to make diſtinction of our perſons from others, but to be witneſſes & pledges of our profeſſion, and both memorials of Gods former mercies towards vs, as alſo euidences Names not to be changed. of Gods euerlaſting couenant with vs, to be our protector and preſeruer for euer. And therfore not to be denied, if we be demanded the ſame, leſt therein we denie our faith: neither to be changed, becauſe our profeſſion muſt not bee changed. Eſpecially ſeeing by deniall, or changing, wee ſhall not onely not aduantage our ſelues to the thing wee intend: namely, not to be knowne, ſeeing by other markes of proportion, or complexion, wee may be bewraied: but being diſcouered, we ſhal hereby adde vnto our affliction, not only being iuſtly exempted out of Gods protection, by reiecting the badge thereof, our names, but expoſed alſo

the rather to the rage of man, as being tainted hereby with diſſimulation, &c.
            Adde we hereunto, that not only we haue not any preſident 
                  Abrahams name changed and no warrāt, becauſe this was done by God, and the caſe different. in the ſcripture for the like in this caſe, but alſo this changing of names is practiſed by ſuch as, either in their iudgements, or liues, or both, deny the Lord that hath bought them, namely, Ieſuites, Seminaries, Theeues, Coſoners, &c.
            For our feature, ſo farre as that may be altered by changing Feature. the faſhion of the haire, beard, &c. this being but ciuill, and differing according to the diuers guiſe of each nation, ſo no painting or diſfiguring, abhorring to nature, or denied by ciuilitie, and religion, bee added; I ſee not but this libertie may be vſed, in a caſe of neceſſitie, for the preſeruation of life: ſo it ſtand with our callings, and tend to Gods glorie.
            The like we may determine concerning change of apparell, Apparell may be changed. as being a ciuill thing, and therefore both ſubiect to a religious end, the preſeruation of life with a good conſcience, and alſo ſubiect to change, according to the diuers guiſe of nations, callings, condition, and occaſion, of proſperitie, or aduerſitie, keeping our ſelues within the bounds of our Chriſtian libertie, becomming all vnto all; as, to winne others, ſo to preſerue our ſelues for their good; as 1. Phil. moſt deſirous to be with Chriſt, which is the beſt of all, and yet readie to follow the Lord in any good occaſion, for the preſeruation of life to benefit the Saints, and make ſure our owne election: prouided that we, 1. keep our ſelues within the compaſſe of our religious and ciuill callings.
            2. That we change not that which is vſuall to the other Deut. 22. ſex.
            3. That we deny not our profeſſion, if this meanes will not conceale vs, being demanded particularly.
            4. That wee ſimply intend, in our preſeruation, Gods glorie, for the benefitting of others.
            A fourth occaſion of this falſe imputation that we haue A fourth occaſion, is the vſe of ſpirituall wiſedom in reprouing for ſin. left our firſt loue, is our diſcretion in reprouing for ſinne, when either we ceaſe to reprooue ſcorners, although our

ſoules doe not ceaſe to weep in ſecret for thē, and our contrary conuerſation is a cōuiction of thē: or reproue priuatly, & generally, if in publike, making difference of perſons in regard of their calling and qualitie of their ſinne, ſauing ſome with feare, and yet raiſing vp others with the ſpirit of meeknes, Gal. 6. 1 &c.
            1. Which imputation how vniuſt it is, may appeare by the rules of the holy Ghoſt: 1. Tim. 5. 1. Mat. 19. And alſo,
            2. By the practize of the Saints: Nathan, 2. Sam. 12. Paul: Compare the practize in reproouing the Church of Corinth, firſt epiſtle and 11. chap. and the Church of Galat. 3. chap. but aboue all, the practize of our Sauiour is peereleſſe, in his different reproofe of the Scribes and Phariſies: Mat. 23. Luk. 11. and of his Diſciples, Mat. 8. Mat. 26. 27.
            A fifth occaſion of this vniuſt challenge that wee may A fifth occaſion, is outward and inward afflictiōs. loſe our firſt loue, is, when the hand of God lying heauily vpon vs in ſome outward emptying, becauſe our eſtate is decaied outwardly, therfore the world concludes a decay within: eſpecially, if wee ſurceaſe in a meaſure ſuch duties of charitie, wherein, before when our cup ouerflowed, we abounded, towards others: which by this may appeare to be moſt vnrighteous; becauſe it is the purpoſe of the heart which God reſpects, which may bee no leſſe open to our 2. Cor. 8. 12. 13. brother, though our purſe be ſtraitned, yea being ſcanted of this outward deuotion, may be more inlarged in ſpirituall almes to procure mercie for the ſoule, and contentment in all eſtates: Act. 3. 6.
            A ſixth occaſion there is alſo of this falſe imputation, A ſixth occaſion▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the honeſt prouiſion for our families. 1. Tim. 5. when wee rectifie our charitie by wiſedome to our ſelues, ſo diſtributing to others as that we prouide for our owne, leſt we be worſe then infidels, and ſo louing our neighbor as that we proue not cruell to our ſelues; ſo diuiding to others that we preferre the houſehold of faith, Galat. 6. 10. both doing the beſt good, and, as we may, continue & hold out longeſt therein. For which, ſeeing wee haue the warrant of the holy Ghoſt, as wee ought to auoide all appearance of this euill by moderation, in our procuring and vſage of theſe things: ſo neede wee not feare hereby any

cooling of our loue. Only make wee this vſe of this vniuſt imputation, as to ſuſpect our ſelues in regard of our carnall loue, and to trie our abiding in the loue of God, by ſuch a loue vnto our ſelues, as may prouide for the fleſh, to the humbling and mortifying of the ſame, as may further our ſelues and others to thoſe durable riches, which are at the right hand of our God for euermore.
            Laſtly, wee may be falſely charged to haue left our firſt A ſeuenth occaſion to this vniuſt challenge that we haue loſt our firſt loue, is the vſe of our chriſtian libertie in things indifferent. Act. 10. Rom. 14. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Tim. 4. Tit. 1. 15. loue:
            When encreaſing in knowledge of our right in Ieſus Chriſt, and from him in theſe outward things wee take libertie for the vſe of ſome things, (which before we refrained, as being either not informed, or not throughly reſolued concerning them) either becauſe they are indifferent, and ſo are all ours in Chriſt, and being ſanctified by the word and prayer may be lawfully vſed, ſeeing to the pure all things are pure. Or elſe being ſimply good, are now of conſcience to be embraced, and cheerefully practized, that they may further vs to the chiefeſt good. Which how falſe an imputation it is, ſeeing the rules of the Word, and practiſe of the Saints haue made good: 1. Cor. 9. Galat. 2. &c. Therefore let vs feare the cooling of our loue, in the vſe of this libertie, ſo that our conſciences bee perſwaded and practize warranted by theſe rules: namely, firſt,
            1. That the meanes of our encreaſe in knowledge bee The right vſe of Chriſtian liberty in things indifferent. Phil. 1. 9. the word of truth, not the authoritie of man.
            2. That wee be able to diſcerne betweene things that differ: not ſtumbling at euill things, vnder the pretence of indifferencie; nor ſubiecting things ſimply good, to the nature of things indifferent, making the neceſſarie worſhip of God, a matter of indifferencie, as the preaching of the Goſpell, catechizing, faſting, &c. yea, thruſting out the ſubſtance of holineſſe for the complement thereof. That as we deſpiſe not order, ſo it further true deuotion: ſo we reſt not in the outſide, and make an idol of bodily ſeruice: Rom. 14. 1. Phil. 9. 10.
            3. That in this liberty we offend not our Chriſtian brother: neither the Magiſtrate, by refuſing what he lawfully

impoſeth; nor the weake brother, by not informing him in Rom. 13. the true vſe of theſe things; or vſing what may iuſtly giue occaſion, either of doubting in faith, or corruption in life: 1. Cor. 8. Rom. 14.
            4. That herein alſo we not only auoid what may hurt, but in all ſpirituall wiſedome doe that which may further to the beſt good, euen the ſaluation of the ſoule: 1. Cor. 9.
            5. And all this to the only praiſe of our glorious God, through Ieſus Chriſt: 1. Cor. 10. 31.
            Thus may wee bee falſely charged to haue left our firſt loue, and thus may we be eſtabliſhed againſt theſe falſe imputations.
            But ſay, what others faſten vpon me, that I feare in my 8. Whether want of feeling of former comforts may be a iuſt imputation that we haue left ourfirſt loue. ſelfe. I feele not that ioy and inward comfort I ſometimes had: theſe ouerflowings, and extraordinarie ſweetneſſe, though I faint after them, and refreſh my ſoule with the meditation thereof, yet I finde them not ſo abound and runne ouer, as in former times: may I not hereby coniecture that I haue loſt my firſt loue?
            Surely the Lord giue thee wiſedome herein, that thou doeſt not wrong thine owne heart, and preiudice the wiſedome and mercie of thy God.
            Remember that thou liueſt by faith, and not by ſenſe: 2. Cor. 3. 7. though thou ſeeſt no outward meanes, yet thy 1 faith will aſſure thee that God is able and will prouide him a ſacrifice, Geneſ. 22. Yea though thou haſt no inward feeling Gods prouidence diſcouered herein. Iob 13. 15. 2 of comfort, yet ſhalt thou truſt in God, euen though he kill thee. And this is the victorie of thy faith, euen to beleeue aboue feeling: thus is thy faith perfited, euen laying hold on things not ſeene, when it is depriued of the ſenſe of things paſt, and preſent. And may not thy God Heb. 11. 1. 3 withdraw theſe comforts from thee, for the further triall of thy faith, and loue vnto his Maieſtie; that though thou want that comfort which heretofore thou haſt had, yet ſtill thou canſt giue glorie vnto thy God in beleeuing his word, and in large thy loue vnto his Maieſtie, euen when he ſeemes to haue forſaken thee? And canſt thou haue a better Rom. 4. 20. 4 triall of the power and purenes of thy faith, then aboue

hope to beleeue vnder hope in the promiſes of thy God, ſubiecting thy chiefeſt good vnto the glorie of God? and through want of preſent ſenſe being guided to forget what thou haſt enioyed, leſt through ſpirituall pride thou mighteſt reſt therein, and rob God of his glorie, thou doeſt the rather make haſte to that which is before, by the power of thy faith ſeeing a farre off, yea laying faſt hold on eternall life by renuing thy ſtrength in Ieſus Chriſt? And is 5 not the Lord herein wonderful, that by withdrawing ſenſe of preſent ioy, he both purgeth vs of ſuch euils as may corrupt the ſame, namely, ſpirituall pride and ſecuritie, and alſo cauſeth vs hereby to lay faſter hold on Ieſus Chriſt, who onely muſt perfit the worke that is begun in vs? And 
               6 canſt thou expreſſe thy loue in greater meaſure vnto thy God, then to loue him then, when hee ſeemes to haue forſaken thee? then to follow after him when hee ſeemes to runne from thee? doth not this aduance the ſinceritie of thy loue? doth not this exceedingly approue thy conformitie to thy Sauiour, that as hee was contented to be abaſed in himſelf, yea to become of no reputation, that thou maiſt be accepted; ſo thou art contented to be emptied, that God may be glorified, thou canſt willingly want preſent comfort, that thy God may haue vnfained worſhip, Rom. 9. when now, not ſo much for thine owne ſake, as for his glorie, thou doeſt beleeue in him, when though he kill thee, Iob 13. 15. 7 yet thou wilt truſt in him? And canſt thou be a loſer where the Lord is ſuch a gainer by thee? canſt thou leaue thy loue when the Lord doth purpoſe to trie the ſoundnes of it; when the Lord prouoketh thee to liue by faith; when by the power of faith hee will thus enable thee to lay hold of eternall life?
            Surely as this is the life of faith to exceed preſent ſenſe; ſo this want of preſent comfort thus conceiued, and applied, ſhall be both a meanes to enable thee to make better Note
                     •
                  . vſe of ſuch ioy, when the Lord ſhall againe turne his countenance vpon thee: and in the meane time miniſter exceeding comfort vnto thy ſoule, that thou doeſt conſtantly beleeue in, and vnfainedly loue the Lord thy God.

And therefore doubt not herein of any decay of thy loue Reſolution herein. vnto thy God, becauſe the Lord in his wiſedome, for thy trial, withdrawes the preſent pledges of his loue from thee. For neither couldeſt thou endure at all, in thy ſenſe of this want of preſent comfort, if thy God did not ſecretly vphold 8 thee with inward and vnſpeakeable conſolations. And in that thou diſcerneſt want of ioy, it is not ſo much becauſe thou wanteſt that which thou haſt had, as that by 9 Note. faith thou apprehendeſt that vnſpeakable ioy which thou haſt not: which that it doth euacuate and emptie thee of ſenſe of preſent cōfort, it is no more maruell, then that the glorious light of the Sunne ſhould obſcure the light of a candle, or that a drop ſhould not be diſcerned being caſt into the maine Ocean.
            Onely for thy full ſatisfaction herein, examine thy heart in this caſe, by theſe rules:
            Firſt, that thou haſt not giuen thy God iuſt occaſion to withdraw theſe comforts from thee: either, Triall hereof.
            
            1. By not prizing them bighly and inualuably:
            2. Or by not being throughly humbled with thē: elſe,
            3. Through beholding of the Sun when it ſhined thou waſt dazled, and puffed vp therewith.
            4. And ſo didſt not imploy them to the beſt vſe of thy Maſter, aduancing his glorie, and to ye good of thy brother.
            5. Either thou didſt meaſure the infinite loue of thy God by them, and ſo didſt ouerrate theſe comforts.
            6. Or elſe thou didſt corrupt them by mingling them with the fleſh, and making them ſerue the luſts thereof.
            7. Either thou conceiuedſt baſely of the meanes, that conuaied theſe comforts vnto thee, namely, the miniſterie of the word, dreaming of reuelations and extraordinarie meanes.
            8. Or elſe being ouerioyed with theſe comforts, thou becameſt preſumptuous and idle, neglecting thy calling which God hath appointed to humble thee, and thereby to fit thee to greater comforts.
            Secondly, examine thy affections in the want of theſe preſent comforts.
            
               
               1. That thou eſteeme not thy caſe deſperate for want of them. Neither,
               2. Be ſo contented with this diſpenſation of thy God, but that it reioyceth thee vnfainedly to remember what thou haſt felt, and
               3. Thou doeſt vnfainedly mourne for the want of this gra
                     •
                  ious aſpect, and withall
               4. Doeſt vnfainedly hunger after the returne, and increaſe thereof. And to this end
               5. Doeſt vſe conſcionably, and reioyce in, the meanes of the preaching of the Goſpell, and effectuall prayer for the recouerie of the ſame: Cant. 1 & 5.
               6. Yea doeſt labour to conferre with the Saints, and holy ones, making triall of their feelings, and quickning thereby thy dulnes, by prouoking their prayers, &c.
               7. And waiteſt patiently the leiſure of thy God, for the returne of comfort, as may ſtand with his glorie, reſoluing thy ſelfe, that his grace is ſufficient for thee.
            
            Thus if thou art reſolued in thy iudgement, and art thus eſtabliſhed in thy affections,
            The leſſe thou feeleſt the loue of thy God, the more is the triall of thy loue towards him; and the more hee tries thy loue, the more is his loue towards thee, and therefore thy loue to him muſt needs be enlarged: which thou doeſt expreſſe by thy ſaith, in beleeuing beyond thy feeling, and hereby giuing glorie vnto God, thou doeſt grow in his fauour; by the power whereof, thou art encreaſed in his obedience, and ſo followeſt hard after the marke, to obtaine that crowne of glorie.
            If yet thou art doubtfull of thy abiding in loue: As thou maiſt decay; ſo thou art iealous of thy ſelfe herein:
            I ſay vnto thee, Bleſſed is the man that feareth alwaies.
            And that thou maiſt be reſolued, whether thou art decaied 
                  Prou. 28. 13. How to know whether we haue left our firſt loue. or no, obſerue for thy triall theſe markes thereof: which are apparent ſymptomes of the leauing of our firſt loue.
            1. Know thou that if thou haſt loſt that peace of conſcience, By theſe markes. whereby thou waſt wont to come with boldnes

into the preſence of thy God, and powre out thy ſoule in ſtrong cries and teares vnto thy God, and ſo canſt not pray with that euidence, as in former times, with that patience and conſtancie ouercomming thy God.
            2. If thou groweſt fearfull of troubles, and vſeſt carnall policie to preuent them.
            3. If thou groweſt worldly, and couetous, withdrawing thy hand from the neceſſities of thy brother, and neglecting the occaſions of charitie, &c.
            4. If thou groweſt negligent in hearing of the word, contenting thy ſelfe either with none, or an vneffectuall Miniſterie.
            5. If thou canſt diſpenſe with thy ſelfe in vaine ſports and recreations, gaming, vaine talke, &c. whereof heretofore thou madeſt ſome conſcience, waſting thy time and wit in them.
            6. If thou canſt frame to all companies, and temporize with each, as preſuming vpon thy protection, from thy Chriſtian calling: Epheſ. 5. 1.
            7. If thou art afraid of death, and neglecteſt the daily and conſtant examination of thy waies, and holie duties in priuate, vnto thy God.
            8. If thou canſt ſo ioy in theſe earthly things, as either not to feele a lothſomneſſe in them, or not to vſe them as ſparkes to encreaſe the fire of thy ſpirituall ioy.
            9. If thou meaſureſt the happineſſe of the life to come by that ſenſe, which for the preſent thou haſt thereof; thou doeſt not liue by faith, and therefore thou haſt left thy firſt loue.
            And for thy comfort obſerue herein an eſpeciall mercie of thy God, that there will follow this loſſe of loue:
            1. Inward trouble of conſcience, which will giue thee Symptomes that follow the leauing of our firſt loue. no reſt till thou haſt reſolued thy caſe with God, and recouered: Pſal. 6. 38, &c.
            2. Some outward ſenſible ſtripe either in thy goods, perſon, children; to open thine eyes the better, and bring thee to repentance: Iob 33. 15, 16.
            3. Now the world will not faile to flatter thee, and as it

were to owne thee, that ſo thou maiſt ſuſpect thy ſelfe the rather.
            4. And yet that thou maiſt diſcerne the worlds loue, thou ſhalt not want ſome mocke and reproch, to caſt the durt of thy decay in thy face, that ſo thou maiſt bee aſhamed and confounded in this decay.
            5. And happily thou maiſt be giuen vp to ſome groſſe ſinne, the more to diſcredit thee with the world, that ſo thou maiſt not be corrupted with the flattery thereof.
            And therefore thus thou maiſt recouer out of this decay:
            1. Reſt vpon the promiſes of thy God, that thou ſhalt How to recouer firſt loue. recouer, and thy latter end ſhall bee better then the beginning.
            2. Meditate on the former experience of the ioy of the ſpirit, that ſo thou maiſt preſſe the Lord from his wonted mercies: Pſal. 77. 1. Sam. 17.
            3. Conſider the meanes that the Lord vſed to plant this ioy and loue in thy heart, and by the ſame know, that he will renue this worke, and therefore at no hand be driuen from the meanes: Cant. 1. Cant. 4. 5.
            4. Reſolue that thy former eſtate was better then now: Oſ. 2. 8. 9. and therfore returne to thy firſt loue againe, that ſo the Lord may renue and increaſe thy loue vnto him.
            5. Acquaint the experienced ſouldier with this thy eſtate, that ſo he may be a meanes to quicken thee againe.
            6. Giue wee not ouer our purſuit of theſe comforts: ſpare we no paines: thinke we all time too little: impoſe we extraordinarie afflictions, as faſting, and ſo groning vnder the burden, and deteſting our ſelues: giue wee the Lord no reſt, till he hath returned to his reſt, and recouered our decaies: Cantic. 5.
            To this end vſe we the meanes before ſet downe to recouer from Apoſtaſie.
            And be we comforted, that we ſhall not loſe, though we haue left this loue.
            And this is the laſt leſſon to bee obſerued out of this Scripture: Namely▪
            
            
               
That the Saints ſhall not loſe, though they leaue their 
                  Doct. 7. The Saints ſhall not loſe their firſt loue. Reaſon 1. Oſe. 2. 19. Eſa 49. Eſa. 27. firſt loue: Luk. 11. Pſal. 92. 2. Tim. 4. 19.
            1. Becauſe the Lord hath promiſed to continue his loue towards them: Ioh. 13. 1. Ioh. 17.
            2. Their afflictions doe tend to their perſeuerance, as purging out their ſinnes: Eſay 1. 25.
            3. Their ſins turne to their continuance in grace: 1. as making them afraid of ſinne: 2. and more expert to conquer the ſame: 3. more fit for grace, by making them more humble, and hungry after it: 4. more mercifull to others, and therefore moouing the Lord to haue more compaſſion on them.
            4. Their Sauiour liueth and triumpheth, to make them more then conquerours: Rom. 8. 36. 37. Ioh. 12. 32.
            5. The ſpirit and word ſhall abide in them to hold them on in grace.
            And therefore
            1. This condemneth the blaſphemie of Papiſts, who teach that the Saints may fall finally, and therein doe impeach Vſe. the power and faithfulneſſe of God.
            2. It checketh the inſolencie of the wicked that reioice at the fals of the Saints, and inſult ouer them, ſeeing that though they fall, they ſhall riſe againe: Mich. 7. 9.
            3. As alſo it reprooueth the infidelity of the Saints, who doubt of their recouery, and wrong the faithfulneſſe of God, and power of their faith, greeue the bleſſed ſpirit, and deny in a ſort the merit of Chriſt.
            4. Heere is firſt for the world to iuſtifie Gods faithfulneſſe, ſeeing he doth not forſake for euer; Lam. 3. 24. 25.
            5. Heere the Saints are leſſoned, as to feare their falles, and not to ſinne vpon preſumption of recouerie; ſo not to diſtruſt of Gods mercie in their greateſt failings, ſeeing the Lord is faithfull, and they ſhall recouer, though not ſo forcible a meaſure as before they had, yet ſufficient to the enioying of that happineſſe that the Lord Ieſus hath purchaſed for them. To this end, for the further ſatisfying and comforting of the conſcience, obſerue wee theſe two things:
            
               
Firſt, that it is one thing to leaue our firſt loue, and to be luke-warme, neither hot nor cold.
            2. That there is great oddes betweene leauing our firſt loue, and loſing it altogether: we may leaue, in regard of a former meaſure, and yet hold a true graine which ſhall cleere vs of luke-warmneſſe: and though we leaue a meaſure, yet wee loſe not all, becauſe the leaſt remaining will be a meanes to recouer againe, if not ſo much as we haue had, yet ſo much as ſhall ſerue both to keepe from finall apoſtaſie, and further to eternall glory.
            6. And therefore heere is matter of exceeding conſolation to the elect of God, not to truſt their owne vnbeleeuing hearts, much leſſe Satanslies; but to reſt on the faithfulneſſe of God, not iudging themſelues by what they are in their decay, but by what they were in their firſt loue: and ſo preſſing the Lord in his faithfulneſſe, and their former experience, they ſhall bee vpheld in their greateſt failings, by a ſecret power; and in good time the Lord will appeare vnto them to bring foorth their righteouſneſſe as the light, and their weldoing as the noone Pſal. 37. 5. Luk. 12. day, that ſo their latter end may be better then their beginning.
            Glory be to the Lord Ieſus.
         
      
   