
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The true and perfect copie of a godly Sermon, preached in the Minster at Lincolne, by the reuerend Father in God, Thomas L. Biſhop of Lincolne the. 28. of Auguſt. ANNO. 1575.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henrie Middleton for Rafe Newberie, dwelling in Fleeteſtrete alitle aboue the Condite.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            WHē I perceiued the earneſt good will of ſome, vvich tooke paines very buſilie to get this ſermon ſo exquiſitely penned, as it vvas pithilie ſpokē, & had therwithal had the view of the halfe (& as it vvere the maimed copie) of the ſame more zealouſly then skilfully collected: I (into vvhoſe handes by the meanes of a friende this true and perfecte copie came) thought my ſelfe to be blame vvorthie, if I should denie to further the honeſt deſire of welmeaning chriſtians. The excellencie of the thing made manie men to requeſt it, and the deſire of many made me to print it, hoping that among manie ſome vvil take profite by it▪ fare vvell.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A Sermon no leſſe godly then neceſſarie, preached in the Minſter at Lincolne by the reuerende Father, Thomas Cooper, Byshoppe of Lincolne on the xxviii. day of August, 1575. Treating on the xvi. Chapter of Matthewe verſe. 26. 27. as followeth.
            
               
                  QVid prodest homini ſi totum Mundum lucratus fuerit & animae ſuae iacturam &c. The laſt day (dearely beloued) you hearde how ſwéetly gently and louingly our ſauiour Chriſt ſpake vnto vs, & with moſt tender and 
                  •
               inde heart called vs to follow him, and aſſured vs to haue careIohn. 14. 15. of our ſaluation. If you love me (ſayde he) keepe my commandements: aſſuring vs withall of his ſingular graces and benefites of his holy ſpirit, & that he woulde not onely teache vs, and be our guide, but that he and his Father woulde come and dwell in vs, and ſo

make our fraile bodyes, as it were, the Temple of the bleſſed Trynitie, And not only that he would make his dwelling place in vs, but alſo abyde with vs for euer, that we might by him enioye eternal life. Theſe ſwéete allurements ſhould not onely moue the hart of Chriſtians to pietie and godlineſſe, but alſo cauſe vs to haue an earneſt & carefull conſideration of our ſoules health and not to neglect this time of grace whereinthe long ſuffring of God doth mercifully call vs to repentance. But lamentable it is, and it woulde make any true Chriſtian heart bléede to conſider, that the moſt part of vs are not onely ſo careleſſe and negligent, but ſo dul of hearing, and ſo heard harted, as we take no héed of gentle ſpeche, we be not mooued with ſwéete allurements, yea, we be ſo a ſlepe in ſecuritie as no ſounde or noyſe of Gods mercie will wake vs out of our deadly flomber.
            Wherefore ſéeing mercie and mildeneſſe will not preuaile with our careleſſe

mindes, ſéeing ſwéete and gentle ſpeeche wil not waken our ſléepie and ſluggiſh hearts, we muſt be contented this daye to heare him make terrible proclamation of his iuſtice, and to put vs in minde of that dreadfull danger, that we ſhal fal into, vnleſſe we ſpéedely haue regard vnto our ſouls. VVhat doth it auaile a man (ſaith he) if he win the vvhole vvorlde and looſe his owne ſoule, for it shal come to paſſe that the ſonne of man &c. The ſomme of Chriſtes ſpéeche is this. The ſonne of man aſſuredlie shall come vvith mightye povver to iudge the vvorlde, and giue to euerie man according to his deſerts: therfore it behoueth you to haue care of your ſoules. This ſhort argument comprehendeth great and ample matter, of ſome part whereof I meane at this time by Gods ſufferance to ſpeak, and firſt of the Antecedent, and then of the concluſion. Firſt therefore I will let you vnderſtande that the daye of iudgement ſhall be, and that ſpéedely. Secondly how and after what ſort it

ſhalbe. And then wil I adde the concluſion, how we ſhoulde haue care of our ſoules and prepare our ſelues for the comming of that day.
            That there ſhalbe a iudgement, If there were no more places in the whole ſcripture, this one might be ſufficient, eſpecially if we conſider who it is that ſpeaketh it, that is, Chriſt our Sauiour,Matt. 16. the Sonne of God and trueth it ſelfe. It shal come to paſſe (ſaith he) that the ſonne of man shal come in the glorie of the Father with his Angels, and then shal he giue to euerie man according to his doings. But beſide this teſtimonie the holy Ghoſt in ſundry places of the Scripture beareth witneſſe to the ſame. Novv (ſaith S. Paul) God denounceth to al men in al places thatAct. 17. they should repent, becauſe he hath ſet a day vvherein he vvil by that mā, vvhome he hath appointed, iudge the vvorlde in righteouſneſſe. And againe: vve al shall appeare before the iudgement ſeate of Chriſt that euerie manRom. 14. may yelde to God an accompt for him

ſelfe. And to the Corinthians: vve muſt2. Cor. 5. al appeare before the iudgement ſeate of Chriſt, that euerie man maye receiue the vvorkes of his bodie according to that he hath done, be it goodDan. 7. Zach. 14 Mat. 25. 26. Iohn. 5. Apoc. 1. 2. Pet. 3. 1. Cor. 15. or badde.
            
            But what ſhould I ſtand in rekoning vp of manie teſtimonies ſeing the holy Scriptures are ful of them? And therefore the Apoſtles of Chriſt, & after thē the holy Fathers of the firſt Church haue layd it downe as a neceſſarie article of Chriſtian faith, the denying or doubting wherof muſt nedes ſubuert al Chriſtian religion, and make vs the moſt miſerable of al men.
            Wherefore Chriſtians that haue féeble and wauering faith, in theſe miſerable and daungerous dayes, muſt ſéeke by all godly meanes to ſtrengthen their conſciences herein, Wherevnto this reaſon following muſt be of great waight and importance with al them that haue any ſenſe of God.
            The Prophetes of God many hundred yeres before Chriſt came in fleſh,

denounced vnto the worlde, that the true Sauiour Chriſte Jeſus ſhould be ſent to worke the redemption of mankynde, and deſcriueth his Conception, his Natiuitie, the place and maner of his birth, his ſtate and condition in the world, finally his death, his reſurrection and aſcention. All which things we ſée haue vnfallibly come to paſſe many yeres ſince. Therefore thoſe things, that they haue propheſied of the laſt day, and of his comming to iudgemēt, muſt alſo proue as true, and as certeinly in due time come to paſſe. But happily many be ſo farre gon in heatheniſhe infidelitie, that they beléeue not the Scriptures, yea they will ſcoffe and ſcorne at this talke, and thinke it is no better thā a bug to feare babes withall. Yea and theſe happyly ſhall be in no ſmall place and countenance in the world. For the world is ſo great with them, that they forget God altogether. Of theſe ſpeaketh S. Peter. There shall come (ſayth he) in2. Pet. 3. the latter dayes ſcorners, vvalking after

their ovvn luſt, and ſaying, vvhere is the promiſe of his comming? For ſince the fathers ſlept, all things continue a like from the beginning of the creatiō. Who heareth not ſuch voyces ſpread cōmōly among the iolieſt ſort of men in this worlde, or if many doe not heare thē, who is it, y• by the obſtinate contempt of Gods holy worde, the diſdain of his meſſengers, and by the vnbrideled looſeneſſe of mens liues, may not iuſtly gather, that this opinion is in the hearts of very many? But I wil anſwere them as S. Peter in effect doth immediately folowing, that is, that heauen and earth doth ſo long remaine, becauſe they are preſerued by the worde of their almightie Creator and maker, who as by his worde he made it of nothing, ſo, when he ſhall appoint the time, it ſhall ende and periſhe, for the ſame worde, that had power to make the worlde of nothing: hath alſo like power, when it ſhall ſeeme good, to diſſolue it. For pro
                  •
               e here of: the world continued from the firſt

creation, vntill the generall deluge of Noah, being appointed by the determined decree of Gods holy prouidence that it ſhould ſo do, and when the ſame almightie worde of God had ſayd, that for ſinne he would deſtroy the whole worlde with water, it was without ſtay perfourmed. Therefore ſéeing the ſame prouidence by his holy ſpirit hath ſayde alſo that in the ende it ſhall be conſumed with fire, the ſame worde ſhall as aſſuredly be veryfied. ForMat. 5. heauen and earth ſhall periſhe and paſſe away in vanitie, but the worde of God ſhall not periſh, but that euery iote thereof ſhal be perfourmed. But, as I haue ſayd, theſe men make ſmall account of Gods worde, I will therefore leaue Chriſtians, and turne my ſelfe to Heathens and Paganes, for ſuche are theſe ſcorning and looſe Epicures of whome S. Peter ſpeaketh, although they hide themſelues vnder the cloakes of Chriſtians. I aſke them therefore, whether they beléeue there is a God or no? If they will ſay no:

               For the foolish hath ſaide in his heart, there is no God: Then will I, will them to beholde the whole world, and the maruellous workemanſhip thereof. The Sunne, the Moone, the ſtarres and planets, with the wonderfull mouing and courſe of the ſame, the earth, the water, the ayre, and all the beautifull furniture thereof, beaſtes, trées, plantes, foules, fyſhes, rayne, haile, thunder, lightning, with the reſidue of Gods maruellous workes in his creatures, and the maner of growing, bréeding, and encreaſing of the ſame, and vndoubtedly the almightie power, the excéeding wiſedome and vneſtimable goodneſſe that ſhall appeare in theſe things, muſt néedes conuince them in their owne conſciences that there is a God, which in ſo excéeding and goodly maner hath framed them. Yea, if he be worthy the name of a man, let himſelfe conſider but the framing of a litle babe in his mothers wombe, from ſéed to ſkynne, ſinews, veynes, arteries, bones, fleſh, lyfe and reaſonable ſoule,

and verie reaſon it ſelfe will tell him, that it is an euerlaſting power that doeth it. For the weighing thereof hath cōuinced the conſciences of great learned Philoſophers, that haue ſtriued to perſuade them ſelues the contrary. Oh wil they ſay, theſe are done by courſe of nature.
            Why, and what is that they call Nature? or what is it, that doeth directe that courſe? is it any thing elſe then the finger of God working in his creatures? Seneca an heathen Philoſopher can witneſſe ſo much. Séeing then there muſt néedes be a God, let them reaſon thus with themſelues. If there be a God, he muſt néedes be a iuſt God, and the office of iuſtice is to rewarde them that be good, and to puniſh them that be euill. For this direction the ſame God by nature hath imprinted in vs. But in this lyfe, although God oftentimes ſhewe ſome notable examples of his iuſtice, in rewarding the good, and puniſhing the euill, yet moſt commonly the wicked doe proſper and flouriſhe, as Dauid

in ſundry places complayneth, and cō
               trarywiſe the faythfull and godly are afflicted. In ſo muche that S. Paule2. Tim. 3. ſayth, vvho ſo euer vvill liue godly in Chriſt Ieſu, shall be ſure to ſuffer perſecution, and therfore it is truely ſaid, Crux comes euangelij, the croſſe is the vſuall companion of the Goſpell. Yea ſuch is the miſerie and trouble of good men in this worlde that Saint Paule ſayth, if there be not a reſurrection of1. Cor. 15. the deade, and another life after this, Chriſtians are of all other moſt miſerable. Chriſt him ſelfe in many places telleth his faythfull and bleſſed Apoſtles, and vnder their names all other true Chriſtians, that they ſhoulde not in this worlde be ſo ſure of any thing as of affliction, trouble, and perſecution. Wherefore it muſt néedes folow as a moſt neceſſarie conſequent, that after this life there muſt be a iudgement, in which men according to the vnfallible iuſtice of God, muſt receiue as Chriſt ſayth in this place, according to their doings, be it good or
               
               bad. This reaſon hath perſuaded the moſt parte of ye heathen Philoſophers, that the ſoule of man is immortal, and receiueth after this life eyther reward or puniſhment. Yea, in perſuaſion hereof, ſome with their owne handes haue diſpatched them ſelues out of this life, as it is writen of Cato Vticenſis, and other: And a great number vpon the ſame hope of a better life after this, haue conſtantly contemned death, and cherefully receiued the ſame. Seing then heathen perſones that neuer had the true knowledge of God, by the very leading of humane reaſon haue growne to an aſſured perſuaſion, that after this life there ſhuld be a iudgement for the rewarding of the godly, and puniſhing of the wicked: What a dreadfull in
                  •
               idelitie is it in Chriſtians to ſéeme any thing to doubt of the ſame?
            Séeing therefore it is by Gods holy worde, and by reaſon conuinced that there ſhall be a iudgement after this life, it remayneth that we as certeinly

vnderſtand, that it ſhall come to paſſe very ſhortly. And for proofe hereof let vs firſt cal to minde the ſimilitude and borowed ſpeeches, that the holy Ghoſt vſeth in the ſcriptures, to declare the ſodaine comming thereof.
            Chriſt himſelfe and S. Paule compareth it to a thief that commeth ſodainly in the night, when th
                  •
                maſter and family thinketh of no danger, but that they may quietly take their reſt. If theMatt. 24. housholder had knovvē
                (ſaith chriſt) at vvhat houre the thiefe vvould haue come, he vvoulde haue vvatched and not ſuffred his houſe to haue ben broken vp. VVatch you therefore and be ready, for the ſonne of man vvil come you knovve not at vvhat houre. S. Paule reſembleth the comminge of the laſt day not onely to the ſodaine aſſault of a thiefe in the night, but to the throwes of a woman traueiling with chylde. For this he ſaith: VVhen they shal ſay vnto you peace, peace and all is vvell, then ſodainly shall deſtruction come vpon them as the panges of
               
               a vvoman in trauaile, & they shall not ſcape it.
            
            In which wordes he noteth ye quietnes & ſecure peace of confidence & good eſtate y• men ſhal haue at the later day. Chriſt Matt. 24. cōpareth it to a flaſhe of lightening comming from the Eaſt vnto the Weſt, then which, you know nothing can be more ſodaine, for it is done in the twinkling of an eye. Therfore, Derely beloued, you muſt be aſſured that in a moment, yea, euen in the twinkling of an eye, when you be in moſt ſecuritie, the laſt day ſhall oppreſſe you. And therefore no man is hable to aſſigne the day, the moneth or the yere, as ſome preſumtuouſly haueAct. 1. taken vpon them. For Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, it is not knowen to the Angels of heauen, no nor the ſonne of man in that he is man: but to his Godheade nothing is vnknowne. The wiſdome of God hath kept this ſecret from all men, thereby to ſtirre vp the faithful alway to be in a readineſſe. For ſuch is the frowardneſſe of our corrupt nature

that if we vnderſtand of any delaye, we abuſe the patience and long ſufferance of God to our owne further condemnation. We ought therfore ſo to frame our ſelues in al godlineſſe as if euery day ſhould be the laſt daye of the world, or at the leaſt the laſt daye of our life.
            And although the houre, day or yere of Chriſtes laſt comming be to vs vnknowen, yet hath he giuen vs certeine tokens whereby we may aſſuredly know when it approcheth or draweth nigh. For thus he writeth: Learne a
               Mat. 24. Mar. 13. Luke. 19. 
               parable of the figge tree vvhen his branche is yet tender, and the leaues ſprong, ye know that ſommer is nigh. So likevviſe vvhen ye shall ſee theſe thinges come to paſſe, be ye ſure that it is nere euen at the doores. And truely, dearely beloued there is nothinge mentioned there by Chriſt to come before the laſt day, or by the holy Ghoſt in any other place of the Scriptures but it is euidently euen to the eye of al faithful people fulfilled, ſo that for any

thing that we know to the contrarie, we may loke for it euen this yere, euen this moneth, euen this day, euen this houre, and I beſéeche almightie God déepely to impreſſe this cogitation into our hearts, that we may ſaye with S. Hierome VVhether vve eate or vvhether vve drinke, or vvhatſoeuer vve doe, vve may ſeeme to heareMatt. 24. Mar. 13. Luke. 19. this voyce of the Archangel continually ſovvning in our eares, Surgite mortui venite ad iudicium.
                Aryſe ye dead and come to iudgement. In the Goſpel Chriſt firſt noteth theſe ſignes and tokens that ſhall appeare before the later day, in the ſunne, the moone, the ſtarres and planets, in the ayre, in the water, in the earth, in the Church, in the ſtate of principalities and kingdomes, in the life & behauiour of mē, which if I ſhoulde ſtande to rehearſe particularly, and for proofe adde the teſtimonie of times and witneſſe of hiſtories in this latter age, an whole day would not ſuffice for ye declaration thereof. Haue we not had within this

few yeres aboue an hundred eclypſes of the Sunne and of the Moone? haue we not ſene many Cometes and other ſtrange and wonderous fierie impreſſions in the ayre? haue we not had many horrible tempeſtes of winde, rayne, hayle, ſnowe, thunder and lightening▪ to the great hurt of man and beaſt? What ſhal I ſay of the greatdeluges of water, at Naples, at Rome, in Germanie, in Flaunders, in England? ſnowe hath fallen twentie Cubites déepe, the Sea about Pontus hath bene froſen to the thickeneſſe of thirtie cubites, Earthquakes, in Italie diuers, in Gréece, in Aſia, in Barbarie, in Spaine, in England & many other places. As for monſters both by ſea and by land, of men & of beaſts, a marueilous number▪ 
               
                  •••
                mainie of which are recorded and put in writing with the note of their times, places & ſignes, and of theſe maner of figures before ſpoken ſundrie haue lighted here with vs in this Realme, ſo that we can not ſay but God forewarneth

vs by the as deepely as he hath done a
               
                  ••
               e Nation. But theſe things are paſſed away with ſleight conſideration, becauſe they haue cauſes Incident to nature whereby they may be thought to come. But chriſtians ought not ſo lightly to let flippe thoſe ſignes and forewarninges which our mercifull Lord and gracious Sauiour the trueeſt Prophet that euer was hath giuen vs to ſtirre vp our faith and expectation of his laſt comming, that our maiſter when he commeth ſodainely may not finde vs as lewde ſeruants ſléeping in ſecuritie, and contempt of God and godlyneſſe, and ſo being taken be caſt into that place, where ſhalbe weping and gnaſhing of téeth, for euer to continue in y• portion of hypocrites. Who is ruler of that nature? and diſpoſer and gouernour of thoſe ſeconde cauſes, vnto which they attribut theſe extraordinarie euents? is it not our Lord and God maker of heauen and earth, who guydeth al things that be done, not onely by nature, but ſuchs

alſo as ſéeme to vs to fall by chaunce? For if a ſparowe fall net, or a little worme of the earth créepe not, or a rude Aſſe wander not without his certeine prouidence, much more ought we to beleeue that ſo ſtrange thinges as I haue ſpoken of before, are not diſpoſed by any other power to fall in theſe or thoſe dayes but by his onely, to veryfie the promiſes, threatnings and forewarnings, that his ſonne our Sauiour hath giuen vs of his laſt cō
               ming to iudgement. By the like contempt and miſinterpreting of thoſe ſignes and wonderous tokens that God ſent before the deſtruction of Hieruſalem, the ſtubbourne Jewes by gods iuſt iudgment, hardened their heartes, and foaded foorth themſelues with vaine hope vntill the very daye that the wrath of God in moſt dreadful maner did light vpon thē, with the vtter deſtruction of their citie and deſolation of their people. There appeared a Comet and other firie impreſſions, but they aſſigned the cauſes to

nature as we doe. A man ſeuen yeres together neuer ceaſed crying, VVo be to Jeruſalem, vvo be to Jeruſalem, and they imputed it to madneſſe.
            The great braſen gate of the temple which twentie men might ſcant open, beeing faſt barred and locked, without handes ſundrie times ruſhed open, and they ſaide it was a ſigne of Gods fauour and of great proſperitie to come vnto them, but in the end, as I haue ſaid, they were ſurpriſed with moſt miſerable deſolation. Chriſtians ſhould beware by their folly. For ſurely I thinke that the ende of the people of the Jewes, and the deſtruction of their citie and Temple is a type and figure of the laſt day, and of thoſe things that ſhall then happen in the Church, as I coulde more largely declare if time would ſuffer me. But becauſe this kinde of ſignes is ſo neglected with mante, and finde ſuch ſhiftes in mans reaſon to auoid the ſignification of them, for the aſſured proofe of the approching of the laſt daye, I will

reſt onely vpon thrée or foure places of the worde of God, which ſhall bring ſo euident teſtimonie thereof, as no mā that hath anie ſenſe of a true chriſtian, and is not altogether caried away with the loue of the worlde, and luftes of the fleſh can with ſafe conſcidence denie it. The firſt is Daniel. To whom when it pleaſed God in a viſionDan. 7. to declare that ſtate of the worlde that ſhould be euen to the end thereof, by the figure of the foure beaſtes, he deſcribed y• foure Empires, that ſhould follow one the other before the ende. The Babylonians by a lyon, whiche ſhould be deſtroyed and eaten vp by the Beare of the Perſians, and that conſumed and waſted by the foure Leopards of the Gretians, and that rent and torne, and trampled vnder foot by the terrible monſter of the Romanes, after which there is no mention made of any other Empire but onely that litle horne, that grewe out of the Romanes Empire to great might and power, by which is ment the king

dome of Antichriſt that ſhall fight againſt the Saints of God in the latter ende of the worlde. Which kingdome of Antichriſt now this many yeares hath ſhewen it ſelfe in the power of the Turke and of the Pops. Now derely beloued waigh theſe things. The Empire of the Babylonians continued not long after this viſion, but was ſubdued by the Perſians. The Empire of Perſia continued. 231. yeares and was conquered by Alexander and the Gretians. The Gretian empire in Alexander and his ſucceſſours deuided into foure kingdomes proſpered about 300. yeres, and after great and longe warres was conſumed by the Romanes which in growing & declyning hath now continued aboue a thouſand yeres and an halfe and is come euen to the laſt pinche, euen to the féete and toes mixed with braſſe and claye as the ſame Daniel deſcriueth it Chap. 9. to note the weakeneſſe and ſmall ſtrength thereof in the ende. For who ſéeth not nowe y• the empire is almoſt

nothinge, and conſiſteth onely of a fewe free Cityes in Germanye? For all the reſidue, it hath left vnto the worlde, as all men may ſée, the power of the Turke and of the Pope which both haue ryſen, and continued very neare about one time. For Mahomet in Arabia, and the Pope in Rome beganne their vſurpation within twelue yeres together. Nowe immediately in the ende of the Romane Empire and power of Antichriſt, Daniell deſcribeth the comming of Chriſt to iudgment. And I beheld (ſayth Daniell)Dan. 7. 
               vntill the thrones vvere ſet vp, and the ancient of dayes did ſit, and ſo forth, in ſuche ſort as you ſhall after heare in the deſcription of the laſte iudgement. Seing therefore experience of times hathe taught vs the trueth in the former part of this propheſie, touching the ryſing, ſucceſſion, and decaye of other kingdomes, we muſt néedes beléeue, if we haue any Chriſtian fayth in vs, y• the ſame ſpirit of God will performe the like trueth

in the reſidue, and that the ende of the worlde, and the laſt iudgement ſhall folowe vpon the decaye of the Romane Empire, and by the comming of our Sauiour Chriſt, vtterly deſtroy and pull downe the power of Antichriſte.
            The ſeconde teſtimonie of the holy Scriptures, for the aproching of the laſt daye, in S. Paule to the Theſſal. Let no man deceiue you, ſayth he, by2. Theſ. 2. any meanes. For the Lorde shall not come, except there come a falling avvay firſt, and that the man of ſinne be reuealed firſt, the ſonne of perdition. what doth S. Paul meane thinke you by falling avvay? vndoubtedly a great and wonderfull reuolting, and falling from the fayth of Chriſt.
            Nowe call to your remembrance that within a meane number of yeres after Chriſtes aſcention, all the thrée partes of the worlde ſubmitted them ſelues to the fayth of Chriſt, as the hyſtories do euidently declare. All Aſia, euen to the vttermoſt partes of the

Indians. All Affrike, euen to the extreame borders of the Aethiopes. All Europe without exception of any part. Adde alſo the Iles about the mayne land, among which we of this Realme of England are. Conceiue wel in your mynde this general profeſſion of Chriſtian fayth, that then was ouer all the earth, and then viewe and conſider in your myndes, the ſtate of Chriſtianitie at this day, and vndoubtedly you ſhal perceiue a maruellous reuolting and falling from the fayth of Chriſte, to haue bene nowe a good many yeres. The furthermoſt partes of Aſia eaſtward, fallen againe eyther to heatheniſhe Idolatrie, or to ſuch ſuperſtition as doth not much differ from it. All the reſidue of Aſia, together with a great part of Affrike, adde alſo no ſmall portion of Europe vnder the Turke, reuolted to the wicked blaſphemie of Mahomet: ſo that the countries of the world that nowe profeſſe Chriſte, are not the tenth part of them that before time haue bene chriſtian. Yea and among

them that profeſſe the chriſtian religion in Europe, for the more part a number of yeres haue bene caried away with the ſuperſtition and idolatrie of the Antichriſt of Rome. In ſo much that if Chriſte doe nowe come, in compariſon of the multitude of miſcreants, he ſhal find true that he ſpake in the Goſpel: vvhen the ſonne of manLuke. 18. shall come, doeſt thou thinke he shall finde any fayth in the earth? Seing therfore we ſée now y• general apoſtacy and reuolting from the fayth nowe in our time fallen out, the want whereof principally S. Paul accounteth in his time to be the ſtaye of Chriſtes comming, we muſt néedes be perſuaded that it can not be farre off.
            As touching the latter part of S. Paules wordes to the Theſſal. Of the reuealing of the man of ſinne, the ſonne of perdition, vvhich is an aduerſarie and is exalted aboue all that is called God, ſo that he as God, ſitteth in the Temple of God, shevving him ſelfe that he is a God: becauſe the full

diſcourſe for the profe of the comming of this Antichriſte woulde require a long proceſſe, and more then this time woulde beare, for the tryall thereof, call to your remembrance this briefe note. That ſince the declination and decay of the Romane Empire, for the ſpace of certeine hundred yeres, you haue ſéene euen in the church of God, euen in Italy, euen in the ſeate royall of the Empire of Rome, a certeine power, which vnder the pretence of holyneſſe, hath aduanced it ſelfe aboue al kings and princes of the earth, that hath claymed the full power of both ſwordes, and to that purpoſe hath ſhewed it ſelfe in open proceſſion, the one day in his pontificall ornaments, and the next in armour like a prince: that hath alſo auaunted, that he hath al power immediately from God, and all kings of the earth by mediation from him: that hath put the ſame in practiſe by depoſing princes, & altring of titles at his pleaſure in Arragon, in Naples, in Sicilie in Englād, in Fraunce, in the

Empire it ſelfe, and welnere in al places of Chriſtendome: that hath had Emperours, Kings, and Princes to holde his bridle, to goe at his ſtirrop, to kyſſe his féete, to ſtande at the gates of his citie whole dayes together barefooted, and coulde not haue grace to come to his preſence, that hath driuen the nobleſt Prince in the earth, to put his head vnder his féete, and he in the meane time with outrageous blaſphemie, cauſed this verſe of the Pſalter to be ſong: Super aſpidem & Baſiliſcum ambulabis, conculcabis Leonem & Draconem. As if he ſhould haue ſayd, behold here is that proude Antichriſt, that the Scriptures witneſſeth, ſhoulde treade vnder his féete the moſt noble ſtate of Emperours, & in the fare of the world, apply vnto him ſelfe that verſe which the Prophet ment of the ſonne of God, and ſauiour of the worlde Chriſt Jeſu. Call I ſay further to your remembrance, that you haue ſéene this power ſhewe him ſelfe as proudly towarde God, as he hath done to princes of the

earth, that he hath called hym ſelfe the heade of the vniuerſall church, Chriſtes Uicar in earth, that he hath taken vpon him for money and bryberie, to ſell remiſſion of ſinnes, to diſpence with moſt horrible vices againſt the lawe of God, to deliuer from hell, to diſmiſſe out of purgatorie, to commaunde the Angels of heauen, to alter the ordinances and inſtitutions of Chriſt. That hath ſuffred his paraſites to proclaime that he hath a diuine power in him, aboue the nature of man, that he can not erre, that he is another God in earth, that he is neyther God nor man, but a monſter betwéen both. Theſe properties I ſay cal to your cō
               ſideration, and compare them with the diſcriptions of Antichriſt, made by the Prophets and Apoſtles, and then dout, if you can, whether the man of ſinne, the ſonne of perdition, be come into the world or no, and conſequently, whether the end of the world, and the comming of the laſt dreadfull iudgement, be euen at hand or no.
            
               The thirde teſtimonie is taken out of the words of Chriſt, Luke. 17. where he ſayth, As it vvas in the dayes of Noe, ſo shall it be alſo in the daye of the ſonne of man, they did eate and drinke, they married vviues and vvere married, euen vnto the day that Noe vvent into the Arke, &c. Likevviſe alſo as it vvas in the dayes of Loth, they did eate, they did drinke, they bought, they ſolde, they planted, they builded, vntill the ſame day that Loth vvent out of Sodome, and ſodeinly it rayned fire and brimſtone from heauen and deſtroyed them. Euen thus shall it be in the day that the ſonne of man shal be reuealed. &c. Why you will ſay vnto me it is no offence to eate, to drinke, to marry, to plante, to buy, to ſell, to builde: and thoſe things haue bene vſed in al ages. True it is that you ſay, neyther doth Chriſte this to reproue thoſe things in them ſelues, but in thoſe words he noteth the great ſecuritie that was among men at thoſe dayes, and the exceſſiue

delight that they had in theſe pleaſures & ornamentes of the world, repoſing ſuche confidence in them, as though the world ſhould for euer haue continued, and as if there had béene none other heauen to haue reſted in but this. And in the truſt hereof dyd they neglect the preaching, warning & calling to repentance vſed by Noe and Loth, euen vntill Gods wrath came vpon them: and euen in like maner doth Chriſt ſignifie that it ſhould be in the ende of the worlde. And when I praye you was there, ſince the worlde was firſt made, ſo great ſecuritie in ſinne, ſuch contempt of godlineſſe, ſuch confidence in worldlye proſperite, ſuche feaſting, banquetting, and daintie feeding, ſuch gorgeouſneſſe in apparell, ſuch ſumptuouſneſſe in building, ſuche vnſeaſonable marrying, ſuch planting, ſuch building, ſuch buying and purchaſing, ſuche raking and ſcraping together of worldly pelfe, as if men did determine to abyde ſtill vpon the face of the earth, or as if euerie

man did ſtriue to paſſe other in riot & ſenſualitie, & whē they haue conſumed them ſelues with monſtrous exceſſe in all pleaſure, then not contented with that they haue, by hooke or by crooke they pull from other, euen from the miniſters of Chriſte, euen from the church of God, euen from the prechers of the Goſpell, and poore ſeruantes of God, which euen among the heathens haue alwayes had their honourable portion left vnto thē. Wherfore howe they doe eſtéeme the true worſhip of God in theſe days, men do ſhew, when they declare ſuche impietie towardes his miniſters. And when they are reproued for theſe enormyties, it is ſo farre off that they doe repent and amende, that they ſcoffe and ieſte, they rayle and ſlander, they taunte and reproue, as if they were at defiance with God and his meſſangers, or as if they had made a couenant with death and with hell, to be out of their danger. But when they ſay peace, peace, all is ſure, then ſodainly, as Paule ſayth, ſhall deſtruction come vpon them, as

the Deluge did vpon the ſonnes of mē in the dayes of Noe, and fire from heauen vpon Sodom, in the time of Loth. For euer before the horrible plagues of God, obſtinate ſecuritie, and contempt of Gods calling, hath gone before as a meſſanger, and ſhewed it ſelf in the lyfe of men.
            The fourth teſtimonie of the ſpéedy comming of the laſt daye, is the wordes of Sainte Paule. 2. Tim. 3. Knovve you this (ſayth he) that in the latter dayes shall be perillous times, for men shall be louers of them ſelues, couetous, boaſters, proude, blaſphemers, diſobedient to parents, vnthankfull, vngodly vvithout naturall affection, truce breakers, falſe accuſers, ryotous, fierce, deſpiſers of them that are good, traitors, headie, high minded, louers of pleaſures, more then louers of God, hauing a fourme of godlines, but denying the povver thereof.
            
            Who would not thinke that Saint Paule did in ſpirite, foreſée the maners of this time, and theſe dayes

into which we are falne, and thoſe wicked vices, wherwith the world is now ouerwhelmed. What ſtate of men is there in which moſt of theſe vices doe not ſhew them ſelues, and that in ſuch maner, as neuer in any age the like? what ſlacke and corrupt gouernment in Magiſtrates? what ſtubbourneſſe and diſobedience in ſubiectes? what pryde and ſelfe liking in the riche and wealthy? what ſpite and enuie in the poore and beggerly? what looſeneſſe and wantonneſſe in youth, what couetouſneſſe and waywardneſſe in age? what cockering and euill enſample of life in parentes? what dnnaturalneſſe and vnkyndneſſe in children? what headyneſſe and fierceneſſe in maiſters? what negligence and vntruth in ſeruantes? what craft, ſubtiltie, and deceyte, what counterfayting and diſſymuling, what falſe and vniuſt dealing, almoſt in all men? Trueth and ſinceritie is banyſhed, couſoning and falſhoode is eſtéemed wiſedome, and chriſtian ſimplicitie is counted péeuiſhe follie. A man

would in theſe dayes maruell to heare of that playne dealing that in old time hath bene. I haue hearde that the gyuing of a mans hande, ſhould haue aſſured his heart, and tyed his fayth and trothe, but nowe all the bondes that mans wit can deuiſe, will ſcantly hold that whiche one couenanteth with another. If there were no other argument, but the ripeneſſe that ſinne and wickedneſſe is nowe growen vnto, it ſhould ſufficiently proue that the glory of this world muſt ſhortly fall & decay.
            There is an olde ſaying of much credite among the ewes, and is called dictum domus Eliae, the ſaying of the ſchole of Elias, and is attributed to the ſonne of the widowe, which Elias rayſed from death to lyfe. The ſumme of it is, that the worlde ſhould remayne ſixe thouſande yeres, that is, two thouſand before the law, two thouſand vnder the lawe, and two thouſand vnder Meſſiah. The firſt foure thouſande we ſée by iuſt computation fulfilled before Chriſte, of the laſt two, one and more

then an halfe is paſſed, nowe if we call to our remembrance, that Chriſte him ſelfe hath promiſed that for his electe ſake, becauſe of the excéeding trouble, miſerie, and wickedneſſe, the latter dayes ſhould be ſhortned, we ſhall eaſily gather, that the world hath not many yeres to continue, and howe fewe we knowe not, for howe much or how litle he will abridge them, we are vncerteine.
            Nowe ſéeing the proofes be ſo euident, that the laſt day can not be farre of (for ſéeing the figge trée leaues be ſpreade, Sommer muſt néedes be at hande) the nexte is (the more to moue our dull hearts) diligently to conſider, howe and in what maner it ſhall be. The ſtory thereof Chriſt briefly comprehendeth, Mat. 25. VVhen the ſonne of man (ſayth he) shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels vvith him, then shall he ſitte on the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered al nations, and he shal ſeparate them one from another, as the shephearde
               
               deuideth his sheepe from the goates, and he shall ſet the sheepe on the right hande, but the goates on the left, & ſo forth as there foloweth. Chriſtes firſt comming was with al méekeneſſe, lowlines & ſimplicitie, according to ye ſaying of the Prophet, Behold thy king commeth to thee meeke, and ſittethZach. 9. vpon an Aſſe. He came then to ſaue ſinners, and therefore he ſhewed him ſelfe altogether in mercy and gentleneſſe, but his latter comming ſhall be with great power, maieſtie and glory, for then he commeth as a dreadfull Judge, to reward in iuſtice the vnrepentant ſinners, that contemned his great mercies offered at his firſte comming. But let vs examine the maner of his comming ſomewhat more particularly. After thoſe ſignes and tokens, that goe before his comming (whereof I haue already ſpoken) there be other alſo ioyned with the verie time of his latter appearing. The ſun shall be darkened, the moone shall loſe her light, the ſtarres shall fall from
               
               heauen, and the povvers of heauen shall be moued, the earth ſhall burne, the firmament ſhall melt away, and the laſt trumpe ſhall blowe, and the voyce of the Archangell ſhal be heard, ſummoning as it were all people, aud ſounding in their eares, Surgite mortui & venite ad iudicium, ariſe you dead and come to iudgement, whicheMatt. 24. 25 26. Mar. 13. Luke. 19. voyce S. Hierome thought he hearde euer ringing in his eares. Then ſhall the ſonne of mā appeare in the cloudes with great Maieſtie as is ſayde, and the dead ſhall riſe, and they that be lyuing, in the twinckling of an eye ſhall be changed, and caryed into the ayre to appeare before the Lorde, who commeth to iudge the worlde in ryghteouſneſſe.
            This maner of Chriſt his comming beſide his owne wordes in ſundrie places of the Euangeliſtes, is witneſſed2. Theſ. 1. by S. Paule. 2. Theſ. 1. VVhen the Lord Ieſus Chriſte shall be reuealed from heauen vvith the Angels of his povver in flaming fire rendring vengeance
               
               vnto them that knovve not God, and that obey not the Goſpel of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. The very place whence he ſhall be reuealed giueth a great authoritie and maieſtie vnto his comming to iudgement from heauen, ſaith S Paule, that is, from the ſeate and habitation of the eternall and euerliuing God, where is al power, wiſdome and iuſtice. From thence, ſaith he in another place, doe we looke for our ſauiour, the Lorde Jeſu. And the Angell, to the Diſciples at the aſcentionPhi. 3. Act. 1. of Chriſt, VVhy ſtand you, ſaith he, gaſing vp into heauen, this ſame Ieſus vvhich is taken from you into heauen shal ſo come euen as you haue ſene him goe into heauen.
            
            And therefore all chriſtians in their beliefe confeſſe that Chriſt is aſcended vp into heauē, from whence, ſay they, he ſhall come to iudge the quicke and the dead.
            In the witneſſe of the Apoſtle aboue rehearſed the power and ende of his comming is noted, vvith the Angels
               
               of his povver, ſaith S. Paule, and to this end, That he may be reuenged on them that knovve not God, nor haue not beleeued his Goſpel. Which thing muſte néedes be moſt terrible to the wicked, as it is in the ſame place more preciſely noted. But of all other the Prophet Daniel moſt gloriouſly diſcribeth the maner of his comming. I beheld
               Dan. 7. (ſaith he) til the thrones vvere ſet vp, and the Auncient of dayes did ſit, vvhoſe garment vvas vvhite as ſnow, and the haires of his heade like pure vvool, his throne vvas like firie flame, and his vvheles as burning fire. There iſſued forth before him a firie ſtreame, a thouſand thouſande miniſtred vnto him, and ten thouſand ſtoode before him, the iudgment was ſet and the bokes were opened, &c. Firſt the Prophet ſayth the Thrones vvere ſet vp, whereby it may appeare there be moe Thrones then one, & that this Judge ſhal haue a great number of aſſiſtances to be as witneſſes of his iuſtice againſt the wicked, and theſe ſhalbe the

number of his ſaintes, as it is witneſſed in ſundrie places of the Scriptures Verely verely I ſaye vnto you, ſaith Chriſt, That vvhen the ſonne of man shal ſit in the throne of his maieſtie, you that haue follovved me in regeneration shal ſit alſo vpon twelue ſeats iudgig the twelue tribes of Iſrael. This iudge is noted by Daniel to be An olde man vvith his haire as white as vvool, Therby to ſignifie the reuerence, wiſdome and experience y• is in him, & thatMat. 19. he cā not let paſſe any thinge by ignorance, errour, or follye: his garmentes as white as ſnowe declare vnto vs his ſecuritie, vprightnes and integritie in iudgement, not reſpecting any perſon nor being corrupted with fauour, hatred or money. The firie ſtream e y• iſſueth forth before him, & the flaming throne that he ſitteth in, ſignifie the dreadfull force and pearſing ſtrength of his iudgement which no creature is able to reſiſt. As fire conſumeth all things & is conſumed of nothing, ſo doth the ſtraight iudgement of God conſume

all the wicked of the earth, For God, as the Scriptures ſaye, is a conſuming fire.
            And the Prophet Eſay ſaith, The Lorde shall comme in fire, and hisEſay. 66. chariot shall be like a vvhirle vvinde, that he may recompence his vēgeance in his vvrath and his indignation in a flame of fire. For the Lord shal iudge all fleshe with the fire and vvith his ſvvorde. The aſſiſtance of an infinite number of ſaints and Angels ſet forth vnto vs the wonderfull maieſtie and power of the ſonne of God in iudgement, for if one Angell in one night were hable to deſtroye 185000▪
                of the hoſt of Senacherib, of what vneſtimable power is he, which hath a thouſand thouſand, that is an infinite number of Angels and Archangels, of powers and principalities, and dominions attending on him at his commandemēt to execute what ſoeuer iudgement he ſhal appoint them? The Bookes that are laid open doe deſcriue vnto vs the detection of al mens faultes, and the

opening euen of their ſecret thoughts and déedes. For the iuſtice of God hath kept, as it were, a perfite regiſter of al things euē of our idle thoghts & words ſo that our conſciences ſhall be at that day ſtraightly burdened and charged with them al.
            Not muche differinge from theſe wordes of the Prophet is that diſcription of Chriſtes comming whiche S. John vſeth in his Reuelation. And IApoca. 19. ſavv heauen open and behold a white horſe and he that fate vpon him vvas called Faithful and true, and in righteouſnes he doth iudge and make battaile, his eyes were as a flame of fire, & on his head were many crownes, & he had a name vvriten, that no man knew but himſelfe. And he vvas cloathed in a veſture dieped in bloud, & his name is called the vvorde of God. And the armies that vvere in heauen follovved him vpon vvhite horſes cloathed vvith vvhite and pure raynes. In this diſcription the white horſe iſſuing out of heauen is the pure and ſincere doctrine

of the Goſpell ſent from God in theſe latter dayes before the laſt appearing of Chriſt. For by ye preaching of the Goſpell as by an horſe or chariot Chriſt is caryed. He that ſitteth on this horſe is Chriſt himſelfe beeinge faithful in all his promiſes and verie trueth it ſelfe, who commeth to iudge the world in righteouſnes and in battell by force of trueth to ouercome Antichriſt and all his enemies. His eyes like flaming fire, declareth his wrath and vehement diſpleaſure againſt the aduerſaries of his trueth. He hath many crowns vpon his head, to declare that he is king of kings, and Lord of Lordes, that al power both in heauen and earth is giuen to him and that it is in his power with the crown of glorie to rewarde all his faithfull ſeruants that haue conſtantly fought vnder his banner againſt the deuil & Antichriſt. His garment dieped in bloud ſignifieth that the conqueſt of his enemies conſiſteth in his paſſion & ſheading of his moſt precious bloud, for thereby ſinne was taken away,

and the power of Satan ouerthrowen. The armies of heauen follovving him on vvhite horſes and apparelled in vvhite and pure reynes: Be the number of his ſaints and faithfull profeſſours of his Goſpel which in this vale of miſerie haue conſtantly fought againſt the enemies of his trueth. The ſworde that iſſueth out of his mouth is the woorde of God, and principally that two edged ſworde of his ſentence at the latter day, by which he ſhal pronounce on the one ſide, Goe ye bleſſed of my father & inherit the kingdome that hath bene prepared for you ſince the foundation of the vvorlde, and cō
               trariewiſe vnto the wicked ones on the left hand, depart from me ye curſed into euerlaſting fire vvhich is prepared for the deuil and his Angels.
            
            By this diſcription of the laſt iudgement left vnto vs by the holy Ghoſte in the ſcriptures of god we may know that at that day we ſhal not haue to do with a common & fraile man, but wt a moſt dreadful Lord & terrible Judge, y•
               
knoweth the verie ſecretes of mens heartes, and iudgeth according to perfite righteouſnes: Whom (as Auguſtine ſaith) neither fauoure can peruert, nor mercie bend, nor money corrupt, nor ſatiſfaction and repentance at that day can aſwage.
            Whoſe beautie and brightneſſe is ſuch, as darkeneth euen the ſtarres of heauen, whoſe might is ſo great as it melteth mountaines and the whole frame of the worlde before him, whoſe wiſdome is ſo perfect that by it the wiſell of the worlde are intrapped in their owne craftineſſe, whoſe puritie is ſo excellent, that in reſpect of it all things are vncleane, whoſe iuſtice is ſo exquiſite, that the verie Angels are not able to abide that ſtraight meaſure of it. Before this God I ſay, before this Judge ſhal the whole worlde at that day appeare, and yéelde a moſt ſtraight accompt of all things that euer they haue done, ſpokē, or thought. Oh dearely beloued, let vs followe therefore the counſaile of that good.

father Ephrem the Syrian, Preparemus nos ſine macula inueniri in terribili illo Christi examine, &c. Let vs prepare our ſelues that in that dreadfull examination of Chriſte, we may be found without ſpot. For then al our thoughts wordes and déedes, ſhall be reproued and conuinced of corruption, yea our idle talke, our loſe and vncomely geſtures, and all our ſmalleſt offences ſhall be layde to our charge. Yea thoſe things wherein in this lyfe we did put our greateſt pleaſure and glory, ſhall then be vnto vs our greateſt griefe and torment. Let vs therefore in time repent, and before hande enter into a ſtraight account with our ſelfe, for as the ſame father addeth, omnia dura, & aspera & amara occurrent hijs qui poenitentiae tempus perdiderunt. All thinges ſhall be harde, grieuons and vnpleaſant to them that léeſe the time of their repentance in this life. In that day, ſayth Bernarde, for the wicked to hide them it ſhal be vnpoſſible, though they deſire the mountaines and rockes to

fall vpon them, and to appeare before the Judge, it ſhall be vntollerable. For in ſo great diſtreſſe their owne conſciences ſhall torment them, and the ſecretes of their heart ſhall vexe them, while their owne heartes ſhall force them to be their owne accuſers, and with trembling ſpirits they ſhal ſtand, looking for that moſte grieuous and dreadfull ſentence, Goe you curſed into euer laſting fire. If there be any ſo obſtinat, wicked, and forlorne in ſinne, as he trembleth not at the cogitation of theſe things: Let him imagine that whiche ſhall be moſt certemly true, that he heareth that hydeous ſounde of the laſt trumpe and voyce of the Archangell, ſummoning all fleſhe to the iudgement ſeate of God, that he ſéeth the heauens melting with fire, and the whole world burning about him, that aboue him he ſeeth the ſonne of God, comming with the glorious armie of his Saintes and Angels, that before him he ſeeth layde open the booke of all his wicked thoughtes, wordes, and

déedes, that within him he féeleth the worme of his conſcience gnawing with perpetual torment, that beneath him he ſéeth hell mouth readie to ſwallowe him, that he ſéeth in euery quarter the Angels of God gathering together his electe, and reiecting him as a wicked reprobate, that on his right and left hand he beholdeth cruel fendes watching vpon the ſentence of the iudge, to carie him to that place where ſhal be perpetual flame without quenching, wéeping and gnaſhing of téeth without ending, darkeneſſe without light, griefe without eaſe, ſorow without comfort, where death ſhall be wiſhed for and neuer obteined, where ſhall be nothing but lothſomneſſe, horror, ſtench, and that of all other ſhal be moſte grieuous, endleſſe ſenſe of the wrath of that God and iudge, before whom he ſtandeth.
            This maner of iudgement is, as you ſée, moſt terrible, the ſpéedie aproching thereof is verie certeine, the ſignes and tokens can not deceiue vs,

they are vttered by the Prophete of God, by the Apoſtles of Chriſte, by Chriſte our Sauiour, by the ſpirite of God, by trueth it ſelfe that can not lye, we therefore may be well aſſured, ſéeing al things to be performed, that the yere of our account is nigh, that that dreadfull Judge is comming, that the day of Gods wrath is at hande, and euen in our neckes we know not how ſoone. Therefore I moſt heartily pray you, and in the feare of God and loue of your ſelues, deſire you ſpéedily to caſt away the care of the worlde, the loue of the fleſhe, the delight of ſenſuall pleaſure and iolytie, whiche holdeth your myndes in ſuche wicked and deteſtable ſecuritie. Set before your eies the image of his comming in ſuch Maieſtie and terror, thinke you heare continually the voyce of the Archangell ſounding in your eares. If feare of puniſhment may driue you to it, he is a ſeuere Judge: If aſſurance of reward may encourage you, he is a bountifull Lord: If hope of forgiueneſſe, before

hand aſked, may comfort you, he is a mercifull Sauiour. Delay not therefore, nor looſe not this time of repentance.
            Séeing then it is moſt certein there ſhall be a general iudgement, and that the time thereof muſt néedes be verye nighe, and that before a Judge of ſo great Maieſtie, and the examination and account ſo ſtraight, to al them that ſhall neglect the time of their repentance: It behoueth all that haue any ſenſe of God, to be carefull for their ſoules, and to prepare them ſelues for the comming of that dreadfull daye. Oure preparance conſiſteth in theſe thrée things, whereof Chriſte him ſelfe warneth vs, Mar. 13. Cauete, Vigilate, 
                        •
                     
                     rate.
                Beware, watch, pray.
            The firſt is a caueat or a thing to take héede of, for feare of that danger that may come thereby. And what it is Chriſt had ſhewen a litle before. Falſe Chriſtes (ſayth he) and falſe Prophetes
               Mar. 13. 
               shall ryſe, and shall shevve ſignes and vvonders to deceiue, if it vvere poſsible,
               
               euen the verie elect. Sed cauete, but take heede, beholde, I haue shevven you all things before. This is that we muſte beware of in theſe latter dayes. Of the like Chriſt putteth vs in mynd, when he ſayth in another place: Bevvare of falſe Prophetes vvhich comeMatt. 7. vnto you in sheepes cloathing, but invvardly they are rauening vvoulfes. There can no more miſchief and danger come to the people of God, then by falſe and corrupt doctrine, for without true fayth and religion, no holyneſſe of lyfe, ſéeme it to the worlde neuer ſo glorious, can be acceptable in the ſight of God. Among theſe falſe teachers principally we haue to take héede of the Papiſt, and of thoſe ſhéepe ſkinnes wherewith he wrappeth him ſelfe, leaſt we be deceiued by them, let vs lift vp his goodly apparell, and we ſhall ſée vnderneath, the panche of a gréedie woulfe, and the clawes of a cruell Lyon. Bée not abaſhed then nor aſtonied, when you heare the goodly names of the Catholike Church, the greate
               
               multitude of ſuche as be of their opinion, the long continuance of many yeres. For if theſe had ben good groūds of mens conſciences, they might well haue ſerued for the Jewes and falſe teachers, againſt the true Prophets of God in olde time, and after for Annas and Cayphas, againſt Chriſt him ſelfe and his Apoſtles. For where were the Prophetes ſtaine? where was Chriſte put to death? where were the Apoſtles perſecuted and kylled? was it not in Jeruſalem the citie of God? was it not among the Jewes the choſen people, and in déede, the churche of God? had not they among them the lawe of God and his ordinances? did not they crye againſt Jeremie, the Temple of God, the Temple of God is with vs, we haue the couenant that God made to our forefathers, euen as nowe the papiſtes doe alledge that the Church of God, the Church of God is with thē, they can not erre, they haue the promiſes of Chriſt, that his Spirit ſhould neuer fayle them. The falſe Prophets

had a thouſand, for one that did folow the true Prophetes. Yea, Elias thought that he had bene left alone. The Scribes and Phariſes in the ende had a great number, and in déede a generall conſent in compariſon of that litle number and ſinall flocke that folowed Chriſte and his Apoſtles. Therefore take héede of theſe things, y• you be not miſcaried by them, they are but lambe ſkinnes, wherein the wolfe of Rome hydeth him ſelfe to deceiue thée. Remē
               ber that all which ſay they haue Abraham to their father, are not by and by the true ſéede of Abraham. Remember that the Scribes and Phariſes ſometime ſit in Moſes chayre, and beare the countenance of the lawe of God. Remember that Saint Paul telleth thée and doth giue thée warning, that the ſonne of perdition, Antichriſt himſelf ſhoulde in the latter dayes ſit in the Temple, that is, the Churche of God. Remember that the ſame Paule telleth for certeintie, that in the latter1. Tim. 4. dayes should come certeine teaching,

the doctrine of deuils, hauinge their conſciences marked with an hot iron, forbidding to marrie and to eate ſuch meats as God hath prepared to be receiued vvith thankeſgiuing.
            
            Conſider whether the Pope hath forbidden Prieſts to marrie, and denounced it a grieuous ſinne if men doe eate fleſh vpon certeine dayes, and then gather whether they be the Churche of Chriſt, or vnder that colour in déed the Synagogue of Antichriſt. Oh ſay they the doctrine of the Goſpel now taught is a new doctrine neuer heard of in y• Church before theſe late yeres. This is not a ſheepe ſkinne (good people) but it is a venimous tuſke of a poyſonous Bore with blaſphemous lying, ſtriken into the Goſpell of Chriſte thereby to wounde it, and make it hatefull. But the Goſpel that we teache is the ſame Goſpel that was firſt from the beginning by the Spirit of God reueiled to the Patriarkes, and Prophets, and after ſpred into the worlde by Chriſt himſelfe and his Apoſtles. So that our

doctrine is as auncient as the Prophets, as Chriſt himſelfe, as his Apoſtles, yea, as the worlde is auncient.
            For it procéeded from God himſelfe at the beginning, when he ſpake to the Serpent and ſayd, That the ſeed of the vvoman should breake the head of the Serpent, That is, that the true Meſſiah ſhould come of the ſéede of the woman, and deſtroy the kingdome of ſiune and Satan. This Goſpell was renued vnto Abraham, and confirmed with the ſeale of circumciſion. When he ſaid, In thy ſeede all the nations of the earth shalbe bleſſed, &c. This Goſpell was preached by Father Jacob, in his death bedde ſaying, This ſcepterGen. 49. shal not depart from Iuda, &c. Vntill Silo come & he shal be the expectatiō of the Gentiles. This Goſpel preached Moſes alſo, The Lord thy God (ſaith he) to the children of Iſrael, shall rayſe vp to thee a Prophet out of thine ownDeut. 18. people, and from among thy brethren and him shalt thou heare. This Goſpel was renued by God himſelfe vnto

Dauid moſt euidently, and afterward by al the Prophets, Eſaie, Ieremie, Ezechiel, Daniel, and al the reſidue. So that our doctrine and the Goſpel that we preache (as I haue ſaid) is as auncient as the Apoſtles, as the Prophets and Patriarkes, as the worlde it ſelfe is auncient.
            For our Goſpell is none other but this, that we haue remiſſion of ſinnes, and are reconcyled to the fauoure of God onely by Chriſt and by his death, that he onely is the mediatour and interceſſour betwene God and vs. That he onely is propitiation and full ſacrifice for our ſinnes, that by him onely we be made the children of God, and heires of eternal lyfe. All doctrines agréeing with this we receiue, all doctrines repugnant to this we reiecte & ſay with S. Ambroſe, Quaecunque Christus non docuit iure damnamus: Whatſoeuer. Chriſt hath not taught we iuſtly and worthily condemne. Therefore doe we iuſtly condemne the moſt part of the papiſtical doctrine as newe and

phantaſtical, becauſe it doth not agrée with this auncient Goſpell of Chriſt vttered from the beginning by God himſelfe, but reſteth vpon the obſeruation of mens traditions, and vnwriten verities, deuiſed within the ſpace of a fewe hundred yeres vtterly againſt and beſide the worde of God.
            Satan in theſe latter dayes to worke ſuſpition to the doctrine of the Goſpel at this time by Gods great goodneſſe renewed, hath raiſed alſo manie other peruerſe and wicked teachers, as the Arrians denying the deitie of Chriſt. The Anabaptiſtes, beſide manie other errours improouinge the grace and ſtrength of baptiſme in infants. The Libert ines diſſoluing all true confeſſion of faith and practiſe of godly life. The familiars of loue in whome Satan turneth himſelfe into an Angel of light, and vnder pretence of holy life bringeth in moſt pernitious errours and hereſies. Therefore, I ſaye vnto you of al theſe, beware, and take héede that you be not ſeduced, and ſettle

your conſciences vpon that ſure foundation and ſtronge rocke of Chriſtes Goſpell whereof before I haue tolde you.
            The next parte of our preparanceMat. 24. 25. Mat. 13. Luk. 12. 21. 1. Pet. 5. 1. Cor. 16. 1. Theſ. 5. is▪ 
               Uigilate, which precept Chriſt, often and in ſundrie places repeateth. S. Peter alſo Sobriſ estote & vigilate, Be ſober and vvatche,
                and S Paule, vvatch and be ſtronge in faith, & to the Theſ. Let vs vvatch and be ſober. To watch is to be carefull and diligent, vtterly contrarie to that ſecuritie and careleſſe wretchedneſſe wherewith the worlde at this daye is ouerwhelmed, & drowned as it were in the delights and luſtes of worldly pleaſures. We are willed therefore to caſt away this ſinfull ſecuritie, and to haue an earneſt care of our ſelues. Well ſaithin Gen. c. 2. Chriſoſt. Decet nos eſſe ſobrios & vigiles &c. It becommeth vs to be ſober and vvatchful and to haue a perpetual and continuall care of our ſoules. For it is the part of a Chriſtian alvvay to ſtand in battaile againſt the luſtes of the
                  
                  flesh, and that the louers & preachers of our Lord and maſter should alvvay ring in our eares.
                And againe, Omnes vos vigilare & ſobrios eſſe oportet, &c. It behoueth you al to vvatche and be ſober and neuer to ſleepe in ſecuritie. Becauſe there is no ſet time vvhen our enemie vvil aſſault vs. Therefore let vs alvvay be vvatchful, let vs alvvaye
               
               In Gen. ca. 6. 
               be carefull of our ſaluation and ſo vve shall neuer bee taken vpon the ſodaine,
            
            Chriſt our Sauiour teacheth vsLuke. 13. how we ſhould watch and after what maner we ſhould be in readineſſe. Let your loynes be girded about you and your lights burning in your handes and ye your ſelues be like vnto men that vvaite for the comminge of their Lord, vvhen he vvill returne from the vvedding, that vvhen he shall come and knocke they may open vnto him immediatly. Happy are thoſe ſeruants vvhom, vvhen the Lord commeth, he shal find vvaking. In that he ſaith we muſt haue our loynes girded, he ſpeaketh

after the maner of the Eaſt coun
               
                  •
               reyes where they vſe long garments and when they goe any iourney, they girde themſelues and truſſe their garmēts about them that they may iourney more haſtely and readily. By this therefore we are taught that in this worlde and vale of miſerie we are but as pilgrimes and wayfaring men, and as Paule ſaith, haue no citie nor place long to abide in, For our countrey & dwelling place is in heauen, whence we looke for our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Jeſu. VVe be citizens of Heauen and of the housholde of God: Where we belieue aſſuredly for euer to dwel. We muſt therefore caſt away the loue, the care, and y• remembrance of this life, & dayly go on in our way to heauen there to enioy the heritage of that kingdome where Chriſt our Sauiour after his reſurrection and aſcention hath taken poſſeſſion to our behoufe. For as he naturally, ſo we by adoption are heires of Eternall life. So long therefore as we be here going

on our iourney we muſt remember S. Paules counſaile, that is, That the time of this life is short, and therefore1. Cor. 7. they vvhich haue vviues muſt be as if they had none, and they that vveepe as though they vvept not, and they that laugh as though they laughed not, and they that vſe this vvorlde as though they vſed it not. Whereby it is ment that we muſt vſe the things of this life onely of neceſſitie for the time, and that neither aduerſitie or wéeping, nor proſperitie and laughing nor marriage, nor the pleaſures and poſſeſſions of this life, ſhould ſo occupy our hearts, that they ſhoulde make vs to forget our countreye and kingdome vnto whiche we are paſſinge through the wilderneſſe of this wicked and ſinful worlde. Our Conuerſation, as Paule ſaith, should be in heauen, & our whole or principall care ſhoulde be vpō heauenly things, neither muſt y• immoderate loue of this world cauſe vs ouer gredely to loke back to the delights & pleaſures therof, as Lots wife

did to Sodom, leaſt as ſhe was turned to a Salt ſtone without ſenſe, So the iuſt iudgement of God d
                  •
               e caſt vs of as reprobates and turne vs into ſtony hearts that ſhal haue no ſenſe of God and godlineſſe, let vs therefore guide our ſelues and go on conſtantly in our purpoſed iourney. But vve muſt haue light in our handes, that is, we muſt haue the knowledg of Gods holy word and our mindes muſt be diligently inſtructed therewith. For that is the light that doth teache and inſtruct vs and in deede truely directe vs which way we ſhal take to heauē. Thy word (ſaith Dauid) Is a Lanterne vnto my feete and a light vnto my ſteppes. By the worde of God onely we are directed the true way. If we be guided by the duſkie light of mans reaſon, vndoutedly we ſhall wander out of the way, and take ſome bye path that ſhal lead vs to eternall perdition. This light of Gods worde we may not carie in our mouthes, nor ſet on our

heades, nor hange on our girdles, but we muſt carie it in our hands, that is, it muſt appeare in our liues and ſhew it ſelfe in our workes and doings accordingMat. 5. to that Chriſt ſaith, Let your light ſo shine before men that they may ſee your good vvorkes and glorifie your father that is in heauen. And ſurely if we haue the right vſe to féede the lampe it will vndoubtedly burne and with faire light ſhew it ſelfe, that is if through Gods good ſpirit working in vs by his holy worde we come in a right and true faith in the promiſes of God, certeinly it will ſhine in our life and with great brightneſſe ſet foorth the glorie of God. This oile becauſe the holy virgines lacked, & had not in readineſſe, when the Lorde came ſodainely in the night, the doore of eternalMat. 25. life was ſhut againſt them, & they excluded vnto perpetuall darkeneſſe where is wéepinge and gnaſhinge of téeth. We ought therefore according to the direction of this true light euery man carefully to walke in his calling,

and as good and diligent ſeruants with al obedience doing thoſe things that the Lorde hath appointed, as to looke for his comming, becauſe, as is before declared, he wil come ſodainely at that houre that we thinke not, we muſt be ready to open whenſoeuer he knocketh. He knocketh by the preaching of his holy worde and calling to repentance, he knocketh by ſignes and tokens from heauen, he knocketh by troubles and afflictions, he knocketh by ſickeneſſe, & laſtly of al he knocketh by death. Whenſoeuer he knocketh to come in, and dwel in our hearts, if we open not it is dangerous, but if we open not when he knocketh laſtly by ſickneſſe and death, vndoubtedly he then paſſeth from vs for euer, and leaueth vs as the poſſeſſion of Satan to eternal fire prepared for him & his Angels. But it is exceding perilus to defer y• opening of y• gates of our hearts vntil that y• laſt pinch, for litle know we whether God will ſuffer vs then to be hable to open, ſéeing we haue ſo often

before either negligently or ſtubburnly, and obſtinately refuſed to open whē he hath by al louing meanes tenderly and mercifully called and knocked to come in.
            Our laſt preparation is to pray. Uigilate,
                ſaith Chriſt, & orate, VVatche and pray leaſt you enter into tentation.
                The worlde is flattering, the fleſhe is fraile, the deuil readie and continually As a roaring lyon going about & ſeeking vvhom to deuoure. Séeing then our enemies be ſo ſtrong and we ſo weake & féeble, it behoueth vs continually to cal for helpe where it is to be had, But euerie good thing, and euerie gratious gift commeth from aboue from the father of lightes. This father of lights is y• eternal God y• father of our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt, of this father therefore we muſt by moſt earneſt and continual prayer deſire aſſiſtance and the ſtrength of his holy ſpirit to helpe vs that we be not caried away from the carefull cogitation of our dueties by the allurements of the

deuil, the fleſh, and the worlde. Woorthely ſaith that good father and Martyr Ciprian: Incumb amus gemitibus aſſiduis,
               
               Lib. 1. epi. 1. 
               &c. Let vs be earneſt vvith continual gronings and often prayers, for thoſe are the heauenly armour that make vs to ſtand ſtrongly & valiantly to cōtinew, thoſe are the ſpiritual weapons that do defend & ſaue vs.
                And againe, Let vs aske & vve shal receiue, and if there shal be any delay or tarying,Lib. 4. epi. 4. becauſe vve haue grieuouſly offended, let vs knocke and the doore of Gods mercifull goodneſſe shalbe opened, eſpecially if vve knocke at the doore vvith prayers, groninges and bitter teares vvherein alſo vve muſt abide and continvve. Let vs therfore continually lifte vp the handes and armes of our harts vnto God, as Moſes did his armes in the battaile betwéene Iſrael and the Amalachites: and then, in that ſtrong battaile that is within vs betwéene the ſpirit and the fleſhe vndoubtedly the ſpirit ſhall vanquiſh & ouercome, but if we faynt

and holde downe our handes, ſurely our enemies wil wa
                  •
                euery day ſtronger then other, and ſo at the laſt giue vs the ouerthrowe. Let vs not fainte therefore but praye continually vnto God, in the name of Chriſt Jeſu our Lord. Thus if we doe as men wel prepared, we ſhal abyde, warily, watchefully, and conſtantly lookinge for the laſt comming of our good Lorde and Chriſt to iudgement. And then he that commeth to the wicked as a dreadful and terrible iudge, ſhall come to vs as a bountifuf Sauiour and redéemer, as in whoſe merite and Paſſion we haue alway put our whole truſt and confidence, though that daye be to the wicked ſo terrible as before I haue deſcriued, yet it ſhal be to vs the daye of our chiefeſt ioye and comfort, and therefore our Sauiour Chriſt willeth vs when the ſigne
                  •
                of that day be
                  •
               come, to lift vp our heades becauſe our redemptionMar. 13. is at hand. For then we ſhal not onely be deliuered from all thoſe afflictions, troubles & dangers which

in the continuance of this fraile world we haue ſuffered, but alſo we ſhall be by him adiudged to the fruition and enioying of that heritage whiche he hath purchaſed for vs by his bloud: wherefore the greater that the maieſtie of his comminge is, the greater confirmation ſhall it be to our fayth. For therin we ſhal both acknowledge the trueth of his worde, who long before hath tolde vs it ſhoulde be ſo, and alſo we ſhall euidently ſée, that he is that mightie Lorde and God, that, according to his promiſe, is able to performe all that he hath ſayde, and vtterly to vanquiſh, ſubdue, and treade vnder foote, all theſe powers, whatſoeuer yt are enemies to his electe and choſen flocke. The worlde they ſée deſtroyed before them: death ended and conſumed, ſinne confounded, Satan and all his powers euen at the laſt caſt, and looking preſently to be throwen into that lake of fire, that is prepared for him and for his angels. Whē we haue then nothing to feare, howe ſhould we

not be in moſte perfite ioy. All thoſe things bréed comfort to the godly, that cauſe terrour to other. Though the examination & account be verie ſtreight, though Satan ſhall lay before vs the booke of our own conſciences to accuſe vs, we ſhal eaſily diſburdē our ſelues, by acknowledging the things, and by cōfeſſing that there is in our ſelues no iuſtice in confidence, when we dare that day ſtand in iudgement, and that oure whole truſt and confidence, is in the innocent death of that immaculate Lambe, that dyed to take away the ſinnes of the whole worlde: and for aſſurance thereof, we ſhall ſhewe acquittances of his moſt bleſſed promiſes, and vpon them with the hande of our fayth, lay ſure hold. For he hath ſayde, God ſent not his ſonne into the vvorlde to iudge the vvorld, but that the vvorlde shoulde be ſaued by him. He that beleeueth in him is not iudged. And agayne. So God loued the vvorld, that he gaue his only begotten ſonne, that vvho ſo euer doth beleeue
               
               on him, should not perishe, but haue lyfe euerlaſting. And agayne, He that heareth my vvorde, and beleeueth in him that ſent me, hath life euerlaſting, and commeth not into iudgement. but paſſeth from death to life. And if Satan ſhall lay any falſe thing vnto vs, or charge vs with the weakneſſe of our fayth: to oure vneſtimable comfort, we ſhall ſée on our right hande as it were the fruites of our faith, ſhewed in chriſtian charitie, which the iudge him ſelfe ſhall not onely teſtifie to be done, but acknowledge them to be done vnto him ſelfe, by ſaying, I vvas hungry, and ye gaue me to eate, I vvas thirſtie, and ye gaue me to drinke, I vvas a ſtranger, and you interteyned me, &c. So often as you did one of theſe things to the ſmalleſt of your brethren, I acknovvledge it to be done vnto my ſelfe. And therefore we ſhall ioyfully looke for that bleſſed and comfortable ſentence: Come ye bleſſed of my father, and enter into the kingdom that is prepared for you,
               
               before the beginning of the vvorlde, there ſhall we ſtill beholde, as Baſile ſayth, the numbers of Angels, the aſſembly of our firſt Fathers, the ſeates of the Apoſtles, the thrones of the Prophetes, the ſcepters of the Patriarkes, the crownes of the Martyrs, the prayſes of the iuſt. Yea, there ſhall we poſſeſſe ſuche ioyes, as neyther eye hath ſéene, nor eare hath hearde, nor tongue can tell, nor penne is able to expreſſe, vnto which endleſſe ioyes, our Lord and Sauiour Chriſte bring vs, to whome with God the Father and the holie Ghoſt be al honour. &c.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   