
      
         
            
            
            THE MIRACVLOVS AND HAPPIE Union of England and Scotland; by how admirable meanes it is effected; how profitable to both Nations, and how free of any inconuenience either past, present, or to be discerned.
            
            
            LONDON Imprinted for Edward Blount.
            1604.
         
         
            
            
            To his louing Countrimen.
            
               
                  IF Euents be the certainest and least suspected Councellors as they that cannot looke but like themselues: for their sakes I hope to be accepted, and for their sakes to haue so much of the priuiledge of an historian as to be allowed to speake truth; which if it carrieth no other then it owne beauty, cal it not a fault, since thereby I giue you proofe I desire not to steale your opinions with inticements. I haue deliuered you the last Time, and This; that out of the experience of both, you may frame the succeeding. I haue spoken them truly, because it is fit you should see them in their nakednes, for to iudge by them is to know them without colours. Lastly I haue touched, (though not neere to the life) the admirable happines of this Iland in our Prince; A Prince whose vertues giue luster to his authority, and that authority to his actions; so as he needs not the pruiledge of his fortune, since all his performances are able to stande vpon their owne force, needing neither countenaunce nor power to giue them reputation. Amongest his vertues I haue showed his vprightnes, that lighted by that great example, you may bee free from all partialities. Thus haue I

performed the duty I owe to you, and my Country, I knowe honestly: if you thinke so my rewarde is the fuller. Free I am from hiding a corrupted will vnder another pretence; And as I haue finished this epistle without mingling it with salutations or excuses, so haue I passed through the boundes of my purpose, wooing no one but all, and all without any other aduocate but truth, the colours vnder which all honest spiritts and good Common-wealthes-men ought to venture themselues. And so not doubting but the same minde that is truly inclined to the good of his country will allowe my intent and pardon my errors, I rest.
            
               The humble seruant of all true Patriottes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The miraculous and happy Vnion of England and Scotland; by how admirable meanes it is effected; how profitable to both Nations, and how free of any Inconuenience, either past, present, or to be discerned.
            
               THe end of knowledge, is acknowledgement, for since we can looke vpon nothing that is not deriued from God, and that beareth not a testimonie of his power and goodnesse, gratitude must follow vnderstanding, if not to recompence, yet to witnesse the feelings of his benefits. From this consideration (louing Countrymen) I haue presumed to offer you this Treatise. We haue all fealt, I doubt not the mercy of God in this late happy and admirable alteration, and I hope not alone fealt it with our bodyes,

but our mindes; for to haue so great a benefit, from so great a power, rewardes the minde with such a satisfaction as earth cannot giue. What you haue thought, pardon mee though I presume to speake, since my end is not to challenge any superiority, but to preuent (if my end may bee as happy as my purpose) the incident diseases of humaine prosperity. My proiect is then the greatnes of this blessing, and not alone the blessing, but to oblige vs the more; the consideration by what vnexpected meanes, and how much beyond either the common course of things, or the strength of man it is effected. Next how free it is from all the inconueniences incident to the common alterations or augmentations of Empires: and lastly since it is aboue the course of nature, or the ordinary disposition of things, being full of profit without either daunger or former hazardes, that like adiuine and supernaturall blessing wee entertaine and vse it. Thus farre goeth the scope of my intent, destinating my labours to bee the seruants of your memory, for which I desire no other recompence, but your owne happy and iust proceedings, taking the aduenture of your acceptance, and leauing vnto you the glory of so great an action, as the due of those progressions that are performed with iust and vnspotted mindes.
            This realme hauing a long time laboured in the

preuention of dangers, and enioying an outwarde rather then inward peace, like a body that fetcheth all the health from Phisicke, and was of late yeares come to that weaknesse, as in a short space had she continued in her course her preuentions had prooued vaine. For the aduantage of others disagreement was by agreement taken from vs, our treasure spent, our souldiers of experience consumed, the subiects purse emptied, and in fine, like a shippe that had throwne out her goods to saue her carkasse, we floated with our liues rather repriued then saued.
            In the meane time, and in all this time, this realme resisted none of her griefes by a naturall course, which is by her owne strength, but beeing rather feathers then winges, neither the glory nor profit was hers, but our blood and treasure, was the medicine of our suspected constitution.
            It is necessary I bring you thus farre backe (good Countrimen) aswell because man knowing nothing in his originall, cannot iudge singlie; but by coupling contrarieties, seeth the difference by the effects: as also feeling your prosperitie and from whence it commeth, you may loose the sight of no part of this blessing. Nowe may you perceiue the nature of it, and the greatnesse, that from a weakned & almost breathlesse state, is come

to be the most opulent, strong and entire Empire of the world. What shall we call it? no naturall name can expresse it, it is a miracle; Take vp thy bedde and walke. It is a miracle in the cure, it is no lesse in the meanes; for if the marriages of Princes, the issue of Princes, the prayers of men, the plottes of our Enimies, or the Iealosies of greatnes, could haue hindered it, England had not beene happy. We had yet laboured vnder the burthen of a torne and dismembered kingdome. How much the resisting these impediments, passeth the common course of nature euery Iudgement may easily discerne: but we haue yet but halfe the sight. A midst all these courses swaied by Ambition, and vniust Iealosies, behold our Prince, prouoked by al means; and by some where his patience might be called in question, suffering all, induring the plots of his enimies against his right, his person against their malice, he withstood all their hates with his loue, his loue to this his coūtry made him suffer his wrongs, and where the hot ambition of some Princes, would easily haue couered the inuading of this Kingdom, vnder the reuenging of his wrongs, and the feare of filling it with the horrible effects of ciuill wars was a curbe to his iust mislikes, choosing himselfe to feele wronge, rather then they should.
            Surely if we consider this truly, wee shall finde the obligation we are bound in to the diuine power, no

lesse stronge heere, then in the rest. For if the resisting wronge bee a warrant of nature to the simplest creatures, and that there is nothing more opposite to euery disposition; how much more in Kinges, vnto whome God hath giuen both power and authority to iudge and punish iniuries and wronges? So that for the good of this lande, he hath not alone resisted the prouocations of flesh & blood, but a liberty, for a more pleasing colour and stronger excuse, no Prince euer had to make warre vpon another. Thus you see the straunge and miraculous passages of former times, from how admirable proceedings your safety is deriued, but behold another part of your blessing. You buie not your peace, your plenty, your strength, your happines, no it is giuē you, for wheras your safties abroad might haue bin purchased, with a Prince that might haue line heauie vpon you at home, & by exactions haue but exchāged your burthens from your shoulders to your hartes, you are blessed with one, that in his whole life, hath approued the happines of the subiect and the flourishing of his Kingdome to be his chiefe contentments. For otherwise, who would haue indured the slaunder of a iust title, the death of his friendes, the plots against his person, but hee onely that valueth iustice and a common preseruation aboue any humaine prouocation, or ambitious enticements.
            
               
Wee haue now heard how much we are blessed and by how strange and extraordinarie meane, and more, that we enioy all this without any inconuenince, either passed or to be discerned. Let vs then examine what the alteration and augmentation of this kingdome hath done. Insomuch as all changes are Earthquakes to a State, shaking the very foundation of gouerment; and augmentations and increases, are neuer vnaccompanied of present daungers, and future burthens. To examine this by history, behold the Auntients, where for the passing of simple lawes, the whole body of the common-wealth, laboured betweene life and confusion. And in those changes where reformation and amendment bare the name, yet did they neuer alter without hazard, the medicine being as dangerous as the disease. How different is this from ours, where the Axeltree or vphold of our common-wealth being changed, we rather heard of it, then fealt it; or if we fealt it, it was the comfort of it. What vproare was there? what confusion? what surfet of the former gouernment brake out (the inseparable accident of an Interraigne) what factions? what misorders of discontented and desperate persons? but on the contrarie as men expecting a wonder, a generall quietnes possessed the whole land, & as it were inspired with the age to come, gaue ouer the care of their own mislikes to the generall redresser,

& all the different humours nourished either by former griefes, or this long expected day, grewe in an instant to be turned to the generall good, and to prepare an entertainement for the elected both by God and man, both by his title and vertues. In a worde, neuer was Prince receiued with so generall an applause, nor was there euer Prince that deserued better of vs: for laying by the iustnesse of his owne title, the remembrance of his sufferings (which to another nature would haue beene accounted an earning of this kingdome) the need we had of him, the testimonies giuen to the whole world of his abilities for gouernment, laying by these considerations, he hath beene yet content to acknowledge the loue of his subiects; & not alone to acknowledge it in wordes, but to assure them of it, he hath not respected his priuate gaine, beyond their profits: To this end hath he abolished Monopolies & other prerogatiues of the Crowne, rather then to let his subiects feele any greeuance, though he might haue kept them without any colour of mislike, being to him inheritances no exactions. But his loue to vs will not permit excuses, but on all sides sheweth he will performe the office of a King, without mingling it with the Iusts of man. But this is but one; on all sides appeare actions of the same quality; how hath he of late, to giue vs yet more testimonies of his loue, taken offendors of the highest

nature out of the hands of Iustice and giuen them mercy? Whereno excuse, no priuate petitions, no not where mercy it selfe (being gouerned by her owne nature) could haue intreated it; For our sakes they liue, and for our sakes, against the rules either of lawe, iustice, or pollicie. Let vs behold these parts with a true consideration, and we shall finde neuer people had so infinite blessings laid before thē. For wheras it hath bin too common amongst some Princes, to esteeme handsome colours good paiment for subiects: our Prince, hath not onely not held them good enough for vs, but euen iust reasons, if they haue any way seemed to concerne him more then his subiects, (though that which concerneth him, must them) haue bin laid by & not respected. To be short, neuer was there Prince, that avowed al his actions to be grounded vpon a more vpright iudgement, which doth not onely represent vs this great blessing of ours more fully, but with all disburtheneth vs of all iealosies of partiality. For he that in all questions between himselfe & the subiect, hath not spared himselfe, cannot betweene man and man be partiall, since all partialities are begottē by self-loue. By this we may cleere the doubt of English and Scottish, since he is King of both, he is father of both, and (being equally charged by the King of Kings with both) owing vnto both one duty, he will giue vnto both one affection. But least I be called into question

for a proofe, behold his former gouernment, where his vprightnes had that hād with him, as neither the generality, nor the custome, could make him yeeld to the common defence & nourishing factions by names, euer protesting him highest in his opinion, that was owner of a good life, aswell as a great name. So that to be knowne for an honest man, was more then to beare the sir-name of Steward. He that knoweth in how contrary a course the example of that kingdom might haue nourished him, & how the customes of their Clannes had brought this integrety to the suspition of a vice, will ask no more instances for cleering all suspitions, that foreknowledge shall neuer bar merit. For since he defended his yongest years, frō the most receiued vice of his countrey, we must expect in this riper time the habituall possession of this Regall vertue.
            Now to the increase of Empire, which though it carieth the face of the happiest alreration, yet being an alteratiō, can hardly escape defects. For not only the nature of all humaine accidents approues it, all things being deliuered to vs cōmixt, we being not to be trusted, either with good or ill alone, separated, such are our frailties & weaknes, presumption or despaire, growing mightie if fed with either fortune single. But more particularly to illustrate the inconueniences of the increase of kingdomes, the cōmon examples are either by power or ambition in one

body, or by necessity compelled to offend defensiuely in another: Both are by conquest, whose violent effects leaue for euer an equall mistrust both in Prince and subiect, an humor of that fatall operation, as nothing but bloud and oppression followeth. What shall I say now of our encreased dominions, that haue made vs terrible to the world without any terror to our selues: But so happy and excellent meanes are the long disioyned partes of this Kingdome, brought to an inseparable imbracement. And if the long receiued Axiome of pollicie shall bee beleeued (that kingdomes must bee maintained by such meanes as they were gotten) vnto what an excellent necessity are we tyed? marriage was the meanes, a friendshippe of that high nature, that God himselfe daineth to bee a witnesse of this indissoluble knot; we must maintaine it with the neerest resemblance, that is by a constant friendship and loue. Verely I beleeue it impossible for man to thinke, how so infinite a blessing to both sides could haue beene accomplished, by any other so easie and euen conditions. For neither side sought others friendship, by comming past the boundes of the reputation of a nation, there were no threates, no violence, no swordes drawne of neither side. So that as if God would prouide to satisfie euen our most distempered and sicke affections, least such sparkes might

inflame this great action, neither nation can charge other with needing, or yeilding, or giuing way to other. So are they met, so are they prepared as they shall scarcely need eyther time or custome the vniters of flesh to assist their incorporating, since they are by the diuine wisdome, so knit together, as it resembleth a new creation. When wee shall haue beheld on all sides the cleerenes of this benefit, how all things answere one another, and all without the least signe of any inconuenience or daunger, what place is left for suspition? or if not for suspition, was there euer any benefit possessed so entirely? who is there now that shall bring in questions of seperation and be beleeued? since we may easily determine all such differences, arise out of the malignity of such dispositions, not the cause. It is most true if you will (happy Countrimen) that the streames of the common wealth and people runne contrary (for flourishing states haue commonly dissolute inhabitants, poore countreies honest people) this is because we borrowe our behauiours from our fortunes not discourses, being good or bad, according to the floud or ebbe of our estates. But if you will be owners of this happines, you will proceed with more aduised considerations, and iudge of your Councellors as well as Councels. If they tell you of the pouerty of Scotland, examine whether our wealth shall not come

from the addition of their Kingdome, for at once we receiue from them the stopping of our vnnecesary warres, and the vse of trafficke. How infinitely haue we beene consumed in the vpholding the low countryes, which we were enforced to vse for a stillt to vphold the body of our state. Shall not a naturall limme, nay another body, that doth not onely rescue vs, but becometh vs, be thought worthy of entertaining? There is none of vs that worne with the trauailes of the world and time, but would buy a new strength and youth at any rate: Be now ashamed to be taken with this selfe-loue, or els value the new youth and strength of our commonwealth. Since gratitude and the knowledge of benefits, cometh from the looking back vpon former times, let vs not be ashamed to remember times past: How was the wealth of our lande decayed? how full of doubt stood wee? with what Prince or state durst we enter league, that was able to be our enimies? nay to such a state wee were come, as wee were as much afraid of peace as warres, and durst trust neither. At once to bee deliuered of these, without feeling any alteration but the ease, what doth it not deserue? Without feeling any alteration, for what hath hapened in this change that we can complaine of? Warres are ceased, peace is entreated on all sides, oppressions are abolished, in the meane time, the Prince exercising al those vertues that may make

the subiect happy, his Iustice, his mercy, his liberality, his benignity. And whereas euen the best Princes, haue thought it sufficient to exercise certaine generall vertues, who is there that could demaund particular fauours of any kind, and hath beene sent away empty? Truth cannot be flattery, and that which so many can wittnes ought not to be suspected. Not alone the deseruers of him haue tasted of his bounty, but the assisters of the gouerment past, haue founde it as sure a plea to be able to proue, they serued his predecessor loyally, as those nearest vnto himselfe. What shall wee gather of this? but that this Kingdome is beheld of him, with the same care that his others are, and that the seruants of it are as deare to him. A rare example of equity, since in the succession of Princes wee see nothing more ordinary, then that the fauour of the seruants dieth with the master. After this assurance to doubt his partiality, and that the number of his auncient attendance will rob the English of places and employments, cannot come but from a minde, that speaketh his owne vices in anothers name. For since wee cannot Iudge the thoughts but by the actions, and that all his actions haue bene found of another nature, from whence issue these suspitions but out of their owne bosomes? Shall it bee thought an answere that the old seruants of his Scottish Gouerment haue beene rewarded? the same minde would

haue pronounced ingratitude if they had beene vnrewarded. For who is hee that censureth honestly, and houldeth not this an argument for our incouragement, who being in the beginings of our times, cannot knowe him but by his vsage of others, who hauing spent for him in a time of lesse expectation, & so lesse to be suspected, their youthes & strengths, how could any indifferent iudgment hould them vnworthy of rewardes? It hath then rewarded vs in them, for the example hath giuen vs encouragement, which is the very food of the soule, and the greatest prouocation of vertue. Shall wee yet doubt and desire more assurances? behould euery man that hath not had a more capitall fault, then the being a stranger to him, holdeth the same place hee possessed before? from the highest to the lowest, yea euen the seruantes of the person and house of the last Prince are his. An vnusuall satisfaction and so to be esteemed, and an action of a Prince, that cannot suspect that in another, that hee findeth not in himselfe.
            Can there now be such another testimonie of his vprightnesse, when by the changing the administers of this state, by another disposition, would haue bin thought so important a part, as he should by the alteration not onely haue rewarded others, but assured his owne person. But from the generall consent of his entrance, hath he framed the rest of

his proceedings; he found vs then, ioyfull, loyall, louing subiects, and according to that demeanure hath he vsed vs: which if we do not acknowledge, and acknowledge in making the same vse of his actions to vs, we are vnworthy of so happy a gouernment. But yet saith some body, how can it be that the number of that nation shall not shorten the benefits of the English? If they brought men without a kingdome it were an obiection, or if men vnder this Prince must not bring somewhat besides a petition. They haue a Countrey of their owne that yeeldeth so much plenty, as their plentie breedeth their want; for concerning the necessaries for mans life no countrey is better furnished: and for wealth, the happinesse of their latter gouernment hath giuen such testimonies of encrease, as already they possesse enough both to defend themselues and to free their countrey from the imputation of sterility. But this is not all, the number of able men is not a discommoditie, for how commeth it (thinke you) that all the Princes of Christendome thinke well of our friendship, but because wee haue many able men: So that either it must be confessed, enuy is better food then safety, or else that two offices in one hand is not so important, as two kingdomes vnder one Scepter, vnder one Lawe, becomming one body. Neither doth the commodity of so many able men end thus, but as it bringeth reputation

and safety from abroade, so ease and wealth at home. For when this multitude of able men shall disburthen the officers of their too much businesse, they shall not excuse vnder-briberies by their ouer many emploiments, and so shall the poore subiect escape paying fees vpon fees, and sometimes double and trebble briberies.
            By this time it is apparant, that neither the pouertie nor multitude of our connexion can be preiudiciall, since it is prooued they will be the onely instruments of our enriching; and that this multitude bringeth a happy necessitie for the redressing the griefes of the greatest part of our people. Let vs then come to the beholding this happinesse together, which since wee finde so infinitely full of blessings as the sharpest sight cannot discerne any inconuenience or future perill, what shall I call it? but a diuine and miraculous blessing of God. Now should we bring vnto this great benefit our sicke and corrupt affections, though neuer so well couered vnder the names of foresight or preuention, shall we not worthily deserue punishments answerable to our fauours? Let this learne vs (good countrimen) our duties to the Common-wealth, whether we ought not to bring our bodyes, but to cary our mindes, for to bring priuate driftes to the publique busines, is an impietie of the highest nature. What shall we say now to their imaginations

that hold our vnity most profitable if it were inseparable, but if the Kings issue should faile, say they, and seuerall titles disvnite vs, then would their neighbourhood be more dangerous: for by our incorporating being growne more riche, they would be more able to affront vs. How doe these striue to bury benefits with suspitions? they haue forgot who ended our warres without miserable conditions, who hath enforced Ireland to lay downe armes, who hath made vs capable of forreigne leagues without buying them, but beholding all these and many more both defences and benefits as things past, and now in their owne possessions they are as weary of their assisters, as they were of their feares. Or els being people of such a condition as finde most contentment in troubled and doubtfull states, because setled and flourishing are the lights that discouer ill affected and ill disposed persons, they desire to shroud themselues still in the darkenesse of confused and perplexed gouernments. But to answere their obiection without them, how vnlike is this to the English stile, that lately durst not thinke beyond one life, and now out-runneth foure, and by Gods grace many more. And are there foure betweene this feare and vs, and is it yet a feare? It is no preuention but an impious forecast; for to prouide beyond probability, armeth our imaginations against the will of God. A strange office for man

to vndertake, since if it were a part of his appointment, Heauen and Earth, and all their generations, reuolutions and changes, and euen God himselfe were idle and vnnecessary powers. But still we insist vpon our wealth and their inriching, which either we mistake or vnderstand not. For if we haue the aduantage of wealth we shall hold it, for since they neither can nor will demaund any thing but by way of commerce or traffique, the long and great concourse of trading to the cheife city of our Iland, will sucke vp still the greatest part of our weath. But might it be that their wealth would be encreased, the publique good purchaseth not losse but profit, for by the dispersion the state findeth the people more able and more industrious, from whence ariseth the increase of traffique to the subiect, and of custome to the Prince, the most honest and easy way of enriching the Kings coffers. Not vnlike vnto this obiection is the mislike that they would lay vpon the disposition of the people that because they haue in times past giuen way to their priuate mislikes and drawne priuate quarrells to multitudes; that wealth vnto such natures being like oyle to fire, might drawe their fewds from a sparke to a flame, and so inwrappe vs in an vnnecessary warre. But they are much deceiued in the generall operation of wealth that suspect that, since if there be any quality in riches more then our opinion hath forced, it

this that it ordinarily maketh ill men good citizens. For it is not the goodnesse of lawes, their integritie, nor good effects in generall, that maketh all men obserue them, but that their wealth hath no other defence, so doe they loue Iustice and her obseruations, out of their owne particular, there being no way to make them conceiue that foundation of equitie (suum cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tribuere) to yeeld euery man his owne, except they haue of their owne to make the instance. But were these probable, are wee not to prouide first against those that threaten vs neerer? is not the first and most waighty consideration of a States man to preuent the inuasion of forraine enimies? and can there be any other course for them, then by our leauing matter of -discontentment amongst our selues. Against outward inuasions nature hath cared; we are enuironed by the sea, and so knit together both by religion, language, disposition, and whatsoeuer els can take away difference; as vnlesse we breed disagreeing affections, we are indissoluble. Neither can we nourish these vnlesse we will contradict Heauen it selfe. Behold how we are ioyned, God, Nature, & Time, haue brought vs together, and so miraculously if we obserue the reuolutions of time, as me thinketh the very words after the consummation of a marriage, shall not be vnproperly vsed, Those whome God hath ioyned together, let no man seperate. Vnto whose iudgement now,

will not these obiections seeme light, if wayed with this consideration. Lawes and pollicie can fight and ouercome inwarde inconueniences, the wisdome of the Statist, is aboue any of these discommodities, especially in Monarchies, where ciuill matters are easily redressed by reason of the absolute power of the Prince, and that the people are not strong enough to fauour their owne imperfections if they come in question. But against outward inuasions invited by inward diuisions, there is no cure but preuention, for being once on foote, wisdome may see the fault, but armes must determine it. To assure you this is no idle warning, let vs both examine the states of our neighbours, their dispositions, their former actions, and then what is likely to leaue matter of discontentment and diuision amongst vs. First for France were it one man, former fauours might warrant vs, but kingdomes can dispence with ingratitude, therefore wee must forget their distresse, and looke for the common disposition of their prosperitie, which hath euer leueld at the keeping vs downe.
            To this end haue they alwaies held correspondence with Scotland, which they haue vsed for their onely refuge, to escape the English preparations. So that if we shal close this past their entrance; we haue taken away their first and safest defence. For now all questions must bee decided within their owne

entrailes, where how so euer they speed, they must be loosers; for though the euents of armes bee doubtfull, yet the deciding place is certaine of losse. Now for Spaine vnto whose ambitions wee haue euer beene an impediment, both in our aides to France, and the Lowe Countries, though we feele not the gratitude of these, yet must wee prouide against the mislike of the other. For by most natures reuenge is preferred before recompence, as the more profitable qualitie: therefore must wee prouide not onely against their ambitions, but mislikes, which double excitation nothing can pacifie but our owne strengths. But it may be the iealosies betweene Spaine and France will cleere these dangers; let vs not borrow a defence out of their humors, when we may haue one of our owne, nor can wee trust to it, since hopes and feares doe equally quench contentions, so that if they haue no other impediment but themselues they will (questionlesse) respit their owne mislikes, vntill they haue taken order with vs. In the meane time we search not enough the Spanish pollicy, who beginneth his attempts thorough diuisions and factions, which if he espie, hee prosecuteth dangerously, for by his strength in Rome and the West-Indies, he searcheth all kindes of dispositions, which if not sound, he maketh at his deuotion. To make perticulars sound, wee must begin with the generall; when we haue laide

our foundation strong, and past the shaking of our enimies, we take away the prouocations both of the Temptor & Tempted against their religion, let our religion be opposed, in respect of whose strength and reputation we ought to be more then moued, since our vnitie in bodies to our already vnited mindes, will make the reputation of our religion so strong, as they that put on the aduerse, for feare and in pollicie, shall neither shame nor feare to vse their owne consciences.
            Shall wee see now out of what matter our enemies can worke dissention, there is neither ambition nor discontentment amongst our great men, nor burthens vpon the people, lawes haue their due course, and purge the vaines of the commonwealth, from vnnaturall stoppings and corruptions. It can then be no other, then in the disposing of our new body, from which we may take the beginning of the happiest Empire that euer was. Plato to illustrate the strength of friendship borroweth so much of Poetrie as to tell a tale that the body of man was first rounde, and whilest hee enioyed that forme was doubly furnished of all the Organes and abilityes of man, after, abusing his strength the Gods diuided him and left him but the halfe of that hee was; but yet with a power (as findding the other halfe which is a perfect freind, not differing in resemblance) he might againe enioy his

first strength and happines. England hath found her other halfe, shee is now doubly furnished with the strength of a Kingdome, she hath foure armes, foure leggs, two harts (made one) two powers, and double forces.
            What can make vs now so vnnaturall, as to doubt of our restored strength? or by what rule will suspition be tryed? If lawes and ordinances bee called and rightly called the soule of the common-wealth, they must not be begotten by ourappetite: for then they can neither be diuine in their operation nor eternall in their continuance; if we confesse it, and appeale to Iudgment, Iudgment trieth all things of this nature by the consent of these three vnuariable rules, namely Conscience, Reason and Example, as those that giue lawes their true essences. For conscience reconcileth our humane lawes to our diuine, in so much as all lawes that take not them for a patterne, cannot be honest, and so not durable. Reason shapeth them against all assaultes which cannot be without making them profitable to all.
            Lastly Example assisteth the weaknes of Reason with the sight of former successes, in so much as the strength of humaine reason, is but to deuise and cannot without triall ariue any nearer the end then probability. Then to examine it by conscience: Is there not a necessity of mutuall helpe imposed vpon man? and haue we freed our selues of infinite troubles and

is there not a duty belonging to the meanes? Doth a Nation not differing in any part from our selues, full of strength, able men, of so important a scituation, offer her selfe with open armes to embrace vs, and can we thinke of another entertainment besides a louing and euen embracement? If the offences or violences of Kingdomes, alloweth vs, first to ouercome, then to subiect and tye them with thraldome, doth loue, freenesse, amity, brotherlike regard require the like vsage? either we were wronge before, are now, or confound merit and iniuries. In a word, were there no other motiue but our Prince, who would not be ashamed to refuse such a Medium. since his bloud is of both nations his minde so iust to all nations, and that his vertues haue already confuted all obiections: what conscience is there that hasteneth not to this combination, not onely for a quiet as compelled, but for ioy as the due of so noble and glorious a performance.
            Now let vs see the triall of reason, this Ilande is happily come within the circle of one Diadem, not by conquest, nor by weaknes, nor for protection, but are drowne together by the vertue of an vnited blood, and made one mans Kingdome by the happy coniunction of the royall blood of both nations. And is that blood growne one, and shall not the Kingdomes growe one? It is reasons office, not onely to bringe the will and the desire together, but

by the way to examine the will, from what right he desires, how iustly, and to what end. By this meanes all parts haue satisfaction or ells the reason disclaymeth the employment. We shall neuer get reason then to goe of this errand, for wee haue no right to the holding it by a diuided title, nor is there iustice in couering an vnequality in a title, nor hath the end, any other soundnes then the deuise of some sicke affection. For if there were some great difference in our powers, power might sway it, and reason would make the weaker yeild to necessity: if the Prince were either by bloud or affection of one side, the other were to light, but hauing neither strength nor right to a superiority, how can it belong vnto vs? Now if this be apparant, were it in our power to bynde them to vs, by some vndername, how standeth it with the pollicy of a state to leaue so many Idle men, for since our industry hath euer an eye vpon our owne good wee must either interest them in the gaines, or wee must expect cold endeauours. For nature hath giuen vs abilityes for our vse and preseruation, which though our reason perswadeth vs to vse for the cōmon good, yet neuer for the common good without including our owne perticular. But it may be it will be answered, let their industries be spent vpon their owne soyle, and so shall ours and wee will craue nothing from them. Who seeth not in this answere either a willfull or ignorant folly?

that forgetting their neernes, the daunger of their mislikes, the gappe for seditions and plotts to get entrance, we reckon them as a people that concerne vs not. No, no, they must haue a hande in our busines, our peace is theirs, our florishing theirs, our successe of all kindes theirs, in so much as if they be not thus farre interessed in these, and their loues so fastned to vs, as to ouercome all temptations, wee must expect none of these, so shall they or we, if we preuent not all enticements be wooed; since forraine forces are too weake to craze our strong constitution without euill Iarres. Lastly if wee looke for presidents and examples to strengthen our resolutions, neuer were two Kingdomes inuited by so stronge and forcible meanes to become one, and reiected it. Contrariwise, Spaine and France were neuer absolute Monarchies vntill the first of seauen Kingdomes became one, and Normandy and Brittaine were annexed to the crowne of France; which before were vnder other lordes. The deuiding a Kingdome into petty principalities prepareth it to bee swallowed by a more vnited power. So standeth Italy at this day, that liueth not by her owne strength, but by the Iealosies of her neighbours: yet was shee once Mistresse of the world, and so would be againe (saith one of their authors) were she re-united and vnder one scepter. But why seeke I forrain examples when wee haue one of our owne so neare vs? Wales

is Englished, a country whose riches did not woe vs, nor her power, nor the fertility of the soyle; but the discommodities that we might receiue by them whilest they were held as Aliens, beeing matter to feed discontented or ambitious plottes, this was the furthest and onely aduantage we expected, which since it lay within the power of our incorporating to cure, and that nature had performed halfe the worke, with the alliance of countreys so neerly knit together vpon one continent, wee performed. Successe hath followed, a warrant for the like occasion, but this is more like vs then that, a greater prouocation, wee differ not in language (a signe that God euer meant to haue vs one Kingdome;) and for the other conueninences of our match, as power, wealth, largnes of territories, reputation of a Kingdome, ability in men, there is no comparison. That the world is possessed by many lords, and that the great empires that grew in her minority, crushed themselues with their owne weight, cannot in one reason be better comprehended (mee thinketh) then that the difference of scituation, clymate and disposition, could not giue power, to the imperiall country, to naturalize her conquests, they could not make them themselues. For it is lawes and customes and euennesse in capicity of offices and dignities, that can make countries loue one another truely, for so they doe as it were beget one another, and become flesh

of flesh, and bone of bone. For want of this it hath beene in the power of priuate men, to shake an Empire, that could not haue moued a Kingdome, and for want of this, haue Empires beene enforced to hould subiected countries by garrisons, and by cruelties waies, so disagreeing from nature, as their authority hath depended meerly vpon fortune, and an externall reputation, which neuer indureth a distemper without a downefall, nor is euer sicke without destruction. For recouerable diseases are onely in naturall bodyes, which these being opposite to, must depend onely vpon force. In the meane time, how much the expence of treasures, and the continuall doubts wee haue of such countries exceedeth the aduantage, we may easily discerne, if we behold but Spaine, whose many dispersed Kingdomes haue beene such a burthen to them, and haue drawne them, into so many inconueniences, as his West Indies, and great encrease of possessions lately annexed to that crowne, haue not bin able to defend him from the extreamest wants, insomuch as his designes haue oftner stood still for want of mony and men, then many smaller Kingdomes. Had it beene now thinke you in his power to haue made them all Spanish and within the limits of one continent, vpon the condition to haue called all Spaine, and but one nation, would hee not haue thought it an excellent exchange? Doubt it not since hee had

at once beene deliuered of those charges and suspitions, that make his possessions a paine, and weaknes rather then a strength, being like a monster of nature that hauing a body without bloud inough, hath his limmes withered and feeble being a great bulke, drowned in his owne proportion. All forced gouerments must bee momentary in so much as they leaue out the will and desire of man, which onely can beget continuance. For an instance behold nature her-selfe, who driueth at none of her endes tirannically, but emorapping her driftes in the naturall desires of her creatures, hath her purposes effected not as hers, but as their owne. So must the aduised Polititian proceed, if he intendeth to giue either a goodly or substantiall forme to his workemanship; for though man can inforce other creatures beyond their willes, yet the will of man, hauing reason to direct it which hath a freedome and eminencie in her nature, must therfore be wrought by perswasions, not enforcements, the onely means to bring her to obedience, and to yeelde to the directions of others. I haue gone thus farre beyond my purpose (louing countrimen) to free you of all suspitions, insomuch as the soule of man, is no sooner cured of any great infirmitie, but there remaine certaine dregges behinde of doubts and suspitions, which I hope these fewe considerations will cleere, not as they are mine, but as they are

truthes, though at this time, (vnto an aduersary) I cannot complaine of my weakenesse, for being the champion of right I doubt not of the successe of Dauid.
            
            You haue now then the sight of this great blessing, which approacheth you so full of infinite happinesses, so pure and vncommixt with the common fortunes of the worlde, as you may laye by all thoughts, but such as are apt to prepare you fit to receiue so gratious an assurance of Gods fauour, and of gratitude though not answerable, yet answerable to your powers. In the meane time beholde the goodly time before you, so cleere and calme as there is not so much as matter for cloudes or stormes left to breed on, (the originall of the happinesse of a common-wealth) for then onely are the inward motions of gouernment made perfect, when there ariseth neither feares nor dangers from abroad, since those times are often so miserable, as they are not onely forced to make vse of the diseases of the time and people, but also to praise them, the forerunner of the downefall of a state. Which you shall easily prooue if you search the ruines of the ancient Empires, where (towards their end) vices went for vertues, and the greatest corruptions were the greatest merits. But our State is of another nature, it cannot growe old and doate, because it had no infancie or youth; wee builded

not our foundation out of a little, and increased it after by the sworde, we are no purchasers, but inheritours, and inheritours of a State, that commeth to vs strong and flourishing, so doe wee want those shiftes and by-courses, which come in with necessity, which make such states in time suffer shipwracke both by iust and naturall reasons. For hauing gotten by oppression, it standeth with Iustice that they loose so: and it is infallible, that people gotten vp by indirect meanes, though the present gaine maketh them insensible of it, yet it leaueth in them the example of the corruption; and being like creatures bred out of putrifaction, they liue no longer then there remaineth such matter to feed on, but are after ouerthrowne by some aduerse power, or els turning head vpon themselues, are the authors of their own destruction. But you freed of all these, shall haue a happy leasure to view ouer your owne inwarde parts of the Common-wealth, and being hindered by no new doubts, may search, medicine and heale, all olde griefes, which not alone the time permits, but the Prince warrants, aleach chosen by God to make a new time setled in an instant, such as the power of Iustice and an vpright distribution, another testimonie of Gods gratious fauour vnto vs. For beeing strangers though not by birthe, yet by personall knowledge, and the commerce of stran gers, warranting almost a partiality to our countreimen,

it is onely the worke of such a King, to alter nature by the force of wisdome. So hath his iust proceedings wrought vpon vs, that neither side, being able to charge him with leaning more to one side then another, neither side hath cause to mistrust him, another doore at which Partialitie often entereth. Will you know now what we haue escaped? the being begotten by a diseased father, for this time being the father of the succeeding, had it constitution beene corrupted by partiality, the after-ages would for euer haue felt it, which would haue beene so much the more dangerous, because as in naturall bodies, hereditarie diseases are aboue the skill of the Phisitian, so would these of the Statesmen. But ours that is to be directed by a Prince so infinitely indued by the graces both of God, Nature and Fortune, we may assuredly expect actions answerable to such a concurrance of vertues. To that height of felicitie are you then arriued, as not onely you shall enioy your country without feares, your estates without hourely impositions, and your liues without warres and hazards, but as if you exchanged these for their contraries, your countrey shall yeeld you peace, and by peace infinite contentments, your estates shall encrease daily, and you shall not buy your owne industries of strange impositions and taxes: and warres that had wonte to diuorce you from your parents and wiues, and by

presses violently pull you from your owne quiet courses, to sacrifice you to the distempered and troubled age, to quench the fire of forraine ambitions that threatned vs, shall no more haue any such power ouer you. But your time and determinations shall bee your owne, and your hopes shall not bee frighted with feares. Prepare then mindes fit to enioy so many happinesses, and mindes fit to bee gouerned by so sincere and iust a Prince, whose very entrance amongst vs hath had that vertue, as to driue away all threatning calamities that hung ouer our heades. Let it not bee forgotten since the remembrance of passed perills is sweet, and not onely sweet but profitable, for it inuiteth vs to the acknowledgement. And since wee cannot better testify our thankefullnes to God, then in the offering our obedient hartes to the meanes he chose for the expressing this his wonderfull and gratious fauour vnto vs; let vs begin our contentments from him, who like the Sunne hath dispersed and consumed our doubts, and like the Sunne draweth nothing from beneath, but to yeeld it downe againe with more vertue then he receiued it.
            FINIS.
         
      
   