
      
         
            
               
               
The manner of the death and execution of Arnold Cosbie, for murthering the Lord Boorke, who was executed at VVanſwoorth townes end on the 27. of Ianuarie 1591.
            
               With certaine verſes written by the ſaid Cosby in the time of his impriſonment, containing matter of great effect, as well touching his life as alſo his penitencie before his death.
            
            Imprinted for VVilliam VVright.
            1591.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The manner of the death and execution of Arnold Cosbie, for murthering the Lord Bourke.
            
               IMediatly after that Arnold Coſbie had receaued iudgement, as you haue before heard, he had his hands faſt bound, and by the knight Marſhals men was committed vnto the Marſhalſey, where he had learned preachers came and conferred with him, ſhewing him that this life was but fraile and tranſitorie, and in no ſort comparable vnto the life to come, for therein conſiſted all ioye, pleaſure, reſt, ſolace, and continuall comfort and that he might be aſſured to dwell and liue for euer among the Angels of of God, if ſo by repentaunce of his former ſinnes he would nowe call vpon God, and ſtedfaſtly beléeue that by faith in Chriſt Ieſus, he ſhoulde haue free remiſſion of all his ſinnes which from time to time hee had committed. By meanes of which godly conferences, the ſaid Arnold Coſby called to minde the ſtate wherein he had before liued, and in what eſtate hee now ſtoode, and therewithall comparing the one with the other, &c. ſéeing his ſodaine downefall through 
                  •
               is pride and folly before committed, he burſt foorth into bitter teares and grieuouſly lamented both his follie and his fall, wiſhing that he had neuer béene borne to performe an act ſo deteſtable, whereby he had loſt the fauour of his prince, and good will of hir people, not being able to make ſatiſfaction for the leaſt droppe of bloud which he had wilfully wiſhed, neither coulde he euer be pardoned of the hainous ſinne which he thereby committed, but onely by the mercie of God which

was ready (as he alleaged) to rfreſhe all penitent ſinners that ſorrowed for their offences euen from the bottome of their hearts. Thus meditating vpon the New Teſtament, and hauing continuall conference with theſe that came to comfort him, he ſometime red and ſometime wrote ſuch things as might beſt content his wofull mind: vntill Wedneſday about nine of the clocke in the morning, at which time he was conueyed from the Marſhalſey in a cart vnto Wanſworth townes ende, where vppon a high hill a gibbet was ſet vp, and being brought thither by the knight Marſhals man he was taken from the cart, and placed at the foot of the ſaid hill, where at his comming he found the Earle of Ormond, with manie knightes, captaines and Gentlemen, who came to ſee him ſuffer death, where he found at his comming Doctor Fletcher Lorde Biſhop of Briſtow and Almoner vnto hir maieſtie, to comfort him againſt the feare of death, who perſwaded him to defie murther and to acknowledge his offence: which he did openly confeſſe before all the people, and ſhewed him ſelfe ſorie for the ſame, aſking forgiueneſſe both of God and the worlde, and therewithall deſired hir maieſtie to forgiue and forget his offence, ſo as it might be hereafter no blot or blemiſh to his kindred or allies. Then after praiers which the priſoner ſéemed to poure foorth from a penitent heart, confeſſing that he had before committed ſundry hainous offences, ſtil calling vpon God to forgiue him euen to the laſt gaſpe, he was turnd off from the ladder and there hanged till he was dead, and nowe remaineth in the placed hanged vp in chaines, according to his former iudgement.
         
         
            
            ARNOLD COSBIES vltimum vale to the vaine world.
            
               ❧An Elegie written by himſelfe in the Marſhalſea after his condemnation.
            
            BReake heart, be mute my ſorrowes paſt compare,
            
               Cosbie complaine no more, but ſit and die,
            Teares are no tokens of ſuch dreriment,
            As thy true griefe poures to the angrie heauens,
            The heauens offended with thy foule miſdeeds,
            O great Commander of this glorious round,
            The workmanſhip of thine immortall hand,
            Thou that doeſt ride vpon the Cherubins,
            And tuneſt the deepes in dreadfull harmonie,
            Caſt downe thine eie vpon a wretched ſoule,
            And from thy throne of grace great Iacobs God
            Raine mercie on me, miſerable man,
            Falne into ſnares of ſinne and ſhamefull death,
            From thee ſweete Sauiour, Sauiour of the world.
            O world, vaine world, vnconſtant, & vnkind,
            Why haſt thou bred me, nurſt me, brought me vp,
            To ſee this daie of ſorrow and of ſhame:
            
               Cosbie complaine. Captaines and men of warre,
            With whom I whilome ſpent my carleſſe daies,
            Daies dated but to this, to end in ſhame,
            
               
Farewell, adieu to you and all the reſt
            That followe armes: and armes and life adieu,
            From armes and life I paſſe drencht in the pit
            Digde by my deſperate hands hands full of bloud.
            Bleed heart to thinke what theſe accurſed hands
            Haue perpetrated, Pardon heauen and earth,
            And gentle Lord miſled by my amis,
            Fouly by me ſent to thy longeſt home,
            O pardon Cosbies cruell minde,
            His minde enraged, and gentle bloud by wrath
            And furie tainted and empoiſoned.
            VVhy do I kill my doefull dying heart,
            VVith ſad rehearſall of this heauie chance.
            O death rocke me aſleepe, Father of heauen
            That haſt ſole power to pardon ſinnes of men,
            Forgiue the faults and folly of my youth,
            My youth miſſpent in waſt and wantonnes,
            And for ſweete Ieſus ſake forgiue my ſoule,
            Fouly defild with this aboue the reſt,
            This wickednes, this hard vnworthie deed.
            And laſtly you whoſe fame I haue defild,
            My kin, my Countrie men, friends and alies,
            Pardon, ô pardon, ſuch as men to men
            Can giue, I beg for wronging you in all,
            For ſhaming you in this my wretched end,
            The fruitles crop, the meed of my deſerts
            
               
My bad, my baſe deſertes, ſweete Friends forget,
            Frends, countrie men, and kinsfolkes all forget,
            My name, my face, my fact, ô blot me out,
            Out of the world, put me out of your thoughts,
            Or if you thinke, o thinke I neuer was,
            Or if you thinke I was, thinke that I fell,
            Before ſome forte, ſome holde in Belgia,
            VVith this ſuppoſe beguile your ſorrowes friends,
            Thinke that I fell before the Canons mouth,
            Euen in mine honors heigth that bleſſed day,
            VVhen in aduancement of my name, I left
            My countries enemie in his baſe reuolt:
            A wretched man to talke of honors heigth,
            Fallen ſo baſely into the pit of ſhame,
            The pit of death: my God, my God forgiue me,
            Next to my God, my countrie pardon me,
            VVhoſe honor I haue ſtained and lawes infringe
            And thou my ſoueraigne Miſtris and my Queene,
            Bright ſtarre of Englandes globe, forgiue my fact,
            Nor let it touch thy Royall Princely hart,
            That Cosbie hath miſdone ſo hainouſly.
            The circle of my time is compaſſed,
            Arriued to the point where it began.
            Worlde, countrie, kin, and friends farewell farewell,
            Flie thou my ſoule to heauen the hauen of bliſſe,
            O bodie beare the ſcourge of thine amiſſe.
         
      
   