
      
         
            
            
            CORYATS
CRAMBE,
OR
HIS COLWORT
TVVISE SODDEN, AND
Now serued in with other
Macaronicke dishes, as the
second course to his
Crudities.
            LONDON
            Printed by William Stansby
1611.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE VERSES
WRITTEN VPON CORYATS
CRVDITIES, WHICH SHOVLD
Haue beene Printed with the other Panegyricke lines,
but then were vpon some occasions omitted,
and now communicated to the
WORLD.
            
               Incipit Ben. Ionson.
               To the London Reader, on the Odcombian writer, Polytopian
Thomas the Traueller.
               WHO euer he be, would write a Story at
               The height, let him learne of Mr. Tom Coryate;
               
               VVho, because his matter in all should be meete,
               To his strēgth, hath measur'd it out with his feet.
               And that, say Philosophers, is the best modell.
               Yet who could haue hit on't but the wise noddell
               Of our Odcombian, that literate Elfe?
               To line out no stride, but pas'd by himselfe?
               And allow you for each particular mile,
               By the 
                     •
                  cale of his booke, a yard of his stile?
               VVhich, vnto all Ages, for his will be knowne,
               Since he treads in no other Mans steps but his owne,
               And that you may see he most luckily ment
               To write it with the selfe same spirit he went,
               
                  He sayes to the world, let any man mend it,
               In fiue monthes he went it, in fiue monthes he pend it.
               But who will beleeue this, that chanceth to looke
               The Mappe of his iourney, and sees in his booke,
               France, Sauoy, Italy, and Heluetia,
               The Low-countries, Germany, and Rhetia
               There nam'd to be trauell'd? For this our Tom saith:
               Pies on't, you haue his historicall faith.
               Each leafe of his iournall, and line doth vnlocke,
               The truth of his heart there, and tell's what a clocke
               He went out at each place, and at what he came in,
               How long he did stay, at what signe he did 
                     •
                  nne.
               Besides he tried Ship, Cart, Waggon, and Chayre
               Horse, 
                     •
                  oote, and all but flying in the ayre:
               And therefore how euer the trauelling nation,
               Or builders of Story haue oft imputation
               Of lying, he feares so much the reproofe
               Of his foote, or his penne, his braine or his hoofe,
               That he dares to informe you, but somewhat meticulous
               How scabbed, how ragged, and how pediculous
               He was in his trauaile, how like to be beaten,
               For grapes he had gather'd, before they were eaten.
               How faine for his venery he was to crie (Tergum ò)
               
               And lay in straw with the horses at Bergamo,
               How well, and how often his shoes too were mended,
               That sacred to Odcombe are now there suspended,
               I meane that one paire, where with he so hobled
               From Venice to Flushing, were not they well cobled?
               Yes. And thanks God in his Pistle or his Booke
               How many learned men he haue drawne with his booke
               Of Latine and Greeke, to his friendship. And seuen
               He there doth protest he saw of the eleuen.
               Nay more in his wardrobe, if you will laugh at a
               Iest, he saies, Item one sute of blacke taffata
               Except a dublet, and bought of the Iewes:
               So that not them, his scabbes, lice, or the stewes,
               
                  Or any thing else that another should hide,
               Doth he once dissemble, but tels he did ride
               In a Cart twixt Montrell and Abbeuile.
               And being at Flushing enforced to feele
               Some want, they say in a sort he did craue:
               I writ he onely his taile there did waue;
               VVhich he not denies. Now being so free,
               Poore Tom haue we cause to suspect iust thee?
               No: as I first said, who would write a story at
               The height, let him learne of Mr. Tom Coryate.
               
               Explicit Ben. Ionson.
            
            
               Incipit Iohannes à Grandi-Bosco.
               
                  THE Orbs Almutez of this age haue bene
                  (Beam'd with the gracefull light of heauens Queene)
                  Ascending Stilbon in his doubled house,
                  Sweete Aphrodite, and he that slew theNempe Apollo Smintheus. 
                     Mouse.
                  
                  Yee Germane wits, Hence, Smith, and Noortwicks Lord,
                  
                     Lipsy, and Hortisbon, you can affoord
                  (Of Rome and Athens you two paragers)
                  Mee testimony, and the Scaligers.
                  
                  VVith, what all you through negligence omitted:
                  This English Ilerma hath vs now befitted;
                  VVho 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  Vnto whose praise no Muse that euer said no!
                  No more shall mine. A happyAlluding to that of Pindar. Olymp. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         neuer fitting so literally as the authers shoe (perserued like Epins
                              •
                           nideum. Corium,) fits it. foote had hee
                  In shoe, that
                        Lunata planta in Martial, and that of Iuuenal Sat.7.Appositam more lunans subtexit alut
                              •
                           e: Witnesse that the Romane nobility, and of the best sort had their Crescents on their shoes expressing a C. the single for our Authors name. 
                     Lunatique most sure had bee
                  In Antique Rome, when iudgement both and guerdon
                  Concurr'd: his like, fore Ioue, was neuer heard on.
                  
                     And Somerset, hereafter Odcombe steeple
                  Shall be Tom's Pyram: nay all Odcombe people
                  No more in him that from the
                        
                           〈…〉
                        Baron of Odcombe,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                     Heath was nam'd,
                  But him, that all his country-men hath sham'd
                  In's worth and wit, shall now for euer vaunt them:
                  Eternally thy Manes too shall haunt them,
                  Till with lustration they haue explane,
                  The non-supply of thy wants Coryate.
                  
                  Compar'd by many th'are to Odysscus,
                  
                  Were not comparisons too odious:
                  I could compare Th
                           •
                        ssalian Apulee,
                  
                  Thou
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Anacreon. 
                     Ros
                           •
                        
                      loode deseru'st as well as hee.
                  I could compare? alas I find no such
                  In him, in the Ithaqu
                           •
                        , Cesar, nor so much
                  Of others praise as thou hast tane; both Muse
                  Do sing thy name, and merry Cornamuse.
                  
                  That smothred name these Calends new broke out,
                  With trumpet summons vs from all about,
                  As 'twere to do
                        
                           •••
                         were 
                           ••
                         Mart. wherein such as had bene faulty in Fornacalia, did their deuoires (as the multitude of braue spirits do now at this feast, to preuent weake stomacks from reiection of Crudities
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        eslus. 
                     Quirinus sacrifice,
                  Too long omitted; now thy Frontispice
                  Pictures that feast; the Muses it deferr'd
                  For thy desert. Well ere thou be enterr'd,
               
               
                  The Beames in Court reflecting from thy plaine
                  (There as a mirrour shalt thou be 
                        •
                     bsern'd)
                  Shall make Castilio's trauelling abstaine,
                  Hopelesse to haue the palme thou hast deseru'd,
                  Or hopelesse haue it. Thy example Tom,
                  
                  VVill cause our sharpest
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         
                        Han desperate of equalling him. 
                     heads to stay at home.
               
               Explicit Ioannes à Grandi-Bosco.
            
            
               
               Incipit N. T.
               Certaine Anacreonticke verses praeambulatory
to the most ambulatorie Odcombian
Traueller.
               COryate, Coryate,
               Though it was my hard fate,
               Not to know thy decre pate,
               Before it was too late
               To sing thy praises:
               Yet now I'le call a Muse,
               (Which of them thou shalt chuse)
               To sing thee and thy shoes,
               VVhich Fame vp-raises.
               No Muse of the Horse hoof'd-spring,
               Because thou had'st no such thing
               As a Horse, but on foot did'st bring
               Thy selfe and thy wit too.
               Whēce thou sawest notThe statue of Iupiter being found in Rome was set vp for the image of S. Peter, the keyes beeing put into his hand in steede of the thunder-bolt: as it is there now to be seene. 
                  Ioue like a Pope,
               Nor Dian's vaile made a Cope,
               Nor to Loretto crope.
               Nor the goddesse Cotytto
               
               (Yet madest gobled Crudities,
               Or cobled rudities:
               O how well brued it is
               For the trauelling members!
               VVith wise Obseruations
               Of seuerall nations,
               And rare indagations
               Rak'd out of th'embers.
               But thou wilt see e're long
               
                  Whether Romes walles be strong,
               Or may be sack'd by a throng
               Of warlike Brittons.
               Yet sure thou need'st not goe
               To coasts or countries moe,
               New fashions for to know,
               Vnfit or fit ones.
               For thy Businesse-face who lookes o're,
               VVill say, thou now trauel'st more
               VVith thy wit then thy feete before,
               
                  Floreat, Floreat.
               
            
            
               In nobile mobile Par Calceorum Th. Coryati
               
                  T'Is you alone O cobled shoes,
                  That caused haue these much a-does.
                  You haue bin sung by many a Poet,
                  And your good Master would haue moe yet.
                  T'is not his sayling to strange lands,
                  From Douer cliffes to Cahee sands,
                  That makes his iourney so admired:
                  By you alone all braines are fired.
                  
                      Most trauellers those countries see,
                  And haddocks feede as well as hee.
                  
                      Many thousands ride in wagons,
                  VVhose foremen make them goe like dragons.
                  
                      Most of your trauelling members know
                  VVhat doth belong to a Gondalo.
                  
                      And some I thinke all ages knew,
                  That scaped fairly from the Iew.
                  
                      And some for stealing grapes of yore
                  Haue bene like threatned by a Bore.
                  
                      To Beggars t'is no new deuice
                  To hang vp ragges from whence drop lice.
                  
                      And many ostlers doe (I tro N)
                  With horses lie at Bergamo.
               
               
                  
                  If this be so, what's then the newes?
                  Onely the story of his shoes.
                  O shoes, no shoes, but monstrous leather,
                  Inchanted aganst winde and weather!
                  Not made of any common hide,
                  But of one necromantifide
                  Of some Oxe-hide in Styx long drenched,
                  Or that had someA warlike engine otherwise called a Mortar, vsually quenched with wet Hides. Granada quenched.
                  At least (of lice he was so full)
                  Of some rebellious Irish Bull.
                  Or if that their Antiquitie
                  Require a further pedegree;
                  Perchance (they were so louing fellowes)
                  That they were made of Vulcan's bellowes.
                  Or of that leather bag I find in
                  
                     Homer, Vlysses kept the wind in.
               
               
                  Sure I am they were so patch'd
                  With Theseus ship they may be match'd,
                  Of whch a doubt at length did grow
                  Whether it were the same or no.
               
               
                  Had they endured more thinke you,
                  Had they bin worne by a Perdu?
                  Or if they heretofore had bin
                  Made for some wandring Capuchin?
                  So might they haue prou'd sandale shoone,
                  And lasted more by many a Moone.
               
               
                  Yet was it well I needs must say,
                  They lasted fiue moneths on the way.
                  Though they can now no more be mended,
                  Yet may their praise; else God defend it.
                  Great pitie 'twas they brake in sunder
                  Before they had made a nine monthes wonder.
               
               
                  Quòd se necauit Seneca si nomen tulit:
                  
                     Coryate tutè nomen à coriotenes.
               
            
            
               
               De futuris eiusdem T. C. Peregrinationibus
infinitis.
               NOui qui peregrè totum propè circuit orbem,
               Stultifer âque domum naue reucctus erat.
               Non Thomas sic noster: is omne quod hactenùs egit,
               Nimirùm pedibus penè peregit iter.
               At nunc longinquas solers scrutabitur oras,
               Et quae diuer so, littora, sole calent.
               Romanam nihil est vrbem, Papam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   videre,
               Anglos saepè videt Roma, videre cupit.
               Pendens arte tuum viset (Mahomete) sepulchrum,
               Vel Monacho instructus fraude dolo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   magis.
               Incensus Zelo Solymas rimabitur ipsas,
               Ex tot reliquijs si quid adbûc veliqui est.
               Et Christum quoniam agnoscit Prestera Iohannem
               Inuiset Thomas, & (si opus) erudict.
               Lunae cultores, Persas, & Solis adibit,
               Et Sophi ipsorum, sed magìs ipse Sophos.
               
               Laetemur tantis eius conatibus omnes,
               Ille typis rediens omnia, nempe, dabit.
               Mactc esto Coryate: peregrinantior (opto)
               Sit fortunatus Spiritus iste tibi.
               Non solùm Antipodes: ipsas, audentior, vmbras
               Si potes infernas vise: reuise tuos.
               Si chartis demùm mandes quid agatur in Orco,
               Tu peregrinator solus in orbe clues.
               Explicit N. T.
            
            
               
               Incipit Laurentius Whitaker.
               
                  (The ensuing verses of these three Authors were made since
my booke of Crudities came forth.)
               
               Course Musicke plaid vpon the Odcombian Hoboy,
to attend the second course of Coryats Coleworts, and
dittied to the most melodious Comicall ayre, borne and
brought vp in the Septentrionall suburbs, which the
vulgar call, The Punks delight.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
VAile bonnet ijgging Festiuals, of Brittish land

                     〈♫〉
                  
and others, you proudest Tuscan Carniuals, and yee

                     〈♫〉
                  
French Bals their brother: DutchA most ingenious sport vsed in the low Countries by Citizēs, where in they vse shooting with Crosbowes at a thing made like a Geay. 
                  Pappigcay, andA kind of drunkē Dutch 
                        •
                     aire held on Sundaies and holidaies in afternoones in Sommer time, both note
                        •
                      vnhappily omitted in the Authors text, which is their proper place. 
                  Carmas gay,
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
in season after Easter, with Frow and Punke,

                     〈♫〉
                  
All reeling drunke, both Boore and Burgomaster.
               
                  YEe Churchales, and ye Morresses,
                  VVith Hobby-horse aduancing,
                  Ye Round-games with fine Sim and Sis,
                  
                  About the Maypole dancing;
                  
                     Ye nimble ioynts,
                  That with red points,
                  And ribands tricke the Bridall,
                  Looke vp your pumpes,
                  And rest your stumpes,
                  For you are now downe cri'd all.
               
               
                  Your Coryphee, great Coryate,
                  
                  TheThe Corybants were certaine mad Priests, and had their names of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         of going vpon their heads (which sometimes they vsed: a terme not vnproper to our Author, because he in going vpon his feete, went truly vpon his head also, for he went vpon that which contained his wit, and conueyed to him the matter of his obseruations. Corybant of Odcombe,
                  
                  Now crested hath his witty pate
                  With no mad but a sad combe
                  Of Doctorship,Viz at the Vniuersitie of Royston, wher he proceeded a Caelarean Doctor.
                  
                  And will not trippe
                  To Market Crosse, or Alehouse,
                  But hath bene made
                  More sage and stayd,
                  By th'Oracles of aOur Author being a Graecian, would needs vary from the Troians, therefore whereas they in their trauails receiued an Oracle from the knawing of Mice (as the knowing Author well knowes the story, 
                           •••
                         he would needs haue an Oracle also but from the biting of smaller. louse:
               
               
                  A learned louse at Heidelberg
                  That bad him fall to writing,
                  Which came to him from
                        Viz. in an old paire of shockings which a Prussian of Koningsberg gaue him, wherein inhabited some or aculous v
                           •
                        rmine. 
                     Koningsberg,
                  
                  To warne him of the biting.
                  Of his vile crew.
                  Which to eschew,
                  And put him into clothes,
                  He must to Court,
                  Write and make sport,
                  So now he hath done both these.
               
               
                  Then waile not Odcombe for thy losse,
                  Though Coryate be remoued,
                  
                     His triumphs acted on thy Crosse,
                  Are in Pauls-yard approued.
                  Nay all pastimes
                  Nam'd in my rimes,
                  Shall stoope to Odcombes standish,
                  Which makes more glee
                  Then any three
                  Of English or outlandish.
               
            
            
               An Encomiasticke scrap or fragment throwen by
a charitable hand into this new Bing or Almesbasket
made by the Author to receiue the Relicks
of the Crudities; which fragment is quicke, for
though it creepes not, yet it thus speakes
to the Author.
               AS at graue Senate-feasts begun with beefe & mustard,
               Ended with Pippin-pies, with Florentine and Custard,
               The courser off all is i'th' hole of the Almes basket
               By officers laid close, till suters come and aske it;
               So in thy Pilgrime feast of lushious Crudities
               Dishes of biting beasts, and shirtlesse Nudities,
               Some Panegyricke scraps of Court and countrey speeches,
               (Which whilom thou wert wont to shew out of thy breches
               And with tough Crudities could hardly be digested)
               Be in th' Almes-basket now of new Calues-skin inuested:
               Which dry meat none cācal; for ther's one scrap a moist one
               The shel fill'd with May dew, thou didst present at Royston.
               Yet not thy feasts nor scraps are made much to be tasted,
               Nor shall their Title leaues on doores or posts be pasted,
               But as brown pasts hard bak't fil roome, & few do tast them,
               So hauing ta'ne thy books, & in some odroome plac't thē,
               Let gentle gallants work their wils: ne're aske thou whether
               They haue ta'ne paines to reade or tast of both or either.
               Explicit Laurentius Whitakerus.
            
            
               
               Incipit Richer for bookes.
               
                  Obserue Reader that the worthy Gentleman which is the Author
of these verses, and who graced me with singular lines vpon my
Crudities, euen as good as any vpon my booke, doth for certaine
considerations conceale his name and his time, and in steede
thereof expresseth onely an Anagramme of it, euen that before
named.
               
               To the most notable Tom Coryate, the very Primrose
of the Authors of this present yeare 1611.
(the sawcy Almanacke-maker
onely excepted.)
               IF, who flie praise, praise onely follow those,
               How got you so much Tom? that write in prose,
               To be set out in verse, and made so deere
               As Cookes with dainty sawce make homely cheere?
               But well, since your great worke set forth of late,
               Hath made you famous vnto euery state:
               Of these small gleanings let no more be said,
               But if the like of them were neuer made,
               Nor neuer shall by any mortall braine,
               That is not weight with yours iust to a graine.
            
            
               Againe to the most royall Phoenix Doctor,
and fluent Orator. M.T.C.
               
                  YOu haue Harangued in English, Tom, so fully,
                  That men doe parallele you now with Tully.
                  
                  And M.T.C. which his name signifie,
                  As aptly to your name they now apply.
                  
                     See see, in placing letters you do sweat,
                  And letters doe conspire to make you great.
               
               
                  As silliest Troian fighting with Achilles,
                  
                  To your braue answer, so your foe-mans bill is;
                  For there was neuer found in paper scrolles,
                  Nor yet in close or patent Parchment Rolles
                  Any like yours, it may be a precedent
                  To all your Clarkes of Christendome and Kent.
               
               
                  O happiest child of Winchester aliue,
                  Thence leapt out Doctor by Prerogatiue.
               
               Explicit in Anagram Richer for Bookes.
            
            
               Incipit Antonius Washborne.
               SInce Doctor Coryates Crudities came forth
               Parboyled in his Oratory broth,
               Since these Orations in Tom Odcombes braine pan
               Decocted were, what lyricke tongue refraine can
               To taste his pickeld wit, and pandred art,
               Seene and allow'd in Citie, Court, andI meane in the country. Cart?
               Till now no Orator arose like Best
               That ere declaimde at Coach-booh, boate, or feast,
               Till now no traueller allowd to lie and cogge
               Did euer write a booke worth casting at a dogge.
               Explicit Antonius Washborne.
            
            
               
               Incipit William Rich.
               William Rich of the middle Temple, in the commendation
of (his learned country-man) Mr. Thomas
Coryate of Odcombe, both Traueller

                     ••••
                   and Orator.
               WOnderfull Coryate, that bring'st two impressions
               Sooner to vs, then Time two quarter-Sessions,
               That writ'st as thou hast trauell'd, with such speed
               As hackney horses, hounds, or hunters feed:
               That writ'st and trauell'st, as there were a strife
               Betweene thy hands and feete for death or life.
               VVell did high Odcombe boast her pride of thee
               VVhen thou to Euill went'st in iollity,
               And led'st an army forth with bowes and gunnes
               To swill their VVhitson-Ale, and cracke their Bunnes,
               VVhere thou, on Crosse aduanc'd, didst spend more wit,
               Then man would thinke thou couldst recouer yet.
               But thou hast more, though much of the same mint
               Men here may reade, and wonder at, in print.
               VVhat will they say, when with thy Crudities
               
               Thy twise boild Colewort here shall simpathize,
               And the great vnbegotten (God knowes what)
               VVhich thou wilt bring vs next, that, yet, is at
               The farre Ierusalem, all in one volume?
               They cannot chuse but then erect a columne,
               
                  
                     •••
                   trauels Trophaees shall be hung
               
                  
                     •••
                   thy workes in Ballades sung.
               Explicit Guiliclmus Rich.
            
         
         
            
            A PETITION MADE
TO THE PRINCE SHORTLY
AFTER THE DEATH OF THE
Last Archbishop of Canterburie, concerning
the Printing of the Booke of my
TRAVELS.
            
               To the High and mighty Prince, HENRY Prince of Wals,
Duke of Cornewall and Rothsay, Earle of Chester,
Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, &c. The
humble Petition of Thomas Coryate.
               
            
            FOr as much as that
greatThe Archbishop of Canterburie. 
               Oecolampadius
of England, euen
that refulgent Lamp
of Gods house, hath
lately lost his light,
the snuffe therof being
fallen downe into the Socket, and so
consequently is extinct for a time; that
Lampe which should haue giuen lustre,

and lent her light vnto my poore Hodaeporicall
lucubrations as the Sunne doth
to the Moone, by the Eclipse whereof
they are now dimmed, and lurke in a
kind of darknes more thē 
               Cimmerian; My
thrise-humble and thrise-suppliant suite
vnto your Highnesse is this, that you
would graciously vouchsase to cherish
and maintaine the scintillant embers of
my diminutiue Lampe by infusing into
them the quickning Oyle of your Gracious
indulgence; by vertue of which,
my Candle which is now hid vnder a
Bushell, may gather strength, and bee
eleuated euen to the conspicuous and
eminent places of this Kingdome, and
disperse abroad her coruscant light to the
illuminating of the caliginous vnderstandings
of my trauelling Countrimen.
            
               Your Highnesse suppliant and
humble Petitioner,
               Thomas Coryate the Od.
combian Traueller.
         
         
            
            CERTAINE ORATIONS
PRONOVNCED BY THE AVTHOR
OF THE CRVDITIES, TO
THE KING QVEENE, PRINCE, LADY
ELIZABETH, AND THE DVKE OF
Yorke, at the deliuerie of his Booke
to each of them.
            
               This Oration following was pronounced to the Prince in
the Priuie Chamber at S. Iames vpon Easter Munday
last, betweene sixe and seuen of the Clocke in the afternoone.
            
            MOst scintillant Phosphorus
of our BrittishThis was the ancient name of Sicily, so called, Quasi 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that is, hauing three promontories, namely Pelorus, Pachynus, and Lilybaeum. As for our Brittish Iland, I therefore call it Tri
                  
                     ••
                  cria, because it hath three Promontories also 
                     •
                  s 
                     
                        •••••
                     
                   had, viz. That of 
                     •••
                   in 
                     •••
                   
                  
                     •
                  ll. Kant
                     •
                  um in the East, euen in that part which we commonly call Kent, and 
                     •••
                   or O
                        ••
                     ss in the 
                     •••••
                   part of S
                        •
                     alland. Con
                        ••
                     en in 
                        •••••
                     .
                
               Trinacria, Euen
as the Christalline
deaw, that is exhaled
vp into the ayre out of
the cauernes & spungie
pores of the succulent Earth, doeth by his

distillation descend, and disperse it selfe againe
vpon the spacious superficies of his mother
Earth, and so consequently fecundate
the same with his bountifull irrigation: So I
a poore vapour composed of drops, partly naturall,
partly literall, partly experimentall,
hauing had my generation within the liquid
Wals of this farre-decantated Iland, being
drawen vp by the strength of my hungrie and
high reaching desire of Trauell, and as it
were craned vp with the whirling wheele of
my longing appetite to suruey exoticke Regions,
haue beene hoysed to the altitude of the
remote climats of France, Sauoy, Italy, Rhetia,
Heluetia, Alemannie, and the Netherlands;
and being there in a maner inuolued
for a time in the sweatie and humid clouds
of industrie capitall, digitall, and pedestriall,
did distend the bottle of my braine with the
most delectable liquor of Obseruation, which
I now vent and showre downe vpon the yong
and tender Plants sprouting out of the same
earth from the which like a poore Mushrome,

I first ascended. With this May dew
of my Crude collections (May I may well
call it, because in May I first vndertooke my
Iourney) I haue now filled this new-laide
Egge-shell, not doubting of the like effect in
your Highnesse the radiant Sunne of our
English Hemispheare, that the great Phaebean.
Lampe hath ouer a naturall Egge-shel
produced by a checkling Henne, and filled
with the Pearly iuyce of the watry cloudes,
which is to eleuate it to a farre more eminent
height then its owne desert can mount it vnto,
and so by your Gracious irradiation to
make it conspicuous and illustrious. Yes,
(which is more) I wish that by the auspicious
obumbration of your Princely wings, this
sencelesse Shell may prooue a liuely Birde,
whose bill with length & strength may reach
and peake the very Mountaines of Arabia,
and there nestle, increase and ingender, and
so breede more Birds of the same feather
that may in future time bee presented as nouelties
vnto your heroycall protection. In

the meane time receiue into your indulgent
hand (I most humbly beseech your Highnesse)
this tender featheredBecause the Booke was bound in Crimson Veluet. 
               Red-breast.
Let his Cage be your Highnesse studie, his
pearch your Princely hand, by the support
whereof, hee may learne to chirp and sing so
lowde, that the sweetnesse of his notes may
yeeld a delectable resonancie Vltra Garamantas
& Indos.
            
            
               DIXI.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE KING IN THE
CHAMBER OF PRESENCE AT
ROYSTON THE SECOND
Day of Aprill being Tuesday, about eleuen
of the Clocke in the Morning.
            IT were no maruaile if
the like should happen
vnto me (most inuincible
Monarch of this
thrise renownedNot Quasi 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   but Quasi Al be one in regard of the happie Vnion of England & Scotland
                
               Albion,
and the refulgent
Carbuncle of
Christendome) speaking vnto your most Excellent
Maiestie that did once to Demosthenes
that thunder-bolt of Athens, when
he spake to Philip King of Macedone, euen
to bee as mute as a Seriphian Frogge, or an
Acanthian Grashopper; since the very Characters

imprinted in the forehead of a King
are able to appall the most confident Orator
that euer spake, much more my selfe the
meanest Orator in your Maiesties Kingdome,
whom if I should compare to a Frogge
as hauing crawlen many leagues by water, or
to a Grashopper as hauing hopped many
miles by land, why should I wonder if by the
gracious aspect of your resplendent Excellencie,
words, speeches, and Orations should be
drawen from me, since by the very inarticulate
sound of Amphions Harpe, stockes and
stones, mountaines and valleyes were said to
daunce Lauoltoes and Roundelayes? But
what talke I of ayrie speeches? Why doe I
mention expatiating Orations? The Persians
(as the auncient Historians doe make vs
beleeue) were wont to present their Kings
with reall gifts and anniuersarie oblations.
I being no Persian borne, but intending er
long by the propicious indulgence of the celestiall
powers to bee borne vpon Persian
ground, do offer vnto your Maiestie a farregrowne

bnt a home spunne present, made indeede
of course Wooll, but plucked from the
backes of the glorious Palaces, the lostie
cloud-threatning towers and decrepit mountaines
of France, Sauoy, Italy, Rhetia,
Heluetia, Alemannie, and the Netherlands;
spunne into a threed by the wheele of
my braine, the spindle of my Penne, and the
Oyle of my industrie in my natiue Cell of Odcombe
in the County of Somerset, and now wouen
into a piece of Rawe cloth in the Printers
Presse of the most famigerated Citie of
London. The lists of this Cloth are the Verses
at both the ends of my Booke. In the beginning
whereof some of the most singular
and selected wits of your Maiesties triangular
Monarchie doe combate in the listes of
Helicon and Parnassus; and in the end my
Fathers Ghost alone doeth diuerberate the
enthusiasticke ayre of Pierian poesie. But I
glory not so much in imitating the Persian
vassals, as in following the trace of our English
Marchants, who returning from forraine

and remote Nauigations, doe bring
home in their Vessels many vncouth and
transmarine commodities; but herein I differ
from them. For they bring home their rarities
in their Ships. But I haue brought
home my Ship and her farre-fetched lading
in My-selfe. My Ship (My dread Soueraigne)
is my Booke, which I brought home
swimming in the liquid Ocean of my braine.
Shee is now rigged, and trimmed, and ready
to hoyse Sayle; your Maiesties fauour will
be vnto it both like a pleasant gale of wind in
the Poupe to make it beare Sayle, and like
a wel-fenced docke and secure hauen of tranquillitie,
where shee may ride at Anchour in a
Halcedonian calme, and shoote off her Ordinance
against the Criticall Pirates and
malignant Zoiles that scowre the surging
Seas of this vaste Vniuerse.
            
               DIXI.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE QVEENE IN
THE PRIVIE GARDEN AT
GREENEWICH, THE FIFTH
Day of Aprill being Fryday, about fiue of
the Clocke in the afternoone.
            MOst resplendent Gem
and radiant Aurora
of Great Brittaines
spacious Hemisphere,
thinke not this apparance
of mine to bee
other then naturall,
though contrarie to the course and order of
nature, my selfe who am nothing but a foggie
vapour and an obscure relique of darkenesse;
doe presume to approach so neare vnto your
Maiesticall Presence, when as all cloudie
fogges and obtenebrating Mistes are by the

glorious appearance of Rose-fingerd Aurora
abandoned and put to flight. Now as amongst
darke clouds and mistie conglomerations
diuers strange shapes are represented,
sometimes of Mountaines, sometimes of
men fighting in the ayre, sometimes of Ships,
sometimes of great beasts, as Mules, Camels,
and such like: So in my selfe and this
which I now offer vnto your most Excellent
Maiestie most of these shapes, nay euen all
of them and many more are most liuely and
perspicuously presented vnto your Gracious
eyes. If your Royall fingers will but deigne
to vnclose this poore Itinerarie, there shall
they discouer the Snowie tops of the Alpine
mountaines, the eminent skie-menacing
Turrets of many renowned Cities and magnificent
Monasteries, my selfe combating
with the Veneti
                  •
               n Iewes with my tongue,
the Wormacian Boore with mee with his
Halbert, yea (which is more) the shape of a
Camell your Maies
                  •
               ie may perceiue in my
poore selfe, who (as Camels vse in the Countryes

that breede them) am come home out
of forraine Regions, laden with outlandish
nouelties and farre-fetched commodities;
which not packed vp in Cordes and Canuas,
but bound vp in Paper and Veluet, I most
humbly present vnto your Maiesties Royall
hands; the glittering resplendencie of whose
fauour will adde such grace and lustre vnto
my silly Merchandise bought with the nimble
industrie of my legges, braine, and fingers,
that as my legges were indefatigably
current through those Kingdomes wherehence
my Ware is fetched; so my Ware it selfe
being the lawfull begotten issue of my legges,
may bee irrefragably current through those
Kingdomes whereof your Maiestie is iustly
stiled Queene; through that also where your
Maiestie first drew your vitall breath, and
all others where the name of Coryate the
Traueller and Odcombe his natalitiall Parish
shall be knowne to posteritie.
            
               DIXI.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE LADY ELIZABETH
HER GRACE IN THE
HOVSE OF THE LORD HARRINGTON
at Kew, the seuenth day of Aprill being
Sunday, about Noone.
            MOST Peerelesse
and Gracious
Princesse, the
true attractiue
Adamant of this
famous Iland, in
who sename, sexe,
and heroicall disposition
me thinkes I see our great Queene
ELIZABETH reuiued and resuscitated
vnto life from the very bowels of her graue:
Giue me leaue I most humbly beseech your

Grace as a poore Traueller out of the roundnesse
of my hart as the circumference, and the
soundnesse of the same as the center and
meditullium thereof, to present to your Graces
lily-white hands the Raw Trauels of
my Head and Toes, faithfully written by my
industrious Fingers as they were truely troden
by these laborious Feete of mine which
with all nimblenesse yeeld true obedience to
their commaunding head. Let not my Title
of Crudities (most Princely Lady) any
thing dismay your Grace, as if it were like
pot like potled, like lippes like lettice. For
the inuentorie of my Bookes freight being a
miscellanie of things of diuers kinds both in
prose and verse, will (I hope) giue your
Grace a full contentment, though the Title
thereof doth not seeme to promise so much.
Vouchsafe then I beseech your Grace to receiue
this leuidense, rough, scabrous, and vnplaned
work into your Graces smooth hands,
where I hope it will receiue a secure protection
against all the malignant bitings of virulent

tongues. And so with all lowlinesse
and submission of duetie, I most
humbly kisse your Graces
FOOTE.
            
            
               DIXI.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE DVKE OF YORKE
HIS GRACE AT SAINT IAMES
THE DAY BEFORESAID
about fiue of the Clocke in the
afternoone.
            MOst glittering Chrysolite
of our English
Diademe, in whose
little yet most louely,
Gracious, and elegant
body doe budde
most pregnant hopes
like faire blossomes of great fortunes and
greater vertues: Within whose velume
great Liuies prayses of Romes ancient
Worthies are inuolued and infolded. Loe,
I here present vnto your Grace the fruites of
my furious Trauels; which I therefore intitle

with such an epithete, because I performed
my iourney with great celeritie, compassed
& atchieued my dessignes with a kind of
fortune not much vnlike that of Caesar, Veni,
Vidi, Vici. I came to Venice, and
quickly tooke a suruey of the whole modell
of the Citie together with the most remarkable
matters thereof; and shortly after my
arriuall in ENGLAND I ouercame my
aduersaries of the Towne of Euill in my
natiue Countrey of Somerset, who thought
to haue suncke mee in a bargaine of Pilchards
as the wise men of Gotham once went
about to drowne an Eele. Vouchsafe with
grace and fauourable aspect, and with the
blandishments of your benigne nature to
ripen these my CRVDITIES, that beeing
distilled through the Limbecke of your
debonaire Grace, they may prooue comfortable,
medicinable, or any other good
thing else that tendeth to enable all those
generose Spirits that attend vpon your Gracious
person; my selfe in one onely straine of

ambition, and no more, differing from them
all, euen in this present suite that I make
vnto your Grace, namely that you would
bee pleased to dignifie and stile mee
with the Title of your Graces
Traueller in Ordinarie.
            
               DIXI.
            
         
         
            
            
            AN OTHER ORATION
MADE TO THE SAME THE
TWENTIETH OF MAY LAST
Past at Saint Iames, concerning the Election
and Installment of him into the thriseNoble
and illustrious order of the
Knights of the Garter.
            AS those representatiue
beastes
of Woode and
Stone carued by
the curious hand
of Daedaloꝰ statuaries,
and layd
vnder the magnificent
concamerations of Churches and
Palaces, doe seeme grieuously pressed and
crushed vnder that massie fabricke which is
imposed vpon them; or as that laborious

Porter, whose brawnie shoulders like a hard
paued Cawsie giue gentle passage to all ponderous
Trunkes and Cloke-bagges, doeth
groane vnder the presse of his cumbersome
carriage, and is forced to send foorth in
sweat the liquid superfluities of his porous
carkasse. So the poore carkasse of my crased
braine hauing lately disburdened it selfe of
the plumbeous weight of my elaborate Crudities,
doth now as it were groane vnder this
heauie and close-bound loade laide vpon it
by your Grace; bound not with Cordes or
Ropes, but with a Garter, that Royall
Garter which so decently and gracefully enuironeth
the Left Legge of your Right
Gracious Person. This Garter hauing
held the sinewes of my braines fast tyed, your
Graces commaund hath beene the launcing
instrument to make the bloud thereof, which
is my inuention, to spirt and spinne out in
these muddie streames; and this preponderating
burden hath squeezed out of mee poore
Coryate, as out of the Porters Corium,
               
these sweatie distillations of my fatigated
braines; which distillations I haue measured
out into three Bottles or Gallipots, and
for orders sake (because I am to speake of an
Order) haue thus ranked and collocated. In
the first shall bee put the Etymologie of the
most famigerated and farre decantated word
of Garter; In the second, the memorable
foundation of this magnificent Order; In the
third, the resplendent dignitie of the illustrious
Knights and companions of it. For
the Etymologie, I may fetch it out of the
French or out of the Greeke. In the French
(as those that are intelligent in the language
haue informed me) it may seeme to bee fetched
from the word Garroter, which is, to
fetter or manacle, emblematically implying
that it fettereth, chaineth, and linketh together
all the associates of it in loue amongst
themselues, and in loyaltie to their Prince.
In my second Etymologie borrowed from the
Greeke idiome, I may call it Garter, quasi
Carter, of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                signifying the head, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
to preserue; because that as an ordinarie
garter bound about the head of any plebeian
when he would giue his members repose, mitigateth
the ach of the head, and maketh
him sleepe in case and quiet; So this Regall
Garter making as it were a circle in the persons
of the circumstant noble Subiects that be
of this sublimious societie, doth euen inring,
colligate, and bind close the head of his most
Excellent Maiestie, and the temples of his
head, which are the Splendidious Prince his
Highnesse and your Gracious selfe, to giue
you all
—Tranquillam & placidam per membra quietem.
And thus haue I euacuated the first Bottle
of my distillation. In my second infusion I
promised the first institution and primarie
foundation of this nobilitated Societie, and
that was at the famous Citie of Burdeaux in
France by that most renowned King EDVVARD
the third, who hauing first trampled
vpon the French Floure de Luces with
the English Lyons, hath made euer since

the one to rampe and stampe, the other to bee
nourished and flourished in the same field or
Co
                  •
               te of Armes. The yeere was 1348. So
that it may for venerable antiquitie hold his
ranke aboue all the Orders of Christendome,
aboue that of the Annunciada of Sauoy, of
the Golden Fleece of Burgundie, of the Alcantares
or Calatrauaes of Spaine, or of that
of Saint Michael, or of the Holy Ghost in
France: And for that of Saint Michael
the reason is most euident and eminent, because
French Saint Michael doeth but on
foote like a Pedant trample vpon his Dragon.
But English Saint George doeth on
Horse-backe like a Caualier pessundate a
Dragon no lesse direfull then the other. And
this is the liquor of my second Bottle. For
my last infusion, it shall not neede any curious
sublimation or extraction, to make the
persume odoriferous. The whole Europaean
Territorie is abundantly possessed with the
renowne and Splendor of this Princely Order.
What Prince is so illustrious, what

Potentate so potent, what Monarch so highcrested,
that doeth not esteeme his Celsitude
conspicuously signified, his Maiestie Royally
dignified, and his Sublimitie gloriously magnified
by being condignely qualified with the
resplendent honour of the English Garter?
To be silent of the rest of the Heroical Nobilitie
of this our Iland that either haue bene
aunciently possessed, or bee now recently inuested
into it (betwixt whose persons and
their Order there is a reciprocall contribution
of honour and dignitie, they nobilitating
their Order, and their Order them) if nothing
else were added to make it transcendently
Noble, it had enough of this that
your Graces Princely Legge is inringed in
the Garter, your Honoured shoulders inuironed
with the Collar, and your Noble
breast condecorated with the rich Image of
worthy Saint George on Horsebacke. Vnto
which most magnificent societie though my
poore selfe can not giue a nights lodging to a
thought so ambitious as to aspire to; my trauelling

Legges being kept to their vocation
with Garters of an other kind, and my bitten
and beaten shoulders being destinated to
Collars of a different matter; yet haue I this
day shewed my dewe affection to doe seruice
to that Noble societie, and principally to
your thrise-noble Grace, as a beggarly Alchymist,
a fragrant Apothecarie, or an honest
Yeoman of the Bottles; all which Bottles
hauing now emptied, I will here stoppe both
them and mine owne speech, and conclude
with that Loyall, ancient, elegant, and to
this purpose pertinent apprecation,
Saint George for England, Saint
Denis for France, Sing Hony
soit qui mal y
pense.
            
            
               DIXI.
            
         
         
            
            
            AN ANSWERE TO THE
MOST SCANDALOVS, CONTVMELIOVS
AND HYBRISTICALL
Bill of IOSEPH STARRE of Euill in the Countie of
Somerset Linnen Draper, wholly conflated and compacted
of palpable Lies, deceitfull prestigiations,
iniurious calumniations, cluding cuasions,
and most fraudulent
tergiuersations.
            
               THE CONTENTS.
               My Answere of a certaine Bill exhibited
into the Chancerie against mee
shortly after my arriuall in England from
beyond the Seas, by Ioseph Starre of the
Towne of EVILL in the Countie of Somerset
Linnen Draper, whereby hee hoped either
to haue nullified or qualified the Debt
of a hundred markes due vnto mee from him

according to his Band vppon my returne
from Venice. This Answere being commaunded
by Authoritie to Print, I haue
thought good to insert it in this place, though
my Plaintife hath not as yet giuen me his
consent to publish the same, which Answere
followeth.
            
            
               MAy it Please your
Lordship to be aduertised
that my antagonist,
my crastie
and versute aduersarie
Ioseph Starre
hath composed such
a Bill as no Christian whatsoeuer (except
hee hath a very cauteriate conscience,
or hath beene brought vp amongst
the inhumane Garamants, the barbarous
Getes, the inciuill Gothes or Tartars)
would doe the like. For it is nothing
else but a cinnus, a rabble, a rhapsodie,

a miscellanie of diabolicall falsehoods.
Diabolicall I may well cal them,
because they proceede from the suggesting
instigations of that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that arch
lyar the diuell. Therefore to the ende I
may with the more perspicuitie & plainnesse
ouerthrow, pessundate, and annihilate
all these fained obiections, I hold it
expedient to answere each particular Sigillatim,
as they follow in order, and that
with as much Laconical breuitie as may
be, auoiding that Battalogia that he hath
vsed in his tedious Bill.
               
               Obserue Reader that because I could not
take occasion to bee so conceited in answering
the first part of his Bill, the matter containing
only a relation of the first originall bargaine
betwixt my aduersarie and my selfe; I
haue therefore excluded the former parts of
my Answere, and doe here expresse onely the
later part therof, as being a litle better handled
(according to the opinion of some critick)
then any part of the rest was, euen this.
               
                  
Well may I apply to STARRE Ciceroes
speech against Marcus Antonius, Miror
eum quorum facta imitetur, illorum exitus
non perhorrescere. I maruaile that
Starre is not afraid lest hee should make
such an end, that is, die such a death as
they do whose example in lying he imitateth.
He coaceruateth and conglomerateth
a meere farrago of lyes. Also hee
traduceth me about the smalnesse and
commonnesse of my Voyage, as hauing
beene out of England but fiue moneths.
Can he iustly call this a smaland cōmon
Voyage to passe almost two thousand
miles by land? to expose ones body to
such a world of iminent dangers both by
Sea and Land as I did? to passe those
stupendious mountaines of the snowie
Alpes? to dispatch my iourney with such
a compendious celeritie? to performe it
with such a dispendious disaduantage to
my estate? & after the consūmation of my
trauels to be thus opposed by a Vilipendious

Linnen Draper? to walke aboue
the clouds ouer hils that are at least seuen
miles high? For indeede so high is the
mountaine Senys I passed ouer, which
disterminateth Sauoy and Piemont: the
danger whereof is such, that if in some
places the traueller should but trip aside
in certaine narrow wayes that are scarce
a yard broad, he is precipitated into a very
Stygian Barathrum or Tartarean lake
sixe times deeper then Pauls tower is
high. Continually to stand in feare of
the Alpine cutthroates called the Bandits?
Being entred into Italy, to passe
throgh that carnificina, that excruciating
and excarnificating torture of the Spanish
Inquisition, which is more cruel then
Phalaris his brasen Bull, or the exquisitest
torturs that the Sicilian tyrants were
wont to inflict vpon offendors? These
dangers and many more I was exposed
vnto, and like to bee circumcised in Venice
amongst the Iewes for maintaining

the cause of my Sauiour and Redeemer
against their refractarie obstinacie, as
that Honourable and completly accomplished
Knight Sir Henry Wotton our
Kings Leager Ambassadour in Venice,
that was an eye witnes of the conflict betwixt
them and me, can testifie. At last
being as desirous to see my natiue countrey
as Vlysses after his ten yeares trauels
was to see his Ithaca, which is so deare vnto
me that I preferre the very smoake of
England before the fire of Italy, I walked
alone asoote with one onely paire of
shooes through many fierce and warlike
nations betwixt Venice & Flushing in
Zealand, hauing my throate like to bee
cutneere the Citie of Worms in Germanie,
and my body to bee turned into
wormes meate onely for pulling a poore
cluster of Grapes in a Vineyard. These
perils beeing considered I hope your
Lordship wil say I haue as hardly gotten
my money as poore laborious Brickmakers

eight pence a day for making Brick.
Wherefore most humbly beseeching
your good Lordship vpon the prostrate
knees of my heart to haue a Christian
commiseration of my estate that haue
vndergone such a multitude of difficulties
and calamities for the getting of this
little wages (little I may well call it in respect
of my great trauell) and to exclude
mine aduersarie out fo your Court of
Chancerie, that by the ordinarie course
of the Common-law I may recouer my
money, which I hope no man in the
Christian world (except he be partiall)
but will say I haue well deserued.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
Dominationis tu
                        •
                     e humillimus supplicissimus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Orator
                  
                     Thomas Coryatus Peregrinans.
                  Your Lordships most humble Orator
                  
                     Thomas Coryate the Traueller.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            AN INTRODVCTION
TO THE ORATIONS ENSVING,
VVHEREIN IS DECLAred
the occasion of the first making
of the said Orations.
            IT hapned in the yeare 1606. that the
Church stocke of my natalitiall Parish
of Odcombe being exhausted & spent
sauing sixteene shillings, some of my
friends of the Parish, amongst the rest
the Church wardens sollicited me to set abroach my wits,
and inuent some conceited and plausible matter, to the
end to draw some great company of good fellowes together
for the benefit of our Church of Odcombe, seeing
they knew that I was well acquainted in the countrye.
Hereupon I resolued to muster vp out of the Parish one
hundred choise and ablemen, as were fit to beare armes
in the field, and by a time limited, euen the VVhitsonday
following about sixe of the clocke in the morning appointed
them to meete me at Odcombe Crosse. VVhich

they did according to my appointment, being furnished
with conuenient munition for a kinde of warfare. For
some of them had muskets, others Caliuers, some Partizans,
some Halberts, with diuersity of other weapons.
Likewise we had good Martiall Musicke and military
officers. I my selfe being their Captaine, was mounted
vpon a goodly milk-white steed, vnto whom that verse
of Virgil which he made vpon Queene Didoes horse,
might be well applied.
Stat Sonipes, ac frae na ferox Spumantia mandit.
And hauing put my whole centurie into a conuenient order,
marched forward with them towards the towne of
Euill three miles distant from Odcombe, being met by
the way by the Oppidanes of Euill, that consisted of two
cohorts, one Masculine & another Faeminine, which incountred
vs like a company of Amazones, & aftert here
had bene some two or three volleyes of shot discharged
on both sides with a prettie kinde of velitation or light
skirmish, we descended a hill called Henford,
and entred the towne. In the market place whereof nere
to the Crosse, wee had one skirmish more, but vmbraticall
and imaginarie. Then I ascended an eminent
and conspicious place about the Crosse, where
was erected a kind of Canopy, vnder the which I aduanded
my selfe alone, and after the warlike Musicke was
ended, hauing two or three times brandished my nakedsword,
I spake this Oration following to the Euillians,
               
and at the least two thousand people more, that then
flocked together to the towne of Euill from many parishes
of the countrie round about.
            
               FRiends and Confoederates,
if ye maruaile for
what cause we Odcombians
onely of all your
other neighbours whatsoeuer
ye haue bordering
about your towne,
doe no lesse valiantly
then volunta
                     •
                  ly present our selues in this military
manner, according to the forme of martiall
discipline before the face of your whole towne,
and your fraternities: I will alledge two causes
why ye ought to pardon our boldnesse in this
behalfe. First, because I that am chosen to be their
Generall Captaine, haue euer from mine infancy
borne that loue to your towne, that I thought
good at this present to make an apparant demonstration
thereof by some extraordinary action;
being also the principall animator of my whole
band of soldiers to ioyne their hands, their hearts
and their purses with me for the accomplishment
of this my resolued proiect. Secondly, because
although we are come vnto you with martiall

instruments, yet not with a martiall resolution
to inuade the precincts of your incorporation
by force of armes, to brandish our glittering
and refulgent swords after a terrible and warlike
sort against you, to bereaue you of your ancient
priuiledges and immunities, to ransacke your
houses and your goods, to subuert your whole
estates, to lade our selues with the rich spoyles of
conquered enemies, to put some as obstinate and
stiffe-necked rebels to the furious and irrelenting
di
                     •
                  t of our swords, to embrace others with the
ar...es of mercy that shall humbly submit themselues
into our hands, and after to carry them away
into most lamentable captiuity. These matters
(deare Consederates) we neuer as much as
harboured in our thoughts; much lesse intended
to put any such hostility in execution. But verily
we are come vnto you for a contrary purpose,
namely, to offer our selues euen of our owne accords
vnto you in a league of friendship, yea such
a league, the like whereof made betwixt vs Odcombians
and you Euillians, neither antiquity hath
recorded, nor the time wherein wee liue hath
seene, nor succeeding ages could haue hoped for,
had not we Odcombians at this present out of the
sincere affection we beare you, sued vnto you for
this confederacy. Moreouer we are come vnto
you for another cause, which is very honest and

religious: for we determine to spend our money
with you for the benefit of your Church, hoping
yea most earnestly crauing to receiue the like curtesie
againe at your hands for our Church of Odcombe.
But before I vse any further speeches vnto
you concerning the confirming of this foresaid
league of friendship, I resolue, by way of preuention,
or preoccupation, to communicate my slender
opinion into you concerning the lawfull
vse of that, for the which we are now assembled,
I meane Church ales; least any captious and carping
wits should deem that we haue intruded our
selues into your liberties, as a very disorderly and
confused crew, rather to giue some cause of offence,
then to benefit your Church. Therefore
to the end I may illustrate this present matter by
relating examples of solemnities vsed in ancient
ages, vnto some whereof our Church-ales may
(in my opinion) be very fitly compared, I will
exemplyfie some few. The ancients celebrated solemne
meetings at certaine times of the yeare for
their pastimes and recreations, as the Romanes
had their seueralThese feasts are treated of at large by su
                        •
                     
                     drie ancient Romane writers as Liuie, Varro, Macrebius, Gellius, &c. feasts, whereof some were called
Bacchanalia or Dionysia, some Saturnalia, some Agonalia,
some Lupercalia, & some others Amberualia,
with innumerable more that were ordained for
sūdrie purposes. Likewise the Atheniās had their

                     
                        
                           •
                        ocrales thereof wrote an Oration. 
                  Panathenea, & their Thesmophoria. The Thebans

theirXenop.histo.Graca.i.b.5. 
                  Aphrodisia, and their Trietericall Orgia celebrated
euery third yeare vpon Cithaeron a mountaine
of Boeotia. The Corinthians theirXmop.in orat.de A
                        •
                     esilao.
                  Hyacinthia.
The Lacedemonians theirXenop histo G
                        •
                      act. lib.5.Plut.in Lyeur. 
                  Phiditia, inuented
by their famous lawgiuer Lycurgus, and
so called from the Greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which signifieth
parsimonie, because those feastes exhibited a
very true spectacle of sobriety, and frugality. Finally
the ancient Christians which liued about
the beginning of the Primitiue Church had their
feasts of charity, which they called in GreekEpist.tude. Apustult.Tertull.in Apolog
                        •
                     tico. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
because they were the verie meanes to confirme
mutuall amitie, and Christian charity betwixt
friends and friends. I humbly craue pardon for
mine errour (if at the least l erre) in saying that
these Church ales which we vse now in England
are very like to those 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of the ancient Christians,
if they are rightly and religiously vsed, as they
ought to be without any outragious enoimities.
Truly I thinke they are: my reason is, because
these are feasts of charity, as those were, and they
were instituted by our anciēt progenitors for many
hundred years ago for these two causes of especially
First for the breeding of loue betwixt neighbors,
& secondly for the raising of a stocke for the
supporting and maintenance of our Church, &
the Church affairs: so that I do most confidently
beleeue that the good & religious vse of Churchales

may be well retained, if the abuses thereof be
vtterly banished, and exterminated out of a Christian
Commonwealth, as drunkennesse, gluttonie,
swearing, lasciuiousnesse, with many more,
which indeed I must needs confesse seeme to be
the inseparable accidents, and indiuiduall adiuncts
of Church-ales. But ought the vse of
Church-ales, which were first destinated for a religious
intent, to be absolutely exti
                     •
                  pated, because
now and then some few abuses creepe into ciuill
and sober societies, by the meanes of some dissolute,
rusticall, and ill-nurtured pessants? Surely
no. Neither ought they which doe so greatly dislike
the lawfull vse of Church-ales soberly managed
for the benefit of a stocke-spent Church,
incurre lesse reprehension, then that furious king
of ThraceHom.Ilia.6.
                  Lycurgus, who because many of his
subiects were often times drunke with the wine
that came from plentifull vineyards of his kingdome,
in his angrie passion, caused all the vines of
Thrace to be rooted vp
                     •
                   an action verily most indiscreet
and inconsiderate. For it behooued him
rather to haue rooted away the abuse, I meane the
drunkennesse of his subiects, then to abolish
both the vse and the abuse cleane together. Therfore
let vs, at this our present meeting, (fellow
souldiers) imitate the feasts of those ancient and
religious Christians, not those of the prophane

and irreligious Gentiles, wherein were exhibited
many lasciuious spectacles, that as certain angling
hookes yeelded alluring baites to draw the
spectators to diuers vanities, and most inciuill
outrage: but we Christians ought at our solemnities
to expresse a very patterne of modesty, and
temperance, yet so intermingled and seasoned Atticis
leporibus, that is, with the sauory salt of pleasant
conceits, well beseeming both the time, the
place, and the persons, that they may neither sauour
of a rude scurrility on the one side, nor of a
too Cynicall austeritie on the other side, but keepe
the golden meane, which vertue betwixt both extremes
we call in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Latine vrbanitas,
and in our mother English tongue, ciuility.
Now for as much as this sociable & neighborly
meeting, which doth tend to the aduancement
of our Churches wealth, cannot be performed
without some expences of mony, giue me leaue I
pray you to make some short digression from my
maine matter, to the end to animate you to spend
your money for so laudable a purpose. Be not I
beseech you slaues to your money, which is but
a base excrement digged out of the very bowels
of the earth. Worship not so dumbe an image,
as a litle peece of stamped gold, or siluer. For truly
I may very fitly terme those euen worshippers
of their money, out of whose purses a man shall

with greater difficulty draw a litle peece of coine,
althogh it be for the benefit of their country, the
credi
                     •
                   of themselues, the good of their soules, and
the wealth of their Church, then Hercules club
out of his hands. Therefore set a broach your pelse
at so opportune a time as this is; howbeit I exhort
you not to prodigality, which is an extreme vice,
but to frugall and moderate expences for the aduantage
of your Church. Remember that golden
sentence of the sweetest Philosopher that euer
drew vitall breath,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     the place of a Captaine: to that I deriue the word Ducall not from Dux, which signifieth a Duke, that is, a supreme or soueraigne Lord of a Signiorie or free State, as the Duke of Florence, the Duke of Saxony &c.f For the name of Duke I did not challenge it my selfe, in my souiall merriments, although a worshipfull friend of mine graced me with the religious title of the great Duke of Charity
                        •
                      but more properly frō 
                     Dux which signifieth a Captaine in warre which word. commeth from Duke, that signifieth to lead an armie or a band of soulcicis. 
                  Plato, that We are not borne for
our selues onely, but that our countrie doth challenge one
part of our birth, our parents another, and our friends
the third.
               
               Taxe mee not, Confederates, of arrogancy,
though I doe according as the nature of my place
and office doth require. For euen as it behoueth euery
prouident and prudent Captaine to direct &
instruct his souldiers in those things that are to be
done, and to forbid them those things that are
not to be done: so I by vertue of my * Ducal authority,
which is a dignitie that I haue receiued
at this time, not by way of vsurpation, but by
imposition, (for by the generall consent and suffrages
of you all it was imposed vpon me) by vertuel
say of my Ducall authority I command you
some things, and prohibit you some other things.
The things that I command you are these. First a

mutuall obliuion of all iniuries whatsoeuer, euen
from the beginning of the world till this present
day, (if at the least any haue bene offered betwixt
vs Odcombians and you Euillians) according to the
imitation of that memorableValer. Max.li. 4. verum memorabilium Tul. in I. Philippica. Xenop. histor. Graca. 3. lib.7. lust.lib.5. Diodorus Siculus lib.14. historica Bibliotheca. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of the Athenians,
that is, an obliuion of wrongs, which
was established by their valiant Captaine Thrasibulus,
after the bloodie gouernment of the thirtie
tyrants (who had most grieuously dilaniated
the whole State with very horrible massacres)
was abrogated and defaced out of the Commonwealth
of Athens. Secondly, friendly, louing,
and harmelesse societie, ioyned with ciuill and
discreet merriments fit for this flourishing time
of the yeare. Thirdly, a cheerfull spending of
your mony without any base whinching or murmuring,
for the emolument of your Church. The
things that I prohibite you are these. Drunkennesse,
swearing, brawling, picking of quarrels,
lasciuious & obscoene communicatiō. For (according
to Menanders speech) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ,
that is, euill words corrupt manners. Finally, I
forbid you to commit any enormous outrage,
whereby we should scandalize our credit, and
make our selues infamous in our country. For
these foresaid matters beseeme rather the wanton
feasts of the goddesseAug.de Ciuit.Dei. 
                  Flora, or god Bacchus the
patron of drunkards, which were celebrated amongst

the barbarous Paynims, then the sober
solemnities of godly and religious Christians.
               But whereas at the beginning of my Oration
I called you Confederates, (which word signifyeth
those that are vnited and combined together
in a league of friendship) not because ye are so already,
but for that I hope yee will be so: I hold it
expedient to vnfolde vnto you the ceremonies
which were heretofore obserued in ancient 
                     ••
                  
at the making of leagues, and to declare the custome
which I would haue you now vse touching
this present league betweene vs. It was the
custome of the ancient Romanes (asDeca
                        •
                     
                   
                  Liuie their
most peerelesse and incomparable Historiographer
doth' record) that a certaine Herauld of
armes should at the Kings commandement take
an hearbe in his hand, and strike an Hog with a
flint stone, pronouncing these words. Sic â loue
feriatur is, qui sanctum hoc fregerit foedus, vt ego hunc
porcum ferio: that is, I pray that lupiter may so strike
him that shall violate this holy league, as I now strike
this present Hogge. But Polybius the Arcadian historian
affirmeth in his third booke of Histories,
where he treateth of a league that was concluded
betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians,
that there was another rite. For he saith thus. As
soone as the conditions of the league were agreed
on betwixt the parties, a certaine herauld of arms

took a stone in his hand, and vttered these words:
If I make this league without any guile or deceit,
I pray the goddes to giue mee most happie
successe in my affaires. But if I doe, or as
much as thinke otherwise then according to
the couenants of the league, I wish that all the
rest being saued, I onely may perish, euen as
this stone shall by and by fall out of my handes:
and there withall hee presently flung away the
stone. As for thePolydorios Virgilius lib.3. ca.15.de rerum inuentoribus. Arabians, whensoeuer they
contracted confederacy with any forraine nation,
one standing in the middest betwixt both
the Ambassadors, strooke with a certaine sharpe
stone the palmes of the handes of them that
were to make the league, euen about their greater
fingers, & incontinently taking a peece of flocks
out of the garments of both the Ambassadors,
annoynted seuen stones that were put in the
middest of them, with the bloud that issued out
of their hands; and all the while they were occupied
about this ceremonie, they inuocated Dionysius
and Vrania. This being done, hee that was
the mediator of making the league betwixt the
friends, ingaged his credit, as suertie for the stranger:
which league they also thought good to obserue
that contracted friendship and familiaritie
together. These and such like sundrie formes of
making leagues there were heretofore amongest

the ancient Pagans, according to their seueral and
distinct nations. But we setting aside these superstitious
rites, as being for many ages past growen
stale and out of date, will vnite our selues in the
league of loue, especially for this time, onely by
the ioyning of our bands together, a token very
sufficient to ratifie an euerlasting and inuiolable
vnion betwixt vs.Erosmu in Adagio Ch
                        ••
                     ad. I. Let vs not imitate the Foedifrage
(that is the league-breaking) Carthaginians,
who for their most execrable infidelity haue bene
branded by many classicall historiographers with
the infamous marke of eternall dishonour, and
infamie; Insomuch that Punica fides, that is, the
faith of the Carthaginians, is prouerbially vsed for
all imaginable treachery, and disloyalty. But rather le
                     •
                  
vs in our thoughts, in our words, and in
our deeds, firmly and sincerely establish this present
league not onely we that are here present during
our liues, but also posterity for many succeeding
genera
                     •
                   ions after vs, to whom let vs now
cōlecrate the memory hereof. But what mean I to
expatiate so far beyond the bounds of the time I
limited myself? wel then I wil recall my selfe, and
now at length draw togither the sailes of this my
rude & inelegant Oration. For I perceiue that I do
euen cloy your eares with such an heap of cōfused
words. Wherfore sūmarily to shut vp al in a word,
I most heartily desire you all to take in good part

this my naked and slender Oration, considering
that I am no professed Orator, nor an affected
Rhetorician, to whom it belonges to paint out
his speeches with filed phrases, curious circumquaques,
and rhetoricall insinuations; but I am
rather a man of armes, and a souldier. Therefore
ye ought to expect the lesse at my hands. Neuerthelesse
if in this my speech I haue deliuered
any documents that are worthy
the obseruation, put them I
pray you in execution with
all alacritie.
               
                  DIXI.
               
            
            
               
               THIS ORATION FOLlowing
I pronounced at Odcombe to
the Euillians when they came home to vs.
               DEere Associates, we entertaine
you with a whole
volley of most heartie
thankes, partly for the
bountifull and magnificent
entertainment yee
lately affoorded vs at
your towne, and partly
for that yee haue satisfied
our expectation by reuifiting vs according to
your faithfull promise, for the reliefe of our
Church. Truly we ingenuously confesse that
yee Euillians haue iustly merited our euerlasting
loue, in that ye being oppidanes (that is, townesmen)At the pronouncing of this word, a volley of shot was discharged by twenty Mus
                        •
                      eters. borne, brought vp, and dwelling in a rich,
populous, and fertile towne, dotated with ancient
charters and priuiledges, yea liuing in so fat a

soyle, that it doth euen flow with milke and honey,
doe vouchsafe vs your poore confederates
the Odcombians of this fauour, as to visite vs with
such a troope of the most selected persons of your
towne; vs I say the Odcombians, being a rurall and
mountanous people, dwelling vpon a billy and
sterill countrie, and wanting many comfortable
helpes of life, which both Nature and Art haue
most abundantly powred out vpon you. Neuerthelesse
because it shall not be thought that I de
                     •
                  
rog
                     •
                  te too much from our selues by attributing
so much vnto you, pardon me I pray you though
I speake somewhat in commēdations of this little
parish Odcombe being my natiue soyle, the
smoake whereof (according as another Au bor
saith of a mans natiue countrey) is more deere
vnto me, then the fire of a forraine place: and the
rather I am induced to digresse somchin; into the
praise hereof, because yee shall haue the lesse occasion
to repent for the league yee haue contracted
with vs, as being no perfidious and disloyall
slaues, but such as will, while our breath doth
last, shew our selues most faithfull and sincere
friends to those whom wee haue once entertained
in our friendship.
                     Lucian in his Treatise intituled Encomi
                           •
                         patriae, whose words are these 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      that is, that smoake of a mans owne countrie it brightet then the fire of an other country. Therefore to deriue my
beginning euen from that which is the necessariest
thing that man hath in this life, without the
which it is impossible for him to breath as much as

one minute of an hower, I meane the ayre, nature
the best perfectresse of things hath priuiledged
this rien soyle of Odcombe with so great a prerogatiue
of a most wholsome and pleasant ayre,
that in that part of happinesse we hold our selues
nothing inferior to any towne or parish whatsoeuer
in the whole Shirewe dwel in, nay we attribute
so much to the excellēt subtiltie of our piercing
Odcombian ayre, as the PoetIn Epistola ad Mec
                        •
                     
                   
                  Horace did to
the aire of Baiae a famous maritime town of Campaniain
in Italy, whereof he saith thus,
Nullus in orbe locus Baiis praelucet amoenis.
That is, no place whatsoeuer within the whole
circumference of the earth doth surpasse pleasant
Baiae for the incomparable temperature of the
ayre. Neither doe we Odcombians sticke to affirme
that our ayre is as sweete as that of the royall Citie
Madril in Spayne, Brixinia in the Earldome
of Tyrol, Serauallum in Italy, Ormus in Persia,
Alexandria in Egypt, and finally Croton in
Magna Grecia: all which Cities are most highly
extolled both by the ancient and moderne Geographers
for the passing amoenitie of their ayre.
The second thing which doth euen nobilitate
our little parish (being also such a speciall accident
for the sustentation of mans life, that it is
impossible for man, especially in this part of
Europe, to liue well without it) is our wooll,

which is so famous for the singular finenesse
thereof, that wedare boldly auouch, that no place
whatsoeuer in England yeeldeth better sauing
onelyCambden in Herefordthite Lemster in Hereford-shire. Neither surely
is this a thing of the least importāce to ennoble
our Parish. For euen asStephanus de vrbibus. Pompo. Mela.lib.
                        •
                     . Strabo vulgo Melazo. 
                  Miletus which was in
times past the verie Queene of the Cities of Ionia
in Greece, and the mother of almost 
                     •
                  ou
                     •
                  escore
Colonies, grew no lesse famous for the singularity
of her wooll, which was distracted into diuers regions
& quarters of the world, then for her pleasant
situation, and the statelinesse of her sumptuous
buildings: So Odcombe (not that I make
any iust comparison betwixt the glorious citie
of Miletus and our little parish, being
but as it were an handfull in respect thereof)
ought to be much the better regarded, by reason
of so worthy an helpe that it ministreth to couer
mans nakednesse. The third is the conspicuous
eminencie of our Church, being erected vpon so
loftie a place, that it ouerprieth and ouertoppeth
the whole countrie round about it; euen as
that notable AEgyptian watch tower calledPlinius lib.2.cap.85. 
                  Pharos
neere to Alexandria, which was built by Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus vpon so eminent an hill, that
it ouerlooked the whole circum
                     •
                  acent countrey.
And truly this our Church deserueth commendation
in consideration both of the nobility of

the founder, being one Moritonius an Earle of
Normandie, that came into this land (as I haue
heard) with William the Conqueror; and also of
the antiquitie. For it is at the least fiue hundred
yeares agoe since the first foundation thereof was
laid. The fourth is the varietie of our sweet and
wholsome springs, distributed by the prouident
artifice of nature into sundrie conuenient places
of our parish, as well for the delight as the vtility
of our inhabitants, and endued with that orient
and Cristalline cleerenesse, together with the
singular effects most inseparably therunto adioyned,
that we may presume to compare them with
whatsoeuer fountains are reputed the excellentest
in our whole countrey. The fift and last is
that which shall (I hope) encourage you to perseuere
most constantly in your league, namely,
our vnity & perfect loue amongst our selues; for
we all from the verie highest to the lowest are
most firmly knit togither in an indissoluble knot
of friendship. It fareth not with vs as it dothoftentimes
with citizens and townsmen. For they
are eftsoones so inraged and inflamed with the
burning 7 eale of ambition, that they foster many
turbulent factions, and oppose themselues in
such virulent and hostile manner against each other,
that now and then there fall out most grieuous
broyles and mutinies betwixt them, whereby

the strength of their societies is the sooner
weakened and dissolued: but wee Odcombians
conioyne our selues together in one, euen as the
members in mans bodie without any emulation,
or repining at each others prosperous estate,
and dispose our affections as a well-tuned
harmonie, that they neuer suffer any iatring
discord. So that by this sympathie of our
neighbourly loue wee waxe the stronger, and
become euen inexpugnable to our enemies, if
at the least wee haue any. Heerein wee follow
the wise counsaile of that sage ScythianPlutar
                        •
                     bus: 
                  Scylurus,
who being on his death bed called to him
all his sonnes, which were in number fourescore,
to all whom seuerally one after another
bee deliuered a sheafe of arrowes bound vp together,
commaunding them to breake those
arrowes as they were so bound; they tried, but
were not able to doe it. Whereupon hee tooke
the sheafe againe into his owne handes, and
hauing loosed the bond, hee easily brake all
those shaftes being sundred one from another,
which hee could not doe, when they were
bound together. By which token hee intimated
to them that they should bee strong and inuincible,
as long as they perseuered in the
bond of vnitie, but should quickly come to
vtter ruine and destruction, if by their priuate

dissentions they were diuided asunder. Therefore,
louing Confederates, imitate vs Odcombians
in this our vnitie, so that not onely yee
your selues may cherish and embrace mutuall
loue amongest your selues, but also that yee
and wee ioyntly together may expresse such
sinceritie of friendshippe, by reason of this late
league confirmed betwixt vs, that wee may
bee as it were one fraternitie, one neighbourhoode.
               Now if any shall reprehend mee of partialitie,
for attributing so much to my natiue
countrey, which seemeth indeede in outward
shewe but a verie obscure and ignoble place:
I heartily craue pardon for my presumption
in this behalfe, being by so much the more
pardonable, by how much the lesse I did euer illustrate
my countrey with any condigne prayses
heretofore in all my life till this present time.
Desiring my countrey-men also the Odcombians
to take this my present speech as a sufficient
satisfaction and recompence in liew of my
long silence of Odcombe, for whose good and
saferie, I hope I shall bee as readie to expose
my bodie to any perils, (if opportunitie shall
so require) yea, (which is more) to powre
out my deerest vitall bloud, as euer was
noble
                     
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     lirus lib.2.sectio.5.
                  Codrus for his Countrey of Athens,

                  Liuius Deca.
                  Marcus Curtius for Rome, or the famous Ladie Androclea for Thebes..
                  Pausanias lib. 9. Boeticorum.
               
               As concerning the entertainment which ye expect
at our hands, pardon vs we pray you, though
we requite you not with a correspondent proportion
both in manner and matter like vnto yours.
For we want those meanes to expresse our bountie
towards you, as yee oppidanes are plentifully
furnished with all. But this wee will assure you,
that the defect of your entertainment shall bee
most abundantly supplied with the integrity of
our heartie loue and affection. Truly wee haue
neither Bulles, nor Beares, nor Apes that are wont
sometimes to be beaten vpon skittish iades, nor
any such things to shew you, for the sight wherof
together with the most peeuish pastimes that
they yeeld to their spectators, many men are oftē
times drawen to vndertake long and chargeable
iournies: but in steed thereof we shew you our
men, that like valiant Martialists present them;
selues vnto you with their warlike munition,
some with partizans, some with those remorselesse
and mercilesse instruments which were for
almost seuen score yeares agoe inuented by a certainePolydor. Virgil.&c. Germane as a pernicious bane of many
millions of worthy men, I meane Muskets and
Caliuers; and some other with swords, with all
which weapons we Odcombians can (if neede requireth)

maintaine right, and repulse wrong: but
these instruments which were made for the effusion
of bloud, we like peaceable men lay aside at
the entertaining of you, and with our Laurell
branches in our hands, which are the true ensignes
of peace, most effectionately ambrace
you as our deere friends.
               But seeing I perceiue that the time doth impose
silence vpon me, I will breake off further circumstances,
which doe breed a tedious wearisomenesse
to the eares of the hearers: and finally conclude
my speech with this request, namely to intreate
you all, and that most instantly, that yee
would as louingly accept of this rurall entertainment,
which our parish shal now yeeld you, as of
luxurious and Epicurious delicacy, which Cities
and townes doe oftentimes affoord their guestes;
seeing kinde entertainment ought not so much
to be measured by the curiositie of delicious
cates, as by the vnfained welcome and
entire beneuolence of the inuiting friends.
               
                  DIXI.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            AT the conclusion and vpshot of this
Booke, let mee a little aduertise
thee (gentle Reader) of a Booke
lately Printed in huggermugger, intituled
The Odcombian banquet. And I am the
rather induced to make mention of it, because
it doth not a litle concerne my credit to cleere
my selfe of two very scandalous imputation
laide vpon me by that virulent and rancorous
pessant, some base lurking pedanticall tenebricous
Lucifuga that set forth the booke.
Wherof the first is the Motto in the first leafe
of the booke. A sinus portans mysteria. The
other in the end of the booke, euen in his Nouerint
vniuersi, viz. That one that intended
to epitomize it, affirmed hee could not

melt out of the whole lumpe of my Volume so
much matter worthy the reading as would fil
foure pages. For the first I will tell thee the
originall wherehence it sprang. It hapned
that after I had presented my Booke at Royston
to the King, and returned backe to London
for Bookes to present to Noblemen of
the Court, I did determine for conceite sake,
and to minister occasion of merriment to the
King, to get me an Asse to carie my Bookes,
with this Latine inscription in faire Capitall
Romane Letters vpon that which should
haue contained them, Asinus portans mysteria;
being indeede taken out of Alciats
Emblemes, and spoken of an Asse that caried
the Image of the goddesse Isis. But heere
the diuulger of the foresaid Odcombian
Banquet most sinisterly and malignantly
applied it (as all the Readers doe interprete
it) to my selfe, and thereby very peruersly
wrested it from that allusion which I intended.
As for the second imputation contained
in his Nouerint vniuersi, it farre exceeded

the first in spite full bitternesse. For whereas
he writeth that hee could not melt out of the
whole lumpe of my Booke so much matter
worthy the reading as would fill foure pages,
I will boldly affirme for the better iustification
of my Obseruations, and by way of opposition
against the malicious censure of that hypercriticall
Momus, that of the sixe hundred
fiftie and foure pages (for indeede so many
are in the booke) he shall find at the least fiue
hundred worthy the reading, especially in my
descriptions of these Cities, Paris, Lyons,
Milan, Padua, Venice, Verona, Brixia,
Bergomo, Zurich, both the `Badens, Basil,
Strasbourg, Heidelberg, Spira, Wormes,
Mentz, Franckeford, Colen, &c. This also
I will further say for the confirmation of
the sufficiencie of my historicall notes, (seeing
they are so seuerely chastised by the censorious
rod of this maleuolent traducer, that
biteth my worke with his Theonine teeth)
and yet without any vaine glorious ostentation:
that let him or any other whatsoeuer in

our whole Kingdome of Great Brittaine,
shew both larger Annotations for quantitie,
and better for qualitie (absic dicto inuidia)
gathered in fiue moneths Trauels by any
English man since the incarnation of Christ, I
will be rather contented to consecrate all the
Bookes that remaine now in my hands either
to god Vulcan or goddesse Thetis, then
to present one more to any Gentleman that
fauours wit and learning. Therefore let
this Coryatomastix Zoilus barke at mee
as long as he list, swell with enuie as bigge as
the AEsopical Toade, and shoote all his darts
of malignitie against me; I oppose this double
thield stronger then the seuen fold Target
of Aiax in Ouid, for my securitie and defence
against him, first that it hath pleased the best
of the Kingdome euen from the Kings owne
person with all those sacred members of the
Royall family, and many Noble personages
of the best note of our land, as well as the
Lords of the Priuie Counsell, as other generous
spirits of great eminencie, not onely to

affoord gracious entertainment to my booke,
but also with their courteous approbation and
candid censure to thinke well of my labours.
Secondly, that my vnparalled friend, that
voluble linguist & sound Scholler M. Laurence
Whitaker, who (I thinke) doth as
farre excell in learning my antagonist the
Author of the Nouerinti vniuersi, as a
rose doth a nettle in sweetnesse, or a Pearle
a Pebble-stone in price, hath vouchsafed to
confirme the authoritie of my booke (hauing
yeelded me that fauourable and patient attention
to heare me reade ouer the whole before
it came to the Presse) with his no lesse
learning then elegant Elogie that preceedeth
my owne Obseruations. But to conclude this
matter of my malicious enemie, against the
violent stroake of whose base wrongs my innocencie
and integritie will like a brasen wal
defend me, I wish the same of them that an
ancient Poet did of the bitter Poet Archi
lochus;

                  Vtque repertori nocuit pugnacis Iambi,
                  Sic sit in exitium lingua proterua tuum.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   