
      
         
            
            
            THE ODCOMBIAN BANQVET:
            Dished foorth
BY
THOMAS THE CORIAT, AND Serued in by a number of Noble Wits in prayse of his CRVDITIES and CRAMBE too.
            
            ASINVS
PORTANS
MYSTERIA.
            Imprinted for Thomas Thorp.
            
            1611.
         
         
            
            Anagramma.
            Thomas Coriatus.
            Homo Cristatus.
            
               THy mother towne that bred thee in her wombe,
               Hath for thine euen head, found out an Od-combe.
               
            
         
         
            
            Mr. LAVRENCE VVHITAkers Elogie of the Booke.
            
            
               THis Epistle ensuing was written by my deare frind M. Lawrence Whitaker to a learned neighbour of mine in the towne of Euill, one M. Iohn Seward a reuerend Preacher, as his censure or Elogie of my Booke, to the end the sayd M. Seward might include it in a letter that he wrote to one Doctor Mocket, Chaplaine to the Bishop of London that then was, for obtaining his approbation that my Booke might bee printed. Therefore seeing it is a witty and elegant Epistle, I haue thought good to insert it in this place, and to prefixe it immediatly before my Booke, though the Author thereof bee disposed in some places to be merry with me.
            
            
               SIR,
            
            I Haue with some difficulty at length traced ouer the high Alpes of this loftie Work of that worthy Orator, Traueller, and Historiographer, M. Thomas Coryat: In which long iourney though I haue met with many a rough and rockie passage, yet I haue beene so eased



with the delight of many smooth and leuell allies of his owne pleasant inuention, that they haue been to mee in stead of an Alpine chaire to carry mee at case ouer the difficult and inuious precipices. Shall I commend the worke vnto you? Shall I vse any reasons to presse, and to proue the fitnesse of it for the Presse? No, in stead of good iuyce to giue it a sweete relish, I should presse out tarte ver-iuyce to giue it a distast, and a suspicion of defect, as if it had crackes and flawes in it, that needed to be playstered vp with the mortar of commendation. All I will say of it, shal be this: it is a garment of many colours so curiously and gracefully intermixed; It is a garden of faire flowers, so pleasantly planted and ordered; it is a ship of rare out-landish commodities, that hath landing, yea and ballasse of such worth and price, that no disgrace can it bee to it, though in this garment were found some rent, in this garden some weeds, in this ship some trash. I will say of the Author no worse then Horace saith of Homer, 
               
                  — Sic veris falsa remiseet,
                  Primo ne medium, medio ne discrepet imum.
                
What said I? Veris falsa? Nay more, sacra profanis, lascina modestis, ludicra serijs: Nay, I will say with Ouid, that there bee in it, 

                  Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                No Apothecary could haue obserued a more iudicious



symmetry in the mixture of his potions and electuaries; no Cooke in the decent composition of his sallets or stewed brothes. Nay both symmetry and mixture is heere such, that though I said I would not commend the worke; yet I cannot hold, but for the one and the other, I must say as Horace saith, hee is. 

                  Primus ad extremum similis sibi —
                
And againe 

                  Omne tulit punctum, &c. —
                  Lectorem delectando, pariter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      monendo.
               
            
            How strongly hath hee fortified his booke with many a fortresse and Citadel? How loftily hath hee adorned it with many a high tower and steeple? Nay, how richly and pompously hath hee set out all the Countries he hath passed through (beeing, as his title speaketh, in number seuen, equall with the wonders of the world, the Wise men of Greece, and the mouthes of the monster-breeding Nile) hauing allowed to euery one of them, a hundred and odde Pages to attend them; nay for euery mile almost seuen lines to describe it, as by his exact Arithmeticke hee can make it appeare to you? To conclude, if the Pearle of the Netherlands Lipsius were liuing, I know hee would not thinke me too bold, if I gaue of these Monita & exempla Hodaporetica, the same censure, that the Regius & Apostolicus Censor doth



of his Monita & exempla Politica; 
                     〈◊〉
                   ea pralo digna non 
                     〈◊〉
                  , cum erudita sint, cum 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   lectorem mirifice oblectent, cum ad illustrationem antiquitatum multùm conferant, & nihil contineant, quod. Catholica fides 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                And so commending the Author to your accustomed fauour, and his worke to your best furtherance, I rest.
            
               Your very louing friend.
Laurence Whitaker.
            
         
         
            
            THE CHARACTER of the famous Odcombian, or rather Polytopian, Thomas the CORYATE, Traueller, and Gentleman-Author of these Quinque-mestriall Crudities.
            
               Done by a charitable friend, that thinkes it necessary by this time, you should vnderstand the Maker, as well as the Worke.
               
            
            HE is an Engine, wholly consisting of Extremes, a Head, Fingers, and Toes. For what his industrious Toes haue trode, his readie Fingers haue written, his subtill head dictating. He was set a going for Venice the fourteenth of May, Anno 1608. and returned home (ofhimselfe) the third of October following, being wound vp for fiue moneths, or thereabouts: his paises two for one. Since, by vertue of those weights he hath beene conueniently able to visite Towne and Country, Fayres and Mercats, to all places, and all 
                  〈◊〉
                a Spectacle gratefull aboue that of Nineueh, or the citty of Norwich; and hee is now



become the better Motion, by hauing this his Booke his Interpreter: which yet hath exprest his purse more then him, as wee the rest of his Commenders haue done, so vnmercifully charging the Presse with his prayse. But to that Gale, he sets vp all sayles. Hee will beare paper (which is cloth) enough. Hee hath euer since the first design of printing hereof, bin à Deliciis to the Court; but serued there in his owne cloathes, and at his owne costs; where hee hath not bin costiue of acquaintance to any, from the Palatine to the Plebeian; which popularity of his (it is thought by some of his Odcombians) may hurt him. But he free from all other Symptomes of aspiring, wil easily outcarry that; it beeing a motly and no perfect ambition: the rather, because when hee should haue beene taken vp for the place (though he hastily preuented it with a tender of himselfe) he conditioned to haue no office of charge, or neerenesse cast vpon him, as the Remora of his future trauell; for to that hee is irrecouerably addicted. The word Trauaile affects him in a Waineoxe, or Packe-horse. A Carrier will carrie him from any company that hath not beene abroade, because he is a Species of a Traueller. But a Dutch-post doth rauish him. The meere Superscription of a letter from Zurich settes him vp like a top: Basil or Heidelberg makes him spinne. And at seeing the word Frankford, or Venice, though but on the title of a booke, he is readie to break doubler, cracke elbowes, and ouerflow the roome with his murmure.
            He is a mad Greek, no lesse then a merrie: and will buy his J mean when he trauelled. A thing that I know he scorned to do since he same home. Egges, his Puddings, his Ginger-bread, yea cobble his Shooes in the Atticke Dialect: and would



make it a matter of Conscience to speake other, were hee trusted alone in a roome with an Andiron of State. The greatest Politicke that aduances into Paules hee will quitte, to go talke with the Grecian that begges there; such is his humilitie; and doth grieue inwardly he was not borne that Countreyman for that Not to beg, but to talke Greeke the better with the naturall Grecians. purpose. You shall perceiue a veine or threed of Greeke runne through his whole discourse, and another of Latine, but that is the courser. Hee is a great and bold Carpenter of words, or (to expresse him in one like his owne) a Logodaedale: which voice when hee heares, 'tis doubtfull whether he will more loue at the first, or enuy after, that it was not his owne. All his Phrase is the same with his manners and hauiour, such as if they were studied to make Mourners merrie: but the bodie of his discourse able to breake Impostumes, remooue the stone, open the passage from the Bladder, and vndo the very knots of the Gout; to cure euen where Physicke hath turnd her backe, and Nature hung downe her head for shame; Beeing not onely the Antidote to resist sadnesse, but the Preseruatiue to keepe you in mirth, a life and a day. A man might vndo the Colledge that would practise with onely him. And there is no man but to enioy his companie, would neglect any thing but businesse. It is thought hee liues more by letting I meane the foreparts, not the binder. out of ayre, then drawing in; and feared, his belly will exhibite a Bill in Chauncerie against his Mouth for talking away his meales. Hee is alwayes TongueMaior of the companie, and if euer the perpetuall motion be to be hoped for, it is from thence. He will aske, How do you? Where you haue beene? How is it? If



you haue trauelled? How you like his booke? with, what newes? and bee guilty of a thousand such courteous impertinences in an houre, rather then want the humanity of vexing you. To conclude this ample Traueller in some bounds, you shall best know him by this: he is frequent at all sorts of free tables, where though he might sit as a Guest, he will rather be serued in as a Dish, and is loth to haue anything of himselfe kept cold against the next day. To giue the Non vltra of him in a word, hee is so Substantiue an Author as will stand by himselfe without the neede of his Booke to be ioyned with him.
            
               Here endeth the Character, attended with a Characterisme Acrostich.
         
         
            
            To the Right Noble Tom, TellTroth of his trauailes, the Coryate of Odcombe, and his Booke now going to trauell.
            
               
                  Trie and trust Roger, was the word, but now
               
                  Honest Tom Tel-Troth puts downe Roger, How?
               
               
                  Of trauel hee discourseth so at large,
               
                  Marry he sets it out at his owne charge;
               
                  And therein (which is worth his valour too)
               
                  Shewes he dares more then Paules Church-yard durst do.
            
            
               
                  Come forth thou bonnie bouncing booke then, daughter
               
                  Of Tom of Odcombe that odde Iouiall Author,
               
                  Rather his sonne I should haue cal'd thee, why?
               
                  Yes thou wert borne out of his trauelling thigh
               
                  As well as from his braines, and claimest thereby
               
                  To be his Bacchus as his Pallas: be
               
                  Euer his thighes Male then, and his braines Shee.
               
            
            
               Ben: Ionson.
            
         
         
            
            CERTAINE OPENING AND DRAWING DISTICHES TO BE APPLIED as mollifying Cataplasmes to the Tumors, Carnosities, or difficult Pimples full of matter appearing in the Authors front, conflated of Stiptike and Glutinous Vapours arising out of the Crudities: The heads whereof are particularly pricked and pointedout by letters for the Readers better vnderstanding.
            
            
               A
               FIrst, th' Author here glutteth Sea, Haddock & Whiting
               With spuing, and after the world with his writing.
               
                  Or,
               
               Yee Haddocks twixt Douer and Calais, Imperat. speake Greeke;
               For Tim fild your mawes with it in Whitsun Viz. An. 1608. when he began to trauel.
                   weeke.
            
            
               B
               THough our Author for's Venery felt no whips smart,
               Yet see here he rides in a Picardy cart.
            
            
               C
               THis Horse pictur'd showes, that our A word that in the Heluetian tongue signifieth a ragged traueller. 
                  Tatter-de-mallian
               
               Did ride the French Hackneyes, and lie with th' Italian.
               
                  Or,
               
               Our Author in France rode on horse without stirrop,
               And in Italy bathed himselfe in their syrrop.
               
                  Or,
               
               His loue to strange horses hee sorteth out prettily,
               He rides them in France, and lies with them in Italy.
            
            
               
               D
               HE hath crost he foure Elements. Sea and he foure Elements. Land, now the cloudes the text
               Of he foure Elements. th' Ayre he is climbling; ware Tom, 
                  he foure Elements. fire is next. saith
            
            
               E
               HEre to his Land-friggat he's ferried by Charon,
               He bords her; a seruice a hot and a rare one.
               
                  Or,
               
               Here to a Tutch-hole he's row'd by his Gondelier,
               That fires his That is, the beauty of her countenance, & sweet 
                        〈◊〉
                      of her lips did enflame his tongue with a diuine & fiery enthusiasme, emptied the Bandolier of his conceipts & inuentions for that time. Linstocke, and empties his Bandolier.
            
            
               F
               HEre his Friggat shootes egs at him empty of Chickens,
               Because she had made his purse empty of Chicquins.
               
                  Or,
               
               Here she pelts him with egs, he saith, of Rose-water;
               But trust him not Reader, t'was some other matter.
            
            
               G
               IN vaine here doth Coryate pipe and dispute,
               His wench was, Iewes will not be caught with his flute.
               
                  Or,
               
               Thy Cortizan clipt thee, ware Tom, I aduise thee,
               And flie from the Iewes, lest they circumcise thee.
            
            
               H
               HE longs for sweet grapes, but going to steale 'em
               He findeth soure graspes and gripes from a Dutch A Rascalin; Dutch. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  Or,
               
               Here is the combat our Author may glory at,
               With Halberd the 
                     〈◊〉
                   laies on, and with Greeke Coryat.
               
            
            
               I
               HEre is his Trophee victoriously dight
               With case, shoes, and stockings, and lice put to flight.
               
                  Or,
               
               See here his poore case, his shoes clowted with cunning,
               His stockings strong-smelling, and lice away running.
               
                  Or,
               
               See our louse-bitten Trauellers ragged deuice,
               Of case, shoos, and stockings, and Canniball lice,
               
                  
                  Or,
               
               This Gibbet the false case and hose doth require,
               That harbour'd the vermine that their Maister did bite.
            
            
               K
               THis should be his picture, 'tis rather his Embleme,
               For by As being the first letter of his name in Greeke. (K) it notes him, though't little But you differ in opinion (Mr. Laurence) from all my other friends that haue compared together the counterfeited and the lyuing figure. resemble him.
               
                  Or,
               
               This picture vnlike him, showes hee's not come home as
               He went, but chang'd, and turn'd trauelling Thomas.
               
               
                  Or,
               
               This picture vnlike him, showes he's not himselfe,
               But changd since he proued a trauelling Else.
               
                  Or,
               
               Know Reader, the notes and contents of this booke,
               Are not to be guessed by th' Authors caru'd looke.
            
            
               L
               THese be the three countries with their Cornu-copia,
               
               That make him as famous, as Moore his Vtopia.
               
               
                  Or,
               
               Here France giues him scabs, Venice a hot Sunne,
               And Germany spewes on him out of her Tunne.
            
            
               M
               THe horse he bestrid till he mounted his chaire
               Doth kindly bestride him at Bergamo faire.
               
                  Or,
               
               He courted a wench, but pennance for his game O
               He doth by lying with horses at Bergamo.
               
                  Or,
               
               The Italian horse more then the French his loue feeles,
               For he rod on the one, and lay at th' others heeles.
            
            
               N
               MOst Politike Thomas, now thou art no The French word for a foole. 
                  fol I see,
               For wanting no money, thou beggest in policy.
            
            
               Laurence VVhitaker.
            
         
         
            
            Here follow certaine other verses, as charmes, to vnlocke the misterie of the Crudities.
            
               A
               HEre, like Arion, our Coryate doth draw
               All sorts of fish with Musicke of his maw.
            
            
               B
               HEre not vp Holdborne, but downe a steepe hill,
               He's carried' twixt Montrel and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            
               C
               A Horse here'ts sadled, but no Tom him to backe,
               It should rather haue beene Tom that a horse did lacke.
            
            
               D
               HEre vp the Alpes (not so plaine as to Dunstable)
               He's carried like a Cripple, from Constable to Constable.
            
            
               E
               A Punke here pelts him with egs. How so?
               For he did but kisse her, and so let her goe.
            
            
               F
               Religiously here he bids, row from the stewes,
               
               He will expiate this sinne with conuerting the Iewes
               
            
            
               G
               ANd there, while he giues the zealous Brauado,
               
               A Rabbin confutes him with the Bastinado.
               
            
            
               H
               HEre, by a Boore too, hee's like to be beaten
               For Grapes he had gather'd before they were eaten.
            
            
               I
               OLd Hat here, torne Hose, with Shoes ful of grauel,
               And louse-dropping case, are the Armes of his trauel.
            
            
               K
               HEre, finer then comming from his Punke you 
                     〈◊〉
                   see,
                
                  Not meaning by F. and K. as the vulgar may peeuishly & wittingly mistake: but that hee was then comming from his curtesan, a fresh. man, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      hauing seene their fashiens, and written a description of them, He will shortly be reputed a knowing, proper, and wel traueled scholler, as by 
                        〈◊〉
                      starchd beard, and printed ruffe may bee as properly insinuated. F. shewes what he was, K, what he will bee.
            
            
               
               L
               HEre France, and Italy both to him shed
               Their hornes, and Germany pukes on his head.
            
            
               M
               ANd here he disdaind not, in a forraine land
               To lie at Liuory, while the Horses did stand.
            
            
               N
               BVt here, neither trusting his hands, nor his legs.
               Being in feare to be robd, be most learnedly begs.
            
            
               Ben: Ionson.
            
         
         
            
            An introduction to the ensuing verses.
            I Here present vnto thee (gentle Reader) the encomiasticke and panegyrick verses of some of the worthiest spirits of this Kingdome, composed by persons of eminent quality and marke, as well for dignity as excellency of wit; such as haue vouchsafed to descend so low as to dignifie and illustrate my lucubrations without any demerit of theirs Mistake mee not Reader. I referre this word to the word Lucubrations. (I doe ingenuously confesse) with the singular fruits of their elegant inuentions, which they haue expressed in the best and most learned languages of the world, two onely excepted, which are the Ironia. Welch and Irish. But in that I exhibite vnto thy view such a great multitude of Verses, as no booke whatsoeuer printed in England these hundred yeeres had the like written in praise thereof; ascribe it not I intreate thee to any ambitious humour of mee, as that I should craue to obtrude so many to the world in praise of my booke: For I can assure thee, I sollicited not halfe those worthy wights for these verses that I now divulge; a great part of them beeing sent vnto me voluntarily from diuers of my friends, frō whom I expected no such courtesie. At last when I saw the multitude of them to increase to so great a number,



I resolued to put aboue a thousand of them into an Index expurgatorius, and to detaine them from the presse.
            Wherevpon the Princes Highnesse (who hath most graciously deigned to bee the You shal 
                     〈◊〉
                   the meaning of this word in a marginal note vpon the verses immediately ensuing. 
               Hyperaspist and Moecenas of my booke) vnderstanding that I meant to suppresse so many, gaue me a strict and expresse commandement to print all those verses which I had read to his Highnesse. Since then that ineuitable necessity hath beene imposed vpon mee, I haue heere communicated that copious rhapsody of poems to the world that my learned friends haue bountifully bestowed vpon mee; wherein many of them are disposed to glance at mee with their free and mery iests, for which I desire, thee (courteous Reader) to suspend thy censure of mee till thou hast read ouer my whole booke.
         
      
      
         
            
            Jncipit 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            LOrdings, full well I hope you know
            I neuer shot in Phoebus bow,
            Or climb'd Parnassus hill:
            Yet must I needes in doggrell rime
            Craue your sweete patience for a time,
            Full sore against my will.
            I am not now to tell a tale
            Of George a Greene, or lacke a Vale,
            
            Or yet of Chittiface:
            
            But I must be the Chanti-cleere
            Of one that is withouten peere,
            A horne replete with grace.
            For he at Odcombe was y-bore,
            Whereas the Fates were heard to score
            The fortunes of his birth:
            Go pretty Dandi-prat to schoole
            (Said they) thou shalt no little foole
            Be counted for thy mirth.
            The child in time was waxen great,
            And all the Sophists he did threat
            Their Problemes to confound;
            Grammarians sore did stand in feare
            The coynage of his words to heare,
            So vncouth was their sound.
            For by a naturall instinct
            The Graces to his lips were linkt,
            (Forsooth his lips were faire.)
            His mouth did open ere he spake,
            And swifter farre then Ducke or Drake
            
               
His words flew through the ayre.
            The stonie hearts that could not bide
            A Church-ale at a Whitsontide,
            He suppled with his speech:
            And like a Captaine bold and stout
            He did aduance his Eagles snout,
            Faire thriue it I beseseech.
            Not Mahound, no not Tarmagaunt
            
            Could euer make halfe their avaunt
            Of deedes so sterne and fell,
            As cau this child, Sir Thopas Squire,
            Inspired with a sparke of fire
            Stolne out of Wisedomes cell.
            He 
                  〈◊〉
                words vpon his teeth
            (Rime thereunto I can vnneeth)
            Yet still I will proceede;
            Like as a Beare doth licke her whelpe,
            Their roughnesse so his tongue doth helpe,
            When polishing is need.
            Now Lordings mercy I do aske,
            That since I vnder-went this taske
            His name I haue conceal'd;
            He keepes the Magazine of wit,
            And beares the priuy key of it,
            Which may not be reueal'd.
            Yet in despight of bread and ale,
            Vnbuekled now shall be the male,
            Betide what may betide.
            His name is Coryate I wis,
            But whether he be flesh or fish,
            I cannot yet decide:
            For like the errant Knight Vlysses,
            
            Through the Seas amongst the fishes
            He lanched foorth his hulke:
            The sides whereof were heard to grone
            No lesse then tweuty miles and one
            Vnder his grieuous bulke.
            
               
Then either 
                  〈◊〉
                scrippe or bagge
            He vide his ten-toes for a nagge
            From Venice for to hie.
            Thorough thicke, and thorough thinne
            Vntill he came vnto his Inne,
            His winged heeles did flie.
            He trauail'd North, he trauail'd South
            With A word that the author once vsed in an Oratroil to the Prince, metaphorically signifying (as beeing deriued 
                     〈◊〉
                   these two greek words 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that signisieth aboue, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a shield, that it, one that opposeth his shield in the defence of his friend against the blow of an enemy) a Patron or Protector. VVhich word by a kind of conuersion may be not improperly applyed (as a certain conceited gentleman lately sayd) to the author 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Hyperaspist 
                        〈◊〉
                      hyperhorspist, that is one vpō whome neuer Asses pist, but Horses once pist on him, as when he lay vpon straw at their 
                     〈◊〉
                   in 
                     〈◊〉
                   a cittie of Lombardy. 
               Hyperaspist in his mouth
            A word of his deuising.
            For Nature letters pattents gaue
            To him the priuiledge to haue
            Of words naturalizing.
            To trees and sleeples as he went
            He did his homage verament,
            And salu-ed them each one.
            He registred their names alwaies;
            Contrary if that any sayes,
            The booke is to be showne.
            A Curtizan then Lycoras
            More sweet in Venice towne there was
            That wisht him for her owne:
            But she could neuer him hand-fast:
            For as a Gelding he was chast,
            Thongh Gelding he were none.
            The Barcaruolo appetite
            His Gondola directed right
            Vnto a female Else:
            Yet would he not play Cupids ape,
            In Chancers ieast, lest he should shape
            A Pigsnye like himselfe.
            This wandring Squire full 
                  〈◊〉
                I heard
            The circle of his Beard had squard,
            And scowred euery haire:
            That sweeter then the Eglentine,
            And then the purple Columbine
            He did appeare more faire.
            He had a kind of simple blush
            
               
That kept him still for being flush
            When Ladies did him woo:
            Though they did smile, he seem'd to seowle,
            As doth the faire broad-faced Fowle,
            That sings To whit to whooe.
            
            It was no crochet of his brayne
            That put his legs to so great paine
            In passing to and fro:
            But sure it was the quintessence
            Of study, that beyond all sense
            Had made his wits to crow.
            With Latin he doth rule the roast,
            And spowteth Greeke in euery coast,
            Ne'r may his wel-spring fade:
            He ouer-speakes the English tongue,
            And picketh gold out of the dongue
            That ancient Poets made.
            If any Zoylus will carpe,
            Or take vpon him for to harpe
            Vpon his learned strings:
            On foote to Venice let him go,
            And then at his returning show
            What fruite from thence he brings.
            For had our Coryate beene a Iade,
            In halfe the iourney that he made
            He had beene foundred cleane.
            But now by foote, by cart and fayle
            
               Tom Coryate is come from Itaile.
            From Italy I meane.
            The squeazie humour of his braine
            Before he parted from this maine,
            Neare perished his scull:
            Now since the Sun began to sup,
            And drinke those grosser vapors vp,
            He is no more a Gull.
            Oh let the sardels of his leaues
            Be held more precious then the sheaues
            
               
Pitched vp in haruest time:
            Ne euer any man aliue
            May see them sayling from Queene-hiue:
            Now Muse stay here thy rime.
            Explicit 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
         
         
            Jncipit Henricus Neuill de Abergeuenny.
            
               GOldilockt god that dost on Pernasse dwell,
               O thou that sweetly playest on a fiddle
               To Sisters Nine, that Aganippes Well
               Do much frequent, there bathing to the middle:
               Lend me thy notes, that I may sweeter sing
               Of Tom of Odcombe then doth Odcombe ring.
            
            
               Oh that some errant Knight could now be seene,
               That he might dub thee, crying; Vp Sir Thomas:
               
               Their dangers and aduentures lesse haue beene
               That erst did wander to the Land of promise.
               Thou mak'st Sir Beuis and Sir Guy a fable,
               With all the daring Knights of the round table.
            
            
               Vnto thy shoes, thy shirt, thy fustian case
               That hang at Odcombe, trophees of thy trauailes,
               Ioyne this faire booke of thine, which makes thee passe:
               Great Merlin Cockay in recounting maruailes.
               Whilst pendant scut chions others tombes adorne,
               O're thine these faire atchieuements shal be borne.
            
            Explicit Henricus Neuill de Abergeuenny.
         
         
            Incipit Ioannes Harrington de Bathe.
            THou glorious Goose that keptst the Capitoll,
            Affoord one quill, that I may write one story yet
            Of this my new-come Odcombe-friend Tom Coryet,
            
            Whose praise so worthy wits and pens inroll
            As (with good cause) his custome is to glory it:
            
               
So farre am I from iudging his a sorrie wit,
            Aboue earth, seas, ayre, fire, ile it extoll
            To Cinthia's spheare, the next beneath the starres.
            Where his vast wit, and courage so audacious
            Of equall worth in times of peace and warres,
            (As Rowlands erst) encombring roomes capacious
            Lie stored some in hogsheads, some in iatres.
            This-makes the learn'd of late in forraine parts,
            Find Phoebe's face so full of wens and warts.
            Explicit Ioannes Harrington de Bathe.
         
         
            Incipit Ludovicus Lewknor.
            OLd wormie Age that in thy mustie writs
            Of former fooles records the present wits,
            Tell vs no more the tale of Apuleius Asse,
            Nor Mydas eares, nor 
                  〈◊〉
                eating grasse:
            This worke of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                so farre them all exceeds,
            As Phoebus fiddle did Pans sqneaking reedes.
            
               He writes not of a gnat, nor frog, nor woodcockes bill,
            Of steeples, townes, and towers, intreats his gooses quill.
            Among the rest he of a wondrous tub doth tell,
            The wine whereof more Poets made then Tempes Well.
            In Odcomb'd Toms regard the Homers Virgil. 
               Cyclops heards were thin,
            Our Tom quicke cattell fed whole legions on his skin.
            So did poore bare Philosophers in former times,
            And so do Poets now that make the lowzie rimes.
            Fiue months with this in child-birth lay Toms labring Muse
            In all which time he seldome chang'd his shirt or shoes.
            The care and toyle was his, thine are the gaines,
            Cracke then the nut, and take the kernell for thy paines.
            Explicit Ludovicus Lewknor.
         
         
            Incipit Henricus Goodier.
            IF in an euennesse all wisedome lie,
            
               Tom thou art wise, thon dost all euenly:
            
               
Once thou didst wench, and thou wert carted once,
            Once thou didst 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                steale, and once they beate thy bones.
            Once didst thou beg, and if thou then didst get
            Nothing by begging, thou art euen yet.
            What onely he saw he onely writes, if than
            He onely reade it, he's an euen man.
            Our spies write home no ill of him: he went,
            He stayd, he came an euen A 
                     〈◊〉
                   man. Innocent.
            The Iesuites could not shake him: for he would not
            Take Orders, but remaine an A layman, or priuat man, as being deri-ued srom the Greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which signifieth a priuate man. Idiot.
            If any thinke him dull or heauy, know
            The Court and citties mirth cannot be so.
            Who thinkes him light, aske them who had the taske
            To beare him in a trunke vnto the maske.
            He is so equall, that if he were laide
            Into those scales, whereby the proofe is made
            Whether the woman or the plume preuaile,
            He and his booke would hardly turne the scale.
            Explicit Henricus Goodier.
         
         
            Incipit Ioannes Payton iunior.
            MAgnifique Caesar that in worth surpasses
            The greatest of our greatest Turkish Bassaes,
            All the long night ost times did waking tarrie,
            And made the night the day his Secretary:
            Yet is in little volumes you reuoke it,
            His worke of many yeares lies in your pockit.
            But thou O Coryate 
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Caesar but a 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   vapulante. 
               Iauell,
            
            And writest huge volumes of twise ten weeks trauell:
            Twise twenty weekes a dwarfish birth will aske,
            Thou in twise ten brought'st forth this mighty taske:
            Then if abortiue birth had not preuented,
            What Atlas would thy Gyant-braine inuented?
            Sith seuen such countries noone so soone could passe
            
               
As thou the learned Coryate Thomas.
            
            Yet thy large writings wonder more I at,
            Thou Odcombs only Grace Tom Coryat:
            
            For of the twaine much rather would I misse his
            That wrote the ten yeares trauels of Vlysses:
            
            For who considers well, he quickly find should
            That thou wrot'st perfect, seeing Homer blind-fold.
            Explicit Ioannes Payton iunior.
         
         
            Jncipit Henricus Poole.
            
               DOn Coryate once I saw, but his booke neuer,
            Yet meane I to commend them both together:
            Him for his booke, his booke for him I prayse:
            The workmans fame the workmanship doth raise
            To great esteeme, no foule tongue can defile it,
            The work's of worth, for Coryate did compile it.
            The goods wherewith this westerne barge is fraught
            Thou (gentle Reader) shalt enioy for naught:
            They cost thee nothing but a thankefull mind,
            Which thus our Author hopes in thee to find:
            Who in his trauell hath obserued more,
            Then euer any wizard did before;
            And what he hath obserued, with his pen
            He here presenteth to his country-men:
            That he whom fiue moneths trauell made so witty,
            Should liue obscure at home, were it not pittie?
            Then Coryate feed thy Muse in forraine parts,
            Swallow their secrets, and deuoure their arts;
            Whereof when thou saturitie shalt gaine,
            Come home, and then disgorge thy selfe againe.
            Explicit Henricus Poole.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Robertus Phillips.
            SInce euery pen is press'd to praise,
            Thee trauelling Wonder of our daies,
            My Muse would chide, should she not sing
            The praise of thee most wandring thing,
            Who with thy restlesse fcete and paineful wit
            A booke of wonders now hast writ;
            In which thy worke we plaine doe see
            How well thy feete and wit agree.
            What others thought too heauy and too high,
            As Tombes, Steeples, with the Butter-flie,
            Thou hast brought home, though not in solid stuffe:
            For which let not our carping Criticks huffe:
            For thou the substance wouldest not bring
            Of ought which might be termed a If you meane solid stones, you are in the right Sir. If sold Obseruations, I reserre my selfe to the Readers censure after hee hath throughly perused my booke, whether I haue brought home any solid thing or no. solid thing.
            Alas poore Tom, they doe mistake thy age
            Who thinke thou art not past the making sage;
            Or that thy iourney had some other ends
            Then to delight and recreate thy friends.
            And if perhaps some man shal call thee foole
            For this thy end, good Tom pul out thy toole,
            Thy booke I meane, demand if that an Asse
            Could haue obserued so much as he did passe:
            Or could haue got such praise in rime,
            As thou shalt shew to future time;
            By which thou shalt so liuely pourtraied be,
            As that the I meane any critical carper that shall taxe thee for thy booke. Asse himselfe himselfe may see.
            Thy danger with the 
                  〈◊〉
               , thy hazard with the Iewes,
            Thy scabs at Turin, and solace in the 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Let others chaunt; I list not tell them ouer,
            
               
Nor of thy liquid case 'twixt France and Douer;
            Though there thou madest so great a sauour,
            That few receiued it for a fauour.
            I onely will commend thy constant nature,
            Who didst returne the Not composed of the vices of those countries through which thou traueldst, which doth often happen to many of our Englishmen that returne home corrupted in manners and much worse then they went 
                     〈◊〉
                  . simple creature
            That thou wentst forth; and hauing trudg'd
            Much ground, at length art iudg'd
            By the full praise of euery Muse,
            Which vshereth in in thy booke of newes:
            Therefore braue Champion of the Whitson-ale,
            Let thy faire Iournall to the presse hoise saile,
            That after-ages too may know thee,
            As well as we that now enioy thee.
            Who, to the end that grateful we may seeme,
            Thee of the That is, the Lawrel, so called from one Marrot a French Poet. 
               Marrot worthy doe wee deeme.
            Explicit Robertus Phillips.
         
         
            Incipit Dudleus Digges vpon the Author and his paines.
            
            OVr Author will not let me rest, he saies,
            Till I write somewhat in his labours praise
            I thinking straight vpon Deliuery,
            Proteft his labour such a Prodigie:
            As may a Mountebanke Man-midwife grauell
            To see a man that was fiue months in trauel,
            So faitely brought a bed, and of a birth
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . As that in the first Aenei. of Virgil. Ques 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   —  So — but of that iudge by these gossips mirth.
            
               
Ioy to the glad Dad, who such This is that which the Latines call Indulgentia, the Grecians. fon 
                  〈◊〉
                shewes,
            That by a hundred markes the wise child knowes;
            Who 'twas, and can in print already call
            
               Coryate the kinde Father, and the Naturall.
            
               Ingeuium liber iste 
                     〈◊〉
                   Corlate sepultum 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
               Continet, inde petat qui caret ingenio.
            
            Explicit Dudleus Digges.
         
         
            Jncipit Rowlandus Cotton.
            
               COlumbus, Magelan, and Drakes braue story
            Are yet remembred vnto their glory.
            But thy high deeds with theirs when I compare,
            I say thy trauels haue with theirs no share.
            I wonder then this writing age hath fail'd
            To tell ere this how farre Tom Coryate sail'd
            In fiue months time, and most or al on foote.
            What man aliue that euer else did do't?
            It cannot be but that the world did looke
            That thou thy selfe hereof should write a booke;
            What good acceptance such a booke shall finde,
            Thou need'st not doubt, there's no man so vnkinde
            That will make scruple for to bee thy halfe,
            Since thou the heifer art that beares the calse.
            Tis thy first borne Tom, I pray thee loue it;
            And whosoeuer shal thy issue couet,
            I wish there may befall him this one curse,
            To treade thy steps againe, and with thy purse.
            Yet one thing Tom I doe dislike in sooth,
            Thou do'st not spare thy selfe to tell a truth.
            
               
What need'st thou in thy story bee so nice,
            To tell thy child of all thy nits and lice?
            Yet it becomes thee well, and much the rather,
            The sonne, I thinke, will prooue so like the father.
            But pardon Tom, if I no further tell
            Those gifts which in thee doe by nature dwel.
            Who tels the Asse that he hath two long eares,
            Or Chanti-cleare that he a coxcombe weares?
            Why, all the world doth know as wel as I,
            That neuer any did as much descry,
            So many nations, manners, and so soone,
            Except alone the man that's in the moone.
            Let other wits that with a nimbler wing
            Doe cut the empty ayre, thy praises sing;
            My Muse intreats thee to resume thy pen,
            And to relate 
                  〈◊〉
                thy country-men
            Whether thy father Iouiall were or sad,
            And what complexion thy faire mother had
            When they were linked in wedlocks louely band,
            And whether of them had the vpper hand:
            How many months thy mother did 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Thy tender body in her fruitful wombe:
            What milder planet gouerned in the skie
            In the Horoscope of thy natiuity:
            Thy mothers midwife, and thy nurses name,
            The shire and houshold whence thy linage came:
            Who trained vp thy, youth, and in what place,
            Whether where Isis hides her dewie face,
            Or where the siluer streames of Chame doe glide,
            Shaddowed with willowes vpon either side;
            That other men may learne to get a sonne
            To see those countries which thy selfe hast done:
            This calculation yet would breed a danger,
            And 'twere not fit to teach it euery stranger;
            Lest when the world thy learned booke should view,
            A foole might get as wife a child as you.
            Explicit Rowlandus Cotton.
         
         
            
            Incipit Robertus Yaxley.
            IF the Author had a curious coate,
            With cap of costly die,
            And crowne of cocke for crest thereon,
            With whetstone hanging by,
            Then might he tell of trauellers,
            And all the thrift-lesse traine,
            Which proudly forth on Asses pricke,
            Twixt Italy and Spaine.
            For Thomas is by trauell tri'd,
            And truth of him to tell,
            Ther's few of them that now goe forth
            Returne home halfe so well.
            Then buy this booke yee Brittans bold,
            But read it at your leisure:
            For it and he, and he and it
            Were made to shew you pleasure.
            Explicit Robertus Yaxley.
         
         
            Jncipit Ioannes Strangwayes.
            THou crau'st my verse, yet doe not thanke me for it,
            For what 
                  〈◊〉
                can praise enough Tom Coryate?
            
            
               
               Kemp yet doth liue, and onely liues for this
            Much famous, that he did dance the Morris
            From London vnto Norwich. But thou much more
            Doest merit praise. For though his feete were sore,
            Whilst sweaty he with antick skips did hop it,
            His treading were but friscals of a poppet.
            Or that at once I may expresse it all,
            Like to the Iacks of iumbled virginal.
            But thou through heats and colds, through punks & trunks,
            Through hils and dales hast stretcht thy weary stumps,
            Feeding on hedge-row fruits, and not on plum-trees,
            Onely through zeale to visit many countries.
            But stay a while, and make a stand my Muse,
            To thinke vpon his euerlasting shoos.
            Come to my helpe some old-shod pilgrime wight,
            That I of you may tread the way aright
            Which leads vnto his same, whilst I doe stile
            How he did goe at least nine hundred mile
            With one poore paire of shoos, sauing alone — a
            He onely once did sole them at You should haue said Zurich. Verona.
            So that it grew a question whether
            Thy shoos or feete were of more lasting leather.
            Which at that time did stand thee in most vse,
            When as the Iewes would cut off thy prepuce.
            But thou that time like many an errant Knight,
            Did ft faue thy selfe by vertue of thy flight.
            Whence now in great request this Adage stands;
            One paire of legges is worth two paire of hands.
            Excipit Joannes Strangwayes.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Gulielmus Clauel.
            
               
                  COryats trauels doe bewitch my pen,
               Worke 
                     〈◊〉
                  , making the dumbe to speake:
               My dumbe-borne Muse yet neuer knowne to men
               Doth by his charmes her silent custome breake.
               For if his worthy acts had not beene such,
               The world could not haue drawne from me thus much.
            
            
               They onely force from me both praise and wonder,
               Who past belise haue conquerd many dangers:
               It can not be describ'd what hee brought You meane some merry matter Sir. vnder,
               Leauing the skars of his renowne with strangers.
               Then frolike man and in thy country rowse thee,
               Although abroade thou scorn'dst not to be lowsie.
            
            
               Send out thy copious booke to common view,
               Make many laugh, some scorne, moue most to pitty.
               Those that trauel, (as no man hath his due)
               Shall still confesse with shame, thy booke is witty;
               And after ages will admire no doubt
               This Gog-Magog thy Gyant-wit brings out.
            
            Explicit Gulielmus Clauel.
         
         
            Jncipit Ioannes Scory.
            THat thou a traueller maist called bee,
            Thankes to thy braines that traucl, not to thee;
            
               
That thou a rare read-scholler clepyd art,
            Giue more thankes to thy tongue, then to thy art.
            Yet haue thy feete in fiue months pass'd more eities,
            Then ere thy Poetry will make good ditties.
            Ballets vnfit to stand before thy booke,
            Wherein who so with iudgments eyes will looke,
            May see a monster of fiue months begetting,
            More rare then that of thine owne Sires begetting.
            Some say, when thou wert borne (O wondrous hap)
            First time thou pist thy clouts, thou drew'st a map,
            But that thou spakest as soone as thou wert borne,
            There is no doubt. For else how couldst thou learne
            In so short time to talke so long and much,
            And to such purpose? Yet I heare no Dutch,
            Nor French, nor Spanish, nor the Italian tongue;
            So mightst thou doe thy Greeke and Latin wrong:
            Of which thou vtterst such abundant store,
            That thy full braines can now containe no more.
            Well Tom, since Europe thou hast seene in part,
            Now into Asia and Africke make a start.
            Boldly encounter all the monsters there:
            For seeing thee they needs must flie for feare:
            But still be sure thy buckler be thy booke,
            
               Modusaes shield had ne're so grim a looke.
            Explicit Ioannes Scory.
         
         
            Incipit Ioannes Donne.
            OH to what height will loue of greatnesse driue
            Thy leauened spirit, Sesqui-superlatiue?
            
            
               
Venice vast lake thou hadst seen, and wouldst seeke than
            Some vaster thing, and foundst a Curtizan.
            That inland sea hauing discouered well
            A Cellar-gulfe, where one might sayle to hell
            From Heydelberg, thou longdst to see: and thou
            This Booke greater then all producest now.
            Infinit worke, which doth so farre extend,
            That none can study it to any end.
            T'is no one thing; it is not fruite, nor roote,
            Nor poorely limited with head or foote.
            If man be therefore man, because he can
            Reason, and laugh, thy booke doth halfe make man.
            One halfe beeing made, thy modesty was such,
            That thou on th' other halfe wouldst neuer touch.
            When wilt thou be at full, great Lunatique?
            Not till thou exceed the world? canst thou be like
            A prosperous nose-borne wenne, which sometime growes
            To be farre greater then the mother-nose?
            Go then, and as to thee, when thou didst go,
            
               Munster did Townes, and Gesner Authors show,
            Mount now to Gallo-belgicus: appeare
            As deepe a States-man, as a Gazettier.
            Homely and familiarly, when thou com'st backe,
            Talke of Will Conqueror, and Proster Iacke.
            
            Go bashfull man, lest here thou blush to looke
            Vpon the progresse of thy glorious booke.
            To which both Indies sacrifices send;
            The 
                  〈◊〉
                sent gold, which thou didst freely spend,
            (Meaning to see't no more) vpon the prosse.
            The East sends hither her deliciousnesse;
            And thy ieaues must imbrace what comes from thence,
            The Myrrhe, the Pepper, and the Frankinsence.
            This magnifies thy leau's; but if they stoope
            To neighbor wares, when Merchants do vnhoope
            Voluminous barrels; if thy leaues do then
            Conuey these wares in parcels vnto men;
            If for vast Tomes of Currant, and of Flgs,
            
               
Of medcinall, and Aromatique twigs,
            Thy leaues a better method do prouide,
            Diuide to pounds, and ounces subdiuide;
            If they stoope lower yet, and vent our wares,
            Home-manufactures, to thicke popular Faires,
            If omni-praegnant ther, vpon warme stals
            They hatch all wares for which the buyer cals,
            Then thus thy leaues we lustly may command,
            That they all kind of matter comprehend.
            Thus thou, by meanes which th'Ancients neuer tooke,
            A Pandect makst, and Vniuersall booke.
            The brauest Heroes, for publike good
            Scattered in diuers lands, their lims and bloud.
            Worst malefectors, to whom men are prize,
            Do publike good cut in Anatomies,
            So will thy booke in peeces: For a Lord
            Which casts at Portescues, and all the board,
            Prouide whole bookes; each leafe enough will be
            For friends to passe time, and keepe companie.
            Can all carouse vp thee? No, thou must fit
            Measures; and fill out for the halfe-pint wit.
            Some shall wrap pils, and saue a friends life so,
            Some shall stop muskets and so kill a fo.
            Thou shalt not ease the Critiques of next age
            So much, at once their hunger to asswage.
            Nor shall wit-pyrates hope to find thee lye
            All in one bottome, in one Librarie.
            Some leaues may paste strings there in other bookes,
            And so one may, which on another lookes,
            Pilfer, alas, a little wit from you,
            But hardly I meane from one page which shall palle strings in a booke. much; and yet I thinke this true;
            As Sybils was, your booke is mysticall,
            For euery peece is as much worth as all.
            Therefore mine impotency I confesse;
            The healths which my braine beares, must be farre lesse;
            Thy Gyant-wit o'rethrowes me, I am gone,
            And rather then reade all, I would reade none.
            
               
               In eundem Macaronicon.
               
                  QVot, dos haec, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   persetti, Dislicha sairont,
               
                  Tot cuordos States-men, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   liure fata 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Es sat a my l'honneur estre 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   inteso; Car 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               L'honra, de personne nestre creduto, tibi.
               
            
            Explicit Ioannes Donne.
         
         
            Jncipit Richardus Martin.
            To my friend that by lying at the signe of the Foxe, doth prooue himselfe no Goose, Thomas Coryate the Traueller.
            
            A SONET.
            OFor a bonny blith and bounsing balled
            To prayse this Odcomb'd Chanti-cleere, that hatched
            These Crudities which (with his shooes) he patehed,
            All hitting right as it were with a mallet.
            Before vs here he sets both bag and wallet,
            Where met are many scraps (you see) vnmatched:
            His feet, hands, head (daies & nights) walkt, wrote, watched:
            And hardly did he lie on any pallet.
            Much oyle he fau'd both from his shooes and sallats,
            Which thristily he are while they were cobled;
            Then (for his fruite) these Crudities he gobled,
            Which since he season'd hath for sundry pallats.
            To him therefore vaile Trauellers your bonnets,
            Of him write Poets all your Songs and Sonnets.
            Explicit Richardus Martin.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Laurentius Whitakerus.
            
               Adlectorem bipedem de Authore Vel quia Polypodis instar crebra loci mutatione mul tos passus prosectus, vel quia 
                        〈◊〉
                      animalcularū multos morsus perpessus est. Polypode, deque Prouerbio ipsi vsitato, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Demosthene citato, scil. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               Ad Odcombiam (niminm, bona si sua norit, foelicem) de indigena ipsius celeberrimo, Pedite celerrimo, Ob validam 
                        〈◊〉
                      cum 
                        〈◊〉
                      Veneto, & Vangione rustico luctam. Pugile acerrimo, 
                  Ob maciem ex nocturna lucubratione, bodaeporetica monitione, & 
                        〈◊〉
                      molitione contractā
                   
                  Vigile macerrimo, Tomo compacto Coriaceo, Thoma Coriato.
               
               ERige 
                     〈◊〉
                   praerupta Odcombia 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Egremio Monstrum prosilit ecce tuo.
               Prosilit histericus, vates, rbeter, peregrinans,
               Cui non dant foetum Punica regna parem.
               Bisque biceps author prolem dat 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , mirts, rhetoris arte, metris.
               Neu monstri 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   quis dixerit 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               Rectiùs hoc 
                     〈◊〉
                   potuisse scias.
               Monstrum à monstrando Criticus 
                     〈◊〉
                  , ecquis
               Tot veltanta alius qua tibi monstret, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               To mundo monstrat, notum facit & 
                     〈◊〉
                   mundum;
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   extera miratuis.
               
                  
Visere sed vatis terras magis 
                     〈◊〉
                   remotas
               Plura
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fert animus mira referre tui.
               Hunc posse emensos tantos, Odcombia, cursus
               Exceptum gremio, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , foueto tuo.
               Semper vt hoc cunctis Portentum nobile monstre,
               Visere qui cupient Theseos oratus.
            
            
               To the most peerelesse Poeticall Prose-writer, the most Transcendent, Tramontane Traueller, and the most single-soled, singlesouled, and single-shirted Obseruer the Odcombian Gallobelgicus.
               
               VVOnder of worlds, that with one sustian case,
               One payre of shoes, hast done Odcombe the grace
               To make her name knowne past the Alpine hils,
               And home returnd hast worne out many quils
               In writing faire thy large red-lin'd Rehearsall
               Of what thou sawst with sharpe eyes which did pierce all
               Stone Tombes, great gates, and manners of the people,
               Besides the height of many a 113. 5. 451: 20. 183. 10. Tower and steeple,
               
                  68. 34. Snailes, 76. 16. Butterflies, black 68. 2. sheep, ibi. black hogs, &
               And the neat vse of eating meat with 90. 22. forks: 41. 4. Storks,
               And, that of stuffe thou mighst leaue out no odde peece
               To raise thy worke, th'hast writ o'th Switzers 386. 30. codpeece:
               Thou sawst the Venice 261. 18. Donna's, and didst quarrell
               With the Dutch 524. 26. Boore: thou sawst the mōstrous 486. 27. barel:
               But O thy temper! seldome wast thou drunke,
               Nor hadst but one nights solace with thy Punke:
               Nor in thy pilgrimage wert much a sinner,
               But when thou didst Beleeue him not Reader, he brings this in onely to make vp the rime. steale bread to saue a dinner.
               Thou in all sorts of trauell hadst thy part,
               But most on foot, and sometimes in a cart 9. 29..
               Nor didst thou scorne for all spruce Criticks mockings
               
                  
T'accept of a gift, a Prussians aged stockings.
               Thou saw st the field of many a famous battell,
               And home thou cam'it well furnisht with quicke cattell;
               Yet must I say thy fortune therein was ill,
               For thou wentst nakt to wash thy shirt at Basill;
               And hauing scene cloysters, and many a Munke,
               Becam'st thy selfe a Recluse in a trunke.
               But ile not write thy labours Inuentory,
               Ile say but this of thee, and of thy story,
               Thou well describ'st the maruels thou didst see,
               And this thy booke as well describeth thee.
            
            
               Sonnet compose en rime a la Ascauoir sellon le sty'e de Clement Marot vieil Poete Francois. 
                  Marotte, accommode au style de l' Autheur du liure; faict en louange de cet Heroique Geant Odcombien, nomme non Pantagruel, mais Pantagrue, c'est a dire, ny Oye, ny Oyson, ains tout Grue, accoustréncy en Hochepot, Hachis, ou Cabirotade, pour tenir son rang en la Librairie del' Abbaye S. Victor à Paris entre le liure de Marmoretus, de baboinis, & cingis, & celuy de Tirepetanus, de optimitate triparum; & pour porter de nom de la Cabirotade de Coryat, ou, de l'Apodemistichopezologie de l'Odcombeuili Somerseti (Soti) en, &c.
               SI de'ce pais le pourpris spatieux,
               (D'ou est sorti ce Cest a dire, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Badin 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  )
               Ou bien la Suisse, ou mesme l'Alemagne
               Pouroit fournir quelque douce compagne
               D'esprit pareil, & de condition
               Semblable à luy, le vieil Deucalion,
               Et Pyrrhe en eux seroient resuscitez:
               Car ne nasquit de nasquit cailloux iettez,
               Que tas de gens, & vn monde 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               Ainsi des pierres, ou nestre Vn certain animal, 
                        〈◊〉
                      la veue 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Blaireau
               
               
                  
A 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   (fut-ce aux ponts, ou Potences,
               Clochers, statues, qui tiennent balances)
               Est nè soudain vn grand hideux volume
               De bean discours, qui s'est rendul'enclume
               De nos esprits, vn monde de fadeze,
               Dont le goutteux se resiouir soit 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Tay toy Rablais, rabbaissè 
                     〈◊〉
                   l orgueil
               De tes Endouilles, qui d'vn bel accueil
               Receurent ton Pantagruel. 
                  Geant en la 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ainsi appellee par Rablais. 
                  Farouche,
               
               Ace Geant d'Odcombe pierre & souche
               Parla, fournit des comptes, l' 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Le muguetta, voire & son sens maintint
               En 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Mais scais-tu bien pourquoy?
               Son Chef Cresté luy donna ceste loy,
               Que des hommes du lieu ne scachant le language,
               Parmy troncs et cailloux il 
                     〈◊〉
                   sa rage.
            
            Explicit Laurentius Whittakerus.
         
         
            Jncipit Hugo Holland.
            
               In personam & laudem Authoris.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               SONETTO.
               QVi può mirar ognun, chinon è 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Vu gallant buomo 
                     〈◊〉
                   Italia 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Ma del parlare hà 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Troppe peccante erà portar si seco.
               Egle pur brauamente parlar Grace,
               Hauendo mai la Gracia 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               
                  
Ma quel viaggio, di 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Gli a 
                     〈◊〉
                   gran stento, e 
                     〈◊〉
                   lode 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               E 
                     〈◊〉
                   vodere i lidi del Leuante;
               Vel signor Turco, e'l 
                     〈◊〉
                   prete Gianni:
               Donde tornardo vn Paladin 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Con qualch 
                     〈◊〉
                   quatrinie d'anni:
               Ne 
                     〈◊〉
                  , fra cosetalie tante,
               Il Turco vn pantalon, e'l prete vn Zanni.
            
            
               To Topographicall Typographicall THOMAS.
               ISing the man, I sing the wofull case,
               The shirt, the shoes, the shanks that seru'd to trace
               S̄euen Countries wide, the greater was his paine,
               That two to one he euer came againe,
               Yet two for one he came: O Muse, O Maid,
               (If Maid or Muse) say what hath so beraid
               This silly (Insignem pit tate 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .) soule, and droue him to such labours,
               As had his hide bin onely made for tabours?
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   my Girle, what did he with the French,
               Before he courted the Venetian wench?
               How could he leaue his well-boyl'd beere, and scape,
               To drinke the raw bloud of the Germane grape?
               Where with his watrie teeth being set on edge,
               He nigh had lost of teeth his double (
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  ) hedge.
               At home much did he suffer, much abroad,
               And neuer once (poore (Note reader that a 
                        〈◊〉
                      must haue the backe of an a 
                        〈◊〉
                     , the mouth of a 
                        〈◊〉
                     , the eye of a hawke, a merchants eare, &c.) asse) did cast his load,
               Yet further went then Scaracalasino,
               
               And after littl'd lay at Bergamo.
               This vsage did he be are abroad vnciuill,
               At home too was he borne not farre from Euill.
               
               In Odcombe parish yet famous with his cradle,
               A chicke he hatcht was of an egge vnaddle.
               Whence a yong Cockrell he was sent for knowledge
               
                  
To Winchester, and planted in the Colledge:
               Not there to prooue a goose (for he is none)
               But that hee might with other cocks come on.
               Where loe a dwarfe in stature he so 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Grew in the Greeke, that he became a Gyant,
               Pronouncing then 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   each letter
               More plaine, and reading all then Honder better,
               This Prince of Poets, that of 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               His Latine too deserues more praise then Priscians.
               
               For Coryate brake, and Priscian he is dead,
               No maruaile; Coryate brake so oft his head.
               Now when in Greeke and Latin he could grauel
               His schoole fellowes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   he needs 
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
               Not for bare language, but his charges earning
               On the by) on the maine, for real learning.
               Be Basil proofe and Zurick too, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               As thou in print 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , if thou 
                     〈◊〉
                   thanke for't.
               What would he with more tongue? He 
                     〈◊〉
                   enough,
               That which hee hath is fine neat-leather tough:
               And yet at Calais to confound the Masse
               Some say he spake the tongue of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Asse.
               And others, that with Sampsons Asses 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               He slew whole hoasts: so is he rough and raw bone.
               T'were but a srump to name the Asses backe,
               Each common traueller beares thereon his packe:
               I therefore leaue the Asse for feare he doubt,
               Or others for him, that I should him 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               But as the Serpent (not the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) 
                     〈◊〉
                   hisses,
               So is he wise; and equald with 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Who townes of many men hath seene and manners:
               The more was he 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               If he had but one 
                     〈◊〉
                   paire of shoos,
               Then how much leather thinke ye could he loose?
               He hath seene Paris 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Lions,
               And Paris Garden of all France, and Lyons,
               With all the townes that 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   this and Venice,
               Where (how beit some say he played at tennis)
               
                  
He more preual'd against the 'xcoriate Iewes,
               Then Broughton could, or twenty more such Hughs.
               
               And yet but for one pettie poore misprision,
               He was nigh made one of the Circumcision.
               But holla, that's a part that must be priuy,
               Now goe we to the towne of learned Liuy.
               
               Where being before Licentiat, he proceeded
               To beg like a poore Paduan, when hee needed.
               Then through Vicenza and Brescia doth he goe
               Among the Cogleons, those of Bergamo.
               Who made him lie in litter like a Villan:
               Then viewes he, in his case of sustaine, Milan.
               (Not Milan sustaine though) yet such a trophae
               As might become a Soldan or a Sophae.
               Which in his frontispice he doth extol,
               Like those of Marius in Romes Capitol.
               And well the case was lin'd with poudred Brmin:
               Though others thinke it was some stranger vermin.
               Now should I tell his trauels with the Dutch,
               But that my Muse doth feare to drinke too much.
               For, if the water of poore Hippocrene
               Doth make her drunke, what wil the wine of Rhene?
               Both Heidelberg I passe, and the great hogshead,
               Which he bestdir himselfe, like a great hogs-head.
               Who list the paines or pleasure take to looke,
               Shal this and more finde printed in the booke.
               VVhose merits here I wil no further raise:
               That were my friend to sell, and to praise;
               Perhaps I know some that haue seene the Turke,
               Yet would bee whipt ere they wrote such a worke.
               But what a volume here wil rise anone,
               VVhen he hath seene both Turke and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Iohn?
               
               Enough: yet in his Crudities behoose,
               This will I say: it is a booke of proofe.
               VVherein himselfe appeares (I will be plaine)
               No foole in print, not yet 
                     〈◊〉
                   in graine.
            
            
               
               
                  Aparallel betweene Don Vlysses of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and Don Coryate of Odcombe.
               
               
                  The Preamble to the Parallel.
                  IF moral Plut areh had done nothing else,
                  Yet should we praise him for his parrallels;
                  Where hee with euery Greeke doth match a Roman.
                  I that would be his Ape, can fancy no man,
                  (Though learned Hackluyt hath set many forth)
                  Amongst our English, who for wit and worth
                  May be compared with the Ithacan,
                  Vnlesse that Brute the braue Odcombian,
                  
                  What doe you tell me of your Drakes or Candishes?
                  
                  We neuer were beholding to their standishes.
                  This man hath manners seene, and men outlandish,
                  And writ the same: so did not Drake nor Candish.
                  
                  If Drake be famous because he did wander
                  About the Seas, Tom may be wel a Gander,
                  That rauisheth with his harmonious quil
                  More eares then any Swan on Parnasse-hil.
               
               
                  The Parallel it selfe.
                  
                     VLysses was a merry Greeke they say,
                  So Tom is, and the Greeker of the tway.
                  
                     Vlysses left at home an aged Syre,
                  And Tom an aged mother by the fire.
                  
                     Vlysses was an Islander I trow,
                  How then? I pray you is not Coryate so?
                  Perhaps Vlysses did in wit excel,
                  
                     
Our Coryate though doth of more learning smel.
                  
                     Vlysses had a ship of no great bulke,
                  And Coryate went to Calais in a hulke.
                  
                     Vlysses in the Troyan horse was hid,
                  The Heidelbergian barrel Tom bestrid.
                  Good harnesse did Vlysses guarde and grace,
                  Where Coryate 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      had but a sustian cafe,
                  
                     Vlysses hardly from his Ciree sluncke,
                  As hardly Tom from his Venetian Punke.
                  By land Vlysses in a Charlot rode,
                  And Coryate in a cart, the greater lode.
                  
                     Vlysses with sterne Aiax had to doe,
                  With the Dutch Boore so had poore Coryate too.
                  At home lest Vlix store of beasts and chattel,
                  And Coryate home came guarded with more cattaile.
                  
                     Vlysses vs'd to drinke the Aethiop wine,
                  With whitson-ale his cap doth Coryate line.
                  Iust twenty yeeres Vlysses with his Greekes
                  Did wander: Corya'e iust as many weekes.
                  
                     Vlysses all that while had but one caruel,
                  
                     Tom but one paire of shoos, the greater maruel.
                  
                     Minerua holpe Vlysses at a lift,
                  And Pacience Coryate, for there was no Because hce came from Venice 
                           〈◊〉
                         one shist. shift.
                  
                     Vlysses heard no Syren sing: nor Coryate
                  
                  The Iew, least his praepuce might prooue excoriate.
                  
                     Vlysses had a wise to lust vpon,
                  But Coryate hath a chaster, hauing none,
                  
                     Vlysses seem'd a 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  So Coryate did; and was, I dare be sworne.
                  
                     Vlysses in his trauel builded Flushing,
                  Where Coryate ending, or'e the Sea came brushing.
                  One Homer onely sung Vlysses praise,
                  But Coryate all the Poets of our 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  The Epilogue of the Parallel.
                  TAke Reader with a laughing sooke
                  This Odcome-new-come wel-come booke.
                  
                     
Looke with the like thou take these parallels,
                  In sober sadnesse we shal marre al else.
                  For Coryate with vs both wil quarel,
                  And teare himselfe out of his parel.
                  In each point though they doe not iumpe,
                  I trust they doe yet in the lumpe.
                  Nor would I ioyne them head and feete;
                  Lines parallel doe neuer meete.
                  Yet one day meete may thou and I,
                  And laugh with Coryate ere we die.
               
            
            
               Englyn vn-odlinion.
               YNody mourglod ae am arglwydh mawr,
               
                  Sir Francis Drake. Hwuad-mor cyfarwydh:
               Dymma' nawr DWM vn arwydh,
               Ond thydan gwaith 
                     〈◊〉
                   wdwn gwydh?
            
            
               Ad Ianum Harringtonum Badensem, Equitem: non Equitem Badensem, sed aur at um.
               
               
                  These Latin verses following were written to be sent to the worthy and learned Knight aboue-named, by the Author of the former, for the obtayning of his encomiasticks vpon my booke: but though they neuer came to that worthy Knights hands, I haue thought good to insert them here, because it was the authors pleasure to haue them printed with the rest of his Panegyricks.
               
               OBone, cuitranslatus olet miserabilis Aiax,
               Qui sat es 
                     〈◊〉
                   & 
                     〈◊〉
                   notus eques.
               Inficiat 
                     〈◊〉
                   vis ne fumosa Tobacci,
               Neu piper attactu mordeat acre sue:
               Ne scombros metuant (
                     〈◊〉
                   quoque carmin a scōbros
               
                  
Thusue graui Diceum condat odore regum.
               His concede precor 
                     〈◊〉
                  , feruentèr Itaneamieum 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      (mi Hollande) cuntuis 
                        〈◊〉
                      & graucolentibu face ijs? num tu stercurie dedicabis, quae alij mei amiei 
                        〈◊〉
                      & Palladi consecrant? absit, absit. olentis
               Sub Clypeo Aiacis posse latere tui.
            
            Explicit Hugo Holland Cambro-Britannus.
         
         
            Jncipit Robertus Riccomontanus.
            
               COryate, thou Corypheus of Odcombe Whitson-ale,
            Who since art our Choregus o're many a hil and dale:
            Thy skil in Artes and Armes doe to vs euenly show,
            As thou art borne to Mirs, so to Mercurie.
            
            Others write bookes prophane, and others that are holy,
            But thine a Dosis is against all Melancholy:
            A worke of worth, that doth all other workes out-
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            A furlong at the least, thou needst not bate an ace.
            A booke of price twil be, if 
                  〈◊〉
                there were any,
            A hundred Sowses is thy due, thou shalt not bate a peny.
            The Mayor of Hartlepoole vpon a day,
            Hearing King Harry was to come that way,
            Put on's considering cap, and Kendall gowne,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                his 
                  〈◊〉
                of the towne,
            What gift they should present as he came by:
            A Skate-fish (quoth his councel) sweet and dry:
            Nay (quoth the Mayor) weele giue him halfe one more:
            Soft (quoth another) now your mouth runnes o'ret
            " As there Masse Mayor, who could not doe but ote-doe
            " So Corly ate 
               
                  〈◊〉
               , who 
                  〈◊〉
                al, and more Not more then truth, but more then other trauellers, too:
            Of mounts, of 
                  〈◊〉
               , of rockes, of stockes, of stories,
            Of Boores, of whoores, of tombes, of dead mens bones,
            Of bowers, of towers, and many a stately steeple,
            Heluetians, Rhetians, and many an vncouth people:
            Nothing escapes his note, that's worth due obseruation,
            The For the Author hath written of some of speciall note in his booke. Gall 
                  〈◊〉
                scapes him not, without due salutation.
            Speake O thou clocke at Strasbourg, and stones at Fountain-beleau.
            
               
If Coryate you forget, and not your wonders shew:
            Weepe Rhenish drops O Palsgraues Tun, if thou be here forgotten,
            No, no, he hath thee hoopt so wel, thy ribbes wil n'ere be rotten.
            The Ladies of 
                  〈◊〉
                that liue in the Bordello
            
            Are painted in their proper hew by him that is sans fellow:
            He liuely them decyphereth, he doth them nought forbeare,
            He strips them to their petticotes, he hits them to a haire.
            Who to refresh his grauer Muse did often walke per spasso,
            
            Sometimes to heare the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and sometimes to the Ciasso.
            
            And yet herein my ventrous Sir, ywis yee were to curious,
            Such places oftentimes do make most temperate men, most furious.
            And who dare sweare for you, I pray, that went for satisfaction,
            (You say your selfe) and so may bee euicted of the action?
            So that by your confession, sans verdict of a Iurie,
            In each place else you shew your wit, but there you shew'd your fury,
            Say what you list, sweare and protest, for all this great Brauado,
            
            It will be said, at least be guest, you were the Puncks Priuado.
            
            And so you'le loose great store of those, whose verse may giue you glory,
            Especially the female fry, the learned Signiory.
            You'le haue none such to praise you much: they wil suspect the wēch
            Hath turnd your Greeke and Latin both into a perfect French.
            Change then thy word (to satisfie) being alone with Sfogare,
            
            And then thy worke Ile dignifie, to be ad omnia quare.
            
            For who could say so much as thou (whereof thine bee the thankes)
            Or of the refractary Iew, or of the Mounte-bankes?
            The stubborne Iew (if it be true) was by thee catechized
            At Venice: which at Rome is since by Bellarmiue baptized.
            For sure that Iew from Venice came, we finde it so recorded,
            In late Gazettes: which or lies, or trifles ne're afforded.
            In which great act to doome aright. and not as partials,
            The greater share is Coryats, the lesse the Cardinals.
            Now, who shal read thy worthy work, & heare thy large discourses
            Will sweare thou knowst the Mountebāks & tracest al their courses.
            Thou hit'st the naile in al things else aright: But O the Boore him.
            That caytif-kerne, so stout, so sterne, il thriue he euermore,
            That capt thee for a bunch of grapes: ten tousand 
                  〈◊〉
                supplant
            I see wel science hath no foeman, nisiignorantem,
            
            
               
Hadst thou had courage to thy skil, and with this Gyant coped,
            (But O such skil and courage both in one can not bee hoped.)
            Thou mightst with Guy & Beuis bold in martiall praise haue shared,
            And Odcombe might with Hampton, & with Warwick haue cōpared.
            Oh then my Muse a higher pitch had flowne, and had thee set
            All pari to Sir Lancelot tho, before Sir Dagonnet.
            
            Yet braue I grant is thy reuenge for that his grosse abuse,
            Thy poynant pen hath 
                  〈◊〉
                him in, O piercing launce of Goose!
            Record we in the rolle of same the Goose and Oxe together,
            Whose shoos did beare him hence, and home, O euerlasting leather!
            Some newes yee shoos, for you did vse with Coryate stil to be,
            And might vs giue (if you could speake) some notes as well as he.
            Twere meete that now from shoos I goe, to sockes & slippers next,
            And yet its fit I them omit, I finde them not ith Text:
            And one bare word of one bare shirt I hope shalbe enough,
            He loues the naked truth too wel, such shifting to approue;
            For nought feares he back-biters nips, in doublet or in canyons,
            He holds them euer as they are, the trauellers companions.
            Couragious Coryate, for one Dutchman that thee sore assailed,
            Thou hast a hundred Picquardes slaine, and to the table nayled.
            Some men may thinke that this is strange: wel, he that list may cauel,
            Wise Coryate thinks no luggage light for him that means to trauel.
            Leaue we the baggage then behinde, and to our matter turne vs,
            As Coryate did, who left at home his socks and his cothurnoes.
            For now of wonders must I treat, wast not thinke you a wonder,
            To goe two thousand miles at least, in fiue months space, not vnder?
            And of strange notes, foure hundred leaues, twenty thousand lines to write,
            This sarre surpass 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Horcules his fifty in a night.
            Besides, rare man, he tell you can, the manners of each stranger,
            Yet, t' vnderstand one word they speake, he neuer was in danger.
            Then lanch thee forth (thou man of worth) when this thy worke is done
            According to thy great defigne, as farre as shines the Sunne.
            And bring vs notes of all the world, when thou hast past it thorow,
            Weele haue a Caske to put them in, shall put downe 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Explicit 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            
            Jncipit Gualterus Quin.
            In lode dell Autore.
            La Cornamusa di Gualtero Quin.
            SE'l gran guerrier, chi tanto fece & scrisse,
            Se stesso, è lmondo 
                  〈◊〉
                ingarbugliando,
            Per commandar à tutti, montre ei visse,
            De'suoi gran vanti andana 
                  〈◊〉
               ;
            Ben è ragion, Tom-asino galante,
            Ch'altiero é brauo tu ti 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Poiche nelfar, e scriuer stranagante,
            Vinci il gran Giulio, non che lo pareggi.
            Di quel, ch'egli 
                  〈◊〉
                in parecchi anni oprato
            Con schiere armate, scrisse vn libraccinolo:
            Ma dal ceruello tuo vn libraccio è nato
            Di quel, c'hai fatto in pochi 
                  〈◊〉
                solo:
            Latino & Greco sapeua esso assai;
            Ma del l'Ingleseera affatto ignorante:
            Tu'lvinci in questo, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                sai
            Greco e Latino, per far vn Pedante.
            Vn gran rumor e terrible fracasso
            Fece ei, per metter sottosopra il monde:
            Di dar da rider con solazzo & spasso
            Atutti, fu de'tuei dissegni il fondo.
            Molte 
                  〈◊〉
                de schiere 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Morir 
                  〈◊〉
                con 
                  〈◊〉
               , dardi, e 
                  〈◊〉
               :
            Mai non ti piaequer Archibugi, O Piche,
            Ne morte alcuna, fuor che de pidocchi:
            Quei chi scamparon l'vnghie tue prigions
            Portasts addosso, 
                  〈◊〉
                quel 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Disquadre 
                  〈◊〉
                e 
                  〈◊〉
                & padrons
            
               
Menossi 
                  〈◊〉
                trionfante e altiero.
            Ei 
                  〈◊〉
                ascese in Campidoglio,
            Con pompa e boria, in carro trionfale:
            Contadinesco carro senza orgoglio
            Per trionfar tipiacque; manco male,
            Coluimostrando, come andaua ratto
            Nel vincer, serisse, Io 
                  〈◊〉
               , viddi, 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            L'hai detto meglio tu vincendo il patto,
            Che tife scorrer e quinci, e costinci.
            Francia, Lamagnia, Italia, Heluetia, Rhetia
            Non scorse già senza armi quel 
                  〈◊〉
               ;
            Come scorresti tu ratto a Venetia,
            Eindietro a casa tua con poco impaccio.
            Solo vn Vilan Tedesco, imbriaco, e 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Con bastonate ben 
                  〈◊〉
                gli 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Forse ch'es sceso dal vecchio Ariouisto
            Dicasa Giulia pensò che tu 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Maper disgratia se'n valor attiuo
            A Giulio alcun sopra te desse il vanto;
            Egli è pur forza ch'in valor passino
            Voto e sentenza egli dia daltuo canto.
            Né 
                  〈◊〉
                viaggi gran fatica ci prese,
            Non peró senza Canai, Muli, & Cocchi:
            Tu sempre 
                  〈◊〉
                a pie, mal in arnese,
            Vincendo i cingani, staffieri, & scrocchi.
            El quel ch'a schiuo bauria per 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Bastotti vn par di 
                  〈◊〉
                in quel 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Che rattoppasti spesso con destrezza;
            De Lefinesca industria vero saggio.
            Questa lode 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            (Di che quel prodigo non fú mai degno)
            Ch'una camiscia & veste, da bvon 
                  〈◊〉
               :
            Sola portasti allhor senza aschio, O 
                  〈◊〉
               !
            Parsa a lui peste saria la 
                  〈◊〉
                rogna,
            Che nel gratterla 
                  〈◊〉
                sol zzo,
            Ballar ti fé come al suon di sampogna,
            O Violin di quel francese pazze.
            
               
L'haurlan vcciso i tuoi stenti, & disagi
            Nel mangiar, beuer, dormir, appiccarti
            Pulci, pidocchi, et cimici maluagi,
            Guaster le gambe, el culo scorticarti:
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Nel tranagliar col corpe il capo ancora,
            Quindi il ceruello ogn'hora lambicando;
            Perciascun passo, che pria facesti, ora
            Righe altretante dal ceruel stillando.
            S'ei questi affanni mai sofferti haurebbe,
            Manco gl'affronti, ente, et scorni, ch'omai
            Non 
                  〈◊〉
                sordo et cieco, soffrirebbe;
            Trastullo a te si fan pur questi guai.
            Poiche in oprar, dungue, én patir 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Anzilo vinci, Tom-asino inuitto,
            Qual Cornamusa si gonfi, et trauagli,
            Chi vuel cantarti con decoro et dritto.
            Explicit Gualterus Quin.
         
         
            
            Incipit Christopherus Brooke Eboracensis.
            
               As for these titles that follow, bestowed vpon me by this worthie Gentleman, I would haue thee know (Reader) that as I acknowledge my selfe vtterly vnworthy of them, so I meant to haue suppressed and concealed them, but that it is the Authours pleasure to prefixe them before his verses. Therfore for obeying of his will I haue thought good, much against mine owne will, to expresse them in this place, euen these:
            
            To the no lesse learned, then wise and discreet Gentleman, M. Thomas Coryate.
            
               In some few moneths trauels borne and brought vp to what you see, vz.
            To be the delight of a world of noble wits, to be a shame to all Authors, as the Gout and Quartan Feauer haue beeene to all Phisitians.
            
            
               This playne-song sendeth Christopher Brooke his poore friend, to attend the descant of his famous booke, through all hands, tongues, arts, trades, mysteries, and occupations whatsoeuer.
            
            THe subtill Greeke Vlysses needes must trauell,
            Ten yeares, for sooth, ouer much sand and grauell,
            
               
And many citties see, and manners know,
            Before there could be writ a booke or two
            Of his aduentutes: and he traueld still
            (Else there are lyers) sore against his will:
            But this rare English-Latin-Grecian,
            Of Orators and Authors the blacke Swan,
            A voluntarie iourney vndertooke
            Of scarce sixe moneths, and yet hath writ a booke
            Bigger then Homers, and (though writ in prose)
            As full of poetrie, spite of Homers nose.
            If he liu'd now that in Darius casket
            Plac'd the poote Iliads, hee had bought a basket
            Of richer stuffe 
                  〈◊〉
                thy volume large,
            Which thou (O noble Tom) at thine owne charge
            Art pleas'd to print. But thou needst not repent
            Of this thy bitter cost; for thy braue Precedent
            Great 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                is, who penned his owne gests,
            And (as some write) recited them at Feasts.
            And at's owne charge had printed them they say,
            If printing had beene vsed at that day.
            The Presse hath spent the three for one you got
            At your returne: whats that? poore thing God wot.
            Manure this land still with such bookes my friend,
            And you shall be paid for it in the end.
            For I (me thinkes) see how men striue to carry
            This Iouiall Iournall into each Library.
            And we ere long shall well percelue your wit,
            (Graue learned Bodley) by your placing it.
            Therfore lanch foorth great booke like ship of fame,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Hopewel of Odcombe thou shalt haue to name.
            Explicit Christopherus Brooke Eboracensis.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Johannes Hoskins.
            
               Cabalistical verses, which by transposition of words, syllables, and letters, make excellent 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , otherwise 
                     〈◊〉
                  , In 
                        〈◊〉
                      Authoris.
               
               EVen as the waues of brainelesse butter'd fish,
               Wih bugle horne writ in the Hebrew tong,
               Fuming vp flounders like a chasing-dish,
               That lookes asquint vpon a three-mans song:
               Or as your equinoctiall pasti-crust
               Proiecting out a purple chariot wheele,
               Doth squeaze the spheares, and intimate the dust;
               The dust which force of argument doth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Euen so this Author, this (This word gymnosophist is deriued from two Greck wordes 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which signifie 
                        〈◊〉
                      Sophister. And 
                        〈◊〉
                      refore cals the Author so because one day he went without a 
                        〈◊〉
                      at 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      it 
                        〈◊〉
                      washing.) Gymnosophist,
               Whom no delight of trauels toyle dismayes,
               Shall sympathize (thinke Reader what thou list)
               Crown'd with a quinsill tipt with marble prayse.
            
            
               Encomiologicall Antispasticks cosisting of Epitrits, the fourth in the first 
                        〈◊〉
                     , which the vulgar call Phaleuciac 
                        〈◊〉
                      syllabes; 
                        〈◊〉
                      Catalecticks, with Antispastic Asclepiads, trimeters 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of two 
                        〈◊〉
                      comma's of some learned named choriambicks, both together dicoli, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      and hyperrythmicall, amphibologicall, dedicated vnto the vndeclinable memorie of the antarkisticall Coryat, the onely true trauelling Porcupen of England.
               
               ADmired Coriat, who like a Porcupen,
               Dost shew prodigious things to thy countri-men.
               As 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   when he kils doth vse his owne darts,
               So do thy pretty quils make holes in our harts.
               
                  
That beast liues of other company destitute,
               So wentest thou alone euery way absolute.
               That beast creepeth a foote, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      pennis,
               
               So didst thou trot a iourney hence to Venice.
               Liue long foe to thy foe, 
                     〈◊〉
                   as a 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Liue long friend to thy friend, kind as a Porcupen.
               Hencefoorth adde to thy crest an armed Histrix,
               
               Since thy cariage hath resembled his tricks.
            
            
               The same in Latine.
               SEiaculo, sesepharetra, sese vtitur 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,Claudian. 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
               
               In reliquas Histrix 
                     〈◊〉
                   parat arma feras.
               Se co 
                     〈◊〉
                   ad Venetam tendens Coriatius vrhem,
               Se duce, se curru, se fuit vsus equo.
               Et decantat iter se nunc authore 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Nec minus à reditu se quoque teste 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Ergo non immeritò 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Histrix,
               Et laudes à se, non aliundè capit.
            
            
               NO more but so, I heard the crie,
               And like an old hound in came I
               To make it fuller, though I find
               My mouth decayes much in this kind.
               The cry was this, they cride by millions,
               Messengers, Curriers, and Postillions,
               Now out alas we are vndone
               To heare of Coryats paire of sho'ne;
               There is no newes we are more sory at,
               Then this strange newes of (A great Gyant 
                        〈◊〉
                      on 
                        〈◊〉
                      of whom mention is in Polychronicon.) Rawbone Coryat.
               
               Who like an Vnicorne went to Venice,
               And drinking neither Sacke nor 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Home in one payre of shoes did trample,
               A fearefull and a strange example.
               But what's the newes of learned people
               In Pauls-church-yard and neere Pauls steeple?
               
                  
Hang vp his shoes on top of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Tyed to his name in parchment 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               That may be read most legibly
               In Tuttle fields and Finsbury.
               Fame is but wind, thence wind may blow it
               So farre that all the world may know it:
               From Mexico and from Peru
               To China and to Cambalu:
               If the wind serue, it may haue lucke
               To passe by South to the bird Rucke.
               
               Greater then the Stymphalides
               That hid the Sunne from Hercules.
               
               And if Fames wings chance not to freeze,
               It may passe north nintie degrees,
               Beyond Metaincognita,
               
               Where though there be no holiday,
               Nor Christen people for to tell it,
               Horrible Beares and Whales may smell it.
               Thence may it on the Northren seas,
               On foote walke to the Antipodes,
               Whose feet against our feete do pace
               To keepe the center in his place.
               But when those fellowes that do wonder
               As we at them, how we go vnder
               From clime to clime and tongue to tongue,
               Throughout their 
                     〈◊〉
                   along,
               Haue tost these words as bals at tennis,
               
                  Tom Coryate went on foote from Venice.
               This trauelling 
                     〈◊〉
                   this walking sound
               Must needs come home 
                     〈◊〉
                   comming round,
               So that we shall 
                     〈◊〉
                   out vpon him,
               His fame in 
                     〈◊〉
                   hath out gone him,
               When all haue talked, and time hath tri'd him,
               Yet Coryate will be 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      idem.
               
            
            
               
                  
SCilicet haud animum 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   mutat,
               Et patriam 
                     〈◊〉
                   se quoque nemo fugit.
               Thersites Phrygiis Thersites perstat in oris,
               Nec Plato in Aegypta desinit 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Plato.
               
               Nec Thomas 
                  Nec vir peregrnians soemina, nec Anglus Romanus fiet. 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ab Indis,
               Nec 
                     〈◊〉
                   qui Coriatus 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     I meane egregiè cordatus 
                        〈◊〉
                      Catus Aelius Sextus.
               
               When all haue talked, and time hath tri'd him,
               Yet Coryate will be 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   idem.
            
            Explicit Ioannes Hoskins.
         
         
            Incipit Ioannes Pawlet de George Henton.
            
            
               These ensuing verses lately sent vnto mee by my tight worshipfull and generose countryman and neighbour in Somerset-shire Mr. Iohn Pawlet of George 
                        〈◊〉
                     , had such a glorious title prefixed before them that I meant to haue excluded it out of my booke, because I am altogether vnworthy of those 
                     〈◊〉
                   termes. But because this worthy Gentleman doth craue to haue it placed before his lines, I doe with his elegant verses present the same also vnto thee, viz.
               
            
            To the Darling of the MVSES and Minion of the GRACES, my deare country-man and friend M. THOMAS CORTATE of 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            SOme cal thee 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                by comparison;
            Comparisons are odious, I will none:
            But call thee (as thou art) Tom 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
            
            That is; The Man the World doth wonder at.
            
               
Whose Braine-pan-hath more Pan then Braine by ods,
            To make thee all Pan with the semi-gods,
            Which pan, when thy fleete wits a wandring goe,
            Is Discretion beares vpon his braine-pan to keepe his wits together. rung to keepe the swarme together so.
            So (recollected) thou with them didst 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            To the worlds Gardens, France and Italy,
            
            Where (like a Bee, from euery honied floure)
            The That is, 
                     〈◊〉
                  . oddest sweets didst; which makes thee scowre
            At home for life: where, in a 
                  Od-combe, the place of his birth, the hungry 
                     〈◊〉
                   whereof first digest his Cruditics, as he himselfe affirmes in his Title-page of this present worke. 
               Combe as odde
            
            Thou 
                  〈◊〉
                it, to feede those that flie abrode.
            Explicit 
                  〈◊〉
                Pawlet.
         
         
            Incipit Lionel Cranfield.
            GReat laude deserues the Author of this worke,
            Who saw the French, Dutch, Lombard, lew, & Turke;
            But speakes not any of their tongues as yet,
            For who in 
                  〈◊〉
                months can attaine to it?
            Short was his time, although his booke be long,
            Which shewes much wit, and memory more strong:
            Anyron memory; for who but he
            Could glew together such a rhapsodie
            Of pretious things? as towers, steeples, rocks;
            Tombes, theaters, the gallowes, bels, and clocks,
            Mules, Asses, 
                  〈◊〉
               , Churches, gates, Townes,
            Th'alpine mountaines, Curtezans and Dutch clownes.
            What man before hath writ so punctually
            To his eternal fame his iourneys story?
            And as he is the first that I can finde,
            So will he be the last of this rare kinde.
            Me thinkes when on his booke I cast my 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            I see a shop repleate with metchandize,
            And how the owner ielous of his 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            With pretious matter 
                  〈◊〉
                the same.
            
               
Many good parts he hath, no man too much
            Can them commend some few ile onely touch.
            He Greeke and Latin speakes with great ease
            Then hogs eate akornes, or tame pigeons pease:
            His ferret eies doe plod so on his booke,
            As make his lookes worse then a testy cooke.
            His tongue and feete are swifter then a flight,
            Yet both are glad when day resignes to night.
            He is not proud, his nature soft and milde,
            His complements are long, his lookes are wilde:
            Patient enough, but oh his action!
            Of great effect to moue and stirre vp passion.
            
               Odcombe be proud of thy odde Coryate,
            
            Borne to be great, and gracious with the State;
            How much I him well wish let this suffice,
            His booke best shewes that hee is deeply wise.
            Explicit Lionel Cranfield.
         
         
            jncipit Ioannes Sutclin.
            VVHether I thee should either praise or pitty
            My senses at great Dilemma are:
            For when I thinke how thou hast trauail'd farre,
            Canst Greeke and Latin speake, art curteous, witty,
            I these in thee and thee for them commend;
            But when I thinke how thou false friends to keepe
            Dost weare thy body, and dost leese thy sleepe,
            I thee then pitty and doe discommend.
            Thy feete haue gone a paineful pilgrimage,
            Thou many nights dost wrong thy hands and eies
            In writing of thy long Apologies;
            Thy tongue is all the day thy restlesse page.
            For shame intreate them better, I this craue,
            So they more ease, and thou more wit shalt haue.
            Explicit Ioannes Sutclin.
         
         
            
            Incipit Inigo Jones.
            All Mol. Mag.
            Tho. Cor.
            
               
                  ODde is the This is a figure called by the Grecians 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , that is, a diuision, when the word is so diuided a sunder as here: Odde is the Combe, so: Odcombe is the place from whence &c as in Ennius, 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         comminuit brum, for cerebrum:
                   
                  Combe from whence this Cocke did come,
               That Crow'd in Venice gainst the skinlesse Iewes.
               Who gaue him th' entertainement of Tom Drum;
               
               Yet he vndaunted slipt into the stewes
               For learnings cause; and in his Atticke rage
               
                  Beleeue him not Reader: Reade my Apology in my discourse of the Venetian Cortezans, Page 270, 15 Trod a tough hen of thirty yeeres of age.
            
            
               Enough of this; all pens in this doe trauel
               To tracke thy steps, who 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   like dost vary
               Thy shape to place, the home-borne Muse to grauel.
               For though in 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou not long didst tarry,
               Yet thouth' Italian soule so soone couldst steale,
               As in that time thou eat'st but one good 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               For France alas how soone (but that thou 
                     〈◊〉
                  )
               Couldst thou haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   thy beard ruffl'd thy 
                     〈◊〉
                  )
               Worne a foule shirt twelue weekes, and as thou 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Sung 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   through thy Persian 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               For faces, cringes, and a 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               And beene as scab'd a Monsieur as the best.
            
            
               Next, to tho sober Dutch I turne my tale,
               Who doe in earnest write thee Latin letters,
               And thou in good not paper ne're didst faile
               To answere them; so 
                     〈◊〉
                   you neither 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               But sympathize in all, saue when thou drink'st
               Thou makst a The modesty of the Author being such, & his temperance indrinking, that hee sometimes frowneth. when a health is drunke vnto him. crab-tree face, shakst head, and winkst.
            
            
               
               Last, to thy booke the Cordial of sad mindes,
               Or rather Cullis of our Od combe Cocke
               
               Sodden in trauel, which the Critique findes
               The best restorer next your Venice smocke.
               This booke who scornes to buy or on it looke,
               May he at Sessions craue, and want his booke.
            
            Explicit Inigo Iones.
         
         
            Jncipit Georgius Sydenham Brimptoniensis.
            Vpon the cloying Crudities chewed in the braines of the Author, and cast vp in the presse of the Printer, by the sole trauel and proper charge of Cordate Coryate, My conceited Country-man and Neighbour.
            
            COuld any one haue done this but thy selfe,
            Oh thou most peerlesse most renowned else?
            Regardlesse of thy stockings and of thy shoes,
            Afoote to wander through a vale of woes;
            Where though thou venturdst for to walke alone
            Like Hercules; so t'is of Coryate knowne,
            That he did n'ere in al his iourney flie once
            From Dogs, from Beares, from Buls, nor yet from Lions.
            In France I heard thou meeting with a Boare,
            (I doe but tel it as twas told before)
            His feareful head thy sword at one blow cuts
            So cruelly, that out came al his guts.
            At Hey delberg thou didst 
                  〈◊〉
                the Tunne,
            And boldly 
                  〈◊〉
                the brauest Dutchmans Sonne
            Come sit with thee, and drinke vntil there were
            
               
Notleft a drop for any other there.
            An act worthy thee, saue who saw thee ride
            Twixt Odcombe crosse and Iuil, and bestride
            Like Alexander Philips horse, would sweare,
            Thy former deeds with this might not compare.
            Comming to Venice, thy vnmatched feature
            Made straight a wench thinke thee a louelier creature
            Then thou thoughst Mary, when thou knowest poore Tom 
               Her cheeke or hand, a Chaucerisme.
            
            How glad thou wert to come and kisse her a bomme,
            These things of trauellers all make me to say,
            That wandering 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                beares the bel away.
            Now being return'd vnto thy natiue land,
            Here thou hast drawne with thine owne curious hand
            A worke more strangly praisd, and by more,
            Then euer worke was yet by many a score,
            A worke that all the world hath long'd to see,
            And now send post to fetch this rarity.
            A worke that hath long time expected beene,
            And now beyond all expectation seene;
            A worke that serues men for all kinde of vses,
            Mistake me not, I meane not for abuses;
            A worke that none but thine one selfe could handle,
            Nor thou haue done it without many a candle:
            A worke that will eternize thee til God Til Doomes day. come,
            And for thy sake thy famous Parish Odcombe.
            
            Explicit Georgius 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            Incipit Robertus Halswel.
            HAdst thou beene stil (in 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                brought forth,
            How grear had 
                  〈◊〉
                shy praise, how great thy worth.
            Dame Admiration hath but one true mother,
            Peruse this worke, and thou shalt finde her brother.
            Explicit Robertus Halswell.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Ioannes Gyfford.
            
               In praise of the Praise-transcending (mine old friend) Thomas Coryate.
               IF any aske, in verse what soare I at?
               My Muse replies: The praise of Coryate.
               
               He, who the immense straight passing ouer
               Twixt sandy Calais, and twixt chalkie Douer,
               With obseruations strange doth edge you on,
               To steale the fruits of many a region.
               And teacheth, without trauaile, how to trauel,
               O're spuing billowes, and o're gaulling grauel.
               Mount then Pierian Bards, or proudly strut,
               In praise of's braine more fresh then freshest nut.
            
            
               Againe for old acquaintance.
               WIt now or neuer helpe me to renowne
               The oddest Combe that Od-combe ere did crowne:
               The wonder of this age, which doth admire
               How Trauel, Wit, and Art doe all conspire
               To make him Table-talke, and pointed at,
               Filling mens mouthes, and eyes with Coryate.
               
               And yet he is to none he liues among,
               Moate in their eyes, nor blister on their tongue.
               Nay he's a spectacle vnto all eyes
               That makes great things of smal (in wordy wise,)
               And vnto tongues, most idle in their talking,
               He's like Greeke wine that sets them stil a walking.
               Neuer did Time, since first he held the Sithe,
               Produce Art such a Cutter of Queene-hithe.
               
                  
We stile him so; because that Hithe, or Banke,
               Whereon the Queenes of Art their Pupils ranke
               Doth yeeld such Cutters, that is, such as are
               The most acute, as thou art (Tom) and spare.
               For proofe whereof, loe here a booke as full
               Of cut-worke, as of hot braines is his scul.
               Here he cuts out with sharpest edge of wit,
               (That Through the subtil hnenesle of the edge. blunts when ought that's hard doth meet with it)
               Many a faire collop from the CONTINENT,
               To broyle on wits fire, Trau'lers to content.
               Of France he makes a rasher on the coales:
               And casts such salt of wit into her holes,
               That he doth make it saurie to the pallet
               Of Pilgrims, trauelling with bag and wallet.
               But this, (O this) I muse at most (perchance)
               That thou shouldst note such pretty things in France;
               Sith (when I crost it in my wandrings)
               I could not see the same for greater things.
               But t'was my fault such small things to decline
               That might haue made my fame as huge as thine:
               Of Italy, and al things (euery way)
               That lie in compasse of fiue months suruay,
               He so hath chopt it out to vs in parts
               (With liberal pen the toole of liberal Arts)
               That, in each part, we see, as in a streame
               (O eloquence) the liuely face of them:
               
                  Munster put vp thy pen, thou art put downe
               By Odcombs issue; then come Combe his crowne:
               Or stroke him on the head for shewing thee
               Each Gallowes Munster shewes not where one Gallowes stands in all his booke. hid in thy Cosmographie.
               
                  Ponponius Mela, and Ortelius,
               
               Nay, Pliny, with thy bookes voluminous,
               Goe get ye gone, or lowly too him fall;
               For his now Goose-quil farte out-flies yee al.
               Wel maist thou Germany vpon him spue,
               That to thy stomacke bitter is as Rue.
               Sith he obscures the glory of thy men
               
                  
That glorified thee with their grosser pen:
               For he is more particular by ods
               In his descriptions, nay, he turnes the clods
               Of euery soyle to see what vnderlies,
               And that expresseth, be it wormes or flies:
               And, not a Gibbet, wheele, nor ought beside
               Whereon (for some offence) a man hath di'd,
               If neere his walke, (nay though far off it lay)
               But too't he went, and doth the same display.
               England reioyce, who now a man hast bred
               That is all wit, and learning, saue the head,
               And that's al Sconce the powers of sense too keepe,
               Where they, from wits incursions, safely sleepe.
               Then O ye gallants of the English Court,
               Let Coryats trauels trauaile you with sport.
               And as great Alexander, Homer making
               His pillowes bolster (for his pleasure waking)
               Made sport with him: so, let our Coryats worke
               Vnder your bolster or your buttons lurke
               To sport, and pleasure you by night and day:
               For, tis a Sermon better then a Play,
               Sermon we call it, 
                     〈◊〉
                   it is a speech
               Of all that lay within his trauels reach.
               Then to this Sermon of those holy things
               (For he (among) doth talke of God and Kings)
               If any be dispos'd t'apply their care,
               Or that about them rather it would beare,
               They shall be sau'd from woe, in words of mirth,
               By Coryats booke, his wits sole Heaven on Earth.
               
            
            Explicit Ioannes Gyfford.
         
         
            Incipit Richardus Corbet.
            Spectatissimo, punctisque omnibus dignissimo, Thoma Cariate de Odcombe, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Pedestris ordinis, Equestris samae.
            
               
QVòd mare transier is, quòd rura 
                  〈◊〉
                Pedester,
            Iam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                colat reduces patria lata 
                  〈◊〉
               :
            Quod
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                idem numero tibi calceus here:, & ille
            Cum corio redeas, quo coriatus abis:
            Fatum omen
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                miramur nominis, ex que
            Calcibus & soleis fluxit 
                  〈◊〉
                tuis.
            Nam quicunque eadem 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Excoriatus erit, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Coriatus eat.
            In librum suum.

                  De tepollicitus 
                        〈◊〉
                     , es, sed in 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Est magnus 
                        〈◊〉
                      hic liber libēllus.
               
            
            I Do not wonder Coryate that thou hast
            Ouer the Alpes, through France and Sauoy past,
            Parch't on thy skin, and foundred in thy 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Faint, thirstie, lowzie, and didct liue to seet.
            Though these are Romaue sufferings, and do show
            What creatures backe thou hadst, could carry so,
            All I admire, is thy returne, and how
            Thy slender pasternes could thee beare, when now
            Thy obseruations with thy braine ingendred,
            Haue stuft thy massie and voluminous head
            With mountaines, abbies, churches, synagogues,
            Preputiall offals, and Dutch Dia ogues:
            A burthen far more grieuous then the weight
            Of wine, or sleepe; more vexing then the freight
            Of fruite and oysters, which lade many a pate,
            And send folkes crying home from Billing 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            No more shall man with mortar on his head
            Set forwards towards Rome: no. Thou art bred
            A terror to all footmen, and all Porters;
            And all lay-men that will turne Iewes exhorters.
            To flie their conquered trade. Proud England then
            Embrace this (I meane his booke.) 
                  〈◊〉
               , which the Man of Men
            Hath landed here, and change thy welladay
            Into some home-spun welcome Roundelay.
            
               
Send of this stuffe thy territories thorough
            To Ireland, Walcs, and Scottish 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
            There let this booke be read and vnderstood,
            Where is no theame not writer halfe so good.
            Explicit Robertus 
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            jncipit Joannes Dones.
            LO her's man, worthy indeed to trauell;
            Fat Libian plaines, strangest China's graucll.
            For Europe well hath seene him stirre his stumpet:
            Turning his double shoes to simple pumpes.
            And for relation, looke he doth affoord,
            Almost for euey step he tooke a word;
            What had he done had he 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                Ocean
            With swimming Drake or famous Magolan?
            
            And kiss'd that vnturn'd (Terra incognita.) cheeks of our old mother,
            Since so our Europes world he can discouer?
            It's not that (Rablais.) French which made his (Pantagruel.) Gydns see
            Those vneouth Ilands where words frozen bee,
            Till by the 
                  〈◊〉
                next yeare they 
                  〈◊〉
                againe;
            Whose Papagauts, Andouilers, and that traine
            Should be such matter for a 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            As he would make? 
                  〈◊〉
                makes ten times worse,
            And yet so pleasing is shall laughter 
                  〈◊〉
               :
            And be his vaine, his gaind, his 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
               ?
            Sit not stid then, keeping 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               :
            But get thee 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                some land 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
            From 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                thy wisdom with those woders,
            Rarer then sommers 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
            And take this praise of that 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                done 
                  〈◊〉
                die.
            Tis pitty ere thy flow should 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Explicit Ioannes Dones.
         
         
            
            Incipit Ioannes Chapman.
            To the Philologue Reader in commendation of our Philogracicall Writer, Topographicall Tom Coryate of Odcombe.
            OVr Odde Author hath comb'd the sertile pate
            Of his knowledge, that thou mightst learne to prate
            Of trauell, his heeles bearing thy head ouer
            Too and againe from Venice vnto Douer
            Though thou sit still, and at his simple charge
            Payes for thy mirth, more then in Graues-end barge,
            Tilt-boate, or the Tauernes thou canst find:
            For here is musicke without noyse or wind.
            A volume which though t'will not in thy pockit,
            Yet in thy chest thou maist for euer locke it,
            For thy childrens children to reade hereafter,
            Beeing disposed to trauell, or to laughter.
            Nor must thou wonder so much stuffe should come
            From 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Tom 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                quill of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            His little eyes set in his liuing head
            See farther then great eyes in one that's dead;
            So he a scholler, but at Winchester,
            
            Doth take mens eares more then did Stone or Chester.
            
            They could do nought but ruyle, or flatter all;
            His ieasts and acts are purely naturall,
            Stuffed full of Greeke and Latin whipt into him.
            Hau'ng learning iust enough to vndo him,
            Vnlesse thou pitty on his charge do take.
            And helpe buy of his bookes for thine owne sake.
            Here is not 
                  〈◊〉
                much 
                  〈◊〉
                few words;
            His (Mistake me not Reader, I therefore callit little, as hauing relation to the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   these of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   traules, viz. fiue moneths, in which short time, though an ordinary traueller would haue written but little: yet if you reade his booke, you may perceiue, that in that short space 
                     〈◊〉
                   found matter enough to affoord many lines of Obseruations to his Countri-men.) little 
                  〈◊〉
                many lines affords
            
               
Buy then, and passe not by the writers glorie,
            That for thy sake hath pen'd this learned storie;
            Wherein he hath three trauels vndergone,
            To pace, to pen, to print it too alone.
            Few Oratours so copiously indite,
            So thou but reade, he cares not (I meane how much he writes or his Obseruations in 
                     〈◊〉
                   countries.) what he write.
            He tels all truth, yet is no 
                  〈◊〉
               , nor child,
            No lyar; yet he is the Traueller styl'd:
            But brought no more tongs home then set him forth.
            Now let his booke for me commend his worth;
            Of whose full merits I could write much better,
            But that I feare to make his worke my detter.
            Explicit Ioannes Chapman.
         
         
            
               Jncipit Thomas Campianus Medicinae Doctor.
            In Peragrantissimi, Itinerosissimi, Montiscandentissimi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Peditis, Thomae Coryati, viginti-hebdomadarium Diarium, sex pedibus gradiens, partim vero claudicans, Encomiasticon.
            
            AD Venetos venit corie Coryatus ab vno
            Vectus, &, vt vectus, penè 
                  〈◊〉
                erat.
            Naue vna Dracus sic totum 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            At rediens retulit to Coryate minus.
            Illius vndigenas tenet vnica charta labores,
            Tota 
                  〈◊〉
                sed vix bibliotheca capit.
            Explicit Thomas Campianus.
         
         
            
            Incipit Gulielmus Fenton.
            SHeeloosht 
                  〈◊〉
                conuay alefill;
            Emnanght elslopen seraght emneghtill;
            Ofaghth contraltight erpon emselah,
            Prutalt artennah semank semnelah.
            
               Jn English thus.
               FAire starte of learning which on vs dost shine,
               With beauteous lustre and aspectfull cheare,
               Goe lend thy light a while beyond the line,
               And blaze on th Antipodian hemispheare.
               Explicit Gulielmus 
                     〈◊〉
                   de Knockesergus.
            
         
         
            Jncipit Ioannes Owen.
            To his ingenious & iudicious frind M. Thomas Coryate, in commendation of this learned Worke.
            
               An Epigramme.
               
                  CHrysippus Colwort, Lucian 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   lie
               Commend in learned writ aboue the skie;
               
                  Fannius the Nettle, Fauorin the Feuer;
               Whose praise with Sun and Moone indure for euer.
               In spite of some that seeme, but are not holy,
               
                  Erasmus spent much wit in prayse of Folly.
               Some later wits haue writ the Asses praise,
               O that those Lads were liuing in thy dayes!
               For if they prais'd base things in learned writ,
               How much more would they praise thy learned wit?
            
            
               In laudem eiusdem Distichon.
               TOt liber hic landes, quot habet vnlpecula fraudes;
               Vix humèris tantum sustinet Atlas onus.
            
            
               
               To the Reader. Jn prayse of this worthy Worke, and the Authour thereof.
               
               THe Fox is not so full of wiles
               As this booke full of learned smiles:
               Come seeke, and thou 
                     〈◊〉
                   find in it
               Th'Abridgement of great Brittains wit.
            
            Explicit Ioannes Owen.
         
         
            Incipit Petrus Alley.
            CAnnons, Culuerings, Sakers and Slings,
            Curr ers 
                  〈◊〉
               , and warlike 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Breath foorth your bowels, make the aire thunder
            
               Of Coryate of Odcombe, Somersets wonder.
            Sound 
                  〈◊〉
               , beate Drums, sing merily life,
            
               Bellona's musicke encouragers of strife.
            Awake men of warre, Vlysses appeares
            Whose trauels report more dangerous feares.
            Send in your Sentinels, your Corporals call,
            Examine your Sergeants and Officers all.
            Nor Captains, nor Colonels, nor Generals great
            Haue made the like iourney, or like setreate.
            Twixt Venice and Flushing on foote he went
            With one paire of shoes 
                  〈◊〉
                they were halfe spent;
            Ouer hils, dales, valleys, and plaines,
            Vntill his iourneys end he attaines.
            But what mishap to him there besell,
            His booke who shall reade, is able to tell.
            His dangerous incounter with cruell Iewes,
            His courting a Curt zan in the slewes,
            His perils in citties, townes and 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            His fearefull climing of the steepie Al es;
            
               
Aboue the cloudes through the middle region,
            With aduentures more then beyond a legion.
            His bickering with the barbarous Boore,
            Was one of the least by many a 
                  〈◊〉
               ;
            But his politique handling of the clowne
            Is very well worth the setting downe:
            And cunning recouerie of his hat
            With humble hauieur and gentle chat.
            Many more hazards he leaues to expresse,
            Onely to make the volume the lesse.
            For if he should all to the presse send,
            His booke I doubt would neuer haue an end.
            Then Souldiers sit downe, let your ensignes be torne,
            
               Coryate hath conquered you with his shoes but half worne.
            Let no man mursnur (Pythagoras dixit)
            Gainst Coryats attempts que supravixit
            
            
               Et viuat & 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                with a famous stile,
            He and his shoes that trod many a mile.
            Explicit Petrus Alley.
         
         
            Incipit Samuel Page.
            To the most worthy Patriot, his most desired friend M. Thomas Coryat of Odcombe, Gentleman and 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               ISing the man, helpe me ye sacred Nine,
               A fitter taske sor you to vndertake
               In your owne numbers and immortall line,
               His numberlesse deseruings to partake
               To his owne natiues, whose expecting eye
               Now stands wide open for his historie.
            
            
               
               Drinke your springs drie you Heliconian Dames,
               
               Here's worke for nine such nines to write his praise,
               Whose variable eye his 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   somes
               For strange ingrossements made in so few daies.
               Put al your wits distillement in your pen
               To doe him right that shames al other men.
            
            
               No curious ambition moou'd our friend
               T' exhale the secrets of a sorraine slate,
               Hee scorn'd to make a tongue or two his end
               To come a diphthong home; it betrer sate
               With his proiection and intendements wise,
               To turne his Microcosme all into eyes.
            
            
               His eyes on all haue set all eyes on him,
               Whose obseruations past whose present pen
               Whose future circlings of this globe, wil dimme
               The wondred glory of al other men,
               And giue the world in one synoptick quil,
               Ful proofe that he is Brittaines Perspicil.
               
            
            
               Goe on braue goer, and graue writer write;
               Thy farre-sight eye, and thy long-hearing eares
               Shal prompt thy tongue to speake, thy pen t'indite
               Thy Vlyssean trauels of ten yeeres.
               Thine is thy gentry, and thy vertue thine.
               But thy experience (Brittaine saith) is mine.
            
            
               Thy first walke was the surface and out-side
               Of some choyce rarities in stranger earth:
               Thy second trauels promise farre and wide
               Of greater wonders yet a nobler birth:
               Thou didst but shaue the lands thou sawst of late,
               Thy future walkes will them 
                     〈◊〉
                   CORIATE.
            
            Explicit Samuel Page.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Thomas Momford.
            
               WEll may his name be called Coryate,
               
               Not of the outward pelt or hairy skinne,
               But of the heart, or very 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   of wit.
               For his conceits shew that his heads within
               His wit, and in his trauels and his works
               Most strange aduentures and experience 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               When he fear'd theeues in policy he begs,
               To saue his purse and selfe from further danger;
               He did escape the force of rotten egs,
               Throwne out by whores vpon an innocent stranger,
               Vpon the monstrous Tun he 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   de,
               In all these things his wit was soundly tri' de.
            
            
               His worthy deeds can neuer be exampled,
               That in a stable lodg'd himselfe al night,
               Ventred his bones with wild iades to be trampled,
               And there endured many a bloudy bite,
               Our English trauellers with all their 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Cannot compare with 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            
               How much are we bound to him for his 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               That for our sakes as plainely as he can
               Writes all these things, not for the hope of gaines,
               But to the capacity of an English man.
               He might as well haue set vs all to seeke,
               If (as he speakes) he had writ his minde in Greeke.
            
            Explicit Thomas Mimford.
         
         
            Incipit Thomas Bastard.
            PVt downe, put downe Tom 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               
Our latest rares, which glory not:
            Since we thy 
                  〈◊〉
                did peruse
            Fraught with the quintessence of newes.
            On seuerall subiects thou hast grated,
            Of men, of bookes yet vnrelated.
            Ther's nothing left for traueller,
            Nor for the trimmest Caualier
            For table talke, in my poore sense
            Thou putst's downe all intelligence.
            The like of things as thou hast noted,
            Nor is, nor was, nor shal be quoted.
            Nor in the chanting Poets theames,
            Nor in the wisest sickmens dreames:
            Nor in the bookes of Pacon Friar:
            Nor in Herodotus the liar:
            Nor in the mud of Nilus thicke,
            With wormy monsters crawling quicke.
            To thee giue thanks for thoughtlesse skil,
            Reports which neuer dropt from quil.
            Which couldst if thou wouldst vnderborne it,
            Haue spoke of state, but thou didst scorne it.
            Thou hast seene Kings, there is no doubt,
            But wisely didst thou leaue them out.
            Choosing by iudgements ayme to hit,
            What all haue mist for want of wit.
            Whilst snow on lofty Alpes shal freeze,
            And paint the dales rich butterflies,
            Thy name shal liue, nor be forgotten,
            When Siuil Oranges be rotten.
            And thou shalt weare our English Bayes,
            And surfeit, yet not die of praise.
            Explicit Thomas Bastard.
         
         
            
            Incipit Gulielmus Baker.
            
               The Anatomy, dissection, or cutting vp of the great Quack-saluer of words, Mr. Thomas 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  our 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Mercury.
               TO praise thee or thy worke (which is the moddel
               Of most the wit enskonfed in thy noddell)
               Were madnesse; since the Poets of our daies
               Run giddy in the circle of thy praise.
               When thou wast borne, some say, and all doe thinke,
               The vrine that thou mad'st, was perfect inke.
               Cosmographers bespoken haue thy head,
               (The eares first pared off, and polished)
               For a terrestrial Globe: and Coryate,
               
               Thy — shall serue to be a Promontory at
               Nicest exactnesse: precious is thy life,
               When ares and nature for thee are at 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               So full of Iouial glee, that men hereafter
               Shal terme thee eldest sonne to wrinkled laughter,
               Better then Rhubarbi purging melancholy.
               One that hath got of words the monopoly:
               That eues-drops a phrase, and like a spie
               Watcheth each bumb 
                     〈◊〉
                   word, as it doth flie.
               His presence is more grateful vnto al
               Then a new play, or on some festiual
               Strange squibs and fire-works, which doe clime the skies,
               And with their glaring sparkes mate vulgar eyes.
               Tis thought if longer hee in England tarries,
               He will vndoe cookes shops and Ordinaries.
               For who, to 
                     〈◊〉
                   a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , an him steales,
               Forgetteth hunger, and out-laughes his meales.
               He knew and felt the Boores, yet was not boorish,
               He knew and selt the whores, yet was not whorish,
               
                  
As Phoebus in his ful of noone-tide pride,
               Passing through muddy clouds, doth pure abide.
               He is a gemme most worthy to be hung
               And worne in choicest eares: but his blowne tongue
               With talke sets ships agoing on their waies,
               VVhen they lie bed-rid, and becalmd on seas.
            
            
               Vpon this vnmatched worke, the true hieroglyphicke of that obseruatiue, and long-winded Gentleman Thomas 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               OVr trauelling 
                     〈◊〉
                  , liquorous of Nouelties,
               Enquire each minute for thy Cindities;
               
               And hope, that as those haddocks tooke refection.
               Cast from thy sea-
                     〈◊〉
                   stomacks 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               And straight grew trauellers, and forso oke our Maine,
               To 
                     〈◊〉
                   on the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               So they by thy disgorgement, at their will
               Shall put downo Web, or Sir Iohn 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               For such an itch of 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   begotten,
               (To the 
                     〈◊〉
                   good, and thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   be 
                     〈◊〉
                   spoken)
               Thy booke shall 
                     〈◊〉
                   the kingdome better far
               Then erst the Irish or Lowcountry war.
               Here natiue Graces carelesly doe lurke
               Skorning Arts borrowed dressings: and thy worke
               Simple as truth, not artificial,
               But like thy selfe naked, and natural.
               Yet here a riddle is, wil pose the wise,
               
                  Tom speaketh truth, and yet was ful of lice.
               And for his volume, this I date to say,
               VVhen he did make this worke he did not play;
               For such huge meritorious paines he tooke,
               That if he be sau'd, twil be by his booke.
            
            Explicit Gulielmus Baker.
         
         
            
            Incipit 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            AWake thou Cocke of great renowne.
            And Crow the praise of Odcombes towne,
            For breeding such a world of wonder,
            Whose writings moue the aire to thunder.
            Thou art the Theefe of trauellers treasury,
            By bartring thy wit for extreame vsury.
            Which is as fine as cobweb-lawne,
            And runneth like the streame of Dawne.
            
            Thy Goate-like sense the rauisher of fame
            Hath parcel-gilt thy memory and name.
            The inuentory of thy braines endeuours
            Hath plumed thee with the Peacocks feathers.
            Which made thee fire to learne out newes,
            And brought thee home from Venice 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Where Emilia faire thou didst frost-bit,
            And she inflamed thy melting wit;
            Thy braine like 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                doth ebbe and flow,
            But fixed is thy wit by standing in the snow
            To keepe out the Connies from leaping the 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Which proues chee a Priest of the Order of Baal.
            
            Thou art the Syren that those inchaunt
            That with their eares thy Muse doe haunt.
            Thou are the 
                  〈◊〉
                that in the 
                  〈◊〉
                nest was borne,
            Whereby thy birth high mounted hath thy horne.
            If thou (sweet Tom) such 
                  〈◊〉
                must haue,
            What then must he 
                  〈◊〉
                got the 
                  〈◊〉
               ?
            But let him be as he may bee,
            Thou art his hony, and hony-combe, men 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Explicit 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
         
         
            
            Incipit Josias Clarke.
            Anagramma in nomen Authoris Thomas Coriatus.
            
            Hoc totus amaris.
            VRbes 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , Cosmopolita,
            
            Cortoris aut animi quis magè quaso 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                memoranda fideli,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                amor patriae, permiscens 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
               , describis 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Nomen & omen 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , HOCTOTVS AMARIS.
            
            Digna notanda 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                legenda 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Explicit Iosias Clarke.
         
         
            Jncipit Thomas Farnaby alias Bainrafe.
            
               IN verdant meadowes crown'd with springs fresh pride
               The paineful Bee tastes euery fragrant flower;
               His thighes ful 
                     〈◊〉
                  , on 
                     〈◊〉
                   wing doth glide
               Home, to store vp his wealth in hony bower.
               From trauailes strange, so Coryate late come home,
               With flowing Nectar filles this hony Combe.
               
            
            
               
                  LYcurgus, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Haue by their trauails taught learned Thomas,
               
               That an 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   is not borne at home,
               But made abroade. Wherefore he leaues 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
               
               
                  
And the Transalpine countrie visits. VVhere hee
               By horse, by cart, on 
                     〈◊〉
                   full 
                     〈◊〉
                   a weary
               Iourney 
                     〈◊〉
                  , with curious obseruation
               Noting the liues and manners of each nation.
               VVhence with wing-footed speed making returne, all
               His right and left aduentures in this iournal
               Hath Gobled vp in hast. And simply true
               Shames not to write how he at sea did vomit.
               There shal you read of 
                     〈◊〉
                   surpassing 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Clowd-touching hilles, Alcinous PARIS Garden.
               Strange Butter-flies. 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Pelting the Greeke in his Venetian 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               But past the besieging of his she Pergamo
               An Irish lodging takes with lades at Bergamo.
               Of Epitaphes and Letters he cites volumes,
               Measures Pyramide 
                     〈◊〉
                   and high columnes.
               Scapes the Dutch 
                     〈◊〉
                  , th Irus or 
                     〈◊〉
                   — 
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Heydelberg 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Cadh.
               
               VVhich with dimension 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               In briefe from 
                     〈◊〉
                   he to Flussing hobled
               With no more shirts then backs, shoes seldome 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Which shirt, which shoes, with hat of mickle price,
               His 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               (Like some world-circling ship, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   shield
               Of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or trophey of 
                     〈◊〉
                   field)
               Hang Monuments of euiternal glory, at
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   to th' honour of Thomas 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               So that when death his soule and body 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            Explicit Thomas 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            Incipit Gulielmus Austin.
            HOw shal my pen describe thy praise
            Thou only wonder of our 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            

               
Since tis a taske that best befits
            Our Poets chiefe, I meane the wits.
            I wish, since I to write 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            My style as high as those in Kent.
            But shall I prayse thy booke or person?
            The grauest lines of learned Gerson,
            
            Or smoothest verse 
                  〈◊〉
                came from Ouid
            
            Vnable is to tell vs of it.
            For none can do't mongst liuing men,
            Iust as it is but Coryats pen.
            To him alone belongs the glorie
            Of all ye see written before ye.
            To him that far and neare hath trauaild,
            Gone, and return'd, his wit vngrauel'd;
            Slept in his clothes; like westerne Pugge,
            Sans Monmouth cap, or gowne or rugge;
            And now for trophey of rich price
            Hangs vp his garments full of lice,
            Which heretofore like weeds of proofe
            Seru'd him to keepe the cold aloofe.
            When as he past the lesuit parts,
            Who were not able with their arts,
            And all their arguments to find
            One hole to 
                  〈◊〉
                his constant mind.
            But conquering still along did passe,
            Nor could they all make him an As
            
            
               Sassinate of his Prince or Peere,
            For still his conscience kept him cleere.
            But if his purpose do hot vary,
            
               He meanes to fetch one more vagary.
            To see before his comming backe,
            The furdest bounds of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Iacke.
            
            When going on I hope hee'l worke
            All Christendome against the Turke
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            In China or Ierusalem.
            Oh may he goe, that they may there
            

               
Admire his wit as we do heare.
            Whose Chastity and Temperance
            Italy knowes as well as France.
            A curtizan, or courteous one
            He hates like Punke of Babylon.
            He neuer learn'd of bright Apollo,
            
            The Dutch Garraus or German Swallow.
            Nor euer haue I heard him noted
            For drinking drunke with 
                  〈◊〉
                bloted.
            Learning's his loue, and he a scholler,
            In Greeke and Latine doth extoll her.
            By whose pure helpe and sacred art,
            (Which he long since hath learn'd by hart)
            Hee'l guard himselfe if foes enuiron,
            As well with verses as old yron;
            And sting a man with inke and paper
            More Satyre-like, then with a Rapier.
            And now of late a booke hath writ
            In prayse of learning and his wit.
            From Odcombe do his 
                  〈◊〉
                flow,
            Then must there Come Ode trickes I trow.
            The famous booke of Mandeuill
            
            Tell not of things so strange and euill,
            Of iests, mistakings and misprisions,
            Of Pagans, Iewes, and 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Of Tombs, Sepulchers, dead mens bones,
            Of Epitaphs, of stockes and stones.
            And how in Venice at a supper:
            But why should I thy prayses slubber?
            Since thou thy selfe in lines of worth
            Hast writ it downe and set it forth
            At thine owne proper cost and charge,
            As the Church-wardens do their large
            And spatious windowes in the church,
            Where schoole-boyes bummes are 
                  〈◊〉
                with burch.
            Besides, thy front shewes not a little
            Thy rare conceit, For in thy title
            
               
Whole sholes of Gudgins gaping skip
            To catch thy larges from the ship;
            And dance for ioy in hope to winne thee,
            Because they seele there's some what in thee.
            Nay more then this, thy very picture
            Seemes of it selfe to read a Lecture
            Betweene three comely Virgins plac'd,
            Figuring the countries where thou wast.
            Italy diet, wine from France,
            Germany giues thee vtterance.
            The world ere long on same shall raise thee,
            Then what need my poore pen to prayse thee?
            Yet ere I end, i'le prophesie,
            If any shall (like thee) fly hie,
            And touch Pernassus in discourse
            With flying pen like winged horse:
            Thy name aboue shall him renowne.
            For all the wits about the towne
            Shall honoured Laurell on him set,
            And call him second Caryet.
            
            And thus adiew, since time doth barre vs,
            I take my leaue, Thine vsque ad-aras.
            
            Explicit Gulielmus Austin.
         
         
            Jncipit Glareanus Vadianus.
            
               De THOMA CORIATO Odcombiensi apud Britanno-Belgas ciue, homine Heteroclito & Anomalo, atque Planeta extra suum 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , Legenda 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Hemist'chion hoc 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      readendum censent 
                        〈◊〉
                     , viz. (I 
                           〈◊〉
                         the harmles man) 
                        〈◊〉
                     , (Oratio pro Archia Poeta) A prayer for the Arch-poet Si quaeratur, quo 
                        〈◊〉
                      in dictione (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     (
                           〈◊〉
                        ) 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      a esse 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      itaimplicare (harmelesse) vel (without harme:) Si vltcrius 
                        〈◊〉
                      quare 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      particula que prafigi debet, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      est in voce 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                      velle Au 
                        〈◊〉
                      coriaticam 
                        〈◊〉
                     . A 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   virumque cano, 
                     〈◊〉
                   quiraptus ab 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  Armoricosque sinus rostratis nauibus 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Multa tulit fecit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   miser; longóque peracto
               Terrarum tractuque maris, per inho 
                     〈◊〉
                   mundi
               Littoraque, & rigidis loca 
                     〈◊〉
                   imperuia 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               In proprium tandem redijt: 
                     〈◊〉
                   viarum
               Consedit, repetens luctus 
                     〈◊〉
                   labores.
               Quos dum 
                     〈◊〉
                   at, pleno Nimis me perstring is mi Glariane. Arbitraris enim (sed perperam) illud 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in ver nacula nostra lingua, esse verum. Trauellers may lye by authoritle
                   & 
                     〈◊〉
                   folle
               Spirat, Magnâtum 
                     〈◊〉
                   condire secundas
               Sueuit, & immodico pnlmonem extendere risu;
               Vnus moeroris Medicus; laterum vnus Aliptes,
               Unica Theriace 
                     〈◊〉
                   noxia toxica pellens,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               Postquam conscendit 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                   solutus
               In mare monstriferum ventorum irremigat alis,
               Protinus hic Pelagi & Telluris inutile Scio te alludere ad illud Homericum. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Sed non mihi arridet tua allusio. pondus,
               Sarcina
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ipse sibi, ructat, singultit, et vdis
               Prospiciens oculis late 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               " Decorto Coryate tuo nunc, inquit, aguntur
               " Iudicia, O Odcomba vale, mulctralia, mactra,
               " Armamenta mei ruris; mutasse dolemus
               " 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   cimbâ, en in remos ramus abiuit:
               " Arbor in antennas et 
                     〈◊〉
                  , hortus in aquor,
               " Mobile pro fixo; pro terra, tergora Ponti,
               " Pro clino clauum 
                     〈◊〉
                   pro mergite mergos.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , stomache 
                     〈◊〉
                   cerebrum,
               Nauseat, et nutat, tussit, screat, oscitat, ager
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   vomit quantum 
                     〈◊〉
                   alta 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Apta bobus mittunt steriles 
                     〈◊〉
                   in agros.
               Compellat 
                     〈◊〉
                   subitò 
                     〈◊〉
                   stupentes,
               Tolli e 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               Atque it a perlotum 
                     〈◊〉
                   in littore 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Conualet Anaeus, duplicataque robora sumit.
               Egreditur, tactàqu semel tellure, repente
               Inde velut Xerxes inflixit verher a ponto,
               Et iussit cohibere minas, compescere fluctus.
               Tum porro perrexit iter, cinctuque 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
                  
Induit interulam 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   tinctam
               Sexipeds contra vermes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   rotundos.
               Quam per tot menses pedicoso in corpore gessit,
               Quot solet in matris puor efformarier 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Baltens iniectus pugili latus alligat 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Ense Medusaeum quali caput abstulit olim
               Perseus, huic Harpe nomen; 
                     〈◊〉
                   quale sacrauit
               
                  Pausanias ferrum quod Myrtalis 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   vocatum est.
               Hoc vnum interer at, Coryatidi quod sua Gladius Guidonis 
                        〈◊〉
                      censis. 
                  Morglai
               
               Non acies, non cuspis erat, sed plumbea lamna
               Nescia bellorum, 
                     〈◊〉
                   & pacis amatrix,
               Hanc non Herculeum pectus, non dextera vibrat,
               Brachia fulta toris, validis 
                     〈◊〉
                   mota lacertis,
               Sed vir Ceruinus, 
                     〈◊〉
                   fugacior vlle,
               Perpectua glacie cu'us praecordia frigent,
               Tergaque qui gladiis potius quàm pectora vertit.
               Aemulus Alcidae 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               Clamari titulo, sed non 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               Ut cui nec vestis, nec velamenta superbis
               Apta sedent humeris, pedibus 
                     〈◊〉
                   mollis aluta,
               Ocreauè 
                     〈◊〉
                   suras solitus vincire cothurnus,
               Empta sed à verpis 
                     〈◊〉
                   bissina diplois,
               Calceus aut 
                     〈◊〉
                   quem supra fibula mordet,
               Et benè suppactas soleas cui subula iunxit,
               Hirtaque seta suis docti cerdonis ab arte.
               Non alio hic 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   iumento fortiter vsus
               Viribus infractis Gallos penetrauit & 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Victor hyperboreos populos superasset & vltra,
               Sinon audisset gentem 
                     〈◊〉
                   tremenda
               Torpentes mactasse asinos ad Apollinis aras.
               Flexit iter, tumidum guttur 
                     〈◊〉
                   ad Alpes.
               Long a per 
                     〈◊〉
                   tenuit via mollis 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   diu, 
                     〈◊〉
                   & multa morantem,
               Diues ager fructu, generosa vite, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Expleuit pingui mensa, fluidisque racemis.
               Ante etenim generis gentisque 
                     〈◊〉
                  , & exors
               Ipse sui decoris, mendicos inter, agyrtas,
               
                  
Erronumque greçes, perhibetur adoppida circum
               Ostiaque à populo Valde erras mi Glareane, semel enim dun taxat in 
                        〈◊〉
                      mea 
                        〈◊〉
                      emendicani, idque occasione quadam inusi: ata impulsus Quod tum 
                        〈◊〉
                      in Itinerarii mei frontispicio, 
                        〈◊〉
                      etiam in libri mei contextu disertis verbis expressi, viz. 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 23. stipem 
                     〈◊〉
                   viritim,
               Furfure contentus, siliquis, & pane secundo.
               Quacunque incedit pedibus retinacula solnit,
               Fertque sub axilla soleas, vt rusticus agnum,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   claram (sic spes est) 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Sar 
                        〈◊〉
                     , ita dictam ob specie quam habct pcdis & calces hu nani. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Dum Cimicus, Cynicus, pede 
                     〈◊〉
                  , asymbolus, excors,
               Calcat 
                     〈◊〉
                   per deuia lustra ferarum,
               Quàrudunt Onagri grunnit amica luto sus,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   generis 
                     〈◊〉
                   as in puluere plant as
               Bestia quaeque sui, simul et vestigia lambunt.
               Nam Coryate tuo Ceruus, Lepus, Vrsus, et Vius,
                — Olidusque caper, 
                     〈◊〉
                   clauduntur in vno.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   loca 
                     〈◊〉
                   quà brachia porrigit aequor
               In terrae gremium, cingitque 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   arctis;
               Spectat vbi Venetos vrbs inclytaditat et ornat,
               Quae procul in saxis extructa à margine 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Inconcussanatat turrita in gurgite salso.
               Pro portis illi est Nereus; pro 
                     〈◊〉
                   equor;
               Prata, maris campus; 
                     〈◊〉
                  , pons; 
                     〈◊〉
                  , caballus.
               Huc conuertit 
                     〈◊〉
                  , portasque ingressus, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Ore stupens, oculis circumspicit omnia limis.
               Miratusque gradum 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; secumque locutus
               
                  Nil vltra est, inquit, Gades hic, sunto laboris:
               Erroris 
                     〈◊〉
                   mei 
                     〈◊〉
                   in littore ponam.
               Venit ad illuuiem populi, putidumque lupanar,
               Scortorumque greges, nimium 
                     〈◊〉
                   ibi fortiter 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Cereus in vitium, capitur 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      tuo more sigmeata cudis, & rem vehementer 
                        〈◊〉
                      gerat, Vadiane nec ist 
                        〈◊〉
                      mea ad meretricem a Vadiano meo 
                        〈◊〉
                      atam aratiuncu'am 
                        〈◊〉
                      subsequentem aliter 
                        〈◊〉
                      (lector) existimes quam rem o 
                        〈◊〉
                      fictitiam. neretricis amore.
               " Qnam sic aggreditur; Medea, Empusaque mundi,
               " O sexus cremor vne tui, tremo vne virilis,
               " Liliaque et lolium, 
                     〈◊〉
                   spica et spina, silexque,
               " Motacilla salax, et plena cruoris hirudo:
               " Que quia te matulam purgandis 
                     〈◊〉
                   offers,
               " Italus, et Calaber, Siculus tibi 
                     〈◊〉
                  , et Afer:
               " O lux cruxque hominum, natura Ehs mobile, Res, In.
               
               " Diuiduumque vagum, Transcendens, classe reponi
               " Quod nequit, et noles, nisi 
                     〈◊〉
                   vincta, teneri.
               
                  
" 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               " Sume parallelum me nunc tibi, sume Colurum,
               " Ipse tibi Centrum, Circum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ferentia dicar,
               " Si mensa dignere tua, dignere cubili;
               " Paparum numismzta. 
                  Iulius & Paulus pacto annumerabitur isti.
               " Illa refert court à, Balatro, barathrum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   macelli,
               " Cumanum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pecus, furfur
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & furcifer idem,
               " Vapulo, Vappa, floces, & oliuae lenis amurca,
               " Quis furor est 
                     〈◊〉
                   meos vage castor amores?
               " Non mea sic lodix, nitidi neque culcitra lecti
               " Tam vili prostant; Tibi sin marsupia turgent,
               " Ingredere, & strumam facile vomicam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   leuabo.
               Succedit tecto; cui fic lupa 
                     〈◊〉
                   infit:
               " Turde malum tibi nempe cacas, viscoque teneris
               " Ipse tuo: Bulgamponas, tumidamque 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               " Ex ibis lenior, nec sarcina tanta grauabit.
               " Quorsum haec drachmarum grando, nullius in vsum?
               Ponere cunctantem, baculo bene fustigat, aede
               Exturbatque suapluuia lotioque madentem.
               " Inclamans, cite pes fuge Dactyle, nec tibi tardi
               " Inijciant remoras Spondai, aut claudus Iambus.
               Quodque vnum potuit, meretrix, Valedicit amante,
               Et blandita breues versus cantillat eunti.
               Animule, vagule blandule,
               Quos nunc abibis in locos?
               Pallidule, rigide, nudule,
               Nec, vt soles, dabis iocos.
               Mene deseris petulce?
               Mene praeteris subulce?
               Pergin ire per Britannos?
               Ebrios per Alemannos?
               Scythicis premi pruinis,
               Corporisque 
                     〈◊〉
                   ruinis?
               Cursitare per culin 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Latitare per popinas?
               Pulices pati nigelles,
               Homines vbi miselles
               
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   sueuit alligare,
               Loris texga perfricare.
               Ergo mihi ne sit male;
               
                  Coryate vale, vale.
               Sic post Iliaden, aestumque, Aetnamque malorum,
               Et 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Odissaeam grauium leuiumque laborum,
               Vnctus & imunctus, variis functusque periclis,
               In patriam remeat peregrinis moribus auctus,
               Hyberno bombyce scatens & lende 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Atque it a sandaliis 
                     〈◊〉
                   laqueare repostis
               O Crispinus Sutorum & Cerdonum 
                        〈◊〉
                      Tutelaris. Crispine tuo, crepidarum quiregis artem,
               Et qui mustricolae monstras Sutoribus vsum,
               Clarus in Odcombae 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , mage claras in ipsa
               Metropoli Regni, decantatu sque per vrbis
               Compitaque & vicos, campos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , vias
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , domosque,
               Fit Procerum risus, iocus Anlae, fabula vulgi.
            
            
               Ad Curiatiorum familiae abortiuum Embryonem, Thomam Coryatum.
               TErgeminos inter fratres è Curibus ortos,
               Romanos totidem qui pepulere Duces;
               Quisque suum, in pugna praeceps, & ahbelus in armis,
               Hostis mortiferum vulnus ab ense tulit.
               Tu genus O Coryate tuum 
                     〈◊〉
                   ab istis,
               Inflexoque parum nomine, 
                     〈◊〉
                   habes.
               Degener hoc tantum, quòd 
                     〈◊〉
                   tibi vilior algaest,
               Nec quaesit a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , sed pede parta salus.
               De cute, de corio pernox & perdia 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Vix tamen in toto est pectore mica Verum est salis 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      stquod 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . salis.
               Cum sic particulam diuine negligis 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Corporis obueniat iam coriago tibi.
            
            
               
               A declaration of Nereus prophesies touching the fall of Glassenbury Abbey, and the rising of Odeombe, by two fishes the Whiting and the Pilchard to the tune of Pastor cum 
                        〈◊〉
                      per freta nauibus.
               
               SOme This is one of the Oracles that Sybilla Cumaea stitched vp in her leaues. And therefore, Credite me vobis sulium recitare Sybillae.
                   
                  Barde a bird of Merlins ayrie
               Of Glassen Abbey 
                     〈◊〉
                   forespeld
               That it should stand, and not be feld,
               Till Whiting ouer it did ferry.
               
                  Whiting a Monke, vassall to Rome
               
               For treason meant against his King
               Vpon the A Terrasse or Mount of earth neare Glassenbury. 
                  Torre in a rope did swing,
               And so fulfild the Wizards doome.
               Of This prophesie is yet to be seene in one of the tauernes, as you trauel vpon via lactea, where Erigene, Doggechased Arctopbylax his Beare so faire North, that they were both frozen into hery stars. 
                  Odcombe it was said of yore,
               That it in darknesse long should sit,
               Vnknowne to men til vnto it
               Should come of skalie Pilohards store.
               
                  Tom Coryate made all this good,
               Borne on a shole of herring frie,
               As once, poore groome, halfe wet, halfe dry,
               On Dolpins backe Arion stood.
               The This is no iest, but res feliciter gesta; for vpon a nouerint 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      hee recouered a hundred Marks. And 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      matriculated amongst those to whom God sendeth good fortune. Country Boores dasht with the matter
               Beganne on him to skance awry,
               But he with bil in Chancery
               Shot them cleane through twixt winde and water,
               
                  Paules chaine for ioy did stretch and yawne,
               
                  Saint Mary Oueries shot the bridge,
               And gald-breech same rode post bare-ridge
               To spread the newes on Antwerpe Pawne.
               
                  
The The seuen stars of Greece are by Isacius reckoned to haue beene. Theocritus, Aratus, Nicander, Apollonius, Homerus Tragicus, Andiomaches Byzantius and Lycophron. Which are easily put down by our Pleiade of English Poets, Chaucer, Sir Phillip Sidncy, Spencer, Daniel, & those others who haue made their Diatribes vpon Tom Coryats Parua naturalia.
                   Pleiade of Poets fel a quassing
               At Hippocrenes fountaine head.
               London her selfe fell sicke abed
               Surfetted on a iole of laughing.
               And as the purple-wing'd King-fisher
               Sitting vpon a willow stumpe,
               For a poore Minnow in doth plumpe,
               And eates her raw, yet one can dish her.
               So 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Tom, the traueller Trip-goe,
               Who feasting fasts, and sitting walks,
               And waking dreames, and silent talks,
               Whose spirits alwaies stand on 
                     〈◊〉
                  -toe;
               Whose minde on trauels still indockt
               Eates obseruations by the eyes,
               Hath spu'd a booke of Crudities,
               
               Which Vu'cans forge will not concoct.
               And as about the time of Prou. At Easter the winde is at Chester. Because it is good for Ireland. 
                  Easter,
               
               T'enrich the towne and trade of shipping,
               The winde which euermore is skipping,
               Is said to come and dwel at Chester:
               
               So Tom the iaile from Ilchester
               
               (To grace his towne out of pure loue)
               Will by repliuy soone remooue
               To Odcombe now cal'd Pilchester.
               
            
            
               L'enuoy.
               
                  OLet the Hurly-Burly Fate
                  Requite thy loue with lasting fate;
                  Long liue, late come to thy enterring,
                  Nor flesh, nor fish, nor good red-herring.
                  And thou O Odcombe laugh and tickle
                  To see thy Pilchard in his pickle,
                  Who late in Court, both wet and shrunck,
                  Lay close embrined in a trunck.
               
            
            
               
               François.
               
                  Asne-Bucephalaeosis ou Recapitulation & Sommaire du gros fatras du Sieur Tho. Coriat.
               
               Les poetes a leur Muses.
               C'Est ass z, belles Muses;
               Bouch zles eseluses,
               Al Aganippée:
               Où pour leur lippée,
               Les Poetes grenouillent,
               Et puis y gazouillent
               D'vne extreme rage
               Leur doux chant ramage.
               Eux faisans leur Feste
               Au coq porte-creste:
               
               Et lauants la teste
               Ala lourde beste:
               Ont perdu toutes-fois
               Et leur charbons & bois
               Leur peine excessiue,
               Sauon & lessiue.
               Leur rimes roulantes
               Et carmes coulantes,
               De belle cadence.
               Comme sault en potence.
               Sus doncq, belles Muses
               Bouchez vos escluses,
               Car Tom le bon drole,
               Ha ioué son role.
               La farce est finie,
               Tai toy, Poesie,
            
            
               Ital.
               Risposta delle Muse.
               TAccte matti che messer Thomasso,
               
               D'vn Meùio èfatto vn Torquato Tasso;
               
               Il cui spirto gentil en vn batter d' occhie,
               Trascorre dal capo, fin al ginocchio;
               
                  
I piedi dan' salto, la testa capricci,
               Quelli fan' il 
                     〈◊〉
                  , questa, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Pouaro viandante chipresone' lacci
               D'amor, sene tornô coperto di stracci,
               Chiper no tener piusale in Zucca
               Che Cauallo di Bergamo, ò bue di Lucca;
               
               Partissi sciocce, volgendosi pazze,
               Delmondo il scherzo, trastullo, e solazze.
            
            
               Espan̄ol.
               Concierto de los entrambos.
               EApues, acabense los chistes y pullas,
               Cantada la missá quedem las casullas.
               El Chronista Thomas pone fin al trauajo;
               Despues de auorse mostrado badajo:
               Y dicho donayres y mil disparates,
               Que hazen ventaje de muches quilates
               A quantos 
                     〈◊〉
                   crito, Quien 
                     〈◊〉
                   tal mosts,
               De poca cosecha 
                     〈◊〉
                   su Agoste.
               Y digan los ninos; Tata, madre, coce,
               He aquipassa Tom tonto yloco.
            
            Explicit Glareanus Vadianus.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Joannes Iackson.
            Can it Be possible for A naturall man To trauell nimbler then Tom Coryate ca? No: though You should 
                  〈◊〉
                to his horne-peec'd Shoes, wings fether'd more then Mercury did vse. Perchance hee bottowed Fortunatus Hat, for wings since Bladuds time Were out of date. His purse hee hath to print What hee did write, 
                  〈◊〉
                who had read of thee O Wandering wight? who else had knowne what thou Hast felt and seene, where and with whom, and how farre Thou hast beene, Ere thou to 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                couldst thy Trophyes bring? Thy hungry praysea in this I gge I sing, At thy request, else in another 
                  〈◊〉
                I would Haue pointed at thy commendation: 
                  〈◊〉
                other Heliconian friends bring store of 
                  〈◊〉
               . of Pepper, and Vineger sowre, to surnish thy Italian banquet forth, whereby is Plainly shown thy 
                  〈◊〉
                worth. Feast Coryate feast the world 
                  〈◊〉
                with thy trauel, discharge The Presse, and care Not then who 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Explicit Ioannes Iackson.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Michael Drayton.
            
               A briefe Prologue to the verses following.
               
               Deare Tom, thy Booke was like to come to light,
               Ere I could gaine bus one halfe houre to write;
               They 
                     〈◊〉
                   before whose wits are at their noones,
               
                  And I come after bringing salt and spoones.
               
            
            
               MAny there be that write before thy Booke,
               For whom (
                     〈◊〉
                   there) who would euer looke?
               Thrice happy are all wee that had the Grace
               To haue our names fet in this liuing place.
               Most worthy man, with thee it is euen thus,
               As men take 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , so 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou 
                     〈◊〉
                   vs.
               Which as a 
                     〈◊〉
                   his 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   doth 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               So this 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   will like wise 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Thou art the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and doest shew vs shapes
               And we are all thy 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , thy true Apes,
               
               I saw 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   (form what it was at first)
               Swolne, and so 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   it was like 
                     〈◊〉
                   burst, I
               Growne so 
                     〈◊〉
                  , so quite 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               That who will 
                     〈◊〉
                   must hazard his damnations
               Sweating in panges sent such a horrid mist,
               As to dim heauen: I looked for Anti christ
               Or some new set of Diuets to 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Worser then those, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Chaos fell:
               Wondring what fruit it to the world would bring,
               At length it brought forth this: O most strange thing;
               And with sore throwes, for that the greatest head
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   to be deliuered.
               By thee 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Coryate we are raught to know,
               Great, with great men which is the way to grow.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   a new 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   finely in,
               
                  
Making thy selfe like those thou meant'st to winne:
               Greatnesse to me seem'd euer full of feare,
               Which thou foundst false at thy arriuing there,
               Of the Bermudos, the example such,
               Where not a ship vntill this time durst touch;
               Kept as suppos'd by hels insernal dogs,
               Our fleete found their most honest courteous hogs,
               Liue vertuous Coryate, and for euer be
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of such wise-men, as are most like thee.
            
            Explicit Michael 
                  〈◊〉
               .
         
         
            Incipit Nicholas Smith.
            TWas much all Country wits to ouershine
            At Court, where there are hundreds iust like thinee
            How sound they thee? how keepe they thee? except
            As Rome being told that onely 
                  〈◊〉
                shee kept
            The target fall'n from heauen, her state should grow,
            Made many like, that none the right might know:
            So, to possesse and keepe thee precious man,
            They make themselues as like thee as they can.
            Hence flow those verses. In this (Tom) appeares
            Thy greatnesse, thou art 
                  〈◊〉
                by thy Peers.
            
            Explicit Nicholas Smith.
            FINIS.
            I Am perswaded (Reader) thou wilt censure me for a most absurd writer, to adde vnto these precedent 
                  〈◊〉
                that haue the word Finis subscribed vnto them, more Panegyricks vpon my booke. Neither indeed can I altogether free my selfe from an imputation of some absurditie committed herein. But let this I intreate thee a little excuse the matter, that after al these former verses were printed, I was most importunatly perswaded by the that haue no small interest in me, to adioyne these ensuing vnto the rest, by way



of a supplement or ouer plus. Therefore seeing I could not conueniently giue the repulse vnto the Authors of the verses fo lowing to 
                  〈◊〉
                their lines into my booke; take them I intreat thee in as good part as the former, especially seeing many of them doe expresse (besides much merry matter) very elegant and witty conceits.
         
         
            Jncipit Laurentius Emley.
            
               
                  These verses immediatly following were lately sent mee by a learned Gentleman of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Colledge in Oxford: who though he neuer saw me, hath vouchsafed to grace my booke with his Encomiasticks.
               
            
            To the neuer-enough wondred at Mr. Thomas Coryate.
            
            ITching desire hath causd vs long to know
            Thy face (deare Coryate) admired so:
            Which that we might the better view at ease,
            The Pencil speakes 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   offigies.
            
            But, let th'ingrauer know, it is not true,
            Since of thy minde it giues vs not the view,
            It well may shew the draught of flesh and bone,
            But that may be applied to many one.
            The 
                  〈◊〉
                of Man is it most glory beares,
            Since by the minde himselfe himselfe appeares:
            To shew thy minde, thy selfe hast thought it meet
            To make vs most beholden to thy feete:
            Thy feete, whose soles employment who so mocks,
            Doth il, for it appeares that they wore 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            For'tis discouered by the sweete effect
            That thou to keepe them sweete 
                  〈◊〉
                ne're neglect.
            Thy feete sought forth what thy faire 
                  〈◊〉
                describes,
            
               
God shield those hands from chilbiaines, feet from kibes.
            Let those be vext with such that priuate lurke,
            And suffer shoes, sayles, Printers to want worke:
            But thou the friend of Arts, manure thy wit:
            Thine Odcombe liue in thee, not thou in it.
            Harsh was the handling of the halberd-swaine,
            Who grutched grapes to thy diuinest vaine;
            And little knew the threatning turbant-slaue,
            The grace that thy returne with vs should haue.
            Though we may doubt much of the pencils grace
            That drops but lowzie matter from thy Case.
            Faire-flowry France, and ful-gorg'd Germany,
            With their third sister sweet-lip t Italy.
            Loth for to leaue him whom they held so deare,
            Sweet company with thee to vs would beare.
            But beeing fixed that they cannot mooue,
            They send with their faire face, imprest their loue:
            And Germany, since thee shee needs must misse,
            In kind remembrance blowes thee a full kisse.
            Then if thou please more Countries yet to see,
            Thou 
                  〈◊〉
                find thousands more in loue with thee:
            In loue with thee, whom thy digested bookes
            Will make as well knowne as thy carued lookes.
            There shalt thou find many an horse or affe
            To helpe thee, that thy chariot may passe.
            There shalt thou find many a double droane
            Which vnder thy wits burden 
                  〈◊〉
                shall groane.
            But, though thou trauell through the 
                  〈◊〉
                round,
            Let not thy impe, thy babe, thy booke change ground.
            Though thou discouer strange lands by thy wit,
            Let them send hither and discouer it.
            For pitty t'is but that the world should know
            That t'is thine owne deare Babe that thou lou'st so,
            And the true braine-bred child of Coryate,
            
            As Pallas was begot of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                owne pate.
            Thus 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , write thy friends as thou 
                  〈◊〉
                fee:
            For none, but their owne foes, will enuy thee.
            Expl. Laurentius Emley.
         
         
            
            Jncipit Georgius Griffin.
            
               Anagramma:
               Thomas Coriatus
               Tu cos arnatoris vel
               Tuta cos amoris.
            
            COses amatoris; quis non probat? esset amator
            Siquisquam, exemplar Te petat ille 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Cos es amatoris, nec tantum hoc, cos es amorit.
            Nam tibi fautrices tot, quot habes, dominas.
            Et bene succedant cum tot (Coryate) puella,
            Cos & amatoris cos et amoris eris.
            Explicit Georgius Griffin.
         
         
            
               Jncipit Joannes Dauis Herefordiensis. In the lowd, allowed, or wel-deserued renowne of our Brittaine-Vlysses: his present Worke, together with a description of the particulars of the Vinet, Title-page, or Frontispice.
            
            IF Art, that ost the learn'd hath stammered,
            In one Because like yron it is strong to containe the remembrance of so many dear Obseruations. yron head-peece (yet no hammer head)
            May (ioyn'd with Nature) hit Fame on the A Metaphor for the head. Cocks-comb
            Then, t'is that Head-peece that is crown'd, with Crownd together with Od combe for producing him. 
               Odcomb:
            
            For, he hard Head (and hard, sith like a Whetstone
            
            It giues 
                  〈◊〉
                edge, and drawes them too like Ietstone)
            Is caput mundi for a world of schoole-trickes,
            
            And is not ignorant in the learnd'st — trickes.
            
            H'hath seene much more then much, I assure yee,
            And will see New-Troy, Bethlem, and Old-Iury:
            
            Meane while (to giue a tast of his first trauell,
            With streames of Rhetoricke that get golden grauell)
            
               
He tels how he to Venice once did wander;
            From whence he came The word (more) for the reason of excellency: and Gander for the Rimes neccsiry more witty then a Gander:
            Whereby he makes relations of such wonders,
            That Truth therein doth lighten, while Art thunders.
            All Tongues fled to him that at Babel swerued,
            Lest they for want of warme Mouths might haue slerued:
            Where they do reuell in such Passing-measure,
            
            (Especially the Greeke wherein's his pleasure)
            That (Iouiolly) so Greeke, he takes the He pleasantly prescrucs it in pristine puri 
                     〈◊〉
                  . guard of
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                hee's the merriest Greeke that ere was heard of:
            For he as t'were his Mothers Twittle-twattle
            (That's Mother-tongue) the Greeke can prittle-prattle.
            Nay of that Tongue he so hath got the Body,
            
            That he sports with it at Russe, Gleeke or Games at cards, whereby is meant all ma nor of sports. 
               Noddy.
            
            For his Inuention in his Bookes 
               The frontispice graucn in brasse. 
               Brass-face
            
            Is seene the glory of it, that doth passe Excels the grace of all other for esronis or Title-pages. 
               Grace.
            
            The The first shewcs how he sayled out of England in a ship. 
               first doth shew how in a ship he sayled,
            
            When out of England he (go — ing) tra — uailed:
            For, as he notes himselfe (and right well noteth)
            No man goes out of England but he boatcth:
            Where he (halse o're board) sprawleth like a Paddocke;
            
            And spues into a VVhale by the figure Hypcrbole, or rather Meiost 
               Whales mouth called a Haddocke.
            
            Right o're gainst it, there is seene The second shewes his 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   relinhis trauel 
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Apparell
            
            Which he did weare when he found out the Barrell
            
            
               Of Heidelberg: shooes, stockings, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and dublet,
            
            With so much of his blood as sils a goblet.
            
            Dropping in creepers from his Trauels Trophie;
            
               Lice ile not style theru, lest you should cry, O fie.
            
            But, that which is most wondrous to consider
            Is, one so leane so long should be their feeder:
            And that the clothes which he went out with all too
            Should serue him and the Lice (which were not small) too
            Till his returne, with but a little patching,
            When's Rags (like catch-poles) greedy were in catching:
            So, like an 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                in Desere wast-land.
            His His clothes which like weeds were now good for nothing but to be throwne away. 
               Weedes held out till he had fully trac't-land:
            And for a Manument to After-commers
            
            
               
Their Picture shall continue (though TIME Canker or rust the Brasse wheron it is grauen. 
               scummers
            
            Vpon th'Effigie) to make Eyes delighted
            With that which by no Art can be more sprighted;
            And shew the maruell of this Because they hold out (as it were) supernaturally. 
               metaphysicke,
            
            That would haue fil'd some Trau'ller with the Going so bare. 
               Tyssicke.
            
            And so t'would haue him done, but that his Senses
            
            Were Desire of glorie made his mind not feele what his body 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               senslesse in pursuit of Excellences.
            
            Then (from that Trophey to descend a little)
            Yee see when he his Gorge with The third shewes how hee fed vpon the Boores grapes without leaue. Grapes did vitrie,
            Was out-rag'd by a Boore, who did abhorre it,
            Till Tullies golden sentences paid for it
            Disburs'd by Coryats Tongue, which so did rolle it
            That Cicero himselfe could not controll it:
            Which fill'd the Boore with wonder to the wozen,
            That made him vomit sweet words by the dozen
            In Toms deare prayse, whilst he most like a Wag-with,
            Tooke of his Grapes as much as he could wag with.
            Then ye descend, where he sits in a The fourth shewes his suruaying of Venice in a Gondola. 
               Gondolow
            
            With Egsthrowne at him by a wanton Room-be-low;
            
            Who lookes so masculine as she were some Boy,
            Playing the pleasant Tomboy with her Tom-boy.
            
            Within which Egs was water sweet immured,
            That he to her there by might be allured:
            Which shewes the manner how he went in Venice.
            When as he tooke surueigh of that strange Sea-p
                     ••
                  ce.
            
            Then doye fall vpon a goodly The fifth, a goodly woman representing Italy. 
               Woman,
            
            Which for her stature, you would take for some man
            Drest in th'Italian fashion, and doth stand for
            Faire Italy it selfe, and 
                  〈◊〉
                is scand for:
            Who on the one side serues for a supporter
            Of that An Oval round wherein he is pictured to the wast. long Round, wherein he is made Shorte
            By halfe (at least) then his length naturall,
            And lookes as if he danc'd a Caterbrall,
            
            With Ruffe about his necke set on so finely,
            That you would sweare be nothing doth supinely.
            On th'other side the Round stands one as tall too,
            Drest like a French-Fem, in a sarthingall too,
            
               
Vpholding (as the other did) the Rundle
            
            Whose clothes, about the Bumme, tuckt like a bundle,
            Doe make her stand for France; and so shee may well,
            For shee hath 
                  〈◊〉
                to make her Doo and say well.
            Then, O ascend, before your last ascending,
            And looke on that that's farre aboue commending.
            A daintie The sixth, a woman ore his head with the tunne of Heidelberg on hire casting vpon him, representing Germany. 
               Dame (not daintie of her vomit)
            Powres downe vpon him (like a blazing-commet)
            The streame of her aboundance from her Gullet,
            And hits him on the A familiar name for the head. Noddle, like a Bullet,
            From whence it glanceth all those Fruites to water
            That in his way he gather'd, like a Cater;
            
            Which Damsell, with her free 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Doth lie, or sit, or stand for Germany:
            
            Vpon her head she weares (beneath it smirking)
            Of Heydelbergs the fore-remembred By the figure Tapinosis. 
               Firkin.
            
            This, this is it that's Creame of all Inuention,
            
            And farre surmounts the milke of wits intention.
            Then vaile your eye againe that is aspiring,
            And see the The seuenth, the horse bee sometimes vsed in his trauell. 
               Horse and Cart he had for tyring.
            On one side stands below an horse, or hobby
            
            Or hobbi-horse (I meane no hawke cal'd hobby)
            Sadled and bridled ready for his trauell,
            When he is owne feet spur-gald had with grauell.
            On th'other side the The eight, the Picardicall cart he trauelled in. 
               Picardinian chariot
            Which some call cart, that That is, conueyed him from place to place. carted wandring Coryate,
            
            Whence, if we looke vp, first our eye is meeting
            How Coryat from the The ninth shewes how be fled from the Jew, lest bee shold haue circumcised him. 
               Iew is Gentilly fleeting,
            Lest if he stayd he should be made a Praepuce;
            
            And so of men, the onely womans Refuse.
            
            From whence looke vp, and next shall your beholders
            See Coryate carried on the Atlas shoulders
            Of such strong The tenth, shewes how he was carried in a chaire ouer or on the Alps. 
               Porters as do helpe him ouer
            The Alpes within a chaire without a couer:
            All which (exprest so farre past wits regality)
            Do shew the power of Coryats singularity.
            Then, on the top, but yet without the Vinet,
            
            
               
He lyeth at the heeles of many a The eleuenth shewes how he lay on litter at the borss heels in the stable of some 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Ginnet,
            
            As then in stable stood on points of litter,
            To shew, his lodging was as hard as bitter:
            For, both together he (most senslesse) feeles there,
            And so on litter lyes he by the Horse heeles. heeles there.
            Right o're against these proud braue Spanish stallians
            Is seene how he doth beg of theeues The 
                     〈◊〉
                   and last, shewes how he begged of Italian theeues, left they shold 
                     〈◊〉
                   robbed him. 
               Italians,
            
            With cap in hand, and lowly genuflexion,
            
            Lest they should sinke him to the Resurrection:
            So, shun'd the fatall hands of the Banditie
            
            With wit that lack't not all of most almightie.
            Hold Muse, no more, vnlesse thou wilt be martyr'd
            Within his world of fame that ne're was quarter'd;
            For, if thou seek'st in numbers to containe it,
            T'will make thy browes sweat, and thy nose to taine it.
            But though we cannot in this Frontispice
            
            Number thy Stations, yet may we count-thy-lice;
            Which (Tom) from one that (roauing) had no resuge,
            Drop downe, to make the Glories floud a Deluge.
            
            Within which Floud my Muse (like a Diue-dapper
            
            In Fames wide mouth wagging my pen, her clapper)
            Is so o're-whelm'd, that as she 
                  〈◊〉
                for more breath,
            The Flood engulphes her, and her words deuoureth.
            So farewell Tom (she sayes) great Natures wonder,
            
            I lye thy Fame a thousand fathoms vnder:
            For, it preuayles aboue the Alpes (high mountaines!)
            
            But when it ebbes, Ile spring, in Castall Fountaines.
            
            All to bewet the earth with streames of prayses
            
            Running to none but thee in fluent 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
            
            Vntill I make a second Inundation,
            
            To wash thy purest, Fames 
               Alluding to that 
                     〈◊〉
                   which men bore to women in the old world, 
                     〈◊〉
                   like 
                     〈◊〉
                   our Author beares to men: for whose loue and commodity bee hath put himselfe to this cost and paines. 
               Coinquination;
            
            And make it fit for finall 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in flames of glory and wonder, as in the iudgement day. 
               Conflagration,
            
            So to preuent fell Enuies indignation,
            
            Explicit 
                  〈◊〉
                Dauis Herefordiensis.
         
         
            
            
               Incipit Richardus Badley. In praise of the most obseruant traueller, M. Thomas Coryat of 
               
                  Vid. CambBri, an ancient village within the county of Somerset, about six miles from another village called 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Odcombe, and of his most 
                     〈◊〉
                   all Hodaepory.
            
            DEare friend (this attribute hee'l not deny,
            That thy great Booke shall in the Church-yard buy;)
            If to admire, and to commend were one,
            Thou should not need this poore Encomion.
            For thy stupendious paines so me amaze,
            That (as thy selfe) I can do nought but gaze:
            Not wondring, thou obserud'st so much by day,
            As that thou writ, and couldst beare all away:
            This is thy prayse, some Trauellers lament
            Their better notes to haue beene from them rent.
            Yet in thy booke the module is descried
            Of many a citty and castle fortified,
            Of townes, of turrets, and their trenchers deepe,
            Of rockes, of riuers, and the mountaines steepe,
            The camps where Romaine fields were fought,
            And where their liues so dearely many bought.
            If Schedules of this nature had beene found
            About Sir Politick, 't would haue made him swound.
            The fruites of France thou no-where dost conceale,
            Nor those of Germany thou mean'st to steale;
            Th'Italian rarities are here depainted,
            So are their Alpes, on which thou neuer fainted.
            In briefe, thy book's an vniuersall Chart,
            Wherein the workes of Nature, and of Art,
            So prodigally there thou dost containe,
            That thou shalt heare (No niggard of thy paine.)
            Vpon that subiect those immortall Rimes
            (Which shall outface the endlesse bounds of times)
            Thy honour'd friends compos'd, I cannot prize,
            
               
Whether thy name, or theirs t'immortalize:
            In which their candour and syncerity
            Towards thee, will shine to all posteritie.
            Howse'uer yet they at thy labours least.
            I iustly thinke th' art greatest in the least:
            
            For many things (I heare 
                  〈◊〉
                friends report)
            Do more augment my wonder, then their sport.
            And pray, what Traueller's so obseruatiue,
            That doth vs not of worthy things deptiue?
            As the French fashion of their Gallowes rare,
            The Switzers cod-peece, with their Nuns so faires
            That curious cage of birds in Amiens towne:
            Their Foole at Whitsontide, who put thee downe.
            But 
                  〈◊〉
                braue pictures! France, or Italy
            Whether, thinkst thou, deseru'st the Masterie?
            There was that master-peece of such perfection,
            
               Apelles need not scorne t'haue layd th'complexion:
            Wherein proud Art (dame Nature to excell)
            Within an Ale-house painted had full well,
            The pilfring pastime of a crew of Apes,
            Sporting themselues with their conceited lapes,
            About a Pedlar that lay snorting by,
            Not dreaming of their theeuish 
                  〈◊〉
               ;
            Whose packe 
                  〈◊〉
                his trinkets on the twigs
            Some fasten, whilst the other dance their 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            This peece did please, and so 
                  〈◊〉
                thy eye,
            Thou iudg'st it worthie immortalitie.
            Another picture was that Non-
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
            
            Which a Venetian shop had then to sell,
            In which luxurious Art did so surmount,
            That now the French peece thou didst 
                  〈◊〉
                count,
            And this the Paragon, which did reueele
            The liuely picture of a Shoulder of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            This did so farre excell you of the Apes,
            That well it might compare with 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            And thou those Birds decei ud mightst parallell,
            If thy then-
                  〈◊〉
                stomacke truth would tell,
            
               
The Ducal Gallowes there (I heard) you saw,
            Which twich him vp, when he offends their law:
            These are beyond those serewed ones of France,
            Where men doe passe away, as in a trance.
            Thy bitter iourney o're the clowdy rockes,
            Deseru'd the sweetest wines Piemont vp-locks:
            For he no sweet hath merited (they say)
            That hath not tasted of the sower by th' way;
            Yet had that wine an vndeseru'd effect,
            Which did so on thy hands and face reflect,
            That stone at Padua, whereon Brankrupts sit.
            On into England th'adst transported it.
            As he his brazen torment first did prooue,
            So mightst rhou this haue hanseld, for thy loue.
            Briefly, for triall of a religious lurch.
            Thou nimbd'st an image out of Brixias Church.
            Yet cannot I suppresse, without disgrace,
            The loue thou bare thy Natalitical place,
            For in the midst of thy most Alpish waies,
            When ruinous rocks did threat to end thy daies,
            No doubt, thou couldst haue 
                  〈◊〉
                thy selfe at home,
            To liue, and lay thy bones in sweete Odcombe.
            
            But after thou hadst past those 
                  〈◊〉
                pikes,
            Which feare and terror to the Pilgrime strikes;
            And did the Garden of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                desary,
            Within the wombe of 
                  〈◊〉
                Lombardy.
            Immortal Mantua could not steale thy loue,
            Nor once from Odcombe thine affections moue.
            Wherein, Viysses-like, thou didst display
            Such loue, as he bore 
                  〈◊〉
                his 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            What should I speake of that rare Patience,
            When thou wast forced (with no smal expence)
            To exercise it on those Hackneyes vile,
            Which rather would lie downe, then ride a mile.
            Thy continence no Lais could 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            For thou cam'st forth, vnburned of the flame:
            But oh! how prouidently didst thou cant,
            
               
When thou didst play the crafty Mendicant?
            This tricke (they say) did stahd thee then in stead,
            Or else thou might'st haue hopt without thy head.
            Now if these notes may immaterial seeme,
            To them that know 
                  〈◊〉
                how to deeme,
            I pardon craue in thy behalfe and mine,
            If in our iudgements we haue mist the line:
            For with thee in this point I sympathize,
            Oft vainer obiects doe my sence surprize.
            But whither, Muse? two long Mid-sommer 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Are not enough for to depaint his praise:
            Thinke thou not neare his industry to come,
            Who in fiue months saw most of Christendome:
            Reserue thou rather thy Poeticke vaine
            Him to salute, when he returns againe
            From that victorious voiage he 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            To th'vtmost confines, where the round world endeth.
            Or if Dame Nature hath some world in store,
            Which neuer was discour'd heretofore,
            Yea thither our 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , with his lance,
            Thy conquring colours (O 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               ) shall aduance.
            
               BVT
            
            I seare that whilst I sing his praises hie,
            Many will taxe me for prolixitie:
            If for this fault my 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                pardon giue,
            I wil not them desire me to relieue.
            For of thee onely (Polypragmon great,)
            I pardon for my 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            The sesquipedal belly of thy Tome
            Pleading for me, to stop the mouth of Mome.
            
            Explicit Richardus Badley.
         
         
            Iucipit Ioannes Loiseau de Tourual Parisiensis. Δ
            
               
               Elegie encomiastique, a Maitre Monsieur Thomas Coryare, dont 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Anagramme est ca, ho, Maitre. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      le 
                        〈◊〉
                      detrois lettres
               
               TOusces Gallans esprits do quil' Artiste Muze
               Change vn Sot, en Socrate en Febus, vne buze,
               Qui d'vn fat, d vn batard, d'vn animal sans yeuz,
               Font vn superlatif des hommes & des Dieuz;
               Sur les maigres seillons d'vne 
                     〈◊〉
                   arene,
               Perdent 
                     〈◊〉
                   à credit & leur tens & leur peyne.
               Mais puisqu a dire, vray, ie nesuis pas meilleur
               Que tant de gens de bien ce mest beaucoup d' honneur
               De danser auec euz, comme le bal me meine,
               Et, quoy qu humble & de 
                     〈◊〉
                  , suyure leur belle veine,
               Silz sont folz, l estre aussi; les consciencieuz
               Auoir noz beauz ecrits n'en jugeront pas mieux:
               Mais le grand C'est pource qu il est parent des Sybiles, en Grec, ou bien à lenuy de ce grand Filosofe qui 
                        〈◊〉
                      en France, souz Henry III. a la grande ioye de toute la Cour, & etoit 
                        〈◊〉
                      vetu de couleur de Laurier. 
                  Sibilot que 
                     〈◊〉
                   voulons decrire
               Est bien tel voirement qu'on n'en peut assez dire;
               Et certes ne croy 
                     〈◊〉
                   qu'onques du monde loeil
               Ait veu, ou puisse voir vn qui luy soit pareil.
               Vray bon homme, sidouz & siplein d innocence,
               Que 
                     〈◊〉
                   plus haut sauior luyest comme ignorance:  Pource qu il estrare: en tout sauoir, oubien, rare de sauoir, ou biende sauoir rare, ou bien, quil a le sauoir, ou le 
                        〈◊〉
                      rare, Ou bien, pource qu ilnous montre, ou plutct desmontre a 
                        〈◊〉
                     :
               
               Nouueau Vlgsse à pie, dont les voyages Lns,
               Ont bien montre qu'il al esprit insque auz talons,
               Voire 
                     〈◊〉
                   auz SOVLIERS, tant cette 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Se delecte de emplir vn double cuyr de beste:
               
                  SOVLIERS iudicieux, SOVLIERS qui clair-voyans
               A force de seruir au C'est pource qu il est parent des Sybiles, en Grec, ou bien à lenuy de ce grand Filosofe qui 
                        〈◊〉
                      en France, souz Henry III. a la grande ioye de toute la Cour, & etoit 
                        〈◊〉
                      vetu de couleur de Laurier. 
                  Monstre de noz ans,
               Quoy qu' auer maints 
                     〈◊〉
                  , maints trouz, maints petassages,
               Nel ont 
                     〈◊〉
                   voulu guitter en ses voyages;
               Sages comme loyauz, afin d' entrer en part
               De l' honneur qu' 
                     〈◊〉
                   huy à leur maitre on depart,
               De estre 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   enson braue Epitafe,
               Etaulieu de eperons mis sur son Cenotafe,
               
                  
Remportans eet hononner vers la Posterité,
               Qui'lz etoyent SOVLIERS preuz, & de grand' loyaute.
               
                  SOVLIERS 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  SOVLIERS, à qui bien j'accompare
               De tous ces beauz esprits la brigade tres-rare;
               Car comme ces SOVLIERS en voyages, sejours,
               Tauernes, Cabarets, le porterent tousiours;
               Ainsitousiours quelcun de la bande subtile
               Le porte à son corté tout du long de la Vile,
               Et, pensans telle fois se sauuer a repos
               Dedans leur Cab. net, le portent sur le dos:
               Et n'y a bon repas, bien qu' abande la soupe
               Sile Ioyeuz n'y est pour defrayer la troupe.
               Voire de telz eutor ay-ie 
                     〈◊〉
                   raconter,
               Quiont tant affecté ces SOVLIERS imiter,
               Que ne 
                     〈◊〉
                   si bien de leur 
                     〈◊〉
                   luy faire offre
               Pour en faire chaussure, ilzl ont mis dans vn coffre,
               Porte, comme vn cors Saint, jusque deuant le Roy,
               Dont le bon homme fut peu en desarroy;
               Et moy mesme 
                     〈◊〉
                  , tout plorieuz, y attache
               Mes vers à ces SOVLIERS & deveau & de vache,
               Pour matasche d'honneur; car de 
                     〈◊〉
                   plus bas,
               Petit commie ie suis, il ne 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Aussi ie ne pourreis. Or quant à sa doctrine,
               Son sauior mirlifie, digne qu'ant Non comme vn Enfant, non: ny comme al'hotel de Bourgonge, mais les plus anciens & sausas 
                        〈◊〉
                      de 
                        〈◊〉
                      portent pour ornement & prerogatiue vne coiffe de linge delie, comme vne elpere de beguin 
                        〈◊〉
                      leur 
                        〈◊〉
                     . lémbeguine,
               Son liure exuperant, fruyt d' vn pareile sprit,
               Ian' auienne pour moy qu'il en soit trop peu dit:
               Iay 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   faire comme les eut 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Pardonnez moy, Messieurs; Et comme l'vn des votres.
               A sagement loue Siluester en son Bartat,
               Ie confesse, simplet, que ie ne l' enten pas;
               Et bien qu' onques ailleurs mon nom nay' 
                     〈◊〉
                   mettre,
               Ie suis content quil soit ymis en 
                     〈◊〉
                   lettre.
               Explicit Ioannes 
                     〈◊〉
                   de 
                     〈◊〉
                   Parisiensis.
            
         
         
            Jncipit Henricus Peacham.
            
               
               Ad Thomam nostrum.
               CVr Coryate 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Daphne
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , & 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Insanos mundi for san contemnis Honores,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   & 
                     〈◊〉
                   es 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Authoris amicae Venetae: Aemilia.
               Verius at capitis 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  (Coryate) miserta
               In calces imes 
                     〈◊〉
                   reiecit onus.
            
            
               To the famous traueller euer to bee esteemed the ioy of his Somerset-shire, Thomas Coryate of Odcombe, professed enemy to the GentleCraft or Mysterie of Shoemakers.
               
               WHy doe the rude vulgar so hastily post in a madnesse
               To gaze at 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and toyes not worthy the viewing?
               And thinke them happy, when may be shew'd for a penny
               The Fleet-streete Mandrakes, that heauenly Motion of Eltham,
               Westminster monuments, and Guild hall huge Corinaeus,
               That horne of Winsor (of an 
                     〈◊〉
                   very likely)
               The caue of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , the skirts of old Tom a Lincolne.
               King Iohns sword at Linne, with the cup the Fraternity drinke in,
               The Tombe of Beauchampe, and sword of Sir Guy a Warwicke:
               The great long Dutchman, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Barwicke,
               The Mummied Princes, and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   wine yet 
                     〈◊〉
                   Douer,
               Saint Iames his Ginney Hens, the An East Indian bird at Saint Iames in the kepinge of Mr: VValker, that will carry no coles 
                        〈◊〉
                      eate them as hot as you 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cassawar way moreouer,
               The Beauer i'the Parke (strange heast as er e any man saw)
               Downe-shearing willowes with teeth as sharpe as a hand-saw.
               The Lance of Iohn a Gaunt, and Brandens still i'the Tower:
               The fall of Niniue, with Norwich built in a bower.
               King Henries slip-shoes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   word of valiant Edward,
               
               The Couentry Boares-shield, & fire-works seen but to bedward.
               
                  Drakes ship at Detford, King Richards bed-sted i' Leyster,
               The VVhite Hal whale-bones, the siluer Bason i' Chester;
               The liue-caught Dog-fifth, the VVolfe and Harry the Lyon,
               
                  
                  Hunks of the Beare-garden to be feared, if he be nigh on.
               All these are nothing, were a thousand more to be scanned,
               (Coryate) vnto thy shooes so artificially tanned:
               That through thicke and thinne, made thee so famous a Trotter,
               And bore thee o're the Alpes, where side 
                     〈◊〉
                  , long, like an Otter
               Thou climb'dst and clambredst, there single solie recounting,
               (Another Alcides) thy labours lustily mounting.
               And as Alcides did scorne to weare any linnen,
               So Coryate 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   did as wel as if he had beene in
               The brauest Lyons hide, with the taile downe fairely depending:
               But matchlesse Coryate since now thy labour hath ending,
               And since th'art welagaine vnto thy Country returned:
               Thy very heeles by me shal be with Laurel adorned.
            
            
               In the Vtopian tongue.
               NYihalonin ythsi Coryate lachmah babowans
               
                  OASIAM Europam Americ-
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Poph-himgi 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Hessen, Rhetia, Ragouzie
               France, Germanien doue Anda-louzie
               Not A-rag-on O Coryate, O hone 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Einen tronk Od-combe 
                     〈◊〉
                   Venice 
                     〈◊〉
                  -mascar.
               Explicit 
                     〈◊〉
                   Peacham.
            
         
         
            Jncipit Jacobus Field.
            OF al the Toms that euer yet were nam'd
            Was neuer Tom like as Tom Coryate sam'd.
            
               Tom Thumbe is dumbe, vntill the pudding creepe,
            In which he was incomb'd then out doth peepe,
            
               Tom Piper is gone out, and mirth bewailes
            He neuer wil come in to tell vs tales.
            
               Tom foole may goe to schoole, but nere be taught
            Speake Greeke with which our Tom his tongue is fraught:
            
               Tom-Asse may passe, but for al his long eares
            
               
No such rich iewels as our Tom he weares.
            
               Tom Tell-Troth is but froth, but truth to tel
            Of al Toms this Tom beares away the bel.
            Explicit Iacobus Field.
         
         
            
               Incipit Glareanus Vadianus A Sceleton or bare Anatomie of the Punctures and Iunctures of Mr. Thomas Coryate of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , in loose 
                  〈◊〉
                called by the Italians, versi sciolti, because they goe like Tom-boyes, scalciati without hose or shoe, bootlesse and footlesse: Perused this last quarter of the Moone, and illustrated with the Commentaries of Mr. Prim-rase Silkeworme, student in Gastrologia and Tuffmoccado.
            
            
               
                  A shrunke word of two into one such as are. Hardyknowt, or Hogssnout, the name of Pope Sergius. So Atome for Ah Tom.
                   BEauclerke of The 
                        〈◊〉
                      of this second 
                        〈◊〉
                     . A village before 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Now by him raissed to tenne 
                        〈◊〉
                      of plate, and of which himselfe is the Choro graphicall Maspe. 
                  Odcombe, Bellamy of Fame,
               Learnings quicke Atome, wits glosse on Natures text,
               
                  A musital note containing foure adde humored crotchets, and sixteene 
                        〈◊〉
                      madde as March hares. Sembriefe of time, the fiue finger of game,
               Ambs-ace of blots, sweep-stake of what comes next.
            
            
               March pane of mirth, the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      meaneth a pantric 
                        〈◊〉
                      made of paste, in which the white Blackmoore (as 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         de 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the Genouesi Moros blancos) stew certaine powerfull words called 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         intoineate to 
                        〈◊〉
                      me Bridegroomes points nouer 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   Genoua past of loue,
               The Graces It is a 
                        〈◊〉
                      into which womens teares blended with loues 
                        〈◊〉
                      are distilled through a 
                        〈◊〉
                      or 
                        〈◊〉
                      into a pure 
                        〈◊〉
                     , to 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      heete. gallipot, The 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      or bended 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in the scale of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      men take the 
                        〈◊〉
                      and 
                        〈◊〉
                      of a 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Musicks fiddle-sticke,
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  The spout of sport as a chimney is of smoake. of sport, and follies turtle Doue,
               
                  Noddyego, being 
                        〈◊〉
                      is Don Diego, who was a famous reader in the Bay of Mexico, where in steed of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      deadly sinnes are publikely read and 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Noddie turnd vp, al made, yet lose the tricke.
            
            
               Thou Chesse-board pawne, who on one paire of shoes,
               Hast trode the foote-bal of this worlds Center,
               
                  
Discouering places Hee meaneth the Gallery of Donna 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      the old countesse of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Arabia 
                           〈◊〉
                        , which is a mcer magazin of verdugals, whither those courteous Dames called cortesans (as M. Thomas himselfe hath elegantly vnshaled the word vnto vs) that doe enter to barter or chaffer, elles perdent 
                           〈◊〉
                        , mais la galle leur 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   couch'd betweene the poles,
               Where honest vertue neuer yet durst enter.
            
            
               How should I sing thy worth in fitting layes,
               With 
                     〈◊〉
                   verses of an hide bound Muse,
               And crowne thy head with misletoe for baies,
               Vnlesse thy Hee meaneth a souldiers or a trauellers trusse or sardle or budget, which the old Romans called mulos Marianos.
                   knap-sacke did new thoughts insuse?
            
            
               Such Gallo-Belgicke Mercuries are not chipt
               From euery billet, nor each axle-tree:
               Nature her selfe in thee herselfe out-stript
               When she produc'd this vagrant Humble-Bee,
            
            
               Whose buzze hath fil'd this worlds circled round,
               Hing'd on the Articke and Antarticke starre,
               And whose great fame finds now no other bound
               Then from the Magellan strait to Gibraltar,
            
            
               Whose glorious deeds out-face and fiercely daunt
               
                  These stories are found Written in the Annalcs of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      & 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the Caspian sea, and in the third Tome of the wars betweene the Milt and the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Tit. Diaphragma, cap de Rumbis, whither forbreuities sake I remit the Reader. For to set tales vpon Fables is as directly against the Pragmaticks of Spaine, as to weare seda 'obre seda, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      vpon silke, or creame upon milke. 
                  Guzman of Spaine, and Amadis of France,
               
                  Vterpendragon, Vrson, and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
               
               Great Don Quixot, and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   of Orleance.
            
            
               Ludgate the floud-gate of great Londons people,
               With double dores receiues a wight so dapper:
               Bel-man and knel-man gentry of the steeple,
               Do peale thy praise with Rousse and Bow-bel clapper.
            
            
               Whiles I thy goodly frame doe seeke to scanne,
               How part to part doth mortise, knit, and linke,
               I boulted haue my spirits to the branne,
               And left my wits fast 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the Clinke,
            
            
               For Tom's a cap-stone, and a turne-spit lacke,
               A skrewed engine Mathematical,
               To draw vp words that make the welkin cracke
               Out of a wit strangly dogmatical.
            
            
               
                  Tom 
                  D. Stapleton 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      written a booke de 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      this is a Tom fit to be comprised in tribus 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   is an Irish Harpe, whose heart-strings tune
               As fancies wrest doth straine or slacke his cord,
               Sometimes he warbleth sweet as a 
                     〈◊〉
                   prune, This is a terme in the Art 
                        〈◊〉
                      or Hydraulicke water works, according to which 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      faith of an old man that hee doth 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        : He 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      tough 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      with a 
                        〈◊〉
                      and a Pulley.
               
            
            
               
               And sometimes iarres out of a crackt sound board.
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      read in Thomas de 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      of one Thomas surnamed the 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . of that name, who for special merit was chosen Tribune of the wether, cockes of 
                        〈◊〉
                     , a man nobly and lineally 
                        〈◊〉
                      from great Solon, because on one paire of soles he fooled it to Venice. 
                  Tom is the padlocke of all secrecie,
               Whose tong's the tel-tale of what's done and more,
               Vents out the barmy froth of surquedrie,
               By thirteene to the dozen, thirty to the score,
            
            
               
                  Tom's a A French Quelque chose farced with 
                        〈◊〉
                      holes, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      and the first blossomes of candid 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Bologna 
                     〈◊〉
                   louely fat,
               Stuft with the flesh of a Westphalian sow,
               The shoing-horne of wine, that serueth pat
               To make the feeble strong, the strong to bow.
            
            
               
                  Tom is a Tom in Hebrew 
                        〈◊〉
                      a twinne. twinne, and yet an Odde, and both,
               Twinne shoes, Odde shirt, and both by combination:
               Which odde twin-triple-one to speaken troth,
               Hath run a wild-goose race, a pilgrims station:
            
            
               This, and all this, is Tom, and yet He is the Retracian side of Fortunes title-page, who is sayd vtramque pugnam implete.
                   much more,
               A Mandrake growne vnder some A land-marke neere Excester, disterminating life and death to those pilgrims that vpon the high waies bid men stand, in stead of bidding them good-
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Heauy-tree,
               
               There where S. Nicholas knights not long before
               Had dropt their fat 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   to the lee.
            
            
               The The herbe knot-grasse called in Greeke 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , or Stop 
                           〈◊〉
                        , 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      they were wont to giue the Commonwealth a vomit, vide 
                           〈◊〉
                         de 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , pag. 44000. paulo 
                           〈◊〉
                         finem.
                   neck-weed-gallow-grasses sapling plant,
               A Mushrum 
                     〈◊〉
                   with a thunder-clap,
               Which without noble stocke or such like vant
               In one nights space grew out of Flona's lap.
            
            
               Yet for all this, Tom, thou hadst prooued soone
               Abortiue, and a 
                     〈◊〉
                   worth but little,
               Had not thy fire, the mans that's in the Moone,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   fed thee in thy youth with Ma' it please thee Reader to be aduertised out of Germany, that this is nothing else but 
                        〈◊〉
                      called syderum 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   Cuckow spittle.
               Then treade the steps of th' Author of thy birth,
               VVho once doth euery Moneth surround the earth.
            
            Explicit Glareanus Vadianus.
         
         
            
            
               Incipit Richardus Hughes CambroBritannus Reg a Pedibus.
            
               Englyn vnodl inion.
               
                  I Candish a Drak i gwendid lhywiai
                        •…
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •…
                     ewn lhawer a
                        •…
                     lendid
                        •…
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •…
                     y scai
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     wy mewn dwy eskid,
                  Yr hell gorph, 
                        •…
                     a 
                        •…
                     hain i gid.
               
               Explicit Richardus Hughes CambroBritannus Regi à Pedibus.
            
         
         
            Thomae Coryati huius operis Authoris ad Beneuolum Lectorem de 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                & Macaronici Scazontes.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               a Vox admirantis.
            
            Ille ego qui didici 
                  〈◊〉
                andare 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Vilibus in scrutis, 
                  〈◊〉
                pede, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Cyclico-gyrouagus coopertos neigibus Alpes
            Passaui, transvectus equo cui nomina, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            Nulla viandanti mihi fit 
                  〈◊〉
                vestis;
            Non cum pennachis 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                veluts
            Bambalea in testà; 
                  〈◊〉
                est guippona satini
            Toscano de more nitens; sed plena pidocchis,
            Et de fustaganà squalens pourpointa Milanà
            Courans espaldas, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                faldas.
            Vna capatorum 
                  〈◊〉
                paia est, vna camisa.
            His ego comptus, iter capio, rodeando per acres
            Grisonas & Rhaetos, me tessaco-trochlea raptat
            Esseda, 
                  〈◊〉
                syluas, 
                  〈◊〉
                sierras.
            Menses bis binos, valles 
                  〈◊〉
                supinos
            
               
Transegi superans. Video te grassa Verona,
            
            
               Bergama
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                Italiae noua Pergama, quà stabulatus
            Succidus vrina madui benè lotus equinà.
            
               Venegiam ingressus, spatiosam Diue Piazzam
            
            
               Marce tuam lustro, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Rialtum.
            
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                suis scalmis Golfum mea 
                  〈◊〉
                verrit,
            Aestu barca Maris nuotat; nouus 
                  〈◊〉
                amoris
            
               Aemyliana tuas subito me truccat ad aeades.
            Vlcera bubarum, terret me paura verollae
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                intrare vetans, & rumor honesti.
            Me torret tua bionda Chioma, & tua guancia bella
            Purpureas 
                  〈◊〉
                rosas; duo giglia pura
            Mortidae 
                  〈◊〉
                manùs; 
                  〈◊〉
                vas, poppa bianca
            Lactis 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , lactisque cremorem: 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Smooth.
               
            
            Crapula me cepit, quare conuersus, 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Parturij, crudos boccones ore momordi:
            Pectoreque evomui, quos nunc submittere stampae
            Allubuit: Tu Lector aue, nostraequè Cucinae
            Cruda, 
                  〈◊〉
                stomachifoculo, benè digere frusta.
            Explicit Thomas Coryatus.
         
      
      
         
            
            Nouerint 
                  〈◊〉
               , &c.
            KNow (gentle Reader) that the booke, in prayse where of all these preceding verses were written, is purposely omitted for 
                  〈◊〉
               , and 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                good: partly for the greatnes of the volume, 
                  〈◊〉
                654. pages, ech page 
                  〈◊〉
                lines, each line 48. letters, besides Panegyricks Poems, Epistles, Prefaces, Letters, Orations, fragments, posthumes, with the comma's, colons, ful-points, and other things 
                  〈◊〉
                apperraining: which beeing printed of a Character legible without spectacles, would haue caused 
                  〈◊〉
                Booke much to exceed that price, whereat 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                witty dayes value such stuffe as that: 
                  〈◊〉
                for that one, 

                  Whose learning, iudgement, wit, 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Are weight with Toms iust to a 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                
Hauing read the booke with an 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                it, could he but haue melted our 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                lumpe, so much matter worthy the 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                filled foure pages: but finding 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                his hope therein fallen short, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                the Author of the Crudities 
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                trauels; which being 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , is likely to produce 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                greater 
                  〈◊〉
               : 
                  〈◊〉
                which beeing 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                exact Compend, as Munster, Baronius, the 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                burgians, and other famous Chronologers haue beene, may perhaps afford something either worthy thy reading, or supply thy need in such cases of extremitie, as nature and custome oftimes inforce men vnto. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   