
      
         
            
            
               
THE Art of Riding, conteining diuerſe neceſsarie instructions, demonſtrations, helps, and corrections apperteining to horſſemanſhip, not heretofore expreſſed by anie other Author:
            Written at large in the Italian toong, by Maister Claudio Corte, a man moſt excellent in this Art.
            Here brieflie reduced into certeine Engliſh diſcourſes to the benefit of Gentlemen and others deſirous of ſuch knowledge.
            Imprinted at London by H. Denham. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worſhipfull Maiſter Henrie Mackwilliam, one of hir Maieſties Gentlemen Penſioners.
            
               SIr, I had rather you miſliked my labour, than miſtruſted my good will. And therefore being often preſſed with your deſires, I haue heere brieflie collected the rules of horſſemanſhip, according to Claudio Corte in his ſecond booke.
            I haue not Engliſhed the author at large, nor medled with his manifold digreſsions; neither haue I ſpoken of all things conteined in the ſaid ſecond booke: but onelie thoſe that concerne the making of horſſes for ſeruice. I haue alſo left that part vntouched,

which intreateth of bitting the horſſes, bicauſe the ſame hath beene long ſince verie ſubſtantiallie handled by Maiſter Blundeuile.
            And ſurelie, albeit in this hir Maieſties most proſperous and peaceable reigne, the Gentlemen of this land haue ſtudied to make horſſes more for pleaſure than ſeruice: yet who ſo ſhall truelie conſider to what end horſſemanſhip tendeth, muſt needs knowe, that the principall vſe of horſſes is, to trauell by the waie, & ſerue in the war: whatſoeuer your horſſe learneth more, is rather for pompe or pleaſure, than honor or vſe. Yet doo I thinke it allowable and therewith commendable, that ſome horſſes (cheeflie of Princes & great perſonages hauing ſtore) ſhould be inſtructed in thoſe ſingularities, and exquiſite motions for pleaſure, as well to delight the lookers on, and make proofe of

the riders excellencie; as alſo thereby to ſhew the capacitie of the beaſts.
            By theſe few words you can conceiue the ſubſtance of my labour, which I haue taken in hand rather to content you, than acquit my ſelfe with commendation. For although ſome men ſuppoſe it an eaſie thing, to reduce the conceipt of anie author into an other language; yet am I aſſured it behooueth him not onelie to haue an exact vnderſtanding in that toong, wherein the author writeth, but alſo apt words, and fit phraſes in his owne, to expreſſe the ſame. Which is alſo the more hard, if the matter be demonſtratiue and artificiall (as this is) conteining diuers particular termes in our Engliſh not to be expreſſed.
            It ſeemeth therfore, that whoſoeuer ſhall, either by waie of tranſlation or abbreuiation, ſet downe the conceipt of this author, it

behooueth him to be fullie informed of his meaning, and well exerciſed in the Art of Riding: in both which I must confeſſe either abſolute ignorance, or ſimple knowledge. In reſpect whereof, I praie you repreſſe this booke when you haue peruſed it, or elſe preſerue it at your owne perill. From the Court at Greenewich, this 18. of Maie. 1584.
            
               Your poore freend and fellow in armes, T. Bedingfield.
            
         
         
            
            To the right worſhipfull, my verie louing companions and fellowes in Armes, hir Maieſties Gentlemen Penſioners.
            
               MAnie bookes haue beene excellently well written by Italians concerning horſmanſhip, a fit ſtudie for Gentlemen to bestow ſome time and trauell in. Which hath mooued me (diuers times) to wiſh, that ſome one able to performe it, would take in hand to tranſlate into Engliſh ſome part of thoſe workes, for common benefit, thereby to encourage our Gentlemen to practiſe horſemanſhip, not onelie for the ſeruice of their countrie (if need ſo require) but alſo for their owne exerciſe, as an ornament of greatest commendation in men of their profeſſion. Among others, whome I ſomtime mooued to vndertake this labour, I entreated of late my verie friend M. Thomas Bedingfield, our fellow and companion in Armes, to affoord his paines in the reducing of theſe few precepts, gathered out of a larger volume written by Claudio Corte, into our Engliſh toong. Who hauing with all courteſie ſatisfied therin my request, and finding the

worke verie well worthie the printing, I could not in anie wiſe conſent it ſhould be ſuppreſſed, but haue preſumed (as you ſee) by my friends leaue, to cauſe it to be publiſhed, & to make a briefe dedication therof vnto you aboue others, as Gentlemen best able to iudge of it: as alſo for the benefit of thoſe which haue any gentlemanlie diſpoſition to attaine to perfection in horſſemanſhip. And for M. Bedingfield, I need vſe no further ſpeach, nor make any particular mention of thoſe commendable partes which we all know to abound in him, but onelie wiſh him that imploiment I thinke he is worthie of. For the matter now in hand, I referre you to the worke it ſelfe; which (I hope) you will thinke well worth your labour in the peruſing of it, and rest of my opinion, that hereafter in ſhort time by experience we ſhall find verie manie of our countriemen much profited thereby. From the Court at Richmund this first of June. 1584.
            
               Your affectionat freend and companion in Armes H. Mackwilliam.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               SIth contrarie to my deſire and expectation this tretiſe of horſemanſhip is happened into the Printers hand, I haue thought good to remember the readers, that albeit Xenophon, Griſon, Claudio, and others (men most excellent) haue preſcribed ſundrie rules and meanes how to handle horſſes, & ride them with good grace and ſeemelines; yet if the ſame be not confirmed by vſe and practiſe, it prooueth vnprofitable & to none auaile at all. I wiſh therfore that all Gentlemen & others deſirous of that knowlege, ſhould not onelie read, but alſo exerciſe the rules in this booke preſcribed. For as in all

other ſciences demonstratiue, ſo heerein vſe and experience ſurmounteth all conceipt & contemplation, which is apparentlie perceiued in thoſe that haue therevnto applied themſelues.
            And ſurelie I ſuppoſe (be it ſpoken without offenſe of time past) that this art hath neuer beene (I meane within this realme) of that perfection it now is; neither were the horſſemen of former ages, equall or comparable to ſome now liuing, ſith they wanting both demonstrations, and skilfull instructors, could not by poſsible meanes atteine therevnto. For, before M. Blundeuile, I find not anie that haue written in our toong: neither were the teachers of that time of much knowledge. Where now, cheefly within hir Maiesties most proſperous reigne, (incouraged by the valorous diſpoſition of ſo excellent a Prince) diuers haue aduentured to write, & many vertuous Gentlemen

with ſingular commendation, atteine to great knowledge.
            Ouerlong it were to reaccount the names of all Noblemen and Gentlemen, that in this age haue aſpired to ſingular skill in horſmanſhip, which I impute cheeflie to the imitation of great perſonages. I wiſh therfore that they, and al other Gentlemen ſhould (both for priuat exerciſe & publike reſpect) applie themſelues to the ſtudie and practiſe of this art, following the example of that honorable perſon the Earle of Leicester, who among manie other vertuous qualities both of mind & body, hath indeuored to atteine ſo great excellencie in this art, as for his iudgment, cunning and cōlines in riding, he meriteth the priſe of perfection. Which appeereth not onlie in his owne perſon, but alſo in his choiſe of the eſquires & riders of hir Highnes ſtable, all men of great knowledge: and ſome of them of ſuch excellencie as may not be matched. I could alſo recite

the names of diuers other Gentlmen very skilfull & commendable, which the rather to auoid enuie I omit. Yet may I not forget the praiſe due to thoſe that be teachers of this art in the citie of London; for by their industrie and vertue, the number of ſeruiceable horſſes & horſſemen is dailie increaſed: & ſhould be more, if other skilfull men would applie themſelues to teaching in that maner.
            Thus much I haue thought good to ſaie, as well to excuſe my ſelfe (hauing written this worke onlie to ſatiſfie my priuate friends request) as to admoniſh the Readers therof, in any wiſe to accompanie their ſtudie and reading with dailie vſe and experience, wherof aſſuredlie great knowledge and excellencie will enſue.
            
               T. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            CHAP. 1.
            
               In what ſort to handle a colt being made fit to be ridden.
            
            
               FIrſt you ſhall vnderſtand, that ſo ſoone as your horſſe hath ben haltered, and is made gentle, you may mount on his backe, & following an other horſſe (if neede be) trot him in ſome waie, or other ground, ſometimes ſtraight foorth, and ſometimes ouerthwart, without order or reſpect, which you ſhall vſe by the ſpace of ten daies; euer remembring that in the end you bring him into ſome furrow or place where he is forced to ſet his bodie ſtraight, and there faire and eaſilie make him to retire. But all this while the rider ſhall ſit in the pad, with his legges ſtretched out, not bending them towards the horſſes bodie, or touching his bellie; but as though he ſtood on the ground, yet keeping his thighes and knees iuſt to the ſadle, and holding the raines of the

Cauezzan at ſuch a length, as the horſſe may conuenientlie go forwards. This order muſt be obſerued and continued till the horſſe be well ſetled, and will ſuffer his rider to mount and diſmount at his pleaſure: which he will quicklie, being gently vſed and faire handled. It ſeemeth alſo in mine opinion a thing moſt commodious and commendable, that the horſſe being a colt ſhould bee taught after the Perſian manner to The Perſian manner of teaching a horſſe obedience. kneele downe to his rider, to the end he may with the more eaſe go to and from his backe.
            When the horſſe is become ſomwhat ſettled, and beareth his ſadle well, M. Claudio willeth he ſhould be paſed foorth the length of three yards, or there abouts, and there ſtaie to cheriſh him a little with your right hand, yet not any whit at all ſlacke the reine of his headſtraine. From thence you ſhall go ſtreight foorth into ſome field or large waie, & for a few daies not doo other than in this ſort: Trot him right out, and ſometimes make him retire faire and eaſilie, to the end his head may become ſtaid, and his necke ſtrengthned. Being thus ſettled, and ſtanding a while ſtill, you ſhall offer to paſe or trot round about faire and ſoftlie, euer remembring that theſe turnes at the beginning ought to be exceeding large, and at leaſure; leaſt the horſſes necke be made

weake, or pulled on one ſide: which error is often committed by ignorant riders and handlers of horſſes at their firſt backing.
            Hauing thus done diuerſe times and diuerſe daies, you may put your colt to trot the wheeles or rings, marked out by ſome other perfect horſſe. And I would wiſh, that at the beginning a colt ſhould follow an other horſſe, for that he will take his waie the more willinglie: and the rider ſhalbe leſſe occaſioned to writh his necke in turning. Firſt he ſhall make three turnes on the right hand, and then three on the left hand, in the vpper ring; and then returne to the other ring beelow, and make therein three turnes; which turnes your horſſe ſhall continue ſo long, as by the riders diſcretion ſhalbe thought good: not forgetting that in the beginning the horſſe muſt be mildlie and gentlie vſed, chieflie in trotting theſe rings.
            Note that commonlie all horſſes doo turne Why horſſes do commōlie turne more willinglie on the left than on the right hand. more willinglie on the left than on the right hand; either bicauſe that nature dooth ſo lead them, or that the motion from the right to the left hand is moſt agreeable with the diſpoſition of all creatures; or that we commonlie hold the reines in our left hand, or that the horſſekeeper leading him doth moſt commonlie hold him on

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
his right hand and turneth to the left, and likewiſe in dreſſing him in the ſtable, moſt vſuallie turneth him on that hand. Sith then eueric horſſe hath this propertie by nature, by ordinarie motion, and the hand of man; it is neceſſarie that euer (or for the moſt part) he ſhould begin & end his turnes on the right hand. And for as much as euerie motion is more violent towards the end than in the beginning or middeſt thereof; it ſeemeth that the horſſe will end his turnes ouer ſpeedilie on that hand, whervnto he is by nature moſt inclined, vnleſſe he be diſcreetlie reſtreined by the riders hand.
            I would likewiſe aduiſe you, that when ſo euer anie horſſe, either at his firſt riding, or after, ſhall What is to be doone, if a horſſe leane more on the one ſide than on the other, &c. leane more on the one ſide than on the other, or that he holdeth his necke on the one ſide (for ſome horſſes be foled contrarie to that we haue ſpoken, with there noſe or necke turned rather to the right ſide than the left) that then you ſhall vſe to turne him from that he is naturallie inclined, and ſo both in the beginning and ending make his turnes. As for example: if he leaneth or turneth his head towards the left hand, then ſhall you in turning or managing begin and end on the right hand; and contrariwiſe, if he leaneth to the right hand, then to begin and end on the

left hand. Now hauing finiſhed the number of turnes in the large rings, you ſhall with ſome ſpeed & more franklie trot your horſſe ſtraight foorth the length of a iuſt manage, ſtopping him betwixt the two ſmall rings; where pauſing a while, & cheriſhing him with your hand, returne him in that ring which is on the right hand, and then paſe him two or three turnes, changing your hands as you did in the large rings: ſauing that in the end you ought to be in the ſame place where you ſtopped, and began to enter the turne.
            You muſt alſo remember, that as well in the large as the narrow rings, your horſſe in the end ought euer to go and turne with more franknes and ſpeed. Then hauing ſtaied a while, to cheriſh him; you ſhall cut the narow ring in the midſt, and from thence trot your horſſe to the ordinarie place of diſmounting: yet before you alight, faile not to make much of him, and once or twiſe aduaunce your ſelfe in the ſaddle, to the end your horſſe may ſtand firme, which doone you may gentlie alight, but not preſentlie ſuffer the horſſe to depart from the place. Thus it appeareth, that the conditions and nurture which you teach your horſſe at the beginning, ought to be good and profitable. I deſire therefore, that

aboue all things horſſes ſhould at the firſt bee taught gentlie, and with great patience.
         
         
            CHAP. 2.
            
               Of the largenes of the rings and their vſes.
            
            
               THe rings to ſerue all ſorts of horſſes (as M. Claudio ſaith) ought to be foure elnes at the leaſt in their diametre: and if they be ſomewhat larger, a colt at his firſt riding will like them ſo much the better. Now to make ſome demonſtration of the forme of the ſaid rings, behold this figure which is the ring:  and the line that diuideth it in the mideſt is the largeneſſe or wideneſſe thereof. But you muſt note, that the wideneſſe of the ſmall rings ought not to be much more than one elne. And to the end you may the better conceiue how the rings

ſhould be made, where to enter, where to come out, and how to exerciſe your horſſe in them, behold the demonſtration or figure ſet downe in the end of this chapter.
            Sure I am, that ſome riders accuſtomed vnto two rings will accompt this figure of three large and three ſmall, to be a thing moſt ſtrange: and where they commonlie doo vſe foure turnes on euerie hand, I would haue onelie three, or rather but two. Notwithſtanding, if they pleaſe to cōſider mine intent, they ſhall find I haue framed this forme of turnes, to eſchew weariſomneſſe both in the rider and in the horſſe, who (cheefelie if he be yoong) will lightlie forget what he ought to doo. Wherefore in my iudgement, theſe rings (though more in number) will not ſo much buſie the memorie neither of the horſſe nor the rider. Beſides that, you may perceiue how in theſe three large rings you may conuenientlie handle two horſſes at one time: which within two rings cannot be ſo conuenientlie doone. I ſhall not need to ſet downe anie entrie or going out of theſe rings or turnes; for whereſoeuer you enter, you ought alſo to paſſe out: and in mine opinion euerie horſſe in the beginning, and after, dooth prooue better, being vſed to few turnes than manie on one hand. I haue ſet out the three

ſmall turnes, to be vſed with the ſame order: which you may exerciſe or not, as by your diſcretion ſhall be thought meete.
            Touching the profit which proceedeth of The profit of trotting the rings. trotting the rings, I ſaie that it bringeth the horſſe to be well breathed, it maketh his ſhoulders and legges nimble, it ſetleth his head and necke, it maketh him to beare light on the hand, it giueth him heart and courage, it maketh him willing to turne on either hand indifferentlie, it correcteth all euill conditions, and the horſſe becommeth more apt and diſpoſed to the ſhort turnes, and euerie other kind of manage.
            The vſe of the ring is neceſſarie for skirmiſh, The manifold vſe of the rings. for battell, and for combate, either offending or defending. It is alſo a comelie ſight in the rider, and ſtandeth him in ſteed for the exerciſe of the turneie, and all other feats of armes. Moreouer, it is a thing that naturallie horſſes doo loue: which is prooued, in that the yoong foles, ſo ſoone as they are borne, doo preſentlie runne about, plaieng as it were in circular wiſe. I doo therefore conclude, that the ring turnes are things of much importance.
            
               
               
                  The forme of the foreſaid rings.
               
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. 3.
            
               How to teach your horſſe in the figure like vnto a ſnaile, which Maiſter Claudio calleth Caragolo or Lumaca.
            
            
               AFter you haue vſed your A deſcription of this Caragolo or Lumaca ſee pag. 12. colt vnto the rings aforeſaid, till he trotteth perfectlie well; then ſhall you put him vpon a cannon made fit for his mouth and ſtature: which doone, hauing ridden him twentie daies therewith, you muſt faire and eaſilie trot him in a large ring, and by little and little bring him into a ſtraight compaſſe, firſt paſing, and after trotting him. Then when you haue brought him as it were within the compaſſe of an elne, you ſhall change hand, by litle & litle, inlarging the ring till you come vnto the ſame wideneſſe wherein you began: and there vpon the ſame hand you ſhall put him ſtraight into the other Caragolo; wherein being, you muſt vſe the ſame order which you did in the former; reſtraining or drawing in the horſſe as afore. This doone, turning towards the right hand, you ſhall gather into the ſtreightnes of the other Caragolo: which order you ought to obſerue,

ſo long as by your diſcretion ſhall be thought fit. Then ſhall you (hauing firſt giuen your horſſe breath in the middeſt of the Caragolo) put him foorth and ſtop him.
            Then pawſing a while in that ſmall ring, you ſhall giue the horſſe two or three turnes, leaning on that hand which you thinke fitteſt. From thence you ſhall paſſe foorth, paſſing in the manage path, vntill you come into the other ſmall ring, when making proffer to ſtop, you ſhall put him foorth two paſes, & ſo firſt in the one and after in the other interteine him, turning him in the one end & then in the other of the manage, wherein as you paſed him, ſo may you trot him eight or ten times. But in trotting, I wiſh that ſo ſoone as you be come to the ring, you ſhould end with a ſtop, and then ſuddenlie thruſting the horſſe forward halfe the waie, make an end vpō that hand which ſeemeth moſt neceſſarie, there ſtopping him for good, and preſentlie diſmount. This manner of leſſon M. Claudio calleth Caragolo or Lumaca, becauſe it reſembleth the forme of either. But for the better conceiuing thereof, behold the figure it ſelfe.
            
               
               
            
            
               
The profit that commeth by this kind of manage is great, and much greater than that proceedeth through vſe of the rings aforeſaid: for it worketh all thoſe effects which they doo, and with more facilitie reduceth the horſſe to good order in turning and managing. Beſides that, the ſame is a motion ſightlie and pleaſing: for it cannot be denied that to turne in the beginning large, and ſo by little and little reſtraining the horſſe, firſt paſing, next trotting, and laſtlie galoping eaſilie or frankelie, is a motion verie ſightlie and contentfull to the lookers on. Alſo ſuch an artificiall kind of manage ſheweth great aptnes, nimblenes, courage, ſtrength & obedience in the horſſe, likewiſe much skill and order in the rider. I may ſaie more ouer in cōmendation of this manage, that by vſe thereof onelie, a horſſe may be made readie and perfect, which by vſe of the two or the three rings may alſo be, but with much difficultie. Who ſo ſhall alſo conſider well therof, may perceiue, that by meane of this Caragolo, a horſſe is taught to turne vpon the ground, which the Italian termeth Raddoppiare terra terra. I doo therefore perſwade euerie horſeman to excerciſe his horſſe more in this than anie other kind of manage, as well for the reaſons aforeſaid, as the rather thereby to giue

him breath, make him obedient, and for manie other reſpects too long to be here expreſſed.
         
         
            CHAP. 4.
            
               How to teach your horſſe the manage reſembled vnto the letter S: and the commoditie thereof.
            
            
               ANother kind of manage A deſcription of this double S ſee pag. 16. there is, which may be likened vnto an S: made in this manner. Firſt you ſhall paſe and after trot your horſſe as it were in the forme of a ring; but before you come to cloſe it, you muſt turne on the contrarie hand, and preſſing forward take a larger compaſſe; from whence you ſhall come backe through the middeſt of the marke readie made, and from thence inlarging returne vpon the ſame hand you began, till you arriue at the place where you entred: which in the end will prooue the iuſt proportion of the letter S doubled: which figure ought to be made ſomewhat long, cheeflie to teach a yoong horſſe or ignorant colt.
            And to the end you may the better conceiue what hath beene ſaid, you muſt imagine two

wheeles or rings to be put together, and that the ſaid rings were not fullie round, but ſomewhat longlike vnto an eg, where paſſing from the one to the other you make one onelie turne vpon one hand. Now when you haue ridden your horſſe ſo long as is conuenient in this manage, you muſt euer end vpon the ſame hand you firſt began. Then going foorth by the ſame waie, you ſhall keepe ſtraight, & ſtop your horſſe without the figure, the length of a ſhort manage. But if you pleaſe to end within the S it ſelfe, it will not be amiſſe, but rather more cunning and ſightlie to behold.
            The waie ſo to doo, is to cut the S in the middeſt, and at the end of the turne make a ſtraight ring, and from thence paſſe right foorth to ſtop at the end of the S, cutting the figure in the middeſt, which dooing two or three times in the ſelfe ſame path, at the laſt you muſt make half a turne and then departout. The forme of this figure may not be longer than a iuſt manage, nor longer than foure elns. Alſo the ſmall rings in the end of the manage, within the S, or without the S, ſhould not be in wideneſſe much more than one elne.
            The commodities proceeding of this manage The commodities of the foreſaid manage of S S. are diuerſe, and ſo apparant as need not be

                diſcourſed. Onlie I ſaie that it may be made at firſte large, then ſtraiter and ſtraiter, accordinge vnto the order of the Caragolo: wherby the horſſe ſhalbe informd how to com into his manage with the halfe or hole turne, without reſt or with coruettes, or in turnes with iumps, that wil haue the grace & faſhiō of ſuch a manage.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 5.
            
               How to manage your horſſe in and out, which Maister Claudio calleth Serpeggiare, with the profit thereof.
            
            
               THe commoditie that cō
               meth A deſcription of this manage, ſee pag. 19. of this manage is not a little: bicauſe in vſe therof the horſſe becommeth well breathed, nimble, and readie on either hand. It cauſeth him alſo to knowe the bridle, the hand, and the heele. Moreouer it is neceſſarilie vſed in all skirmiſhes, to auoid the danger of the harquebuſſe, and other ſmall ſhot. Alſo euerie horſſe delighteth in that kind of manage, & the more, if he be fierce and couragious. The proofe thereof is found true, in that all horſſes of great courage doo of themſelues naturallie trot, turning their bodies vnder the man to and fro: as I ſaid before they delighted in turning. The Italians doo terme this manage Serpeggiare, bicauſe the horſſe therin dooth vſe a motion like vnto the ſnake ſliding in & out, as in the figure hereafter is expreſſed.
            I knowe well that this kind of manage, without anie demonſtration or figure, is eaſilie conceiued:

yet I thinke it not amiſſe to entreat therof, to informe the ignorant that be deſirous to knowe, and the rather, for that I find the ſame much diſcontinued, and as it were baniſhed the ſchooles: where now adaies nothing is almoſt vſed but ſundrie ſorts of ſuperfluous danſing and pranſing, which M. Claudio calleth Coruette & peſate vaue.
            
            The maner of this manage is firſt to bend your horſſe towards the right hand, and wheeling to The manner of the Serpeggiare.
                and fro forward as it were the length of a ſhort carriera, ſhut vp a ring on the left hand. Then returning after the ſame maner, cloſe the other end on the right hand. Which you may continue ſo long as by your diſcretion ſhall be thought good. And when you determine to leaue, being at the one end, you muſt put forth the horſſe ſtraight the length of ſix elnes, there ſtopping him in ſuch order & faſhion as beſt becommeth him; where hauing pauſed a while, you ſhall make him retire preſentlie: then ſtaieng againe, caſt him firſt on the one hand, then on the other, large or ſtraight, faſt or ſlow, as you ſhall thinke fitteſt for the force and skill of the horſſe. You may alſo (if you thinke ſo good) teach your horſſe in doing this manage to falſe & mocke in turning, which the Italians call Volte ingannate
               
and Rubbate. 
               
                  ¶ A deſcription of the manage in & out, called the Serpeggiare; for the furder meaning whereof looke before in the xvij. page.
                It will alſo make him more redie and liuelie on ech hand, when hee ſhall manage without reſt.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 6.
            
               What leſſons are to be taught the horſſe after the turnes before ſaid.
            
            
               WHen you haue brought your horſſe to be well ſtaied, & that he vnderſtandeth both the large and narrow rings, bearing himſelfe comelie vpon the cannon; you ſhall trotte him ſtreight foorth the length of a ſhort carriera: and at the end thereof faire and eaſilie ſtop him, ſo as he may ſtand and ſtaie himſelfe firmelie. For by ſo dooing (cheeflie if you hold the reines euen) he ſhalbe forced to beare his necke and head ſtaied: which I would wiſh you to doo, till ſuch time you find he is become firme and iuſt in his ſtopping. But if you ſee that he ſtoppeth not ſtreight and iuſt as he ought to doo, then without turning of anie hand, put him againe ſtreight foorth the length of halfe a manage, and there againe ſtop him with helpe of your bodie, and drawing one of the reines of the Cauezzane more than the other, put him backe: which order well obſerued ſhall bring the horſſe to ſtop ſtreight & iuſt, either at the ſecond or third time

of ſtopping. And remember, that as in the other, ſo in this leſſon you muſt vſe much patience; ſith euerie horſſe is more eaſilie woon by faire handling than by force.
            After you haue thus awhile enformed your horſſe to ſtop, and beare his bodie ſtreight and iuſt; you may returne to the exerciſe of his former leſſons, & in them continue ſo long as your ſelfe ſhall thinke good: euer remembring you leaue him in good breath & courage, for by that meanes he ſhall not become abiect of mind, but be ſound of bodie and liuelie of ſpirit. Neuertheleſſe, if the horſſe committeth anie diſorder, you ſhall before you diſmount, ſollicite and practiſe him, till you find him to amend and doo that well which you would haue him. As for example, if he ſtop not iuſt, and firmelie, holding his head in the due place, you may not ceaſe to ſtop him ſo oft till you ſee he dooth euerie thing as you deſire. In like manner he muſt be handled committing anie other error, for till you haue brought him to amendment, he may not in anie wiſe be ſuffered to depart.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 7.
            
               By what meanes to teach a colt to vnderstand the helps of the rod, the heele, and the voice.
            
            
               WHen you haue brought your colt to trot well ſtraight foorth, ſtop firmelie, and make his large turnes iuſtlie: I would haue you remember that as yet you ſhall not ſtop him vpon the decline of anie hill or ſteepe place. From this time foorth you may vſe a rod; and when ſo euer he committeth anie fault, preſentlie correct him therewith, & accompanie your correction with your voice. As for example: if he goeth not well forward, you may with a certeine cherk of your lips prouoke him forward, adding therto a ſtripe or two with your rod vpon his bellie, iuſt betwixt the ſurſingle and your heele: whereby he ſhall at one inſtant, or at ſundrie times, taſt of three corrections.
            So ſoone as the horſſe trotteth well, ſtoppeth and can make his large rings iuſtlie, you may put him vpon the cannon, which would be ſomwhat worne before, ſuffering the curbe to be verie

looſe, and the reines verie ſlacke. But after from time to time you may gather them vp by little and little, drawing them to the iuſt length, making the curbe and cannon to ſtand in the true place.
            And to the end the horſſe may become the more aſſured and accuſtomed to the bridle, you muſt (while he is warme and doing his ordinarie leſſons) faire and eaſilie by degrees drawe the reines to the true length, and then with diſcretion ſtraine them more or leſſe, till the reines be brought to the iuſt length, and the curbe vnto the true place.
            If the horſſe ſhall not go in the rings as he ought, but leaneth more on the one hand than on the other, or goeth out of the path; then muſt The vſe of the rod, the heele, and the voice. you helpe him both with the rod, your heele, and voice altogether: which muſt be doone in this caſe, according to the rings and the qualitie of the fault committed. As for example: if you would incourage the horſſe to go with more ſpeed, ſaie, Via, via, beating him on the contrarie ſhoulder with the rod: and if you would yet encreaſe his ſpeed, then ſay, Via, via, via, & in the ſame inſtant ſtrike him on the contrarie ſhoulder, and likewiſe with the contrarie heele.
            Moreouer, it ſeemeth in mine opinion verie

conuenient, when you trot the ring vpon the right hand, that then notwithſtanding you keepe the reines iuſt, yet you ſhould raiſe the right hand ſome what aboue the left, and alſo a little aloofe from it; to the end you may carrie the rod with the point thereof towards the left ſhoulder. Beſides that, whenſoeuer a greater helpe is required, you muſt raiſe your right hand much higher, beating the horſſe as it were with the whole rod vpon the ſame ſhoulder. Then changing hands, with the ſelfe ſame order you ſhall turne the rod towards the right ſhoulder, from time to time touching the horſſe vpon the ſame ſhoulder, and (deſeruing it) to vſe greater correction.
            True it is, that theſe corrections ought to be The vſe of the forſaid corrections. vſed, rather to enforme the colt how to vnderſtand the firſt leſſons, than for the correction it ſelfe. For afterwards you ſhall dailie increaſe your corrections, and become more ſharpe and terrible in voice, and otherwiſe, as the colt giueth occaſion.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 8.
            
               How to teach your horſſe to retire or go backe, and the commoditie thereof.
            
            
               BIcauſe I am hereafter to ſpeake of retiring, it ſeemeth fit to enforme you what profit it carrieth, and how to make your horſſe doo it. When you haue gone forward ſo farre as we haue before aſſigned, you muſt aſſaie faire & ſoftlie to draw in the reines of the Cauezzan, which muſt be done with both hands euen together, holding them lowe towards the horſſes ſhoulders, drawing him backe two paſes. But if the horſſe reſiſteth, then doo not in anie wiſe inforce him, but cauſe ſome footeman that hath knowledge, to come neere, firſt to cherriſh the horſſe, and then faire and eaſilie to laie hand vpon the reine of the Cauezzan, gentlie putting him backe: which your ſelfe muſt alſo doo at the ſame inſtant. But that not ſufficing, let the ſaid footeman with a rod lightlie ſtrike him on the knees and forelegs, not rating him, but ſpeaking gentlie, and then he will perhaps with leſſe a doo than we haue ſpoken retire willinglie.
            
               
But though it fortune that all theſe meanes will not preuaile, yet vexe not the horſſe in anie wiſe, either with pulling or beating; but after you haue trotted him a good ſpace about, and ſtopped him, doo thus. Firſt offer him to go backe; which if he refuſe to doo, cauſe him to trotſtrait foorth in ſome euen ground; & hauing ſtopped, ſuddenlie offer him to retire: and I am ſure he will either the firſt, ſecond, or third time doo it, though not the ſame daie, yet the next daie after.
            But note, that if the horſſe, which hath worne a The vſe of correction when neceſſarie. cannon and a ſadle, doo hap to haue ſo great obſtinacie or diſobedience, as he refuſeth to go backe, you may not then vſe ſo manie faire meanes or reſpects, but ſhall emploie the corrections due vnto that diſobedience: as beating on the legs, quiching with the Cauezzan, ſometimes with the one, ſometimes with the other hand, and ſometimes with both together: and alſo giue him a chocke or two with the bridle, ſaieng; Retire, retire: or, Backe, backe.
            And if it ſo be, that all theſe corrections will not force him to retire, then muſt ye diſmount, & take one reine of the Cauezzan in your hand, cauſing an other footeman to laie hold on the other, and betwixt you force the horſſe gentlie to

go backe, and in the ſame inſtant ſtrike him vpon the knees, accompanieng thoſe ſtripes with your voice.
            Moreouer, if all that you can doo will not bring him to retire, yet ſtaie firmelie in the ſame place, and aſſaie once more patientlie to put the ſame correction in vre, offring the horſſe to go backe: and if he ſo doo, put him forward againe to the ſame place, and then mount on his backe, and you ſhall find him preſentlie content to retire: which dooing, you muſt make much of him, both by your voice and hand, and once more put him backe. Marie if he refuſe, then preſentlie alight, and doo as you were woont, correct him on foot, till he becommeth obedient: for ye ſhall be ſure within two or three mornings, he will doo as you will haue him, or perhaps within an houre. You muſt in no wiſe vſe theſe extreame corrections, as chocks with the bit and Cauezzan, to anie colt that weareth no bit, ſeeing they are fit for horſſes of more continuance, & vſed to the bridle: but I thinke for horſſes that beare the bit, and become diſordered, correction would be performed with terror.
            Touching the commodities that proceed of The commodities of retiring, &c. retiring, or putting the horſſe backe, they be more than euerie man conceiueth. For retiring

maketh the horſſe light vpon his ſtop, and nimble in beſtowing his legs in all his dooings. Beſide that, if he happen into ſuch a place as he can neither go forward nor turne, it ſtandeth him in great ſteed to retire directlie. It helpeth him alſo in the motion of his ſhoulders and legs, to make him ſlide on his heeles and ſtop well. And aboue the reſt, it is of moſt neceſſitie to make him firme and ſtaied vpon the bridle, & alſo go light vpon the hand. All which things, with diuerſe others, how neceſſarie they are, I leaue to the conſideration of euerie diſcreet horſſeman.
         
         
            CHAP. 9.
            
               How the colt after he hath beene ridden two moneths ought to be gallopped.
            
            
               IT ſeemeth that to make your horſſe trot well, and ſetled of head, M. Claudio thinketh two moneths a time ſufficient. Notwithſtanding, hee would haue him continued in his ordinarie leſſons, thereby to increaſe his breath by little and little; alſo to vſe him to ſtop & retire, not forcing much, though all this while he be not ſtopped vpon anie hanging ground,

bicauſe it maketh a colt fearefull in ſtopping, & alſo ſtreineth his ſinewes, ioints and loines. But when he knoweth perfectlie how to ſtop and go backe, you muſt euer after euery ſtopping make him retire two or three paſes, foorthwith putting him as much forward, and then for a while ſtand firme.
            And for as much as I ſuppoſe, that in theſe two moneths, your horſſe will go well & ſtaied vpon the canon, I would wiſh you to bring him into ſome place of good ground for a carriera, hauing on the one ſide ſome wall, pale, or banke. It were alſo verie conuenient, that at the end of the carriera, the ground were ſomewhat declining: wherein hauing trotted your horſſe two or three times after his ordinarie leſſons, you ſhall ſtop, retire, and cheriſh him, which done, you ſhall returne backe, paſing him ſomwhat liuelie, aduancing your bodie, and ſuddenlie put him foorth vpon his trot, and franklie fall into a gallop, till you come at the end of the carriera.
            Then hauing there ſtopped and made him go backe, as he was woont, you ſhall returne vpon a ſhort & liuelie trot. And being come to the end of the ſtop, againe in the ſame order and turning backe you ſhall put the horſſe foorth in his gallop, and towards the end of the carriera increaſe

his gallop with ſome franknes: which I wiſh you ſhould continue to doo two or three mornings, euerie daie increaſing the number of your galloping courſes.
            And bicauſe it may be that the horſſe before he hath paſſed halfe the carriera, will of him ſelfe force to make more ſpeed than is fit, not ſtaieng till you put him forth, you ſhall hold him in with a ſtaid hand, till ſuch time as your ſelfe thinketh good, & then ſuddenlie thruſt him forward to gallop, holding both the reines and Cauezzan firme and well, euen towards the end, forcing him to go with more ſpeed and liuelineſſe, & then at the due place to ſtop. Which you may doo, in thruſting the horſſe by little and little forward, keeping your bodie ſomewhat backward, and holding your legs ſtraight ſtretched out, drawing the reines and Cauezzan faire and eaſilie, till the horſſe ſtoppeth iuſt.
            Then hauing ſtopped and doone all thoſe things before ſaid, you ſhall returne to the other end of the carriera, obſeruing the like order: where hauing ſtaied a while, & turned & ſettled both your perſon and horſſe, you ſhall put him foorth with more ſpeed than in the former gallop, & being halfe waie, fall into his full carriera, and therein continue to the end, helping him rather

with your voice than otherwiſe. Then the next morning if you pleaſe (obſeruing the ſame order) force him to runne out the whole length of the carriera.
            Thus much I haue thought good to ſaie, not bicauſe I would haue you vſe to run your colt, nor that I like you ſhould ſo doo; but to find the will and diſpoſition of the horſſe, not onelie in his trot, but alſo in his gallop, carriera, and ſtop: for to run ſwift and ſure, and ſtop firme, is an excellent Signes of a good horſſe ſigne of a good horſſe.
         
         
            CHAP. 10.
            
               How to ride a horſſe with the ſadle, and what obſeruations are therein to be vſed.
            
            
               AFter you haue thus handeled your colt two moneths, and ridden him in the pad; you may put on a ſadle, which you ſhall firſt in the ſtable doo faire & gentlie, letting the ſtirrups hang cloſe to his bodie. Then you ſhall ſuffer the ſadle in this ſort ſetled to ſtand vpon the horſſe backe the ſpace of one whole houre, with the reines turned vp vpon his necke, and the curbe hanging by looſe. The head of the horſſe

muſt be turned downewards from the manger, and his head tied on either ſide with the cords of his Cauezzan. But before you thus doo, remember to annoint the mouth of the bit with vineger and honie in the winter, and in ſummer with wine and ſalt.
            The next daie you ſhall tie vp the curbe as it ought to be worne; and therein you muſt take great heed: for commonlie the horſſekeepers and footemen are vtterlie ignorant how to place the curbe, bicauſe for the moſt part they make it ſtraiter than it ought to be: whereby the horſſe being much pinched, dooth grow angrie, putting downe his head, and making manie vnſeemelie motions.
            I would therefore aduiſe you, to let your curbe, when it is looſe, hang on the right ſide: and when you will make it faſt, then without writhing it at all, to put it vpon the hooke on the left ſide, in the firſt or ſecond chaine, as you ſhall thinke moſt expedient. Marrie here I muſt warne you, A caueat touching the curbing of a colt, &c. that in curbing a colt or yoong horſſe that knoweth not the bit well, or anie other horſſe that is cholericke or tender of berd, you ſhall in no wiſe make the curbe ſtraight, but rather ouer looſe, euer faſtening it on the left ſide.
            Surelie ſome men (being much deceiued in the

conceipt) would haue the curbe to be ſhut on the right ſide, ſuppoſing thereby to remooue that fault, which the Italians doo call La credenza: which is a certeine obſtinacie of not turning willinglie on either hand: which fault may be ſometimes remooued by meane of the curbe, but not in that ſort of tranſpoſing it. I doo therfore iudge that cuſtome verie vnfit in ſundrie reſpects, and cheeflie in that you ſhould be forced to make faſt the curbe with your left hand, or verie incommodiouſlie with the right hand.
            Now your horſſe being made readie and in good order, as he ſhould be with his curbe, you ſhall ride him to the accuſtomed place of teaching: where after you haue made much of him, you ſhall excerciſe him in his ordinarie leſſons, wherewith you muſt interteine him for fifteene daies together, but in no wiſe put him to runne anie carriera.
            But for ſo much as to ride in the ſadle is a thing Of ſitting in the ſadle and pad. more commendable and comelie than in the pad, alſo of much more iudgement and skill; I will put you in mind to ſit in the ſaddle with better grace and regard, and alſo with better diſpoſition of bodie than you were woont to ſit in the pad; yet euer eſchuing all curioſitie and affectation. Which you may doo, if before you depart

from the place of mounting, you ſettle your ſelfe iuſt in the middeſt of the ſadle, letting your legs fall in their due order, neither putting them too much forward, nor too much backward, nor too neere, nor too farre from the horſſe bellie, ſtaieng your feete vpon the ſtirrops, as they ought to be, turning your toes ſomewhat towards the horſſes ſhoulder, and ſetling your ſelfe vpon the ſtirrops, yet not ſo hard as though your feete were growne out of them.
            Touching the length of the ſtirrops, they The length of the ſtirrops. ought to be neither ouer-long, nor ouer-ſhort for your legs; but conuenientlie fit and of euen length: but hereof we will ſpeake more at large in another place.
            The ſureſt hold and ſtaie you muſt haue on The ſureſt hold on horſebacke. horſebacke ſhall conſiſt not in the ſtirrops, but in your knees & thighs, which ought to be euer as it were made faſt or nailed in the ſadle: but from the knees downeward let your legs be looſe and at free libertie, to mooue as occaſion ſhall require. But to returne to that I ſaid firſt, let not your legs be ouer-much caſt forward, or backward, neither ouer neere to the horſſe bellie, nor holding your foote in the ſtirrop ſo far towards the horſſe necke as you poſſiblie can, nor put your feet ſo little as onelie to ſet your toes within

the ſtirrop, for the one is like vnto a foole, the other ſeemeth to proceed of affectation, as though a man would counterfet S. George: but you ſhall doo beſt to obſerue the meane, ſith in all actions the vertue reſteth in the middeſt, and extremities are euer imperfect.
            The reſt of your perſon muſt be kept ſtreight at libertie, and diſpoſed ſo, that your necke wrieth not either forward or backward, or more on the one than on the other ſide. Yet is it not amiſſe, but ſufferable, to looke downe to ſee your horſſe how he ſtandeth, or whether he bringeth orderlie the one leg ouer the other, and other helps neceſſarie, whereof we will intreat hereafter: yet will I allow thoſe motions the leſſe, if they be vſed in the preſence of manie ſtrange riders and lookers on; bicauſe you may both ſtop and manage your horſſe otherwiſe without declining, writhing, or other vnſeemelie geſture of bodie, ſo long as you keepe meaſure with your hand and heele.
            You muſt alſo vſe your hand and arme with a certeine iuſt and comelie motion, and cheeflie your right arme ought to be a little bowing: though ſome riders doo make therewith ſundrie geſtures & croſſes not vnlike vnto coniurors in the circles; yea ſome doo beare both the arme

and all the reſt of the bodie with ſuch curioſitie and affectation, as in deed they ſeeme to be men made rather of wood than otherwiſe. You may not be one of that number, but in all things ſhew dexteritie without affecting, likewiſe meaſure, with order, and ſeemelie boldneſſe.
            Thus your horſſe being brought to beare the ſadle comelie, and you to ſit well on his backe, you may exerciſe him dailie in his woonted leſſons; wherin you ſhall practiſe him fifteene times more without running him at all: in which leſſons I wiſh, that ſo oft as you trot the large rings, you ſhould at the laſt put him to gallop ſomewhat furiouſlie, to the end that in ſtopping he may gather his bodie, and ſtop as it were on his buttocks. I would you ſhould alſo accuſtome your horſſe to make more ſpeedie turnes than he was woont in the ſtraight rings.
            In all theſe 15. leſſons you may not run your horſſe more than once or twiſe in one morning, and that muſt be in the accuſtomed place of carriera: vnleſſe that returning home you hap to find ſome good ground, which hath in the end ſome prettie fall, where you may doo well to gallop him frankelie, & ſtop him faire and eaſilie at the decline of the place, ſo as he may beare his head firmelie, & ſtop vpon his heeles. Yet neuer

forget to bring home your horſſe in good breath and without ſweating.
         
         
            CHAP. 11.
            
               How to exerciſe your horſſe, the next fifteene daies.
            
            
               WHen you ſee that your horſſe is brought to gallop wel in the end of his ring turnes, and that of himſelfe he goeth ſwiftlie and as he ought in the ſtraight turnes, and that he will run and ſtop perfectlie, which he may well doo in theſe two moneths and a halfe wherin he hath beene taught; I would then you ſhould trot him leſſe than ye were woont, and put him to gallop dailie more and more, as well in the rings as ſtraight forth. Alſo in gallopping I wiſh ye ſhuld make much of him, and indeuor your ſelfe to bring him to gallop ſhort, round, & liuelie, helping him with a voice fit for that purpoſe.
            Then would I haue you alſo to make him gallop in the ſtraight rings, yet in no wiſe to haſten him with rating or beating, but with a ſoft voice meete for that turne incourage him: but if he grow ſlacke in his gallop, then muſt you ſollicite

him preſentlie with the due corrections: or if he become hote, and make ouer-much haſt, then gentlie croſſe your rod ouer his necke, and reſtreine the reines and Cauezzan a little: alſo if you thinke ſo good, giue him a pretie twich or two with the Cauezzan, which muſt be doone with no furie, but with moderation & patience.
            In theſe leſſons you ſhall exerciſe your horſſe fifteene times, which maketh vp three moneths complet. But you muſt in no wiſe force him to do any thing more, though I know well he might be drawne in much ſtraiter, and ſhalbe after: for I deſire he ſhould doo all things iuſtlie and aſſuredlie, which he will vndoubtedlie doo, ſo ſoone as he can perfectlie performe all theſe things before recited.
         
         
            CHAP. 12.
            
               Certeine particular things to be obſerued by the rider, and vſed the first moneth he rideth the horſſe with the ſadle.
            
            
               WHen the Rider perceiueth that his colt beginneth to doo his leſſons indifferentlie well, and that he vnderſtandeth the helps before ſaid; then being on horſſebacke, hauing

pauſed & ſetled himſelfe, he ſhall put the horſſe three paſes forward; and ſtaieng there, make him retire a little: which done, being againe put forward, he ſhall giue him two or three turnes on either hand.
            From thence you may go on to the place of riding, where your horſſe hauing finiſhed all his leſſons, & ſtopped: you muſt offer him to turne, and therewith leane forward with your bodie, to ſee whether he bringeth ouer his contrarie leg as he ought to doo: for both in paſing, trotting, & galloping, the outward leg in the turne ſhould as it were couer the other which is next that ſide whereon the horſſe turneth, which the Italians doo call Incaualare. Alſo in turning, you muſt take heed that the horſſe doo beare his bodie euen, and make his turne iuſt in one tracke: which he will doo, if the rider ſitteth ſtaiedlie and aptlie, and handleth the horſſe heedefullie, alwaies helping him when neede requireth: of which helps we will hereafter ſpeake at large.
            Thus, when you haue ridden your horſſe, & ſtaied him againe, making him retire, & then go forward three paſes as he was woont; you muſt once more looke downe on either ſide, to ſee How your horſſe muſt ſtand, &c. whether he ſtandeth iuſt vpon his legs, and beareth his head well. And if you find he ſtand not

iuſt, but putteth one leg before the other, reſting his bodie more on one ſide, than on the other, you ſhall faire and ſoftlie with your rod beat him on that leg that ſtandeth out of order, to the end he may remooue it into the right How the horſſe ſhuld ſtand at his ſtop, &c. place: for in deed the horſſe ought to ſtand iuſt vpon all foure legs, ſo ſoone as he is ſtopped and ſtaied. This correction you may alſo vſe in the ſtable, when ſo euer you ſee the horſſe putteth one leg more forward than the other, or ſtandeth more firmelie vpon one than the other: which ſeldome chaunceth, if he be paſtorned as he ſhould be.
            You may not thinke, that to looke downewards, to behold the iuſtneſſe of your horſſes legs and bodie, dooth ſerue to ſmall purpoſe: for it alſo is a meane to let you vnderſtand, if your horſſe in dooing his leſſons hath hurt his legs, his feete, or his mouth. Beſides that, you may the more eaſilie & perfectlie know the motions The motions of the horſſes bodie & mind appeare by his eies. of his bodie and mind, which doo cheeflie appeare by his eies. For if you ſee his eies looke fierie, that is a ſigne that choler aboundeth in him: if diſcoloured, then is he diſcouraged, and faint of courage: if they be wet with teares, then he complaineth of wearines, or ſome other ſuch cauſe. So that knowing his greefe, you may

eaſilie prouide the cure thereof, as by your diſcretion ſhalbe thoughtfit.
            Thus after you haue made two or three ſtrait turnes on either hand paſing your horſſe, or otherwiſe as he can beſt doo, with that iuſtnes that is required; you ſhall euer depart from thence to the place of riding, trotting him liuelie and roundlie, keeping your bridle euen, & the reines of the Cauezzan more ſtrait on the one than on the otherſide, as you find the horſſe inclined: in that ſort trotting him cheerefullie along the waie, you ſhall ſomtimes with a ſoft voice incourage him, and ſometimes with the point of your rod touch him on the crooper of his buttocke, and ſomtimes lightlie ſtrike him ouerthwart the necke vpon his ſhoulder, to the end he ſhould raiſe him ſelfe, and take his paſe with ſpirit and courage: which done, you may fall into your ordinarie leſſons, firſt on the trot, and after on the gallop.
         
         
            CHAP. 13.
            
               How the rider ought from hence-forth to exerciſe his horſſe in the Caragolo.
            
            
               IF you ſee that your horſſe doth gallop well, I wiſh (not hauing vſed him therevnto before) that you ſhould in

anie wiſe, for twentie daies togither, vſe him vnto the Caragolo: for it will greatlie helpe a horſſe to make the turnes vpon the ground, and likewiſe bring him vnto the manage without reſt. During the time you practiſe your horſſe in this leſſon, you ſhall vtterlie leaue the rings; ſauing that you muſt ſtill trot and gallop ſometimes ſtraight forth, and then ſtop as you were woont.
            When ſo euer you trot the Caragolo, you muſt Aduertiſements touching the trotting of the Caragolo.
                at the firſt go faire and ſoftlie; and after towards the ſtraight turnes, and alſo in the inlarging, trot with more furie: which you ſhall doo the ſpace of fiue or ſix mornings, and all the reſt of twentie daies. In the end of the ſwift trot, you muſt put the horſſe to gallop, at the leaſt once on either hand: yet ſo, as you make an end on that hand, which your horſſe is leaſt willing vnto.
            And now once more, that you muſt alwaies end amids the Caragolo in the narrow; and after ſtop ſtraight in the ring which you ſee in the figure. Then hauing ſtopped in the order before ſaid, you ſhall there turne in that ſort we haue heretofore preſcribed, euer taking heed, that in turning, the contrarie leg of the horſſe doo come ouer the other: as for example. If you turne on the right hand, ſee that his left leg may go before and couer the right leg: and turning on the

left hand, the right leg of the horſſe muſt doo the like.
            Hauing thus doone, and ſeeing your horſſe head in the end of his turns towards the ſtraight rings of the Caragolo, pauſing a while, you muſt paſe, or els trot (as your ſelfe thinketh beſt) into the ſaid ring, where ſtopping the horſſe ſtrait, you ſhall make an halfe turne, and put him foorth to the other ring, ſo long exerciſing him, as to your diſcretion ſhall be thought ſufficient.
         
         
            CHAP. 14.
            
               How and when to teach your horſſe to turne vpon the ground, Terra terra.
            
            
               WHen your horſſe can ſtop well, gallop the ſtraight rings, the S, and the Caragolo; I would haue him brought either into new rings, or into a Caragolo of much more ſtraightnes than the other wherevnto he was before vſed, and there in the end drawe him as ſtrait as poſſiblie you can: firſt paſing him, then trotting, and in the end gallopping, vſing all neceſſarie helpes, and cheeflie that of the bridle hand, which muſt euer lead the reines with due meaſure and diſcretion.
            
               
But if you will exerciſe your horſſe in the ſmall rings, you may for certeine mornings onlie trot him, and then afterwards increaſing the ſpeed of that trot, fall into a gallop: ſo long continuing both on the one & the other hand, till the horſſe dooth that you deſire. Then finding he is brought to ſuch paſſe, you muſt for fifteene daies continuallie gallop him onelie in the ſame rings, ſtraiter and ſtraiter, helping him with the due helps, whereof we ſhall hereafter intreat at large. Thus much your horſſe will eaſilie be brought vnto, and performe with a good grace, if you obſerue time, changing hands as you ought, and at euerie change thruſt him foorth one paſe.
            And note, that within the circuit of the ſelfe ſame rings you ſhall both ſtop, ſtaie, and make the horſſe retire, if in the end of his turnes he hath forced too much forward out of the place of turning: but if he hath ſwarued out of anie hand, or gone backward in turning, then muſt ye preſentlie put him forward, or at leaſt ſo ſoone as you haue ſtopped.
            But now I muſt warne you, that in no wiſe you A caueat to auoid toiling of your horſſe, and the reaſon whie. ſhould toile your horſſe long in this kind of leſſon; bicauſe it is labourſome and painfull: yet haue I ſeene manie riders (forgetting themſelues)

that ceaſed not to ride their horſſes ſo long in one ſelfe place, till they were all in ſweat and fome, ſcant able to fetch their breaths, or ſtand vpright: whereof dooth proceed ſo manie diſeaſes of the ſinewes, the legs, the loines, the head, and other members. I doo the rather forewarne you, wiſhing you ſhould teach your horſſe to turne, ſome while in one, and ſome other while in an other place, which he will performe without labour or anie danger at all, & become ſo perfect as you would haue him: beſides that, your ſelfe ſhall be reputed among other gentlemen, of iudgement and diſcretion.
            So long as you pleaſe to practiſe your horſſe to theſe turnes, you may not trouble him with anie other leſſon, ſaue onelie in the S: which muſt be made more ſtrait and ſhort than it was woont, and therein you may not doo much.
            Touching the commoditie of turning vpon The commoditie & vſe of turning vpon the ground. the ground, it ſerueth to manie good ends, as well in skirmiſh as battell, in combate and triumph; beſides that, it is a thing of much commendation and pleaſing the beholders: for after the horſſe can thus turne on the ground, he may doo it for more pleaſure aloft, or aboue the ground as we call it, with, or without iumps and yerks as your ſelfe beſt liketh.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 15.
            
               Of that motion which the Italians call Coruette or Peſate, whereof in our language there is not (for ought I know) anie proper terme yet deuiſed.
            
            
               MAiſter Claudio is of opinion, that this motion is of leſſe neceſſitie than anie other, and that no horſſe ſhould be learned to make the Coruette when he is ouer yoong, nor till ſuch time as he be perfect in all the leſſons aforeſaid: ſith it behooueth that the horſſe ſhould be firme of head, ſtrong necked, raiſed in his paſe, and iuſt in all his dooings, which he will be by obſeruing the orders before expreſſed, and vſing the helps which ſhall hereafter be ſet downe: for thereby he is brought to ſo great perfection, as in ſuch a ſhort ſpace may be atteined; that is, to trot nimblie and lightlie, to gallop roundlie and willinglie, to ſtop before hand firmelie and iuſtlie, and make his turnes ſwiftlie, comelie, and aſſuredlie: all which are things ſo neceſſarie as more they may not.
            Wherefore your horſſe being reduced to that

forwardnes, as to performe the leſſons beforeſaid; I would, that after he hath beene a while exerciſed in turning and ſtopping, dooing them according to your deſire firmelie and iuſtlie, that then you ſhould put him to make the Peſate and Coruette, which you may doo in this maner.
            You muſt go into ſome ſtrait waie that hath The maner how to put your horſſe to the Coruette or Peſate.
                a wall or banke on either ſide, and the ground ſomewhat declining. Then comming from the higher end downewards, you muſt put your horſſe forward, paſing two or three elns: where making proffer to ſtaie, you muſt with your voice incourage him to aduance before, accompanieng him with the due helps thereto belonging, holding your bodie a little backeward, and the reines both of the bit and Cauezzan ſomewhat ſtraiter; yet ſo iuſt, that if the horſſe would force forward to ſhun the aduancing, or for that he vnderſtand not what he ſhould doo, yet he could not.
            You may alſo put your hands a little forward, and ſo raiſe the horſſe before, which will be a meane that he may with more eaſe lift vp the fore part of his bodie; yet muſt this helpe be vſed with great diſcretion. And thus you muſt doo at the end of euerie three elns, till he dooth aduance before, or at the leaſt ſeemeth deſirous ſo

to doo.
            But if he happen to aduance ouer hie, and force Faults in your horſſe deſeruing correction. forward more than he ought (cheefelie if he ſprall with his legs) then muſt you foorth with correct him with your rod, by beating him vpon the knees. Or if he commit anie other diſorder, as caſting downe his head, or leape ouerthwart, yet force not thereof at all: but after you haue corrected him for the ſame, returne to make him aduance, and you ſhall be ſure he will in one morning, or percaſe in leſſe than the third part of one houre fall from one aduancing to make manie Peſate: which dooing you muſt preſentlie make much of him.
            Other meanes there are to bring your horſſe to make the Peſate, as in the ſtrait path of a ring, or in a plaine waie; yet ſtill obſeruing the ſame order: alſo in ſome right vp furrowe halfe an elne wide.
            For certeine daies you may exerciſe your horſſe in the Peſate, without forgetting his other ordinarie leſſons. But ſo ſoone as he is perfect in them, both vpon the paſe and trot, to the end he ſhould not become ouer-buſie in that motion, as manie yoong horſſes are, you muſt vſe him commonlie to be brought into ſome long carriera; where paſing him two third parts thereof, put

him to trot the reſt ſwiftlie, till comming neere the end, you may a little drawe the raines, and putting thereto your voice, ſtrike him gentlie vpon one of his ſhoulders, ſo cauſing him to Coruette, and therein (if need require) helpe him otherwiſe.
            I would not (vnleſſe great neceſſitie ſo requireth) The vſe of the ſpurs. that in theſe Coruette you ſhould vſe the helpe of your ſpurres. Neuertheles, if the horſſe be naturallie heauie, hard of head and cold, then is it meete you ſhould ſtrike him towards the flanke, with the iuſt ſtroke of the ſpurres, thereby to raiſe him, and remooue his heauines, ſtubbornes, and dulnes. But at what times the ſpur is to be vſed I haue not yet ſpoken, but reſerue to intreat thereof hereafter.
            Now, ſith that manie yoong horſſes doo eaſilie learne the Coruette; and hauing learned them, vſe them willinglie; imagining that ſo ſoone as they haue made a few Coruette, they are not to doo anie thing elſe, or being corrected with the ſpur continue ſtill to make more Coruette, euen againſt the riders will, and when they ought not, and in places vnfit, dooing them manie times higher than they ſhould: therefore vſe your ſpurres verie ſeldome, and likewiſe ſpare to emploie the calues of your legs. For it is an euill

ſight, that for this purpoſe you ſhould ſet them ſo buſilie a worke, cheeflie in coruetting & ſtopping, at which times you ſhould ſhew rather to ſit firmelie and liuelie, which were to more purpoſe both to become the horſſe and your owne perſon. For in all places, with the onelie helpes of your rod, your voice, and a little raiſing your bridle hand, the horſſe will aduance thicke, and doo what you would haue him.
            And albeit the helps of the voice and ſpurre ought to be vſed at the beginning, when the horſſe learneth; yet M. Claudio thinketh both the one and the other may afterwards be diſcontinued. For (beſides the reaſons alledged) it is no ſeemelie thing in the preſence of lookers on, to vſe ſo manie artificiall motions and affectations as diuers dailie doo.
            It ſhall therefore ſuffice, that when your horſſe can make his Coruette well, you vſe onelie a little helpe of the bridle hand, accompanieng the ſame by holding your right hand ſomwhat high; putting thereto ſuch a ſoft, ſharpe, and ſpeedie voice, as that motion requireth.
            But if the horſſe would ſtaie to make his Coruette, where you would not haue him, the remedie is to put him forward with the due correction of the voice, the rod, and the ſpurre: beſides

that, it is neceſſarie to put downe your hand angerlie vpon the horſſe necke, and ſo trot him the whole length of a carriera, in the end ſtopping him with two or three Coruette: and then before you make much of him, returne him to trot in the ſame waie, and there againe put him to make a few Coruette iuſtlie: by which few I meane the number ought not exceed three, becauſe more were vaine and ſuperfluous. Which order you ſhall euer obſerue in ſtopping, and all manages which require to be doone with Coruette: which if your horſſe will doo with his forelegs comelie, yet not ouer hie from the ground, ſo as the one doo not tarrie for the other, you ſhall leaue, and make much of him.
            Likewiſe, if in his former leſſons he gallop and ſtop well, with the helps thereto belonging; and increaſing the gallop cheefelie in the end, that is to ſaie, the third part of the gallop ought to be as it were running: and at the ſtop you ſhall faire and eaſilie interteine him, leaning your bodie ſomewhat backward, and holding your legs in their place ſtretched out and firme, helping the horſſe with your voice and rod, by ſtriking him faire and ſoftlie vpon that ſhoulder: for by ſo dooing he will bow his howghes, and ſtop vpon the heeles, as he ought to doo.
            
               
But if he commeth to his ſtop, with his legs caſt right foorth & vnwillinglie, his correction ought be the more; and cheeflie vpon the ſhoulders: yet not ſo great, as to make the horſſe angrie, but let him know that you correct him onelie bicauſe he ſhould doo what you would haue him.
            Maiſter Claudio ſaith, that ſithence the Coruette are as it were the children of the Peſate; ſo ſoon as the one is learned, the other will foorthwith follow. And betwixt them there is no other difference, How the Coruette and the Peſate doo differ. than that the Peſate muſt be performed with more ſpeed in good time and often, handling the matter ſo, as the horſſe may alwaies at the firſt go faſter forward in his coruetting.
            In this motion you may vſe the calues of your legs, and likewiſe the euen ſtroke of your ſpurs, yet lightlie, and ſometimes one ſpur and ſometimes the other, as ye ſhall ſee occaſion: which order you may obſerue in the Peſate, vſing all other helps likewiſe in that caſe required.
            The motion of coruetting cannot be comelie, vnleſſe the Coruette be doone ſhort, lowe and thicke. And it ſhall ſuffice thee to make ten or twelue at one time: for I allow not of thoſe that inforce the horſſe to go from the one to the other end of the ſtreate, vpon the Coruette, forgetting that too much of one thing is diſpleaſing.

Beſides that, much coruetting brooſeth both the horſſe and rider.
            Maiſter Claudio therefore affirmeth plainelie, that he miſliketh manie Coruette both forward and backward, and moſt of all if they be made ſidewaies: neither dooth he allow them forward in manage-wiſe, vnleſſe it be with determination to make a turne in that order, for ſo they are commendable. Yet (ſaith he) let no man maruell, that the turnes vpon the Coruette are doone with more difficultie, and are more pleaſing to the beholders, than to turne without pauſing and ſwiftlie; for therein he ſhould be deceiued. For euerie horſſe may be taught to turne vpon the Coruette, and may doo it eaſilie, by reaſon he may therein take breath and time: but to the other turne he ſhall neuer atteine, vnleſſe he be of more force and ſpirit, ſeeing he is conſtrained to hold his breath longer, and vſe more ſtrength of his backe, with the ſtiffnes of his necke, & firmenes of the mouth. Of one thing you may be aſſured, that when your horſſe can trot well forwards, he is eaſilie learned to doo it euerie other waie.
            Now it remaineth to enforme you whie thoſe Whervpon the Coruette hath his name. motions be called of the Italians, Coruette and Peſate: & how to name them in Engliſh I know

not, where with I will declare the commoditie and diſcommoditie they carrie with them.
            
               Coruetta is that motion, which the crowe maketh, when without flieng ſhe leapeth and iumpeth vpon the ground: for Coruo in the Italian toong ſignifieth a crowe, and a leape in that ſort is called Coruetta. Peſate I ſuppoſe were ſo called of the verbe Peſare, which in our language is to waie or balance. And the Italians hauing tried the wait of anie thing, doo commonlie ſaie Ecoſa peſata: ſo likewiſe metaphoricallie and by waie of reſemblance, they called thoſe liftings vp and lettings downe of the horſſe feete in iuſt time and order, Peſate. This motion was in ancient time among the Italians termed Orſata, bicauſe the beare vſeth ſuch a heauing vp and downe with his bodie.
            The commoditie proceeding of theſe Coruette 
               The commoditie & diſcommoditie comming by the Coruette.
                and Peſate, is, that therby we may conceiue of what obedience, lightnes, & valure the horſſe is: for in deed they doo greatlie procure the horſſe to become nimble and light. But the diſcommodities proceeding of the Coruette are diuerſe, and often found in the warre, in combate, in turnements, & other exerciſes on horſebacke. They are alſo hurtfull to the horſſes bodie, being vſed ouer-much; bicauſe it weakeneth the

ſinews, and hurteth the loines, forceing their humors to fall into the legs and hooues. Alſo it maketh the hoofe to breake into quarternes, ſpeciallie if the horſſe be put to make his Coruette vpon ſtonie places, or often in anie other place.
            All theſe leſſons before recited, the horſſe may be taught to doo, within foure moneths next after he is firſt ridden: during which time he ſhall be ridden with the Cauezzan and Canon; but euer after to be handled otherwiſe.
            By that which hath hitherto beene ſaid, it ſeemeth that M. Claudio ſuppoſeth foure moneths ſufficient to make an horſſe ſeruiceable and perfect vpon the ground: which is manie times and in manie apt and docible horſſes prooued true; cheeflie in Italie, where they are commonlie of great ſpirit and aptneſſe to be taught: but in horſſes of theſe countries doo aſſuredlie require more time, in reſpect of their conſtitution; yet the diligence and diſcretion of riders doo manie waies ſupplie ſundrie defects of nature.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 16.
            
               How to make vp an horſſe vpon the ground, and of the manage without time.
            
            
               IT is the opinion of Maiſter Claudio, that within the ſpace of foure moneths a horſe may become perfect in all the leſſons aforeſaid, vnleſſe by ſome accident he be hindered. For the horſſe may be within this time brought to ſuch ſtaiednes and obedience, that the Cauezzan may be taken off, and in ſteed thereof you ſhall vſe a falſe reine. During all this time, I would not haue you in anie wiſe to put your horſſe to manage with halfe or whole time, no nor with the ſwift turne: neither would I haue him put to turne hie, with or without yarking. Moreouer, you may not in anie wiſe meddle to make him doo the Capreola, to leape, or gallop galliard; no although the horſſe doo ſhew great ſpirit, or deſire to doo thoſe things, for it is vtterlie vaine to teach them, till ſuch time as he be firme and perfect in all things vpon the ground. Beſides that, bicauſe the horſſe dooth want his full ſtrength, you may worke an effect contrarie

to your deſire.
            But being reduced to this ripenes in fowre moneths, I would not haue you (as diuers men doo) neuer leaue off the Cauezzan, continuing there with, moneths, yeares, and whole ages of men, before they make vp the horſſe: but finding him firme and perfect in the dooings aboueſaid, you ſhall preſentlie take awaie the chaine, and in all his leſſons exerciſe him with the falſe reines, at the leaſt one whole moneth. Then if you ſee that he goeth well, you may put him altogether to manage without reſt: where vnto ye may eaſilie induce him to doo it both iuſtlie and ſwiftlie, by obſeruing that hath beene often ſaid; which is, if by little and little you drawe in the horſſe, and make him go with more ſpeed: wherin, to exerciſe him often vnto the S, being made ſomewhat ſhort and ſtrait, dooth helpe much in this reſpect; as I haue at large before diſcourſed.
            The manage without reſt, called of the Italians Maneggio di contra tempo, requireth great Maneggio di contra tempo, & Maneggio di mezzo e di tutto tempo. firmeneſſe both of hand and bodie, and perhaps more time and meaſure is therein to be vſed, than in anie of the other manages with halfe or whole reſt, which they call Maneggio di mezzo e di tutto tempo. All which manages are verie

diſcreetlie engliſhed by Maiſter Blundeuile; a manage with halfe reſt, whole reſt, and without reſt.
            It ſeemeth more ouer, that M. Claudio thinketh the manage without reſt is both moſt commendable, and moſt difficult; cheefelie when the turnes are made not vpon the ſoft gallop, but ſwiftlie and furiouſlie. Alſo when the horſſe is in ſtopping, if you ſuddenlie at the middeſt of the turne put him foorth with a good grace, cloſing the next turne ſwiftlie, and cloſe as it ſhould be; and if from thence the horſſe doo depart ſuddenlie, making haſt to the other end of the manage, there dooing the like, and ſo continue without ſtaie or diſorder.
            You muſt neuer forget that this manage muſt be taught the horſſe in the order before ſaid, which is; firſt paſing, next trotting, and laſtlie gallopping, by little and little drawing him to that ſwiftnes and frankenes that is required, according to the force of the horſſe; remembring in the end to ſtop him comelie, with two or three Peſate made well, and with breath enough. And ſurelie, if you continue thus to doo, you ſhall make your horſſe ſo perfect, that if you pleaſe to put him to doo more, he will learne it eaſilie. You muſt alſo, during this moneth, vſe your

horſſe much to the turnes Terra terra, which I would haue him learne, before he be brought to manage, to the end that both in them and all other dooings, he may come more readilie and iuſtlie to his halfe turnes.
            But if it fortune that your horſſe dooth not euerie thing firmelie and iuſtlie as you deſire, yet ought you not be diſcouraged; but preſentlie in the ſame place where he committeth the fault, correct him by all meanes due to that fault: neither ſhall you ceaſe ſo to doo, till ſuch time as he amendeth. And trulie, either the firſt, ſecond, or third morning he will be brought to doo according to your owne fanſie, ſo that you giue him not ouer at the firſt. This we haue ſaid ſhall ſuffice, to enforme you how to make your horſſe perfect in all his dooings vpon the ground.
         
         
            CHAP. 17.
            
               How to helpe the horſſe with your voice.
            
            
               THe helps required in horſmanſhip Helpes in horſſemanſhip reduced to nine in number. are diuers, and may be reduced to nine: as the voice, the rod, the bridle, the calues of your legs, the ſtirrops, the ſpurres, the

bodie, the ground, and the water.
            As touching the voice, you muſt vnderſtand Of varieng the voice in diuerſe reſpects. it maie varie, lowder or ſofter, as the dooings of the horſſe and his diſpoſition altereth. So that, if you ſhould alwaies vſe one voice, your horſſe could neuer conceiue your meaning, and conſequentlie your helpes become vaine. It ſhall therefore behooue you to vſe one voice to a coult at his firſt handling, an other when he beginneth to go well, another when he ſtoppeth, another when he gallopeth at leiſure, an other in his gallop galliard, an other in his turnes vpon the ground, an other when he turneth hie with yarkes or without, an other in his carriera and leaping.
            Likewiſe, whenſoeuer you teach him his ordinarie paſe or order of going, a particular voice ought to be then vſed. You muſt alſo be prepared to haue a voice for your horſſe, when he is ouer light behind, ſtubborne or diſobedient; and one other, if he doo obedientlie, willinglie, and couragiouſlie. All which M. Claudio dooth labour to expreſſe in his language; yet for that they be in all toongs rather ſignificant ſounds than words of expreſſe meaning, I commit them to the riders diſcretion: it ſhall ſuffice that the horſſe thereby may conceiue your meaning,

and be forced to obeie in that you would haue him to doo.
            Yet now, that this helpe of the voice may not A caueat touching the voice, when you ride before a prince, a noble perſonage, &c. be vſed mnch, if you ride in preſence of the Prince, or other great perſons; chieflie when the horſſe is redie: for at ſuch times and in ſuch places it were vnſeemelie to open your mouth, and vtter voices of diuers ſounds and meaning. In ſted of thoſe voices, you ſhall imploie certeine ſecreat helps and motions artificiall. But the moſt comelie grace on horſſebacke (if you ride in ſo great preſence) is not to helpe the horſſe at all, otherwiſe than to accompanie him with your hand and bodie, wherby you ſhall couertlie declare much cunning, without apparant helpes or inforcement.
         
         
            CHAP. 18.
            
               How to helpe your horſſe with the rod.
            
            
               THe helpe of the rod is vſed by one of theſe meanes, by whisking, by ſtriking with the whole rod, with the point therof onlie, with the middeſt, and alſo with the end vnder the hand, or with ſhewing the rod. Touching the

whiske, it ought not be vſed, till ſuch time as the horſſe knoweth well all other helpes of the rod, and can manage perfectlie on either hand. The rider may vſe this kind of helpe in ſteed of the voice, & it ſtirreth vp the ſpirit of euerie horſſe, but chieflie of thoſe which are of courage and great life.
            Striking with the whole rod is required, when you would haue your horſſe go forward liuelie, either in his trot, his gallop, his carriera, his halfe or whole turns, either vpō the ground or aboue, with yarkes or without: for then you ſhall ſtrike him vpon one of his ſhoulders, his flanks & buttocks, his legs or thighes. This ſtroke of the rod ſhall helpe much, being giuen in due time; and the more, if the ſame be accompanied with the other helps, and chieflie that of the voice.
            You may alſo firſt vſe this helpe in paſing your horſſe, ſometimes ſtriking him on the ſhoulder, to the end he ſhould the more raiſe himſelfe. And you muſt ſtrike him, firſt on the one, and then the other ſhoulder, whereby he will gather his legs the better, go with more life, and beare his head the higher. The like order you muſt obſerue in his trot and ordinarie gallop. But in his carriera you ſhall beate him either vpon his ſhoulders, or vpon his flanks, verie ſharplie: you

may alſo ſometimes vſe the whiske.
            In offring him to make Coruette, you may likewiſe helpe the horſſe with the rod, ſtriking him vpon one of his ſhoulders at euerie turne and euerie Coruette, yet onelie when need ſo requireth. It ſeemeth not good, that the horſſe ſhould be continuallie ſtriken vpon, when you offer him the Coruette: for it may be he will writh his mouth & necke the rather towards the left ſide; you ſhall therefore ſtrike him on that ſide your owne diſcretion dooth thinke good. If you will raiſe your horſſe to leape at his ſtop; then, ſo ſoone as you haue ſtriken him on the ſhoulder, incontinent turne your hand, & ſtrike him alſo vpon the flanke. The like you may at occaſions doo in the gallop galliard, or turning aboue the ground. But if your horſſe be light enough before at his ſtop and leape, then without either beating vpon the ſhoulders or flanks, you may make him to yarke, by letting the point of your rod to touch the horſſe behind in the middeſt of his buttocks.
            An other waie to helpe your horſſe by the rod, is, when you would haue him ſtaie in one place; for then you ſhall laie it ouerthwart his necke, and then he will, as he ſtandeth, lift firſt one, then the other leg, with a certeine grace and comelie

countenance. And maruell not though this one maner of holding the rod doth worke two contrarie Two contrarie effects in holding the rod, &c. effects, for in the one you doo ſollicit the horſſe to go by beating, ſtill beating, in croſſing his necke: but in the other you doo onelie laie the rod croſſe, but not moue it otherwiſe.
            Touching the great end of the rod vnder your hand, you may therewith make much of your horſſe, if you ſcratch him therwith faire and eaſilie vpon the necke, in ſigne he dooth well. Moreouer, the ſhew of the rod is in the turns an helpe vnto the horſſe, and a grace vnto the man. For in turning the horſſe on the left hand, you muſt put the point of the rod within one handfull of his eie, or els let it fall downewards ſomewhat towards his right ſhoulder; yet neuer ſuffring your hand to remoue far from the true place therof. And if you will manage your horſſe on the right hand, you ſhall put your rod downe towards the left ſhoulder, yet neuer remoouing one hand far from the other. For in deed, ouer much mouing of the right hand, and lifting vp the rod, ſauoureth too much of affectation, yet at this daie it is of diuerſe men much vſed.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 19.
            
               Of the helpe of the bridle hand.
            
            
               THe horſſe is helped by the bridle hand, when in his dooings he putteth downe his noſe more than becommeth him; or elſe if he hangeth too hard on the hand, or trotteth heauilie: for in all thoſe caſes you muſt giue him certeine chockes with the bit, more or leſſe, as occaſion doth require. The like may be doone, when at the ſtop or end of anie leſſon, you find the horſſe beare his head lower than he ought. But if he leaneth therewith, more on the one than the other hand, then muſt you with the two laſt fingers of the right hand (holding the contrarie reine) giue him a chocke or two, or more, as you doo find the horſſe deſerueth to be corrected.
            You may alſo helpe your horſſe with your bridle hand, in the midſt of his manage, and likewiſe his turnes, by giuing ſoft or hard chocks, as occaſion ſhall require. This correction will alſo ſerue to make your horſſe retire, and hold him direct and light vpon the hand. Neither will it

be amiſſe, but rather a good helpe, if in leapes of all ſortes, & likewiſe turnes, opening your hand to raiſe the horſſe, you put the ſame forward towards the bending place of his necke, ſo as your thumbs be neereſt therevnto, & conſequentlie the little finger furtheſt off, & neereſt vnto your ſadle: yet may not your hand be from your ſadle farther off, at anie time, than two fingers; vnleſſe it be at ſome extraordinarie times and occaſions. For then it is not amiſſe, to raiſe your hand much higher, & farther from your bodie, as it were putting it as far as the middeſt of the horſſes necke. And in this maner by little and little vnfolding your hand from turne to turne, & from leape to leape, you ſhall helpe the horſſe more or leſſe, as need requireth. But ſuch helps muſt be performed in verie due time and meaſure. Therefore in vſing them you ſhalbe heedfull and diligent. This is (I thinke) the true counſelling of M. Claudio touching the helpe of the hand, whereof M. Astley hath largelie diſcourſed 
                  M. Aſtley in his diſcourſe of horſſemanſhip. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, chapters. more at large, and verie skilfullie ſet downe not onlie the helps of the hand according to this author, but alſo vnto the opinions of Xenophon and Gryſon added his owne knowledge and experience. For which reſpect I haue indeuoured my ſelfe to ſaie the leſſe.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 20.
            
               Of the calues of the legs, the ſtirrops, and the helpe by water.
            
            
               THe helpe of the calues is onelie to be vſed vnto horſſes of great life, ſpirit, & courage, in all ſortes of turning, by putting the calfe of your leg to the contrarie ſide of the horſſe. As if you will haue him to leane or yeeld towards the left hand, then muſt you laie your leg cloſe to the rightſide of the horſſe; and likewiſe, if he ſhould go on the right hand, then put your leg to the left ſide. But M. Claudio holdeth this kind of helpe to be of no great importance, neither doth he make much accompt of the ſtirrop: yet being at ſometimes vſed it is to good purpoſe. That helpe ſerueth to touch the horſſe vnder the ſhoulder, to the end he ſhould hold his neck and noſe as you would haue him.
            The water is exceeding good, to bring your Of helping your horſſe by water. horſſe to gather his legs, & become light if you vſe to trot him therin. The water fit for this purpoſe ſhould be ſo deepe, as the horſſe may feele it to touch his bellie, the bottome where of muſt

be ſound earth, or rather perfect good grauell.
         
         
            CHAP. 21.
            
               Helpes of the ground.
            
            
               AN apt place for riding, and a ground fit for that purpoſe, are things verie profitable & neceſſarie to make your horſſe go well and ſpeedilie. A plowed land, a ground riſing, & a ground declining, are places fit to giue the horſſe breath and lightneſſe. The ground declining is alſo exceeding apt to bring your horſſe to ſtop well, make his Coruette, and doo all things required in the managcs both with and without time. The ground like vnto the backe of a knife, ſerueth well for the manage turnes aboue the ground. The plaine ground hauing on either end prettie ſmall hils, helpeth the horſſe to make the halfe turne, and alſo to yarke therewithall. The ground that is round and high in the midſt, is fit to bring your horſſe to lightnes, and make him go well on that hand whereofhe is hard. It will alſo bring him to go more iuſt in the rings, lift his legs, and put one leg ouer the other. The ground like vnto a boat,

not being aboue three or foure ſpannes wide, ſerueth well to make a horſſe to turne, to caſt his legs, and put one ouer the other in good order. The ground adioining to ſome wall or pale, is good to make the horſſe go iuſt and ſtrait. The ſame is alſo fit to amend him, if in his manage turnes he diſordereth his hinder parts. The ground moſt fit for the carriera would be plaine without ſtones or other ſtaies, not ſoft, nor ouer hard: and if at either end it be declining, it will be by ſo much the better.
         
         
            CHAP. 22.
            
               The helpe of the mans bodie.
            
            
               BIcauſe this helpe ſhall hereafter be ſpoken of among the corrections, I ſaie onelie that the bodie helpeth much, and thereby the rider is eſteemed of the looker on, to be a man skilfull and cunning in that profeſſion, if he Notes of a good rider. vſe that helpe in good order and times conuenient. For whoſoeuer ſeeth a rider leaning ſomewhatforward, when his horſſe trotteth or gallopeth, will (being of anie knowledge) foorthwith conceiue he ſo dooth, the more aptlie to helpe

the horſſe to be firme of head, and not raiſe himſelfe higher than he ſhould, but beare his bodie euen, by reaſon he feeleth his burden counterpeiſed.
            Likewiſe when the horſſe commeth to ſtop, the rider ſhall greatlie helpe him, by caſting his bodie backewards, which will cauſe him to ſtop lowe behind, euen as it were vpon his buttocks. Alſo if the rider dooth leane towards the one ſide, it is to be thought that he would haue the horſſe to yeeld that waie. If the rider in paſſing his horſſe ſtrait, ſitteth ſhort on the one ſide, and leaneth hard vpon the other ſtirrop, it is to be thought that he ſo dooth purpoſelie to bring the horſſe to hold his necke and head that waie. Whenſoeuer in turning the rider yeeldeth his bodie more on the one than the other ſide, it is to be thought, that the ſame will helpe him to go more eaſilie and ſpeedilie by that hand.
         
         
            CHAP. 23.
            
               Of the helpe and correction of the ſpurs, and how and when they muſt be vſed.
            
            
               MAiſter Claudio affirmeth, that the ſpurre ought not be vſed to anie horſſe, vntill ſuch time as he is become firme and

well ſtaied of head. For if you doo otherwiſe, it will be a meane to make him more vnſtaied, and conſequentlie the longer before you can ſettle him.
            And it is apparant, that when ſo euer a colt vnſetled of head dooth feele the ſpur, he will offer to reſiſt and diſorder his head much more than anie other horſſe ſettled and perfect in his leſſons. Yet his meaning is not you ſhould defer At what time a colt is to be ſpurred. to ſpur him till he be fiue or ſixe yeares of age, but ſo ſoone as you find him brought to be ſtaid and ſetled (which I hope may be doone in foure moneths) then you may boldlie giue the ſpur vnto your horſſe: which you ſhall not firſt doo in anie ſtreet or waie, but in ſome deepe plowed ground, or ſandie place, after he hath doone his ordinarie leſſons. Firſt you muſt make him feele the one and after the other ſpur, faire and gentlie, as he paſeth or trotteth the large rings, forthwith ceaſing ſo to doo, and cheriſh him, laieng your hand vpon his necke, and vttering ſome courteous voice. In this ſort you may pricke him ſometimes on the one and ſometimes one the other ſide, after he hath beene warned well in his leſſons. And hereof you may be aſſured.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 24.
            
               How to helpe your horſſe in the rings, and at his ſtop.
            
            
               I Haue here to fore diſcourſed of helping your horſe, yet did I not particularlie informe you at what times and what places the ſame helpes ought be vſed: which is doone to the end I might proceed in order, & you the better reteine them in memorie. But now hauing accompliſhed what order and helps are required, here will I let you know how and when they ſhalbe vſed.
            And firſt you muſt remember, that when ſo How and when the foreſaid helpes are to be vſed. euer either in the large or ſtrait rings, in the Caragolo, in the figure of S, or in the manage in and out, which (as is before ſaid) the Italians call Serpeggiare, your horſſe dooth put out his but tocke; then muſt you forth with correct him on that ſide with your rod, with your heele, and with your ſpur (if you weare any) which you muſt continue till the horſſe amendeth his fault. The like you muſt doo, if turning of anie hand, or in going forward, he caſteth his hinder part out of order.

You may alſo in that caſe vſe this ſubtiltie; firſt to make proffer to go on one hand, & then ſuddenlie put the horſſe to turne on the other. You may likewiſe for this fault correct him well, if you paſe or trot him neere vnto a wall, & when he turneth putting out his hind part, he muſt of force hurt himſelfe, vnleſſe he holdeth his bodie ſtrait, which he will not doo often, but for feare therof leaue his fault, which he ſhall doo the better if you ad there vnto the other helpes.
            In gallopping the rings you may helpe the horſſe with your bodie, by carrieng your legs put forward more than ordinarie. And there is nothing that maketh a man to ſit ſo comelie on horſſebacke as the gallop: for in gallopping he may take time to ſettle his feete in the ſtirrops, to hold his legs in their due place with his thighs and knees cloſelie, and his whole bodie ſtrait and diſpoſed, with either hand beſtowed in their places. Therefore M. Claudio (perhaps contrarie to many other good riders) thinketh beſt that the ſtirrops ſhould be euen of one length, which The ſtirrops ſhould be of euen length. will be a meane that the rider ſhall ſit with the better grace, and more conuenientlie helpe his horſſe; much maruelling why the right ſtirrop ſhould be ſhorter than the other.
            In gallopping you muſt ſomewhat yeeld your

perſon towards that ſide you would haue the horſſe turne, yet not mooue your legs but when need requireth. As for example. If you gallop turning on the right hand, you muſt ſtaie your ſelfe ſomewhat more on the right than the left ſtirrop. The like order ſhall you obſerue on the contrarie hand, holding your bodie a little forward toward that ſide. Alſo in turning you muſt put your contrarie ſhoulder ſomewhat more forward, reſting your bodie on that ſtirrop more than the other: for by that meanes you ſhall ſwaie your horſſe towards that ſide, and be the more readie to helpe him. But in his trot or gallop ſtrait foorth, you ſhall not ſo doo, but ſit equallie in the middeſt, without leaning: vnleſſe the better to helpe your horſſe you beare your bodie ſomewhat forwards.
            It is alſo at ſometime permitted, you ſhould leane your bodie to the contrarie ſide, from that the horſſe is inclined, thereto to enforce him to leane the ſame waie your ſelfe leaneth. Alſo if vpon that occaſion you vſe the helpe of the ſtirrop, ſtriking his ſhoulder therewith on the contrarie ſide, and likewiſe giue him a twich or two with the falſe raine on the ſame ſide, it will be a good meane to draw him that waie.
            But in ſtopping you muſt caſt your bodie a

little backwards, ſuffring the horſſe to ſlide forward as it were alone, drawing the reines faire & eaſilie, till ſuch time he be come vnto that place you would; then hauing ſtaied his furie, you may ſtop him firme, and ſtaie him there. This I would haue obſerued, with thoſe horſſes that vnderſtand how to be handled vpon the ground. But if in ſtopping the horſe leaneth more on the one than the other hand, then muſt you, leaning backe, giue your ſelfe moſt towards that ſide, whereto he leaneth not, helping him all other waies: and ſo gallop him & ſtop him ſtrait forth, till you find his fault amended. But note, that gallop ſhall not exceed the length of an ordinarie manage. At the end wherof hauing ſtopped, if the horſſe ſtoppeth not ſtrait as he ought, put him forward againe, and at his ſtop correct Corrections diuerſe waies for not ſtopping, &c. him on that ſide he yeeldeth not, with your ſtirrop, the calfe of your leg, your ſpur, & your perſon, till he be content to yeeld and ſtop as you would haue him.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 24.
            
               How the ſtirrops ought to be of euen length.
            
            
               WHo ſo euer rideth with one ſtirrop longer than the other, dooth ſeeme therein to proceed contrarie to nature, hauing made man two legs of one iuſt length. Therfore if you make one ſtirrop ſhorter than the other, it is not poſſible you can ſit ſo comelie or iuſtlie on horſbacke, as if they were of equall length: or how can you vſe your ſpurs commodiouſlie or euenlie? For in ſtriking the horſſe with the ſpurs, you ſhall of force ſpur him higher on the one than the otherſide, ſo long as the one ſtirrop be longer than the other: which thing how vnſeemelie it is, I refer to your iudgement.
            Beſides that, how can you with your bodie ſo conuenientlie helpe your horſſe in his dooings? Sith you doo not ſit with your bodie iuſt in the ſaddle, or reſt your ſelfe equallie vpon the ſtirrops, iuſtlie counterpeiſed? which is the thing that makes you ſeeme faire & firme in the ſadle, by not leaning more on the one than the other

hand, and ſuch a ſeate will beſt become you in all ſorts of turnes, either on the ground, aboue with yarkes, and euerie other motion.
            And albeit it is the opinion of ſome, that to The opinion of ſome, that the right ſtirrop ſhould be ſhorter than the left, &c. breake lances it behooueth a man at armes to haue his right ſtirrop ſhorter than the other by two fingers, yet doo I not conceiue the reaſon thereof; ſith both in running at the ring, or courſe of the field, an horſſeman ought to ſit euen, without leaning more on the one than the other ſide, or turning anie of his ſhoulders: for thereby he ſhall ſhew the more cunning, and gaine aduantage in the length of the lance, which is ſome helpe at the incounter.
            Moreouer, although it ſeemeth that leaning more on the one than the other ſtirrop, and that thruſting forward of the one ſhoulder, dooth make the man ſtronger, both to meet the aduerſarie, & receiue his reinconter; yet is it certeine, that thereby he is the more apt to commit the errors beforeſaid, by ſitting looſe in and vneuen in his ſtirrops.
            Furthermore, ſith euerie man ſtandeth moſt ſtronglie vpon the ground, when he reſteth vpon both his feete: ſo doo I thinke that an horſſeman, ſtaieng his bodie vpon both ſtirrops equallie, ſhall be better prepared both to aſſaile,

and receiue the incounter of his aduerſarie, than if he ſhould doo otherwiſe.
            For theſe reaſons Maiſter Claudio reſolueth, that the ſtirrops ſhould be of equall length, whereby the rider may (as he thinketh) ſit more comelie and aſſuredlie. Neuertheleſſe, it is (as beforeſaid) permitted, that the rider ſhould at occaſions, to helpe the horſſe in his leſſons, reſt more on the one than the other ſtirrop, but not otherwiſe. It is not alſo to be diſallowed, though The left ſtirrop to be longer than the right. to fight in combate or turnie, the left ſtirrop be made longer ſomewhat than the other: bicauſe the rider is to emploie his right arme, and turne on the right ſide, in reſpect whereof the left ſtirrop would be the longer.
         
         
            CHAP. 25.
            
               In what ſort to helpe your horſſe in euerie manage.
            
            
               WHenſoeuer you will manage your horſſe without reſt, you muſt trot or gallop, till you come to the place of turning; where making as it were a ſeeming to ſtop, you muſt raiſe him, and therewith ſuddenlie put him forward

one paſe, leaning your bodie, and caſting your bridle hand a little forward: then by moouing your leg, you ſhall warne him to returne an other paſe, and in the turning eaſilie you ſhall put him forward at the halfe turne Terra terra, helping him with your voice, your heele, & ſpurre. And if you will haue him to turne on the right hand, helpe him on the left ſide; and on the left ſide, with the right ſpurre: & remember to helpe him much or little, as you ſee occaſion require.
            Remember alſo, if at the halfe of his turne he commeth about hard, as it were hanging on the contrarie hand from that he turneth, that then you muſt forbeare to ſtrike him with the contrarie ſpurre, that is to ſaie without the turne, and ſtrike him with your ſpurre within, on that hand you doo turne. The like order you ſhall obſerue both in gallopping and the franke manage. But if you find your horſſe commeth ouer faſt about to his halfe turne, not ſetting himſelfe iuſt in the ſame path from whence he came, for (to make the turne iuſt he muſt bring his head where his hinder feet were) then ſo ſoone as you haue giuen him the ſpur on the outſide, you muſt preſentlie anſwere the ſame with an other on the inſide: both which muſt be neere vnto the girths, vnleſſe you find occaſion to giue them neerer

vnto the flanks; which is, when the horſſe dooth turne with his buttocks more on the one than the other ſide. But if he turne ouermuch, bending on his legs behind, & ouer low with his buttocks; then muſt you foorthwith thruſt him forwards, ſtriking him neere vnto his girthes with both ſpurs together; accompanieng that helpe with the rod vpon the horſſes flanke, and likewiſe your voice, if need dooth ſo require.
            The ſtroke of the rod dooth alſo helpe much in turning, if the ſame be giuen when need requires vpon the contrarie ſhoulder of the horſe: but if no ſuch neede be, it ſhall ſuffice if you put your rod ouer the horſſe, ſo as the ſame may hang on the left ſhoulder, to make him turne towards the right hand, and likewiſe on the right ſide, when you would haue him turne on the left hand.
            But you ſhall helpe him much more, and with better grace, if when the horſſe ſlideth vpon his heeles, you ſit ſomewhat with your bodie leaning backward; and ſuddenlie putting him forward, turne the point of your contrarie ſhoulder towards that hand you would haue the horſſe to turne. As if you would haue him come on the right hand, then muſt you put forward your left ſhoulder; or if you would haue him turne on the

left hand, then put your right ſhoulder ſomewhat forward.
            In turning, you muſt alſo remember that your bridle hand may not be farre remoued from the bending of the horſſes necke, euer holding it right againſt the middeſt of the pommell.
            If you ride a horſſe that is alreadie made, and perfect; then, to make him turne on the left hand you muſt turne your bridle hand, yet not mouing it from the place; ſo as your thumbe be downewards, and your little finger (which is betwixt the reines) be vppermoſt: and turning on the right hand, you ſhall turne your fiſt contrariwiſe; ſo as all the other fingers be vpward, but the thumbe not ſo high as the ring and little fingers. This motion of the hand is not eaſilie expreſſed; and therefore M. Claudio remitteth it to the diſcretion of the rider, ſo that he keepe his hand firme in the due place preſcribed.
            But if your horſſe be not brought vnto perfection, but weareth his Cauezzan or falſe reine, then theſe points of cunning are not required; bicauſe you are to emploie all neceſſarie helps, to the end the horſſe may hold his head ſtrait, & go iuſt with his necke, chieflie when he turneth: euer helping, as need requireth. As if you turne on the left hand, then faire and eaſilie you ſhall

(according to neceſſitie) drawe the right falſe reine: or if you turne on the right hand, then muſt the left falſe reine be holden and drawne ſtrait, and the other as you thinke good.
            Theſe halfe turnes in the manages without reſt, I wiſh to be iuſt, and with good grace; for ſo being, M. Claudio ſaith they are the moſt ſeemelie and neceſſarie motions the horſſe can make. And if the horſſe can doo theſe turnes exactlie well, you may eaſilie make him alſo to doo them (as it were) mocking (which for want of engliſh words to expreſſe the ſame) I will vſe the Italian, calling them Volte ingannate & rubate. The waie Volte ingannate & rubate. to manage your horſſe with theſe Volte ingannate is, that when he commeth vnto the place of turne, readie to ſtop, you muſt proffer him to turne on the one hand, and ſuddenlie turne him on the other.
            If you like to vſe the ſame order in turning your horſſe, you may doo it in this maner. When you haue ſet your horſſes head ſtrait in the ſame path and place where he ſtood with his heeles, without putting him any whit forward; you muſt force him to make a whole turne round in the ſame order you obſerued in the halfe turnes: ſo as at euerie end of the manage you ſhall make one whole turne & a halfe vpon one hand. And

remember that the horſſe doo not paſſe forward to the other end of the manage, till you haue ended the turnes, but tarie till you will haue him ſo to doo. You may alſo (if ſo you thinke good) hauing giuen your horſſe an halfe turne on the right hand, preſentlie returne him with the like time on the left hand, to make an whole turne, in the order before preſcribed. But remember that in theſe dooings you may not labour your horſſe much, vnleſſe he be of great force; and more than ordinarie ſtrength. The like order you ſhall obſerue in helping in managing your horſſe with reſt; ſauing that you muſt then turne him at the firſt or third aduancing. This manage may be made with halfe turnes, & whole turnes mocked: but they muſt be aboue the ground & aloft. For I haue often told you, that I like not the whole turnes that be made ouer high, the horſſe reſting onelie vpon his two hinder feete. And if in ending the halfe turne or the whole turne with the halfe, you put your horſſe to one or two Peſate, or as manie Aggroppiati rileuati, before you come to the other end of the manage, the ſame will be pleaſing to the beholders; you ſhalbe alſo thought to ſhew much skill, and the horſſe more obedience. Note that in this manage with reſt aboue the ground, and high,

you muſt at euerie turne (for the moſt part) help the horſſe with the euen ſtroke of the ſpurs: yet not hard, vnleſſe need ſo requireth.
         
         
            CHAP. 26.
            
               How to helpe your horſſe in his Coruette, Peſate, and Raddoppiare.
            
            
               ALbeit we haue heretofore ſpoken of turning, and likewiſe of the Peſate and Coruette, yet did I not particularlie enforme you of the helpes to them belonging. I ſaie therfore, that neither in the Coruette nor the Peſate you muſt in anie wiſe mooue your legs, to helpe the horſſe ſo buſilie, as thereby to ſeeme rather a weauer than a rider: for you may helpe him ſufficientlie otherwiſe. But you ſhall hold them ſtrait and forward, and your bodie right vp in the ſadle; and not leaning forward, as ſome curious riders doo, raiſing their buttocks behind, and lifting them vp and downe more than the horſſe either in his Peſate or his Coruerte dooth.
            Maiſter Claudio therefore dooth counſell you, that without anie imitation of theſe men, you ſhall in coruetting ſit firme in your ſadle; with

your legs in their due place, holding a conſtant hand vpon your bridle. Neuertheleſſe, if your horſſe doo beare hard, and not make his Coruette lightlie, then may you helpe him with the euen ſtroke of your ſpurs; or firſt with the one, and after with the other, and (if need ſo requireth) with your bridle hand, turning your fiſt in ſuch wiſe, as heretofore I told you; that is, at euerie Coruette, your ring finger, which is vnder, may turne vpward, and your thumbe at the ſame inſtant may fall ſomewhat downeward, towards the bending of your horſſe necke.
            It will be alſo a good grace, if in coruetting you hold the end of the reines in your right hand, holding it vp from the other hand two ſpans: but you may not, during that time, vſe your rod, but in ſteed thereof betwixt your two hands open the reines, and at euerie Coruette ſhut them ſuddenlie, making thereby a certeine ſharpe ſound, which will ſomewhat awake, ſtirre and put forward the horſſe. You may alſo vſe the voice fit for this purpoſe as is before ſaid.
            Likewiſe at occaſions you ſhall imploie your rod, ſtriking the horſſe ſometimes on the one and ſometimes on the other ſhoulder, lightlie or ſharpelie, as by your diſcreation ſhall be thought meeteſt. You may in like maner with the

midle part of your rod ſtrike the horſſe vpon the bending of his necke, or with the point therof vpon the middeſt of his buttocks, letting the rod fall backwards ouer your ſhoulder. It will moreouer be good to vſe the whiske of your rod, ſometimes before, ſometimes behind: for that ſhall helpe much to haſten the horſſe to aduance, and beare his bodie with a ſeemlie grace, and beate the time faſt.
            Now you muſt vnderſtand the reaſon, whie M. Claudio miſliketh ſo much the motion of the The motion of the legs and perſon miſliked, and why? legs and perſon: bicauſe (ſaith he) it is a thing diſcommendable in the preſence of manie lookers on (cheeflie if they be of knowledge) to vſe ſo much art, or bring into their preſence a horſſe that cannot without helpe, and as it were alone make the Coruette and alſo the Peſate.
            
            I wiſh alſo, that when your horſſe turneth, you ſhould ſit ſtrait and firme with your bodie, holding your legs in their place, helping the horſſe in due time; ſomewhiles with the euen ſtroake of your ſpurs, ſometimes on the one ſide, & ſometimes on the other. It may alſo happen, that the helpe of your legs alone will ſuffice, and that your ſpur ſhall be needleſſe; for that your horſſe is of too great life and ſpirit. Therefore that helpe ioined with your bridle hand, your voice

and your rod ſhall worke the effect of your deſire, and make him turne as you would haue him.
            If you will turne your horſſe vpon the ground Terra terra, we haue heretofore told you how to doo it: if halfe aboue the ground (which the Italians call Amezzo aere) the ſame helpes ſhall ſerue, yet ſomwhat increaſed. But if his turnes be loftie Di tempo in tempo, then in turning you muſt helpe him with a great voice and ſtronger helps: which the horſſe will performe at euerie turne, whenſoeuer it pleaſe you, if among other helps with the point of the rod you beate him betwixt his buttocks, adding therevnto your voice.
            But note this one thing, that in what ſort ſoeuer you turne your horſſe, you muſt not in any wiſe tranſgreſſe or go out of the place. As for example. If you turne Terra terra, the hinder Orders to be obſerued in the turnes Terra terra, and A mezzo aere.
                legs of your horſſe may not remooue, but the forelegs onelie go about: the like order you muſt obſerue in his turnes A mezzo aere.
            
            In the turne wherein the horſſe mooueth as well his hind as his foreparts (which the Italians call Raddoppiare a groppette) he muſt of force firſt mooue his forelegs, and next his hinder legs: yet ought neither the forelegs preſſe ſo far forward, nor the hinder legs ſo much backward, as to exceed the bounds of the beaten circle, which

muſt not be in widenes more than the horſſes length. Yet though the horſſe dooth not preciſelie keepe the compaſſe, it ſhall be no great fault: for it were a thing almoſt impoſſible, to meaſure the motions of an horſſe by the geometricall compaſſe, or the watch of a clocke.
            Now to the end you may better conceiue what is ſaid, behold this figure, and imagine that the hinder feet of  the horſe doo ſtand in the centre, which is the middeſt of the circle, and the forefeet in the circumference. Then, when ſo euer you put the horſſe to turne, you muſt make him to mooue his feet from the place where he ſtandeth, vnto the next line of the croſſe, and ſo from thence to the other without loſſe of time: ſo in foure remooues of the horſſe feet, he ſhall euer make one round turne complete; firſt on the one and then on the other hand. But if it happen, that either you or the horſſe doo not keepe the iuſt remooues of his feet, it ſhall not be anie great fault, ſo long as

you obſerue time, and cloſe the turne comelie.
            To turne loftilie, with or without yarks, you ſhall obſerue the ſame order: but therein you muſt be warie and well aduiſed to keepe your bodie, and chieflie your backe well knit, to the end that when the horſſe riſeth or ſetteth, you yeeld not more on the one than the other ſide. And aboue all things, you muſt keepe your legs firmelie ſtretched out, not touching the horſſe with your ſpurre, but with great meaſure.
            The waie to doo ſo, is to raiſe your horſſe firſt with his hind parts, as it were a iumpe or two, & then at the ſecond or third iumpe to drawe him to turne aloft, & euerie fourth turne helpe him with the euen ſtroke of your ſpurres, with your rod on the contrarie ſhoulder, & ſuddenlie with the point of the rod vpon his crooper; adding therevnto the helpe of the bridle hand and bodie, if need requireth. The like you may doo on the other hand, neuer forgetting that in the end of euerie turne (of what ſort ſo euer) you muſt vſe greater ſpeed.
            It is alſo a great helpe to make your horſſe to turne high and aboue the ground, if you vſe him to turne in ſome ground that hath the ſides ſomewhat higher than the middeſt: for therein you turne the horſſe, for not hurting his legs

vpon the hill, he will lift his feete with a good grace, caſting out his legs as he ſhould doo, and let them fall againe in the iuſt time and place: & therewith alſo at the halfe turne yarke out behind, as you would wiſh, according vnto the helps you put vnto him. The ſame hils will alſo ſerue well to teach your horſſe to put one leg ouer the other, which the Italians doo call La ciambetta. But note, that this place ought not to be betweene the hils more than three or foure ſpannes at the moſt.
            Thus much concerning the Coruette, Peſate, and turnes, both vpon and aboue ground. All which things (the turnes Terraterra excepted) may ſeeme ſuperfluous in a horſſe for ſeruice: yet ſith you may haplie deſire to know M. Claudio his opinion in them, I haue thought good to make this ſhort diſcourſe. There with adding the difference betwixt the Coruette and the Peſate, as thus. The Coruette are thoſe motions, which How and wherein the Coruette and Peſate doo differ. the horſſe maketh like vnto the iumps of a crow forward: and the Peſate are the ſame, not ſo much remoouing forward, but ſtirring the horſſe feet both before & behind, in the ſame place, like vnto a paire of balance.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 27.
            
               What is to be obſerued in the Carriera, and euerie other manage.
            
            
               FOR ſo much as your horſſe ought to runne ſurelie, ſwiftlie, and nimblie increaſing his ſpeed, you ſhall ſometimes vſe him to paſſe a carriera, which ought to be rather ouer long than ouer ſhort, chieflie if in the end therof you will raiſe the horſſe to leape with yarkes: which muſt be doone vpon no hard or ſtonie ground, but without impediment or perill: and aboue all, looke the place be plaine, rather aſcending than deſcending, yet if at the end it be a little declining, your horſſe may ſtop ſo much the better.
            Note that all horſſes generallie doo run more ſurelie and better vpward than downeward. When ſo euer you will run your horſſe, remember to go vnto the end of the carriera, where ſettle your ſelfe a while; yet ſo, as the horſſe may notſtand ſtarke ſtill with his feet, but ſometimes moouing the one, and ſometimes the other: for that is a comelie ſight, and ſheweth the horſſe to

be couragious and fierce, chieflie if he doo it naturallie, beating the ground often with his feet.
            Thus being ſettled, you may put foorth the horſſe ſwiftlie, and ſpeedilie; yet looke that he run not ſcoping, but rather low with his bellie neere the ground. But before you put the horſſe forward, warne him a little by ſome ſort of making of him, gathering vp the reines in your righthand, bearing the ſame ſome what high, to the end of the carrierra. You muſt alſo carrie your bodie ſtrait and firme, with your face vpward, and your legs comelie: not ſtriking the horſſe, either with ſpur or rod, more than twiſe, if you find occaſion ſo to doo.
            In the end of the carriera, you ſhall by little & little gather the horſſe, ſo as he may ſlide vp his heeles vnto the ſtop: which will be a meane he will ariue with his head the more firme, and fit to make the Peſate or leapes as you deſire. If in gathering vp the horſſe, not hauing carried your right hand in the courſe as before, then muſt you take hold of them with the ſame hand, holding the left hand firme, yeelding your bodie backwards, which will be a grace and a ſigne of skill. Note alſo, that when ſo euer you paſſe a carriera, or otherwiſe manage your horſe, that in the end you turne your face towards thoſe lookers

on, which be of moſt honor and reputation.
         
         
            CHAP. 28.
            
               In what ſort you ſhould vſe and exerciſe horſſes of ſeruice for the warre.
            
            
               IF ſo be you deſire to haue your horſſe made fit for the war, you muſt be ſure to keepe him well breathed, and run him often times vp and downe among hils & vneuen grounds. You ſhall like wiſe put him to leape ditches and Meanes to make horſſes venterous and hardie. hedges: but remember, that at the firſt, thoſe leapes be not great, but as you find the horſſe able and diſpoſed, ſo you may put him vnto larger and hier leaping. You muſt alſo manie times bring him vnto the turnie and fight with ſwords, againſt another man armed. Which you may firſt doo diſarmed, with your ſword drawne, trotting or gallopping to and fro againſt another man, hauing like wiſe his ſword in hand: ſo as firſt vſed to this fained fight and noiſe of armes, he may be bold to doo the like in earneſt. Alſo to in courage your horſſe, let the horſſe of him that commeth againſt you, retire and ſeeme affraid, as though he would flee for feare.
            
               
You muſt labour alſo to make your horſſe to loue the lance & ſword, by ſhewing them to him when you ride: and in ſteed of a rod, laie them ouerthwart the horſſe necke, and betwixt his eares. It will not be amiſſe if in like ſort you draw your ſword vpon the horſſe, when he commeth out of the ſtable, and ſuddenlie (as it were for feare) retire from him. And if then the horſſe doo take courage, and come towards you, put vp your ſword, and giue him ſome thing to eat, making much of him: ſo ſhall you find he will become couragious and careles of weapons. The ſword prepared for this purpoſe would be without point or edge, yet bright and glittering.
            The ſtrokes which offend horſſes moſt, are thoſe that be giuen vpon their faces. Therefore, to the end your horſſe may beare them without harme or impatience, you ſhall do well to arme him with a ſhaffron; and in the ſtable vſe him vnto the ſounds of trumpets, drums, and ratling of armor: which being firſt doone, the reſt will feare him the leſſe.
            Aboue all things you muſt accuſtome an horſſe of ſeruice to hunting, where manie other horſſes are aſſembled, and where is great noiſe and ſhooting; as hornes, drums, and harque buſſes. Alſo accuſtome him to fiers, waters, ſwimming,

and to behold men both armed and diſarmed, aliue and dead, and paſſe among them. You may alſo ride him among coches, carts and other carriages, and all things vſed in the warre. It is alſo to good purpoſe, if you put your horſſe ſometimes to indure hunger and thirſt, cold and heate, and ſuffer him to ſtand the whole daie with ſome burthen on his backe.
            Moreouer, it were good to ride ſometimes in the night, to accuſtome an horſſe vnto the noiſe of armes and warlike inſtruments, which ſhall make him the more couragious, bold, and aſſured. Faile not likewiſe to let him eate all ſorts of meat, to drinke wine, and be bridled and ſadled willinglie, and to let you mount & diſmount at your pleaſure. But aboue the reſt, make him to loue your perſon, and (as it were) be in loue with you.
            A horſſe for the warre, ought to be a ſwift Properties required in a horſſe for ſeruice in warre. and ſure runner, a good eater, light vpon the hand, ſtrong, nimble, and valiant, without fault or imperfection.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 29.
            
               How to correct a reſtie horſſe that rereth and yarketh behind.
            
            
               AReſtie horſſe is he that refuſeth or reſiſteth to obeie Corrections for horſſes. his rider, either in not going forward, or turning on which hand you would haue him. The beginning of this ſtubborne condition is eaſilie perceiued. For whenſoeuer you find your horſſe to go, as it were in two minds, ſeeming he doubteth whether he ſhould go or not: then ſhall you foorthwith vſe ſome ſharpe correction of voice, and (if he be reſtie) accompanie the ſame with ſome ſure ſtroakes of the rod, vpon his ſhoulders and loines. But beware in anie wiſe to ſtrike the Not to ſtrike the horſſe on the head. horſſe vpon the head, and cheeflie betwixt his eares, for ſo he may be eaſilie ſlaine. To ſtrike him on the head, may alſo bring other inconueniences, as hurt of the eies, and make an horſſe ſo ſtriken, for euer after to be fearfull of the ſword, and cowardlie.
            Beſides the correction of the voice, the rod, and ſpur, you may cauſe two footmen (that haue

ſome skill) to ſtand with goads in their hands, & when the horſſe refuſeth to go forward, then to rate him terriblie, and pricke him behind, till he doo go as you would haue him, & then ceaſe. But during all this time, the rider ſhall ſit quietlie, and ſaie nothing, and ſo ſoone as the horſſe goeth forward, or amendeth his fault, make much of him.
            An other waie to correct your horſſe for this Sharpe corrections for a reſtie horſſe. fault, is, that when he goeth arſward, and refuſeth to doo as you would, then to pull him ſtill backe, till he be wearie, and then let a footeman come behind with a long pike, hauing a wiſpe burning at the end thereof, and therewith pricke your horſſe till he go forward; which doing, you muſt make greatlie of him. But vnleſſe the horſſe be more than ordinarilie reſtie, I would not wiſh you to touch him with fire, or tie chords to his ſtones, or cats to his taile, as ſome men doo; bicauſe ſo cruell corrections doo deforme the horſſes skin, and make him deſperate: beſides that, ſuch helps are ouer baſe, and vnfit to be vſed by gentlemen.
            Remember alſo, that if an horſſe hauing this fault dooth weare an hard bit, you muſt take it awaie, and in ſteede thereof put on a canon or ſcatch. You muſt likewiſe foreſee, whether your

horſſe hath this fault through want of ſight: for if his eies be not good, then will he be fearefull to go forward in reſpect thereof: in which caſe you may not proceed with ſuch rigour, but rather by all faire meanes, and much making of, giue him courage to looke well vpon the thing he feareth. M. Claudio therefore dooth counſell riders to walke their horſſes abroad, as well in the night as the daie, and bring them in ſtreets and other places, where is much noiſe, and other things to be feared, as ſmiths ſhops, pewterers, braſiers, and ſuch like places.
            If your horſſe reareth, you muſt foorthwith Corrections if the horſſe rereth, &c. looke what is the occaſion therof, to the end you may prouide a remedie. As if you beare too hard an hand, you muſt hold it more temperatlie. But if the fault be in the horſſe, then beat him ſurelie ouerthwart his ſhoulders: which correction is alſo neceſſarie, when the horſſe dooth make his Coruette more high than you would haue him, or in dooing them caſt his legs ſtrait foorth. It is alſo neceſſarie, that at ſuch time as the horſſe dooth go about to reare, you beare a light hand vpon the bridle, and haue the curbe more ſlacke than ordinarie.
            But if your horſſe be ouer light, and apt to yarke behind, then ſhall you correct him well: if

at euerie yarke you giue him a chocke with the bridle; accompaning the ſame with a ſtripe of the rod, ouerth wart his bodie and ſhoulders. Note alſo, that the crooper of ſuch horſſes ſhould be verie ſlacke, and likewiſe the quiſeill.
            If the horſſe dooth yarke when he is ſpurred, then muſt you continue to ſpur him the more, till he leaueth that fault: yet ſo, as the ſame be doone in due time, firſt with the one, and next with the other ſpur, mixing thereto a chocke of the bit, with the corrections of the rod & voice. Till ſuch time as the horſſe be brought to leaue this falt, it were alſo good to haue a ſtrong bit, & ſometimes put him forward a great waie in a ſwift gallop, and therewith tire him.
         
         
            CHAP. 30.
            
               How to correct an horſſe that wrieth his mouth, or that is not willing to turne on either hand indifferentlie.
            
            
               SOme horſſe will drawe vp or wryth the one lip more than the other, the cauſe thereof may be, either that the bit dooth hurt him, or reſteth not in the true place; or elſe may

proceed of ſome euill cuſtome. Touching hurting the horſſe mouth, or euill placing the bit, the remedie is eaſie. But if the fault proceedeth of euill cuſtome, you muſt then correct the horſſe, ſometime with your heele, ſometime with your ſtirrop, ſometime with the rod, ſometime with the ſpur, and ſometime with drawing in the contrarie ſide of the bit: which corrections you muſt vſe more or leſſe, according to the obſtinacie of the horſſe: and till ſuch time as you ſee him to leaue the fault; which dooing, you muſt ceaſe from correction, and make much of him. Alſo to carrie the muſroll ſtrait, will helpe well in this caſe.
            If your horſſe refuſe to turne of anie hand The fault in an horſe called in Italian La credenza.
                (which fault the Italians doo call La credenza) or beareth his necke more on the one ſide than the other: then would I wiſh you to put a ſtring vnto the cheefe eie of the bit, and tie the other end thereof to the girth, at ſuch length as your diſcretion ſhall thinke good: which doone, you muſt continuallie ſollicit him to turne on that hand you haue tied the ſtring, helping him with your heele, your rod, and ſpur on the ſame ſide. But the beſt correction for this fault is, firſt to alight, and tie the horſſe head faſt to his girths, on that ſide he refuſeth to turne or go, ſo leauing

him to ſtand one whole houre: and after with your voice and rod force him to turne on that hand. Other corrections there are which for ſhortnes I omit; and the rather, bicauſe ſome horſſes ſubiect to this fault are therein naturallie ſo obſtinate, as they are vnworthie of the riders labour.
         
         
            CHAP. 31.
            
               How to correct an angrie horſſe, and tender of mouth, that dooth wryth his head from one ſide to the other.
            
            
               I Haue here to fore told you, that an horſſe being naturallie angrie, muſt be much made of; but that not ſufficing, aſſure your ſelfe it proceedeth of euill nature: and therefore faile not to affoord him ſtripes enough, rating Sharp correction for an angrie horſſe. him with a terrible voice, and correcting him by all other meanes due to that errour; vnleſſe his anger proceedeth of the tenderneſſe of mouth, for then you ſhall entreat him with more patience. And if you find that the horſſe mouth is tender vpon the barres, or in the curbing place, then muſt you vſe a gentle bit, and a curbe accordinglie.
            
               
And note, that ſometimes an horſſe putteth downe his head, for that ſome tooth is more long or more ſharpe than it ſhould be, pricking the gums, or the inſide of the lip: which may alſo be a cauſe that manie times he eateth not well, and conſequentlie becometh leane: which muſt be amended, by filing that tooth, or otherwiſe as the ferrer can deuiſe. If an horſſe hauing a gentle mouth doo wryth his head, he may happilie amend that fault, if you put in his mouth a ſoft bit: but if his mouth be hard, then muſt you What is iuſtlie the hardnes of the mouth, read M. Aſtley his booke of riding: cap. 1. pag. 8. vſe an hard bit, correcting him with the ſpurres, the ſtirrops, & twitches of the bit, ſometimes on the one and ſometimes on the other ſide, euer accompanieng the ſaid corrections with a voice fit for that purpoſe, holding your hand firme & temperatlie; and if need be, draw the reine of the Cauezzan to the vttermoſt ſtraitneſſe. The like you muſt doo, when ſo euer either in paſing, or trotting, he dooth beare his head ouer low, or putteth it downe ſuddenlie.
            And if he letteth his head fall more on the one than the other ſide, then muſt you vſe the chock of the bridle, & twitch of the Cauezzan with one onelie reine, and on the contrarie ſide, togither with the other corrections. But if the horſſe putteth

downe his head euenlie on either ſide, then muſt the correction be giuen with both reines equallie, with both heeles, and the euen ſtroke of the ſpurs; or at the leaſt, ſo ſoone as you haue ſtriken him on the one ſide, you muſt doo the like on the other.
         
         
            CHAP. 32.
            
               Of horſſes that run awaie, and are hot mouthed by meanes of euill riding.
            
            
               SVch horſſes as haue beene euill ridden, and put to run much in their youth, will commonlie runne awaie with their riders. Which was the reſpect I haue heretofore told you, that verie ſildome you ſhould runne your horſſes, if before they were not made firme of head and mouth, and therewithall fullie growne. You muſt alſo refraine to Notes of angrie horſſes. run your horſſe, the rather if you know him to be naturallie full of life, and euill mouthed: for ſo are all cholerike and angrie horſſes, as ſorell, aduſt, and roane, and euerie other horſſe that hath his ſnowt reddiſh, or their whole heads ſo coloured, if that colour proceedeth not of age. You muſt likewiſe refraine to run all ſlacke and

heauie horſſes, and thoſe that haue weake backs, weake legs, and euill feet.
            But if the horſſe be well made, and coloured as he ſhould be, and therfore runneth awaie onlie bicauſe he hath beene euill ridden: then muſt you by little and little (and not all at once) reduce him to order, not by meane of ſharpe bits, but by vſing manie daies to paſe and trot him forward, and ſtop him often vpon the decline of an hill, putting him ſtill backe, without making him after to go forward, but then ſtand ſtill. During theſe leſſons, your horſe muſt weare the cannon and Cauezzan, adding therevnto (if need be) a martegall of leather, or iron in ſteed of the Cauezzan.
            If your horſſe at any time dooth well in theſe leſſons, you muſt in any wiſe make much of him, and at the ſtop ſuffer him to ſlide a little at the ſtop, as well in his trot as his gallop, vnleſſe he be a great horſſe, & bendeth his houghes with difficultie: for ſuch horſſes ought to be ſtopped ſhort, and you muſt caſt your bodie backward more ſuddenlie than is required in riding other horſſes.
            To reduce an horſſe from running awaie, it To keepe a horſſe from running awaie. will helpe much to ſtop him before a wall. It were alſo good to bring him into ſome deepe

ditch that were in length almoſt as long as a carriera, and at either end place a footeman, holding a cudgill in his hand: who finding when the horſſe refuſeth to ſtop, ſhall preſentlie rate him (and if need be) beate him vpon the ſhoulders. It were not amiſſe alſo, for reforming of this fault, to ſet ſome kind of thing to ſtop at the end of the ditch, ſo as the horſſe ſhould of force ſtaie there: but if he be ſo diueliſh, as he doubteth not to run againſt that prouiſion, then let him be incountered with a paire of harquebuſſes, or ſome burning wiſpes. All theſe extremities may be vſed, but M. Claudio thinketh that horſſes ſo deſperatelie diſpoſed, are vnwoorthie the ſtable of Princes or Gentlemen.
         
         
            CHAP. 33.
            
               How to correct a dull and cowardlie horſſe, that runneth not willinglie.
            
            
               A Cowardlie horſſe muſt be corrected courteouſly, leaſt wanting courage, he may be made reſtie. And you muſt neuer forget to cheriſh and make much of him when ſo euer he dooth well. But if the horſſe be both dull and

churliſh, then muſt you vſe great & ſharpe corrections, yet at occaſions make much of him.
            If your horſſe will not runne out his carriera, A deceit of the rider to make his horſſe run, &c. being ordinarilie corrected: then ſhall you deceiue him in this ſort. Firſt you muſt trot & gallop him to & fro at large, a good while, without obſeruing anie order at all, & then put him ſtrait forth, where you meane to ſtop him: and being there, by little & little make the gallop, ſo ſpeedie, as in the end you force him to run: but at the firſt, when you vſe this ſubtiltie, you may not make the horſſe to paſſe in full carriera more than the length of a manage. Afterwards vſing the like craft, you may increaſe the courſe, till it be a full carriera.
            But if all this ſuffice not to raiſe the horſſe to run couragiouſlie as he ſhould doo; find meanes to run him often in companie of other horſes, & cauſe an other horſſeman to follow him, rating & ſtriking him with a cudgell vpon the crooper, and the rider likewiſe beate him, and helpe him with his voice. It is alſo good, if after you haue gallopped the large rings, you put your horſſe forward with furie, till you come vnto the place of ſtopping: bicauſe he being deſirous to leaue his labouring in the rings will make haſt to the ſtopping place.
         
         
            
            CHAP. 34.
            
               How to correct an horſſe that lifteth not his legs, and how to make him put one leg ouer the other.
            
            
               IF your horſſe either in his Peſate or other doings lifteth not his legs as he ſhould doo, then muſt you with your rod beat him on the knees, chieflie if he lift them ouer high, or put them ſtrait foorth. But in the halfe or whole narow turnes, you muſt ſtrike him onlie on the knee, on that ſide you do turne, & alſo helpe him with your ſtirrop on the ſame ſide. It will helpe much alſo to ride him in ſome ground like vnto a boat, euer turning the horſſe againſt the hill, and helping him as before ſaid.
            If you will haue him put one leg ouer the other (which will greatlie helpe a horſſe, and is a comelie ſight) then trot him about verie ſtrait, firſt on the one then on the other hand, without ſuffering him to take breath; yet helping him as before ſaid, and leaning downe, to ſee how he mooueth his ſhoulders: but finding that the leg on that ſide the horſſe turneth not to go vnder the other, then muſt you beate him moſt therevpon with your ſtirrop & rod. You may obſerue

the like order in paſing your horſſe. And the ditch made like vnto a boate will helpe much to bring the horſſe to caſt one leg before the other: which motion the Italians doo call La zampetta, or gambetta.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 35.
            
               How to teach your horſſe the Gambetta, and what that is.
            
            
               THe Zampetta, or (as M. Claudio calleth it) Lagambetta, is when the horſſe dooth put forward one leg before the other, either in his manage vpon halfe turnes, the Coruette, or at the ſtop ſtanding firme: which leg would be ſomewhat lifted vp from the ground, whenſoeuer the rider dooth ſo require.
            A horſſe being perfect in this lifting and putting forward of his leg, dooth become himſelfe the better, not onelie in his turnes vpon the ground, and the other ſomewhat aboue ground (which the Italians doo call Volte raddoppiate a mezzo aere) but alſo in the manage turnes, and when he is caſt about ſwiftlie, narrowe, and as it were without reſt or time.
            
               
You may teach your horſſe the Gambetta in an hollow ground, made like vnto a boate or muskell ſhell, hauing little hils on either ſide: ſo that the plaine ground betwixt the hils be not larger than three or foure ſpans: you muſt thervnto put the helps beforeſaid.
            But you may teach him better in the ſtable, Where and how to teach your horſſe the Gambetta.
                by ſtriking him with a rod vpon the inſide of that leg, which you would haue him lift or put forward, adding there vnto your voice, as; Vp, vp: which you muſt continue, till the horſſe lifteth his leg. But ſo ſoone as he ſo dooth, remooue your rod, and giue him ſome bread or graſſe, in ſigne he dooth content you.
            This order you muſt dailie obſerue, till you ſee the horſſe willing to lift and put the one leg forward, whenſoeuer you mooue him thereto with your voice onlie: which he will doo, ſo ſoone as you come towards him. The like you muſt after cauſe him to doo with the other leg.
            When you will haue your horſſe hold vp his leg, not letting it fall till you will haue him, then hold your rod ſtill at his leg, ſo long as you would haue him to doo it. But if he ſet it downe before you would, then with the ſame voice and rod faile not to correct him, without remoouing the rod, till he hath ſtood as long as you

deſire, and in ſuch ſort as you would haue him: for after that correction he will, at your onelie voice, lift and put forward firſt one then the other leg, as you would your ſelfe wiſh, and ſo hold them aboue the ground a good while. You may likewiſe in riding your horſſe, helpe him to doo the Gambetta, if you ſtrike him on the leg with your toe or ſtirrop.
         
         
            CHAP. 36.
            
               How to teach your horſſe to kneele downe, and that he ſhall ſuffer his Maiſter onelie to ride him.
            
            
               FOr ſo much as Maiſter Claudio hath in the beginning of this booke commended an horſſe that will kneele downe, when ſo euer his rider would haue him, either when he mounteth or diſmounteth: I thinke good to informe you what meane he would haue you vſe to bring the horſſe thereto.
            Firſt you muſt doo vnto the horſſe in the ſtable, as you did in teaching him the Gambetta; ſauing that you ſhall now ſtrike him on the out ſide of his knee, putting therevnto a contrarie voice. For as you ſaid before; Vp, vp: ſo ſhall you now ſaie; Downe, downe.
            
               
But if being vpon the horſſe backe, you will haue him kneele on both knees; then muſt you ſtrike him with your rod on the right knee, and in the ſame inſtant ſtrike him with your foote vpon the left leg, adding therevnto the voice you vſed to make him kneele. When you haue brought the horſſe with theſe corrections to vnderſtand how to kneele downe, firſt with the one then with the other leg, and then with both at once: to cauſe him ſtand ſo ſtill, ſo long as you would haue him, you muſt hold downewards your rod towards his knees, ſaieng; Stand firme, or, Stand ſtill. When you will haue him ariſe vp, lift vp your rod from his legs, beating him lightlie vpon the bent of his necke, and you ſhall ſaie thriſe; Vp, vp, vp. Alſo if you haue before taught him to leape and yarke, then may you ſuddenlie, at his riſing, put him therevnto, by vſing the voice and helpe required in leaping & yarking.
            If you will make your horſſe ſo coie, as not to Bucephalus the horſſe of Alexander Magnus had this propertie. ſuffer anie other than your ſelfe to ride him; then let euerie other man that rideth him, rate him, beate him, and intreate him the worſt he can deuiſe: beſides that, let them labour him extreamlie, and when they diſmount, beate him & threaten him the moſt that can be deuiſed. In the meane ſpace, you muſt make your ſelfe well acquainted

with the horſſe in the ſtable, and then ſo ſoone as others (hauing rigorouſlie vſed him) doo diſmount, you muſt come vnto him with a cheerefull countenance, giuing him pleaſant things to eate, and put them aſide that haue offended him.
            You ſhall likewiſe pleaſe him much, to cheriſh him with your hands, when you weare ſweete gloues, wiping his face, and chieflie his noſthrils with perfumes & ſweet handkerchiefs: for neatneſſe & ſweetnes be two things wherein a horſſe Two things wherein a horſſe delighteth. dooth ſingularlie take pleaſure. Hauing thus doone, you ſhall mount vpon his backe, firſt ſtaieng a while; then making much of him, both before & behind: put him forward paſing, & then alight, not ſuffering any man but your ſelfe to lead him into the ſtable, & giue him ſome pleaſant thing to eate when he is dreſſed.
            But note, that whatſoeuer hath beene ſaid of kneeling downe, and not ſuffring others than the maiſter of the horſſe to ride him, muſt be vſed onelie vpon horſſes of great ſpirit, vnderſtanding, and aptneſſe therevnto.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   