
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The Araignment,
Examination, Confession and
Iudgement of Arnold
Cosbye:
            
            VVHO WILFVLLY
Murdered the Lord Burke, neere
the Towne of Wanswoorth, on the 14. day
of this present Month of Ianuary
and was executed the 27. of the
same moneth.
1591.
            AT LONDON
Printed for Edward White, and are
to be solde at the little North doore of
Saint Paules Church, at the Signe
of the Gunne.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Araignment, Examinatiō,
confession & iudgement, of Arnold
Cosbye, who wilfullye murdered the Lord
Burke, neere the Towne of Wanswoorth, on
the 14. day of this present moneth of
Ianuary. 1591.
            
            
               VPon the 25. day of Ianuary
last past, 1591. Arnold Colbye
commonlye called and
knowne by the name of
Captaine Cosbye, an Irish
man borne, being before
committed to Newgate for
the murdering of the Lord
Burke, apparrelled in ayellowe Fustian dublet,
and alwse night gowne cast ouer with his
handes bound: was brought from thence alongst
the Citie of London ouer London bridg
into the borrough of Southwarke, within the
Countie of Surrey, where the knight marshals
men were ready to receiue him▪ and conducted
him to the Sessions house on S. Margets
hill, wherupon he was immediatlye put
into the docket, and had a great paire of 
                  〈◊〉
               
boltes put vpon his feete, his handes vnbound
and his armes pinnioned: Soone after there

came thether the right honourable the Lord
Chamberlayne, the Earle of Wormewood, sir
George Carew knight Marshall of England,
with Maister Popham the Queens Attourney
generall, and other of her Maiesties Iustices
for Middlesex and Surrey: who being orderly
placed, proclamation was made for the people
to be silent, after that a substantiall quest of enquirie
was calde and impannelled, who hauing
their charge giuen them by her maiesties
Attourney generall to enquire if any wilfull
murders, rowts or riots &c. were latelie committed
in the verdge of the Queens Maiesties
housholde: by vertue of which enquirye, they
found this matter of wilfull murder.
            That doone, the Prisoner was commaunded
to hold vp his hand at the barte, and then the
Clarke of the peace read the bill of inditement
with alowde voice, which contained in effect
that the saide Arnold Cosbye contrarye to the
peace of our Soueraigne Lady the Queene:
vpon the 14. day of Ianuary last past, not hauing
the feare of God before his eyes, did forceably
set vpon Iohn Lord Burke in the Town
of Wanswoorth in a close: and there vpon a diuelishe
and most malitious intent did wilfully
murder him, then & there giuing him one mortall
and deadly wound with a rapier, contayning one
inche wide, and 10. inches depe, by
meanes of which greeuous and deadly wound,

the said Lord Burke fell downe, and after that
the saide Arnold Cosbye with a Dagger price
two shillinges, gaue vnto the said Iohn Lord
Burke xxj. greeuous & seuerall wounds more:
of which said great and deep wound, the aforesaid
Lord Burke died within two houres after.
Wherupon the prisoner being demaunded if he
were guiltye of the murder for which hee was
accused? he answered & pleaded to the same not
guiltye, and for triall put himselfe to God and
the Cuntry: wherupon there was a sufficient
Iewrie chosen for his triall, before whom the
Prisoner stood to heare what might be aleaged
against him, for proofe of the fact which before
he had denyed. Then the Court did commaund
proclamation to be made for all such to come in
& make their appearāce, as could say any thing
against the prisoner concerning the fact: otherwise
he stood vpon his discharge: whereupon
the Queenes Attourney generall first shewed
and openly commaunded to be read, the confession
& examination of the saide Arnold Cosbye
taken the 16. of Ianuarye before maister
VVilliam Fleetwood Sargiant at Lawe,
and Recorder of the Cittie of London, which
saide examination contained, that about a
twelue moneth before the said Lord Burke and
the prisoner, fell out and fought together at
Greenewich, and that afterward they were
made freends; neuerthelesse it appeared thereby

by that Cosbye gaue vnto the said Lord Burke
sundry very base tearmes & vnsomely woords
with other such great abuses, as no noble Gentleman
would haue put vp at the handes of so
meane a man as Arnold Cosbye was, and the
same alway iustified by the partie, who from
time to time did discouer them to my Lord,
whome the prisoner in his examination aforesaid
charged to doo it of malice: and in conclusion
euen in the scope and course of his saide examination,
it euidētly appeared that he had before
wilfully pretended the murder of the saide
Lord Burke, and in most shamefull sorte effected
it as aforesaid: as Maister Atturney generall
did learnedly lay it open. And in the saide confession,
the said Cosbye declared, that the Lord
Burke and he rode together from the Courte,
where the said examinate desired him to crosse
the riuer vpon the common way to London, to
the ende (as he saide) if it were his chaunce to
endanger him, he might the more easily escape
by means of his frends, which my L. refused.
            After that there was a letter openly shewed
and read, sent from Cosbye the night before the
Lord Burke died, containing very 
                  〈◊〉
               
tearmes, far vnmeet for so meane a man to send
to so noble a personage, in which he did threaten
a sharpe reuenge to the saide Lord and called
him therein by the bare name of Burke, so

that by the saide letter it appeered that he pretended
a sharpe reuenge vpon the Lord Burke,
and then his own confession aforesaid: proued
that the next day following he committed wilfull
murder vpon him. Neuertheles for further
proof, witnesses were called in to declare what
they could saye touching the same, whereupon
one Maister Powell of 
                  •
               answoorth shewed,
that being moued by the Lord Burkes foot man
to make search for the saide Lord, by reason he
was ridden foorth with Captaine Cosbye to
fight: spared neither hedge nor ditche, vntill he
came to the place where the L. Burke laye sore
wounded ready to giue vp the Ghoste, finding
with him at his comming a woman that did
comfort him so much as she might, by casting
hir freeze safegarde on him, and had laboured
to stop the woundes with clothes, such as she
might conueniently come by. M. Powell so soon
as he came to the L. Burke, being in what greeuous
estate he stood, ready to quake and quiuer
with the blood which cooled and bled inwardly
in his bodye: he first threw his cloke vpon the
L. Burke, and then demaunded of him how he
came so sore hurte. Whervpon euen in the very
agony of death, hauing supped vp two or three
dishfulls of new milke, oh said he, Cosbye hath
villanously wounded me to death, I neuer striking
blow nor giuing thrust, but whilst I was

stooping to vnbuckle one of my spurres, hauing
vnbuckled ye other before through his perswasion,
saying they would be some trouble vnto
me, he most cowardly thrust me in at the top of
the shoulder, which ran farre into the body, yet
if I had striken but two blowes with him, it
would neuer haue greeued me, had he thē manfullye
slaine me in fight. Whereupon the said
Powell demaunded if his Lordship could go or
ride, but seeing hee could doo neither, hee was
constrained to put him into a carte, 
                  〈…〉
               
vnder him, which one had before brought
into the feelde for Cattell, and so conueyed him
to his house, in which his honor dyed, whose
house was at Wanswoorth: Maister Powell
hauing made an ende of his speeche, Cosbies
Swoord was shewed openlye before ye Lords
and Iustices, which was all to be smeared
with the blood of the Lord Burke, at the least
sixteene inches deepe. And the same Maister
Powell being demaunded how many wounds
he told on the body of the Lord Burke (he being
before sworne to what he should speak) answered,
that he tolde one and twentye woundes about
the fore parte of the bodye of the murdered
Lord after hee was dead, but the Lord
Chamberlayne affirmed there was foure and
twentye at the least, beside the great wound
of which he died.
            
               many of which smaller woundes were in his
handes, some in his armes, some in the face,
breast & sides, the rest in his thighs and legs,
and some so low as to his anckles. Which extreame
crueltie shewed a most bloudie mind
in the man, and that he neither respected the
commandemēt of God, who forbiddeth murther,
neither did he regard the displeasure of
the queenes most excellent maiestie, by whom
he had his maintenance, neither did he respect
the towardlinesse of the said Lorde Boorke,
nor his owne credit in the Court, where hee
was well beloued, but in all cowardize and
rigor as appeareth, executed his bloudthirstie
and cruell minde as is aforesaid, all which
the said Cosby seemed to deny, and to colour
his shamefull and vnnaturall act, he woulde
haue perswaded the Lordes & Iustices there,
that he meant no quarrell nor hurt to the L.
Boorke, but said that he perswaded the Lord
Boorke being in the fielde to breake the point
of his sworde, and then to returne againe to
the Court, & there to acknowledge that they
had fought, that the Lord Boorke had offended
the said Arnold Cosby, and that the Lord
Boorkes life lay in Cosbies handes at what
time they fought, this should the Lord Boork
haue done, as the said Cosbie affirmed, and
why? Forsooth, because Cosbie (as he said
at the barre) stoode vpon his reputation, and

yet it is doubtfull, whether he euer made my
Lord Boorke that offer or not, no man testifying
it but him selfe. And if he had offered it
yet it had bene a matter of great disgrace vnto
the said Lorde to haue perfourmed it: or to
any other of his degree to haue stouped so
lowe to so meane a man, being in his highest
degree and estate, but a captaine by her maiesties
commission, preferred to that place by
those that were of honourable estimation, and
doutlesse such was the courage of that noble
man, that before he woulde haue done him
selfe, so great a dishonour he would first manfully
haue died in the fielde at Cosbies feete,
neither is it to bee supposed that the Lorde
Boorke did offer that disgrace as Cosby alleaged
at the barre, which was that he pulled
him by the nose the night before they
fought, whereas none can come in and iustly
make report thereof, but Cosbie him selfe, yea
it is a matter manifest and plaine that the
Lord Boorke was a man of courage, that
he bore an vndaunted mind, that he was vall
                  •
               ant
and a hardy man at armes, he was curteous,
milde, and liberall, and had beene sufficiently
tried, with better men than euer
Cosbye durste to encounter with hande to
hand: and therefore as the Lordes said vnto
Cosbie, so it seemed to fall out, that it was
onely the cowardize of Cosbie and not his

courage that caused him so cruelly to murther
so towardly and courteous a Lorde.
Whereupon after that Captaine Moston had
deliuered to the Lords & Iustices there assembled,
the trueth of all that had passed betweene
the Lord Boorke and the said Cosby
iustifying that the Lorde Boorke neuer gaue
him any iust occasion of malice or inwarde
grudge: and therewithall hauing besides
shewed sandrie pointes of cowardize in the
said Cosbie, as well towardes the said Moston
as also towards diuerse others, iustified
by the honourable on the benche, the Iurie
went together and stayed awaye some short
space: in which time the right honourable
Lorde Chamberlaine vttered vnto the prisoner
a speeche of great effect and deepe consideration:
which was in maner and
effect as foloweth.
         
         
            
            The speech of the right Honorable the
Lord Chamberlaine.
            
               COsbie, giue eare
what I saie vnto
thee, and regard
my speech,
looke into thy
selfe, and behold
the iust iudgementes
of God
vppon thee in
this action, first
it is most euident,
that thou hauing in a most shamefull
sort murthered y• noble Gentleman, for whose
death thou art here araigned, thou thoughtest
to saue thy self by flight: & hauing of thy own
as good a hunting nag as anie is within this
Towne, thou diddest suspect that he woulde
hardly serue thy turne, and therfore thou diddest
refuse him. Then thou tookest the Lorde
Boorkes gelding, and supposing to ride away
vpon him, hee sodainely broke from thee, and
would at no hande bee taken by thee, to carrie
thee from the place where thou didst commit
the murther. Secondly, note how thy owne
nag

serued thee, that when thou wert vppon
him, thou couldest hardly get him to carrie
thee to the wood where thou diddest hide thy
selfe. When thou camest into the wood neere
Wimbleton, there thou staiedst most parte of
all the daie, there thou hadst time, space, and
sufficient meanes to haue fled farre inough,
and to haue staide there long inough, yet thou
hadst not the power to doe it, there thou lingeredst
all the daie long, and durst neither
passe one waie or other, the fact being committed
about eight of ye clock in the morning, thou
hadst no power to depart before euening, and
then note the iudgements of God vpon thee,
whether didst thou flie? Thou hadst no power
to passe an
                  •
               e waie, but euen to the place
where the man saie whom thou murtheredst,
and comming on the backe side of the house,
thou sawest my son, but he sawe not thee, and
then to hide thy self, thou fledst behind ye house
where the dead corpes laie, at which time all
the woundes in the Lord Boorkes bodie did
bleede afresh, and the better to shadowe thee
from the iust iudgementes of God, who compelled
thee to come againe to that place wher
thou committedst murther, thou didst demand
of a b
                  •
               ie which was the waie to London,
as though thou knewest not the way to
London, being an ordinarie man & fauored in
the court, but this was Gods doing to shewe

his wonderous workes vpon thee, and a token
that God would not suffer thee to flie, nor
thy fact to go vnpunished: yea the very beasts
did shunne, & seemed vnwilling to carrie thee
from the place where thou committedst the
murther, thy best friends fled from thee when
thou hadst done it, and for dooing it, they dyd
abhorre thee. Thou knowest that thou wast
well beloued in the Court, as well of noble
men as other, but this thy foule and odious
fact, maketh euery one of them to despise thee.
Well, now call vpon God and bee sorie for thy
offences, for it is some notable and grieuous
offence which thou hast in time past committed
against God, that causeth the iust iudgementes
of God to followe thee euen at thy
heeles, and hath neuer lefte thee till thou
camest to this place.
            This speech ended, the Iewrie came to giue
vp their verdit, whereupon the prisoner was
set forth to heare the same, but when hee sawe
that hee was iustly condemned in the case of
wilfull murther, hee saide nothing, nor neuer
changed countenance therat, neuertheles before
iudgment was pronounced against him,
he fearing least he should haue some grieuous
death for his horrible offence, he humbly craued
the fauour of the Court, that rather than
he should be hanged, he desired to be shotte to
death with bullets, but the right worshipfull

sir George Carey, knight marshall of England,
tolde him that the law would not allow
it, but of necessitie ye fact being odious, it must
be punished according to the laws of the land.
Then hee made another motion, & desired the
honorable and worshipful of the bench, that he
might not bee executed that present daie, but
that he might haue that daies respite, and a
Preacher appointed to comfort him to Godward,
seeing hee was nowe no man of this
world: which they all granted because it was
a Christian motion. Thereuppon master Atturney
proceeded to iudgement, and first shewed
him the odiousnes of the fact & murther
committed, the shortnes of his life, & that now
he was to looke for nothing but death, and
therefore willed him to comfort himself with
hope of the ioyes in the life to come, willing
him to aske God mercy, for (saith he) God hath
promised that no sinne shall be vnpardonable
with him, but onely the sinne against the holy
Ghost, which he hath sayd shall neuer bee forgiuen.
And therefore trust in the mercies of
God, for in him now onely resteth your comfort.
Wherfore according to the lawe, the court
doth award you to goe from this place vnto
the Marshalsey, & from thence to be conuaied
to Wansworth, to some conuenient place nere
about where the fact was committed, & there
to be hanged till you be dead, and so the Lord

haue mercie vpon your soule, and afterward
to be hanged in chaines, for example sake to
al other that shal attempt to do the like. Then
the right honorable the Lorde Chamberlaine
did in fauour of his first motion grant him his
life vntil the wednesdaie morning following,
so that he had one day granted more vnto him
then he desired. Wherevpon the Court brake
vp and departed, and the prisoner accordingly
was committed to the
Marshalsey.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               LONDON
Printed for VVilliam VVright. 1591.
            
         
      
   