
      
         
            
            
            ESSAYES
Of
Certaine
PARADOXES.
            At London, Printed for Th. THORP. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            
               praysed.
               K. RICHARD the 3d
               
               The French POCKES
               
               NOTHING
               Good to be in DEBT
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE PRAYSE OF
King RICHARD
the THIRD.
            
               THat Princes are naturally ambitious,
and that Ambition makes
them to effect their desires, rather
then to affect the equitie of their
designes, may more truly then
safely be auowed. For all of them,
I thinke, were the record of their
actions indifferent, might be taxed of this vice. But
this excuse cleares not the accused; yet it testifies,
that Princes erre against nature, if they aspire not.
We hold (not without reason) that if the bill of the
Plaintiffe bee stuffed with friuolous assertions, that
the complaint fauoureth more of malice, then of
wrong. Why should not the same Axiome bee a
motiue to cleare this wronged Prince, whose accusers
lay to his charge the anguish his Mother felt,
when he came into the world? then which accusation
what can be more friuolous; it being a punishment
hereditary to all women, from the first? His
being toothed, as soone as borne, seemes to me rather

a blessing, then any imputation, as being a presage
of his future worthinesse, and as all Nurses will
confesse, an ease of much paine and danger. But
he was crook-backt, lame, il-shapen, il-fauoured. I
might impute that fault to Nature, but that I rather
thinke it her bounty: for she being wholly intentiue
to his minde, neglected his forme, so that shee infused
a straight minde in a crooked bodie, wherein
shee shewed her carefull prouidence. For oftentimes,
the care to keepe those parts well formed,
with-drawes mens mindes from better actions, and
drownes them in effeminate curiositie. His lamenesse
turned to his glory; for with those imperfect
limmes, hee performed actions most perfectly valiant.
            How rightly his Father
                  Rich. D. of Yorke, father of Edw. the fourth George D. of Clarence, & Rich. the third. claimed, his brother

                  Edw. E. of March, eldest sonne of R. D. of Yorke, after K. by the name of Edw. the fourth.obtained the Scepter, is sufficiently knowne,
and therefore superfluous and impertinent: and
also how his brother dusked his right, (if right)
by abrogating the oath, which he sware at Yorke,
that his comming in armes was only for that Dukedome.
For the Dukedome of Yorke, as his right, fro his father D. of Yorke.But to dilate how variable, and inconstant
the people of those times were, shall be more necessary
and effectuall, that knowing their inconstancie,
their traditions (like themselues) may the lesse bee
beleeued: so light-headed, so foolish, so irreligious,
as their opinion (for what else are the thoughts
of Ignorance but opinion) made them breake
their oath to their Prince,K. Henry the sixth. and to such a Prince
as they did not shame to dislike, onely because
hee was too good. Him they abandoned, deposed,
after restored; not as desiring, (being guilty of
their owne fault) but onely that it stood with the

liking of Warwicke the child of their loue.
                  Rich. Neuile Earle of Warwick, sirnamed the King-maker If then
they were such, (as indeede they were) and that
those relations wee haue, must come from that
people, it were better (I thinke) to bury their traditions,
then refute their obiections, were not our
age, apt to erre, infected with this folly.
            For his brother K. Edward:
               K. Edward the fourth. though his vices
seem not to adde vertues to this condemned Prince,
yet questionlesse they doe; making all his ill-estimated
actions of an other nature. Hee obtained the
Crowne, but rather fortunately, then wisely, were
not all wisedome thought folly, to which Fortune
lends not successe. For I thinke, Lust, or if you will
terme it Loue, could not more haue preuailed with
the most licencious creature, then at once to breake
the bonds of amity, discretion and policy; and all
to enioy a woman, in respect of his heighth, base: a
widow,Lady Eliz. Gray, widow of Sir Iohn Gray Knight, afterward married to K. Edward the fourth. and of his enemy, without bringing him
either alliance, or riches; proppes most pertinent
to his new-erected buildings. Wherein, besides
his breach of regall discretion, with his chiefest
friend the Earle of Warwick, whom he had sent into
France, to treate of marriage betweene him and the
Lady Bona,
               Lady Bona, Neece to the French King Lewes the eleuenth, & daughter to Lewes D. of Sauoy. (wherein being deluded, hee became
his mortallest enemie) his abuse to God was more
abominable; being before betrothed (as his owne
mother constantly affirmed) to the Lady Elizabeth
Lucy: in testimony whereof hee had layde such
earnest,For he had got her with child. as should haue bound any common
man, much more a King, to performance. How
soone the wrath of God followed this his irreligious
inconstancie, his being driuen from the Seate-Royall
into exile; the birth of his sonne in a Sanctuary;

(hauing no place else of freedome in his Fathers
kingdome) the miserie of all his partakers
sufficiently testifie. In which generall misery, who
did more truely follow him? Who more faithfully
ayded him, then his now disgraced Brother?
Whereas his other Brother
                  George D. of Clarence, secōd brother of K. Ed. the 4. 
               Clarence not onely
left him, but ioyned in marriageHee married Isabell, daughter of Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke.
                with the daughter
of his principall enemie, and holpe to expulse
him: with what loue, what constancy, his indeauours,
his aduenturing his life to restore him, doth
witnesse.
            Neuer was he noted all the life of K. Edward, to
thirst after the Kingdome; neuer denyed hee any
commandement of his Prince, but performed all
his employments discreetly, valiantly, successfully.
The suspition of helping his Brother Clarence toHe was drowned in a Malmsey butt in the Tower.
his end, was but a suspition, since the kings old displeasure
awaked by a new Prophesie, was vndoubttedly
the cause; if otherwise (when he after repented
him) hee would haue misliked of Gloucester, it
being naturall to sinne; but vnnaturall, to ease others
of their crimes. For the killing of the Heire
of the house of Lancaster at Tewksburie,
               
                  Edw. Prince of Wales, sonne of K. Henrie the 6. slaine after the battaile of Tewksbury.
                (if so)
seemes to mee, rather the effect of loue to his Brother,
then crueltie to the Prince: for he was an enemie,
yea, the chiefe and principall enemie of the
contrarie faction. Yet it cannot be proued the action
of Richard, but that it was an act wished by the
King to be done, and executed in both their presences,
by the Duke of Clarence, the Marquesse Dorset,
the Lord Hastings and others.
            The death of Henrie
               The death of Henrie the 6 in the Tower. the 6. in the Tower, can
no way belong to him, since the same reason that

cleareth his Brother, fitteth him; hee being able, if
desiring his death, to haue effected it by a more vnworthy
hand. And indeed this accusation hath no
other proofe, then a malicious affirmation. For many
(more truely) did suppose that hee dyed of
meere melancholie and griefe, when he had heard
of the ouerthrow of his friends, and slaughter of
his sonne. But if it were true, though it spots him
with bloud, yet it confirmes his loue to his Prince;
which loue was so coldly requited, as might haue
mooued a true louer of Rewards more then of Vertue,
to haue altered his indeauors, whether it were
a iealousie of the Nobilitie of his blood, or of the
height of his spirit, whether the abundance of
affection to bee led by a woman, or that hee was
defectiue in all brotherly affection, certaine it is, he
rather imployed him, then rewarded his imployments.
Contrary, the Queenes kindred, daylie to
rise, meerely without desert, but that they were of
her kindred; and their basenesse being thus suddenly
exalted, not only to plucke from him promotions,
due to his deserts, but to enuie the Duke, and contend
with him; how insupportable it must be to so
magnanimous a spirit, whose memorie beare witnesse
of their vnworthinesse, his owne worth, any
like spirit may imagine.
            Thus continued this vnequall contention, vntill the
King, sent for before the greatThe death of K. Ed. the 4. King of Kings, to
make an account of his greatnes, left his body, to
testifie the worlds folly in contending for Worlds,
when one little part of the earth must contain them.King Edward Prince of Wales son to K. Ed. the 4.
His successor at that time very yong, was wholy possessed
by the mothers bloud, whom the
                  Richard D. of Gloucester made Protector. now Protector

had great reason to feare, being euer his mortall
enemie, and now most strong, by being most
neerely allied to this Prince: Therefore iealous of
his own preseruation, of the safety of the Commonweale,
and of the ancient Nobilitie, with great reason
and iustice hee executed them, whom, if he had
suffered to liue, were likely enough to haue beene
the destruction of him, it, and them. But the deed
accomplished, stirred vp no little feare in the Queen-Mother,
and her faction: For the Queenes taking
Sanctuarie with her younger sonneRichard D. of Yorke, younger son of Edward the 4. 
               Richard Duke
of Yorke, without any cause that hee knew, draue
Gloucester to suppose that they doubted of their
right, and put him in possibility of obtaining his
owne: wherein by ambitiousHen. Stafford D. of Buckingham. 
               Buckingham he was
assisted, who then related to him afresh the vnlawfull
Marriage of his Brother, that being vnlawfull,
consequently his children were bastards, and so vndoubtedly
the Crowne was lawfully his; to which
discourse hee annexed protestations of furtherance.
Though perhaps an earthly spirit would not haue
beene mooued with these motiues, but rather haue
desired safety, then Soueraignty: yet in a true Heroick
spirit, whose affect is aspiring, they could not
but be imbraced, vsing the wings of Time, to bring
him to that height. Be not obstinate (Mortalitie)
against this climing Axiome, for hourely you commit
worser errors, more groueling, more base. Were
it not common, euery dayes issue, it were admirable
to note the impudencie of man, who at this instant
condemnes actions, which himselfe would instantly
accomplish, were he permitted by occasion. The
Queene-Mothers feare, his owne right, Buckinghams
               
ayd, and his owne iealousie to erect a Prince, too
young to gouerne himselfe, much lesse others, but
was likely to bee gouerned by his Mother, and her
kindred, the Protectors mortallest enemies, men of
meane birth, not inured to gouernment, such as were
likely to destroy the ancient Peeres, to fortifie their
new Nobility, could not but draw a true discerning
spirit, to fauour himselfe, to protect the ancient Nobilitie,
to defend the people from being wasted, and
oppressed by the ambition and tyrannie of new vnexperienced
Statists, and to respect his owne preseruation,
rather then others. For well hee saw hee
could not liue, vnlesse hee were a King; that there
was no safety, but in Soueraigntie. Should I put
thee in choyce (condemning Reader) whether thou
wouldest not be, rather then be a King; thou wouldest
perhaps answere no: but that answere should
proceede, rather from the knowledge of thy want
of power to Royallize thee, then through the abundance
of thy modestie. No, no, it is a desire befitting
the most worthie desirer; and were all mens
affections so high, their actions would not proue
so vnwor-thy.
            The State being thus in labour with Innouation,
the Peeres in counsaile about their Infant Kings Coronation,
all busie, yet dissenting in their businesse;
in a Councell holden at the Tower, Hastings Lord

                  Wil. L. Hastings, Chamberlaine to Edward the 4.Chamberlaine was apprehended, and no sooner
apprehended, but executed. The not leisurely proceeding
by forme of Law, may seeme to pleade
Hastings innocencie, the Pretectors crueltie. But they
that consider the nature of the people of that time,
apt to sedition, greedy of innouation, and likely to

be glad of so pittiful a color (for Hastings was a man
growne very popular) will hold the Protector in that
action very iudiciall, and, if guilty of any thing, of
discretion, and policie: But could Hastings be innocent,
whom
                  Phil. de Cō
                     mines, Lord of Argenton in his Historie. 
               Cōmines reporteth to be a Pensioner
of the French King, Lewis the 11. the onely subtill
Prince of that time? he, of all others, that most
affected tyrannie, and was naturally the mortall enemy
of this kingdome. Or was he fit to be a Statesman
or Counsailor, who beeing corrupted by the
bribes of an enemie, had disswaded his Master, the
late King Edward the 4. from assisting the oppressed
Lady
                  Mary sole daughter and heire of Charles D. of Burgūdy, after married to Maximilian the Emperour. the heire of Burgundie, against Lewes the
French King, whereby that Lady was driuen to seek
ayd elsewhere, who, otherwise, was likely to haue
married with the Duke of Clarence, or some other
English Prince, and so to haue vnited that Dukedome
to this Crowne, to the eternall benefit and
security of both Countries; who gloried in his priuate
reuenges, who not onely enticed his Master,
but accompanied him in all sensuality: who in the
deflowring of mens wiues,Shores wife. and such other his vnprincelike
actions, was his perpetuall attendant, and
sometimes (as it is thought) would begin to him?
Doct. Shaes Sermon at Pauls Crosse.Doctor Shaes Sermon not a little illustrates the
malice of his accusers: For I thinke, no man that
is discreet, will imagine this Prince so indiscreet, as
to haue witnesse that he commanded that Sermon,
and gaue instructions what should bee said: Then
how do our Chroniclers report it for truth, were not
their malice greater then either their truth, or their
iudgement? But they are Historians, and must be
beleeued.
            
               
Alas, poore men, how would they be beleeued,
whose greatest authorities (as a learned and honourable
Knight writeth) are built vpon the notable
foundation of heare-say?Sir Philip Sidney in his defence of Poetry. men that haue much aide
to accord differing writers, and to picke truth out of
partiality. But it is not mentioned, that Shaw euer
executed this action, with alleaging him to be the
cause. It is likely indeed, that Shaw being ambitious,
gaping after preferment, supposing some such
intent in the Protector (as hee had a reaching head)
was bold to set his Rethoricke to sale, to publish his
fancies: but seeing his hopes vanish into smoke, and
his expectation deluded, seeing the Protector neither
rewarded, nor regarded his Rhethorick, he soone after
languished and dyed: a iust example to teach
Theologians so boldly to intermeddle with Princes
affaires, before they be commanded: for (doubtlesse)
had the Protector set him a worke, hee would haue
payed him his hire. But if it were so, that he commaunded
the Sermon (as that is yet vnproued) was
that an offence to make the people so publikely partakers
of his right; yea, to prostitute his cause to
their iudgements? for charging his Mother with adulterie,
was a matter of no such great moment,
since it is no wonder in that sexe: And surely he had
more reason to aduenture her fame, then his Kingdome,
because of two euils it is wisedome to chose
the least. If it were true, it was no iniustice to publish
it; and what could be expected from his, but
true Iustice, who was so impartiall, that hee would
not spare his owne mother? if vntrue; good faith,
he was therein too blame, and her innocencie the
more meritorious; but certaine it is, the people approued

his right: for he was crownedThe Coronation of K. Richard the third. with such
consent, and so great applause both of Peeres and
people, that if we will iudge by the outward behauiour
(the onely marke our iudgements may or can
leuell at) we must determine them so contented, as
no actions which might testifie the satisfaction of
their mindes, were omttted: surely, if euer the vniudiciall
multitude did any thing iudicially, it was in
receiuing this Prince, whom his chiefe disgracers
cannot but acknowledge for valiant; then who was
more meet to restraine domesticke, to subdue forraine
seditions? For these ciuill dissensions had almost
wasted and made desolate this populous Nation:
discreete hee was and temperate, (two so rare
and excellent qualities, as hee that truly possesseth
them, meriteth the possession of a Diademe:) for in
these vertues, ioyned with that Cardinall vertue Fortitude
(wherof also he had a very large portion) consisteth
the soule of Soueraignty, which whosoeuer
wanteth (be he a while neuer so powerfull) his owne
greatnesse so crusheth him, that he forfeiteth all in a
moment: most liberall he was, desiring rather to
want, then to suffer worth vnrewarded: and this liberalitie
is the onely true Nurse, and fosterer of vertue;
vertue vnrewarded being vnsensible, our flesh
being gouerned, aduised, yea mastered by our senses:
this worthy, this Princely ornament some calumniators
haue sought in him to deface, alleaging;
that his liberality to some, proceeded from his
extortion from others: but euen those cannot deny
him to haue been politicke and wise; then is it
likely that a Prince of his wisedome and policie,
could not discerne betweene the worthy and vnworthy?

And to take from vndeseruers, to bestowe vpon
deseruers, must bee acknowledged a Vertue.
            He was neither luxurious, nor an Epicure, not giuen
to any riot, nor to excesse, neither in apparell,
nor play: for had he been touched with any of these
vices, doubtlesse they which obiect lesser crimes,
would not haue omitted these: then (without question)
hee was largely interessed in vertues, (their
contraries) but those (through malice) are either not
registred, or (if registred) so infamed, as if all his vertues
had a vicious intent: yet to acknowledge the
vertues of the vicious, is such a right, that what Historian
willingly omitteth them, therein becommeth
vicious himselfe. But in all that I haue hitherto
among tee vulgar obserued:
Calpatur factum, non ob alaud, quam exitum:
they approue, or disproue all things by the euent;
which though sometimes it proueth like the cause,
yet it is more often gouerned by the will of the diuine
prouidence. And surely, but that the gracious
goodnesse of God, to manifest the weaknesse of humane
policy, ouerthrew his designes, tooke from
him his Kingdome; and contrary either to mans
hope, or our merit, vnited by a blessed and happy
coniunctionThe two dissenting factions of Yorke and Lancaster, vnited by the mariage of Henry the seuenth to Eliz. eldest daughter to Edw. the fourth. the two dissenting factions, to the true
establishing of sweete peace and prosperity of this
desolate kingdome: for, otherwise, had he liued to
haue left Issue to haue succeeded him, such might
haue beene his and their merits, that Fame would
haue been no more iniurious to him, then to his
Predecessors, the fourth Henry and Edward, whose
reignes were polluted with much more royal bloud:
for he omitted nothing, that in wisedome, or true

policie might secure himselfe, or establish peace, or
good lawes in this Kingdome.
            His Statutes are extant; what can be found in
them not becomming a King? what, not befitting
the seruice of God? the worship of Religion? the
good of his Countrie? yea, I haue heard of some,
accounted both good Lawyers, and good Statists;
that in those three yeares of his gouernment, there
were more good Statutes for the weale-publike
inacted, then in 30. yeares before. He was no taxer
of the people, no oppressor of the Cōmons, though
he came to manage an Estate, whose treasure was
exceedingly exhausted; no suppressor of his subiects,
to satisfie either licentious humors, or to inrich
light-headed flatterers. But (alas) who robbes vertue,
but ingratitude, detraction, and malice? what
a curse is it to Mortalitie, that no fashion of life, no
merits, no regards can free Princes from discontentments
in their life, and infamy after death?
who is it that heares of any one so endued, so loden
with vertues, that iudgeth him not happy? yet he
is defamed; and by whom? euen by those, for
whom hee cared, laboured, and omitted nothing
that might profit, committed nothing that might
preiudice them.
            This, the charge and commandement that hee
gaue presently after his coronation, to the Lords
and Gentlemen (whom hee sent home into their
Countries) that they should in their Countries▪ see
Iustice duly administred and impartially, (that no
wrong, nor extortion should bee done to his subiects)
doth testifie; this, his lawes, and all his actions
approue: yet neither the care of his Country,

his lawes, nor actions, are thought to be sufficient to
pleade his equity and innocency: for malicious
credulitie rather embraceth the partiall writings of
indiscreet Chroniclers, and witty Play-makers, then
his lawes, and actions, the most innocent, and impartiall
witnesses.
            It is laid to his charge (as a maine obiection)
that hee was ambitious, let vs examine the truth
of this accusation. Was he ambitious, who was
onely content with the limits of his own Countrey,
who sought to bee rather famous for instituting of
good Lawes, then for atchieuing great conquests?
No, no, he wanted nothing to make him an accomplished
Prince, but that hee was not ambitious enough:
for had hee imitated that worthie King
Henrie the 5. who, in a like vnsettled estate, led out
the Nobility and people, to make warres vpon forraine
enemies, to make conquest of France, and to
embrue their Warlike swords (lately bloudied against
one another) in the bloud and bowels of
strangers: he might (perhaps) haue had a fortunate
successe: For he wanted not the like title, he was no
lesse valiant, no lesse politicke. So might hee haue
re-conquered that kingdome, and those Territories,
which by the pusillanimity of some of his Predecessors
were giuen away, and lost, & (peraduenture)
so busied the stirring heads of the Nobility and
people, that they should haue had no leysure to
thinke vpon any Innouation or part-taking at home:
so might he happily haue secured himselfe, and inlarged
the bounds of his conquests beyond any of
his Ancestors. What lets or obstacles could hinder
him from those glorious enterprises? His Subiects

were warlike, trained vp in armes; somewhat
too much exercised in bloud, because it was in their
owne. His neighbours, the French, were gouerned
byLewes the 11. a king, who had some policie, but so little valour,
that he would rather yeild to any Capitulation,
then heare the sound of an aduersarie Drumme. So
that his people, being vnured to warres, were easily
to be conquered by that Nation, which had so often
beaten them in the height of their daring.
            The Scots, their colleagues, he had already been
victorious ouer: his name among them was grown
terrible. For in the time of his Brother hee wanne
from them many Castles, and Holds. But principally
he conqueredBarwick won from the Scots by Richard the third. Barwik, the chiefe and principall
Towne vpon their frontiers a piece of speciall
importance, either to make easie our entrance into
that kingdome, or to keep them from inuading ours:
so that I cannot iustly accuse him of any crime so
much, as that his ambition stretched not farre enough.
To iustifie his aduersaries accusation, in
this time chanced the death of his two youngThe death of Prince Edward, & Richard D. of Yorke in the Tower,
Nephewes in the Tower, whose deaths promising
quiet to him, and wholly imposed vpon him, how
truely, I haue reason to doubt; because his accusers
are so violent, and impudent, that those vertues
(which in other men are imbraced, for which they
are esteemed as Gods) they impute to him rather
to be enamellers of vices, then really vertues: His
Humility they terme secret pride: his Liberality,
Prodigality: his Valour, crueltie and bloudthirstinesse:
yet in these dayes, their partiall opinions are
thought to be of validitie sufficient, to make proofe
of any imputation: But if it were so, that their

deaths were by him contriued, and commanded,
the offence was to God, not to the people: for the
depriuing them of their liues, freed the people from
dissension. And how could hee demonstrate his
loue more amply, then to aduenture his soule for
their quiet? But who knoweth, whether it were not
Gods secret iudgement, to punish the Fathers transgression
in the children? and if it be so, complaine
of their Fate, not Richards crueltie: (for in these
fatall things it fals out, that the High-working powers,
make second causes vnwittingly accessarie to
their determinations) yet, in policie, Princes neuer
account Competitors (how young soeuer) innocent,
since the least colour of right prouokes innouating
humours to stirre vp sedition, which (once
kindled) threatens the subuersion, both of Princes
and Subiects.
            And if some wise, and politike Princes haue
imprisoned, and put to death, such as haue been reputed
their heires and successors, because some factious
heads, (weary of good gouernment, and hoping
for authority by alteration) haue sought to establish
them before their times; (as commonly,
giddy-brained people doe more reuerence the Suns
rising, then his fall) had not King Richard great
reason to depriue them of their liues, who were not
to succeede him, (but in many mens iudgements)
had most right to bee invested before him with the
Diademe? And (indeed) the remoouing such occasions
of ciuill warres in a well-ruled Commonwealth,
is most profitable, most commendable; being
no crueltie, but pitty, a iealousie of their subiects,
and a zealous regard of their owne safeties.

And (indeed) if we duely consider, how much the
duty we owe to a Countrey, exceedes all other duties,
since in it self it containes them all, that for the
respect thereof, not onely all tender respects of kindred,
or whatsoeuer other respects of friendship, are
to be layd aside; but that euen long-held opinions,
(rather grounded vpon a secret of gouernment,
then any ground of truth) are to be forsaken: since
the end, whereto any thing is directed, is euer to be
of more noble reckoning, then the thing thereto directed;
that therefore the weale publike is more
to be regarded, then any person or Magistrate that
thereunto is ordained, the feeling consideration
hereof moued King Richard, to let principally before
his eyes the good estate of so many thousands,
ouer whom he had reigned, rather then so to hoodwinke
himselfe with affection, as to suffer his Realm
to run to manifest ruine.
            If any man shall obiect, that his course was
strange, and vnlawfull: let him know, that new necessities,
require new remedies; and for him there
was no remedie, but this one. Then if for this action
hee ought to be condemned, it is for indiscretion
in the managing; for as safely might hee haue had
the Realmes generall consent, in disposing of their
liues, as of their kingdome. Had hee held a secret
execution best, hee might haue effected it more secretly:
but hee rather chose a middle way, content
to let the people know it, holding their knowledge
equall with their consents: And it should seeme,
the people, (though they were at that time very
factious) yet approued thereof: for wee find not
that in any action, either inward or outward, they

shewed any dislike. And (truely) such is the difference
between the thoughts, the actions, the dispositions
of Princes and Subiects, that I hold no
subiect sufficiently iudiciall, to censure them: their
courses so vnlike, that what is meete, expedient in a
Prince, in a lower fortune is vtterly vnmeete, vnexpedient.
Therefore let no seruile condition aduenture
to condemne them, since all such eyes lose their
facultie, if they but gaze against the Sunne of Maiestie.
It is sufficient for vs to know how to obey;
this Nature commandeth and exacteth of vs: but
to search into the actions of our Commanders, dilates
more curiosity, then honestie: Nay, though
we would, we cannot: for our knowledge extends to
things equall, or inferiour; those aboue vs, in diuinity,
are comprehended onely by faith; in terrene
matters (if superating our estates) they are onely
snatched at by supposition. And this our Lawes
approue, which appoint euery man to bee tried by
his Peeres; shall then the head, the director of ciuill
policie, the anointed Maiestie of a King, be barred
from the right, allowed to subiects? No (surely) it
is preposterous, most vnlawfull to condemne a king,
if not found faulty by aA King not to bee condemned, but by a lury of Kings. Iury of Kings. Were
man in his innocencie, this aduice were not lost: but
beeing nousled in misusing of his malicious
tongue, euer to condemne others, neuer to amend
themselues, it is (as they will be for their
abuse) perpetually lost; No more then for
them.
            Let vs yet further cleare this wronged Prince:
It is constantly affirmed (say our Croniclers) that
hee first noysed, after, contriued the death of

his wife:
                  Anne Wife of K. Richard the 3. daughter of Ri. Neuill E. of War. & widdow of Prince Edward, son to Henry the 6. and that it was bruited, before it
was effected, thereby with her sorrowes to confirme
the report. This euidence they adiudge pregnant,
and effectuall enough to condemne him: did Fame
neuer lye? What are more generally receiued for
vntruths, then flying reports, seeing no creature
sensible will giue credit to Fame, or take her word,
without a surety, whom they may assuredly know to
bee credible? But constantly (say our Croniclers)
could their words bee so constant, whose actions
were the very stage of inconstancie, who opposed,
deposed kings at their pleasure, and (to make sure
to be no worse then they were) swore allegeance
to twoTo Henry the 6. and Edward the 4. Princes at once, and with both broke theif
Othes? But I will spend no more time, in prouing
the vanitie of these Croniclers, since their owne
pen contradicts it selfe; first, shewing the affections
of this people to be mutinous, and after, approuing
them: for certaine it is (but vncertaine, that the
King caused it) that such a rumour there was, and
that it made a great impression in the Queene, deeming
(as women are euer fearefull) this propheticall
relation to be the forerunner of her end: which
bewailing to her husband, hee fought with all kindnesse
to remoue that melancholy fantasie. What
more could hee doe to testifie his loue, to cure her
passions? But how absurd is it to thinke or imagine,
that the king contriued her death? Where, if hee
had pleased to marry elsewhere (for that is made
the cause) hee might and would haue vsed a more
safe meanes by a diuorce; did not the French king
Lewes the 12. (becauseThe wife, frō whome hee was diuorced, was Ioane, daughter of Lewes the 12. sister of Charles the 8. Ga
                     •
                  . Iab. 4. his wife was barren, and
crooked backt) sue a diuorce, and obtained it from

Pope Alexander the sixt, and afterward by his dispensation
married with Anne Dutchesse of Brittaine,
the widdow of his predecessor Charles the 8? Might
not King Richard haue done the like: for he had the
like cause (his wife being barren) whereof hee had
often complained to Rotheram then Archbishop of
Yorke? And the Popes of those times were not so
nice conscienced to deny Princes such requests, but
were easily wonne thereunto, either by fauour, or rewards:
therefore, that he contriued her death, was
a slanderous, false and absurd accusation; but her
The death of Anne wife of Richard the 3 and secōd daughter of Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke.
               time was come, which Mortalitie might sorrow,
but sorrow might not preuent, Death beeing
deafe to all humane lamentations.
            After her death, being desirous to reconcile himselfe
to all such, as held themselues offended (as at
his Coronation hee had done with Fogg a meane
Attourny, who had highly offended him) he laboured
to win the one sort with benefits and rewards,
and freely pardoned the others misbehauiors and
offences: hee had no cause to feare Fogg, therefore
feare was not the cause. No, it was a worthy, a
kingly humility, that would rather abate of his greatnesse,
then to haue it stained with the bloud of so
meane a vassaile, for a crime committed against
himselfe, yet was hee guilty of counterfeiting his
Royall hand and Signet, and of a most vntrue and
infamous libell: therefore how falsely do our Croniclers
seeke to cleare Collingborne, who was (as may
appeare by his inditement
                  Collingborn executed for Treason, not libelling. executed for treason
against the state, not for that ryming, foolish, ridiculous
libell? for neither they, nor any other can euer
prooue, that euer he reuenged any iniury whatsoeuer

committed particularly against himselfe. For
the good and safety of his kingdome and people, he
was zealous, hee was feruent: for, onely for their
peace, for their quiet, hee was content to suffer his
neerest kinsmen, his dearest friends to be executed;
so now with the mother Queene he laboured reconciliation,
he often solicited it, at the last he effected
it: This rare, this excellent worke of Christianity,
this true cognisance of a Religious Queene, our Chroniclers
defame, and impute it to her as an horrible
crime: such is the obstinate errour of mankinde,
that, when hatred is by God absolutely prohibited,
they dare say and maintaine the contrary: but (were
not they thus corrupt, partiall, gouerned wholly
by affection, not truth;) their Histories would be the
wisest guides, making men that are young in yeeres,
olde in iudgement, making experience most precious)
most cheape: For Knowledge, Iudgement,
and Experience are dearely purchased, when wee
must wander into infinite errours, ere we can be
perfect in our way; nay, they were most deare, were
they had with no other expence, but growing old
before we enioy them, waxing rotten, ere they grow
ripe. The end and scope of this reconciliation was,
to vnite himselfe in marriage with hisThe Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edw. the fourth, after wife to Henry the seuenth. Neece:
a contract (no doubt) inconuenient, and prohibited
the Vulgar; but amongst States-men it is like to produce
infinite good, both to Prince and people. It is
an incōuenience, most conuenient, nothing strange,
because vsuall, and accustomed amongst Princes:
tolerated, yea allowed by their receiued Oracle of diuinity;
the Pope, who considering the cause, ordinarily
dispenseth with the Consanguinity. It is granted

that this desire of marriage was mentioned by this
King, in respect of the publike peace; to make satisfaction
to the Mother, in exalting the daughter, for
the deiecting of the Sonnes, and to auoid the effusion
of much of the peoples bloud, which was likely
to be spilt, if his Neece should marry elsewhere: as if
(sayour Chroniclers) the first could not be established,
the latter auoided without this Platforme of Policie;
No, had not Gods secret working bin beyond mans
wisest apprehension, it could not: for well he knew
the head-strong obstinacy of this people could hardly
be kept in awe by a man, therfore impossible to be
restrained by childrē: this made him dispossesse them
of their Kingdom, & (peraduenture) of their liues:
for had they been suffered to liue, they would euer
haue bin the fire-brands of new seditions; and therfore
he thought it more conuenient, they should be
quenched with their owne blouds, then with the
blouds of infinit numbers of the people; yet to make
satisfaction for this wrong, (if it were a wrong to depriue
the disturbers of the common good) hee was
contented and much laboured to marry their Sister,
his Neece: but he is therefore adiudged ill: why?
because his accusers would be reputed good, though
(without doubt) he was a good Prince, and they all,
or the most part of all, euill, phantasticke, and seditious
people. And euen at this day, though the fortunate
& succesfull gouernment of our later Princes,
hath somwhat altered their natures, & bettered their
conditions; yet it were a lesse difficult quest to finde
one good man, then many. But it pleased not the diuine
Ordainer of marriage to permit that coniunction,
but rather to set a Period at once to his kingdome
and life.
            
               
About the time of the plotting of this mariage, the
iudiciall Buckingham, (not thinking himselfe sufficiently
regarded) grew discontent, and got the Princes
fauour to retire himself into the Country; where
(no doubt) his fantastick melancholly would soone
haue vanished (being a man more happy in the inheritance
of his Father, then in the legacie of Nature,
discretion, or iudgement) had not the Prisoner corrupted
the Iaylour: namely,This Moretō
                   was after in the reigne of Henry the seuenth Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinall and Lord Chancellor of England. 
               Moreton, Bishop of Ely
(committed by King Richard to his custodie) who
finding this Duke discontented, more desirous to
inflame his griefes, then to redresse them, with his
fiery wit so wrought vpon the Dukes combustible
matter, that suddenly he brought him to kindle a fire
of rebellion, and to take vp armes against his Soueraigne:
this K. Richard soone hearing, he prosecuted
him as an enemy, and so laboured (what by his
owne wisedome, what by his especials) that within
a while he tooke his head fromThe death of Henry Stafford D. of Buckingham beheaded at Shrewsbury. his body, for being
no better able to aduise him in his proceedings: was
it a fault to punish periury in him, who had sworne
true allegeance? then the executing of law is a sin;
if so, let transgressors be accounted innocent, and
Magistrates and Iudges guilty of transgression. And
had this been the action of some other Prince, it had
been good, iust, necessary; but being his, it is censured
the contrary: so that sinne is not sinne, nor vertue
accounted vertue, by their owne natures or effects,
but are made vertues or vices, by the loue or
hate that is borne to the committer: such is our humane
vnderstanding, as they rather confound all
things, then by distinguishing them to make choice
of the worthiest; for let a Noble-man be popular, if

he haue an ill face, it is termed warlike, his drunkennesse
is termed good fellowship, his slouenliness,
humility, his prodigality, liberality; thus is vertue
suppressed, and forced with her own titles to adome
her mortallest aduersaries. But, to returne to our defamed
King had not his mercy exceeded his cruelty,
his safety had been better secured, and his name not
so much subiect to obloquy: for though he cut off
the head of a mighty Conspirator, yet he suffered the
conspiracie to take so deepe root, that (in the end)
the branches thereof ouertopped his glory, and ouershadowed
his greatnesse.
                  Margaret Countesse of Richmond, wife of Thomas 
                  
                     •
                  . Stanley, mother of K. Henry the seuenth. For the Countesse of
Richmond labouring in her sonnes right, daily enticed
and inueigled many to be of her faction: to streng,
then which the more, it was plotted betweene the
two Mothers, to ioyne
                  Q. Elizabeth mother to Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edward the fourth, and Marg. Coun. of Rich. mother to Henry the seuenth, after King. the two dissenting houses in
vnitie, byYorke and Iancaster. a marriage. This practice the King
well knew; yet mercy, loue, lenity so preuailed
with him, that hee onely sought to preuent that
coniunction, by vniting his brothers daughter with
himselfe, and inflicted no other punishment on the
Countesse, but onely the committing of her to the
custody of her
                  Tho. L. Stanly, after by Hen. the seuenth created E. of Darby. Husband. Would a cruell bloud-thirsty
Prince haue done so? could any thing haue
been performed with more mildnesse and lenity?
could he do lesse then let her vnderstand, that hee
knew her secretest practises? Surely, if hee were an
Vsurper (as that he could not be now, standing after
the death of his Nephewes in the same ranke, that
Edward the fourth his brother did) yet his equity in
iustice, his mercy in pardoning offendors, his care
of Religion, his prouidence for the safety of the people,
should and ought to haue tempered the bitternesse

of his most malicious enemies, with no lesse
mercifull gentlenesse he vsed her husband, (and that)
at such time as her sonne was already landed, and
made claime to the kingdome: for hee onely tooke
his sonne
                  George Lord Strange, son & heire to Tho. L. Stanley.
                the Lord Strange as an hostage, and
then suffered him to go into the Country to leuie his
forces: so farre was he from bloud and cruelty, as,
though he knew his alliance to the contrary faction,
a motiue, sufficient to make him (as indeed hee
did) incline to their ayd, though hee might iustly
suspect him, and could not haue wanted colour to
haue beheaded him (as being father-in-law to his
Competitor) yet he only detained his sonne in his
Campe; and when hee had assured notice of his
Fathers disloyall reuolt, yet he suffered the Hostage
of his loyalty to liue: an euidence effectuall enough
to testifie, that he desired rather to settle, then to ouerthrow
the quiet of this Land; that he laboured
to win the hearts of his subiects, rather with meekenesse
then cruelty; what Prince could haue done
lesse? Nay, what King would not haue done more?
since both the effect, and the present feare, are both
such inward tormentors, that it is hard to determine
which is most grieuous: so opposite, so contrary to
the nature of a Prince (borne, not to feare, but to be
feared) that it is most iust, most naturall, to remoue
such a terrour; but nowHenry the 7. the Heire of Lancaster being
come to challenge the Crowne, what did the
King? Did his spirits faile him? Was his magnanimous
courage daunted? No, he then gathered
new spirit, he new steeled his courage, he withstood
him with the height of fortitude; protesting rather
to dye valiantly, then to liue lesse then a King. With

what a Roman-like spirit did he resist fortune? being
ouerthrowne, how Heroically did he encounter with
death? This our detracting Chroniclers cannot but
acknowledge: for so high, so powerful was his magnanimity,
that (in spight of malice) it preuaileth, and
(like the Sunne) breaketh thorow the misty clouds
of his aduersaries slaunders: was it a fault to withstand
the Lancastrian heires claime? then those are
faulty, who being in possession of lands, to proue
good their title, prosecute suites, and are ouerthrown
by the lawe: for the sentence of iudgement makes
them to perceiue that to be an errour, which before
they imagined none. Besides, he knew well, that his
kingdome & life had both one period, to which life
he was perswaded his Competitor had no right, and
therefore he would neuer be guilty of such a sinne (as
wilfully to betray it) till he which had lent it him required
repayment.
            Had his life, his actions been most abominable;
yet (like a slaue) to haue yeelded his throate to the
execution, would haue been an imputation beyond
all other imputations: but could he as openly haue
manifested his other vertues, as he did his valor and
policy, the worlds opinion had been otherwise, and
I neither had taken such paines to defend his innocency,
nor in some weake iudgements to endanger
mine owne. But surely he did couragiously and valiantly
withstand his enemies, with great expedition
rallying his forces, and performing all things with
wonderfull celerity, he went to encounter the disturbers
of his quiet.
            It is reported, that, the night before the day of
battaile, he dreamed a mostK. Rich. dream the night before the battaile of Bosworth. dreadfull and horrible

dreame, which by our Chroniclers is interpreted to
be a testimony of his wicked and tyrannous life. Did
not Caesar,
               
                  Plutarch is the life of Caesar, Dion and Brutus.
                before he attained the Empire, dreame
that he knew his owne Mother carnally? had not
both Dion and Brutus the figures of terrible spirits
represented vnto them, the night before their end?
and yet these were reputed good men, and louers
and protectors of their Countrie; and because king
Richard dreamed with some terrour, must his life of
necessitie be euill? O vaine! O friuolous obiection!
but they hold this dreame to be a compunction of
his conscience: happy Prince to haue so indiscreete
slaunderers; for how could they more truly witnesse
his integrity? since onely they which reuerence and
feare God, are indued with that inquiring conscience,
which censureth their actions: for they which
are giuen ouer to a reprobate sence, are insensible
of that good Angell, which seeketh by telling vs our
faults, to make vs repent our sinnes past, and to bee
wary, lest we commit any more.
            Surely, I thinke, his conscience (like a glasse) presented
before him the figures of all his actions;
which he faithfully examining, humbly craued pardon
for his misdeeds: and so hauing made atonement
with God, like a deuout Penitentiary setled his
minde, he went with alacrity to the bloudy Court,
where the cause of his life was to be tryed: where
his sword being his Aduocate, pleaded most valiantly.
In all which tumult, he failed neither in discretion,
nor in execution, but boldly encouraged his
Souldiers, both by word and example.
            There is extant in our Chronicles, anThe Oration of K. Richard. Holliniheds 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in the end 
                     〈…〉
                  . Oration,
which at that time he made to his Souldiers, wherein

he confesseth his errors, and desireth pardon of all
the world, as he hoped his repentant teares had obtained
mercy of God.
            What a Saint-like thing was this, for a King, to
craue forgiuenesse of subiects? for a Generall, to
humble himselfe to his Souldiers? What could it be
but the effect of a more diuine, then terrene vnderstanding?
If (like the common fashion of men) he
would haue put his affiance in humane assistance,
and neglected his God, he might (in common reason)
haue promised himselfe the victory: being double
in forces, and nothing inferior, either in valor or
policy; but hee acknowledged and confessed the
power of the most powerful: he knew that it was not
the multitude of men, but God, that giueth the victory.
And therefore hauing first made peace with
his owne soule, he humbled himselfe, and asked pardon
of those, ouer whom he had gouernment: knowing
no gouernment to be so perfect, wherein some
good men are not offended.
            This was the effect of his compunction; to put
him in remembrance, that Princes are mortall, and
that his being a King, bound him to a more strict
reckoning, then one that enioyeth a lesser Farme.
Now whether this mercifull remembrance of God
disgraceth him, iudge ye that haue grace. But now
(both battailes being ioyned) what did this valiant
King? Did he onely stand to giue directions to others?
No, he did rigorous execution with his sword
vpon his enemies.
            Did he, when he perceiued some of his Subiects
disloyally to reuolt, and that his forces were put to
the worst, thinke vpon yeelding or flight? Though

by some of his faithfullest seruants he was counsailed
to flie, and for that purpose presented with a
Horse of wonderfull speed, yet hee would not: for
hauing been inured to conquest, he scorned to yeeld:
hauing been a King, he would not die a vassall; and
therefore, because the garland was a Crowne, the
prize a Kingdome; victory, Maiestie, and perpetual
renowne the reward, this Lyon-hearted King couragiously
charging his speare, ran into the Battalion
of his aduersaries; where, with his owne hands hee
slew the stoutS. Wil. Brandon Standard-bearer to Henry the 7. slaine. He was father to Charles Brandon, after created D. of Suff. by Henry the 8. Sir william Brandon, Standard-bearer
of his enemy: he ouerthrew the strong and valiant
Sir Iohn Cheney, and singled out his Competitour:
who beeing the most Heroick and valiant
Prince of those times, yet had doubtlesse been slaine,
had not he been rescued by S. William Stanley, who
came happily with three thousand men to his rescue,
who on all sides encompassing King Richard, so
assayled him, that though he did more then a man,
though his Sword acted wonders, yet beeing oppressed
by so great a multitude, hee was there manfully
slaine; not ouercome, for hee conquered the
betraiers of men in danger, passion, and feare.
            Thus lost he both kingdome and life, but nothing
diminished his interiour vertues: When the adiudged
punishment is performed, our Laws do account
the offender as cleere of the crime, as if he neuer had
committed it. Why should this common benefit be
denied a King, since if guilty, his bloud made restitution,
and being dead, his royall body was dispoyled
of all kingly ornaments, left naked, and not only
vnroyally, but inhumanely, and reprochfully dragged?
Yet neither can his bloud redeeme him from

iniurious tongues, nor the reproch offered his body,
be thought cruell enough, but that we must still
make him more cruelly infamous in Pamphlets and
Playes. Compare him now (iudicious Reader) impartially
with other Princes; iudge truely of all their
actions, their forme of gouernment, and their Statutes
and ordinances, the vpholders, the strength,
the sinewes of gouernment; and thou shalt find him
as innocent of cruelty, extortion, and tyranny as the
most; as wise, politike, and valiant as any: if so,
censure him, his actions, his ordinances, according
to their deserts, and this Treatise of mine as a
charitable well-wishing to a scandalized
and defamed king.
            Yet for all this know, I hold this but a Paradox.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            THE PRAYSE OF
THE FRENCH
POCKES.
            
               IT is the complaint of an ancient
writer, Nulla tam modesta foelicitas
est, quae malignitatis dentes
vitare possit: There was neuer
any felicity, whether moderately
seasoned, or compleat in
perfection, so happy; that could
auoyde the griping teeth of enuie and backbiting.
Out of which naturall in-bred malice, men doe not
sticke to defame and discredit the most noble and
illustrious disease of the French Pocks, and to wrong
those that be the worthy subiects in whom they reside:
insomuch that the very mention of them is so
noysome and offensiue, and doth so much ouercome
their stomacks, as the naming of the things which
are the purgings of the belly, and are within the
ward and bailiweeke of the girdle. Whereas the
name of the Pocks is of so reuerend estimation, and
foundeth so pleasingly in the eares of them that are
not passionate, that euen Diana her selfe whom the

               Paynims adored for their Goddesse of Chastity and
honesty, tooke her name from them; whom the Latines
cal Bubones, the French Bubes, and the Spanish
Buvas;
               Latrator Anubis Sancta
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Bubastis, Ouid Meta. lib. 9. so is she called Bubastis. Yea, the famous
starre Böötes, which guides Charles his waine, admits
these syllables into his name, and is called Bubulco.
And why then should men here on earth thinke
skorne of this name, which is well brooked by stars
of the first magnitude, and Goddesses of the fairest
beauty? But because Deriuations doe many times
driue words out of fashion, and a notation of names is
of all the Artificiall Arguments in Logick, one of the
weakest, lest, by seeking to lift the Pasty by one end,
we marre all; let vs fasten vpon some thing more
materiall, and from the originall of the word, come
to the beginning of the thing.
            Amongst those rich treasures, which Christopher
Columbus brought home into Spaine, after his discouery
of the Indyes, one of the chiefest was the Pockes;
For in his Fleete (amongst other fraught) were wafted
ouer certaine Indian Women, with whose happy
conuersation the Castilians came home plentifully
furnished with this holy contagion: Holy I call it,
because the cure of it is that, which they call lignum
sanctum, or Guaiacum; Holy, for the place, where it
is healed, which is the Hospitall; called by the
French, Maison-Dieu, & holy, because they are great
helpes to make them that haue them, Saints. For,
whosoeuer shall behold the outward mortification
of a pocky companion, the delicacie of the tone of
his voyce; his pale and meagre face; his wanne
colour; and his whole body broken and disioynted,
that a man may shake all his bones together in his

skinne; and lastly, shall see him wholy made a very
picture and painted table of repentance; hee may
see sufficient tokens (at least wise) of apparant holinesse:
for you neuer see fat panches, and plumpt
cheekes, and idle fellowes euer admitted into the
schoole of repentance; nor into the Stewes the
workehouse of Courtizans; nor in the Hospitall
and Lazer-house of the Pock-rotten aduenturers.
            Among the three Capitall enemies which with
fire and sword doe assaile the soule, the greatest of
them, which is the flesh, is wholy subdued by the
Pocks: because by them it is made vnable to exercise
any vnlawfull act. Is there any thing in the world
that doth more open the gates to holinesse, then
to take away the occasions of sinning? and what is
there that hath more efficacie to withdraw a man or
a woman from occasions of euill, then this holy leaprosie?
for if a woman know that a man hath the
Pocks, she flies from him as a ragged sheepe from a
bramble-bush. Againe, what greater token of holinesse
can there be in a man, then to haue a sense
and feeling of his sinnes? Now who is he that doth
suffer greater griefe and paines for his sinnes, then
he that hath the Pocks? Who are more franke and
more bountifull in gifts then such men? for a Pock-master
was neuer accounted a pild paltry fellow. For
as when wee see a Black-moore crosse the street, we
say, speaking by the contrary, There goes Iohn Blanco:
or when we see a common woman, wee likewise say,
There goes a good one: so we call this holy infection,
the peeling disease, vnderstanding that such a one will
part with his very skinne.
            All other aches and paines haue some enemy

that may destroy them; or by a bill out of the Apothecaries
shop, like a writ of Remoue, they may be
dislodged; but the Pocks haue made their peace
with all drugs and confections, there is not found among
all the Phials and Gally-pots any simple, or
syrop so powerfull, that can disturbe the Pocks out of
their possession: whence it is plaine, that it is wrongfully
and abusiuely called an infirmity: for the word
infirmitie argueth and importeth want of firmenes;
whereas the Pockes are so farre from not beeing
firme, that to him that hath once caught them, they
continue so firme, so stable and so well settled; that
they neuer forsake him, but accompany him to his
graue; and I thinke, into Purgatory too, because no
lenitiues, or purgations, can either asswage their
paine, or driue them out; surely so good a thing neuer
goes to Hell.
            They that set out the worth and greatnesse of that
excellent Poet Homer, ascribe it much to his honour,
that hee drew his beginning from many Cities
and Islands, as Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon and the
like: how much greater is the honour of this spreading
gangren of the Pocks, which deriues his descent
not from Ilands and Citties, but from great kingdomes
and Prouinces. Some call it the Neopolitane
disease; others the French euill; some the scab of
Spaine, others the Indian Sarampion or tetter, and
ring-worme; Others that speake with some reuerence
and respect to these Lady-mistresses, they feare to
vsurpe their proper name; they do not say plainly to
a man, You are a Pockie-knaue, but rather Vous auez,
sir, ye are pepper'd; and indeed such is the dignity
and greatnes of this malander, that they speake of

it, after the stile of Kings and Dukes and Grandes,
in the plurall number. For whereas we commonly
call blaines and sores in the singular number, the
scurfe, or the scabbe, or the Winchester goose, these are
all saluted in the plurall number, the Pocks, as if they
should stile themselues nos bubones, & pustulae Gallicanae.
And well doth this stile agree vnto them, because
they deale royally and nobly with their attendants;
for whereas in Princes Courts they that are
suiters, do not see an end of their pretensions in many
yeares, and when all comes to all, they seldome
reape the fifth part of what they sued for: these nobles
do soone dispatch all that negotiate with them,
or plead at their barres, wonderfully well prouided
for.
            Now let not any man obiect as an inconuenient,
that the Pocks do peele all those that are of their fraternity
& liuery, & make them as bald as an egge: for
if we consider it, they do vnto them no therein small
benefit: For looke what proportion the leaues beare
to the Tree, feathers to a Bird, the same haue the
haires and the bush-naturall to a man, that is, they
are giuen both for an ornament and a defence; for a
couering and for comlinesse.
            And seeing that Nature doth do trees a fauour, in
making them to shead their leaues, and Fowles to
moulter their feathers, that so she may dight them
and cloath them yeerely with new; shee doth not
deale so with men, but leaues them to themselues, to
effect it by their own industry and prouidence, wherunto
when they are disposed to moulter and to doe
off their perriwigs or perruques, the Pocks in this
case is Natures agent, which doth maintaine herselfe

with that which is most delicate in that subiect,
such as are the thin lockes of the head, the daintines
of the eye-liddes and the eye-browes; the venerable
beards, & the most valiant mustaches: for neuer any
timerous and white-liuered cowards haue the Pocks,
but the most foole-hardie aduenturers are admitted
into this corporation.
            It is a rule infallible, that men are vsually such as
are those with whom they conuerse. And who are
they (I pray you) that are most hanted with the Pocks
but noble Lords, Caualiers, and men of high parentage?
The plow-swaine or day-labourer neuer
knew that there was any such thing in the world as
the Pocks; such is their miserable ignorance; nor
yet the Porters or Carre-men are greatly troubled
with this Luggage in their owne persons, neither
doe they euer descend so low as to chare-maids and
Tankard-bearers. But you must seeke for them amongst
the lusty gallants, and gay Ladies that ruffle
it in silkes, and outward brauery▪ And therefore
may it please thee to be aduertised, gentle Reader,
whosoeuer thou be that standest vpon complement;
that whensoeuer thou shalt salute such a Ladie or
Caualier in the street, by vailing thy bonnet, know,
that by that obeysance thou dost homage to two
Grandes and great personages at once, one to the
party principall that is obuious to thy eye, the other
to the Pocks which he carrieth about him.
            How doth the world dote vpon Astrologers and
Starre-gazers, that can foretell and diuine of things
to come, whether they bee the writers of the
Greeke Menologies and Calenders of the Monthly
variation of dayes; or Prognostications of the

changes of the Moone: or dayes Almanackes for
the alteration of the weather? Whereas there is no
Astrologer more vveather-wise then a Pock-master,
or whose predictions are more certaine: for, if
there be any change of weather or season approching,
presently the intrinsecall Accidents that
cleaue to his bones & sinews, do giue him a perfect
notice of it, in that he feeleth an ache in euery commissure
of his ioints, and his bones doe euen rattle
in his skinne.
            Adde hereunto, that men thus affected (or infected
rather) haue this great priuiledge aboue other
men, that although they be in vassallage, and
slaues by condition, yet are they obserued and respected
as absolute Lords; and are serued of euery
bodie, whereas they serue none but God, whom
by the Pocks they are brought to remember. And
see, I pray you, to what a Lordlinesse they are aduanced,
in that not onely their persons are in a
manner sacred, and may not be approched, but at
a certaine distance; but whatsoeuer is about them,
and belongs to their necessary vse, cannot safely be
touched of any man, as if they were some holy Reliques;
For no man dares to lye in their bed, or to
weare their clothes, or to drinke in their cup, or to sit
in their chaires; men willingly withdrawing themselues
from these things, as from vessels consecrated
to this great Idoll of the Bubositie.
            Howbeit, it is not greatly to be maruailed at; that
the Pocks haue attained to so high a pitch and prerogatiue
of excellency, considering that the same
act and operation, and the same instruments which
Nature imployeth to produce a man, which is the

noblest of her creatures; the same are also the generature
causes of the Pocks; I meane, the great and
honourable Pocks: for those other pushes and inflammations
that arise in the body, of cold, or from
an ouer-heated and exulcerated liuer, are not properly
pocks, but pouts and pimples. So then, this
reason being considered, the Pocks may very iustly
take state vpon them, and stand vpon puntillos of
honour, and out-braue a man to his face and say,
that they are issued from as good Parents as he. And
surely it seemes no lesse; for as they that are nobly
borne, the better to shew their greatnesse and to
maintain their state, they liue retiredly in the inmost
and remotest roomes of their house: so do the Pocks,
out of the same rule and reason of State, keep residence
in the very bones and the marrow of him that
hath them; which is the reason also why for their
birth and honourable ranke, they finde place and intertainment
in Loues Court, into which nothing is admitted,
but what sauoureth either of greatnesse or of
goodnesse, as braue, resolute and determinate men;
gallant and faire women; free discourse; wanton
witty Poems, and plenty of great Pocks. And lastly,
what greater token can there be of a Noble Nature,
then to shew thankfulnesse to those that haue
suffered any thing for their sakes, or done ought to
procure their good? in which kind of retribution
the Pocks are no way deficient. For whereas the nose
in the purchase of the Pocks doth suffer a kind of lesion
and hurt by the arrosion of its gristle; to make
it ample amends and satisfaction; the pocks doe
make the nose the trumpet, or horn-pipe of their
owne prayses; whose gracefull tone varied Chromatically

vpon the musicks and halfe-notes of snuffing
and snorting, is much like the vntamed voice
and braying of Silenus his hobby-horse.
            Now if there be any man so ill an husband, that
amongst other things of his owne getting and acquisition
hath not been so happy, as to become owner
of the pocks; let him blame himselfe for an vnthrift,
that hath mis-pent his time; and say, that hee is
without them, because they are not within him: or
with the Spaniard, that hee wants them, because he is
not worthy of them:
            
            
               Yo no Lis padezco,
               Porque no las merezco.
            
            Carnestoliendas de Castilla. Noche tercera.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Prayse of Nothing.
            PArdon, Graue Sages, Natures Treasures,
            Earths best Surueyers, Heauens best measures,
            Who in the deepes of Sciences do wade,
            Teaching that Nought of Nothing can be made.
            I will vntwist the strength of your decree,
            And from your errors Labyrinth you free.
            Sith to the making of this All-Theater:
            
            Nothing but Nothing had the All-creator:
            
            And as the structure of this worlds great masse,
            Out of vast emptinesse first reared was,
            Embellisht with each curious ornament,
            Without or staffe, or matter preiacent;
            So by great Nothings frank and free expence,
            We yet enioy each rarest excellence.
            For Nothing is more precious then gold:
            'Mongst all those things which Neptunes arms enfold,
            'Mongst sublunarie bodies which do range,
            About th' worlds Center suffring daily change,
            Which fil Fates mort-main, & which death deth mierce,
            Driuing them from their cradle to their hearse:
            Amongst all these, and whatso else we haue,
            
               Nothing did euer yet esape the graue.
            
               
               Nothing's immortall: Nothing euer ioyes;
            
               Nothing was euer free from all annoyes.
            Why should not Nothing then of vs expect,
            That shrines and Altars we to her erect?
            
               Nothing more ioyous is to vs then light;
            Or the Springs flowry mantle all bedight
            With Pinks, and Primrose, when sweet Zephirs breath
            Inspireth life after long Winters death.
            
               Nothing is safe in warre, Nothing in peace
            Is iust; which made Tibullus once confesse,
            That to auoid all danger, dread and scath,
            The happiest man is he that Nothing hath.
            He Theeues by land, nor Pirates feares, nor wracks,
            Nor iuggling Iudge, whose sentence often rackes
            The richer Client, who must seldome spare
            To waste his wealth in fees, his health with care.
            So Zenoes wise-man onely doth aspire
            
               Nothing to couet, Nothing to admire.
            And Socrates it his profession made,
            
               Nothing to know: which is a thriuing trade;
            Sith not to know, but to haue much to giue,
            Is that which purchaseth best meanes to liue.
            The Alchymist, who with Spagyrick trickes,
            Doth sometimes sublimate, and sometimes fixe,
            Nis baser mettalls by a Chymick fire,
            Excocting them by art and fell desire,
            From Stannar and Calaminary mould,Stannar is the Mother of Mettals.
            
            To turne crude Mercure, into liquid gold.
            How! how doth he in this gulfs Baltick sound,Calaminaris lapis, out of which brasse is drawne.
            
            His wit, his wealth, himselfe and all confound!
            And all for Nothing, t' whom he is in thrall,
            And 'mongst fooles morall, a pure Naturall.
            
            
               
               Nothing to Phoebus is vnknowne,Architas Tarentinus. Hor. lib. 1. od. 28.vnskann'd,
            Of him that number could the Lybian sand.
            And you, great Clerks, who dry and waste your brains,
            Through sleeplesse nights, and with vncessant paines
            To compasse Knowledge; if I should but aske
            Th'intended end of all your toyling taske;
            Your answere, I suppose, to this would tend,
            That you know Nothing, Nothing comprehend.
            Yet Nothing is more bright then Summers Sunne;
            Or purest flame. Nothing can swiftly run,
            And flye as swift without both feet and wing;
            Without a voice,Tangere enim aut tangi nisi corpus nulla potestres. 
               Nothing can sweetly sing.
            
               Nothing without a body can be touch'd.
            As wise Lucretius grauely hath auouch'd.
            
               Nothing can moue without exchange of place:
            
               Nothing is seene without faire colours grace.
            
               Nothing's more helpfull to asswage our smart,
            Then noble Phisicks euill-curing Art.
            Whosoeuer then is liuer-sicke of loue,
            And faine would Philtres and loue-potions proue;
            Let him not seek to th' helpe of Magick charmes,
            For no such spels will euer heale his harmes.
            Onely of this let him himselfe assure,
            That Nothing can loues hot Imposthems cure.
            Yea those who once haue past the Strg
                  ••
                lake,
            
               Nothing can them from Death recouer backe.
            
               Nothing can conquer the infernall Furies,
            
               Nothing can alter their eternall Iuries.
            The Giants felt when with the Heauens they stroue,
            
               Nothing more fearefull then the wrath of Ioue.
            
            The gods feare Nothing; Nothing keeps in awe,
            Rebellious men that reake not of the Lawe.
            
               
               Nothing with God may be compared right,
            For Iustice, Wisedome, Maiestie, and Might.
            And though within, God fill this spacious Round,
            Yet Nothing may without it well be found.
            This is the taske that I did vndertake,
            Of Nothing Nothing, something for to make.
            Iohannes Passeratius apud Theodorum
Bezam in Epigrammatis.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THAT IT IS GOOD
to be in DEBT.
            
               WEE are fallen into that dotage of
the World, in which, the worst
things doe ouertop the worthiest,
sence doth besot the vnderstanding,
drinke ouercommeth the
braine, and the eye beguyleth
and misleadeth the sight. And therefore in tender
commiseration of mankinde, I will endeuour to rectifie
their iudgement in a Paradox, then which there
hath none more intricate, been discussed and canuassed
among the Stoiks in Zenos porch, that is, That
it is better for a man to liue in debt, then otherwise.
            
               Ordiar ab ouo, I will begin from the egge, that your
concoxion may be the easier. In the whole course
and frame of Nature, we see that nothing is made
for it selfe, but each hath a bond of duty, of vse or of
seruice, by which it is indebted to other. The sunne
by his splendor to lighten all the world; by his
warmth and heate, to cherish and comfort each liuing
and vegetable thing. Yea, man himselfe is so
framed of God, that not onely his Countrey, his
Parents and his friends claime a share in him, but
he is also indebted to his dogge, and to his Oxe, to

teach the one to hunt for his pleasure, the other to
labour for his profit: so that quicquid habet genij, ingenij,
moris, amoris, the abilities of his spirit, the
affections of his mind, he hath them for others, asmuch
as for himselfe; nay the more for others, by
how much hee desireth to be the greater Lord ouer
others. Let him but looke into himselfe, and see
how his constitutiue parts are debters each to other,
the soule doth quicken and giue life to the body, the
body like an Automaton, doth moue and carry it selfe
and the soule. Suruey him in his parts, the eye seeeth
for the foote, the foote standeth for the hand,
the hand toucheth for the mouth, the mouth tasteth
for the stomacke, the stomacke eateth for the whole
body, the body repayeth backe againe that nutriment
which it hath receiued, to al the parts, discharging
the retriments by the Port-Esquiline; and all
this in so comely an order, and by a Law so certaine,
and in so due a time, as if Nature had rather man
should not haue been at all, then not to be a debter
in euery part of him; which hath made me resolue,
that to whomsoeuer I meane to bee a friend, I will
striue to be in his debt: and what can I do lesse? for
to him that doth mee a good turne, I am bound to
returne him the greatest pleasure; which I can no
way do, but by being in his debt: for what contentment
will it be vnto him, when I shall repay him his
owne againe? The Alchymists, who promise to
themselues to turne Tin into siluer, and Copper into
gold, how will they bee transported out of themselues
with ioy, if they should but see a happy issue
of their attempt? How much more a Creditor,
when hee shall recouer a desperate debt? It is like

the ioy of a Father that receiues his lost Child.
            Againe, he that is in debt, hath this great priuiledge
aboue other men, that his Creditors powre
out hearty prayers for him, they wish that hee may
liue, and thriue and prosper, and grow rich, and all
for their owne aduantage. They seeme to be carefull
for their debtors, that they may not lose their
principall with the interest, for their money is their
life, witnesse those Vsurers of France, who, when
they heard that the price of Corne was fallen, went
and hanged themselues for griefe.
            What a command doth the debtor gaine ouer his
Creditors? He becommeth in a manner their Landlord,
to whom they cap, crouch, and kneele, as if
they did owe him all suits and seruices, and are as
ambitious of their fauours, as they who in Rome
did canuas the people for their voices to attaine the
greatest offices: but here is their cunning: Laudant
vt Leadant, they praise them, that they may prey vpon.
And therefore, you braue gallants and spendthrifts,
who find by your wofull experience, that no
whip giues a shrweder lash then the label of a Bond
or Obligation, with a Nouerint vniuersi Skinner and
Lacy. Whensoeuer you fall into the Mercers books,
neuer take care, or make conscience of paying your
debts, for by that meanes you shall keepe your Creditor
in awe, and shall haue him wonderfull courteous
and officious, and obsequious towards you, and
a great mint-master of faire words.
            Without debt and loane the Fabricke of the world
will be disioynted and fall asunder into its first Chaos.
The beauty of the Starres, what would it be but vastnesse
and deformity, if the Sunne did not lend them

light? The earth would remaine vnfruitfull, if shee
did not borrow refreshing dewes from the watery
Signes and Planets. The Summer is pleasant, and
promiseth great hopes of plenty, but it is, because it
taketh vp much vpon trust, from the friendly and seasonable
temperment of the Elements. And to say
the truth, there is nothing good or great in the
world, but that it borroweth something from others
to make it great, or lendeth to another to make it
good. And therefore I maruaile why Antiquity,
who made Mildew,
               1. AErugo. 
               Feauer, and Scuruinesse goddesses,
did not matriculate loane and debt among the
rest.2. Febris.
               3. Psora.
            
            The Elements who are linked together by a
league of association, and by their symbolizing qualities,
doe barter and truck, borrow and lend one to
another, as being the Bursse, and Royall-Exchange
of nature: they are by this traffique and intercourse,
the very life and nourishmēt of all sublunary bodies,
and therefore are called Elimenta quasi alimenta,
whose happy concord & coniunction hath brought
forth those, whom the World for the good done to
mankind, hath esteemed gods, as Bacchus the great
Vintner, Ceres the Meale-mother, Flora the Tutty-maker,
Vertumus and Pomona Costard-mongers.
            Now, if euery man would render and repay in
full waight, that which by due debt he oweth and
hath borrowed from others, Saturnes golden age
would returne againe, in which there was no difference
of metals, but gold and siluer were all one
Oare, and made the yelke of the earth, Natures
great Egge, neither did Meum and Tuum bound
out, and apportionate Lands and Lordships, by

meare stones, and diuersity of Tenures of sockage
and focadge; since when, Qui habet terras, habet guerras,
and the King of heauens peace hath been disturbd
amongst men: but then all things were all
mens, as necessitie did allot and award, who was
then the onely iudge and arbitrator, competently allowing
to euery man, that which he stood in need
of.
            With what dearenesse haue both gods and good
men countenanced and graced debtors? To whom
Diana the great goddesse of Ephesus, granted her
Temple for a Sanctuarie, to keepe them out of
Bagwell: Pigeon-houses. Or if they were caught, Solon by
a solemne Law inacted, would not haue their bodies
to be fettered or manacled amongst malefactors, but
that they should enioy their liberty throughout all
the Parkes and Purlues of the prison, or to speake
more mildly, of their restraint & indurance: For the
Prison is built Purgatory-wise, after the Architecture
of Rome, with a Limbus and Tullianum. The
dungeon is the Deuils pinfold and the very suburbs
of Hell, where varlets, roarers, and stilettostabbers
are let downe, as the proper food that stuffes that
great greedy maw. The next roome is the Lollard
of trunck-hosed famulists and separatists, who after
they haue been rowelled in the neck, to cure them of
the Megrim of the head, they are by the gentle flame
of this Stoue, and the heate of their owne zeale,
made to sweat out their contumary and other peccant
humors. The vpper skirt and stage of this
building, is the Garret of expencefull wasters, gamesters
and vnthrifty debtors, where though they liue
robbed of their liberty, as they rifled others of their

money. Yet is it their great happinesse, that being
glutted, as it were, with an Apolausticke voluptary
life, they haue an easie ouverture made to the contemplatiue
and practick life of Vertue. Who euer
liued more like a Souc'd-gurn-head amongst men,
then Diogenes the Cynick, barrelling himselfe vp in
his tubbe like a Kegge of Sturgion? Yet was the
happinesse of his contented life enuied of the greatest
Monarchs, who hauing made their throats the
through-face and the cullenders of meats & drinkes,
found an ouergorged belly, to be Wits clog, Reasons
sepulcher, Lusts Arsenall, the Magazin of lewd
practices, and the Nurserie of all vices: all which
prouocations are defalted by Debts wants and indigency.
            And lastly, the Lumbards, Vsurers, and Scriueners,
who are the Bedles of Beggars, and are accounted
the Tetters vpon the body politike of the
Common-weale, who turne the Calends and new
Moones, and the Festiuall dayes of quarter-gaudies,
into the Octanes of disaster and Doomes-day reckonings,
when any of these come to Heauen, there
is a wonderment amongst the Angels, and they cry
out with Sr. Gurman of Alfarache, fruta nueua, fruta
nueua, heere is a new kind of fruit start vp, a Pumparadise
vpon a crab-stocke, Lumbards and Scriueners
are become the Popes cannonized and beatified
saints.
            Farewell then, Vlpianus, Modestinus, and other
pettifoggers of the Law, Sollicitours, and molesters
of causes, who account being in debt a kind of
bondage and seruitude. I pittie Senecaes weakenesse,
who blushed to borrow; miserum verbum et dimisso
               
               vultu proferendum, Rogo:
               Th. Ocleue. in. Chaucer. That Poet Laureat, for-faited
his wreath of Bayes and Iuie twine, who made his
praiers to his purse to keep him out of debt, in this
manner.
            
               To you my Purse, and to none other Wight
               Complaine I, for you be my Lady deere:
               I am sorry now that you be light,
               For certes yée now make me heauie chéere,
               Mée were as lefe layd vpon a Béere.
               For which vnto your mercie thus I cry,
               Be heauy againe, or else mote I dye.
            
            
               Now vouchsafe this day, or it be night,
               That I of you the blisfull sound may heere,
               Or see your colour, like the Sunne bright.
               That of yellownesse had neuer Pere,
               
               Ye be my life, ye be my hearts flere;
               Queene of comfort and of good company,
               Be heauy againe, or else mote I dye.
            
            
               Now Purse, that art to me my liues light
               And sauiour as downe in this World here,
               Out of this Towne helpe me by your might,
               Sith that you will not be my Treasure,
               For I am shaue as neere as any frere:
               But I pray vnto your curtesie,
               Be heauy againe, or else mote I die.
            
            Yet wellfare the Prodigall vnthrift, who is magis
promus quam condus, and serues at the Buttry-hatch,
whatsoeuer is in his Binn or his Barrell, and therefore
could neuer indure the complaint of his Purse,
who thus bemoan'd her selfe vnto him.
            
               Materia infoelix, detracta cadauere; forma,
tam varia, vt nec ego me mihi nosse queam.
               
                  
Haud melius fatum, nam pendeo more latronis,
ingenium sic me fueris habere putant.
               Si dederis seruo; seruatum reddo petenti
non nisi at auriculis tracta referre volo.
            
            
               A skinne flayed off, yeelds my materialls,
my forme is various, where my selfe I loose,
               My doome's a fellons death and funerals,
for at a Belt I am hanged by a nooze.
               I doe not filch for mine owne thrift and gaine,
but what you giue, I closely keepe and beare,
               And when you aske, I it restore againe,
yet not, except you plucke me by the eare.
            
            For the Al-te-mael, and foote of the reckoning,
this is the summa summarum: Debemur morti nos
nostra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . So that whilst I liue, I must resolue to liue
in debt, in debt to God, for my being; in debt to
CHRIST, for my well-being; in debt to Gods
sanctifying Spirit, for my new-being: And I will euer
be ready to pawne my life for my Countries liberty,
I will owe obedience to my Parents, Faith
and Loyaltie to my Prince: And when I shall pay
my great debt vnto Nature, I will render my spirit
into the hands of God; bequeath my body to
be deposed in the lap and bosome of the
earth, and cry, Domine, dimitte debita
mea.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   