
      
         
            
            
               
A Conduit of
Comfort. Preached at Sainct Iames before the
Commissioners of the Vnion
of the Realmes. By W. Couper,
Minister of Gods word.
            The Lord is my Comforter.
            Imprinted at London for W. Ferbrand,
and are to be sold at his Shoppe in
Pops-head Allie, neare the
Exchange. 1606.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A CONDVIT
OF COMFORT.
            
               Rom. 8. 28.
               
                  Also we know that all thinges worke together for
the best, to them that loue God; euen to them
who are called according to his purpose.
                  My helpe is in the name of the Lord.
               
            
            
               THis Chapter may be conueniently

                  •
               earmed,This Chapter is a compende of Comfort. 
               A C
                     ••
                  
                  p
                     •
                  nde

                     •
                  f Chr
                     •
                  stian consolation;
for, whereas many kindes
of comfortes, are dispersed
throughout the holy Scriptures,
for the strengthening
of the man of God, some of
euery kin
                  •
                are heere gathered
together in one, and like chosen Flowers picked
out of the Garden of God, are knitt together in one
bunch, and presented to thee, who art a Christian.
            There are two thinges onely which trouble vs in
this life.The summe and deuision of this Chapter. The first, is the remanents of sinne in our
corrupt nature: this was such a matter of griese to
the holy Apostle, that it made him to cry out; O miserable
man that I am,Rom. 7. 24. who shall deliuer me from this body
of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? So despleasant was it to him to liue in that
body, wherein he found the motions of sinne rebelling
against the law of his God. And if the Apostle
accounted this bu
                  •
               then so waightie to him, Alas

how should we complaine▪ and what cause haue we
with Ezcchi
                     •
                  
                to walke weakely in the bitternes
                  •
               e of
our 
                  •
               ou
                  •
               es all our dayes▪
               Esa. 38. 15. in whom the life and power
of that sinning sinne is 
                  •
               arre lesse restrained? Yet
least wee should be so cast downe with the sense
of sinne, that we despeare & perish, being swallowed
vp with griefe▪ the Lord furnisheth vs with many
comforts against it,2. Cor. 49. frō the beginning of this Chap.
to the middest of the 17. verse. The other thing
which may discourage vs, is the manifold troubles
which follow vs in the following of Christ.
            For our Lord is like a Lillie among Thornes,Cant. 2. 2. and at
an Apple tree among the trees of the Forrest: If wee delight
to sit vnder his shadow; and if his Fruite be
sweete in our mouth, wee must be content to walke
toward him through many sharpe afflictions:2. Tim. 2. 3. therefore
are we commaunded not only to suffer afflictions
as the good Souldiers of Iesus Christ, but also to
reioyce in tribulations: and if we cannot attaine to
that perfection,Rom. 5. 3. at the least to count it exceeding
ioy when we fall into diuerse temptations:Iam. 1. 2. Yet because
no chastisement is sweete for the present, it hath
pleased the Lord of his fatherly indulgence, and pitty
toward our weakenesse,Heb. 12. to seyson the cupp of our
bitter griefes, with his sweete comforts; which as he
doth in many other par
                  •
               es of holy Scripture, so specially
from the 17. verse of this Chapter, to the 30.
wherein the Apostle aboundes with consolation;
shewing himsel
                  •
               e a fayth
                  •
               ull Steward in the house of
God, most carefull to lead as it were by the hand,
the weary Son
                  •
               es and Daughters of the liuing God,
into the Lords Wine-seller; there to refresh and stay
vs with the Flagons of his wine,
               Cant. 2. 4. and to comfort vs with
his Apples;
               Cant. 5. 1. to 
                  ••
               rengthen vs with his hid Manna, and
to make vs merry with that Milke and Honny, which
out immortall Husband Iesus Christ, hath proulded

for vs to sustaine vs, if wee faint not through these
manifold tribulations, wherewith we are compassed
in this barren Wildernesse.
            That this is the Apos
                  •
               les purpose, and order of
proceeding in this Chapter, I thinke his conclusion
makes it manifest, which you haue from the 31. verse
to the end; wherein he drawes all that he had sayd,
into a short summe, conteyning the glorious triumph
of a Christian, ouer all his enemies: the triumph
is first set downe generally in the vers. 31. What
shall we say then to these things: If God be with vs, who
can be against vs? thereafter hee partes this generall
in two: there is (would he say) but one of two that
are against vs; either sinne, or affliction: as to sinne,
he triumphes against it, verse 33. and 34. Who will
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
iustifieth, Who shall condemne? It is Christ, who is dead,
or rather who is risen againe, who is also at the right hand
of God, and makes request for vs. As to Affliction, hee
begins his triumph against it, verse 35. Who shall separate
vs from the 
                     •
                  oue of Christ? his answere mountes vp
by a gradation, Will tribulation, or anguish do it? yea,
will death it selfe do it? or that which is much more;
Will Principalities and Powers doe it? no: in all these
thinges we are more then conquerours, through him that loued
vs: Tha
                     •
                  kes therefore be vnto our God, who alwayes
makes vs to triumph in our Lord Iesus Christ.
            
            Now in this verse,2. Cor. 2, 14. as Iacob gaue his sonnes his greatest
blessing in the last roome, so the Apostle giueth
to Christians his greatest comfort in the last roome,
wherof this is the Summe: Our af
                  ••
               ictions are so far
from being preiudicial to our saluation, that by the
contrary, through the Lords marueilous working,
they tend to the aduancment thereof, & he enlarges
the comfort: Not only afflictions, but, all other things
workes for the best together, to them that loue the Lord.
            
            
               
The partes of the Verse are two: the first conteynes
the comfort: the second, a description of the persons
to whom the comfort appertaineth. Now I come
to the wordes.
            
               Also, that is, besides all the comfortes which I
haue giuen to you before, I giue you yet this further,
learning vs,Our troubles are many▪ but our c
                     •
                  mforts are more then our troubles. that albe
                  •
               t our troubles be many, yet
our comforts are more. Many (sayth Dauid) are
the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord deliureth him
out of them all. As if he would say, for euery trouble,
the Lord hath a seuerall deliuerance.Psal. 34. 19. Euery temptation
(sayth the Apostle) hath the owne issue. Euery
horne that riseth against vs to push vs,1. Cor. 10. 13. hath attending
vpon it an hammer to repres
                  •
               e it, (saith the Prophet.)
Esau mourned vpon his father Isaac:
               Zach. 1. 21. although he
was prophane, yet he cried pittifully, Hast 
                     〈◊〉
                   but
one Blessing my Father? But wee (with the holy Apostle)
may blesse our heauenly Father, who comforteth
vs so in all our tribulations; that as the suffe
               
                  •
               ings
of Christ abound in vs, so our consolations abound
through Christ:2. Cor. 1. 5. not one, but manifold are his
blessings; and the storehouse of his con
                  •
               olations, can
neuer be emptied. The Lord our God hath not
dealt 
                  〈◊〉
                nor spa
                  •
               ingly with vs, but a good measure
of co
                  ••
               olatio
                  •
               s, pr
                  •
               ssed downe and running
ouer hath he giuen to vs in our bosome;Luk. 6. 38. his name
be praysed therefore: and yet how little is all this
that we now receiue, in compa
                  ••
               son of these 
                  〈◊〉
               
ioyes of God, that he hath prepared for v
                  •
               ;
the like whereof the eye neuer saw,1. Cor. 2. 9. the eare neuer
heard of, and the heart can not vnderstand: Surely
the greate
                  ••
                measure of comfort that we haue in this
life, is but the earnest penny of that principall, which
shalbe giuen to vs hereafter: If the earne
                  ••
                be so
grea
                  •
               , what shalbe the principall? 
                  〈◊〉
                the 
                  〈◊〉
                fruites
of the Heauenly 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                be so delectable, how shall

the full masse thereof abundantly content vs,Psal. 17. 15. when
we shall behold the face of our God in righteousnes,Psal. 16, 11.
and shalbe satisfied with his image; when we shalbe
filled with the fulnesse of ioy, which is in his presence,
and with those pleasures which are at his right
hand for euer-more?
            
               Wee know. If you ponder the Apostles words,The Priuiledges of a Christian, can not be knowne of them, who do not possesse them. you
shall finde, that by an Emphasis, hee restraynes this
knowledge to the Children of God, excluding
Worldlings and Naturalistes from it. The spiritual
man discerneth all thinges: but hee himselfe is iudged of
no man. A naturall man can not vnderstand the things
that are of God.
               1. Cor. 2. 14. 15. The Gospell is Wisedome indeede;
but Wisedome in a misteri
                     •
                  ; and Wisedome among them
that are perfect.
               1. Cor. 2. 7. Euery Article of our Fayth & 
                  •
               oynt
of Christian doctrine: euery priuilege of a Christian,1. Cor. 2. 6.
is a Misterie: therefore no maruaile that the Gospel
be foolishnesse to the Naturall man, who perisheth:
And this doth draw vs to consider that the excellent
things of Christiani
                  •
               e, can be knowne of none,
but of those that possesseth them. The value, or rather
vanitie of earthly Iewels, hath bin better knowne of
some that neuer inioyed them, then of them who possesse
them: but the Iewels of Gods kingdome such
as Peace, Righteousnesse, ioy in the Holy Ghost, can be
knowne of none but of the Christian onely, who inioyes
them. The new Name,
               Reue. 2. 17. giuen to the Christian,
who can know but hee that hath it? and none can
know what is the sweetnes of hid Manna, except he
taste it: therfore saith the Psalmist,Psal. 34. 8. 
               Taste and consider
how gratious the Lord is: telling you that the graciousnesse
of the Lord, can not be considered by him
who neuer did taste it. If you goe and speake to a
Worldling of inwar
                  •
                Peace, of Spirituall ioy, or of
the priuiledges of a Christian, you shall seeme to him
a Barbarian, or one that speaketh a strange language

which he vnderstandeth not; or if he himselfe speake
of them which he sees learnedly hearing or reading,
yet shal he speake like a bird, vttering voyces which
she vnderstandeth not. As the bruite Beast knoweth
not the excellencie of a mans life, and therefore delighteth
it selfe with Hey and Prouander, seeking
no better; because it knoweth no better. So the Naturall
man knoweth not the excellencie of a Christian,Act. 26. 24.
and therefore disdaines him, counting him a
foole, a madd man, and the ofspring of the world:
he taketh the Dung of the earth in his armes for his
inheritaunce:1. Cor. 4. 13. let him brooke the portion of Esau,
that the fatnesse of the earth may be his dwelling place:
               Gen. 27 39.
let his Wine and his Wheare abound to him,Psal. 4. 7. hee
cares for no more: he knowes not what it is to haue
his Soule made glad with the light of the countenance
of God. This is your miserable condition, O
yee wretched worldlings, yee are cursed with the
curse of the Serpent;Gen. 3. yee creepe as it were on your
bellies, and licke the dust of the eath all the dayes of
your life:Coloss. 3. 1. yee haue not an eye to looke vp to heauen,
nor a heart to seeke those thinges which are
aboue; most fearefull is your estate: wee warne you
of it, but it is the Lord who must deliuer you from it.
            This resolute knowledge is the mother of spirituall
courage,Resolute knowledge is the mother of patience. constancie, and patience: therefore the
Apostle vrgeth it in this place, that the Christian may
be made thereby strong, and patient in tribulation:
and indeed what needes him feare in the euill day;
yea though the Earth should be remooued,Psal. 42. and the
Mountaines fall into the midest of the Sea: who
knoweth that the Lord sitteth on his Throne,Reue. 4. hauing
the world as a glassie Sea before him, gouerning
all the walterings, changes, & euents of things therein,
to the good of them that loue him? Oh that we
had prosited so much in the schoole of Christ all our

dayes, that without doubting, or making any exception,
we could beleeue this which heere the Apostle
layeth for a most sure ground of comfort, that so we
might change all our thoughts and cares into one;
namely, how to grow in the loue of God, that in a
good conscience we might say to the Lord with
Peter, Lord thou knowest I loue thee. And as the rest of
our feares, gr
                  •
               eses, & temptations, which many times
do so compasse vs, that to our iudgements, wee can
see no out-gate:Psal. 37. cast all the burthen of them vpon
the Lord, who careth for vs; and hath giuen vs this
promise for a Pr
                  •
               munire: All comes for the best.
The Souldier with courage entreth into the Battaile,
vnder hope to obtaine the victorie. The Marriner
with boldnesse committeth himselfe to the
stormie Seas, vnder hope of vantage: and euery man
hazardeth in his calling; and yet are they all but vncertanie
venturers, and knowes not the end: But the
Christian,1. Cor. 9. 26. 
               runnes not as vncertaine; but as one sure to obtaine
the Crowne: for he knowes that the God of peace,
shall shortly tread Satan vnder his seete.
               Rom. 16. 20. What then?
shall hee not with courage enter into that battaile,
wherein he is made sure ore euer he fight; that all the
Watriers of Iesus shall become more then Conquerours
through him?
               Rom. 8. 37. If we will onely stand still,
               Exod. 14. 13. we shall see the
saluation of the Lord, Gideon & his 300. sought against
the great Hoste of Midian without feare,Iudg. 7. 19. because
he was sure of victorie. Dauid made haste, and ran to
encoūter with Goliah,
               1. Sam 17. 48. because he was perswaded, the
Lord would deliuer him into his handes. The Israelites
spared not to enter into the Flood of Iorden, because
they saw the Aike of God before them,I
                     •
                  s. 3, 16. deuiding
the waters: And shall only the Christian stand astonished
in his temptations, notwithstanding the word
of God goe, before him to resolue him, that whatsoeuer
fal out, shal worke for the best vnto him? The Lord

increase vs, and make vs abound more and more in
loue of our God; for perfect loue casteth our feare.
The Lord strengthen our Fayth, that through these
mistie cloudes of afflictions, which now compasseth
vs, we may see that comforttable end, which the light
of God hath discouered vnto vs.
            But wee are to beware of the subtile sleightes of
Satan, who to the end, he may spoyle vs of this comfort
in trouble, endeauoreth by many meanes, either
else to quench this light of God in our mindes;Iudge not of Gods working before the end, for that doth greatly impaire our comfort. or
else to darken and obscure it by the precipitation of
our vnbeleeuing heartes, carrying vs headlong to
iudge of the workes of God, by their beginings;
and to measure our selfe in trouble, by our present
estate and condition, not suffering vs to 
                  ••
               rty while
wee see the end: whereof it comes to passe, that our
heartes beeing tossed too and fro with restlesse perturbance,
like trees of the Forrest shaken with the
wind: in our necessities, wee hasten to be our owne
prouisors: in our dangers, wee wilbe our owne deliuerers,
and euery way we become the caruets of
our owne perdition: wee haue so much the more to
beware of this precipitation, because the dearest seruants
of God haue fallen through it, into fearefull
sinnes against the Lord their God, and breed great
vnquietnesse vnto them selues. When Dauid was in
extreame danger in the wildernes of Maon,
               Psal. 116. 11. he said in
his feare, that all men were lyers. O what a blasphemie!
that doing the promises of God, made to him by
Samuel the Lords Prophet, were but lyes: and how
many times thought hee (in his other troubes) that
God had forgot to be mercifull, and had shut vp his
tender mercies in displeasure: But when he saw the
end, then was he compelled to accuse him selfe, to
giue glory to God,Psal. 77. 9. & to say: I should haue been dumbe,
and not opened my mouth,Psal. 39. 9. because thou didest it: I sayd it

in my feare, but now I see,Psal. 116. 11. 
               Precious in the sight of the
Lord, is the death of his Saincts. As this precipitation
made Dauid to stumble & fall, so will it carry vs also
to the like inconuencience too, except we, beware of
it: For if we should looke to Lazarus in the dunghill
full of Byles & Sores,Luk. 16. 19. hauing no comfort, but from
the Dogges, and compare him with the Richman
cloathed in Purple, and fareing daintily euery day▪
                What
can we iudge, but that Lazarus is the most miserable
of the two? yet tarry while the Lord haue ended his
worke, and Lazarus be conueyed to Abrahams bosome,
and the Rich glutton be gone to his place, then
shall the trueth appeare manifestly: All thinges
worke together for the best, so them that loue God. Let vs
learne therefore to measure the euent of thinges, not
by their present condition, but by the prediction of
Gods word. Let vs cleaue to his Promise, and waite
on the Vision which hath his owne time appoynted,Abac. 2. 
                        •
                     . it shall
speake at the last, and shall not lie: though it terry, let vs
waite for it, it shall surely come, and not stay. Let vs goe
into the Sanctuarie of God, and consider the end; there
shall we find and learne,Psal. 37. 37. that there is no peace to the
Wicked, how soeuer they floorish for a time; and that
it can not be, but well with them that feare the Lord.
Marke the vpright man, and behold the lust; for the end
of that man is peace; but the transgressors shalbe destroyed
together, and the end of the Wicked shalbe cut off: So
both in the troubles of the Godly, and prosperitie of
the Wicked, are we bound to suspend our iudgment,
till we see the end.
            
               All thinges worke together.
               Many working instrumentes of contrarie qualities and intentions in the world, yet agrees all in one end. O what a singular priuiledge
hath the Christian, that not onely Afflictions,
but all thinges whatsoeuer workes for the best:
and not onely so, but they worke together for the
best to him. Many working instrumentes is there
in the world, their course is not one, they communicate

no counsels, yea, their intentions often times
are contrary; yet the Lord bringes all their wayes
to this one ende, To the good of them that loue him.
Where 
                  〈◊〉
                they be, in regard of place: what euer
they be, in regard of persons: what euer their purposes
be, how soeuer disagreeing amongst them selues;
yet such is the power and prouidence of that supreame
gouernour our heauenly Father, that All of
them, workes together to the good of them that loues him.
And herein doth his Power and Wisedome appeare
more clearely, then in the tempering of this great
vniuerse, making Elements of so contrary qualities
to meete together, & agree in one pleasant harmony.
For the illustration of this, let vs marke but one example
for all.Gen. 37. 
               Iaacob sendes his sonne Ioseph to Dothan,
to visite his brethren; his brethren castes him
into the Pitt, Reuben relieues him, the Marchants of
Midian buyes him, and selles him againe to Poliphar,
his Mistris accuses him, his Maister condemnes him,
the Butlet (after long ingratitude) recommendes
him, and Phara
                     •
                  h exaltes him. O what Instruments
are heere! and how many handes are about this
one poore man of God: but how doth the Lord
direct them all? yea, beside their owne intention to
further Iosephs aduancement in Aegipt, for his owne
good, and the good of his Church. But now to the
particulars.All the wayes of God, yea euen when to walke stubbornly against hir children, are for the best to them.
            
            There is nothing in the world which workes
not for our weale: All the workes of God, all the
stratagems of Satan, all the imaginations of man,
are for the weale of Gods Children; yea, out of the
most poysonable thinges, as Sinne and Death, doth
the Lord draw healthsome and mediciuall preseruatiues,
to them that loue him.
            
            
               All the wayes of the Lord (sayth Dauid) are Mercie
and Trueth. Marke what he sayth, and make not

thou an exception, where God hath made none:Psal. 25.
               All, none excepted. But be thou strengthened in
Fayth, and giue glory to God,Iob. 13 15. saying with the patient
Iob: Albeit the Lord would slay mee, yet will I
trust in him.
            
            Sometime the Lord walkes in the way of anger,
seeming angie with his Children, and to walke
stubbornly against them, which hath mooued them
to powre out the like of these pittifull Lamentes.
The arrowes of the Almightie are vpon me,
               Iob. 6. 4. (sayth Iob) the
venlme whereof doth drinke vp my sp
                     •
                  rit, and the terrours
of God fight against mee: Thou settes mee vp as a marke
against thee, and makest mee a burden to my selfe. Thy
indignation lyeth vpon mee;
               Psal. 88. 7. 1
                     •
                  
                (sayth Dauid) Yea from my
youth I haue suffered thy terrours, doubting of my life.
For felicitie, I haue had bitter gri
                     •
                  fe,
               Esa. 38. 17. (sayd Exechia) for
the Lord like a Lion, brake all my bones, so that I did chatter
like a Swallow, and mourne like a Done. I am troubled
on euery side, (sayth the Apostle) hauing fightings
without,2. Cor. 7. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   and terrours within: And yet in all these, the
Lord hath a secret way of mercie, wherein he walkes
and workes for the comfort of his Children; which
albeit for the present wee can not perceiue,Iob. 13. 24. and can
see no other, but the Lord hath taken vs for his enemies:
yet in the ende, wee shalbe compelled to acknowledge
it,Psal. 119. and confesse, with Dauid: O good
was it for mee, O Lord! that euer thou correctest mee:
Therefore also sayd the Apostle, The Lord is maruelous
in his Saincts.
               2. Thes. 1. 10 And the Apostle cryed out,
O the deepenesse of the riches hath of the Wisedome and
Knowledge God!Rom. 11. 35. how vnsearchable are his iudgementes,
and his wayes past finding out! His glorie is great
when hee worketh by meanes; his glorie is greate
                  •
               
when he worketh without meanes: but his glorie
shineth most brightly, when he worketh by contraries.
            
               
It was a great worke that hee did open the eyes
of the blind man:The Lord workes by meanes, without meanes, & by contraries: and then is his glory greatest but greater, that he did by application
of Spittle and Clay, such meanes as are meeter
to put out the eyes of the seeing man, then to restore
the sight to a blind man. So he wrought in the
first Creation, causing Light to shine out of Darknes:
So also in the worke of Redemption: for by cursed
Death, hee brought happy Lyfe: by the Crosse, hee
obtayned the Crowne: and through Shame, he went
to Glory: And this same order, the Lord keeps yet
in the worke of our second Creation, which is our
Regeneration;Hos. 6. hee casteth downe, that he may raise
vp; hee killes, & hee makes aliue: hee woundes, and
hee will binde vp: hee woundes, and hee will heale:
hee accuseth his children of sinnes, that so they may
get remisse of their sinnes: hee troubleth their Consciences,
that so he may pacifie them; and in a word,
the meanes which he vseth in working, are contrary
to the worke it selfe, which he intendes to performe
towardes his Children. Hee sent a fearefull Darknesse
on Abraham, but afterward communicated to
him a ioyfull Light: hee wrestled with Iaacob, and
shooke him too and 
                  •
               ro; but in the end blessed him:
hee stroke the Apostle Paul with blindnes, and then
opened his eyes, that he might know the Lord Iesus:
hee frownes for a while vpon his owne,Gen. 43. as Ioseph did
vpon his Brethren; but in the end with a louing affection
shall he imbrace them: hee may seeme angrie
at thy Prayers, as hee put backe the Petition of
the Woman of Canaan;
               Math. 15. 22. but at length, will graunt a
fauourable answere to them: therefore let vs learne
to possesse our soules in patience; let the Lord worke
by any meanes it pleaseth him: It is enough that wee
know, All the wayes of God, yea euen when he dealeth
most hardly with his Children, are mercy, and tendes
to the good of those that loue him.
            
            
               
And as to Satans stratagems, it is also out of doubt,All Satans stratagems, worke for the best to the godly.
that they worke for the best, to them that loue the Lord;
not according to his purpose in deed, but because
the Lord trappeth him in his owne snare. If vnder
the Serpents shape he deceiued Adam, vnder the
Serpents name shall the Lord curse him: and all these
weapons whereby he intendes to destroy the worke
of Gods grace into vs, shall the Lord make forcible
to destroy the workemanship of Satan into vs, I
meane that whole bastard Generation of sinfull afflictions,
which Satan hath begotten vpon our mutable
nature, by a most vnhappy and vnlawfull copulation:
The experience of all the Sainctes of God
will prooue this, that Satan by his restles temptations,
doth destroy him selfe; which is most euident
both in his temptations for sinne, which tend to desperation,
as also in his temptations to sinne which
tend to presumption.How Satans temptations for sinne, doth good to the Christian. Euery accusation of the Conscience
for by-past sinnes, is a Preseruatiue to the
Childe of God, to keepe him from sinne in time to
come; hee reasoning with himselfe after this maner.
If my Enemie doth so disquiet my minde with inward
terrours, for these sinnes which foolishly I did
by his inticement, why shall I harken to him any
more hereafter,Shall I heare and trust the enemie of my soule, that hath deceiued mee so often? and so increase the matter of my
trouble; for what fruite haue I of all the sinnes wherein
I tooke pleasure, but terrour and shame? And shall
I looke that this forbidden Tree, shall tender any
better fruite hereafter? O what a faythlesse traytor is
Satan,Rom, 6. 21. hee inticeth man vnto sinne; and when he hath
done it, he is the first accuser and troubler of man
for sinne. When hee workes in vs, he is a temptor:
when we haue finished his worke, (which is sinne)
hee is an accuser of vs to the iudge; and when he returneth,
he returneth as a troubler and a tormentor
of vs for our sinnes. Stoppe my care therefore, O my

soule from the voyce of this deceitfull enchaunter.
His temptations againe vnto sinne are so many prouocations,
spurring vs forwarde to the throne of
grace: for whilest we finde his restlesse malice pursuing
that sparckle of spirituall life, whereby the
Lord hath quikened vs; and our owne weaknesse
and inhabilitie to resist him: then we are forced with
Israel in Aegipt,
               2. C
                     •
                  r. 20. 12 to sigh for the thraldome; and to cry
with Ioseph, O Lord our God, we wott not what to doe! but
our eyes are turned toward thee. And who feeles not
this? that the grace of feruent Prayer, wherein otherwise
we faint, (our handes being more readie to fall
downe then the handes of Moses, except they be
supported) is greatly wakened, and intended in the
Children of God, by the buffets of Satan: So they
wakened the holy Apostle,2▪ Cor. 12. 7. and stirred him vp to
such feruencie in prayer, that he besought the Lord
thrise, that is, many times, to deliuer him from them:
Yea (which is more) the Lord made them effectuall
meanes to beate downe the power of naturall
pride in him, least hee should haue been exalted out of
measure, through the greatness of his reuelations. A wounderfull
worke, that the Father of Pride, becommeth
against his will, a represser of Pride: and hee who
first procured this Poyson in the nature of Man, is
made (contrary to his intent) an instrument to suppresse
it. Thus the Lord our God out-shooteth
Satan in his owne Bowe:How afflictions are profitable to a Christian. and with the Sword of
Goliah, cutteth off his owne head: His holy name
be praysed therefore for euer.
            Now as concerning outward afflictions, it is true,
that as the Philistines could not vnderstande Samsons
Riddle,Iudg. 14. 14. how Sweete came out of the sower, and meate out
of the eater: So can no Worldlings vnderstand,R
                     •
                  m. 5. 3. that
Tribu
                     •
                  ation bringeth out Patience: and that our light &
momenta
                     ••
                  e afflictions,2. Cor. 4. 17. causeth vnto vs a farre more excellent

and eternall waight of glorie: but the children of
God hath learned by experience,2. Cor. 4. 17. that albeit no visitation
be sweete for the present, yet afterwardes it
bringeth the quiet fruite of righteousnes vnto them,
who are thereby exercised: and that there is more
solide ioy in Suffring rebuke with Christ,Heb. 11. 25. then in all the
pleasures of sinne, which indure but for a season. For as
Moses, the mediator of the old Testament,Exod. 15. 25. by his
prayer, made the bitter Waters of Marah sweete, that
the Israelites might drinke of it; so Iesus the mediator
of the new Testament, by his Passion, hath mittigated
to his children, the bitternes of the Crosse:
and not onely mixed it with ioy, but made it most
profitable.Luke. 15. 12. The for-lorne Sonne concluded, neuer
to returne home to his Father, till he was brought
low by affliction. And many in the Gospell, were
forced by Diseases corporall, to run to Iesus, where
others enioying bodily health, did nothing but disdaine
him. The earth which is not tilled and broken,
beares nothing but Thornes and Briers: the Vines
waxe wilde by time, except they be proyned and
cut: so should our vaine heartes ouergrow with
vilde affections, if the Lord by sanctified trouble, did
not continually manure them. Therefore (sayd Ieremie)
It is good for a man to beare the yoake in his youth.
               Lam. 3. 27.
And Dauid confessed, It was good for him, that hee was
afflicted.
               Psal. 119. Yea (sayth our Sauiour) Euery branch that
beares fruite, my he menly Father purgeth it, that it may
bring forth more fruite.
               Iob. 15. 2. No worke can be made of
Gold and Siluer, without Fire: and Stones are not
meete for Pallace worke, except they be pollished
and squared by hamering: no more is it possible, that
we can be vessels of Honour in the houres of our
God, except first we be fined & melted in the fire of
affliction: neither can we be as liuing Stones, to be
placed in the Wall of the heauenly Ierusalem, except

so long as we are heere, the h
                  •
               nd of God beat from
vs our prou
                  •
                lumpes, by the hammer of Affliction.
As standing Waters pu
                  •••
               sies and rottes,Psal. 55. so the wicked
feares not God (sayth the Psa
                     •
                  nist,) because they
haue no changes. And Moa
                     •
                   keyes is sent, (sayth
the Prophet) because he was not powred from vessell to
vessell,Ier. 48. 11. but hath been at rest euer since 
                     •
                  is youth. And
therefore, O Lord! rather then we should keepe the
old sent of our naturall corruption, and liue in a
carelesse securitie, without the 
                  •
               ea
                  •
               e of thy holy
name, and so become sitfasts in our sinnes; no rather,
O Lord! change thou vs from estate to estate;
waken vs wid
                  •
                the presence of thy hand: purge vi, O
Lord! with thy fire, and chastice vs with thy roddes;
alway Lord, with a protestation, that thou stand to
thy promise made to the Sonnes of Dauid, I will visit
them with my roddes,Psal. 89. if they sinne against mee: but my
mercie wili I neuer take from them. So be it Lord, euen:
So be it.
            The same comfort haue we also against Death;
that now in Christ Iesus,How death also workes for the best to the Christian. it is not a punishment of
our sinnes, but a full accomplishment of the mortification
of sinne, both in soule and body; for by it, all
the conduites of sinne are stopped, the weapons of
vnrighteousnesse broken: and though our bodyes
seeme to be consumed, yet are they but sowen like
graines of Wheate, into the 
                  •
               ielde and husband
                  ••
               e of
the Lord,Death compared to the red sea, wherin the Egyptians were drowned, and the Israelites went through to Canaan. which must die, before they be quickness;
but in the day of haruest, shall spring vp againe most
glorious, and shalbe restored by the same holy Spi
               
                  •••
               e
who now dwel
                  •
               s in them: and as to our
soules they are relieued out of this house of seruitude,
and that they may depart and returne to 
                  〈◊〉
               
from whom they came; therfore haue I compared
Death to the Redde Sea, wherein Phara
                     •
                  h and his
Aegyptians were drowned,Rom. 8. and sanke like a Stone to

the bottome, but the Israelites of God, went through
to their promised Canaan: So shall Death be vnto
you, O miserable Infidels! whose eyes, the God of
this world hath blinded, that no more then the blind
Aegiptians, can you see the light of God, that shineth
in G
                     •
                  shan, that is, his Church; although yee be in
it: to you I say, your Death shalbe a Sea of Gods
vengeuce, wherein yee shalbe drowned, and shall
sinke with your sinnes, heauier then a Milstone about
the necke of your soule, to presse you downe to
the lowest Helle
                  •
               . But as to you, that are the Israelites
of God, yee shall walke through the valley of
Death, and not need to be a
                  •
               rayde, because the Lord
is with you;Psal. 23. 
               His Staffe and his Rodde shall comfort you:
Albert the terrours of Hell, the horrour of the Graue,
the guiltinesse of Sinne, stand about thee like Mountaines,
threatning to ouerwhelme thee; yet shalt
thou go safe through, to the land of thine inheritance;
where, with Moses and Mertam, and all the children
of God, euen the congregation of the first borne:
Thou shalt sing prayses ioyfully to the God of thy saluation.
And thus wee see,Exod. 15. 11. how that not onely our present
Afflictions, but Satan, Sinne, and Death, are made,
to worke for the best, to them that loue the Lord.
            
            Now in the last roome concerning the imaginations
of men against vs,How the plots and imaginations of men worke for the best to the Christians. we shall haue cause to say of
them in the end, as Ioseph sayd to his brethren, You did
it vnto mee for euill, but the Lord turned it vnto good.
The whole Historie of Gods Booke, is as a cloude
of mani
                  •
               old witnesses concurring altogether to confime
this trueth: I content my selle therefore for all,
to bring one. When Dauid was going forward in
the Batta
                  •
               le against Israel with Achish King of Gath,
(vnder whom he soiourned for a while, in the time of
his bani
                  •
               hment) the remanent Princes of the Philistines,
comm
                  •
               unded him to goe backe; and this

they did for the worse to disgrace him, because they
distrusted him: but the Lord turned it to him for the
best: Consider Dauids estate now, and yee shall
see him set betwixt two great extremities. If he had
gone backe of his owne accord, the Phil
                     •
                  stines might
haue blamed him, and han
                  •
               led him as an enemie:
if hee had come forwarde, hee should haue been
guiltie of the blood of Israel, and especially of
S
                     •
                  ul the Lordes annoyted; who was slaine in that
Battaile.
            In this straite, the wit of man can finde him no outgate,
but the prouident mercie of God deliuers him
in such sort, that no occasion of o
                  •
               fence is giuen to
S
                     •
                  ul & his people, because Dauid came not against
them: neither yet could the Philistines condemne him,
because he went backe by their commaunde. So
notable a benefite did Dauid receiue euen by that
same deed, wherein his enemies thought they had
done him notable a shame: and it should learne vs
in our straightest extremities whereunto men can
driue vs, to depende on the Lord; and euer then to
hope for an outgate, when we see none. For such is
thy prouidence, O Lord, whereby in mercy thou
watchest ouer those that loue thee, that these euilles
that are intended against them, by thee, are turned
into good to them.
            And heere we haue further to consider,If this comfort belong to euerie member, much more to the whole body and state of the C
                     •
                  urch. that seeing
this is the priuiledge of euery one that loues the
Lord; much more must it appertaine to the whole
Church of God. It is the portion of Abraham, alber
                  •
               
the Father of the Faythfull, yet one of Gods
Children, I will blesse them that blesse thee, end cursse
them that c
                     •
                  rsie thee: And shall it not belong (thinke
wee) to all the congregation of the first borne? Will
not the Lord be a Wall of fire rounde about Ierusalem,Zach. 2. 5.
                  
and the glory in the middest of her? Will bee not keepe her
as the apple of his eye? Shall not Ierusalem be as a Cuppe
of Poyson vnto all her enemies,Zach. 12. 2. and a heauie Stone?
Yea surely all that lift it vp shall be torne, though all
the people of the earth be gathered togeather against
it; the weapons made against her shall not
prosper; and euery tongne that shall rise against her
in iudgement, shall be condemned. This is the heritage
of the Lordes seruantes, and the portion of
them who loue him. For the Church is that Arke
of God,Gen. 7. 18. which may mount vp higher as the Waters
increaseth; but can not be ouerwhelmed: the
Bush which may burne,Exod. 3. 2. but can not be consumed:
the House built on a Rocke, which may be beaten
with wind and raine,Math. 7. 15. but can not be ouerthrowen.
            The Lord who changeth times and seasons;Enemies of Gods Church, looke to their end, who
takes away Kinges, and settes vp Kinges: hath reprooued
Kinges for his Churches sake: and hee gouerneth
all the Kingdomes of the earth in such sort,
that their rysinges and fallinges, their changes and
mutations, are all dispensed for the good of his
Church: for there is but one of two sentences, wherein
all the Iudges of the world may iudge of themselues,
and see clearely their end. Either that, which
Mordecai sayd: Ester,
                     
                        •
                     ster. 4. 14. Who knowes if for this thou art
come to the Kingdome, that by thee deliueraunce might
come to Gods people?
               Dan. 
                     •
                  , 21. Or else that which Moses in
Gods name sayd to Pharaoh, (the first oppressor
of Gods Church in his adulescencie) I haue set thee
vp to declare my power, because thou exaltest thy selfe
against my people.
            
            How miserable then are they, who when they
are highest, abuseth their power, to hold the people of
God lowest?
            
               
Haue they not cause to feare, least the Lord haue
set them vp against him, as an Obiect of his Power
and Iustice? If we will marke the course of the Lords
proceeding euer since the beginning of the world,
wee shall finde, that as he orders the state of earthly
Power, for the accomplishment of his will concerning
his Church; so euermore a blessing followes
them, who are instruments of her good: and by the
contrary, an inuitable cu
                  •
               ss
                  •
                followes them, who
are the instruments of her euill.
            When the Lord concluded to bring his Church
from Canaan, to so
                  •
               orne in Aegipt, hee sent such a
Famine in Canaan, as compelled them to forsake it:
but made p
                  •
               entie in Aegi
                     •
                  t, by the hand of Ioseph;
whom the Lord sent b
                  •
               fore as a prouisor to his
Church; and by whom Phar
                     •
                  oh was ma
                  •
               e so 
                  •
               auourable
to Iacob, that he was allowed to dwel in G
                     •
                  shen:
but when such time came▪ that he would translate
his Church from Aegipt to Canaan, then hee altered
Pharaohs countenance; hee raysed vp a new King,
which knew not Ioseph, and turned the Aegiptians
heartes away from Israel, so that they vexed Israel,
and caused them to serue by crueltie▪ and all this the
Lord did, to the end his people should become wearie
of Egipt, and inforced by violence to make forward
to Canaan, whereas otherwayes (as it well appeares)
if they had been danted as in the beginning,
they would haue neglected the promised Land, and
contented themselues with Onions and Fleshpots of
Egipt. Thus Pharaoh by his obstinacie bringes on
him selfe, his iust 
                  〈◊〉
                punishment; and the Lord
workes to his people their vndeserued deliuerance:
and afterward, when the sinnes of his people drew to
that ripenesse, that they had caused their dayes to
draw neare,Ez
                     •
                  ch. 22. 4 & were come to their tear
                  •
               e, the Lord
sturred vp the King of Babel,
               
                  
                     •
                  sa, 10. 5. as the Rod of his wrath,

and Staffe of his i
                  •
               dignation, he s
                  •
               nt him to the dissembling
Nation, and gaue him a charge against the
people of his wrath, to take the spoyle and the prey,
and to tread thē vnder 
                  •
               eete like myre in the streets:
and then that the Lord might be auenged of the
sinnes of Israel, he subdued all Kingdomes round
about them vnder the King of Babel, that no sloppe
or impediment should be in their way to hold off
the iudgement from them:Esa. 10. 12. But yet againe, when the
Lord had accomplished all his workes vpon Mount
Sion, and the appoynted time of mercie was come,
and the 70.The gouernement of the wh
                     •
                  le earth altered f
                     •
                  r the Churches sake. yeares of Captiuitie was expired, the
                  •
               
the Lord visited the proude heart of the King of
Ashur; and for his Churches sake, he altered againe
the gouernment of the whole earth, translating the
Empire to the Medes and Persians, that Cyr
                     •
                  s the
Lords annoynted, might performe to his people the
promised deliuerance. All which, should learne vs
in the greatest changes and alterations which can
fall out in the world, to rest assured, that the Lord wil
worke for the good of his Church,Psal. 42. though the earth
should be mooued, and the mountaines fall into the
middest of the Sea; yea though the waters thereof
rage and be troubled, yet there is a Riuer whose
streames shall make glad the Cittie of our good
God, in the midst of it, and therefore it shall not be
mooued: yea they who should be as nursing fathers
& mothers vnto the Church of God, may forsak her,
& become her enemies: but assuredly they shall perish;
and comfort & deliuerance shall appeare vnto
Gods people out of an other place. The Lord for a
while may put the bridle of bondage in the Phi
                     •
                  istines
handes to humble Israel for their sinnes,Esa. 12 1. but it shall
be taken from them: and the day shall come, wherein
we shall with ioy draw Water out of the Welles
of saluation, and prayse the Lord, saying: Though

thou wast angry with mee, thy wrath is turned away, and
thou comfortest mee. Yea, Sion shall cry out, and showt
for ioy, for great is the Holy one of Israel in the midest of
her: and therefore in our lowest humiliations, let
vs answere our aduersaries. Reioyce not against me,
Oh mine enemie, though I fall, I shall rise: and when
I shall sit in darknesse; the Lord is a light vnto mee:
I will beare the wrath of the Lord; because I haue
sinned against him, vntill hee plead my cause, and
execute iudgement for mee, he will bring me foorth
to the light,Mich. 7. 8. and I shall see his righteousnesse: then he
that is mine enemie, shall looke vpon it, and shame
shall couer him who sayd to mee,What is a Christians best. What is the Lord
thy God? Now shall he be trodden vnder, as the
myre in the streete: yea, so let all thine enemies perish,
O Lord!
            
               For the best. This best, is no other thing, but that
precious saluation prepared to be showen vs in the
last time, reserued in the heauens for vs, and wherevnto
we are reserued, by the power of God through
Fayth; whereof we learne that our best estate is not
yet wrought so as it is accomplished; it is only in the
working,
                  
                     •
                  
                  ▪ Pet. 1. 5. sayes the Apostle: and therefore we are
not to looke for it in this life.
            There is a great difference betweene the godly
and the wicked:The wicked man is at his best, when he comes first into the world. the one enioyes their best in this
life: the other, lookes for it, and are walking toward
it: For if it should be demanded, when a wicked man
is at his best? I would answere, his best is euil inough;
but then a wicked man is at the best, when he comes
first into the world; for then his sinnes are fewest, his
iudgement easiest. It had bin therfore good for him,
that the knees had notIob. 3. 11, preuented him, but that he had 
                     •
                  yed
in the bath: for as a Riuer which is smallest at the beginning,
incre
                  •
               seth as it proceedes by the accession
of other Waters into it, till at length it be swallowed

vp into the deepe; so the wicked, the longer he liueth,2. Tim. 3. 13.
               Wax
                     •
                  th euer worse and worse; deceiuing, and being deceiued
(sayth the Apostle.) Proceeding from euill to
worse (sayth Ieremy,)Ier. 9. 3. till at length he be swallowed
vp in that Lake that burneth with Fire and Brimstone.
               Reu. 19. 20.
And this the Apostle expresseth most significantly,
when he compares the wicked man vnto one gathering
a treasure, wherein he heapes vp wrath to himselfe,
against the day of wrath: For euen as the
Worlding, who euery day casteth in a peece of money
in his treasure,Rom. 2. in few yeares multiplies such a
summe, the particulers whereof hee him selfe is not
able to keepe in minde; but when he breakes vp his
Boxe, then he findes in it sundry sortes of Coyne,
whereof he had no remembrance:A warning for impenitent sinners. Euen so is it, and
worse, with thee, O impenitent man, who not onely
euery day, but euery hower and moment of the day,
doest multiply thy transgressions, and defile thy
Conscience, hoording vp into it some dead worke or
other: to what a reckoning thinkest thou, shall
thy sinnes amount in the end, though thou forget
them as thou committest them? Yet the Apostle
telleth thee, that thou hast laid them vp in a treasure,
and not onely so, but with euery sinne, thou hast
gathered a portion of wrath proportionable to thy
sinne, which thou shalt perfectly know in that day
wherein the Lord shall breake vp thy treasure, and
open the booke of thy Conscience,Psal. 50. 1
                     •
                  . and set thy sinnes
in order before thee: then shall Thine owne wickednesse
correct thee,I
                        •
                     r. 2. 19. and thy turninge backe, shall reprooue thee:
then shalt thou know and behold, that it is an euill thing
and a bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God:
And shalt be astonished to see such a multitude of
witnesses standing vp against thee; then shalt thou
perceiue that these sinnes which thou hast cast behind
thy backe,Psal 90. 8. the Lord hath set them in the light of

his countenan
                     •
                  e: and then woe shallbe vnto thee, for
the Lord shall turne thine owne wayes vpon thy
head, when thou hast accomplished the m
                  •
               asure of
thine iniquitie: the Lord shall gi
                  ••
                thee to drinke
of the cuppe which thou hast s
                  •
               lled with thine owne
hand, and shall double his stripes vpon thee, according
to the multitude of thy 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            But as to the Children of God,The Christian is not at his best now: it is in the working only. i
                  •
                you will aske,
When they are at their best? 
                  〈◊〉
               . Pray
                  •
               e
                  •
                be
God, ou
                  •
                wo
                  •
               st is away, our good is 
                  〈…〉
                best
is at hand: as our Sauiour sayd to his Kinsmen, 
                  •
               o
may we say to the Worldlings: Your Ti
                     ••
                   is a
                     ••
                  ay,
but,Ioh. 7. 6. 
               my time is not yet come. W
                  •
               e were at the worst
immediatly before our con
                  •••
               sion; for our whole
life t
                  •
               ll then, was a walking with the children of disobedience
in the brode way that leades to damnation:
and then were wee at the worst, when we had
proceeded furthest in the way of vntighteousnesse,
for then were we furthest from God. Our best began
in the day of our recalling, wherein the Lord by
his Word and holy Spirit, called vpon vs, and made
vs turne our backes vpon Satan, and our face toward
the Lord, and so caused vs part companie with the
children of disobedience; among whom, we had
our conuersation before: then we came home with
the penitent 
                  •
               orlorne to our fathers family; but they
went forward in their sinnes to iudgement: That
was a day of diuision betwixt vs and our sinnes: In
that day (with Israel) we entred into the borders of
Canaan into Gilgall,
               Ios. 5. 9. & there were we circumcised, and
the shame of Aegipt was taken frō vs, e
                  •
               en o
                  •
                sinne,
which is our shame indeed, & which we haue borne
from our mothers wombe: the Lord graunt that we
may keepe it for euer in thanke
                  •
               ull remembrance:
and that we may 
                  ••
               unt it a double shame to re
                  •
               urne
againe to the bondage of Aegipt, to serue the prince

of Darknesse in Bricke and Clay; that is, to haue
fellowship any more with the vnfruitfull workes of
darknesse, but that like the redeemed of the Lord,
wee may Wak
                     •
                  from strength to strength,Psal. 84. 7. till we appeare
before the 
                     •
                  ace o
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ur God in S
                     •
                  on.
            
            Alwayes this difference of estates of the godly
and wicked,This difference of the godly & w
                     ••
                  
                  ked concerning their best, should learn: vs comfort and patience. should learne vs patience: Let vs not
seeke that in the Earth, which our gracious God
in his most holy dispensation hath reserue
                  •
                
               
                  •
               or vs in
the Heauen: Let vs not be like the foolish Iewes,
who loued the place of their Banishment in Babel,
better then their home: For heere we are not at our
best,1. Ioh. 3. now our life is hid with the Lord, and wee know
not yet what we shallbe: but we know when he shall appeare,
we shall be like him:
               Exod. 15. 13. the Lord shall carry vs by his
mercie, and bring vs in his strength to his holy habitation:
Hee shall plant vs in the mountaine of his inheritance,Esa 35. 10.
euen the place which he hath prepared; and
sanctuarie which he hath established: then, Euerlasting

                     〈…〉
                   vpon our hea
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  , and sorrow an
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
shall fl
                     •
                  e away from vs for euer. And now till the
Lord hath accomplished his worke into vs,Psal. 3
                     •
                  . let vs not
faint, because the wicked fl
                     •
                  resh: neither thinke we
haue clensed our handes in vaine, because they prosper,
they are to be pittred rather then enu
                  •
               ed: let
them eate and drinke, and be merry; sure it is, they
will neuer see a blyther day then that which they see
presently: they haue enioyed their Heauen in the
Earth: they haue receiued their consolation in this
life,Luk. 19. and hath gotten their portion in this world. Oh
what tongue can expresse their miserie! And yet as
Samuel mourned for Saul when God rei
                  •
               cted him:How miserable are the wicked, who haue their heauen in the earth.
and Ieremy wept in secret for the pride of his people,
that would not rep
                  •
               n
                  •
                of their sinnes: How can we
but take vp a bitter lamentation for many of you,
whom in this time of Grace, wee see to be strangers

from Grace? We wish from our hearts, yee were not
like the Kinsmen of L
                     •
                  t, who thought he was scorning,Gen. 19.
when hee tolde them of a Iudgement to come;
and therefore for no request would goe with him
out of Sodom, but ta
                  ••
               yed while the fire of the Lords
indignation consumed them. But rather as Sara followed
Abraham from Chaldee to Canam, so you would
take vs by the hand, and goe forward with vs, from
the Helles to the Heauens. But alasse, the lustes of the
flesh, holdes you captiue, your Sinnes hath blinded
you, and the Loue of the world doth bewitche you;
but all of them in th' end, shall deceiue you: For All
the labour vnder the Sunne,Eccles. 
                        •
                     . 17. is but vanitie and vexation of
spirit. When you haue finished your taske, you
shalbe lesse content then yee were at the beginning:
you shalbe as one wakened out of a dreame, who in
his sleepe thought he was a possessor of many things,
but when he awaketh, behold, he hath nothing. Like
that Rich man, who sayd in his securitie, N
                     •
                  w my
soule, thou hast mickle good for many dayes: and euen vppon
the next day, redacted to so great poue
                  •
               tie with
him that despised Lazarus, that he had not so much
as a drop of cold Water to coole his tongue with:
then shall you lament, Wee haue wearied our selues
in the way of iniqui
                  •
               ie, and it did not pro
                  •
               ite vs.
Alasse, how shall I learne you to be wise? The Lord
when he created man, set him in a roome aboue all
his creatures; and now degenerate man, sets euery
Creature in his heart aboue the Lord, O fearefull
ingratitude.Deut. 32. 6. 
               Do you foreward the Lord, yee foolish people
and vnwise? There is nothing which you conceiue to
be good; but when you want it, you are carefull to
seeke it: when you haue it, you are carefull to keepe
it; onely you are carelesse of the Lord Iesus, though
hee be that incomparable Iewell, that brings light in
darkesse, life in death, comfort in trouble, mercie against

al Iudgement▪ you should set him as a Signet
on your heart, as an Ornament on your head; & put
him on as that glorious attire that gets you place to
stand before God. But what paines do you take to
seeke him? what assurance haue you, that yee are in
him? or what mourning doe you make, because yee
are strangers from him? Can yee say that the tenth
of your thoughts & words, are imployed vpon him?
Alas, how long will you wander after vanities, and
followe lyes? Will yee for euer forsake the Fountaine
of lyuing Waters, and digg to your selues broken
Pittes that can holde no Water?Psal. 50. 22, 
               O consider this
(in time) yee that forget the Lord, least he teare you in
pee
                     •
                  es, and there be none to deliuer you.
            
            The last lesson wee obserue in this part of the
verse,All thinges worke to the worst, to the wicked. is this: as All thinges workes for the best, to them
that loue the Lord; so all thinges workes for the worst
to the wicked: there is nothing so cleane', which
they defile not: nothing so excellent, which they
abuse not. Make Saul a King, & Balaam a Prophet,
and Iudas on Apostle, their preferment shalbe their
destruction. If they be in prosperitie, they contemne
God, and their prosperitie becomes their ruine: If
they be in aduersitie, they blaspheme him; and like
raging waues of the Sea, cast out their owne dirt to
their shame. Yea, what speake I of these thinges,
euen their table shalbe a snare to them:
               Psal. 69. 22. Iesus Christ is a
r
                     •
                  cke of offence to them, the Gospel the sauour' of death to
them,
               2. Cor. 5. and their prayer is turned into sinne to them: And
what more excellent thinges then these, as a soule
stomacke turneth most healthsome food into corruption,
so their polluted Conscience, turne Iudgement
into Gall; & the fruite of Righteousnesse, into
Wormewood▪ And all this should prouoke vs to
become good in our persons, or else there is nothing,
were it neuer so good, can be profitable vnto vs.
            
               
               To them that loue God.
               The second part of the vese, is the persons to whō the former comfort belongeth. Heere followes the second
part of the verse, conteyning a description of the persons
to whom this priuiledge appertaineth, together
with a reason of the former comfort: of force All
thinges must worke for the best, (that is to saluation) to
them that loue God, because they are called (namely to
saluation) according to Gods purpose. The strength of
this reason, standes in the necessitie and immutabilitie
of the Purpose of God, more stable then the Decree
of the Medes and Persians; for what he hath
decreed, can not be reuoked, annulled, not impeded.
It is that supreame cause of all, which orders all inferiour
causes and incidents whatsoeuer, in such sort,
that they must worke to the aduancement of that
most high purpose of God.
            This reasō is made clearer in the subsequent verse,Our calling comes from Gods purpose, and ca
                     ••
                  es vs to the determined glory.
where the Apostle lets vs see how the linkes of the
golden Ch
                  •
               ine of our Saluation are knit togeather
inseparable, by the hand of God, that no power in
heauen or earth can sunder them: whereof it comes,
that he that is sure of one, is sure of all. And now let
vs take a short view of it, for confirming the Apostles
reason. Election is the first, and it is the most ancient
Charter of the right of Gods Children to their
fathers inheritaunce. Calling, is the second, and it is
that gift of God whereby wee are cognosced the
Sonnes of God, and our Election secret in it selfe, is
made manifest to our selues and others. Iustification
is the third, and it is that Grace of God, whereby we
are in
                  •
               est in Iesus Christ in such sort, that wee are
made one with him, and partakers of all that is his,
Gl
                     ••
                  ification is the last, and it is that Grace of God
whereby wee shalbe entered in the due time, full
heires to our heauenly Father.
            No King on the earth can produce so auncient a
right to his Crowne, as the Christian, effectually

called. No Man on the earth can be cognosced his
Fathers heire vpon such sufficient warrant, as the
Christian. For in his Regeneration, the Father communicates
to him his Image, his Nature, his Spirit,
whereby he begins from feeling, to call G
                  •
               d 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               ather;
and in life and manners 
                  •
               e
                  •
               embleth him. No
Free-holder so surely infe
                  •
               t in his Landes, hauing so
many confirmations of his right, as hath the 
                  〈◊〉
               
Christian, who vpon his gi
                  ••
               , hath receiued the 
                  ••
               arnest,
the Pledge, the Seale, and the Witnesse o
                  •
                the
great King. And last of all, the Christian shall be
entered to the full fruition of his inheritaunce, with
such ioy and trumph in the glorious assemblie of the
Sainctes, as the like was neuer seene in the world, no
not in Ierusalem that day when Sa
                     •
                  omon sate downe
in his fathers Throne;1 Kin. 1. 4
                     •
                  . then their ioy was so great,
That the earth rang with the 
                     •
                  ound of them: but nothing
comparable to this: and herein standes the excellencie
of a Christian, and certaintie of his saluation.
            For this Cheyne of our Saluation reacheth (as I
may say) from eternitie to eternitie:How the Christian is made sure of his election, and glorification. the beginning
of it (albeit before beginning) is our election: the
end of it (albeit without end) is our glorification:
And these two endes of the Cheyne, the Lord keepes
them sure and secret in his owne hand: but the
two middle linkes of the Cheyne, to wit, Calling and
Iustification, the Lord hath le
                  ••
               en them downe from
the Heauen to the Earth, that wee should g
                  ••
               pe and
apprehend them; that being sure of the two mindle
Linkes, we might also be sure of the two endes; because
the Lord hath knit them inseparably together.
Then thou, who wouldst be comforted with the assurance
of thy saluation, take heed to this, making it
knowen to thine owne Conscience by a holy life,
that God hath called thee, and iustified thee: Gripe
sure, as it were with the one hand, the Linke of Calling,

and with the other hand, the linke of Iustification;By our disposition in this life, each man hath to consider of his euerlisting weale or woe.
then mayst thou know assuredly, Election before
the world is thine; Glorification after this, shall also
be thine. To make this yet more plaine, we are to remember,
this mortal life of ours, is a short interiected
poynt of Time betwixt two Eternities (if so I may
call it:) or like a stepping Stone betwixt two
Gulphes, wherevpon some in feare and trembling,
worke out their saluation; and so steppes from Gods
eternall Election to endlesse glorification. Others
againe, in wantonnesse & carelesse securitie, drinkes
in Iniquitie with greedinesse, and so steppes from
the decree of Reprobation, that most iustly they
procure their euerlasting condemnation: So that
euery man is to consider of his euerlasting weale or
woe by his present disposition in this life. Oh that
we had sanctified memories, to remember this so
long as we are heere. If of weakenesse we fall, we
may rise againe: and if we haue not learned well to
repent in one day, we haue leaue of the Lordes patience
to learne it better an other day: his name be
praysed therefore, who hath opened a doore of mercie
to sinners, and with long suffering, waites for our
repentance. But he who in the day of his transmigration
steppes the wrong s
                  •
               eppe, will neuer get
leaue to amende it. Where the tree falles, it shall lie
there, the wicked dies in their sinnes, and so steppes
downeward to the deepe Pit and Gulph, out of die
which there is no redemption. Let vs therefore be
well aduised before we leape. Let vs fasten our feet
                  •
               
in the borders of that Canaan in time, which shall be
done, if we make our whole life a proceeding from
Election to Glorification, and that through Calling and
Iustification; which two, is inseparably following
them, the Sanctification & Renouation of the whole
man, The Lord make vs wise in time, that we may

consider our course, and thinke of the end wherevnto
it leades vs: for there is but one of two, as M
                     •
                  
                  ses
protested to the Israelites, so do I vnto you: I haue
layde this day life and death before you: the Lord giue
you grace to make choyce of the best.
            But now to returne to the wordes of this description
of the persons, to whom this priuiledge appertayneth,
wee haue these thinges. First, the Purpose
of God: Secondly, his Calling according to his Purpose:
Thirdly, the euident token according to Gods calling,
which is, the loue of God. The Purpose of God, concerning
thy saluatiō, thou mayest know by thy Calling:
and if againe thou wilt try thy, Calling, try it by the
Loue of God, which thou findes in thee. And of these
three, now let vs speake shortly.
            
               According to his Purpose.
               What comfort wee haue in this, that our saluation is grounded on the Lords vnchangeable purpose. Heere you see then
how the Apostle draweth our Calling from the Purpose
of God: and so when he will comfort vs with the
certaintie of our Saluation, hee leades vs out of our
selues, vp to the Rocke that is higher then wee; hee
teacheth vs to cast our Anchor within the Vaile, and
to fasten our Soules vpon that vnchangeable Purpose
of God. It is most expedient for the children of God,
to marke this, because the manifold changes we find
in our selues, do often times interrupt the peace of
our mindes, that the Lord our God hath in such sort
dispensed our Saluation, that the ground thereof is
layd in his owne immutable Purpose; but the markes,
tokens, and pledges, he placeth in them▪ after their
Calling, for whom it was ordayned. The tokens are
changeable, as wee our selues in whom they are, are
changeable, but the ground holdes fast, being layde
in the vnchangeable God, in whom falles no shadow
of alteration▪ and this should comfort vs against
our dayly vicis
                  •
               itudes, changes, defectes, and temporall
desertions: our Fayth may faint, our spirituall

life may languish, our Hope hoouer, our Heartes in
praying fall downe like the infeebled handes of
Moses; yet let vs not despaire, no change in vs, can
alter the Lords vnchangeable Purpose: hee who hath
begun the worke in vs, will also perfect it. Because I
am not changed (sayth the Lord) therefore is it that yee,
               Mal. 3. 6.
               O sonnes of Iacob, are not consumed.
            
            This Purpose of God, is called otherwayes,Our saluation is neither in part nor in the whole ascribed to our merites 
               The will
of God, and, The good pleasure of his will: and it doth
learne vs, to giue to the Lord the prayse which is due
to him, namely the prayse of the whole worke of our
Saluation, should be ascribed to the good pleasure of
his will onely, and not to our foreseene Merites: that
poyson of pride, which Satan powred in our first
Parents, whereby he prouoked them to aspire to be
equall with God, doth yet appeare in their posteritie:
the corrupt heart of man euer ayming at this,
eyther in part or in whole, to haue the prayse of Saluation
ascribed to him, and so would start vp in the
roome of God, vsurping that glory which belongeth
to the Lord, and he will not giue to another: then
the which no sacriledge more fearefull can be committed
against the Lord. O man! content thee
with that which the Lord offers thee, and let that
alone which the Lord reserueth to him selfe. My
Peace (sayth the Lord) I giue vnto you, but my Glorie I
will not giue to an other. It is enough that the saluation
of the Lord is thine; but as to the glorie of Saluation,
let it remaine to the Lord: he is for this, called
The Father of Mercie, because Mercie bredde in
his owne bosome: many causes without himselfe,
found he without himselfe, moouing him to execute
Iustice; but a cause moouing him to shew mercie
found he neuer, saue onely. The good pleasure of his will.
Therefore sayth the Apostle, The Lord hath called
vs with a holy calling, nor according to our workes; but according

to his Purpose and Grace. Surely except the
Lord had reserued Mercie for vs, we had been like
Sodome and Gomorrah, but it hath pleased him in his
Mercie, of the same lumpe of Clay, to make vs vessels
of Honour, whereof he hath made others vessels
of dishonour; and who is able sufficiently to thinke
of so great a benefite? Therefore let the Redeemed
of the Lord,Psal. 
                     •
                  . cry out with a louder voyce then Dauid▪
O Lord! what are wee, that thou hast been so mindfull of
vs? Not vnto vs O Lord! not vnto vs, but vnto thy name,
giue the glory: for thy louing kindnesse, and for thy
truthes sake; for our saluation commeth of God,
that sits vpon the Throne, and of the L
                  ••
               be: to
thee therefore be prayse, and honour, and glorie for
euer and euer.
            
               To them that are called.Two callings
                        •
                      outward, and inward. The Purpose of God, which
is sufficient in it selfe, is made knowne and manifest
to vs by his Calling: for our Calling is a declaration of
the Decree of our Election, and as it were the secret
Voyce of God, bringing from the Heauens to our
Soules, this comfortable message, That wee are the
Sonnes of God. Now we must know, that Gods, Calling
is twofold: one outward, which is common also
to the wicked, and of it speakes our Sauiour, Many
are called, but few are chosen: The other inwarde and
effectuall, proper onely to the Godly, whom the
Lord is purposed to saue. And this will learne vs to
consider of three sortes of men in the world, whereof
some not called at all; some called, but not chosen:
some chosen, and therefore called to be sanctified,
lustified,All the world standes in 3. Cucl
                     •
                  s, & that none are happy, except they who are within the third. and glorified. Yee that will take a right
view of all mankind, shall find them as it were standing
in three Circles; they onely being happy who
are within the third. In the outmost Circle are all
those on whom the Lord hath not vouchsafed so
much as an outward calling; and heere standes the

greatest part of the world. In the middlemost Circle,
which is much narrower, are all those which are
partakers of Gods outward calling by the Word &
Sacraments. And in the third Circle, which is of
smallest compasse (in regard of the rest) stands those,
who beside the outward calling of God by his Word,
are called also inwardly and effectually by his Holy
Spirit. These are Christes litle Flocke, the few chosen,
the communion of Saincts, the Lords third part,
so to speake with Zacharie;
               Zach. 13. 9. the two partes shall be
cut off and die, but the third will thy Lord 
                     •
                  ine as Siluer
and Gold: of them will the Lord say, This is my people:
and they shall say. The Lord is my God. It is a great step
in deed, that wee are brought from the vttermost
Circle vnto the second, but it is not sufficient to
saluation: yea rather they who stand in the second
Circle, hearing the voyce of God call them to repentance,
and yet harden their heartes, and will not
follow the Lord, may looke for a more fearefull condempnation,
then they who are in the vttermost
rancke of all. Waightie are those warninges of our
Sauiour: Sodome and Gomorah shall be in an easier
estate in the day of Iudgement, then they to whom
the Lord hath spoken by his word, but they would
not receiue it: and that double stripes are for him
that knowes his Maisters will, and doth it not. Content
not your selfe therefore with this, that yee are
brought within the compasse of this visible Church,
and made partakers of an outward Calling; that yee
haue been Baptized in the name of Iesus, and communicated
at his holy Table: for not euery one that
sayes Lord, Lord, shall enter in his Kingdome: except
yee find also the Lords inward and effectuall
Calling, that the arme of his Grace hath drawen you
within the compasse of this thirde Circle, and so
brought you to be of his owne third part, and set

you downe among the generation of them that
seekes the face of God, and therefore forsakes their

                  •
               innes, that they may find him.
            Then we see this excellent Priuiledge is restrained
to them who are called inwardly;Of the inward calling. and therfore
let vs yet a litle consider it. This inward Calling, is
the communication of Christs sauing Grace, wherby
the minde is inlightned, the heart purified by Faith,
the affections sanctified, and the whole man reformed:
For as the Lord by his Gospell, offers to his
Children Righteousnesse and Life, so by his holy
Spirit he giues them that iustifiyng Fayth, and openeth
their heart to receiue that Grace which is preached
and proclaymed to them in the Gospell. So
then, this worke of our Calling, is altogeather the
Lord
                  •
               : It is his prayse that he calles thinges which
are not,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 4. and makes them to be. The Lord that commanded
light to shine out of darknesse, hath giuen to
our minds the light of the knowledge of his glorie in
the face of Christ Iesus:Psal. 51. he it is that creates in vs a
new heart, and putteth a new spirit into our bowels,
that we may walke in his Statu
                  •
               es. The Lord promised
that he would call many of the Gentiles to the spirituall
Ierusalem,
               Ezech. 11. 19 to suck out the m
                  ••
               ke of the breastes
of her consolation, & be delighted with the brightnesse
of her glory:Esa. 66. shall I cause others to be fruitfull;
said the Lord, & remaine barrē my selfe? and this his
gracious promise hath he most aboundantly performed
in our dayes this name be p
                  •
               aysed therefore.
            As this worke is onely the Lordes,This inward calling is the 
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  ne of God, choosing 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the world his owne elect. so he restraines
it onely to them who are his owne. The outwarde
Calling is extended to all: but the inwarde Calling
makes a particular separation of a fewe from the remanent:
where it is wonderfull to see the distinction
which is made betwix
                  •
                man & man in all ranckes &
estates, by this effectuall Calling of two Brethren,

as Iacob and Esau: of two Prophets, as Moses and
Balaam: of two Kinges, as Dauid and Saul: of two
Apostles, as Peter and Iudas: of two Theeues, th' one
is taken, th' other reiected: and thus the Arme of
the Grace of God, goes through to euery corner of
the earth, according to his pleasure, culling out by
his Word, from among the remnant of the world,
those who belong to this Election. This Grace of
God, it enters in a Land, and not into euery Cittie: it
enters into a Cit
                  •
               ie, but not into euery Familie: ye
                  •
               ,
and it will enter in a Familie, and yet not come to
euery person of the Familie, of husband and wife, of
maisters and seruants,Whereof it comes, that the Gospell where it is preached, makes a great difference betwixt man and man. of parents and children, of brethren
and sisters; often times the one is taken, the
other is left: It came to Iericho, and weyled out Zacheus:
It came to Philippi, and weyled out Lidia and
the Iaylor: It came to Nero his Court, and not to
him selfe: It entered into the Familie of Narcissus,
and yet past by Narcissus himselfe: It is the worke
of God, and maruellous in our eyes. The Gospell is
preached to many, but the Blessing brought by the
Gospell, lights onely vpon the Children of Grace▪
And hereof aryseth this dayly distinction which we
see betweene man and man: all heare alike, but all
haue not Fayth; all are not edified alike: Some forsake
their sinnes, and followes the Lord: others forsaking
the Lord, walkes on in their sinnes. As the
Lord gouerneth the raine, and makes it fall vpon
one Cittie and not vpon another; so hee dispenseth
the deaw of his Grace, that he makes it drop downe
vpon one heart▪ and not on another. And of this I
would wish,How the heart whereon grace descends▪ not, now in this time of grace, is accu
                     •
                  sed. that so many of you as yet are strangers
from Grace, should learne to know your miserable
state: What a fearefull thing is this, that God hath
conuerted so many in the Cittie wherein thou dwellest,
yea perhaps many in the Familie wherein thou

remaynest, and yet his Grace neuer lighted vpon
thee, but thou art lest in thy old sinnes: Consider it
rightly, I pray you. If the Lord should do to you as
he did to Israel in the dayes of Athab, causing it to
raine for three yeares and a halfe on all the Landes
about you, but not vpon your Land, would you not
conceiue in it a sensible cursse of God vpon you?
O Hypocrite, thou that canst discerne the face of the
Skie, and take vp the tokens of Gods anger in the
creature, canst thou not discerne the state of thine
owne soule, nor apprehend this for a sensible cursse,
that 30. or 40. yeares the showers of sauing and renewing
Grace, hath descended vpon many people
round about thee; but neuer vpon thy selfe? thou
possessest thy old sinnes, and keepest still a hard, a
barren, & a fruitlesse heart. What shall I say to thee?
to cut thee off from all hope of Mercy, and so send
thee to despaire; I haue not that in commission: the
Lord hath his owne time of Calling, and can when
he will, of Saul a persecutor, make Paul a Preacher.
But one thing I can certifie thee of, So long as thou
art in that state, mourne if thou wilt, thou hast much
cause of mourning; for if this effectuall Calling by
Grace, go by thee in time to come, as it hath done is
time bygan, it is an euident declaration, that thou
art a man reserued to wrath, and not ordayned to
mercie.
            Now that this Calling flowing from Election, may
be yet made sure to our consciences for our greater
comfort,In the inw
                     ••
                  d calling, the Lord begins at the illumination of the minde. let vs marke the maner of the Lordes proceeding
into it, and so gather vp some tokens wherby
we may discerne it. As in the first Creation, the
Lord began at the light; so in the second Creation,
he begins at the illumination of the minde: For we
can neither know the Lord to feare and loue him,
neither yet our selues and our sinnes 
                  •
               right, till the

Lord who commaunded light to shine out of darknesse,
shine also into our hearts, to giue vs the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Iesus Christ: and this light of God discouers to vs
so many workes of darknesse, wherewith in ignoraunce
we defiled our consciences, that we begin to
be ashamed of our selues in the sight of God; ye
                  •
               
our very flesh trembleth for feare of his Iudgements,He wor
                     •
                  eth motions of sorrow and contrition in the heart.
and we cry out with Iob: Now my eye hath seene the
Lord, therefore I abhorre my selfe. And thus the Lord
proceedes from the minde to the heart, working into
it such a contrition and godly sorrow,Io
                     •
                  . 42. 6. as causeth
repentance vnto saluation, whereby the heart that
was senselesse before, being dead in sinne and trespasses,
begins now to stirre and moue; as the heart
of Iosiah melted at the reading of the Law: and the
hearts of those penitent Iewes which were pricked at
the sharpe Sermon of Peter: then feeling our selues
vnder death through sinne, we begin to bethinke vs
of the way of life,Act. 24. 25. and to aske (with the Iaylor) What
shall we do, that we may be saued? These motions, meltings,He worketh a respondence and answering of the heart to his calling, & a following of the Lord.
and prickinges of▪ the heart, wrought, in the
elect, by the hearing of Gods word, are the very
pluckes of the hand of God, translating thee out of
Nature into Grace: yet must we not rest heere, for
Felix may tremble while Paul is preaching: and
many for a while, may receaue this word with ioy,
and yet afterward fall away in the time of temptation.
We must therefore consider, if there be in the
heart a respondence and answering vnto the Lord:
So oft as he calleth, doe we present our selues before
him, ready to follow him, saying with Abraham,
Heere I am Lord: and with Samuel (after he knew the
Lords voyce) Speake on Lord, thy seruant heareth th
                     ••
                  .
This answering and following of the Lord, are vndoubted
tokens of effectuall Calling. So oft as the

Lord calleth, the Christian answereth: When thou
saydst,Psal. 27. 
               Seeke yee my 
                     〈◊〉
                  : my heart answered, O Lord!
I will seeke thy 
                     〈◊〉
                  . If the Lord commaund, the Christian
answereth,Psal. 119. 1
                     •
                  . 
               O Lord! quicken mee according to thy
louing kindnesse, that I may apply my heart to keepe thy
Statutes alwayes to the end.
               Psal. 119. 39 I
                  •
                the Lord promise Mercie,
the Christian answers, Stabl
                     •
                  sh O Lord! thy promise
to thy seru
                     •
                  nt, and let it be to mee accordi
                     •
                  g to thy word,
for I beleeu
                     •
                   in thee; but Lord, helpe my vnbeleife. And
thus in the heart of one effectually called, there is a
continuall respondance to the voyce of God, awayting
on the Lord, a walking with him, and a following
of him where euer he goe, If the Lord haue
called thee, sure it is thou wilt follow him; and no
power of the Diuell, of the World, or the Flesh, shall
hold thee backe from him. When Eliah touched
Elisha with his Cloake, he left his Oxen, and came
after him. When Iesus called on Andrew and Peter,
they left their Nets, their Ship, and their Father, and
followed him: When he called on Matthew, he
left all his gainefull trade of the receit of Custome,
and followed him▪ When he called on Mary Magdelen,
she forsooke her sinfull life, and followed him.
Heere is the finest touchstone to try an inward calling.
If the Lord hath called thee, thou wilt follow
him: but if yet thou be wandring after vanity, walking
on in the course of thy sinne, turning thy backe,
and not thy face vnto the Lord; deceaue not thy
selfe, partaker of this heauenly Calling▪ (wherein
s
                  •
               andes the onely comfort of a Christian) hast thou
neuer been.
            
               That loue God.
               The lo
                     ••
                   of God is a sure token of an inward calling, & of the commendation o
                     •
                   Loue. And last of all, to returne to the
wordes againe, the whole effectes of our Inward Calling,
the Apostle compriseth vnder one, to wit, The
loue of God; and that most properly, for Lou
                     •
                  
                compriseth
al the rest v
                  •
               der it. Loue is the cognoscence of

Christs Disciples, sayes our Sauiour. It is the Band of
perfection (sayth the Apostle,) and accomplishment of
the Law. Loue, speakes with the tongue of euery
Vertue, Pittie biddes thee helpe the Indigent, Iustice
biddes thee giue euery man his owne, Mercy biddes
forgiue, Patience biddes suffer: but the voyce of
Christian loue, commaundes all these. Holy loue is the
oldest Daughter of a Iustifying Fayth; that is, the first
affection that Fayth procreateth and sanctifieth,
and whereby she workes in the sanctification of the
rest. L
                     •
                  ue is the strongest & most impe
                  •
               ious affection
in the whole nature of man: all the rest of the
affections giues place vnto it, which we may see,
euen in the man naturall and vnregenerate: Where
Loue is kindled, Feare is banished▪ Couetousnesse
coucheth, Ambition is silent. A Coward i
                  •
               flamed
with Loue, becomes valia
                  •
               t; and a Couetous man is
oft times commaunded by Loue, to be prodigall:
yea, the Proud & ambitious man, who otherwise
giues place to no man, for obtaining that which he
loues, cares not to prostrate his honour to the dust.
If Carnall lou
                     •
                  
                be so forcible, what shall we say of the
Spiritual l
                     •
                  ue how much more doth it draw the whole
powers of soule and body after the Lord: neither
is it possible to do otherwayes; for euery thing returnes
to his owne origin
                  •
               ll, as the waters go downe
to the deepe from whence they came; and Fire
tendes vpward to the owne place and region: euen
so holy L
                     ••
                  e, being a sp
                  •
               rke of the heauenly Fire,
kindled in our heartes by the 
                  •
               oly Ghost, doth rauish
vs alwayes vp
                  •
               ard towar
                  •
               e, the Lord, 
                  •
               rom whom
it came, and 
                  〈◊〉
                vs neuer to rest while we en
                  •
               oy
him: then we begin to l
                  •
               ue, when we begin to Loue.
As no Creature can liue out of the owne 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
so the Soule is but 
                  〈◊〉
                in sinne, 
                  〈…〉
                of
the loue of God. No feare to o
                  ••
               end him, no 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               o

please him, no obedience to his Commandements
can be giuen by the heart that loues him not. 'twere
longsome to speake of all the properties of Loue, we
make choyce of a few, as chiefe tryalles of our Loue.
            
            The fir
                  ••
                propertie o
                  •
                
               L
                     •
                  ue,
               First tryall of Loue. is a bur
                  •
               ing desire to
ob
                  •
               aine that which is b
                  •
               loued; as a Woman that loueth
her Husband vnlargnedly, can not be content
with any Loue token she receiueth from him in his
absence, but longeth more and more till she receiue

                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ So the Soule which is wounded with the
Loue of I
                  •
               sus her immortall Husband, hath a continuall
desire to be at him. I graunt euery 
                  •
               oken sent
from him, bringes comfort; but no contentment till
she enioyes him: whereof comes these, and such like
complaintes,Psal. 42. 1. 
               As the Hart brayes for the riuers of water,
so panteth my soule after thee, O my God: O when shall I
come and appeare before the presence of my God:Psal. 143. my soule
desireth after the Lord,Phil. 1. as the 
                     〈◊〉
                   land: 
                     
                        •
                     or, I would
be diss
                     •
                  lued,Reue. 22. and be with the Lord: therefore come, euen so
come Lord Iesus. But alas, heere are we taken in our
sinnes: 
                  •
               hou sayest thou Louest him; but how is it
then thou longest not to see him, neither desirest to
be with him? yea a small appearance of the day of
death, wherein we should goe 
                  〈◊〉
               ; or mention of
the day of Iudgement, wher
                  •
               in he shall come to vs,
doth terrifie and affright thee. Thou that contents
thee with the gy
                  ••
               s of God, & thinkest not long for
him selfe, thou art 
                  •
               ut like an 
                  〈◊〉
                woman,
who if she possesse the goods of her husband, regards
not, albeit she neuer see 
                  〈◊〉
               .
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . The 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                are blamed,
because they called on the Lord 
                  〈◊〉
                for oyle
& wine, 
                  〈…〉
               
for worshipping the creature 
                  〈…〉
               :
but more 
                  〈…〉
                be condemned
for louing the gilts 
                  〈◊〉
                God, 
                  •
               ore then the giuer.
Let vs therefore beware of this 
                  〈…〉
               .

We may indeed reioyce in all the gifts the Lord hath
giuen vs, & they should thankfully be receiued; but
alwayes with a protestatiō, that no thing giuen vnto
me heere, be allowed vnto me for my portion, and
inheritaunce; and that no contentment euer come
to our hearts, till we get the full fruition of our louing
husband Christ I
                     •
                  sus. If the Loue of men compelled
the Apostle to 
                  •
               ay to the Corinthians, It is not yours,
but you I seeke, how much more should the L
                     •
                  ue of
God compell vs to say to our Lord, It is not thy gift,
but thy selfe, O Lord! I long for: thou art the portion of
my soule: If thou wouldst giue me all the worke
                  •
                of
thine handes, yet shall I neuer haue comfort nor contentment,
except thou giue mee thy selfe: therefore
O thou whom my soule loueth! shew mee where thou feedest,
where thou lyest at 
                     〈◊〉
                  ;Cant. 2. 6. for why should I be as shee that
turnes aside to the flockes of thy companions: Blessed is
he that hungers and thirsteth for thy righteousnesse,
for he shall behold the face of his God, and be filled
with his image; for in his presence is the fulnesse of ioy,
and at his right hand, 
                     〈◊〉
                   pleasures for euermore.
            
            The second tryall of holy Loue,
               Second tryall of loue. is Obedience, and
a care to serue and honour the Lord in all estates
and calli
                  •
               ges. Preachers must be tryed by this rule,
Peter, L
                     •
                  uest thou mee? 
                     •
                  eede my fl
                     •
                  cke. Gouernours
and Counsellers in your callings, must be tryed by
this: Can you say with the godly Gouernour Dauid,
I loue the Lord
                     •
                  
                then will yee also say with him,Psal. 119. 12 
               What
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefites? How shall
I shew to the Lord my Loue? and what shall I do in
my time, for the aduancement of his glory? If you
loue the Lord, then 
                  •
               e 
                  〈◊〉
                Fathers to his Church;
be saythfull a
                  •
               uaun
                  •
               ers of his K
                  •
               ngdome, wise prouisors
to remooue the stu
                  •
               bling blockes that impede
the course of his Gospell: If yee loue the
Lord. Stand vp with Dauid, and say, Doe I not hate

them, O Lord! that hate thee
                     •
                   and do I not earnestly contend
with them that rise vp against thee? Surely I hate
them with vnfaigned hatred, as if they were my vtter
enemies. If yee honour the Lord as Dauid did, the
Lord shall blesse you as he did Dauid. Dauid sware
vnto the Lord, that hee would not rest, till he found out a
place for the Lord, euen an habitation for the mightie God
of Iacob. And the Lord sweares againe to Dauid,
that of the fruite of this body, he should set vpon his Throne
to raigne after him. But if otherwayes there be nothing
in you, but a care to stablish your selues and
your houses, with the neglect of the glory of God;
then remember, the Curs
                  •
               e of Shebna, and not the
Blessing of Eliachim,
               Esa. 22. shall be vpon you: you shall
not be fastened as a Nayle in a sure place, but shall be
rowled and turned away like a Ball: The Lord shall
driue thee from thy station,Psal. 140. 11. and out of thy dwelling
place shall he destroy thee; for the wicked shall not
haue his desire; his thoughtes shall not be performed,
neither shall he be established on the earth,
but euill shall hunt him to destruction: the Lord shal
take thee, and plucke thee out of thy Tabernacle,
and roote thee out of the land of the lyuing: and
generally all of you in your callinges, remember the
value of your Christian Loue must be tryed by the
same touchstone; not by your wordes,Psal. 52, 4. but by your
deedes. If any man loueth mee (sayth Christ) let him
keepe my C
                     •
                  mmandements. But heere also the hypo
               
                  ••
               isie
of this age is clearely discou
                  •
               red: In word
they pretend the loue of God, but in deed, they grieue
him with their transgressions: as the Iewes, they called
him King, and bowed their knees before him,
but spa
                  ••
                in his face, and busseted him: So the bastard
Christians of this age, call Christ, their Lord, and
bow then knee before him, yet they crucifie him,
and tramples his blood of the Couenant vnder their

feete: they kisse him, and betray him with Iudas. It
is but a Scepter of Reede they graunt to him, for
they giue him no commaundement ouer their affections:
wherefore, great is the cont
                  •
               ouersie which
the Lord hath this day with the men of this generation.
            The last tryall of Loue,
               Last tryall of Loue. whereof I will speake at
this time (leauing many other) is, Boun
                     ••
                  fulnesse.
Loue (sayth the Apos
                  ••
               ) is bountifull. Experience
prooues this: euery Louer is a bountifull bestower
on them whom he loues. Yee loue your Backes, and
spares not to cloath them, yea with excessiue Apparrell:
Yee loue your Bellies, and therefore are bountifull
dayly to them in feeding them: Yee loue your
Children, and therefore lettes them want nothing
that is needfull for them: yea, yee loue your Beastes,
and yee bestow largely on them; onely you say you
loue the Lord, but wherein are yee bounti
                  •
               ull toward
him? It is true, that in nothing can a man be 
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  fitable
to the Almightie, sayth Iob. But are there no workes
which should so shine before men, that by them our
heauenly Father may be 
                  〈◊〉
               ? Though workes
can be no merites, yet are they your witnesses: and
what haue you done to stand
                  •
               , when as you are
dead, as witnesses of your 
                  
                     ••
                  ue towardes the Lord?
Though your goodnesse extend not to the Lord,
yet where is your delight that should be in his
Saincts, and excellent ones vpon earth? Where is
your compa
                  •
               sion and loue towarde the Brethren?
Are not the men of this age like the 
                  •
               ig-tree, that
haue faire Leaues, but not so much as one Figge to
giue Iesus in his hung
                  •
               r; hau
                  ••
               g the sh
                     •
                  w of godlin
                     •
                  sse,
but hath de
                     •
                  ied the p
                     •
                  wer there
                     •
                  f,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. 3. 5. rendring wordes
ynough, but no 
                  •
               ruites to adorne the glorious Gospell
of our Lord 
                  〈◊〉
                And so, (if wee might proceed)

                  •
               uery tryall of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , should di
                  •
               coue
                  •
                th'hypocrisie

and bastard Christianitie of the most part of
Professors of this age. But, being forced at this time,
to conclud; I turne mee toward you (whom I know,
hath set your heart
                  •
                to seeke the Lord) that I may
leaue my last blessing behind mee vnto you, beeing
no more purposed to speake to you from this place;
to you, and to euery one of you, who can say with
Pet
                     •
                  r in a sinceere conscience, L
                     •
                  rd thou knowest I loue
the
                     •
                  : to you heere, in the name of God, I ratifie this
priuiledge, All thinges shall wor
                     ••
                   together for the best
vnto you. Faint not therefore (
                  •
                beseech y
                  •
               u) in the
course of Go
                  •
               lynes
                  •
               e, but 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in the grace of our
Lord Iesus Christ st
                     •••
                  fast in the power if his might,
praying to the Lord 
                  〈◊〉
               , that he would
stablish that which he hath wr
                  •
               ught in you, and
bring it forward to p
                  •
               r
                  ••
               ction, And now I commend
you to that grace of God, which is able to buylde
you 
                  •
               arther, and to giue you inheritaunce among
them that are sanct
                  •
               fied in Christ Iesus: to whom,
with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour,
prayse, and glory, for euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   