
      
         
            
            
            ANTI-COTON,
OR
A REFVTATION OF
Cottons Letter Declaratorie: lately
directed to the Queene Regent, for the Apologizing
of the Iesuites doctrine, touching
the killing of KINGS.
            A BOOKE,
In which it is proued that the Iesuites
are guiltie, and were the Authors of the late
execrable Parricide, committed vpon the Person of the
French King, HENRY the fourth,
of happie memorie.
            
            TO WHICH IS ADDED,
A Supplication of the Vniuersitie of Paris, for the
preuenting of the Iesuites opening their Schooles
among them: in which their King-killing
Doctrine is also notably discouered,
and confuted.
            Both translated out of the French, by G. H.
            
            Together with the Translators animaduersions
vpon Cottons Letter.
            LONDON,
Printed by T. S. for Richard Boyle, and are to be
solde at his Shop in the blacke Fryers.
1611.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE QVEENE
REGENT.
            
               May it please your Maiestie:
            
            
               IN as much as it is the common
opinion, as well of your
owne Subiects at home, as of
Strangers abroad, that the Iesuites
were the workers of that
damnable Parricide, which
striking to the heart of our deceased
King (whom God absolue) hath stricken to the
very throate of Fraunce it selfe: and thereupon the
Iesuites complaine that they are wrongfully dealt
withall, and that these reports are spread by their enemies,
thereby to make them odious to the world: I
thought it necessarie to make appeare to your Maiestie
the originall causes of this aspersion cast vpon
them, to the end that if it be found to spring from
sure and vndoubted grounds, your Maiestie may from
thence coniecture, whether it may stand with the

safeguard of the present King, your Sonnes life, to
suffer these holy Fathers to approach neere his person:
as also whether it may be done without holding
your Subiects in continuall alarmes, and de
                  •
               iances
one of another. For if it were forbidden by Moses Law
(as Father Cotton hath obserued, in his Epistle Dedicatorie,)
to seeth the Kid in the milke of the Damme;
much more vnlawfull must it needs be, to deliuer the
Sonne into hands already imbrewed in the bloud of
the Father. I desire not to be beleeued without euident
proofes, and professe withall, that I am no way
transported with passion against their persons, nor
would at all bee drawne to speake or write against
them, if after the maner of other Monkes and Fryers,
they would be content to bound themselues within
the lists of instructing the people, and managing the
affaires of the Church: but that which I now speake,
is not the suggestion of Heretiques, but the testimonie
of your highest Courts of Iustice, the consent of
the greatest part of your Clergie, and among them,
euen of the sacred facultie of Diuinitie, and in a word,
the common vniuersall out-crie of all your people:
all which, notwithstanding, would willingly haue
learned the Arte of forgetfulnesse with Father Aubigny,
and beene content to mourne without speaking
a word, were it not that wee see the murthering
of Princes become a custome, and that if your Maiestie
put not to your hand to stop it betimes, Treason
will shortly stand in the rancke of Christian vertues,
and be helde the fairest and shortest way to
heauen.
            
               If then your Maiestie please for a while to lay aside
your important affaires of State, and to peruse this
ensuing discourse, you shall finde, I doubt not, in
this case the voyce of the people, the voyce of God:
whom I beseech to make the Flower de Lice to flowrish
vpon your Sonnes head, and to poure downe vpon
your Maiestie, all possible happinesse.
            
               Your Maiesties
most humble and
obedient Subiect,
P. D. C▪
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            AN ADVERTISEMENT
TO THE READER.
            
               READER, meruaile not that the Author
of the Worke puts not to his name:
it may iustly be imputed to the iniquitie
of the times, in which it is hard to vtter
the truth, and not thereby to procure
enemies: notwithstanding, if there be any
that will vndertake the answering of it from point to
point (which I hold impossible, such is the cleere euidence
of truth) the Author promiseth to reioyne vpon the
same subiect, and withall to discouer his name: for hee
hath both courage and countenance enough to maintaine
himselfe, and his cause against the malice of his aduersaries,
and the troublers of the publike peace.
         
      
      
         
            
            A
REFVTATION
of Father Cottons declaratorie
Letter to the Queene Regent.
            That the doctrine of the Iesuites approues and maintaines
the Parricide of Kings, and the Rebellion
of Subiects.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  THat we may take all rubs out of
the way, and fully cleere the
doubt in question: it will not
proue vnnecessarie to search
out, and discouer the dependances
of the matter in hand,
till wee arise to the head-spring
it selfe.
               Wee finde it registred in the French History, that
in the yeare 1407. Lewes Duke of Orleans, brother
to King Charles, the sixt of that name, the 22. of

Nouember in the twilight, was slaine by Assassinates,
hired to that purpose by Iohn Duke of Burgundie, who
then contested his right to the Regencie against the
said Duke of Orleans: but the Duke of Burgundie being
no way able to inuent any colourable varnish for
the shifting off the fact, grew bolde to maintaine in
the presence of the Princes of the bloud, and Officers
of the Crowne, that what was acted by his command,
was honourable and iust; and thereupon set a
worke Iohn Petit Doctor of Diuinitie, by birth a Norman,
who publikely defended, that both by the Law
of God and man, as well Canon as Ciuill, it was lawfull
for any man to make away a tyrant, and that by
any meanes; whereupon the matter was so carried,
partly through feare of violence, and partly by
strength of perswasion, that the course of Iustice for
that time was stopt, and nothing done.
               At that time there liued in Paris, Iohn Gerson
Chancellour of the Vniuersitie, a man of no meane
learning, (as that age afforded,) who strongly opposed
himselfe to the fore-mentioned proposition of
Iohn Petit, insomuch that not long after a generall
Councell being held at Constance, Gerson was imployed
thither as Ambassadour from Charles the sixt,
hauing in his instructions expresse charge to propose
that conclusion to the Fathers of the Councell, by
them to be further discussed and censured: where
both parties being indifferently heard what could be
obiected on either side, the Councell in their fifteenth
Session, condemned the opinion of Iohn Petit as hereticall,
the Canon begins thus: Quilibet Tyrannus, &c.
                  
plainely defining that it no way rightfully fals within
the compasse of the Subiects reach, to set vpon the
person of his Soueraigne, vnder pretence of curbing
a Tyrant.
               This erroneous Doctrine hauing beene now a long
time quenched as it were, and buried by the authoritie
of this Councell, is now againe enlightened and
set a foote by the Iesuites, but vnder the cloake and
colour of Religion, that is to say, when it shall be iudged
necessarie to make away a King for the good of
the Church: to this purpose they haue published diuers
discourses, in which they permit and incite the
Subiect to kill his Soueraigne, when his Regall power
degenerates into tyrannie.
               Peter Ribadenera a Spanish Iesuite venteth this doctrine,
in a booke which he hath written of Religion,
and the vertues of a Prince, speaking thus of the parricide
of Iames Clement: For as much as the resolution
which Henry the third tooke vpon him, was the aduise of
a Politician, and a machia
                     •
                  elist, not conformable to the
rules of our Sauiour; behold the reason, that by the iust
iudgement of God, the said Henry was made away by
the hand of a simple young Monke, and dyed by the stroke
of a knife.
               
                  Carolus Scribanius a Flemish Iesuite, who by an
anagrammatisticall inuersion of Letters, cals himselfe,
Clarus Bonars
                     •
                  ius, hath written a Booke, which
he entitules, Amphitheatrum honoris: in which hee
stoutly maintaines the same murthering position. Lib.
1. Cap. 12. where he thus speakes: if it so fall out that a
Denis, or a Machanidas, or an Aristotimus, monsters of

their ages,
                  Dionicij, Machanidas, Aristotimus saeculorum portenta, Galliā opprimant, nemo Pontifex Dionē, Tim
                        •
                     le
                        •
                     ntē, Philopoemē, Helenatum securus animabit? 
                  oppresse Fraunce, shall not the Pope haue power
confidently to encourage against them some Dion, or
Timoleon, or Philopoemen; that is to say, tamers, and
quellers of tyrants? and a little after speaking of a tyrant
wasting Fraunce, What? will no man take armes
against that beast? will no Pope set free that noble Kingdome
from the stroke of the Axe? where obserue, that
he speakes not in that passage of an vsurper,
                     Nullus in hanc belluam miles erit? nullus Pontifex nobilissimū Regnum securi eximat?
                   but of a
lawfull King, who vnlawfully vseth his power.
               
                  Bellarmine in his second Booke against the King
of England, condemneth treason and conspiracie
against Princes, but in such captious and ambiguous
termes, that vpon the matter he seemes to approue it,
and incite men vnto it, by commending the Iesuite
Garnet, that being acquainted with the conspiracie
against the King of England, by the confessions of
the Traytors, he would not disclose it, his words are
these;Cur deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Henricus Garnetus, vir doctrina omnis generis, & vitae sanctitate incomparabilis, vltimo supplicio affectus est, nis
                        •
                      quia reuelare noluit, quod salua conscientia reuelare non potuit? 
                  Wherefore was Henry Garnet, a man vnmatchable
in all kindes of learning and holinesse of life, so punished
in the highest degree, but onely because hee would
not detect that, which with a safe conscience hee could
not? See then here the doctrine of the Iesuites, which
is this: that if a man disclose vnto them his purpose
to kill the King, he ought to conceale it, and rather
suffer the King to be killed, and the kingdome to be
ruined, then to breake vp the seale of confession: an
opinion which the Sorbon holds not, it being of the
Law of God to be loyall to our Soueraigne, and of the
Law of Nations to hold the receiuer of stolne goods
as guiltie as the theefe,L. 13. ff. de off. praes. L. 1. ff de Receptat. and in the case of treason
equally to punish the vndertaker and the concealer,

as being both principall,L. quisquis. §. id quod Cod. ad Leg. Iul. Maiest. an offence of that nature admitting
no accessorie.
               The same Iesuite Bellarmine, and together with
him, the whole troupe of that societie, generally defend,
that the Pope hath power to dispose of kingdomes,
to bestow them as he shall see fit, on whom it
shall please him, and to stir vp the Subiects to rebell
against their Prince, by vnloosing them from their sacred
bond of allegiance: his words are these, in his
sixt Chapter and fift Booke,Papa potest mutare Regna, & vni a
                        •
                     ferre at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      alteri conferre, tanquam summus Princeps spiritualis. 
                  De Pontifice Romano:
The Pope may dispose of Kingdomes, taking them from
one, and giuing them to another, as being the Supreame
Prince Ecclesiasticall: and the Iesuite Gretzer in his
Booke entituled; Vespertilio haeretico-politicus, pag. 159.
We are not such dastards, that we feare openly to affirme,
that the Pope of Rome may,
                  Tam timidi & trepidi nō sumus vt asserere palā vereamur Romanum Pontificem posse si necessitas exigat, subditos Catholicos soluere iuramēto fidelitatis, si Princeps tyrannic
                        •
                      illos tractet. &c. 
                  if necessitie so require, free
his Catholike Subiects from their oath of fidelitie, if their
Soueraigne handle them tyrannically: Nay, the same
man addes in the same place, that if the Pope doe it
discreetly and warily, it is a meritorious worke. Consider
here this new and vnknowne kinde of merit, by
raising sedition, and commanding disloyaltie, from
whence must necessarily issue, attempting vpon the
person of the Prince: for in such a rebellion it is to
be presumed that the Prince will take armes to safeguard
himselfe, and oppose force to force, which
cannot possibly be done, without manifest hazard of
his life.
               
                  Tolet in his first Booke of the instructions of Priests,
                  Excommunicat
                        •
                      subditi non tenentur iuraruen. to fidelitatis.
and 13. Chapter, affirmes, that Subiects are not bound
to keepe vnuiolate their oath of allegiance to an excommunicate

                     person: and againe,Excommunciatus non potest iurisdictionis actū exercere. An excommunicate person
cannot exercise the act of Iurisdiction: which rule
if we admit as true, we must consequently hold that
Henry the third was no King; and he which killed him,
killed no King.
               
                  Mariana, another Spanish Iesuite, hath set forth a
Booke, De Rege & Regis institutione, first printed at
Toledo, by Peter Roderigo, in the yeare 1599. and
and since againe at Mentz, by Balthasar Lippius in the
yeare 1605. in the sixt Chapter of this Booke, after hauing
commended Iames Clement,
                  Cognito à Theologis, quos 
                        •
                     rat 
                        〈◊〉
                      tyrā
                     num iure interi
                     
                        ••
                     i posse. hee addes, that he
had beene instructed by Diuines, with whom he consulted
in that point, that it was lawfull to kill a Tyrant:
and thereupon describing how the young Frier gaue
the deadly blow,Su
                        •
                      sang
                        •
                     ine patriae cōm
                        •
                     nis & gentis libertatē redemptā inter ictus & vulnera impense lae
                        •
                     ebatur, scilicet caes
                        •
                      R
                        •
                     g
                        •
                      ingens sibi nomen fecit, c
                        •
                     ede caedes est expiata ac manibu
                        •
                      G
                        ••
                     isij Duci
                        •
                      per
                        •
                     ide perempti regi
                        •
                      sang
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     e est parentatum. hee cries out; Insignem animi confidentiam,
facinus 
                        ••
                     emorabile! O excellent confidence of
Spirit! O memorable fact! And a little after speaking of
the same murtherer, amidst the blowes, and the wounds
which he receiued, he continued full of comfort, as hauing
redeemed with his bloud, the liberty of his Country,
and hauing 
                        •
                     lai
                        •
                     e the King, he purchased himselfe
great renowne, in expiating the death of the Duke of
Guise, (treacherously made away) by shedding the bloud
Royall; Thus dyed Clement, being about twenty foure
yeares of age, a young man, of nature gentle, not tough of
body, but that a higher power actuated his vigor and courage.
Thus speakes this Iesuite, and in the same Chapter
speaking of a lawfull King, to whom the Subiects
haue passed their oath of allegiance, hee sayes: If he
peruert the Religion of the Land, or if he draw the common
enemie into his Country, he that labouring to satisfie

the publike desire,
                  Si sacra patriae pessumdet, publicos
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hostes in patri
                        •
                     m attrahat, qui voti
                        •
                      publicis fauentes 
                        •
                     um p
                        •
                     rimere tē
                     tarit, ha
                        •
                     d quaquā 
                     
                        •
                     um inique fecisse existima
                        ••
                     . 
                  shall assay to kill him, shall in my iudgement,
not doe vniustly.
               
               In the Chapter following, hee steppes yet one
degree farther; in which hee allowes the poysoning
of a Tyrant as iust and lawfull: notwithstanding it
is worth the while to marke the nicenesse of the man,
and how precisely those of his hayre obserue their
cases of conscience: for fearing least by poysoning
the Tyrants meate or drinke, hee should by that
meanes be enforced to make himselfe away, Mariana brings this remedie: For mine owne part (saith
hee) I would vse this moderation,
                  Ho
                        •
                      tamen temperam
                        •
                     nto vti in hac quidem disputatione licebit si non ipse qui perimitur veneni
                        •
                     
                     ̄ haurire cogitur, quo intimis medullis cōcepto pere
                        •
                     t, sed exterius ab alio adhib
                        •
                     atur, nihil adi
                        ••
                     āte eo qui perimendus est, nimirum cu
                        ••
                      tantavis est ve
                        •
                     eni vt sella eo aut veste delibut
                        •
                      vim inter
                        •
                     iciendi habeat. 
                  not to constraine
him (whom I purpose to doe away) to take the poyson
himselfe, which might presently disperse it selfe
through his inwards, and so kill him, but that some
other lay the poyson so, that hee who is to dye, no way
concurre in the taking of it; which may be done, when
the poyson is so strong, that a chaire, or a garment being
annoynted with it, may worke vpon the body which
sits on the one, or weares the other: which is a cunning, I
finde the Kings of the Moores haue often vsed: Such is the
pietie of the Iesuite, who makes vs Disciples to the
Moores.
               This Booke of Marianaes is commended by Gretzer the Iesuite, in his Vespertilio, alleadged once already,
where hee affirmes, Pag. 160. that Mariana is
traduced, as hauing written that it was lawfull to kill
any Prince who disobeyes the Pope: sithence hee maintaines,
that a lawfull Prince, who disobeyes the Pope,
notwithstanding ought not to be made away by any priuate
man, if sentence be not pronounced against him, or

that it be not demanded by the voyce of the people, or
that the consent of learned men runne not that way:
but note this by the way, that by the definitiue sentence,
he vnderstands the iudgement of the Pope; and
by the approbation of learned men, the aduise of Iesuites:
and touching poyson laid vpon a garment or
chaire, the Iesuite Gretz
                        •
                     r pag. 162. approues simply
Marianaes position, and complaines that Mariana is
vniustly accused, for hauing affirmed, that a tyrant
ought to be poysoned, seeing he maintaines the contrarie,N
                        •
                      tyrannum quidēprimi vel secundi generis 
                        •
                     tiam post iudiciariam contra illum latam sententiam ve
                        •
                     en
                        •
                      licite tolli, si Tyrannus ipsem
                        •
                     t vene
                        •
                     um illud sum
                        •
                     re & sibi applicare debeat. Affirming, that a tyrant cannot lawfully be made
away by poyson if himselfe take it, and apply it to himselfe,
which cannot be auoyded when his meate or drinke
is poysoned, so that labouring to blanch Marianaes opinion,
in the end he fals vpon the same himselfe.
               
                  Clarus Bonars
                        •
                     ius in the 13. chapter of his Amphitheater,
likewise commends this Mariana, both for
the stile and the matter, and wisheth that all ages
should reuerence him, what? (saith he) what age shall
not reuerence those graue and learned writings of Mariana,
Quid? Marian
                        ••
                      grauem & decorā constructionē sonantis ver
                        •••
                      splendor
                        •
                     m narrandi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sublimitatem copiosum ingenium in no
                        •
                      impari materia quae 
                        ••
                     t
                        •
                     s n
                        •
                     n re
                     
                        •
                     erebitur? 
                  his piercing phrase, the neatnesse and loftinesse of
his narrations, the plentifulnesse of his wit, together with
stuffe commendable alike?
               
               And to the end that it may be knowne, that this
position of Mariana is not the opinion of a few Iesuites,
on the fore-head of the Booke you shall finde an
approbation & permission from their generall Aquauiua,
and Stephanus Hoyeda Visitour of their Societie
in the Prouince of Toledo for the Printing of it; in
which grant, these words may farther be obserued:
These Bookes of Mariana haue beene approued by graue

and learned men of the order of Iesuites:
                  Quippe approbat
                        •
                     s prius à viris doctis & gra
                        •
                     ibus ex eodem nostro ordine. Whence it
appeares, that howbeit the generall of their Order
were ouertaken (as Father Cotton would make vs beleeue
((forging Letters as from the said Aquauiua, out
of his owne braine,) yet so it is, that their Visitour and
Doctors who had the examining and censuring of the
whole worke, before it went to the Presse, could not
possibly be ouer-seene. What should wee presse this
point any farther? some foure Moneths before that execrable
Parricide committed vpon the person of the
good King deceased, the very same Consistoricall act,
by which the arrest against Iohn Chastel, and Mounsieur
Thuanus his Historie were censured at Rome, suspended
also another Book of Marianaes, which treates
of 
                     •
                  oynes, not medling at all with this booke which
approues the murdering of Kings, which makes mee
thinke, that his holinesse being busied about other affaires,
was circumuented by the cunning of the Iesuites
(who dominiere at Rome) for otherwise hee
would surely as I thinke, rather haue censured this
Booke, which plainely teacheth murther and parricide.
               This booke of Mariana being first printed at Toledo,
was brought into Fraunce, about eight yeares
since, and shewed (the most seditious passages being
marked out) to his Maiestie, who calling Father
Cotton to him, asked him if hee approued that Doctrine
or no? the Iesuite who bends with all occasions,
and knowes well enough how to fashion himselfe
to the times, replied, that he approued it not; wherevpon
his Maiestie▪ by the aduise of Mounsieur Seruin
                  
his aduocate generall, vrged Cotton to write agains
                     •
                  
it, but he found meanes to excuse himselfe, and auoid
the taske, as well perceiuing that he could not oppose
himselfe against it, but withall hee must of necessitie
oppugne the Generall of their Order, the Prouinciall
of Toledo, and a many of their societie, who had their
fingers in approuing of it; but now when he sees that
through the death of the King, the Iesuites are
growne into a generall distaste, and perceiues himselfe
to be pinched by the Court of Parliament, and
the Sorbon, he hath published an Epistle Dedicatorie,
in which he would seeme forsooth to condemne
Mariana, which hee performes indeede, but in such
mincing gentle termes, that a man may without spectacles
perceiue, he feares to launce too deepe, onely
affirming, that it was the lightnesse of a soaring quill, in
stead of accusing the person of Heresie and perfidious
barbarous treason, and the doctrine of impietie, and
enmitie against God and man: but howbiet hee had
reached home in reprouing Mariana, yet now (as the
Abbot of Boys hath well obserued) the medicine
comes after the Patient is deceased: for had he done
as he ought, hee should then haue put pen to paper
when the King pressed him to it, and not suffered such
an opinion to roote it selfe in the mindes of the people,
which for want of weeding out at the first, at
length growing vp, cost the King his life within a
fewe yeares after: but let vs passe to some other examples.
               There are yet at this day left aliue in Paris aboue
two thousand witnesses, who vpon their credit will

testifie that Iames Clement ordinarily frequented the
Iesuites, and that some of them accompanied him euen
to the towne ditch, when he departed out of Paris
to strike the blow, and some three moneths after,
was published at Paris a Speach of Pope Sixtus, made
in full Consistorie, the 11. of September, 1589. in
which the assassinate of Iames Clement, is paraleld
with the mysteries of the Incarnation, and Resurrection,
and the exploits of Eleazer and Iudith: and after
hauing set on the tenter-hooks the vices of the slaine
King, he addes:Propter h
                        •
                     ec & similia manifesta impoenitenti
                        •
                     e sig
                        •
                     a decreuimus pro ipse non esse celebrad
                        ••
                      exequias. 
                  for these a
                        •
                     d the like manifest tokens of
impenitencie, we decree that his exequies shall not be solemnized.
Concluding with a prayer to God, that it
would please him graciously to accomplish that which mercifully
he had begun: this speach was imprinted at Paris
by Nicholas Neuil, and Rollin Thierry, Printer to the
holy Vnion, together with the approbation of three
Doctors, Boucher, Decreil, Ancelin: not that I can beleeue,
that such impious speaches could drop from
the lips of our holy Father, but rather take it to be a
meere imposture: the Iesuites and other Doctors of
the same feather, hauing forged it, there by to make
the murther allowable, and to incite some other to
the dispatching of the succeeding King.
               At the same time Iohn Guignard a Iesuited Priest,
residing in Paris, at the Colledge of Cleremont, wrote
a Treatise in the praise of Iames Clement, together with
diuers motiues for the making away of the succeeding
King, who last dyed; which since too manifestly appeared
at the arraignment of the said Guignard: for
behold how God wrought, as the commissioners were

busied at the arraignment of Iohn Castel, some of them,
deputed to that purpose, with-drawing themselues to
the Colledge of Cleremont, seased vpon many papers,
among which was found a Booke written by the hand
of the said Guignard, containing many arguments
and reasons to proue that the murther of the King was
iust and lawfull, together with diuers inductions, and
incitements for the making away of his Successour:
some of which I will here set downe, being copied out
of the original, which is yet to be seene among the
Records of the Court: First, that the 
                        •
                     ruell Nero was
slaine by Clement, and the counterfaite Monke dispatched
by the hand of a true Monke. Secondly, that the heroycall
act of Iames Clement, tearmed by Diuines a gift
of the holy Ghost, was iustly commended by Burgoin,
Prior of the Iacobins, Confessour and Martyr, and that by
many reasons, as well at Paris, when he read there vpon
Iudith, as also before the worthy Parliament of Tours.
Thirdly, that the Biarnois, howbeit conuerted to the Catholike
faith should be handled more gently then he deserued,
if he had set on his head a Monasticall Crowne:
that if hee could not be deposed without warre, that
it should be vndertaken against him, and if that might
not be, he must be made away priuately.
               
               The Court hauing perused these papers, and Guignard being put to his answere, freely confessed that
they were written by his owne hands: whereupon the
Court by an arrest executed the 7. of Ianuarie 1595.
declared the said Guignard attainted and conuinced
of high Treason, condemned him to make honourable
amends, naked to his shirt, the halter about his

necke, before the chiefe doore of our Ladies Church
in Paris, and after this to be hung in the Greue, and
his body burnt.
               May it please the Reader to make inquirie if euer
as yet any Iesui
                     •
                  e were heard of, who condemned this
Guignard of treason and disloyaltie: but on the other
side, Rich
                        •
                     ome in his Apologie excuseth him as farre
as he dare, affirming that Guignard discussed the forementioned
propositions onely by way, and in forme
of Scholasticall dispute, and in this wee agree: for I
haue alwaies held it, that to kill a King is the vndoubted
conclusion of the Iesuits diuinitie: which position
if any Iesuite, eyther driuen to it by force of argument,
or drawne to it by shame, any where condemne,
it ariseth eyther from want of discretion, or learning,
or some such ground.
               The which may from thence be made to appear
in that the Iesuites haue ranged Guignard in the catalogue
of their martyrs, which they haue caused to be
Printed at Rome in two formes, in the one of which
Guignard is; in the other he is left out, to the end that
some copies at le
                     •
                  t, might be passable in France without
danger: besides this, the Iesuite Bonarscius, Chap. 8.
of his Amphitheater, extols this Guignard to the skies,
howbeit without naming him, for feare belike of offending
the King, yet openly enough to decipher
him, the words are these: I will passe thee ouer in silence,
O bright Star,
                  Tacebo 
                        •
                     go 
                        〈◊〉
                      clarum coelo terra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sidu
                        •
                      & vltimū nil amplius doliturae domus innocuū piamen
                        •
                     um? Nullu
                        •
                     
                   
                  cleerly shining both in heauen and on
earth, the last expiation of an house, no more capable of
sorrow, no day will euer be able to blot out the tincture
of thy blood: and then presently addes; All Fraunce

will concurre with me in these my vowes:
                  tui sanguinis ve
                        ••
                     igia dies exteret, to
                        •
                     a
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in haec vota m
                        •
                     a ibit Gallia
                        •
                     . which words
are not applyable to any but Guignard, who was a
French Iesuite, and the last that suffered in France.
               Out of the same forge was shaped that detestable
Book, De iusta abdicatione Henrici 3. of the iust degradation
of Henry the third. A Booke whereof the Authour
is not certainely knowne, but onely that it was
printed at Lions, and beares in it forefront, the stampe
of the Iesuites.
               
                  Franciscus Verona Constantinus hath written an Apologie
for Iohn Chastel,
                  Non obstante de
                     
                        •
                     re to supradicti Co
                        •
                     cilij constanti
                        •
                     nsis Priuatis & singulis licitū sit Reges & principes haereseos & Tyrannid
                        •
                     s condē
                     
                        ••
                     atos 
                        •
                     ccid
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     . which out-strips Mariana in
villany: for in his 2. Chap. & 2. Part, he plainly affirmes,
that notwithstanding the decree of the Councell of Constance,
it is lawfull for any priu
                        •
                     te man to murther
Kings and Princes condemned of haeresie and tyrannie.
               
               Now we see by the example of our two last Kings,
that at their pleasure they would make Princes beleeue
(whom they purpose to make away) that they
are Heretiques, or fauourers of them, if they set not
their kingdomes in combustion by ciuil warres, thereby
to giue aduantage to the inuasion of the Spaniard,
or send ayde to their neighbour princes, for feare of
being vndermined by the house of Austria. Thus dealt
the Cyclope in Homer, who finding no reason to misuse
Vlysses and his associates, and yet desirous to feede
vpon them, would needes perswade them that they
were pyrates. In the same Apologie, hee commends
the fact of Iames Clement, as being against a publike
enemie iuridically condemned.
                  Contra hostem publicum & i
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     idice condem
                     
                        •
                     at
                        ••
                     . The same Author in
his third Chapter defends also the fact of Iohn Ch
                        •
                     stel
in this manner; that in striking at Henry of Bourbon,

his intention was not to kill the King, howbeit he called
himselfe King,
                  Vulnerando Hē
                     ricum Borbon
                        •
                     ū, non vol
                        •
                     erit 
                        •••
                     
                     dere aut occidere Reg
                        •
                     m, etiams
                        •
                      se talem dicebat, & in quo praeter imaginem nihil Regij quam quod genere Regio ortus erat. 
                  sithens hee had nothing left but the appearance
of a King, as being of the blood Royall: adding
thereunto, that Henry of Bourbon could not be called
King, no not since his reconcilement to the Catholike
Church.
               
               
                  Emanuel Sa in his Aphorismes of Confessions, at
the word Clericus, affirmes, that the rebellion of a Clarke
against the King is no treason;
                  Cl
                        •
                     rici reb
                        •
                     llio in Regem non est crimen laesae Maiestatis, quia non 
                        •
                     st subditus regi. Summus P
                        •
                     ntifex exemit clericos 
                        •
                      sub
                        •
                     ectio
                        •
                      principum. Non sunt amplius reges, Clericorum superiores▪
                   
                  in as much as he is not subiect
to him. Bellarmine in his 28. Chapter De Clericis,
speaks in a maner the same; the Pope of Rome hath exempted
clarks from subiection to Princes; Kings are now
no more Superiours of Clarkes. Consider here a little
their cunning; if you demand, whether it be lawfull
for a subiect to kil his king, or to rebel against him vnder
pretence of being a tyrant; vpon this demand, the
Iesuites fearing to speake too roughly, and thereby
become odious, in affirming that a Clark may kil the
King; they affirme that Clarks are not subiect to Princes,
and from thence draw this conclusion, that being
so, they cannot be held guilty of treason, since that
he against whom they conspire, is not their Master or
Lord.
               
                  Garnet the Iesuite, with Hall his companion, otherwise
known by the name of Oldcorne, were executed in
England for tampring in the pouder treason: Garnet
being apprehended vpon the deposition of one of the
Conspirators, constantly, and with oathes affirmed
that hee knew nothing of the plot, whereupon the
Commissioners perceiuing that they gained nothing
by threats, bethought themselues of another course,

which was this: they lodged Hall in a chamber next
adioyning to Garnet, and wished the Iaylor to tender
to Garnet all courteous offices, and withall to giue
him notice that his companion Hall was placed in the
next roome, and that there was a little hole in the
middle wall, by meanes of which they might, if they
thought good, enterchange conference, which they
daily did: in the meane time▪ the Iaylor sets some in
a close corner not farre off, to listen what their talke
was, who ouer-hearing them, by that meanes brought
their secrets to light, which they discouered in this
conference betweene themselues, but had before denied
to the Iudges: hereupon Garnet being againe
conuented before the Court, and finding himselfe discouered,
confessed indeed that he vnderstood of the
enterprise, but it was opened to him in confession,
which he could by no meanes vnseale, there were also
produced witnesses, who deposed, that in a sermon
which he made to the Catholiques, he exhorted them
to pray God, that an important and dangerous businesse,
which was then in hand, might haue an happy
successe for the Catholique Church.
               Being then demanded, wherefore hee had so constantly
forsworne that which now proued to be true,
he made answere, that being demanded, if hee were
acquainted with the plot, he told them indeed that he
knew nothing of it, but that hee vnderstood in his
minde this restriction, I knew it not to tell you, and
thereupon was brought to confesse, that he had published
a Booke of Equiuocations, prescribing therein
the meanes to cosen the Iudges by doubtfull answers,

and by ambiguities to auoide the intent of their Interrogatories.
               In behalfe of this venerable Father Garnet, a Iesuite
named Iohn l' Heureux, but disguising his name
in an Hyrogliphicall forme, cals himselfe Andreas Eudaemon-Iohannes
Cydonius, hath very lately written an
Apologie, Printed at Colen, by Iohn Kinke, Anno.
1610. together with the approbation of the Generall
of their Order, Aquauiua, and three other of their
Doctors, where he maintaines it tooth and naile, that
it is lawfull to deceiue the Iudges by Equiuocations,
and also that a priest, for any cause whatsoeuer, though
the life of the King, and the safetie of the state stand to
the stake for it, ought not to reueale any confession.
Vpon the first point behold his words pag. 38.C
                        •
                     m quis n
                        •
                     llis iustis iudicijs in iusvocatur, quianemo tenetur s
                        •
                     
                     ipsum magi
                        ••
                     ratui prodere idque 
                        •
                     ex naturae satis docet apertè & liberè, sin
                        •
                      vlla tergiuersatione negare potest id cuius gra
                        •
                     
                     ti
                        •
                      accersitur quia. semper clausula illa intelligitur, vt t
                        •
                     
                     near dicere. 
                  When
any man is drawne▪ into question vnder an vniust tryall, no
man standing bound to informe against himselfe (as the
law of Nature teacheth vs plainely,) he may peremptorily
and freely denie that for which he is called into question,
without any tergiuersation, because he alwaies vnderstands
this clause, vt tenear dicere. Here note by the
way, that he stiles the iustice of the Kings of England,
exercised vpon the Iesuites, an vniust iurisdiction, as if
they stood not obliged to appeare at their command.
               
                  Martinus Nauarus Aspilcueta a Spaniard by birth,
and trained vp in the 
                     •
                  ame schoole, hath written a
Booke purposely of Equiuocations: in which, pag. 352.
he deliuers this doctrine:In de
                        •
                     r. C. humanae aures. 22. quest. 5. pag. 3
                        •
                     8▪ Franciscus interrogatus a lictoribus homicidam persequen
                        •
                     ib
                        ••
                     , anillac vbi S. Franciscus erat talis homicid
                        •
                      transisset? i
                        ••
                     
                     miss
                        •
                     s manibus intra manicas, respondit hac non transiuisse, sub intelligend
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     acit
                        •
                      contra cō
                     munem intelligentiam non trā
                     siuisse per 
                        〈◊〉
                      manicas. 
                  that it is lawfull for a man to
dissemble his being a Catholike, and in another place
allowes the answere of him as good, who being demanded
by the Seriants if a murtherer whom they pursued,

were not passed that way, thrusting his hand into his
s
                        •
                     eeue, protested that he passed not that way. And in the
end addeth, that the doctrine of Equiuocations, is founded
vpon the memorable example of S. Francis, which is
without all doubt a grosse iniurie offered to the vertue
and piety of that holy Father, by fathering vpon
him the coyning of such kinds of abhominable lying
and cousening.
               The fore-named Andreas Eudemon-Iohannes Cydonius,
in his 40. pag. targets himselfe with the authoritie
of Siluester, in the 5. accusation, & 13. question, where
he thus writes:Quando iuridicè non pr
                        •
                     cedit, v
                        •
                     l quia accusatus e
                        •
                      non est subditus simpliciter, vel in hoc caus
                        •
                     , 
                        ••
                     t qu
                        •
                     cunque alia de caus
                        •
                     , tum lice
                        •
                      m
                        •
                     ndacium sit illicitum, non tamen e
                        •
                     t mortale, quia nec est co
                        •
                     tra debi
                        •
                     um iustitiae, nec in iudicio ve
                        •
                     ro, sed in vsurpato. Immo 
                        ••
                     n erit 
                        •
                     tiam veniale si respond end
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , & vt aiunt sophis
                        •
                     icè, dicat aliquid falsum apud sensum iud
                        ••
                     is & apud su
                        •
                     m verum. Si crimen omni
                     
                        •
                     o occultum est de quo quis in
                     
                        •
                     errogatur, 
                        •
                     um aequiuocatione vti poterit, respōdendo nescio, intelligendo tamen intrae se vt dicam tibi, vel respōdendo non feci, intelligendo intra se nunc non feci.
                   
                  When the Iudge doth not proceede iuridically,
the arraigned being not simply subiect to him, either
in this case, or for some other reason; vpon such termes,
howbeit lying be vnlawfull, yet it is not a mortall sin, it
being not against that which wee owe to Iustice and true
iudgement, but only against that which is vsurped: nay, we
hold it not a veniall sin, if in answering warily, or as they
terme it, sophistically, he vtter somwhat which is false according
to the apprehension of the Iudge, but not in his
owne meaning, for that in this case, sithence he is not his
subiect, he is not bound to speake the truth, according to
his vnderstanding. Here wee must remember, that by
iudgemēt, which is not rightful, but vsurped vpō those
who are not subiects, he means the passing of the iudgmēt
of the ciuil Magistrate vpō Ecclesiastical persons,
& chiefly Iesuites, who are no way subiect to Bishops.
               The Iesuite Tolet in his fourth Booke of the instructions
of Priests, Chap. 91. speakes thus: If the offence
be secret, vpon which thou art demanded, thou maist then
vse Equiuocation, answering, I know it not, with this

reseruation to the selfe, to tell it you; or thou maist answere,
I did it not, vnderstanding, at this present.
               The ancient Ari
                        •
                     n Heretiques chalked out this
way long since to the Iesuites: For Nicephorus in the
eight Booke of his Historie, Chap. 51. saith, that Arrius,
hauing subscribed to the Confession of the
Nicene Councell, had another Confession hid in
his bosome, which himselfe had written, and therevpon
confidently swore to the Emperour, that
hee did beleeue as hee had written, vnderstanding
thereby the writing which hee had wrapt vp in his
bosome. By the vertue of this Doctrine, a man may
denie his Religion, his Faith, his God, and all, telling
the Iudge, that he beleeues not in Iesus Christ, but
with this mentall reseruation, to tell you: and Saint
Peter denying Iesus Christ to the Maide, might well
haue shifted himselfe by the helpe of this Sophistrie,
saying; I know him not, but softly to himselfe, to
tell you.
               
               By this subtiltie the Iesuites haue found a tricke,
how to stirre vp Instruments to assault the sacred persons
of Princes, and withall to instruct them in the
meanes not to disclose their Complices, perswading
them that they may keepe their conscience safe, by
such and such Equiuocations, as to denie, that they
neuer saw it, or heard of it; alwayes prouided, that
they keepe to themselues some secret limitation or
condition, by which they may free themselues
from the imputation of a lye, and not offend their
conscience. This is it which makes the parricides
of Kings, so confidently to forsweare themselues

in the face of the Court, being taught by their
spirituall Guides, that in so doing, if they reserue some
other meaning in their owne mindes, it offends not
God at all.
               And from hence it ensues, that a man cannot fixe
any certain beliefe vpon Father Cottons protestation,
in disauowing Mariana: for who knowes, whether
hee haue not some reseruation locked vp in his
owne breast? or who can tell whether in saying, I
condemne Marianaes bookes, he vnderstands not for not
hauing said enough: or thus, A priuate man cannot lawfully
attempt vpon the life of the Prince, speaking thus to
himselfe, except the Pope giue way to it, or the King
be excommunicated, or be no true King; but such, or
such, is no true King, because he doth this or that, &c.
But to conclude this point, as in contracts heretofore
among the ancient Romaines, their women were
compelled to renounce the Villeian decree, and the
authentique Si qua mulier: In like maner, Father Cotton if he would haue vs giue credit to his declaration,
he ought first to haue renounced his priuiledge of lying,
and vsing Equiuocation; and yet I feare, that in
this very abrenuntiation, hee would haue vsed some
other ambiguitie and craft.
               The other point maintained by Iohn l' Heureux is,
that Henry Garnet and his companions, hauing vnderstood
of the conspiracie against the life of the
King and his whole race, ought not to reueale it, but
keepe it close: he deliuers it in these termes, Pag. 262.
of his Apologie: Adde hereunto the scandall which Catholiques
would conceiue,
                  Adde Catholic
                        •
                     
                     rum scandalum, & off
                        •
                     nsionem si sacerdos idem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      I
                        •
                     suita conscientiae causa cons
                        •
                     ltus id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      interposita confessionis religione q
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      nulla maior inter Catholicos esse potest, consultores su
                        •
                     s detuliss
                        •
                     t? quem enim in posterum in rebus sui
                        •
                      d
                        ••
                     bijs adire, aut cui ampli
                        •
                     s 
                        •
                     idere possint▪ si 
                        •
                     e in sacerdotibus quidem fidem inueniant? Rem sacrosancto confessionis arca
                     
                        •
                     o obsignatam sine immanni sacrilegi
                        •
                      prodi nō potuisse. 
                  if a Priest, a Iesuite, being consulted

in a case of Conscience, and that in the most Religious
act of Confession, (the most sacred mysterie among
Catholiques,) should informe against one, who comes to
craue aduise: for to whom would they afterward addresse
themselues to be resolued in their scruples of Conscience
? or whom can they trust, if they finde no faithfulnesse
in Priests? And in the 290. Pag. A thing sealed
vp with the most holy signet of confession, cannot be
broken vp without detestable sacriledge: his 13. Chapter
entire is spent about this subiect, in which at length
he comes to this passe, to affirme, that there cannot
fall out so great a mischiefe, for the auoiding of which, it
can be lawfull to bewray a Confession. The Iesuit Suares
sayes the same in effect in his Treatise of Pennance:
Disput. 33. sect. 1. num▪ 2. 
                  Yea, though the safety of the whole Common-wealth
should stand vpon it.
               
               Of late dayes since the death of the last King, Father
Fronton Iesuite, though lesse seditious then the
rest, accompanied with another Iesuite, came not
long since to the Kings librarie at the Cordeliers, and
there finding Mounsieur Causabon, the keeper of it, they
fell into dispute with him vpon this Theame, Fronton
maintaining it stoutly, that hee would rather all the
Kings in the world should perish, then that he would
reueale one confession.
               How then? shall a Sonne rather suffer his Father
to be slaine, then acquaint him that such or such lye
in ambushment to kill him, though he haue receiued
it vnder the seale of Confession? or shall a Iesuite rather
suffer his King and Country to swimme in bloud,
then open a confession? Yea, but will some man reply,

the Confessor must be faithfull to his Penitentiaries:
it is true, but I say also, that he ought to be obedient
to his God, and loyall to his Soueraigne: God commanding
vs to be faithfull to him, to whom we haue
solemnly sworne allegiance; and if wee looke into
those sacred Tomes of holy Writ, we shall meet with
store of passages which enioyne vs loyaltie and obedience
to Kings, but not so much as a fillable of enioyning
secrecie after confession: it is a precept which
the Church onely hath put vpon vs, but with this
caution, that it be not preiudiciall to the Commandements
of God, or that vnder the pretence of secrecie
we turne Traytors, and by our perfidious silence
become the cause of the murthering of our
Father or our King, which is, as if I espying one who
hastning to set fire on his brothers or neighbours
house, should quietly suffer him to doe it, because I
had promised to disclose it to no man. No certainly,
wee must beleeue that on the contrarie, rather the
breach of such manner obligations is more praiseworthie
in it selfe, and pleasing to God: for hee that
can preuent a mischiefe, and yet suffers it to passe, was
euer held as guilty. And surely for none other reason
is it, that Homer in the very entrance of his Iliads tels
vs;Homer. Il. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . L. 1. §. 
                        ••
                     cis
                        •
                     rum 
                        •
                     um s
                        •
                     qq. ff. ad. S. C. Syllania. L. 9. §. 1. ff. ad. leg. Cornel. de fals. L. 1. Cod. de falsa mon. L. quisquis Cod. ad leg. Iul. Maiest. Idem in cap. quantae de sentent. excommu. cap. delicto. de sentent. excommuni. In 6. Cano. non inferenda. 23. quest. 3. 
                  that the rage of Achilles against Agamemnon, slew
many valiant men, and gaue their carkasses as prayes to
the dogges. And hence it is, that in the Romaine lawes,
such kinde of patience is as farre forth lyable to punishment,
as the principall acte it selfe: which rule
hath it place and truth, not onely in common crimes,
but most especially in Treason, as the Lawyers teach.

And to the end that no Marianist may obiect that
the founders of those Lawes were Pagans, the Popes
themselues haue euer heretofore maintained the
same to be iust, in like case together with the whole
rabble of Canonists, adding their reason, that there
is a great presumption of secret intelligence and corespondence
betweene the delinquent and the conniuent.
               The Iesuite then, and Cardinall Bellarmine, take
the wrong Pigge by the eare, in labouring to iustifie
Garnet and Oldcorne, as if they had well done, especially
since they might easily haue brought the matter
to light without accusing any body, by writing a
word or two to warne the King to looke to his person,
or to search vnder the Parliament house, and by
that meanes might the conspiracie haue beene discouered,
and not the Confession. The source and
spring of all this mischiefe, ariseth from that vowe
which the Iesuites take to obey their Superiours, that
is to say, the Generals of their Order (who of necessiti
                     •
                  
ought alwayes to be subiect to the King of Spain)
as also to their other Gouernours, and that with a
simple, absolute vnlimited obedience, not such as enquiring
why or wherefore, which themselues call an
obedience not of will onely but of iudgement, or a
blinde obedience. There is a little Pamphlet, entituled,
Regulae societatis Iesu, which themselues haue
caused to be Printed at Lyons Anno 1607▪ by Iiques
Roussin, in the end of which they haue set a long Epistle
of Ignatius Loyola
                        •
                     s, the Spanish souldier, Patron
and founder of their sect: in which the said Ignatius,

Page. 254. layes downe these rules to his Societie:Statuatis vobiscūt ipsi quicquid superi
                        •
                     r praecipit ipsius Dei prae
                     
                        •
                     eptum esse, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vt ad credenda qu
                        ••
                      Catholica fides propo
                        •
                     it toto a
                        •
                     nimo affectu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vestro statim in
                     
                        •
                     umbitis: sic ad 
                        ••
                     faci
                        •
                     nda quaecunq
                        •
                     e superior dix
                        •
                     rit caeco quodam impetu voluntatis parendi c
                        •
                     pidae sine vlla prorsus disposi
                     
                        •
                     ion
                        •
                      feramini.
                  Entertaine the command of your Superiour in the same
sort, as if it were the voyce of Christ: And a little after,
hold this undoubted, that all which your Superiour commands,
is none other then the commandement of God
himselfe, and as in beleeuing those things which the Catholique
Faith proposeth, you are presently carried with
all the strength of your consent: so for the performance
of all those things which your Superiour commands, you
must be carried with a certaine blind imp
                        •
                     tuosity of will,
desirous to obey without farther inquiring why or wherfore.
And to the end that they might not finde any escape
by the word quodā, certaine impetuositie, other
passages there are in the same Epistle, where that
word is forgotten; as where he sayes, perit caelebris illa
obedientiae caecae & simplicitas. For in as much as those
things which the Superiours command, might sometimes
seeme vniust and absurd, this Saint (though
not yet canonized) commands the Iesuites so to captiuate
their vnderstanding, that they sift not the commands
of their Superiours, after the example of
Abraham, who prepared euen to sacrifice his Sonne
at the commandement of God, and of Abbot Iohn,
who watered a dry logge of wood a whole yeare together,
to none other purpose but to exercise his obedience;
and another time put himselfe to the thrusting
downe of a great rocke, which many men together
were not able to moue, not that he held them
things either vsuall or possible, but onely that hee
would not disobey the command of his Superiour.
               This rule then consequently drawes to this issue,

that if the chiefe of the Iesuites Order, among whom
their General is alwaies subiect to the King of Spaine,
command a young French Iesuite any thing whatsoeuer,
he stands bound instantly to put it in execution,
without so much as casting an eye vpon the danger
or difficulty of it, or any way respecting how dammageable
it might proue, either to himselfe or the
state. A Maxime which if it be held as sound, our
Kings shall no longer be secure of their liues, then the
Heads of the Iesuits command their vnderlings nothing
to the contrarie: for it being once commanded,
they are forbidden to enquire if the thing be iust, the
matter giuen them in charge, shall be sure to carrie
the name of the good of the Church, and be grounded
vpon a satisfaction for some enormious sinnes, or
vpon the hope of being crowned Martyr, and obtaining
in heauen some preheminence aboue the ordinarie.
               This vow is also the cause, that the Iesuites are exempt
from the obedience of Bishops, for it had beene
a matter meerely impossible to obey their Superiours
in all things, if the Bishops had had power to correct
or hinder that which the Superiours should command.
               Some one it may be will tell me, that these things
are indeede cleere enough, and the testimonies sufficient
to settle any mans iudgement in discerning the
doctrine of the Iesuites: but whence comes it to
passe (then will some body here obiect) that in some
places they condemne the murthering of Kings, and
maintaine that a subiect ought not to attempt vpon

the person of his Soueraigne, howbeit he be viciously
giuen and abuse his power: to which I answere, that
the opinion indeede of some of the Iesuites is, that a
Subiect ought not to rebell against his Soueraigne,
although he be an Heretique or a Tyrant, before the
sentence of depo
                     •
                  ition be pronounced by the Pope,
or by some of the most learned, among which the
Iesuites euer suppose themselues to stand in the first
degree, and that by expresse declaration the subiect
may be vnloosed from his oath of allegiance, as the
Iesuite Andreas Eudemon-Iohannes teacheth at large,
in the third Chapter of his Apologie for Henry
Garnet: but they also generally hold, that after sentence
of deposition, which is commonly procured at
the instance of these holy Fathers, such or such a King
is no longer King, and that another ought to supply
his roome, and that his Subiects owe him no obedience
at all. This point is at large demonstrated
by the same Iesuite in the same Chapter, and we haue
already made it cleere, that the same is also the doctrine
both of Ballarmine and Gretzer. Nay, France it
selfe hath by experience sensibly felt the smart of it,
to her great misery and grieuance. Now this is it
which I affirme, that whosoeuer maintaines that the
Pope can at his pleasure alter kingdomes, displacing
one, and setting vp another, and exempt the French
from their oath of allegiance, consequently maintaines
that the French in such a case ought to kil their
King: For a man may well thinke that a King from
whom offer is made to snatch away his kingdome, will
take armes to maintaine his right, and labour to

reduce his subiects to loyaltie, who stand armed against
him: now in such a warre, and among so many
rebels, it is impossible that the Prince should not
r
                     •
                  nne in hazard of his life, since that in defending
himselfe he is resolute not to loose his kingdome, but
with the losse of his life: these be the nicities of the Iesuites,
by which they euchant men; they protest solemnly
that they allow not the murdering of Kings,
but herein lyes the craft, that they acknowledge none
for Kings but whom themselues please, and maintaine
that to kill a King, whose gouernment they cannot
brooke, is not to kill a King, but a man (as they say)
masked vnder that title. But yet marke here another
mischiefe, by which they are plainely conuict to be
enemies to our Kings: for the French could neuer yet
be brought to acknowledge, that the Crowne of
Fraunce depended from the holy Sea, or that the
Pope might giue it too, or take it from whom hee
thought fit, and neuer approued the Canon Alius,
which is to be found, Causa. 15. Decret. quest. 6. and
runnes thus in plaine termes:Romanus 
                        〈◊〉
                      Zachari
                        •
                     s s
                        •
                     ilicet Regem Franciscorū non tam pro suis i
                        •
                     iquitatibus, quā pro eo quod tantae p
                        •
                     testat
                        •
                      erat i
                        ••
                     tilis, a regno deposuit▪ &c. Zachary the pope of
Rome deposed the French King, not so much for his witkednesse,
as for that he was vncapable of so great a power;
and h
                        ••
                     th set Pippin, Father to Charles the Emperour
in his roome, and absolued all French men from
their oath of allegiance. By vertue of which Canon the
Pope attributes to himselfe power, to remoue the
Crowne frō the heads of our Kings, without regarding
whether they be Here iques or Catholiques; whether
of a vicious or innocent and vertuous life; but onely if
in his iudgement he finde them vnfit, and some other

more capable of gouernment. Whosoeuer maintaines
this opinion, withall cannot but hold that our
Kings are meerely tit
                     •
                  larie, and that their Crowne is
held at the mercy and disposition of the Pope.
               But the Iesuites hold that the Pope cannot erre in
Doctrine, and thereupon maintaine all and euery article
which he teacheth, whereupon consequently it
followeth, that the Pope in pronouncing this decree,
hath spoken nothing but the truth.
               I will adde hereunto yet one point more touching
the Doctrine of the Iesuites, which may giue vs a fuller
taste of their humour. At Garnets arraignement
among other matters which he confessed, he acknowledged
that Catesby the ring-leader in the Conspiracie,
was touched with remorse of conscience, because
that the time drawing neere for the acting of the plot,
hee considered that in blowing vp the Parliament
house, he must needes together with the Heretiques
make away many innocent Catholiques; now to be
resolued of this scruple, hee addresseth himselfe to
Garnet, and demaunds of him whether in doing to
death the bad, a man might with a safe conscience
make away the good also that were found among
them: Garnet to this question thus replies, that hee
should make no doubt but that he might iustly murtherboth
the one and the other, prouided alwaies
that it aduanced the good of the Catholique Church.
Is it possible to finde a more desperate rage then this,
which to kill Kings spareth not the dearest bloud both
of brothers and friends? And this I report not onely
from the testimonie of Garnets arraignement, but

from the Confession of those Iesuites, who since his
death haue written discourses in his commendation:
for the Apologie of Garnet, composed by Iohn l' Heureux,
and approued by their Generall Aquauiua, and
three other of their Doctours, confirmes the same,
and offers to make good this fact of Garnet, Pag. 103.
and 265. He confesseth moreouer,M
                        ••
                     et omnes qui ad solemnem Ecclesiae c
                        ••
                     
                     tum conuenerant, vt obnix
                        •
                      orent Deum pro felici success
                        •
                      grauissimae cuiusdam rei in causa Catholicorum sub initium comitiorum. that Garnet in his
publique prayers, in a Catholique assembly, exhorted
the people to pray vnto God, for the good successe
of an enterprise, which was to be executed at
the opening of the Parliament: and Pag. 269. he confesseth,
that the Iesuite Hall being apprehended and
put to his answere, that wee were not to iudge by the
vnfortunate successe of the enterprise, of the iustnesse
of the cause. And Pag. 273. he acknowledgeth, that
the rebels hauing taken Armes after the enterprise
was discouered, the Iesuite Hamond in stead of perswading
them to disarme themselues, and lay aside
their weapons taken vp against the King, gaue them
all absolution. Againe, Page. 275. he affirmeth, that
all that were of the powder treason, were men of very
tender and scrupulous consciences. The same Apologie
Page. 310. witnesseth that the Iesuite Garnet in certaine
Letters of his, resoluing to hazard his life for the
Catholique cause, speakes thus; It is necessarie that one
man die for the whole people: applying to his owne person
those speeches which Caiaphas inspired by the holy
Ghost prophesied, touching the redemption of the
world by the death of our Sauiour. At the arraignement
of the same Garnet hee confessed to the Commissioners
deputed to examine him, that hee had

offered sacrifice vnto God, for the hindering of the
enterprise; yet with this restriction, if it were not profitable
for the Catholique Church; hereupon the
Apologie labours to excuse him in these words: Garnet
approued not the fact,
                  Neq
                        •
                     e vero ob 
                        •
                     am re
                        ••
                      factum probabat ed 
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •••
                     bat euentum. 
                  but loued the euent: as if a
man should say, that hee approued not the murdering
of the King, and his family, but yet was glad that
it was done: these are the windings and turnings of
the Iesuites, ready to say and vnsay the same thing in
the same line. These were the heroycall exploits for
which Garnet and Oldcorne, iustly executed as Traytors,
are by B
                        •
                     llarmine stiled by the honourable name
of Martyrs, as also by the Apologist, approued as I
haue said before, by their Generall of their Order,
Aquauiua, and three of their Doctors, and thereupon
they are ranged in the Catalogue of the Iesuites martyrs,
lately printed at Rome: a copie of which is to
be seene and sold, at the Palace in the prisoners Gallerie,
and that since the death of the King. From
hence then let the Kings and Princes of Christendome
duely con
                     •
                  ider, in what suertie they can liue
hereafter, since the people is instructed by these Doctors,
to seeke the glory of Martyrdome in the villanie
of murther; and let all good Catholiques be moued
with iust griefe, that the sac
                     •
                  ed name of Martyr,
so much honoured in the Primitiue Church, should
now a dayes be giuen to bloudy barbarous parricides,
and disloyall Traytors.
               I passe ouer my iudgement to what purpose that distinction
tends, which the Iesuites make of two sorts
of Catholiques, naming the one true Catholiques,

and the other state Catholiques: for these latter, howbeit
they accord in all points of faith with the Romaine
Church, yet are they not esteemed of them
but as demie Catholiques, because forsooth they will
not be as factious as they are, nor approue treason
and rebellion, a distinction which without all peraduenture
will breede a Schisme in the Church of God,
if his mercy preuent it not.
               These accusations which wee haue mustred together
in this Chapter, sufficiently witnesse, that Mar
                        •
                     ana
hath not alone stragled out of the way, but that all
the Iesuites vpon this matter erre with him, whom
Father Cotton cannot iustifie in generall, without giuing
satisfaction to the particular obiections drawne
out of other Bookes, as expresse for the murthering
of Kings as that of Marianaes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Wherein the same thing is further proued by the facts of
the Iesuites.
               
                  WEe haue already sufficiently proued by the
writings of the Iesuites, that it is an opinion
generally currant among them, that
it is lawfull euen for priuate men to kill
Kings: now wee come to demonstrate the same in
their actions, the horrible effects of a detestable Doctrine.
               
                  It may from thence strongly be presumed that this
mischieuous sect first set a foote this Doctrine, in as
much as before their arising, neuer a word was extant
of attempting vpon the persons of Kings, vnder pretence
of Religion: and beholde, since, two of our
Kings successiuely haue miscarried through the impression
of this damnable perswasion; and if some
order be not soone taken against it, it will turne into
custome.
               And we haue found by experience in Fraunce how
pernicious vnto a state this Sect is, which comming
out of Spaine aboue fifty yeares since, yet could not
the sweetnesse of the French ayre, qualifie the fiercenesse
of their spirit vnto this day.A
                        •
                     lian. de ani
                     
                        •
                     alib▪ lib. 12. cap. 23. A very strange
thing, considering that heretofore euen Lyons and
Tygers being brought vnto the Temple of Adonis in
Persia, were no sooner entred there, but that their
rage and naturall cruelty was changed into such a
gentlenesse as is almost incredible.
               And if it pleased the Queene, and my Lords the
Princes of the bloud, to enforme themselues throughly
by my Lords the Presidents, and Counsailors of
the Court, or by the Aduocates and Atturnies generall
of his Maiestie, of the proceedings taken against
the Iesuites, they shall finde this which followeth to
be true, which wee haue drawne out of the arrests of
the said Court, and out of the interrogatories of the
conuicted, which are yet kept in the Office of the same
Court, namely:
               That in the yeare 1594. the 27. of December, Iohn
Chastel, Clarke, brought vp in the Colledge of the

Iesuites, hauing giuen the late King a stab with a knife
in the mouth, thinking to haue giuen it in the breast,
was taken and committed to the Prouost of the Kings
house, and brought into the Bishops prison, where vpon
an interrogatorie, he confessed, that long agoe hee
had purposed in himselfe to giue this stab, and missing of
his purpose, he would doe it yet if he could, being perswa
                        •
                     ded
that it would be for the good of the Catholique, Apostolique,
and Romane Religion. Being brought from
thence to the prison of the Palace, hee was examined
by the chiefe Officers of the Court, to whom he confessed
amongst other things, that whereas he had a conceite
that hee should be forgotten of God, and was certainly
perswaded, he should be damned like Antichrist, of
two euils he made choise to auoid the worst, and being a
damned person, hee had rather his damnation should be
in a fourth degree then in an eight. Being demanded
where he had learned this new Diuinitie, he made answere,
that it was by Philosophie. Being asked whether
he had studied Diuinitie in the Colledge of Iesuites,
he answered: Yea, and that vnder Father Gueret,
with whom he had continued two yeares and a halfe.
Being (further) asked whether hee had euer beene in
the Chamber of Meditations, whether the Iesuites vse
to bring the greatest sinners▪ there to behold the representation
of many Diuels, diuersly and fearefully
shaped (vnder colour of reducing them to a better
life,) thereby to cause a perturbation in their spirits,
and consequently vpon such or such resolutions to
push them forwards to the vndertaking of some
great action. His answere was, that he had often been

in this chamber of meditations. Being demaunded
whether the killing of the King were not matter of
ordinarie discourse amongst those Iesuites, made answere,
that hee had heard them say, It was lawfull to
kill the King, and that he was no member of the Church,
neither ought wee to obey him, nor hold him for (our)▪
King, vntill hee had (receiued) approbation from the
Pope.
               
               During the foresaid proceedings, certaine of the
Lords of the Court, came to the Colledge of Cleremont
where the Iesuites were, and (there) seazed on
the papers of Iohn Guignard, amongst which there
was found a Booke composed in the praise of Iames
Clement, who murthered Henry the third, with exhortation
to doe the like vnto hi
                     •
                   Successour: out of
which Booke diuers clauses haue beene produced in
the first Chapter.
               The Court vpon the sight of these Writings, sent
for Guignard the Author, who when his Writings
were shewed him, and himselfe examined thereupon,
confessed that himselfe had composed them, and
written them with his owne hand. And hereupon
Guignard by sentence of the Court, was (condemned
and) executed the 7. of the Ianuary, 1595.
               By another sentence was Peter Gueret Iesuite, the
Maister of Iohn Chastell condemned to perpetuall banishment,
and all his goods seazed on, and confiscated
vnto the King, with commandement for the erection
of a Pyramis before the great gate of the palace,
with an inscription containing the causes why
the Iesuites were banished. In which (inscription)

they are tearmed Heretiques, troublers of the State,
and corrupters of Youth. Which Pyramis while it
stood, if any did aske why it was set vp, many more
now a dayes are ready to aske why it was puld down.
               A case like vnto this fell out at Melun, the last of
Aprill. 1593. what time the processe criminall was
made against Peter Barriere, who being apprehended
vpon the intelligence of a Fryer, an honest man and
faithfull vnto the King, confessed that he came purposely
vnto the Court to make away the King, and
that he had been incited hereunto by one Varad
                        •
                     
                   by
name, a Iesuite, whose daily practise was to defame
the King with vile speeches. By the perswasion of
this Iesuite, the fore-said Barriere had prepared a knife
to doe the fear. About this he first of all asked the aduise
of A
                        •
                     bry, Curate of S. Andrew des arts, to whom
he made his purpose knowne, and afterwards betooke
himselfe vnto Varade, Rectour of the Colledge of Iesuites,
vpon the fore-said Aubry his aduise. That the
said Varade confirmed him in his resolution to kill the
King, and that by assuring him, that in case hee were
apprehended and put to death, hee should obtaine in
heauen a Crowne of Martyrdome. That the said Varade
adiured him vnto this action, vpon the Sacrament
of Confession, and of Communion of the body
of our Lord.
               It was also obserued, that when the late King was
striken, their Colledges being enuironed with a Guard,
certaine Iesuits cried out at the doores of their Chambers;
Surge frater, agitur de Religione: Vp brother, vp,
our Religion is in danger.
               
               
                  Besides this, in the Colledge of the said Iesuites,
there were found diuers theames giuen by the Maisters
of formes, the argument of all which was an exhortation
to set vpon Tyrants, and to suffer death constantly.
               
               It was also certified to betrue, that after Paris was
reduced vnder the Kings obedience, the Maisters of
the Colledge of Iesuites, forbad their Schollers to
pray for the King.
               Else-where informations haue beene made against
Alexander Hayes, Iesuite, borne in Scotland, who
taught openly that it was good to dissemble, and for
a while to performe obedience vnto the King in shew.
He was wont to say, Iesuita est omnis homo. This Iesuite
was further charged to haue said, and that often,
that he wished if the King came along by their Colledge,
he might fall out of the window vpon him, and
breake his neck. For which cause by the sentence of
the Court, giuen the 10. of Ianuarie, 1595. the saide
Hayes was condemned to perpetuall banishment; and
withall hee was wished to keepe himselfe out of the
Country, vpon paine of being hanged, without any
other forme of arraignement. Moreouer, the said Fathers
haue beene often conuicted for corrupting children,
that so they might sende them into strange
Countries against the will of their Fathers. As for instance,
in the yeare 1595. the 10. of Aprill, a Iesuite, by
name Iohn the Fayre, of the Colledge of Cleremont,
did honourable pennance in the great Chamber, during
the Audience, bare-head and bare-foote in a
white sheete, holding in his hand a burning Torch of

two pound weight of waxe, and sentenced to professe
and declare vpon his knees, that rashly and vnaduisedly
hee practised to seduce Francis Veron, Clarke,
Student in the Vniuersitie of Poictiers, to send him
fo
                     •
                  th of the kingdome. And further, that he had indiscreetly
reserued and kept with him Lectures and
Treatises made by some of the said Societie, which
hee receiued and wrote out with his owne hand in the
said Colledge of Cleremont, containing many damnable
instructions to attempt against Princes, and
(withall) approbation and commendation of that detestable
parricide, committed vpon the person of our
King of most blessed memorie, Henry the third. These
are things so common and so well knowne, that who
so should faine ought, or adde vnto it, cannot haue
any hope to belieued; and he must needes be accounted
impudent that should denie them, the whole bodie
of the Court being witnesses of the truth of them.
Besides all this, there is no man that hath not by experience
found, that the Iesuites were neuer other
then sworne enemies vnto our Kings. For during
these last troubles, which endeuoured to transport
France into Spaine, there were many of the Religious
persons found, and that of all Orders, to ha
                     •
                  e
taken the Kings part, but there was no one Iesuite
found to be for him, vntil such time as for their crimes
they were driuen out of the kingdome.
               In a word, the late King our Prince, who neuer was
afraide in warre, (yet) was afraide of these men in
peace. My Lord the Duke of Sully can testifie this,
who perswading the King not to recall the Iesuites,

was answered by him, Giue mee then securitie for my
life.
               
               And if we step forth of the kingdome of France, we
shall finde many examples of the like. In all the conspiracies
against Elizabeth the late Queene of England,
it was alwayes found that some Iesuites or other
had the tempering of them: and yet for all this they
cease not to martyr her with wrongfull speeches after
her death, prouoked hereunto by this, that shee
suffered them not to murther her. Bonars
                        •
                     ius the
Iesuite, in the first Booke of his Amphitheater, and
fourth Chapter, cals her, Lupam Anglican
                        •
                     m, The
English Wolfe. And the Iesuite Eudaemon-Iohannes,
in the 116. Page. of his Apologie for Garnet, cals her
Sororis filiam, Patris neptem: Her Sisters daughter, and
her Fathers Niece.
               
               Of late Henry Garnet, Hall, surnamed Oldcorne,
Hamond, Iohn Gerard, and G
                        •
                     inuelle, were found to be
complices in that powder-mine, which was made
vnder the house where the King with the States of the
Country were to assemble together. And for these the
Iesuite, Iohn the H
                        •
                     ppy, hath writ an Apologie: wherein
hee confesseth that indeede they knew the intendment,
but that they ought not to reueale it. It was
found also that they had communication (hereon) by
letters with Bauldwin, the English Iesuite, who (then)
liued at Bruxels: this Iesuite was taken since as hee
passed through the Pals
                        •
                     raues Country; and we doubt
not but that if he were but a little stretcht by the fingers,
a man might learne strange misteries of him;
yea, & that he had some intelligence (to) with Francis

Rauillac, who had been in Flanders somewhat before
his cursed enterprise.
               And if you passe into Polonie, you shall finde that
the Iesuites doe absolutely possesse the King, and hauing
as it were the Tutorship of him, haue carried
him vnto such violent courses, that the Country by
their meanes is risen vp against him, and he in great
hazard of his kingdome. Their factio
                     •
                  s humour is
the cause that Sueden is lost from the Crowne of Poland,
and from the Catholique Church. For they
haue moued the King of Poland, to make warre vpon
Duke Charles (who now stiles himselfe King) so by
force to compell him to receiue the Iesuites.
               Neither is Transyluania free. Wee haue seene the
Letters of the Baron of Zerotin, dated the 2. of May
last, wherein hee declareth how a Lord of the Country
hauing a Iesuite (with him) in his house, was by
the same Iesuite drawne to conspire the death of the
Prince of Tran
                     •
                  yluania; who being aduertised of the
day (appointed) for the enterprise, went forth of the
Towne that day, giuing out that he went to hunt, and
laid an ambush without the Towne, wherein hee surprised
the enterprisers, who followed after him to execute
their intendment vpon him. He put them all to
death, and the said Iesuite was executed with the generall
slaughter of his complices.
               The house of Austria alone hath this priuiledge,
(as) to be free from the conspiracies of this Societie.
Of this family the Princes liues are sacred and inuiolable
vnto the Iesuits: for the founder of their Order,
and the General of their Societie being a Spaniard, to

whom they haue vowed a blinde obedience vnder
oath, it is not to be feared in this respect, that euer
they should be moued to enterprise ought against the
Kings of Spaine, or against such as are of his house.
               And therefore it is not without cause, that the
Common-wealth of Venice, (whose wisedome of gouernment
is to be admired) hath driuen them out of
Venice, and out of all their dominions: They (well)
perceiue that these men are creatures of bloud, and
fire-brands of warre, whom they can better endure
without, then within their Country. For their last
troubles had their beginning from the Iesuites: for
whereas the Senate had discouered, that the Iesuites
by cunning fetches had gotten great store of Legacies
by Will, and made themselues Lords of much
land, to the preiudice of the Common-wealth: It was
concluded by aduise in Councell, to prohibite all
Clergie men thence forward to receiue any goods
immoueable by testament, without leaue of the common-wealth:
whereunto when other of the Church
submitted, the Iesuites who opposed it, and wrought
against it at Rome, were for euer banished the State.
               And for these considerations it is, that the Citie of
Orleans would neuer receiue them, albeit they haue
much desired it and laboured it. They sent thither one
of their companie to preach their Lent Sermons; but
the Inhabitants were not very well satisfied: for instead
of studying, he busied his braines in searching
out and entertaining such as had yet in their hearts
any (remainder of the) olde leauen of the League: by
whose entercourse this Iesuite set the report going,

that the Kings pleasure was, they should be established
there. Heretofore their talke was of driuing out the
Monkes of S. Sampson, that they might get their
Church, and of displacing Mounsieur, the Marshall of
Chastres, Gouernour of that Citie, to get his house,
making reckoning to ioyne it together with the houses
in the way vnto the fore-said Church. And besides
all these preparatiues, hauing giuen the King to
vnderstand, that the Citizens of Orleans did exceedingly
desire their company, they did so importune
his Maiestie, that hee granted them to haue an house
there, yet with this charge that the Citizens should
be drawne to consent vnto it. Now when they were
solemnly assembled together about this matter, one
amongst them, Touruille by name, a famous Aduocate
of the Citie, a man of learning and iudgement,
declared vnto them the inconueniences that might
befall the Citie if they did admit them, and by strong
reasons made it good, that in France for a man to loue
his King and the Iesuites, were things that could not
stand together. The chiefe Officers of Iustice following
this first tune, and all the Citizens concurring iointly
in the same opinion, it was concluded, that they should
not be receiued. This Citie at other times hath drunk
of the cup of Rebellion, with many others, but sithens
their reducing vnder obedience vnto the King, they
haue at all times declared themselues most faithfull;
euen by their carriage in this last common affliction,
as they haue declared more griefe then any other, so
do they make the continuance of their obedience appeare
by al maner of good works, more then any other.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               That the Iesuites are guilty of the murther of our deceased
King, Henry the fourth.
               
                  WHosoeuer shall consider the crime of this
wicked (wretch) Rauillac, in euery part
and circumstance of it shal easily perceiue
that the Iesuites had their fingers in the
Pie, and that the mischiefe came none otherwise then
by their instruction.
               It is some fiue yeares since that at S. Victors, there
was a Maide possessed with a Diuell, whose instrument
she was for the tel
                     •
                  ing of diuers things that seemed
admirable. Father Cotton, either moued with
curiositie, or grounding himselfe vpon the familiaritie
he had with his Spirits, tooke a iourney thither,
to question with this Spirit on diuers points which he
had a desire to know. And to helpe his memory, hee
wrote in a ticket the points whereon hee was to demand:
Amongst other points these were some: What
should be the issue of the conuersion of Mounsieur de la
Val: and of the enterprises against Geneua: and of the
continuance of Heresie: and of the estate of Madamoyselle
Acarie; and about the life of the King. There were
many like vnto these: but so it fell out, that Father Cotton,
deliuering vnto Mounsieur Gill
                        •
                     t, Counsailour, in
in the great Chamber a booke which he had promised

him there, through some ouersight, left behinde him
his memoriall, which falling by this meanes into the
handes of the said Mr. Gillot, he communicated it vnto
certaine others, and amongst others to my Lord
the Duke of Sully, and so the matter came abroad.
Had this fallen out at some other time, while some vigour
of spirit yet remained in men, this had beene
sufficient to haue entred an inditement against the Iesuite;
it being a matter capitall for a man to enquire
about the tearme of his Princes life: (and that) not
onely by the Romane lawes,Paulus. lib. 5. the Authors whereof
were Pagans and Idolaters;Sentent. tit. 21. §. 9. but euen by the lawes of
God,Qui de falute Principis vel summa Reipub. Mathematicos, Ariolos Aruspices Vaticinatores consulit, cum eo qui responderit capite punitur. Cui auté opus est serutari super Caesaris salute nisi à quo aduersus illam aliquid cogitatur, aut post illam speratur & sust
                        •
                     nctur? as we may read in the 18. Chap. of Deutronomie.
And Tertullian giues the reason of it in his Apologe.
ticus, to wit, that such a one hath imaginations against
the Princes life, that makes such inquirings about it.
               Two yeares after this, so it fell that Mounsieur de le
Forze, Lieutenant for the King in Bearne, by the intelligences
which hee had from Spaine, by reason of
his neighbour-hood vnto it, was aduertised that a
Spaniard of such a stature, of such an hayre, and in
such apparrell, departed such a day from Barcelona,
to go into France, with intendment to make away
the King, by poyson or other meanes. Well, this Spaniard
came to Paris, addressed himselfe to Father
Cotton, who brought him vnto the King, & gaue high
commendations of him. A while after came the Letters
of Monsieur de la Forze: when the King had read
them, hee sends (forth) to seeke Father Cotton, and
shewes him the Letters of Mounsieur de la Forze, and
commands him to bring backe againe that same

Spaniard. Father Cotton answeres, he could not belieue
it, and that the aduertisement was false: neuerthelesse,
he would go seeke out the said Spaniard, and
bring him before his Maiestie. Whereupon he goes
forth, and returning a good while after, hee tels the
King, he could not finde him, and that hee was gone.
To see clearely vnto the bottome of this, but a little
good sight is too much.
               It is not aboue a yeare agoe that Father Cotton
wrote vnto a prouincial of Spaine diuers things which
our King had vttered in secret, and reuealed in Confession,
and such as turned to the disgrace of his Maiestie.
The discouery whereof was the cause why hee
continued in disgrace for the space of sixe Moneths.
Neuerthelesse the late King (through a clemencie
(that was) fatall vnto his owne destruction) forgaue
him, and receiued him into fauour. But it may be remembred,
how not many daies after, our young King
being importuned by him, gaue him a gird, by such
an answere as he well deserued, in these tearmes; I
will tell you nothing, for you will writo in into Spaine, as
you haue done the confession of my Father.
               
               And to come neere the fact of Rauillac: like as after
the death of Henry the third, a man might heare
the Iesuites preach sediciously, and exhort their auditors
to do the like vnto his Successor: and amongst
others, Father Commolet, crying out in his Sermons,
We haue need of an Ehud, be he a Monke, or be he a Souldiour,
we haue need of an Ehud. Right so at Lent last,
might a man haue heard a Iesuite, by name Father
Hardy, Son to one Mercier, dwelling on Nostre-Dame

bridge, preaching at S. Seuerins, and saying, that
Kings heaped vp treasures to make themselues feared,
but that there needed but a mattocke to kill a King. In
witnesse whereof, I can produce Mounsier le Grand,
and Mounsier de la Vau, Counsailours of the Court,
who were present thereat, besides diuers others.
               At the same time Father Gontier preached so sediciously,
and so iniuriously against the King, that
Mounsier the late Marshall of Ornano, as zealously affected
vnto the Catholique religion, as any man in
France, being asked of his Maiestie what hee thought
of his Sermons; made answere to him, that if Gontier
had spoken as much at Burdeaux, he would haue caused
him to be throwne into the Riuer. Euery one from
that time might prognosticate some great mischiefe,
and the murmure was so great amongst true Frenchmen,
that my selfe falling on a time amongst good
company, where some speach past between vs, one
of them affirmed, that a iolly man of qualitie, called
Mounsier de la Grange▪
                   Secretary to the Prince of
Condy, would auouch to Fathe
                     •
                   
                  Gontier (s face,) that
whiles (during these warres) he remained prisone
                     •
                   at
Perigeus, the said Gontier in presence of Father Saphore,
Rector of the Colledge, did maintaine against
the said de la Grange, that it were a good deed to kill the
King.
               
               Yet this is not all: for to giue fire to the match at
both ends, the Iesuites by meanes of a person named
Guron, (who makes shew of much deuotion) would
faine haue prescribed vnto the Curates of the parishes
in Paris, a forme of preaching the very last Lent,

giuing them in writing sundry discourses tending
to sedition. But diuers honest Curates came to the
Duke of Sully, beseeching him, that by his meanes
they might speake with the King; to whom they
made their complaints, saying; there were some that
would prescribe them to preach things contrarie to
their allegiance. The excessiue clemencie of this great
King contented it selfe with making remonstrance
hereof vnto Father Gontier; yea, and to winne
his heart, he made him his Preacher, and gaue him a
pension.
               Like as before lightning a man shall heare some
grumbling in the Clouds: euen so, these preachings
and seditious meetings were the forerunners of this
great blow, that hath shaken this State in the person
of so great a King, whose losse we lament now, but
shall feele it much more in the time to come.
               Adde hereunto the Confession of Rauillac,
                  This is to be found in the Records. who iustified
vnto Father Aubigny, that hee had told him in
confession, that he had ben sent to giue a great stroke,
and that hee shewed him the knife, hauing an heart
grauen vpon it. But the said Iesuite protested, that
God had giuen him this grace, that so soone as ought
was reuealed vnto him in confession, hee forgat it
incontinently. The Gallant saued his life by this: but
had he beene in another Countrey, hee would haue
beene taught the Art of Memorie.
               They that haue sounded this Rauillac, and haue
beene present at his examination, may perceiue that
the said parricide hath beene (very) throughly instructed
in this matter: for in euery other point of

Diuinitie hee shewed himselfe most ignorant; but
in the question, whether it be lawfull to kill a Tyrant;
he was well skilled in all manner of euasions and
Iesuiticall distinctions, as my Lords the Commissioners
can testifie, the Sieur Coeffeteau Doctor of Diuinitie,
and others, who had the examination of this
Rauillac in this matter. And this parricide being demanded
what moued him to this attempt, told them
more then once, What the causes were why it was requisite
to kill the King, they might vnderstand by the Sermons
of the Preachers. His meaning was, that he was
induced hereunto be the sermons before mentioned.
But (more then this) it was easie to perceiue that besides
publike exhortations, he had (withall) receiued
particular instructions at large, so well seene was hee
in this argument.
               Neyther is it a circumstance to be neglected, that
Father Cotton, hauing obtained leaue to speake with
Rauillac in prison, amongest other things that he spake
vnto him, this was one; Looke well to it, that you accuse
not the Innocent: fearing (belike) least hee should
accuse the Iesuites: but the Cordeliers, Carmelites,
and other honest religious persons, who were not
touched in conscience, they feared not lest any should
accuse them.
               But whence was it, that at Bruxelles and at
Prage where the Iesuites dominiere, the Kings death
was spoken of (some) twelue, or fifteene dayes before
it came to passe? At Roan diuers receiued letters
from their friends at Bruxelles, desiring to be informed
whether the report that went of the Kings death

were true, albeit at that time it was not so.
               Mounsieur Argentier at Troyes, receiued letters
from the 
                     •
                  utor of his children at Prage, wherein hee
was aduertised that a Iesuite had giuen it forth, that
the King was dead before it fell out to be so, and withall
had tolde them, that after his decease Monsieur
the Dolphin should not be King, but the King of
Spaine, and that for the same reasons which Father
Gontier gaue in his sermons at Aduent and Lent last.
               I may not omit the prediction of the prouost of
Petiuiers, (who was found strangled in prison) who
being at Petiuiers, two days iourney from Paris, and
playing at nine pinnes, amongst sundry of his friends,
told them saying; This day the King is either slaine▪ or
hath a blow. This prouost was in faction a Iesuite, and
had committed a sonne of his vnto them, who at this
day is a Iesuite.
               Diuers haue obserued with what disdaine and generall
indignation it was taken of euery one, to see
the Iesuites at the Louure, the (very) morning after
this abhominable assassinacie, looking with a smiling
and pre
                     •
                  umptuous countenance, as who should say,
all things went well for them; and to be presented
vnto the Queene by Mounsieur de la Varenne, their
Benefactor and restorer; and to haue that boldnesse
in this common heauinesse and sorrow, so speedily
to demand the ha
                     •
                  t of the poore deceased King, which
they carryed away in a kinde of conquest, wherewithall
they had done well to haue buryed also the tooth
which Iohn Chastel, a disciple of theirs, strooke out
some yeares since.
               
                  But who did not wonder to see all the Orders of
religious persons assist the funerals of the King, and
pertake of the common sorrow, sauing the Iesuites?
who alone hauing receiued more good turnes of this
good King, then all other Ecclesiasticall persons put
together, euen they alone vouchsafed not to accompany
his body vnto the graue. Which being obserued
by diuers of the Spectators, some said, the reason
of their absence was, because they disdained all other
Orders: but the most iudicious, their opinion was,
that it was no small part of their wisedome: and that
Tiberius and Iulia, hauing procured the empoysoning
of Germanicus,
                  
                     Tacitus. lib. 3. Annal. Tiberius atque Augusta publico abstinuere, inferius maiestate sua
                        •
                     rati, si palam lamentarētur, anne omniū oculis vultum eorū scrutantibus, falsi intelligerentur. in the publike mourning that was at
Rome, would not appeare openly, for feare least the
people should discouer their sorrow to be but false
and counterfai
                     •
                  e.
               After the Kings death, they did what they could to
keepe his purpose from taking effect, and to thwart
such courses as he iudged to be for the good of the
State. Hee had resolued to send companies vnto
Cleues, for aide to the princes of Germanie. Since
that, Mounsieur the Marshall of Castres, Generall of
these forces, prepared himselfe for the iourney, when
behold two Iesuites who came to seeke him out, tolde
him that he could not goe this voyage, not bring succour
vnto Heretiques with a good conscience, and
fought to affright his conscience with threats, as that
if he did this, hee could not be saued. But the said
Marshall giuing no credit vnto their words, within a
while after, they come vnto him to change their language,
and to appease him.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               An Examination of the declaratory Letter of
Peter Cotton.
               
                  FIrst of all, I say, that this Letter being extorted
(as it is) by necessitie, comes out of
season, and doth not preuent the euill, but
comes after it: for it should haue beene
written against Mariana when hee first peeped forth,
and when the late King intreated Father Cotton to
write against it.
               I say further, it is vtterly vnknowne to vs whether
he speakes in earnest: in his Letter, or whether according
to the doctrine of his Order, he vseth Equiuocation,
and suppresseth the one halfe of his meaning:
or if he speakes in good earnest, who seeth not that his
companions are not of his opinion, sith none of them
hath subscribed his Booke, nor approued it? which yet
had been most requisite in a matter so publike and of
such importance.
               Againe the authoritie of so many Iesuites condemning
the murthering of Kings, is alledged by him in
vaine: for all such passages of the Iesuites are vnderstood
of Kings whom the Pope and Iesuites acknowledge
for Kings: But wee haue made it cleere in the
former Chapters by the authoritie of a great many
Iesuites, and by their actions, that when the Iesuites

do attempt vpon the life of any King, they make good
their action by this, that such a one they doe not
reckon to be a King, albeit he beares the name, in as
much as he is excommunicated, or because hee is an
enemie vnto the Church: and in very deed this wretched
Rauillac, alledged this for the cause of his attempt,
to wit, because the King would make war against
the Popr, and that the Pope was God, and by consequence,
                  These are the very words of the interrogatori
                        •
                     .
                  that the King would make warre against God.
               
               And therefore the reuerend Abbot of Boyse, hath
well obserued in his answere to Father Cotton, that
whereas Gregorie of Valence, Iesuite, saith; It is no way
permitted for a man to attempt vpon the life of his
Prince, albeit he abuse his authority; yet he addes, If
it be not done by publique iudgement. Now all the Iesuites
maintaine that the iudgement of the Generall
of their Order is a publique iudgement, and whereon
they must rest (themselues,) as on the voyce of Christ,
as wee haue shewed before; wee hold also the iudgement
of the Pope to be a publike iudgement.
               Againe we haue formerly obserued that the Apologie
of Eudemon-Iohannes the Iesuite, approued by
their Generall Aquauiua, and of three Doctors
                     •
                   of the
Iesuites, affirmes that Iesuites doe no way approue the
murthering of Kings, notwithstanding they loue the
euent: so that it serues to no purpose for Father Cotton
to condemne him that murthered the King, if neuerthelesse
he be glad for the euent, that is to say, for
the death of the King.
               And in very deede, it is a fraudulent protestation
that hee makes of approuing the decree of the

Councell of Constance, where they condemne the
proposition of Iohn Petit, and declare that it is not
lawfull for a subiect to kill a Tyrant: for the Iesuites
haue their euasion ready, and which is a truth, namely,
that the Councell of Constance speaketh of such
Tyrants as are lawfull Kings, and that they speake not
of Tyrants deposed by publike iudgement, and whose
Subiects are discharged and absolued of their oath
of allegiance by the Pope, nor of Kings who are
iudged enemies vnto the Church. For if the Iesuites
shall vndertake to make away a King, they will easily
finde (out) some reason (or other) to proue that he is
no King at all, and by consequence that (herein) they
doe nothing against the Councell of Constance, nor
against those places which Father Cotton alledged out
of the writings of the Iesuites.
               That which Father Cotton addes, that this was the
singular opinion of Mariana, and not of all their Order,
hath beene disproued in the first Chapter, by the
approbation of a great many Iesuites, whose names
are in the front of Marianaes Booke, and by the bookes
of sundry Iesuites, who affirme the same that Mariana
doth; yea, they commend him, and maintaine him:
and the Iesuite Cotton (himselfe) doth so tenderly
condemne him, that in his reprehensions of him, hee
doth rather seeme to flatter him.
               As for that pretended decision, which hee would
make vs belieue to haue beene made in a prouinciall
congregation of the Iesuites, wherein Mariana was
condemned by them: this seemes to mee, to marre
their Market, 
                     •
                  ith they haue concealed this decision

hitherto,) and would haue no man know it. Did they
feare to make French-men too well affected towards
the preseruation of the King? or did they feare to giue
offence to the Iesuites of Spaine, by publishing their
condemnation of Mariana? Out of doubt it will be
found that either any such decision was neuer made,
or if it were, it was a matter of (mere) Equiuocation,
and ambiguous (construction)
               And this will be more easily belieued when a man
shall come neare, and obserue the Iesuites confession
in this matter, which Father Cotton hath reduced to
fifteene heads or Articles, which are nothing but infoldings
of words, and which declare the Iesuites beliefe
in such points whereof no man askes them any
question: for behold, (these are the points) whereon
wee would expect to heare the Confession of their
Faith.
               I. Whether when the Superiour of the Iesuites
shall command them to vndertake against the King,
they ought to obey him.
               II. Whether the Pope can discharge Subiects of
their oath of allegiance made vnto their King.
               III. Whether a King being deposed by the
Pope, and excommunicated, is neuerthelesse a King,
and whether the Subiects are bound, neuerthelesse to
performe obedience to him in things temporall after
excommunication.
               IIII. Whether in case some good Catholique
shall discouer vnto a Iesuite in Confession his purpose
to kill the King, the Iesuite ought to reueale this Confession,
or conceale it.
               
                  V. Whether the Pope can giue and take away
kingdomes, and at his pleasure transferre them: namely,
whether the Iesuites do approue that Canon which

                     •
                  aith, that the Pope may take off the Crowne from a
Kings head, albeit he be without blame.
               VI. Whether Kings are aboue Clarkes: that is to
say, whether the King hath authoritie ouer their
goods, and ouer their liues, as much as ouer his other
Subiects.
               VII. Whether faith giuen to the enemies of the
Church be to be kept.
               VIII. Whether a Iesuite being accused of Treason,
and kept prisoner thereupon, may lawfully vse
Equiuocations in his answere.
               IX. Whether to slay a mans enemies, it be lawfull
for him to kill his friends.
               X. Whether the rebellion of a Cleargie man against
the King be high treason.
               XI. Whether a man can hate him that murthereth
a King, and yet be glad for the euent.
               XII. Whether Garnet & Oldcorne are Martyres:
and whether Guignard were iustly condemned to
death.
               These are the points, whereon all honest Catholiques
desire the Iesuites might be catechised, and that
it would please the Queene Regent, and my Lords the
Princes of the bloud, the Officers of the Crowne, and
Lords of the Counsaile, to commaund Father Cotton,
and his companions to write their mindes clearely,
and to set forth their Confession, to the end these
new impressions which enfeeble the authoritie of

our Kings, and hazard their liues, might be razed
out of (the mindes of) the people, in stead of giuing
vs articles which touch not the matter, and which
(withall) are carried in obscure and doubtfull termes,
like vnto the sword of Delphos, which cuts on both
sides.
               The first Article is this: All Iesuites (saith hee) in
generall and in particular, are ready to seale euen with
their owne bloud, that they haue not either in this matter
or other, any other Faith, doctrine and opinion,
then that of the Church of Rome. Herein he speakes against
his conscience: for if all Iesuites in particular
are agreed in euery thing, it followes that Cotton and
Mariana doe agree together, and that Cotton doth not
well to condemne him. Whereas he saith, that all the
Iesuites are ready to subscribe, that in this matter they
haue no other beliefe then the vniuersall Church
hath. I answere, that the Iesuites may easily subscribe
to any thing that a man would haue them, sith they
haue their retention, and secre
                     •
                   conditions, which
they reserue in their mindes: but I am well assured
that the vniuersall Church will not subscribe to any of
those abhominable positions of the Iesuites, which
we haue formerly alledged out of their Bookes, much
lesse will it approue their actions.
               His second Article is: That amongst all kindes of
gouernments and administrations of Common-wealths a
Monarchie is the best. To what purpose is this? It is not
necessarie that they who esteeme a Monarchie to be
better then a Democratie, for this cause, must make
scruple to destroy Kings: or that they who desire
                     •
                  
                  
to kill the King, must haue an intention to change the
forme of Gouernment; but only they desire another
King, because he that liues mislikes them.
               The third Article sauours altogether of the Iesuites
veyne, and of their termes, for therein is nothing but
Equiuocations, and mentall reseruations. It saith,
That such as is the spirituall Gouernment of the Church,
which relyes on the Vicar of Iesus Christ, the Succ
                        •
                     ssour
of S. Peter: such is the temporall of the State and Kingdome
of Fraunce, that it determines in the person of the
King, our Soueraigne Lord and Maister. There is nothing
spoken to the full in this, but with much dissimulation:
for hee dares not affirme that the King is
as simply absolute in his Kingdome, as the Pope in
the Church: for the Iesuites alone maintaine that the
Pope can depose Kings; but they do not maintain that
Kings may depose Popes: they hold that Popes can
discharge Subiects of their obedience vnto Kings; but
they do not hold that Kings can dispense with Christians
touching their obedience vnto Popes: They hold
that the Popes power reacheth vnto the temporalties
of Kings, either directly as some say, or indirectly as
others say; but they doe not belieue that Kings haue
any power either directly or indirectly, ouer the spiritualties
or temporalties of Popes: they hold that there
are many persons in Fraunce who are not lyable to
tryall before the Kings Iudges; but they do not hold,
there is any man within th
                     •
                   territories of S. Peter who
is not triable before the Officers of his holinesse: they
hold that the Pope can leuie money and rents vpon
the Ecclesiasticall reuenewes of the Kingdome of

Fraunce; but they doe not holde that the Kings of
Fraunce can leuie any mony vpon the persons nor vpon
the lands of Italy, which are of the Patrimonie
of S. Peter.
               
               For it is not credible that Father Cotton will oppose
himselfe against Cardinal Bellarmine the Iesuite,
all the Iesuites now adayes being his Disciples and
Schollers, who in his fift Booke, De Pontifice Romano,
and sixt Chapter, writes thus: The Pope may change
kingdomes, take them from one▪ and bestow them on another,
as the supreme Prince spirituall, and when he shall
finde it necessarie for the saluation of soules▪
                   Of whom
also we haue formerly learned that Kings are not aboue
Clarks. The same (Authour) in the second
Chapter of his Booke, Of the exemption of the Clergie,
cals all Kings and Princes ingenerall, Prophane men:
And he holds in diuers places,Qui
                        •
                      dicere audeat ius e
                        ••
                     e profano 
                        •
                     n ea quae sancta sanctarū, id est, sanctissima dici meruerunt? that the power of secular
Princes, is but an humane institution, and is onely the
worke of men. Albeit the Apostle in the thirteenth
to the Romanes, saith; That there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
And therefore it is no part of the Iesuites beliefe, to
account Kings to be Kings in such sort, as the Pope is
the head of the Church, seeing they are not Kings but
by humane institution: but the Pope is head of the
Vniuersall Church by the institution of God. In a
word, Cotton speakes but with halfe a mouth, and by
that which hee saith, it is impossible to apprehend
what he beleeueth. And the same may be said of his
other Articles.
               The last Article is a recrimination of those of the

pretended reformed Religion, sundry of whose Books
he saith are infected with this opinion, that it is lawfull
for a Subiect to make away his King. After this he
addes; I could note and specifie the places, alledge their
words, were it not much better that they should remaine
swallowed vp of the gulfe of forgetfulnesse. Oh what
matter of triumph here doth he giue vnto our aduersaries?
whose saying will be, that if Father Cotton had
knowne those places, hee would not haue failed to
bring them to light, and it had beene good to name
the bookes, that they might be suppressed, and the
Authors punished if they were liuing.
               Now hereupon I haue been moued in the humor
of curiosity to cleare my selfe: and enquiring of some
of the contrary Religion, men not vnlearned, they
haue answered mee, that indeede the Councell of
Constance in the eight Session, makes an enumeration
of Wickliffes Heresies, and amongst other things accuseth
him for being of opinion,Artic. 15. Nullus est Dominus dum est in peccato mortali, & Artic. 17. Populares possunt ad arbitrium suum dominos delinquentes corr
                        •
                     
                     gere. that no m
                        •
                     n is a Maister
or Lord in ciuill things, during his continuance in
mortall sinne. Againe, that people may at their pleasure
correct Princes that are faulty. And that Buchanan
an Historian and Scottish Poet, in his Booke,
De iure Regni apud Scotes, speaketh (indeed) of handling
Kings roughly, and driuing them out, when
they become Tyrants. But the Councell of Constance
slandereth Wickliffe, not onely in this point, but also in
diuers others: that this is no where to bee found
throughout his writings: and that he was not present
to answere for himselfe: that after the same slanderous
maner, the same Councell chargeth him to haue

said, that God must
                        •
                      obey the Diuell: that Buchanan was
no Diuine: that amongst their Doctors there are indeed
found some free speeches against Kings that persecute
their Churches, so farre as to say, that notwithstanding
their wicked wils, they will not giue ouer
to aduance the worke of God, and such like. But not so
much as any one word is to be found of aduise to kill
Kings, nor so much as any one precept of rebellion.
That Luther writ indeed against King Henry the eight
of England, in most contemptuous sort and indiscreet
termes: but that Luther was none of his Subiect, and
that he neuer spake of killing Kings, nor of rebelling
against their Soueraigne, and therefore that these examples
are not to purpose.
               This I say, not that I rest satisfied with these iustifications,
I leaue them as they are, but to stirre vp Father
Cotton to speake more plainly vnto this point, for
feare least our aduersaries should say, that they are
accused without proofe, and without shewing wherefore.
               That which remaines of Father Cottons declaratorie
Letter, is onely a declamatorie discourse, wherein
he talkes of Otacoustes, Prosagogides, and Quadruplators:
words that had giuen vs the stop, had they been
put in the entrance (of his discourse.) For these are
words too hard for vs, that know no other Latine
then that of Ac
                        •
                     ursius, and that busie our selues to
proue as good French-men, as the Iesuites are good
Spaniards.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               Whether it be for the good of the State, that Father
Cotton should be neere about the person of the King,
or of the Queene Regent, and whether the lesuites
are to be suff
                     •
                  red.
               
                  IF all the world wonders to see after the
blow that Iohn Chastel gaue with a knife, after
the condemning of the Iesuites, after
the erection of the Pyramis for a memoriall,
yet neuerthelesse a little after (all this,) these Fathers
to be established againe, and to possesse the heart
of the King, whose mouth they had slit: So is it a
thing as much to be wondred at, to see at this day,
after so horrible a death, those, who haue set abroach
the doctrine of murthering (Princes) and who are
knowne to haue a 
                     •
                  inger in the action, to continue
still, and to be neare about the person of the King.
               I will beleeue that the person of Father Cotton is
free from this crime, and that Father Gontier and
Aubigny had no communication with him, and that
he had no intelligence with the Iesuites of Bruxelles:
yet such are his maners and his profession, that it is
no way fit, nor for (the) credit (of the Court) for him
to come neere about the person of his Maiestie.
               First of all, I affirme that Cotton, who cals himselfe
a religious person, yea, of such a Company who take

vnto them the name of Iesus, is a scandall to the
whole Church, being euery day a follower of the
Court: for this is a thing contrary, not onely to the
Institution of all Monkes, but particularly to the rules
of the Iesuites, as Father Richeome assureth vs in his
Apologeticall complaint: and Cardinall Tolet the
Iesuite, in his Booke Of the Institution of Priests. 1.
Booke, and 40. Chapter, holds it for a generall truth,
that a religious person who betakes himselfe vnto the
Courts of Princes, is an excommunicate person, albeit
he hath leaue of his Superiour.
               
               Secondly, for the imprinting of vertue in the heart
of a Prince, it is fit to set about his person men that
are enemies vnto vices, and such as will not flatter him
in his imperfections. This was one of the (great) faults
of Father Cotton, euen his conniuence at the pleasures
of the late King, in stead of with-drawing him from
them. And such a Prince was hee, that if a man an
enemie vnto vice, had helde his place about him,
it had beene an easie matter to restraine him. This is
the complaint that Father Portugais, lately made in
our hearing, in a funerall Sermon that he preached at
S. Iames in the Shambles, and which afterwards he set
forth in print.
               Yet this is not all: for in stead of restrayning him,
he rather humoured him, affirming euen at a full Sermon,
that his Maiestie made amends for his sinnes
with many merits: that Dauid committed faults, although
he were a man after Gods owne heart.
               (Nay,) he did well worse then this: for he was the
Messenger of the Kings loue, and carried his Loue-letters

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
vnto Ladies: a great Prince of this kingdome,
and who now liues in Court, can testifie, that (as hee
told him) (how) he wondred at this, that Father Cotton
should be employed in bringing a certaine Damsell
vnto the King: the said Iesuit answered him, that
indeed it was a sinne, but that he was rather to regard
the health of the King, whose life was so necessarie
vnto the Church, and that this euill should be recompenced
with a greater good.
               And for his life; therein he hath discouered egregious
Hypocrisie. He vaunted (sometimes) in the
presence of sundry Lords of the Court, who yet are
liuing, that since he was two and twenty yeares of age,
he neuer committed any mortall sinne; and yet neuerthelesse,
the Abbot of Boyse hath iustified vnto
him, and is ready to iustifie it, that since that time it
is that a sentence hath passed against him at Auignon,
for getting a Nun with childe. Mounsieur des Bordes,
Lord of Grigny, a man that wants no good part, saue
to be a Catholike, hath lying by him at this day Father
Cottons (loue) Letters vnto Madamoyselle de Claransac
de Misme, written with his owne hand: wherein
after many protestations of friendship, he tels her, that
he hopes to see her shortly, to pay her the principall, and
the arrerages of his absence: and that the affection h
                        •
                     e
beares vnto her is such, that he cannot promise himselfe
to haue full ioy in Paradise, if he finde not her there. This
Damsell was entred amongst the questions which this
Iesuite was to propose vnto the Diuell.
               Who doth not wonder at the incredible impudencie
of this man, who insinuates himselfe euery where,

and shrinkes not backe for an hundred puttings by?
who thrusts himselfe into euery action, who makes
himselfe a companion to Princes, who in the Meditations
he sets forth, seemes as if hee would flatter God,
and bring him a sleepe with words that sauour of his
Queane? What an heart-burning would it be to see a
caitife Iesuite besiege the spirit of a King, and to be
as a man may say, tyed to his girdle, while in the
meane time, Princes and Lords who haue done him
great seruice, haue much a doe to come neere him?
I cannot conceiue any reason why other of the Clergie
who for many ages haue beene the pillars of the
Church of Fraunce, who neuer laide hand on their
Kings, and who neuer abandoned them in their afflictions,
especially in the (time of our) last troubles,
should not enioy the same fauour that these new come
vpstarts, who are not subiect to any Bishop, but immediately
depending of their Spanish Generall, and of
their Consistorie: and who haue been already driuen
forth, for the crime of parricide? Haue not other Religious
Orders better deserued to be Confessors vnto
the King, or Preachers vnto the Queene; whose Confessions
these men will write into Spaine, to some Prouinciall
of Castile, or to their Generall at Rome?
               And if in seauen or eight yeares, since their reuocation,
they haue bestird themselues so well, that in
diuers parts of Fraunce, they haue gotten aboue an
hundred thousand crownes of rent, and built in diuers
places, especially at la Flesche, an house, that comes to
aboue an hundred thousand crowns, what wil they do
if they continue but twenty years more? This is a canker
that stil gets ground. They cannot be in a place but

they must dominiere to: they haue already built an
house for nouices in the Suburbs of Saint Germanes, a
pretie towne might stand within the precincts of it:
and there the Rector of the Vniuersitie shall haue nothing
to do, but to looke on; and from thence are they
like to draw all the youth, as being more subtile then
others to insinuate into mens houses, to please women
giuen to deuotion, to flatter their children, to take neither
for washing nor candles of their schollers, so they
may swallow lands, and whole inheritances: whence it
will come to passe, that the Vniuersitie of Paris, shal be
but a shadow, and assuredly come to nothing. From
hence in tenne yeares space, the Priuie Councell, and
Courts of Parliament, and the great Councell, shal be
full of the Disciples of the Iesuites, and the rest of the
Clergie shal no more be made reckoning of: for they
haue a purpose to bring them lower, and they speake
contemptuously of them, as of ignorant persons: and
yet I haue heard of many that are learned, and particularly
of Mounsieur, the Cardinal of Perron, that them
selues are ignorant persons, & that they wil ouerthrow
learning. For the restoring whereof, my Lord the said
Cardinall hath a purpose to erect a new Colledge in
the Vniuersitie, where he will raise (the study of good)
letters, which are falne, sith these men haue soyled
them, by reducing them vnto a miserable kinde of
Schollerisme, and making them to consist of slender
obseruations which themselues haue gathered.
               (Yet) this were but a small matter, were it not that
by bringing vp Schollers, and making men learned,
they hereby graspe the State, and goe about to bring
Kings vnder a Tutorship, and stirre vp people vnto

sedition, and if they were as ready to rise, as these are
busie to solicite them, France by this had runne ouer
with bloud, and the death of the King had beene followed
with massacres both of the one and of the other
Religion: for this was their hope in this cursed parricide:
from which if this blow cannot keepe them from
falling, they will easily finde the meanes to renew
their party.
               In the meane while let my Lords of the Councell,
and my Maisters of the Courts of Parliaments, iudge
whether with a good Conscience they can permit the
hearing of confessions vnto them, who haue sworne
to reueale nothing, though it necessarily concerne the
preseruation of the King: and whether it be not fit to
force them from so damnable a doctrine, that makes
them culpable of high treason. To what purpose serues
it to burn a book by the executioner, while the (persons
themselues) are suffered? and to execute a piece of paper,
while in the meane time a man dares not name
the Iesuits, for feare to offend them? Let them consider
whether they will be glad to see the ruine of the Vniuersitie
of Paris, which euer since Charles the great,
hath beene the Ornament of this Kingdome: or whether
in suffering the encrease of these, and their establishment
in the Court, they can be content to hold
the Kings faithfull Catholiques in defiance, and in expectation
to behold yet a third parricide. Let them
be forbidden to entermeddle in affaires of State: let
them preach the Gospell, and the Commandements
of the Church: let Parents be bound to send their
Children vnto Colledges in the Vniuersitie: let there
not be two distinct Vniuersities: let enquirie be made

what the Iesuites doe with all their wealth, seeing it is
wel knowne they are but few in number, and that they
do not spend it neither vpon apparrell, nor on horses,
nor vpon seruants. To what end then serues all their
reuenewes, saue to make voyages, and Commissions
for strange Countries, and to make a store-house that
may serue to wage the enemies of the State, and contribute
to the charges of some Rebellion, as they did
in the last league? For I finde the Polander had reason,
when he said that the Societie of the Iesuites was
a sword, whose scabberd was in France, but the handle
of it in Spaine, or at Rome, where the Generall of
the Iesuites abides; for the first motion to draw this
sword comes from thence.
               This is it we had to say on this matter, whereunto
my desire is, that answere should be made from point
to point: or rather that we would open our eyes vnto
these considerations, which are most cleare and needfull.
And if in doing this we shall procure more hatred
then we shall gaine commodity, yet this shall be
our comfort, that wee haue not failed in our duty of
proposing things necessarie for the good of the State,
and for the peace and safety of the Church.
               
                  A QVADRANE
To the Queene.
                  If you desire your State continue may,
                  Then chase these cruell Tygers farre away:
                  Who cutting their Kings life apart,
                  Are their owne pay-maisters with his heart.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE
SVPPLICATION
OF THE VNIVERSITIE
OF PARIS, FOR THE PREVENTING
OF THE IESVITES
opening of their Schooles in Paris.
            WHEREIN THEIR
KING-KILLING DOCTRINE,
IS ALSO OPENED
and refuted.
         
         
            
            TO THE QVEENE REGENT: THE
LORDS, THE PRINCES OF THE
BLOOD: AND THE LORDS
of the Councell.
            
               
                  MAY it please your MAIESTIE:
            
            The Vniuersitie of Paris in all humility
desires to make to it knowne to your Maiestie,
that the doctrine of the killing of Kings by assa
                  •
               
               sins,
who of deuotion destine themselues to death, as
to a Martyrdome pleasing to God, is by vs held to be
a pestilent deuise, neuer seene nor read in the records
of Antiquitie; nor as much as knowne to the ancient
Pagans or Christians. Among the Mahumetanes only,
one named, the old man of Montagne, is found to haue
vsed this tricke, but the rest of that Sect crushed it in
the egge, and neuer since put it in practice, howbeit
their malice a gainst Christian Princes be no way abared:
Onely about sixty yeares agoe, this poyson
spread it selfe in the vaines of Christendome, and began
to be put in execution in England and in France;
we say in England, in as much as in regard of ciuill
and temporall obedience due to Kings, and for the
safegard of their liues; all Christian Princes, though
Pagans, Heretiques, Idolaters, Infidels, excommunicates,
Apostates, are notwithstanding vnto vs, holy &
sacred, as the Apostles 
                  •
               each, and the primitiue Christian
Church, and the examples of Saints, now in heauen,
sometime prelates and Bishops of France. Now
this hellish position of theirs is grounded vpon another

erroneous doctrine, which is, the Popes omnipotencie,
whom we acknowledge head of the Church,
in that manner and meaning as our predecessors haue
done. The doctrine of this omnipotencie, is not at all
to be found in the diuinitie of Paris, nor in the bosome
of the Vniuersitie, but we find it in the Sermons
and writings of the Iesuits, & in the answeres of assa
                  •
               
               sines
at their arraignment before the ludges.
            To put this matter out of doubt, we need no more,
then to heare themselues speaking. Parrie, who vndertooke
the murthering of the late Queene of England,
maintained that he might lawfully doe it, she s
                     •
                  anding
excommunicate by the Pope, and consequently her life
abandoned. Catesby the vndertaker of the fire-worke,
which should haue blowne vp the King of great Britaine,
the Queene, their Children, & the States, stood
to it, that the enterprise was holy: for since Clement the
eight by two briefes, forbad the Catholikes to receiue him,
they had better reason (as he thought) to make him away
being receiued. Iohn Chastel affirmed that he thought i
                     •
                  
a meritorious worke to kill our last King, because that
although the Bishops of Fraunce had receiued him into
the Church, yet he was not in it, the Pope hauing not admitted
him. Rauillac, the last parricide, affirmed that
the King vndertooke the last warre against the good will
of the Pope, that God was the Pope, and the Pope God,
by vertue of those words; Thou art Peter, and vpon this
rocke, &c. Hereupon the Bishop of Cleremont, one
of their disciples failed not after the execution of the
murtherer to be present at the assembly of the Sor
                  
                     •
                  on,
which was called (accordingly as our ancestours
had chalked vs out the way,) for the censuring and

condemning of that murthering doctrine, where turning
himselfe from company to company, before the
sitting of the Doctors, he told them they should take
heede what they did, for you haue here (saith he) two
of the Popes Nuncioes; and the Company being sate,
he told them, that the question then to be discussed
had beene diuersly handled, and that in his iudgement
it was needfull they should propose it to the
Popes Nuncioes, who might giue notice of it to the
Pope their Maister; as is none other Kings were to liue
but whom it pleased the Pope.
            After that many good Preachers of this Vniuersitie
had contested against the murthers of Kings, and
the broachers and abettors of that doctrine, at last Father
Cotton presents your Maiestie with a Letter declaratorie,
of the doctrine of the Iesuites in that behalfe,
in which hee labours to giue contentment to
such as complaine that their writings maintaine these
three doctrines, cousen-germains, the omnipotencie
of the Pope, and from thence depending rebellion against
Kings, & abandoning of their liues, when they,
or such as themselues, shall iudge them Tyrants: but
men of vnderstanding sufficiently perceiue the Equiuocations
and fallacies wherewithall they would shadow
their mischieuous doctrine, following herein the
vse and practise of that position where of their Sect
make open profession in treatises expresly allowed
by the Generall of their Order; as may be seene in
the Apologie made in the behalfe of Henry Garnet in
the Chapter of Equiuocations: yet should wee be
loath to discouer them, and to hinder their counterfaite
coine from being currant for some profit which might

might from thence arise; were it not that by the
vertue of these ambiguities, that Sect hopes to get
the start of vs in opening their Schooles in the Vniuersitie
of Paris, against the setled and resolued determination
of the last King. In regard whereof this
Vniuersitie, daughter of the French Kings, should
hold her selfe guiltie of disloyaltie if she did not vnmaske
those fallacies, and become an humble petitioner
to your Maiestie to prouide that this daughter
(most faithfull to her Liege as long as shee is kept
from being forced,) be not stained with the company
of that sect which hath long since beene found to be
most dangerous to our State.
            He then would make your Maiestie belieue, that
the writers of his Order affirme, that it is not lawfull
to kill a Tyrant but they by him alledged▪ and by
name, Valentia (their late great Doctor) addes this restriction:
if it be not done by publike iudgement; and 
                  •
               o
the end you may not make scruple what is mea
                  •••
               
by that publike iudgement, hee afterward layes y
                  •••
               
downe certaine articles of the doctrine of the Iesuit
                  •
               s,
touching the Soueraigntie of Kings, in fashion as f
                  ••
               lloweth:
That a Monarchie is the best kinde of goue
                     •
                  nment:
That the Pope is a Monarch in the Church for 
                     •
                  he
spirituall gouernment, as the King is in his kingdome▪ for
the temporall; as not allowing the King to be King
                  •
                in
his owne kingdome, if the Pope be not absolute Soueraigne
in the spirituall affaires of the Church. But
may it please your Maiestie to be informed, that this
is an assertion directly opposite to the doctrine of the
Church, which your Vniuersitie of Paris hath alwaies
stood for: namely, to affirme that the Pope hath

Monarchiall power in the Church: for they are indeed
contradictorie speaches, to maintaine, that a
Counsell is aboue the Pope, (as your Vniuersitie hath
alwayes done,) and that the Pope is absolute Monarch
of the Church. This doctrine of your Vniuersitie
if euer it were necessarie, surely now a dayes it is
more vsefull then euer, aswell in regard of our owne
King, as of all the States of Christendome.
            Now what are the effects of this absolute spirituall
Monarchie, hee cleeres in another Booke, which hee
hath dedicated to your Maiestie, the Princes of the
bloud, and the Lords of the Counsell; you shall finde
it in the end of the second Tome of his Institutions,
Q
                     •
                  est. 35. where hee affirmes that the Pope hath no absolute
power to command and dispose the Crow
                     •
                  es of
Kings: but his fallacie lyes in this word [absolute,] in
as much as hee hath power to put of and put on the
Crownes of Kings, but that power is not absolute:

                  〈◊〉
                King, and your Maiestie, and the Lords pretend

                  〈◊〉
                absolute power to dispose of the goods of your
su
                  •
               iects, but onely by the rule and guidance of Iustice.
M
                  •
               reouer Father Cotton a little after affirmes that the

                  〈◊〉
                by vertue of his spirituall gouernment, and for
th
                  •
                vniting of Religion and the State, may by the
po
                  •
               er of his Ecclesiasticall censures dispose of Princes
Crownes, for the seruice of God, the good of the
Church, 
                     •
                  nd the saluation of Soules. Neyther is this any
peculiar point, which himselfe alone defends, but it
is the common tenent of that Societie: but this doctrine
of the vniting, as hee termes it, of Religion and
the State of the Church and the Common-wealth,
is meerly opposite to the doctrine of our Lord Iesus

Christ, who hath for euer put a separation betweene
the Church and the State, in those words, Giue vnto
God, that which is Gods, that is to say, religious Seruice;
and vnto Caesar, that which belongs vnto Caesar,
that is, ciuill obedience, honour, homage, and tribute.
            May it please your Maiestie: your Vniuersitie of
Paris hath neuer taught otherwise, holding her selfe
fastto the ancient councels, and reiecting the new, in
that wherein they reiect this wholesome doctrine, and
this is it in which the Kings, the Bishops of Fraunce,
the Courts of Parliament, the Kings councell, the
French Doctors, & lastly, this your Vniuersitie, haue
alwaies held the liberties of the French Church and
kingdome to consist. And surely, it is no final question
which we haue now in hand, no lesse worth then the estate
of the King, which these men leaue to the mercy
of the Pope, these men I say, to whose charge the training
vp of our youth is euery where committed, the
consciences of the people in their confessions, and by
their sermons and writings the instruction of all. Notwithstanding
that in the meane while the life of the
King, & that of your Maiesty are in hazard, in as much
as when the pope withdraws the right of gouernment
from a Prince, they hold him presently for a tyrant, as
vsurping against the determination of that publike
authoritie, which according to the Iesuites doctrine,
may of a King make a tyran
                  •
               nay, they farther affirme
that Subiects may rebell against their Soueraigne, although
he be not excommunicate, if they beleeue,
that those who should do it, fearing his greatnes, durst
not▪ this is the decision of the Iesuite Suarez, who by
that means sets the estates & liues of al potent Princes

to sixe and seauen. Such is also the practise of some
murtherers of Kings, men who acknowledge the omnipotencie
of the Pope, taught by the Iesuites, and
indeed acknowledge none other, but so far forth as it
pleaseth the Pope; and this was apparantly the practise
of that last wretched parricide, as it was cleere
by that execrable discourse which he held with those
diuines, who were sent to confer with him; vnto whom
he shewed him selfe to haue beene perfectly skilled, in
all the shifts and cauils which Sophistrie it selfe could
possibly inuent, touching that subiect: this man I say,
was thus cunning in this point, who was otherwise
deuoid of all good literature, and almost common
vnderstanding.
            We make no doubt, but if it would please your
Maiestie to consult the Pope in this point, he would
be drawne to performe that, which hee ought, in condemning
by his Bu
                  •
               s to hell pit such murtherers and
assassins, and by stopping (which might be done by a
word of his mouth) the torrent of those mischiefes,
which cast a shame and obloquie vpon the innocency
of Christian Religion; for the power which these
men haue hitherto had at Rome, hath giuen occasion
to 
                  •
               ome to giue out, that since hee labours not to
preuent these mischiefes, acted by them, vpon whom
he may worke what he list, it cannot be auoided but
himselfe must needes be thought to be the author
of them: as the rules of iustice require.
            The pretence which Cotton drawes from the good
of the Church, thereby to draw to the Pope power
to dispose of kingdomes, is but a colourable pretext:
for by vertue of that separation, which our Lord Iesus

Christ hath for euer made betweene Religion and the
State, through the whole world, where his Gospell
should be preached, wee stand obliged, notwithstanding
all Ecclesiastique censures, interdictions, dispensations
for oaths of allegiance, or commandements
whatsoeuer from the Pope, not to take Armes against
our Kings, but contrariwise to yeeld them all ciuill and
temporal
                  •
                obedience, and for safeguard of their liues
to hazard our owne. This is the law of nature, ingrauen
in the hearts of men, euen when they enter into this
world, which the Sonne of God clothed with our flesh,
hath since established and consecrated, binding Christians
to the obseruance of it in a straiter maner th
                  •
               n
were the Pagans, led by the sole light of Nature; and
Priests more strictly then Laickes, to whom they are
to preach sound doct
                  •
               ine as wel by words as example;
and Bishops rather then ordinarie Priests, and lastly,
aboue all, the chief
                  •
                Bishop of all, because his example
in this case would more preuaile then any other,
nay all the other beside. This was the true cause why
the King of great Britaine, to safeguard himselfe from
these King-killers, was constrained to exact of his subiects
an oath of allegiance, for their ciuill and temporall
obedience, and the surety of his life, notwithstanding
the Popes Buls.
            An oath which the frequent doctrine and practise
of assassines now a dayes makes in a maner necessarie
through Christendome, to secure the estates and liues
of Gods annointed, and withall to free the Catholike
Apostolike Romaine Religion toward the Kings and
Princes of the earth, from that blame & hatred which
this wicked doctrine drawes with it, and to make it

more gracious in the eyes of those who maintaine a
different religion. Yet is this wholsome doctrine more
needfull in France then any where beside, because the
effects of the contrarie fall especially vpon the life and
crowne of the King, and rather now in the minoritie
of our King, then in his full age, this erroneous doctrine
ought to beresuted, and the venters thereof punished,
because the practise of the ages past hath euer
taught vs, that when they would draw out their censures
against the temporalties of Kings, that commonly
set vpon the weakest.
            For these reasons the Vniuersitie of Paris, daughter
of the Kings of Fraunce, most humbly beseecheth
your Maiestie, the Princes of the blood, and the Lords
of the Councell, not to giue way to the Iesuites (sithence
they defend an opinion touching the popes
omnipotencie, and the suretie of the estates and liues
of Kings, quite contrarie to that which this Vniuersitie
hath alwayes taught and maintained) to the opening
of their Schooles here in Paris, much lesse to
their incorporating into the Vniuersitie, least they
make the learning and manner thereof as repugnant
to the estate of Kings, as is their owne Sect, as may appeare
by those writings which Father Cotton dedicates
to you, and puts into your hands daily, and by
that experience which wee haue found of them, and
yet daily find in many quarters of Christendome,
and th
                  •
                Vniuersitie shall euer be bound to pray for
the establishment and happinesse of the King, your
Maiestie, the Princes of the bloud, and the Lords of
the Councell.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE TRANSLATOR, TO THE READER.
            
               Reader,
            
            
               THat thou be not ignorant of the occasion
of Anti-coton, bepleased to be informed,
that since the last execrable parricide in
France, th
                  •
                Doctors of the Sorbon met
together in solemne Conuocation, condemned
a booke written by Iohn Mariana a Spanish Iesuite,
maintaining the murthering of Kings, and before
that, was it adiudged by the presidents of the Parliament
of Paris, that the said booke should publikely be
burnt by the common executioner before the great gate
of the Pallace, and withall as well the buying as selling
of it was by them straitly forbidden; hereupon a rumour
spread it selfe, that the Iesuites generally maintained
the same opinion: and consequently their writings
to that purpose were as lyable to censure and fire as that
of Mariana Whereupon Cotton newly returned from
the Fu
                  •
               erals of the Kings heart at la Flesche, and seeming
to be much appaled with this unexpected noyse,
was in a manner co
                  •
               strained (for the making up of this
sodaine breach) presently to put pen to paper to disclaime
what Mariana had affirmed, to produce the testimonies
of his associates, who seemed to defend the contrarie;
and lastly, to set downe those articles in this point,

which his societie (as he pretended) would stand vnto;
upon this Declaratorie Letter of Cottons (as himselfe
termes it) dedicated to the Queene Regent, comes forth
within a very short space this Anti-Coton, (written a
                  •
               
it seemes by one of the same Religion, and therefore cannot
but carrie the greater shew of truth,) which labours
to proue against Cotton, that the doctrine and practise
of the Iesuites made a ready way vnto, if not acted, the
late horrible blow in Fraunce: which booke (as I am credibly
informed by a friend of good intelligence and credit,
being greedily deuoured of all sorts of the French,
               Auidissime l
                     •
                  
                  ctus ab omnibus 
                     •
                  sque adeo 
                     •
                  ssit Cottonum 
                     •
                  t 
                     ••
                  
                  mini exciuerit lachrymas prae dolore & iudignatione. 
               So

                     ••
                  ung Cotton, that it wrung teares from him for very
griefe and indignation, and personall imputations (as
you know) the truer they are, the deeper impressions they
usually worke. Now because I suppose some may be desirous
more particularly to understand of the quality of
this Cotton (who is so often named thorow this worke,)
for the further content of such, I can assure them, th
                  •
               t 
                  〈◊〉
               
France he carries the name rather of a good Orator, then
a deepe Clark, as 
                  〈◊〉
                better what belongs to points
of Courtiership, then Schollership, notwithstanding a man
he is, much magnified by his owne Societie, for hauing so
thorowly understood, and fully possessed the affections of
the last King, as if he had inchanted him; to whom hee
was both Confessor and Preacher: and was besides that
both at meales and at Masse continually in his eare, no
man more; insomuch that in Fraunce it grew to a common
iest upon any repulse from the King, or deniall of
acc
                  •
               sse 
                  〈◊〉
                him; Les oreills du Roy sont buschees de
Cotton: The Kings eares are stopt with Cotton. Whereupon
about three yeares since this Pasquill flew abroad
in Paris.
            
               
               
                  Le Roy ne scauroit faire vn pas,
                  Que le Pere Cotton l'accompagne:
                  Mais le bon Sire ne scait pas,
                  Que le fin
                        Fin in the French signifies as vvel craftie as fine. Cotton vient d'Espagne.
               
               
                  The King no where can step a foote,
                  But Father Cotton findes him out:
                  But the good King is not aware,
                  That fine Cotton is Spanish ware.
               
            
            But I leaue his person, and returne againe to his Letter,
in the scanning of which I have somewhat to say to
him, which the Author of Anti-Coton passeth by, which
is this; that whereas he vndertakes to proue that the
other Iesuites accord not with Mariana, in the doctrine
of making away Princes, and to that end produceth the
testimonie of Becanus, one of their chiefe pillars: turning
to the passage he quotes, I finde that Becanus in
that very place approues 
                  〈…〉
                in expresse
termes, and withall holds 
                  〈…〉
                common tenent of
the Iesuites, his words are these▪ 
               In respons▪ ad Aphorism.
9. At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   haecest expressa sententia Iohannis Marianae
loco citato, & aliorum Iesuitarum qui ha
                     •
                   de re
scripserunt, in qua non video quid Caluinistae possint
meritò reprehendere: And this is expresly the opinion
of Iohn Mariana in the place alledged, as also of the other
Iesuites who haue written touching this subiect, in which
I see not what it is which the Caluinists ca
                  ••
                iustly disproue.
That which I now affirme is a matter of fact, and
therefore needes no more adoe then the opening of the
Booke, and the reading of the text.
            
               Againe in producing Gregorie de Valentia his testimonie
of him,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   2 2. disp. 5. quest. 8. punct. 3. he affirmes, determine qu'il n'est nullement
permis d'attenter sur la vie du Prince, iaçoit
qu'il abuse deson authorite: he concludes, that it is in
no case lawfull to make a
                  •
                assault upon the person of the
Prince, howbeit be abuse his authoritie▪ Whereas the said
Valentian in the same place by him alledged, first distinguishing
of a tyrant by adminis
                  •
               ration and usurpation,
plainely affirmeth, de primo eadem estratio, ac de alijs
malefactoribus▪ qui solum per publicam pote
                     ••
                  atem
puniri possint: of a tyrant taken in the first sense (that is
by administration) there is the same reason as of other
malefactors, who cannot be punished but by publike authori
                  •
               ie.
In which words he seemes to me to range unruly
Princes (though they pretend neuer so iust a title to
their Crownes) in the Catalogue of common murtherers
and theeues, and to make them as abnoxious to publike
censure, whereas Cotton would make us beleeue
that he holds their persons altogether inuiolable.
            Lastly, that 
                  〈…〉
                to say at this time against
Cotton, and the 
                  〈…〉
                he alledgeth is this; against
himselfe, that he prote
                  ••
               eth, the opinion in this case of all
the I
                  •
               suites in common, and euery of them in pa
                  •
               ticular,
no way to dissent or vary from that of the uniuersall Catholique
Ch
                  •
               rch, which assertion of his to be meerely u
                  •
               
               true,
shall hereafter (God willing) be fully demonstrated,
by making it cleerely appeare what the Catholique
Church hath euer taught and practised in this point from
age to 
                  〈◊〉
                downe to thes
                  •
                very present times, and by
comparing it with that which the Iesuites now adayes
generally both teach and practis
                  •
               . Against the Authors
he alledgeth this I say, that whereas they impute the

occasion of the Canon of the Councell of Constance against
tyrannicides,Azorius Serarius, alij
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . to the doctrine of the Hussites, it
must needs arise either from their ignorance, or their
malice, or both; for had they but read the Canon it selfe
as it is laid down in the body of the Councel, or Iohn Gerson,
In his proposition on the behalfe of the French
King: or lastly, The French Historie in the life of
Charles the sixt, they might easily haue perceiued that
the occasion thereof grew from a doctrine which Iohn Petit,
a Doctor of the Sorbon, set a foote in 
                  •
               aris on the
behalfe of Iohn Duke of Burgundie, who tre
                  •
               herously
shew Lewis Duke of Orleance, as the author of this precedent
Booke hath rightly obserued, in the very first entrance
thereof, and surely I make no doubt but the greatest
part of those Fathers who met at that Councell, if
they now liued and saw how matters are carryed in Christend
                  •
               m,
would as willingly subscribe to the censuring
of that opinion which the Iesuit
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                maintain touching
to making away of 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                did to the condemnation
of that of Iohn 
               
                  〈…〉
                very deed and
truth is little or nothing differing 
                  •
               rom that of the Iesuites,
sa
                  •
               e onely they are growne more cunning to east a
fairer glasse & varnish vpon it. Thus much haue I added,
not that I take any pleasure in ripping vp and discouering
other mens imperfections, which with my heart I rather
wish were not; or in exagitating that Sect among whom
reside many excellent wits, but which dwell ill, and as he
said, in malum publicum, but only that I migh
                  •
                a little
farther search into that wound which I find cannot be
cured without much launcing: in the meane time my desire
is, and daily prayer vnto God shall be, that notwithstanding
wee differ in some points of our Religion, yet

we may all agree in our obedience to our Soueraigne, and
striue on each side to gaine credit to our Religion by the
fruits of our obedience, as assuring o
                  •
               r selu
                  •
               s (because
Truth it selfe hath deliuered it) that Obedience is better
then Sacrifice:
               1. Sam. 15. 22. Ita a plebibus Principes, & a s
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  is domini fer
                     ••
                  di sunt, vt sub 
                     •
                  x
                     •
                  rcitati
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  e t
                     •
                  leranti
                     •
                  e 
                     〈…〉
                  
                Iconclude with S. Augustine: So are
Subiects to beare with their Soueraignes, and Seruants
with their Lords, that through the exercise
of our patience, things transitorie
may be endured, and eternall
hoped for.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   