
      
         
            
            A
VERY SOVERAIGNE
OYLE to reſtore DEBTORS; being
rightly and ſeaſonably vſed.
Extracted out of that moſt tried and Quinteſſenſed
OYLE, by the Prophet
ELISHA.
By vertue whereof the VVIDDOVV indebted,
(mentioned in the ſecond Booke of the
KINGS) was reſtored out of debt, and her
Children releaſed of the bondage whereof
they were in danger.
            Written by Samuel Cotesford, late Miniſter at Stepney:
AND
Now newly publiſhed by W. CRASHAVVE, Miniſter
of Gods word at White-chappell,
neere LONDON.
            
            PROV. 20. 18.
            Eſtabliſh the thoughts by Counſell.
            
               LONDON:
Printed by T. S. for GEORGE HODGES,
and are to be ſold at his Shop at the Signe of the
Greyhound, in Pauls Church-yard.
1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE HONOVRABLE
Knight, Sr. Edward Sackvyle, a
worthy member of the COMONS
Houſe of PARLIAMENT.
            
               Honourable Sir;
            
            
               AMongſt the many honourable
motions and worthy intentions
of the preſent Parliament, you
did great honour to your ſelues
in hearing the cries of ſo many
hundred poore priſoners, whoſe
bloud, and the bloud of their
Children, cries I feare, for iudgement
mercileſſe, againſt thoſe mercileſſe Creditors, that
value not the precious life of a man, at the rate of an Oxe
or a Horſe: But for farre leſſer ſummes, doe keepe many
able and actiue men in Priſon, till they either dye, or become
vnable to ſerue the Common-wealth. Heauie and
bitter are the lamentations, cries, and complaints, that are
daily brought to vs, the Preachers of this Cittie, by the
poore wiues and Children of thoſe diſtreſſed priſoners, of
whom ſome lie in priſon for a blowe giuing, ſome for a

word ſpeaking, ſome for a quarters rent, ſome for a ſmall
remainder of an olde debt, ſome for a debt paid already,
but the Bond could neuer be got out of the Vſurers hand,
ſome for a iuſt debt, but ſome ſmall matter; ſome for no
debt of their owne, but onely other mens, and that for
which they would be content to ſtrippe themſelues of all
they haue, ſo they might but enioy their life and liberties.
But what ſay many of theſe greedy cormorants, It
ſhall coſt me more then my debt, but I will haue him; I
care not ſo much for my money, as that I may haue my
will of the villaine: Now I haue him, he ſhall lye by it, I
will haue his skin, I will make Dice of his bones? Such
vnmercifull and vnmanly words are vttered by theſe cruell-hearted
men. We brag that wee haue no Gallies, nor
Gally-ſlaues: If it be a glory to our Nation, then woe to
them that make many a poore man liue ſo in priſon, as
they had rather be a ſlaue in the Gallies. Wee boaſt wee
haue no Wolues in England; but if it be a bleſſing, then
pittie is it wee haue ſuch woluiſh and wicked natured
men, that like hungry Wolues deuoure their poore neighbours;
They ſay, that rauenous creature will dare to ſet vpon
a man, if he be alone, and will howle and yell to call
together his fellowes, that they may eate him amongſt
them. So, if a decayed Gentleman come within their
clutches, or the honeſt Marchant (whoſe eſtate is loſt by
Sea) fall within their danger, forth-with one of them
giues notice to another, like Wolues, one howling for
another, preſently they all fall vpon him, and ſtriue who
ſhall firſt haue his heart out, like ſo many Rauens, Vultures,
Kytes, or Cormorants, that eate vp amongſt them
and teare in pieces the ſilly dying horſe, which happily a
little before carried the King.
            You cannot better commend your ſelues to the preſent,
and your memories to future ages: you cannot amongſt
temporall things more aduance the honour of

the Engliſh Parliament, then by taking away one of the
foule ſtaines of this our Nation, euen by taking ſome wiſe
and godly order for the releaſing of the poore priſoners
of this kinde. It is ſaid by the wiſe, and I feare it is too true
an obſeruation, that all Europe hangs not vp ſo many
proper men, nor keepes in bondage ſo many men fit for
imployment, for vniuſt or ſmall debts, as England doth.
Deepe, and foule, and large, are theſe ſtaines, they be dyed
in graine, nay alas, in the bloud of many thouſands. Oh
happy, and to be honoured for euer, they that haue skill,
and will, and power together, to wipe off theſe vnworthy
ſtaines from off the face of our State! Some rich ones
haue the skill, but want will, they know well enough how
this might be helped, but for certaine carnall and worldly
reſpects they would not haue it ſo. Some good honeſt
men haue the will to reforme this, but want the skill; they
know not how it may be done. Some learned, wiſe, and
godly men, haue both skill and will, but being priuate
perſons, they want power. You of this high and thrice-Honorably
aſſembly of the Parliament, being ſo many
godly men, cannot want will; being ſo many learned and
wiſe, cannot want the skill; being the Councell of the
Kingdome, and hauing eſpecially ſo wiſe and mercifull a
King to ſecond you, you cannot want power; nay, the high
and Soueraigne power is in your hands. Put to therefore
your powerfull hands, for the furthering and effecting of
this worthy worke of God, and the Common-wealth, for
ſauing the liues of ſome hundreds, and redeeming the liberties
of ſome thouſands. How to ſaue the liues of ſo
many executed yearely in this Land, and yet to redreſſe
the euills, I will not enter, nor venter to ſet downe to them
that know better then my ſelfe; and now I hope haue
taken that conſideration to heart afore this day; at leaſt I
will reſerue it for another, and happily a more ſeaſonable
time. That which the preſent Subiect puts vs principally

in minde of, is the helping of thoſe many poore priſoners,
that conſume their beſt yeares in priſon, for Debts either
of an vngodly nature, or of a trifling quantity; for
ſuch are they onely that here are ſpoken for, or elſe ſuch
as being of moment, and iuſt alſo, and yet too cruelly
ſought for.
            I confeſſe there are an euill generation of ſuch as care
not to get mens goods into their hands, and then take
priſon, as a Sanctuary, and can pay well enough, but will
not; and others worſe then they, that wilfully breake
when they need not, or take mens monyes or goods, when
they haue a purpoſe to breake, and conſequently a purpoſe
not to pay: Theſe two ſorts of people are plaine
theeues, and many leſſer before God goe to Tyburne euery
yeare: Euen with the ſame breath, I begge mercie for
the former, I craue iuſtice and reuenge vpon thoſe, as being
one of the worſt kinde of Caterpillers, that eate out
the life of this Citties Common-wealth: Draw the ſword
of Iuſtice againſt thoſe, and ſpare not; let them be known
and vſed like great theeues, and robbers, as they are, and
much worſe then many by the high-way: But pittie and
relieue thoſe poore men, whom Gods hand, by fire or water,
or the ineuitable misfortunes of Sea and land, haue
made poore, ſuch as would gladly pay it if they had it, and
are well content to pay all they haue, or can make, nay,
would be glad to worke, and yeeld the benefit of their labours
to their Creditors. That ſuch honeſt poore men,
and ſome poore Gentlemen, ſhould not in theſe caſes bee
relieued, and either ſet at libertie, and put into imployment
(paying all they can preſently, and more as they
may hereafter) or elſe thoſe made to maintaine them that
keepe them in priſon, let others conſider how it ſtands
with ciuill pollicie and good gouernment; I am ſure it is
farre from the rules of Chriſtianitie, and (I take it) worſe
then the cuſtome and practiſe of other Nations.
            
               
You of this noble Parliament, that haue Power in your
hands, Mercy in your hearts, Experience before your cies,
and the cries of the oppreſſed in your eares euery day,
helpe forward this bleſſed worke: If they ſhall be ſo highly
rewarded at the laſt day, that viſite poore priſoners, how
glorious ſhall thoſe bee that mooue a meanes to redeeme
them? If this Treatiſe may ſtirre vp your zealous and noble
hearts, or ſet the leaſt edge vpon your godly affections
hereunto, I ſhall hold it a happie houre when I found
it amongſt the writings of that deceaſed Deuine, that
good man that wrote it.
            You, noble Sir, haue had a noble name for ſtanding vp,
and opening your mouth in good cauſes and charitable
motions, at Seſſions in Parliament, and other publique
meetings; Goe forward in the name, and with the bleſſing
of the God of mercie; Adde this to the manifolde
honours God hath already layd on you, and to the loue
that thouſands beare you: Thus ſhall you purchaſe the
prayers and praiſes of many hundred poore men, their
wiues and children, and hereby ſhall you gaine one poore
friend more, and euer binde me to remaine
            
               White-chappell
Nouēb. 3. 1621.
               
Your Seruant in Chriſt,
W. CRASHAVVE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               2 KINGS 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
               
                  1 ANd one of the Wiues of the ſonnes of the Prophets
cried vnto Elizha, ſaying: Thy ſeruant (mine
Husband) is dead, and thou knoweſt, that thy
ſeruant did feare the Lord: and the Creditor
is come to take my two ſonnes to be his Bond men.
                  2 Then Elizha ſaid vnto her, What ſhall I doe for thee?
Tell me what haſt thou at home: And ſhe ſaid, Thine Handmaid
hath nothing at home, ſaue a Pitcher of Oyle.
                  3 And he ſaid, Goe and borrow thee veſſels abroad of all
thy neighbours emptie veſſels, and ſpare not.
                  4 And when thou art come in, thou ſhall ſhut the doore
vpon thee, and thy ſonnes, and power out into all thoſe Veſſels,
and ſet aſide thoſe that are full.
                  5 So ſhe departed from him, and ſhut the doore vpon her,
and vpon her ſons, and they brought to her, and ſhe powred out.
                  6 And when the Veſſels were full, ſhe ſaid vnto her ſonne,
bring me yet a Veſſel; And he ſaid vnto her, there is no more
Veſſels: and the Oyle ceaſed.
                  7 Then ſhe came and told the man of God, and hee ſaid,
Goe and ſell the Oyle, and pay them that thou art indebted vnto;
Liue thou and thy children with the reſt.
               
            
            
               THE Argument of this Hiſtory is
this, Debts muſt be paid. The circumſtances
are thele: Firſt, The Perſons:
Secondly, The meanes whereby the
Debt is to be paid: Thirdly, The iſſue
of the meanes. The perſons are the Widdow,

her two ſonnes, the Prophet, and the Creditour:
The meanes, by the miraculous worke of God in
the miniſtery of Elizha, out of the veſſell of Oyle:
The iſſue of the meanes, two-fold: Firſt, the Oyle
is increaſed. Secondly, the Debt is paide. The
manner of handling this is by Bill and Anſwer, the
complaint of the Widdow, and the anſwer of the
Prophet.
            In the circumſtances, the firſt concerning the widdow,
are to be examined as they are laid downe in
the firſt Verſe, and they are motiues of compaſſion,
whereby ſhe drawes the Prophet to tender her
indebted eſtate: Theſe motiues ariſe, firſt, from her
ſelfe, and her two ſonnes: ſecondly, from the condition
and credit of her husband: thirdly, from
the Creditour, in demanding of his debt by the extremity
of Law then to be executed vpon thoſe
who were no way able to pay, that is, in requiring
her two ſonnes to be his Bond-men.
            The firſt motiue in theſe words, And one of the
wiues of the ſonnes of the Prophets, wherein ſhe layes
downe her ſelfe to be a ſole-woman or widdow; a
good motiue of compaſſion, as in the Law of Moſes
and throughout the whole Booke of God is to
be ſeene.Exod. 21. 22, 23, 24, verſes. 
               Ye ſhall not trouble any Widdow, nor fatherleſſe
Childe: If thou vexe and trouble ſuch, and ſo hee
ſhall call and cry vnto me, I will ſurely heare his cry,
then ſhall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with
the ſword, and your Wiues ſhall be Widdowes, and your
Children fatherleſſe. The other part of this motiue
concerning her two ſonnes, in theſe words: And

the Creditour is come to take my two Sonnes to be his
Bond-men: A wonderfull motiue to enforce, from
the naturalneſſe of a mother; wherein ſhe firſt complaines
that ſhee was to be depriued of her ſpeciall
ioyes and comforts in her widdowhood, viz. of her
two ſonnes, who were to her as the Images of her
Huſband, by whom alſo ſhe found perhaps ſome
meanes of helpe for their mutuall reliefe, as ſmall
helpes from children to the fathers and mothers
ſeeme great: Beſides ſhe complains that ſhe ſhould
not onely be depriued of them, but they ſhould alſo
be taken as Bond-ſlaues, their bones and tender
bodies day and night to be worne and tyred out
with moſt hard and grieuous labors. A very ſtrong
argument to breake a ſtony heart that otherwiſe
would not be mooued.
            Another motiue from the condition and credit
of her Huſband; firſt, a Prophets ſonne. Prophets
ſeldome haue meanes to leaue their wiues and children
rich: Secondly, a man alſo that feared God,
(and therefore ſeldome without the croſſe,) whereby
ſhe bindes the Prophet the more ſtrongly to her
ſuite.Gal. 6. 10. 
               Good is to bee done indeede to all, but ſpecially
(ſaith the Apoſtle Paul) to the houſhold of faith.
            
            Another motiue from the perſon of the Creditour,
who came to take her two ſonnes to be his
bond-men, whoſe ſeueritie (or extremitie rather,
becauſe either ſo hee muſt doe or looſe all) is not
ſo much to be cenſured, as ſhee was to be pittied
who was no otherwiſe able to diſcharge the debt
but by the loſſe of theſe her two ſonnes.
            
               
Now that I may lay downe ſome Leſſons as they
ariſe out of the Text: The firſt generall Leſſon
from the Widdow to all ſorts of people oppreſſed
is this, That in any wiſe they faile not in their miſeries
and comfortleſſe eſtates to vſe all good helpes
and meanes, both for their comfort, and the curing
of their decaies. In this the manifold examples in
the Scripture are Preſidents for our inſtruction, according
to proportion in the like, euen from the
greateſt perſons to the leaſt, and ſo relatiuely of all
to all,Gen. 41. 14. as each ſtands in need of other. Pharaoh and
Nabuchadnezzar are not reproued for ſeeking the
one to Ioſeph,
               Dan. 2. 1. 16. the other to Daniel, for the perſwading
of themſelues in their fearefull and troubleſome
dreames, by the interpretation of them: Yea,
how often was Pharaoh inforced to vſe and call for
the miniſtry of Moſes, in praying to God for him,
and his people, to deliuer them from the plagues
that iuſtly befall them.Gen. 20. 7. In the 20. of Geneſis, God
by a dreame informeth Abimilech King of Gerar, to
deale well with Abraham as concerning Sarah his
wife, becauſe (ſaith God) he is a Prophet, and hee
ſhall pray for thee that thou maieſt liue. How neceſſary
meanes the Prophets are betweene God
and his people, the very wicked are driuen to confeſſe
and againſt their wils to ſeeke to them: As Ieroboam
ſtretching out his hand to lay hold vpon
the Prophet that had denounced Gods iudgements
againſt him, and his idolatrous Altars; that
perſecuting hand of his, that ſtretched out it ſelfe,
being dried vp, he was inforced to intreat the Prophet

to pray for him as it is ſaid,1. Kings 13. 6. 
               I beſeech thee, ſaith
he, pray vnto the Lord thy God, and make interceſsion
for me, that mine hand may be reſtored vnto me. Likewiſe
in the New Teſtament,Math. 8. 11 verſe 5. the Leper came to Ieſus
for himſelfe,Matth. 15. 22. the Centuſion for his ſeruant, the
Canaanitiſh woman for her daughter:Acts 3. 23. Likewiſe to
the Diſciples of Chriſt came the Creeple, euen to
Peter and Iohn to receiue an almes.
            But ſome perhaps may thinke this leſſon needleſſe,
becauſe euery one is forward enough to promote
his owne cauſe, and to ſeeke helpe for himſelfe.
Whereunto I anſwer negatiuely, becauſe
what in the pride we haue of our ſelues, as thinking
that God doth ouermuch wrong vs, when he doth
any way take vs downe ſhort, or on the other ſide,
by an ouerweening of our too great abaſement, vnder
our afflictions through the corruption of our
diſtruſtfull hearts, wee, in the dayes of our peace,
wealth, and welfare, not hauing once ſought for any
meanes to ſuccour vs in our aduerſities, as if it
ſhould alwaies goe well with vs, doe many times
both ſhrinke & ſinke in the neceſſary ſuits for our
reliefe, eſpecially in the changes of our eſtates from
riches to pouerty. To omit them who in the matters
of fleſhly & inordinate loue, becauſe they cannot attaine
to their burning and luſtfull deſires, neuer vſing
any good, lawfull, holy, and commaunded
meanes, doe moſt Heathen-like, as people without
God, as by faithleſſe deſpaire, deſperately vntwiſt
their threede of this life: To omit all them,
who, becauſe they cannot bee liked, fauoured,

and counſels, are ready with Achitophel to cut themſelues
off from the world, as we reade of him, &c.
Now when Achitophel ſaw that his counſell was not
followed,
               2 Sam. 17. 23. 
               he ſadled his Aſſe, and aroſe and went home
vnto his City, and put his houſhold in order, and hanged
himſelfe, and dyed. Such are the dangers that will
fearefully befall them, who in not acquainting
themſelues with God in his holy Word, doe faile in
depending vpon him, according to the ordinary
meanes preſcribed by himſelfe, and to be vſed by
all his people, in and vnder the burthen of their
griefes and calamities: The not vſing whereof, cauſes
one miſery to follow another, to the increaſe not
onely of miſeries here, but to the procuring moſt
commonly of endleſſe miſeries of ſoule and body
after this life for euer.
            Indeede many are the diſcouragements that ſtep
in betwixt vs and our afflictions, as firſt the baſe
conceit that we are brought into of our ſelues, as if
wee were the leſſe in Gods fauour, becauſe of our
preſent puniſhments, which (we being of Gods choſen
in Chriſt) is but a conceit of ours, ariſing from
the frailty of our faith, without any iuſt ground of
the word of truth. Secondly, the ſlackneſſe, (nay,
the feare of the ſlackneſſe) and delay of iuſtice by
our ſuperiours; for we complaine many times without
a cauſe. Thirdly, the vnmercifulneſſe of the
time. Fourthly, the diſdaine of our neighbours, brethren,
and friends. Fiftly, the readineſſe of the wicked
cormorants, that ſtill ſeeke to prey vpon our
miſeries, (they be of many ſorts) iudge who they

be, who neuer giue ouer ſo long as there be any
thing for them to prey vpon. Sixtly, the hard account
that the World maketh of vs in their ſiniſterly
iudging vs to be ſo much the more wicked,
by how much the more the Lord doth humble vs:
All theſe to vndergoe, being ſore & grieuous temptations,
is not in our owne power, without the lawfull
and timely vſe of the Miniſters of God, or of
the Magiſtrates, or of both, whom reſpectiuely
vſed, and in their due ſeaſons, God hath ſanctified
for the comforts of our ſoules, as alſo of our bodies
during this life.
            Another danger may befall vs, a fore-runner of
theſe extreames before mentioned, which is a contempt
of Gods holy Commandement, the very
path way to Anabaptiſme, an hereſie wherein the
moſt neceſſary vſe of the Chriſtian Magiſtrate is denied,
whoſe vſe and end God, by Moſes, ſets downe
to his people, in all manner of treſpaſſe, (whither it
be for Oxen, for Aſſe, for Sheepe, for rayment, or
for any manner of loſt thing which another challengeth
to be his, the cauſe of both parties ſhall come
before the Iudges, and whom the Iudges condemne,
(for euery one may not be his owne Iudge)
hee ſhall pay the double vnto his Neighbour.
               Exod. 22. 9. Likewiſe
the Apoſtle Paul ſets downe the cauſe why tribute
is to them paid:Rom. 13. 4. & 6. verſes. 
               For this cauſe ye alſo pay tribute,
for they are Gods Miniſters, applying themſelues for
the ſame thing; that is, as in the fourth verſe he ſaith,
He is the Miniſter of God for thy wealth. To conclude
this point, doubtleſſe as we cannot continue long

in our bodies in this life without foode, or ſuch like;
no more can we (conſidering the diſordered courſe
of our wrangling and contentious diſpoſitions be,
or hold out long without the Magiſtrate, or the
Miniſter.
            The vſe then that we muſt make of this doctrine,Vſe.
is firſt to make triall of our ſelues, (by calling our
former wayes to remembrance, eſpecially how it
hath fared with vs in our ſundry afflictions) whether
we haue fainted at any time vnder the burden:
For as Salomon ſaith;Prou. 34. 10. 
               If thou be faint in the day of aduerſity,
thy ſtrength is ſmall: or whether wee euer
found comfort in the Croſſe, and thereafter to proceede
with our ſelues by humble and hearty prayer
vnto God to arme vs with patience, and to teach
vs the beſt wayes vnder our troubles, and to leade
vs on chearefully to vſe them, whereby we may not
onely be comforted, but alſo (if God ſee it good for
vs) be reſtored. Herein alſo wee muſt proceede
with continuance, waiting the happy iſſue of them,
(yea, and that vntill the Lord haue mercy vpon vs)
whereunto let the widdow that importuned the
vniuſt Iudge, and yet (though long firſt) in the end
preuailed; ſtirre vs vp to ſteady proceeding on in
our ſuites, which Iudge though hee neither feared
God, nor reuerenced man, yet becauſe this widdow
ſaith he, troubleth me, I will doe her right, leſt at the
laſt ſhee come and make me weary: And ſo much the
more to hearten vs on, let vs not forget in our
prayers our Magiſtrates, then eſpecially when any
of our iuſt cauſes are vpon trialls to the which purpoſe

the Pſalmiſt directeth vs in theſe words;Pſal. 72. 1. 2. 
               Giue
thy iudgements to the King, O God, and thy righteouſneſſe
to the Kings Sonne: Then ſhall hee iudge the
people in righteouſneſſe, and the poore with equitie.
This is the way to keepe our faith vpright in God,
ſtill to relie vpon him in the bleſſing of the meanes
to vs. Laſt of all, let vs looke backe to Gods former
care ouer vs, and from an experimentall feeling
of that his goodneſſe, let vs quicken vp our
dull and heauy ſoules, 
                  •
               aying confidently, as from
the aſſurance of faith,Pſal. 27. 12. with Dauid; Though my Father
and Mother forſake me, yet the Lord will gather me vp.
And with the Apoſtle Paul, to teſtifie of God in
this ſort:2 Cor. 1. 10. 
               Who hath deliuered vs from ſo great a death,
doth deliuer vs, and in whom we truſt that he will deliuer
vs.
               1 Cor. 10. 13. Againe, God is faithfull, which will not ſuffer
you to be tempted aboue that you be able, but will euen
giue the iſſue with the tentation, that you may be able to
beare it.
            
            Now let vs proceede to ſome particular obſeruations
further, to be drawne out of the words
of her Petition: Thy ſeruant mine Husband is dead,
and thou knoweſt thy ſeruant did feare the Lord, and
the Creditor is come, &c. It is as cleare as the Sunne
that her Husband left her indebted, and not that
ſhee fell into debt after, becauſe the words are inſeparably
conioyned, as alſo from the cuſtome of creditors,
who immediately vpon the death of their
debtors doe ſeeke into their eſtates, and with all expedition
call home their owne. But the thing to be
obſerued vpon this place, in the mention making of

her Husband to feare God, and therein appealing
to the teſtimony of the Prophet himſelfe, is this, that
againſt the practiſe of moſt women ſhee forgets her
pouerty, preuailing mightily againſt the male-contentedneſſe
of her eſtate, or rather the hard eſtate
her Husband left her in, and with the comfortable
remembrance of her Husbands piety, and feare of
God, ſhee doth as it were feede and ſatisfie her
ſelfe.
            The leſſon that is taught women aboue others
in this place, is, that in their chaſte and ſincere loue
they ought (inaſmuch as in them lieth) to couer the
treſpaſſes of their Husbands, eſpecially they failing
but in matters of worldly wants, or in ſuch like,
whereof God depriues them for ſome thing beſt
knowne to himſelfe. Doubtleſſe, worldly encombrances
doe breede much diſcontentedneſſe betweene
Husband and Wife, where Gods feare ouerrules
not in each; to which purpoſe, the Apoſtle
Paul ſpeaketh as by way of compariſon betweene
the marryed eſtate and ſingle life;1 Cor. 7. verſe 33. 
               The marryed man
(ſaith he) careth for the things of the World, and how
he may pleaſe his wife; which in the things more indifferent
of this life to doe, is no diſparagement to the
Husband at all, being done in knowledge: according
alſo to which the Wife is to walke, yea, ſo farre
as behoueth her place, and that for the nouriſhing
of houſhold peace, yea, as a teacher of honeſt things;
which leſſon howſoeuer it concerne; ſpecially the
elder women, yet all women are (being come to that
holy degree of the married eſtate) not onely to

know for themſelues, but for their Husbands, Children,
Seruants, and Neighbours: and herein the Apoſtle
Peter doth affirme,1 Pet. 3. verſ. 1. that the knowledge of the
Wife how to walke in all good and due ſubiection
to her Husband, and ſo to doe, (for there be too
many that know and doe not,) is as an excellent
meanes preparatory to draw on an vntoward Huſband
to the profeſſion of faith, to which purpoſe
theſe words tend: Likewiſe let the Wiues be ſubiect
to their Husbands, that euen they which obey not the
Word, may without the Word be wonne by the conuerſation
of the Wiues. But what if the Wife doe in ſome
good meaſure of knowledge goe beyond the Huſband,
and able perhaps to direct her Husband?
(God willing it ſhould be ſo vpon ſome occaſions)
not ordinarily:1 Pet. 3. 7. for the Husband is the Wiues head, and
Husbands ſhould dwell with their Wiues as men of
knowledge. Such a Wife had Manoach the Father of
Sampſon,
               Iudge. 13. 23. as wee reade; ſuch a Wife was Abigal to
Nabal, that man of Belial: few ſuch Wiues, but too
too many ſuch Nabals. I feare this age is repleniſhed
with, ſeparating, to the end Husbands may follow
their ſtrange luſts: But to goe on, herein let not the
Wife in her knowledge vſurpe a dominion ouer her
Husband, nor yet in pride of heart inſult ouer him,
for that is rather to deſtroy then to build, and builders
ought, good Wiues to be, as Salomon teacheth.
A wiſe woman buildeth her Houſe.
               Prou. 14. 1. This then is required
further of a Wife, that ſhee doe carry her
ſelfe in all temperance and ſobriety, with a meeke
and quiet ſpirit, which is before God a thing much

ſet by, and therein as a fellow-helper, comforter,
and counſellor, ſo ſpeaking to & for her Husband,
as if he knowing all already, and more then ſhe can
tel & aduiſe him, may be, and ſo ſtand, as his remembrancer,
ſeeking with this widdow in al ſhe may, the
honor, credit, and eſtimation of her husbands good
name, thogh dead, much more liuing; not admitting
(thogh perhaps there be ſome cauſe) any one, thogh
vniuſtly, to eſtrange her heart from her Husband.
            The conſideration of this Doctrine may ſerue all
good and Chriſtian Wiues,Doct. either ſo being, or hauing
beene Widdowes, thoſe eſpecially vnto whom
(vpon too ſudden a change of their eſtates) oftentimes
there fall out many diſcontentments, to teach
them by all meanes to auoide all vnſeemely, quarrellous,
and contentious ſpeeches, and no way diſtemperately
to vexe, grieue, thwart, and croſſe
their Husbands, but in all good peace ſo to carry
themſelues towards them, though perhaps irreligious
and farre out of order, as that they rather
learne to take, and ſo take theſe troubles of theirs,
which in want of fore-ſight they haue brought vpon
themſelues, as not onely tryals of their faith
and patience ſent from God, but alſo medicinable
corrections for their further amendment. If this
then be the duty of Wiues to Husbands who feare
not God, what is then to be required of thoſe
Wiues, whoſe Husbands, in a good and conſcionable
regard of them and theirs, doe labour in their
profeſſion, and according to their place, to walke
according to all godlineſſe and piety? Theſe I ſay,

(by the wiues in all mildneſſe) are much more in all
ſubiection to be yeelded vnto.
            Thus then you ſee this woman, vpon the loue
to her Husband, not ſo ſoone forgotten, was comforted
to ſollicite Elizha in her owne behalfe, by an
argument drawne from the feare of God, that was
in him well knowne to Elizha himſelfe, as ſhee
ſaith; And thou knoweſt that thy ſeruant did feare the
Lord: whereby alſo the Prophet was ſo much the
more willing to liſten carefully to her ſuite. Good
indeede is to be done for all,Gal. 6. 10. 
               but eſpecially to them
who are of the Houſhold of Faith.
            
            Another doctrine alſo out of the words of the
woman doe iſſue,Doct. in that ſhee ſpeaking to Elizha,
calles her Husband his Seruant, and afterward her
ſelfe his Hand-maide; and it is this: That the Prophets
of God, as now the Miniſters of the Goſpell,
are each to reſpect other with a ſpeciall reſpect, and
that betweene themſelues, with difference, according
to age, grauity, knowledge, vnderſtanding, and
the differing gifts of Gods grace in them; as is here
ſomewhat to be ſeene: A leſſon ſlenderly reſpected
in theſe dayes, wherein all things goe out of ſquare,
ſo great is the pride and diſdaine each of other, yea,
and that among the teachers themſelues. But to the
purpoſe in hand: It appeares that her ſaid husband
deceaſed, brought vp in one of the Schooles of the
Prophets, whether Bethel or Iericho, as an ordinary
Miniſter of the Church, accordingly trayned vp,
did, whether in prayer, interpretation of the Scriptures,
doctrine, or exhortation, performe his duty

in the Churches ſeruice, according to the ordinary
calling whereunto he was, and that by ordinary
labour and trauaile, prepared. But in that ſhee
ſubmits her husband ſo low, as to terme him Elizhaes
ſeruant, ſhe may ſeeme too much to abaſe her
Husband, and too highly to aduance Elizha: Nothing
leſſe: She ſpeakes of them both, according to
the ſeuerall gifts that were in them, wherein Eliſha
extraordinarily called, did thereafter ſhine in gifts
extraordinary, worthy therefore in her account of
double honour. By occaſion whereof, ſomewhat
may be ſaid as concerning the titles of the Lord
Biſhops now amongſt vs, and that very fitly, although
they can no way approue themſelues equall
to Eliſha: neither doe they ſeeke it, in reſpect
of that calling, and thoſe extraordinary gifts of
working miraculouſly being ceaſed. But the rather
to lay it downe, not as an anſwere to thoſe who doe
diſpitefully in tearmes carry themſelues towards
the Church-gouernours, diſdayning them for their
titles ſake (for they are ſuch as will neuer be anſwered)
and indeede are not worthy an answere:
but for the further confirming of them in the
truth, who are in the ſame already; this is the
thing. It is not forbidden ſimply to giue to the
Miniſters of the Church honourable titles; prouided
alwaies that it be not done in flattery, or beſides
true knowledge: Neither are thoſe places; Be
not called Rabbi;
               Matth. 23. 8. 9. 10. 
               Call no man Father vpon earth; Be
not called Doctors, any way of force to abridge the
Miniſters of the Goſpel of their due honour: It

ſerued indeed to reſtraine the ambitious Phariſees'
who hunting after vaine titles, deſired ſo to be called;
and would alſo that the people ſhould wholly
reſt themſelues vpon whatſoeuer was propounded
vnder their names, as meerely authenticall, and
no way to be gain-ſaid:Iob 32. 22. Neither that of Elihu; For
I may not giue titles, left my Maker ſhould take mee away
ſuddenly.
               Iames 3. 1. Neither that of Iames; Be not many
Maſters ſo to be taken? as if all title of honour, or reuerend
eſtimation, were taken away, or forbidden
to be giuen to the Miniſters of the Church: This is
onely forbidden them and thee; Them, that they
doe not ambitiouſly ſeeke and hunt after the titles
of thoſe places and callings, for the honour and
titles ſake, without purpoſe to doe the duties beſeeming
thoſe places and callings; or, as if vnder
that name or title of honour, whatſoeuer ſeemed
good in their eies, they might propound, and it not
to be refuſed; which to doe were meere Papal and
antichriſtian: Thee, that thou alſo doe not tie thy
iudgement, or faith, (concerning God and holy
things) to men; for their outward reſpects ſake:
But let them be called Fathers of the Church, and ſo
call thou them,1 Cor. 4. 15. for ſo Paul was called, and ſo called
he himſelfe: For though ye haue ten thouſand inſtructors
in Chriſt, yet haue yee not many Fathers
(ſaith hee) for in Chriſt Ieſus I haue begotten you,
through the Goſpel: yea, hee called himſelfe the Doctor
and teacher of the Gentiles; and thus they are,
and may be called, ſo as they doe wholly and ſimply
ſubmit themſelues to Chriſt, as to their onely

Maſter, ſent of God; and ſeeke alſo to ſubiect and
bring thee and thine, by their authoritie, vnder
the obedience, ſoueraignty, and dominion of Chriſt
himſelfe, their teacher, and thy teacher; their Lord
and thy Lord; their Maſter, and thy Maſter. And
thus much by the way, vpon that the Widdow
called her Husband, Eliſha his Seruant, and herſelfe
his Hand-maide.
            There is further vpon this poynt, that hee feared
God, notwithſtanding hee died in debt, this Doctrine
to be obſerued, that a man may be indebted,
and yet be free from the common fame of the
World, that is, to be an ill Man: Which is no
more true, then on the other ſide to ſay ſuch and
ſuch are wealthy, rich, and of good credit in the
World, and therefore they muſt needes be good,
honeſt, and godly men, when as yet perhaps they
neuer knew what true godlineſſe meant. But how
can this agree then with thoſe places (will ſome ſay)
where God makes a large promiſe to his people,
vpon condition that they hearken to the voyce of
their God, to obſerue and doe all his commaundements,
as by Moſes is written:Deut. 15. 6. & 28. 12. 
               Then thou ſhalt lend
to many Nations, and not borrow thy ſelfe. And againe
the Prophet Dauid ſaith, A good man is mercifull,
and lendeth.
               Pſalme 112. 5. And on the other ſide, the Prophet
Dauid, hee ſets it downe as a ſpeciall marke of
a wicked man, to borrow and not to reſtore. The
wicked man borroweth,
               Pſalm. 37. 21. 
               and (ſaith hee) payeth not againe?
&c.
            
            I anſwer. Howſoeuer the promiſe of Gods bleſſings

to the whole body of the people of Iſrael, is
no longer proper to them, then they ſhall ioyntly
and together bind themſelues ſincerely and ſimply
to keepe, and in ſo being bound, doe indeede
keepe Gods Commaundements; yet in ſome other
reſpect God both may, and at his pleaſure doth oftentimes
temporally puniſh the godly with the
wicked (as the Apoſtle Peter layeth it downe in
theſe wordes:1. Pet. 4. 17.) For the time is come, that iudgement
muſt beginne at the houſe of God: Yea, and amongſt
other puniſhments, with this as one, God puniſheth
thee, it being incident to the children of God, rather
to want then to abound, and this as hee doth
iuſtly inflict vpon man for ſinne, as Ieremy ſaith;
Man ſuffereth for ſinne:
               Lament. 3. 39. Yet ſome other ends there
may be and are with God▪ as the triall of the faith
and patience of his ſeruants vnder the croſſe, whereby,
to the further glory of his name, ſome hidden
vertues may more fully appeare out of them which
before were not knowne. A ſecond end may be, a
greater manifeſtation of Gods care ouer them vnder
preſent wants,1. Kings 17. 4. 9. as ouer Eliah the Prophet, for
whoſe reliefe God had prouided the Rauens to
feede him; and by the widdow of Sareptha; and
his mightie protection, which neuer ſhews it ſelfe
more, then when his people are in the greateſt
danger, as in the time when the people of Iſrael
were in the Red-Sea; as alſo, whileſt in the change
of their condition and eſtates from wealth to pouerty;
he againe, of poore makes them rich, by reſtoring
them to their firſt or former eſtate, as hee

did Iob.
               Iob 42. 10. Thirdly, for the taming or reſtrayning of
ſome one or other ſinne, God oftentimes meetes
with his children (after their long ſecurity and careleſſe
regard of the Word, calling them to repentance,
they not repenting) by the rod of affliction:
Whereupon he hauing, as Elihu ſaith, ſet to his ſeale,
ordaining it as the pruining-knife, to the cutting off
the ſuperfluous branches, for the cauſing of them
to bring forth fruit the better, he faith: Then he openeth
the eyes of men,
               Iob 33. 
               euen by their corrections, which
he had ſealed. Whereby he hauing (as the Prouerbe
is) ſtrooke the nayle to the head, the heart and the
affections once renewed and changed, then hee
brings vnder obedience all thoſe wandring luſts,
which before-time went aſtray from Gods holy
Commandements: to the which purpoſe the Prophet
Dauid confeſſeth, as is 119. Pſalme: Before I
was afflicted, I went aſtray: as for that of the good
man, to be mercifull, and to lend, it rather deſcribeth
the true propertie of a good man already inriched,
for the diſpoſing of his riches to the good of others,
then otherwiſe in any vngodly care to get or
increaſe his wealth: which (by occaſion of the next
place) viz.
               Pſal. 37. 
                     •
                  1. 
               (The wicked man borroweth, and payeth
not againe) as afore is more fitly met withall; which
words of the Prophet doe not concere thoſe
who ordinarily being poore and needy, are inforced
to borrow directly for the ſupply of their preſent
wants, being alſo godlily minded, vpon good
fore-ſight, and hope of meanes in like manner to
make reſtitution by: But it concernes all ſorts and

degrees both of rich and poore, who any way vniuſtly
minded, doe take into their hands the goods
of other men, for their preſent vſe, without any purpoſe
of reſtoring; of whom thoſe monſters amongſt
men, who immediately borrowing without need,
vpon purpoſe to breake, doe (by the ſpoyle of other
their creditors, inforced to ſtand at their courteſie
for preſent payment,) haſtily become rich vpon
other mens goods: Some other there are, who
vnder the name of a more ſtrict courſe of godlineſſe
in the profeſſion of the Goſpel then others,
hauing yet a mind that they liue, but are dead, (being
indeed aſhamed to acknowledge their mother,
in whoſe wombe they had their firſt conception
vnto life) theſe in like manner (omitting their honeſt
and lawfull callings, being weary of well-doing)
as buſie-bodies, whileſt they will become
planters, and reformers of Churches, ſtrayning
beyond their Laſt, till all cracke againe, hauing run
themſelues out of breath, are brought to borrow;
and this alſo they hold they may doe, not purpoſing
euer to make reſtitution, accounting in their
Anabaptiſticall community, as a ſpeciall point of
Diuinitie with them, the goods of them of whom
they make thus bold with, euen the goods of the
Church (the ſpoyle of Babel, as they tearme it) as
if they had by ſome Oracle from Heauen, with the
Iſraelites,
               Exod. 3. 22. receiued a warrant from God ſo to doe.
To omit all other needleſſe borrowers for the
cunning ingroſſement of commodities of all ſorts
into their hands by way of Monopolie, not caring
what become of the Common-wealth ſo they alone

may liue; to omit all other borrowers vpon
vſury, to the end they may to a further and greater
exacting againe, vpon vſury, lend, All theſe, ioyne
them in one, are of the number of thoſe, and may
well ſo be reckoned, of whom Dauid ſpeaketh; The
wicked borroweth, and payeth not againe.
            
            Out of this which hath beene ſpoken, euery true
member of the Church is to learne; firſt, for his ſetled
courſe of conuerſing and making trafficke with
men;Doct. That if he deſire to haue the report of one that
feareth God,Col. 3. 22. and that in ſingleneſſe of heart; he muſt
take heede (as the Apoſtle Paul teacheth) that he oppreſſe
not,
               1 Theſ. 4. 6. 
               nor defraude his brother in any matter.
And then, that he trie and examine himſelfe by the
two looking-glaſſes of the Law, and the Goſpel, the
two parts of the Word of God, wherein hee may
finde out whether he truly feare God, or no; a point
very neceſſary to be ſtood vpon. Doubtleſſe in the
one and firſt, which is the Law, he ſhall find out in
himſelfe nothing but ſin and iniquity, and thereby
that he ſtands in the ſeuerity of Gods extreame iuſtice,
in and vnder the danger of eternall death and
condemnation: In the other, he ſhall find that God
according to his owne goodneſſe, will looke vpon
him with an amiable and chearefull countenance,
and diſcouer vnto him Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne, as
the onely waſher, purger, and cleanſer of him from
his ſinne, not onely by forgiueneſſe, but alſo by his
ſanctifying Spirit; taking away the power of ſinne,
that it ſhall not rule or raigne any longer in his mortall
body,
               Rom. 6. 12. 
               to obey it in the luſts thereof: And becauſe

there is iuſt occaſion offered to ſpeake of this point
in these words (And thou knoweſt thy ſeruant did feare
God) it is not from the purpoſe, that I ſet downe
thus much more vpon it, before euery one that
reades it; (viz.) that according as God did worke
formerly in men a true care of performance of the
duties, whatſoeuer of equity, honeſty, or charity
between themſelues, ſo he meaſured his owne loue
to them-ward, by an aſſurance of faith vnto eternall
life accordingly: For men are reputed no further
to haue profited in the ſound knowledge of
God, according to the rules of the firſt Table of the
Law, then they are ready to expreſſe the ſame by
doing the duties of the ſecond: For by this rule did
both the holy Prophets and Apoſtles meaſure out
the aſſurance of the loue of God to themſelues, and
the people. Micah the Prophet expoſtulating this
point with the people of Iſrael in his dayes, who
ſatisfied themſelues, as they doe now, with an outward
ſhew of ſeruing of God, by their ſacrifices;
when in the meane time they were full of cruelty,
and oppreſſion, voide of all mercy to their Neighbours.
Will the Lord (ſaith he) be pleaſed with thouſands
of Rammes,
               Micah 6. 6. 7. 8. 
               or with ten thouſand Riuers of Oyle?
ſhall I giue my firſt borne for my tranſgreſsion, euen the
fruite of my body for the ſinne of my ſoule? And thereto
he anſwereth. 8. He hath ſhewed thee O man what
is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee; ſurely to
doe iuſtly, and to loue mercy, and to humble thy ſelfe to
walke with thy God: And thus muſt euery debtor,
yea, and creditor alſo, trie himſelfe whether he feare

God, or no; euen by the Offices of borrowing and
lending, according to good and pure loue, laide
downe in the Word. For ſaith the Apoſtle Iohn;
Whoſoeuer doth not righteouſneſſe,
               1 Iohn 3. 10. 
               is not of God; neither
he that loueth not his brother. All which duties of the
Law alſo, concerning God and man, muſt be done
in like manner wholly, and that from a ſound heart:
And therefore if thou ſhalt ſoothe vp thy ſelfe in
ſome duties doing, and ſhalt in the meane while
faile in other; know this from the Apoſtle Iames,
who ſaith:Iames 2. 10. 
               For whoſoeuer ſhall keepe the whole Law,
and yet faileth in one point, is guilty in all. Where then
the true feare of God is, there is firſt integrity of
heart, and then whole obedience, that is, a continuall
ſtriuing vnto the performance of all and euery
duty, with care of doing what wee doe for Gods
cauſe, or becauſe of the loue that wee doe beare to
God conſtrayning vs thereunto.
            But becauſe in either getting, or keeping a good
report, whileſt men dealet together in matters of this
World, as in borrowing and lending, there be many
windings and turnings, ſo that it is hard for a man
to paſſe away without ſome ſtaine of his credit (eſpecially
if hee bee one that ſtriueth vnto godlineſſe,
whom all the World ſeeketh to ſpeake ill of,) it
ſtands euery man in hand therefore, ſo much the
more truly to 
                  •
               ift himſelfe, eſpecially when Gods
hand is vpon him in this affliction of being in debt.
He therefore that will not be deceiued in himſelfe,
in looking vpon the Law of the ten Commandements,
as vpon a looking-glaſſe, wherein he deſires

to behold the errors of his life; let him caſt his eye
aſide, and with good care looke into the extreame
part of that Glaſſe, euen the tenth Commandement:
Thou ſhalt not couet, &c. Or as the Apoſtle
ſaith,Rom. 7. 7. 
               Thou ſhalt not luſt; and there ſhall hee learne
this leſſon, that if hee haue giuen but way to any
ſinne to make proffer to him, and ſo ſuffer it to reſt,
and Sathan the firſt mouer or ſuggeſter to ſinne,
with any, though neuer ſo ſmall an entertainment
of him; yea, if he haue but granted time, (vpon the
motion and firſt ſuggeſtion thereunto) to demurre,
and as it were to aduiſe whether it be beſt to thinke,
or not to thinke, to doe, or not to doe, thereby calling
the Law of God into queſtion or doubt, put
the caſe it be vpon this point of borrowing, vpon
a deceiueable purpoſe to ſerue thy preſent neede;
if that party whoſoeuer hath not giuen either in the
point in hand, as borrowing vpon deceiueable purpoſes,
or any the like motion or prompting vnto
ſinne, (as our Sauiour Chriſt) did vnto Sathan,
the preſent auant or auoid Sathan,Matth. 4. 10. and with Dauid,
Away from me all yee workers of iniquitie;
               Pſal. 6. 8. or rather
with the ſame Prophet, in the like words; Away
from me yee wicked,
               Pſal. 119. 15. 
               I will keepe the Commaundements
of my God; let him know that hee hath ſinned already
againſt his owne ſoule, euen in this, that by
demurring with Sathan, as by way of counſailetaking,
he hath giuen him ſome hope to preuaile at
the laſt; which to doe is ſinne with God: and therefore
to this purpoſe ſpeaketh the holy Apoſtle
Paul:
               Epheſ. 4. 
                     •
                  -7. 
               Let not the Sunne goe downe vpon your wrath,

neither giue place to the Deuill. For how ſmall ſoeuer
a ſinne (not to reſiſt ſinne vpon the firſt ſight,) in
outward ſeeming appeares to be, becauſe the beginnings
of ſinne are very deceitful, it being a common
ſaying, A little is not ſo much: Yet ſo great
it is doubtleſſe, as once being entred vpon thee,
hardly after, if euer, vntill thy dying day, will it be
got out: for the very regenerate haue their ſinnes,
vnder the which they doe continually labour,
which maketh them goe heauily mourning all the
day long, and oftentimes to water their couch
with their teares, as Dauid did, who complained
ſaying;Pſalme 6. 6. 
               I fainted in my mourning, I cauſe my bedde
euery night to ſwimme, and water my couch with my
teares: and this doth the looking into this firſt
glaſſe of the Law cauſe, yea, in them who truely
feare God. But here they muſt not ſtand: There
is another more cleare criſtalline and comfortable
glaſſe of the Goſpel, which alſo they muſt with all
good ſpeed looke into, where they ſhall euen vpon
the very firſt view, ſo ſodainly behold Chriſt Ieſus,
that onely comforter of them that mourne in Sion,
and the refreſher of thoſe that goe heauily laden vnder
the burthen of their ſinne, and ſeeke their refreſhing
where it is to be had: for faith in Chriſt
Ieſus, is the onely marke of that filial, ſon-like, and
true feare of God, without the which faith, there
is no true feare of God at all; and when thou ſeeſt
him, goe to him, lay hold on him, make thy moane
to him, ſhew him thy ſoares, thy wounds, certifie
him of the foyles thou haſt had ſince thou entredſt

thy ſelfe a Souldier vnder his Banner, challenge him
for thy Captaine, acknowledge thy ſtrayings and
wandring out of his Campe; let him know thy ſeuerall
and particular ſinnes, hide nothing from
him, (though he know all before) it ſhall be his
greater glory, and in the end thy greater comfort:
bewaile his ſo long abſence from thee, with the great
dangers thou waſt in whileſt thou waſt left to thy
ſelfe: Say with the Church in Salomons Song. I
ſought him,
               Song of Salomon, 5. 6. 
               but I found him not; I called vpon him, and
he anſwered me not. Giue me leaue a little longer,
becauſe this feare of God,Eccleſiaſtes 12. 13. as is ſaid; Hoc eſt totum hominis:
it is all that God requires of man, and it is
that thou muſt haue, and it is a point whereupon
thou muſt trie, and often examine thy ſelfe; euen
King, Queene, Prince, Nobles, Gouernours, Miniſters,
Husband, Wife, Father, Children, Maſters,
Seruants. I cannot therefore end, I am as in
a maze; giue me leaue yet in a word, who is it that
as the Church before ſaith, hath not called vpon
God often, and yet hath not preuailed; and what
then, ſhall he therefore giue ouer? No, ſhall he not
ſtill pray? Yes. Wilt thou aske how long, leaue
him not vntill he haue mercy vpon thee; let not the
terribleneſſe of thine enemy (although he be as a
roaring and deuouring Lyon,
               1 Pet. 5. 8. laid downe by the Apoſtle
Peter before thee, let it not daunt thee, but awaken
thy ſpirits the more, the rather; and therefore
to the purpoſe it is, that the Apoſtle ſaith:
Watch ye, ſtand faſt in the Faith; quit you like men,
               1 Cor. 16. 13. 
               and
be ſtrong. And as in the Epheſians: Hauing finiſhed

all things, ſtand, and to thy greater hope of preuailing,
adde (as the Apoſtle Paul in that very place
immediatly after ſaith,Verſe 18. thereunto Prayer: And pray
alwayes (ſaith he) with all manner prayer and ſupplication
in the ſpirit, and faint not. And howſoeuer euery
ſinne, whereof Sathan will (hauing beene the firſt
mouer of thee thereunto) be thy accuſer, ſhall appeare
to thy wounded conſcience as a moſt fearefull
and terrible monſter, greedily, and with open
mouth gaping wide, doe ſeeke to ſwallow and deuoure
thee vp euen aliue; yet as thou feareſt God,
and deſireſt the report thereof in the World, in life,
in death, and after death, as this poore Widdowes
Husband, haue faith in God, and ſhrinke not;
behold his loue to thee in Chriſt, and be of good
cheare: although thou haſt liued in the wayes of
the World, without regard of God and his Law
heretofore, yet vpon this thy faith, fruitfull in repentance,
be comforted with Paul; It is not thou, but
ſinne in thee,
               Rom. 7. 17. & 15. as is ſaid: It is no more I, (for now thou
beleeueſt, thou art another perſon in Chriſt Ieſus
before God, thy ſinne is not looked vpon) but ſaith
he, It is ſinne that dwelleth in me: For I allow not
(ſaith he) that which I doe, for what I would, that doe I
not; but what I hate, that doe I. It is that naturall corruption,
which doubtleſſe cleaueth to them who
are regenerate, and although daily in conquering,
yet not cleane conquered. But in this triall of thy
ſelfe, as concerning the true feare of God to be in
thee; if thou feeleſt that thou haſt thus farre profited,
goe on ſtill with the bleſſed Apoſtle, as one wearied

with theſe miſerable conflicts of Sathan, and
ſhew thy faith more and more, by ſtill going to
God, as thy onely helper, and crie aloud with
groanes and ſighes;Verſe 24. 
               Oh wretched man that I am, who
ſhall deliuer me from this body of death? And againe,
to deſpite Sathan to his teeth, as if thou hadſt already
gotten the victory, (for Faith, whoſe obiect
is Chriſt, with all the graces of his Spirit, giueth to
each beleeuer things abſent, as already preſent) be
bold to out-face him,Pſal. 118. 13. and ſay as Dauid to Saul; Thou
haſt thruſt ſore at me, that I might fall; but the Lord
he hath holpen me. To the end then that all iuſt ſuſpitions
of deceitfull ſhifts in borrowing may be taken
from thee, and that thy name may be free from
all iuſt ſlander,Pſal. 119. 22. pray with Dauid to God, and giue
not ouer; Remoue from me ſhame and contempt: and
againe in the 39.Verſe 39. verſe. Take away my rebuke that I
feare, &c. And in thus doing, and preuailing, thou
ſhalt reape vnto thee, for thy comfort, both liuing
and dead, this report; that thou haft feared God.
Now to proceede to that which followeth, concerning
the Creditor, in theſe words of her complaint:
And the Creditor is come to take my two Sonnes to be
his bond-men.
            
            The Law of bondage, as appeareth both by the
Scriptures, as alſo by the Law of Nations hath been
ancient; which alſo may be found to haue beene amongſt
vs, as by certaine Inſtruments of Manumiſſion
for the releaſe of bond-men or villaines;
and this before the time of the Goſpell may euidently
appeare. By the Law of Nations it appeares

ſo to haue beene.Aul. Gell. lib. 20. cap. 1. It was decreed (ſaith Aulus
Gellius) by the Iudge, that after the Debtor was
demaunded by the Creditor his debt, hee not hauing
to pay at the inſtant, that then hee ſhould
haue thirtie dayes more giuen him, and if within
that time he could not make ſatisfaction, then the
poore man was fettered by the feete; and further,
being faſt bound with a cord or long line, was ſo
deliuered ouer to the Creditor; who leading him
home as an Oxe or an Aſſe, hee put him to what
ſeruile worke ſoeuer, vntill that by his moſt ſlauiſh
and more perhaps then Egyptian-like bondage, he
had by all toyleſome labour wrought out vnto his
Maſter ful ſatisfaction of his debt; and thus for the
time of their bondage were they bought and ſold
from one to another, as beaſts are ſold in a market:
For proofe wherof, vnder the law of Moſes, we read,
If thou buy an Hebrew ſeruant,
               Exod. 21. 2. 
               hee ſhall ſerue ſixe
yeares, and in the ſeauenth he ſhall goe out free for nothing:
               Gene. 37. 27.
Before the Law written, we read of Ioſeph,
who was twice ſold; once by his brethren to the
Iſhmaelites,
               Gen. 39. 1. and then after by them to Potiphar, an
Eunuch of King Pharaohs. In the Booke of the
Pſalmes, the Prophet Dauid, ſetting downe as by
way of bewayling the miſerie of Gods people, to
God himſelfe, vnder the hard ſeruitude wherewith
they were oppreſſed:Pſal. 44. 11. 
               Thou ſellest thy people for
nought. (ſaith hee) and thou doeſt not increaſe their
price: And in the Propheſie of Eſay, ſaith the Prophet,
as in the perſon of God;Eſay 50. 1. 
               who is the creditor
to whom I ſold you? Behold, for your iniquities are yee

ſold, &c. As if he ſhould ſay; You are indeed vnder
bondage, but your ſelues haue made ſlaues of
your ſelues, by your owne vngodlineſſe. Likewiſe,
vnder the New Teſtament, where our Sauiour likeneth
the Kingdome of Heauen to a certaine King which
would take account of his ſeruants,
               Matth. 18. 23. 24. 25. 
               and when hee had
begun to reckon, one was brought vnto him which
ought him 10000. talents, and becauſe he had nothing
to pay, he commaunded him to be ſold, and his wife, and
his children, and all that hee had, and the debt to be
paid, &c.
            
            So that the creditor did the widdow no wrong▪
ſhee being inſufficient, to take her two ſonnes to
be his Bond-men; and yet ſhee complaines to the
Prophet, I will not ſay of the cruelty of the Creditor,
the Law then ſo requiring it, but rather of her
owne diſtreſſed eſtate, who was in danger of the
loſſe of ſo great comforts, the loſſe whereof how
great it was, may appeare by the example of a
poore man, of whom Saint Baſil writes, who hauing
many children, in a heauie time of Famine,
was with all of them euen at the point of a famiſhment,
ready to ſtarue for want of food: for the relieuing
of whom, one of them muſt be ſold, to buy
corne and victuals withall, to ſaue all the reſt aliue.
The father cals his wife, and cauſes her to call all
his children together, they aduiſe each with other
which of them they ſhould depart from, and ſo, not
without teares, the father beholding the eldeſt, the
beginning of his ſtrength, the excellencie of his dignitie,
the firſt that called him father; the ſecond,

too young; the third, like the father; the fourth,
the mothers darling; the fift, the expreſſe image
of the grand-father; the ſixt, well made, and like
to proue a ſouldier; the laſt, wittie, ingenious, and
very fit to make a Schollar: ſo tender-hearted was
this kinde and naturall father, as that he could not
find any one amongſt them, from whom he might
depart, chuſing rather to redeeme all their liues
with his owne perill and danger, then to ſuffer any
one of them to depart vpon ſo hard conditions.
Blame not then this poore woman, although ſhee
complaine for this her loſſe of the hope of her comfort
in both her ſonnes, at once; conſidering that
the ſodaineneſſe of her change vpon the death of
her husband, together with the haſtineſſe of the
Creditor to ſee his owne, perhaps was ſuch as it
could not but moue her greatly to labour euery
way for her releaſe. But on the other ſide, (to this
of debts to be payed by the taking of the debtor,
his wife and children, to be as bond-men to the
Creditors behoofe, by their labours and trauailes,
ſo to be imployed vntill the debt be ſatisfied,) I
heare ſome careleſſe altogether of all good credit,
and iuſt dealing, to ſay and giue out; Tuſh I feare
no ſuch bondage, the Goſpel hath taken away all
the ſtraitneſſe that was in the Law, of that ſlauiſh
ſeruitude in former ages; I will deale well enough,
although I pay not any thing. I anſwer thee, Thou
doeſt greatly abuſe the libertie of the Goſpel, which
is inward, and ſtands moſt in the peace of a good
conſcience, by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whereof thou

haſt made ſhip wracke, whileſt thou giueſt thy ſelfe
liberty to liue in all iniuſtice, vpon the ſpoyle of other
mens goods: Yea, know this in time whileſt
thou mayeſt know it, that thou art but a prophane
and an vnbeleeuing wretch; thou doeſt blaſpheme
God, and takeſt the name of the Goſpel in vaine in
thy mouth, whileſt hauing borrowed, and out of
other mens eſtates haſt gathered vnto thy ſelfe
Lands and liuing, goods and money, which vpon
a falſe truſt into other mens hands, as ill as thy
ſelfe, thou haſt turned ouer, to deceiue by, and vtterly
refuſeſt to pay, or at leaſt will pay at thy
pleaſure what thou ſeeſt good: Know this, that
howſoeuer it fall out with thee to eſcape the hands
of men, and perhaps vnder colour of Law doeſt
impudently couer thy deceits, yet aſſuredly in
ſeeking to rid thy ſelfe from the dangers of men,
thou haſt ſold thy ſelfe, and art become a very villaine
and bond-ſlaue to the Deuill, whoſe hands
thou canſt not eſcape; vnder whoſe cuſtody if once,
(not preuenting thy fearefull eſtate in due time, by
returning to God whileſt thou art called to repentance)
be aſſured of it, hell hauing receyued thy
ſoule and body, thence, there neither is nor euer
can be redemption; but as in the Parable of the
Rich-man and Lazarus, as vnder the ſpeech of Abraham
to the Rich-man being in hel in torments,
lifting vp his eyes, ſeeing Abraham a farre off, and
Lazarus in his boſome:Luke 16. 23. Then hee cried, and ſaid;
Father Abraham, haue mercy vpon me, and ſend Lazarus,
that he may dip the tippe of his finger in water,
               
and coole my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame:
But Abraham ſaid; Sonne, remember that thou in
thy life time receiuedſt thy pleaſure, but Lazarus
paines; now therefore he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
Beſides all this, betweene you and vs there is a
great gulfe ſet, ſo that they which would goe from hence
to you cannot, neither can they come from hence to vs, &c.
So that once with the Deuill in hel, thy Mittimus being
once vnder ſeale, & charge to the Iaylor giuen,
Take him, bind him hand and foot, with that moſt wofull
ſentence of the Iudge: Depart thou curſed one into
Hell, there to be tormented with the Deuill and his Angels
for euer, neuer after looke to be releaſed.
            
            But, what is laid downe in the caſe of an vniuſt
Debtor, is and may fitly be applyed vnto a hard,
mercileſſe, and vnconſcionable Creditor, who is
like to drinke of the ſame Cup, euen the Cup of
Gods eternall wrath; whom to lay downe I cannot
better, then from the out-cry of a poore, honeſt,
and well-minded Debtor, whoſe pittifull
moane and complaint goes in this manner: Alas,
(ſaith hee) I doe indeed owe much, and haue not
preſently to pay, but as it ariſes out of my trade,
and honeſt labour; little I haue, but that little I am
willing to depart from vnto ſatisfaction: Yea further,
my ſelfe, my wife, and children, all of vs, will
ioyne together in one▪ freely, to the vttermoſt by
our labours and trauailes, to worke out what is in
our power for the Creditors beſt profit: But alas
this will not ſerue his turne, he will haue all (and
all he may haue in time vnder Gods bleſſing, if hee

would but a while depend with vs vpon Gods prouidence,
whoſe bleſſing alone makes rich,Prou. 10. 22. but hee
will haue it preſently, or elſe no way with him but
one: all his Song is, To priſon with him, I wil haue
my penni-worths of his carkeiſe, I will make dice
of his bones: And thus, like the vnmercifull Creditor
in the 18.Matth. 18. 28. of S. Matthewes Goſpel, 28. verſe,
he vrges all extreame courſes that may be. Beſides,
he hath made mee ſpend as much in Law for the
keeping of my liberty, and the freeing of my body
from hard impriſonment, as would haue payed
a quarter of the debt: Hee can no way endure to
heare of the mitigation of iuſtice, letters of Commiſſion
from the ſupreame Magiſtrates, for the ordering
of the debt to the equall good of both parties,
by indifferent men, lawfully appointed to that
buſineſſe, hee cannot abide: Is it true (ſaith he)
doth Law conſiſt vpon two parts, (viz.) of extreamitie,
and moderation? I will then doe well enough
with the beggarly knaue: He will haue what
Law will giue him to the vttermoſt, body and
goods, yea all will not ſerue his vnmercifull and
bloud-thirſtie humour: And whereas wee are in
hand with the Law of bondage, (as before) wherein
Huſband, Wife, and Children, were by their honeſt
labours to trauaile euery way at the Creditors
pleaſure, and for his beſt auaile: hee will no way
yeeld to haue his mony paid in that ſort by peecemeale:
Hee will rather (if by and vnder the Letter
of the Law he may haue it,) ſee him rot in priſon,
and wife and children ſtarue all at home, then to

accept of ſuch beggarly payment, wherein I may
compare this bloud-thirſtie wretch vnto a certaine
Iew, of whom wee reade, who hauing lent money
to a Chriſtian, the day being come, and the poore
Chriſtian not able to make payment, the Iew was
contented, ſo he might haue a pound of the Chriſtians
fleſh, to looſe the nine hundred crownes, for
ſo much was the debt that the Chriſtian ought him.
But this hard and vnequall courſe is no way befitting
the Church or people of God, in a Chriſtian
Common-wealth: Nay rather, the rich Creditor
abounding in all wealth, if hee will approue himſelfe
to be a good man, not before men, (becauſe of
his wealth, for that may deceiue) but before God
in Chriſt Ieſus, (being mercifull as Chriſt is mercifull)
he muſt rather forgoe all, and ſimply forgiue
the debt, then vpon a wilfull reuenge to attempt
to doe any thing that may endanger the life of that
his poore Debtor: or if not wholly to forgiue,
which is an extreame on his part, yet at the leaſt to
haue a conſcionable regard of his inability, and
therein ſo to accept of his debt, as by day and day
he may at the laſt (God ſo ſeeing it good for both)
receiue his owne in part or in whole, without the
hurt of any one of them both.
            Whereunto if parties cannot be drawn betweene
themſelues, rather then by their owne violent and
delatory courſes, for the gaine onely of time, without
the good of any one of them, they ſhall ſpoile
each other, it is not amiſſe the Iudge himſelfe vpon
the iuſt notice of the cauſe doth doe, by enforcing

whitherſoeuer of them is faulty by his power
and authority, immediately to yeeld to what indifferent
courſe, for both their goods he ſhall at the very
inſtant aſſigne them vnto.
            For doubtleſſe it is generally ſuppoſed, that euery
Law of Iuſtice, eſpecially amongſt vs Chriſtians,
hath theſe two things in it; that is, the very extremity
in plaine termes, according to the letter of the
Law, and the mitigation of the extreamity, according
to circumſtances implyed in it; becauſe otherwiſe,
Summum ius (cannot be) but Summa iniuria.
            
            And this ſeemeth the Prophet Dauid to teach
from himſelfe, in his owne perſon, when he ſaith;
I will ſing mercy, and iudgement. But to what end is
all this, will ſome ſay? Truly not beſide the matter
in hand, wherein my purpoſe is to iuſtifie the execution
of both theſe parts of the Law (viz.) Extreamity
and Mitigation, each of them, according to
their times, and this to doe, as in other caſes, ſo in
the caſe of the Creditor and Debtor: firſt as any
one of them ſhall be ſpyed out to exceede in oppreſſing
each other, that then according to the expreſſe
letter of the Law, (the intent of the Law being
the good of the people) they be ſo dealt withall,
thereby to breake the necke of the ſtubborne
and contentious party, to make him to know himſelfe,
as yet the other point of mitigation cloſely
concealed, without the which no Law intented to
be, may for the ioynt good of either, according to
equity, be duely alſo and ſeaſonably by the Iudge

executed; prouided alwayes that this moderation
of Law in the extreamity thereof, come not too
late, when (if not at all) yet the greateſt part of that
worth of that which is ſued for, is come already into
the Lawyers Coffers, a little perhaps remaining
behind for the ſuing party himſelfe, and this doubtleſſe
is the generall complaint throughout the
Land.
            I know againe it will be ſaid, that I goe ouer-far
in this point, medling with the Law, beyond my
limits: To this I anſwere, that when a meere cruell
oppreſſour ſhall vnder colour of Law to get his
owne, where perhaps it is not poſſibly to be had,
and in all extreamity to wreake his wroth by it,
keepe that his poore debtor in priſon ſo long vntill
he be ready to ſtarue, and ſo endanger his life, which
is an entrance vpon the Kings free-hold; yea, and
this to doe as vnder the Kings name, in the abuſe of
the Kings Writ, making the Law and the King
ioyntly partakers of this their cruelty, to the ouerthrow
many times of a better Subiect to the King
then himſelfe is: It is time then that equity, the
fountaine whereof is the Word of God, and we as
the buckets by whom ye all muſt draw forth, as out
of the holy and heauenly wells,
               Iſay 12. 3. 
               the comfortable waters
of your ſaluation, it is high time for vs to put in fact,
conſidering that it is a doctrine which Salomon as
from Gods ſpeciall inſtinct hath left vs to teach;Prou. 14. 28. 
               In
the multitude of a people, is the honour of a King (ſaith
he) and for want of people, commeth the deſtruction of
the Prince: Whence thus I reaſon; If Kings themſelues

by all equity and clemency are to encreaſe,
and not by tyranny to leſſen their people, as doubtleſſe
they are, and good reaſon, becauſe where this
care is not, their Territories and Countries are eaſily
ſubdued, and the borders of their gouernment
diminiſhed: Much leſſe are they to ſuffer the people
one to eate vp and deuoure another; yea, if ſo be the
people will, and doe generally condemne tyrannous
cruelty and oppreſſion in their Kings to them,
much more were it to be condemned betweene
themſelues.
            The doctrine then hence is, that all Kings, Magiſtrates,
and people, muſt by all meanes auoide all
occaſions of bloud-ſhedding, or wilfull murdering
of any, becauſe God will not ſuffer the life of a man
to goe vnreuenged: as it is ſaid;Gen. 9. 5. 6. 
               At the hand of a mans
brother will I require the life of man. Who ſo ſheddeth
mans bloud, by man ſhall his bloud be ſhed: For in the
Image of God he made man. Whereunto let me adde
this, that not onely murder it ſelfe is forbidden, but
euery tracke or path that leadeth to it.
            The vſe that we muſt make of this point is, alwayes
vpon the troubleſome and furious motions
of our wrathfull and reuengefull affections and fierie
paſſions, to looke backe to the holy Word of
God, and thereby ſo to temper our ſelues, as that
we ſuffer not our rage in any wiſe to breake out;
becauſe, if God, (as it is ſaid) will put the teares of his
Saints into the bottle of his remembrance, much more
ſhall he auenge himſelfe of the bloud of any of his
people. But now to returne againe to the Widdow,

ſo pittifully complaining to the Prophet vpon the
Creditor, his taking her two ſonnes to be his bondmen,
concerning whom, her ſorrow being then ſo
great vpon the loſſe of her two ſonnes, if thou ſhalt
by comparing time paſt with the preſent time, and
the courſes which then were vſed for the ſatisfying
of debts to the Creditors, with thoſe ſtraight courſes
that now are vſed, and ſhalt finde, and as it were
ſenſibly feele, that the Creditors of theſe dayes, and
the meanes they vſe towards thoſe poore debtors
of theirs, are more hard and grieuous; learne thou,
firſt, whileſt thou art at liberty and thy ſtate ſound,
learne betimes to auoide all occaſions of falling into
the hands of ſo vnmercifull men, and no further
deale with them if it be poſſible, then thou mayeſt
at thine owne pleaſure eaſily eſcape out of their
hands. If thy liberty, thy ſtate, thy Wife, thy Children,
yea, thy life be ſo deare vnto thee, and the loſſe
of them ſo ſharpe and grieuous, let not preſent
pleaſures, nor the ſeruing of thy turne to prodigall,
or vnneceſſary vſes, or any way beſides the duties
of thy calling, ſo ſoon, or ſo eaſily draw thee to buy
repentance at ſo hard a rate.
            But doth this leſſon come a little too late, art thou
already caught by the heele? learne then from this
Widdow a ſecond leſſon; lie not thou ſtill in thy
wofull and perplexed eſtate, but ſpeedily repaire for
remedy and comfort where it is to be had, to God
firſt by prayer, for the remedying or reforming
rather of what maſter-ſinne ſoeuer is in thee, or for
patience vnder this thy croſſe; then to the Miniſter,

to the Magiſtrate, to thy Creditor, to thy
Friends, as helpers and ſollicitors for thee, looſe no
time, redeeme it rather, it is the Wiſedome of God
by Salomon;
               Prou. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. verſes. 
               Doe this now my ſonne, and deliuer thy
ſelfe, ſeeing thou art come into the hand of thy neighbour,
goe and humble thy ſelfe, and ſollicite thy friends, giue
no ſleepe to thine eyes, nor ſlumber to thine eye-liddes, deliuer
thy ſelfe as a Doe from the hand of the Hunter, and
as a Bird from the hand of a Fowler. What thou doeſt
herein doe ſpeedily, (Mora trahit periculum) make
proofe at once of the lawfull meanes, and leaue the
ſucceſſe to God; knowing this, that he it is that hath
the hearts of men in his hands, yea, and for thy
good:Prou. 21. 1. So ſaith Salomon. The Kings heart is in the
hands of the Lord, as the Riuers of waters he turneth it
whitherſoeuer it pleaſeth him. Let nothing ſtep in thy
way to diſcourage thee in the lawfull and ſeaſonable
vſing of theſe meanes for thy remedy, for, for
thee, euen for thee, and for thy reliefe are all Kings,
Princes, Iudges, Magiſtrates, Miniſters, appointed,
and by him ſet vp:Rom. 13. 4. 
               For he is the Minister of God for
thy wealth.
            
            But becauſe where ſuch popular oppreſſions doe
grow, and as by way of example one from another
they doe daily increaſe, it argues remiſſeneſſe both
in the Gouernours and gouernment, and ſome heauy
iudgement (of what kinde he beſt knowes that
is the Iudge of all) to hang ouer that Land; for ſo
it appeares to haue beene in the dayes of the Prophet
Eſay, who prophecying of a deſolation to fall
vpon the people of Ieruſalem and Iudah, as is to ſee

in theſe words:Eſay 3. 1. 5. 
               For loe the Lord of Hoſts will take away
from Ieruſalem and Iudah the ſtay and the ſtrength,
&c. In the fifth verſe he ſaith, to the purpoſe I haue
in hand: The people ſhall be oppreſſed one of another,
and euery one by his Neighbour: the children ſhall preſume
againſt the ancient; and the vile againſt the honourable.
But becauſe when theſe grieuous ſinnes of
oppreſſion and vndutifulneſſe doe exceede, it ſtands
the Magiſtrates in hand firſt in themſelues to begin
to reforme, and then to proceede not onely to make
Lawes of reformation for the cleanſing of the
Church and Common-wealth of their enormities,
but to proceede with all ſeuerity and celerity vnto
execution; and becauſe hereunto examples doe
much prouoke, let me be bold a little to lay downe
before all, who are in place of Magiſtracy vnder the
ſupreame Magiſtrate, the example of that worthy
Gouernour Nehemiah: It is yet time, while then it is
called to day (as is ſaid.) All you who would be accounted
the Fathers of your Countries, reade him,
and follow him. Fathers muſt not be oppreſſors;
Fathers muſt be helpers, comforters, and nouriſhers
of their Children: Fathers muſt not ſuffer oppreſſion
in their Families, one Childe to oppreſſe
another; ſo the Fathers ouer Churches and Common-wealthes,
muſt not take vpon them thoſe places
of honour and renowne for their owne credit,
gaine, or eaſe, but to be good ouer-ſeers of their
people, carefull puniſhers of oppreſſion; and not to
ſuffer (inaſmuch as in them lieth) one to oppreſſe another,
one to lay ouer-heauy yoakes or burdens,

one vpou another. Nehemiah 5. 1. verſe, to the end
of the 13. Reade it I beſeech you, marke it, make
vſe of it, and God aſſiſting you, doe it; the words
are theſe.
            Now there was a great crie of the people, and of their
wiues againſt their brethren the Iewes. 2. For there
were that ſaid, We, our Sonnes and our Daughters, are
many; therefore we take vp Corne, that we may eate,
and liue. 3. And there were that ſaid, we muſt gage our
Lands, our Vineyards, and our Houſes, and take vp
Corne for the famine. 4. There were alſo that ſaid, we
haue borrowed money for the Kings tribute vpon our
Lands, and vpon our Vineyards. 5. And now our fleſh
is as the fleſh of our brethren, and our ſonnes as their
ſonnes, and loe (ſaith he) we bring into ſubiection our
ſonnes and daughters as ſeruants, and there be of our
daughters now in ſubiection, and there is no power in our
hands; for other men haue our Lands, and our Vineyards.
6. Then was I very angry, when I heard their
cry, and theſe words. 7. And I thought in my minde,
and I rebuked their Princes and Rulers, and ſaid vnto
them; Ye lay burdens euery one vpon his brethren, and
I ſet a great Aſſembly againſt them. 8. And I ſaid vnto
them, We (according to our ability) haue redeemed our
brethren the Iewes, which were ſolde vnto the Heathen,
and will you ſell your brethren againe, or ſhall they be
ſolde vnto vs? Then helde they their peace, and could
not anſwere. 9. I ſaid alſo, that which you doe, is not
good; ought you not to walke in the feare of God, for the
reproach of the Heathen our enemies? 10. For I, euen I,
my brethren and ſeruants doe lend them money and

corne: I pray you let vs leaue off this burthen. 11. Reſtore
vnto them, I pray you, this day their Lands, their
Vineyards, their Oliues, and their houſes, and remit
the 100. part of the ſiluer, and of the corne, of the
Wine, and of the Oyle that you exact of them. 12. Then,
ſaid they, we will restore it, and will not require it of
them: We will doe as thou haſt ſaid. Then I called the
Prieſts, and cauſed them to ſweare that they ſhould doe
according to this promiſe. 13. So, I ſhooke my lappe,
and ſaid: So, let God ſhake out euery man, that will not
performe this promiſe, from his houſe, and from his labour:
euen thus let him be ſhaken out, and emptied. And
all the Congregation ſaid, Amen, and prayſed the Lord,
and the people did according to this promiſe: Oh bleſſed
Ruler, O bleſſed People; and ſo much for this point.
Now followeth, the Anſwer of the Prophet to the
Widdow, by way of conference together, which
is a declaration of the meanes whereby the debt is
to be payed, in theſe words:
            
            
               Verſe 2. Then Elizha ſaid vnto her; What ſhall
I doe for thee? Tell mee, What hast thou at home?
And ſhe ſaid, Thine hand-maid hath nothing at home,
ſaue a pitcher of Oyle. Verſe 3. And he ſaid; Goe,
borrow thee veſſels abroad of all thy neighbours, emptie
veſſels, and ſpare not. Verſe 4. And when thou
art come in, thou ſhalt ſhut the doore vpon thee, and
vpon thy ſonnes, and powre out into all thoſe veſſels,
and ſet aſide thoſe that are full.
            In this anſwer to her complaint by the Prophet,
there are two things to be obſerued: Firſt, a Queſtion:
Secondly, a Counſaile. The queſtion, two-fold:

Firſt, What ſhall I doe for thee? Secondly, What
haſt thou at home, &c. The Counſaile, Goe, and borrow
thee veſſels abroad, &c. From the Prophets example,
wee are to obſerue a generall poynt for our
practiſe (viz.) The care that he had ouer the poore
widdow, which appeares in his firſt demaund;
What ſhall I doe for thee? We ought to doe the like,
a queſtion moſt fit for all fathers of Countries, Cities,
and Common-wealths; For all the reuerend
Fathers of Churches, as Biſhops, Paſtors, and Teachers,
yea, for all whom it concernes to be as the
Eares, Eyes, Mouth, Hands, Feete, and what not,
for the poore fatherleſſe, the ſtranger, the oppreſſed,
the widdow, and who are no way able to helpe
or ſpeake for themſelues. Such a one was Iob; I
was (ſaith he) the Eyes to the blinde, and I was the feet
to the lame; I was as a Father vnto the poore, and when
I knew not the cauſe, I ſearched it out diligently; I
brake alſo the iawes of the vnrighteous man, and pluckt
the pray out of his mouth: This is, to doe for the oppreſſed,
not barely to ſpeake for; and yet in ſome
reſpect, ſpeaking may be doing, as this very
ſame Prophet, in a care hee had for the woman of
Shunem, and in part of requitall of her kinde care
ouer him in his trauaile: He ſaid to his man in theſe
words, Verſe 13. Then he ſaid to him (that is, to
his man) ſay vnto her now; Behold, thou haſt had all
this great care ouer vs: What ſhall wee doe for thee?
Is there any thing to be ſpoken for thee to the King, or
to the Captaine of the Hoſte? Vnder which words,
ſpeaking for, and doing, are ioyned together, as of like

nature and condition: as alſo, the Miniſters of the
Goſpell, men of Law in the caſes of their Clients,
who in no wiſe are to ſpare to ſpeake in the cauſe
of the diſtreſſed, what repulſe ſoeuer they haue;
ſo it be according to equitie, whoſe ſpeaking may
be (being throughly and ſeaſonable performed, in
a caſe of iuſtice and iudgement) as a deed done; for
certainly words auaile not, where deedes are not:
Deedes are the teſtifications of a fruitfull and liuely
faith, which faith, if it haue no deedes, is dead in
it ſelfe.
               Iames 2. 15. 16. 17. So ſaith the Apoſtle Iames: For if a brother,
or a ſiſter, be naked, and destitute of daily food,
and one of you ſay to them; Depart in peace, warme
your ſelues, and fill your bellies, notwithstanding yee
giue them not thoſe things that are needfull for the body,
What helpeth it? Euen ſo the faith, if it haue no
workes, is dead in it ſelfe. But this ſpe
                  •
               ch of the Prophet,
doubtleſſe, was powerfull and fruitfull: Bare
words would haue done to her ſmall comfort;
they were then, and are now, Deedes that muſt
cheare vp the hearts of the affl
                  •
               cted; or, (as I may
ſay) words that carry deedes with them, as theſe of
the Prophets: What ſhall I doe for thee? But, alas,
wordes tending to the good of the poore, eſpecially
in caſes of ſuit, are growne to ſo high a rate, as
they can hardly reach.
            But let each party that reades this, vpon view-taking
of the ſlender deedes of charitie that theſe
dayes affoord, (eſpecially where the Lawyer muſt
be vſed in the helping of the diſtreſſed, and oppreſſed,
to his right) let him not weigh with himſelfe

what the World doth, but let him ſee into the example
of this Prophet, what himſelfe ſhould doe,
and doe it; and hauing conſidered what, when, to
whom, and in that kinde hee may doe good, let
him reſolutely, and ſpeedily, as occaſion ſerueth,
doe it: For true is the Prouerbe, Qui cito dat, bis
dat, He giueth two gifts at once, who giueth one
ſpeedily: and let Solomon herein be thy director,
who teacheth thus;Prou. 3. 28. 
               Say not vnto thy neighbour, Goe,
and come againe, and to morrow will I giue thee, if
thou now haue it.
               Luke 10. 36. and the 34. Be not as the Prieſt, and Leuite,
to him that fell among Theeues; the one of them,
making daintie to giue ſo much as the caſt of the
eye; the other, though croſſing the way to looke
on him, yet not ſparing a word of comfort to the
diſtreſſed; doth of them leaning him helpleſſe;
But with the good Samaritane, goe to him, and doe
to him (as the Prophet ſaith) What ſhall I doe for
thee? And as it followeth, 34. Verſe; Hee came
neere to him, he had compaſsion of him, he bound vp his
wounds, hee powred in Oyle, and Wine, and put him
on his owne beaſt, and brought him to an Inne, and
made prouiſion for him, to the end, &c. Thus, vpon
the proffer of a poore man that wants thy helpe,
when God will make proofe of thy faith, according
to thy fruitfulneſſe in mercy; bethinke thee then
with this Prophett, and ſay: What ſhall I doe for
ſuch a one for his reliefe? and doe it; for aſſure thy
ſelfe, what faire ſhew ſoeuer thou makeſt in the
profeſſion of the Goſpel, denoting thy ſelfe to all
holy exerciſes of faith and holineſſe, without works

of mercie to teſtifie the ſame, woefull is thy profeſſion:
for, as Saint Iames ſaith, Pure Religion, and vndefiled
before God,
               Iames 1. 27. 
               euen the Father, is this; To viſit
the Fatherleſſe, and Widdowes in their aduerſitie, and
to keepe himſelfe vnſpotted in the World.
            
            Seeing then wee can no further approue our
ſelues to God, then wee finde and feele our hearts
inclinable to pitty, and mercy, and ſuch other
fruits of the ſpirit, and to the vnreuocably, reſolute
execution of them; becauſe it in not enough
to thinke, purpoſe, and reſolue to doe good, but
we muſt do it.
            Let euery one, great and ſmall, make a holy
and a good vſe of this point, examining our ſelues,
what we haue beene formerly, what we ſhould be,
and how vnapt and vnready wee haue beene and
are to that which we ſhould both be, and doe: and
as thou feeleſt thine errour, finding out thine vnmercifull
and hard heart, how vnready to doe any
good to the poore and needy, how ſtrait a hand
thou haſt held ouer thy Tenants, thy Workemen,
thy Seruants, thy Debtors, and all other
thy poore Neighbours; making alwaies gaine
out of the dung-hill (with him that ſaid, Lucri ſuavis
odor eſt ex re qualibet) to be thy godlineſſe,
acknowledge thy ſelfe, and lay downe thine owne
wayes, as Dauid did, before the Lord in theſe
words:Pſal. 119. 26. 
               I haue declared my wayes, and thou heardeſt
mee; for God loueth men when they can confeſſe
againſt themſelues their ſinnes with remorſe, and
as in touch of conſcience,Iob. 33. 27. to ſay as it is in Iob, ſpeaking

in the perſon of a true Conuert: I haue ſinned,
and peruerted righteouſneſſe, and it doth no way profit
mee. And hauing gone thus farre in examining
thy ſelfe, both of what thou haſt beene in former
time, with a diſlike of the wayes of ſinne, wherein
thou before thy effectuall calling walkedſt, eſpecially
thoſe thy ſinnes of cruell, hard, rigorous, and
vnmercifull dealing with all men; as alſo, if thou
findeſt in thee a deſire to be ridde of all thoſe olde
and tattered ragges of worldlineſſe, which thou
diddeſt weare in the dayes of thine oppreſſion, and
cruelty, at what time thy money, thy lands, thy
cattle, thy corne, were as thy gods: and doeſt on the
other ſide deſire to be mercifull, and tender hearted,
putting vpon thee a new liuery, euen the robe
of Chriſts righteouſneſſe, and the liuery garment of
Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe, in all tender compaſſion,
then ſhalt thou, vpon this ſodaine change of thy
affections, bethinke thy ſelfe, and ſeeke how thou
mayeſt from henceforth with thy wealth, money,
lands, and liuing, doe good to the Church, to the
Common-wealth, to the poore, miſerable, and needie;
how thou mayeſt beſtow thy goods to the
reſtoring of the decayed, ſetting at libertie the
poore, that are indebted, out of hard bondage, and
impriſonment:Luke 19. 8. Then with Zaccheus, (as it is written
of him) ſo ſoone as Ieſus hath taken vp his
lodging in thy heart, as hee did in Zaccheus houſe
and heart, alſo thou wilt not thinke it any loſſe for
thee to ſay, and doe as hee did: Lord, Behold, the
halfe of my goods I doe giue to the poore: and if I haue

taken from any man by forged cauillation▪ I restore
him foure-fold, &c. But in thus beeing minded, if
thou findeſt it hard for thee to performe, and art
driuen to ſay with Paul:
               Rom. 7. 18. 
               For to will is preſent with
mee, but I finde no meanes to performe that which is
good, &c. Goe on yet ſtill, and lay downe, as before,
thy wants, and weakeneſſes, neuer giue ouer to confeſſe
againſt thy ſelfe, againſt thy beſt-beloued ſin,
and pray withall, and ſay: Lord, thou that haſt ſet
at libertie the feete of the lame, haſt commaunded the
ſickneſſes and diſeaſes of men and women to depart and
to leaue them, and haſt made them, by the word of thy
mouth, whole and ſound, to goe and walke about their
affaires: ſo I come to thee, O Father, I come to thee for
my ſicke, ſinnefull, leprous, blinde, halt, lame, couetous,
and adulterous ſoule, poſſeſſed with a legion of vncleane
Deuills: and I ſay to thee, and beſeech thee, with
the Centurion,Matth. 8. 8. 
               ſpeake thou the word onely, and I ſhall
be healed, cleanſed, and deliuered from the power of
ſinne: ſet my ſoule at libertie, and giue me thine holy
Spirit,
               2 Cor. 3. 17. 
               then ſhall I be free: For, as the Apostle Paul
ſaith: Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is libertie,
yea perfect and full libertie indeed. Then, and neuer
before ſhalt thou be able to preuaile againſt all thy
corruptions, then ſhall neither Idolatry nor Blaſphemy,
nor Sabboth-breaking, no Rebellion, no
diſhonourable account of thy naturall Fathers, of
Magiſtrates, or Miniſters, no malice, no murdering
affections, no deceit, no adultery; then ſhall
neither ſinne nor Sathan preuaile ouer thee, to thy
deſtruction. Acknowledge God mightie in mercy,

and ſay to him in Prayer from thy heart: Lord, ſay
Lord to mee, ſpeake but the word, and commaund my
heart to feare thee, commaund thou my ſoule and body
to leaue off to doe euill, and to doe the thing that is iuſt
and vpright, and I know I ſhall feare thee. Yea, with
the Prophet Dauid ſay to God as he ſaid;Pſal. 119. v. 32 
               I will, yea
I ſhall, runne the way of thy Commaundements, when
thou ſhalt enlarge my heart. And let thy louing kindneſſe
come to mee, and thy ſaluation, according to thy
promiſe. And in this thy asking, make ſure to thy
ſelfe, that thou mayeſt be able to charge God with
his promiſe, and that thou art of them to whom
all Gods promiſes doe appertaine, that ſo thou
mayeſt be able to ſay and pray to thy Lord God
with feeling, as Dauid, and doubtleſſe thou ſhalt
finde a comfortable change vpon this thy thus examining,
and further proceeding with thy ſelfe in
forme aforeſaid.
            Now it followeth; What haſt thou at home?
Whereof, as briefely as I may, and ſo to the Anſwere
of the Widdow, and the Counſaile of the
Prophet vpon this her anſwer. Wherein, as well
may be gathered out of the Prophets words following
her Anſwer, this, in the 3. and 4. Verſes, that
each perſon that is indebted, is, out of that which
remaines ouer and aboue his ordinary prouiſion
for meat, drinke, and neceſſary apparell, to make
ſtate of the reſt, to the Creditours beſt behoofe,
without further fraud, couin, or deceit: This alwaies
reſerued, that nothing of preſent vſe, wherein
reſts the continuing eſtate of preſent life, as

meat, drinke, and neceſſary apparrell is to be taken
away, or detained from him: and to that purpoſe
ſpeakes Moſes:
               Exod. 22. 25. 26. 27. 
               If thou lend money to my people, that
is, to the poore with thee, thou ſhalt not be as an Vſurer
to him, yee ſhall not oppreſſe him with Vſury.
26. If thou take thy Neighbours rayment to pledge,
thou ſhalt reſtore it before the Sunne goe downe. 27. For
that is his couering onely, and this is his garment for his
skinne: Wherein ſhall hee ſleepe? Therefore when
he crieth vnto mee, I will heare him, for I am mercifull.
Doubtleſſe, the Prophet did not aske her, of
her eſtate, to the end hee might fleece her to his
owne behoofe, as the preſent age of this World
doth, that is, to lye in wait for aduantage, and ſo
long as there remaines any fleſh at all vpon the
bone to picke, yea ſo long with the Crowes, Cadowes,
Kites, and Cormorants in the World, to be
praying vpon it: But, as a man of God, by godly
counſaile, in due ſeaſon, taking occaſion to helpe
her diſtreſſed eſtate, and out of that her ſmall ſtore
that remained, he aduiſes her in the feare of God,
and ioynes with her vnto God, that as by his ſpeciall
helpe (when all helpes faile) hee will (as the euent
ſhewes he did) ſo vouch-ſafe her deliuerance,
out of this her preſent griefe, to the glory of his
owne name, the comfort of her, and credit of her
children; as alſo, to the continuance of her Huſbands
good report, in the full ſatisfaction of the
Creditor. Hee doth not herein, as the men of the
World in their ſelfe-loue, narrowly ſearching by
themſelues, and their ſpies, factors for that purpoſe,

where and whence any gaine, neuer ſo courſe,
vile, baſe, ſhucking, and abhominable, is to be had
and gotten, vſually to lay hold of it: He doth not
enquire of that ſmall remainder ſhe had, to buy it
of her for little or naught, taking occaſion of her
neceſſitie, that afterwards he might make his boaſt
of his great penniworths: For this is the World;
happy is hee that can ouer-reach others in bargaining,
that can buy cheape, and ſell deare, hauing
a tongue that can change note vpon a ſodaine: as
before he buy the thing, when he ſees commodity
to be had, to ſay it is naught, the time ſerues not, it
will decay in your hand; the longer you keepe it
the leſſe you will make of it; the ſooner you make it
off, the better: but hauing laid wait for it by ſome
other (if his owne perſwaſion will not preuaile) and
ſo by cunning ſleight, at the laſt hauing got it into
his hands; then, at an inſtant, it is good, and very
good, and ſo according to the perſon that enioyeth
any matter of commoditie, the price to be, as
doubtleſſe it is and may well be in ſome caſes, the
things with the circumſtances and perſons well
weighed. Salomon to the like purpoſe ſpeakes of
the craftie and deceiuable faſhions of the World,
where hee ſaith:Prou. 20. 14. 
               It is naught, it is naught, ſaith the
buyer; but when he is gone apart, he boaſleth: So doe
men in theſe dayes, (ſinne and iniquitie hauing got
the vpper hand,) they ſinne, and that egregiouſly,
in what kind (ſuppoſe it) whatſoeuer, as the Prophet
Iſay ſaith; They declare their ſinnes, as Sodome,
and hide them not: But this Prophet in his demand

of the Widdow what ſhee had at home, doth it
wholly with reſpect of the care he had to relieue the
Widdowes diſtreſſe by his counſell, and by what
comfortable manner he might indeed performe the
ſame. In whoſe example reſts a good inſtruction
for all whom in ſuch a caſe it may concerne, eſpecially
the very Creditor himſelfe, becauſe this Scripture
is occupyed wholly in the things concerning
the Creditor and the Debtor, that hee doe not by
caſting his eye too much vpon what his poore
Debtor hath left, (hauing nothing left, but what
muſt ſerue preſent neceſſity perhaps) to luſt after
it, and to ſeeke to wind it wholly out of his hands
to his owne vſe; but he muſt rather forget himſelfe,
and ſet vp all his thoughts how that which remaineth
may be diſpoſed of to the mutuall good of
them both, according as God may bleſſe it in time
to both their goods, chooſing rather to looſe all his
debt, then ſo hardly to draw from the poore diſtreſſed
man that thing, the loſſe whereof cannot but
withall hazard his life. There be that make godlineſſe,
in the profeſſion thereof, to be a very large
cloake to gaine by, but ſuch perſons are condemned
as hypocrites, according as the Prophet Eſay
ſets them downe in their colours; ſeeking as it were
to out-face God, by iuſtifying their holy Faſts againſt
him, when indeede there was nothing but
cruelty in their hearts, and vnmercifulneſſe in their
deedes:Eſay 58. 3. 
               Wherefore haue we faſted, and thou ſeeſt it not?
(ſay they) on the one ſide we haue puniſhed our ſelues,
and thou regardeſt it not: the Lord anſweres them as

a iuſt Iudge and ſearcher of their hearts: Behold,
in the day of your faſt you will ſeeke your will (ſaith the
Lord) and require all your debts: As if he would ſay;
The true faſt that I make reckoning of, is to faſt
from your owne gaine, and teſtifying it by releaſing
of your poore Debtors of the ſtraight bonds
you haue them in: and thus much for that point.
Onely I adde this with the Apoſtle Paul;
               2 Cor. 9. 7. 
               God loueth
a chearefull giuer, to ſtirre thee vp, that whatſoeuer
thou doeſt in any worke of Chriſtian compaſſion
to thy Neighbour, to doe it freely and chearefully,
knowing that what thou doeſt ſo, thou doeſt it to
the Lord, who will recompence it againe, as Salomon
ſaith:Prou. 19. 17. 
               He that hath mercy vpon the poore, lendeth
to the Lord, and the Lord will recompence him that he
hath giuen. And thus hauing ſet downe that both
the Debtor and the Creditor are each to reſpect other,
according to the rule of Chriſtian equity; I
will proceede to the anſwere of the Widdow, with
the Prophets replie, wherein he counſels her what
to deo for her reliefe, vpon that poore remainder
of her Pitcher of Oyle: Her anſwere in the end of
the ſecond verſe; Thine Hand-maide hath nothing at
home ſaue a Pitcher of Oyle.
            
            It appeares in the holy Scriptures that Oyle was
of ſpeciall vſe, and thereafter alſo in great requeſt,
and according to their ſeuerall vſes, ſo the kindes
were ſundry, ſome ſeruiceable vnto the ſacrifices,
ſome to the annointing of Kings, Prieſts, and Prophets,
ſome other to the chearing and refreſhing of
mens countenances, ſome more common to the

ſeruice of their cakes, or bread-making, inſtead of
other liquour, to that of ſacrifices as Moſes preſcribeth:
After,
               Leuit. 2. 15. 
               thou ſhalt put Oyle vpon it, and lay incenſe
thereon, for it is a meate offering. In the annointing
of Kings,1 Sam. 10. 1. it is ſaid; Then Samuel tooke a Viall
of Oyle, and poured it vpon Sauls head, &c. For the
chearing of the heauy countenance: It is ſaid; And
wine that maketh glad the heart of man:
               Pſal. 104. 15. and alſo in the
92. Pſalme and the 10. And I ſhall be annointed with
freſh Oyle: Oyle that maketh the face to ſhine. And to this
our Sauiour oppoſeth ſowre lookes, when he ſaith,
to the beating downe of hypocriſie in religious faſts;
But when thou faſteſt,
               Mat. 6. 17. 
               annoint thine head, &c. to common
vſes, where the Widdow of Sareptah ſaide to
Eliah:
               1 King. 17. 12. 
               As the Lord thy God liueth, I haue not a cake, but
euen a handfull of meale in a barrell, and a little oyle in
a cruſe: Of this Oyle, which appeares to be of the
moſt vſuall and common kinde, ſhee had but a ſmall
quantity, farre vnfit to pay debt withall, euen one
poore Pitcher of Oyle.
            But thus doth God moſt vſually deale with his
deareſt ſeruants, to bring them very low, yea, to
beggars eſtate; wherein our Sauiour himſelfe did
ſeeme to walke, and that to ſpeciall purpoſe: firſt,
to teach that his Kingdome was not of this world,
neither came he to abound with earthly riches, as
where hee affirmes to the Scribe;Mat. 8. 19. 20. 
               The Foxes haue
holes, and the Birds of the Ayre haue neſts, but the Son
of man hath not where to lay his head: which alſo he
doth as to another and ſecond end, that is, to teach
his Diſciples not to ſet vp their reſt in him, as vnder

hope to obtaine, as from him, either profits, promotions,
or pleaſures, here on the earth; but rather to
looke vpward to Heauen, and there ſetting their affections
where he is, to ſeeke the endleſſe comforts
of euerlaſting ioy, according to which purpoſe, the
Apoſtle Paul ſpeaketh. 1. If ye be riſen then with Chriſt,
ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue,
               Col. 3. 1. 2. 
               where Chriſt ſitteth
at the right hand of God. 2. Set your affections on things
which are aboue, and not on things which are on earth,
(ſaith he.) Which whileſt men ſhall ſeeke to doe
vnfainedly, it cannot poſſibly be auoyded, but that
by how much they ſhall finde out his goodneſſe in
ſmall things, by ſo much the more their tongues
ſhall be occaſioned to acknowledge the greatneſſe
of his power, Maieſty, and mercy towards them,
and ſo finally to returne the praiſe of them all to
him againe. Which is a ſpeciall vſe that we muſt
make of this point (viz.) that although wee are
poore, not to eſteeme the more meanely of our
ſelues, as in Gods preſence, conſidering that he hath
ſent his owne Sonne our Lord and Maſter Chriſt
Ieſus, in a baſe eſtate, to fulfill his ſeruice here vpon
earth, to his glory and our good, vnto whom as his
ſeruants wee to conforme our ſelues, are not to account
of it as any diſparagement at all. Theſe leſſons
are to be laboured vpon, very much: firſt, the
corrupt iudgement of the World, which doth make
reckoning of men who are poore, needy, indebted,
and out of credit with the World, to be no otherwiſe
with God; beſides (the feare that many men
haue to fall into pouerty thereby) keeping them

from the performing of the workes of mercy and
iuſt dealing, ariſing from the great diſtruſt that is in
them to God-ward, becauſe of the care ouer their
owne: Theſe two are mightily to be withſtood, vpon
this point, that this poore widdow had no more
then one poore pitcher of Oyle.
            But now to proceede, to ſhew to what end the
Prophet would know what ſhe had at home, which
was doubtles to this end, that he might aduiſe her,
as alſo deale for her with God, how out of that little
which ſhee had remaining, ſome releaſe of her
ſelfe from care and griefe, as alſo ſome ſatisfaction
of the Creditor might be wrought; and indeede
that is the maine point that ouer-ſpreadeth it ſelfe
in this Treatiſe (viz.) Debts (in all that poſſibly
may be) muſt be paide.
            To the ſpeeding whereunto, one generall point
is to be obſerued vpon the Prophets counſelling of
her, as in part hath beene laide downe before, and
it doth concerne principally all Miniſters, and as
from them all other Chriſtians; the Miniſters to
ſtand vp as in Gods behalfe, to miniſter words of
diuine and holy comfort to all Gods afflicted people,
and that in due ſeaſon: To the which purpoſe
the Prophet Eſay doth in the perſon of Chriſt Ieſus
himſelfe the true comforter, repreſent them who
are called to the Miniſtery of Gods Word. The Lord
Gods hath giuen me (ſaith he) a tongue of the learned,
               Eſay 50. 4.
               that I ſhould know to miniſter a word in time to him
that is weary; that is, to him who is any way diſtreſſed
in conſcience, or oppreſſed by affliction and miſerie,

and that ſo wearyed comes to me: and of this
mercy of God in Chriſt, the Miniſters ſhould be able,
as from not onely knowledge out of the Word
of God, but vpon experience alſo, to ſpeake comfortably
to the ſoules of the people. The Apoſtle
Paul ſpeaketh to that purpoſe,2 Cor. 1. 4. 5. when he ſaith; Which
comforteth vs in all our tribulation, that wee may be able
to comfort them who are in any affliction, by the comfort
wherewith we our ſelues are comforted of God; for as
the ſufferings of Chriſt abound in vs, ſo our conſolation
aboundeth through Chriſt.
               Heb. 2. 18. The like is ſaid of Chriſt:
For in that hee ſuffered and was tempted, hee is able to
ſuccour them that are tempted. What comfort alſo
the people doe reape from the Miniſters, they are
mutually as neede requires each to comfort other,
which are vnder any heauineſſe or affliction; and
this is the generall point to be obſerued vpon the
Prophets counſell-giuing to the Widdow: Now let
vs ſee the counſell it ſelfe.
            
               And he ſaid, goe borrow thee veſſels abroad of all thy
Neighbours, empty veſſels, and ſpare not. 4. And when
thou art come in, thou ſhalt ſhut the doore vpon thee, and
vpon thy ſonnes, and poure out into all thoſe veſſels, and
ſet aſide thoſe that are full. The generall obſeruation
in this counſell of the Prophet, and the putting it
in practiſe by the Widdow, is this: All perſons, in all
caſes of extreamity, are mutually to aide and aſſiſt
each other, in the reſtoring of any decayed amongſt
them; as here firſt the Prophet in his counſel-giuing,
then Neighbours in their lending, the Widdow
in her working, together by her ſonnes, vpon the

emptie veſſels of Oyle, her ſonnes in going vp and
downe, fetching, carrying, pouring out of the full
veſſell, ſorting, and ſetting aſide the empty from
the full, to their right ends: And this is taught by
way of ſimilitude, in the Epiſtle to the Romans,
where the Apoſtle ſpeaking of the Church in Chriſt,
as of the members in one body,Rom. 12. 4. 5. ſaith; For as we
haue many members in one body, and all members haue
not one office; ſo we being many, are one body in Chriſt,
and euery one anothers members: and as one member
in the naturall body, according as it is in want and
weakeneſſe, is to be reſpected with care by that other
which is aboue it in power, and ability; ſo it
ought to be much more in the myſticall body of
Chriſt Ieſus, who are mutually to ſerue one another
in loue, But that the members ſhould haue the ſame
care one for another (ſaith the Apoſtle:1 Cor. 12. 25. 26.) 26. Therefore
if one member ſuffer, all ſuffer with it; if one member
be had in honour, all the members reioyce with it:
and to this purpoſe each perſon and thing, in Gods
prouidence, are ordayned for the ſuccour and reliefe
of his Children vnder the Croſſe. Thus God
wrought for Dauid by Ionathan, by Ionathans boy,
and by the arrowes that Ionathan ſhot beyond the
marke, for the informing of Dauid how Saul ſtood
affected towards him, each perſon and thing working
together for Dauids ſafe deliuery out of the malicious
hands of Saul, who ſought his vtter ouerthrow.
If this were duely obſerued by all, that none,
no, not the mightieſt can ſtand alone by themſelues
without helpe, in caſe of extreamity, it would make

them more carefull, and ready to relieue each other
in their miſeries.
            The vſe then that is to be made of this point is,
vpon the knowledge thereof to remember our
ſelues how dead ſpirited, and dull we haue been in
former times to diſcharge this duty, and thereupon
to goe to God by, and in, prayer, for the gracious
aſſiſtance of his holy Spirit, thereby to quicken
vs vp vnto a further and more compaſſionate care
in all Chriſtian loue, to and for the good of others,
for the time to come.
            Now where he ſaith, Goe, and borrow thee veſſels
abroade, of all thy Neighbours, empty veſſels, and ſpare
not; or not a few, but as many as thou mayeſt get, that
there be no want of veſſels to worke into; The Prophets
counſell as a command from God, doth animate
and encourage the Widdow to vſe all her Neighbours,
as helpers with her vnto this her reſtoring againe:
Wherein giue mee leaue by the way to ſet
downe from the Prophets counſelling of the Widdow,
and the Widdow her acceptance of his counſell,
and putting it in practiſe, with the happy ſucceſſe
of the ſame, this vndoubted truth; that is,
who ſo heares the Prophets, Apoſtles, and Miniſters
of God, teaching them the way to euerlaſting
life, by Ieſus Chriſt alone, the onely doore thereunto,
and that by the written Word of God, the holy
Scriptures, ſo called, muſt ſo heare them, receiue
them, and beleeue them and their doctrine, as in
full perſwaſion of their hearts that what they haue
heard, and doe heare, is the very ſpeech of God himſelfe,

as our Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus aſſureth his Diſciples,
when he ſaith;Luke 10. 16. 
               He that heareth you, heareth me;
and he that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me; and he that deſpiſeth
me, deſpiſeth him that ſent me. The want then of
ſuch hearers and thus hearing, is it that cauſes ſo
little practiſe in doing the will of God; for many, if
not the moſt, doe heare, but doe not: This is the
cauſe why Papiſme, Athieſme, Turkiſme, Heatheniſme,
yea, Sathaniſme, the fulneſſe of all ſinne,
(O woe is me to ſay it) doth ſo faſt and ſpeedily
creepe into, and grow vp in the Land, threatning
from day to day, as we grow worſe and worſe, the
remouall of the glorious light of the Goſpel, which
God forbid, out of this our moſt glorious, glittering,
and golden Candleſticke of the Church of God,
in this our happy England. Oh happy long, to his
good pleaſure, may it be, yea, ſo happy, as that the
glorious light of the Goſpell that maketh it to ſhine
ſo gloriouſly, may be ſo farre from euer being extinguiſhed,
as that it may be rather like to the light
of the righteous, whereof Salomon ſpeaketh, when
he ſaith;Prou. 4. 18. 
               The way of the righteous ſhineth, as the light,
that ſhineth more and more vnto the perfect day: ſo oh
Lord, if it ſeeme good in thine eyes, let not this light of
ours, how outragiouſly ſoeuer the wicked enemies, both
without and within the Land, doe oppoſe themſelues to it
to extinguiſh it: let it not O Lord, be euer put out, vntill
that perfect and euerlasting Sonne of righteouſneſſe,
Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe doe come triumphantly in the
cloudes to make a full end of all! for the accompliſhment
whereof, let euery one that waites for, and loues his appearing,

ſay with mee, Come Lord Ieſu, come quickly,
               2. Tim. 4.
Amen; Euen ſo be it: Lord, ſo be it.
            
            But now to returne to our Widdow againe.
Had not the Prophets Counſaile wrought in her, as
the commaund of God himſelfe, and that by his
ſpeciall inſtinct through faith, and animating or incouraging
of her, to the vſing of her neighbours,
ſhe might haue beene diſhartened at his Counſaile,
in willing her to goe to her neighbours, and to
borrow of them: Alas, ſhe might haue ſaid to her
ſelfe; No neighbour will lend me ought, they will
be jealous of me, that I ſhould make it away; and
becauſe my debt is ſo great already, I may periſh
before I get ought: Nay, this is the courſe of the
World, they will anſwer negatiuely, and by way of
preuention; they will diſcourage me from asking,
before euer I aske: But if I doe aske, they haue
their Anſwere ready: Nay truely, I cannot lend,
I haue ſworne to the contrary, I haue bound my
ſelfe in bonds, I haue promiſed all my friends, not
to lend: So farre are men from the true knowledge
of walking in that golden meane, betweene
two extreames: Or elſe they will (not with the
Prophets minde, but for their owne gaine) aske of
me, what I haue, if I haue a faire pawne, a pledge,
or a ſuretie, perhaps ſomewhat may be had: or if I
haue any thing to ſell out-right, they will then try
their friend to buy it, if they may haue a penniworth,
or if I will vſe reaſon: Now this reaſon, vpon
extremity, you muſt vnderſtand is as much as
little or nothing: For it is commonly held, that

thoſe goods of the decayed, though as good as the
Rich mans euery way for value, and price, yet being
in a ruinated, decayed, and a poore broken mans
hands, is worth ſome fourth part or leſſe perhaps:
This is the faſhion of the World, whereunto euery
man faſhioneth himſelfe; that is, rather to keepe
him downe, that is downe; or, if not downe, but
going in the way, to beat him downe altogether,
rather then to helpe to raiſe him vp againe.
            This is one diſcouragement, that might haue ſtaied
this Widdow, (eſpecially had ſhe liued in this
Iron or ſteely age of ours) from following the good
Prophets Counſaile: Another ſtay, (ariſing alſo
from the frailty of an vnbeleeuing heart) had not
God wrought faith in her, might haue ſtopped her
courſe of being contented to be directed by the
Prophet (as thus:) Alas, might ſhe haue ſaid, what
ſhould I doe thus troubling ſo many of my neighbours,
in borrowing ſo many empty veſſels? Why,
what good will emptie veſſels doe mee? mine
owne poore pitcher of Oyle is not able to fill it
ſelfe, how then ſhall it be able to fill any one other,
much leſſe ſo many as may amount to the
price or value of my debt?
            Vnfaithfulnes, or diſtruſt in God, is able to diſcourage
fleſh & bloud from vſing meanes ſeeming vnlikely
to mans conceit; yea, it hath bred great doubtfulneſſe
in the very deare children of God; yea, ſo
far it hath preuailed, as that they haue expoſtulated
the matter with Gods meſſengers, as in a thing not
poſſibly to be effected:Luke 1. 18. as that of Zachary, about the

birth of Iohn Baptiſt, where he reaſons with the Angel
thus: Then ſaid Zacharias to the Angell, Whereby
ſhall I know this, for I am an olde man, and my wife
is of great age? Likewiſe the bleſſed Virgin Marie,
vpon the ſalutation of the Angel,Luke 1. 28. 31. Verſe 28 where
the Angel certifies her, that ſhe ſhall conceiue, and
beare a ſonne;
               34. verſe. in the 34. Verſe, ſhee enquires of
him about the point: How ſhall this be (ſaith ſhee)
ſeeing I know not man? This troubled the bleſſed
Virgin greatly, as is ſet downe in the 29. Verſe;
ſo as after ſhee had heard the ſaluation of the Angel,
as is written, ſhe ſaid thus: And when ſhee ſaw
him, ſhe was troubled at his ſaying, and thought what
manner of Salutation this ſhould be: So that wee ſee,
where faith in God is not fully ſetled (as in a continuall
groath it muſt be in vs during life) by many
turbulent diſtractions, vnbeliefe wil breake out,
and cauſe many times a yeelding to doe that which
may be very ill for vs, and a leauing off to doe
what otherwiſe may be and is warrantable for vs
to doe, the doing whereof may turne to our great
good; the not doing, to our greater hurt. Indeed
this increaſe of Oyle, as out of it ſelfe without further
meanes, by the power of God in the miniſtry
of Elizha, was miraculous, and may ſeeme incredible,
wherein if I ſhould take occaſion to ſpeake of
miracles, how they were then, and afterwards vnder
the dayes of the Goſpel, and to what end they
tended, and vnto what time they were limited; If
alſo I ſhould ſpeake of the abuſe of the Church of
Rome, in that poynt of miraculous working (a

meere illuſion to deceiue the people by,) I ſhould
not take my ſelfe vp in any good time; yet thus
farre to ſay, becauſe they onely are the miraclemongers,
we ſeeke not to take the credit of working
miracles out of their hands. If counterfaited
ſignes, and lying wonders, by the working of Sathan,
with all power to deceiue by, (which they arrogate
to themſelues) and that among them that
periſh, ſpoken off by the Apoſtle Paul, as purpoſely
to ſet forth in ſome of his colours their Antichriſt,
be miracles, I yeeld it to them: For wee of
the Goſpels profeſſion, doe not require any iuggling,
or apiſh trickes, to bleare our peoples eyes
withall; we hold them cloſe to the holy and onely
Word of truth, for the working of faith in
them, and that by the preaching of the ſame, as
the Apoſtle Paul ſaith:Gal. 3. 2. 
               Receiued you the Spirit, by the
workes of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith preached?
            
            A time there was, when before the whole truth
of Gods Word, in the holy Scriptures, was come
in, and digeſted into thoſe two Teſtaments, the Old
and the New, as they now are, and ſo haue beene
miraculouſly preſerued, through the dangers of
many ages, and reſerued to the Churches perpetuall
vſe, as alſo, propounded to the view of the
whole World, to the end that the preachings of the
Prophets, as alſo, the Doctrine of our Sauiour
Chriſt himſelfe, and of his Apoſtles, might be the
more beleeued and reſted vpon, as the very truth
of God himſelfe, they had power to worke miramircales,

as this Prophet three times in this Chapter
did, beſides this in hand, thereby to teſtifie to the
people, that he was the true Prophet of God. Concerning
the which point, the Prophet Eliah vpon
the triall of the true worſhip of God, and the idolatrous
worſhip of Baal, betweene him and thoſe
foure hundred and fiftie falſe Prophets, doth ratifie
and confirme both himſelfe, and his religion, and
his Doctrine, to be of God, and from Heauen, by
hauing power from that God of heauen and earth,
to commaund the fire to deſcend from heauen to
conſume the ſacrifice,1 Kings 18. 36. 37. according as wee find it in
that his moſt diuine and holy prayer in theſe
words:
            36 Let it be knowne this day that thou art the God
of Iſrael, and that I am thy ſeruant, and that I haue
done all theſe things at thy commandement. 37. Heare
mee, O Lord, heare mee, and let this people know that
thou art the Lord God, and that thou haſt turned their
heart againe at the laſt. By which it may appeare
alſo, that miracles were not to be done at the
pleaſure of man, but at the will and pleaſure of
God: Of which miracles, wee reade there are two
kindes; one pure, and the other mixt, as one writeth
very learnedly of them: The pure, are they
which without meanes or creatures, God worketh
alone: he calleth them mixt, where God by
the miniſtry of any of his ſeruants, doth worke
ſtrangely, in and by creatures, as in ſtretching out
beyond nature their vigor or ſtrength, in cauſing
them extraordinarily to increaſe, to the ſeruing of

his will at an inſtant, for the good of any of his
people. The like did our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe,
in that kinde of pure and ſimple miracles, when
by his Word alone hee commaunded the Deuils,
and diſeaſes;Matth. 8. 3. & 13. the one, & the other, to come out of
them, and to leaue the poſſeſſed and diſeaſed. The
like did Peter to the Creeple, that was ſo from his
mothers wombe, when he ſaid to him: In the name
of Ieſus Chriſt of Nazaret,
               Acts 3. 5. 
               riſe vp, and walke.
            
            But in ſpeaking vpon the counſaile of the Prophet
giuen to the Widdow, in theſe words: Goe,
borrow thee veſſels abroad; and if it ſhall be further
asked by what warrant the Prophet did this, to
commaund, as in the name of God, and to aſſure
the Widdow of theſe vnlikelihoods; firſt, to borrow
of her Neighbours, &c. and then, how that
one full veſſell of Oyle ſhould hold out to fill
thoſe other emptie Veſſels that were borrowed.
The anſwere is made by the Prophet himſelfe, in
the 43. Verſe of this Chapter, where the Prophets
Seruant, queſtioning with his Maſter about
the twentie Loaues to be diſtributed to an hundred
men, as if they were vnlikely to ſuffice ſo many:
The Prophet replies againe vpon him with a
ſecond commaund: Giue vnto the people, that they
may eate: For (ſaith Eliſha) thus ſaith the Lord, They
ſhall eate, and there ſhall remaine: So that (thus ſaith
the Lord) is the Prophets warrant: and that beyond
Gods Word he went not, the ſequell of the
ſucceſſe doth manifeſtly declare, he not being able
any way to performe ſo ſtrange a worke, to the

comfort of this Widdow, in her ſonnes, and the ſatisfying
of the Creditor, had not God himſelfe graced
him with his owne power, and as it were ſtouped
downe to worke together with him. Mightie
then is this word of God, where God himſelfe inforceth
it by his Spirit, yea, mightily it preuaileth
both in that executing his iudgements in iuſtice
vpon the wicked contemners of his ſeruants, as in
that where Eliah called for fire vpon the two captaines
of the fifties,1 King. 1. 9. 10. & thereafter it fell vpon them:
As alſo,Acts 5. 1. 2. 3. in that of Peter, where Ananias and Saphirah,
were ſtroken dead vpon the word immediately
ſpoken by the Apoſtle, for their ſacrilegious
lying and hypocriſie: As alſo, in the ſtrange and
wonderfull meanes, whereby he extraordinarily
worketh by his ſeruants for the Churches good, as
where Peter, by the power of the Word (God
working with him) to the comfort of the Church,Acts 9. 40.
raiſed vp Dorcas from death to life.
            Yea, but I heare ſome ſay me thinkes, Tuſh, the
miniſtry of men vnder the Goſpell, is weake enough,
there is none of them all can doe any ſuch
ſtrange worke, we need not feare; their big thunder-bolts
are but crackes: But the reaſon of their
ſo blaſphemous ſpeeches, in their careleſſe regard
to feare God, is becauſe God meeteth not with
them in their preſent ſinning, as he did with Zimri
and Cozbi, euen in the committing, of fornication
together (by the hands of Phinehas hee ſlew them
both) in their Tents, as is written in the Booke
of Number, 25. 9. They preſumptuouſly thinke,

and ſay in their hearts, there is no God, no Deuill,
no Heauen, no Hell, they be but tales that our
Preachers doe tell vs: But of theſe like perſons,
the Apoſtle Peter propheſieth,2 Pet. 3. 4. and theſe are the
dayes of the fulfilling of his propheſie. This firſt
vnderſtand, that there ſhall come in the laſt dayes,
mockers, who will walke after their luſts, and ſay,
Where is the promiſe of his comming? &c. Thus the
Deuill is very buſie to with-draw mens mindes, yea
let euery one obſerue it; the more the miniſterie
of the Goſpel increaſeth, the more he rageth, by
cauſing men to ſeeke after that that is not neceſſary,
and to leaue vnſought after that which maketh
moſt for the ſaluation of ſoule and body eternally:
For Sathan hath his inſtruments in euery place,
who labour to obſcure in what they may, and to
make inglorious the eternall Word of our immortall,
inuiſible, and onely wiſe God, in the holy miniſtery
of the Goſpell, which preſages, and that truly,
that he feares that his time is not long, but that
he is neere, and very neere, to his vtter and finall
caſting out. Let them therefore know, and that
ſpeedily, and let them aſſure themſelues, that the
Word of God is no leſſe effectuall now, neither is
his arme any whit more ſhortened in the powerfull
Goſpell of his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus, although it
appeare ſo to be to the wicked world: Onely this
is the difference, the iudgements of God, (for I
ſpeake now to them onely that make a mocke of
God) doe not to them appeare ſo great and heauy,
becauſe he comes not ſo immediately and preſently

vpon their ſeueral wickedneſſes committing
to execute thoſe his iudgements; yea, he ſeemes to
them to haue forgotten to bee iuſt; but let them
know, that not one iot, or tittle of Gods word ſhall
fall to the ground; for whatſoeuer wants in the execution
of theſe his puniſhments for the preſent,
ſhall be doubtleſſe doubled, and redoubled, according
to the delay and putting off the ſame: ſo that
when he doth or ſhall ſtrike indeede, his hand ſhall
fall ſo heauily, hauing beene long in lifting of it vp,
and when he beginnes to lift it vp, he will lift his rod
ſo high, to the fetching of a greater ſtroke, that he
will make the proudeſt Ruffian of them all like to
a Potters veſſell, which he will ſo breake to ſhiuers,
that there ſhall not be found any one ſheard to carrie
fire in.Pſal. 2. 9. 
               Thou ſhalt cruſh them (ſaith Dauid the Prophet)
with a Scepter of yron, and breake them in pieces
like a Potters veſſell.
            
            But what matters it to anſwer the prophane minded,
vtterly anſwerleſſe? Let ſo many then as are
contented to ſtoope downe to the holy Word of
God, in the Miniſtery of men, and to learne thereby
ſoberly to be wiſe, know of a ſurety, that howſoeuer
God did limit the times and ſeaſons paſt,
wherein thoſe perſons whom he had alſo more ſpecially
giuen power vnto, as the Prophets and Apoſtles,
to worke ſtrangely in and about the things of
this life, for the confirmation of that Doctrine
which they brought vnto the World, whereof men
being more earthly minded, did alſo take a greater
view, then thereby to be ledde to the apprehenſion

of the truth in Chriſt Ieſus, for euerlaſting life; yet
is not the power of God in his Word any whit abated
the more now, but rather aduanced to a further
and a more eminent working in, and about, the turning
of mens hearts from gazing or looking vpon
the things of this life, vnto the longing, luſting, and
thirſting after the righteouſneſſe of God in Chriſt
Ieſus, to their euerlaſting comfort in the Kingdome
of Heauen. And yet giue mee leaue, his care is no
leſſe for vs now, (if we feare him) then it was in former
times, and according to his care ouer vs, ſo his
power and will, yea, in prouiding for vs in our
wants; indeede we are blinde and ſee it not, becauſe
wee doe not continually referre our ſelues in the
things we haue, or in the things whereby hee hath
relieued vs beyond expectation in our diſtreſſes; we
doe not, I ſay, referre our ſelues to Gods prouidence,
for the beholding of it as we ought: for truly
howſoeuer he doe not encreaſe our Pitcher of Oyle
ſo miraculouſly as we ſee here he did to the poore
indebted Widdow, and in that manner, yet when
he worketh mens hearts towards thee, for thy reliefe,
yea, to make thine aduerſaries thy friends, is it
not worth the obſeruation? He is the ſame God to
vs that he was in Iobs dayes, who ſpeaking of the
wicked,Iob 27. 16. faith; Though he ſhould heape vp ſiluer as the
duſt, and prepare rayment as the clay; he may prepare it,
but the iuſt ſhall put it on, and the innocent ſhall diuide
the ſiluer:
               Prou. 13. 22. and againe, where Salomon ſaith; The riches
of the ſinner is laid vp for the iuſt: and this he hath
done, and doth daily performe, onely our vnbeliefe,

our vnthankfulneſſe, our deadneſſe of faith,
keepes vs from ſeeing it, to our ſhames.
            But to end this point ordinarily, the worke of the
Miniſtery of the Goſpell, is a greater worke then
healing, or curing the bodily diſeaſes of men, by
ſpeaking the word, whither from Peter, or from
Paul, or by whomſoeuer, although it be indeed miraculous;
yea, as much as the ſoule is beyond the
body in excellency, by ſo much is the holy worke
of the Goſpell of Chriſt, conuerſant wholly in the
reſtoring of the dead ſoules of men from death to
life, more excellent; for loe, now the dead ſoules of
men and women, that haue long ſlept in ſinne, and
haue beene dead, as doubtleſſe all are vntill by the
power of the Word of God, they haue life put into
them, euen the life of the Spirit, whereof Paul ſpeaketh,
when he ſaith:Gal. 2. 20. 
               Thus I liue, yet not I now, but
Chriſt liueth in me; and in that I now liue in the fleſh, I
liue by the faith in the Sonne of God, who hath loued me,
and giuen himſelfe for me. Of this life ſpeakes our Sauiour
himſelfe:Iohn 5. 25. 
               Verily verily, I ſay vnto you, the houre
ſhall come, and now is, when the dead ſhall heare the
voyce of the Sonne of God, and they that heare it, ſhall
liue.
            
            The Vſe to be made of theſe laſt and former doctrines,
is this, that whenſoeuer the word of Faith
hath entred the poſſeſſion of Ieſus Chriſt into our
ſoules, whenſoeuer you thinke of him, meditate vpon
him, ſeeke him in your prayers, follow after him
in the publike preachings of that his moſt glorious
& comfortable Goſpel, be ſure ſo to think of him as

of your Sauiour and deliuerer, not from bodi
                  •
               l
ſickneſſes, or other perills or dangers of this life,
but as he is indeed, by God his father, appointed
to ſaue thee, and deliuer thee from hell, death, and
eternall condemnation, as a Sauiour of thee from
thy ſinnes, and a deliuerer of thee from thoſe miſeries
whereinto thou haſt ouer-plunged thy ſelfe in
ſoule and body by thy ſinne: as Paul the Apoſtle
teacheth thee in theſe words, concerning Chriſt leſus,
and the working by the Goſpel in all thoſe
that beleeue,2 Tim. 1. 10. 
               Who (ſaith he) hath aboliſhed death, and
hath brought life, and immortality vnto light, through
the Goſpell.
               1 Tim. 1. 15. And as againe he ſaith, Ieſus Chriſt came
into the World to ſaue ſinners, of whom I am chiefe.
Let the thought of his very name be comfortable
to thee, from the remembrance of his being firſt
named by the Angel at his entrance into the
World,Mat. 1. 12. as is written: And thou ſhalt call his name
Ieſus, for hee ſhall ſaue his people from their ſinnes.
Finally, thinke and meditate vpon him, as vpon
an heauenly, not an earthly King; hee is come for
thy good euery way, but eſpecially to deliuer thee,
ſo as that after the fulneſſe of thy deliuerance, thou
mighteſt neuer be in danger after; his deliuerance
being ſpirituall, not corporall, heauenly not earthly,
as he is further deſcribed, where it is ſaid: Firſt
vnto you (meaning the Iewes) hath God raiſed vp his
Sonne Ieſus,
               Acts 3. 
               and him he hath ſent to bleſſe you, in turning
euery one of you from your iniquities.
            
            Seeke then to him, as to one in whom you are
begotten againe, and in him caſt as in a new mould,

to become new creatures,1 Pet. 1. 3. 4. (as the Apoſtle Peter
ſaith:) Bleſſed be God, the father of our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt, which, according to his abundant mercie, hath
begotten vs againe vnto a liuely hope, by the reſurrection
of Ieſus Chriſt from the dead, to an inheritance
immortall, vndefiled, and that fadeth not away, &c.
For to this end is his comming into the world: firſt,
to take the burthen of thy ſinne, lying heauie vpon
thee, vpon himſelfe: ſecondly, to diſcharge thee
from the guilt of ſinne: thirdly, to take away the
power and ſtrength of ſin, that after once thou art
a true member of that his body the Church, whereof
he is Head,Rom. 6. 12. ſinne may no longer haue that dominion
ouer thee, as before.
            
               Now it followeth in the Text. 5. So ſhee departed
from him, and ſhut the doore vpon her two ſonnes,
and they brought to her, and ſhe poured out. 6. And
when the veſſels were full, ſhee ſaid vnto her ſonne,
bring yet a Veſſell; and he ſaid vnto her, There are no
more Veſſels: And the Oyle ceaſed.
            Now we are come to the third point, which is,
(the iſſue of the meanes, conſiſting vpon the words
or command of the Prophet, in the obedience of
the Widdow.) This iſſue of the meanes beeing
two-fold, the increaſe of the Oyle, and the paying
of the debt; from that the obedience of the Widdow
in theſe words: So ſhe departed from him, and
ſhut the doore, &c. As the words lye in the Text,
they all are liuelily deſcribed, the mother, and her
two ſonnes, to ſettle themſelues to their buſineſſe;
her ſons they bring, the mother ſhe powers o
                  ••
               , no

hand at all idle amongſt them. Whence I gather
for inſtruction, from the Womans example,
this; that ſhee in finding out the readineſſe of her
Neighbours to helpe her with thoſe emptie Veſſels
which ſhe borrowed of them, is heartened on
cheerefully to proceed in her labours, and that
without delay, aſſuring her ſelfe that God, who had
begun ſo fauourably with her, would not giue ouer
vntill he had performed what he had ſet her about,
not doubting but that the Prophets Counſaile
was as the Lords owne commaundement, and
the commaund of the Lord, as the deed done.
            We then, from her, being thus aduiſed by the
Prophet, and ſo reſolutely and readily putting his
Counſaile in execution, wee are taught in all our
honeſt and neceſſary affaires to doe the like, and after
mature, holy, and deliberate Counſaile taken,
not to delay to performe what wee haue well aduiſed
vpon, for delayes often proue dangerous. Salomon
in thoſe words,Prou. 20. 18. 
               (Eſtabliſh thoughts by counſaile)
doth teach indeed this, to be well aduiſed vpon
mens thoughts firſt, before they be ſet on foot,
but after once counſaile is aduiſedly taken, then to
ſettle, ſtabliſh, and to execute, not giuing ouer vntill
wee haue attained the end of our firſt well-aduiſed
purpoſes. Well (ſaid he) whoſoeuer he was,
That as an vnconſtant, changeable, and wauering
minded man, is vnfit for ſocietie, becauſe there is
neither aſſurance of his words, nor of his purpoſes:
ſo he makes himſelfe ridiculous to the world, in enterpriſing
that, to his ouer-great loſſe, which hee

neuer brings to any good end: whereas the end of a
thing is ſaid to be better then the beginning. Vpon
the which poynt, our Sauiour doth ſeuerely tax
all thoſe that vndertake the profeſſion of the Goſpel,
and giue ouer in the mid-way:Luke 14. 28. and this hee
doth vnder two ſimilitudes, the one of a Builder,
the other of a King, (reade the places.)
            The Vſe that we muſt make of this Doctrine, ariſing
from the Widdowes reſolution, is to examine
our ſelues, concerning the ill ſucceſſes wee
haue had in our former buſineſſe, and whence they
haue ariſen (dealing ſoundly with our ſelues,) and
then if we finde that either they haue come from a
raſh, heady, and vndiſcreet proceeding, without
counſaile-taking, or elſe from an vnſtable, wauering,
and a cowardly minde, that yet durſt not reſolue
vpon good counſaile had; let vs then proceede
with our ſelues, according to the finding out
of our errours, to repaire to him who is able to repaire
in vs all our decayes, and will at his pleaſure;
(if once we can aſſure our ſelues, and make good to
our ſoules that we are his children, to whom all
the promiſes of God in Chriſt Ieſus do appertaine)
let vs then without delay, goe to him, and aske a
greater meaſure of wiſdome for the going on in
our buſineſſe, then before time we had. The Apoſtle
Iames teacheth ſo to doe:Iames 1. 5. 
               If any of you lacke
wiſdome, let him aske of God, which giueth to all men
liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it ſhall be giuen
him.
               1 Kings 3. 9. 11. 12. 13. So did Salomon, hee asked a wiſe and an vnderſtanding
heart, and had it graunted him, with

riches, and honour, beyond all that were before
him. Let vs alſo craue a ſtable and a ſetled heart for
execution, after that by good aduice we haue attained
vnto reſolution: let vs doe this with Dauid, ſeeing
alſo all that we doe is euill, and cannot but be
ſo where the heart is euill, that is, let vs goe to God,
and ſay with him;Pſal. 51. 10. 
               Create in me a cleane heart, and
renew a right ſpirit within me: and againe, ſtabliſh me
with a free ſpirit.
            
            There is further from the obedience of this Widdow,
in ſetling her ſe fe and her ſonnes ſo readily
and vpon the inſtant to labour, a good leſſon to be
learned by all Fathers and Mothers, to bring vp
their Children as in all good knowledge, and nurture;
ſo from the very Cradle to acquaint them
with, and accuſtome them vnto all good and honeſt
labour and trauell: and this to doe, for the anoyding
of idleneſſe, becauſe in doing nothing (as one
ſaith) we learne for the moſt part to doe euill, and
to be idle is very dangerous, eſpecially to youth.
Therefore Salomon in his Prouerbs giueth a good
precept to all Fathers and Tutors ouer children &
young folkes:Prou. 22. 6. 
               Teach a Child in the trade of his way,
and when he is old, he ſhall not depart from it. It is a fit
leſſon to be renewed in this age, and vpon our people,
becauſe many walke as if they were priuiledged
to liue out of any calling at all, and ſo to liue as no
way helpfull, but hurtfull both to the Church and
Common-wealth; they thinke they may doe it in all
licentious idleneſſe, inordinately, without the check
of the Magiſtrate. Againſt this idleneſſe, oppoſe this

Law of God ſet to Adam after his fall: In the
ſweate of thy face thou ſhalt eate thy bread,
               Gen. 3. 19. 
               till thou returne
to earth: Not that Adam was before idle, or
wrought not at all, but that the labour he tooke after
that he had broken Gods Commandement, was
not without weariſome tediouſneſſe, whereof before
he was free. To liue idle, and in no good, ſet,
certaine, and lawfull calling; the Apoſtle Paul calleth
it an inordinate,2 Theſ. 3. 11. or diſordered kinde of liuing:
We heare that there are among you ſome (ſaith he) who
walke inordinately, and worke not at all, but are buſie-bodies.
This great ſinne of the Land, as it is ſeuerely
to be met withall, by the continuall teaching and
ſharpe reprehenſion of the Miniſters, ſo in no wiſe
to be permitted in the Houſes of our Church-Gouernours,
who by occaſion of their large and ſpacious
manſions, and their many buſineſſes, by reaſon
of their wide circuites, are to retaine and intertaine
many followers, and therefore to take heede,
may I be bold to ſpeake, (Bona cum venia) that not
one be towards them, whom they may not, or doe
not applie to ſome ordinary buſineſſes in their places;
not foſtering this ſinne of idleneſſe within their
walles: and howſoeuer the common deſire of thoſe
who will be towards them in ſeruice is, that they
may liue at eaſe, or idlely; conſidering that the holy
Apoſtle Paul, enforming Timothy concerning a
Biſhop,1 Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4. that he muſt be watchfull himſelfe in his place,
as alſo one that loueth goodneſſe, hauing faithfull children,
which are not ſlandered of riot,
               Tit. 1. 6. 7. 8. 
               neither are diſobedient:
much more is he, yea, with a more ſtraight

eye, to ſee that none about him, as a ſeruant, be
without his place of employment, and that to good
purpoſe. It was one of the ſinnes that Ezechiel reporteth
to haue beene the great ſinne of Sodome,
fore-running the deſtruction thereof; and this hee
doth, thereby to take vp roundly the people of Iſrael
and Iudah, affirming that the ſinnes of Sodome
were not greater then their ſinnes:Ezech. 16. 47. 48. 
               Behold (ſaith he)
this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodome▪ pride, fulneſſe
of bread, and abundance of idleneſſe, was in her, and in
her daughters: neither did ſhee ſtrengthen the hands
of the poore and needy, &c. But when this ſinne
ſhall grow vp (notwithſtanding the teaching of the
Miniſters, and the care of Church-Gouernours, inaſmuch
as in them lyeth;) The ciuill Magiſtrate
is then to ſtep in, euen from him that is in the higheſt
and moſt honourable place of all, vnto him who
is the moſt inferiour in reſpect of gouernment, according
to the Lawes prouided in that caſe, for the
remedying of this ſinne, as alſo for the prouiding
reliefe for the poore, to ſee that execution without
intermiſſion of thoſe Statutes be had; and not to
ſpare to puniſh the idle and vnprofitable perſon
within his or their libertie or liberties; and beyond
all, firſt, to prouide that themſelues be watchfull,
diligent, and carefull in their owne places of gouernment,
as alſo ouer thoſe who are within their
roofes, becauſe themſelues are exemplary preſidents,
and as high Beacons ſet vpon the toppes of
the higheſt places of aduantage, to giue warning by
to the Countrey, of any danger preſent, or neare

it is lamentable to ſee and heare the inordinate and
more then Sodomitiſh behauiour of thoſe perſons
and ſeruants in Noble and great mens Houſes, who
for want of employment, being idle, yea, very
babes new out of the ſhell, doe exceede in all manner
of impiety and abomination; ſuch as I am aſhamed
once to name: Let it ſuffice in a word, onely
this as a watch word (giue me leaue to ſet downe to
the view of all great ones;) Conſider I beſeech you,
conſider how your Houſes are receptacles of the
ſonnes and daughters of many Families in your
Countries, who deſire to liue vnder your ſeruice,
and that many Fathers and Mothers doe make
great ſuite that their Children may be your attendants
and ſeruants, perhaps they looke no further
then that they may in time get ſomewhat vnder
you to liue vpon; but to liue honeſtly, ſoberly, and
religiouſly, perhaps they neuer looke after; yet how
careleſſe ſoeuer they haue beene, in you muſt (and
God requireth it at your hands) O ye noble perſons,
whoſe greateſt honour it is, and ought to be to
feare God, with your whole Families; you muſt ſee
(I ſay) that all within your walles, without exception,
euen all your ſons, your daughters, your menſeruants
your maid-ſeruants, euery one of them
ſo to beſtow themſelues vnder your gouernements,
as that according to their places aboue and vnder
each other, they may be fitted to the Church or
Common-wealthes vſes, as God ſhall ſee it good for
them, to the ſeruice of the Age ſucceeding: If otherwiſe
there be any that will not fall to ſome buſineſſe

or other, but liue of the ſweate of other mens labours,
then doe as the profitable and moſt laborious
Bees in their Common-wealth doe; let euery
one as he is in place, take thoſe idle luskes and ſlothfull
droanes, within his limits, and caſt them out as
not meete for the ſociety of men. For thus are the
Bees ſaid to doe, Ignauum fucos pecus a praeſepibus arcent;
They take the droanes, and ioyntly they
hurle them out of their Hiues: Much like as we vſe
to doe with our vagrant rogues, whip them out
at a Carts arſe to the Townes end, and ſo let them
goe.
            But to this Widdow, in her employment, let me
returne. Shee ſeeing her owne preſent miſery, and
the miſeries of her two ſonnes, whereinto they were
likely to fall, on the one ſide; as alſo that God had
offered her ſo great hope, firſt, by the Prophets aduiſing
of her, and then by the ſucceſſe in her neighbours
ioyning with her willingly, euery one to helpe
her by the loane of their empty caske of veſſels,
tending to all their goods; on the other ſide, ſhe loſes
no time, ſhee ſpares no labour, her ſonnes in like
manner as ready at hand, it being euery one of their
caſes, they ſhake off idleneſſe, and giue not ouer
their worke, vntill they had attained the thing they
laboured for.
            But becauſe all Scripture is written for vs, euen
for vs to vſe, let vs euery one from the higheſt to the
loweſt, eſpecially thoſe of vs who haue been endangered
by debt, howſoeuer befallen vpon vs, becauſe
debts muſt be paid; let vs I ſay, vſe the example of

this Widdow and her two ſonnes aright, let vs doe
as they did, worke vpon the remainder of that
which we haue, be it but one poore full pitcher of
Oyle; let vs goe to worke, and make triall what may
be done; let not one hand be idle, conſidering there
remaines ſtill a promiſe vnto vs, as to our fore-fathers,
God will vndoubtedly bleſſe thee in vſing all
good, holy, and commanded meanes. The wiſe
man Salomon telleth thee;Prou. 14. 22. 
               In all labour there is abundance;
and againe in another place, he encourageth
thee who haſt made thy ſelfe a bond man to thy
Creditor, if thou inſtead of being bound, wouldeſt
be free and a commander in thine owne houſe, and
haue power ouer thine owne goods, and comfort
in thy wife and children, heare his counſell, and follow
his direction:Prou. 12. 24. 
               The hand of the diligent ſhall beare
rule, but the idle ſhall be vnder tribute.
            
            Make then this vſe of it, euery one that beareth
the name of a Chriſtian; for I tell thee howſoeuer
by the Law of nature thou art tyed to giue ſuum
cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , that is, to euery one his owne, and to make
difference betweene meum and tuum, yet thou art
doubly bound in the Law of Chriſtianity, and that
to thy further condemnation (if thou doe not performe
it,) for there is afforded vnto thee by the Goſpell
(if thou receiue it) the holy Ghoſt, for the inabling
of thee to doe what by the Law of nature
thou canſt not haue, which if thou attaine not vnto,
it is thine owne fault: Examine thy ſelfe in this
point, and ſee into thine owne firſt eſtate, how thou
haſt liued out of any commendable and lawfull calling

before time: for to be a Gentleman, which is
the thing that many baſe liuers doe challenge to
themſelues, and no way to haue beene either publikely,
or priuately ſeruiceable to the Church, the
Prince, the Common-wealth, or any one priuate family
for the gouernment thereof. If thy conſcience
therefore accuſe thee in this behalfe, returne betimes,
repent thee of thy former wayes, and take
a more Chriſtian courſe, and inſtead of walking
wholly after thy delights and inordinate pleaſures
any longer, ſee into the wants of the Church and
of the Common-wealth, and giue thy helping hand
to repaire the ruines or decayes either of the one, or
of the other, which way ſoeuer God ſhall incline
thy heart vnto, and make thee fit for; knowing this
for a ſurety, that idleneſſe, is a ſtep vnto all manner
of wickedneſſe: yea, the eight Commandement,
Thou ſhalt not ſteale, will take thee ſuſpicious as a
tranſgreſſor thereof: Be well aduiſed therefore, and
follow the holy Apoſtle Pauls counſell, who ſaith to
thee, to me, and to euery one that liueth, or hath
liued, or beene a nouriſher of them who haue liued
inordinately:Ephe. 4. 28. 
               Let him that ſtole, ſteale no more; but labour
the thing that is good, that hee may haue to giue to
him that needeth. And thus much for that point;
Now it followeth:
            And the Oyle ceaſed, ſtood at a ſtay, or left off to increaſe.
            Now that the Widdow hath gotten into her
hands the poſſeſſion of meanes enough, out of this
Gods good, (as I may call it) this ſo plentifull encreaſe

for the releaſe of her ſelfe from care, from
debt, and of her ſonnes from ſeruitude or bondage,
God ſtayes his hand, hee knowes what is enough,
the Oyle giues ouer and increaſes no more Doubtleſſe
God is wiſe in the performance of the worke of
mercy, according to time & meaſure, vpon whomſoeuer
of his Children; neither is any other reaſon
to be rendered thereof, beſides his good pleaſure;
as alſo in the execution of his iudgements, when he
ſeeth meete to puniſh them whom he meaneth to
puniſh: wherein for the meaſure and time of ſtaying
of theſe his iudgements when he pleaſeth, he is
not to be queſtioned with.2 Sam. 
                     •
                  4. 15. In the ſecond Booke of
Samuel, it is recorded, that after the Lord had ſlaine
with the peſtilence threeſcore and ten thouſand of
the people of Iſrael, becauſe Dauid had cauſed his
whole people in the Land to be numbred, as a great
pride; and the Angell of the Lord ſtretched out his
hand vpon Ieruſalem to deſtroy it;Verſe 16. it is ſaid, that the
Lord repented of the euill, and ſaid to the Angell that
deſtroyed the people; It is ſufficient, hold now thy
hand.
            
            The firſt thing that is to be obſerued vpon this
point is, that all Creatures are at the command of
the Creator, to liue or to die at his pleaſure, they
haue their time to ſerue him in for the good of his
Children, they haue their ſpring time, their harueſt,
and their fall of leafe, their time to liue and grow vp
in, their time to ceaſe growing, or any way increaſing;
and this commeth to paſſe wonderfully, although
ordinarily man knoweth not how: But as

the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of the Corne that is ſowen,
Each Corne hath his owne body after he is ſowen,
               1 Cor. 25. 38. 41. 
               euen to
euery ſeede his owne body, at Gods owne pleaſure: So
that it is not the wit of man, nor his labour, with
all his skill; it is not the goodneſſe of the ſoyle, it is
not the ſeaſonableneſſe of the weather, but it is God
himſelfe who bringeth theſe mighty things to paſſe.
It is he, euen he alone, and none but hee that maketh
this encreaſe.
            Obſerue it alſo in another thing: Man feedes vpon
bread and other foode, which of themſelues
haue no life at all, whileſt they feede him; nay, euery
thing muſt change, and be changed, before it
proue, or can be meete nouriſhment for him, it is
by God that they turne as the preſeruatiue Inſtruments
of life:Deut. 8. 3. To this purpoſe ſpeaketh Moſes to
the Children of Iſrael, and as from him our Sauiour,
to ſtop Sathans mouth:Mat. 4. 4. 
               Man liueth not by bread
alone, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the
mouth of God. How then this Oyle encreaſeth, and
ſtayeth from encreaſing, let vs not ſtand as at a
gaze to admire, and goe no further; but goe on to
make a holy and profitable vſe of it, thereby to be
led to glorifie God, who is, as the Lord of Heauen
and Earth, ſo of the times and ſeaſons, wherein his
Creatures are to ſerue him to their ſeuerall ends, or
to reſt from doing any ſeruice at all.
            Whereas theſe words (And the Oyle ceaſed) doe
ſeeme to yeeld ſmall matter, let me be bold yet in
the power of the Spirit, euen of the Spirit of our
Lord Ieſus, who hath taken me (vnworthy though)

into his ſeruice, and according to my poore meaſure
and place, hath giuen me to be faithfull, who
alſo vpon this Scripture hath drawne me along
thus furre, whereof in the many dayes of my diſtractions,
in the caſe which preſently I doe here handle,
I haue made ſome vſe, and receiued ſome comfortable
hope of the goodneſſe of that God, euen
my God (giue me leaue) the God of vs all, the mercifull
God of this Widdow; yet vpon this very ceaſing
of the Oyle, ariſeth moſt worthy doctrine, tending
to the teaching of euery Chriſtian man and
woman contentedneſſe of his, her, or their eſtates,
euen that wherein God hath ſet them.
            The doctrine then is this. That as God doth giue
or take away from thee, as God encreaſeth or abateth
of thy ſtocke or ſtore, be thou alwayes ready
to ſet vp the reſt in Gods good pleaſure, and not as
the World doth, in that Heatheniſh and Idolatrous
goddeſſe, blinde and vnſtable Fortune, an vtter
enemy to Gods moſt certaine, and vndoubted prouidence.
It is a leſſon fit for this time, wherein the
bottomleſſe & vnſatiable hearts of couetous men
and women of all ſorts, rich and poore, may be met
withall, whoſe nature is ſo repining, that if the Lord
doe but ſtop the courſe of any earthly increaſe, by
what meanes ſoeuer, forth-with they fall into ſuch
grudgings, and vntoward repinings againſt God
himſelfe, as if he denyed them once to be their own
caruers, and did cauſe them to ſtand to his appointment,
he then could not but doe them great wrong.
Such male contents all the ſort of vs doe, and will

proue, if God, as he doe with-draw his hand from
relieuing vs, and from the increaſing of our ſtore,
he doe with-draw our hearts in like manner from a
ſetled and quiet contentment of enioying what he
ſees good for vs.
            But to the curing of this malady, this example
of the Widdow, and of the Lords hand, in ſtaying
further then her neede was to relieue her, with ſome
few other Scriptures that follow, may be, if they be
vſed accordingly, very ſoueraigne and medicinable
remidies. Let vs then with this, vſe alſo that prayer
that is ſet downe for our inſtruction in the Prouerbs;
Giue me not pouerty,
               Prou. 30. 8. 
               nor riches, feede me with foode
conuenient for me, leſt I be full and denie thee, and ſay,
who is the Lord? or leſt I be poore, and ſteale, and take
the name of my God in vaine. When thoſe empty
veſſels, (and borrowed) of the widdowes, were once
filled, the Oyle ceaſed, as if God ſaide; It is enough,
vſe it well, and be content. The care then which we
ought to haue for the things of this life, is, as from
the teaching of the Apoſtle Paul, by God himſelfe
limited: Therefore when we haue foode and rayment,
let vs therewith be contented. The holy Patriarke
Iacob, although conditionally as the words
doe import, did ſolemnely binde himſelfe to God,
and as by prayer entreating God to teſtifie himſelfe
to be his God:Gen. 
                     •
                  8. 20. In theſe words; If God (ſaith he)
will be with me, and will keepe me in this iourney which
I goe, and will giue me bread to eate, and cloathes to put
on, ſo that I come againe vnto my Fathers Houſe in ſafetie,
then ſhall the Lord be my God. As if hee ſhould

ſay; I deſire no Kingdomes, nor Lordſhips, I deſire
but competency, with Gods fauour. Let vs alſo
to the ſame purpoſe, behold Paul in himſelfe, for
vs to follow:Phil. 11. 12. 
               For I haue learned (ſaith he) in whatſoeuer
ſtate I am, therewith to be content; I can be abaſed,
and I can abound, euery where, in all things; I am inſtructed
both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound,
and to haue want. All which leſſons, how farre they
are off from hauing learned, who reſolue themſelues
they will be rich, and doe make their reckoning before
hand, that they will not leaue vntill they haue
attained to ſo many thouſands, giuing themſelues
liberty to get or gaine howſoeuer? This is the great
ſinne, both in Church and Common-wealth, and
ſuch there are doubtleſſe too many. Theſe are they
of whom the holy Ghoſt ſpeakes:1 Tim. 6. 9. 10. 11. 
               For they that will
be rich, (ſaith he) fall into tentations and ſnares, and
many fooliſh and noyſome lusts, which drowne men in
perdition and deſtruction: For the deſire of money
is the roote of all euill, which while ſome haue luſted
after, they haue erred from the Faith: And
haue not many amongſt vs done ſo? Haue they not
turned Turkes, Papiſts, Athieſts, and what not, for
Lands, liuing, honour, and credit?) and then ſaith
the holy Ghoſt, and haue pierced themſelues thorow
with many ſorrowes. How farre are theſe from
this contentedneſſe, or that before ſpoken of Iacobs
meate, drinke, and apparell, who by inordinate
couetouſneſſe, and vſury of all ſorts, deceit and oppreſſion,
idleneſſe, and ſuch like, haue gone out of
the way of Gods Commandements? let euery indifferent

Reader iudge vprightly. But to thee I
ſpeake, to thee I write, who art deſirous to returne
out of theſe ill and peruerſe wayes, who art not
wilfull and obſtinate, but deſireſt to walke with an
vpright heart, to the well-pleaſing of God: before
thee it is that I haue laide downe the example of
this Widdow and her two ſonnes, learne then from
her, for the redeeming of thy ſelfe, if thou haſt endangered
thy eſtate by debt any way▪ to labour
from hence forth ſo as thou mayeſt in thy honeſt
and iuſt trauailes both liue and ſatisfie; and as thou
doeſt taſte of Gods goodneſſe towards thee, ſo lift
vp thine heart and glorifie God, being contented
with whatſoeuer God in his prouidence ſhall prepare
for thee; and when thou ſeeſt thou art at a ſtay,
God not pleaſing that thou ſhalt abound with
wealth, but onely haue from hand to mouth, bread
for the day; with this (and the Oyle ceaſed) ſet vp thy
reſt wholly in the Lord. Thus much for that point.
Now it followeth.
            7. Then ſhee came, and tolde the man of God, and he
ſaide; Goe, and ſell the Oyle, and pay them that thou
art indebted vnto, and liue thou and thy children of the
reſt, &c.
            The thing that is to be obſerued in the Widdow
in her comming the ſecond time to the Prophet, is,
that ſhee doth not ſatisfie her ſelfe in requiring the
Prophet as at the firſt which way her preſent need
might be ſupplyed; but her turne being ſerued, ſhe
goes to him againe, and deſires aduice how ſhe may
diſpoſe of that to her beſt auaile. Whence we are to

learne in euery ſeuerall action to goe to God for his
counſell, and not to ſuffer any thing to be done by
vs without the further direction of his holy Word:
Indeede to aske at Gods hands we will be ready,
and to take alſo all that he giues with a common
or courſe acknowledgement of the giuer, asking
perhaps of him, what if we obtaine to conſume it
on our luſts;Iames 4. 3. which alſo is the cauſe, that often wee
aske, and goe empty away, and receiue not.
            
            But when we haue gotten of him ought any way,
how then to diſpoſe of it, therein we will make ſtay
to goe to him: for euery one thinkes that being
intereſſed, or poſſeſſed of ought, it is then his owne,
and lawfull for him to diſpoſe of it at his pleaſure.
Is it not the common anſwere of euery one; May
I not doe with mine owne what I pleaſe? I anſwere
thee no: for thou art vnder the ſubiection of the
Almighty, who hath thee and all thine vnder his
command, to diſpoſe of, according as he hath preſcribed
thee in his holy Word: Otherwiſe thou art
an vſurper, howſoeuer perhaps thou wilt not ſticke
to equall thy ſelfe to Chriſt Ieſus, who to ſtop the
mouthes of the enuious, murmuring, and repining
labourers,Mat. 20. 15. recorded in Matthewes Goſpell, anſweres
them as by right he might, being Lord of Heauen
and Earth; Is it not lawfull for mee to doe what I
will with mine owne? There is a difference betweene
Chriſt Ieſus thy Soueraigne Lord and Maſter and
thee, he being out of all command, and thou altogether
vnder him: for no otherwiſe canſt thou
challenge a property in the leaſt of Gods bleſſings

vpon thee, but as thou art in him.
            But to the further proofe of the matter in hand;
how that in each particular action, both for the hauing
what we want, and the vſing it when we haue
it aright, we ought not to goe without counſell.
There is one example in Scripture to confirme vs,
in the Booke of Iudges,
               Iudges 13. 4. 5. and it is of one Manoah,
whoſe Wife was barren, to whom the Lord ſent his
Angell, euen to the woman to certifie her, that ſhe
ſhould conceiue and beare a ſonne; whereof when
ſhee had certified her Husband with euery circumſtance,
as in the 3. 4. and 5. verſes: Manoah not ſo
ſatisfied, as in the 8. verſe, prayed to the Lord that
he would ſend the Man of God again to him, which
accordingly the Lord did, and ſent his Angell the
ſecond time to his Wife, as in the 9. verſe: which
comming of his, when his Wife had diſcouered vnto
him, he then went with her, as in the 11. verſe,
and in the 12. verſe, Manoah ſaide; Well, be it ſo, we
will expect a childe, as thou ſayeſt: But as if Manoah
ſhould ſay further; It is not enough for one to haue a
childe, but (ſaith he) how ſhall we order the childe, and
doe vnto him, &c? Many deſire to haue Husbands,
Wiues, Children, Lands, liuings, and goods, but
to aduiſe out of the Word of God how to order or
behaue themſelues in the rightly vſing of them to
the glory of God and their owne good, that they
care not for at all; which is a principall cauſe that
makes all goe wrong in Countries, Cities, Townes,
and Families. Herein the very Children of God
haue beene ouertaken by an ouer-great perſwaſion

they haue had of the goodneſſe of the matter purpoſed
vpon.2 Sam. 7. 4. 5. 
               Dauid being purpoſed to build an
Houſe to God: The Prophet Nathan in like manner
approuing his intent, becauſe it ſeemed to be a
worthy thing to build God a Houſe, they both
were deceiued: for as it is in the 4. and 5. verſes;
The ſame night the Word of the Lord came vnto Nathan
ſaying, 5. Goe, and tell my ſeruant Dauid, Thus
ſaith the Lord: ſhalt thou build me an Houſe for my
dwelling? As if the Lord ſhould ſay; Thou ſhalt not.
But ſpeaking of Salomon, he ſaith; He ſhall build a
Houſe for my name. So that how good ſoeuer our
matters ſeeme to be, God will haue vs in them all to
take his Law to be our Counſellors, yea, aſwell in
the manner, as in the matter; otherwiſe, the failing
in the manner of proceeding, and that in a good
cauſe, it ſelfe may worke the ouerthrow of the
cauſe.
            
               It followeth in the anſwere of the Prophet: Goe,
and ſell the Oyle, and pay to them thou art indebted vnto,
and liue thou and thy children of the reſt.
            In theſe words, the holy man of God counſelleth
her, as from God, what vſe ſhee muſt make of the
ſupplie that God had made vnto her out of her
ſmall ſtore: The firſt is, Pay thy debts. The ſecond,
Liue of the reſt. The firſt vſe is, the ſhutting vp of
the point; that is, the maine argument of this Hiſtory:
viz. Debts muſt be paid. Whereof to ſpeake
more fully, I will ſet downe ſome reaſons to inforce
thereunto: the firſt is drawne from our ſelues, in
our owne deſires, who would not willingly permit

any man to with-draw from vs, or to incroch vpon
vs, for any part of thoſe our goods, which God
hath giuen vs for our neceſſary vſes, and that againſt
our willes. To this purpoſe our Sauiour
ſpeaketh:Luke 6. 13. 
               As ye would that men ſhould doe to you, ſo
doe you to them.
               2. Reaſon,
            
            A ſecond reaſon is from Gods Commandement
in things of leſſe account then borrowed goods
are, as in finding things loſt of another mans, in
keeping things committed to his cuſtodie. Againe:
In finding thine enemies Oxe or Aſſe going aſtray,Exod. 23. 4. 5.
thou ſhalt bring him to him againe; or if thou ſeeſt
thine enemies Aſſe lying vnder his burthen, wilt
thou ceaſe to helpe him vp? (as if it were a moſt inhumane
point) and then he enioynes him ſtraightly;
Thou ſhalt helpe him vp againe: Much more then
it behoueth a man or woman of God, with care and
great conſideration, nay, conſcience alſo of that
which was lent to him vpon loue, and whereof he
hath had long vſe perhaps, to make to the vttermoſt
of his power honeſt, iuſt, and ſeaſonable reſtitution.3. Reaſon.
            
            A third reaſon may be drawne from the wrong
that thou offereſt thy ſelfe, or any other that ſtands,
or ſhall ſo ſtand in neede for the time to come; for
thou cauſeſt thy mercifull friend, a pitiful and compaſſionate
lender perhaps to many in former times,
now to cloſe vp his heart, and ſtiffely to ſtrengthen
it from reſpecting thee, or any other in thine, or
their neceſſities: for doubtleſſe a chiefe cauſe of ſo
little lending, is euill and vniuſt payment.
            
               
Fourthly,4. Reaſon. thou haſt opened a doore of liberty to
thine owne heart, vnto all fraud, ſubtilty, and deceit,
if not to flat theeuery, at one time or at other,
by thy careleſſe regard ouer thy liuing Neighbours
goods, in not repaying that againe which thou hadſt
borrowed, for no liberty at all muſt any man giue,
no, not to himſelfe of doing the leaſt wrong, if it be
but once in his life; becauſe cuſtome in euill, if it doe
but ſauour of any preſent good to the fleſh, breedes
hardneſſe of heart for the continuance in the ſame:
yea, know for a certainty, that theſe kindes of
wrongs are brought vnder the compaſſe of the
breach of the eight Commandement. Thou ſhalt
not ſteale: Wherein whatſoeuer Lands, liuing, or
goods, not thine owne, but another mans, ſubtilly,
ſecretly, cunningly, and vniuſtly incroched vpon
by thee, whereinto thou haſt entred poſſeſſion, as
from a falſe clayme or title, and doeſt onely enioy
it by might, againſt right, and that vnder colour of
Law onely, gayning time vpon the innocent, not
being able to match thee by the purſe, or otherwiſe
by ſome ouer-ſight in not timely ſeeking his owne;
know this, that howſoeuer the Law of man may
priuiledge thee to hold that which thou haſt vniuſtly
gotten, yet the Law of God will not take from
thee the guilt of that ſinne, vntill that faith of thine,
hauing opened thy heart vnto true remorſe for that
ſinne of thine, doe waſh thee thorowly from the
ſame, in the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, for thy full forgiueneſſe.
            A fift reaſon,5. Reaſon. why thou art to regard the paying

of debts, ariſeth from the ſlauery or bondage a man
brings himſelfe into, by either borrowing ouergreedily,
or vnto ill and vnneceſſary purpoſes, what
bitter reproaches, taunts, checkes, reproofes, ſlanders,
doeſt thou make thy ſelfe ſubiect vnto, of the
greateſt company of lenders, thoſe eſpecially who
in their lending reſpected no way loue, but their
owne gaine, if at the very day thou haſt not to repay
them againe? Theſe reaſons might induce thee
to haue a better regard of thy credit, liberty, eaſe,
and comfort of heart, then formerly thou haſt had;
whereof, by thy careleſneſſe, thou haſt depriued thy
ſelfe.Prou. 22. 7. It is a moſt true ſaying by Salomon: The rich
man ruleth the poore, and the borrower is a ſeruant to
the lender; The latter part of the ſentence is it that
ſerueth this purpoſe, wherein the holy-Ghoſt doth
not iuſtifie the pride, and tyranny of thoſe vnmercifull
lenders; but rather ſets it downe as a caueat
for Gods Children to take heed how they enter into
the hands of ſuch vnmercifull men. I doe the
rather preſſe this point, and vrge it vpon vniuſt and
baſe minded borrowers, towards them who are
conſcionable and neighbourly friends, who vopn
meere loue were willing to depart from their goods
for a ſeaſon, to pleaſure the borrower with; becauſe,
ſuch is the iniquity of the time, that there are that
take other mens goods into their hands, howſoeuer
in faire words, and colourably, vnder cloake of
Religion, they carry the matter with faire promiſes,
till their turne be ſerued; yet, before-hand, they
reſolue to breake time, yea, and that although they

neede not; ſome other, not euer purpoſing to pay:
but whereunto may ſuch deceitful debtors be compared?
they are like to a faire Horſe of ſome hope,
whereupon, when the Maſter hath beſtowed all his
coſt by prouandar, and other keeping, to his great
charge; euen then, when hee thinkes him fit, and
lookes for ſeruice at his hands, hee proues a very
Iade; and withall, ſuddenly turnes vp his heeles:
Euen ſo is a diſſembling debtor to an honeſt lender;
or rather, like to a piece of ground, whereon a man
ſetting his hope, and thereafter beſtoweth his labour;
firſt his rent, then his labour, his manure and
his ſeede in all good Husbandry, with long expectation;
euen then, when hee ſhould receiue the
fruites of his tedious toyle, he looſes all, and ſcarce
receiues his ſeede againe. Take heede then to thy
ſelfe, if thou wilt not be accounted of as a ſtinking
lade, of whoſe carkeiſe comes carrion for the Kites
and Crowes to picke on; or, if thou wilt not be as
the ground, which is reproued, and is neere vnto
curſing, whoſe end is to be burned; keepe then a
good conſcience, that may be thy comfort when
the World ſpeakes ill of thee; know thine owne
from other mens, feare God, deale iuſtly, giue to
euery man his owne, hauing eſpecially receiued (as
this Widdow hath, although not in that manner)
ſome good increaſe from God: let not in any
wiſe the feare of thine owne want, make thee corrupt
in paying to them that thou oweſt. God is
rich both for the one and the other: (Pay ſaith the
Prophet) to them thou art indebted; for debts muſt be

paid. But if thou wilt ſay, thou haſt it not, and in
ſo ſaying, ſpeakeſt ſimply; I yet aduiſe thee with
him who ſaid it, and that moſt truly: Si non effectu,
affectu tamen: If thou canſt not come any thing
neere to pay the whole debt, yet come as neere as
thou canſt; ſhew thy readineſſe out of that little
that thou haſt remaining, if not any thing neere to
a full, yet toward ſatisfaction: and howſoeuer it will
not perhaps pleaſe men, yet in hauing a good conſcience,
God will be well pleaſed.
            One other reaſon may induce vs to reſtitution,
and that is, that loue of God wherewith he hath loued
thee, and cauſed thee by the power of that his
loue, to loue him againe; let this loue of God infinitely
ſhewing it ſelfe to thee both for ſoule and
body, worke in thee a care of iuſt and equall dealing
with men, according as God is iuſt, and requires
it of thee, that therein thou reſembling him, mayeſt
alſo reape the comfortable witneſſe fo God and
thine owne conſcience, which neuer goes without
her true and endleſſe ioy.
            Beſides theſe reaſons already, let me be bold to
ſtirre vp all ſorts and degrees of people, both Honourable,
Worſhipfull, and others, by the example
of a meane and poore labourer, to diſcharge this duty
of equity and vprightneſſe, in making care to
pay to euery man his owne, neither let the meanneſſe
of the perſon cauſe thee leſſe to eſteeme the
truth, but rather reſpect it highly, vnder whoſe perſon
ſoeuer it be brought to thee, becauſe it is the
Word of the onely true, and eternall God. The

thing is this:2 Kings 6. A poore labourer being taken to fell
timber for the building of a Houſe for the Children
of the Prophets, as is ſaid, verſe 5. As he was
felling of a Tree, the yron fell from the helue into
the water: Then he cryed, and ſaid to Elizha; Alas
Master, it was but borrowed: as if the poore man
ſhould ſay; The loſſe of the Axe head doth not ſo
much grieue me, as that I borrowed it, and muſt reſtore
it againe. The example of Paul to Philemon,
brought in before, to teach all lenders mercy to
their diſtreſſed priſoners, for debt, where no meanes
is otherwiſe to be had for ſatisfaction, may alſo ſerue
to this purpoſe of iuſt dealing, without oppreſſion
any way of any man: Where mention being made
of Philemon,
               Philemon. hauing an vntruſty ſeruant, called Oneſimus,
who had runne away with his Maſters goods,
being caught vp in the priſon where Paul was, by
Gods prouidence, being there ſtayed, became (as
appeares) Pauls conuert, for whom Paul writeth
to Philemon, that he would receiue him agine, and
that very earneſtly; and leſt that Philemon ſhould
grudge ſo to doe, vnleſſe there were withall made
reſtitution of thoſe things that Oneſimus had purloyned
away; the holy Apoſtle, who made care
of every thing that he did, and perſon to whom to
doe it, without offence, in the eighteenth verſe of
that Epiſtle vndertook for Oneſimus in theſe words;
If he hath hurt thee, or oweth thee ought, that put on my
accounts, I Paul have written this with mine owne
hands, I will recompence it: As if the Apoſtle ſhould
inferre thus much; I ſhould Philemon, I confeſſe,

doe thee great wrong, if as I doe intreat for thy ſeruant,
I ſhould not withall either draw him to reſtore
what he hath deceiued thee of, or elſe aſſume
my ſelfe to ſatisfie thee.
            The vſe that may be made of theſe reaſons and
proofes of this point, (that debts muſt be paid)
from this Widdow, is firſt, as of a Looking-glaſſe
for all the loofe, careleſſe, vncharitable, vnnaturll,
(many of them) and vnconſcionable Widdowes in
all parts of our Countries to looke themſelues in;
ſuch Widdowes as in whom there in little feare of
God appearing, nor any true loue to Husband
while hee liued, without care or conſcience of the
Creditors, who without all equity or honeſty,
(inſtead of going to the Prophets, the Miniſters of
God, ſuch as are men of God, who dare not but
giue good counſell) ſeeke out to themſelues the
moſt ſubtill, cunning, and crafty-headed mates, by
whom they may learne how to ſtrip, if poſſibly they
may the Creditors of the whole; or elſe by delayes,
when they neede not, (hauing enough, if not ſome
of them more then enough) to put them off from
their owne vntill they can be at leaſure. This Widdow,
if they looke well into her, will reach them
another leſſon; that is, as before is ſaide, to conceale
the Husbands weakeneſſes, to doe all what may returne
him credit, yea, after his death, ſo often as occaſion
is offered to ſpeake of him: this Widdow, wil
teach them to goe to God, and by their Miniſters
to be enformed to doe what is meete to be done,
concerning hauing or leauing the things of this

life, and how to vſe them in all good conſcience,
for the good of thoſe with whom they haue to
deale, as alſo for their owne both credit and comfort.
And as for Widdowes (for ſuch there are) this
is a good looking-glaſſe, ſo it may be vſed by all
manner of perſons whomſoeuer, to behold themſelues
in, thereby to diſcouer vnto them their manifold
blemiſhes in the matter of borrowings and
lendings, of the which kindes, there are of borrowers,
if I ſhould ſay one hundred for one, I might
perhaps be thought to ouer-reach farre, but who
ſees it not, and that too plainely? and herein who
ſees not withall, the very liuely portraiture of a
declining and decaying age, enery way both in
Church and Common-wealth approaching very
neere, and that vnder theſe happy dayes of proſperity
and plenty, both of Preachers and preaching,
bleſſed be God, wherein yet (might I ſpeake freely
without offence) what I feare, (Oh were it but
one mans feare) I would ſay, not to the laying
of any ſtumbling blocke before the profeſſion of
the Goſpell, and the Profeſſors, there be too many
ſtumbling blockes already, (Oh woe is me) there
be too many rockes of occaſion, and ſtones to ſtumble
at, there be too many lies in the way; the reports
of theſe occaſions are ſounded throughout the
World, Fame with her light and ſwift wings hath
ſoared aloft, and cryes out, and cannot be ſtopped,
to the heartening of our aduerſaries, vnder hope of
a day, which hope yet of their God deſtroy, as he
hath hitherto done, and rather (as Dauid deſired,

when he was put to the choyce which of the three
puniſhments he would rather require) for God had
decreed, and puniſhed the Land and people muſt
be, for Dauids ſinne, in the numoring of his people,
the decree was already out, and not to be called
in: Heare the words of Dauid, and let vs making
vſe of them all, euen all of vs ſay, and that with the
ſpirit of Dauid; I am in a wonderfull ſtraight, (ſaith
he) Let vs fall now into the hands of the Lord, for his
m
                     •
                  rcies are great, and let vs not fall into the hands of
men. But what is the crie in the Land? The crie is
this, that Popery, and all manner of prophane wickedneſſe,
couers it ſelfe vnder the cloake of holineſſe;
yea, and where it enters, it preuailes beyond
holineſſe and the thruth it ſelfe: this is the crie; but
to the purpoſe in hand. The crie is as the Prophet
I ſay ſets it downe.Iſay 24. 2. 
               Behold, there ſhall be like People, like
Prieſt; like Seruant, like Master; like Maide, like Miſtreſſe;
like buyer, like ſeller; like lender, like borrower;
like giuer, like taker to vſury, &c. This is the crie of
the Prophet, fore-ſpeaking the curſe of God ready
to light vpon the people for their ſinnes.
            But my purpoſe is (after this parentheticall digreſſion)
not altogether from the purpoſe, to be
vnto you (Oh ye rich and wealthy of the Land, who
haue huge Territories, and great poſſeſſions) an
humble ſuiter, that yet I may be to you as the poore
Iſraelitiſh Mayden, taken captiue in the Hoaſt, was
vnto Naaman the Sarian, & a Captaine, a great man,
honourable, mighty, and valiant, yet a Leper: Shee
was as an occaſion of the healing of the leproſie

of him her Lord and Maſter, by the report ſhee
made of Eliſha the Prophet vnto him. Let me alſo
as by the way of paſſage, and walke through the
Wilderneſſe of this wretched life, the full period
whereof I am almoſt at; let me be to ſome of you
and yours, Oh that I might but be, as an occaſion
any way of your good, either for ſoule, or body, or
for both: For doubtleſſe there is a creeping leproſie,
a ſpiritual and a ſoule-leproſie entring into your
houſes, if not entred, (Principijs obſta:) it is this leproſie
of oppreſſion, of this kinde whereof my
Treatiſe is, that is; Debts muſt be paid: Oh that I
might (if not by my ſelfe) which I cannot, my phyſicke
being (although I dare aſſure you it is of the
right balme in Gilead) not ſo fit for your Honours
perhaps.
            Yet Oh that I might be as this poore wench was
vnto Naaman, an occaſion, by report vnto you of
ſome one or other, ſuch as Eliſha was, as doubtleſſe
there be among you men of great worth, to whom
I would breede no diſparagement; yet becauſe the
malady is dangerous, and no leproſie ſo infectious
as it is,Prou. 11. 14. and as the Wiſe man ſaith; Where many
Counſellors are▪ there is health: And why ſhould I be
ſo fooliſh as to require the nomination of him vnto
you, who might worke out the cure thorowly?
Giue me leaue therefore, there is but one, and hee
alone, who can make the medicinable potions miniſtred
vnto you by your skilfull Phyſicians effectuall,
vnto the curing of this diſeaſe, euen God
himſelfe; to whom Dauid prayed, Pſalme 119. moſt

earneſtly:Pſal. 119. 3
                     •
                  . 
               Incline my heart vnto thy Teſtimonies, and
not to couetouſneſſe; if it be for the leproſie of voluptuouſneſſe
and inordinate pleaſure, for the curing
whereof we your Miniſters are appointed to make
you medicines, and to lay them to your running
ſoares: yet the ſame Prophet in the ſame Pſalme alſo
craueth of God, that hee will cauſe it to worke
effectually, to the curing thereof, where he prayeth.
Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanity,
               Verſe 37. (and
where is more vanity then in Kings Courts, nay,
can there be any Kings or Princes Courts without
vanity?) and quicken me (ſaith he) in thy way. He
it is that I muſt make report of to you, for where
he workes not, there is no proſperous hope of doing
good by the Phyſicians of your ſoules, nor of
your receiuing good from them without him: Intreate
him therefore earneſtly, that himſelfe will
take you his Patients to cure, and doubtleſſe you
ſhall be cured.
            But you muſt not then (Oh ye Sonnes of Men)
you muſt not let your greatneſſe priuiledge you againſt
your Teachers, but you muſt heare them, beleeue
them, and follow them: giue not eare to any
Syrens charme, let not the counſell of Wife, Friend,
Counſellor of Law; let no Steward, Bayliffe, or Officer,
nor ought elſe preuaile with you in this point,
to cauſe you at any hand to oppreſſe your Tenants
ouer-heauily, to borrow of them and not to pay
againe: Beare them not downe with your greatneſſe,
nor let any towards you, in your names, detaine
from them what is due debt on your parts to

them, but pay them, and they ſhall the better be
able both to pay you, and ready to ſerue you in all
neceſſary ſeruices they may. Farre be it from vs
that you, or any of the Church-Miniſtery, ſhould
giue vs cauſe to crie out ſo bitterly againſt you, as
the Prophet Micah did againſt the Rulers and falſe
Prophets of his time.Micah. 3. 1. 2. 3. 2. They hate the good, and loue
the euill; they plucke off their skinnes from them, and their
fleſh from their bones. 3. And they eate alſo the fleſh
of my people, &c. Reade further at your leaſures.
And for the Prophets,Verſe 5. he ſaith, (But can this time of
the Goſpell breed any ſuch couetous falſe prophets thinke
you?) Such there were then, and ſuch may be
where God takes away his grace: Thus ſaith the
Lord, concerning the Prophets that deceiue my people,
and bite them with their teeth, and cry peace; but if a
man put not into their mouthes, they prepare warre againſt
him. But you wealthy ones, who cannot endure
bondage on any hand, keepe your ſelues then
free, and diſcharge whatſoeuer any meane perſon
can iuſtly challenge of you: pay your debts to the
meaneſt perſon, yea, the rather, becauſe he is baſe or
meane, be you the leſſe beholding to him. A wofull
Age we liue in, who lookes abroade, ſees it, yea, he
ſees more then he that is ſhut vp: Euery one cries
out of wrong, when in the meane while, who is it,
if aduantage may be had vpon neuer ſo ſmall a
ſtraine, but will be ready to offer it, and that without
remorſe. And ſo to haſt to an end of this point;
Would God there were not iuſt cauſe to cry out
with the Prophet Ieremy:
               Ier. 8. 10. 
               Euery one from the leaſt

to the greateſt, is giuen to couetouſneſſe; and from the
Prophet to the Prieſt, euery one dealeth falſely.
            
            That laſt leſſon (ſomewhat ſpoken of before in
this Treatiſe) which ariſeth out of theſe words (and
liue thou and thy children of the reſt) is to be renewed
againe vpon vs for our further inſtruction.
            Firſt then God will haue the poore comforted,
with this example, that they in whom it pleaſeth
him to worke a good conſcience, and in it a care of
iuſt dealing with euery man, and meanes that ſo it
may be (videlicet) in this one kinde, that the poore
man doe teſtifie his vprightneſſe, by liuing of himſelfe
by his labour, and paying where he borroweth;
he ſhall not then, neither his, be deſtituted of
what neceſſary prouiſion is meete for him, and his
to liue vpon during life: alwayes this prouided,
that hauing foode and rayment according to his,
or their places, without exceſſe, therewith to learne
to be content.
            Another leſſon as naturally iſſuing out of this
bountifulneſſe of God to this Widdow, in prouiding
for her maintenance, beſides for her and hers,
ouer and aboue that which paid the Creditor: The
rich man as from God himſelfe, is to learne a leſſon
of tender pitty and compaſſion, to be extended by
them vnto their Debtors, when they ſhall come to
make reſtitution of what they borrowed being not
ſo able as willing to make ſatisfaction, without their
great hurt, that the man of wealth doe not ſo narrowly
deale with him or them, as vtterly to ſtrip
them of all, but rather (if not to forgiue) yet to

leaue vntill a further time, what is moſt neceſſary
for their preſent vſe, vntill by their honeſt
and ſeaſonable labour they haue gotten ſomewhat
more to worke out in the end full contentment.
            Whereunto, that Gods Spirit may worke in all
an honeſt heart, for iuſt and vpright dealing betweene
man and man; as alſo in the rich, a good care
of ſhewing themſelues pitifull where God requires
it at their hands; let them be well pleaſed to heare
what charge God hath giuen to them in that firſt
Epiſt.1 Tim. 6. 17 18. 19. of Paul to Timothy, in theſe words: 17. Charge
them that are rich in this World, that they be not high
minded, and that they truſt not in vncertaine riches, but
in the liuing God, which giueth vs abundantly all things
to enioy. 18. That they doe good, and be rich in good
workes, and be ready to diſtribute, and communicate.
19. Laying vp in ſtore for themſelues a good foundation
againſt the time to come. Heare alſo, O ye, whoſe ſtate
is very low, who are oppreſſed with pouerty, in the
dangers of men indebted, and neere to vtter ouerthrow;
heare O ye who are of an honeſt heart, and
loue iuſt and vpright wayes, to walke in them.
Heare what Dauid teacheth you.Pſal. 37. 3. 3. Truſt in the
Lord (ſaith he) and doe good, dwell in the Land, and
thou ſhalt be fedde aſſuredly. 4. Delight thy ſelfe in the
Lord, and he ſhall giue thee thine hearts deſire. 5. Commit
thy way vnto the Lord, and truſt in him, and hee
ſhall bring it to paſſe. 7. Waite patiently vpon the Lord,
and hope in him: fret not thy ſelfe for him which proſpereth
in his way; nor for the man that bringeth his enterpriſes

to paſſe: Theſe, and ſuch like, meditate day
and night vpon; let them be vnto thee as ſpeciall
preſeruatiues againſt pride, diſdaine, enuy, grudging
and repining at the rich, becauſe they are rich, and
againſt thy murmuring at the Lord himſelfe, becauſe
thou art poore: for what thou art, thou art
by his prouidence, and it is a fruite of our originall
and naturall corruption, to enuie and repine at other
mens proſperity.
            And thus I end this Treatiſe, wherein you haue
heard the proſperous ſucceſſe of this Widdow in
her ſuite, and in the vſe of all good meanes by her,
according as ſhee was preſcribed by the Prophet;
and of her being made able to pay, where ſhee was
left by her Husband indebted; whom when we beganne
with, we found very poore, and full of heauineſſe,
hauing but one poore Pitcher of Oyle to
ſerue all her turnes withall: Now we muſt leaue
her ioyfull, with many full veſſels plentifully increaſed
by the LORD, whereby all her turnes
more fully ſerued, the Hiſtory of her is now
ended.
            Now let vs pray vnto our gracious and bountifull
Lord, the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that
he will vouchſafe to all perſons, (whether borrowers,
or lenders, giuers, or takers, buyers, or ſellers,
rich and poore,) that in all Chriſtian moderation
they may walke together to the well-pleaſing
of GOD, in the whole courſe of this
life.
            
               
The God of Peace,Heb. 13. 20. 21. that brought againe from the
dead our Lord Ieſus, the great Shepheard of the
Sheepe, through the bloud of the euerlaſting Couenant,
make you perfect in all good workes to doe his will;
working in you that which is pleaſant in his
ſight, through Ieſus Chriſt: To
whom be praiſe for
euer and euer.
Amen.
*⁎*
            
         
      
   