
      
         
            
            
            THE
BRAZEN
SERPENT:
OR,
the Copie of a SERMON
Preached at PAVLS Croſſe,
Decemb. 31. 1620.
            BY
IOHN ANDREVVES, Prieſt and
Preacher of the VVORD of GOD at
Saint Iames Clerkenwell in
MIDDLESEX.
            Martial. lib. 13. Ep. 2.
            Ne perdas operam. Qui ſe mirantur in illos
Ʋirus habe; Nos Haec nouimus eſſe Nihil.
            
            
               NOLI ALTUM SAPERE
            
            LONDON,
Printed by G. P. for Thomas Thorp, and are to bee ſold
neere Chriſt-Church Gate by Ed. Wright. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE
RIGHT
HONOVRABLE
IOHN, EARLE OF
Houlderneſſe, Viſcount Haddington,
and Baron of Kingſtone vpon
Thames, &c. My ſingular good
LORD and PATRONE.
            
               
                  Right Hon: and my very good LORD:
               
            
            
               SInce I firſt vnderſtood,
that it pleaſed
GOD, of his gracious
mercy, to make choice
of your right hand, to be the happy
Inſtrument, by which Hee
thought it meete to make this
Kingdome of Great BRITAINE

happy, in reſcuing the life of
His Anointed, Our Gracious and
dread Soueraigne, from the Malignant
Sword of bloud-thirſty
conſpirators; I did euer magnifie
the name of the Lord for
you. For not I only; But all the
Inhabitants of this Kingdome
(at leaſt, So many as loue the peace
of Hieruſalem, and pray for the
proſperitie of Sion) are bound to
honour you, and to praiſe God
for you. Seeing that by your
meanes (in preſeruing our Soueraigne
from the Sword of the
Treacherous) he preſerued, for
vs, the matchleſſe perfections of
many Princes in one. For in him
we enioy an Augustus, a Commodus,
a Probus, a Pius, a Conſtantinus,
               
and a Salomon, a King of
Peace: (without which, neither
Religion, nor Piety, nor Probity,
nor Commoditie, nor Maieſty
can haue their perfect luſtre.)
For, his Maieſty is not only, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
peaceable in himſelfe; but, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
a Peace-bringer to vs in
this Land; and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a
Peace-maker among Forraine
Nations round about: and for
this cauſe, highly honoured and
deuoutly prayed for, by all ſorts
of People, euen beyond the
Seas; as being One, whom they
hope God hath ordained to be
a principall meanes to heale the
freſh-bleeding wounds, and to
ſtaunch the Bloudy-iſſue of
Chriſtendome. So that all Chriſtendome,
               
for his Maieſties preſeruation,
next vnder God, ſtandeth
bound vnto you. My Lord
(I am a plaine-breſted man: Hee
that knoweth me, knowes I cannot
flatter) This, with many other
expreſsions of goodneſſe,
was that which did firſt not inuite,
but enforce me to loue and
honour you. I may bow to
your Greatneſſe; but it is your
Goodneſſe that claimes from me
all loue and vnfained honour towards
you: And heerein I doe
but imitate your Lordſhip; who
had rather weare the ſtyle of a
Good man and an Honeſt Lord,
then of a Rich man and a Great
Lord. And you heerein do imitate
the Lord of all Lords, who, albeit

he be Deus Optimus, Maximus:
of All thats good, the beſt;
and of all thats great, the greateſt:
yet, notwithſtanding, as
Pliny ſaith,Plinius in Panegyric
                     •
                   Traian: dict. He is prius optimus
quam maximus. Hee prefers his
goodneſſe before his greatneſſe.
Wherefore (howbeit

                  Tantò ſim peſsimus omnium propheta,
                  Quantò Tu optimus omnium Patronus)
               
I preſumed to preſent theſe
worthleſſe Papers to your Lordſhip,
truſting only vpon your
Goodneſſe for a liberall Acceptance.
For (vnleſſe the wiſer Sages
haue deceiued me,) Bounty
and Liberalitie conſiſt not only in
Giuing, but alſo in a cheerfull and
gracious Accepting and receiuing
of a Preſent. The ſlenderer the

               Preſent, & the meaner the Giuer
is, the more doth it commend and
increaſe the Liberalitie of the
Noble Receiuer. For to Princes
and great Potentates, we doe
not ſo much giue the Thing it
ſelfe which we doe preſent vnto
them; as in It, wee doe make
tender of our very Hearts, our
Loue, Dutie, Honour and deareſt
Regards. All theſe I heere preſent
to your Goodneſſe, and (not
doubting of your Noble acceptance)
commend you to the
goodneſſe of Him that hath honoured
you on Earth, and will
glorifie you in Heauen:
            
            
               Your Honours poore Beadeſ-man
and vnworthy Chaplaine,
IOHN ANDREVVES.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               REader (whether courteous or vncourteous,
I know not; I am ſure, I care
not: For, in this matter, I am Iohn
indifferent.) As I came, of late to the
Croſſe, as a Beare to the Stake; ſo,
now I come to the Preſſe, (as a Theefe to the Gallowes)
ſore againſt my mind. Which I write to premoniſh
thee, leſt thou ſhouldeſt miſtake one for another.
For another there is, who writes both his
Names as I doe; and hath publiſhed diuers Bookes,
as Petitions, Subpoena's, Chriſt-Croſſes, &c. Now
becauſe I would be loth to defraud him of any Right
or Honour, which may duly belong vnto him; or
that He ſhould ſhare with me in my ſhame; I doe
heereby certifie thee, that I am not the Man: For I
neuer ſaw the Kingdome of Ireland in all my life,
but in Bookes; nor the County of Wilts, but in the
worthy Worke of the learned, iudicious and famous
Antiquary, Mr. Clarencieux. And for my part,
howſoeuer I be the meaneſt among the many thouſands
that are called to the Sacred Prieſthood; yet
I may truly proteſt, that I neuer played the Circumforanean
Theologaſter: Iſtos enim Circulatores,

qui Sacram Philoſophiam honeſtiùs neglexiſſent,
quàm vendunt, ſemper exoſos habui.
And for mine Owne part, I was neuer in Print before:
Neither was it either in my purpoſe, or in my
deſire to come abroad to the World in Print at this
time. The importunate requeſt of my friends could
neuer haue preſſed me to the Preſſe, if I had knowne
which way to ſuppreſſe certaine baſtard and illegitimate
Copies of this ſilly Sermon, which wandred
vp & down the Town, like vagrants; and were taken
Begging, here, for a Crown; and there for an Angel,
&c. It was my deſire, that they ſhould haue been had
to the Houſe of Correction; and (after due puniſhment)
ſent back to the place where they were born,
or, rather, misbegotten. But the multitude of them
was ſo numerous, that Iuſtice (without inconuenience)
could not be done vpon them. Therefore, to
vindicate my ſelfe from the imputation of glorious
Barbariſme, and moſt lame and vnioynted Nonſence;
I knew no better courſe, then by making the
Genüine Copy of that, which I then deliuered, publique
to the World. Such as it is, thou haſt it; accept
it, euen as thou canſt finde in thine Heart. I grant, I
haue not interlarded it with any exotique Elegancies,
nor conclouted the Margent with many Quotations;
becauſe I found it ſomewhat cumberſome to
the Compoſitors. For the Style, I confeſſe, it is plain
and incurious (euen like my Speach & Garments.)
For it was my ſtudy, euer, to be rather inter Zenonis
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , quàm 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And to ſay the
Truth, as I neuer had any facilitie in teaching Periods

to daunce Friskin, and ſuch-like curioſities; So did
I neuer take any felicitie in it: For I was perſwaded,
that ſuch laborioſae nugae were better neglected
then ambitiouſly affected; If for no other regard, yet
for this: That they do Emaſculate the Senſe. Knowing
it therefore to be ſuch an homely piece, and ſo far
out of the Faſhion, I could not expect any applauſe by
it: nay, I defie him that can thinke more contemptibly
of it, then I doe:
            
            
               Falſus honor juvat,Horat. & mendax infamia Terret,
               Quem? niſi Mendoſum & Mendacem.
            
            For as there be many great Names, to whom I doe,
with all reuerence, riſe vp; acknowledging that nothing
which can fall from me, can be worthy their
eye: So for vulgar and halfe-coddled Iudgements
(whether of Patricians or Plebeians) The VVorld
knowes, that
Pro Captu Lectoris habent ſua Fata Libelli.Martial.
               
As it is, If it doe any good to any one; it is that
which I heartily wiſh, but dare not Hope for. For
(as the Times are) How may I hope for any Good
from a Sermon, when euen Ballads (which are in
farre more reſpect amongſt the Many) can doe no
good vpon them? If it doe Good to none, it doth but
ſhare with others of farre better worth; in the ſame
Fortunes. Yet, Come the worſt that can; I am
ſure, That after it hath burdened the Stationers Stall
the 12. part of the date of an Almanack, it may ſerue
well enough for waſte Paper; which is the common
Deſtinie that hangs ouer the Moſt writings of this
Kind. So I take my leaue, May 25. 1621.
            
            
               Io: ANDREVVES, Presbyter.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
BRAZEN
SERPENT.
            
               IOHN 3. 14.
               As MOSES lift vp the Serpent
in the Wilderneſſe; ſo
muſt the Sonne of Man be
lift vp.
            
            
               AT the hearing of a Serpent,
ſome, it may be, will preſently
begin to feare ſtinging: but
I may ſpeake vnto them in the
Angels Preface, Luk. 2. 10. Nolite timere;
Bee not afraid: For though I bring you
heere a Serpent in ſhape; yet this Serpent is

without a ſting. And let it not ſeem ſtrāge
to you, that for a New-yeeres gift, I ſhould
offer to ſo honourable an aſſembly ſuch
an ominous preſent, as a Serpent: For beſides,
that the Serpent caſt into a circular
figure (holding his Tayle in his mouth)
hath of old bin made anPierius. 
               Hieroglyphique,
and myſticall repreſentation of the reuolution
of the yeere, and of the meeting of
the end of the old yeere, with the beginning
of the New: becauſeVirgil. Georgic.
               —In ſe, ſua per veſtigia voluitur Annus;
whereupon it is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Beſides, this
I ſay,Sueton. in Tiberio c. 72. 
               Suetonius tels me that the great
Emperour Tiberius had a Serpent, inter
oblectamenta, among his choyceſt delicacies,
and would feede it at the Table with
his owne hand; taking great pleaſure in
ſporting himſelfe with it. If it found ſuch
fauour with ſo great a Monarch; I finde
no reaſon why this Serpent may not receiue
as good entertainment from You;
marry, that Serpent of Tiberius had no
ſting in it, to hurt withall: No more hath
this; wherefore let none be afraid of it:
               
for I will enter ſecuritie for it, that it intendeth
not to ſting any one; either Churchman,
or Courtier, or Lawyer, or Citizen.
Neither doe I thinke it hath any neede to
ſting any: for, I make no doubt, but their
Conſciences haue beene prickt and ſtung ſufficiently,
by thoſe of my Brethren which
haue ſtoodAt the Croſſe. 
               in this place before me. And I
pray God, that their ſtingings haue not
proued to many, like Cleopatra's Aſpes;
which ſo benummed and ſtupified her
Senſes, that ſhee ſlumbred her ſelfe to
death, inſenſibly. If any heere haue been
thus ſtung into a benummedneſſe of Conſcience:
I could wiſh, for their ſakes, that I
had the vertue of the Pſylli or Marſi
               Suetonius in Auguſto cap. 17. Cleopatrae, quam ſeruatam Triumpho maximè cupie bat, etiam Pſyllos admouit.; that
ſo I might ſuck out the ſting or poiſon
from their ſoules, and make them ſound
againe. If any wonder, why we being
now within the Octaues of the Natiuitie,
I ſelected not a Text fit for the Time; may
it pleaſe him to grant me pardon in this:
for the Time is not very fit for my vnſound
and crazy conſtitution of body:
and howbeit, perhaps, I might with as

much eaſe to my ſelfe, and as little profit to
the Audience, haue diſcourſed vpon a
Chriſtmas Text, as vpon this: yet I feared
that your eares had euen ſurfeted already
vpon the Hearing of the Birth of a Sauiour;
and I knew, by experience, that the Children
of this Age haue Athenian eares,
deſirous of nouelties; Itching after new
things, Acts 17. 21. Wherefore I thought
it would be more acceptable to treate of
any other kinde of Argument ad euitandam
nauſeam. Beſides, becauſe I ſaw the ſupinity
and carleſneſſe of the people of theſe
times to be like vnto that of the Iewes.Eze. 33. 32. Ier. 6. 29. Eſa. 49. 4.
               Qui, modò audiant, quo audiant modò, ſuſque
dequè habent: which, ſo they heare ſomewhat,
it mattereth not greatly, what it bee,
nor after what manner they heare it. Therfore
I put a reſolution vpon me, to imitate
the Graecians: Which, as Scaliger ſaies, modò
dicant, quo dicant modo, nil penſi habent;
So they ſay ſomewhat, after what manner
they vtter it, they doe not greatly ſtand
vpon. So that it may be a worke of Supererrogation
in me, a man panged with often

convulſions in body, and intangled in a
multitude of vnneceſſary and impertinent
buſineſſes at home, if I ſhall blunder out
any tolerable dudgeon Diuinitie out of
theſe words read vnto you: As Moſes
lift vp the Serpent in the Wilderneſſe.
            
            Which paſſage of Scripture, is a compariſon
betwixt the Brazen Serpent and our
Sauiour Chriſt, who ſtileth himſelfe heere,
the Sonne of Man. Chriſt is the Subſtance
and Body ſignified by that Serpent. The
Serpent is the figure and ſhadow of Chriſt.
            
            The parts of
it are two, a

                  Sicut.
                  Sic.
               
a

                  Type,
                  &

Antitype.
               
or

                  Figura,
                  &

Figuratū.
               
            
            The Figure or Type, is the Serpent lift
vp by Moſes in the Wilderneſſe (at Phunon
the ſix and thirtieth Manſion.) The
Antitype or thing figured, is Chriſt hanged
on the Croſſe.
            In the firſt
wee may
conſider a

                  Hiſtory. [Moſes lift vp, &c.
                  Myſtery. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
or

                  Factū figurans.
                  &

Facti figuratū.
               
            
            The Hiſtory is laid down in Numbers 21.
from the fourth verſe, to the end of the

               ninth: which place I do referre the Reader
vnto. Theſe words are a Commentarie
of the firſt part of my Text.
            In which ſtory, to the end that we may
the better conceiue the meaning of my Text,
I ſhall obſerue vnto you theſe foure things.
Firſt, The ſinne of the Iſraelites. Secondly,
The puniſhment inflicted vpon them
for that ſinne. Thirdly, Their ſorrow and
repentance vpon that puniſhment. Fourthly,
The remedy which God gaue them vpon
their repentance. I will but touch vpon
theſe foure very briefely, and ſo come to
that which is more principally intended.
            1. Their ſinne was murmuring againſt
God and Moſes, verſe 4. 2. Their puniſhment
was ſtinging to death by fiery Serpents,
verſe 6. 3. Their Repentance was
in Peccauimus; We haue ſinued in ſpeaking
againſt God and thee, verſe 7. 4. Their
Remedy was a Serpent of Braſſe ſet vp for
a Signe, verſe 9.
            
            
               Firſt, The People of Iſrael being ouerwearied
with long trauaile and tedious
iournies betwixt Aegypt and Canaan, thorow

the wild Wilderneſſe of Arabia the
ſtonie, fell into impatiency, and complained
againſt God and his ſeruant Moſes;
as if God had dealt cruelly with them: as
if Moſes maliciouſly and cunningly had
drawne them forth of Aegypt, from a
ſweet contented ſtate of life, with a purpoſe
to plunge them into a depth of miſery and
diſtreſſe. Wherefore the people forgetting
their no leſſe gracious, then maruailous
deliuerance from the tyrannie and thraldome
of Aegypt, (which was no leſſe grieuous
to be borne then death it ſelfe) doth
now vpbraid the Lord & Moſes their gouernour
with it; miſconſtruing the Bleſſings
of God, and accounting the greateſt
happineſſe that euer Nation receiued, to be
their greateſt curſe and malediction: and
not only ſo; but they grew ſo queazy-ſtomackt,
that they diſdained Manna the food
of Angels; which God, moſt miraculouſly,
ſhowred down from heauen vpon them:
for ſo they ſay in plain terms, Nu. 21. 6. Our
ſoule loatheth this light Bread. Which, notwithſtanding,
at the firſt, they deſired moſt

earneſtly, and receiued moſt ioyfully,
Exod. 16. Such was the inconſtancy and
ingratitude of that people; euer whining,
euer complaining, neuer contented.
            And in them, as in a glaſſe, we may behold
our ſelues, euen to the life. When
the light of the Goſpell of Chriſt (which,
for long time, had beene beclowded with
fogs of ſuperſtition, and darke myſts of
error and ignorance) began firſt to dawne
to vs in this Land; with what generall joy
of heart was the bleſsing welcōmed? euery
mans mouth was filled with praiſe and
thankefulneſſe to God for it; no leſſe,
then if they had beene deliuered from the
Aegyptian ſeruitude; nay, from the Gulph
of Hell. But ſee the vngratefull mutability
and graceleſſe inconſtancie of the many
among vs, (who can neuer conſtantly
affect any thing that is truely Good;)
Many now adaies either fainting vnder
the Croſſe, or growne wanton with too
much happineſſe and proſperitie, doe barke
againſt Heauen, and complaine becauſe
they are freed from Romiſh tyranny: inſomuch

that they open their mouthes againſt
God, and his Goſpell, his Meſſengers
and Miniſters; as if they were the Originals
of all the euils and curſes that euer
happened to this Land. They diſdaine
and lothe the Bread of life, the true Manna,
the Goſpell of God; it is but light meate to
them; they cannot relliſh it. The Garlike
and Onions of Aegypt, any fabulous tale
out of the Leaden Legend, hath better taſte
with them, and edifies more to ſaluation.
Lord Ieſus, lay not this ſinne to their charge;
for they know not what they doe. So much,
briefely, for the fault which prouoked
their puniſhment.
            
            
               Secondly, Now follows their puniſhment,
ver. 6. Wherefore the Lord ſent fierie Serpents
among the people, ſo that many of the
people of Iſrael died. See how iuſt, how fitting
and proportionable the puniſhment
is to the ſinne. As the ſinne increaſed by
little and little, and ſpred it ſelfe like the
poiſon of Serpents, flaming vp more and
more, till it came to the higheſt; euen an
high contempt againſt God himſelfe: So

the puniſhment by the ſtinging of thoſe
fiery Serpents crept, and ſpred it ſelfe by
little and little: Then (the burning heate
of their ſting increaſing their thirſt) it
augmented, till at laſt, with a peſtilentiall
flame it deuoured and conſumed the tranſgreſſors.
For as the People, like to Serpents,
ſharpened their tongues, ſpitting out
their poiſon and venom againſt God and
Moſes; So God ſent Serpents that diſgorged
their deadly poiſon vpon them,
that like might be puniſhed with like;
Poenâ talionis. For God in wiſedome doth
ſo temper his puniſhments to the offence,
that alwaies there appeares ſome proportion
betweene the ſinne and the puniſhment.
Not that any puniſhment in this
world is able to ſatisfie fully for any ſinne,
whereby the infinite Maieſtie of God is offended:
but that the Temporall puniſhment,
heere, may be (as it were) an
earneſt of eternall puniſhment otherwhere.
            Thirdly, Vpon their puniſhment (in
the third place) followeth their Repentance,

               ver. 7. Therefore the people came to
Moſes, and ſaid, We haue ſinned: becauſe
we haue ſpoken againſt the Lord and Thee:
pray to the Lord that he will take theſe Serpents
from vs, &c.
            As plagues and puniſhments doe put
men in minde of their ſinnes: ſo ſinne,
and the ſmart for ſinne, led them to Repentance.
For as God doth receiue to mercy
ſuch as are vnfainedly penitent and heartrent
for their tranſgreſſions; ſo impenitent
and obſtinate offenders he reſerueth for
his iudgement of horrible vengeance in
another World. I leaue this, becauſe I haſten
to the remedy which God gaue them
vpon their Repentance.
            Fourthly, verſe 8, 9. The Lord ſaid to
Moſes, Make thee a fiery Serpent, and ſet it
vp on a pole for a ſigne, that as many as are
bitten and ſtung, may looke vp on it, and liue.
So Moſes made a Serpent of Braſſe, and ſet
it vp for a ſigne; and when a Serpent had
ſtung or bitten any, he looked vp to the brazen
Serpent, and liued.
            So many as looked vp to the brazen

Serpent, recouered; but ſuch as did not looke
vp to it, died. But as it is moſt wiſely and
truely ſpoken by the Wiſeman, Sap. 16. 7.
He that turned towards it, was not healed by
the thing he ſaw (id eſt, by the Braſſe piece
vpon the pole) but by thee, ô Sauiour of all.
For this we muſt lay down as an vnmoueable
ground: That the Brazen Serpent,
being a thing without life, or motion, or ſence
in it ſelfe; had not in it ſelfe, of it own nature,
any power or vertue (by being only lookt
vpon) to cure actually, and really to conuay
health to ſuch as were ſtung to death
by fiery Serpents; but all the power of
healing was in the Ordinance of God. God
had ordained and promiſed, that whoſoeuer
(being Serpent-ſtung) ſhould looke vp to
it, ſhould be healed: Therefore ſuch as
beleeued that God would be as good as his
word, and keepe his promiſe inuiolable,
they did looke vp to it, and were healed.
Others, that beleeued not the truth of Gods
word, nor ſtedfaſtneſſe of his promiſe,
but diſtruſted him, and gaue no credit vnto
him, they did not looke vp to it; and therefore

were not healed, but dyed of the
ſting.
            This is to teach vs, that a thing which
is once commanded, and ordained by God
to ſuch and ſuch an end and vſe, muſt not
be valued and prized by the outward ſhew
it hath, which preſenteth it ſelfe to our outward
ſenſes: but it muſt be eſtimated by the
Decree of Gods will, who, by his ſingular
wiſedome, hath ordained and appointed
things to our vſe, as he beſt knew was moſt
expedient for vs. Our dutie it is to do that
which he bids and inioynes vs; and to
reſt perſwaded, that what hee commands,
he doth will, and what he promiſeth, he will
moſt aſſuredly performe.
            
            The Cauſes why all promiſes of men
are not alwaies kept, I haue obſerued to be
commonly two, (viz:) either want of power
and ability to performe: or want of will to
bee as good as their word: neither of
which can be ſaid of Chriſt. For he is
God omnipotent, potent and able to doe
whatſoeuer hee promiſeth; And he is
Optimus, of a good and gracious diſpoſition,

               willing to performe whatſoeuer hee
promiſeth. So that, as I told you, though
the Brazen Serpent, conſidered in it ſelfe,
be but a very weake and vnlikely meanes to
heale ſuch as were ſtung to death by fiery
Serpents; yet becauſe God did ordaine it to
that end and purpoſe (as a Morall Inſtrument)
to conuay health to all ſuch as did
looke towards it: (Hee being able to doe
what he will, by what meanes, how weake
ſoeuer it pleaſeth him to make choice of)
therefore whoſoeuer looked towards it,
was actually healed.
            
            Conſider the like to this, in the Curſed
water, drunke by the ſuſpected Wife, Num.
5. 27, 28. If ſhee were guilty of breach of
wedlock; the water, being drunk, cauſed
her thigh to rot, and her belly to ſwell: if
not guilty: ſhe, vpon the drinking thereof,
conceiued with child. I demand then,
Whence had the water power to diſtinguiſh
betwixt a chaſt, and an vnchaſt Wife?
how chance it did not rot the thigh of the
woman that was not guilty, as well as of
the other? The ſimpleſt may perceiue, it

did not theſe things by any vertue or power
it had in it ſelfe: but becauſe God had
ordained and appointed it ſo, that it being
thus vſed, ſhould produce ſuch effects.
            And this will giue ſome light vnto vs
in the matter of the Sacrament, ſo much
controuerted betwixt vs and the Church
of Rome: from whom, as in diuers other
points of Religion; ſo alſo in this, wee ſuffer
ſlander. They would faine beare the
World in hand, that we make the Sacraments
of Chriſt but bare emptie ſignes of
certaine graces, and no more. But heerein
they doe vs great wrong; For howbeit
we ſay truely, that they are Signes: yet
not bare ſignes, butConfeſſio Anglicana, articulo de Baptiſmo. 
               morall inſtruments and
meanes, by which God doth confer thoſe
graces really and truly on vs, which thoſe
ſignes doe repreſent. So ſaith the Catechiſme
of our Church. What doeſt thou
meane by this word, Sacrament? Anſ. I
meane an outward and viſible ſigne of an inward
and Spirituall grace, giuen vnto vs;
ordained by Chriſt himſelfe, as a meanes
(or Inſtrument) whereby wee receiue the

ſame (Grace,) and a pledge to aſſure vs
thereof.
            
            Indeed, a man would thinke, that a little
Bread and Wine conſecrated with ſolemne
benediction, were but poore and
feeble meanes to conuay vnto vs the Body
and Blood, and Godhead of Gods eternall
Sonne, together with all his benefits purchaſed
for vs, (as namely, to free vs from the
wrath of God; from the endleſſe torments of
Hell; from the curſe of the Law; to cloath vs
with the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, and to conuay
vnto vs a ſure & firme title to the Kingdome
of Heauen and euerlaſting life) one
would thinke this were impoſsible to be
performed by a morſell of Conſecrated
Bread, and a ſup of hallowed Wine. And
ſo it is, if wee conſider the things as they
are in their owne nature. But if we weigh
with our ſelues, that Chriſt himſelfe, being
God omnipotent, hath ordained and appointed
them to this end; that we, by them,
ſhall receiue ſuch Benefits, and hath faithfully
promiſed, that He, by them, as by a
morall inſtrument, will beſtow ſuch vnconceiueable

graces vpon vs: though
thoſe Graces be not Naturally contained
in the Symboles and outward Elements
of Bread and Wine themſelues.
It remaineth, that we doe but fit
and prepare our ſelues to receiue them, and
ſo to beleeue vndoubtedly, that he is and will
be as good as his word in beſtowing all
them vpon vs, at the very inſtant that we
receiue the Bread and Wine into our bodies.
As whoſoeuer was fitted for it; and
as God had commanded, did but looke vp
to the Serpent, did immediatly recouer his
bodily health; Not becauſe a piece of molten
Braſſe had that power in it ſelfe to giue
life (hauing none in it ſelfe) but becauſe God
had ordained it to that end; and did really
performe what he did promiſe. Let me
torment your patience a while longer vpon
this point.
            I haue often compared thoſe Holy myſteries
to a Leaſe: which is a morall Inſtrument.
A Gentleman makes, ſeales, deliuers
a Leaſe to a Tenant, of a Farme, containing
two or three hundred Acres of

Land, lying, butting and bordering thus
and thus; vpon condition that the Tenant
ſhall pay him ſo much Rent. The Tenant
receiues the Leaſe, and hauing it in his
hand, ſhews it to his Friend, and tels him,
that he hath there two hundred pounds a
yeere, three hundred Acres of Land.
            
            The Parchment and Inke and Waxe of
the Leaſe haue not the very Acres of
Ground, nor Trees, nor Houſes growing in
them; and yet by that Parchment or Leaſe,
the Tenant will poſſeſſe ſo much. I demand
then, how commeth it to paſſe that
this piece of Parchment, and theſe drops of
Inke (This Leaſe) hath power to conuay ſo
much ground (Really and actually) to mee,
to a Tenant? It hath no ground growing
within it; whence then hath it power to
giue it to me? The anſwer is; that the Power
it hath to performe this, commeth not
from the Waxe, Inke and Parchment, but
from the legall Power and Authoritie of
the Law-maker; who did decree and ordaine,
that a Deed, conceiued in ſuch and
ſuch forme of words, ſhould be effectuall
               
and powerfull, to giue to a Tenant reall poſſeſſion
of ſuch Lands and Houſes.
            So it is in the Sacrament, euen as in an
Indenture; By it, Chriſt doth giue vs his
very Body and Blood, his Merits & his righteouſneſse;
By it he paſſeth ouer to vs a Deed
of all the Ioyes of Heauen; he ſeales vnto
vs a pardon of all our ſinnes, and of all
the puniſhments belonging vnto them:
Mary, on this Condition; that we doe
truly pay to him his Rent: viz. True Repentance
of all our ſinnes; True Charitie with
our Neighbours; True Faith in his Blood,
and a New ſincere Obedience to Gods Commandements.
When we receiue this, wee
ſay, This is the Body and Blood of Chriſt:
heere haue I Remiſsion of all my ſinnes,
and the Kingdome of Heauen paſſed ouer
vnto me. Yet that bit of bread hath not
the Kingdom of Heauen contained in it, nor
the Body of Chriſt growing in it, or conuerted
into it; neither hath the Wine the
Blood of Chriſt within it: and yet, by
That Bread and Wine, the worthy Receiuer
doth really and truly receiue whole Chriſt,
               
with all his Graces and benefits mentioned.
Whence haue they this Power? In
their own Nature they haue it not. Whence
then can they conuay All this to me? I
Anſwer, The power which they haue,
comes from the Law-giuer (Ieſus Chriſt,)
who decreed, inſtituted and ordained, that
Thoſe Elements of Bread and Wine (receiued
on theſe conditions) ſhould bee
powerfull and effectuall to deriue vnto
me ſuch and ſuch Graces.
            So that, as the Land groweth not in the
Leaſe, yet I doe actually poſſeſſe and inioy it
with all appurtenances by the Leaſe (as by
a Meanes and Inſtrument ordained to eſtate
me in it:) So the Body and Blood of
Chriſt Ieſus are not within the Conſecrated
Bread and Wine; and yet by them (as
by a Means or Morall Inſtrument) ordained
and appointed by God to confer ſuch Graces
vpon me, I doe take as True and reall poſſeſſion
of Chriſt and all his merits, as any
Tenant hath true and firme poſſeſſion of
his Lands. I hope that I am rightly vnderſtood,
and that the ſimpleſt doe fully

perceiue how groſſely the Church of England
is belyed; when they giue out that we
make the Sacraments no more but naked
and empty ſignes. So much for the fact
or Hiſtory.
            I come now to the Myſterie, or to the
figure of the fact: in 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in Sicut; together
with which, ye muſt be intreated to
take the Sic alſo: The Anti-type with the
Type, for they relate one to another, and
cannot well be conſidered apart.
            What then was pointed at and figured
by this Brazen Serpent? For, there is no
queſtion but God could haue reſtored
health, by a thouſand other meanes beſides
this. Wherefore ſome great Myſterie was
fore-ſignified; in that his Wiſedome (who
knoweth all things beſt) made choice of this,
of the Brazen Serpent, rather then of any
elſe. For our Sauiour Chriſt all along this
Chapter, had to doe with Nicodemus, who
was a Phariſee, a great Doctour in Iſrael,
Ioh. 3. 10. and conſequently, well ſeene
in the Lawes of Moſes; and therefore, hauing
before told him of his Godhead, verſe

13. heere hee comes to ſhew what his
Manhood was to ſuffer. And to make
him beleeue it the more firmely; he produceth
the Figure of the Brazen Serpent.
For Nicodemus could not but imagine that
ſome great Myſterie was fore-ſhadowed
by that fact of Moſes.
            
            For none ſo ſimple, but could vnderſtand,
that a Brazen Serpent hanging on a
pole, had not in it ſelfe any power at all to
cure the poyſonfull bitings of liuing Serpents:
and that God, who could, by a thouſand
other meanes, haue cured them, did
vpon Speciall and ſingular conſideration
command that: becauſe he, in it, would
ſhaddow forth ſome deepe Myſterie that
was to come. To the end therefore that
our Sauiour Chriſt might the better perſwade
his doctrine, by the lifting vp of
this Serpent, he ſheweth Nicodemus before-hand
of his Paſsion; That when it
ſhould happen, he might not be ſcandalilized.
And (howſoeuer it chiefly aime at
his Paſſion;) yet, to ſpeake the truth, there
is not, in all the Old Teſtament, any one

Type or Figure, that doth more liuely repreſent
all the parts of the Myſterie of
Chriſt his comming in the fleſh, then this of
the Serpent.
            For firſt of all, it ſhewes vs his Incarnation.
For that Serpent of Braſſe was but
a ſerpent in ſhew and ſhape only; it was not
a ſerpent in deed: it had no poiſon or venome
in it as other Serpents had: So our
Sauiour Chriſt, albeit to many he appeared
to be a ſinfull Man, and was reckoned among
the wicked, Eſay 53. 12. yet the
truth is, Hee did no ſinne, neither was
any guile found in his mouth, 1. Pet. 2. 22.
Euer ſince our firſt Parents did ſuck poiſon
from the Old Serpent the Diuell; euery
one that iſſued from their loynes, haue retained
much of the Serpentine nature, that
is, of the venome and poiſon of ſinne
Hence Dauid ſpeaking of vnregenerate
men; ſaith, The poiſon of Aſpes is vnder
their lips. And Iohn the Baptiſt ſpeaking▪
to the principall of the Iewes, Math. 3. 7.
termeth them, a Generation of Vipers. (And
Vipers, you know, are Serpents.) But Chriſt
               
had no poiſon in him at all. For though he
aſſumed the true fleſh and nature of man;
yet, together with the nature, he did not
take the ſinne of man. He was true man, but
not truly ſinfull Man. God ſent his Sonne
(ſaith Paul, Rom. 8. 3.) in the ſimilitude of
ſinfull fleſh. Similitudo non ad carnis veritatem,
ſed ad peccati imaginem referenda
eſt, ſaith Caſsianus collat. 22. cap. 11. Where
the word ſimilitude hath relation not to
Fleſh, (for that was true,) but to this word
ſinfull: for though to ſome he appeared a
ſinner in ſhew; yet, he neuer committed any
ſinne
               In veritate quidem Corporis, ſed ſine veritate peccati, ſuſcepit Dominus ſpeciem peccatoris. Ambroſ. de Spiritu Sanct. li. 3. ca. 9. Non alienus ab Hominum genere, ſed alienus à crimine. Leo. Hom. 11. de Paſſ. Dom..
            And heerein the wiſedome of the New
Serpent went beyond the craft and ſubtiltie
of the old Serpent, the Diuell, asLeo de Paſſ. Dom. ſer. 11. Chriſtus vt humanum genus vinculis mortiferae praevaricationis abſolúeret, Et ſaeuienti diabolo Potentiam ſuae Majeſtatis occultauit, Et infirmitatem noſtrae humilitatis objecit. 
               Leo
tels vs. For the Diuell, becauſe Chriſt was
a Man in deed and truth (albeit he were a
very Holy-man,) thought that he was alſo
guilty of Originall ſin deriued from Adam:
becauſe all elſe (euen the beſt) are ſo by
naturall generation: and alſo, though
ſometimes he had ſeene the effects of his
Deitie and Godhead, and had confeſſed

him to be God indeed, Marke 1. 24. Yet,
at other times, his vnderſtanding was ſo
dazeled, that he did not ſtedfaſtly beleeue,
that in him all the fulneſſe of the Godhead
dwelt bodily, Coloſ. 2. 9.Si. n. crudelis & ſuperbus inimicus conſilium miſericordiae Dei noſſe potuiſſet, Iudaeorum animos manſuetudine potiùs tē
                     perare, quàm iniuſtis Odijs ſtuduiſſet accendere; ne ominum Captiuorum amitteret ſeruitutem, dum nihil-ſibi-debentis perſequitur libertatem. Fefellit igitur eum Malignitas ſua &c. Id. Ibid. for had he known
certainly, that Chriſt had beene not only
very Man, without ſinne; but alſo very
God in humane fleſh; no doubt, but he
would haue beene as wiſe as the Princes of
this World. And Saint Paul ſaith, 1. Cor. 2. 6.
That, If the Princes of this World had
knowne it, they would neuer haue crucified
the Lord of Glory.
            
            Wherefore, the Diuell not beleeuing
firmely that Chriſt was very God, and taking
him to be but a man, as others were,
ſubiect to ſinne, at leaſt, to Originall guilt; he
makes at him, and vſeth all meanes to put
him to death. And Chriſt comming to
redeeme the World, did imitate the Fiſhers
               Damaſcenus lib 3. de Orthod. Fide. cap. 27. Gregor. Nyſſen. orat. Cat. cap. 23. Naturae noſtrae integumento celatae fuit Diuinitas; vt, inſtar piſcium, cum eſcâ carnis ſimul attraheretur hamus Diuinitatis: & ſic, vitâ ad mortem introductâ, & Luce apparents in tenebris, Luce & vitâ deleretur id quod eis contrarium intelligitur., who when they angle for Fiſh, do

not caſt the hooke into the water, bare, naked
and vncouered (For then they know
the Fiſh will not bite.) Therefore they hide
the hooke within a worme or ſome other
baite, and ſo the Fiſh biting at the worme,
is caught with the Hooke. So Chriſt, ſpeaking
of himſelfe, Pſal. 22. 6. ſaith, Ego vermis
& non homo: I am a worme and no man.
He comming to performe the great Worke
of our Redemption, did couer and hide his
Godhead within the Worme of his humane
nature: The great Water-Serpent Leuiathan,
Iob. 40. 20. (the Diuell) thinking to
ſwallow the worme of his Humanitie, Captus
eſt Hamo Diuinitatis; was caught vpon
the hooke of his Diuinitie. This hook ſtuck
in his iawes, and bruiſed the Serpents head:
by thinking to deſtroy Chriſt, he deſtroyed
his owne kingdome, and loſt his owne
power.
            In the ſecond place, by this Serpent was
figured the maner of Chriſt his Incarnation
and Conception. For this Serpent which
Moſes lift vp in the Wilderneſſe, was not
made of Wood or Stone, or Iron, (which

may be laboured and wrought into a
forme with the Hammer, Fyle or Cheſil) but
it was made of Braſſe, which commonly
muſt be molten in the fire, before it can
be caſt into any Forme: and the Fire purgeth
and cleanſeth it from all droſſe. Secondly,
if you goe about to carue an Image
of a man, in wood, or ſtone, or Iron,
firſt you faſhion the Head, then the Face,
then the Neck; one part after another ſucceſsiuely.
But if you would caſt the ſame
in Braſse; you neede no more but ſee that
the Mould be fitly prepared; and then doe
but powre the molten Braſſe into the
Mould, and in a moment you haue a perfect
Image.
            
            So the Body of our Sauiour CHRIST
was not begotten by the Ordinary way of
procreation, by mixture of Man and Woman:
(for ſo many as are ſo conceiued, are
conceiued in Originall ſinne;) but He was
conceiued by the Holy Ghoſt; 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
ſaith the Greeke Father: Not
by any carnall effuſion of Seminal humor,
but by way of manufacture or handyworke:
               
by the Power and operation of the Holy
Ghoſt. Non de Subſtantiâ Spiritus Sancti,
ſed Potentiâ, nec generatione, ſed juſsione,
ſaith Auguſtine, Serm. 6. de Tempore. Hee
was conceiued and made, not of the ſubſtance
of the Holy Ghoſt: (for ſo the Holy
Ghoſt being God, ſhould haue begotten
him, not man, but God;) for the Holy
Ghoſt is God; and generans generat ſibi ſimile.
Beſides, if the Holy Ghoſt ſhould
haue begotten Chriſt our of his own ſubſtance,
hee ſhould haue begotten a meere
Spirit, and not a man: for that which is
borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, Iohn 3. 6. But
he was made, ſaith Auguſtine; Non de ſubſtantiâ
Spiritus Sancti, ſed de Potentiâ;
Not of the ſubſtance of the Holy Ghoſt,
but of his Power, by his handy-worke:
Nec Generatione, ſed Iuſſione & Benedictione;
Not by way of Generation; but by
his energeticall Command and Benediction.
And the Holy Ghoſt ſanctified and
prepared the ſeed of the Bleſſed Virgin, that
it might be made an habitation fit for the
Soule and Deitie of the Sonne of God.
            
               
Now the Holy Ghoſt in Scripture (you
know) is often compared to fire: for as
Fire purgeth But the droſſe from metals;
ſo the Holy Ghoſt doth cleanſe, purge,
and ſanctifie that Matter in the Body of the
Virgin, whereof the Body of Chriſt was
to be framed; viz. the pure bloud or ſeed
of the Virgin: For that ſeede, euen of the
that bleſſed Virgin her ſelfe, before it was
ſanctified by the Holy Spirit, was tainted
and infected with ſinne: But (being once
purged and ſanctified by the Holy Ghoſt)
afterwards it neuer had, nor euer ſhall haue
any ſtaine or taint; but being filled with
ſanctitie beyond all meaſure, it became a
moſt holy Inſtrument of his Soule and
Godhead. Let none miſtake my words:
I doe not ſay, that the bleſſed Virgin her
ſelfe was by the Holy Ghoſt purged from
all ſinne: but that, That part of her Virgin-Blood,
whereof the Body of Chriſt was compoſed,
was ſo ſanctified and cleanſed, that
in it there was no ſpot nor ſtaine of Originall
Corruption.
            Secondly, In ordinary Generation, firſt

the Liuer, the Heart, and the Braine are faſhioned,
then other of the parts one after
another: for the Seminall humour firſt becomes
an Embryo, then a body inorganicall,
without forme or limmes; one by degrees
ſucceſſiuely after another is framed and
perfected: (For, as the Schoole of Phiſicians
ſaith, it is at leaſt 40. daies before the
body of a Child in the wombe be fully
formed;) But the Body of our Sauiour
CHRIST in the wombe of the Virgin,
by the obumbration and operation of the
Holy Ghoſt, was inſtantly, in a moment,
made abſolute and perfect in all parts and
members: (As the Braſſe molten in the
fire, is no ſooner powred into the Mould,
but inſtantly it is a perfect figure and ſhape
of a man, or Serpent, or Beaſt, as the Mould
is made for.)
            Beſides, the reaſonable ſoule of Chriſt
did not ſtay till the 40. day (as in other it
doth) before it was created and infuſed
into His body; But at the ſame moment,
in and with the Body, it was created and
vnited to his Body, by the Holy Ghoſt.

So that the Body of Chriſt, at the very
firſt inſtant of Conception, was (quoad perfectionem
partium, non graduum;) perfect
and complete in all parts, and indued at
that inſtant with a reaſonable ſoule: Otherwiſe
Hee had not from his firſt conception
beene perfect God and perfect Man;
for perfect Man ſubſiſteth of a reaſonable
ſoule and humane fleſh:) AndAthanaſius Creede. then
had he not been perfect Chriſt: for Chriſt
is perfect God, and perfect Man, ſubſiſting
of a Reaſonable and Humane fleſh.
Wherefore the Schoole ſaith truly, Chriſtus
totam humanam naturam vniendo Peronae
adſumpſit, & aſſumendo vniuit; Chriſt
by vniting the whole intire Humane nature
to his Perſon, aſſumed it; and by
aſſuming it, he vnited it to his Perſon
whole and intire.
            This is no new Doctrine: for the Fathers
of the Primitiue Church haue conſtantly
taught it. I reckon Saint Bernard among
none of thoſe Ancients, yet he hath it Hom.
2. vpon Miſſus eſt. But old Saint Hierome,
he hath the ſame vpon thoſe words in the

Prophet, Ier. cap. 3. Foemina circundabit virum;
a Woman ſhall compaſſe a Man: Speaking
of the Virgin incloſing Chriſt in her
wombe. And before Hierome, Athanaſius
in his Booke of the Incarnation of the
Word, Carnis vnio cum verbi Diuinitate ex
vtero originem traxit; The vnion of the
fleſh with the Diuinity of the Word tooke,
its originall from the wombe. And after both
theſe, Saint Auguſtine in his 18. Chapter de
fide ad Petrum: Firmiſsimè crede, & nullatenus
dubites, non Carnem Chriſti ſine diuinitate,
conceptam in Virginis vtero, priuſque
ſuſciperetur à Verbo; ſed ipſum Verbum
Deum ſuae carnis acceptione conceptum, ipſamque
Carnem, Verbi incarnatione, conceptam.
Doe thou aſſuredly beleeue, and make no
ſcruple of it at all, that the Fleſh (or Humanitie)
of Chriſt was not conceiued in the
Virgins womb, before it was aſſumed by the
Word: but that the very Word, God himſelf,
was conceiued in the taking of his fleſh:
and that his fleſh was conceiued in the Incarnation
of the Word.
               Aug. Ep. 3. ad Voluſianū. Cū enim verbum Dei permixtum eſt Animae habenti Corpus, Simul & animam ſuſcepit, & corpus. Idem, li. 1. 3. de Trinitate cap. 17. After all theſe,
comes Damaſcen in his third Booke de Orthodoxâ

fide cap. 2. and
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Damaſcen. ibid. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Id. lib. 3. cap. 22. ſaith 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
at the ſame inſtant, that the Humanity of
Chriſt was fleſh; it was alſo the fleſh of God
the Word; it was at the ſame moment, liuing
fleſh, indued with a reaſonable Soule,
and vnderſtanding. The Ancients taught
thus, therefore 'tis no nouell Doctrine. And
it is no vnſound Doctrine. For, beſides that
it is conſonant to good reaſon and diuinitie,
wee haue not only all the followers of D.
Luther that embrace it, but others alſo, as
Peter Martyr in his expoſition vpon the
Creede, (on thoſe words, Conceiued by the
Holy Ghoſt, borne of the Virgin Mary.)
His words are theſe: Spiritus Sanctus in
eam (ſc. Virginem) deſcendit, & principali
ſua vi, ex illius jam gratiâ purificato ſanguine,
ſingularem perfectum Hominem creauit,
qui miraculoſè fuit ab aeterno Sermone aſſumptus.
The Holy Ghoſt came downe
vpon the Virgin; and by his Operatiue power
(hauing now purified her blood by his
Grace) created an extraordinary ſingular
and perfect Man, which was miraculouſly
               
aſſumed by the eternall Word. The very
ſelfe-ſame is deliuered by Amandus Polanus
in Syntag. Theologico, libro ſexto,
cap. 14. which I forbeare, for breuities
ſake, to repeate vnto you; neither may we
maruaile, ſeeing that the firſt Adam in a
moment, of the ſlime of the Earth was
made (by Gods power,) a man perfect and
complete in all parts and faculties; if that
our Sauiour Chriſt (the ſecond and more excellent
Adam) was at the firſt moment of
his conception made by the handyworke of
God the Holy Ghoſt, a perfect & abſolute
man; and not only perfect Man, but perfect
Chriſt, that is, King,
               Cyril. lib. de. Fide ad Theodoſium, in ſine. Aug. lib. 15. de Trin. ca. 26. Nazianzen. Oratione 4. de Theologia. Hieronym. in Pſ. 132. Origen. Hom. 1. in Cant. Fulgentius de Incarn cap. 10. Anſelm. in Cap. 1. ad Hebr & alij complures. 
               Prieſt and Prophet,
as the Fathers doe truely teach vs.
            But againſt this which hath been deliuered;
ſome perhaps may pick a quarrell,
and ſay, that Chriſt was not without all
manner of ſin: for al that were in Adams loyns
and are deſcended from Adam, did ſin in Adam:
for it is written, Rom. 15. 12. By one
man ſinne entred into the World, and by Sinne,
Death; and ſo death went ouer all men, for
ſo much, as all men haue ſinned. If all men
               
haue ſinned; then Chriſt; for Chriſt is man:
and, according to the fleſh, was in the loynes of
Adam, as all others were, and therefore S.
Luke fetcheth his pedegree frō 
               Adam, Luke
3. laſt. Therfore it ſhould ſeem that Chriſt
was not quite free & clean from all ſinne.
            To which I anſwer firſt, by denying
that all and euery one that were in Adam,
did ſin in Adam, or were guilty of Adams ſin.
The guilt of Adams ſin, laid hold on ſuch
only as were in him, both according to the
ſubſtance of their fleſh: and alſo, Secundum
rationem Seminalem; according to the carnall
way of Propagation, by which man is
begotten of Man. Of all ſuch the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh, when he ſaith, By one man ſinne
entred into the World, and went ouer all men:
namely, ouer all that were begotten and
born of Man and Woman: But Chriſt was in
Adam according to the ſubſtance of his fleſh
only; but not according to the ordinary way
of Generation: for he was conceiued by the
Holy Ghoſt, and born of a pure Virgin, who
neuer knew man carnally; therefore he ſinned
not in Adam.
            
            
               
But yet S. Paul ſaith, Rom. 6. laſt; Death is
the ſtipend of ſin: but Chriſt ſuffred death.
Therefore, it ſeemes that he was guilty
of ſinne: otherwiſe death durſt not haue
arreſted him.
            I anſwer: Death did not arreſt him by
any lawfull warrant or authoritie of her
owne, becauſe He had no ſin: He might
haue brought an action of falſe impriſonment
againſt her: but he voluntarily and
of his owne accord went to Death, and
ſuffered it to attach him, that he might ſet
vs free from ſinne and death. So ſaith
Eſay 53. Oblatus eſt, quia
               Chriſtus, de Adae propagine, vnus extitit; in quo Diabolus quod Suum diceret, non haberet. Qui dum in Eum ſaeuit, Quē ſub peccati lege non: tenuit; Ius impiae dominationis amiſit. Leo. de paſſ. Hom. 12. D. Athanaſius lib. 4. ad Antioch. Antequam Caput inclinaſſet, mors propiùs accedere verebatur. 
               voluit: he was
offered vp, becauſe he would: for had Hee
not beene willing, none could compell or
conſtrain him to it. Wherfore Chriſt himſelf
ſaith, Ioh. 10. 17. I lay down my life, that
I may take it againe: No man taketh it from
me, but I lay it downe of my ſelfe. I haue
power to lay it downe, and I haue power to
take it vp againe. And therefore, when
he hangeth vpon the Croſſe, he ſtaies not
Deaths leaſure (till death come to take away
his life,) but willingly and couragiouſly
               
he meets him in the way, and like a Champion
that
               Quantum voluit, vixit. quādo voluit, tradidit ſpiritum. Chryſoſt. hom. 104 Vide Auguſt. Tract. 120. in Ioann. D. Hall. Ser. de Paſſ. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . ſcornes to bee ouercome,
(nay, knowes he cannot be) yeeldeth in the
midſt of his ſtrength, that He might by
dying vanquiſh Death. Therefore Saint
Iohn 20. 30. ſaith, that he bowed his Head,
and gaue vp the Ghoſt: not bowing (as
commonly men doe) becauſe he had giuen
it vp before: but becauſe he would doe it.
Nature, in him, was ſtrong enough, hee
might haue liued; but he gaue vp the ghoſt,
and would die, to ſhew himſelfe Lord of
Life and Death.
            
            Thirdly, In the lifting vp of this Serpent,
is ſhadowed the Paſsion of Chriſt. Moſes
did faſten the Serpent to a long Pole, and
ſo hanged it vp on high, that all the whole
Hoſt of Iſrael might looke vp to it; and
looking, be healed of the Serpents biting.
So Chriſt, at his Paſſion, was lift vp on the
Croſſe, thatLeo, Hom. 11. de paſſione. 
               all might looke at him
with the eye of Faith; and by vertue of
his death, might eſcape Death (the wages
of ſinne) and receiue health and Saluation.
Heere is the difference: The Brazen

Serpent gaue them but health and
life of Body only, and that, for a time:
but Chriſt giueth eternall Health, eternall
Life, to Body and Soule both. This Serpent
was but the meanes and inſtrument of
that life, which God, by it, gaue to ſuch
as were Serpent-bitten: but Chriſt is the
Author, the cauſe, the very Originall of eternall
Life. And, as it was not poſſible
for the Iſraelites (being once ſtung) euer to
be cured; except they did looke vp to the
Brazen Serpent: So, is it not poſsible for
any man, ſince the ſtinging of Adam by the
Old Serpent in the beginning of the
World, to be ſaued, but by IESVS
CHRIST and him crucified.
            
            Fourthly, this Brazē 
               Serpent was but one,
and ſet vp by Moſes, that Many Thouſands
of the people that were ſtung by thouſand
other Serpents, might recouer health:
and all ſuch as were either before or behind
it, on the right hand, or on the left (if
they did but turne towards it and behold
it) were healed. So Chriſt is but one Sauiour,
one Mediatour; yet His death is

               ſufficient to take away the venome and
ſmart of all our ſinnes; and not ours only,
but of the whole World; nay, of a Million
of Worlds. If they would but fixe their
Eye vpon him, and beleeue in him: for
Chriſt is the end of the Law to Righteouſneſſe,
to euery one that beleeueth, Rom. 10. 4.
a Sauiour he was to ſuch as beleeued that
He would be ſacrificed for them, (long before
he was borne of the Virgin) as, to Adam,
to Noah, to Abraham and Dauid. For Abraham
reioyced to ſee my Day (ſaith Chriſt)
and he ſaw it, and was glad. He ſaw it by
the light of Faith, 1500. yeeres before
Chriſt manifeſted himſelfe in the Fleſh.
For (as Leo ſaith) Refudit ſe, in aetates
praeteritas, myſterium illud, tam illis, qui
praeceſſerunt, vtile; quàm nobis, qui ſequimur.
            
            The Myſtery of our Redemption by the
death of Chriſt (as the Sunne at one inſtant
diſperſeth his beams ouer the whole
Horizon, from Eaſt to Weſt) did ſhoote it
ſelfe to all Ages (paſt, preſent, and to come.)
For He was the Lambe, ſlaine from the

beginning of the World, Reu. 13. 8. as beneficiall
to ſuch as dyed before his comming
(if they looked towards him) as to
vs that liue after him: for as it is in Mat.
21. 9. All that went before him, and they that
followed after, cryed Hoſanna to the Sonne
of Dauid: That is, they expected Saluation
from Ieſus Chriſt, and by him only.
Neither from any Man; were that man,
Moſes: nor from the workes of the Law;
but only from the Blood of the MESSIAS.
As theſe Iſraelites, when they
were bitten by the Serpents, although
they roared and cryed to one another; yet,
not any was able to heale or helpe, either
himſelfe or any other; No, not Moſes:
but God only, by the Brazen Serpent.
            
            Fifthly, I beſeech you conſider the
meanes, which God made choice of to
giue life to the Children of Iſrael. It
was a Serpent, as it were, dead: for it had
no life in it; Being but a piece of ſhining
Braſſe▪
                And ſome Naturaliſts affirme, that
ifHemingius. one be poyſoned with the ſting or venome
of a Serpent, the very looking on

ſhining Braſse, is preſent death to him. In
which, the power of the miracle doth more
plainely diſcouer it ſelfe: Becauſe God
made that, which, of it ſelfe, is the cauſe
of Death, to become to ſuch, as vſed it
according to his Ordinance, a cauſe of Life
and Health: Working one Contrary out
of another: giuing Life by Death. So it
is in Chriſt: For by his death, all true beleeuers
are tranſlated from Death to Life.
Which is ſo ſtrange a wonder, that
it cannot ſinke into many mens heads
how it ſhould euer bee brought to
paſſe: that Chriſt his death ſhould
procure and conuay euerlaſting Life to
vs.
            
            When Chriſt tels the Iewes, Iohn 12.
32. that Hee muſt be lifted vp, (that is,
hanged on the Croſſe, and ſo dye) and
giue his Life for the life of the World: They
could not be perſwaded, that if he were
the right Chriſt, the Sauiour of the World,
that hee ſhould die at all, but liue for
euer. Therefore, verſe 34. The People
anſwered him; We haue heard in our Law,

that Chriſt bideth for euer: then how doſt
thou ſay, that he muſt be lifted vp, that is,
hanged on the Tree, and ſuffer death vpon
the Croſſe? And therefore, 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Chriſt crucified, (that is, hope of euerlaſting
life, by ſuch a one as like a notorious
malefactor, ſuffered death vpon the
Gallowes) is ſaid, to the Iewes to be a ſtumbling
block; and to the Gentiles, fooliſhneſſe.
So it pleaſeth carnall men to deeme of the
Myſteries of our Saluatiō: becauſe they are
aboue their ſhallow Reaſon, they account
them meere fooliſhneſſe. But the Wiſedome
of God in this (to ſuch as are enlightened
with ſuper-naturall light) appeareth to be
the greateſt: and the very fooliſhneſſe of
God, is wiſer then the (greateſt) wiſedome
of Men; and the weakeneſſe of God, is ſtronger
then Men, 1. Cor. 1. 25.
            But to make both his Wiſedome and power
knowne vnto Men; it hath pleaſed
God many times to bring one contrary out
of another. As at the firſt, he made Heauen,
and Earth, and all things elſe; of
what? of Nothing: only by the power of

his Word. And what more contrary to all
things (which haue a Being) then nothing,
which hath no Being at all? Whence was
the order, the Beautie, the wel-compoſed
frame of the Vniuerſall World faſhioned?
was it not out of an empty, rude, vnſhapen,
and indigeſted lump or Chaos? Did not
Hee bring light out of Darkneſſe? and
what more contrary to Light then Darkeneſſe?
            
            So Chriſt, by the very ſhame of the
Croſſe, purchaſed to vs eternall Glory; and
by his Death giueth vs redemption from
eternall death, and euerlaſting Life to all
true members of his myſticall Body. And
this muſt needes be ſo: For, conſidering
that Chriſt is perfect God, who made all
the World, and that with a word of his
mouth (being able, if he pleaſed, with one
word to make a thouſand Worlds, as great
as this.) Conſidering, I ſay, that He, Chriſt
IESVS, the moſt high God, did take vpon
him, (as to morrow, the day of his Circumciſion)
to beGal. 5. 3. 
               our Suretie, to pay to his Father
our Debt of death Temporall and

Eternall: He being more worth, then all
the Spirits of Men and Angels, in a thouſand
Worlds: (becauſe he is the Maker of
them all.) His death muſt needs be more ſatisfactorie
to Gods iuſtice and wrath, then
if all the Men and Angels in Heauen and
Earth, ſhould, for mans ſins, haue ſuffred
all the endleſſe and Numberleſſe torments
of Hell, for euer and euer; and if the Surety
ſuffer death, and pay the debt, is it not
reaſon, that the principall go quit and free,
and haue his life ſpared? Wherfore in Ioh.
18. 7. when the Officers came to apprehend
Chriſt, he asketh: Whom ſeeke yee?
and they ſaid, Ieſus of Nazareth. Then ſaid
he; I am He. Therefore if yee ſeeke Mee,
let Theſe goe their way: that is, If I that am
but their Suretie, muſt pay the debt, then
reaſon it is, that the principals ſhould bee
diſcharged of it.
            Sixthly, Marke. This Serpent which
Moſes hung vp on the Pole, did not benefit
or doe good to any, but only to thoſe
which did looke vp to it. Such as refuſed
to looke vpon it, dyed and periſhed in the

Wilderneſſe. So it is heere: the Death and
Paſſion of Chriſt is beneficiall to none, but
ſuch as looke vpon it ſtedfaſtly with the
eye of Faith, and by that Faith apply it to
their owne Soules. Such as regard it not,
nor care to conſider it, but let it paſſe as a
matter of no moment, it healeth not, but
they periſh in their ſins.
            For as in this Figure 3. things do concur.
1. God. 2. the Serpent. 3. the looking on the
Serpent. God it is that giueth thē 
               health &
life; the Serpent is the inſtrument or means
by which he cōferreth it vnto thē, & he that
did behold the Serpent, receiued this health.
So alſo 3. things meet together in the work
of our Iuſtification. Firſt, Chriſt, he, by imputing
his Righteouſneſſe to vs, doth make
vs Righteous, before his Father. Secondly,
the means wherby he deriueth this righteouſneſſe
to vs, are his holy Word and Sacraments.
Thirdly, the Inſtrument wherewith
we don this robe of Righteouſneſſe vpon
our ſoules, is a liuely faith in Chriſt, it is as it
were the hand, by which we buckle & gird
Chriſt his merits to our ſelues, Gal. 3. 27.
            
            
               
Seuenthly, albeit the People of Iſrael,
whilſt they trauelled thorow the Wliderneſſe
towards the Promiſed Land did encounter
many more calamities, and inconueniences;
yet, wee reade not, that
they had any other externall Signe giuen
them againſt thoſe inconueniences, ſaue only
this Serpent againſt the mortall ſting
of the fiery Serpents. So we men, although
we are obnoxious to a thouſand Miſeries,
bodily, and ghoſtly, (as to Hunger and
thirſt, Heat and cold, weakneſſe and ſickneſſe,
ſhame and infamie, ſorrow and
feare, &c.) yet we haue no ſigne giuen vs
againſt theſe: becauſe none of theſe (if we
be cleare from ſinne) can doe vs any hurt,
(no more then they hurt our LORD IESVS
CHRIST.) But againſt the Biting of
the Serpent, (that is) againſt Sinne, God
gaue vs a ſigne to looke vpon, viz. His
Sonne hanging on the Croſſe. Concerning
whom, old Simeon fore-told his Mother,
Behold, This Childe is appointed for a Signe,
Luk. 2. 34.
            And fitly is Sinne reſembled to the biting

of a Serpent. For the Diuell is called
a Serpent, Gen. 3. 1. and from this Serpent,
this poiſon of ſinne was firſt caſt into our
nature. Secondly, if a Serpent ſting you in
the heele, the venome of the ſting will poiſon
your foote, your legge, thigh, entrailes,
Heart, Liuer, Braine, and all, till the whole
Body be infected; of ſuch a poiſonfull contagious
nature is ſinne. It infecteth both
Body and Soule; and that, not in one or two
parts, as other diſeaſes doe; but in euery
part; in Reaſon, Will, Memorie, affections
and all: and that not in one man alone;
but in all mankinde, in euery Man and Woman
deſcended from Adam by c
                  •
               mmon
courſe of nature. Thirdly, the Biting of
theſe Serpents was incurable; no remedie
in Nature could be found to cure it: Therfore
God gaue the Brazen Serpent, not for
a naturall, but for a Morall means againſt
it. Such is Sinne: All the Balme in Gilead,
and all the Phiſicians in the World, no, not
Aeſculapius-ſelfe with his Serpent; Nay, all
the Angels and Saints in Heauen & Earth,
are not able to cure the infection of one ſin.

Nothing is able to take away the poiſon
and ſting of that, but only the Death and
Bloud of the Sonne of God, powred out for
our health & Saluation vpon the Croſſe.
            Laſtly, Let vs aske the queſtion: For
whoſe ſake was this harmeleſſe Brazen
Serpent made, and afterwards hung vp
on the Pole? was it for it ſelfe?
No; in no wiſe. It could reape no profit
either by being made, or hung vp in the
Ayre, expoſed to all weathers and ſtorms.
All the benefit redounded to them that
were ſtung, and could not otherwiſe be
cured, but by looking vp to it.
            Let inquiry be made: For whoſe ſake was
the glorious eternall SONNE of GOD
contented to be made Man? was it any
honour or benefit to Himſelfe? Surely, No.
Exinaniuit ſeipſum, Hee emptied Himſelfe,
ſaith the Apoſtle, Phil. 2. 8. It was a farre
greater abaſement for the Sonne of God to
be made the ſonne of Man; then for the
greateſt Prince or Monarch to be made a
crawling Worme; nay, a graine of duſt. He
was made man then, not for any good or

profit that Hee could reape thereby, but
to benefit and honour vs. So ſaith Eſay
9. 5. Vnto vs a Child is borne, and vnto vs
a
               Symbol. Nicen. propter nos homines & propter noſtram Salutem, &c. Athan. de beat. Fil. Dei. Chryſoſt. Hom. 7. in Iohan. Cypr. de van. Idol. Proſper in Epigram. —Terrae, rerumque Creator, Me propter, Sacra Virgine, natus Homo eſt. 
               Sonne is giuen: all the benefit of his
conception and natiuity is Ours, not his:
borne and made, he was for vs. And for
whoſe ſake was he lift vp? was he crucified
and ſlaine? was it any profit or honour to
Chriſt, thinke you, to be put to ſuch a painfull,
ſhamefull, and diſhonourable death?
No certainly. Daniel ſaith 9. 26. The Meſſias
ſhall be ſlaine; but not for Himſelfe:
If not for himſelfe; then for ſome others.
So S. Peter, 1. Ep. 2. 21. Chriſt ſuffred for vs.
So that the benefit of his Paſſion too, is (not
His, but) Ours. His was the paine and
ſhame; Ours the profit and honour. If He
had not beene lifted vp, and put to death
for vs; Euery Mothers child liuing and
dead, had ſuffred euerlaſting death in torments
of Hell, with the Diuell and his
angels. Our Sinnes, the Sinnes of the
World, the Stinging of the Old Serpent,
could not be taken away by Man, or Angell,
but only by the Bloud of the Lambe of

God, which taketh away the ſinne of the
World. Our Sinnes they were that put to
death the Lord of Life.
            
            The Price of them could not be bought
out with gold or ſiluer, or al the Treaſure in
the World: they coſt no leſſe then the moſt
precious Hearts-blood of Gods owne Sonne.
            
            Your Soules then are bought at the higheſt
rate: Why doe you prize them ſo cheape,
ſo baſely? Doſt thou beleeue in thy Heart,
that the Saluation of thy Soule coſt the
deare-deare price of Gods owne heart bloud?
and dareſt thou goe and ſtake and pawne it
to the Deuill, to Hell, for a kiſſe of a Strumpet?
for a drunken Carouſe? for a little painted
Vanitie? for an handfull of glittering
droſſe? for a little vnprofitable Profit, and
deceyueable gaine? See then, if with Iudas
thou doe not ſell thy Soule and the Redeemer
of thy Soule for 30. pieces: for thirty?
nay, for twenty, for ten; many, for one; a
matter of halfe a Crowne, or leſſe: Nay, many
paſſe away their Soules to Satan for
nothing at all; for an oath; for a ſtab, a little
Reuenge. Oh take heed! For ſuch as did

               not feele the ſmart of the Serpents biting,
nor had any griefe or paine becauſe of it;
Such neuer looked vp to the Brazen Serpent,
nor receiued any life or health from it:
only, ſuch as felt the ſmart and ſting, and
earneſtly deſired to be cured; they looked
vp to it, and were healed. So it is heere.
Such as go on in their ſin, and feele no ſmart
of it; they thinke they ſtand not greatly in
neede of Chriſt; and therefore they heare
of his death and bloud-ſhedding, as a matter
that little or nothing concernes them: Such
perſons, as yet, are not capable of any benefit
by Chriſts Blood. They only, that are
wounded in Soule, and feele the ſmart of their
ſins in their conſcience; Thoſe only looke
vp to their crucified Sauiour, & ſeek health
and Saluation from him: Theſe only receiue
comfort by Chriſt; thoſe only are healed
of their ſting:Pſalm. 103. 1. 
               And all that is within them
praiſe His holy Name: To whoſe Name, be
all Honour and Glory, now and for
euer. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   