
      
         
            
            
            THE
Vnmaſking of a
feminine Machiauell. By THOMAS ANDREWE,
Gent.
            Est nobis voluiſſe ſatis.
            Seene and allowed by authority.
            LONDON
Printed by Simon Stafford, and are to be ſold
by George Loftis, at the golden Ball in
Popes head Alley.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            D. Langworth, Arch-deacon of Welles.
            
               
                  ALCIBIADES, right Worſhipfull (as
Plutarch reporteth) comming to ſpeak with
Pericles on a time, was anſwered, that hee
could not then haue acceſse vnto him, being
very buſie in ſtudying how to make vp his accounts with the
Athenians. Alcibiades knowing he was deeply in their
debt, ſaid, his ſtudies would haue more profitably bene imploied
in deuiſing how to auoidreckoning at all. Which his
ſaying of Pericles, may not vnfitly be applied to my ſelfe,
that am inuenting what accoūt to yeeld for the receit of your
manifold fauours, for which being in no ſmall arrerages,
I might better ſtudy how to paſſe them ouer with ſilence, thē
to bee found ſo farre engaged aboue my ability of merit,
yet knowing that you expect nothing but acknowledgement
of the ſame, which you accept as a ſufficient ſatiſfaction, I am
content, by confeſſing your boūty, to haue exceeded the meaſure
of my weake deſeruings, rather to bewray my defects i
                  •
                publike,
then iuſtly by ſilence to be taxed with the imputation
of baſe vnthankfulneſſe. And therefore as well in teſtimony
of my remembrance of your curteſies, as in pledge of
my 
                  •
               utious affection, I make bold to preſent theſe papers to
your patronage: Not doubting but vnder your tuition, my
tender Muſe ſhalbe as ſafe from the ſting of Detraction,
as was Vliſſes ſecure from the Greeks, being couered with
Aiax Target. And thus loth longer to detaine you with my
rude lines, I wiſh you as much happineſſe, as you can deſire,
or I deuiſe.
            
               Your worſhips louing Nephew,
Thomas Andrewe.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the vertuous, Miſtris
Judith Hawkins.
            TO thee that well deſeru'ſt that Epethite,
            As a ſure witnes of my ſpotleſſe loue,
            Theſe lines my true affections fruit I write,
            My faithfull zeale in publike to approue,
            Of thee no tongue (vnleſſe of enuy hatefull)
            Can ſpeak but well, ſo wel doeſt thou deſerue.
            My pen, vnleſſe I ſhould be too vngratefull,
            Muſt make thine liue, when vulgar names ſhall ſterue
            Thy vertues ſhal by me in ſerious layes,
            Be caractred for euery eye to view.
            No time ſhall ſet a period to thy prayſe,
            That our ingenious Muſe ſhall ſtill purſue:
            For thy perfections powerfull vigor lent,
            Vnto my thoughts euen languiſhing & ſpent.
            
               Thomas Andrewe.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            REader, being as vncertaine of thy quality, as vnacquainted
with thy condition, I ſtand doubtful
how to intitle thee: if thou be gētle, I moſt willingly
afford thee thy due attribute▪ if otherwiſe, I
will not, to inſinuate, giue thee one iote of addition
vndeſerued. But howſoeuer, be thou friendly or froward,
ſince this fruit of my Muſe is (by the importunity
of diuers to her Eſſayes intirely affected) now
committed to the Preſſe, I deſire thee to know thus
much frō me, that I wrote not to get vulgar applauſe.
Non ego ventoſae plebis ſuffragia venor.
Neither haue I ſet pen to paper for profit, holding it
baſe for a free-borne Muſe to be a mercenary. I haue
ſcribled to pleaſe mine owne conceit, & not ſeruilely
to fawne on the vnknowne humours of other men.
Some may imagin, I haue written of malice to ſome
particular perſon, by reaſon of my Titles ſtrangenes,
wherin whoſoeuer is opinionate, is far wide: yet if any
guilty conſcience (that perhaps I know not) will
wreſt my writings, & interpret my meaning in other
then the right ſence, I am not to bee blamed, if that
creatures corruption accuſe it ſelfe. As it is, accept
it, & where I conclude abruptly, cenſure not wrongly:
and ſo without further Ceremonies, I willingly
leaue my labours to the iudgement of the auſtereſt,
if indifferent opinion.
            
               T. A.
            
         
         
            
            To Detraction.
            ILL tongu'd Detraction, that vpon my Booke
            Doeſt caſt a hatefull vituperious looke,
            Read and deride, depraue and carpe thy fill,
            Say that my Verſe is harſh, my lynes are ill:
            I paſſe not for thy cenſure, better men
            Shall iudge the worth of our induſtrious pen.
            In ſpight of thee, and all that thou canſt ſay,
            My lynes ſhall liue, when ſteele ſhall weare away:
            And when that thou rak't vp in duſt ſhalt lye,
            Then through the ſpacious Orbe our Muſe ſhall flye:
            Although that yet ſhe hath with motion ſlowe,
            Taught her hiewing to keepe a courſe but lowe.
            I muſt acknowledge, theſe vnpoliſht rimes
            Sute not the nature of our curious times,
            When each ſharpe-ſighted Critick doth diſdaine,
            What is not bred in his fantaſticke brayne:
            Yet will I not with ſupple fawning words,
            Seeke for more praiſe then merit iuſt affords.
            My pen is free, and whatſo'ere I write,
            Proceeds eſſentially from my delight:
            Then let whoſe will, or praiſe, or diſcommend me.
            Neyther can make me proud, nor yet offend me.
         
         
            
            In laudem Authoris, magiſtri Thomae Andreae,
Generoſi, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            FLos nouus en laetis muſarum creſcit in hortis
            Aſpectu dulcis, dulcis odore ſuo:
            Laetantur muſae, nil non laudabile cernunt,
            Gratus odor tentat, grata figura placet:
            His Phaebus, galeae flos hic fuit optima Martis
            Pluma, fuit galeae fama decuſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſuae:
            Abripui, vitam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dedi, florem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dicaui
            Vobis, en vobis creſcet honore nouo.
            Creſcet in immenſum flos hic, dicetur & olim,
            Gloria Muſarum, Pieridum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                decus.
            
               Rob. Hunt Heath-fieldenſis.
            
         
         
            To his worthy friend, M. Thomas
Andrewe.
            STill may thy vpreard Muſes happy fruit
            In the faire boſome of this Iland flouriſh,
            And neuer may thy golden toung be mute,
            Whoſe ſpeech ſweet ſeaſond eloquēce doth nouriſh.
            Do thou proceed but as thou haſt begun,
            And thou ſhalt liue, after thy life is done.
            
               E. B. Gent.
            
         
         
            
            To his reſpected and kind affected
Friend, Mr. Thomas Andrewe,
Gent.
            
               NO hungry vaine of profit or of praiſe
               Inuites thy Muſe ſalute the Printers Preſse:
               Thou doeſt diſdaine thoſe Hackneyes of our daies,
               That pawne their Poetrie of meere diſtreſſe:
               Thy pen is but a quill of recreation,
               Which ſerues not thee in ſtead of occupation.
            
            
               But with deare bought experience tuter'ſt time,
               By true vnmaſking an incarnate Deuill,
               No fiction is the ſubiect of thy Rime,
               But a damn'd monſter of deformed euill;
               Whoſe portreict ſo to life thy pen doth touch:
               I know no Penſill can performe ſo much.
            
            
               Samuel Rowlands.
            
            
               Veritas non quaerit latebras.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The vnmasking of a feminine
Machiauell.
            
               The Argument of this Booke.
               POſſeſt with ſleepe, in ſilent night,
               Me thought I found a wofull wight,
               Whoſe heart was heauy, looke was ſad,
               In ſorrowes colours being clad,
               In a vaſt deſert all alone,
               For his deſaſter making mone,
               Filling with plaints the tender ayre,
               Who, when to him I did repayre,
               His various fortunes and eſtate,
               To me did mournfully relate:
               And did deſire I would vnfold,
               What vnto me by him was told.
               Hapleſſe Andrea was he call'd,
               Whoſe heart with ſorrowes deepe was gal'd.
               What e're I ſaw in that ſtrange dreame,
               My Muſe hath choſen for her theame.
            
            
               
                  BLacke vapory clouds, the gloomy
night attending,
               From Acheron to the ſtar'd skye
aſcending,
               Twixt heauens bright lamps, and
th'earth were interpoſde,
               Darkning the rayes cleare Cinthia had diſcloſde:
               To poynt the wandring Pilgrims out their wayes,
               
                  
Whilſt Titan to th' Antipodes diſplayes
               His glorious ſplendor, when from vs a ſpace
               His wel-breath'd Courſers runne another race.
               I ſeeing thus the ſable Curtaynes ſpread,
               Before the glittring Windowes, o're my head,
               Hearing nights Sentinell, the vnluckie Owle,
               Shricke lowd, thou feareles of the wondring fowle,
               Who in the day purſuing him with ſpight,
               Made himdeteſt and not indure the light.
               The greene wood left where Philomel did ſing,
               The luſtfull rapine of the Thracian king,Ouid. Met. li. 6
               
               And warned by the Euen that forſooke me,
               As time requirde, vnto my bed betooke me,
               Wherein, poore I, of loue left and forlorne,
               Did meane to reſt me till the purple morne.
               By the ſhrill muſicke of the timely Larke,
               Should be awakte, to driue away the darke,
               And make night in her ſmoaky Charriot drawne,
               To yeeld her place to the delightfull dawne,
               Ah, but though me the dayes long courſe had tyred,
               I found not then the reſt that I deſired:
               For when light Morpheus, that gentle god,
               Had toucht mine eyes with his ſleep-charming rod,
               I ſaw ſuch apparitions in a ſlumber,
               As fild my heart with pity, feare, and wonder.
               Do thou, my Muſe, my drooping thoughts inſpire,
               
                  
Touch my ſad ſoule with true Promethean fire,
               And be propitious to mine Artleſſe pen,
               That I may ſhew the viſions vnto men,
               That in th' obſcure and melancholy night,
               Were ſtrangely repreſented to my ſight:
               Into my Verſe ſuch eloquence infuſe,
               That whoſoeuer doth my lines peruſe,Tib. Foelix quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dolore alterius diſces poſſe carer
                        •
                      tu
                        •
                     
                  
               
               May learne to ſhun falſe friends, finding by reaſon,
               The dearer truſt, proues oft the deadlyer treaſon:
               Guide my weake hand, to bring to end my taske,
               From falſhoods face pull thou the whited maske.
            
            
               AT firſt me thought vpon a ſedgie banke,
               Where fenniſh Reeds, & Bulruſhes were ranke,
               That walked in a Riuer that did glide,
               With pleaſing murmur by a Forreſt ſide,
               I ſtood, where on the Criſtall waters brim,
               Snow-whiter Swans ruffing their plumes did ſwim.
               Vpon this faire and delectable ſtreame,
               Might beauteous Cithareaes ſiluer Teame,
               Haue drawne their miſtris in her lightſome Carre,
               That in the Aire ſhines like a glorious ſtarre:
               So euen and cleare this fluent Riuer was,
               As pureſt Criſtall, or the ſmootheſt Glaſſe,
               Through whoſe tranſparēce piercing with mine eye,
               A thouſand fiſhes of all ſorts I ſpye.
               
                  
On the ſand bottome playing here and there,
               Securely ſwimming▪ being free from feare,
               On which, poore fooles, as earneſtly I looke,
               Sporting themſelues in the ſoft ſliding brooke,
               On their delights meaning to gaze a while,
               For a ſhort ſpace my ſorrowes to beguile,
               Such a ſad ſound did enter in mine eare,
               As canceld ioyes, and did recall my care:
               For there (me thought) a man in deepe deſpaire,
               I heard breathe forth ſuſpires into the ayre,
               Whoſe earnfull accents were no ſooner gone,
               But in this dolefull wiſe he'gan to mone:
               To playne of Time, of Fortune, and of Fate,
               Lothing his life, delight being out of date.
               My ſad afflicted ſoule, breake from my breſt,
               Thy loathed priſon, harbour of vnreſt:
               Fly from that horrid place, that doth encloſe,
               Of ioyes not any, but a world of woes:
               So that time cannot with his courſe conclude,
               The paynes by whom thou euer art purſude:
               But ſtill each howre vpon his ayry wings,
               The ſad memoriall of my ſorrowes brings:
               Vayne is their iudgements that conclude and ſay,
               Time either takes the greateſt griefe away,
               Or at the leaſt, when woes haue long bene borne,
               They ſeeme the leſse, their anguiſh is outworne:
               
                  
For now the Sunne hath paſſed ſeuen times,
               In his progreſſion through the watry ſignes,
               Since ceaſleſſe griefe did enter in my breſt,
               Content that baniſht and excluded reſt:
               In the conſuming of which wofull yeeres,
               Still cares increaſe, but comfort none appeares:
               In ſtead of leſſning of my ſorrowes vigor,
               Time gaue them greater ſtrength, & more ſtern rigor.
               And with Time, Fortune that reſpectleſſe Dame,
               Conſpir'd to worke the downfall of my fame:
               Yet of all other why ſhould ſhe torment me,
               That neuer gaue me wherewith to content me?
               To tread on him,Qui iacet in terram, non habet vnde cadat. no glory can ſhe gayne,
               That to lay lower, ſhe but ſtriues in vayne,
               To inſult o're me a wretch, can neuer rayſe her,
               But will make all men iuſtly to diſprayſe her,
               And hold her baſe, that on ſo poore a wight,
               Would exerciſe her cruelty and ſpight:
               For when ſh'ath done her worſt, & deadlieſt frownd,
               She cannot driue me lower then this ground,
               In whoſe cold boſome were I once inueſted,
               My thoughts ſhould then haue eaſe, that yet n'ere reſted.
               
                  I neither hope for honour, gape for wealth,
               Nor wiſh to liue, although in perfit health.
               The thing that I deſire, for which I pray,
               Is tha
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  y time may ſoone be paſt away.
               
                  
O let my dayes of life be ſhort and few,
               And euen vaniſh, as the vaporous dew,
               That from the graſſe exhaled by the Sunne,
               Is ſoone forgot, as it is quickly gone,
               And let the howres appoynted till I die,
               New impe their wings, more ſpeedily to flie,
               And till that I haue runne my weary race,
               Let time not turne vnto his wonted pace.
               This mournfull ſpeech, to which I well attended,
               Begun in griefe, in ſighes being ſadly ended.
               Wondring thereat a while I ſtood amazed,
               Like him that on Meduſaes head had gazed,
               Knowing that he whoſe paſſion I did heare,
               Although I ſaw him not, muſt needs be neare.
               At length I did reſolue, (doubts ſet aſide)
               To find him out, what euer did betide:
               From the faire Riuer, to the thick-leau'd wood,
               I haſted then, and often liſtning ſtood
               There in a couert, wherein he did hide him,
               I walkt not farre, but ſuddenly eſpide him:
               The ſight of whom would haue enforſt to mone,
               The ſterne Dolopian, or the Mirmidon.
               
               Vnder a broad Oake on the earth he lay,
               His head downe caſt (as loth to ſee the day)
               His guiltleſſe heare was like his garments ren
                     •
                  
               
               Such the ſharp anguiſh of his diſcontent.
               
                  
Attir'd he was in tawny, as forlorne,
               Deſpiſde, diſgrac'd, reiected, held in ſcorne.
               The ground whereon he lay, was watred well
               With teares abundant from his eyes that fell:
               His callow chinne did ſilently declare,
               He was too young to haue to doe with care.
               I comming neere him, he raiſde vp his head
               With heauy motion, as a man halfe dead:
               And euen as I was ready for to ſpeake,
               He ſigh'd againe, as if his heart would breake.
               I grieued then to ſee ſo ſad a ſight,
               Thus fram'd my ſpeech vnto that wofull wight:
               What e're thou art, in whoſe bleake looke appeares
               More ſigne of ſorrowes, then of many yeres:
               Thy deepe complaints that in mine eares did enter,
               Were the occaſions of my bold aduenture,
               To find thee out, not to deride thy ſtate,
               But for to comfort thee diſconſolate,
               Whoſe mones being heard, if charitably felt,
               Might make th'obdurate Ithacan to melt.
               Let me entreat, although I am a ſtranger,
               To know thy ſtate, miſdoubt not any danger,
               By the diſcouery of thy cauſe of griefe,
               Which being conceald, can neuer haue reliefe.
               Fea
                     ••
                   not deceit in me, for firſt that Sunne,
               Which gloriouſly before our eyes doth runne,
               
                  
Shall from his lofty ſpheare fall to the ground,
               Ere faithleſſe I, or treacherous be found:
               And if my beſt endeuours may aſſwage
               The burning furie of thy paſſions rage,
               On my vnfained word thy ſelfe aſſure,
               With ſpeed I will thy remedie procure:
               For he griefes vigour can the beſt diſcerne,
               That their effects hath felt, and needs not learne.
               Herewith he raiſed his deiected eyes,
               That on the earth were fixt, and thus replies:
               Vnhappie I, whoſe wretched ſtate affords
               A greater multitude of woes then words:
               So that my ſpeech vnable is t'expreſſe,
               For thy great kindnes, my true thankfulneſſe:
               Yet from my breſt ſhall ſooner flye my ſpirit,
               Then the impreſſ'd memoriall of thy merit.
               Thy faith I feare not, for euen in thy eye,
               Me thinks pure Truth ſecurely I eſpie.
               The cauſe of my arriuall here was thus:
               My fortunes euer inauſpicious,
               Forſt me in ſolitarie Groues to range,
               My ſelfe entending from the world t'eſtrange,
               Meaning to ſhunne community with men,
               And rather choſe in ſome forſaken den,
               To ſpend th'irreuocable courſe of time,
               Clipping my hie thoghts wings that once did clime,
               
                  
Imped with expectations fiery plumes,
               To Honours Manſion, whom no age conſumes:
               Then failing of my hopes, being ouertaken,
               With trecherous practiſes to liue forſaken;
               Or being an obiect to all vulgar eyes,
               Each Hind might deſcant on my miſeries:
               Wherfore long wandring through vncouth wayes,
               To find a place to conſummate my dayes,
               Whereas no eye might euer find me out,
               At my heart-breaking diſcontent to flout,
               That I vnheard to the deafe woods might plaine me,
               Where of my raging fits none might reſtraine me:
               At length in this vaſte Forreſt here I found
               A Caue deepe mined in the ſolid ground,
               Whoſe entrance blacke as the foule mouth of hell,
               Seem'd to inuite my ſorrowes there to dwell:
               Where I vnſeene might long obſcurely reſt,
               In ſable darkenes my minde fitting beſt.
               For he that hath a melancholy ſpright,
               Before cleare day preferres the darkeſt night.
               About it round were buſhes ouergrowne,
               Where any path had bene could ſcarce be knowne▪
               
               Which ſhew'd the ſame was Deſert, vnfrequented,
               The meeter Manſion for one diſcontented.
               Within, it well cohered with my mind;
               For euery place for want of light ſeemd blind;
               
                  
Except that through a clift appear'd a ſparke,
               Sent from the Sunne to fright the fearefull darke.
               Here did I meane the poſting houres to ſpend,
               Till with my death my dolours ſhould haue end.
               At this he ſtops, when ſuddenly againe,
               His eyes let fall a ſhowre of teares amaine.
               Then I replide, Though moyſture now be ſcant,
               Thy ſhady ground none of thy teares doth want:
               They comfort not, but th'earth doe rather burne,
               Which were it ſenſible, for thee would mourne:
               Preſerue them then, ſpend not thy ſtore in vayne,
               Be not too lauiſh of ſuch deare bought rayne.
               We ſee each day, that the fond prodigall
               Liues vnregarded, hauing waſted all.
               Stay now thy teares, tis woman-like to weepe,
               
               Concealment of thy caſe no longer keepe;
               But vnto me doubtleſſe participate
               Thy fortunes croſſed by ſome angry fate:
               And all my whole endeuours ſhalbe bent,
               Theſe ills to cure, or future to preuent:
               Harken to counſell, be not obſtinate,
               Leſt good aduice doe after come too late.
               Oh but (quoth he) When on ſome ſhelfe of ſand,
               
               Lying not farre off from the harbouring ſtrand,
               A luckles Pylot, being there a ſtranger,
               His Barke hath burſt, vnskilfull of the danger.
               
                  
His counſell then would be but all in vaine,Mant. Vtile non eſt, conſiliū poſt facta dare, quod oportuit an
                        •
                     
                  
               
               That would cry out, You ſhould haue kept the maine.
               Yet for thy kindneſſe and thy louing offer,
               All that I haue, my humbleſt thanks I proffer,
               Which as my ſelfe, low at thy feet I lay,
               And for thy better hap will euer pray:
               And to declare that I do hold it hatefull,
               For ſuch great courteſie to be vngratefull,
               My tragick haps to heare, ſince thou doſt long,
               Ile briefly tell thee. By a Sirens ſong,
               Or by a voyce worſe then the Mermaids ſound,
               That made Vliſses feare to runne a ground,
               
                  I was allurde to anchor in the roade,
               Where curſed policy made her abode,
               In womans habit that her ſelfe did hide,
               Such her deceits, as ſcarce could be eſpide:
               Yet would I not, the noble female ſexe
               Should thinke in her I modeld their defects:
               For I proteſt, I hold, in all their kinde,
               Not ſuch another any man can finde:
               As ſoone the ſingle Phoenix might be found
               To haue a mate, as ſhe her match on ground.
               That damned Politician Machiauell,
               
               That, ſome ſay, had his Maximes out of hell,
               Had he but beene a ſcholler vnto her,
               To learne his Arte, need not haue gone ſo farre.
               
                  
She of her owne would haue imparted ſtore
               Of curſed plots, ne're thought vpon before,
               Such and ſo deepe, as none could e're deuiſe,
               But her great Grandſire, father of all lyes,
               With the Hienaes voyce can ſhe beguile,
               And weepe, but like the Nile bred Crocadile,
               
               That on the pray ſhe inſtantly deuoures,
               Diſſembling teares in great abundant powers.
               With the Cameleon can ſhe change her hiew,
               Like euery obiect that her eye doth view.
               
                  Proteus was neuer halfe ſo mutable,
               As ſhe vnconſtant, of her word vnſtable:
               Her eyes like Baſilisks dart poyſon out:
               Her oyled toung aſſiſts to bring about
               Her plots to their ineuitable end,
               Which to contriue, ſhe all her time doth ſpend.
               She hath a conſcience (full of guilty dread)
               Will ſtretch like Cheuerell in her working head,
               Dwell damned thoughts to miſchiefe euer bent,
               And in her brayne are all ills reſident:
               She, whoſe falſe heart for to Annatomize,
               Volumes importable will ſcarce ſuffice:
               She, that in youth was bad, in age farre worſe,
               That had ſome rauenous Tiger to her nurſe;
               With the ſweet ſtraine of her alluring toung,
               Drew ſilly mee, my yeres though very young,
               
                  
Neuer before acquainted with deceit,
               Not able to diſcerne th'inticing bait,
               To follow her, till in a fatall toyle,
               Which ſhe had pitcht, my poore eſtate to ſpoyle,
               I was enſnarde: and when ſhe ſaw me taken,
               She plainde on me of all my friends forſaken:
               For leauing them, their ſpeeches not reſpecting,
               To follow her, their counſailes graue neglecting,
               I felt iuſt plagues, yet had my wealth bin all,
               That I had loſt in my vnlucky fall,
               I ſhould not haue diſquieted my foule
               With ſuch ſad thoghts, as no ioyes might controule.
               But with my meanes at that vnhappie tide,
               My reputation hazzarded beſide:
               The worth of which fayre iewell I held more,
               Then Europes magaſins vnualued ſtore,
               Since that my name in countrie and in towne,
               Hath giuen argument to euery Clowne:
               By which rude Peaſants to be cenſured,
               Whoſe beſt conceits like them are baſely bred,
               Who could indure this? made me hither flie,
               Loathing to liue where euery vulgar eye
               Should ſtare on me, where euery abiect Slaue,
               With toūgs enuenomd ſhould my worth depraue:
               
                  For ſuch the nature of the raſcall Hinds,
               
               
                  That haue no other then deiected minds,
               
               
                  
                  That croſt by Fortune the beſt tempred ſpirit,
               
               
                  Shalbe by them held moſt deuoyd of merit.
               
               O pardon me, that thus I breake the bounds
               Of helpeleſse patience; for the yet greene wounds,
               By trechry made, though euer angry ſore,
               Now being new handled, do rage ten times more,
               Which makes my toūg, that of my woes doth ſpeak,
               Vrgde by ſharp anguiſh in extreames to breake.
               The ſumme in briefe, of all that I can ſay,
               Is, that a curſed creature did betray
               My infant fortunes, my hopes bloſſomes blaſted,
               My natiue ſtarres, with blacke clouds ouercaſted.
               Why but, quoth I, if thou no more diſcloſe,
               Then this compendious abſtract of thy woes,
               Like Tantalus, who for his puniſhment,
               Is doom'd to ſtand in the moyſt Element
               Vp to the chinne, yet can by no meanes drinke:
               For as he ſtriues to taſte, downe the waues ſinke:
               His vnſtauncht thirſt, although exceeding ſore,
               The ſight of water aggrauateth more.
               So I, before thou ſpak'ſt, hote with deſire
               To heare thy haps, am now ſet all on fire:
               To quench which ardor, oh let me intreat,
               That from th'originall thou wilt repeat
               The true cauſe of thy grieuous diſcontent,
               Wrought by ſome inauſpicious accident▪
               
               
                  
If, as thou ſayſt, ſome daughter to the Deuill,
               Borne to do miſchiefe, exerciſde in euill,
               Haue by ſome wicked plot betrayd thy youth,
               Abuſde thy truſt, vnder pretence of truth,
               From female Machiauell pull thou the maske,
               Tell me her name, and it ſhall be my taske,
               Her perſon ſo to portreyt with my pen,
               As I will make her odious vnto men:
               The blazon that my vpreard Muſe ſhall giue her,
               Shall make her infamy long to out-liue her,
               That babes vnborne, which after-times ſhall breed,
               Her ſhames memoriall in my lines ſhall reed.
               "Though wrackful time braſſe monumēts deuoure,
               "Verſe ſhall ſuruiue vnto the lateſt houre:
               "And when the proud Pyramides to duſt,
               "Age ſhall outweare, & ſteele conſume with ruſt:
               "Then like Apolloes Lawrell, euer greene,
               "Shall Verſe be verdant, and vnchang'd be ſeene;
               "Such is the power of high-bred Poeſy,Ouid. Carminae quē tribuunt, fama perenuis erit.
               
               "That it can euen to perpetuity
               "Eyther make glorious, or as much diſgrace
               "The noble minded, or th'abiected baſe:
               "Alcides labours, Theſeus laſting fame,
               "Achilles deeds, and Hectors noble name,
               "A thouſand yeres had now in ſilence ſlept,
               "If Poeſy their gloryes had not kept
               
                  
"In her great Regiſter, nor had this age
               "Knowne Tarquins rape, nor madde Oreſtes rage.
               "Who could haue told faire Lucrece chaſtity,
               "Or wiſe Vliſses wiues great conſtancy?
               "Euen in her tombe had Cleopatraes pride
               "Bene now inter'd, the fame had neuer dide.
               "If Poets had not in their Tables pend,
               "All for examples to this purpoſ'd end,
               "The good might imitate the good, and they,
               "From vertues pathes that run their courſe aſtray,
               "Might backe returne into the way againe,
               "That leadeth to the faire Elizian plaine.
               With Scilla, Mirrha, and Calipſa fell,
               With Meſſaline, and Heccate of hell,
               With the Bellides and the ſhame of Greece,
               And her that did betray the golden fleece,
               And all thoſe infamous that liu'd of olde,
               Whoſe names by ſacred Poets are inrold,
               As a companion ſhall thy foe be plac'd,
               Whoſe memory by time ſhall ne're be ra
                     •
                  'd.
               Then let not former paſſed times more grieue thee:
               But hope of future better happe relieue thee.
               A miſchiefe meant, perhaps may be preuented:
               But once hapt, tis in vayne to be lamented.
               Ceaſe then with bootleſſe words for to complaine.
               Then he reuiu'd his ſad diſcourſe againe.
               
                  
A wofull Tale thou vrgeſt me to tell,
               Whoſe heauy Accents like the paſſing Bell,
               Such melancholy Muſicke foorth will ſound,
               As thy attending eares will deepely wound:
               Nay, if my ſorrowes giue me leaue to ſpeake
               Vnto the ende, teares can not chooſe but breake
               From out thine eyes that formerly reſtraind,
               Longer in limittes will not be containd.
               Full twice ſeuen times from my vnhappy birth,
               The comfortable Spring had cheerd the earth,
               And thawd the froſty boſome of the ground,
               Wherein all Plants in Icie cheines were bound:
               When preſently in coates of greene appeare,
               All trees and herbes that beautify the yeare:
               
                  The Spring ſoone paſt, Aprill and gorgeous May
               Declar'd how ſwift earths pleaſures poſt away.
               The luſty Summer proudly comming on,
               Was as the former ſoone diſpatcht and gone,
               Who by the withering of the gariſh Flowres,
               Shew'd how conſuming time vaine toyes deuoures:
               Which Note to men might be th'remembrancer,
               Before light follies vertues to preferre.
               Then mellow Autumne that declines to cold.
               Not young as Summer, nor as Winter old,
               By whoſe rough blaſts all trees before faire leau'd,
               Of their greene liueries were ſoone bereau'd:
               
                  
For which the Birds from their mellifluous throats,
               Sadly did ſound full many mournfull noates,
               Euen then when all things ſenſibly did mone
               The ſharpe approach of cold froſts comming on,
               Began the ground of my inteſtine griefe,
               That long expected, but ne're found reliefe:
               When by the wan inexorable Death,
               My deareſt Parent loſt his vitall breath,
               Whoſe tender care, whoſe counſayle being reft me,
               Content took leaue, ioyes fled, and pleaſures left me:
               For like a ſhippe that luckleſſely had loſt
               Her ſkilfull Pilot on an vnknowne coaſt,
               With wrackfull tempeſts being roughly driuen,
               Her ſides by proud waues ready to be riuen,
               Fearefully ſtrikes all her ſwelling ſayles,
               Her Flagges lett's fall, her hie top-gallants vayles,
               Beſt courſe to ſteare for ſafty knowing not whether,
               But liues at mercy of the winde and weather:
               So far'd my ſelfe and my vnſettled ſtate,
               My Parents liues thrid being clipt by fate,
               Who was that Pilot that my courſe did guide,
               Secure from danger of that ſtormy tide,
               He thus deceaſd, for me in fatall time,
               I not contented in this peacefull clime,
               To ſpend my youth determined to range,
               Of forreine lands to ſee the various change:
               
                  
Youth being full of wandring appetites,
               Nature it ſelfe to nouelties incites:
               At length, the rumor of the bloudy iarres,
               Th'vnkind diſcenſions, th'vntamed warres,
               That then the fertile Netherlands afflicted,
               Where peace was exild, quiet interdicted,
               Made me reſolue my freedome to forſake,
               My ſelfe intending ſolely to betake
               Vnto a Souldiers life, hoping to gaine
               Honor and Reputation for my paine.
               It was not want that made me leaue the ſoile
               Where I was borne, in Belgia to turmoyle,
               For lacke of meanes, but an enflamde deſire
               To raiſe my hopes, that did too hye aſpire:
               Knowing if raging ſtormes of warre ſhould riſe,
               Their fury in our Ile to exerciſe,
               (Where vnaffrighted peace had long time flouriſht,
               The land enriching where ſhe had bene nouriſht,)
               In forreine broyles experience I ſhould learne,
               The feates of Armes expertly to diſcerne,
               That in my countreyes and my Princes right,
               I might be able with aduice to fight:
               From happy England with no ill intent,
               To try my fortunes ſodainly I went.
               A Southweſt gale for Fluſhing fitly blew,
               When from the Rode the little Pinniſſe flew,
               
                  
Wherein I was embarkt, faire Douer leauing,
               When as black night her head was firſt vp-heauing.
               Safely arriu'd, to Gelderland I haſted,
               That ſword and ardent fire had welnigh waſted,
               There did I march in cold, in ſcalding heat,
               By night and day in Armour all compleat;
               Lay on the ground, in froſt, in ſnow, in rayne,
               Expoſde my ſelfe each minute to be ſlayne:
               All trauailes I delightfully endurde,
               To which addicted I was ſoone inurde.
               In theſe tumultuous ſturres did I remaine,
               Till that great conflict with the powers of Spaine,
               
               Where the high Archdukes army on the ſands
               Were fought withall by thoſe vnconquered bands,
               Led by Naſſaw. Here could I tell the Story,
               How either Hoſte was rang'd in all their glory,
               How each Eſquadron marcht, and by whom led,
               The glorious acts of thoſe aliue or dead,
               The true forme of the fight, did not my griefe
               Enforce my toung to ſtay or be but briefe:
               Yet ſhall not that great day be cleane o'repaſt,
               Whoſe fame no time can e're haue power to waſte,
               But in compendious maner will declare
               The fight wherein my Fortunes had a ſhare.Newport battell, In. 22,1600
               
               The morne lookt red, whoſe bluſhing did bewray
               The fatall bloudſhed ſhould enſue that day:
               
                  
The rackie clouds on th'earth diſtilled dew,
               In pearly drops, which plainly did foreſhew,
               Heauen grieued at that ſacred day prophan'd,
               That by the Lord for prayer was ordain'd.
               Aſſiſt my Muſe, my fainting toung direct,
               Breathe a new ſpirit in mine intellect,
               That by thy wondrous power and glorious might,
               I may be able to vnfold the fight
               'Twixt two great Armies both alike engag'd,
               Both with ſterne furie terribly enrag'd:
               The one contending for the Soueraignty,
               Th'other reſolu'd to die for liberty.
               The Duke of Brabant clad in angry Armes,
               Of warlike Souldiers leading wondrous ſwarmes,
               That ſuddenly vnlookt for he withdrew
               From Venlo, Derſt, and Herntalls, to purſue
               Th'vnited Prouinces vndaunted powers,
               That razd his Caſtles, ouerthrew his Towers,
               Deſtroyde his Villages, ſpoyld all his Corne,
               Leauing the Countrey as a land forlorne:
               Seeing faire Flaunders girdled all in fire,
               Moued with pity and repleat with ire,
               Reuenge to his great courage giuing wings,
               Him after vs like a black tempeſt brings:
               But comne neere Newport he was roughly met
               By hardy Scots, and Dutch, that thought to let
               
                  
His paſſage o're a Bridge that he had paſt:
               Such their ill fortunes, or their little haſte.
               Betwixt theſe powers, at the firſt enterview,
               Was bloudy greeting, fatall Bullets flew,
               Like ſtormes of Hayle, till luckleſſely at length,
               Our Regiments being ouerpreſt with ſtrength
               Of th'Archdukes multitudes, were put to flight,
               Of whom eight hundred there were ſlaine outright.
               Proud of theſe fortunes, our inſulting foes
               Aduaunc'd with ſpeed to deale more deadly blowes,
               Of their owne powers ſuperbiouſly preſuming,
               Of our whole force to haue the full conſuming:
               But our great God, his choſen that defends,
               Brought their hie hopes to vnexpected ends.
               When now both armies on the euen ſands
               Were come in ſight, and proudly tooke their ſtands,
               Then all the Regiments of either ſide
               Were rang'd in order, neere the ſurly tide.
               Both furniſht well, both rich in their array:
               Which was moſt glorious, it was hard to ſay:
               The place being couerd with ſuch armed crowds,
               As ſeem'd to menace heauen and dare the clouds.
               Of either part, Courage, the Captaines cry,
               By your true valours win the day, or die.
               Vnto our Engliſh Troope, hie-ſprited Vere
               
               Did vſe perſwaſions to extinguiſh feare.
               
                  
But e're the reſolute Battalians came
               To down-right ſtroakes,—
               Cannons diſchargde bullets in fire wrapt round,
               Circled in ſmoke, whoſe terror-breathing ſound,
               Like the blacke bolt of Ioues Imperiall thunder,
               With hideous noyſe the thin ayre ſhakes aſunder.
               There might you ſee a deadly ſhott that ſtrikes,
               In a thicke ſand our ſtrong embatteld pikes,
               Renting the rankes, make ſhattred Splinters flie,
               As they were ſent to bandy with the ſkie:
               Souldiers ſome ſlaine outright, ſome deadly torne,
               From the thicke preaſe confuſedly are borne.
               Whilſt o're the ſands theſe brazen Lions roar'd,
               And interchangeably the ſoyle begoard,
               A ſhippe of warre was come into the Bay,
               That oppoſite vnto our foe-men lay,
               Who from her armed ſide, her ſterne, her chace,
               Sent yron poſtes into their troupes apace,
               So thicke ſhe ſhot, that he which had bene nie her,
               Would haue conceyued ſhe had bin light on fire.
               Another, that the Holland Enſigne bare,
               That on her poope plaid with the wanton ayre,
               This former there did ſecond in ſuch ſort,
               As in the aduerſe campe made bloody ſport.
               The angry Duke againſt thoſe ſtormy ſhips,
               His deadly Cannons turnd, from whoſe blacke lips,
               
                  
Flew forth the black Ambaſſadors of death,
               That rag'd like ſuries in the vaults beneath,
               To whoſe dire meſſage they would haue replide
               In termes alike, had not the falling tyde
               Made them ſtand off, and beare into the Maine,
               Who thus being gone, to vs began againe
               Their thundring language, anſwered with the ſame,
               Their ſhot with ſhot, their fire with burning flame.
               At length began the ſterne and horrid fight,
               Whoſe ſmoke and duſt made day like diſmall night,
               When as the powers that long had ſtood oppoſ'd,
               Ranne altogether, and with fury cloſ'd,
               Pikes, Pikes encounter, ſhot at ſhot let flye,
               All Nations on their ſeueral Patrons crie,
               The Trumpets clangor & the Drums hoarce ſound,
               With Souldiers ſhout, each others noyſe confound.
               There murdrous Muſkets like quick lightnings flaſht,
               Whoſe balles ones face with tothers bloud bedaſht:
               Of eyther part the Enſignes brauely flying,
               Some nobly fighting, ſome as nobly dying:
               In th' Armies both was hope,Virg. Inter vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      volat dubiis victoria pennis. whilſt vnto neyther
               Proud Victory enclind, but fauour'd eyther:
               With various fortunes, full three bloudy howers,
               Endur'd the ſternerage of theſe warlike powers:
               Till at the laſt, the ouer-maſtered foe,
               From field was forſt with greateſt loſſe to goe,
               
                  
To quit their armes, their Enſignes leaue forlorne,
               That but euen now by them were proudly borne.
               When they the field had thus abandoned,
               Moſt flaine, ſome wounded, & the remnant fled,
               Vpon the ſandy bankes and in the fields,
               Lay broken Pikes, bruz'd Helmets, batterd ſhields,
               The proud Burgonian Croſſes kiſſe the ground,
               Their Bearers lying in a deadly ſwound,
               And hardy Captayns ſtriuing for the day,
               Euen in the places where they fought, they lay,
               With troupes of Souldiers, whom they ſtoutly led,
               Some kild outright, ſome dying, but not dead:
               One gaſpes for breath, another mercy cries,
               And begs of him vpon whoſe ſword he dies.Virg. O ter, quater
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      beat
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Retreit being ſounded, thoſe of ours remayning,
               Came to their colours for their friends complaining,
               Of whom ſome buried, others not interd,
               Whoſe funeralls were longer time deferd.
               Who dies with honour, though he want a graue,Virg. Facilis iactura ſepulchri.
               
               No greater happineſſe at all can haue.
               But ſoft, where am I now? me thinks too farre
               I haue diſcourſd the fortunes of the warre.
               When I began, I briefly meant to tell
               The Battels fury, where ten thouſand fell:
               But being entred, I could not conclude,
               Till to the end the ſtory I purſude.
               
                  
This euer-famous day thus brauely wonne,
               The Troopes diſperſt, each to their Gariſon,
               Adorn'd with honour, and inrich't with ſpoyle,
               To take their reſt after laborious toyle:
               I then determined, whilſt the wars did ceaſe,
               To viſit England, crown'd with golden peace:
               To giue more ſpeed to my reſolu'd intent,
               From thence a Letter came, vnto me ſent
               From one that euer I accounted deare:
               Whoſe faithfull loue I thought had neuer Peere.
               One, for whoſe ſake I other friends neglected,
               Was rul'd by him, ſtill did what he directed.
               Which Paper, as the Poſte to me deliuers,
               My hand vnwont, as in a feauer ſhiuers:
               At which (being ſtrange) I could not chuſe but muſe;
               And as the ſmooth Indorſement I peruſe,
               Breaking the ſeale, the waxe ſo faſtned cleaues,
               As ſeem'd vnwilling to let looſe the leaues:
               But forced open, as th'ad bene halfe blinde,
               Mine eyes 'gan dazle, and no way could finde,
               Where to beginne the ſweet ſowre Lynes to read,
               From whence my fatall ſorrowes ground proceed.
               Mens ſences, ſudden altering out of reaſon,
               Doe bode ill lucke, or do fore-ſhew ſome treaſon.
               At length my hand 'gan ſtay, and eke mine eyes
               On th'obiect fixed, that before them lyes,
               
                  
Thus I begunne. Since happy Fates ordaine
               Thou haſt ſuruiu'd, where multitudes were ſlaine,
               From out thoſe Lands, breeding diſſenſion blacke,
               Vnto thy natiue ſoyle with ſpeed come backe:
               Whereas my euer-waking induſtrie,
               Hath gotten meanes to eleuate on hie
               Thy tender fortunes, which if thou neglect,
               Succeding times will ne're haue power t'effect.
               If thy eſtate, thy Country, or my loue
               Thou would'ſt increaſe, hold'ſt deare, or any wayes may moue,
               Leaue tedious toyles, and warres affording paine,
               And write not backe, but come thy ſelfe againe.
               This letter read, the meſſenger of light
               Not thrice from th'earth had chac'd away blacke night,
               Who ſunke to hell, the father of the day,
               To all the world his glory did diſplay:
               But in a ſmall boat plide with ſtriuing Oares,
               I bade adue vnto the Belgicke ſhores,
               Vnhappy farewell, and diſaſtrous fate,
               To leaue bright honour, and o'rethrow my ſtate:
               Being come aboord, our ſailes a ſtiffe gale ſtretches,
               Which holding faire, the ſhip ſoone Englād retches,
               On which cleare coaſts in ſafety thus arriu'de,
               Many reioycing that I there ſuruiu'de,
               Free from the loſſe of limbs that others felt,
               That likewiſe in the late ſterne conflict delt,
               
                  
Gaue me kind welcome more then I deſeru'd,
               Ioying from danger that I was preſeru'd.
               Preſeru'd from danger, ſaid I? no, not ſo,
               But was reſerued to a greater woe:
               O had I dide where Yaxley, Honniwood,
               
               And more braue Gallants in their hie blood,
               Couragious fighting, fell downe all imbrude,
               This home-bred miſchiefe had I then eſchude!
               But ſince the Deſtenies did thus ordaine,
               I muſt confeſſe, tis bootleſſe to complaine.
               Long time e're I returnd, the meanes was plotted,
               Whereby my reputation was beſpotted,
               That ſhooke my ſtate betwixt that friend of mine,
               Whoſe words I held as Oracles diuine,
               Who to my ſoule and ſecrets ſtill was neere,
               
                  Apollo n'ere held Hiacinth more deere:
               And her whoſe tongue for cunning may compare
               With Greekiſh Sinon, and with Circes ſhare:
               Each hunny word ſhe ſpake, like Magick writtes,
               Were able to enchant the deepeſt wittes:
               She for the hope of Auaricious gaine,
               Will ſweare and forſweare, flatter, lie and faine:
               Her owne child a Polygamiſt ſhe made,
               By her vile counſaile. Curſed be her trade,
               That hopes not heauen, nor reſpecteth hell,
               Where, in dire torments, leſſe offenders dwell:
               
                  
Each circumſtance (quoth he) ſhould I entend,
               T'vnfold to thee, diſcourſing to the end
               Her practiſes, as well may vndertake
               To number Libick ſands, and firme land to make
               Of Thetis playnes, where on a Dolphin rides
               That aged god, the ſurly ſea that guides.
               Let this ſuffice, that ſhe is ſuch a one,
               As but Medea there was neuer none.
               Write what I ſay, though I conceale her name,
               It pleaſeth me ynough ſhe read her ſhame
               With bluſhing cheekes, if any ſparke of grace,
               (Which I miſdoubt) be liuing in her face.
               Scarce had he ended, when we ſaw from farre,
               As we imagined, a waiged Carre,
               Which comming neere vs, preſently I knew,
               'Twas Morpheus Coach that foure night Rauēs drew,
               The wheeles did make no noiſe, yet ſo faſt ran,
               As could beguile the very ſight of man:
               With ſoft Arabian ſilke 'twas ouer-couerd,
               About the which, light dreames & viſions houerd:
               The Curtaines of the ſame were made of Rings
               Of the quicke Battes that Veſperugo brings,
               To flie as Harbengers before the night,
               When to th'inferiour Spheare the Sun giues light.
               His Teame being come vnto vs, Morpheus ſtaid,
               And looking foorth, euen thus (me thoght) he ſaid,
               
                  
Loe, I the ſonne of griefe-beguiling ſleepe,
               That neuer any certaine forme doe keepe,
               But in what ſhape I liſt aſſume, can flie,
               From earth to hell, from thence vnto the skie,
               To thee Andrea, haue my courſe directed,
               Who of all other holdſt thy ſelfe reiected:
               Thou knowſt, a thouſand viſions I preſented,
               In gloomy night, thinking to haue contented
               Thy grieued ſoule, yet all was but in vayne,
               Shaddowes of ioyes more did increaſe thy payne.
               But now I come to carrie thee, euen where
               Thou ſhalt behold obiects repleat with feare:
               Yet I well know, the ſight thereof will pleaſe thee,
               And of the burthen of thy ſorrowes eaſe thee:
               Stand not to anſwere, but with ſpeed aſcend
               Vp in my Coach, and take with thee thy friend,
               That may with vs ſuch wonders ſtrange behold,
               As ſeene, as dreadfull, fearefull to be told.
               Mournefull Andrea and my ſelfe being plac'd
               By Morpheus ſide, the Chariot ran in haſte,
               Till ſuddenly vpon a banke it ſtands,
               Whereas the ſleepe-god tooke vs by the hands,
               And going forth, thus comfortably ſaid,
               What ſight ſoe're you ſee, be not afraid,
               Ile goe before your footſteps to direct,
               Dangers at all by no meanes do ſuſpect.
               
                  
Him as our guide, we follow to a place,
               I thinke ſcarce ſeene by any mortall face:
               For in a vale, where Titan ne're diſplayes
               The radiant brightnes of his golden rayes,
               Where neither lowly ſhrub, nor lofty tree,
               Nor leafe, nor graſſe, nor any plant we ſee,
               We found a vaſt and melancholy Caue,Virg. Facilis deſcenſus Auerni.
               
               That op'ned like a hollow wide-mouth'd graue:
               Wherein we enter through a paſſage made,
               Eaſily deſcending to th'infernall ſhade.
               At length we ſaw (was neuer ſuch a ſight,
               'Mongſt all the gaſtly viſions of the night)
               Farre vnderneath vs, ſuch a place to lie,
               As could affright the moſt vndaunted eye;
               Where Thunderclappes and fiery lightnings flaſh,
               Where boyſtrous tempeſts ſtorme, dread hailſtones daſh,
               Frō whence did come a ſound aſtoniſhing,
               Of wofull ſhreekes, that fearefully do ring
               Into our eares. Then 'gan Andrea thus,
               Where are we now? ſpeake, gentle Morpheus:
               
               Oh, wherfore haſt thou brought vs, where our eyes
               Meete ſuch ſterne obiects? Then the God replies:
               The place that vnderneath, farre off you ſee,
               Though ſtrange to you, is not vnknowne to mee:
               It is that Chaos, that confuſed Den,
               Where are th' eternall puniſhments for them,
               
                  
That ſurfetting in ſinne euen from their birth,Inferni poenarum deſcriptio. Cal
                        •
                     r.
               
               Without true penitence doe leaue the earth:
               Here all lewd actions, fruits of foule deſire,
               Tormented are with euerlaſting fire,
               Whoſe burning fury vnextinguiſht powers,
               Being but compared vnto that of yours,
               Would make it ſeeme or nothing, or ſcarce warme,
               Like Winters Sun-beames, not of power to harme.
               
                  Aetna ſtill couered with ſulphure fume,
               And ardent Hecla ſhall by time conſume:
               But this, whoſe feruour waters n'ere aſſwage,
               Shall haue continuall and vnceaſing rage.
               Then are there likewiſe euer-freezing lakes,Frigus.
               
               As ſharpely cold, where 'mongſt the Icy flakes,
               That cut like razors the vnhappie wights,
               Are toſt like red-hot bloomes, by vgly Sprights,
               Whoſe horrid lookes moſt fearefull to behold,Aſpectus daemonum
               
               Torment as bad, as the congealing cold.
               Dragons,Morſus ſerpentum fell Serpents with enuenom'd ſtings,
               That plague alike both ſlaues and tyrant kings,
               There in each place in ſuch abundance crall,
               AsInſula ſerpentum plena. Auerni fetor. 
                  Ophiuſae neuer ſaw at all.
               Their wounds are worſe then Adders, earth-bred Snakes,
               Or Baſilisks, or Aſpes, or Ibis makes.
               The loathſome ſauours of this Acheron,
               
               Neuer exhaled by th'attractiue Sunne,
               
                  
Are there farre worſe, in th'earth then any bred,
               Then ſtrangling brimſtone, or th'vnburied dead,
               And there impriſoned in the vault of hell,Obſcuritas loci.
               
               Doth nights blacke Nurſe, Cimerian darkneſſe dwell:
               Whoſe pitchy temples are ingirt with clouds,
               That in her looke affrighting horrour ſhrouds:
               Whereas vnſtaunched Famyne wanting bread,Fames.
               
               Eates balles of wildfire, drinketh ſcalding lead:
               To aggrauate which wofull paines, the place
               Remou'd from God his fauour and his grace:Diſpoſitio loci.
               
               There terrour, feare and deſolation,
               Haue their eternall habitation:
               Gnaſhing of teeth, howling, and woful weeping,
               Are in the diſmall concaue neuer ſleeping.
               There wights afflicted, ſtill for death are crying,
               Deadly tormented, yet are neuer dying.
               There bloudy Nero, cruell Commodus,
               
               Luxurious Tarquine, drunke Vitellius,
               
               
                  Tarpeia falſe, Semiramis vnchaſte,
               Are euery one in their due order plac'd:
               There periur'd ſlaues, beaſtly Adulterers,
               Accurſed Atheiſts, biting Vſurers,
               With murdrous Ruffins that delight in blood,
               Shall all be plagu'd in the Sulphurean Flood.
               Thither that foule ſtaine of the female kinde,
               Whoſe deep fetcht othes are lighter then the winde,
               
                  
That by diſſembling and abuſing trueth,
               Blaſted the bloſſomes of thy tender youth,
               Her liues courſe finiſht (if deepe penitence
               Waſh not away her foule offence)
               Shall come but in her flint-vnyelding breſt,
               Where liues a guilty conſcience wanting reſt,
               Are wicked thoughts, that in a mighty band,
               In order plac'd as Sentinels do ſtand,
               To barre good motions entrance, that driuē thence,
               In worthyer places ſearch for reſidence:
               She, the true patterne of deteſted pride,
               There ſhall not borrow an old Coach to ride:
               But in a fiery flaming Chariot,
               By Dragons drawne inſufferably hot,
               Shall progreſſe thorough Hell: for her falſe haires,
               Snakes in their folds ſhall winde about her eares:
               In ſtead of hired cheynes of burniſht gold,
               Shall Iron linkes her wretched corps enfold,
               And torments more then this: for none can tell
               The tenth of tortures that are vſde in hell.
               But for thy ſelfe, if I diuine aright,
               Thy hopes ſhall mount with an auſpicious flight,
               Thy fortunes that late croſt, thou ſtill holdſt vaine,
               Shall haue a time to flouriſh freſh againe:
               I know the meanes by which thou ſhalt aduaunce
               Thy owne eſtate, euen in deſpight of chaunce▪
               
               
                  
—Vt quondam Te
                     •
                  thrantia regna te
                     •
                  enti,
               Sic tibi res eadem, vul
                     •
                  us opem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fer
                     ••
                  .
               Doth not my prophecie reioyce thy ſpright?
               And bonds of ſorrowes cancell with delight?
               Speake man: But why thus holdſt thou downe thy head?
               Why is thy looke ſo ſad? thy colour dead?
               Quoth he, I grieue for her vnhappy ſake,
               I feare e're long ſhall come into this Lake,
               Though my attempting hopes ſhe layd in duſt,
               Though ſhe be moſt perfidious and vniuſt:
               Theſe paines I wiſh her not but doe deſire,
               If yet ſome ſmall ſparke of celeſtiall fire
               Be vnextinguiſht in her breſt, it may
               Breed quick repentance, and auoyd decay.
               But, gentle Morpheus, if thou be of power,
               Tranſport her Genius hither but one houre,
               That with an intellectuall feeling ſence,
               May ſee all ſinnes eternall recompence:
               And then (no doubt) the viſion will controule
               The wicked motions working in her ſoule.
               This ſaid, our guide aſcendeth vp againe,
               Whom we attend, leauing the place of paine:
               And being from the dusky denne come forth,
               Cold Charlzis Wayne was ſet directly North,
               When winged Morpheus once more ſilence brake,
               And to Andrea thus the God he ſpake:
               
                  
When I am gone, thinke not thou art deluded,
               Thy fortunes are by deſteny concluded:
               Into whoſe ſecret braſen-leaued booke,
               They curteouſly did giue me leaue to looke:
               Wherein by fate vndoubtedly I finde,
               Time ſhall effect according to thy minde.
               By this, broke from the mornings cold embrace,
               
                  Saturnes bright ſunne aduaunc'd his royall face,
               Whoſe glorious looke, pale night aſtoniſhed,
               That fearefull of his preſence ſwiftly fled▪
               
               He mounting then his Carre damaſkt with fire,
               Made his free horſe gallop th'accuſtomd gire,
               When ſleepe departing, did vnlocke mine eye,
               Whereat my dreames like miſtie vapors flye:
               And onely left the memory behinde,
               Of the ſtrange Viſion that diſturb'd my minde.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   