
      
         
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            
               If thou doſt read or hear this work,
               Onely ſee thou doe this,
               Haue care to mend thy euill wayes,
               Now paſt and done amiſſe.
               All thoſe that ſtill preſume in ſin,
               Not minding to amend,
               Dayly this Booke will witneſſe be
               Reuengefull in the end.
               Each day repent, Oh ſtill repent
               With ſpeede, I humbly pray,
               Euen for his Sons ſake, Ieſus Chriſt,
               So ſinne is waſht away.
            
            Anagramma: Annon Ieſu reades?
         
         
            
            ANDREWES Reſolution: To returne vnto God by Repentance.
            Directed vnto all the Elect Children of God, which truly repent, perfectly guiding them in the right way therein.
            Right godly to reade, as delightfull to heare, but moſt profitable to be practiſed.
            Newly publiſhed by Iohn Andrews, Miniſter and Preacher of the Word.
            
               LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, 1621.
         
         
            
            The Contents of the booke.
            
               1 What Repentance is.
               2 God is the Author of Repentance.
               3 Of Contrition.
               4 Of Examination.
               5 Of Confeſſion.
               6 Of Faith.
               7 Of the time when to repent.
            
            Theſe parts are al Authenticall, and exactly compriſed in a moſt ſhort and compendious Method, briefly to be read, that it may be effectually practiſed.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Francis, Lord Verulam, Lord high Chanceller of England, and one of his Maieſties moſt Honorable Priuie Counſell, Grace, Mercy, and peace bee multiplied in this life: and a Crowne of eternall felicity in the life to come.
            
               RIght Honorable: Although mā was made according to the Image of the Trinity, that hee might

attaine vnto the knowledge of the Deity, yet by reaſon of ſinne, which ſo greatly abounds in this our laſt, euill, and declining age; it is to be feared, too too many are become ſo alienated and eſtranged from God, & haue ſo accuſtomed themſelues dayly to commit wickednes, that the ſinne of the whole world is ready to come to maturity, and to cry vnto the heauens for vengeance againſt vs. Wherefore that man ſhould ſearch himſelfe, that hee might ſee (as in a looking-glaſſe) the abhominable horror, and crying of ſin, to the end that it might induce him ſpeedily to returne vnto God by Repentance: I haue therefore imboldened

my ſelfe (although vnknowne) to dedicate theſe my poore and vnlearned labours vnto your learned View: the which I haue intituled (Andrewes Reſolution) ſhrowding it vnder your Patronage, from the preiudice of contempt.
            Thus, my humble duty remembred, I take my leaue, deſiring almighty God that theſe my labors may breath out ſuch ſound and godly doctrine, that they may become a ſalue to cure & preſerue the ſoules of the Readers.
            
               Your Honors in all Chriſtian duty to be commanded,
Iohn Andrewes.
            
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader, health in the Lord.
            
               Reade to gaine thereby.
               Iudge indifferently.
               Repent vnfeignedly.
               Receiue inſtruction willingly.
               Meditate thereon zealouſly.
               Leſt you enter into temptation careleſly.
            
            Vale in Chriſto.
Iohn Andrewes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Firſt, what Repentance is.
               
                  THere is no Doctrine in the Church of God more neceſſary thē the doctrine of Repentance and amendment of life; neither doth the holy Ghoſt ſo much labour in all the Scripture, as hee doth to beat repentance into mens heads.
               It was not only the only Sermon which S. Iohn Baptiſt preached, to prepare the way for Chriſt, but alſo

it was the firſt that euer was made, it was preached by God himſelfe, to our firſt parents in Paradiſe; & euer ſince both the Prophets, Apoſtles, and many of Gods faithful Miniſters haue preached Repentance vnto the people.
               Yet notwithſtanding many are ſo wedded vnto ſinne, and they are become ſo godleſſe, ſo graceleſſe, ſo rooted and fully reſolued to liue therein, yt the moſt part little vnderſtand the Doctrine of Repentance, and leſſe practiſe the duty. Many preſume to deſcribe it, though few know it: many can talke of it, but few walke in it; many ſpeake of it, but few feele it; and

many thinke they haue caught it, when they haue but the ſhaddow of it; becauſe it is ſo ſlippery that few can hold it, and ſo ſecret that many cannot find it: it is hid from the world, and reuealed vnto none but to the elect Children of God.
               It is a worke that no men with their ſine heads and deepe deuices can comprehend, for the conuerſion of a ſinner is ſupernatural. And whoſoeuer doth or hath not felt in himſelfe what repentance is, ſhalbee dammed; therefore hee that hath eares to heare, let him heare, and he that hath eyes to ſee, let him ſee what Repentance is, and withall

bring this precept of the Philoſophers with him, Noſce teipſum, Know thy ſelfe; it is the firſt thing to be done in repentance, and the beginning of all grace.
               
                  Repentance is a worke of grace▪ ariſing of a godly ſorrow, from a true faith, and knowledge of a mans own ſpirituall eſtate. It is a conſtant turning of man in his whole life from all his ſinnes, vnto God; it is an harty ſorrow for ſinne with amendment of life, hauing a godly Reſolution to ſinne no more.
               It is a moſt neceſſary thing for mankind; it is the very ſuperſedeas and diſcharge of ſinne, and the cauſe of vnity betweene

God and man. There is no other means to make peace betweene Chriſt and vs, but Repentance: No other to diſcharge ſin, nor courſe to auoyde hell, but Repentance; neither any way to winne heauen, but Repentance: and therefore Repentance is moſt neceſſary.
               What wounded body would not ſeeke a ſalue? much more what wounded ſoule, ſlain with ſin, would not ſeeke Repentance, ſeeing it is the onely ſalue to cure the ſoule?
               It is an Ephod of purity; and a defiled man may not weare it. The dignity of it is great, & honorable; and the Lord will not beſtow it vpon an vnworthy

perſon. It is a magnificent gueſt, and wil not come into a polluted Tabernacle. It is an holy Sainct, and will not dwell in the Synagogue of Sathan.
               
               It is not to bee bought with ſiluer or gold, nor to bée had from the gifts of Kings, Popes, or Potentates: it is a thing of ineſtimable value, it ſheweth the attonement betweene the Sauiour and the Sinner; and beeing gotten by Faith, Prayer, and hearing the Word of God, it brings thee vnto Chriſt. It is libera Donatio, a gift abſolute, without conſideration, which God euer beſtoweth vpon his friends, vppon thoſe that loue him. It

is called the Spirit of Burning; therefore with ſpéede repēt, that repentance may burne thy ſinnes, leſt the fire of hell burne thy ſoule. Eſay 4. 4.
               
               The true Eſſence or nature of thy Repentance, onely conſiſteth in turning from all thy ſinnes vnto God: and therefore it is not altogether deriued of the word Poenitentia, becauſe the Diuines ſay, it doth not comprehend Totum Terminum a quo et ad quem, from what, and to whom thou muſt returne.
               But this is the true Repentance, which the Latins interpret by this word Reſipiſcentia, or Conuerſio; we is not onely the changing

of the minde, but it is Receſsus a malo, a forſaking of euill, Acceſsus ad bonum, & returne vnto that which is good: Reuertimini vſque ad me, returne as farre as vnto me. Thou muſt not with Agrippa come we almoſt, for God delights not in thoſe which will but almoſt repent: but if thou wilt repent truely, thou muſt carefully giue vnto God three things, viz. Primam Lunam, Rotam Solis, Canis iram:
               
               
                  The firſt quarter of the moon, COR
                  The circle of the Sun,
                  And the rage of a dog.
               
               And withall haue both a purpoſe in minde, and an inclination in will, and endeauour

in life, wholly to forſake all thy ſins for euer, and turne vnto God.
               For better proofe that true Repentance is a turning vnto God, thou maiſt finde examples in the holy Scriptures plentiouſly.
               
                  O ye children of Iſrael (ſaith Eſay) turne againe frō al your infidelity, wherein you haue drowned your ſelues.
               
               
                  Turne you, turn you from all your euill wayes, for why will ye dye O ye houſe of Iſrael?
               
               Repentance may be called a worke of Grace; yea, a ſupernaturall Grace of a ſanctified ſpirit, ariſing of a godly ſorrow, from a true faith, and knowledge of a

mans owne ſpirituall eſtate.
               I may call Repentance a worke, becauſe it ſeemes not to bee a quality or habite, but an action of a Repentant ſinner, ſtriuing to returne from all his ſinnes, to come vnto God: and it cannot be practiſed by any, but ſuch as are in the ſtate of Grace.
               Thou muſt leaue all ſin, and turne wholly to God: therefore to be contrite, and not to conuert; to conuert, and not to reforme; to forſake ſinne paſt, and not to amend; to eſchew▪ euill, and not to doe good; and to acknowledge Gods mercy, & not to giue thāks: is indéed, not to repēt truly.
               
                  To doe one thing, and to leaue all the reſt vndone; or to doe all but one, and to leaue that vndone, is to do nothing at all: but to leaue all vndone, is to put the Diuell out of one corner of thy heart into another.
               For bee thou well aſſured, that thy ſoule is a reall thing, and cannot paſſe but by liuery; therefore if thou wilt deliuer the whole poſſeſſō of thy ſoule vnto God by Repentance vnfeignedly, thou muſt needes driue the Diuell out of all the corners of thy heart by amendmēt of thy life wholly.
               Thou muſt reſolue to leaue ſinne fully and abſolutely. If thou begin to repent,

and goe not forward from Grace to Grace, thy Repentance is of no value: Non progredi eſt regredi, Not to goe forward (in thy Repentance) is to go backward, without thy amendment: for there is no ſtanding ſtill (in the ſtate of ſin) if thou mind to repent. Qui ceſsat eſse melior, ceſsat eſse bonus: He that ceaſſeth to bée better, ceaſſeth to bée good; but he that doth begin & goe on to the end, receiues his reward, and this can neuer be obtained, except thou repent truly.
               To Repent, conſiſteth but of two ſyllables; yet vnto the wicked it is ſo hard to be learned, and ſo vnapt to be practiſed, that

like as the Camelion can change himſelfe into all colours ſauing white, ſo wold they change thēſelues from all goodneſſe to follow euil, rather then to returne vnto the Lord by Repentance.
               To conclude this point, thou ſhalt no ſooner repent, but heauen ſhall bee confirmed vnto thee, habendum et tenendum, for euer and euer.
            
            
               Secondly, God is the Author of Repentance.
               
                  REpentance is libera donatio, a gift abſolute, without conſideratiō; and it comes fréely from

God, who is the very efficientIer. 31. 18. Lam. 5. 21. Ier. 31. 18. Ier. 31. 18. 2. Tim. 25. 26. and principall Author or Donor thereof. It is therfore to be held the more precious, and to bee deſired with the more hope; yea, to be thy Summum Bonum, for it obtaineth Saluation vnto all thoſe which truely repent and turne vnto God. And hee that turneth vnto God by Repentance, muſt firſt of all bee turned by God: and ſo ſaith Ieremiah, Ierem. 31. 19. Surely after IIer. 31. 19. was conuerted I repented, and after I was inſtructed, I ſmote vpon my thigh; I was aſhamed, yea euen confounded, becauſe I did beare the reproch of my youth. AndIoh. 6. .44. our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith, No man can come vnto

me except my Father draw2 Tim. 2. 25 Pſ. 118. 29. Ier. 33. 11. Mat. 19. 16 Pſal. 105. Pſal. 103. 8. him. Therefore ſaith S. Paule, Inſtruct them with meekeneſſe, prouing if God will at any time giue them Repentance, that they may be ſaued.
               
               For God is good andEzech. 18. Rom. 10. 1
                        •
                     . Pſal. 50. 15 Pſal. 91. 15 Pſal. 145. 18. mercifull vnto all thoſe that turne vnto him by Repentance; he is full of pitty, and hath no pleaſure at all that the wicked ſhould die: but is rich vnto all that call vppon him for mercy; and hath promiſed to heare thy petitions if thou truely repent.
               Furthermore, if thou hadſt repentance in thine owne power, and mighteſt repent when thou wouldeſt;

yet it were but a folly; yea, it were a méere madneſſe to preſume in ſinne becauſe thou haſt a remedy. But now ſéeing thy repentance is in the hand of God, and that none can repent without his eſpeciall Grace, it were a double and a treble folly to delay thy Repentance from day to day, or to ſeeke it from any other but from God.
            
            
               Thirdly, of Contrition.
               
                  COntrition is a feare and inward ſorrow of conſciēce, perceiuing that God is angry with ſin, & is ſorry that it hath ſinned. And to ſpeake more largely of

it, thou maiſt know this; y• Contrition alſo comprehendeth firſt the knowledge of God, requiring Obedience, and diſcommending Diſobedience; and not to remit Sin without full and perfect ſatiſfaction, either in reſpect of obedience it ſelfe, or elſe in reſpect of puniſhment.
               Secondly, the diſcuſſing and examining of thy Nature, thy thoughts, will, affections, and all thy actions and déedes, according to the ſquare and rule of Gods Lawes in euery point: for as ſaith S. Auguſtine, Peccatum puniendum eſt aut a te, aut a Deo: ſi punitur a te, tunc punitur ſine te: ſi vero a te non punitur, tecum punietur.
                  
Sin muſt néedes bée puniſhed, either of God, or of thy ſelfe; if by thy ſelfe, then ſin is puniſhed without thée; if of God, then thou and thy ſin muſt bée puniſhed together. Therefore if thou wouldſt repent with a true contrition, that thereby thou maiſt reape a moſt plentiful harueſt, thou muſt ſowe in Gods field ye ſéedes of Repentance, and oftentimes water them wt the teares of thy humble Contrition: ſo ſhalt thou gather the true fruits of euerlaſting ioy and felicity. For as ye déeper the woūd, the more diligent the cure: ſo let thy repentance bring forth as much ſorrow, as ſin gaue thee delight.
               
                  And as S. Ambroſe ſaith, Expectat lachrimas noſtras Deus, vt profundat Pietatem ſuā: God looketh for thy teares in thy Contrition, that hée may powre downe his grace vpon thy amendment. Lauandum eſt cor Poenitentiae lachrimis. Thou muſt waſh thy heart in the troubled Poole of Betheſda, in the true tears of Repentance, hauing an inward ſorrow wrought by the holy Ghoſt, for thy ſinnes before committed, againſt ſo good and gracious a God; ioyned both with a perfect faith to bee forgiuen for Chriſt his ſake, and alſo from henceforth, with a ful and determinate purpoſe to amend and leade a new life.
            
            
               
               Fourthly, of Examination.
               BEfore thou confeſſe thy ſinnes vnto God, thou muſt take heede to examine thy ſelfe, that thereby thou maiſt know them both in greatneſſe and danger: for vntill thou know thy ſins, that thy conſcience may be conuicted by them, thou canſt neuer humbly & hartily confeſſe them.
               For, let any repentant ſinner aske his conſcience, what was the firſt cauſe of his conuerſion, and ſurely he will ſay, That when hee began to repent, he did firſt ſearch himſelfe; and finding his wayes dangerous, and

his cauſe feareful, did therevpon reſolue to take a new courſe. It is the beginning of all grace, to ſearch, trie, and examine thy ſelfe. It is alſo a meanes to preuent Gods iudgement: for if thou doeſt not ſearch thy ſelfe, then God will ſearch thee with his fiery croſſes and terror of his puniſhments.
               But if thou truely examine thy ſelfe, firſt to bee guilty of Adams ſin.
               Secondly, prone by Nature to all euill.
               Thirdly, ſubiect to the curſe of Gods wrath.
               Thus in the guiltineſſe of Adams ſin, ſin hath his beginning; in the originall, his continuance; and in

actuall, his full perfection.
               So, anſwerable thereunto is the wrath of God; it beginneth by leauing thée by nature vnto the ſlauery of Sathan; it is continued by death, and accompliſhed by damnation.
               Now theſe three rules I leaue to thy carefull conſideration, aſſuring thée from God, thou canſt neuer bee ſaued, vnleſſe thou repent; nor neuer repent, except thou doeſt ſearch, trie, and examine thy ſelfe.
               Thus, if thou wilt repent truly, thou muſt ſearch and looke into thy ſelfe, to ſee in what a miſerable caſe thou art; as I haue ſaid before: and thou ſhalt find, that by nature thou art the

child of wrath, out of the fauour of God, not onely wretched and accurſed by the Law, a bond-ſlaue vnto Sathan, but finally ſubiect to death, hell, and damnation.
               Thus if thou wouldſt know, if thou art in the right way of repentance, or no, thou ſhalt finde, if thou conſider in thy ſelfe, whether thou hadſt euer any neede of Gods pardon for thy ſinne, or of Chriſt his blood, to ſalue and cure thy ſoule: Or was thy heart euer wounded or grieued for thy ſin, ſo that thy ſoule were euen ſicke with the ſtinke thereof?
               Or didſt thou euer hunger and thirſt after God in

Chriſt? and with ſighes, groanes and teares, beg for his mercy vpon thy knees (as for life and death:) If thou haſt not felt, nor done theſe things in ſome meaſure, ſurely thy caſe is very fearefull and dangerous; yu art not yet in the way of Repentance: therefore as yet the mercies of God belong not vnto thee.
            
            
               Fifthly, of Confeſſion.
               SAint Chryſoſtome ſaith, that nothing pleaſeth God more then Confeſſion, if it be ioyned with true contrition; and that it is a part of Humiliation, euer ioyned with true Repentance,

becauſe they cannot bee truly humble & repent, who confeſſe not their ſins vnto God: neither will he giue them pardon; for God couers when men vncouer and acknowledge; he iuſtifieth when men condemne themſelues, and flye vnto him for mercy. If any plead vnto God, Non eſt factum, and deny his deedes, and debts of ſinne; there is no reaſon why he ſhould haue the Acquittance of Grace. Therefore, ſaith Salomon,
                  Prou. 28. He that hideth his ſins ſhal not proſper, but hee that confeſſeth them and forſaketh them, ſhall haue mercy.
               If thou confeſſe them effectually, it wil cauſe thee

to weepe like Mary Magdalen; wraſtle with God like Iacob; and poure forth flouds of teares, like Ezechia. Thou muſt cōfeſſe thē in this or ſuch like manner. First, yu muſt put vp an inditement againſt thy ſelfe, and accuſe thée before God; wherin thou muſt acknowledge both thy particular & vnknowne ſins, generally without any excuſe, extenuation or defence, in hiding the leaſt of them. An example thou maiſt finde in Dauid: I know my iniquity is euer before me.
               
               Secondly, yu muſt wt griefe of heart (as a Judge vpon ye Bench) giue ſentence againſt thy ſelf, acknowledging thy vnworthineſſe, by

reaſon of thy ſinne, to haue deſerued euerlaſting damnation; as the Prodigall child did, who ſaid, Father I haue ſinned againſt heauen and before thee: Or the Publican, who ſtanding a far off, would not ſo much as caſt vp his eyes vnto heauen, but ſmot his breaſt, crying: Lord bee mercifull vnto me a ſinner.
               
               Thou muſt alſo accuſe thy ſins, thy very conſcience muſt witneſſe againſt them, and thy heart conuince them; thou muſt accuſe them, firſt, as ſtrangers deiected; ſecondly, as aduerſaries conuicted; and thirdly, as enemies profeſſed.
               In ſo doing, ſaith Auguſtine,
                  
when thou accuſeſt thy ſelfe by confeſſing thy ſins vnto God, thou preuenteſt thereby the Diuell of his purpoſe, ſo that hee cannot accuſe thee at the day of Judgement. For, ſaith hee, thou blotteſt out all thy ſinnes by Repentance.
               Where there is no accuſer, there is no crime produced for the Judge to cō
                  demne: For Eius quod non eſt, non eſt poena: peccatum remiſſum, non eſt; ergo peccati remiſſi non eſt poena. That which is not, hath no puniſhment; forgiuen ſins are not; ergo forgiuen ſins haue no puniſhment. And ſo ſaith the Author to the Hebrewes, 10. 18. Leo ſaith,

that thoſe ſins ſhall neuer bee condemned which are purged before with confeſſion and Repentance Neither is Jeſus Chriſt any longer thy Judge to condemne thee, but thy Aduocate to plead for thee, if yu accuſe thy ſelfe by confeſſion.
               Therefore confeſſe thy ſins vnto God without any excuſe or delay. For it is another manner of thing to repent then many take it for; It is not euery ſob or ſigh, that brings Repentance; God is mercifull, &c. And thus lightly dawbe them ouer, as though Gods mercy were to be gained in a moment. Let no man deceiue himſelfe; it will coſt

thée many a praier, and many a teare in thy confeſſion, before thou canſt haue pardon for thy ſins.
               If thou diddeſt feele the ſmart of ſin but pricke in thy wounded conſcience, yu wouldſt neuer giue God any reſt; but like Dauid, crye vnto God againe, & againe, vntill thou haſt found ſome comfortable perſwaſion of Gods mercy in Chriſt, for the forgiueneſſe of thy ſins.
               Untill thou doe thus, thou ſhalt neuer finde any quietneſſe in thy conſcience, nor any ſound comfort of Gods Spirit in thee.
               
                  Dauid could neuer repent vntill God ſent Nathan vnto him; to reprooue him for his ſin: but ſo ſoone as hee

ſaw his ſin, and that it was not onely cōmitted againſt Vriah, but alſo againſt God it preſently ſo woundes his conſcience, killed his poore heart, and ſo grieued his ſoule, that hée cryed out in his conſcience; Againſt thee O Lord, againſt thee haue I ſinned, &c.
               
               As if he would haue ſaid, Oh my God, it grieues me exceedingly, and wounds my very ſoule, that euer I was ſo vile a ſinner as to ſinne againſt thee, O my moſt gracious and merciful God.
               Therefore the only way to repent, is, from the bottome of thy heart, in thy conſcience to grieue for thy ſin; eſpecially for that it is

againſt God, and cauſeth thee to breake his Lawes; for if thou couldſt bee ſorry for thy ſin, becauſe it is againſt God, more then for fear of puniſhment it were a good ſigne that thou wert in the ready way of Repentance.
               Wherefore if there were no ſhame nor puniſhment, no Hell nor damnation, yet thou oughteſt to repent, becauſe thou haſt ſinned againſt ſo good and gracious a God, who hath created and redeemed thee.
            
            
               Sixthly, Faith is the ground or roote of Repentance.
               FAith may be added vnto Repentance, not as a

part, but as the ground or roote thereof; for it cannot bée, that the roote and the fruit ſhould bée both one thing: and without Faith there can neuer be any true Repentance, therefore they are ſtill ioyned together.
               To cleare this doubt, thou muſt conſider three things: Firſt, the order of Nature; ſecondly, the time; thirdly, the manifeſtation of them both.
               In order of nature, faith goeth before Repentance: in manifeſtation of them, repentance is firſt; in time, they are both ioyned together.
               By order of nature, firſt a mās cōſcience muſt in ſome ſort bée ſetled, touching his

reconciliation with God in Chriſt, before he can truely repent.
               As S. Ambroſe ſaith, No man can rightly repent, vnleſſe he hope for pardon. So that remiſſion of ſins is beleeued, then vpon that comes Repentance.
               By manifeſtation Repentāce goeth before faith, for it is ſooner deſcried then faith.
               Regeneration is like the ſap of a trée, hid within the barke, when as Repentance is like the bud, that spéedily ſheweth it ſelfe.
               If wee reſpect the time, neither of them are one before the other, but are begotten both in an inſtant. So ſoone as there is fire, ſo

ſoone it is hot: and ſo ſoone as a man is regenerate, ſo ſoone hee repents: for he that beleeues, inſtantly repents. Therefore none can truly repent, except hee beleeues that he is Gods. And none can haue beleefe, but hee that hath his grace, and faith in him.
               Furthermore, none can repēt vnleſſe they hate ſin; and faith cauſeth a man to hate ſin: now none can hate ſin, except he be ſanctified; and none can be ſanctified, without hee be iuſtified; and this cannot be without faith; for faith comprehendeth iuſtification.
               Againe, the inward or inſtrumentall cauſe of Repentance, is faith, which

may be called the mother of repētance, becauſe it brings it forth, as the Word is the begetter; and ſo may haue the name of a Father: for he that is without faith is dead. No life without faith; no repētance without life: & therfore neither ye 
                  Phariſies Prayer, the Harlots vow, the Traitors kiſſe, the Sacrifice of Caine, the Faſt of Iezabell, the Oblation of Ananias, nor the Teares of Eſau, could bee accepted of God, becauſe they were not truly deuoted from a liuely faith.
               Laſtly, the efficiēt or principall working cauſe of faith in thy repentance, is God, wherby, by faith euery true beleeuer receiueth Chriſt

for himſelfe, as giuen for him, borne for him, dying for him, and roſe againe for him: for hee dyed for his ſins, and roſe againe for his iuſtification.
               And to conclude, repentance ſeparated from faith in Chriſt, is no true Repentance.
               And thus much concerning Faith.
            
            
               Laſtly, the time when to repent.
               MAN hath no time of repentance certaine, no tearme of yeares but tearme of life, and that is moſt vncertaine.
               Though God called Saul
                  
twice, Samuel thrice, his Spouſe foure times, the Nineuites forty dayes, and the Iewes forty yeares; yet hee giues vs no time to repent, but to repent now.
               The time of repētance is ye time preſent without delay, as ye holy Ghoſt teacheth: This day if you will heare his voice, harden not your hearts: for there is but one acceptable time, wt being neglected, is as a Bird eſcaped out of the hand, or a ſhaft ſhot out of a bow, not to be recalled. At what time (ſaith the Lord.) The Lord limits no time, if a man repent truly. The time of repentance is double; Firſt it muſt be done preſētly, without delay: Secondly, continually,

euery day. It muſt bee done ſpéedily without delay: for who knows whether this bee the acceptable time, which if thou neglect when God calls thée in thy youth, or in thy health, it may be he will not call thee hereafter in thy age or ſickneſſe; and the longer thou doeſt defer thy repentance, the harder it will be for thée to repent. Therefore if thou haſt ſuffered the bud of thy youth to be blaſted, thy flower to fade, thy leaues to dry vp, and thy boughes to wither, yet kéepe life in the roote, leſt the whole become fuell for hell fire.
               Be not like thoſe wt begin not to liue vntil they be ready to dy, & then after a foes

deſert, com to craue of God afrends enternainmēt. Nor thinke to ſnatch vp heauen in a moment, which the beſt can ſcarce attaine vnto in many yeares: or iumpe from Diues diet to Lazarus Crowne; that is, from the ſeruice oſ Sathan, to the ſolace of Saints. O Beloued, Heauen is not to bée gained ſo eaſily.
               The theefe indéede may be ſaued on the Croſſe, and mercy found at the laſt; but late repentance is ſeldome or neuer true repentance. For if a man repent when he can ſin no more, then hée leaues not ſinne, but ſinne leaues him.
               Looke in the whole book of God, there is but onely

one, and that was that good thiefe, that truely repented at the houre of his death: and who knoweth whether hee had repented before or no, we reade nothing to the contrary (yet howſoeuer) Ille vt nullus deſperet, ſolus vt nullus praeſuma
                        •
                     , He is left vnto vs for an example that no man ſhold deſpaire, he only that no man ſhould preſume.
               Oh therefore if thou wouldeſt bee free from this doubt, auoyd the vncertainty, repent whilſt thou art in good health, take time whilſt it is offered thee, for time and tyde ſtayeth for no man. Common experience teacheth vs, that tempus eſt pretioſum, breue, et
                  
                  irreuocabile, time is precious, ſhort, and irreuocable, which can neuer bee redeemed: and withall conſider, Qui non eſt hodie, cras minus aptus erit, hee that is not ready to repent to day, will be leſſe ready to morrow: it may be God hath appointed this day to be the end of thy life. Oh therefore alwayes ſo liue, that thou bee euer prepared to dye: remember the ſaying of Chryſoſtom, The wicked (ſaith he) haue this puniſhment, in dying they forget themſelues, becauſe in their life time they forgate God.
               And on thy death-bed (if thou ſhouldeſt deferre thy repentance vntill then) it may be thou wilt be wearied

with dolour and paine, thy thoughts may bee amazed, and thy memory decayed.
               But thy guiltie conſcience burthened with ſinne, that would continually accuſe thee, and the Deuill wt all his curſed caitiues, will bee there in a readineſſe to perſwade thee to deſpaire, with their vaſa furoris, their veſſels of fury, to attend & require their hire for their ſeruice, preſenting before thine eyes all thoſe ſinnes that they haue tempted thée to doe, alleadging that thus and thus they haue done for thee.
               O what then wilt thou doe? What anſwer canſt thou make? Doeſt thou

think that God whom thou neuer regardedſt to ſerue, will then ſend his Angels to deliuer thée out of his clawes? No, no. It is iuſt and right, that thou beeing dead ſhouldſt neuer want torment, that whilſt thou liuedſt wouldeſt neuer want ſinne.
               According vnto Chriſts owne ſaying, Quantum inReu. 18. 7. delitiis fuit, tantum dato illi tormentum: Looke how much they haue delighted in ſin, ſo much torment ſhal be laid vpon them.
               If all this will not moue thée to turne vnto God by repentance; what wil moue thee then? Wouldeſt thou deferre thy repentance vntill thy laſt day? Oh! who

knoweth whether the Lord will giue thee grace and ſpace to repent then or no? If he would, it were an vncertaine point, to hazard ſo great a Jewell as the ſaluation of thy ſoule vpon.
               Or wouldeſt thou continue in thy ſinnes, and neuer repent, and yet thinke to haue eternall life? It is impoſſible. As ſoone thou maiſt driue God out of heauen: for Chriſt himſelfe ſaith; I tell you nay; Except ye repent, yee ſhall all likewiſe periſh. Or wouldeſt thou forgoe heauen, and eſcape hell too? It is as much impoſſible.
               Wherefore to conclude, I beſeech thée gentle Reader, in the Name of Jeſus,

and for Chriſt his ſake, to beware that thou deferre not thy repetance, leſt thou finde thy heart deepely wounded, when thou ſhalt finde many ſinnes committed and not repented, and many of thy promiſes made to God, but in little or no meaſure performed.
               Therefore I beſaech thée, ſhake off thy ſinnes, baniſh thē, ſend thy darlings packing, and neuer more pitty them; for they ſéeke thy very ſoules deſtruction. If thou doeſt deferre thy Repentance vntil it be too late; Oh! then thou wouldeſt giue a thouſand worlds for one dayes repentance, or an houres contrition. Record therefore a decrée in

thy heart, to kéepe all thy ſins in perpetuall exile, and neuer admit them againe in thy coaſts. Now followeth an excellent marke to know the childe of God which hath truly repented.
               
               Hée that hath earneſtly repented, and is truly conuerted from his ſinnes, hath this ſpeciall marke in him; he is none of thoſe fruitles hearers, barren beléeuers, vnregenerate knowers, or verball Profeſſors: but hée is the faithfull doer of the will and Word of God.
               (1 Ioh. 2. 5) Whoſoeuer keepeth Gods word, in him verily is the loue of God perfected: Hereby know wee that wee are in him: he that abideth in God, ought alſo to walke
                  
                  euen as he hath walked, that is, as S. Iohn ſheweth vs, (1 Ioh. 3. 3.) Euery man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himſelfe, euen as he is pure.
               
               For the regenerate man deſireth nothing ſo much, as hée deſireth God; therefore hée maketh himſelfe fit for him: (Rom. 4, 7 8.) Bleſſed, (Eſay 41. 8. Wiſedom. 7. 27. Ioh. 15. 14. 15.) the friend of God, (Phil. 3. 8) and doe count all things but dung, that hee may winne Chriſt. Wherefore he doth (Cor. 11. 1) imitate the godly, (Pro. 4. 14) ſhun the wicked (Mat. 5. 6) embrace vertue, (1. Pet. 3. 9) and flye ſinne.
               
               For the Spirit of God aſſures no man pardon of his ſins, but ſuch as be hū
                  bled for them, repent of 
                     •
                  hē, confeſſe them to God, leaue and forſake them, & withall

become a new creature, and walke in newneſſe of life.
               Thoſe which walke in newneſſe of life, are theſe which Chriſt calleth (Mark. 3. 35.) his Mother, Siſter and Brother, (Rom. 6. 18.) his Seruants, (Ioh. 15. 14. 15.) his Friends, (Cant. 5, 1.) his Sons, (o) and his Spouſe. To conclude, thoſe be tearmes of loue, and that from Chriſt himſelfe, to requite the regenerate man that returns vnto him by vnfeigned repentance.
               
                  Non tam audire, quàm obedire, requir it Deus.
               
               God regardeth more a faithfull heart, than an attentiue eare.
               Now I haue ſhewed thée what Repentance is; how neceſſary it is; what benefits

it brings; and whoſe gift it is; and alſo how it is attained; and now laſtly the time when it is to be taken in hand.
               Oh repent, repent therfore, that thou and I, and al the Elect children of God may haue all our ſins freely forgiuen vs, and bee with Chriſt Jeſus our Sauiour, who hath ſo deerely bought vs: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, be all Honor, Power, Glory, and Dominion, both now and euer more. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Booke to the Reader.
            If that my lines could ſpeak with voice, Oh, then moſt loud ſtil ſhould they cry; He that might heare them wold reioice No doubt to buy me preſently.
            A greater Booke of price more 
                  〈◊〉
                Now maiſt thou haue, yet 
                  〈…〉
                Directions right, as I haue hee
                  ••
               , Repentance truly for to gaine.
            Each line doth guide thee to rep
                  •••
               
               ▪ With phraſe moſt plaine vnto thine Eſteeme me well, do not relent, (eares: Sweet is the fruit repentance beares.
            Anagramma:
Viveneranda ſones.
         
      
   