
      
         
            
            
            A
SHORT DISCOVERIE
OF THE VNOBSERVED
DANGERS OF
ſeuerall ſorts of ignorant and vnconſiderate
Practiſers of Phyſicke in England:
Profitable not onely for the deceiued multitude,
and eaſie for their meane capacities, but
raiſing reformed and more aduiſed thoughts
in the beſt vnderſtandings:
With
Direction for the ſafeſt election of a Phyſition
in neceſſitie:
BY IOHN COTTA of Northampton
Doctor in Phyſicke.
            
            
               LONDON,
Imprinted for WILLIAM IONES, and RICHARD
BOYLE dwelling in the Blacke-Friers.
1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE, RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL AND WORTHY
Gentlemen, my deſired friends and deſeruing Patients
of Northamptonſhire, honour, health and
happineſſe of life.
            
               RIght noble and renowned
Gentlemen, it is now the tenth
yeares ſince the ſingular fauors,
loue, merite and tried worth of
my thriceSir William Tate. honored friend hath
firſt here detained mee in the
eye of your vſe. In this ſhort
ſpace of quick time, as my publicke
office hath bene truly deuoted vnto you all the
common right, ſo many your noble peculiar deſerts
haue worthily challenged their ſpeciall claime. In
pledge therefore of my loue and dutie vnto you all,
and in memorie of my trauels amongſt you▪ (when
former vowes ſhall haply hence re
                  •
               all me) what my
time here paſſed hath brought forth, moſt rare or worthy
vnto choice obſeruation, I freely publiſh, and reciprocally
here preſent vnto the countries good, and
together with generall caution and rule for ſafe and
wholeſome medication, repay and dedicate. The matter
and ſubiect it ſelfe, vnto common reading, is of a

virgine freſh and as yet vndiuulged view, and no leſſe
of neceſſarie and ſerious vſe. The ſtile can neither be
ſo farre in loue with it ſelfe as to forget the matter,
nor altogether ſauoureth of his oft interrupted & vnſetled
leiſure; and breuity doth not ſuffer the reading
to be any burthen. The paines and loſſe of ſecured
ſafetieNamque tacere Tutum ſemper erit. Scalig. Conſtare gratis quin ſilentium poſſit. Martial. in ſilence are mine own, and the opportunity
euery mans that luſteth to cenſure, or to ſatisfie any
other more honeſt end: I haue thus freely expoſed
my ſelfe in a propoſed hope, that the hence deriued
good of many may make good my good deſire vnto
all. Since thē this ſmall ſacrifiſe of my ſelfe to all your
happy healths (a mite anſwerable to my might) doth
therwith include a needful vſe vnto a common good,
that after ſucceeding participation may enlarge the
benefite vnto all, or at leaſt my poore paines awake
more ample merite in ſome others worth, vouchſafe
my free & honeſt labor in your friendly acceptance,
ſhrowded by the true ſplendor of your generoſe and
noble worthes, may dazle the narrow ſight of baſe
obtrectation. Thus ſhal your euer deſeruing loues and
now deſired patronages, make both ſo much more
deſerued loue your deſirous ſeruant, and religiouſly
euer oblige my ſelfe in all true rights vnto your daigned
fauours, perpetuall ſolicitor of humble, officious
and thankfull memorie.
            
               IOHN COTTA.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               THe Sunne doth riſe and fall, and
returneth euerie day: but when the
ſhort day of mans life once goeth
downe, it neuerSoles occidere & redire poſſunt: Nobis cum ſemel occidit breuis lux, Nox eſt perpetua vna dormienda. Catull. dawneth. Life is
deare, and too deare (being loſt) for
all ineſtimable valewes to redeeme:
and health is the ſweetneſſe of life,
and the verie life ofNon eſt viuere ſed valere vita. Martial. liuing, without which, men while
they liue are alreadie dead. Thou therefore that loueſt thy
life, and for thy life thy health, take counſell of a Phyſition
without a fee. So many and ſo infinitely do the numbers of
barbarous and vnlearned counſellours of health at this
time ouerſpread all corners of this kingdome, that their
confuſed ſwarmes do not onely euery where couer and eclipſe
the Sun-ſhine of all true learning & vnderſtanding
but generally darken and extinguiſh the very light of cō
               mon
ſenſe and reaſon. It is euery mans office to do good for
goodneſſe ſake, and both my generall duty vnto a common
good, and my ſpeciall bond vnto my friends, do earneſtly
ſolicite me hereto, ſince no man (that as yet I heare) hath
hitherto vndertaken this taske. For their ſakes therefore,
for whoſe harmes by vnskilfull hands I haue oft heretofore
ſorrowed, and for their loues, whoſe life and health
I wiſh heareafter preſerued, and for their good who will
take paines to know it, I here commend (leauing the common
miſchiefe to the common care) vnto euerie particular
for himſelfe this needfull detection of harmefullCui malus eſt nemo, quis bonus eſſe poteſt. ſuccours,

and neceſſarie counſell for ſafe ſupplie (neceſsitie being
neuer more diſtractedly miſerable in hard choyce of
good) in ſo common and confuſed multitudes of ill. For
the meanest readers ſake (whom in this whole worke I
labour equally to obſerue) I haue ſuited the plainnes and
ſimplicitie of a familiar ſtyle: and for facilitie of common
reading haue alſo ſmoothed and cleared the ſtreame
and current of this little volume, from the ſtops and interruptions
of vnuſuall ſounds and language (as farre as
the ſubiect will permit) refreſhing onely the learned in
the margine. Neither haue I eſteemed it any indecorum
for the meaneſt vnderſtanding ſake, together with generall
cautions and rules to inſert particular caſes and reports,
which may be both an inducement to reade, and an
enticement to continue, example being neither leaſt pleaſing
nor leaſt profitable vnto the vulgar. There ſhall appeare
in this following treatiſe deſcribed, firſt, ſuch inſufficient
workemen and practitioners, as this time doth generally
ſet forth, with their ſeuerall manners, defects and
dangers: and after ſhall ſucceed a plaine patterne of that
ſufficient Artist, vnto whom with iudgement and better
ſatisfaction vnto thy owne vnderſtanding, thou maist
commend thy health, and whom the Ancients, right reaſon,
and experience haue euer allowed. I labour not in
this plaine diſcouerie with words to feaſt prodigalitie, nor
hope altogether for want of correſpondence vnto ſatisfaction
to macerate frugall ſatietie. Few words do beſt hold
Citò dicta Percipiunt dociles animi, retinentque fideles. Horat. memorie, and a ſhort taſte doth breede more eager appetite.
I will therefore onely briefly point the common
forgetfulneſſe by bare aduertiſement to better memorie,
which after may better thence guide it ſelfe to more

large and accurate conſideration. This plaine endeauour
begotten of ſucciſiue houres by good deſire, thy propoſed
benefite (deſeruing Reader) hath here brought forth into
this common light. Enioy therefore therein what ſeemeth
liking, or of vſe: the reſt thy wiſer thoughts may either in
reading, abſtract, or thy ingenuous mind compare with
that is better, or by it ſelfe cenſure as a cipher. Farewell.
            
               Thy weale-aduiſing friend,
IOHN COTTA.
            
         
         
            
            THE SEVERALL TRACTATES
of the Treatiſe following.
            
               In the firſt Booke.
               
                  Chap. 1. The Introduction.
                  2. The Empericke his defects and danger.
                  3. Women their cuſtome and practiſe about the ſicke, commonuiſiting
counſellours, and commenders of medicines.
                  4. Fugitiues, workers of iugling wonders, Quackſaluers.
                  5. Surgeons.
                  6. Apothecaries.
                  7. Practiſers by ſpels.
                  8. The explication of the true diſcouerie of witchcraft in the ſicke,
together with many and wondered inſtances in that kind.
                  9. Wiſards.
                  10. Seruants of Phyſitions, miniſtring helpers.
               
            
            
               In the ſecond booke.
               
                  Chap. 1. The methodian learned deceiuer or hereticke Phyſition.
                  2. Benificed Practiſers.
                  3. Aſtrologers, Ephemerides-maiſters.
                  4. Coniectors by vrine.
                  5. Trauellers.
               
            
            
               In the third Booke.
               
                  The true Artiſt his right deſcription and election.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST
BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               The Introduction.
               
                  THE dignitie and worth of Phyſicks skill
conſiſteth not (as is imagined commonly)
in the excellence and preheminence of remedies,
but in their wiſe and prudent vſe.
It is an ancient true ſaying, that wholeſome
medicines by the hands of the iudicious
diſpenſer, are asRemedia ſi ab indoctis Medicis vſurpentur ſunt venena, ſi verò à doctis & exercitatis, Deorum ſunt auxiliares manus. Herophil. Angels of God ſent for the good
of men; but in the hands of the vnlearned, are meſſengers
of death vnto their farther euill. Good medicines are in
themſelues excellent inſtruments of health and life, but require
a learned workeman iudiciouſly to guide them vnto
their deſtined end. It is order and not confuſion, that is
euer ſafe and happie; and knowledge (which worketh by
election, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſtot: true reaſon, and not raſh boldneſſe, which
doth good by chanceHomo inconſultus & temerarius futura non videt. Cicero. and vncertaine euent) that is the
light and ſafe guide of vnderſtanding mindes. Who knoweth
not how muchId ſolum bene fit quod fit opportunè. Plato. opportunity aduanceth in all performances?
how deſcreete obſeruation of ſmalleſtin alijs 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in alijs 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . circumſtances
aduantageth? how wiſe and learnedOmnes intellectus mentiſue habitus ad vnius prudētiae complementum deſiderantur, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Ariſtot. cunctation,
and ſometimes anticipation, make fortunate an action?
Who ſeeth not in euerie dayes experience, how neceſſarie
it is by a mature and iudicious eye to foreſee in all
attemps the after vnauoydableFronte capillata, poſt eſt occaſio calua. hinderances? Who diſcerneth
not that without prudent circumſpection and prouident
forecaſt, blinde raſhneſſe and ignorance do alwaies

hazard, & oft vnrecouerably ouerthrow all good ſucceſſe.
Through want of knowledge to miſtake
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſtot. time, is loſſe of
labor and of time. Ignorant ſlowneſſe doth come too late,
and raſh haſte doth ſtumble: he that knoweth not the danger,
doth eaſily runne vpon the rocke. Thus is it eaſie for
the vnlearned to erre, and thoſe that want vnderſtanding
to fall into the ſnare. If then all enterpriſes proſper by wiſe
aduice, & it is wiſedome in matters of meaneſt moment to
conſult with a wiſe and iudicious friend, in caſes of health
and life certainly euery man is not a ſufficient counſellor.
He that conſidereth the multitude of cauſes in diſeaſes,
their infinite kindes, manners, and natures, the varietie of
accidents, their ſodaine and variable mutations, the ſoone
loſt occaſions, and hardly gained
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . &c. Hippoc. Aph 1. opportunities, the wiſedome
which circumſtances require, the care and vigilance
which the ſubiect exacteth, the doubts which repugnances
bring, the reſolutions which neceſſities vrge; ſhall find
the moſt exquiſite powers of vnderſtanding, iudgement,
wit, diſcretion, and learning herein exactly ſifted. From the
varietie ofPrincipium medendi cognitio morbi, minimuſue error in illius ignoratione commiſſus eſt maximus in fine. Galen. de Meth. med. cauſes of diſeaſes, what varying differences
ariſe in the manner, quantity, qualitie, and times of remedies:
euery one requiring a ſeparate and diſtinct reſpect
and diſpenſation, euen in the ſame diſeaſe and perſon? The
immediate cauſe from the mediate, the antecedent from
the continent, the neceſſarie from the caſuall and contingent,
require both a diuers handling, and alſo a diſtinction
in order of handling: neither is there a like conſideration
of the externall and internall, the poſitiue, the priuatiue,
the materiall, the immateriall, thoſe that are ſingle and
alone, and thoſe that are ioyntly and with others. Sometimes
many cauſes are coincident in one effect, ſometimes
many diſeaſes from one cauſe. Sometimes the ſame cauſe
receiueth a difference from it ſelfe, and exacteth an exact
difference in his owne remedies. Sometime the ſame cauſe
is ſo farre vnlike it ſelfe that it ſeemeth not it ſelfe, being
either more then it ſelfe in quantity, or a monſter toAcceſſu qualitatis peſtiferae & deleteriae. it
ſelfe in malignant quality. As cauſes & diſeaſes (according

to their cauſes:) ſo no leſſe materiall are accidents to be
diſtinctly knowne and conſidered. Some of them bring
Hinc alia 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in quibus 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , alia 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . &c. certaine knowledge, ſome artificiall coniecture, ſome
matter of preſumption and probability. Some are manifeſt,
ſome anxious and ambiguous, ſome ſignificant by
themſelues, ſome conſignificant with others. Some are of
vertue in ſingularitie, ſome in multitude: ſome are conſidered
as ſignes and cauſes, ſome as neither, ſome as both.
Some accidents go before the diſeaſe, ſome accompany,
ſome follow after. Ordinarily the diſeaſe doth draw all attendance
vnto it ſelfe, ſometimes theSymptoma crudeliter ſaeuiens à morbo auocat. Hinc curatio duplex habetur, haec regularis, illa coacta. accident doth obſcure
the diſeaſe. Some accidents alone are ciphers, but added
vnto other make vp a iuſt account; ſome prognoſticate,
ſome iudicate, ſome are idle: ſome iudicate the conſtitution
of the ſicke, ſome the humour, ſome the diſeaſed
part, ſome the diſeaſe it ſelfe, and ſome the iſſue. Sometimes
diſeaſes are diſcouered by no ſignes at all, but by an
exact and exquiſiteHaec eſt illa 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      acerrime coniectans, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      intuēs ſumma ingenij ſagacia. diſquiſition of a ſound andAEgritudines aliae manifeſtae, aliae occultae, aliae difficiles cognitu, aliae faciles, aliae incō
                     prehenſae niſi exquiſita & ſubtili aeſtimatione. Auicenna tract. de horis AEgrit. ſolert
iudgement. So that according to the kindes, places, courſes,
changes and courſes of accidents, varie ſignifications,
iudications and prognoſtications, and follow ſafe adminiſtration
and application of apt remedies, vnto the more
ſpeedySummè haec ſpectanda in Medico vt tutè, iucundè, celeritèr ſalutem expediat. benefite of the ſicke, facilitie of cure, and ſecuritie
of after health. Diſeaſes, their cauſes and circumſtances
wiſely diſtinguiſhed and knowne, do point a diſcreete
knowing workman to a more certaine iſſue; without
which as the beginning of cure muſt neceſſarily be raſh, ſo
muſt the end be doubtleſly vncertaine. Hence it muſt
needs be apparent, that by the common neglect and ignorance
herein, the monopolizing of cures vnto the prerogatiue
of this or that ſecret, and thereby the contempt of
the due permutation of medicines, according to requiſite
circumſtances and neceſſities, and the omiſſion & reiection
of the wholeſome adminiſtratiō of the generallQuemadmodum duae ſunt primae & communiſſimae morborum cauſae, Plethora & Cacochymia, ſic totidem oportet eſſe communiſſima remedia purgationem debitam, & idoneam opportunamue ſanguinis miſſionem, &c. remedies
(without which the particular are vaine and prepoſterous)

do commonly turne to the common perdition of
moſt valetudinary men. From hence alſo it doth come to
paſſe, that many diſea
                     •
                  es, beyond their owne nature, and
beſides the conſtitution of the ſicke, grow ſo commonly,
ſo eaſily rooted, and vnobſeruedly confirmed in mens bodies,
that oft they can neuer haue end, which by due ordering
ſhould neuer haue had beginning. Hence grow
ſo frequent the multitude of ſtrange and vnnaturall changes,
and new faſhions of fits, euen through the too common
vſe of wholeſome remedies in vulgar and prophane
hands. For through this preſumption, either by idle trifling
and vaine flattery of eaſe, dangerous diſeaſes quickly
& in ſhort time grow too proud for any medication: or
elſe in the otherAegritudines in alias aliae facilè mutantur. Auicen. de diſpoſ. Aegrit, extreme, by too much haſte and violence
are hunted out of their owne courſe,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Hippoc. Aphor. l. 2. and ſo metamorphize
themſelues into wilde and vnaccuſtomed ſhapes.
Hence likewiſe it cometh to paſſe, that diſeaſes in their
owne kind eaſie and of ſmall continuance, by the wrong
and iniury of remedies (without aduice admitted and celebrated)
are not onely extended, to a lingring age of many
daies: but from daies to weekes, from weekes to yeares,
yea oft vnto a longer life then the ſicke himſelfe, after him
inheriting his children and poſteritie. It is a verified and
true ſaying, Worſe are the bad after-conſequences of ill
applied medicines, then diſeaſes themſelues. Although this
be often apparent, euen vnto the common ſence of vulgar
ſight, yet much more infinite are the impeachments and
ruines of health by the learned ſeene and diſcouered daily,
whereof a common eye is not
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Non eſt cuiuſuis malum in initio exo
                        •
                     iens dignoſcere. A
                        •
                     ſtot. in Polit. capable; while vnperceiued
miſchiefes ſtealingly
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Latet corruptio quia non tota ſimul fit, decipiturque mens ab illa. Ariſtot. in Polit. & inſenſibly enter with vnpriuiledged
remedies, and by ſome preſent benefite or eaſe
for a time, gayning credit and entertainement, by litle and
litle ſecretly vndermine the verie frame and foundation
of life. We may inſtance in Tobacco: with what high fame
and great renowne was it at his firſt arriuall here in England
entertained as an incomparable iewell of health, and
an vniuerſall antidote and ſuperſedeas againſt the force,

and capias of all diſeaſes, euery man with the ſmoke thereof
in his noſthrils, breathing the prayles and excellencies
thereof in his mouth? But now hath not time and many a
mans wofull experience giuen teſtimonie to right reaſon
and iudgement, from the firſt ſuſpecting, and vntill this
prouing time ſuſpending the too great name thereof? Is
not now this high blaſed remedy manifeſtly diſcouered▪
through intemperance and cuſtome, to be a monſter of
many diſeaſes? Since the riotous vſe of this ſtrange Indian,
let it be noted how many ſtrange & before vnknowne
diſeaſes haue crept in vnnaturally, beſides the former cuſtome
and nature of the nation, prouing now naturall and
cuſtomary to the follies of the nation. Is it not apparent
that the aire of this vapor and ſmoke by the ſubtility therof,
doth ſodainly ſearch all parts with a generall diſtreſſe
oft times to nature? And is it not thence probable, that by
aduantage in the weakeſt, it may oft leaue behinde it (eſpecially
where it is any time vſed) ſuch impreſſion and
print, beſides painefull diſtention through his incloſed vapour,
that no time of life, no remedies, oft times, are euer
after able to blotA vaporoſae & aereae ſubſtātiae occulto ſubtiliue ſeminario imperceptibiliter nouos & inauditos ob
                        •
                     epe
                     
                        •
                     e humano generi affectus ignotum nō eſt. Hinc Galenus lib. 1. praedictionum interpretatur illud 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Hippocratis, ambientis aeris efficaciā
                     ▪ quod inſenſibili ratione, ideoue miris modis corpora immutare ſoleat. Hoc non modo in aere peſtilenti conſpicuum, ſed & in pluribus exhalationum generibus per aerem diffuſis clam, & celeriter quaſi ſyderantibus. out? And frō this Nicotian fume grow
now adaies, doubtleſly, many our frequent complaints,
and euerie day new deſcriptions ofHinc febres catarrhoſae, & ab his latentes 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , cachexiae etiam occult
                        •
                      obrepentes, tota 
                        •
                     aepe ſanguinis maſſa à catarrho contaminata dum in venas delabitur, ſaepe diuerſis corporis partibus imperceptibiliter laceſſitis, ſaepe manifeſto maleficio oppreſſis, prout per arterias, muſculos, neruos, aut occultos & latentes meatus praecipitata à capite fertur pituita. paines, according
haply to the diuerſitie and difference of the parts it chiefly
affecteth, or the more or leſſe extreme vſe thereof. And
men haply led by ſome preſent bewitching feeling of
eaſe, or momentarie imagined releaſe from paine at ſome
time, hereby vnaduiſedly with ſuch meanes of their eaſe,
drinke into ſome weake parts, ſuch ſeede of future poiſon,
as hauing giuen them for a time ſuppoſed pleaſing eaſe,
doth for time to come ſecretly and vnfelt ſettle in their
bones and ſolid parts, a neuer dying diſeaſe (while they
liue.) How many famous patrons and admirers of this
ſimple, haue ſenſeleſly died in the very time of the idle vſe

thereof, while it yet ſmoked in their teeth? and others liuing
in the immoderateI condemne not a plentifull and liberall vſe thereof when any neceſſitie or neede with reaſon and iudgement conduct thereto, but the ordinary, fond and needeleſſe cuſtome therof, led by no perſwaſion of any foreſeene good or benefite, muſt needes fall into the cō
                     mon errors and harmes of vſeles and needeleſſe actions. burning loue therein, haue with
the fierie zealous gluttonie thereof (as the badge of his
maſterſhip in thē) ſenſibly ſtupefied & dried vp their euer
after, fooliſh and beſotted braines? I might giue other inſtance
in theſe well knowne and vulgar remedies of
the named French diſeaſe, which by a preſent benumming
of the ſenſe, couſining, and eaſing of paine, do withall, for
after time, inure and leaue behinde them ſuch a rottennes,
and weakneſſe ofttimes of the bones and ſinewes, as ſuffereth
few of our Mercurials to liue, to knowRato antecedentem ſceleſtū Deſeruit pede poena claudo. Horat. their age in
health, eſpecially who throughly knew the ſiluer-ſalue in
their youth. Hence toward declining age (if not before)
ſome fall into conſumptions and maraſmes, ſome loſe
their teeth, ſome haue the palate of the mouth rotted, ſome
the very bones of their head eaten, ſome by conuulſions
their mouthes and faces ſet awry. And it is ordinary with
moſt of this ſort, long before harueſt to leaue no graſſe
grow vpon their paued tops. I do not altogether condēne
theſe ſmoakes, but feare their fire, and with the Ancients
ſparingly commend their kinde of remedies, knowing
their pernicious danger in their ignorant and raſh ouervſe,
with their ſingular ſeruice in ſome rare exigents, God and
nature haply leauing a ſting and poyſon in them, for their
too common vitious neede and cuſtome. I might here yet
farther inſiſt in all other diſeaſes, how the vſe of the moſt
excellent, proper, and apt remedies being vnaptly applied,
either too little or tooQuot ſunt qui ſolo victu competenti citra vllum diſcrimen ab affectibus liberari poſſint, qui praeter rem pharmacis contunduntur? Brudus de vict. febricit. much, too ſoone or too late,
before their ſeaſon or after, in ſome caſes at any time, or in
any maner, bring in corrigible and helpeles harmes, being
in their owne natureVidi quos in pemiciem traxerit ſolum ſimplex apozema ex numaria cum ſenae folijs temerè exhibitis: nam corpus totum in colliquantem fluxum traxit. Heurnius in Aphor. Hippocr. harmeles, but in their vnskilfull vſe
pernicious and mortall. It is apparent in all myſteries and
faculties whatſoeuer, that the excellencie of the toole
without the excellencie of the workeman, doth not bring
forth excellencie in the workmanſhip. Hence it muſt

needes come to paſſe, that medicines though wholeſome
in themſelues, and of a ſauing and ſoueraigne power, without
any touch of harmefull quality at all, yet being ignorantly
or indiſcreetly out of time or place diſpoſed or diſpenſed,
muſt likewiſe bring forth miſchiefe, in ſteade of
expected good. And although many hardened by cuſtome
vnto a boldnes of trāſgreſſing in this kind, prouoke oft reuenge
of their follie, (for a time without harme or puniſhment)
yet do they not alwayes eſcape: for though happe
oft paſſe by, it lights atQuem ſaepe tranſit caſus, aliquando inuenit, Senec. laſt, and not ſeldome heauily.
Caſſia is eſteemed for a delicate, wholeſome and harmeleſſe
lenitiue vnto old men, children, babes, women with child,
and the weakeſt amongſt the ſicke; yet the learned know
it in ſomeGraues affert mutationes & pernicioſas ſaepe Caſſia, perturbat, diſtendit, diſtorquet cum moleſtis deliquijs in naturis & temperamē
                     tis bilioſis. Quercit. de tot. capit. Affectib. caſes not onely vnprofitable, but of maine miſchiefe.
Rhabarb is ſaid to be the life of the liuer, yet in ſome
conditions thereof it is anIn lienteria, in ventriculi imbecillitate in flatibus, in renum vlceribus & veſicae notiſſima ſunt mala. enemie; And for the generall
remedies, phlebotomy, purging, vomite, ſweating, bathing
and the like, reaſon and experience daily giue demonſtration,
that oft in the ſame body, and the ſame diſeaſe, they
are variablie, ſometime neceſſary, ſometimes profitable
not neceſſary, ſometimes neither profitable nor neceſſary,
but accurſed. Sometimes bleeding doth ventilate and refreſh
the ſpirits aboue, and beyond all other remedies, and
is the onely key vnto health; ſometimes againe it doth exhauſt
and ſpend their vigour, ſometime being both profitable
and neceſſary, yet vſed out of time or quantity doth
no good, or vſed vnſeaſonably doth much hurt. Purgatiōs
in ſome eſtates withSiccis corporibus non parum nocet. preparatiues, and in ſome without
In humoris turgeſcentia, nimia tenuitate▪ ichore ſuſque deque fluido. preparatiues are harmefull: in ſome either
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Hippoc. Aphoriſ. with preparatiues,
or withoutHaec ſunt 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Communem materiem educentia. preparatiues they are neceſſary and
neuer to be omitted. And as there is infinite danger in errour
and ignorant diſpenſation, ſo is there vnſpeakable
good in the prudent preſcription according to the nature,
quality and ſeate of each humor; according to which it is
wiſdome ſometimes to quicken, ſometimes to alay, ſometimes
to haſten, ſometimes to moderate their effects, diſcreete
ſtayes oft making more ſpeedy iourneys.Aph. 18. lib. 4. Aph. 17. lib. 4. Vomits

in ſome diſeaſes are altogether baniſhed and not admitted,
and in ſome contrariwiſe they haue onely priuiledge.
The like may be ſaid of outward remedies, plaiſters, vnguents,
cereclothes, fomentations, and baths, which alſo
according to wiſe and diſcreete adminiſtration, or a raſh
and heedleſſe abuſe, are good or euill. And this is the reaſon,
that ſo many famous and renowned remedies now adaies
bring forth effects vnworthy themſelues; for (being
with ſuch diſſolute licenciouſneſſe euery where and in all
places permitted to breake forth, out of the prudent awe
of vnderſtandings guidance) how ſhall they chooſe but
become wild and irregular in the hands of vnskilfull raines
that want true art, and the methode of their right diſpenſation?
There is no place nor perſon ignorant with what
confuſion of good order (either by abuſe of immunities, or
impunitie, ill prouiſion, or ill execution of good lawes)
through all parts of this kingdome, all ſorts of vile people
and vnskilfull perſons without reſtraint, make gainefull
traffique by botching in phyſicke; and hereby (beſides many
wicked practiſes, iuglings, couſinages & impoſtures,
which maske vneſpied vnder the colour and pretence of
medicining) numbers of vnwotting innocents daily in
thrall, and betray themſelues, their liues and ſafetie, to ſuſtaine
the riot, luſts and lawleſſe liuing of their enemies &
common homicides. It is a world to ſee what ſwarmes abound
in this kinde, not onely of Taylors, Shoemakers,
Weauers, Midwiues, Cookes, and Prieſts, but Witches,
Coniurers, Iuglers, and Fortune-tellers. It were a wrong
to exempt any that want wit or honeſtie in a whole country,
yea and many that haue too much of either, muſt be
priuiledged by an old prouerbe, to be Phyſitions, becauſe
it is no manners to call them fooles. And hereby not onely
the ſimple and vnlettered, but oft times men of better
ſort and qualitie, caſting their eyes vpon ſome attempts of
theſe barbarous medicine-mongers, (good oft in their euent)
and not conſidering the dangerouſneſſe of ſuch habite
and cuſtome, deſirouſly oft times entertaine the meſſengers

and miniſters of vnrecouerablePerdere quos vult Iupiter, hos dementat. Senec. miſerie vnto
their after life. For as in militarie deſignes, oft times a bold
and foole-hardy enterpriſe aboue and beſides reaſon, and
beyond expectation, produceth an excellent and admired
good in the happie iſſue, yet is it not commended, or in any
caſe permitted (as being verie dangerous) in ordinarie
practiſe or cuſtome of warfare: ſo likewiſe diuers euents
of medicines proue good, whoſe bold vſe and raſh preſcription
is dangerous and vnskilfull. I do not onely herein
pittie the meane capacitie, but wonder alſo at the madneſſe
of men in their wits, who in other kinds of knowledge
reuerend, yet herein, with deſire of life, ſeeme oft to
haue ſo little care of their liues. It is ſtrange to obſerue
how few in theſe dayes know, and how none almoſt labour
to know with election and according to reaſon, or
reaſonable likelihood, to beſtow in caſes of their liues
the truſt and care of their craſed healths, but for the moſt
part wanting a right notice of a iudicious choice, take
counſel either of common report which is a common lier,
or of priuate commendations, which are euer partiall. The
vnmindfulneſſe hereof, and the more minde of mindleſſe
things, do ſteale from men the minds of men. Hence euery
where prepoſterous intruſion doth diſorder the right
and propriety of euery thing, and the generall forgetfulnes
of that which to euerie one is moſt pertinent, doth beget
an itching buſineſſe in that which to euerie one is moſt
impertinent; and ſelfe conceited and preſuming ignorance
doth pricke forward raſh ſpirits to become more bold &
buſie, then modeſtie doth permit diſcreete mindes, ſoberly
limited within their owne bounds. This is the cauſe, that
vnwottingly to the poore patient, vnwittingly to the vnskilfull
workeman, and generally for the moſt part vnobſerued
of all, is the thread of many a mans life ordinarily, by
vnskilfull hands intangled in ſuch inextricable knots of
ſickneſſe, paines and death, as no time nor art are euer able
to vnfold. Vnproper remedies are for the moſt part worſe
then diſeaſes, and vnlearned Phyſitions of all bad cauſes

of diſeaſes themſelues the worſt. That therefore men continue
not in this generall confuſion (through voluntarie
ignorance, euer ignorantly vnfortunate) it is not a needleſſe
learning, more ſtudiouſly to know and diſcerne

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Euripid. good from ill, and ill from good, beginning with the laſt
firſt.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the Empericke.
               
                  RIghtQuae ſub ſenſum non cadunt mentis vis & ratio percipit. Gal. reaſon and trueMente perſpecta & ratione generatim comprehenſa, ſenſuum fide cognoſcimus magis & ſtabilimus. Gal
                        ••
                     . de ſect. experience are
two the ſole inſeparable inſtruments of all
humane knowledge: the Empericke truſting
vnto experience alone without reaſon,
and the Methodian vnto the abuſe of
right reaſon; the Ancients haue deuided
all ſorts of erronious Phyſitions into theſe twoDuplex ignorantium medicorum genus. Alterum eorum qui ſola experientia nituntur, aiuntue nullius rei naturam poſſe ratione inueniri. Alterum eorum qui ſibi nomen ſapientiae vindicant, & licet parem habeant cum prioribus ignorantiam, opinionem tamen ſcientiae ſunt aucupati. Sed eorum inſcitia inde habet initium quòd in rationalibus ſcientijs nequaquam ſunt exercitati, quae nos ritè diſtinguere & ſecernere docent 
                        •
                     as propoſitiones quae demonſtrandi vim habent, ab ijs quae probabilitatem quidem continent, nihil autē veri poſſunt aut demonſtrare aut inuenire. Gal. lib. 1. de different. febr.. For
ignorant experience and without reaſon, is a falſeIdeo impoſitum eſt iudicium tanquam praetor quidam ad inuentorum & obiectorum perpenſionem. Senſus enim apprehenſio eſt ſimplex, non iungit aut diſiungit, neque iudicat, ſed aliavis interna per ſenſum intellectum promouet. Scalig. de Sbutil. ſenſe,
and miſtaking reaſon is deniall of reaſon. As therefore vnto
theſe two, other ages before, ſo we now may reduce all
the faultie practitioners of our time, beginning with the
Empericke. The Empericke is he who reiectethEmpiricir ati
                     
                        •
                     nem negant, ſenſum recipiunt. Galen libr. de Sectis. the diſquiſition
of diſeaſes and remedies, their cauſes, natures &
qualities according to iudgement and vnderſtanding, and
the carefull perpenſion and ballancing of his action and
practiſe vnto a iuſt proportion with reaſon; but onely informeth
himſelfe by ſuch things as oft appeare euident &
manifeſt vnto ſenſe and experimentall proofe, carrying his
heart and vnderſtanding (for the moſt part) in his hands
and eyes, taking nothing ſure but what he ſees or handles;

and from the differing maners of experience, are numbred
ſeuerall and diuers kindsHinc 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . &c. of experience. The defect in the
Empericke hence appeareth to be want of true methode &
the habite of right operation and practiſe according to
reaſon, (which is art) through which defect his actions
muſt needs oft be reaſonleſſe,Ars vſus rerū incertos certis legibus coercet, Scalig. de Subt. and by conſequent as blind
in their intention, ſo likely to be fooliſh in their iſſue and
execution. For there muſt needs be in all actions want of
much more neceſſary knowledge then ſenſe and experience
canne aduance vnto: and experience muſt needes
witneſſe againſt it ſelfe, that the longeſt age of experience
doth nothing ſo fully furniſh and inſtruct in many things,
as much more ſpeedily doth prudent inuention; which
though occaſioned and helped by bookes and reading,
which are both keyes vnto all knowledge, and alſo rich
ſtorehouſes of experiences, not onely of one age and
countrie, but of all times & nations; yet do they only glut
the ſenſe with ſtories of experiences paſt, but reaſon and
iudgement truly enrich the mind, and giue daily new increaſe
and light in before vntried & vnexperienced truths.
Indeede particular experience, if it be accompanied
with vnderſtandingOmnibus in rebus prudenter agendis ratio pro ſuaſore habenda, vſus pro duce. Scalig. and right reaſon (which is the touchſtone
of truth and right in nature) eſtabliſheth and confirmeth
knowledge; but if experience be no more but experience,
it muſt needes proue in many caſes a ſlow guide to
lame inſtruction. For as it is with the ſouldier in the field,
let his owne ſpeciall experience in armes be neuer ſo ancient,
ſo true, ſo ſound, yet without a more generallPrudentia eſt habitus qui deducit omnia ſua facta è rationibus ad fines ſuos ſine offenſione. Dicimus enim prudenter factū ab Imperatore vbi rectè partes exercitus diſpoſuerit, tametſi ſimiles ordines acierum nunquam antea notos habuerit. Scalig. in Poet. vnderſtanding
or theorie, and a more enlarged knowledge then
his particular and limited experience can bring forth, he
muſt be lamely fitted vnto many ſuddaine and oft before
vnſeene occurrents, which the perpetuall mutabilitie and
change of circumſtances in warfare muſt needes produce.
The field, the enemie, the time (not alwaies the
ſame) require a diuers and oft a contrarie conſultation,
deſigne and manner, wherein one particular experience
by it ſelfe cannot but be much wanting, becauſe the ſame

thing or actiō ſeldome or neuer happens againe the ſame
in all circumſtances; & one circumſtanceAd eundem modu
                        •
                      non poteſt quidquā ſaepe videri. Aſ
                        •
                     lepiad. alone cōmonly
altereth the whole cōdition. As it is in military affaires, ſo is
it in the aſſaults of diſeaſes, where the fight & wreſtling of
nature is not alway in the ſame part, nor in the ſame forme
or maner, nor with the ſame diſeaſe, nor of the ſame period:
all which circumſtances in the ſame ſubiect cannot happen
alwaies to anie ſight or ſenſe the ſame, (which maketh
experience) yet are euer preſent in the generall notions of
the vnderſtanding, whereby the prudent and wiſe man
doth make ſupplie though experience faile. Beſides the
differences which circumſtances make, many diſeaſes in
themſelues and their owne kinde are ſuch as are ſcarce
ſeene in a mansGalenus morborum ſaepe meminit quos à ſe nunquam viſos profitetur, alios quos ſemel autbis. life, ſome in many yeares, ſome in an age,
ſome in many generations; & therein how can experience
giue preſcription for thoſe things whereof it hath not had
experience? for experience is of things
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſt. in Eth. oft ſeene. If then
the ſame things be in all circumſtances ſeldome or neuer
ſeene, and ſome at ſometime ſeene which a life or age ſhall
not ſee againe, and there can be no true experience where
there is not ſight and ſenſe, how blinde an helpe muſt oft
experience be? Doth not euerie day bring forth ſomewhat
new or ſtrange vnto the day, and worthy denomination of
the day? The French, Spaniſh, Neapolitane, Italian diſeaſe
was a ſtranger ſometime in old Albion, which now is an
Engliſh deniſon. The Scorbut not maine yeares ſince
was vnnamed of writers; now commonly knowne vnto a
common eye. The Engliſh ſweatingSudor Anglicus tam laethalis vt vix cētiſimus quiſque correptus euaderet. Qui euadebant in morbum bis ter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      relabebā
                     tur, & tandem concidebant. Correpti intra 24. horas animo deficiebant & moriebantur. Hollerius ex Polydoro Virgilio. ſickneſſe very ſeldome
(if more then once) here ſeene, nor at all, or at leaſt
not oft elſewhere. To wander yet farther into ſome more
wonder, Ruland with other reporteth a tooth of gold naturally
Rulandus de Dente aureo. growing with the common ranke in the mouth of
a child: HolleriusHollerius in ratis obſeruationibus. witneſſeth a child in the wombe to
thruſt forth the hand at the nauill of the mother, and ſo
continuing the ſpace of fifteene daies, in the end the
child borne liuing, and the mother ſaued. BraſauolusBraſauol. in Aph. Hipp. 18. ſ. 6. mē
                  tioneth
his cure of a ſoludier who liued after 3 yeares, hauing

almoſt halfe his head cut away with a portion of his
braines, onely thereby loſing his ſenſe and memory, neuer
eating nor hauing memorie to require at any time to eate,
but as it was put into him; nor redeliuerage at the poſternes,
but inſenſiblie. Albucaſis knew in his time a womā
carrying one dead child in her wombe, notwithſtanding
to conceiue and quicken of another, the dead child in the
meane ſeaſon rotting and falling away by parcels at ſeueral
times. But to paſſe theſe and many the like infinite receiued
vpon credite and report, my ſelfe haue met ſome accidents
in my owne practiſe, & for the moſt part within the
ſpace of theſe eight laſt yeares, worth their memorie. In
the yeare 1608. an ancient gentlemanOf Thingede
                        •
                      in Northamptonſhire. being neither
ſicke nor much pained, and onely moleſted with a cough
and ſhortneſſe of wind (from which his health was neuer
free) requeſted my aduice for the preuention of the increaſe
of the former accidents (in which alſo he found, vnto
the generall ſeeming vnto his owne ſenſe and ſome other
learned counſaile, very chearfull and comfortable amendement)
my ſelfe onely ſuſpecting and ſignifying vnto
his friends my deſpaire. Betweene his pulſes on the right
ſide and the left in generall manifeſtly appeared a wondered
ods, ſo continuing the ſpace of 12. or 14. daies together.
On the left ſide no poſitionPulſibus manum applicand
                        •
                      tres modos tradit Galenus lib. de Pulſib. palpationem, compreſſion
                        ••
                     , modum mediū. of touch, no ſearch could
finde any pulſe at all. On the right ſide the pulſes were conſtantly
& continually, as in his beſt health, manifeſt, ſtrong,
equall, in good order, with full diſtentiō vnto all the dimē
                  ſions.
In the ſame parts where the pulſes on the other ſide
ſeemed dead, all other faculties perfectly liued in naturall
heate, color, vigour, ſenſe & motiō. This was thē witneſſed
by certaine honorable gentle women preſent, whō well vnderſtanding
& more then ſufficiēt for ſuch a taske, I therto
intreated, & it cold by no ſenſe be denied. It was imagined
by ſome learned diſſenting frō my firſt howres diſlike, that
it was no other but an imperceptibilitieTale quiddam narrat Struthius in arte Sphygmica, propter vulnus acceptū, in brachij arteria pulſationem fieri poſſe imperceptibilem. of his pulſe, and
without danger, as ſuppoſed vſuall vnto him in his health
by reaſon of diuers deepe wounds tenne yeares before receiued

vpon that ſide. My experience of the contrarie oft
in his former health, and alſo in diuers other his ſickneſſes,
confirmed by owne doubt, & death which determineth all
things, ſodainly and vnexſpectedly determined this, in ſo
faire a viſard ſo many dayes deceiuing many. In the yeare
1604. my paines was ſolicited vnto a vertuous Lady honorably
both in her Knight, and her ſelfe allied, and no
leſſe eminent in their owne worth, then lying neare Grafton
in Northampton ſhire. I found her left by a former
A Parſon-Phyſition. Phyſition to verifie his prediction by her death. She was
miſerably perplexed with the doubtfull deliuery of a dangerouſly
begunne abortion, her owne ſtrength failing, and
the ordinarie aſſiſtance of women in thoſe caſes ſhrinking
from her, and a deepe die of a mixt and diuers coloured
iaundies, with extreme paines of her ſtomacke (giuing no
reſt nor intermiſſion) adding feare and ſorrow; the ſubſtance
alſo of her vrine continually troubled, confuſedly
thicke, the colour altogether reſembling the ſtrained iuice
of the greneſt hearbe. In the terrour of her abortion my
indeuour proued vnto her ſpeedily happy and ſucceſfull.
Afterward according vnto the ſecond indication from the
iaundies (neceſſity vrging, and her ſtrength then fauouring
the worke) I commanded her to bleede in the arme; which
done with good eaſe and felicitie, nature, in ſpite of all indeuour
to the contrarie, kept the orifice after ſtill open,
running daily and continually the ſpace of three weekes
together, and then healing and cloſingHollerius inter raras obſeruationes virum memorat cui è regione Hepatis vena per interualla dehiſcebat, quae ſanguinem fundebat, poſteà ſanguine ſponte reſtitante veſtigium nullum apparebat. it ſelfe with her
perfect amendment. At the ſame time (a ſodaine ſharpe
paine giuing a ſpeciall diſtinct ſenſe thereof) ſhe disburthened
of a round white hard ſtone full of little holes,
that part which giueth the name and ſeate vnto the Colike.
In the yeare 1607. a youngOf Hac
                        •
                     leton in Northampton ſhire. woman of 30 yeares
age, with another graue gentlewoman accompanying her,
came vnto me requiring aduice in her wondered eſtate
and condition. The skin or membrane of her belly (from
the nauill downeward withered, dead, and gathered together,
in likeneſſe of a rotten bladder or a wet leather bag,

and in that forme falling flagge from the former cloſe ſetting
vnto the guts and bellie) lay continually looſe vnto
the one ſide. In the yeare 1601. a barbersApprentiſ
                        •
                      vnto one Iohn Frende. boy of Northhamptō
auoided wormes, beſides other ordinary paſſages,
bySimile quiddam inter raras obſeruationes 
                        •
                     arrat Hollerius, & Medicus Argentoratenſis Didymus Obrechtus de ſe ipſo idem refert. vrine. In the yeare 1600. a ſhoomaker of Northampton
ſometime a bayliffe of the towne, falling dangerouſly
ſick, called my counſell together with an Empericke. The
other accuſed the hypochondriaca paſſio, my ſelfe made
knowne my ſuſpition of an abſceſſion in the bulke: vaine
hope gaue credite to that it rather deſired, and the patient
truſted himſelfe with the other. Shortly after he was ſurpriſed
with ſodaine frequent ſwoundings & feare of imminent
ſuffocation, but by cough and ſpitting eſcaped,
and with wonder in ſhort ſpace filled diuers largeSimile quiddam narrat Reolanus de aegro qui ſimili materia plures pelues impleuerit, & expurgatus perfectè, liberatus eſt. Addit praeterea huiuſmodi abſceſſus primarios nō eſſe ſed epigenematicos, nec verum aut legitimum pus, ſed potius 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , dum pituita in thoraeis capacitatem deſtillatione lapſa morâ coquitur, & fit puri ſimile. baſins
with foule purulent ſtuffe (one paroxyſme at once, ſometime
before intermiſſion, making vp the ſaid meaſure.) In
this feare and terrour vnto himſelfe and the beholders, he
earneſtly ſued, and againe obtained my aduice. He perfectly
recouered (the purulent collection after theA Principio ſaniei expurgetionis numerando, non generationis. 40 day
exhauſt) and he yet liueth freeNon praeclſè neceſſarium eſt intra 40 dies vel expurgari, velin pthiſin tranſire, nam & poſt 40 diem & expurgari & liberari quis poteſt proculdubio, modò 40 diem non multum excedat. Braſauol. in Aph. Hipp. from the ſequeles of any
other manifeſt diſeaſe or danger. In the yeare 1607.
a womanWife vnto Maiſter Langham of Thornby in Northamptonſhire. vexed with a palpitation of her heart, together
with an oft intermiſſion of her pulſe, by an inward
preſention mouing from a ſo daine troubled agitation
of her minde, would vſually vnto my ſelfe (with others
preſent) foretell when her pulſe ſhould ſtand and intermit,
ſometimes two, ſometimes three or foure pulſations, before
the intermiſſion. The pulſe in theiuſt knowne number
and time did euer keepe time with her prediction, herſelfe
nor then nor euer wotting how to feele a pulſe by
her hand or touching. She in this manner continued
by vncertaine fits and times the ſpace of 2 mon
                     •
                  ths or
thereabouts, while ſometime myſelfe reſorted vnto her,

being for that and other accidents by her husband called
& conſulted. It is reported vnto me by diuers well knowing
gentlewomen, and others of good worth, that aWife vnto one Tiplar of Harding ſtone in Northamptonſhire. woman
dwelling within a mile of Northamptō was brought
to bed firſt of one childe, and within twenty weekes after
of another, quickening of the latter the ſame day ſhee was
churched of the firſt. It is teſtified by many now inhabitants
of Northampton, that from within the wombe of
a woman with child (then dwelling in the towne) her child
was audibly heard to cry, vnto her owne amazement, and
the wonder of diuers hearers of credite & vnderſtanding.
Anno 1610 a woman of NorthamptonOf Woolaſton in Northamptonſhire. ſhire being with
child and growing neare the time of her deliuery, was
extraordinarily diuers dayes pained in the bellie an inch
diſtant from the nauill, vntill at length diuers wormes, each
equalling in length a quarter of an ell, ſodainly at two
diſtant places did eate themſelues a paſſage through the
skinne of her bellie; and ſo came forth and gaue her eaſe.
A gentlewoman my late patient, and now dwelling in
Northampton, reporteth vnto me frō her owne ſight with
many other eye witneſſes; that among her owne children
a male child, being then fiue weekes of age, a fortnight together
had the breaſts full of milke, as readily & plentifully
flowing and ſpouting out milke as the breaſts of a ſuck-giuing
nurſe. Theſe few inſtances are ſufficient to proue
the like contingence of other the like, which other times
in other manner, may and do oft bring forth. Neither is
euer nature ſo great a niggard (though not to euery eye
alike bountifull) but euery day almoſt may poſe bare and
naked experience. He therefore that ſeeth not but with his
eyes of his owne experience; where he hath no experience,
hath no eyesPer artis exercitationem cō
                     peri eam remediorum inuentionem quae ex vera demonſtratione procedit in his quae rarò accidunt longè praeſtare: vnde multos curaui morbos medicamentis ab experientia alienis., and therefore there is blind and cannot ſee.
Since then many things fall out beyond the compaſſe of
experience, which by experience make experince blind,
how then where are no eyes ſhall an Empericke borrow
eyes?Galen
                        •
                     de Locis affect. It is againe anſwered, Though the Empericke haply
haue not ſeene the ſame with that which ſeldome, or once

onely doth happe, yet very ſeldome hath he, not oft, or at
leaſt ſometime ſeene theHinc ille En
                        •
                     
                     piricorum tranſitus ad ſimile 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . like, and thence vnto the like he
fits the like diſpoſing. But with the wiſe the like is much
vnlike theSimilitudo nō affert identitatē. ſame. Their confuſion is onely proper vnto
the foole, and the dangerous iſſue his deſerued puniſhment.
It is a chiefe point in all learnings truly to diſcene
Vnum eſt ex Principijs humanae ſapientiae rerum differentium ſimilitudines & ſimilium differentias ritè dignoſcere. Ariſtot in Top. betweene differing ſimilitudes and like differences. Many
accidents commonly fall out ſeeming like, yet haue no
affinitie; and againe in ſhew the ſame, yet indeede contrarie.
Contraries haue oft in many things likeneſſe, and likeneſſe
contrarieties eaſilie deceiuing the vnwotting and
vnleamed. It is therefore of no ſmall moment or conſequence
for a Phyſition truly by a diſcerning eye to put
iuſt difference. This he that cannot do, muſt either through
the deceiuableneſſe of likeneſſes confound repugnant remedies,
(which cannot be without great harme and hazard
of life and health) or by miſtaking parities for imparities
diſioyne helpes better vnited, which cannot be without
both hinderance and hurt vnto the ſicke, their ſafetie
and ſecuritie. Many diſeaſes ofttimes ſo liuely mocke one
the other, that a good eye may eaſily deceiue it ſelfe. The
vlcers of the baldder and the reynes, a mole and a true
conception, a ruptu
                     •
                  e and a relaxation, pluriſies and ſome
kindes of inflammations of the liuer; the Colike and
ſome other kinde of the ſame inflammations, diuers kinds
ofHinc Hectici pulmonarij & hectici à iecore retorrido. &c. conſumptions according to diuersPauci febrem ſpuriam duplicem à quotidiana diſtinguunt; nam licet facilè ſit febrem cognoſcere, difficile eſt hanc ab illa diſtinguere Synochus putris & non putris facilè decipiūt ab eadem materia antecedente natae, cum materiae ſimilitudo ſimilia producat accidentia vt & partium vicinitas, continuitas, ſitus. feauers with
infinite more in their intricate ambiguities, diſſemble
themſelues and deceitfully reſemble one the other, much
thereby oft times perplexing the beſt vnderſtanding. Somtimes
the moſt vnlike will put on likeneſſe, and the moſt
like weare contrarietie. What more vnlike then death and
life, death to life, and life to death? Yet ſometimes life appeareth
in the ſhape of death, terrifying the beholders
with frightfull ſhewes of inquietude & anxietie, deliquation,
ſodaine and violent euacuations and exagitations
Aegri febriunt, vehementius vigilant, grauiter ſe habent quando ſunt propinqui criſi. Galen. of the whole body,Semper grauia ſymptomata criſim antecedunt. Hippo. doctr. Aphor. when the healthfull criſis is at hand,

and the victorie of nature in the maſterie of her enemie the
diſeaſe. And ſometimes death cometh ſmiling in a viſar
of life with cheerefulneſſe and ouer-pleaſing lightſomeneſſe,
when the laſt houre is now already runne,Vigor morbi eſt vehementiſſimum totius aegritudiois tē
                     pus, quod ſequitur criſis. and the
Sun for euer ſetting. Hence the vnconſiderate and vnlearned
to diſtinguiſh, are eaſily induced, ſometimes by vaine
hope deceiued to phyſicke death, ſometime too fearefully
deſpairing with exequious offices to comber life and the
recouerie of death.Gal. de Criſ. lib. 1. Hence are oft ſound parts vexed with
needeleſſe remedïes, and the comforts of lifeCogimur à gratis animum ſuſpendere rebus, atque vt viuamus, viuere deſinimus. Maximian. Hiſtoria.
                   impriſoned
for an vntimely death. It is now the ſixth yeare ſince I
was ſolicited for a woman by the opinion of the dyſenterie
or abraſion of her guts, miſerably held for the ſpace almoſt
of a quarter of an yeare vnto the continuall vſe of eueryday-glyſters
and other aſtringent medicines, vntill it was
my fortune coming vnto her, by good reaſon to diſcouer
the ſuppoſed membranous deiections to be nothing elſe
but skinnes of wormes, which firſt dead, after putrified &
diſſolued into ſmall parcels deſcended with ſome torment
in the ſimilitude of little skinnes. The skinnes being found
it was an eaſie matter by a new warrant to fetch the skinners,
whoſe thereto appearance confeſſed the euidence, &
gaue the ſuſpition of the dyſentery for euer after free diſcharge
and perfect deliuery. In this one inſtance he that is
wiſe may conceiue many more without number, which
therfore as vnneceſſary and troubleſome I will not farther
here trouble or awake now ſleeping with time paſt. In
theſe like caſes, ſometimes the beſt perfectionSimilitudines non modò vulgares ſed etiam M
                        •
                     dicos eruditosa iquando decipiunt. Galen. in Apho. 2. lib. 4. Hippo., the ripeſt
vnderſtanding doth and may miſtake. And therefore
the ignorant Empericke who profeſſeth confuſion and
vſeth no light, or helpe of iudgment or reaſon at all, but
the onely
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Senſuum nullum exiſtimamus ſapientiam. Ariſtot. Metaph. 1. ſenſe of his owne experience, how ſhall he do
otherwiſe, but oft and continually miſtake manifoldly
much more? And thus we haue briefly diſcouered the
Empericke in matters requiring extraordinarie counſell,
ignorant, in caſes of his beſt experienced knowledge yet
vnto ſome circumſtances vnfurniſhed, in many matters

of ſubſtance altogether vnexpert, in rare accidents and before
vnſeene at a maze, in true & right diſcerning wanting
the eye of right reaſon, in confounding things differing, &
in ſeparating things in their owne nature inſeparable, dā
                  gerous.
Now as we haue pointed out the Empericke himſelfe,
ſo it remaineth that with him and in him, we note all
that by inſtitution, educatiō, tradition, inſtruction, or ſtolne
obſeruatiō deriue their rule, example & cuſtome from him.
In this number are all that vſually profeſſe thēſelues in confidence
of their choyce ſecrets and excellent medicines,
commanders & maiſters of all diſeaſes. Such alſo are they
who in all places proclaime open defiance againſt all maladies,
& with vehement remedies vpon euery light occaſiſion
needeleſly, & vnprouoked (if diſeaſes preſently cānot
away) either fire them out or pull their hold about their
eares, with the fall of the diſeaſe needeleſly hazarding the
diſeaſed. Oft times a good euent may authoritſe it for skill,
& their friendly offer call it good will; but their kinde care
is too oft ſeene and proued a keene weapon to wound
their friend, and the ſicke are nor ſeldome oppreſſed with
being ſo loued. I would it were a ſlander in theſe dayes,
that good will and excellent medicines put to death more
liues then open murther. For as the moſt complete armour,
engins, and forts of warre, the excellent munition
and rich prouiſion vnto a man without knowledge to
mannage them, are but inſtruments without life, vntill
ſome better skill put life into them: ſo good medicines
being the Phyſitions inſtruments and weapons, either defenſiue
for nature, or offenſiue againſt the forces of diſeaſes,
in other hands then his muſt needes proue as but dead
in themſelues, ſo ofttimes deadly vnto others. To ſquare
and leuill their right vſe requireth more vnderſtanding
then is to be found in reaſonleſſe medicines, or yet their
ſenſeleſſe maiſters. For as in all other affaires, where
knowledge, prudence, and diſcretionSapientis conſilium vnum multorum manus ſuperat. Gal. in Suaſor. ad Artes. haue prerogatiue,
the attempt is commendable, and the iſſue likely to be
happy; ſo alſo in caſes of health, wherin wiſe & iudicious

diſpenſation, or in raſh & erroneous, the vertue and efficacy
of medicines doth liue, or die in vſe and power. It is
ſtrange notwithſtanding in theſe dayes to behold, with
what ſenſeleſſe madneſſe, men are become worſhippers of
medicines: and ſo great ofttimes is their idolatrous folly
herein, that (as if they had gotten ſome rare good in a
boxe, I meane ſome rare ſecret) they preſently inflamed
with the furie and opinion thereof, dare vpon the conſuſed
notice of a diſeaſe commend with as ſacred ſecrecie and intolerable
vſurped titles of infallible, abſolute, and irreſiſtable
vertue & force, as if any particular excellencie were
able to coniure the generall caſualty whereunto all earthly
things muſt needesCaſus & tempus omnibus rebus accidunt. Eccleſiaſ
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        
                      9. 11. be ſubiect. For God hath ſet downe
a law of mutability and changeableneſſe to all things;Galen. lib. 1. de Aliment. facult.
created according to diuerſitie of circumſtances, by which
all things vnder heauen are continually altered, changed,
and gouernedConſi
                        •
                     ium docto reſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      locuſ
                     
                        •
                     ue dabunt. Ouid.. There is no creature, medicine or
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      &c. Affectuū cog nitio eſt materia remediorum, non ipſorum remediorum cognitio. herbe
that hath any ſuch boundles or infinite power as to keepe
the ſame inchangeable or infallibe, but there ſhall be a diuers
and manifold conſideration andOccaſio eſt Domina rerum agendar. coaptation of the
ſame thing. There can be no endeauor, meanes, way, or inſtrument
of neuer ſo complete perfection or tried proofe
directed to what effect, iſſue or end ſoeuer, that receiueth
not ordinarilyNeque doctorum hominum ſed Empiricorum ſunt ſingulares illae quae circumferuntur 
                        •
                     egulae. Fetrerius de lue Vener. impediment, oppoſition, and contradiction,
whereby thoſe things which in themſelues might haply
ſeeme certaine and good by accident and circumſtance,
are againe very vncertaineExhibenda remedia pro re nata & ſemper pro circunſtantijs variare aliquid oportet. Galen de puero epilept. and euill. All ignorants therefore
whatſoeuer (ſuch are whoſoeuer are not Artiſts) had
they for all diſeaſes the moſt choyce and excellent medicines
knowne euen vnto God and nature, aboue and beyond
all knowledge of men, yet except therewith they
know their due diſpenſation, they cannot but peruert their
right vſe, be they neuer ſo ſoueraigne. The generallGeneralia remedia ſemper praemittonda particularibus. Galen. de Loc. affect. 4. remedies
againſt the common cauſes of diſeaſes ordained,
except firſt rightly adminiſtred, ſhall continually and neceſſarily
foreſtall and hinder the good and benefite from
any particular. There are no materiall diſeaſes wherein

the common remedies are not requiſite. Such are phlebotomy,
purgation, vomite, and the like. And whereſoeuer
theſe are requiſite, if they be not rightly adminiſtred, all
other medicines be they neuer ſo excellent and incomparable,
muſt needs loſe their excellent and incomparable
vſe. And none can rightly diſpence the generall remedies,
but thoſe that are more generally learned then the beſt
acquaintance and familiarity which particular medicines
can afforde. From hence it cannot but be manifeſt, how
infinitely blinde good will and zeale do herein daily erre
to the deſtruction of many. It were happy if at length
the common inconuenience and publike ſcandall might
beget a law, and law bring forth reſtraint. For illuſtration
of that which hath bin ſaid, it were indifferent to inſtance
in any diſeaſe, but I will make choyce of ſome few onely,
to ſatiſfie for all. It is an ordinarie cuſtome in thoſe daies
with women to giue medicines for the greene ſickneſſe; &
other ſtoppages in young women. In which practiſe if it
ſo happen that no inward impediment fruſtrate the indeuour,
they caſually ofttimes do ſeeming preſent good, and
blaze the excellencie of their medicine: but if ofttimes
(which they cannot diſtinguiſh or obſerue) the generall
cauſe of the obſtruction be not firſt by the generall remedy
remoued or diminiſhed, or the immediate cauſe ſetled
within the ſtopped parts, be not firſt fitted and prepared
to yeeld, all their medicines of neuer ſo great force, yea
though commonly as ſtrong as ſteele or iron, do not onely
no good or ſmall good, but ofttimes incorrigible hurt and
miſchiefes neuer after able to be reformed, or by the moſt
learned counſell to be redreſſed; while from the plenty or
ill diſpoſition of humors in the body theſe ſearching and
piercing medicines carry with them into the ſtopped parts
either more or worſe matter then was before, and thereby
there leaue a diſeaſe which ſhall neuer after die except by
exchange for a more pernicious. In the common knowne
diſeaſe of the ſtone likewiſe many and famous medicines
are at this day in many common hands, and perhaps truly

celebrated; yet if ſometimes bleedingSi metus ſit inflammationis, ſanguis mittitur tum è baſilica partis affectae ad minuendam plenitudinem, tum de vena poplitis ratione partis & materie coniunctae. haue not a firſt
place, (namely where is preſent or imminent danger of
inflamation of the reines) ſometimes if vomit be omitted
(namely where the ſtomacke is ſtopt and full, & vnto euery
thing impenitrable,) ſometimes if glyſters or lenitiues
be not premiſed, (namely where the fulneſſe of the belly
doth preſſe the paſſages, the bladder and the vreters) all other
excellent medicines whatſoeuer for the ſtone do not
onely in vaine exaſperate the diſeaſe, but hazard the party
much more then the omiſſion of meanes. Likewiſe in a
continuall feauer, if ſometimes preſent and immediate opening
of theVbi in ſynocho ob ebullientis ſanguinis copiam, ex leui occaſione irritatam adeſt ſuffocationis periculum. veine without delay or intermiſſion haue
not precedence, all other meanes are not onely prepoſterous
but pernicious. Likewiſe in the ſmall pocks, a diſeaſe
ſo well knowne and common to children and other: whatſoeuer
other fit and good medicines and Cordinals be adminiſtred,
ſometimes if bloud-letting go not beforePerpetuum nō eſt abſtinere phlebotomia cū iam papulae in ſuperficie corporis extitere. Etenim fit aliquando prae copia vitij vt plurimum reliquum ſit in corpore, vrgeat vehemē
                     ter difficultas ſpirandi, grauis ſit febris, quo tempore vena ſecanda eſt. Hollerius de Morbillis. their
breaking out, ſometimes if not vſedVbi iam malū in habitum corporis euaſetit, periculoſa eſt plebotomia. Hollerius. after, all other good
meanes are fruſtrate. And at another time if there be any
bleeding at all, it is hazard, danger, and death it ſelfe. There
are no medicines ſo commonly well knowne as ſuch as
are euery where in vſe, and at euery mans hand prouided
for the paines and diſeaſes of the ſtomacke, and for that vſe
haply ſpeciall good; yet ofttimes we ſee how long and
vainely thoſe meanes without benefite are applied, vntill
the true cauſe by a generall remedy be haply remoued, and
that remedy perhaps the moſt vnlikely in a common
iudgement, and ſeldome in common practiſe, preſcript or
cuſtome vſed for that purpoſe. When all other trials are
waſte and loſt in this caſe, and paine doth nothing ſtoupe,
ſometime the opening onely of a veineMulier in vehementiſſimo dolore ſtomachi nullis 
                        ••
                     luta remedijs ducto tandem ſanguine ex vtraque baſilica ſeruata eſt. Hippocrat. Epidemion 5. in the arme,In magno dolore ventris, ſecanda interna vtriuſque brachij, & hoc magis ſi dolor grauis, ſi repentinus, ſi difficilis ructus & ſpiritus, ſi febris eſt, ſi dolor in dorſum & ſcapulas extenditur. Hollerius de compoſ. Medic. tractat. de ſtomachicis. being
reckoned amonſt the moſt vnuſuall and commonly
harmefull for that vſe, doth prooue the ſole helpfull refuge

and author of caſe. And as in this caſe is ſometime
ſaid of bleeding, ſo at another time may be ſaid of purging
and vomite. In the apoplexie ſometime bleedingIn Apoplexia pituitoſa cerebrum magis magiſ
                        •
                     ue ſangunis priuatione refrigeſcit. is preſent
death, ſometime the onelyIn Apoplexia ſanguinea vincū & ſingulare remedium à phlebotomia expectandum. hope of life. In peſtilent
feauers and in the plague it ſelfe, all the moſt choyce Cordials
and Antidotes are made fruſtrate, ſometime by
Si peſtis cum ephemera aut hectica analogiam habeat. bleeding, ſometime forSi peſtis ſit ſynocho putri ſimilis, & corpus plethoricum. want of bleeding. And from
hence growe our ſo great diſputes & differences amongſt
Phyſitions themſelues, ſome chiefly and aboue all magnifying
it, ſome with execrations deteſting it: which groweth
in them for want of right diſtinction of the ſeuerall
cauſes, and differences of the peſtilence. In the ſame diſeaſe
the like may be ſaid of vomite, if at ſometimeVbi magnae cacoethiae ratione ſi conturbaueris naturam, praecipitas. vſed at
all, at another time ifVbi humor qui venenum aut contagium conceperit in primis venis ſubſtiterit aut in ventriculo. omitted. The common generall remedies
vſed againſt the dropſie are purging, vomiting,
ſweating, and the like; yet ſometime the moſtSi hydropis origo à menſium ſuppreſſione aut ſanguinis multitudine calidum innatum ſuffocante manifeſtò ducatur, à ſanguine detracto curandi ratio neceſſariò eſt auſpicanda. vnuſuall
and ſeldomeſt ſafe, is onely neceſſary and helpfull vnto it.
Sometime if a woman with child be let bloud ſhe ſuffereth

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Hippocrat. Aph. lib. 5. abortion, ſaith Hippocrates. Sometime if ſhe omitNoui quam plurimas quarum aliae abortiunt, aliae foetus edunt parum firmos aut vitales niſi intermedijs menſibus phlebotomia plenitudo minuatur Reolanus. letting
bloud ſhe cannot eſcape abortion,Multae niſi▪ 4. menſe releretur vena abortiunt. Foetus enim copia obtuitur. Ferne
                        •
                     ius de Meth. Med. ſaith Fernelius.Mulieri grauidae ſi menſes fluxerint liberius ſanguinem mittas. Hollerius.
Many and innumerable more might inſtances by, but
theſe may ſuffiſe for light and illuſtration to all the reſt, as
alſo for ſufficient caueat for putting any truſt or confidence
in the excèllencie of any particular remedies without aduice,
for right diſpenſation of the generall. And here by
may be iudged and diſcouered the indiſcreete thoughts of
light braines and vnderſtandings in theſe dayes, of men,
that ſo prepoſterouſly diuulge in all places ſo many
bookes and paper-Apothecary-ſhoppes of ſecrets and
medicines, better iudgment and learned ſoath teaching
the wiſe and diſcreete, that things without reaſon in themſelues
are by reaſon and wiſedome to be guided and ordered;

leſt in ignorant handling and vnwotting abuſe their
faire promiſing ſeemings proue gilded poyſons. If any
man want wit to ſee or know this or knowing will not
conſider, let the danger proue it ſelfe vnto him, and let
ſuch experience be euer the mother of fooles. And
for thoſe that herein make mercy and commiſeration
apologie for their raſh violating the rules of wiſedome,
ſobrietie and ſafe diſcretion in ignorant intermedling, I
wiſh them conſider how dangerous are the harmes and
conſequences of good intentions, and charitable indeauors,
where they runne before knowledge and proprietie
in the agent. Euery honeſt function is not euery honeſt
mans, but vnto euery man is diſtributed and allorted the
action of his owne calling: which alſo muſt be made his
and appropriate, not onely by approued ſufficiencie in
himſelfe, but authorized approbation in others: whereby
the action being good in it ſelfe, lawfull in the doer, fitting
and accommodate vnto the circumſtance, it is bleſſed
of God, commended of men, ſeaſonable in it ſelfe, harmeleſly
profitable, and euery way without reproch.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Women their cuſtome and practiſe about the ſicke, common-uiſiting
counſellors, and commenders
of Medicines.
               
                  OVR common offenders in the former
kinds are generally all ſuch,Women counſellours. Commonuiſiting counſellour's and commenders of medicines. as are knowne
to want inſtitution in arts and ſciences; are
not educated in pertinent precepts, not
ſtudied nor brought vp in places of good
libertie: without which good
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſtot. meanes ordinarily there cā accrew to mē no perfectiō in any faculty.Bona inſtitutio triū opus habet, naturae, doctrinae, exercitatio
                     
                        •
                      is.
For althogh it be poſſible that there may grow in ſome few
an allowable mediocrity in ſome ſort ſufficient to informe
themſelues, and profit others by a fitneſſe in nature ioyned
with induſtrie, (though the ordinarie courſe of inſtruction

by readers, teachers and ſchooles, be not ſo plentifully ſupplied)
yet is it no ſafe diſcretion ordinarily to truſt a ſufficiency
ſo very rarely found, ſo hardly, ſo ſeldome, and in ſo
few truly gained. Here therefore are men warned of aduiſing
with women counſellours. We cannot but acknowledge
and with honor mention the graces of womanhood,
wherein by their deſtined property, they are right and
true ſoueraignes of affection; but yet, ſeeing their authority
in learned knowledge cannot be authenticall, neither
hath God and nature made them commiſſioners in the ſeſſions
of learned reaſon and vnderſtanding (without which
in caſes of life and death, there ought to be no daring or
attempt at all,) it is raſh cruelty in them euen there to do
well, where, vnto the not iudiciouſly foreſeeing, that well
might haue proued ill, and that ill is oft no leſſe then death,
or elſe at leaſt the way to death, which is the hazard of
health. Their counſels for this cauſe in matters of ſo great
and dangerous conſequent, modeſtie, nature, law, and
their owne ſexeMulieribus nemo nunquam Lycaeum aedificauerit, aut Senaculum ſtatuerit. hath euer exempted. We may iuſtly here
taxe their dangerous whiſperings about the ſicke, wherein
their preualence oft being too great, they abuſe the weake
ſenſe of the diſeaſed, while they are not themſelues; and
make iuſt and wiſe proceedings ſuſpected, and with danger
ſuſpended.Scalig. de Subtil. For it is not ſufficient for the Phyſition to do his
office, except both the ſicke
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Sed & aegrotum, & aſtantes. himſelfe, and alſo all that are
about him, be prudently and aduiſedly carefull and obedient
vnto good reaſon: without which, loue it ſelfe may be
dangerouſly officious, the error of friendſhip a deed vnto
death,Hippoc. Aph. 1. and a kind worke in intention the wound of an enemy
in iſſue and execution. Among thoſe that are wiſe, a
good conſcience doth ſtay all raſh commiſſion: and confirmation
of all neceſſary offices by ſuch as are learned, doth
preuent the accuſation of careleſſe omiſſion: and in this
meane for the vnlearned to conſiſt, is onely harmeleſſe piety.
Betweene the vnconſiderate haſt of abundant affection,
and the lame and careleſſe pace of want of loue and
duty: betweene too buſie medling, and too curious forbearance,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
are conſpicuous the excellent vertues of prudence,
diſcretion and knowledge, vpon which are ſafely
founded wiſe moderation and temperate vſe of meanes,
vnto which euer and onely God hath bleſſed all actions,
their ends and iſſues. In whom therefore theſe are not,
how vnwarranted are their actiōs vnto their owne hearts,
and how dangerous alſo muſt they be to others harmes? If
women then profeſſe no arts, nor as maiſters of ſciences
can proue their rules, let them with ſobrietie gouerne the
great rule of themſelues, and ſo ſhall they be moſt harmeleſly
happy in being freed from the vnhappineſſe of hauing
their hands ſo commonly in others miſhaps, vnto the
diſhonour of womanhood,Hiſtoriae. A gentlewoman lately falling
grieuouſly ſicke, through the frights of bloud-letting
(wherewith womens counſell by many ill reports thereof
had confounded her) refuſed the only ſafe reſcue of her life
thereby. Whereupon very ſhortly after, her bloud grew
ſo furious, that breaking the wonted bounds and limits
of her veines, with violence it guſhed out not onely at
her mouth and noſe with diuerſe other paſſages of her body
beſides, but alſo made a diruption in the veines of one
of her legs, from whence iſſuing in great abundance it
ſpeedily diſpatched her, euen vnto the end and laſt breath
ſtill making her choyce, that rather her bloud ſhould thus
kill her then ſhe cōſent to part with any part thereof otherwiſe.
Thus ſhe miſerably died. Cōtrariwiſe another gentlewoman
Wife vnto one Maiſter Mercer of Northampton an ancient Alderman. in the yeare 1602. and of her age the 74. (as ſhee
her ſelfe numbred) vexed many yeares with a continuall
iſſue of bloud, after ſhe had bene long left in hopeles care
& deſpaire, required and expected of me her laſt doome.
I found (oft obſeruing her pulſe) a manifeſt, equall and
conſtant magnitude, altitude, and vehemence, the habite
of her body well liking; and by theſe aſſured my ſelfe as
of the cauſe of her diſeaſe, ſo alſo of the ſtrength of nature.
Many other remedies before in vaine iterated and
varied, and none preuailing or profiting, contrary to the
iudgement of ſome former Phyſitions, as alſo her owne

liking in regard of her age and ſuppoſed weakeneſſe, and
contrary to the generall diſclaime and wonderment of
her friends, herDiſtinguendae vires grauatae & oppreſſae à languidis & attritis. Hae maiora remedia poſtulant, illae nullo modo ferunt. ſtrength in the former indication fauouring
it, neceſſity vrging, and therefore her age diſpenſing,
I commanded her to be ſparingly let bloudFirmus puer, robuſtus ſenex tuto ſanguinis miſſionem ferunt. Fernel. in
the arme; whereupon without any farther other helpe ſhe
immediately recouered her ſtrength, and was freed the
ſpace of eight yeares together from the iſſue, which had
continually vexed her many yeares before. I deliuer theſe
familiar examples of mine owne for better ſatisfaction,
whereby vnto the meaneſt eye and ſimple vnderſtanding it
is apparent, that bloud-letting or not bloud-letting (as all
other remedies) are either good or euill, or neither good
nor euill, in ſeuerall ſeaſons and circumſtances; whereby
the perſwaſion or diſſwaſion thereof by ſuch as want
iudgement,In decrepita aetate ſanguinē mittit Rhazes vrgente valde neceſſitate. is euer caſually alſo good or euill in it ſelfe, but
euer vniuſtifiable in the ignorant counſellor. The iuſt will
not herein offend, but the foole will be babling, whereof
to beware vnto many had bene ſauing phyſicke, that now
are dead. Many times haue many by perſwading without
reaſon or iudgement drawne their friend vnto death, contrarie
to their better meaning, troubling them with feare
of death in the remedy, while they run themſelues to death
for want of remedie. Ill counſell for the moſt part produceth
ill euent. Ignorant counſell is neuer good counſell.
And therefore it is honeſt for it ſelfe, and ſafe for the ſicke,
that ignorance be euer ſilent, or neuer preſumptuous. It is
oft occaſion of mirth to ſee, how euen after ſicke men are
ſometime perfectly recouered, the very ill opinion of remedies
paſt (laboured into the conceite by the wauing of
idle tongues) holdeth them ſtill needleſly ſicke, vntill their
wiſer thoughts draw their minds to forget their imagination,
or to remember themſelues: and thus vnawares they
ſometime eaſe themſelues of their owne impoſition,
which was firſt the vaine ſuppoſition of a friend. Such
friendſhip is oft ſimplicity, and haply ſometimes knauery;
but let the patient that deſireth his owne good, be impatient

of ſuch folly, and not enlarge his kinde heart vnto ſo
vnkinde hurt vnto himſelfe, remembring (though it be
humanity to heare a friendly voice) that the attendant of
wiſedome is ſlow beliefe. Oft and much babling inculcation
in the weake braines of the ſicke may eaſily preuaile
with them, to forget both that which their owne good
hath taught them, and alſo by a borrowed opinion from
others indiſcreete words, to corrupt their owne ſenſe. It is
the common cuſtome of moſt common people thus ordinarily
to moleſt and trouble the ſicke. Their preſence
therfore is dangerous, & carefully to be either prohibited,
or better gouerned. Common & vulgar mouthes eaſily incline
ſcandalouſly to preiudice the things they know not.
Hence it is in theſe daies a cuſtomary worke to diſſwade
phyſicke, while mē not making right choyce of their Phyſition,
or perue
                     •
                  ting good counſell by their owne peeuiſh
frowardnes, and thereby multiplying vnto thēſelues continuall
occaſion of complaint, vniuſtly therfore accuſe art,
which they neuer duly ſought, nor found, nor vſed, & therfore
neuer knew. The offences that men iuſtly take, are the
faults, the blots, the ſtaines of vnperfect workemen, not of
art; whereof art is as guiltleſſe as they are void of art. Many
becauſe they may haply obſerue ſome others by the too
much & immoderate vſe of phyſicke, ſometime too hardly
to keepe vnder their owne ſtrēgth, ſometime haply to tire
nature, or too cōtinually to interrupt & perturbe her quiet
fruition of herſelfe, & the true ſenſe of her owne power &
ſtrēght in her ſelfe; therefore in the other extreme they alſo
with a nice and fooliſh moroſity altogether contemne and
reiect the temperate and moderateIn vitium ducit culpae fuga ſi caret arte. Horat. vſe thereof, denying
vnto God & nature their care, & duty to thēſelues, reſtraining
nature from the priuiledge of remedies which God
hath giuen vnto her, and iniuriouſly ſuffering her to liue
within them impriſoned, oppreſſed, and oft needleſly ruined.
Phyſicke it ſelfe is honored by the mouth and mention
of God himſelfe, and in it ſelfe hath demonſtration of
it ſelfe, vnto them whoſe vnderſtanding doth giue them

eyes; but the ignorant and the exceſſiue vſe, the abuſe
therof, & no leſſe the peruerſe contempt & neglect thereof,
are the curſe of God, and the ſinne of men. They therefore
that perſwade the ſicke that they haue no neede of the
Phyſition, call God a lyar, who expreſly ſaithNon eſt opus valentibus Medico, ſed malè habentibus. Mathaei cap. 9. otherwiſe;
and make themſelues wiſer then their Creator, who hath
ordainedEſt enim à Supremo medicus, & à Rege ſtipendium accipiet. the Phyſition for the good of man. Let men
therefore flie and take heede of ſuch fooliſh calumnie, and
in their neceſſities let them remember their Maker, and
thankfully embrace his bleſſing and benefite of eaſe and
health, which thereby he hath commended and giuen vnto
them; leſt vnthankfull to him, and acceſſarie to their owne
hurt,Eccleſiaſt. 38. 2. they periſh in a double ſinne. Beſide the ordinary &
meane ſort of viſiting people,Dominus è terra condidit medicamenta, & prudens homo non contē
                     nit ea. doing in the former kinds
very ſcandalouſly and continually much hurt, it is too ordinary
vſe and manner generally with all orders of men:
for ſince moſt men are not capable, worthy, nor vnderſtandingly
able to diſcerne a true good; it is no wonder that
the feweſt ſpeake truly good of good.Eccleſiaſt. 38. 4. Some of theſe ſorts
do not ſimply or abſolutely diſſwade phyſicke, but (as an
inducement vnto their owne practiſe and admittance) ſuch
phyſicke onely as cometh vnknowne vnto them, out of
Apothecaries ſhops, or from Phyſitions hands and directions:
thereby preferring their owne priuate ointments,
plaiſters, ceareclothes, drinkes, potions, glyſters, and diets,
becauſe by time and cuſtome they are become familiarly
knowne vnto them, and now are of their owne domeſticall
preparation, & therefore are by their knowledge,
acquaintance, and auouching of them, growne into ſome
credite and reputation with them. With this inſinuation
& officious promiſe of their knowne, gentle and pleaſant
medicines, and of vndoubted good from this their owne
proteſted proofe and experience, many allureSpes laqueo volucres, ſpes captat arundine piſces, Cum tenues hamos abdidit antè cibus. the ſicke
miſerably to beguile themſelues; to exchange reaſonable
likelihood, for perſonall confidence; the knowledge of
the right and ſafe vſe of medicines, for the knowledge of
the compoſition of their medicines;Tibull. the preciouſneſſe of

time and oportunity of health. For the partiall expectation
of vncertaine triall, theſe knowne defects as the perpetuall
conſequences of this ignorance and want of knowledge,
as they are ordinarily admitted, ſo are they continually
manifeſtly obſerued and noted by others harmes, and
ofttimes too late repentance: for ſince want of knowledge
doth euer lamely giue ſupply to any want, what ſafe expectation
or probable hope can the diſeaſed haue of ignorant
perſons in their diſtreſſed wants? Old Eue will neuer
be worne out of Adams children. Alas an apple can do no
great hurt. It is faire and beautifull vnto the eye, pleaſant
to taſte, and but a trifle, a ſmall matter, a little quantity,
and of excellent quality; Adam muſt needs taſte. It is good
for his eyes, it will cleare his ſight, an excellent medicine
to make him ſee. What is more faire, more eaſie, more
gentle, more harmeleſſe, more cordiall, more daintie then
an apple? Eue in good will offered it, and ſo Adam tooke
it. It made him alſo ſee; but Adam had bene better ſtill
blind. A dangerous and incurable leproſie and infection
thence ſeiſed vpon him, which after none but the great
Phyſition of heauen and earth could cure. Many medicines
are ſmall, harmeleſſe, gentle, pleaſant, and in themſelues
do not hurt. But by accident, by conſequent, by circumſtance,
death oft followeth them at the heeles. Milke,
broth, butter, and many other wholeſome meates, iuices
and fruits in themſelues, are of common harmeleſſe vſe,
milde, nouriſhing and comfortable, ſome of them ſometimes
ſoueraigne antidotes againſt many poyſons, mitigators
of diuers paines; yet becauſe ſometimes againſt ſome
circumſtancesIn horadoloris vehementis clou
                        •
                      quicunq
                        •
                      pe
                        •
                     oulo non caret. Gal. de victu Febricit. againſt art or reaſon vſed, they proue a
deſtruction vnto the vſer: and as ſometime a ſmaller dammage,
ſometime a greater, ſo therefore ſometime more and
ſometime leſſe, obſerued. Who almoſt ſuſpecteth a meſſe
of milke or a cup of beere,Data tempora proſunt: Et data non apto tempore vina nocent. Ouid. things ſo familiar and cuſtomary
in daily vſe and diet? yet permitted in ſomeIjs qui in morbi acumine euacuatione indigent, ſi quis cibum dederit, magnum operatur malum. Galen. de vict. Febricit. conditions,
in ſome manner with ſome error,Si quis dolorem alui ſubductione vel inſecta vena ſoluerit, pro humoris exigentia, & vel pauxillum ita affectis ptiſanam dederit, praecipites aget in mortem. Galen. de vict. Febricit.
                  Si Phlegmone vel redundantia adſit, cauenda ante acceſſionē cibatio ſeu res maximè noxia. Gal. de vict. Febricit. the meſſengersLeniſſimum ſaepe erratum in victus ratione irreparabilis damni cauſa. Galen de vict. Feb. of

death attend them, oft faintings, ſwoundings, ſodaine extinction
of the naturall heate, anxietie and vexation, with
other accidents of eaſie corruption and putrifaction in
the one, as of ſtupefaction and mortification in the other.
This did witneſſe a late Sommers ſodaine heates, wherein
the vnaduiſed haſty ſatisfying of thirſt with cold drinke,
by heapes in diuers places in Northamptonſhire ſent labourers
& harueſt people into their graues. With theſe for
farther illuſtration, I might number without number many
more; but vnto the wiſe and worthy, a word is ſufficient
intimation. And thought many ignorants may ſpeake faire
and pleaſing, and commend things that looke ſmooth, and
ſmiling vpon the liking of the ſicke; yet prouident neceſſitie
will hence be warned to be wiſe for it ſelfe, not raſhly
admiting ſo dangerousImpia ſub dulci melle venena latent. Ouid. flattery, nor too ſwiftly truſting
Syrens for their ſongs, nor Crocodiles for their teares: but
in matters ſo nearly concerning life and death, duly and
carefully inquiring, and according to the verdict of vnderſtanding
and reaſon, trying and examining, and not forgeting
beſide the hazard in vnſafe error by vnſufficient
Counſellors, the loſſe of time and oportunitie for better
helpe, which ofttimes is neuerSerò mediciā 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , Cum mala per longas inualuêre moras. Ouid. regained. And for entertayning
ſo meane counſell in the vſe of ſuch meanes as carry
a manifeſt danger and malignity in their nature and vſe,
I could thinke no man ſo voide of counſell, as to neede
therein counſell: yet becauſe experience of ſome errors
herein paſt is argument of other remaining poſſible to
come, I will onely by one example aduertiſe, and from
that example it will be eaſie for euery one to raiſe a rule
and cautionFoelix quicunque dolore Alterius diſces poſſe carere. tuo. Tibull. to himſelfe. It is ordinary with many vnskilfull
buſie-bodies vnder colour and pretext of gentle
and ſafe dealing, to make familiar and ordinary the vſe of
perillous medicines, which haply alſo they do not ſo diſtinguiſh
or repute, and therefore cannot be ſaid to lye, (becauſe
they ſpeake their thought,) yet tell not truth, becauſe
they thinke not right.Hiſtoria. I was ſometime ſolicited by a
carefull mother for her child, whom I found by a ſharpe

and acute conuulſion violently diſtorted, and before time
allowed leaſure for preparation of remedies, ſwiftly ſtrangled.
In any propenſion thereto in the conſtitution or other
diſpoſition of the child, was nothing which might apparently
be accuſed; and therefore making diligent inquirie
after ſome outward cauſe, I found that the ſuſpition
of wormes had occaſioned the commendations and vſe of
of the hearbe Bearefoote, which though ordinary and
much accuſtomed for that end among women, and oft by
good hap without hurt; yet we could not but with good
reaſon hereof conuince, conferring the preſent harme
(which no preſumption could vnto other thing impute)
with the danger and maligne nature of that herbe in production
of ſuch like effects: (although many for the like
vſe haue in like manner giuen it vnto their children without
blame.) Thus ſometimes ſome men haue deuoured
mortall poyſons, not onely without harme, but with good
and commodious effect. By theſe conueyances & through
the like preſumption, many vnwotting bodies oft bury in
themſelues vnbewailed (becauſe vnknowne) Ellebor,
Quickſiluer. Precipitate, and the like, coloured with better
names, and at the preſent vnperceiued. Deſperate trials
ſometime bring forth ſtrange deliuerances, yet neither
is the boldneſſe warrant, nor the eſcape encouragement.
There happen oft in theſe daies many ſodaine, maruailed
and ſtrange accidents, poſing the beſt Phyſitions themſelues,
without doubt oft raiſed from cauſes by theſe errors
vnknowne, ſecret, concealed, or haply by time before
the effect appeare, forgotten: (for ſecret miſchiefs long
time inſenſibly vndermine before the ſenſible euent appeare.)
For proofe of dangerous cuſtomes in ignorant
hands,Hiſtoria. I will make one example a light vnto many. A woman
ſometime came to aduiſe concerning an extraordinary
accident in her ordinary vſe of ſpurge-comfits. She gaue
(at the ſame time her ſelfe, and ſome others in the ſame
houſe taking thereof with anſwerable effect and euacuation)
vnto a very aged man eight in number (being her

vſuall doſe.) The firſt day they had no effect with the old
man, and in all the reſt performed their wont: ſhe therefore
gaue him as many the next day with the like effect,
and as many euery day vnto the 10 day, with the like
proofe. It was then her feare he had taſted his owne funerall
feaſt before his death, but he ſuruiued the feare without
ſenſe of change or danger. Is it ſafe from this good
hap, for other in hope ſtill to hazard themſelues in ſuch
vnſafe handling? Is it not rather manifeſt how ignorantly
and commonly theſe creatures ouerlooke the danger
which iuſtly wiſdome and reaſon ſuſpend and feare? Diſcreete
feare awaketh vigilance and circumſpection, but
ignorance of danger is void of feare, and therefore of care.
Careleſſe attempts draw harmfull and repented iſſues: and
though good haps ſometimes flatter vaine ſecurity, yet if
ſeldome harmes be not wiſely extended as a caution and
example vnto many, the cuſtome of neglect will make the
rare confuſion quickly common. So large a feaſt of ſpurgecomfits
hath ſeldome kept ſo many holy daies in one bellie,
or a banketting likenes ſo harmeleſly priuiledged idleneſſe
in a working quality. The conſequent hapned much
fairer then could be foreſeene or hoped. If for that cauſe
any man will againe aduenture the like, who will not imagine
that in the thought he hath already loſt his wits, & in
the proofe may loſe himſelfe? If notwithſtanding he eſcape,
any man will wonder, but no man, I ſuppoſe, imitate.
It may be haply deemed incredible, that ſo common and
meane ſort of people can attaine acquaintance with ſo
dangerous inſtruments, as ſome before mentioned and other
the like; but due exploration oft by the harmes occaſioned
doth teſtifie it, and the meanes of their acquaintance
diſcouered doth proue it eaſie. Quackſaluers, banckruptapothecaries,
and fugitiue Surgeons euery where ouertrauelling
the face of this kingdome, hunted by want of
riot from place to place, are oft compelled to inſinuate
and creepe into the fauour of many meane people; and in
their neceſſity do ſell for gaine and entertainement, and in

their prodigality for luſt and loue, theſe generoſe and
noble ſecrets carrying on the outſide the titles of famous
medicines, and being within infamous poyſons. And by
this meanes quicke and deſperate experiments, with ſuch
as thus like to gaine them, grow vulgar medicaments.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Fugitiues, workers of iugling wonders, Quackſaluers.
               
                  NOW ſeeing we are caſt vpon the mention
of the former ſort of men,Fugitiues, Quackſaluers. we will here
for giuing better knowledge of them,
protract their ſhort ſtay.Empirici, Chymiſtae, Of this order are
they who in townes and villages hang vp
their banners and triumphant flags in
fields, of broken armes, rotted legs, and halfe faces, and
haply alſo timber for new, diſplaying at large before the
ſimple amazed multitude, their prouiſion of ſhot and
wildfire in quinteſſenſes and ſpirits: ſcouring vp before
them goodly ſtore of harneſſe wherewith men of all ſorts
may arme themſelues againſt all diſeaſes; diſcourſing
Quod ſi doloſi ſpes refulſetit nummi, Coruos poetas, & poetridas picas cantare credas Pega
                        •
                     cium melos. Perſius. with what agility they can ſoudre new griſ
                     •
                  es for old noſes,
and newly againe infranchiſe French limbes, and finally
making themſelues admirable tinkers of all infirmities.
Amongſt theſe men credulous mindes may ſee things inuiſible;
beggers are enabled to ſell gold to drinke, that
want ſiluer to make them eate. Aurum potabile, the natuturall
Balſamum, the Philoſophers ſtone, diſſolued Pearle,
and the like ineſtimable glories and pride of Art and nature,
are their profeſſed ordinary creatures and the workmanſhip
of their hands, in whoſe hands are nothing but
idleneſſe,Clinicus Herodes trullam ſubduxerat aegro, Deprenſus dixit, ſtulte quid ergo bibis? Martial. theeft, and beggerie. To ingage wonder aboue
wonder with admiration vnto the beholders, ſome of this
ſort will not ſeeme nice to cut their owne fleſh, that it may
be glory within few howres to heale it vp againe, the
paine being pleaſure which is inuited by conſent, and recompenced
by gaine. It is ſtrange to ſee how theſe men
leauing their old occupations and mechanicall myſteries

wherein they were educate, ſodainely finde themſelues
inſpired with a ſpirit of reuelation of rare ſecrets, and
thereby promiſe vnto themſelues and others miraculous
wonders. And it is indeede true wonder to ſee
with what agility they are able ſo groſly to deceiue, and
in the end like noble Chymiſts, hauing extracted ſiluer out
of the baſer mettall of idle words, in ſmoke they vaniſh,
leauing behinde them the ſhadow of death, with thoſe
who leauing the day light of clearer vnderſtanding neglected,
raſhly run themſelues into the miſt of impoſture
and ignorance. Thus preualent is faire pollicitation and
vaine wonderment. If men would conſult with reaſon &
iudiciouſly conſider; though their wonders were truly to
be wondered, and worthy to exerciſe the wiſe and learned
in their extrication (as they are the vanities and inanities
of argute and ſubtill couſinages,) yet muſt it neuer be forgotten,
that wonders yea and miracles themſelues are ſolie
neuer arguments of truth or ſufficiencie, but for the
moſt part fruites of vnprofitable curioſity, deceiuing the
ſimple, amazing the multitude, and giuing way and credite
to vntruth, couſinage and iugling. Therefore in this
kind the diuell himſelfe is excellent, and for the moſt part
it is one chiefe part, a true marke and prerogatiue of his
followers, Coniuerers, Sorcerers, Witches, and Iuglers;
who wanting true worthineſſe in themſelues, make vnto
themſelues theſe glorious couers. God hath giuen nothing
vnto man, but for his trauail and paine. And according
to his ſtudious induſtrie, care, prudence, prouidence,
aſſiduity and diligence, he diſpenſeth vnto him euery
good thing. He hath not ordained wonders and miracles
to giue ſupply vnto our common needes, nor to anſwer
the ordinary occaſions or vſes of our life: but our
owne needefull diſcreete indeauors euer depending vpon
his prouidence. Truth and ſufficiency receiue not their
iuſt triall by rare workes or caſuall euents, but by anScientia, intellectus, prudē
                     tia, ſunt habitus, qui vigili ſtudio, labore, diligentia & aſſueſcendo acquiruntur. habituall
and continuall proofe and exerciſe in their daily, ordinary,
and proper ſubiects and occurrents: whereunto

truly and pertinently they apt and fit euery deſigne and
action: whereunto their owne vpright iudgement is a
truſtie guide, and others eyes vndeceiued witneſſes. And
thus if men will learne to guide themſelues, they ſhall not
ſo commonly and eaſily loſe their eyes in the gaze of
wonders, nor their reaſon in the maze of ſuch inexplicable
and intricate folly.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Surgeons.
               
                  THAT which hath bene formerly ſaid ſuffiſeth
to point out the deceiuers laſt mentioned.
Their affinitie giueth occaſion to
mention in the next place, their next
neighbours, diuers our common vnlearned
Surgeons, hauing neither letters nor
humanity, nor euer acquainted with the dialect and language
of the learned. Theſe men for the moſt part eſteeming
themſelues deſeruing well for the operaryAc ſi interiores affectus ſenſu cognoſcātur, aut manus operâ curentur. Riolanus. vſes of a
skilfull and well exerciſed hand in wounds, inciſions, amputations
of ſphacelate parts and the like, hence take vnto
themſelues an emerited priuiledge in phyſicke practiſe.
Some alſo venture farther, and for ſome rare exeperiences
arrogate vnto themſelues ability, a power and authoritie
to educate & inſtitute Phyſitions, as an vnder-growth
vnto themſelues, by lying promiſes, perſwading many
honeſt ſimple parents to commit their children, otherwiſe
perhaps more fortunate and ingenuous, to be their
apprentices. Hence it cometh to paſſe that many in theſe
daies thus traded vp by their example vnto a nimbleneſſe
of deceit, and of aduenturing in all occurrents, ſo ordinarily
promiſe like gods, dare aboue men, and act like diuels
crucifying the liues of poore men: while by the grace
of one goodQuo fieri poſſit modo Seuere, vt vir omnium peſſimus Charinus, vnam rem bene fecerit, requiris? Dicam, ſed citò: Quid Nerone peius? quid thermis melius Neronianis? Maritial. deede of good hap, the oportunity of committing
many tragedies vnſpoken is gained. And thus is
the world furniſhed with factors for the graue and the

perdition of mankind. An example of double impudence
let here witneſſe.Hiſtoria. A gentleman of Northamptonſhire
vexed with an vlcer of the bladder required my aduice.
Vnderſtanding by the daily abundance of purulent matter
in his vrine (for the ſpace almoſt of halfe an yeare before
continually obſerued) together with ſome ſtore of
bloud ofttimes withall, (neither of which the bladder it
ſelfe and the exility of the veines thereof could ſo plentifully
with ſo eaſieA pure longè putidiore quod à veſica ſeparatim exit, grauiora ſolent inter meiendum aſturgere accidentia. Pus quod è renibus defluit, ſubſtantiae eſt magis ſubtilis & elaboratae, ideoque cum minore difficultate permeat, doloremque minorem creat Renes praeterea ſunt partes indolentes magis quā veſica, & partium aliarum conſenſum minus ducunt vbi magis computrueint. accidents afford) as alſo by the more
perfect permiſtion thereof with the ſubſtance of the vrine,
that it was not onely an affection of the bladder, but a
greater and more dangerous in the reines, (about the region
whereof was euer much paine and weakneſſe) and
coniecturing them paſt poſſibility of cure (their ſubſtance
already ſo far ſpent) I refuſed to promiſe or meddle farther
then by palliatiue cure, wherein accordingly I inſiſted a
long time with good eaſe and ſatisfaction vnto the patient.
At length by ſome friends there was commended
highly for a farther and better performance, a Barber Surgeon,
who thereupon being required and conducted thither,
came vnto the gentleman, and according to the commendatiōs
premiſed promiſed to cure him in ſixeAut facere ingenui eſt, aut non promiſſe pudici. Catull. weekes
ſpace. Shortly after the patient complaining of want of
ſleepe, he gaue vnto him a Ladanum pill of Paracelſus,
and after Mercuriall pilles for another ſuppoſed end; by
the vſe whereof in his body, then by the length of his diſeaſe
exceedingly before weakened and extenuate, he preſently
fell into an amazed ſtaring ſleepineſſe, or an aſtoniſhment
betweeneComa vigilās dictum Galeno, lib. 4. de loc. affect. waking and ſleeping, wherein after
he had continued a naturall day, in the morning following
he was ſodainely ſurptiſed with acute and epilepticall
fits and a generall conuulſion, with foming, gnaſhing
his teeth, loud ſtertors and the like, whereof after in one
day he had paſſed 8 or 9 fits in my ſight (being then vpon
that new occaſion newly required, the SurgeonQui nondum ſtygias deſcēdere quaerit ad vndas, Tonſorem fugiat, ſi ſapit, Antiochum▪ Martial. fled) he
was after my coming and meanes vſed partly by Theriacall
glyſters, ſuppoſitars, and antidotes fitting the preſent

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
cauſe and accidents, through the grace of God vnexpectedly
deliuered, after he had by ſtoole thus procured,
auoyded one whole pill vndiſſolued (ſeene by diuers well
vnderſtanding witneſſes preſent,) as alſo diuers ſmall fractions
of Quickſiluer fluctuating and floating like white
pinnes heads, as the women that ſaw reported vnto vs.
To make the cauſe of theſe accidents yet more manifeſt;
it happened that two maid-ſeruants there attending vpon
the gentleman, by their continuall conuerſing neare him
and the infected ſweate of his body, fell ſtrangely and ſodainely
into the ſame fits one after another by courſe, and
each hauing ſuffred ſixe or ſeuen apart, were carried forth,
and after that time neuer ſince (as I yet heare) nor euer
before had the like, as they both then ſaid. One of theſe
now liueth maried in Towceſter in Northamptonſhire, the
other was lately ſeruant vnto an honorable Lady. This
hiſtory is knowne vnto many of note and worth beſide.
To conclude, the gentleman thus eſcaped, and grew by
little and little vnto his former ſenſes and ſtrength as his
firſt diſeaſe would permit. Within a quarter of an yeare
after, or thereabout, another Surgeon againe put the gentlemā
into a new hope of recouery: & although the report
of my iudgement did ſomewhat (as I heard) ſhake his
confidence, yet not conceiuing my reaſon nor ſeeing the
cauſe, and ſuppoſing no other but the vlcer in the bladder,
he tooke him in hand; and in his hand within few dayes he
left his life, according to my prediction vnto diuers his
friends concerning this ſecond attempt likewiſe ſolicited.
By theſe examples it is manifeſt, both how bold and confident
ignorance will be, as alſo how powerfully and bewitchingly
it deceiueth the diſtreſſed minde, eaſily
proneQuod nimis miſeri volunt hoc facilè credunt. Senec. to beleeue that which it deſirouſly would. From
hence alſo may be coniectured how commonly ſuch errors
by theſe ignorant perſons in likelihood befall, yet for
the moſt part either for want of knowledge vneſpied, or
by the priuacy ſmothered. For if they kill, a dead
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   man
telleth no tales: or if by chance they ſaue one life, that

ſhall be a perpetuallLepidè illud: Sol ſucceſſus intuetur; errores tellus operit. flag to call more fooles to the ſame
aduenture. This is commonly ſeene in the vulgar cuſtome
of curing the French diſeaſe by Barbers and Surgeons,
who precipitate commonly euery one alike, and confuſedly
without reſpect or order thruſt all through the purgatorie
of their ſweatings; bleeding, vomiting, vnctions,
plaiſters, and the like. Hereby many needleſly intangle
themſelues vpon meere ſuppoſall and feare, and many
take more then neceſſity vigeth; and others for ſatisfying
that neceſſity, neglect a more materiall, and flying
too timorouſly and raſhly a knowne inconuenience, run
headlong vnknowing into an after too well knowne vnrecouerableFumum fugientes in ignem incidunt. miſchiefe. For if they that fal into ſuch rough
handling be ſtrong in themſelues, and no way liable to the
harmes of ſuch deſperate remedies, and be free from the
implication of all other diſeaſes beſides, (which entring
by their breaches may interrupt their ſmooth paſſage, and
make pernicious their French medication) they may haply
eſcaping the danger, for the hazard attaine their deſired
deliuerie, as is in ſome ſeene. But if nature haply be weake,
or the diſpoſition of the ſicke ſubiect to the perils of that
cure (which theſe men ſeldome do or can conſider) or any
other diſeaſe lie in waight too prompt to truſt with any
aduantage, (which theſe men want knowledge to foreſee)
the acquaintance with ſuch remedies may eaſily proue a
greater plague vnto the greateſt poxe. How can he that
conſidereth the diſeaſe and not the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Non cō
                     munis homo curatur, ſed ſingulorum quiſque. Galen de Meth. Med. perſon (as is vſuall
with theſe men) becauſe the contrary is not poſſible with
ignorance) how can they I ſay in curing the one but indanger
the other? We ſee ordinarily, the ſame medicine in the
ſame force vnto one man is ſcarce ſenſible, vnto another
is a ſting; vnto one fauourable, vnto another cruell; in one
wanting edge, in another exceeding. It therefore requireth
learned ability to diſcerne the hidden ods and differences,
thereby iuſtly to diſtribute vnto euery ſeuerall his
proper and fitHabenda enim ratio non manifeſtae modo qualitatis, ſed & occultae, tum vniuſcuiuſque 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . proportion of the ſame thing. Neither
is it ſafe to accommodate ſo harmefull helps as belong to

ſo cautelous a cure without a iudicious view, not onely of
this ſtrange diſeaſe it ſelfe, but alſo of the mixture or
Morbi è duorum humorū putredine in eadem ſede nonnunquam fiunt confuſi, nonnunquam in diuerſa impliciti, nonnunquam ab eadem materia in diuerſis partibus, diuerſimodè diſpoſiti. In omnibus ſecundum varias, diuerſas aut contrarias indicationes, ab vrgentiore auſpicatur prudens Medicus, ſingulos perluſtrat, leuiſſimos verſat. coniunction of any other maladies and reſpects therewith,
whoſe neceſſities may and do oft forbid and prohibite
his remedies (that being a medicine to one diſeaſe
which is a miſchiefe to another, and an eaſe to one which
is a ſorrow vnto another.) It is therefore no maruaile, that
while theſe men contemne order and method, and the learned
examination of theſe and ſuch like circumſtances, and
blindly proſecute iſſues vnknowne to foreſeeing reaſon,
they therefore (though ſometime they remoue a miſchiefe)
yet either equall it againe with the like, or exceed
it with a greater, or elſe ofttimes not profiting nor ſatiſfying
the vtmoſt patience and painefull expectation with
the ſmalleſt good, effectually double the greateſt euill.
This for that all men ſee not, few conſider, many forget,
& ſome ioyouſly eſcaping defend. The hurt is oft vneſpied
the harmes vnheeded, the ſhamefull wrongers and homicides
with the dead buried, and the good haps by many
fooliſh liuing idly admired, vnto the increaſe and continuance
of multiplied miſchiefe. Hereof ſolie for the moſt
part wofull experience is capable, neither reaſon, nor example,
nor any aduice warning or moderating,Morbus coniunctus exigit curam coniunctam vt ſimplex ſimplicem, in coniunctis verò quae potior potiorem exigit non neglecta altera. Galen in Aph. Hippoc. though the
ordinary batteries from hence euery where almoſt leaue
rotten and mangled monuments of remedileſſe cures,
if not preſent with the cauſe, yet neuer farre of, and though
ſometime long, yet euer certaine. For though where the
body is ſtrong, ofttimes many groſſe errors may be by the
ignorant committed, and yet not eſpied, (becauſe where
is ſtrength there is leſſe ſenſe and eſteeme of harmes,
(weakneſſe being only vnable to beare or endure without
complaint) yet the inſenſible ſting doth oft breede the
moſt feſtered poyſon, in the lateſt ſenſible ſmart. The errors
of the vnskilfull Pilote though great and many, in the
calme are notPlurimi medici ſimiles vi dentur nauium rectoribus. In tranquillo mari regendo ſi quid errent peccentve, error non patet. In aduerſa tempeſtate errore aut ignorantia facilè nauem perditam in omnibus liquidò conſtat. Brud. de vict. Feb. conſidered, but in the dangerous ſea the

leaſt error offereth the ougly ſhape of his owne foulneſſe.
In bodies not eaſily harmed many raſh harmes are hardly
diſcouered, but in dangerous cōditions the leaſt lapſes are
heauie loades. Ignorance therefore is onely good when it
doth no hurt, whereunto it is neuer wanting in her propertie,
but onely ſometimes in power. It is obiected, that wiſe
and learned men do oft miſtake. It is true: where is the
greateſt wiſedome the moſt incomparable, yet there is, and
euer muſt be ſometimes miſtaking and infirmities. The reaſon
is, for that abſolute perfection is aboue the nature of
mortality. He therefore that in his art or faculty doth neuer
erre, is
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . more then a man. He that moſt ſeldomeIdeo theore. ma deſcribit Galen. lib. de Finit. Med. cuius contrarium rarò euenit., nor
groſly, nor eaſily erreth, and for the moſtVbi plura nitent non ego paucis offendar maculis. Horat. part and commonly
frameth all his iudgements and actions vnto right
reaſon, he is onely a right andArs eſt eorū quae ordinariò & plerunque non aliter fiunt, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . complete Artiſt. He that
groſly or eaſily or commonly erreth and miſtaketh, iuſtly
meriteth the name of an ignorant and idiot. This is the
plaine and vncontrolled difference betweene the learned
and vnlearned. It is yet farther obiected, that oft as good
happe ſmileth vpon theſe ignorants as vpon more learned.
It is ſometime true, but it is wiſedome to diſtinguiſh how.
Al things that happen vnto the vnderſtanding and notion
of the mind (which is the guide of all actions) are either
Rerum quae cognoſcuntur ſpecies ſunt 4. Aut enim apparent ſenſui vel ſtatim per ſe vt colores, vel ex alijs ſeu ſignis, vt ignīs ex fumo. Aut ſenſui quidem occultae ſunt, rationi verò manifeſtae, eae
                        •
                     ue vel ſtatim euidentes vt bis duo 4. vel per demonſtrationem diſcendae. Incipit autem demonſtratio ex aliqua praecedentium, id eſt, ex apparentibus, vel euidentibus aut certè ex demonſtratis antea; primam ſpeciem ſenſus indicat, ſecundam 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , tertiam 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : quartam conſenſus ad confeſta ſiue ea apparentia ſint, ſiue euidentia, ſiue antea demonſtrata. Galen. lib. de Opt. Sect. in themſelues certaine and demonſtrate, or neceſſary by
conſequent, or probable and of likelihood, or of contingence
and good hap. In the firſt the truly learned cannot
erre; in the ſecond not oft nor eaſily. But, in both the
vnlearned is euer ſubiect to error, as vnable to diſtinguiſh
plaine truth from ſeeming appearance. In the third
the learned may beNeque idem vnquam aequè eſt beatus. Neque eſt quiſquam quem non aliquando videre Suffenum poſſis, Catull. deceiued, but not ſo commonly and
eaſily as the vnlearned. In the fourth good hap and blind
fortune is indifferent vnto both, and therein the foole hath

oft as good hap as the wiſe man. But he that hath common
ſenſe may diſcerne great ods. The learned hath a
prerogatiue in three parts vnto himſelfe, and an equall
part with the vnlearned, in the fourth. The learned hath
for his light and guide either knowledge, whereof isScientia eſt habitus demōſtratiuus, habet
                     
                        •
                     ue principia nota & aeterna. demonſtration,
and thereby are his actions more certaine; or
reaſon and iudgement, and thereby are they more tried
vnto right and truth; or right probability and artificiall
Artificialis cōiectura quàm propè accedit ad veritatem. Galen paſſim. coniecture, and thereby are they more ſeldome found erring.
The vnlearned wanteth all theſe helps,Inſipiens mouetur falſa finis ſpecie, non fine. and is led
onely by bold aduenture in hope of good hap, which after
long expectation is but ſeldomeQuod caſu fit, inexpectatò fit, & tarò & incer
                        •
                     ta mora fit; vt quod natura ſit, expectatò fit, ferè ſemper fit, vel vt plurimùm ſit. ſeene, and then ſoone
gone. For the bounty of good hap is not euery day, and
when it ſodainely like a wanton ſheweth it ſelfe, her ſmiles
are obuious to any one, and therein hath the learned with
the vnlearnedQuippe deeſt finis cuius gratia agatur, vbi caſu aliquid fit. Negatio finis ponit ca
                        •
                     um. Poſitio finis negat caſum. Sapiens verò ſine propoſito fine nihil agit. equall intereſt. It breedeth yet farther
doubt, that is ſometime ſeene. The Empericke and vnlearned
Surgeon do ſometimes cure where the learned
hath long trauailled, and at length hath giuen place vnto
the diſeaſe. It cannot be denied, in many deſperate caſes
theſe men are the onely fit inſtruments. Where the learned
foreſeeing the ſlippery hope of meanes, and the notation
and ſtaggering of nature, doth make warieTutus & intra ſpem veniae cautus. Horat. proceeding
(vnwilling where the caution is ſo nice that the action
cannot be ſafe, to vndertake ſo hardSemper metuit quem ſaeua pudebunt. Lucan. Hiſtoria.
                   an office) there
theſe men (who thinke nothing hard though impoſſible)
being euer ready to giue bold aduenture, may hap luckily
to ouerſute the danger, and thereby the cure muſt needs
be a mightyHinc illa Empiricorum miranda geſta & vulgata miracula, Riolanus. deliuerance. An ancient gentleman of
Northamptonſhire, being then my patient, related vnto
me among our merriments his medicine for a continuall
head-ach and giddineſſe, which in time paſt had long
vexed him, and ſolicited diuers good Phyſitions in vaine.
By chance he met with an angry Surgeon, who being by
him in ſome words prouoked, and finding the gentleman
alone and far from companie or reſcue, with a ſtaffe vnto

the vtmoſt perill of life ſoundly brake his head, and plentifully
let him bloud in diuers places; but life eſcaping, he
thereby deliueredAb iſtiuſir odi errore naſcitur expe
                        ••
                     ent
                        •
                     a 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Galen. de Sect. him of his diſeaſes, whereof more wiſe
and deliberate counſell could neuer with much labour and
long time free him. It was a great ouerſight in his learned
Phyſitions, that they could not foreſee, nor would not
preſcribe ſo fortunate a remedy. Thus malice was as happy
as an Empericks bold attempt, yet herein was ſomewhat
better, that it was freely beſtowed.Hiſtoria. In like manner,
vnto another ſo far ingaged in the Neapolitan diſeaſe,
that diſcreete counſell durſt not oppoſe equipollent remedies,
a woman (purpoſing to poyſon him) gaue an
vnknowne doſe of rats-bane; and thereby nature driuen
vnto her vtmoſt and laſt ſhift, ſetting open all the paſſages
of his body, at once with the poyſon wholly expelled the
former diſeaſe. Thus iſſueth wondered good out of diuelliſh
and dangerous acts. I condemne not ſharpe and extreme
remedies, when as extremeSaepe miſera auxilia tolerabiliora faciunt mala miſeriora. Leuin. Lemn. neede requireth them;
neither do I commend a trembling and timorous iudgement
in preſcription and accommodation there of where
isDabitur
                        •
                     ue licentia ſumpta pudenter. needefull. But I admit not hard or ſodaine
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Plurimùm atq
                        •
                      repentè quouis modo corpus mouere periculoſum. Hippocrat. lib 2. Aph. attempts,
but onely in extreme neceſſities, where alſo theIn extremis morbis extrema exquiſitè remedia optima ſunt, vt Hippocrates. Sed agendi iudicatio ſemper ſumenda à viribus, nec deploratos attingat Medicus. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in aſcite vtilis, ſed plerunque lethalis. Ideo fruſtra tentatur fractis viribus aut vbi hydrops ſuccedit ſ
                        •
                     hirrho aut febribus ardentibus. In extractione calculi veſicae cauendum etiam à longo dolore fractis viribus. In partim etiam principum vehementiore affectu diacrydiatis atendum cautè, &c. ſtrength
of nature hath by the iudicious and learned bene carefully
foreballanced betweene hope and hazard: without theſe
reſpects the vſe of hard and vehement remedies by the
hands of vnlearned Practitioners are growne too common.
It is therefore good for men to take heede, how
they too boldly walke in the common tract of Empericks
and vnlearned, whoſe waies oft troden grow ſlippery, and
therefore not varied proo
                     •
                  e dangerous. It is ſometime
neareſt way to go out of the common way, many times
the faireſt way, and not ſeldome the ſafeſt way. For though
diſeaſes may be of eaſie note and well knowne, and the
vulgar medication no leſſe otherwiſe apt vnto the neceſſitie;

yet may one ſmall circumſtance onely by it ſelfe making
the diſeaſe different, once eſcaping an vnskilfull and
blind eye, for euer after ouerrun the hopefull vſe of any
other meanes, and fruſtrate the happineſſe of after-health
by better counſell. This is the reaſon that ſo many ſodainely
and vnexpectedly periſh not without wonder in the vnskilfull
practitioners hand, who caſting his eye vpon nothing
but that which is common, taketh for a great
ſtranger what is otherwiſe, and therefore not foreſeeing,
his coming is not prepared to entertaine or intercept
him with beſt aduantage; nor giueth nor taketh warning
of him, and therefore is ſo ſodainely oft ſurpriſed by
him.Hiſtoriae. I may hereof giue a rare inſtance in an eſteemed
friend ſometimes a learned Diuine, who by ſome raſh aduice,
his eſtate at that time not duly conſidered, required
of an Apothecary a ſtrong medicine againſt the ſtone
(wherewith from his childhood he had bene euer hereditarily
Qui calculi non diu concreeriut ij medicamentis aptis diſſolui poſſunt; qui verò diutiùs exiccati & indurati difficillim
                        •
                      aut nunquam enrā tur, ideo
                        •
                     ue periculoſè irritantur. Rondeletius de vrin. moleſted. The one prepared it, the other
tooke it, both expecting no other vſe or conſequent, then
that which was vſuall to ſuch a medicine. But the ſame
night that potion violently deſcending brake through
hisLapillis in ve ſica ſubſiſtentibus crabrones irritant quicunque ſaxitragis deturbant temere. Reolan. bladder, making therein two iſſues, where by the vrine
came from him immediately then, and continually after
by thoſe two breaches, before it could attaine the vſuall
paſſage or conduit. Hereof was then witneſſe a graue
& learned gentleman an ancient Doctor of Phyſike vnto
whom this patient did ſlie for his iudicious aduice in
this ſodaine miſchiefe, and with whom my ſelfe had ſerious
conference about that accident, both of vs lamenting
his ſo vnhappy diſtreſſe and miſery.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               Apothecaries.
               
                  HERE ſo faire occaſion offering their memory,
we may not forget our Apothecaries.
Among them alſo ſome to do a friend
an vnlicenced friendſhip, or to keepe their
wares in motion for feare of corruption,
will haply ſometimes offer a caſuall good
turne, to any that like the venture. I muſt needs ſay for
the priuiledge of Apothecaries, that if any may haue prerogatiue
to be Phyſitions, by the excellence and rare
choice of medicines, it is moſt proper vnto them; who
haue with them regiſtred and inrolled the priuie choice,
truſt and command of all the beſt remedies, and haue the
beſt light to geſſe at their beſt vſe. Nay I may commend
them farther; that for the excellent preparation and knowledge
of medicines they ſometimes may excell ſome Phyſitions
themſelues: but aboue and beyond the preparation,
the right and iudicious diſpenſation is truly worthy, commanding
and directing their ſafe and prudent vſe. This
skill requireth an vnderſtanding able to raiſe itſelfe aboue
both the medicine and theQuam enim proportionem Architectu
                        •
                      erga coementarios lignarioſue fabros & alios quibus imperat gerit, eandem Medicus erga miniſtros ſuos, herbarios, venam ſcindentes, cucurbitulas admouentes & Clyſteres immitentes. Galen in lib 6. Hipp. de Morb. vulgar. maker, vnto the great Maker
of them both, and from his generallNaturae legibus Medicinae leges ſemper conſentaneae. Fernel. decree and counſell
in the adminiſtration of all things in nature, to leuie and
limite circumſtances,Vt medici cuiuſque auxilij quantitatem, occaſionem & vtendi modum cognoſcimus, vt miniſtri verò venam ſecamus & reliqua manibus operamur. Galen. in lib. 6. Hipp. de Morb. vulgar. proportion, time, place, quantity
and quality, according to the manifold ſeuerall purpoſes
and infinite vſes for the preſeruation, conſeruation, and
continuance of health and life vnto mankind. And herein
how far it behoueth the erected mind of higher contemplation,
to exalt it ſelfe in conſultation aboue the elementary
conſideration and compoſition of a medicine and the
vulgar and common ſenſe, the continuall exquiſite vſe and
exerciſe of the moſt incomparable prudence and learning
in the ordinary and daily difficulties that befall the health,
do plainely proue and demonſtrate. It is not the medicine

it ſelfe, but the iudgement and knowledge of the learned,
and right accommodation annexed vnto the wholeſome
medicine, that addeth vnto it a worth aboue it ſelfe; whereby
it doth far exceede it ſelfe in excellency, in variety of
greater good, in diſtinction of more proper vſe, according
to art and reaſon thereto conducting it, which is the life
of euery application and accommodation in all things.
Hence euen the greateſt clerkes with this ſufficiency prouided,
haue not bluſhed to borrow or learne a good medicine
at a ſimple and vulgarNeque enim turpe eſt per vulgus & aniculas profeciſſe. Non enim puduit maiores noſtros in multis remedijs brutorum diſcipulos ſe profiteri. Quin & acceptis à vulgo remedijs adhibenda ratio & rectus vſus, in quo ſumma artis poſita eſt. Holler. Inſtit. Chirurg. hand, yea from fooles and
brute beaſts, in their owne more excellent adaptation as
the ſoule vnto the body, conferring the full and true perfection.
The Ancients themſelues haue not ſhamed ſo to
do, as Galen in diuers places profeſſeth of himſelfe. Vnto
Apothecaries therefore that faithfully and truly apply
themſelues and their whole indeauor, that haue tried and
experienced skill, and vſe faithfull induſtrie in fitting
wholeſome and incorrupt remedies to attend each honeſt
need and neceſſity without fucation, adulteration or deceit,
and containe themſelues within themſelues, no man
can deny a worthy eſteeme both in priuate thoughts and
publike eſtimate; but if the pride and maiſter-ſhip of
the medicine ſtirre once in them the ambition of medication,
as in the former men commēd them, ſo in the ſecond
they ſhall iuſtly condemne them: and as in the one ſafely
vſe them, ſo in the other with ſafe diſcretion refuſe them,
fearing leſt with Salomons fly being taken in the Apothecaries
boxe, they alſo in like manner make a ſtinke of the
medicine,Hiſtoria. & an end of themſelues. Valleriola mentioneth
an Apothecary who with the imprudent vſe of quickſiluer
poyſoned himſelfe. I knew ſometime an honeſt and approued
good Apothecary in Warwickſhire, who imitating
a preſcription of precipitate againſt an inueterate diſeaſe
which he ſuppoſed in himſelfe, exulcerated his guts, and
therefore died. Theſe experiments in other then themſelues
had bene bloudy and vnhoneſt, and in themſelues
rather then in other argue their ſtrong confidence, (which

therefore might eaſily ſeduce them to be in time bold
with others.) Example and imitation (which are the rules
of an Apothecaries practiſe) are but patterns of anothers
ſufficiencie. Sufficience therfore being not their owne, it is
ſufficient to put them in mind of their owne. It is good for
euery one to be contented and contained within his owne
liſts, and of his owne ſtore with liberality to lend, and of
anothers with loue and licence to borrow. This vpholdeth
ſocieties and good orders in common weales, maintaineth
mutuall neighbourhood and humanity, friendly and iuſt
commerce with loue and loyall reciprocation, and diſtribution
of euery right to euery owner, with good to the generall
and common, and without hurt to euery priuate
and particular. I ſay nothing of banckrupt Apothecaries,
who hauing left their owne ſtanding become walking
merchants, and with a few pedlarie wares remaining
keepe ſhop in their owne hoſe, or elſe in their guts, who
(wanting other vſe) imagine them ſufficiēt to make cleane
the kitchin. Let thē that deſire their meate in the ſtomacke
ſhould long finde good cookerie, take heede who put
herbs into the pot. It hath bene required and by ſome impoſed,
that a Phyſition ſhould be both Surgeon and Apothecary
himſelfe. It is eaſily decided. In iudgement, skill,
knowledge, and ability of direction, it is very requiſite and
neceſſary, and the contrary is not tollerable in a true architect:
but euery particular executionEi qui praeſidet, ſcire operari neceſſarium non eſt, ſed potius aliorum miniſterio vti. Ariſtot. polit. 3. or manuall paines
and trauell is neuer vniuſtly, ſometime neceſſarily, and oft
more conueniently diſtributed and deuided vnto others,
whoſe viciſſitude, aſſiſtance, and oft more ready handling
thereof, is as ſufficient, nothing inferiour, yea for operary
proofe and cunning handworke far without enuy
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Nonnulli neſcientes quàm aliqui ſcientes ad opera ſunt magis ido nei. Ariſtot. eth. 6. ſuperior,
becauſe the maine and continuall exerciſe therein,
doth therein alſo make the meaner iudgement better apted
and more prompt. Galen indeed himſelfe in neceſſity,
& want of other (whoſe better and more ſpeciall practiſe
and exerciſe therein might make it their more proper performance)
put his owne hand vntoPrimi medicinae parentes & veteres Graeci Medici ferè omnes humanit
                        •
                     te ducti (vbi ita res poſtulauerit) ſuis manibus operabā
                     tur in ciuitatibus nondum populoſis. At vbi hominum multitudo increuerit, aliò res delegata eſt. Hinc etiam Principum edictis diſtincta extant Medicorū & Chirurgorū miniſteria & officia. chirurgie: but when

he found it another diſtinct office, as an eaſe vnto himſelfe
and a commodious liberty & inlarged helpe to his other
imploiments, ſtudies and care, he thereunto referred
hand-operation, though euer haply conferred his mind &
iudgement. In like maner Hippocrates refuſeth byNec verò calculo laborantes ſecabo, ſed viris Chirurgiae operarijs eius rei faciendi locum dabo. Hippoc. iurc iurando. oath
to meddle in Chirurgerie, & expreſly in the extraction of
the ſtone of the bladder, and leaueth it vnto thoſe that are
therein exerciſed: The fewer offices the leſſe diſtraction,
& where leſſe diſtraction, there is the better bent vnto the
more maine and proper ſcope. Where therefore with as
ſufficient ſupply by others, the ſuffection or deputation
may eaſe of a burthen (as indifferently elſe were impoſed)
there (the buſineſſe leſſe, and the diligence and incumbence
equall) the remaining taske muſt needes be completely
and abſolutely attended & perfected. Concerning
the Apothecarie included in the Phyſition: indeed the firſt
Ancients were Apothecaries vnto themſelues, becauſe in
themſelues onely was then newly ſprouting in the infancie,
the inchoation of that skill, and therefore as yet they
could notOmnes artes rudiores primū, tractu deinde temporis abſoluuntur. Scal. Poet 3. communicate perfection vnto others. But now
time and age haue accompliſhed it, the Phyſitions eye and
skill hath vſed anothers hand both as a needfull and requiſite
Medico mulrae artes aptam materiam praeparant, ipſe naturae per miniſtros ſuppeditat Galen. in lib. 6. Hippo. de morb vulgar. helpe in the mechanicall miniſtery, and alſo as an
aduantage and eaſe to the more neceſſary, laborious, and
ſtudious trauels of his mind. In ordinarie diſpatches therfore
it is vnauoidably neceſſary an Apothecarie be euer at
hand, as faithfull as his owne right hand, and in extraordinarie
the Phyſitions owne heart muſt onely truſt his
owne hand, and his owne eye witneſſe their conſent. This
equitie may ſatisfie curioſitie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               Of Practiſers by Spels.
               
                  NOw to leaue both Surgeon and Apothecarie,
the oppoſition againſt the vſe or
need of either, doth put in mind in the
next place not to forget thoſe, who profeſſe
the performances, vſes, and end both
of Surgeon & Apothecary, yea and Phyſition
himſelfe without their helpe or need: ſuch are ſuch
as cure by ſpels and words. If men beleeue as reaſon would
and as reaſonable men ſhould (for men are noNec credere poſſis Hunc hominem, humana qui ratione caret Maximiā. vel vt alij, Cornel Gall. men if vnreaſonable)
of any effects from ſpels, among the wiſe is no
true reaſon or cauſe, and without reaſon can be no right
perſwaſion. Betweene a true cauſe and hisCauſa immediata protinus per ſe cohaeret cum effectu. Sca
                        •
                     ig. de ſubt. proper effect,
there is an immediate neceſſity; betweene a cauſe by accident
and his effect, there is aCauſam per accidens ſequitur per accidens effectum. mediate conſequution: but
this cauſe being onely ni opinion, can be no more then opinion,
and in opinion is no truth. Some finding ſpels to
do no good, obiect as a good, they do no hurt. This hurt I
am aſſured they do; while men haue gaped after ſuch ſhadowes,
they oft in the meane ſeaſon haue loſt the ſubſtance,
their life and health: which while due ſeaſon offered
vnto them that had learned to know oportunitie, bad
ſcholers were ſtill at ſpelling ſchoole. To ſpeak more ſeriouſly
of ſuch a toy: If the faithfull and deuout prayer of
holy men (vnto which the promiſe of God, and the bleſſings
of men are annexed) hath no ſuch aſſurance or ſucceſſe
of neceſſarie conſequent, without laborious induſtry
and the vſe of good meanes, how can religionQuod neque religio praecipit nec oritur ex cauſis naturalibus eſt ſuperſtitio. Melanth. or reaſon
ſuffer men that are not voyd of both, to giue ſuch impious
credite vnto an vnſignificant and ſenſleſſe.Scripta, verba annuli, characteres, ſigna, nihil valent ad profligandos morbos, ſi nulla ſuperior poteſtas diuina vel magica acceſſerit. Inania itaque ſunt vereue anilia credētium animos ſuperſtitione occupante. Fernel. de Abd. rer. cauſis. mumbling of
idle words, contrarie to reaſon, without preſident of any
truly wiſeVide Galenū lib. 6. & 10. de ſimpl. Med. facultat. Theophraſt. in hiſt. plant. l. 9. Aug. tract. 7. in Euan. Ioānis. or learned, and iuſtly ſuſpected of all ſenſible
men? It ſhall be no error to inſert a merrie hiſtorie of an
approued famous ſpell for ſore eyes. By many honeſt

teſtimonies, it was a long time worne as a iewell about
many necks, written in paper, and incloſed in ſilke, neuer
failing to do ſoueraigne good when all other helps were
helpleſſe. No ſight might dare to reade or open. At length
a curious mind while the patient ſlept, by ſtealth ripped open
the myſtical couer, and found the powerful characters
Latin, which Engliſhed were theſe: TheDiabolus effodiat tibi oculos, impleat foramina ſtercoribus. Wierus de praeſtig. cap. 4. diuell digge out
thine eyes, and fill vp their holes with his dung. Words
without meaning are nothing, and yet ſo here are beſt. Of
nothing can come nothing (much leſſe good:) yet ſoIn thought. it
was, and yet it wasIn deed. not ſo) oathes and teſtimonies auouching
the one religion, & truthNeque enim verum eſt hominem ab homine noceri poſſe verbis. Sed demon credulitate decipit hominem vt ſocium habeat, tum impietatis, tum aeterni exitij. Scal. de ſubt. denying the othes. Thus
ofttimes things haply begun in ſport and ieaſt, with light
minds, by vaine opinion grow to ſooth and earneſt. It is
ſtrange in theſe daies to behold how this follie doth laugh
euen wiſe men to ſcorne, while their vnreaſonable parts
of imagination and fancie, ſo iuggle with their iudgements
and vnderſtanding, that they can ſcarce containe
themſelues from beleeuing and conſulting with ſuch ridiculous
folly. Thus able is fancie, not onely to deceiue
ſenſe, but to obſcure our reaſon. If there be any good or
vſe vnto the health by ſpels, they haue that prerogatiue
by accident, and by the power and vertue ofPhantaſia imperium habet in ſpi
                        •
                     itus & humores, qui ſunt morborum parentes. fancie;
wherein is neither certaintie nor continuance. Fancie, according
vnto the nature thereof, can ſeldome be long fixed
vpon any thing; becauſe naturally being euer full of
fiction, it muſt needs eaſily and continually beSenſus interioris motus perpetuus. Ariſtot. de inſomn. tranſported.
Fancie therefore can be no ordinarie or common remedie,
being but rarely fixedly detained; and where it is
moſt earneſtly bent, yet hardly of long continuance. If
fancie then be the foundation whereupon buildeth the
good of ſpels, ſpels muſt needs be as fancies are, vncertaine
andGalen. lib. 6 & 10. de ſimp. med facultat. Confidere doctos & bonos Midicos medicamentorum ſubſtantiae praecipit, non verbis aut carminibus. vaine: ſo muſt alſo by conſequent be their vſe
and helpe, and no leſſe all they that truſt vnto them. I
ſpeake not of inchanted ſpels, but of that ſuperſtitious
babling, by tradition of idle words and ſentences, which
all that haue ſenſe, know to be voide of ſenſe, as the other

diuelliſh. The one (if there be no remedie) we muſt permit
vnto fooles, in the other we cannot denie the diuell.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               The explication of the true diſcouerie of Witchcraft
in the ſicke, together with many and wondered
inſtances in that kind.
               
                  MAny things of great power and wonder,Witcheraft.
aboue reaſon and beyond the power of
nature, haue bene effected through the
imprecation, ſtimulation and miniſterie
of wicked men the aſſociates of diuels,
whoſe commerce with ſpirits hath bene
oft plaine and manifeſt. But it is good before we enter
into the conſideration thereof, that we be warie and cautelouſly
wiſe, how we make a true difference betweene a
true worke of the diuell, and the ſtrange likeneſſe which
phantaſmes (oft countenanced by caſualties and euents)
ſtrongly worke in the opinion and conceit. For as the machinations
of ſpirits are certainly oft inſerted into the actions
of men;Hiſtoria. ſo by the iuglings of the imaginarie, are ſo
liuely framed reſemblances and counterfets of them oft
times, that they can hardly be diſtinguiſhed. That it may
therefore the better firſt appeare what fancie and imagination
are able to do, I will not here omit an hiſtorie
worth good eare: Anno 1607. a Parſons wife of Northhamptonſhire,
dwelling within three miles of the towne,
came vnto a Phyſition, complaining of a tumor in one of
her breaſts. He demanded her among many other things
concerning the Sciatica, which heNarrata ab aegrotante praeter totius plethorā laſsitudo partium omniū inferiorum cū menſium retentione, coxarum grauitate in motu, torpore dum quieſceret, paratum affectū monſtrabant. Ideo neque praedixiſſe difficile, neque re ipſa affectum ſubſequi miraculi loco haberi debet. coniectured to vexe
her. She denied any acquaintance or notion thereof in all
her former life. The ſame night (being returned home) ſodainly
about midnight the Sciatica ſeized painfully and
grieuouſly vpon her. Some few daies after, it happened another
of her neighbours came alſo vnto the ſame Phyſition,
whom (beſide the diſeaſe which ſhe her ſelfe made

knowne) he gueſſed to be troubled with thePraeter plethoram tum infra tum ſupra diaphragma conſpicuam, tumor venarum moleſtus circa crura & in poplitibus, de quo conqueſta eſt aegra, de ſpaſmo & diſtentione illarum partium facilem inde dant coniecturam. Vbi igitur aegrae imprudentia praeſatur cauſam, facilis eſt prudentia probabilem pòſt fari effectum. crampe,
and curſorily queſtioned her thereof. She neuer before
ſenſibly knowing any ſuch paine, after her returne alſo
that night ſuffered thereby exceeding torment. Theſe two
accidents compared together by the firſt partie, (the one
in her ſelfe, and the other in her neighbour) and the apprehenſion
being whet by her exceeding paine continued,
cauſed in her a ſtrong and reſolute opinion of bewitching,
which ſhe preſently vnremoueably imputed vnto
the Phyſition. Her outcries and impatience through her
paine, made ſuch forcible impreſſion in her husband, that
to ſatisfie his wiues vnreaſonable importunacie, he was
contented to come vnto the Phyſition from her to expoſtulate.
He, before he could vtter his meſſage, bluſhing at
the folly, and yet deſirous to ſatisfie his wiues iniunction,
becauſe ſhe would not otherwiſe giue him reſt, at length
related vnto him the cauſe of his coming, deſiring him
for his ſake (being much aſhamed thereof) to conceale
the folly of his wife. This done, he returned home, and
found his wife nothing better, but aſſuring her ſelfe and
him, that if he would but once more come vnto the Phyſition,
and (as I coniecture) gaine him to forgiue her, ſhe
ſhould preſently be well. Accordingly the next day he
came vnto him, and (then concealing the reaſon and cauſe
of his coming) deſired him to forgiue and pardon his wife.
This eaſily granted (as ſuch a toy) he preſently demanded
the houre of the day, which inſtantly the clocke gaue two,
being afternoone. He haſtened homeward, and before he
could ſpeake vnto his wife, ſhe ioyouſly entertained him,
and with preuention told him that ſhe was perfectly well,
and that iuſt atShe was aſſured late the night before of the Phyſitions being at home that ſame day; ſhe knew the length of the way, her huſbāds vſuali pace, and n
                        •
                     w direct ſp
                        •
                     ed. She might eaſily compare the time of his going forth, with a competent time for his attaining the Phyſition, and with all theſe might well hope of the Phyſitions facilitie by his friendly entertainment the day before. From hence her imagination ſatisfying itſelfe with the confidence thereof, ſhe might thereby, ſetling and quieting her ſpirits, minde and humors, for a time thus appeaſe and mitigate her paines. As for her ſo true and iuſt coniecture at the time which was two of the clocke, the circumſtances before mentioned, and likelihood it ſelfe did guide her to ſuppoſe it. If this reaſon ſatisfie not, religion and reaſons giue leaue farther to ſuſpect, that the diuell to aduance errour and illuſion, might conuey into her imagination an inward and ſecret ſence of the time. The power that the diuell doth exerciſe in this kind, might be made cleare by many examples. two of the clock her paine left her, which

ſhe (it ſeemed) imagined (as it alſo hapned) to haue bene
the ſame time and moment that the Phyſition had giuen
her deſired pardon. The next morning her husband did
write vnto him, diſcouering with this newes the reaſon of
his laſt coming vnto him the day before, together with this
ſtrange euent following it. Within halfe a yeare after, ſhe
fell ſicke againe, andAfter the penning of this hiſtory, the cauſe and maner of her death by her neighbours of worth and credit, was thus reported. Her huſband, at her earneſt ſute, conſulted with a wandring Surgeon, whom fame, it ſeemeth, had magnified for charmed and potent cures of ſuch as were bewitched. The Surgeon deliuered a medicine vnto the huſband, promiſing a miraculous cure thereby, and charged him withall, by no meanes to be feared, though haply there might fall out ſome ſtrange and fearfull operations vnto the ſeeming. The medicine with this ſtile coming vnto the patient, was gladly receiued; and after ſhe had receiued it into her bodie, ſhe died. The glorious name of the medicine, together with a confidence that this was onely the ſtrange operation of the medicine foretold by the Surgeon, cauſed the friends about her ſtill to expect ſome admirable euent of recouerie, and therefore they ſtill gaped after her rpriſing: but in the end neceſſitie called for a graue: and thus their hope with her was buried. died. This ſtrong imagination, with
this ſtrange euent, might haue intangled many a poore
ſpinſter in a thicker ſtring then her cunning could vntwiſt,
to ſaue the cracking of her neck. But if mē wold more duly
oft examine and weigh theſe caſes, they ſhall many times
find the Witch in a fooliſh ſconce; and greater and more
dangerous are the bewitchings of a mans owne folly, and
more effectuall oft times vnto his owne hurt and others,
then any witch, yea or diuell whatſoeuer. Without doubt
chance may flatter and countenance the imagination with
vnwonted, yea and iuſtly wondered euents, and yet is that
no demonſtration of ought about nature or reaſon. Caſualtie
doth ſo apt oft times conſequences vnto dreames, as
if there were ſome ſecret power or influence in them proceeding
vnto ſuch effects, yet is it no proof of truth or truſt
in them. Women oft times out of theirAelianus lib. 4. ſcribit Aſpaſiam concubinam Cyri poſterioris admonitam fuiſſe in ſomno de medicamento quo ſanauit vitium oris, quod venuſtatem priùs valdè deformauerat. ſleepes haue foreſeene
and foretold many things, which according to time
and place haue iuſtly come to paſſe, but this doth make
their dreames no oracles. Many vain mē out of the preſage
of their owne minds, haue confidently made prediction of
ſuch things as haue aſſuredly hapned, yet is this no inducement
to take them for prophets. In like maner ſome that

haue poſſeſſed themſelues with witchcraft, and the opinion
thereof, haue ſeemed to know things aboue their
knowledge, and that knowledge aboue and beyond all
reaſon hath bene true: yet neither is this any diſpoſſeſſion
of themſelues of this ſpirit of folly, nor no iuſt proofe or
accuſation of any one to be a witch. I cannot therfore take
it for an ingenuous courſe, vpō ſuch grounds to draw ſimple
people vnto confuſion. It is an eaſie matter for any impreſſion
to worke it ſelfe into the imagination of a vaine
mind. And why may it not ſeeme as eaſie for the diuell
who is the author of lyingHinc illa 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      diabolica. wonders, to credite it with
wonderfull euents aboue the weake eye of our reaſon?
Therefore ineptly and iniuriouſly may the illuſion of fancie,
and the practiſe of the diuell therewith ioyned, be
made ſnares for the innocent, whoſe deſtruction is his intention
who reioyceth in the perdition of mankind. Neither
can I beleeue (I ſpeake it with reuerence vnto grauer
iudgements) that the forcedNon abſimilis vis compellendi motus tum animi tum corporis etiam philtris & carmini bus attribuitur. Philtra nocent animis vimue furoris habent. Ouid. Carmina de coelo poſſunt deducere lunam Virgil. coming of men or women
to the burning of bewitched cattell, or to the burning of
the dung or vrine of ſuch as are bewitched, or floating of
bodies aboue the water, or the like, are any trial of a witch.
I ſee no reaſon why I may not thinke, that the diuell by the
permiſſion of God, hath power indifferently to worke
theſe effects vpon any man, whether a witch or no. For if
he had power for his owne malitious purpoſe vpon the
bodie of our bleſſed Sauiour, to tranſport it through the
aire, and to ſet it vpon a pinnacle of the temple; and vpon
the body of righteous Iob, with hope and deſire of his ouerthrow:
by what prerogatiue dare any other man whatſoeuer
preſume to free himſelfe from his power, but by a
ſpeciall grace and mercie of God? Or why is it any imputation
vnto any man to be knowne to be ſubiect thereto,
ſince God doth permit it in diuers his deareData eſt Diabolo poteſtas non modò vt fallat malos, ſed vt exerceat bonos. Auguſſin. ſeruants? If
men ſhall grant the diuels exerciſing his power vpon any
man a ſufficient euidence to conuince him a witch,Diabolus imperium exercet in impios. In pios etiā in multis caſibus particularibus poteſtatem habet, qua & vulnerantur & concidunt. Caluin. lib. inſtit. there
ſhall thereby be allowed vnto the diuell a largeQuid Angeli mali poſſunt, quid nō poſſunt facere per naturae ſuae conditionem, homini explorare difficile immo impoſſibile, Auguſtin. de Trinit. commiſſion,
which his malice will eaſily extend beyond the latitude:

as by right obſeruation of many learned in their own
experiences hath ben
                     •
                   and may be oft truly noted. I do
not deny nor patronage witches or witchcraft, but wiſh
that the proofes and triall thereof may be more carefully
and with better circumſpection viewed and conſidered:
that raſh determination beguile not the wiſe, nor condemne
the innocent, vpon whom the diuell can with more
nimbleneſſe and agilitie transferre his owne euill workes,
then either they can auoide it, or others eaſily eſpie it. Euerie
thing whereof euerie man cannot giue a reaſon, is
not therefore a miracle. There are many things whereof
fewSoli viri ingenioſi & ſubtilis mentis acici difficilia cognitu facilè comprehendere valent. Ariſtot. men, many whereof no man can attaine the reaſon,
yet euerieMulta ſunt quorum cum veritas certa ſit, tamē cauſae nos latent. Plutarch. de Sympol. man knoweth to haue a reaſon in nature. Behold
a toy for an example. There is ſeene in the hand of a
iugler a thing as it is indeed; ſodainly in a moment without
perceptible motion, it is againe ſeeneInter praeſtigiatoris manus quod eſt video. Mutatur ſpecies vel propter celeritatem vel propter aliud. Quare verò mutetur latet me. Scalig. de Subt. as it is not. That
there is a cauſe of the change who knoweth not? what it is,
who knoweth except to whom it hath bene made known?
With great wonder andIn natura plurima fiunt miranda & ſingularia, inquit Ariſtoles, ideo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      naturam ipſam appellat 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . admiration haue diuers in this
age ſhewed mercenarie ſpectacles, incredible
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Camerarius de diuinat. euen vnto
the beholding eye, and yet in the actors by meane
vnderſtandings deprehended to be nothing but agilitie
and nimble cunning, by continuall practiſe and cuſtome
working deſperateneſſe into facilitie. Thus with common
wonder haue ſome walked and danced voon cords. Some
are written to haue leaped and danced vpon the edges of
ſharp ſwords without hurt vnto thēſelues, & with pleaſure
vnto the beholders. Some haue credibly bene ſuppoſed
to deuoure daggers and other ſharpe and dangerous weapons.
That naturally the loadſtone draweth iron the meaneſt
know: the reaſō or cauſe the wiſeſt neuer knew. There
are wonders in nature, & wonders aboue nature; theſe are
ſubtilties, the other miracles. That fire and aire, contrary
to their owneA forma vniuerſali mouentur ſponte ignis & aër deorſum, ne eueniret vacuum. Forma particularis obedit vniuerſali ad conſeruationem totius entitatis & vnitatis. Scalig. de Subt. particular nature of the owne accord deſcend,

and waters aſcend: that the heauie mettals of iron
and lead, contrary to their owne naturall motion, ſhould
with ſuch admirable ſwiftneſſe, in ſo ſhort aQuia nequit tam citò ratefieri ad implendum vacuum, quod reliquum poteſt facere facit, atque tam citò abit. Scalig. de ſubt. moment
paſſe ſo large a diſtance through the aire, from a ſmall
flaſh of a little flame: theſe and ſuch like are ſubtilties, becauſe
the cauſe and reaſon thereof doth vnfold it ſelfe to
few, or not to all, yet vnto the learned. That the Sunne
ſhould ſtand ſtill in the firmament, the Moone be ecclipſed
in no interpoſition, the bodies of men ſhould flie in
the aire, or walke vpon the face of the water; theſe and
the like are miracles, becauſe hereof is neither power nor
reaſon in nature. And as in the former to be eaſily drawne
to admiration, and to aſcribe naturall effects to ſupernaturall
cauſes, is groſſe ignorance, ſo in the latter to enquire
naturall cauſes inFruſtra de metaphyſicis quaeruntur phyſicae rationes. ſupernaturall effects, is profane curioſitie.
In both theſe extremes men too commonly erre, the
learned for the moſt part in the latter, the vnlearned in the
firſt; the one tooSapientia vera, Nolle nimis ſapere. wiſe, the other ſtarke fooles. None truly
learned, or that truly know the face of nature (whoſe ſcholers
the learned euer profeſſe themſelues) can be vpon the
vaine flaſhes of ſeeming wonders lightly moued to denie
or call into queſtionHoc nomine Cardanum taxat Scaliger lib. de ſubtilit. Quae conſultò natura in orbe molita eſt ſuo, is praeſtigiae nomine denotandum putat. the power and force of nature. With
therfore the common amazed thoughts of vulgar people,
to be blaſted by the ſtupiditie of euery idle feare, to gape
after witchcraft, or to make nature a diuell or a bugbeare,
muſt needs be baſe procliuitie and vnlearned lightneſſe.
To admit alſo nothing aboue or beſide nature, no witchcraft,
no aſſociation with diuels at all, is no leſſe madneſſe
of the oppoſite and extreame. But thoſe whom true learning
and wiſedome hath well inſtructed, know how to
ſtay themſelues, and to conſiſt in a temperate mediocritie
betweene both theſe. The actions of the diuell are diſcouered
by the proper notes and difference. Firſt they are euer
Hoc à diuinitatis excellentia ſeparat. omnis enim poteſtas ſupra naturam eſt vel diuina vel diabolica, haec voique & ſemper bona, illa nuſquam non mala. euill, either in themſelues or in their end. Secondly,
they are aboueQuorum daemones authores ſunt eorum ratio eſt trans naturam. Fernel. de abd. rer. cauſ. the power and courſe of nature and reaſon.
This appeareth manifeſtly in his violent cariage of ſo
many heards of ſwine headlong into the ſea, mentioned in

the Goſpell: in his bringing fire from aboue ſo ſodainly to
deuoure ſo many thouſands of Iobs ſheepe. Theſe, with
other ſuch like, carry in their miſchiefe and hurt the ſtamp
of ſuch an author, and in the tranſcendentDaemoniaci nonnulli obloquuntur ſummè ardua, arcana reſerant & occulta renunciant. Edunt verba & ſententias graecas & latinas, cum ipſi vtriuſque linguae omnina ignari ſunt. Fernel. de Abd. rer. cauſ. and ſupernaturall
power thereof, the teſtimonie of a ſpirit. This is plaine,
and by theſe notes men may learne to diſtinguiſh between
an imaginarie and a reall diuelliſh practiſe. Now the
doubt remaineth, how we may in theſe workes and practiſes
of the diuell, detect the conuerſation and commerce of
men. I do not conceiue how any markes in the fleſh or bodie
of any one, may be any triall or manifeſt proofe: for beſides
the grant, thatMany and ſtrange haue bene the formes of diuers excreſcencies, or growings in the fleſh through all parts almoſt of the bodie, whoſe nature, forme and cauſe are well knowne vnto the Phyſition, though to his eye oft times ſtrange and wondered. Scaliger in his booke of Subtilties, mentioneth a Waterman, knowne vnto himſelfe, who had a horne growing vpon his backe. The like haue others ſince and before knowne and written. Some men haue bene borne with parts proper vnto the other ſexe, and women with parts or reſemblances of parts naturally giuen to the malekind alone. The errors of nature in monſtrous births, are not obſcure, and feede varietie of wonder; nor are nor can be tied from the counterfeit of any ſhape, likeneſſe, marke or figure, ſometimes ſuperfluouſly caſt vpon one part, ſometimes vpon another. likeneſſe may deceiue, who can aſſure
me that the diuell may not as eaſily, ſecretly and inſenſibly
marke the fleſh of men as their ſoules vnto deſtruction?
If the diuell may marke them without their knowledge
and conſent, ſhall his malice be their offence? or
how ſhall I be aſſured he cannot ſo do? He that can do the
greater, can do the leſſe. He that could giue vnto the Son
of God a view of all the kingdomes of the world in one
inſtant (which was no doubt a ſpeciall ſtraine of his vtmoſt
ſpirituall cunning, conſidering he was then to deale with
wiſedome it ſelfe) can that cunning finde no meanes to
make a ſmall ſcarre, impreſſe or tumor in fleſh? Who
dare preſume to ſay, God will not ſuffer him? Who euer
ſo farre entred into the counſell of God, or meaſured what
therein he doth permit? If no holy writ, no reaſon manifeſt
it, proud and blaſphemouſly daring is obſeruation in ſo
infinite and vnmeaſurable a ſubiect. I denie not that the
diuell by couenant may ſucke the bodies and bloud of witches,
in witneſſe of their homage vnto him; but I denie any
marke (of neuer ſo true likeneſſe or perfect ſimilitude)
ſufficient condemnation vnto any man; and beſide and aboue

all other notes or marks whatſoeuer, iudge it chiefly
and principally and firſt to be required, that both the diuelsThe diuels propertie is knowne by actions, deeds or workes firſt found ſuſtained by a ſupernaturall power, and next bent vnto an euill end. Thus for diuelliſh ends haue Witches and ſorcerers bene knowne to ride vpon the ſeas in veſſels vncapable of ſuch cariage, or of any defence. Thus haue ſome haunted men and other creatures, in maners, meanes and circumſtances more then any way reaſonable or poſſible vnto humanitie or the nature of man alone. Thus haue ſome alſo declared the ſecret words and actions of men, then abſent in farre diſtant places, and foretold particular things to come. Theſe with their diuelliſh affection, end, and intention are certaine proofes of diabolicall power and witchraft. propertie therein, & alſo the partiesConſent and cooperation may be manifeſted firſt by proofe of any incantation, inuocation, ſpels, and other performances of other diabolicall rites and ceremonies: ſecondly by their vſe of ſuch instruments as are vſuall or proper vnto ſuch diuelliſh workes Of this kind are pictures of waxe or other matter, by which they ſecretly worke waſting and conſuming paines vnto the liuing perſons of thoſe dead reſemblances. Of this kind are alſo charmed kno
                        •
                     s, characters and figures. Of this kinde alſo are diuers ſorts of poiſonſome matters, by them knowne to be ſolemnly ſought, and carefully hidden or kept. Theſe found or detected, are certaine conuictions of witches and witchcraft, ioyned with other due preſumptions and circumſtances, and a manifeſt detection of the aſſiſtance of any tra
                        •
                      ſcendent force. conſent thereto
may be iuſtly and truly euicted, which is oft too lightly
weighed. It may be with good reaſon iudged, that the diuell
doth not bluſh to be both bold and cunning, there to
ſet his marke, yea and make his claime where he hath no
intereſt. But when the diuell doth appeare in workes and
ſignes proper to himſelfe, and therewith ſhall be euident
either directly or by good conſequent the act of any man
conſenting or cooperating, there law may iuſtly take hold
to cenſure; and there alſo the former preſumptions and
markes (denied ſufficiencie while alone and ſingle) may
now concurring be admitted and allowed. I ſpeake not
this in contradiction of other learned iudgements, but retaining
the libertie of mine owne, and leauing the like equanimitie
to euery one. Nor do I denie or defend diuelliſh
practiſes of men or women, but deſire onely to moderate
the generall madneſſe of this age, which aſcribeth vnto
witchcraft whatſoeuer falleth out vnknowne or ſtrange
vnto a vulgar ſenſe. Concerning diſeaſes therefore, it will
not here alſo be impertinent or vnprofitable to deliuer
many their ſtrange ſeeming formes from the too ordinarie
iniurious imputation in this kind. It is manifeſt and apparent,
that the mixture and implication of diuers and differing
diſeaſes in the ſame ſubiect, may and do oft bring forth
a wild and confuſed concourſe of accidents ſeeming therfore

of monſtrous and wondered ſhapes, and therefore
in their deceiuing appearance coming very neare vnto the
ſimilitude of bewitching. But becauſe euery eye is not able
in ſo various a chaos toQuippe vbi nec cauſas nec apertos cernimus ictus, Vnde ergo veniant tot mala, caeca via eſt. Propert. analyſe and reduce them vnto
their ſeuerall heads, and proper diſeaſes, (ſo intricately
confounded one within another) it is not therefore ſufficient
for reputing them as things without cauſes in nature.
Many diſeaſes ſingle, alone and apart by themſelues,
ſeeme ſtrange and wondered, which therefore in their
ſtrange formes vnited, and in their mixture one with another,
muſt needs ariſe much more monſtrous and Hydralike.
For example, in one kindIn 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vel 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Gal. de loc aff. of diſeaſe, the whole body
as it were in a minute is ſodainly taken in the middeſtIn this maner Ann. 1598. my ſelfe being preſent, a child of one M. Barker of Couentry was afflicted, and in the end theſe fits changing into conuulſions of his face, mouth, and eyes, he therein died. of
ſome ordinary geſture or action, and therein is continued
ſome ſpace together as if frozen generally, ſtarke and ſtiffe
in all parts, without ſenſe or motion, yet with eyes wide
open, and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Gal. de loc. aff. breathing freely, as if it were a mouing image
or a liuing carcaſſe. In another, the ſicke are alſo ſodainly
taken or ſurpriſed with a ſenſleſſeIn Apoplexia vel morbo attonito. Gal. de loc. affect. trance and generall
aſtoniſhment or ſideration, voide of all ſenſe or mouing
many houres together, onely the breath ſometimes ſtriueth
and laboureth `againſt the danger of ſuffocation, and
the pulſe continueth. In another, the ſicke are ſwiftly ſurpriſed
with ſo profound and deadly a ſleepe,An. Dom. 1602 In this maner a former wife of one M. Roſon of Northampton continued the ſpace of two daies and nights, being then my patient. that no call,
no crie, no noiſe, noIn Caro. Carum verò diſtinguit à Catalepſi. Galen. lib. de loc. affect. quòd in hac oculi aegrotorum clauſi permanent, in illa aperti. ſtimulation can in many houres awake
and raiſe them. In another, the ſicke are doubtfully
held, in ſome partHoc genus coma vigilans Galeno dicitur tract. de comate, quod & inſomne vocat, & Phreneticis attribuit. Iuxta hoc coma pigrum & ſomnolentum ſtatuit quod è contra Lethargicis aſcribit. waking, and in other part ſleeping, in
ſome reſpects, maners and parts expreſſing wakefull motions,
ſenſe, ſpeech, right apprehenſion, memory and imagination;
in other reſpects, parts and maners (as men ſleeping)
voide of the libertie or vſe of ſenſe, motion, or any
the other faculties. The forme of this diſeaſe, Hippocrates

hath very fitly aſſimilated to the ſhapeHippocrates in Prorheticis, & Epidemior. 5. and faſhion of
drunkenneſſe, whoſe ordinarily knowne effects are in
ſome things buſie wakefulneſſe, in other ſome at the ſame
time dull ſleepineſſe; in ſome imaginations, apprehenſions,
ſenſes and motions quicke and readie, in ſome with
as apparent vrgence, yet ſenſleſſe and dead. Contrary to
theſe formes, in ſome other diſeaſes there ariſe continuall
ſtirrings and depraued motions through all the partsDeprauati motus ſunt plurimi tremuli, conuulſiui, palpitantes, vibrantes, qui prout in toto corpore vagantur, diuerſam appellatio nem ſortiuntur. Galen. de ſympt differ. of
the bodie, contrary to the will, and beſide the ſenſe and
power of the ſicke. This is ſeene commonly in
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      &c. Epi epſia vel morbus caducus vniuerſo corpori motus affert deprauatos. Gal. de diff. ſympt. falling ſickneſſes,
diuers kinds of conuulſions, and the like. In theſe
diſeaſes,Conuulſio ſimulat omnem motus voluntarij ſpeciem, & hac ſola ratione à motu naturali differt quod praetor voluntatem fit. Galen. de loc. affect. ſome bite their tongues and fleſh, ſome make
fearfull and frightfull ſhrinkings and outcries, ſome are violently
toſſed and tumbled from one place vnto another,
ſome ſpit, ſome froth, ſome guaſh their teeth, ſome haue
their faces continually deformed and drawne awrie, ſome
haue all parts wreſted and writhed intoMotiua actio laeſa pro particularium inſtrumentorum ratione ita variantur, vt varias habere ſpecies videantur, cum illius motionis ratio fit vna. Galen de ſympt. diff. infinite vgly
ſhapes. Some haue their heads violently wreſted forward,
and their faces behind. Some haue their eyes with inordinate
twincklings, rauings, and rollingsConuulſis muſculis, oculos mouentibus. disfigured. Some
haue their mouthes diſtorted into diuers formes, grinning,
mowing,Muſculorum maſticatoriorum & eorum qui peculiariter lati appellantur conuulſione, contractione, reſolutione, fit ſpaſmus cynicus, tortura oris, riſus Sardonius &c. laughing, ſometimes gaping wideConuulſis muſculis temporalibus contrahuntur dentes, & ſtrident, reſolutis fit hiatus oris. open,
ſometimes cloſe ſhutting. Some haue their limbes and diuers
members ſodainly with violence ſnatched vp and caried
aloft, and after ſuffered by their owne weight to fall
againe. Some haue an inordinate leapingGeneralis haec palpitatio dicitur ab Auicenna, ab alijs membrorum ſubſultus & iactatio. and hopping
of the fleſh, through euery part of the body. In ſome diſeaſes
the mind is as ſtrangely tranſported into admirable
viſions and miraculous apparitions, as the body is metamorphoſed
into the former ſtrange ſhapes. In many ordinary
diſeaſes, in the oppreſſions of the braine, in feauers,

the ſicke vſually thinke themſelues to ſee thingsHiſtoria Theophili, Medici aegrotantis lectu digniſſima eſt, libr. Galeni de diff. ſympt. ſect. 3. that
are not, but in their owne abuſed imaginarie and falſe conceit.
Sometimes with their fingers they hunt for flockes
and flies, and with narrow eyes prie for puppets and toyes,
working in the conſiſtory of their owne braines. Sometimes
they complaine of their friends and others to lie
vpon them, to creepe or ſit vpon them, to ſtop their winds,
to endeuour to cut their throates, and the like. Sometimes
they complaine ofVide Hollerij hiſtoriam de Pharmacopoeo incubo correpto, ſcholijs in tractat. de incubo. Auicen
                        •
                     am in Cant. de ſignis Melancholiae. diuels or witches, liuely deſcribing
their ſeeming ſhapes and geſtures toward them. Some in
ſickneſſes ſo farre forget themſelues, that they haue not
ſo much memorie as of their owneThucydides de in peſte ſeruatis ſcribit, inde factos eſſe fatuis ſimiles tantaue ignorantia & fatuitate imbutos vt ſe ipſos & familiares planè ignorarent. Galen. in 1 Porrhet. Hippocrat. names, or their moſt
familiar friends. Some aboue all perſwaſion or reaſon to
the contrary, ſtrongly imagine themſelues vnreaſonable
In 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Actuar. lib. 1. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . creatures. Some crie out and flie fromIn 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Galen. in Pror
                        •
                     et. Hipp. Hiſtoria pulcherrima.
                   waters when
none are neare: ſome from fire, and likewiſe from many
other ſuppoſed feares, in their vanitie infinite, as in their
preſent and ſodaine appearance vnto the beholder full of
amazement. How can theſe like accidents, or any of them
euen ſingle and alone in their ſeuerall peculiar ſhapes apart,
but ſeeme wondered? Much more when diuers of
them, moſt or many of them, as it ſometimes falleth out,
are confuſedly together ſo compounded, that at once in
the ſicke, a man may ſee a part of one and a part of another,
a ſhew of many, and a perfect ſhape of none; muſt
they needes not onely affright a common beholder,
but ſometimes alſo exerciſe the better iudgements. I
ſaw hereof in the yeare 1608. a rare example, which both
for illuſtration of that which hath bene ſaid, and the inſtruction
of other that may hereafter hap to behold the like,
and eſpecially for the contentment of many eye witneſſes
(both worthy and deſirous therein to be ſatisfied) I may
not omit. A gentleman of ancient name and ſeare in Warwickſhire,
in the time of the late memorable long froſt, called
me vnto his daughter afflicted in an vnknowne and
ſtrange ſodaine manner, both vnto her parents, friends, &
neighbours, and alſo ſomeBeneficed Phyſitions. Phyſitions therein conſulted.

A vehement ſhaking and violent caſting forward of her
head, euery day in a much maruelled faſhion ſurpriſed her
about three or foure of the clocke each afternoone, and ſo
vſually continued vntill the twelfth houre of the night: euery
ſuch ſhaking or caſting of her head, ending with a
loud and ſhrill inarticulate ſound of theſe two ſillables,
ipha, ipha. After my firſt ſight, I diſcouered theſe before
wondered motiues to be nothing elſe but ſneeſings and
ſternutations, which in all men haue their different and

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Sonat ſternutatio quia per anguſtum illi eſt ex itus. Hippocrat. Aph. 7. l b. diuers noyſes, and in her were more then ordinarily violent.
To confirme and ſettle this iudgement, I gaue both
by writing and ſpeech prediction of a ſequele, either of the
falling ſickneſſeIngens ſternutatio affinitatem habet cum epilepſia, tū quod ab eadem cauſa naſci poteſt, tum quod in eadem ſede ſita eſt. Ideo Hippocrates ſternu tationem cum rheumate malū nuntiat; quin & indeſinens ſternutatio animalem facultatem validè ſaepe fatigat, nec non & ſternutantes ſaepe mortui conciderunt. or ſome other ſpice or ſpecies of conuulſion,
ſo grounding vpon the continuall violence and vehemence
of the ſternutation, and the great oppreſſion of the
braine, together with ſome obſcure contractions of ſome
parts alreadie begunne, though haply of others vnobſerued.
In the meane ſeaſon before my departure at that time
in few dayes the grieuouſneſſe, length, and frequence of
the former fits was much mitigated and grew more eaſie,
and ſo continued the ſpace of a fortnight after my returne
from thence. This time laſt mentioned expired, ſodainly
the parents againe ſent for me: from them I learned that
their daughter after diuers tortures of her mouth and face,
with ſtaring and rolling of her eyes, ſcrawling and tumbling
vpon the ground, grating and gnaſhing her teeth,
was now newly fallen intoEpilepſiam ſequitur plerunque grauis ſopor. Andernac. de med. 
                        •
                     et. & noua. a deadly trance, wherein ſhe
had continued a whole day, repreſenting the verie
ſhape and image of death, without all ſenſe or motion: her
pulſe or breathing onely witneſſing a remainder of life.
With theſe fits (oft in the meane ſeaſon firſt frequenting)
at length ſhe againeCompoſitus enim morbus videtur, ex comate, caro, Apoplexia, Epilepſia. In nonnullis enim acceſſionibus ſopitis motu & ſenſu libera erat reſpiratio, in alijs graui cum difficultate ſpirandi & ſtertore periclitabatur, quae duo Apoplecticos à veternoſis & catalepticis diſtinguunt authore Galerio lib. de loc. affect. Epileptici verò motus vix vnquam deſiere. interchanged new, and then awaking
out of her aſtoniſhed ſleepe, wiſtly caſting her eyes
as looking ſometime behind her, ſometime to the one

                  Deprauato omni genere motus voluntarij tum capitis tum oculotum. ſide, ſometime to the other; ſometime ouer her head (as
if ſhe had fearefully or frightfully eſpied ſomewhat hagging
about her) with her eyes ſtaring open, her mouth
wide gaping, and her hands and armes ſtrongly diſtent &
carried aloft aboue her head, together with a generall
ſtarkneſſe & ſtifneſſe of al theſe parts, ſhe ſpent many daies
in this maner, both day and night iterating theſe fits, and
each ſeuerall fit continuing the ſpace ſometimes of halfe
an houre, ſometimes a quarter of an houre. While theſe fits
at any time diſcontinued, ſhe either ſlept, or (at leaſt all her
outward ſenſes ſlumbring) her imagination ſtill led her
hands vnto many and diuers continuall actions and motiues,
which argued in their folly great fatuitie andEpilenſia eſt totius corporis conuulſio cum rectricis partis actionum cohibitione. Galen. de Symp. differentijs. defect
of reaſon and vnderſtanding, yet manifeſted the buſineſſe
and depraued motion of her oppreſſed imagination,
which therefore continuallySingularium praeter ſenſum exteriorem eſt ſenſus internus. Ariſtot. eth. 6. imployed her fingers to imitate
many vſuall exerciſes of her health (as dreſſing
and attiring the heads of ſuch women as came neare vnto
her. In all theſe actions and motions ſhe neither had nor
vſed the helpe of any other ſenſe but onely the feeling
Saepe morbo laeditur ratio ſalua imaginatione, ſaepe deprauata imaginatio ne integra perſtat ratio ſaepe deficit vtraque, ſaepe deficiunt ſenſus exteriores ſeruatis internis, & è contra. Gal. de Loc. Affect. with her hand, whereof ſhe ſeemed alſo altogether depriued
inComa eſt motus imaginatricis deficiens & imbecillus. Galen. de Sympt. differ▪
                   all other things, except onely thoſe whereto
her imagination (which is miſtreſſe and great commander
of all the ſenſes) leadCommunis facultas & potentia à cerebro per neruos in ſingula ſenſoria penetrans alterationes omnes ipſorum perſentit. Gal. lib. 7. de Plat & Hippoc. dogmat. her feeling. Hereof was oft
made triall by pinching and the like, whereof ſhe tooke
no care, nor was therby moued, except onely when thereby
haply they intercepted or interpoſed her feeling and
the imagined obiect, whereof ſhe was euer for the moſt
part very ſenſible. After I had with much aſſiduitie and diligence
by ſome quicke medicines ſolicited nature to a
better remembrance of her ſelfe, at length vpon a ſharpe
prouocation ſhe immediatly anſwered our deſired hope,
and we then firſt gained her ſenſe of her ſelfe with ſome
comfortable words, and with a perfect returneIn Caro & intelligere & excitari aegrotus poteſt. Auicennna de ſign. ſpec. Subeth. of her vnderſtanding

the diſtinct vtterance of diuers ſhort, but deuout
inuocations of God, vnto the ſingular comfort of her
parents, hauing before beheld her three weekes together
bothLaeſa ſeptima neruorum à cèrebro ortorum coniugatione loquela imminuitur, deprauatur aut ad tempus tollitur neceſſariò. Galen. de loc. Affect. ſpeechleſſe and ſenſleſſe. Her ſpeech ſhortly againe
(after the operation of the medicine had taken the vſuall
effect) departed, but her better ſenſe and vnderſtanding
ſtill remained, which by herThe words which by writing ſhe expreſſed, were theſe: God is a wonderfull God, The Lord can doe maruellous things; and when the skill of man hath done what it can, God will ſhew himſelfe a wonderfull God. pen ſhe ſignified, and therewithall
an holy mind and thoughts rare in ſuch an impe
(being then vnder the thirteenth yeare of her age) with an
inward feeling of her agony and affliction, oft bleſſing
God, and therein honouring her vertuous and carefull education.
Thus after much labour by the grace of God, and
good means (for ſo they proued thēſelues euer by the immediate
ſequele of good vnto them) we at length obtained
the continuance of all her ſenſes. Her tongQuomodo lingua, nunc motum nunc ſenſum amittat ſeparatim aut coniunctim, magis vel minus, perue viciſſitudines ratione cerebri laeſi aut proceſſus neruorum. vide Galen. de loc. aff. remained
ſtillRefert Guintherius Andernacus aliquos ſibi natos, qui ex ingenti refrigeratione, & inde nata deſtillatione muti per aliquot dies perſtitere, liquore verò abſumpto vocem recepere. Andernac. lib. de Med. vet. & noua. vnperfect, yet continually moued it ſelfe to force a
certaine imitation of ſpeech, with a mumbling, which
(though no plaine articulate ſound of words) yet vnto
thoſe that were thereto accuſtomed, oft intelligible and
well perceiued. Sometimes perfect ſpeechThe very ſame accident, about the ſame time, in the ſame maner, befell a gentlewoman then lying at Cotesbrooke in Northamptonſhire, and ſometimes daughter vnto M. Reade, while he liued there dwelling. She oft diuers dayes together lost her ſpeech, and againe by fits ſodainly recouered it, being beſides vexed with diuers maners of conuulſions. ſodainly and
vnexpectedly would come vnto her, but ſtaied not conſtant
nor long. In this meane ſeaſon I imparted vnto her
parents my doubt of a hard condition, namely a palſie or
maime in ſome part likely to be annexed vnto her recouerie,
if ſhe ſuruiued her conuulſiue fits which ſtill remained
as before mentioned. Betweene hope and this feare we
continued endeuour, and in the end by the infinite goodnes
of God, her fits before mentioned (namely of gaping
and carying her armes diſtent aboue her head) with the
reſt decreaſed, now diſcontinuing all day, onely foure or
fiue ſhort fits euery night when ſhe firſt lay downe in

bed continued, and with the decreaſe of the former vehemence
and fearefull continuall frequence of the ſaid
fits, ſucceeded (as was before feared) a palſie, which poſſeſſed
both her legs with a ſenſleſſe deadneſſe, and a generall
ſtupiditie of one ſide of her bodie, being the ordinarie
terminations of an Apoplexie, and therfore foredoubted.
After ſhe had continued in this hopefull forwardneſſe the
ſpace of two moneths or thereabout, ſhe was then commended
vnto the Bath, with my report and deſcription of
her former paſſed accidents vnto her Phyſition there,
where after much and long feare and doubt, ſhe began at
length to yeeld better hope, finding by little and little the
vſe of her legs, onely the former ſmall fits did ſtill hand faſt,
and her ſpeech as yet remainedEx faciei partibus ſola lingua ſaepenumerò afficitur. Gal. de loc. affect. vnperfected. Her legges
being at Bath, began there to recouer; her ſpeech ſhortly
afterSaepe medicamentorū commoda non ſunt cum vſu praeſentia ſed poſt emergentia. her returne home from thence alſo followed, and
all her former fits and complaints vaniſhed before that
Compenſante procul dubio aeſtate ad tempus inſigniter feruida incommoda praecedentis hyemis inſigniter gelidae. Ab inſigni verò refrigeratione ortum & originem mali factum eſſe, apud me ſatis conſtat. Frigus verò cum humiditate intenſum ſoporem, ſtuporem, omne conuulſionis genus, Epilepſiam, Apoplexiam conſtituere, author eſt Galenus lib. de loc. affect. 4. ſommer paſſed. It hath bene and is ſtill a great doubt
and queſtion, not onely among the common and vulgar
ſort, but diuers alſo learned, whether this gentlewoman
(in maner aforeſaid afflicted) ſhall iuſtly be ranked among
thoſe vpon whom (by the permiſſion of God) diuels and
witches haue had a power, or whom nature and the courſe
of naturall diſeaſes haue thus in maner aforeſaid afflicted.
My owne iudgement muſt needs incline vnto the latter,
for that I could behold in the gentlewoman nothing
(moſt continually conuerſing with her) which either my
eies had not before ſhewed me in others, or perfect notion
from reading both ancient writings and later neotericall
deſcriptions, had not before made the ſameQui vniuerſale cognoſcit quoquo pacto cognoſcit & particulare. Ariſtor. vnto my vnderſtanding,
which they then preſented themſelues vnto
my ſight. The firſt is in part teſtified in the margine of the
page 59. 60. and 64. The ſecond, any man may witneſſe true
who can compare the report of all the fits and accidents
which befell this gentlewoman (which as truly and nearly
as I could, and I ſuppoſe fully, by the teſtimony of any that
ſaw her, I haue related) with the ſeuerall ſhapes of ſome

diſeaſes before mentioned, pages 59. 60. 61. 62. which are
truly ſet downe according to the common conſent of moſt
writers. The mixture of diuers of them one with another,
muſt needs make ſome difference in them from themſelues,
where they are each alone and ſeuerall: but he that
with that iuſt allowance of that oddes onely, can conſider
the particular accidents in the ſpeciall example, with the
true notion of the diſeaſes before it generally deſcribed,
muſt needs grant them to be the ſame in kind and nature.
It may farther perſwade, that my ſelfe with reaſon from the
knowne cuſtome and nature of ſuch diſeaſes, gaue both
by ſpeech and writing, prediction of the conuulſion which
after followed, and alſo of the termination of herSaepius enim deprehendebatur repentino lapſu aut depriuatione omnis ſenſus & motus, comitante difficultate ſpiritus & ſtertote nec non rectricis facultatis functionibus omnino cohibitis. Hanc Apoplexiam veram diſtinguit Galenus praedictis notis, lib. de loc. affect. quam etiam generalem paralyſim aliàs appellat. Apoplexiam verò vel generalem paralyſim terminari particulari, nemo non norit, grauem ſcilicet 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      plerunque, leuem 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vel vnius tantùm membri. Apoplecticke
acceſſions in the lameneſſe and palſie of ſome
parts, which alſo came to paſſe, and cannot now be denied
teſtimonie of many. It maketh yet farther againſt the opinion
of witchcraft, that ſuch medicines as were miniſtred
vnto her, in reaſon good for her, according to that reaſon
and expectation for the moſt part euer profited, ſometimes
immediately with their vſe reducing her vnderſtanding
before loſt, ſometime recouering her ſpeech when
ſhe had diuers weekes together before continued ſpeechleſſe,
and by litle and litle euermore repairing continually
ſome decayes, notwithſtanding many and diuers relapſes;
which both her parents themſelues, and the ſeruants, and
all that miniſtred vnto her, muſt needs vnto God and truth
with thankes acknowledge. It farther confirmeth the negatiue
of witchcraft, and is not the leaſt, that while the opinion
thereof moſt hotly poſſeſſed moſt hearers and beholders,
the parents of the gentlewoman at no time in the
height of their daughters affliction, or a good ſpace after,
could reſolue vpon whom with any iuſt ſhew of reaſon to
caſt the ſuſpition of bewitching, as they oft auouched vnto
me both then and ſince. The moſt certaine and chiefe
proofesVide Wierum de praeſtigijs daemonum. Conſule Langium in epiſt. Medicin. tract. de Daemoniac. Ioann. Hucherū Bellouacum de Maleficijs. Ioan. Baptiſtam Codronchium de morbis veneficiatis. of witchcraft & diuelliſh practiſes vpon the ſick,
among the learned eſteemed are generally reputed three:

Firſt, a true and iudicious manifeſtation in the ſicke of
ſome reall power, act or deed, in, aboue and beyond reaſon
and naturall cauſe. Secondly, annihilation and fruſtration
of wholeſome and proper remedies, with diſcretion
and art adminiſtred, without any iuſt reaſon or cauſe
thereof. Thirdly, ought either in the knowledge or ſpeech
of the diſeaſed, diſcouering a rauiſhment, poſſeſſion or obſeſſion
of their minds or ſpirits by any infernall inſpiration.
Hence the ſicke oft ſpeake ſtrange languagesFernelius de Abditis rerum cauſis, lib. 2. vnto themſelues
vnknowne, and prophecie things to come, aboue
humane capacitie. To the firſt doth ſatisfie the former manifeſt
reference of all accidents befalling the gentlewoman
mentioned, vnto the preualence and power of diſeaſes
before related. The ſecond is negatiuely anſwered by
plaine teſtimonies. Of the third and laſt was neuer mention,
nor queſtion, nor reaſon of either. There can nothing
be required more vnto ample ſatisfaction: and as I therein
reſt and ſtay my ſelfe, ſo I doubt not the conſent and
content of all that affect truth and embrace reaſon. I will
notwithſtanding for the better exerciſing and ſtirring vp
of diligence, circumſpection and vigilance, generally in
this ſo hard and deceiuable point of witchcraft, and alſo
for their ſakes, whoſe weakneſſe may as yet be vncapable
of ſatisfaction in the former particular, anſwer ſome obiections
therein made. The forenamed conuulſiue fits, of
lifting vp her hands aboue her head,Obiect. which were the laſt
remaining fits, toward their decay and latter end, neuer
came vnto her but onely when prepared at the night for
bed, and vnclothed into her night-weeds, ſhe began to
yeeld and decline her body to lie downe. In that inſtant,
each night without failing, euer and neuer before began
her fits. When ſhe at any time lay her ſelfe downe to reſt
vpon her bed in her clothes (whether by day or night) her
fits notwithſtanding appeared not. Some haue imagined
ſome coniuration or witchcraft vpon or in her nightcloths
or ſheets; but to them that ſeek reaſon, I ſuppoſe it found.
The power of voluntary motion, which is the animall facultie,

and the diſeaſe it ſelfe both poſſeſſing the ſame
parts, namely the ſinewes and muſcles, while the diſeaſe
was in his vigor and ſtrength in the beginning, it therfore
maſtered the facultie and mouing power, and continually
ruled, ſo that the fits then neuer almoſt ceaſſed by day or
night. Now in the declination and weakneſſe of the diſſeaſe,
and toward the end, the facultie grew ſtrong, reſtrained
and commanded ouer the diſeaſe, whereby all
the day there appeared no fits at all. But when the mouing
power or facultie compoſed it ſelfe to a true and
generall ceſſation and reſt, then in that inſtant the diſeaſe
tooke his aduantage and libertie to ſtirre.Obiect. But why was it
not thus alſo when ſhe ſlept in her clothes? The ſenſe and
incumbrance of the day-habite is euer an hinderance of
perfect ſleepes. Therefore to them that ſleepe in their
clothes, or vpon their beds, commonly there is not ſo true
a ligation of their ſenſes, neither are their ſleepes ſo
ſound, nor of the like continuance. While therefore ſhe
lay or compoſed her ſelfe to reſt in her clothes, the ſenſe
thereof both interrupted the facultie from the true and
ſound diſpoſing it ſelfe to reſt, and alſo thereby put it in
mind of the diſeaſe which had ſo lately ſharply viſited it,
with tart remembrance; and the diſeaſe being now too
weake to reſiſt or to prouoke the facultie, could not vpon
that vnperfect aduantage ſtirre, vntill by a more ſound
and true diſpoſe to reſt and ſleepe, the ſpirits and naturall
heate more truly retiring inward, had more perfectly left
the outward parts, and thereby the diſeaſe there ſtill remaining
might haue more libertie and power to ſtirre,
which notwithſtanding alſo ſoone after of the owne accord
deſiſted, becauſe it wanted the former ſtrength to
maintain continuance.Obiect. That which breedeth other doubts,
is that at ſuch time when ſhe wanted all her ſenſes, and altogether
ſeemed ſenſleſſe of any obiect offered vnto her,
or of it ſelfe occurring, yet had ſhe a curious feeling of
ſuch things as her minde and liking ſought or ſeemed to
hunt after. This is no wonder to them that know where

the imagination intently and earneſtly worketh, it there
giueth ſenſe to thoſePrimum ſenſorium omniū ſenſuum commune eſt. Galen de ſympt. differ. parts it exerciſeth, though all other
parts be ſtupified or aſleepe. This is oft ſeene in many who
in their dreames walke, talk, and do ſeriouſly many works,
diſtinguiſhing and feeling thoſe things whereabout the
fancie occupieth them, of other obiects, though haply
more neare hand and of quicker remembrance, taking no
notice at all. The diſeaſe or accident which moſt oft and
frequently poſſeſſed this gentlewoman, was a kinde of
Apoplexiam, carū, catalepſin altos ſopores nominat omnes. Galen lib 13 de Meth. Med vt & aliis, Lethargum etiā inter ſopores recenſet ſed cum febre incidentē propter humoris putredinem. Obiect.
                   heaue ſleepe, in degree onely exceeding the ordinarie
reſolution and ligation of the ſenſes by ſleepe, and therefore
the ſame reaſon may indifferently ſerue both. It is
farther obiected, that the gentlewoman oft pointed, ſometime
this way, ſometime that, as ſeeing the appearance of
a woman of ſuch and ſuch forme and colours, which alſo
according vnto her maner of vnperfect ſpeech, ſhe after
deſcribed, as ſome ſay. It is not vnuſuall with the ſicke oft
to imagine indifferently, as well things inconſiderate
andSicut in ſomnis decipimur inſomnijs, ita vigilantes in aegritudinibus, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Ariſt. de inſomnijs. incompoſed as truths, and therefore are their imaginations
of noEgregiè hac in re ſatisfacit Theophili Medici aegrotantis hiſtoria, memorata à Galeno lib. de ſympt. different. validitie without better proofe or reaſon,
which I thinke before ſufficiently ſatisfied. And in this
gentlewoman (hauing her head, where her diſeaſe had ſo
manifeſtly deeply ſeated it ſelfe, therefore ſo mightily oppreſſed)
it was more eaſie for any faculitie therein to miſtake
and erre, then to conceiue aright. And therefore
though it might haply manifeſtly appeare (which may be
and is ordinarily rather the abuſiue impreſſion of ſome indiſcreete
The mention of her ſuppoſed ſight of the witch, came after the returne of all her ſenſes, and when onely the conuulſions of her armes and face were remaining accidēts Obiect. whiſpering about the ſicke) that ſhe of her ſelfe
primarily and without ſuggeſtion conceiued the forme or
ſhape of a witch, yet is that no ſound proofe or clearing
of the queſtion of witchcraft in generall, nor any reaſonable
euidence againſt one particular, ſince the trials of truth
are not ſterred by imaginations. It is laſtly obiected, that
certaine witches lately dying for ſorcerie, haue confeſſed
themſelues to haue bewitched this gentlewoman. I grant
the voluntary and vncompelled, or duly and truly euicted
confeſſion of a witch, to be ſufficient condemnation of her

ſelfe, and therefore iuſtly hath the law laid their bloud
vpon their owne heads, but their confeſſion I cannot conceiue
ſufficient euiction of the witchcraft it ſelfe. It is
knowne euidently vnto men learned, that the ſubtill ſerpent
and deceiuer the diuell doth vſually beguile, delude
and deceiue thoſe that truſt in him by his iugling colluſions,
perſwading oft times thoſe actions and euents to be
his gratification of their malicious affections, which are
indeed the very workes of nature, and oft times the rare
effects onely of hidden cauſes in nature. A witches confeſſion
therefore being onely grounded vpon his credite,
information and ſuggeſtion, whoſe nature, cuſtome and
propertie is and euer hath bene to lie and deceiue, is a
meane, poore and vncertaine proofe of witchcraft, though
a iuſt condemnation vnto the witch, her ſelfe being proued
an aſſociate with the diuell in any ſort. Her death
therefore doth ſatisfie the law for her offence, but is no
ſound information of the iudgement of the witchcraft.
Thus according to that whereof my ſelfe could take notice
in this gentlewoman (if more full information of others
obſeruations in thoſe things that by my ſelfe were
not ſeene or noted, faile me not) I haue truly and fully deſcribed
euery materiall accident and circumſtance; and to
all the knowne or conceiued likely doubts and difficulties
therein haue carefully and directly anſwered, and
therein alſo haue (I ſuppoſe) ſatisfied the ingenuous and
reaſonable with breuitie at full. Now to conclude the
former explication of the queſtion of witchcraft in generall,
I intreate the Reader to call vnto mind the formerly
mentioned feares and doubts of witchcraft, which vnknowne
accidents and diſeaſes eaſily impoſe vpon mindes
herein vnacquainted and not diſcerning their cauſe and
reaſon, and in them farther for future good to conſider the
poſſible contingence of many more of like nature and ſort
in other the like caſes elſewhere hapning, and here vnmentioned.
In both and with both let alſo be recalculate
and caſt the ſtrange and ſlie ſuggeſtions of the fancie and

imagination, ſometimes countenanced by admired caſuall
euents and chances, ſometimes applauded by ignorant
credulitie, and ſometimes aduanced by ſuperſtition in all
and euery of theſe ſtill with the vulgar ſort, aduantaging
the ſame error and opinion of witchcraft. I haue ſo much
the rather thus farre laboured, for that ordinarily herein
I ſee truth and iudgement too much peruerted, the diſeaſed
their health and life thereby neglected, and many
times ſimple ideots and fooles oppreſſed, whoſe weaknes
doth oft ſeeme guiltie, becauſe euer vnable to defend it
ſelfe. Euery one in theſe caſes is not fit or competent arbiter:
it requireth the learned, and not learned in word
and ſuperficiall ſeeming, but indeed truly iudicious and
wiſe, whom euer to preconſult in theſe occaſions is onely
ſafe, is right, expedient, and euer neceſſary.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Wiſards.
               
                  THe mentione of witchcraft doth now occaſion
the remembrance in the next place of
a ſort of practitioners,Wiſards. whom our cuſtome
and country doth call wiſemen and wiſewomen,
reputed a kind of good & honeſt
harmles witches or wiſards, who by good
words, by hallowed herbes and ſalues, and other ſuperſtitious
ceremonies promiſe to allay and calme diuels, practiſes
of other witches, and the forces of many diſeaſes.
But theſe being of the ſame nature with thoſe before mentioned
to vſe ſpels, and as they before, ſo theſe now ſometimes
onely ſuperſtitiouſly vaine, ſometimes diuelliſhly aſſiſted,
I will referre theſe vnto them, and onely diſmiſſe
them both with a ſhort hiſtorie. Anno 1602. a poore boy
of Pychley in Northamptonſhire, was ſodainly ſurpriſed
with a vehement conuulſion, drawing his head and heeles
violentlyNam in auerſam partem aegrotantis reclinationem opiſthotonon vocamus, neruis qui eò loci ſunt malè affectis. Emproſthotonon autem ſi in priorem partem homo deflectitur, neruis anteriùs poſitis laborantibus. Aret. lib. 1. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . backward, and in that ſort carrying his whole
body into a roundneſſe, tumbling vp and downe with

much paine and inward groning. The parents of the child
poſed with the ſtrangeneſſe, preſently accuſedHic hominum ineptorum mos eſt, in malis ſua ignorantia vel acquiſitis vel cōmorantibus cum anu Aeſopica ſemper daemonem accuſare. witchcraft,
ſent for a wiſewoman, & her wiſedome came vnto them.
At the ſame time it fortuned my ſelfe to be in the towne
with a patient of mine, a worthy and vertuous Lady there
inhabiting, who moued me to ſee the bewitched child, and
vpon the motion together with her Preacher then liuing
in her houſe, I went vnto the place where the child lay.
There among other ſtanding ſilent and vnknowne, I beheld
the fits, & heard alſo the wiſewoman wiſely diſcourſing,
and among other things of the like nature, declaring
vnto the cōpany, that the lungs of the child were as white
asAn poſſit oculos tantum contendere Lynceus? her kercher. With this and ſome other ſuch like kercher
learning, IDolebā meherculè quòd pugillares & ſtilum non haberem qui tam bellas fabellas pernotarem. ſilenty departed. When I was returned
vnto my patient, I there profeſſed my opinion concerning
the manner and nature of conuulſions with their ſeuerall
cauſes, amongſt the reſt not omitting the ſtrange accidents
which did oft fall out in ſuch diſeaſes by wormes. Not
long after, when the cunning of the wiſard was now
growne without profite, ſtale and forſaken, the child auoyded
a great and long worme, and immediatly after recouered
without other helpe or meanes, and ſo hath continued
euer ſince. Thus the ſerpent beguiled the woman,
and the woman beguiled (though not Adam) many fooliſh
ſonnes of Adam. At length a poore worme gaue them
demonſtration of their ridiculous folly. Such teachers are
fitteſt for ſuch ſchollers, whoſe groſſe ignorance is euer ſo
farre in loue with it owne preiudicate conceite, that
though they were brayed in a mortar, yet cannot this
loue be beaten out of them for any loue of truth or reaſon.
I did not therefore trouble them with my patience
to inſtruct them, nor they moleſt me with their impatience
to heare.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               Seruants of Phyſitions. Miniſtring helpers.
               
                  NoW to fulfill our iuſt computation of Emperickes,
and therewith to conclude their
mention and number: the laſt (but not
the leaſt) that offer themſelues ordinarily
in this kind and name, are ſuchas either by
oft ſeruing Phyſitions,Seruants of Phyſitians. Miniſtring helpers. or by continuall
conuerſing with them and viewing their cuſtome and practiſe,
or by their owne imploymentIdeo olim Clinici & lecticularij dicti & Diaetarij. from their directions
in applications and adminiſtrations vnto the ſicke, or by
ſome ſpeciall truſt and attendance about the neceſſities
of the diſeaſed, ingroſſe vnto themſelues ſuppoſed ſpeciall
obſeruations, and choice and ſelect remedies, and with
ſuch ſmall wares thus taken vp vpon credite, ſetHâc ab origine Experientia nata eſt 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & imitatoria. vp for
themſelues, preſuming it good rhetoricke (becauſe an old
figure) to take a part for the whole. Thus ſeeing too much
honeſty would not ſuffer them to rob their teachers of a
more ſufficient portion of generall methode and art, they
thinke it ſufficient to be able to ſupply the ſame particular
meanes with the like deſire and goodwill. But apiſh imitation
and reſembling ſhew can neuer expreſſe the life of
reaſon in her natiue vſe. Although therefore ſometimes
ſome of this ſort, by ſubtiltie, a good wit, officious diligence,
and thereby pleaſing fortunateneſſe, do angle a
good report and eſtimation, and thereby catch many ſimple
Parua leues capiunt animos people (who hoodwinkt with good opinion diſcerne
not the baite) yet doth their commonly obſerued daring
thoſe things which they know they know not, and their
ordinary raiſing themſelues by the ladder of boaſting, manifeſtly
detect, both their cloaked defect, and their choaked
guilt. For what expectation can be of them who for
the moſt part build their whole worth vpon the meaneſt
proofe of anothers ſufficiencie, and all the skill which they
are able to expend, is but that little which another without

enuy or ielouſie could ſpare? Timely and well growne perfection
is neuer to be attained either by ſeruice or bare
obſeruation. It is neceſſary that man be in himſelfe a maiſter
of knowledge and of ſincere iudgement, that ſhall be
able truly to make right vſe of anothers experience. Experiece
therefore alone, and the benefite of a Phyſitions
ſeruice or admiſſion vnto the view of practiſe, without the
benefite of ſufficient generall theorie and learning going
before, can in it ſelfe be no true benefite. It is reaſon and
knowledge that doth guide men wiſe vntoQuoniam ars circa particularia verſatur quae inſinita ſunt, qui non redigit ad vniuerſalem methodum, caeco & incerto modo agit & opera fortunae committit. Gal. de puero Epilept. all their particular
actions and experiences, and thoſe actions ſucceeding
in triall and proofe according to that reaſon commend
and confirme that reaſon, and made good that experience.
For that which experience hath once or ofttimes
knowne and found to do good, muſt not therefore in neceſſitie
ſtill doMedicina ſexies vel ſepties probata non facit vniuerſalem propoſitionem. Galen. the ſame good, except the ſame reaſon of
the good do in each circumſtance againe commend and
command it, which onely they can iudge and examine
that are wiſe and learned. That experience therefore is
onely certainly and truly allowed truſt, which prouing it
ſelfe good doth therein alſo iuſtifie
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Aequè mutila ratio ſine experientia, & experientia ſine ratione Nazianz. the knoweldge and
reaſon which directed it vnto that good. They therefore
that without methode, art, reaſon andQui ſe artem acquiſiuiſſe ſine Methodo arbitratur ſciat ſe vmbram habere non artem. Plato in Phileb. knowledge, take
care to ſpend their time in gaping after others experiences,
do ſet the cart to draw the horſes, and euery one that
goeth vnto plough, knoweth they either neuer went to
ſchoole, or beginne their leſſon at the wrong end. By this
prepoſterous defect therefore, and therein want of knowledge
to foreſce the likely iſſues of their actions, ſince theſe
Emperickes themſelues know not, not truly forſee what
they indeauour or do, how ſhall others that truſt them
know what thereby they ſhall ſuffer? Prouident foreſight
is farre from blind ignorance, and wiſe preuention from
imprudent temeritie, and the experiment made without
ait or reaſon dothPer ſe naturaue ſua fallax eſt experientia & periculoſa. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Hipp. Aph. 1. more commonly reproue and chaſtiſe,
then inſtruct and eſtabliſh. Neither can any man make a
true rule or vſe of his experience, that truly knoweth not

the particular nature and eſtate of thoſe things whereof
he hath experience, together with all circumſtances that
may alter the conſiderations. They therefore that will
learne more ſafely to informe themſelues, let them know
aſſuredly, that ſufficiency is neuer found in the vtmoſt obſeruation
or Empericall tradition, but in a ſetled and itſelfe
confirming knowledge and vnderſtanding. Neither
can this true knowledge be duly or competently attained,
but by early begunne, and late continuing education
thereto, inſtituted in places fit and free for true grounds,
for the groweth and ſeed of pure and good knowledge,
inſtilled into the minde by littleHabitus omnis intellectiuus, actiuus, factiuus ſenſim acquiruntur nec ſine aſſiduitate, tempore, diligentia ſtabiliuntur vnquam. and little, by daily
reading, contemplation, meditation, and aſſiduitie in
both, watered with the dew and ſweate of painfull ſtudie,
haſtened to maturitie by carefull and continuall good culture
Doctrina nam vim promouet inſitam. Horat. of ancient counſell and direction, and laſtly confirmed
and ſtrengthned in the good and perfect groweth
vnto a firme age and time there in by choyce example and
experience, withall theſe poſſeſſing anNaturae ſequitur ſemina quiſque ſu
                        •
                      Propert. aptneſſe in nature
as the ground of all.
               The end of the firſt Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND
BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               The Methodian learned deceiuer or hereticke
Phyſition.
               
                  THus farre haue bene remembred
the ignorant practitiones that infoſt
this age. Now it followeth we
come vnto another erronions kind
of ſuch as haue a name and portion
among the learned: ſuch are they
that haue a taſte of good arts and
ſcience, but are not truly earned,
nor haue ſincerely drawne the naturall and liuely ſap of
true ſcience and vnderſtanding. Of this kinde among the
Ancients, were reputed thoſe they termedQuales Proclus, Antipater, Dionyſius, Theſſalus, Themiſon, de quo nomine Iuuenalis ſic habet: Quot Themiſon aegros autumno occidederit vno. Methodians,
either by an Ironie or Antiphraſis, as hauing no true
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & omnium maximè 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      appellat Galenus. method,
but a compēdium or a method of their own making;
or elſe becauſe they arrogated this name vnto themſelues
in the beſt ſence, as onely in their owne ſuppoſall meriting
the title of true Art and Method. Theſe had their peculiar
and proper errors in thoſe times in which they liued, then
eſpecially noted; but we will make bold more generally
vnder this name to comprehend all who carry a name and
viſar of learning, but are not able to expreſſe the power
thereof, either by their diſtinct and truly digeſted vnderſtanding,
or by right performance in action and practiſe
according thereunto. Theſe men, any man may note to be
of three ſorts: Firſt, ſuch as may commonly be obſerued
to beare naturall defects and impediments within themſelues:

ſecondly, ſuch as want time in nature or their ſtudies:
thirdly, ſuch as haue ſpent moſt part of their life otherwiſe
diſtracted, and haue not had entire emploiment
in their callings. The firſt ranke nature her ſelfe doth note
vnto euery one by their imperfect parts ſtamped and expreſſed
in their daily conuerſation. Such are they who argue
in themſelues want of wit, of common capacitie, of ordinarie
gouernment: or are diſpoſed to lunacies, to inordinate
affections and cuſtomes in the continuall courſe
and practiſe of their life. The ſecond are youths, yong men,
and all wanting diſcreet yeares in their faces orInconſideratio cognatum & perpetuum iuuentutis vitium. Scalig. de ſubt. manners,
with all ſuch as deriue their knowledge no further then
grammar ſchooles, or in Vniuerſities haue made ſhort ſtay
and too ſodaine departure. Both theſe are eaſily diſeouered,
and therefore cannot ſo vſually deceiue, or elſe can
but deceiue ſuch as deſerue no better. The third, are all
ſuch aside fraud their callings of their whoſe endeuour,
and deuide themſelues between two profeſſions. Their
neutralitie in both doth proue their nullitie in either. Perfection
in any facultie requireth more then aQui ſi quid homo ſit ſeias facile te nihil eſſe intelligas. Ego vero nequaquam nos homines eſſe dicere conſueui ſed partes hominis. Ex omnibus enim aliquid fieri poſſe, idque non maginum, ex ſingulis pene minus quam nihil. Schilg. de ſubtil. man,Nemo noſtrûm ſatis eſſe poteſt ad attem vel conſtituenda vel abſolunda: ſed ſat ſuperque videri debet ſi quae multorum annorum ſpacio priores inuenerint poſteri accipiamus, atque his addentes aliquid illa aliquando compleamus & perficiamus. Galen. in Aph. Hipp. and
Competit quod par eſt, par eſt quod ſufficit, ſufficit quod nullius indiget 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſt. Eth. 1. competence a whole man nor euer was any in an excellent
whom one calling could not 
                     〈◊〉
                   deſerue and employ.
Within this compaſſe alſo ſtand ſuch, as hauing ſpent
a good part, or moſt part of their time in one art or ſcience,
towards the end 
                     〈◊〉
                   in them iddel courſe exchange.
Theſe from the 
                     〈◊〉
                   flowing and wanting of their minds in a
former ſtreame, 
                     〈◊〉
                   arriuing in a new 
                     〈◊〉
                   cannot ſodainly
lauch vnto any depth or profoundneſſe of iudgement
(which onely time by ſtealing ſteps by little and litle
doth mature and ripeth as a timely fruiteNam mora dat vires, teneras mora percoquit vuas. Et validas ſegetes quae fuit herba facit. Ouid.) and therefore
they may in haſt and greatily ſwallow vpon hole ſentences,
yea & volumes vnche wed, yet can they neuer truly digeſt
them but with
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Tempus inuentor & adiutor bonus, vnde & artium ſunt facta incrementa. Ariſt. Eth. 1. many dayes and much leiſure. Euery Art

is an habit: an habit is by ſmall degrees and length of time
and cuſtome acquired, and thence riſeth by little and little
to perfection and full growth. There is to euery facultie
belonging, firſt an habit of right iudging therein, and diſtinct
knowing: ſecondly an habite according to iudgement
and knowledge of right action and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . &c. Omnes mentis habitus ſunt extremorum, &c. diſpoſing. A
double habite in euery facultie, requireth a double time
in euery facultie, which therefore cannot but with long patience
and carefull aſſiduitie therein be inuited. The too
common want hereof in theſe dayes, is the cauſe that many
reputed great clearks & ſcholers, haue in their mouthes
and diſcourſe, the phraſe, the language and ſentences of
wiſedom, but want the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Alia eſt enim dicacitas, alia doctorum elegans & erudita ratio: haec conſiſtit in verborū virtute, illa in idearum quae rerum ſunt ſpecies. ſoule, the ſubſtance and the ſenſe.
Hence it cometh to paſſe, that tongues ouerflow with aphoriſmes,
maximes, and rules of ancient truth, but for the
moſt part confuſedly, not rightly diſtinguiſhed, miſtaken
or ſuppoſed. Neither cau excellence in one facultie giue
prerogatiue in another. Therefore thoſe that are perfect
and abſolued artiſts in their owne facultie, and will impaire
their dignitie by engaging it in another, (where neither
their time nor proofe can equall it) let wiſe men cuatelouſly
and with ſuſpition admit their counſell or truſt their
practiſe. I ſometime knew a learned Diuine, batchelar in
that facultie,Hiſtoriae. a great clearke, of much reading and ſtudie
therein, whoſe buſie and ambitious braine not contenting
it ſelfe within ſo infinite an ocean of ſufficient ſacred and
ſweete imploiment, would needs breake out into other
bounds, and from ſome borowed houres and time for ſtudie
in phyſicke, grew to affect therein more then a common
name and vnderſtanding. In the end his pride and
conceit of his knowledge tranſported him ſo farre, that among
other ridiculous paradoxes, he both in ſchooles
and common profeſſion defended an indifferencie in the
natures, qualities and vſe of Stibium and Ratsbane: to
conclude, his confidence herein ſo farre bewitched him
that he made triall thereof in himſelfe, and as a iuſt execution
vpon himſelfe, was the ſame day poiſoned. Another

of my knowledge and acquaintance, a man in the
Greeke, Latine, Hebrew, Chaldey, and other languages
much ſtudied, and in the iudgement and theory of Diuinitie
of approued worthineſſe and vnderſtanding, hauing
therein beſtowed the beſt part of his time, ſodainly interchanged
with an vnaduiſed courſe of practiſe in Phyſicke;
he ſpent ſome time in trauell beyond the ſea, and returned
againe thence dignified; but his former ſtudies were ſo
well and ſoundly foreſetled, that they admitted not ſo true
and right after-ſetling of the ſecond. Hence as his braine
ouerflowed with vnconſtant propoſitions, and his tongue
with paradoxes, his actions alſo thereto ſuited. In the end
he made vpon himſelfe an experiment of the force of Opium
in a more then ordinary doſe, and ſo compoſing himſelfe
vnto a deſired ſleepe, neuer returned to view the iſſue
of his experiment, but deſcending into the graue, left this
memory behind him. If any man wonder at theſe grand
lapſes in men learned, let him ſtay and ſatisfie his doubt
with admiration of the multitude of ſects in all ages, ſwarming
with groſſe errors and opinions, euen amongſt the
learned of all faculties and profeſſions. This vndoubtedly
groweth from no other ground but want of entire vnderſtanding
of thoſe things men ſtudie and reade, through
imperfect and diſtracted imploiment of their mindes, ſeriouſly
and wholy required vnto any meaſure of perfection.
Therefore Galen in his learned treatiſe of the method of
right cure (as alſo in other places) doth oft times witnes,
that where ſects and ſectaries abound, there is infallibly
miſtaking and vnſound apprehenſion of truth, and therefore
lamely, defectiuely, and in part attained, becauſePrim
                        •
                      & praecipua delictorū & errotū cauſa in aegrotantium curatione, Diuiſionum prauitas, vt & in alijs haereſibus. Quidam in primis & ſupremis diuiſionum generibus conſiſtunt contenti illis indicationibus quae ab illis ſumuntur. Quidā verò vſque ad aliquid diuidūt non tamē vſque ad finem perueniunt. Nonnulli verò vitioſis vtuntur diuiſionibus. Qui verò omnia quae ſunt ſecundùm naturam & praeter naturam recto diuiſionis artificio complectitur, atque ab omnibus ſumit ſufficientes indicationes, hic ſolùm medendo non errabit, quantum humanis conceditur viribus. Galen. de ratione Meden. ad Glaucon. ſo
onely ſought. If any man require a more ſpeciall proofe
or triall hereof, let him with me here cull and examine any
few Aphoriſmes of Hippocrates, and in them (though
commonly and orderly read and auouched by euery
mouth) ye ſhall he find how eaſie and ordinarie it is for
any man in any one to be inconſiderately deceiued and miſtaken,
if he do not with all poſſible diligence, indiſtracted

vigilance and circumſpection, continually, wholy and indefatigably
Puta apprehenſio ſimplex ſaepe caret ratione, nondum excitata ratione, aut ſuae cognitionis non inita ratione. Scalig. de ſubt.
exerciſe all his powers in ſeeking out their
hidden truth, which doth neuer freely reueale it ſelfe to
thoſe that careleſly or in part, or for ſiniſter & triflingHinc pauciſſimi ſapientiſſimā Hippocratis 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ritè ſapiunt. ends
labour after it. For example, in his ſixt booke of aphoriſmes
and 52. aphoriſme, Hippocrates doth nominate a mortall
ſigne in the diſeaſed, the appearance of the white of the
eye in ſleepe, and ſleeping with vncloſed eyes. In many
diſeaſed, this oft is found vntrue, but with Hippocrates
vnderſtanding it is neuerVide Galenū in praedictum Aphoriſ. & Braſauolum in vtroſque. falſe. He that ſimply and verbally
onely vnderſtandeth, and without meditated differences
and exceptions, or maketh not more narrow
ſearch, ſhall hardly truly find the certaine and true limitation
of this truth. For if this maner of ſleeping fall out
from any outward cauſe, or beſides reaſon or cauſe thereof
in the inward diſpoſition, it is not ſimply or altogether
bad, much leſſe mortall. For where the ſicke are thus accuſtomed
to ſleepe in health, or ſo ſleep by reaſon of fumes
and vapors aſcending vnto the head, and thence diſtilling
into the eye-lids, and ſo hindering their right cloſure, (as it
is oft ſeene in great drinkers) or where it proceedeth
onely from wormes in children, and the like, the incautelous
and ſuperficiall vnderſtanding is readily deceiued. In
like maner the 51. aphoriſme of the ſame booke doth promiſe
by the coming of a feauer thereto, the profligation of
the apoplexie. But this is not true, confuſedly interpreted,
and therefore beyond the firſt view requireth further ſtudious
inquiſition to find out the quantitieOportet febrem neque leuiorem eſſe quā quae morbi materiam diſcutiat, neque grauiorem quàm aegri virtus ferat. Holler. tract. de Apoplex. Galen. in dictū Aphoriſ. of the feauer,
with the degree of the apoplexie. Great wounds and cuts
of the head (ſaith the 50. aphoriſme of the ſame booke)
procure and incurre feauers: but he that doth no further
ſearch to know theNeceſſe eſt febrem ſuperuenire ſed non ſimul. Nam putredo cum vulnere accelerat febrem, vulnus ſine putredine tardigradam producit febrē. Braſauol. in praedict. aph. times that feauers may differently in
ſwiftneſſe or ſlowneſſe of their coming take, nor vnderſtandeth
the cauſes ſlackning or quickning the feauers
ſpeed, may eaſily too haſtily before iuſt time accuſe the
truth hereof. The 3. aphoriſme of the fift booke threatneth
danger in conuulſions vpon great iſſues and loſſes

of bloud; but in what quantitie thou ſhalt eſteeme them
Magnus ille eſt fluxus quicunque repente indeſinenter & celeriter profluit. Gal. in dictum aph. great, or with what conditions, thou muſt vſe diligence,
and elſewhere enquire. Many haue loſt great meaſures of
bloud at once, and yet haue eſcaped both with and without
conuulſions, if 8. 9. 10. or 12.Ponderauit Braſauolus libras 18. ex ſiniſtra nare foeminae nobilis fuſas ſimul & ſemel, praeter 4. libras aut plures per lintea & mappas ſparſas, nec aderat interea aliquod vitae diſcrimen, ſed conualuit. Braſauol. in aph. pounds at once from the
noſe may be called much or great. The firſt aphoriſme of
the fift booke, doth pronounce the conuulſion procured
in aſſumption of Hellebore mortall. It is notwithſtanding
ſeene, that conuulſions ſo raiſed, ceaſſe againe without
death or other danger. To vnderſtand therfore aright,
we muſt know to diſtinguiſh the diuers wayes andConuulſio quam affert Hellebori aſſumptio ex oris ventriculi vellicatione plerunque ſine diſcrimine, quam verò ex immodica euacuatione, illa maximè lethalis. Galen. in aph dictum. maners
whereby Hellebore doth produce conuulſions. The
31. aphoriſme of the fift booke, menaceth vnto a woman
with child being let bloud, abortion. But whether we ſhall
vnderſtand it ſimply neceſſarie, or onely as an hazard or
periclitation, or with what conditions, more certaine information
doth aske further ſearch. The 40. aphoriſme of
the ſecond booke, threatneth vnto old men ſurpriſed with
mur
                     •
                  hes and diſtillations, the end of their diſeaſe with
the end of their dayes. But vnto perfect conceiuing, is
further requiſite the conſideration of the degrees of old
men, in whom is apparent either age alone (which is onely
the number of yeares) or oldneſſeHinc ſenectus & ſenium, ſenectus prima & vltima, viridis & decrepita. with age, which
is a decay and wearing of nature together with yeares.
Infinite might we be in theſe and the like, euery triuiall
and vulgarly receiued rule requiring a more circumſpect
and conſiderate vnderſtanding, then the firſt view or light
reading doth offer or preſent. It is a common well known
and commendable caution, to ſuſpect phlebotomy in
children vnto the foureteenth yeare, and in old men after
fiftie or ſixtie yeares. But with what reſtraints and limitations
theſe rules are to be bounded, fully and truly to conceiue,
beſides their hearing or reading is required a view
and reuiew of differing reaſon and expoſitiō, diligent and
carefull ſcrutiny, oft comparing and conferring oddes and
differences of circumſtances. None truly learned will or
can be ſo inconſiderate or raſh to take bloud from age,

whoſe veines are exhauſt or ſpent, blood dried vp, or from
infancie crop the firſt hopefull ſprouting or ſpring therof;
yet with deſerued fame and honour to themſelues, and
incomparable benefite vnto the ſicke, haue right learned
worthy and excellent Phyſitians vſed and preſcribed phlebotomy
both vnder fiueAuenzoar filio ſuo trimo venam ſecuit., and after ſixtieRhaſes aetati decrepitae in pleuritide venam ſecuit. yeares. Diligence
will not reſt vntill it haue foundIntereſt enim non quae aetas ſit, neque quid in corpore geratur intus, ſed quae vires ſint. Firmus puer, robuſtus ſenex, & grauida mulier valentes ſanguinis miſſione tutò curantur. 
                        •
                     ernel. de ſang. miſſ out reconciliation
to theſe doubts, and confirmation to more perfect knowledge,
which ſerious labour muſt buy, ſtudie continually
attend, and thence time gaine, free from other impertinent
implication. The common want hereof ſuffereth ſo many
vnprofitable queſtions amongſt the the learned, maintaineth
contentions and pride of words, multitude of ſects
and ſchiſmes from truth: and while men at other leiſure,
for other ſhifts, ends, and ſupplies, and not for the owne
worthineſſe, or for it ſelfe ſeeke knowledge, they cōmonly
loſe the true end, and therfore true perfection. The innumerable
diſſentions amongſt the learned concerning
the Arabicke and Chymicke remedies at this day infinitely,
with oppoſite and contradictorie writings, and inuectiues,
burthen the whole world. Some learned Phiſitians
and writers extoll and magnifie them as of incomparable
vſe and diuine efficacie. Some with execration accuſe and
curſe them as damned and helliſh poyſons. Some becauſe
they find not theſe remedies in the common & vulgar readings
of the Ancients (the famous and learned Grecians)
with feare and horror endure their very mention, farre
therein vnlike and differing from that ingenuous ſpirit of
the thriſe worthy and renowmed Pergamene Claudius
Galen, who in brightneſſe of vnderſtanding, ſharpneſſe of
apprehenſion, and inuention ouerſhining al the precedent
wits that were before him, yet did he with humble and
daigning deſire ſearch & entertaine from any ſort ofVerſatus ſū & i
                        •
                     notui celeberrimis in vna quaque ſecta praeceptionibus & pa
                        •
                     i ſtudio omnibus dedi operam. Galen. de Loc. Affectis. people,
yea from the moſt vnlearned Empericke himſelfe, any
their particular remedies or medicines, which after by his
purer and more eminent iudgement, and clearer light of
vnderſtanding, refining, he reduced to more proper worth,

and thereby gaue admired preſidents of their wondered
ods in his learned preſcription and accommodation. Some
contrarily contemning the learning and knowledge of the
Grecian, and with horrid ſuperſtition, deifying an abſolute
ſufficiencie in Chymicke remedies, reiect the care or
reſpect of diſcreet and prudent diſpenſation. A third and
more commendable ſort differeth from both theſe, and
leauing in the one his learned moroſitie and diſdainfull
impatience of different hearing, and in the other his ignorant
and peruerſe Hermeticall monopoly, with impartiall
and ingenuous deſire free from ſectarie affectation, doth
from both draw whatſoeuer may in either ſeeme good or
profitable vnto health or phyſicke vſe: from the Grecian
deriuing the ſound & ancient truth, & from both Greek,
Chymicke, or Arabian, borrowing with thankfull diligence
any helpfull good to needfull vſe. Antiquitie hath
giuen vs our firſtMaiores noſtri ad veritatis indagationem & conuentionē cum magno animo atque excel
                        •
                     o per ſa
                        •
                     ebras atque tenebras iter ſuum contulerint, vt quo poſſint modo praelucerent nobis, quare nō erunt illorum manes (prope dixerim) Deorum cultu celebrandi? Scal. de Subt. lights in all knowledges, ſucceeding
times haue added their ſeuerall luſtres, and our lateſtAtque iniquū decreti genus eſt quod omnē laudis fructum & gloriae vni Graeciae detulit, vt Arabum & poſterita
                        •
                     is ſtudia perpetuis tenebris obruantur. Quaedam poſteritas addidit non iraudā
                     da laude. Vixerunt Graeci in media luce literarū, ex
                        •
                     iterunt Arabes, & inde ductae familiae iam deſertis & ſcpultis melioribus diſciplinis digna tamen luce aeterna
                        •
                     ue memoria nobis reliquerunt. Hollerius inſtit. Chirurg. poſterity
hath yeelded alſo many things not vnworthy their
worthy praiſe. Chiefly to honour the ancient worthies, yet
toEtiam hiſpidis, etiam qui errarunt habendam eſſe gratiam cenſeo. Scalig. de Subt. contemne none, and to view all, is the rareſt growth,
but trueſt perfection. And thus by the examples before for
many innumerable more, it is manifeſt that men learned,
knowing and reading much, may notwithſtanding either
through diſtraction or negligence be eſteemed and found
in complete perfect and diſtinct knowing, ignorant and
vnwotting. And as their vnderſtandings are hence corrupted
and depraued, ſo neceſſarily by conſequent muſt their
actions be anſwerable thereto, ſince thence deriued, bad
principles euer producing bad practiſe. This is not obſcure
nor dainty in many common practiſers of imperfect
knowledge, to be daily inſtanced almoſt euery where,
whereby that man whoſe owne iudgement cannot giue
him diſpenſation to ſwarue and differ ſometimes from the
common vnderſtanding, vſe, and cuſtome of vulgar practiſe,

ſhall oft times dangerouſly erre. In aboue 40. yeares
being, I haue now twenty yeares bene an vnderſtanding
obſeruer and partaker of diuers and different medicinall
practiſe, and therein haue oft noted how that which ſomtime
hath oppoſed common receiued rule, in the peculiar
proofe of ſome other learned, hath giuen good occaſion
of new diſquiſition of before vnconſidered reaſon or diſtinction
in the rule. For a briefe taſte of many, I will particularize
ſome few. I haue obſerued in ſome kind of Palſies
bloud taken frō the paralytike ſide, when all other meanes
haue proued vaine, to haue bene the ſole preſent ſuccesful
remedie, yea beyond all hope hath oft reſcued the lateſt
hope out of the iawes of death. This much experience
doth teſtifie, yet is it contrary vnto receiued ancient edict.
In like manner in ſome diſeaſed plethoricall bodies, I haue
obſerued and ſeene, that their generall numneſſe,Torpor leuis quaedam Paralyſis. Galen. de Sympt. cauſis. torpor
and ſtupidity raiſed in them from the diſtention, compreſſion
and obſtruction of their full veſſels, hath immediatly
on the ſame ſide that was let bloud, found preſent and ſenſible
deliuery from thoſe accidents with great lightſomneſſe
and alleuiation, the oppoſite ſide ſtill continuing in
the former manner oppreſſed and greeued, vntill the ſame
remedy of phlebotomy hath bene thereto likewiſe applied.
In cōmon ſtoppages of the wombe I haue oft ſeene
when the vſuall bleeding in the foote hath nothing at all
profited, but in vaine wearied the parts thereby fruitleſly
vexed, that the inciſion of a veine in the arme hath immediatly
opened the ſtoppage, and the former current hath
freely ſtreamed. In ſome kind of dropſies, cachexiaes, or
greene ſickneſſes. I haue obſerued that letting bloud by
excellent fruite and benefite, hath proued the ſuccesfull
remedie, aboue, beyond, and after all remedies. Theſe
things are witneſſed by many worthy teſtimonies, and yet
are generally eſteemed violations of rule. I will not here
diſpute the cauſes and reaſons of theſe things, nor diſquire
how iudgement did guide vnto theſe trials, nor how neceſſarily
or probably the effects and conſequent followed,

or cohered with the iudgement. I will leaue it indifferent
vnto euery one learned, and vnto right perpenſion in iuſt
occaſion of due conſideration hereof. I giue not theſe inſtances
(as raſh ſuppoſall may imagine) to encourage
Empericall boldneſſe, vnto common imitation hereof, nor
do hereby allow (as ſome not diſtinguiſhing may imagine)
bloud-thirſtie phlebotomy to ſuck mens liues in raſh trial
hereof▪ but to proue and manifeſt how neceſſary it is for a
iudicious and orthodox Phyſition, diligently and prudently
in his facultie exerciſed according to art, to retaine and
enioy a reſerued power and warranted ſufficiency within
himſelfe, to varie and differ ſometimes from too ſtrict &
ſuperſtitious imitation of a common rule and receiued cuſtome.
And from this worth and vertue hath it come to
paſſe, that many learned & famous men, in their ſeuerall ages
haue left ſo many worthy additamēts vnto knowledg
and the common good, by their owne ſpeciall proofes &
trials of rules, in their peculiar practiſe oft different from
vulgar conceit, vſe and cuſtome; vnto whom may not be
denied beyond the ordinary bounds, a libertie and diſpenſation
contained within the latitude of ſafe diſcretion and
art. And thus briefly both by the vſe of common diſtracted
reading, and thence indigeſted vnderſtanding, and alſo by
the former particular proofes of eaſie deception in acception
of common rules, and laſtly by examples of practiſe,
it is manifeſted that men otherwiſe, and in other reſpects,
eſteemed iuſtly learned, may inconſiderately & eaſily erre,
whē diſtractedly & deuidedly they employ their thoughts
and cogitations, or want that ſole or ſolide poſſeſſion of
their whole minds and meditations by their owne proper
faculties and functions. This is the reaſon, that though
comparably to theſe times no age hath euer affoorded
writings more prodigally obuious, nor ſhew of knowledge
with greater affluence, yet in Authors neuer hath
bene either leſſe true meaning, or leſſe right vnderſtanding.
Hence as ſeeming vnderſtanding did neuer more
abound, ſo neuer was it of worſe report, the gooſeCapit inſanabile cunctos ſcribendi cacoethes. Scalig. ſo liberally

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
giuing wings and feathers vnto fantaſticke thoughts,
but the eagle-eye of cleare &Prepauci aliquid bene ſciu
                        •
                     t Ad apicem plura aſpirant magis ingenia quàm perueni
                     
                        ••
                     t. Scalig. ſincere iudgement, ſeldome
vndazedly, or without winking, fixed vpon the perfect
brightneſſe and puritie of ſerene and clearly diſtinguiſht
truth. And thus much touching thoſe that are of beſt proficience
and moſt learned note in deuided ſtudies and
callings, diſtraction neceſſarily leauing a remiſneſſe and
neglect in many things both of minde and action. As for
thoſe that are of meane literature in their owne profeſſions,
their intruſion in others, and deſperate eſteeme and
qualitie in their owne, muſt needs preach their inſufficiencie
in the latter by their mediocritie in the firſt.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of beneficed Practiſers.
               
                  THE grand and moſt common offenders
in thoſe kinds before remembred, and in
theſe dayes, are diuers Aſtrologers, but eſpecially
Eccleſiaſticall perſons, Vicars and
Parſons, who now ouerflow this kingdome
with this alienation of their owne
proper offices and duties, and vſurpation of others, making
their holy calling a linſey wolſey, too narrow for their
minds, and therefore making themſelues roome in others
affaires, vnder pretence of loue and mercie. Beſides, their
profane intruſion into inhibited liſts, their vnlimited
breach of law, and want of reuerence and reſpect of order
and diſtinction of callings, (which true Diuinitie doth
teach holy men) reaſon and experience do dayly witneſſe,
that by the neceſſarie coincidence oft times of both callings
requiring them at the ſame moment in diſtant places,
without conſcience they impoſe vpon themſelues
a neceſſary neglect of both by an vnneceſſaryElige quid velis, qu
                        •
                      enim pudor omnia velle? Martial. aſſumption
of the one. This the poore patients neceſſitie and
need muſt oft complaine, though haply more ſeldome obſerued:
and therefore of few is that which herein is lamentable,

at all lamented. Many times many poore people
(and ſometimes men of better worth) in their neceſſities,
and oft laſt extremities, through this voluntarie ouermeaſure
of emploiment in theſe enlarged ſpirits, are not onely
deferred, procraſtinated and neglected, but oft times euen
to death illuded. For from report and information
by others vnto the Phyſition, and from the indication by
vrine (which are borrowed, and therefore ſlipperie
grounds) many diſeaſes conceale themſelues: oft for want
of the preſence of the Phyſitions owne view, the chiefeſt
opportunitie and hopefull houre ſteale away vneſpied, and
death maketh many blind, becauſe they had not their Phyſitions
eyes. In theſe difficulties therefore (wherein conſiſt
the greateſt vſes and benefites of a Phyſition) theſe
men by their double and both-hand emploiment, compell
themſelues commonly to a double crueltie, either for the
moſt part to denie their preſence, or elſe not to performe
the promiſe of their preſence, being euer ſubiect to a countermaund,
by their voluntarie ſubiection to a double command.
If therefore they would conſider the ſhortneſſe of
their liues, with the immenſitie of their owne taske, they
would not allow ſo large a vacancie to ſucciſiue houres
and workes, which now for the moſt part are moſt part of
their time vnto the great hurt and iniurie of others, and
the increaſe of ſcandall vnto theirPerſona namque venuſtat ſtudium dum ſuo inſiſtit officio, nec praeripit alienum. owne vocations. I
know the learned and reuerend Diuine is herein for the
moſt part free, or if ſome few be iuſtly taxed, their modeſt
minds will eaſily moderate and reduce them; and for the
reſt, whoſe diſpoſitions are ſhameleſſe and incorrigible,
that may haply ſtill become the foole, which is a reproach
vnto the wiſe, andNam quod turpe bonis Seio Titioque decebit, Criſpinum. befit the vnhoneſt that defames the
iuſt. I do not diſlike the deuout and charitable deeds of
their holy minds, nor reall compaſſion and contribution
vnto the ſicke and needie, nor yet their medicinall aduice
with incorrupt hands free from implication of priuate
gaine, and vnobſerued and concealed merchandizing in
charitable deeds; but I abhorre and wiſh repented (which

in many of them is abhominable and ſacrilegious) their
pecuniarie trafficke and trading by vſurped erecting in
their houſes Apothecarie ſhops by manumiſſion of baſe
wares that are not allowed, nor haue obtained freedome
elſewhere, whereby vnlawfully they exenterate and eate
out the bowels of poore mens purſes. Neither is it any
way to be iuſtified, that they ordinarily trauel vp & downe
to ſpoile the more worthy of his fee, and the proper laborer
of his hire: nor yet is it leſſe ſhame, that without ſhame
or bluſhing their bils in many places inhabite ordinarily Apothecaries
files and ſhoppes, as if their owne vndoubted
right. Their maiſter Saint Paul teacheth euery man to walk
within his1. Cor. 7. verſ. 20. 24. owne calling, and not to be buſilyVnicū ab vno optimè perficitur opus. Ariſt. Polit. 2. ſtragling
in others: ſo ſhall they honour their calling, and their callings
honour them, and both honour God that ſent them.
I know the gift of healing in the Apoſtles was the gift of
God his grace and ſpeciall fauor and allowance vnto them
for thoſe times; but it was in them a miraculous and diuin
                     •
                  
power conſe
                     •
                  rated vnto an holy end: but in theſe times it
is an acquired facultie, and in theſe men vnto a mercenarie
vſe. It is indeed a deede of mercie to ſaue and helpe the
ſicke, and a worke of charitie to aduiſe them for their
health & eaſe: but the common good and publicke weale,
& the law for both doth inhibite the doing of euery good
by euery man, and doth limit and reſtraine it vnto ſome
ſpeciall and ſelect ſort of men, for neceſſary cauſes, and reſpects
vnto good gouernment and policie, and for auoiding
confuſion, which is the ruine of publicke weales. Shal
then Diuinitie teach and allow for priuate deedes, ends
and reſpects of charitie and mercie, to breakeFuit haec ſapientia quondā, Publica priuatis praeponere, ſacra prophanis. Sic honor & nomen diuinis vatibus, atque Carminibus venit. Horat. publicke
edicts, to tranſgreſſe lawes, to contemne magiſtracie, to
confound and diſturbe good order? Good order forbiddeth,
that for pretence of any neceſſitie whatſoeuer, cauſe
or reaſon, one man preſume to breake into anothers
bounds, yea and Diuinitie teacheth the ſame. God himſelfe
tieth men in all things, in all neceſſities, vnto certaine
and appointed ends. He ordained a ſelect number of Apoſtles

and Diſciples, and vnto them onely annexed the diuine
worke and calling of nations and people vnto ſaluation,
commanding all men vpon paine of damnation to
ſeeke out and follow that meanes whereſoeuer or howſoeuer
diſtant, and did not ordaine the meanes confuſedly
in euery perſon to waite vpon euery priuate neceſſitie. In
like maner in a commonweale, lawes and policie ordaine
(preferring the common good before eueryOmne publicum cōmodum habet aliquid ex iniquo: quod in ſingulos peccatur, vtilitate publica rependitur. Tacitus. priuate eaſe
and benefite) that euery man haue his diſtinct calling, vnto
which all other mens neceſſitie therein may and ought
to repaire. For if euery man might be of euery calling, confuſion
of callings would in the end leaue no calling. Therfore
euery mans need or neceſſitie is not ſufficient to make
euery one capable of giuing ſupply needfull thereto, but
God, and nature, and law haue tied and allotted men to
ſeeke meanes, and thoſe meanes confirmed to certaine ſet
bounds and limits, that men may ſtill in all things according
to the law of mortalitie, be euer in this life ſubiect
vnto caſualties, oft for their triall, ſometime for their puniſhment,
or elſe for a further decree and ſecret purpoſe
of the Diuine prouidence, ſo and to ſuch ends thus ordering.
Thus by cleare truth ouerſhining the miſts & clouds
of falſe pretexts to the contrary, it is manifeſt, that this fluctuation
of theſe men betweene two callings is offenſiue
to God, ſcandalous vnto religion and good men, and iniurious
vnto commonweales, and but preſumption borrowing
the face of Diuinitie. What encouragement their
example hath giuen vnto drones and idle perſons, abounding
by their example infinitely in the ſame wrong, he hath
no eies that doth not conſider. Their many, ordinarie, raſh,
ignorant and vnskilfull errors and commiſſions againſt the
health and life of many, beſides their forenamed omiſſions,
intruſions, procraſtinations, and neglects of one calling
by another, I could by many too true inſtances confirme,
but for reuerēce of the callings I ſpare the men. I wil
onely giue two knowne inſtances, wherein (as in a glaſſe)
men may view the diuers faces of many more of the like

ſort.Hiſtoria. A gentleman in Bedfordſhire not long ſince was ſodainly
ſurpriſed by a continuall feauer, accompanied with
a generall laſſitude and wearineſſe of the whole bodie, and
together with heate and burning, delirations and lightnes
of braine. The habit of his bodie and his fleſh were muſculous
and well liking, the ſeaſon warme, his age firme, and
conſtitution ſanguin
                     •
                  , his pulſe high, full, large, and in the
vehemence and ſtrength of motion manifeſt euen vnto the
beholders eye. A Parſon or Vicar comming vnto him, maketh
many feares and ſeeming-graue diſcourſes of the
danger and imminence of aIn principio morbi, firmis viribus, habitu pulchro, exinanitione nulla, plenitudinis & ſuffocationis pericula non ſine ratione ſaepe obuia fiunt, quo tempore & modo ſi maraſmus coutingeret, prodigioſum planè foret. Spectatum admiſſi riſum teneatis? Maraſme, and from this ſuppoſed
grand perill ſtoutly withſtandeth the needfull vſe of
due phlebotomie. The allies and friends of the patient obſeruing
the dayly decreaſe of hope and health, diligently
enquire after another Phyſition, and by happe found me
where then employed. When I came vnto the patient, the
Parſon entertaineth vs with confident diſcourſes and diſputes
concerning a Maraſme, whom when I found after
long patience and calme conference in the preſence and
hearing of diuers worthy knights and gentlemen ſtill endleſly
and reaſonaleſlyMaraſmum Trallianus li. 12 deſcribit, in quo humiditas ſubſtantialis in totū conſumpta fuerit aut torrefacta, vel 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪ Quod in corpore 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & ſucculento nunquam quiſquam praeterea inuenerit. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . inquit Galenus de Bon
                        •
                     habit. vaine, and yet poſſeſſed with an in
                  
                     •
                  incible
ſpirit of open and obſtinate contradiction, I in
the end with their common conſents contemned and reiected
him. The patient I found free from any particular
which might inhibiteVires, habitus, aetas intrepid
                        •
                      ferunt, morbus, calor sitis, deliria, plethora exigunt, anni tempus, conſtitutio aegri annunt. phlebotomie, and manifeſtly ſaw
the danger of the delay thereof, (both which may appeare
by the deſcription of his eſtate) and therefore ſeeing the
indication ſo plaine, and the neceſſitie ſo vrgent, contrarie
to the babling oppoſition and cauſ
                     •
                  eſſe predication of
needleſſe danger, I cauſed him to bleed; whereupon within
few houres after, beſides immediate alleuiation, nature
Natura vel vis quae i
                        •
                      potentijs naturalibus aliena excernit, vehementiùs operans magnum & violentum arteriarum efficit motum, appetens illa quae moleſta ſunt expellere, atque ita profluuium ſanguinis facit. Galen. in aph. 21. lib. 7. Hipp. ſeconding the worke, expelled at his noſe diuers quantities

of bloud at ſeuerall times; and thus wasLeuata quae corpus noſtrum regit natura exonerata
                        •
                     ue eo quo velut ſarcina premitur, haud aegrè quod reliquū eſt vincet & expellet. Galen. de Meth. Med lib. 11. enabled to
performe her Criſis, being before detained by the oppreſſion
of the former quantitie of bloud, whereunto her
ſtrength was not equall. The life of man vnto God and
men is deare & pretious, yet behold how preſumptuouſly
glorious ignorance, and the lawleſſe breach of the
due liſts of diſtinct and proper callings, doth licentiouſly
hazard the vtmoſt price and date thereof. And how
likely may it ſeeme, that the memorie of this wrong
had bene in the ſame graue buried, if it had not bene
preuented, and by the preuention ſolely obſerued. I
will now annexe another example of ſecret betwitching
flatterie by cloſe whiſpering of the ſicke, ordinarily practiſed
by theſe kind of men, vnto the vnobſerued and ſtoln
perdition of many. Anno 1611. a gentleman in this maner
falleth ſicke. He was ſodainly ſurpriſed by a continuall
feauer, with burning, thirſt, troubleſome heate in the ſoles
of the feete, and palmes of the hands, frequent delirations
and perturbations of the mind, fulneſſe of the ſtomacke,
loathing, painfull diſtentions and ructuations, drineſſe and
yeallowneſſe of the tongue, bitterneſſe and heate of the
mouth, paines about the ſhort ribs, loynes, backe and
ſhoulders, ill ſleeps & confuſed dreams. There entertained
theſe accidents the vſuall fulneſſe of his body vnto the cō
                  mon
outward view, & accōpanied a pulſe ſwift, vehement
and large, an vrine high coloured, red, and thicke: al which
many witneſſes of vnderſtanding confirme. According
vnto the former indication, the patient was twiſe let
Maxima remedia continuarum febrium haec duo ſunt Detractio ſanguinis & potio frigida, Gal. lib. 9. de Meth. Med h Saluberrimū autem eſt febribus venam incidere, non continentibus modo ſed etiam alijs omnibus quas purtrelcens humor concitanerit. Gal. lib. 11. de Meth. Med. Ideo miſſus eſt ſanguis ex hepatica ad ſanguinis hepatiſ
                        •
                     ue refrigerium & ventilationem, è mediana etiā ad minuendam plenitudinem. bloud, the quantitie loſt the firſt time, coming ſhort the
ſecond time, not exceeding ten ounces, as the Surgeon
doth witneſſe. He was onceSi ad os ventriculi materia febrilis quae putruerit ſua ſponte impetum faciat, per vomitum expellatur. Galen. de Meth. Med. lib 11. vomited, by due reſpites
twiceBilis abundantia & turgeſcentia manifeſta hoc exigebat, ſecundum intentionem Hippocrat. Aphoriſ. 22. lib. 1. & aph. 10. lib. 4. Curandae autem non ſunt omnes febres eodem tenore, nec eae quae ſunt ſine accidentibus ac illae quae cum accidentibus tractandae ſunt, vt teſtatur Gal. de Arte curat. ad Gla
                        •
                     
                     conem lib. 1. In alijs igitur eadem remedia iteranda, in alijs non omnino vſurpanda. purged with good effect and alleuiation, oft by

gliſtersIn febribus Galenus ſaepe injicit mulſam per clyſterem fi aliuus ſponte non ducitur▪ vide de Method. Med. lib. 11. & lib. 9. de arte curat. ad Glaucon. gently moued, his diet preſcribed, cooling, opening,
and altering the euill qualitie of humors. After theſe
things done, within few daies the vrine in colour, ſubſtance
and reſidence manifeſtethQuippe miſſo in febribus in initio ſanguine non ſolùm pauperibus ſed diuitumetia ſeruis, plurimis quidem quinto pòſt, aliquibus ſeptimo Criſis contigit. Galen. de Meth. Med. lib. 11. concoction, and therewith
follow ſome diſquiets and anxieties, notVigilant aegri magna ex parte grauiter ſe habent & febriunt vehementiùs, quanto propius criſim accedūt. Gal. in aph. 71. lib. 4. Hippoc. b 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Circa initia & 
                        •
                     ines omnia imbecilliora, circa ſtatum omnia fortiora. Hipp. aph. 30. & 29. lib. 2. vnhopeful
forerunners of the approch of the expected Criſis of the
diſeaſe, by the vrine ſoSi velociter morbus moueatur, etiam coloris & ſubſtantiae vrinae mutatio ſ
                        •
                     nt ſufficientia ſigna futurae Criſis. Gal. in Aph. 71. lib 4. Hipp. fairely promiſed. In this faire hope
(though by vnbeleefe of ſenſe denied) a Parſon-Phyſition
led by a ſecret ambition of ſtealing the praiſe of ſuch a
cure, (if fortune might haply fauour the patient with eaſe,
and himſelfe therein with the opinion of the merit (as was
verie likely) in this hope taking opportunitie of the patients
impatience, he whiſpereth vnto him the excellencies
of Aurum potabile, farre beyond all other remedies.
After the patient had from him receiued it, within ſhort
time good hap gaue eaſe. Eaſe being gained, begetteth in
the patient an euer after incorrigible conſultation with his
owne ſenſe, and now meaſuring his good by his eaſe, and
ſetling in his thoughts an aſſurance of his recourie, he
ſtudiouſly and continually defameth his Phyſition, and
with euill clamours filleth all corners of the countrey, as
farre as his agents, his owne tongue or credite could extend.
In this interim likewiſe he reiects the former begun
methode of diſcreete euacuations and alterations of the
offenſiue humours of his body, and in ſteed therof he cheriſheth
and cheareth vp himſelfe with daily magnifying
and worſhipping Aurum potabile as the God and ſole
author of his ſuppoſed recouery. In this meane ſeaſon and
intermiſſion of former courſes, the forward ſignes of faire
concoction, ſo hopefully before appearing diuers dayes
together, now retire and vaniſh, and painfull ſwellings fall
intoSic lib. 11. Galen. de Meth▪ Medendi, Diuites qui propter delicias debita praetermiſere remedia, phlegmonas contrahunt vel in iecinore, vel in ventriculo, vel in aliquo alio viſcere. his legs and neather parts: and then compelled he
ſendeth for other learned Phyſitions, but vſeth them by

vncertaine fits, as his owne conceit induced, and with a
reſeruation of his ſole happineſſe and beſt ſecuritie in Aurum
potabile. To conclude, he eſcaped the preſent perils
of the former ſharpe accidents, butQu
                        •
                     cunque morbi imperfectè iudicati ſunt, deinde ſeruantur in ſequē
                     tium iudicatoriorum dierum aliquem vsque ad 40. diem, nō simpliciteracuti ſed acuti ex tranſmutatione vel decidentia nominantur. Gal. in aph 23. lib. 2. Hipp. continued lingringly
and languiſhingly ſicke from about the middle of March,
vnto the the latter end ofQuadrageſimus diesprimus eſt morborum diutinorū, quicunque hunc tranſcendunt ad ſeptenarij rationem habent Criſim, non ſeptenarij quoad dies, ſed quoad menſes, deinde annos. Gal. aph. 28. l▪ 3. Hip. Auguſt next following. About
that time he firſt beganne to find ſome reaſonable ſatisfaction
in eaſe, and the recouery of ſome better ſtrength,
but a ſecret remainder or impreſſion of the former delirations
continued, and ſome ſuſpitious ſignes of a Scorbut
ſeemed to increaſe, which before likewiſe did obſcurely
ſhow. Beſide the ſhamefull wrong vnto Phyſitions and
patients, and the iniurie of Arts and truth it ſelfe, in men
that are profeſſors of diuine and holy callings, behold the
vſuall inſidiation of Death and Danger, by the ſpirit of
flattering intruſion and ſecret lenocination of falſe hopes
and eaſe poſſeſſing the diſtraction of the diſtreſſed ſicke.
What man learned and iudicious cannot determine,
whether this dangerous long continuance of this Gentlemans
diſeaſe may not iuſtly and in good reaſon be
aſcribed vnto the ſodaineSi integrè, ſi plenè, ſi perfectè Natura iudicat, nihil noui moliatur Medicus: ſi verò in quopiam deficia
                        •
                      Natura, quod deficit debet Medicus adiungere. Gal. in Aph. 20. lib. 1. Hippoc. diſcontinuance of his firſt
meanes, & to the neglect thereby of perfecting the hopefull
Criſis ſo fairelySignum concoctionis nullum vnquam prauum fuit, 
                        •
                     ed omnia optima ſemper, & tanto citiùs aegrum conualiturum o
                        •
                     tendunt quanto citiùs apparu
                        ••
                     int. Gal. in aph. 12. lib. 1. Hippoc. promiſed and intended? Or vnto whō
doth it not appeare palpably groſſe, that Aurum potabile
can containe in it ſelfe any ſuch golden ſufficiency, as ſoly
to remoue or preuent all the former accidents in this gentleman
deſcribed, which God, and nature, and reaſon haue
euer denied vnto any one particular or ſpeciall medicine
whatſoeuer? Let al men then vnto whom God hath giuen
eares or eyes, aduiſedly behold and conſider how dangerous
and iniurious theſe ordinary and ignorant intruſions
in reaſon proue vnto poore patients, who thus beguiled
with opinion, and blinded with deceitfull hope, or 
                     •
                  aſe,
or ſenſe, ioyouſly oft giue thankes for their owne hurt,

magnifie the authors, and not ſeldome periſh in the praiſe
of their own harms. The vnlimited expatiation of ſo foule
wrongs, do challenge all men, not onely the learned, but
all honeſt or ingenuous, vnto the vendication of art and
truth from oppreſſion by ſo groſſe and harmfull ignorance.
Theſe examples are ſufficient to admoniſh the offenders
of their impieti
                     •
                  , and others of their owne perill in
truſting vnto them.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Of Aſtrologers, Ephemerides-maſters.
               
                  NOw concerning Aſtrologers-practiſers:Aſtrologi, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
There is a ſort of men, who beſide and
beyond that is ſufficient and profitable
vnto Phyſicke, vſe in Aſtronomicall ſcience,
(hauing vnaduiſedly, prodigally or
vnrecouerably ſpent too much paines and
time in the too curious or ſuperſtitious, or ſuppoſed excellence
in the vanities of Aſtrologie, or elſe finding by
their other defects in themſelues the want and inſufficiencie
of knowledge more proper and eſſentiall vnto a
Phyſition) do therefore (which now is all the hopefull remainder
of their time ſo farre ſpent) fiſh for a name and
fame amongſt the common and eaſie deceiued vulgars,
with the glorious baites of prodigious precepts. Thus they
hook ſimple credulitie to worſhip and admire their lying
reuelations, preſcribe fortunes and fates, and limit the
dayes and dates of mens liues and deaths vnto the darke
points of their Kalēdars. Neither do they bluſh to promiſe
and profeſſe that they take counſel of heauen (when heauē
                  Vide Iſai. cap. 47. verſ. 13. Stent & ſaluent te Augures coeli qui contemplabantur ſydera & ſupputabant menſes, vt ex ijs annuntiarent ventura tibi. Ecce facti ſunt quaſi ſtipula & ignis combuſſit eos, Deuterō. cap. 18 Nec inueniatur in te qui ariolos ſciſcitetur, aut obſeruet ſomnia, aut auguria, aut pythones cōſulat. Omnia enim haec abominatur Dom. & propter iſtiuſmodi ſcelera deleuit eos in introitu tuo. denieth them) thereby gaining to themſelues glorie in
the ſlander of heauen and the ſcandall of truth. Thus vſually
they peruert the right vſe of Aſtronomicall ſcience vnto
deceit, impoſture, and iugling merchandizing for vniuſt
and iniurious gaine, and perſwade the voluntarie motions
and arbitrary actions of men, their conſequences and iſſues

to be driuen by the heauens vnto ends and deſtinies there
inrolled, and themſelues (as if the onely true ſons of heauen
forſooth) there onely admitted to reade and view. Indeed
the will of man hath not power in it ſelfe to will or
moue it ſelfe to any good pleaſing vnto God, or ſauing to
it ſelfe, but by the ſpeciall grace of God, drawing, guiding,
or mouing his will thereto, yet doth the generall concordant
conſent of moſt Diuines grant as vncontrouerſed, a
libertie and freedome of mans will vnto anyDeus nos docet, irradiat, aſſiſtit, etiam ſuo modo trahit vt Saulem. Quod autem in nobis ſit nullum internum principium poteſtatis, eorum eſt vociferari qui nihil intelligunt. Scalig. de ſubt. morall, naturall,
ciuill or politicke good. And in theſe kinds all Diuines
both ancient and neotericke, haue both acknowledged
and admired the worthy examples of vertue in Philoſophers
and heathen men, whoſe infinite ſtudious paines
and voluntarie laborious induſtrie in atchieuing ſo many
incomparable excellencies, no ingratitude can denie, or
without honour mention. Vertue is not
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Virtus morali
                        •
                      eſt habitus electiuus. Ariſtot. Eth. 6. forced, but free
in whom it is, and therefore not to be aſcribed vnto the
heauens or any other outward
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſt. Eth. 3. cauſe, but vnto the free
and voluntary agent of it ſelfe, and by the owne inward
power in it ſelfe, mouing it ſelfe thereto, from his owne

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Ea quae ſecundùm virtutem aguntur, non iuſtè aguntur ſi ſint iuſta, ſed ſi agens, ſci
                     
                        •
                     ns, eligenſ
                        •
                     ue propter virtutem ipſam agat, animo
                        •
                     ue ſtabili & firmo agat. Ariſtot. Eth. 2. purpoſe therein. This all men, Diuinitie, Philoſophie,
reaſon, experience, with an vnitie of conſent confirme. If
then a mans action be his owne, if the end his owne, the
effectuall proſecution thereof vnto the end his owne; if
God himſelfe haue granted this priuiledge vnto all men, as
indifferent and common vnto all whom he hath created
vnder the condition of men, what creature ſhall intercept
thePoſt Adamae lapſum (inquit Caluinus) ſupernaturalia dona in homine extincta ſunt niſi quatenus per regenerationem recuperentur▪ at intelligentia, iudicium, cum voluntate, quia inſeparabilia ab hominis natura, omnino perire non potu
                        •
                     re, Caluin. inſtit. lib. 2. endowment of the Creator? what ſhall take the honour
of this gift from him that gaue it, or the right thereof
from him that thence receiueth it? The heauens cannot ſo
blaſpheme their Maker, though men thus dare belie the
heuens to iuſtifie their owne impietie. All things depend
vpon the prouidence of God, and from him and by him

are ordained ſecond cauſes, which indeed in nature haue
their neceſſitie, but in the will of man haue a power onely
to moue or incline, and not to force. This is the reaſon, that
though man by his ſtarres be borne to infinite miſeries, diuerſly
mouing and affecting him continually, from the
earth, from the ſea, from the land, from the aire, from the
fire, from his owne affections, infirmities, diſeaſes, from diuers
haps and caſualties; yet vnto him that knoweth the
free gift of his Maker, and the good that he hath done for
him, none of all theſe things by any neceſſitie in themſelues
therto, can touch him or onceAſtrologorū decreta non sunt praetoria. Ptolomaeus. come neare him. For
whether calamitie approch from aboue or below, from
maligne conſtellation, or other inferior or terreſtriall incumbrances,
man by his ſpirit of vnderſtanding, by prudence
and circumſpect prouidence, hath a large immunitie,
whereby he may and oft doth auoide theſe violences,
and delude their forces. The wiſe man (ſaith Salomon)
foreſeeth the plague, and hideth himſelfe, neither can any
euill befall the wiſe, which he may not and doth not, either
being to come by prouident foreſight preuent, or preſent
by carefull induſtrie allay, or paſt by diligence redeeme, no
influence or deſtinie being able to bring mans will and endeuour
to an higher point then wiſedome and goodneſſe.
This is the reaſon that common calamities befall not all
men alike, yea rather to euery one vnlike. This is alſo the
reaſon that many borne vnder the ſame conſtellation, haue
different fortunes from each other, and farre vnlike their
like conſtellation: nay it is oft ſeene, and cannot be denied,
that many men by their owne induſtrie haue contradicted
their ſtarres, whereby vnfortunately marked in their natiuities,
they haue triumphed ouer the heauens in the felicitie
of their owne wiſedome and vertue. Of this ſort haue
bene not onely one Socrates and the great Philoſophers,
but many common men SocraticallySapiens aſſueſcit futuris malis & quae alij diupatiendo leuia faciunt, hic leuia facit diu cogitando. diſpoſed and endeuouring.
Contrariwiſe alſo diuers borne vnder good
ſtarres vnto good deſtinies, in their growth haue either
ouerunne, orSi ingenia primitiùs vtiliter ſalubriter
                        •
                     ue ficta ſint, omnē illam vim quae de facto extrinſecùs ingruit inoffenſiùs tractabilius
                        •
                     ue tranſmittunt. Sin cō
                     tra, licet paruo aut nullo fatalis incōmodi conflictu vrgeantur, ſua tamen leuitate & voluntario impetu in aſſidua delicta & errores facilè ruunt. Gellius. come ſhort of their deſtinie. For although

the heauens doe worke by their hidden power and influence,
ſecret impreſſions, procliuities and inclinations,
as in all things vnder heauen, ſo in the conſtitutions
and tempers of men in their generation, conception
and birth: yet are their effectuall productions
thereof in menSecundae cauſae in natura quidem neceſſariae, in voluntate inclinantes, non cogentes. Scal. de Subt. themſelues variouſly alterable according
to education, inclination, occaſion, and circumſtance,
and therefore as touching the abſolute power of the heauens
euer varying. There is no man that can ſo farreSi homines nil ſponte, nil motu arbitra
                        •
                     io faciunt, non erunt 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſed ludicra & ridenda 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Gellius. Noct. Att. deny
himſelfe a man, as to make doubt of free arbitrarie choice
in himſelfe to do or not to do, to like or diſlike, to do that
he will, to refuſe that he nill. For if heauenly influences
compell or force mens actions, and their wils be led and
not free, vniuſtly any man ſhall be vniuſt, neither can the
lawes of God or men be iuſt ordained againſt wilfull
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Non contingit quempiam ea velle quae impoſſibilia ſunt aliter fieri. Ariſt Eth. 6. offenders:
but God is iuſt, and lawes are righteous, and therfore
mens actions are their owne, moued from an inward
power and eſſence peculiar vnto themſelues, and from an
end and intention which is their owne. Touching thoſe
therefore that from the heauens promiſe to tell fortunes,
to caſt figures, to turne Ephemerides for natiuities, for
good haps, for ill haps, ſucceſſes, loſſes, fortunate, infortunate
euents, he that hath but common ſenſe and reaſon, and
can thinke but worthily of himſelfe, mayCalliditas neque comprenſa neque percepta loquitur ſed ambagioſa, inter falſa atque vera pedetentim quaſi per tenebras ingrediens & multa tentā
                     do incidit aliquando repent
                        •
                      in veritatem. Gellius. eaſily diſcouer
their falſhood, impoſture, deceit and couſenage, howſoeuer
ſometimes euents may countenance; for hoodwinked
happe may ſometimes light vpon truth, and craft working
vpon credulitie, may make any truth of any falſhood. Thus
farre briefly concerning the powers of the heauens ouer
the minds and willes of men, their voluntary actions, their
conſequences and iſſues. Now concerning their vertue
ouer the bodies and humours of the ſicke and diſeaſed:
No man can deny the heauens as generallSunt enim ſuperiora formae conſeruatrices inferiorum, quia cauſa cauſarum tuetur ea quae fecit. Scalig. de Subtil. and ſuperiour
cauſes to haue power ouer all things created vnder heauen,
by whoſe influence and radiation all things increaſe,
grow, liue, and are conſerued, and by whoſe receſſe all

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
things mourne, wither, fall and droupe. This doth witneſſe
the ſommer and the winter, & all other ſeaſons, which the
heauens by their motion varying, bring vnto all things viciſſitudes,
changes, and alterations, and by their ſecret influence
imperceptibly diſtill different and contrary inclinations,
tempers, and affections. Hence winter, ſommer,
ſpring, and autumne, breed their peculiar diſeaſes. Euill
and maligne conſtellations beget plagues, peſtilences, and
other epidemiall contagions, which the aire as the great
mother of all things breathing doth fruitfully conceiue,
and plentifully bring forth. Vnto what ſight or ſenſe hath
euer bene vnknowne, either the pride or ſplendor of the
Sunne, mounting in his glorious altitude, or his eclipſed
force and light ſomneſſe oppoſed and abaſed? Who is ignorant
of the monethly metamorphoſis of the Moone?
What thing is or can be inſenſible of the Cynoſure, and
the nipping froſts? Is not the glorie of the heauens ouer
all, and are not his forces in all? Notwithſtanding generall
cauſes produce not particular effects, and the heauens are
but generallPendent noſtratia haec à ſuperioribus propter aequiuocam connexionem, non propter vniuocam effection
                        •
                     m communionem. Scalig. de Subt. cauſes, ſecond cauſes, outward cauſes, remote
cauſes, mediate cauſes, vnto thoſe things which immediatly
fall out in the bodies of men from inward cauſes
contained within themſelues, and therfore ſoly hauing
by their inſeparate neareneſſe an ineuitable and vnauoided
neceſſitie in themſelues. The inward cauſes of diſeaſes
are the humors of the body, which can neuer be ſeparated
from the body, becauſe in them conſiſteth the life and being
of the body. Therefore when either they corrupted frō
their kind, or offending in qualitie or quantitie, raiſe diſeaſes
in the body, how or by what meanes can the body
chooſe but be therewith affected, except it could leaue it
ſelfe? From any outward cauſe which is without, and of another
deuided and ſeparate nature, ſeparation doth free
from immediate neceſſitie or conſecution. Since then the
heauens are outward cauſes, and remoued cauſes, & therefore
neuer neceſſarily or ſimply of themſelues affect, and
the inward cauſes of diſeaſes ſticke nearer, and ſo cloſely

touch in their effects, that they ſuffer no interpoſition, it is
manifeſt, that the heauens haue no certaine or abſolute
h power in the diſeaſed,Communes cauſae communes habent effectus, nec vires aut actiones particularium flectunt ſimpliciter aut primariò. Cauſas verò immediatas neceſſariò ſequuntur effectus. nor can match or equall the immediate
force appropriate onely vnto the diſeaſe. The
heauens indeed do oft and much alſo preuaile in raiſing,
allaying, increaſing, diminiſhing, enraging and calming
the inward cauſes, but euer by a proportion, either with
the temper and conſtitution of the ſicke, or the humours
of their bodies, whether originally bred, or after by time
acquired. Saturne is therefore ſaid a great Lord ouer melancholy
bodies, in like manner the Moone ouer phlegmaticke,
Iupiter and the Sunne in ſanguine, Mars in cholericke,
(whether in their ſeuerall reuolutions apart, or their
coniunctions and combinations) and according to the
greater or leſſe proportion of their peculiar humors in the
bodie, and the diſpoſitions of the particular parts of the
body, they more or leſſe exerciſe their rule. Therefore alſo
according as meanes more or leſſe accrew to leſſen or increaſe
their proportion: ſo more or leſſe manifeſtly are
their effects and operations weakned or quickned. If the
wiſe Phyſition foreſeeing the euill approach of a maligne
and Saturnine aſpect, by diſcreete preuention abate and
withdraw the melancholy humor from the body, Saturne
ſhall thereby want a part of hisCauſae efficientis opus augetur eius aucta ſubſtantia. Gal. in aph. 5. lib. 6. Hipp. proportion, and as the
greater abundance thereof doth neceſſarily more aduance
and promote his efficacie, ſo the exiguitie there of muſt
needs abridge and obſcure it. The like may be ſaid of all other
aſpects in their ſeuerall deſtined and appropriate humours.
For the conſtellation of it ſelfe ſimplyAſtra vim non neceſſitatem inferunt. Ptolomaeus. cannot effect
anything, nor can build or ruine any being, which firſt
hath not the ſeminarie and prime foundation thereof in it
ſelf, both as his ſubiect and his meanes. And this is the true
cauſe, that the body either by Phyſick reduced to iuſt temper
in it ſelfe, or to an equall contemper of all the humors,
or of it ſelfe ſtrong and healthfull, in the moſt different
conſtellations doth commonly find indifference of alteration.
And this is the reaſon that many in the moſt Saturnine

and deadly conſtellations liue, as the contrary alſo
cauſe that many in the moſt faire and Iouiall die. From this
vncontrouerſed ground, Aſtronomers generally themſelues
aduiſe and preſcribe meanes, both to preuent the
harmes of influences to come, and alſo to redreſſe them
preſent, and giue vnto the Phyſitions hand powers and
remedies to command, countermand, delay, allay, and aboliſh.
And from this reaſon P
                     •
                  olomy himſelfe, the Prince
and father of Aſtrologie, in vnfortunate aſpects doth aduiſe
to conſult the prudent Phyſition, and by his counſell
and helpe to decline the maligne conſtellation. For right
remedies rightly adminiſtred vnto the diſeaſes and their
inward cauſes, by the decree of God and Nature neceſſarily
oppugne, allay, preuent and expell diſeaſes, and therefore
are not preſcribed vnto outwardExternis cauſis nihil praeſcribitur, ſumma tamen diligentia perquirendae praecognoſcendae
                        •
                     ue ſunt vt deducant in interiorum cognitionem Gal. de Meth. Med. cauſes, but onely
vnto the inward. And although the outward cauſe haply
firſt raiſed or impo
                     •
                  ed the diſeaſe, yet in the cure is not
that cauſe ſo much reſpected, but his effect (which is the
diſeaſe it ſelfe) or the inward cauſes by which, and through
which, the outward had admiſſion to their effects. If the
inward cauſes (the antecedent and the immediate) be remoued,
it is a miracle, and a thing ſupernaturall, that there
ſhould remaine hisCum efficientibus cauſis neceſſe eſt accidentia tolli Gal. in aph. 22. lib. 2. effect, the diſeaſe; but the outward
cauſe may be remoued, and yet hisSi in vna requalibet leui cauſae ratio claudicet, ſimul in reliquis vbi videtur abundare meritò titubabit, vbique 
                        •
                     
                     nim ſibi conſtare debet cauſa ſi quidē vera eſt. Gal. de dign. Pulſib. effect therein not
follow him. Thus corrupt and hote conſtitutions of the
aire, and conſtellations from the heauen, breed peſtilent
and hote diſeaſes in the body, and the diſeaſes ſtill remain▪
when the conſtitutions or conſtellations are changed; but
when the peſtilent & hote humors, and diſpoſitions within
the body, which are inward cauſes, are throughly remoued,
there can no ſuch effects continue, be farther fed, or
maintained. The outward cauſe may alſo be continually
preſent, yet particular ſubiects or bodies, feele orQui quidem ex Solis incendio feb
                        ••
                     citat ab agentis cauſae caliditate affici Natura aptus eſt. Gal de diſ
                        •
                     . febr. participate
no effect: but if the inward cauſe grow in quantity or
quality vnto the exceſſe, it is impoſſible it ſhould not in
the ſame moment produce the like ſenſible effect. For example,
in ſome heauenly coniunctions or combinations
there may ariſe an hydropicall conſtellation, though many

particulars be nothing therwith affected, or therto therby
inclined; but if hydropical humors or cauſes abound within
the body, it is impoſſible they ſhould there be without
not only the imminence, but preſent cōſecutiō of the dropſy.
By theſe examples it is not obſcure, that the heauens are
a forreine inuaſion, and therefore more eaſily admitCauſa nulla ſiue aetherea, ſiue ſyderalis, 
                        ••
                     ne patientis aptitudine agete poteſt. Galen de di
                        ••
                     . Febr. 1. interception,
and that diſeaſes are euer to be ſuſpected, becauſe
euer preſent. Where there is an vnproportioned congruitie
or ſuſceptibilitie in the bodie and humors with the
heauenly inclination, there the heauens haue no edge.
Where the diſeaſe hath once taken poſſeſſion in the body,
the neceſſitie of his effect is abſolute andCauſas immediatas neceſſariò ſequuntur effectus. Ideoque effectus immediatus eſt ſignum 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſuae cauſae. vnauoidable,
Quoties vehementiores morbi premunt aut inſtabunt, vt in ſuffocante pleuritide, angina, ſanguinis immoderato fluore, extrema vaſorum plenitudine, in alijs denique morbis qui nimiū praecipites ſunt, nullus aſtrorum delectus haben
                        •
                     dus aut cura. Fernel. de hora Phlebot. howſoeuer the heauens or any outward cauſes are diſpoſed.
He therefore that finding the inward diſpoſition, ſhall
for the ſuperſtitious feare of ſtarres delay with ſpeed to
ſeeke preſent remedie, or in hope of forrein ſupply from
conſtellations, neglect certaine reſcue more neare hand, is
a foole, a mad man, or worſe then either. The firſt is continually
acted by common ſimple deluded people, the other
patronaged by obſtinate defendants of vaine paradoxes;
and the third by our impudent Aſtrologers proſtitute
for gaine. I commend not ſenſleſſe moroſitie in the
peruerſe reiection of true Aſtronomie, ſo farre as is commodious
for Phyſicke vſe (which reaſon it ſelfe, experience
and all the Ancients worthily extoll) but with reaſon and
authoritie, I diſlike ſuperſtitious and needleſſeOptimi qui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aſtronomi iudiciariā aſtronomiam tanquam vnam & futilē & nullo fundamento ſubnixā poſtquā multū. diu
                        •
                     ue verſarūt, repudiarunt. Mornae. de verit. relig. curoſitie
in the ouer-religious eſteeme thereof. He that obſerueth
the wind, ſhall not ſow: and he that regardeth the clouds,
ſhall not reape, ſaith Salomon, Eccleſiaſtes 114. And I
cannot but deteſt the ſhameleſſe dayly couſenage and impoſture,
heatheniſhly practiſed by many, vnder the colour,
pretext and falſeIn praeclariſſima arte Aſtronomica curioſa vanitate in obſeruationes veras ſe implicāte, ſuperſtitioſa & aliena inculcata reperiūtur. Camer. de diuin. ſhadowes of true Aſtronomy. An example
here of may not impertinently for better illuſtration
be here propoſed. A gentleman of Northampotonſhire diſeaſed
by an immedicable vlcer of the reines, was moued
by his friends (after my deſpaire of his recouerie ſignified

priuatly vnto them) to call the aduice of a famous Ephemerides-maſter,
who coming vnto him, and not knowing
(and therefore not conſidering his diſeaſe) from the counſel
table of his Ephemerides pronounced, that if the patient
ſuruiued 3. or 4. daies (which we muſt ſuppoſe were of an il
aſpect) vntill the next enſuing Tueſday (which was, it ſeemeth,
a fairer influence) he made no doubt of his recouerie
and life. But he ſuruiued three moneths or thereabout, and
in the interim neither did the aforeſaid ill diſpoſed ſtarres
any apparent hurt, nor the wel diſpoſed any eminent good:
but after the forenamed three moneths, the ſtarres brake
promiſe, the diſeaſe kept touch, the gentlemanAſtrologi dum coeli ſcrutantur plagas, quod ante pedes eſt, nemo eorum ſpectat. Cicero. died. The
reaſon in the diſeaſe was manifeſt: without a new creation
or generation, a part in it ſelfe radically, and in the whole
ſubſtance periſhed, can neuer be reſtored. The diſeaſe therfore
could not lie, nor all the heauens could performe either
a new generation (becauſe the patient could not again
enter into his mothers womb) nor a new creation (becauſe
the world could not againe returne into the old chaos.)
How vainly then did here the Aſtrologer gape and gaze
after vncertaine ſtarres, when the true knowledge of the
diſeaſe, the cauſe and nature thereof (wherein conſiſteth
an infallible ground) manifeſted the certaine iſſue? How
fooliſhly and ignorantly (or ſhameleſly and impudently)
did Aſtrologicall ſimple folly or intollerable impoſture,
either cunningly and wittingly ſeeme to looke aloft for
that which lay neare hand below, or ſimply ſtumble ouer
ſo plaine truth, and tumble into ſo ridiculous and groſſe error?
And thus it is apparent, both how vncertaintly Aſtrologers

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Leonid. Tranſtulit ſic quidam: Vatum ſidereos quiſquis ſcrutare meatus Diſpereas, mendax non niſi vana ſonas. Obſtetrix tibi ſtultitia eſt, audacia mater. O miſer & proprij non benegnare probri. fable, and how certainly diſeaſes do not lie: and
who comparing the one with the other, cannot ſee, in
which truth hath more euidence, and truſt ſecuritie? There
is a ſober andSyderum occaſus & ortus cognoſcendi à Medico artis perito, ratione morborū vulgariū & epidemiorum, quia hi temporum mutationae, tempeſtatum
                        •
                     ue vi ſuſcitantur. Hippocr. lib de Loc. aere, aqu. lib. Epid. lib. aph. 3. modeſt vſe of Aſtronomie,In vnaquaque regione vbi obire artem Medicam inſtituimus, cuiuſque ſyderis emerſus occaſuſ
                        •
                     ue perſpexiſſe neceſſarium eſt, quia tempora ab his anni circunſcribuntur. Galen. in lib. 1. Hippocr. de Morb. vulg. either for generall

prediction, or particular accommodation vnto particular
ends: both theſe (thereby putting a difference betweene
the honeſt vſe and falſe abuſe thereof) Ptolomey
himſelfe hath bounded within that which is either manifeſtly
naturall and according to
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . nature, or in reaſon
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . poſſible
or contingent. Wha
                     •
                   with theſe conditions Aſtronomie
doth affoord vnto the benefite of the ſicke, is to be
eſteemed and guided by the prudent Phyſition, according
to particular neceſſities, circumſtances and conſiderations,
as either the heauenly inclinations ſhall ſeeme
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Hippoc. proportioned
vnto them, or they liable to thoſe generall and common
cauſes. Whatſoeuer doth wander further, or is extended
vnto other vſes then theſe, is not ingenuous nor proper
vnto a Phyſition, but is abuſe of time, himſelfe and others,
trifling vaine idleneſſe, foule & vnlearned falſhood.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Of Coniectors by vrine.
               
                  AS the heauens themſelues are not free
from the inſinuation of impoſture and
deceit (thus cunningly doth euill winde
it ſelfe into the likeneſſe & ſhape of goodnes:
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :)
ſo is nothing almoſt vnder the heauen
created, which is not made an inſtrument,
a viſar and ba
                     •
                  d vnto adulterate ſeeming, lying and
couſenage. The aire, the fire, the waters, the fowle, the fiſh,
and infinite otherHinc 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. creatures, yea their definite and ſingle
Hinc Extiſpicia 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Magia 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. parts apart, are all made prodigious inchantments▪ and
ſnares of ignorant minds, begetting faith vnto falſhood,
and truſt and credit vnto vntruth. As Art vpon true and
proued grounds doth promiſe according to good reaſon
faire likelihood, ſo impoſture vpon wondered and vnknowne
concluſions profeſſeth aſſurance in falſhood, and
certaintie in impoſſibilitie; which while wiſe men contemne,
credulous fooles admire and follow. Amongſt many

other, the inſpection of the vrine is in this kinde too
commonly moſt palpably abuſed by many that carrie the
name and badge of learning. It is a common practiſe in
theſe dayes, by a colourable deriuation of ſuppoſed cunning
from the vrine, to foretell caſualties, and the ordinarie
euents of life, conceptions of women with child, and
definite diſtinctions of the male and female in the wombe;
which while impudence doth gloriouſly ſet forth, the
common ſimplicitie doth worſhip and reuere. It is vnknowne
to none learned, that the vrine is truly of it ſelfe
and properlyVrina primò & per ſe verè & propriè antecedentes morbo rum cauſas, affectus partium naturalium ſecundaue regionis indicat, tum venarum, renum & veſicae. Galen. in Prorrhet. Hipp. comment. 2. indication of no other immediate diſpoſitions,
but ſuch as are of the veines and liuer, the bloud and
humors; the antecedent cauſes of diſeaſes, and the naturall
facultie giuing onelyConiunctas morborum cauſas extra venas, affectus tertiae regionis, pulmonis, cerebri ex accidente & incertò vrina monſtat: affectus hepatis, venarum, renum manifeſtè & ſine dubio demonſtrat. Galen. in Prorrh. Hipp. coniecture at the diſeaſes of other
parts by conſequent, by the knowledge of thePlethorae ſcilicet & Cacochymiae à quibus omnes morbi primum fiunt, deinde fouentur. common
and antecedent cauſes of all diſeaſes. Erroneouſly therfore
the common ſort imagine, that in the vrine is contained
the ample vnderſtanding of all things neceſſary to informe
a Phyſition, and from thence common expectation doth
generally deceiue it ſelfe in the proofe of a Phyſition by
his iudgement of the vrine. Vnto the ſatisfaction of a Phyſitions
knowledge, are many wayes and helpes beſides the
vrine, as materiall, and in many caſes of more ſpeciall moment,
neceſſitie and vſe. In the pulſe are properly and ſoly
apparent manifold medications, which in the vrine Lynceus
himſelfe could neuer ſee. This is the cauſe that many
euen vnto the laſt moment of a languiſhing life, continue
in their vrine not onely no ſhadow of danger, but faire
and flattering formes of lying ſafely, the pulſePrognoſtica quibus praeuidemus fitne moriturus aeger, aut conualiturus, certa ſumuntur à pulſu, qui vitalium & ſpiritualium partium affectus arteriae pulſatione monſtrat euidenter. Galen. lib. de decret. Hipp. & Plat. onely by it
ſelfe-forewarning the miſchiefe. The animall facultie, the
affections of the third region, and habite of the bodie, and
many other particular parts haue their peculiarOmnes quae nutriuntur particulae excrementum aliquod creant, vtique non negamus. Galen lib. 1. de nat. facult. excretions,
which onely keepe the propertie of their indication

vnto themſelues, communicating no partSic ſudor ſuccorum qui in toto corpore abundant nota eſt: vrina verò ſuccorum qui in vaſis. Gal. de ſanit. tuend. lib. 4. vnto the vrine:
neither is the iudgement by the vrine euer infallible, or
Nos autem ingenu
                        •
                      fatemur ferè totam partem ſemeioticen in vrinis eſſe coniecturalem, ſed coniecturae in multis ſunt artificiales, quae proximè accedunt ad veritatem. Rondelet. de vrin. not deceiuable, euen there where it is properly and ſoly
allowed chiefe eſteeme, diuers impediments both poſitiuely
and priuatiuely foreſtalling his right eſtimate: poſitiuely
either by aſſumption of diuers meates,Alteratur ſaepiſſimè vrina nouiſſimè ſumptis Rhabarbaro, Terebinthina, Violis, &c. drinkes orVrina immoderato potu facilè diluitur, & aliena permiſtione conſpergitur. Fernel. de vrin. medicines,
or when diuers diſeaſesIn eodem corpore ſaepe plutes occurrunt morbi, compoſiti, impliciti, connexi, congeneres, degeneres, contrarij, varij. concurring in the bodie,
together ſend downe their ſeuerall or contrary recrements
into the vrine, and thereby confound the true iudgement
of any of them therein; or thereby priuatiuely, when either
by ſtoppages (which diuerſly happen in the tortuous
windings and turnings betweene the liuer and the veines,
and conduits thence deſcending vnto the reines and bladder)
the ſubſtance, colour and contents of the vrine are
Hoc indicatur in 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in valida renum obſtructione à grumo, calculo, lenta & viſcida pituita, in generali etiam obſtructione à crapula, ebrietate, plethora. intercepted, and the thinne aquoſitie oft onely iſſueth by
ſo ſtraight a percolation, as can carrie no ſigne, no
ſight or ſhew of the naturall eſtate of the vrine in it
ſelfe; or elſe when the naturall heate withdraweth it ſelfe
vnto ſome interiorHinc in apoſtematibus internis vrinae apparent ſaepe tenues & vix coloratae. intention of nature within. When
therefore the vrine deſcendeth in his owne ſubſtance,
quantitie, qualitie and contents, without impediment or
hinderance, it is a certaine, proper and true demonſtration
of the true affects of the liuer, veines, the ſecond concoction,
and of the diſeaſes of thoſe parts which in his deſcent
it waſheth, and giueth vnto the wiſe Phyſition an vninterrupted
certaine iudgement of it ſelfe, as when it deſcendeth
in borrowedIn aegris ſaepe tranſmittitur aliena materia ad vrinas tum criticè tum ſymptomaticè, in ſanis per proportionem correſpondet bibitis & aſſumptis vrina. Actuar. lib. 1. de iud. vrin. liquor and colours, it reporteth rather
his rubs and interception by the way. Hence the learned
Phyſition, either by the firſt immediatly inſtructeth himſelfe
to a direct oppoſition vnto the diſcouered diſeaſe; or
by the other, finding the impediment that hindered the

right vnderſtanding and diſcouerie, he thereby informeth
himſelfe to remoue that impediment, or elſe finding it
thereby vndiſcouerable, ſearcheth it by another diſquiſition
or inueſtigation, by another way or method, vntill he
haue attained the right end of a true Phyſition, which is
the prudent reſcue of the diſtreſſed life and health, and not
the falſe trumpe of his owne vndeſerued praiſe, promoting
vnworthineſſe to gaine & lucre. Thus he neither deceiueth
himſelfe with vaine expectation, nor others with
lying profeſſion, but diuerſly in both maketh a prudent
and good vſe of both, according to the indication, whether
certaine and vndeceiuing, or doubting & ambiguous.
And as the ends are diuers, of thoſe that view the vrine
to coniure vp wonders, and thoſe that eſteeme the vrine
to detect the diſeaſe for the good of the diſeaſed: ſo are
their vnderſtandings differing, the one trulyArt
                        •
                     s improbae apparens bonum, verae verum bonum comparant. Galen. directed by
reaſon and iudgement, the other by nimbleneſſe of couſenage
and circumuention of ſimplicity and ignorance;
whereof the chiefe vſe is not the benefite of the ſicke, but
the colour of fraud and comodity by deceit. Touching the
oracles of Fortune pretended in the vrine, and their floating
fauours in ſo low an ebbe, thoſe that too commonly
in their owne experience find good drinke to ſteale their
wit out of their braine, may haply imagine it thence deſcended
into the vrine. I leaue them there to ſeeke it, that
want it ſo much, and deſerue it ſo litle. The mention is vnworthie
mention. Concerning the looking of vnborne
babes in an vrinarie glaſſe, and the making of old fooles in
loue with their owne reflexion: to vnmaske the common
illuſion in this kind, I will briefly point vnto the diſcouerie
of the folly, whereinto entring their ſerious cogitation
& due recognition, they may more amply after exerciſe &
ſatisfie themſelues, whom their owne fatall ſtupidity doth
not detaine, or reſolute obſtinacie preoccupate. The conceptions
of women, together with the accidents accompanying
the ſame, do neceſſarily bring forth generall alterations
vnto the whole body, partly by the conſequent ſtoppages

of the body, and partly by diſtracting the naturall
heate and ſpirits from other parts vnto that new intentiō,
whereby is added either quantitie or qualitie, or both vnto
the bloud and humors, and from thence the vrine receiuing
different tincture & ſubſtance doth manifeſtly report
the ods. Yet for that this ſodain productiō of change
in the body iſſueth from conceptiō only by accident, therof
being truly and immediatly no cauſe it ſelfe, but an occaſion
onely mouing other cauſes, as commonly or more
cōmonly moued, both by diuerſe kind of other obſtructiōs
beſide, & alſo by other diſtractions of the naturall heate &
ſpirits, by criticall intentions, concoctions, & maturations
of diſeaſes; therfore is the confuſed alteration of the vrine
found vpon conceptiō indefinite, & can be no ſpecial note
of cōception. This is alſo further manifeſted by the alterations
and effects themſelues following conception, which
not onely in differing bodies, but in the verie ſame, are ſeldome
the ſame, but cōmonly farre vnlike, yea and oft contrary
at one time from themſelues at another. This women
themſelues in their owne experience muſt needs witneſſe,
ſeldome obſeruing the changes of bodies after cōception
in all alike, & oft each in themſelues finding the particular
manners of their owne alteration farre diſcrepant. This
their oft deceit in themſelues, miſtaking, and vncertaintie
in themſelues commonly doth teſtifie, ſometimes ſuſpecting
thēſelues with child when they proue diſeaſed, ſomtimes
doubting diſeaſes being only with child. Since then
conception is neither in it ſelfe a ſole, nor a ſeparate cauſe,
nor any true immediate cauſe of the alterations of the body
following therupon, but onely the occaſion mouing other
cauſes, and thoſe cauſes are as indifferently alſo moued
by many other occaſions beſides vnto the ſame effects,
their generalitie doth diſcharge their proprietie in
this particular, and the common indication in the vrine any
ſpeciall ſignification proper vnto conception alone.
This demonſtratiuely proueth the vncertainty of the ſigns
of conception that are common with other in the vrine.

Now concerning the ſmall certaintie of the ſignes that are
therto ſuppoſed peculiar: the inward diſpoſitions and affectiōs
of inward parts, which by the outward ſenſe cānot be
deprehended, are by threePartem intetiorem aff
                        •
                     ctā 
                     
                        ••
                     dicant Actio 
                        •
                     ae
                        •
                     a, Dolor vel ametria in ex
                     
                        ••
                     etis aut retenris. waies or meanes ſoly to be detected.
The firſt is the action or function properEa pars per ſe aut per conſenlum laborat cu
                     
                        •
                     us functio eſt laeſa. and ininherent
in the partie. The ſecond is the properExc
                        •
                     eta naturalis oeconomiae fideles nuntij. excretions
proceeding fromht he partie. The third is a diſtinct
feeling orVbi dolor ibi morbus. paine in the part. The proper functions of any
part can neuer be diſioyned from the part, and therefore
appeare not in the vrine. Paine or other ſenſe & feeling are
euer vnſeparable companions with their patient parts,
whereof the vrine hauing no ſenſe, can haue no part, and
therefore therein alſo is vnſignificant. It onely then remaineth,
that the affection and conception of the wombe ſoly
doth diſcouer it ſelfe by the determinate excretions therto
peculiar. The peculiar excretiōs of any part do bring teſtimony
vnto the truth of their indicatiō, either by theQuicquid è corpore excernitur vel eſt toto genere praeter naturam, vel de ſubſtantia partis affectae, vel parti adnatum, vel coctionis excrementum. cō
                  comitance
of part of the ſubſtance of the part, or of part of
ſome ſubſtance either naturally, orby ſome il diſpoſitiō adherent
to the part, or of the ordinary recrements of concoctions,
or other preparatiōs, or operations of nature in the
part. Whether excretions in al theſe kinds proceed frō the
womb, & how & with what differences & diſtinction, it is
not here neceſſary to determine. It is ſufficiēt that the proper
indicatiō of the diſpoſitiōs of that part muſt neceſſarily
be deriued from the excretions therto appropriate: which
therfore proueth the vrine no right prognoſticator of any
affectiō therof iſſuing frō other & different veſſels. It may
be obiected, that by the contiguity of the wombe & bladder,
and the neare termination of their extremities, the expulſiue
facultie of the ſeminarie veſſels, mouing ſometimes
with the vrinarie, may thereby mixing their recrements
connexe their indications. This is true, yet not alwaies, but
rarely and ſeldome true, and therfore vncertainly hapning
doth doubtfully promiſe or ſignifie. The expulſiue motiōs
and offices of the ſeminarie parts are not ſo ordinarie, ſo
frequent, ſo common, as the vrinarie, neither doth their

raritie in their motion alwaies then meete or conſent with
the vrine, and ſometimes alſo meeting therewith, it giueth
notwithſtanding impertinent indication vnto the inquiſition
of conception, other commonIndican
                        •
                      mē
                     ſes albi grauidarum qui ſaepe in bonis habentur, rubri etiam qui ſaepiſſimè per anaſtomoſin venarum exteriorum ceruicis vteri & crurales dicuntur fluidi ſunt. recrements after conception,
no leſſe or rather more deſcending then thoſe
which are onely conſequents of conception. And thus is
made apparent the falſhood and deceit of the ordinarie
profeſſion of the prediction of conception by the inſpection
of vrine, which alſo the moſtVeteres Graeci omnes omnino praetermiſerunt mentionem ſignorum conceptus in vrina. Mongius & Coſtaeus in annot in tract. Auicen de vrinis. ingenuous and iudicious
writers and authours from their owne long proofe
& experiēce haue euer generally exploded as impious impoſture.
The true Artiſt doth promiſe nothing beyōd that
which reaſon doth demōſtrate, & art habitually performe:
the deceiuer by faire pollicitations bewitcheth ſimple credulitie,
ridiculouſly to delight in his owne wrong and
groſſe colluſion. It is verie worthy note and memorie, that
a great and learned clearke Cornelius Agrippa, retracting
his former wont therein, doth ingenuouſly confeſſe of his
affectation and circumuention of common admiration by
his ſuppoſed magicke and Aſtrologicall skill,Vrinarum inſpectione abuti ad praeſentiendum an mulier conceperit vel non, impoſtorū eſt, non medicorum, licet permulti nugas inid genus cognitionis & cautiones ſcripſerint. Ioannes 
                        •
                     ebon. de therap. puerp. and it doth
well fit and ſettle inſtruction and ſatisfaction in this our
particular alſo, though of another kind I haue bene (Ego quoque hanc ar
                        •
                     em à parentibus puer imbibi, deinde non modicum temporis & laboris in ea amiſi, &c. Vide reliqua ex authore tractatu de Aſtrologia. Vide in marg. c. 3. p. 101. ſaith
he) from my childhood by my parents carefully iuſtituted
in Aſtrologie, and in riper age and vnderſtanding afterwards
ſpent therein no ſmall time. At length by long and
certaine proofe I found it wholly compound and founded
of meere fictions, and toyes of vaine imaginations: wearied
therefore and grieued with my time and ſtudy ſo long
and ſo idlely ſpent, I laboured to caſt away the irkeſome
and vnpleaſing memorie thereof out of my mind, and neuer
in my thoughts to entertaine it.Vrinam de impraegnatione nil certi ſignificare omnes antiqui crediderunt, ideo de hac re nullas notas reliquerunt. Nam cum foetus ſit extra venas & de venoſo genere tantùm indicet vrina, non poteſt aliquid certò indicare, niſi adiunctis alijs. Rondeletius de vrinis. But the violent and
forcible importunacie of great and mightie Potentates,

(who vſually preuaile to abuſe great and worthie wits vnto
baſe arts and offices) againe compelled me vpon the
fame rocke, and my owne priuate profite againe inticed
me to thinke it dutie and honeſtie to make profitable vſe
of wilfull folly, and with toyes to pleaſe theſe that ſo much
deſired toyes. The ſame Apologie for the exerciſe of vrinarie
Praeſtigiaturae opinionem meritò referūt, qui non ex ſpeculatione medica, ſed ex diuinandi quapiam arte in morbis praedicunt. Gal. lib. 10. de ſimp. Med. facultat. Hiſtoria.
                   diuination, their owne conſciences vnto themſelues
do make that vſe it, but they loath the example, and
truth is hatefull becauſe incommodious. It was ſometimes
my happe to witneſſe the free profeſſion of a dying Phyſition
vnto this point. He inhabited Northampton many
yeares, was in nation Iriſh, in manners homely, in learning
of me diocrity, but in the auguration by vrine of conceptiō
was generally reputed excelling, and in a fortunateneſſe
therein oft poſing ſome better learned. Three or foure
daies before his death (expected and knowne vnto himſelfe)
while by his owne earneſt requeſt then (as oft before)
I was preſent, motion was made vnto him that
he would commend vnto poſteritie that skill by which
hee liued with many ſo much eſteemed and admired.
His anſwer was free and ingenuous, to this effect: It is
vnworthy poſteritie, vnworthy the name of Art. I haue
long with the felicitie of a good opinion exerciſed it, and
with tried certaintie know it vncertaintie, and certaine deceit.
Simplicitie is euer ready vnwittingly to betray it ſelf,
and it is eaſie to him (that is therein much and continually
exerciſed) in common people palpably to ſee their ſimple
hearts, in their eyes, in their geſture, in their countenances,
and other circumſtances, of themſelues vnobſerued and
vnconſidered. I haue ſometime by good hap bene fortunate
in my predictions by vrine, of conceptions, which
becauſe when it ſometime happened, it ſeemed a wonder;
it therefore was euer largely tranſported many waies, and
much buſied and employed common talke. I haue proued
therein an hundreth fold more often and more commonly
in mine owne knowledgeTemerè, callidè, & aſtutè dicta aliquando incidunt in veritatem. ſed quae vera dicunt prae caeteris quae mē
                     tiuntur non eſt pa
                        •
                     s milleſima. Gellij dictum de Aſtrologis. falſe, yet becauſe to
erre was no wonder, (and therefore not ſo much worth

either relating or obſeruing) as alſo for that it was for the
moſt part but priuatly to ſome ſew knowne, and oft times
alſo the ſhame of illuſion in the moſt put the report thereof
vnto ſilence, the contradictorie inſtances ſtill died vnremembred,
but fame and opinion ſuruiued and proſpered.
It euer excuſed my deceitfull cuſtome vnto my ſelfe,
that I deceiued none but ſuch as either deſired or deſerued
it, who by their inſidiation of the proofe of my skill either
prouoked it, or by their vnreaſonable earneſtneſſe extorted
it. In this and other the like, ſome few dayes before his
death, he thusVixit qua voluit viuere parte magis. died vnto his former life, and liued vnto
his ſoule and ſauing health. And thus it is manifeſted, both
by reaſon and alſo by the laſt teſtimonie of dying experience,
how the vrinary diuining for prediction of conception,
forſaking the brighter ſtreames and clearer fountaines
of detecting truth, doth hide it ſelfe in the puddle water,
there laying ſhining baites for dazeled fiſh. The more ſilence,
the better fiſhing; leſt therefore I may haply too
much preiudice the pleaſing ſpoile of willing fooles, I will
thinke that which hath bene alreadie ſaid vnto any other,
ſufficient intimation, aduiſing honeſt minds from the iudicious
Phyſition, by the plaineſt information to draw the
Incertam & plerunque dubiam mercedē referet qui periclitatione Medicos tanquam vates augurari coget. Conſultor verò prudēs & fidelis ſani conſilij fructū percipiet. Fern. de vrin. directeſt counſell, leſt by the vaine proofe of a deceiuing
worth, ſeeking that is not, they loſe that might be more
proper and pertinent vnto their health.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Of Trauellers.
               
                  AS from all parts of the world true knowledge
doth fetch home his ſubſtantiall
grounds to enrich it ſelfe; ſo falſhood and
lying imitation doth likewiſe deriue deceiuable
colours to beguile the imprudent.
Hence vnder the name of Trauellers
ſuppoſed much knowing, by much ſeeing of things worthy
to be knowne (the common expectation of wonder

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
giuing glad entertainment, and deſire of noueltie ioyous
welcome) inſufficiencie clothed with this outward figure
of ſufficiencie, doth oft enter into the rights of better deſert,
and by caſuall pofiting ſome few, deceiueth moſt, and
ruineth many. Trauell is required in a Phyſition, not as any
part of his eſſence, but as an ornament, receiuing the eſſence
and perfecting of it ſelfe from the eſſence and perfection
of a foreſetled and continuing vnderſtanding. The
generall theory and ſpeculation of any knowledge or ſcience
whatſoeuer, is in no ſoile or countrie a ſtranger to
them that duly and truly ſeeke it, nor doth vnderſtanding
meete, or is taken vp in high waies; but to the moſt ſecret
retired thoughts reflecteth the brightneſſe of his true
worth, and from the perfect fulneſſe of time, and thence
accompliſhed brightneſſe of his beames doth ſeaſonably
breake forth, and ſoly giue the rectified perſpectiue of
particular obiects. In the occurrents of trauell, it is indeed
the ſenſe that conducteth the obiect to the vnderſtanding,
but it is a pre-exiſting power and abilitie in the

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Scientia eſt, intellectus inſtrumentum. Ariſtot. vnderſtanding it ſelfe that rightly iudgeth and diſpoſeth
theRes ipſae ſaepe aut praepoſterae, aut confuſae, aut falſa ſpecie ſolēt ſeſe offerre. obiect. If therefore the vnderſtanding be either in it
ſelfe originally defectiue, or by want of time vnſetled, or
by precept and doctrine not habitually formed; the ſenſe
may truly, rightly and continually preſent, but the vnderſtanding
ſhall either falſly or not fully apprehend, diſtinguiſh,
digeſt or diſpoſe, whereby diſorder in want of right
method, doth rather multiply confuſion then increaſe
right vſe. Hence many things worthy notice eſcape ignorance,
vniuſt reductions are commonly miſcarried to improper
ſubiects, good vſes are vnſeaſonably or vnreaſonably
wreſted, miſtaking obuious, right eſtimates either for
the moſt part vnobſeruedly ouerpaſſed, or caſually well
hapning. For where wiſedome doth not leade trauel forth,
knowledge guide it on, prudence accompanie it, good deſire
vphold it, the true end perſwade and call it forth; folly
eaſily ſeduceth, and depraued ends peruert the right fruition.
Hence we ſee commonly many trauell farre, and bring

home litle. Some make ſwift aduenture, and ſlow returne,
with late repentance. Some bring home more then they
would, ſome more then they ſhould; and all that begin
trauell with raw iudgement, for the moſt part come home
perpetually after drunken with opinion. Different countries,
aires, people, cuſtomes, manners, zones and climates,
do fruitfully expoſe commodious conſideration vnto thoſe
whoſe iudicious view and exchange doth know rightly to
entertaine them in the way, and in many examples of many
worthy Phyſitions, the benefits thereby haue euer bene
conſpicuous. Amongſt the reſt, Galens induſtrious commutation
of diſtant regions, by his owne writings are not
obſcure. But he that entreth into Galens trauels without
GalensCoelum non animū mutant qui trans mare currunt. Horat. mind, may exceed him in the paines, but ſhall neuer
come neare vnto him in the fruite and worth. This is
the reaſon that our common trauelling Phyſitions for the
moſt part (the learned onely in all places and countries
worthily purchaſing vnto themſelues due reuerence) do
oft from beyond the ſea bring home ſtrange preparations
and medicines, but litle wit and diſcretion ſafely to vſe
them; by the great opinion of farre fetched wondes diſtracting
and couſening the needfull inquiſition of a more inward
worth in themſelues to warrant their accommodation,
without which, both heedleſſe proofe and needleſſe
vſe, do oft find in the beſt excellence a harmfull goodnes:
and howſoeuer haply commending it ſelfe in his owne
propertie and vertue, yet oft ſtinging vnto the heart buſie,
vnneceſſarie and vnaduiſed medling. It is growne ſo common
in theſe daies to entertaineQuia inopes ſunt & indocti in patrijs ſuis viuere non poſſunt bene noti. Galen. de ſui temporis pſeudomedicis, lib. praedict. fugitiues vnder the former
pretexts, that it ſhall eaſe my paines to report the miſchiefes,
being growne too common to need any other notice
then their owne vglineſſe, each poſt proclaiming their
woodden worth, and their painted clouts euery where
hanging vp their raggedCyclopum crudele genus, Viſceribus miſcrorum & ſanguine veſcitur atro. executions. It is vſual with theſe
men, mouing their wandring and vncertaine ſteps from
place to place and from towne to towne, by faire deluding
promiſes and pollicitations to draw theHoc ſolo à latronibus differentes quod in vrbe non montibus ſcelera perpetrant. Gal. lib. praedict. liues of ſimple

credulous men, for their owne gaine, into their owne
hands; and after they haue by their common deſperate
courſes prouoked and drawne foorth vnwilling death
(when they ſee him coming) to runne away, and to leaue
the miſerable beguiled innocent in his angrie iawes, to anſwer
their raſh and needleſſe chalenge. The wiſer ſort haue
better learned to know them, but the ſimple are ſtillQuod non cognoſcantur ab omnibus, hoc ipſum malitiam naturae ipſorum auget, & vſque ijs inſidiantur qui ea quae verſutè ſemper perpetrant non norunt. Galen. lib. praedict. their
prey. It neceſſarily now followeth vnto the generall concluſion
of all that hath bene before ſaid, that both the trauels
of the mind, and contemplation in the former tractates
mentioned, and alſo the change of places and countries
here ſpecified, with all other ſenſe-informing meanes and
inquiſitions of knowledge and ſcience, without precedent
right inſtitution, and ſetled incorrupt ſeeds of ſelect vnderſtanding,
ſhall all euer doubtfully, and for the moſt part
lamely ſucceed vnto timely growth or ripe perfection. For
knowledge muſt euer go before induſtrie as a guide, and
particular practiſe follow generall rule, which he that hath
not firſt in mind fully and truly conceiued, muſt needs
want the idea that formeth an vnderſtanding action. And
thus hath it hitherto appeared negatiuely, now it followeth
affirmatiuely, where true election may make right
choice of a good Phyſition.
               The end of the ſecond Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD
BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               The true Artiſt his right deſcription and election.
               
                  THe corruptible condition of all
things inHaec 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      illa 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ſubſtance, & perpetuall
mutabilitie and alteration in a accidents,
doth euery moment beget
ſuch diuers oddes and differences
in the ſame things, that their former
conſiderations and reſpects,
can neuer conſtantly, truly, and indeed
long continue them to be the ſame. Hence by viciſſitude
it ordinarily cometh to paſſe, that of thoſe things
whereof lately ſeeemed certaintie, thereof by continuall
acceſſe of different accidents and circumſtances, is againe
begottenQuin res, aetas vſus, ſemper aliquid apporret noui, vt quae te ſcire credas neſcias, & quae putaris prima in experiundo repudies. Terent. vncertainties. That which late ſeemed neceſſarie,
in an inſtant becometh caſuall; that which was true,
now falſe; that which was good, now euill, and that which
was poſſible, oft impoſſible. Neceſſity & this vncertainty
of all things, doth driue men that deſire with more likely
certaintie, through prudence to guide their actions vnto
the ſchoole of contemplation of the world, and of the generall
reuolution of all things therein, (which is true Philoſophy)
that thence by long ſtudy and diligence obſeruing
to know and diſtinguiſh what is in nature, and the
ordinarie viciſſitude of all things, according to ſeuerall
ſeaſons, circumſtances and ſubiects, meanes, meaſures, and
manners variouſly, now true, then falſe; now neceſſarie,

then caſuall, now abſolute in it ſelfe, now conditionall,
with ſuppoſition, and by accident, now poſſible, now impoſſible;
they may informe themſelues from tried and approued
knowledge, where with certaintie is ſafe toBona conſultatio è ſumma 
                        •
                     atione eruit conſilia, & haec eſt rectitudo conſilij. Ariſtot. Eth. 6. reſolue,
how in vncertaintie neither to
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Qui conſultat quaerit & rationem ſubducit. Ariſtot, eth. 6. neglect the leaſt
hope, nor to ouer-weene the beſt good happe: how to
endeauour in that is poſſible, how to obſerue neceſſitie
in that is impoſſible, prouidently how in caſes of vrgence
and ſerious counſell, to forecaſt and husband occaſion
and opportunitie, that ill hapsharme not, vaine hope deceiue
not, time beguile not, aduantage eſcape not, vncertaintie
preiudice not, occurrents preuent not that
good which according to reaſon and the deſtined iſſue in
nature, diligent endeauout may otherwiſe effect. This is
the ſumme of art and prudence. This is the vſe and perfection
of reaſon in man, without which man muſt needs
be as the brute beaſt, voide of vnderſtanding, dwelling
in perpetuall blindneſſe, darkneſſe and confuſion, without
diſtinction of good and euill, true and falſe, without
conſultation or election of the one or other. Without the
knowledge of nature our life is death, our ſight blind, our
light darkeneſſe, and all our waies vncertaine. He that
knoweth not the qualitie of the fire, can neither ſeeke
comfort by the warmth, nor feare the ſcorching. He that
hath not obſerued nature in the water cold and moiſt,
ſhall neither needing their contemper thinke of their
vſe, nor ſubiect to their danger decline their hurt. Who
hath euer bene ſo blind, that hath not claymed reaſonIdeo Plutarch. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      conſundit 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Rationem & Diſciplinam. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. for
euerie action, both as natures common light and rule in
all things, as alſo his owne eye andRatio manus intellectus. Scal. hand to guide him
vnto the vnderſtanding thereof? For there isQuae vi
                        •
                     tus mouet 
                        •
                     or, quae mutat ſuccum in cibos, quae diſtribuit, quis dicat id ſine ratione agere? Sine ratiocinatione quidem non ſine ratione. Scalig. de Subtil. reaſon in nature,
and reaſon of vnderſtanding. Reaſon in nature is the
conſtant courſe andNatura eſt ratio Vniuerſi. Scalig. order of nature according to which
ſhe gouerneth and ordereth all things. Reaſon of vnderſtanding

is thatRatio eſt vis animae quae mouet ſe ab effectibus ad cauſas inueſtigandas & viciſſim à cauſis ad ea quorum illae cauſae ſunt. Scal. de Subtil. light and eye of the mind, whereby is
diſcouered what is according to reaſon in nature, good &
euill, true and falſe. Thus the reaſon of man hath his excellence
and perfection, conſiſting in finding out and vnderſtanding
the excellence and perfection ofQuid eſt Ratio niſi Naturae imitatio? Senec. reaſon in
nature. This is the top and heigth of all humane wiſedome,
knowledge and learning. Hereby is diſtinguiſhed
the ſubtileSolertia eſt acerrima coniectatio ex iudicij ſummi adytis penitius eruta. Ariſtot. eth. 6. and wiſe from the meane vnderſtanding, from
the foole and idiote; the counſell of the prudent, from the
raſh and vnaduiſed; the ſharpneſſe of wit and diſcerning
vnderſtanding, frō ſottiſh amazement & ſtupiditie. Hence
are onely ſetled and cleared all doubts, difficulties, and
ambiguities, by which otherwiſe for euer men remaine
voide of counſell and of truth. Hence it cometh to paſſe,
that as men more or leſſe earneſtly ſeeke the wiſedome, order,
and reaſon of nature in her diſpenſation of the whole
world, and therein more or leſſe diſpend their ſtudious
paines, ſo they diuerſly obtaine anſwerable meaſures and
proportions therein, growing in wiſedome more or
leſſe according as they are more or leſſe of generoſe deſire
and ingenuous
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Qui rerum cauſas & Naturas maximè dijudicat & docet maximè ſapientem iudicamus Ariſtot. metaph. 1. exerciſe therein. The order of nature
in all her works is
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Nihil eorum quae Natura fiunt aliter aſſueſcit. Ariſtot. eth. 2. conſtant, full of wonder, and vnchanged
truth in the continuallEſt enim naturalis ordo 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      omnium rerum, ex aeterno alijs ad alia conſequentibus incommutabili manente eiuſmodi complicatione. Gellius. Noct. Attic. coheſion, ſequence and
fatall neceſſitie of all things, their cauſes and effects: wherein
therefore how the Almightie Deitie hath commanded
all things by an vnchangeable law to be ordered, is both
true and neceſſarie wiſedome to vnderſtand, and the true
Natura dux optima. Naturam ducem ſi ſequamur, nunquam aberrabimus. Cicero. patterne, rule, and ſquare of euerie diſcreete, ſober, and
wiſe deſigne and conſultation. Hence vpon the principles
of nature ſtand euerlaſtingly founded all arts & ſciences.
For ſcience is the faithfull and truly ſtudied apprehenſion
of the mind, of the neuerScientia eſt conueniens, firma, & nunquam à ratione declinans cognitio. Galen. in Medico. opt. deceiuing generall grounds in
the generall diſpenſation in the nature of all things: and

art is the learned and skilfull habiteArs eſt habitus cum ratione factiuus. Eth. 4. of imitation thereof
in humane action. And all true arts thus founded vpon
the vndeceiuing grounds of nature, in themſelues are euercertaine
Ars medica quoad naturam propriam theoremata & praecepta Artis indubitatae eſt fi dei vera, firma, ſtabilis, Naturae principijs ſemper cōſentanea, ſolùm quoad ſubiecta varia, medentium operas, & inde euentus inſtabiles coniecturalis. Galen de Sect. opt. and infallible, whoſe rules although diſcretion
according to circumſtance may continually diuerſly vary,
yet can noIn medicina perpetuum eſt quod ſequi debeat, non ſemper perpetuum quod ſequi conuenit. Celſus. time nor circūſtance euer or at any time abrogate.
Hence aboue all other arts & ſciences the art of Phyſick
muſt needs be moſt excellent and true, becauſe it moſt
continually conuerſeth with nature, as her prime & proper
ſubiect, and beyond all other moſt immediatly dependeth
vpon the perpetuall ſtudy, view, & obſeruatiō of nature, &
the continual conſultatiō with nature in euery actiō. For it
is requiſite in a cōpetent Phyſition, that he be truly able &
fully furniſhed to be vnto nature a gouernor & moderator
to preſerue her, to conſerue her, behoofefully to diſpoſe &
Haec eſt 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſanitatis tuendae conſilum, & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   guide her in her beſt and righteſt way, not only of being,
but of being well, & well continuing. It is alſo requiſite he
be able as a prudent miniſter with knowledge to prouide
& reach vnto herMedicina eſt adiectio neceſſariorum, detractio inutilium. Hippocrat. all needfull helps, and to remoue from
her all harmefull impediments. Laſtly, he muſt be a faithfull
friend in her neceſſitie, needfully aſſiſting, helping,
and comforting her. And how can he duly performe theſe
things vnto nature, that truly and perfectly knowethPhyſiologiae neceſſitas perpetua medico non ad diſcendam modò ſed ad exercendam quoque artem. Galen. de Med. opt. not
nature? Aboue therefore and beyond all other Artiſts the
Phyſition immediatly hath need & vſe of exquiſite knowledge
of nature. For ſince he is deputed to be helper and
reſtorer of particular nature, how can he for that end but
become ſcholler and imitator of the generall? For as all
particulars do euer participate the nature and kind of the
generall, and are therein comprehended, ſo beſides that
which vnto euerie indiuiduall nature is ſpecially proper,
there is an eſſentiallSpecies generis, indiuiduum vtriuſque naturam participat, vtrunque & indiuiduum & ſpeciem genus & facit & comprehendit. propertie in it belonging vnto the generall:
without which as the particular cannot be at all, ſo
therefore is euer an eye, a reſpect and reference to be had,
that thoſe things which for the good of the particular are

conſidered or conſulted, may neuer be diſproportioned frō
the generall: which he that knoweth not, cannot conſider.
He therefore that ſhall rightly and prudently diſpoſe
for the good of any man, ought as well to know and aduiſe
what and how he participateth with the generall condition,
as not to be ignorant what is peculiarHuc ſpectat 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſpecificae differentiae, & proprietates rerum occultae. vnto himſelfe.
For if he know not theSed & Medicus & exercendorum corporum magiſter optimè ſingulorum curam rationemue habuerit, ſi genus vniuerſum cognouerit. Nā qui bonus artifex & ad res percipiendas & cō
                     templandas idoneus effici velit, ad genus vniuerſum illi progrediendū eſt, atque in illo cognoſcendo elaborandum. In hoc enim ſcientias poſitas eſſe ſcimus. Ariſtot. Eth. 10. generall kinds and natures
of things, what powers, faculties, priuiledges, prerogatiues,
properties, indowments, belong indifferently to all,
as well as differently to the ſpeciall, he ſhall oft omit and
ouerſlip a larger portion offered in the common good,
then any ſpecialtie ſhall after recompence or counteruaile
in it ſelfe. Contrariwiſe alſo, if he onely know the general,
and vnderſtand not to compare, conſider, apt and fitly ſute
it vnto theVniuerſè enim ei qui febre afflictatur inedia & quies vtilis eſt, alicui autem fortaſſis inutilis. Ariſtot. Eth 10. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. particular, he ſhall neuer from the common
deriue thereto ought pertinent or truly accommodate. It
is neceſſarie therefore a Phyſition vnderſtand both what
nature hath allowed man in vniuerſall, with all other
things, and alſo no leſſe what proper to himſelfe, and incloſed
in his owne. For if he know not nature in her ſpecial
kind,Qui ignorat corporis affectum ſecundùm naturam à quo actio producitur, prorſus cognoſcere non poteſt affectum praeter naturam à quo actio laeditur. Galen. de meth. med. when her ſelf is ſeparate and free from other implications,
how ſhall he iudge or know her iuſt reduction
thereto, when he findeth her oppreſſion requiring his aſſiſtance
to bring her home vnto her ſelfe? Neither muſt he
here onely conſiſt, but muſt farther view and conſider,
what God either in heauen or in earth, in the whole
world, or the wide occan, from all the elements or elementary
things hath ordained for any good or vſe of man.
For as God hath created all things for the good of man, ſo
hath he appointed the Phyſition to fit and accommodate
all things vnto the neceſſitie and need of man, and hath
farther alſo deputed him to ſupply vnto man euen thoſe
things whichNatura non poteſt aratro boues iungere, nec illorum opera terram ſcindere, arte vtrunque fit. Scalig. nature her ſelfe oft times cannot. Nature

cannot either open the neceſſarie veine, or ventilate or euacuate
the corrupt bloud from the bruiſed part, or in the
right and behouefull quantitie. Nature cannot with election
or regularly purge the right and proper humor, fitting
the cauſe and neceſſitie. Nature cannot fetch home
from the fields and mountaines her medicinall herbes,
fruit, wood and plants vnto her owne neceſſitie; but Art
tranſporteth them vnto her at ſeuerall ſeaſons, and for ſeuerall
needs. Nature cannot decoct, infuſe, compound,
mixe or prepare her rootes, mettals, or other drugs and
ſimples, in number and nature infinite; but Art is vnto her
benefite and ſeruice therein accurate. As therefore the
Phyſition muſt euer haue Nature for his chiefeQuo natura vergit tendendū medico naturae miniſtro. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Hippocrat. counſellor,
ſo muſt he euer againe be ſufficient and able ſubſtitute
andVt natura rectè operans imi tanda, ita aberrans reducenda & adiuuanda. Natura enim aliàs agit ſatis, aliàs parum, aliàs nihil. Galen. de venae ſect. contra Eraſiſtrat. helper vnto her. Not to ſpeake of his excellent ſubiect
(which is the life and health of mankind) his diuine
direction in his calling (led by the vnchanged order and
wiſedome of God himſelfe, manifeſted and ſet forth vnto
him in the ſtructure and great frame of heauen and earth)
doth exact and require in him all poſſible perfection to
ſound and fadome the depth and height thereof. For as it
is manifoldly and vnmeaſurably infolded and wrapped vp
in the intricate wiſedome of his vniuerſall workmanſhip,
ſo muſt long dayes and time carefully ſpent, indefatigable
ſtudie, paines and meditation, reſtleſſe vigilance, a cleare
eye of vnderſtanding, and ſincere affection worke and labour
it out, and thence muſt his prudent and wiſe action
deriue the ground of all his counſels and conſultations.
And thus muſt the true Phyſition euer behold God as his
guide, and be gouerned and directed by his hand. For God
is nature
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Eſt enim Deus omnium cauſarum cauſa & principium. Ariſt. metaph. 1. aboue nature, and nature is his handNatura eſt ordinaria Dei poteſtas. Scalig de ſubtil. and ſubordinate
power:Natura quid aliud quàm Deus & diuina ratio toti mundo & partibus eius inſerta? Senec. lib. de benef. God being therefore the cauſe of cauſes
in nature, he is the giuer of health and life in nature, and
the Phyſition is hisSanitas opus Dei, opera verò noſtra. Scalig. ſeruant & miniſter therein. To learne
of ſuch a teacher, to imitate ſo abſolute a patterne, what
wiſedome is ſufficient, what ſufficiency worthy? If any man
thinke it a light labour to finde out the order and reaſon

of ſo infinite a workman in the immenſe worke of all
things, or but an eaſie difficultie to imitate his example in
infinite actions, he knoweth not what is the height of humane
wiſedome, which being to know moſt
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Qui maximè homini diſſicilia cognitu potis eſt cognoſcendo aſſequi, ille ſapiens. Ariſtot. metaph. 1. among men,
(although what in that knowledge is neareſt vnto God, is
the leaſt ſhadow of himſelfe) yet is it ſo much as is able to
make men iuſtly admired, and happie that obtaine it; as all
other that want it, worthily as vnhappie and infortunate
as ignorance can make man. Ignorance is euer blind, blindneſſe
continually ſtumbleth and oftAnimus lumine mentis & intelligentiae orbatus, ignorantiaeue tenebris & caligine demerſus, ſibi ipſi mentitur, ſe ipſum perpetuo fallit, & in capitales fraudes facilè impellit vndique. Oſor. de reg. inſtit. infortunately falleth;
but knowledge giueth eyes, and the happineſſe of ſight
declineth the vnhappineſſe of our liues perpetuall groping
error, and the miſerable confuſion of the darknes of mind.
Since then knowledge is the eye and ſight of the mind,
and all knowledge cometh either by the ordinarie light of
nature, or the extraordinarie illumination of the Creator
of nature, whence ſhall the ordinary diſpenſation of mens
wayes and actions borrow counſell and light, but from nature?
And then how neceſſarie is the knowledge, learning
and ſtudie of nature, not onely vnto the accompliſhment
and ornament of our better being, but vnto the eſtabliſhment
of prudence and diſcretion, and the happie conſequences
thereof in all our liues and actions? If prudence
and wiſedome flow from hence, and the miſerable condition
of man perpetually craue their ſupply, and the neuerceaſing
mutable vncertaintie of circumſtances continually
multiply occaſion of conſultation from thence, how
can any action or purpoſe of man be rightly tried, approued
and aſſured vnto him, but by the complement and perfection
of this knowledge? And if knowledge onely rectifie
and make happie mens workes, endeuours and actions
in all things, how is it much more chiefly and abſolutely
requiſite and neceſſarie in a Phyſition? His ſubiect,
which is the ſafeguard of lifeMorbus cum ſit vitae humanae capitalis hoſtis, Medicus vnicè natura duce eſt morbicida. Pulchrè Riolanus. and ſuccour of nature, exacteth
the moſt exquiſite wiſe and warie working. His rule
in working (which is the prudent obſeruation and imitation
of his Creator in the created order and reaſon of all

things) challengeth the helpe and aſſiſtance of all poſſible
worthineſſe and excellence, the higheſt perfection of
counſell, and moſt incomparable ſagacitie of vnderſtanding.
For what wiſedome, learning and knowledge, can
be more then needfull vnto his vſe and helpe, whoſe continuall
emploiment and exerciſe conſiſteth in executing
the perpetuall decrees and counſels of
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Morborum medici naturae 
                        •
                     unt, naturae verò miniſter medicus. Hippocrat. creation, in reſtoring
the ruines and decayes of generation, in rectifying,
reforming and moderating the errors of continuall mutation
and alteration, in oppoſing death, and enlarging life;
laſtly, in arming the ſeuerall true trials and iuſt eſtimates
of the natiue vſes and properties of all things, ſubſtances,
quantities, qualities, formes, ſeaſons, and circumſtances,
according to the command of the generall commander of
heauen and earth, and the edicts of nature, for the good of
man? What humane ſcience can affoord more ample matter
and occaſion of diuine cogitation? what emploiments
are more continuall workes of charitie? what vertue commeth
nearer vnto God in goodneſſe and mercie? God
createth man, the healthfull and helpfull hand of the Phyſition
reſtoreth and repaireth his daily lapſes. What wiſedome
more inwardly conuerſeth with the hidden and ſecret
workes of God and nature? And though his better
and more erected thoughts oft humble themſelues vnto
the neceſſities of miſerable men, (which proud and fooliſh
minds contemne) yet hath the example of the ſauing
Deitie herein moſt exalted him whom vertue inſtructeth,
wiſedome formeth, prudence counſelleth, and Art firmly
guideth; without the competent concurrence of all which,
the neceſſitie of their hourely vſe doth altogether denie
ſufficience in a Phyſition. How worthy reuerence in themſelues,
and how happie for others were it, if more wontedly
and vſually our Phyſitions would firſt labour for this ſetled
perfection andOperatio eſt finis ſyllogiſmi practici. Ariſt. Eth. 6. generall idea of prudent deliberation,
before they ſo readily ruſh vnto particular practiſe and action?
For although it be experience that indeed giueth
vnto reaſon the true reflexion of it ſelfe, yet is it the rule

of reaſon that firſtPrudentia rei futurae conſultum curat ex diſciplina non ex antegreſſis actionibus. Quare hic habitus omnibus artibus communis ſit neceſſe eſt. Scalig. Poet. 3. guideth experience forth vnto likely
proofe. But now in theſe dayes this excellent knowledge,
ſo worthy in it ſelfe, how vnworthily is it eſteemed by others,
becauſe ſo ſlightly ſought and found in Phyſitions
themſelues, euery man haſtening to run before his knowledge
either ofHuiuſmodi turbam vulgò videmus à primis literarum rudimentis continuo ſe ipſam Medici nomine iactitantem, & venditantem, inuidam, maledicam, obtrectatricem, nouam ſpeciem Cynicorum, auaram, ſupinam ignauam, ſimul atque ignaram. Scal. Poet. 3. himſelfe or his action, vnto particular trials
of confuſed conceit and confidence in opinionate
grounds? Hence as mechanicall offices and adminiſtrations
are rather more commonly conſpicuous in our ordinarie
practitioners, then any weight of prudent perpenſion
or liuely ſtampe of iudicious diſpoſition or ordering; ſo
doth the generall ſlightneſſe and lightneſſe herein of moſt,
ſprinkle a common diſgrace and ignomie vpon all, caſting
the excellent facultie it ſelfe ineſtimate almoſt behind the
moſt inferiour ſcience. To leaue therefore the proud and
diſdainfull contemners herein vnto the iuſt contempt of
God and nature in his greateſt need, that others deſerue
not ſo ill, and all may learne rather to chuſe the good from
the ill, then to deſpiſe the better for the worſe, I will here
point the inquiſition of the beſt, who though haply rarely
found, yet may the patterne commend the neareſt thereto,
and draw the well deſeruing vnto his ſafeſt choiſe. In all
caſes and ſubiects of election, it is wiſedome chiefly firſt
to ſeeke that is moſt excellent; next, where excellence is
not, prudently to accept mediocritie, but euer knowingly
to auoide euill. The patterne of perfection doth ſhew the
more and leſſe perfect, and manifeſteth the more or leſſe
imperfect, frō which the fartheſt diſtance is the greateſt defect,
and the neareſt affinitie the beſt excellence. Of mediocritie
are many degrees. There is mediocritie aſcending
b from it ſelfe toward perfection or excellence, and mediocritie
deſcendingMediocritas in confinio boni maliue poſita eſt. Col. lib. 4. from it ſelfe vnto the loweſt ſtep of
meanes. All that are contained within the latitude of mediocritie,
participate the ſame true rules and grounds with
thoſe that conſiſt in the higheſt top of excellence, onely
herein differing, that the latter with a more piercing eye
ſearcheth the marrow of the ſame truth, the other more

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
ſhallowly ſoundeth the ſame proſunditie. This difference
of mediocrities diſtinguiſheth onely the ſeuerall meaſures
of the ſame perfection, whereby they differ, not in kind
but in degrees of compariſon. Thus are men termed
Alius alio ſapientior, alius alio 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; good, better, and beſt of all; all conſidered in the ſame
qualitie, euery one an Artiſt, euery one rightly vnderſtanding,
but ſome more clearly, readily and fully, other
leſſe, and all truly. Vnto whom therefore either excellence
doth giue true ſplendor and eminence, or mediocritie
maintaineth within different bounds of true Art
and ſcience, he is either in the one worthy, or in the other
intollerable. He whom farther vnworthineſſe hath
exempted out of both theſe, is in himſelfe vnprofitable,
and in others vſe
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Eurip. Malus nihil aliud praeterquam malus. harmfull. The firſt and ſecond, and the
ſecond by the firſt thou mayſt here view in the following
deſcription of this latter booke, and the third and laſt
in the firſt and ſecond going before.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  AS all ages haue deriued and acknowledged
the foundation of Arts from the principles
of nature,Artes omnes ratione & methodo acquituntur. Ariſtot. metaph. 7. reaſon, prudence, and
knowledge or ſcience; and experience
hath euer confirmed their profite and neceſſarie
vſe vnto conſtitutionSine generali methodo nulla ars diſcitur, neque diſci poteſt. Galen. de meth. Med. of Arts by
daily proofe: ſo vnto the complement and atchieuing firſt
of knowledge, and after of the right compoſing of Art,
fromArtes inſtituuntur & accipiunt principia ex ſcientijs. Scalig. de Subt. thence all times and men haue with one generall
decree and conſent determined a neceſſitie of ſeuen euer
preſuppoſed conductiue helpes thereto, without which
neither knowledge nor ſcience can preexiſt, nor art from
thenceIntellectus ſpeculatiuus, actiuus, factiuus, habent principia vniuerſalia commun
                        ••
                     . Scalig. de Subt. exiſt or haue firme being. Theſe ſeuen Hippocrates
with conſent of his owne time, and aſſent of ſince ſucceeding

times, hath in this order numbred.Naturam. Nature,Praeceptionē. precept,
fitLocum ſtudijs aptum. place for ſtudie,Studium. ſtudie,Inſtitutionem à puero. inſtitution,Induſtriam. induſtry,
Tempus. time. Ariſtotle with ſome others haue named only three,
nature, precept, induſtrie; but in theſe three by conſequent
hath included all the reſt. For ſtudie and contemplation
muſt neceſſarily attend precept and induſtry both.
Studie without fit place and ſome certaine ſeate, can neuer
deepely ſettle, vncertaine motion diſtracting and interrupting
ſerious cogitation and aſſiduitie; and time is neceſſarie
to be ſuppoſed in all. By nature we muſt not generally
vnderſtand the firſt mouing and being power
which is in allOmnis ſubſtantia Natura dicitur. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ariſtot. in Metaph. things in vniuerſall, but more ſpecially for
this ſubiect, procliuity, naturall aptnes or fitneſſe, peculiar
Natura etiam pro peculiari indole, ingenio, more accipitur. Sic apud Virgilium. Nunc age, naturas apibus quas Iuppiter ipſe Addidit, expediam. diſpoſition in the helpes and gifts of nature, ripeneſſe of
wit, capacitie, reaſon and docilitie. By precept are vnderſtood
the maximes, axiomes, andAxiō. propoſitiones ſunt per ſe fidem facientes, omnibus doctis in confeſſo & perpetuae. Gal de Meth. Med. ancient golden rules
of truth, which many ages and aged obſeruation from time
to time for common good and caſe haue commended,
compiled and ſummed methodically into generall orders
heads and numbers. By place fit for ſtudie, are not onely
vnderſtood the narrow incloſures of retired ſilence, and
abdication vnto priuate contemplation, but alſo the places
of the ſocieties and common aſſemblies of the learned,
where both by priuateGrata colloquia & iucundi dialogi opulentiora quàm perpetui libri. Scal. conference, and alſo by publike

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Conuerſatio artes peperit. Eurip hearing the daily readings, teachings, and exerciſes of
logicallEtenim ficuti lapidum colliſione ignis: ita ex diſceptationibus elicitur veritas. Scalig. de Subt. diſceptations of ſchooles allotted euerie facultie
by it ſelfe,Optima illa eſt docendi ratio quae viua voce traditur. Neque enim quenquam ex libro nauclerum vel alterius artis artificem euadere licet. Libri enim ſunt ijs qui antea eruditi fuerunt monimenta, non rudium & indoctorum doctrina perfecta. Galen. de Alim. fac▪ lib. 1. the mind may vſually receiue redoubled memorie
of the maximes, axiomes and rules of euery art and
ſcience, whereby continuallQui ſapiens & doctus euadere cupit, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      oportet, Plato. de Rep. inculcation may both more
firmely ſettle them, and occaſion their more frequent and
better laboured examination and rumination. That in

whoſe admiſſion two ſenſes beare teſtimonie, and by two
waies doth enter, hath firmer poſſeſſion. The weakneſſe
or wearineſſe of the ſight or eye in priuate reading ſometimes
miſtaketh, oft omitteth, and not ſeldome ouerſlippeth;
but the vnderſtanding ſtandeth readie at the
Animus habitat in auribus. Herod. gates of the eares, euer giuing eaſie entrance, and with
readie attention more dueVox ſcripturâ ad audiendum longe praeſtantior & diſertior, aurium
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſenſus potior magiſter. Plato. perpenſion, the moſt faithfull
remembrance by the eare conducted vnto the inward ſeats
and ſelles of the ſoule and contemplation. By ſtudie is generally
conceiued the continuall occupation and imployment
of allStudium eſt vehemens animi applicatio ad aliquid. Perot. in Epigr. Martial. the faculties of the mind in ſerious diſquiſition,
prompt apprehenſion and reception of generall rules
and precept, and frequent oft after reuiew of their former
ſeuerall notions, reflecting the vnderſtanding vpon it ſelfe
in the recognition of his paſſed intellection, and in due rumination
vnto right digeſtion; from whence by long exerciſe
and vſe therein gaining an habite and true methode
thereof, the firme knowledge and ſcience of aſſured infallible
rule and principle, doth beget art, and art bring
forth the end and perfection of art, which is the honour
of the Artificer, the euer-reaſonable ſatisfaction of needfull
vſe and neceſſitie, and for the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Infirmos omnes ſanos facere eſt impoſſibile. Hippocrat. moſt part deſired iſſue.
By inſtitution is conceiued education, early beginning, &
inchoation fromEducatio eſt nutritio & prouectio à tenerioribus annis. Sic Terent. Eduxi è paruulo, &c. Et Virgil. Naſcentes educat vuas. Nonius Marcellus de proprietat. Serm. ſic habet: Alere eſt vitam victu temporali ſuſtentare, educare autem ad ſatietatem perpetuam educere. young and tender yeares, whereby
the grounds and rules of knowledg growing vp with age,
become in ſhorter time more naturall, permanent, familiar,
eaſie, more cleare and free of difficulties, which vnto
ſodaine apprehenſion bring confuſion and impediment.
By induſtrie is vnderſtoodInduſtrij homines ijdem qui laborioſi, amantes laboris, agendi pulchra ſtudioſi. Cicer. Tuſc. Quaeſt. 2. continuall care, exerciſe, and
paines to make euerie benefite and vtmoſt vſe of natures
bountie, of precepts worthie of place and euerie other behoofefull
circumſtance, to perfect inſtitution, to ſaue, preuent,
and redeeme time and opportunitie, with ſerious affection
and deſire to whet, vphold, and maintaine alacritie,
conſtancie, and perſeuerance through labour and diligence
vnto perfection. By time is vnderſtood the ſeuerall

competence of yeares to euerie ſingle vſe, and due in
all. The neceſſitie of the helpefull concurrence of all theſe
vnto any one perfection is eaſily manifeſt. The want of naturall
helps of wit and other reaſonable parts of man, muſt
needs beQuod natura negat reddere nemo poteſt. vncapable of precept. Without precept (being
the rich compiled treaſure of the excellent knowledges of
many ages and generations) how ſhall any ſingle liues
ſufficiencie otherwiſe truly attaine the precious worth and
benefite of due perfection in any art? Without ſtudie alſo
precept is neuer daigned, becauſe not deſerued, God and
nature perpetually bleſſing and proportioning ſeuerall
meaſures of knowledge and vnderſtanding, to ſome equalitie
of thoughtfull
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Dij labore vendunt bona mortalibus. ſearch and aſſiduitie. Where is not
place fitting ſtudie, and allowing the prompt concourſe
Scholae 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Baſil of learned conference, ſtudie muſt needs want thoſe readie
helpes which mutuall ſpeech,Tantam enim vim habet puerilis inſtitutio, vt ſine ill
                        •
                      nemo ad vllum decus eniti poſſit. Oſorius. ſpeciall example, and
many common reciprocall auxiliarie aſſiſtances in learned
ſocietie, do manifeſtly, profitably, and continually ſupply.
Where wanteth
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Non parum igitur ſed plurimum quin potius totum refert, ſic vel non ſic homines ab adoleſcentia aſſuefactos eſſe. Ariſtot. Eth. 2. timely inſtitution, either later ſprings
bring ſlower growth, or too ſodaine ſproutes ſoone waſted
ſprings. Where induſtrious affection and exerciſe either
fainting waneth, or is not euer in the full, eclipſed care
muſt needs proue dull, and paines ſlow, and without pains
ſhall euer ſucceed but meane profite. Laſtly, where full
time is ſcant,Veritas filia temporis: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . defect is large, and where ſeaſonEmuntur artes tempore & diligentia. Lac
                        •
                     t. ſhort, no
goodNon poteſt in eo ſuccus eſſe diuturnus, quod nimis celeriter eſt maturitatem aſſequutum Cicer. proofe long. And thus it is apparent, that none,
and no one of theſe may be wanting, where is deſired any
reaſonable perfection; and this is the ſame infallible
truth in all faculties and profeſſions. For many inſtances,
behold but one, and ſee by common conſent of all learned,
by teſtimonie of reaſon and experience, how progreſſe
of knowledge doth in euery part anſwer the nature
and cuſtome of husbanding ſeed. Compare
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Analogiam habet natura cum tellure, agricola cum eo qui praeceptis inſtituit & inſtruit, ſemen cum ſalubribus praeceptis▪ Plutarchus. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . the fecilitie

of ſoyle with capacitie in nature, the ſeed with wholeſome
precept, the countrey neighbourhood of readineſſe
and plentie (whereby need with common benefite may
mutually both lend and borrow) vnto the like helpes of
learning in learned ſocietie. Compare carefull gathering
together and ſtoring of good ſeed, vnto daily ſtudy; induſtrie
and paines to toyle and labour; vſuall early bringing
vp, and prudent timely countrie education, to neceſſitie of
inſtitution, and the yearely ſeaſons to ſtudious times. Are
not all in both, and both in all alike? The ſeeds of vertue
and knowledge are euer fitly ſowed in childhoodPueritia ad 14 annum numeratur. the age
of inſtitutionVenaticus ex quo Tempore ce
                        ••
                     inam pellem latrauit in aula, Militat in ſyluis catulus. Nunc adbibe puro Pectore verba puer, nunc te melioribus offer. Horat., in whoſe vniudging youth their hidden
vertue ſtealeth roote, in yearesAdoleſcentia haec eſt, ab annis pueritiae durans ad 20. & 25. annum, huic ſuccedit iuuentus & progreditur ad 35. of diſcretion growth, in
Iuuenilis haec eſt aetas. confirmed age gathereth ripeneſſe, and in conſiſtingConſiſtit aetas à 35. ad 50. aut circiter, & vel paulo magis vel minus pro temperaturarū differentijs. age
bringeth forth ripeStudia in Adoleſcentia ſunt tanquam in herbis, quae annis poſt maturioribus pulchrae fruges ſunt futurae, nam quae ſeminauerit in iuuentute metet cum ſenuerit. Plutarch. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . frui
                     •
                  e in practiſe and proofe, therein
continuing euer vntill declining autumne, the fall of age,
and the winter of this mortall life. And this is that ſpan of
mans life, and ought be his reckoning of his dayes well diſpent
in any vertuous or noble facultie. Theſe things are
manifeſt vnto all, and need not ſo much proofe as better
conſideration. And thus the neceſſary concurrence of the
knowledge of nature vnto perfection in any worthie faculty,
hath briefly and ſufficiently appeared, and more ſpecially
the vſe thereof vnto a Phyſition hath bene plainly
inſtanced and manifeſt, and his primacie in the counſell
and conſultation of nature, the neceſſities of life haue amply
proued. It hath bene likewiſe farther conſidered, that
as in all other arts and ſciences, ſo eſpecially in Phyſicke,
no man euer attained the meaneſt ſatisfying worth, without
the aſſiſtance of a ſeuenfold furtherance, without nature
eitherTu nihil inuita dices facieſue Minerua. diſpoſing or fauouring, hath bene declared
the vanitie of vtmoſt endeauour. Without
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Innatam virtutem ignauia & deſidia deſtruit, & corrumpit, naturalem ineptitudinem ruſticitatemuc corrigit & emendat doctrina. Plutarch
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . precept where

hath euer bene any right ſubiect, rule, or meaſure vnto
wandring confuſed thought and contemplation? Without
ſtudie and
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Quae facilia ſunt cognitu fugiunt incuriam, quae verò difficilima elegantia concinna capiuntur. Plutarc. induſtrie was neuer gained worth, nor without
inſtitution euer purchaſed aſſurance of any perpetuitie.
In want of fit and ſetled place, the moſt deſirous indeauour
doth find weariſome loſſe of ſo faire and helpefull
opportunitie, and there is no goodneſſe byAnnus in apricis maturat collibus vuas. Ouid. time vnſetled
hath euer bene after wellIllud ingeniorum velut praecox genus, non temerè vnquam peruenit ad frugem. Quintil. confirmed. From hence
it muſt neceſſarily follow as a certaine concluſion, that
according as mē are more or leſſe wanting in any of theſe,
ſo do the number of the wants truly meaſure the quantity
of their defects. And ſince theſe are ſeuen ſo inſeparable
companions & guides vnto ſufficiencie in thoſe by whom
it is truly acquired, they muſt needs therefore by neceſſarie
conſequent be therein faire likelihoods and proofes of
that ſufficiencie vnto others alſo whom it ſhall concerne
to know and enquire it for their owne direction and ſatiſfaction.
And as theſe are thus neceſſarie to be enquired, ſo
is it as eaſie for the meaneſt to trace and diſcouer them
in any particular knowledge.Feſtinata maturitas occidit celeriùs. Idem. Nature doth expreſſe
her ſelfe in her owne indowments open to euery eye
in common conuerſation. The hope and opinion of
good precept, doth vnto the moſt ignorant giue prudent
gueſſe, either by the particular knowledge, or at leaſt inquiſition
of precedent timely inſtitution and likely inſtitutors.
Good and pertinent inſtitution, deriueth probabilitie
of it ſelfe, from the teſtimonie of conuenient time and
fit place of inſtitution. Induſtrie cannot be hid, and ſtudie
by hisIn omni literarum profectu ſtylo, libello 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      perpetuo eſt opus. Iſocrat. aſſiduitie doth euer proue it ſelfe, and by continuall
exerciſe of it ſelfe, as it firſt giueth, ſo it after perpetually
Literae marſupium non ſequuntur: ſudoris comites ſunt & laboris, ſociae ieiuniorum, non ſatietatis, continentiae, non luxuriae. Hieronym. holdeth ſufficiencie, and manifeſteth it ſelfe thereby,
both paſt and preſent, vnto any one. And as education
it ſelfe is of all learned eſteemed and iudged abſolutely beyond
Recta inſtitutio caput omnis virtutis. Plat. de Leg. exception or diſpenſation neceſſarie, ſo are his
places common, and therefore not obſcure. Laſtly time
well diſpent doth point his proofe vnto examination of

his ſeuerall degrees of groweth, both how inEradenda cupidinis praui 
                        •
                     unt elementa, & tene
                        •
                     ae nimis mentes aſperio ribus formandae ſtudijs. Horat. childhood
and youth, vnto the yeares of diſcretion, diſpoſed, and
how alſo after that time in manhood and confirmed age
vnto conſiſtence, diſpoſing himſelfe. Theſe are thoſe eaſie
notes, whereby from the neceſſitie, partly of their continuall
preſence, and partly precedence in euerie facultie,
the meaneſt capacitie together with the beſt may confirme
and better ſatisfie their prudent hope or feare in
choyce. Theſe markes though common and indifferent
vnto all, yet do they bring more or leſſe different behooffull
vſe, according to different iudgings andFoelices eſſent artes ſi de ijs ſol
                        ••
                     udicarent artifices. Ariſtot. vnderſtandings.
Such as are learned in the ſame facultie, beſide theſe
outward and common informations are farther enabled
to aſſure this inquiſition by the preſence and knowledge
of the ſame ſufficience in themſelues, when they find it repreſented
vnto them in another, Such as are learned in different
faculties, or are generall readers or ſchollers onely,
by the ſignes cōmon vnto all kinds of learning may better
iudge of a common facultie in generall knowledge, but
vnproperly determine of aArtis cuiuſtibet iudicationes primae omnibus hominibus ſunt notae, ſequentes ſoli arti
                        •
                     ici. Gal. lib. 6. de Meth. Med. ſpeciall worth. The firſt haue
therefore more certaine vnderſtanding, the ſecond ſomewhat
more aduantaged coniecture. He onely that is altogether
vnlettered and vnlearned, for that he cannot help
his iudgement frō any of theſe two former inward lights,
or intelligence of his owne vnderſtanding, muſt therefore
chiefly deriue his information frō without, and from theſe
outward ſignes, from whence it is alſo better to raiſe
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Eurip. Bene qui conjiciet vatem hunc perhibebo optimum. Cicero de Diuin. probable
reaſon and coniecture to reſolue himſelfe, then altogether
to truſt report and others faith. For that which is
probable comethArtificialis coniectura è probabili eruitur ratione & proximè 
                        •
                     ēper accedit ad veritatem. Galen. neare vnto truth, and he that induſtriouſly
exerciſeth himſelfe in diſcerning rightly true probabilitie,
ſhall alway more wiſely walke, and moſt ſeldome
erre or be deceiued.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  ANd thus with a plaine ſenſibleneſſe vnto
vulgar capacitie, I haue deliuered the ſententious
ſumme of thoſe things which
the learned in the largeneſſe of many volumes
haue widely ſcattered and confounded:
which as according to the firſt
promiſe and purpoſe, it giueth vnto the meaneſt a light
vnto a larger field of prudent conſideration, ſo doth it alſo
vnto the yonger ſtudent yeeld a profitable taſte of that
true way and method which proſperouſly guideth vnto
perfection. And although ſharpe witted folly in the ambition
of proud conceit hath oft times deuiſed and imagined
eaſier and ſhorter wayes andHuiuſmodi 
                        •
                     uere illi Theſſalij aſini & ipſe ipſorum parens Theſſalus, qui in ſex menſium ſpacio totam medicinae artem non modo vorabant ipſi, ſed & alios docere profitebantur. cuts vnto an higher
pitch, yet after-time hath ſtill otherwiſe proued it vnto
erroneous men, when for the moſt part their eyes and time
are almoſt out, and folly hath alreadie too ſufficiently fatted
it ſelfe to glut repentance. I will not ſpend time in
blaming this our time herein, dayly experience is iuſt reproofe.
From that which hath formerly bene diſcourſed,
there ſeemeth yet remaining a doubt demanding anſwer:
whether non but men, as before, knowne learned, may
proue of ſafe or commendable vſe? Where the cauſes and
diſeaſes are both common and vulgar, and no circumſtance
requireth more then ordinarie conſult, there without
doubt ordinary harmleſſe remedies without deeper counſell
or aduice, may by themſelues ſufficientlySed & medicus optimè ſingulorum naturā rationemue habuerit qui genus vniuerſum cognouerit. Verunta men nihil prohibet quo minus etiam is qui ſit neſcius vni alicui pulchrè conſulat, dummodo experiendo quae cuique accidunt accuratè proſpexerit: quemadmodum multos ſibi ipſis optimos medicos videmus, cùm alteri ſubuenire atque opitulari non poſſint. Ariſtot. Eth. 10. ſatisfie an
vſuall need. For this cauſe the Emperick is iuſtly to be preferred
before all other ſects, for that (for the moſt part)
neuer changing his approued ordinary good remedies, he
thereby in ordinary caſes doth more commonly benefite;
while other ſectaries from the wildeMethodici debitae pharmacorum compoſitionis ignari opera Artis inuertunt. Galen. de Sect. compoſition of their
confuſed and deceiued minds (euer therefore vainly continually

varying the mixture of their medicines) muſt
needs thereby both peruert the ordinary benefite of vſuall
and tried medicines in common diſeaſes, and in all other
alſo by their miſgouerned rules, and miſtaking reaſon, euer
either ouerrunne or come ſhort of that happie and ſafe
iſſue, which more diſtinct, iudicious and truly vnderſtanding
accommodation from more prudent right deliberation
doth more certainly and aſſuredly bring forth. This is
the reaſon thatGalen. lib. de ſectis in Suaſor. ad artes. lib Iſagoges Med. Galen inſtituting and counſelling a yong
Phyſition, doth chiefly inſtruct him firſt to bend all his
whole labour and endeuour to aime at that vnſtained puritie
of ſight and diſcerning ſagacitie, which is onely proper
vnto the truly learned and ſoly orthodoxe Phyſition,
whereunto if his power and meanes wil not aduance him,
he then aduiſeth him to make choiſe of the Empericke ſoly
toEaedem in 
                        •
                     j
                        •
                     dem affectibus medelae ab ijs qui rationem profitentur & Empiricis medicis trahuntur. De ratione inueniendi eas inter eoſdem diſſentio eſt. Galen de Sect. imitate before all other ſects; becauſe his plaine conſtant
courſe in ordinary diſeaſes doth moſt oft good, and in
other moſt cōmonly leaſt hurt, though with the reſt neuer
ſure, and not euer ſafe. And thus farre (deſeruing reader)
I haue pointed thy better remembrance into the right way
of the moſt likely inquiſition. Vertue is likewiſe a needfull
companion vnto ſufficience of vnderſtanding, a grace and
ornament vnto a Phyſition, and in him a benefite and aduantage
vnto the patient; by the one well gained, diſcreetly
and iuſtly ſteering his ſufficience, by the other well
knowne,Natura ſiquidem vtraque haec largita eſt nobis, & ipſa judicia & ſidem. Naturalia iudicia ſunt ſenſus & ratio. Ordiuntur haec à maximè facilimis vſu & cognitione. Fides & per 
                        •
                     uaſio ſine vlla 
                        •
                     iſciplina natura d
                        ••
                     e i
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     cijs adhibentur. Galen▪ lib 9 de dog. Hipp. & Plat. aſſuring his confidence: but being euery mans
common dutie to learne, the Philoſophers ſubiect, and beſide
my promiſed performance, I will commend it vnto
eaſie obſeruation in euery man his owne triall and proofe,
the ordinary iudgement more eaſily knowing vertue in
theNatura ſiquidem vtraque haec largita eſt nobis, & ipſa judicia & ſidem. Naturalia iudicia ſunt ſenſus & ratio. Ordiuntur haec à maximè facilimis vſu & cognitione. Fides & per 
                        •
                     uaſio ſine vlla 
                        •
                     iſciplina natura d
                        ••
                     e i
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     cijs adhibentur. Galen▪ lib 9 de dog. Hipp. & Plat. outward ſhape of faire action, then readily conceiuing
or examining it by the generallNon omnes ita ſunt 
                        •
                     ole
                        ••
                     es vt ex ſolo vniuerſali ipſi particularia inueniant. Galen. lib. 5. de ſan. 
                        •
                     uend. idea or large deſcription.
It onely now remaineth thou call once againe remembrance
vnto remembrance, by recouering in our paſſed
diſcouery in few words the generall briefe ſumme for
better impreſſion and continuance. It hath bene manifeſted
how ſenſleſſe common vſe doth draw fond cuſtome

vnto mechanicall counſel. Reaſon and prudence haue alſo
giuen thee a taſte and better ſenſe of the vnobſerued miſchiefe
therein, and hath taught thee a more wiſe feare.
Nor hath it bene the leaſt wiſedome, to know to hold ſuſpected
among thoſe whom learning hath exempted out
of the vnlearned multitude, ſuch as make profeſſion of
double perfection in twoSua ipſius propria agere & alienis negotijs non implicari, eſt iuſtitia, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Plato de Rep. faculties, where one in true reaſon
is neuer ſufficiently or aboue needfull meaſure fulfilled
in the moſt excellent, beſide the perfection and right habit
of vnderſtanding, the attendance in care and circumſpect
action requiring neuer leſſe then the whole and vtmoſt
endeuour;Qui omnes in arte aliqua minutias & ſubtilitates perſequitur, exitum nullum inueniet: ſi vero in illis modum vtilitate terminauerit, non mediocre fructum ex illis capiet. Non enim omnia ex ſingulis diſciplinis, ſed neceſſaria, & ad vſum magis accommodata ſunt addiſcenda. Oſor. de Reg. inſtit. which he that thinketh too much for his owne
calling, profeſſion or facultie whatſoeuer, is the leaſt of all
worthy of it, or well deſeruing in it. It hath bene likewiſe
farther noted vnto prudent obſeruation, that among men
honeſtly limited within one calling, notwithſtanding immoderate,
extrauagant and impertinent curioſitie too prodigally
diſpent in things of leaſt moment, leaſt pertinent
or profitable vnto neceſſary vſe, doth vainely ſometimes
e diuert the more ſerious and chiefly fixed ſtudy and reſpect
vpon the more maine ends and offices therein, (as hath
bene before noted of curious Aſtrologers and ſuperſtitious
Ephemerides-maſters) whereby that which is moſt neceſſary,
is dangerouſly oft neglected, and that which is leaſt
needfull, fondly more preferred and eſteemed. Laſtly hath
bene pointed the man whom thou maiſt moſt diſcreetly
and with moſt likely ſafetie chuſe to truſt with thy life and
health. Firſt thou art aduiſed to conſider that he be a man
free from the former imputations; and ſecondly that he be
commended vnto thee by the ſeuen forementioned teſtimonies:
one whom naturePraeclara autē ſtudia non omnibus ornamēto eſſe poſſunt, ſed ijs tantùm qui praeclaro ingenio & egregia virtutis indole praediti ſunt. Oſor. de Reg. inſtit. hath fitted and ſet foorth by
common good parts expreſſed in open and apert, iuſt and
diſcreet word and action, and alſo in ſpeciall proofe and
vſe, the ſame in all occaſions, capable, ſenſible, wiſe temperate,
and vnderſtanding; in his profeſſion carrying credited
aſſurance by his former times, place, inſtitution, ſtudy and
induſtry well knowne, commendably formerly, and euer

diſpent. If thou make this carefull and likely good election
of thy Phyſition, thou ſhalt not ſo vſually find ſo many
luckleſſe euents of after-repented choices, nor ſo cōmonly
heedleſly draw vpon thy ſelfe ſo many miſerable calamities
as daily fall out in want of more reaſonable fore conſidered
care thereof. Happie is he who doth conuerſe with the
prudent,Prudentia ad rationis normā quae cogitat quae que agit vniuerſa dirigit, & nihil praeter rectum & laudabile facit. Macrob. conſulteth the wiſe, truſteth the iuſt and honeſt,
and imploreth skilfull helpe. God hath promiſed his bleſſing
vnto the prudent, in his vnaltered decree deſtining
vnto prouidence both more certaine preuention of euill,
and alſo more likely foreſtalling of otherwiſe more caſuall
good. In the wiſe (with caution and difficultie euer admitting
any ſuſpected or doubted truſt) ſucceedeth euer for
the ſometimesA
                        •
                     tem in pleriſque certam ſubuertere non debet paucorū vel in paucis error. Galen. de Med. opt. deceiued iſſue, ordinarily redoubled recompence,
of fooles vnguſted, but vnto the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Omnia ſecuudùm rationem facienti licet nō ſuccedat ſecundùm rationem non eſt ad aliud tranſeundum dum manet quod à principio viſum eſt. Hipp. Aph. lib. 2. end deſeruing
it, repaying the vnknowne inexplicable nectar of inf
                     ••
                  te
acquieſcence of mind, and ample content of rich ioy
of heart vnto it ſelfe. In the skilfull, errour is barred
frequence, and folly common or ordinarie a admittance.
Theſe things common experience doth rarely know, becauſe
ſeldome regarded: follie for euer poſſeſſing this
world of fooles, and a
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Solertia eſt dexteritas in verum ſcopum ſeu finem collimandi. Ariſtot. Eth. 6. mite of wiſedome being euer
more rare e then ten mines of gold.Vir bonus & ſapiens, 
                        〈…〉
                      repperit vnum Millibus è cunctis hominum conſultus Apollo, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
ipſe ſui, &c. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Know thou therefore
the beſt patterne, aime euer to attaine his neareſt affinitie,
with diſcreete coertion of that deſire in want of ſo plentifull
ſupply, contentedly alſo accepting reaſonable mediocritie,
but euer eſchuing the hated name and inured note
of knowne ignorance & adulterateTantum
                        •
                     e otij eſt à re tua tibi, aliena vt cures quae nihil ad te pertinent. Tere
                        ••
                     
                   bigamie of two callings,
the one in common vſe wholy inſufficient, the other
for the moſt part, but in partable to ſupply either outward
preſence or inward worth. Commit thy life into his hand
that eſteemeth it worth his whole ſtudie and endeauor,
that vnderſtandeth the cauſes in nature, wherein conſiſteth
life, and is skilfully able to draw foorth thy deſtined line

vnto the 
                     ••
                  moſt length and date in nature: that knoweth

                     〈…〉
                   and opportunity of life,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. Medicū vti prouidentia vt mihi videtur optimum eſt. Hipp. lib. 1. praenot. that feareth God, & lo
                  
                     ••
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   man: vnto whom knowne danger giueth carefull
caution, ſafetie ſecuritie, iudgement reſolution, variable
circumſtance more warie circumſpection, and generall
In medico nulla poteſt eſſe perfectio ſine illa encyclopedia quae homini viam munit ad foelicitatem. Scalig. knowledge vnſcanted counſell in all occurrents. Thus
ſhalt thou not betray thy life to follie, nor by thy blame

                     •
                  hall others
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                        •
                     ſt & hoc vile & miſer
                        •
                     m cum ſtultis & fatuis inſipere. Eurip. ignorance deſeruedly puniſh and interrupt
thy quiet eaſe.Foelix qui potuit tran
                     
                        •
                     uillam ducere vitam, Et laetas ſtabili claudere fine dies. Maximian. Thus maiſt thou both liue in more free con
                  
                     •
                  ent,
and oft more happie daies,Quaſi poma ex 
                        •
                     rboribus cruda ſi ſint vi auelluntur, ſi matura & cocta, decidunt: ſic vitam adoleſcentibus is aufert, ſenibus maturitas. Cicero. and die in thy full time
by a ripe and mature death, in the bleſſing of God, and

                     •
                  ight of nature, yeelding thy life vnto the common law

                     •
                  wrod
                     •
                   of mortalitie, not falling vnder the heauie burthen of thy
owne guilt in raſh expoſall, or careleſſe neglect.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Gentle Reader, I pray thee to correct theſe faults, eſcaped
partly by reaſon of the difficultie of the copie, and partly by abſence
of the Author.
            Epiſt. p. 2. l. 6. r. any long burthen. Epiſt. 2. p. 
                  •
               . r. this neceſſary plane talke. 
                  〈…〉
               
compare r. compute. Pag. 3. lin. 20. for courſes read chaunces. ibid, l 26. 
                  〈…〉
               
known
                  •
                certaine p. 6. l. 6. r. the as well. ibid. l. 19. grow, r. growing. 
                  〈…〉
               
theſe. pag. 10 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                iteretur. p. 13. l. 4. deliuerage▪ r. deliuering. 
                  〈…〉
               
r. my. p. 17. l. 26. r. to diuers parts diuers feauers. ib. l. 34 delivation. r. 
                  〈…〉
               
l. 9. death. r. health p. 19. l. 14. cannot, r▪ runnot p. 21. l. 8. which r. with, ib. l.
                  〈…〉
               
r. theſe, p. 24. l 30. libertie r. literature. p. 25. in marg. r. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
ſole. p. 39. l. 35. r. content. p. 43. in marg. l. 37. r. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                p 45. privie 
                  〈…〉
               
4
                  •
               . l. 14. r. be more completely. p. 56. l. 29. r. the other oppoſite. p. 62. l. 8. 
                  〈…〉
               
motiōs. p. 63. l. 13, motiues, r. motioōs. p. 69. l. 32. on, r. any one. p. 74. 
                  〈…〉
               
p. 79 orderly, r ordinarily. p. 82. l. 36. eminent, r. emunct. p. 85. marg. Scalig. 
                  〈…〉
               
p. 88. l. vlt. ends, r. meanes. pag. 94. l. 21 precepts, r. pretexts. Ib. firſt note 
                  〈…〉
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 97. laſt note in marg after, ea quae fecit, r, per ea quae 
                  〈…〉
               
103. the third note, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 104. l. 25. r. indications. Ib. l. 29. 
                  〈…〉
               
p. 106. l. 21. their, r, her p. 111. l. 3 r. the illulion. ib. l. 14. diuining, r diuing 
                  〈…〉
               
continuing, r. confirmed. Ib l. 4. pofiting, r. profiting. p. 113. l. 21. wondes, r. 
                  〈…〉
               
pa. 124, l. 10. different, r, indifferent. p 127. l. 24. meane, r, meagre. Ib. l. vlt. 
                  〈…〉
               
fertilitie. pag 130. himſelfe, read it ſelfe.
            
         
      
   