
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE ANATOMIE Of BASENESSE. Or The foure quarters of a Knaue;

                  Flatterie,
                  Ingratitude,
                  Enuie,
                  Detraction.
               
            
            He that hath theſe foure parts, neede no more haue To be recorded for a complete Knaue.
            
            Imprinted at London for Richard Redmer, and are to be ſold at the Weſt dare of Paules at the ſigne of the Starre. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE TRVELY enobled both by Vertue and birth, Sir ROBERT SYDNEY Knight of the BATH: I. A. wiſheth the reward of his Vertue, honour in this world, Glorie in the next.
            
               Honourable Sir:
            
            
               TO immitate the common methode of Epiſtolizers in this kinde, were rather to write of you, then to you, which courſe though I affect not, J cannot altogether neglect, though I ſhall thereby either wrong you, or my ſelfe; for in publiſhing (though ſparingly)

my knowledge of your worth to the world, ſuch, to whom you are vnknowne will ſo much iniure mee, as to taxe me with (what I condemne in others) flatterie; whereas ſome (to whom you are no ſtranger) will cenſure mee as much on the cōtrary to haue dealt with you rather, according to the pouertie of my abilitie, then to the fulneſſe of your merite.
            Jt will peraduenture ſeeme ſtrange vnto you (if this poore worke chance to come to your view) what aſſurance of your good acceptance begot ſuch preſumption in me as to dedicate the ſame vnto you. J must first anſwere, I haue not done it mercenarily; for then I would haue preſented it to your hand: nor vaine-gloriouſly; for then I would either haue craued your allowance, or ſubſcribed my name; but freely and honestly

out of that reſpect which I owe to that innate Goodneſſe which I know to be in you. Though I forbeare (out of ſome reſpects) to haue my name publiſhed; yet I can acknowledge the Booke to be mine without bluſhing. If it bee (by anie) ill digested, the fault muſt be in the taker not in the Author: it was written with a right hand, and I wiſh it may not bee ſiniſterly intertained by any; but if ſom wil needs be ſo forward, the care is taken. In you I am made ſo confident by that (I might iuſtly vſe Honourable, Noble, Worthy, or ſome ſuch high Epithete: but I will rather ſay) Honeſt (a poore phraſe will ſome thinke) and vertuous diſpoſition which accompanies you, that I muſt account it may happineſſe that I liue to knowe a ſecond, whoſe breſt Goodneſſe makes her habitation; yet pardon mee if I

ſay, I enioy not this happineſſe without ſome touch of griefe; I ſhall not neede to implore your protection, though your pardon. I acknowledge I haue preſumed, and know you can and will remit the errors of Affection in him that is,
            
               
                  The wiſher of your Honour, and honourer of your VERTVES J. A.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ANATOMY of Baſeneſſe. OF THE FLATTERER.
            
               
                  THey that compare the fawning Pariſite
               
               vnto the Spaniel, do the curre much wrong;
               for he will often heare his maſters tongue,
               When in the field he follows his delight:
            
            
               Yet neuer queſt; but th'ecchoing Sicophant
               
               at euery word, by his weake fauourer ſpoken,
               cries good, 'tis true, and this is held a token
               Of much reſpect and loue; though from the haunt
            
            
               Of worth and merit, his baſe nature range
               as farre as falſhood, from the ſtrong built neſt
               of Truth and Goodneſſe, which in euery breſt
               Should like two twinnes be nouriſht; but tis ſtrange
            
            
               To ſee how this poore worthleſſe humour liues,
               euen in thoſe boſomes where good bloud and parts,
               haue their abiding, poiſoning generous Arts
               With that, to which no language ſpoken giues
            
            
               
               An Epithete too bad: and to thoſe men
               (if I may tearme them ſo) whoſe only words
               ſuch ſweetneſſe to the flattered eare affoords,
               To yeeld a fitting title by my pen:
            
            
               I am as much vnable, as vnapt
               to imitate their baſeneſſe; which indeede
               had I not chanc't t'haue heard, into my Creede
               Could nere haue come, but it hath often happt
            
            
               To ſownde within the compaſſe of my hearing,
               whereby mine eares as to the pillory,
               ſeem'd to be nailde in ſuch groſſe flattery;
               Yet in their checkes no ſigne of ſhame appearing.
            
            
               It may ſeeme ſtrange (yet I dare ſay't is true)
               that I haue bluſht to ſee their impudence,
               while they (vn-man-like) ſeem'd to haue no ſence
               Of their owne baſenes: of this thriuing crue.
            
            
               I haue obſerv'd both Sexes to be free;
               too free in ſome reſpect, though in ſome kinde
               more bound then ſlaues, for our beſt part (the minde)
               Was chiefly giuen diuineſt things to ſee:
            
            
               And not to be by ought that ſhares with vs,
               in the ſhort courſe of our mortalitie
               ſo fetter'd, leaſt vnhappily it be,
               Depriv'd of its beſt good in being thus.
            
            
               
               Haue I not heard one tell, the Crowe ſhee's white,
               and Midas-like preferre the pipe of Pan
               
               before Appollo's harpe? wherein this man
               (Who thus from Art and Nature teares their right).
            
            
               Thus from the Phrygian differs, Midas weares
               (as the reward and badge of ignorance)
               th'eares of an Aſſe; but 't is the others chance
               To thriue by clawing th'ignorant Aſſes eares.
            
            
               Haue I not heard ſome tell the prodigall,
               't is for his honour to be bountifull:
               and with applauſe commend the humorous Gull
               In all his actions? I haue ſeene them fall
            
            
               And kiſſe the feete of a great golden calfe;
               whoſe very beſt of his admired worth
               was by a Taylor to the world brought forth,
               To whom his Honour ought his better halfe.
            
            
               Let a man chafe (though no iuſt cauſe there be)
               and then obſequious Apes will fret as faſt,
               as had they ſeene a verier ſlaue t'haue paſt
               By, then themſelues: or be your humour free
            
            
               And Iouially diſpos'd, they'le Ianus-like
               ſtraite ſhew a cleerer face, where you may ſee
               the true proportion of hypocriſie
               Drawne to the life; (which loues as others like)
            
            
               
               Many yeeres ſince the famous Chaucer writ,
               that, theſe ſame men which beare a double viſage,
               are as meere monſters in good Natures linage;
               And for good mens ſocietie vnfit.
            
            
               Like your Camelions theſe will change their hew
               as you your colour, be it good or ill,
               change nere ſo oft, yet you ſhall finde them ſtill,
               (From what they were) transforme as faſt as you.
            
            
               Seeme to be moſt vnlike your ſelfe, or ſpeake
               what you leaſt thinke they 'le be, and ſpeake like you;
               tell them they 're Knaues theyle ſmile and ſay ſo too;
               Faine your ſelfe ill, they'le ſweare they finde you weake.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE FLATTERED.
            
               FOnd Man, that ſuck'ſt the pleaſing poyſon in
            (which from the Syrens vnſuſpected tongue
            Is kindly offer'd to thine eare) wherein
            are all the drugges and dregges of vildneſſe wrung:
            Aſſure thy ſelfe; if in thy boſome liue
            ought that deſerues the name of worth, 't is knowne
            More then thy ſelfe, nor ſhalt thou neede to giue
            
               Fame a reward to haue thy mercy blowne:
            For 't is her care, the more ſhe findes thee ſlow,
            or careleſſe, whether thy deſert ſhall be
            Knowne vnto any, but thy ſelfe, or no;
            to ſownd the louder: (ſo to honour thee)
            Thorough her golden Trumpet, (good mens throats:)
            Or if thine eare ſhall loue, and itch to heare
            Thine owne praiſe ſung in ſmooth and pleaſing notes,
            (which makes true worth vnlike it ſelfe appeare)
            She hath an other Trumpet blowne by thoſe,
            whoſe mercenary tongues ſhall ſownd thy praiſe;
            But with a breath which blaſteth as it blowes,
            and ruines that which it pretends to raiſe.
            For do but note, you ſhall perceiue their plots,
            are (being once aſſur'd of you as friends)
            To thruſt their blankes amongſt your high priz'd lots,
            ſo by your loſſe to compaſſe their owne ends.
            
               But ſelfe-conceipt ſo much corrupts your ſence,
            that to your iudgement, onely that ſame man
            Seemes wiſe, and honeſt, and giues no offence
            that by this Art, can make a Gooſe a Swanne.
            If by the breath of theſe, you ſtriue to raiſe
            your Reputation, your Ambition's weake;
            You muſt reſolue of ſuch to buy your praiſe,
            not for the Trueth, but for reward they ſpeake.
            If on the former (who for Vertues ſake
            honour that good is in you) you relie,
            Their approbation ſhall haue power to make
            your glorie liue to all Poſteritie.
            Doe not you thinke that man deſerues much blame
            who findes his owne infirmitie, yet feedes
            Daily on that which nouriſheth the ſame,
            And dangerouſly the braines corruption breeds?
            Such is your caſe (weake men and women) for
            you like the meate becauſe the ſauce is ſweete;
            What bitter is (though wholſome) you abhorre,
            diſabling that which iudgement holdeth meete.
            But Iudgement, is no iudgement, if it ſeeme
            to contradict your humour; but the longer
            Y' are conſtant to this pooreneſſe, (which you deeme
            worth in your ſelues) your weaknes proues the ſtrōger.
            Though to the palat pills diſtaſtfull be
            they to the health more beneficiall proue,
            Then things more pleaſing to the ſence; we ſee
            cutting doth oft in curing much behoue:
            
               But you like Herod thinke, that he moſt loues you
            who cries, you ſpeake more like a God then man,
            Beheading him that honeſtly reproues you,
            not caring though it be baptizing Iohn:
            Let a man ſeeme but cheerefully to ſing
            
               Placebo to your words and actions, then
            You quite forget, neere honie lies a ſting;
            and that the diuell (clarke-like) ſayth Amen:
            Where flatterers (his Chaplaines) reade the Maſſe
            whoſe ſuperſtition (making you their Saint)
            You doe allow as currantly to paſſe,
            for Truth, as Goſpell (which no tongue can taint.)
         
         
            
            TO THE FLATTERER.
            
               THou that canſt grieue becauſe another ſmiles,
            and giue, to vndeſeruing ſpirits, ſtiles
            Which thou doſt filch from gen'rous noble minds;
            becauſe thy poore obſequious humour findes
            Cold intertainment there, tell me; doſt thinke
            that all are blinde that are content to winke?
            Or that thy ſhameleſſe flattery beguiles
            euery man that at thy glozing ſmiles?
            Aſſure thy ſelfe thy thoughts deceiue thee much;
            for many ſmile to ſee thy baſeneſſe ſuch:
            And ſuch as thou think'ſt blind more truly ſee
            thy heart, then they that hugge thy flatterie;
            And (ſcorning by thy pitch to be defil'd,
            or by thy ſweet tun'd lullabies beguil'd)
            Doe loath to view thy vilde deformitie,
            which pleaſing is to ſuch as fauour thee.
            That euery man be maſter of his owne
            all men allow; but it is lately growne
            To ſuch a cuſtome, (firſt by thee brought in)
            among th' Ambitious of this age of ſinne,
            That to a man (if I profeſſe to loue him)
            I muſt giue titles ſome degrees aboue him:
            Or elſe be tax'd with enuie or neglect,
            though my ſoule knowes, I giue more true reſpect
            
               Then you that id'ly light a torch at noone,
            and tell the Sun hee's brighter then the Moone;
            Which argues only that your humour is,
            ſtill to be doing though you do amiſſe
            In guilding golde. This I obſerued haue
            in ſome, whoſe age did homage to the graue,
            Whoſe words in prai'rs more fitly had been ſpent,
            and with deuotion on embaſſage ſent
            To make their peace with heauen, then to obay
            that which would guide them by the broader way.
            
            If it be hatefull euen in younger yeeres
            to temporize and gloze, ſure it appeares
            Monſtrous in age, whoſe part it rather is
            to grieue for what in youth it did amiſſe;
            Then in the laſt act of a life miſ-led,
            To heape more blowes vpon a wounded head.
            Could I inſtruct, or might I but aduiſe;
            I'de teach, or wiſh you to become more wiſe:
            But 'twill be thought prepoſterous in youth
            to tutor Age, though by the Word of Truth
            
            Such proofes as it doth bring approoued be:
            Therefore I leaue you to your humour free;
            Wherin (no doubt) you'le one day finde this true,
            
               You make your fav'rers fooles, they knaues of you.
            
            Too mild a ſtile, for that's a tearme for men;
            if ſo, too good for any flatterer then:
            What ſhall I call thee diuell, monſter, beaſt?
            if not all theſe, thou 'rt one of them at leaſt
            
               Transform'd to th' ſhape of man; nor ſeemes it ſtrange
            if thy grand Maſter (who himſelfe can change
            Into an Angels likeneſſe) make thee ſeeme,
            a Saint-like man in many mens eſteeme;
            Inſtructing thee vpon what vaine to worke,
            and where thou maieſt the moſt ſecurely lurke
            With beſt aſſurance, bids thee plie that minde
            where thou the weakeſt eaſineſſe ſhalt finde:
            Such thou maieſt puffe as Butchers do their meate,
            and with thy breath perſwade them they're as great
            As thou doſt make them; and aboue the reſt,
            be ſure (my child) thou ſuff'reſt not a Ieſt,
            
            Bee 't nere ſo poore to paſſe without a Good,
            
            though by none elſe the ſame were vnderſtood
            How to deſerue applauſe; and then thou hear'ſt
            amongſt that Sect (where gracious thou appear'ſt)
            A tedious talker, ſenceleſly diſcourſe
            (till he dull others, and himſelfe grow hoarſe)
            Let thy attention (till his tongue ly'th ſtill)
            ſtare in his face, then let him finde thy skill.
            Theſe be the rules, and many worſe then theſe
            thou muſt obſerue, if thou deſir'ſt to pleaſe;
            Thy Tutor ſayth, whoſe helpe will nere deceiue thee,
            and to whoſe fauour wretched man I leaue thee.
         
         
            
            OF THE INGRATEFVL.
            
               
                  SOme haue compar'd (and not improperly)
               him that is tainted with this worſt of ills
               vnto the Swine, who (freely, daily) fills
               His hungrie mawe euen to ſacietie
            
            
               Vpon ſuch Maſte as from the fruitfull tree
               falls to the ground; yet his deiected eye
               is fixed only where his food doth lie,
               And neuer rais'd the Giuers face to ſee.
            
            
               Guilty of this vnpardonable crime,
               where diuers kinds of theſe inhumane men,
               diſcourſed by th' induſtrious famous pen
               Or heathen Tully liuing in his time.
            
            
               The firſt Diſſemblers were of fauours reap'd
               proportioning the ſame (being more or leſſe)
               To the ſmall meaſure of their thankfulneſſe,
               Though a full hand on them the ſame had h
                     •
                  ap'd
            
            
               The next acknowledg'd freely that occaſion,
               off'ring it ſelfe (ioyn'd with abilitie)
               to make requitall (for each curteſie)
               Seem'd deafe to opportunities perſwaſion.
            
            
               
               An other ſort there was, whoſe ſhameleſſe crauing
               would not admit deniall, but being made
               maſter of their deſires could ſoone perſwade
               Their tongues (too baſely) to denie the hauing.
               
            
            
               The fourth and laſt (and worst my Author writes)
               were ſuch as, what they had receiu'd, forgot.
               
               Vnthankfull he then that remembers not;
               He that denies, diſſembles, not requites.
            
            
               Let me adde one kinde more, which I conceiue
               worſe then all theſe, who like the frozen ſnake,
               
               ſtings that ſame boſome, whence it warmth did take;
               And would, what gaue it life, of life bereaue.
            
            
               Such there hath been my obſeruation knowes,
               who (from a poore, deiected miſer ſtate)
               being rais'd (by Great ones) proued ſo ingrate,
               To bring their Rayſers necke neere th'axes blowes.
            
            
               Should I demaund why ſuch vnnumbred were
               among the former, ſome man might reply;
               (as vnto him who ask't the reaſon why,
               Among ſo many lawes, ſo ſtrict, ſeuere,
            
            
               Made by the Romans, none was knowne to touch
               the childe, whoſe hand ſhould guide the fatall knife;
               to cut his throat who gaue his being life):
               Becauſe that Tully thought there liv'd none ſuch.
            
            
               
               But ſince the time perfidious Iudas dyed
               (who at his end (I feare) bequeath'd his curſe,
               
               to ſome that do in theſe daies beare the purſe)
               Such there haue been, ſuch haue been Deifide.
               
            
            
               If your proſperity ſtrike ſayle, be ſure
               Theſe Kites, which ſtoop to you while you can feede them,
               come to an others fiſt; and if you need them
               They ſoare aloofe, checke at your empty lure.
            
            
               Much like their Embleme which (for the full payles)
               followe the maide that beares them; if ſhe fall
               and ſpill the meate, to that they run, and all
               Reſpect of her that vs'd to feede them, failes.
            
            
               Or Cuckoe-like, they to your Summers ſunne
               ſing merrily (though ſucke your egges withall)
               but when they finde your Summer faile, and fall
               Draw neere, they're gone, and their harſh muſicke done.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE BOVNTIFVLL.
            
               IF on the waters you ſhall caſt your bread
            it is not loſt, but if your pearles you throw
            Vnto theſe ſwine, be ſure the ſame they'l tread
            vnder their feete; good ſeed in good ground ſowen,
            
               Beneficìa malè locata malefacta ſunt.Fauours ill plac'd, are numbred with ill deeds;
            for if that hand which liberally beſtowes,
            (Though it (in giuing) other mens exceedes)
            not the true vſe of Bountie rightly knowes,
            Twere better be more ſparing, for to giue
            is proper to all creatures in their kinde:
            The meaneſt thing which we can ſay doth liue,
            in ſome reſpect we beneficiall finde.
            But vnto man is only giuen the powre
            to limit Bounty, know when, how, on whom,
            Beſt to beſtowe; not like a heedleſſe ſhowre
            to let faire flowers die in their mothers wombe
            For lacke of moiſture, whil'ſt vpon vild weedes
            it (in aboundance) poures refreſhing droppes;
            This kinde of giuing naturally proceedes
            from partiall hands, which in the courſe ſoone ſtoppes.
            Nor ſhould your bountie (like the ſunne) runne round
            and ſhine on all alike, though (like the beames)
            The ſame ſhould ſeldome in the eclipſe be found;
            the trueſt Bountie liues betweene extreames.
            
               Non ita claudenda eſt res familiaris, vt eam benignitas aperire non poſsit, nec ita reſeranda vt pateat omnibus.Your hand ſhould neuer be ſo lockt from all,
            as to deſerue a couetous report:
            
               Nor ſtill in action like your Prodigall,
            who makes expence his moſt delightfull ſport:
            Long ſince were none then Good-men held more fit
            to taſte your Bountie (then 'twas rightly vs'd);
            But in thoſe daies, ſuch men muſt naked ſit:
            thus is true liberality abus'd.
            He that can now moſt temporize, beſt thriues,
            and great men, more then good men, Bounty taſte;
            Honie is brought vnto the fulleſt hiues,
            ſmall riuers giue vnto the ſea (in waſte.)
            Many (againe) like Husband-men doe lay
            their ſeede in th'boſome of the fatteſt ground;
            Whoſe richneſſe will with much aduantage paie,
            where for each graine there ſhall an eare be found:
            And ſome of you, to gaine a knaues good word;
            orby a Ieſter to be highly prais'd
            Will giue with both handes, place them at your boord;
            when good-men are not ore your threſhold rais'd.
            Bounties pure current in this muddie time,
            is by the fogges of Prodigalitie
            So ſteinch't, with ſtinking ayres, ſo 're-ſpread with ſlime,
            that (as it were not) no ſuch thing we ſee.
            Wee finde the ſtreame as contrary to runne,
            vnto that courſe which it ſhould rightly hold:
            As is the Weſt to th'riſing of the ſunne,
            or Southerne heate vnto the Northerne cold.
            
               Nay more, this Vertue ſuffers ſo much wrong,
            as to be made a ſubiect nay a ſlaue;
            
               Euen vnto ſuch whoſe baſe malitious tongue
            the Giuers reputation dare depraue:
            Yet haue they ſtill gift after gift receiu'd,
            euen to the full of their deſires. Shall I
            
            
               Taelis benignitas vanitati est coniunctior, quam liberalitati. Cic.
               Say this was bounty? I might ſeeme bereav'd
            (in ſaying ſo) of ſence and honeſty.
            If a curſt dogge (fed at your table) bites you,
            you'le kick him (if not hang him) at the leaſt:
            And in a man (which doggedly requites you)
            reward you that, you puniſh in a Beaſt?
            I know not what to tearme this kinde of giuing:
            nor will I make my braine a minte for phraſe;
            But wiſh that men (whil'ſt their faire fame is liuing,
            would manifeſt it comes of Vertues race:
            Whoſe true-borne children ſhould relieue her friends;
            but Vertue ſtarues, they ſo degenerate
            
               Virtus laudatur & alget.In ſucking baſe ones, for their priuate ends
            whil'ſt ſhe and hers (though prais'd) are deſolate.
            Alas poore Vertue, (onely poore to ſuch,
            as do not know thy worth, who liue and die
            Without all ſence of goodnes, or a touch,
            of ought but Beaſt-like ſenſualitie):
            Or rather let me pittie them then thee.
            for though the ſtrange deformed Brats of vice
            Be richly clad now, thine in pouertie;
            they valued high, but thine at meaneſt price;
            The time may come, when Bountie ſhall appeare
            pure, like it ſelfe, and like faire Vertues friend.
            
               When Oſtentation ſhall not dare come neere,
            nor Prodigalitie perſwade her ſpend,
            But vpon ſuch as merite more then craue;
            then ſhall no bauling foole, no wit-bare Ieſter,
            No fawning baſe inſinuating ſlaue
            preſume, the place where Bountie liues to peſter.
            And you that now it thus abuſe, ſhall then
            curſe your much-giuing, and miſ-giuing hand.
            When you ſhall ſee the deeds of other men,
            grauen in braſſe, yours written in the ſand.
            Such mettle are mens hearts, the thankfull part
            cannot forget the good it doth receiue,
            But (as in braſſe) record it in his heart,
            of which no time can ere the ſame bereaue.
            Th'ingratefull Nature (ſand-like) doth retaine
            th'impreſsion of your hand, and more perceiues
            An aptneſſe in it ſelfe to take againe,
            then to make ſhew it any thing receiues.
         
         
            
            TO THE INGRATEFVLL.
            
               IS 't long of thy ſhort memorie, that thou
            yeeld'ſt not due thanks, where thou the ſame do'ſt owe?
            Alas, good man; why do'ſt thou not forget
            to begge as well? or doſt thou thinke it fit
            For men to craue thy thankes; becauſe to thee
            vnask't their fauours came not? can there be
            Excuſe allow'd for ſuch a fault? O no;
            But contrarie, no Tyrants lawe can ſhow
            A torture too ſeuere for ſuch an Ill:
            Looke how an ore-charg'd peece breaking doth kill
            The gazers on, and yet the Gunner ſtand
            not hurt at all, though from his fatall hand
            Death tooke his flight; ſo doth thy want of Art
            rightly to vſe a friend, make many ſmart
            And ſuffer too vniuſtly: For, thy fault
            makes honeſt hearts (with no ſuch baſeneſſe fraught)
            Suſpected; which approues the Prouerbe true
            men ſcalt with hot, cold water do eſchewe.
            The guiltleſſe ſeruants of that Naball. 
               Carmelite
            
            
               inur bane foole, who did with ill requite
            Fauours receiv'd) had been to death purſude
            (but for his wife) for his Ingratitude.
            Arr thou reliev'd in want, and canſt forget
            (vnworthy wretch) what gracious hand did ſet
            Thy miſry free? dooſt thinke ther's nothing more
            to be perform'd, when of thy leaprous ſore
            Of Pouerty thou'rt cur'd; no thankes, no praiſe,
            rendred to him which chang'd thy painfull daies
            
               To times of eaſe? more grieuous is thy ſore
            (through thy neglect) by much then 't was before.
            Thine outward ſence then only felt the ſmart;
            but now it ſticks ſo cloſe to thy falſe heart,
            (And vlc'ring ly'th in thy corrupted bloud)
            that not from thence proceedes a thought that's good.
            If by ſiniſter meanes thou haſt obtain'd
            what thou inioy'ſt, thou canſt not ſay 'tis gain'd.
            By wealth that's purchaſt with the loſſe of Fame,
            men do growe rich in nothing elſe but ſhame:
            In whom, deſert, no thankfulneſſe doth moue,
            they doe no leſſe then cheate men of their loue.
            Thou with a hollow heart, falſe, ſtopp'd within,
            on thy beſt friends wilt play, ſo thou mai'ſt win:
            Gaine ſauours well to thy miſiudging ſence,Dulcis odor lucri.
            
            whoſe facultie can eaſily diſpence
            With any Stocke, with any ground, or dung
            (bee't ne're ſo baſe, or vild for any tongue
            But thine to touch) from whence it doth proceede,
            though in thy boſome with the ſame doth breed
            Hatefull Ingratitude; whoſe braſen brow
            (bold Impe of Impudence) will not allow
            A bluſh to touch it. I confeſſe my fault
            from miſconſtruction came, in that I thought
            Thou had'ſt been man, aſwell in deed, as Name,
            which title di'd to thee, when thou to ſhame.
         
         
            
            OF THE ENVIOVS.
            
               
                  DOe we not hold him mad, that in his hand
               dare gripean Adder, though he cruſh it dead?
               or ſeemes it ſtrange, if he by whom is fedde
               A Lyons whelpe, or hath of Beares command,
            
            
               Shall haue his bloud by them vntimely ſhed?
               What ſhall we thinke him then that entertaines
               a Viper next his heart, which from his vaines
               Sucks his beſt bloud, and leaueth in the ſtead
            
            
               A fretting poyſon? whoſe effect is this,
               It makes him grieue and rage at others good,
               to ſtabbe himſelfe to ſpill an others bloud,
               And thinke himſelfe curs'd in an others bliſſe.
            
            
               Let him be gorg'd, euen to the very throate;
               yet will he vexe to heare an other call
               for a poore cruſt of bread; it frets his gall
               To ſee a ſayle belongs not to his boate.
            
            
               If with the price of one of his owne eyes
               he can buy both an other mans, hee'l doo't:
               'Tis to be fear'd too, for a Soule to boote
               Hee'l giue his owne to hell a ſacrifice.
            
            
               This is the man which from his mothers wombe
               hath been peruerſe and froward, whoſe vild life
               is nouriſht only by the breath of ſtrife;
               Which birth and breathing cannot want a roome
            
            
               
               At laſt in hell; for he that trauells heere
               (this Monſter-like) with miſchiefe, cannot finde
               a place more ſuting to his diu'liſh mind,
               Then where his friends and father may be neere,
            
            
               To be deliuer'd of his hell-bred ſeede:
               for there ſome damn'd infernall Hagge or other
               may be the Midwife, fit for ſuch a mother
               From whom (at beſt) ſome Fury muſt proceede.Vix ſunt ho
                        •
                      hoc nomine 
                        〈◊〉
                      quam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lup
                        ••
                      plus ſeritatis bent, perfud
                        •
                      maenus frate
                        •
                      ſanguine fr
                        ••
                     
                  
               
            
            
               This is the man who ſits, and laughs to ſpie
               where men do (Wolfe-like) by the throate, each other
               teare: how th'inhumane brother kills the brother,
               And by the hand of children, Parents die.
            
            
               Where he perceiues an others downe-fall nigh,
               He thirſts to ſee their ruine, more then they
               whoſe high-flowne Falcons (watchfull for their prey)
               Threatning to bring Deſtruction from the skie,
            
            
               Long to behold the fearefull game ſtrooke dead.
               'Tis Enuies life, ſoule, ſummum bonum, all
               which we tearm deere, to ſee an other fall,
               Though 't be the man that giues his hunger bread.
            
            
               To ſee his neighbour faſt is his beſt foode,
               It makes him leane to ſee another fat;
               He pines to nought, when he finds nought whereat
               He may repine. To haue him vnderſtood,
            
            
               And to the full deſcrib'd; thus in a word,
               it grieues his ſtaru'ling ſpirit more to ſee
               An others good, then his owne miſerie;Inuidus non 
                        •
                      nu
                        •
                      diſcruciat
                        •
                      aliena felicita quàm ſu
                        •
                      inf
                        •
                      tuni
                        •
                     .
               
               Though it cut deeper then Afflictions ſword.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE ENVIED.
            
               IS it not ſtrange, that ſuch can liue, whoſe foode
            is dres'd by Enuie, and with poyſon mixt,
            Whoſe heart's the kitchin, and whoſe canker'd bloud
            the meager Cooke carowſeth; while betwixt,
            His maſter and the diuell are begotten
            prodigious Monſters, which appeare as barren
            Of honeſtie as Hell, their ioints as rotten
            through want of marrow, as a peece of carrion?
            By theſe th'art malic'd; but be not diſmaide
            nor grieue thou at them, rather for them grieue
            If ſo thou canſt thy Charitie perſwade,
            (which as thou'rt fleſh and bloud, I ſcarce belieue.)
            When a fierce Dogge comes running at thee, ſtay
            and thou ſhalt finde hee'l rather back retire,
            Then offer to aſſault thee: if away
            from him thou fly'ſt thou further'ſt his deſire.
            So theſe (farre worſe then dogges) will fiercely bite,
            when they perceiue their venome makes thee ſtirre:
            For nothing giues ſuch fulneſſe of delight
            to th'ſnarling ſpleene of a malitious Curre,
            As to behold the miſchiefe that he doth.
            But where well-temper'd patience doth preſerue
            
               Inuidia virtute parta, gloria, non inuidia putanda eſt.(As a ſafe Antidote to th'rankling tooth
            of Enuies whelpes) they pine awaie, and ſtarue.
            This to thy Fare-well; if thy Vertues make thee
            hatefull to th'bad, their enuie is thy glorie:
            If loue to vice make good mens loue forſake thee,
            reſolue thy ſelfe they enuy not, they 're ſorrie.
         
         
            
            To the Enuious.
            
               BVt that I know thy face, I muſt confeſſe
            I ſhould haue trembled; for an Obiect leſſe
            Fearefull, were able without Phyſicks Art
            To make a Coſtiue man play a looſe part.
            I cannot thinke the worſt of Pharaoes kine
            Look't halfe ſo bare, as this poore trunke of thine;
            Which like Sir Cranion, or a ſtarv'ling Capon
            Staukes here and there, proportionably ſhapen
            To thy leane ſpirit, whoſe repining hate
            Hath brought thy Carcaſſe to this pining ſtate.
            I ſee there are more waies to th'wood then one.
            Not age, or wedlocke, bring'th a man alone
            Vnto a Night-cap; for a wretched minde
            Gaue thine to thee; O had it been ſo kinde
            T'haue put a Noſe-gaie too into thy hand;
            And in thy Ruffes roome plac'd a falling band,
            Many had look't t'haue ſeene thee turne, and Hope
            Would haue preſum'd that next had come a Roape:
            Whereto thy hanging ominous lookes preſage
            Thou muſt do homage; in th'meane time, ingage
            That little hope thy wretched ſoule enioyes
            Of Heauen, to him who thy beſt good deſtroyes,
            In feeding thy inſatiable ſpleene;
            Which, (had not helpe from hell tranſported been)
            Could not haue been ſo diueliſh as 't hath proov'd,
            But it in thee infernall powers haue mou'd:
            
               Scarce Hell it ſelfe, could conſter that for ill;
            VVhich (damned) thou (to ſatisfie thy will)
            Haſt vrg'd (I know) as an extreame offence,
            Againſt vnguiltie, harmeleſſe Innocence.
            
            VVhich hiath by ſome (too credulous weake men)
            (Out of their wiſdomes) been found faulty; when
            Had they been maſters but of ſo much ſight,
            As to diſtinguiſh betweene day and night,
            They had beene leſſe iniurious, or more iuſt;
            But to ſuch Iudges muſt the guilty truſt,
            VVhil'ſt Innocence muſt ſuffer; yet not ſo
            But it may liue to ſee their ouerthrow
            VVho moale-like heaue vnſeene, till at the laſt
            Their working be diſcouer'd, and they caſt
            Out of their hollow trenches, and withall
            Trod on by them, whom they deſir'd might fall;
            Then ſhall your ſable Cacodaemon be
            Hang'd with a twigge vpon ſome willow tree;
            To all which Enuious vndermining ſlaues,
            I wiſh no fairer Ends, no better graues.
         
         
            
            OF THE DETRACTER.
            
               
                  THis comes in laſt, becauſe he comes behinde
               thoſe whom he wrongs, though in his doing ſo
               the diuell cannot him in skill foregoe;
               Vnto the laſt but this, This laſt I finde
            
            
               To be as neere alli'd in Baſeneſſe, as
               a brother can be to a brother twinne,
               in feature, though (as oft) Nature therein
               Proportion them ſo like, that each doth paſſe
            
            
               For other. Only this one difference I note
               this laſt, allow'th more freedome to his tongue
               then Enuie doth, and other men are ſtung
               By him more then himſelfe; he makes his throate
            
            
               An open graue, where his contagious breath,
               labours to blaſt the ſpotleſſe fame of ſuch,
               whoſe Reputation it ſhall chance to touch.
               Nor can the hand of Reconciling Death
               
            
            
               Free men from this iniurious Monſters ſting,
               which through the bowels of the earth doth pierce,
               and in the quiet vault appeares more fierce
               Then Death (the graues ſterne tyranizing King.)
            
            
               Were a man here as free from actuall ill,
               
               as when he firſt mov'd in his mothers wombe;
               or as the man that calls the Heauen his home
               Guiltleſſe of ſinne; yet would this trie his skill.
            
            
               
               If in a bul-ruſh he can finde a knot;
               or from pure hony (which the harmleſſe Bee
               ſuck'd from thoſe flowers which like it ſelfe was free)
               Straine poiſon'd iuyce; where if he finde one iot
            
            
               Which he can iudge doth reliſh of a weede
               (from which the toylſome Bee cheerfully flies,
               home to the hiue with hony-laden thighs)
               He ſtraite concludes no good can thence proceed.
            
            
               So ſtrange is the diſtraction of this Tom
               
               of Bedlam, that all places, times, and men
               without diſtinction ſeeme alike: for when
               The furious rayling fit comes on him, from
            
            
               His ſtinking ſtomacke, hee 'le belch forth ſuch geere,
               ſuch filth; and with ſuch violence, as though
               he meant to caſt his rotten garbage: ſo
               He ioyes to make his loathſomneſſe appeare.
            
            
               This (what ſhall I terme him?) will deuoure your bread,
               call you his maſter, crouch with cap in hand,
               profeſſe he falls, if you ſhall faile to ſtand;
               Yet curſe you liuing, ioy when you are dead.
            
            
               He 'le be the Herald of your Infamy,
               and ſcandalize your worth, though you haue bred
               him to the ſhape of man euen from a ſhred.
               
                  Hic niger est, &c.This is a blacke-one, full of trechery.
            
         
         
            
            To the Detracted.
            
               THough Wolues againſt the ſiluer Moon do bark,
            they blemiſh not her brightnes, nor the ſpight
            Of bauling Curres, (which ſhe diſdains to mark)
            can any whit eclipſe her of her light.
            So mai'ſt thou ſlight the railing of ill tongues,
            if a cleere ſhining conſcience be thy guard;
            Which to defend thee from the worſt of wrongs,
            will, as a wall of braſſe, be found as hard.
            Men are by Nature apt to blame, and hate
            ſuch as diſtaſte what they approue as good:
            If thou diſlike to heare a Parrat prate,
            and tell a tedious tale of Robin-hood;
            He 'le ſhoot Detractions boult againſt thy braine,
            terming it ſhallow, barren, poore and dull;
            Becauſe not vented by a windy vaine,
            empt'ing it ſelfe to make thy mouth ſhew full.
            But wiſer men then he aſſures thee no;Loquacit a
                     •
                   certiſsimū fatuitatis argumētum Eraſ.
               
            
            They are moſt fooles (ſay they) that vſe moſt words:
            That ſilence argues folly, 't is not ſo;
            for vertues branches no ſuch fruite affords.
            Admit a Turke ſhould call thee Infidell;
            wouldſt be offended? or imagine, that
            One dubbe thee knaue, in whoſe owne heart doth dwell
            baſeneſſe enough, to make him wondred at
            By all that know him? ſhall the firſt perſwade thee,
            that thy Religion knowes more Gods then one;
            
               Or to denie the ſacred power that made thee,
            or t'giue his honour to a carued ſtone?
            Or can the ſecond force thee to confeſſe
            through his report, thou art as baſe as he?
            If none of theſe thou wilt, their power's the leſſe,
            thy worth the more by their detracting thee.
            An honeſt fame (like ſpice) the more 'tis brus'd
            ſauours the ſweeter, which when we are dead
            Will be the ſweeteſt ſeare-cloath can be vs'd
            to wrap vs in; it will out-laſt the lead
            Wherein that bodie lies, in which did liue
            a ſpotted conſcience, a detracting ſpirit;
            Which to it ſelfe an earthly heauen did giue,
            and of Heauens ioyes it ſelfe did diſinherite.
         
         
            
            TO THE DETRACTER.
            
               THink'ſt thou it makes thy Reputation faire,
            if by thy muddy tongue thou canſt impaire
            An other mans? looke how a murtherer can
            (whoſe fatall hand ſhall kill an other man)
            Adde to his owne by ſhortning others daies;
            ſo by detracting others growes by praiſe.
            Perchance thou feed'ſt thy ſelfe with a conceipt,
            that euery man that heares thee raile, doth ſtraite
            Belieue that all thou ſayſt is true, for that
            they contradict thee not; Ile tell thee what,
            In my opinion thou ſhouldſt rather feare,
            it makes them tremble and amaz'd to heare,
            How diu'liſhly thou ſecond'ſt what thou ſay'ſt
            with oaths, and curſes; or admit thou mai'ſt
            Light vpon ſome who (knowing not thy vſe)
            may be perſwaded, that from ſome abuſe
            Offer'd to thee, proceeds thy railing fit:
            Yet all the glory thou enioy'ſt by it
            Is, they'le note thee euerafter, for
            a creature which all good men ſhould abhorre.
            Or ſay thou ſhalt ſome man, to ſome depraue
            who know him honeſt; think'ſt thou for a knaue
            They can do leſſe then iudge thee? and beware
            thou rayl'ſt to no men that iuditious are:
            For they 'le ſoone finde that thou diſhoneſt art,
            and therefore know thou tak'ſt no good mans part:
            
               Whoſe prayſe they iudge is equally the ſame,
            Where Iuſt men doe applaud, or thou defame.
            I might haue ſpar'd my breath in wiſhing thee
            to men of iudgement not to be too free;
            For thou art chiefly carefull in this point
            to plie his eare whoſe iudgement's out of ioynt:
            By whom as yet was neuer vnderſtood
            how any cauſe could, but the firſt, be good;
            Whoſe ignorance (I thinke) might argue rather
            Th' Vicar of fooles will prooue their ghoſtly father.
            And as for thee, thou doſt reſolue I know
            thou muſt die mad, thy braine's diſtemperd ſo.
            Which will be for thy credit when thou 'rt dead:
            for ſome will lay the fault vpon thy head,
            And ſay thy braine inforc'd thy tongue to raue.
            Better be thought a mad-man then a knaue.
            FINIS.
            
               
                  Qui ducis vultus, & non legis iſta libenter,
                  Omnibus iuuideas liuide, nemo tibi. 
                  
                     Mart.
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   