
      
         
            
            
            The Helliſh and horribble
Councell, practiſed and
vſed by the Ieſuites, (in their priuate
Conſultations) when they would
haue a man to murther a
KING.
            According to thoſe damnable inſtructions,
giuen (by them) to that bloody villaine
FRANCIS RAVILLIACKE, who murdered
HENRY the fourth, the late
French King.
            
               Sent to the Queene Regent, in anſwere of
that impudent Pamphlet, publiſhed by PETER
COTTON Ieſuite, in defence of the Ieſuites,
and their doctrine; which alſo is
hereunto annexed.
            Tranſlated out of French.
            IOHN 8. VER. 44.
            Ye are of your father the Diuell, and the deſires of your father ye will
doe: he hath beene a murtherer from the beginning.
            LONDON,
Printed for T. B. and are to be sold by Iohn Wright at his
ſhop by Chriſts-Church-gate.
1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE QVEENE,
MOTHER OF OVR
KING, AND REGENT OF
FRANCE.
            
               MADAME,
            
            
               
                  THE combate of ſpirits is ſo
iealous, as there is not any kind
of errour, how cleare and euident
so euer it be, but it shall
finde a defender, rather then any
way to yeeld or giue place to
truth: becauſe opinion, in ſuch
mindes as pride will neuer permit, to humble themſelues
vnder the victorious arme of the ſtrongeſt wraſtler,
beares them out (with no meane courage) in all
apparant and impudent ſhame. The Ieſuites doe hereof
giue ſufficient teſtimony, whoſe doctrine, both iuſtifying
and defending the killing of Princes, they dare
yet put on ſuch ſhameleſſe vizardes; as, to perſwade
your Highneſſe, that they are no ſuch men, neither
doe deſerue any ſuch taxation.
            Vpon this our late lamentable diſaſter in France, by
ſuch a bloudy, fatall, and parricide hand, as hath bereft

vs of the moſt remarkable King, that euer this flouriſhing
Kingdome enioyed; the Ieſuites, to excuſe
their helliſh harts, and palpable bloudy intentions
(hauing beene ſo highly fauoured from you, as to
haue the buriall of the Kinges hart, at the College of
La Fleſche) haue publiſhed a little pamphlet, called;
A dedicatorie Letter, of the doctrine of the Fathers
Iesuites, conformable to the decrees in the
Councell of Constance; directing it alſo to your
Maieſty, that you might remaine fully aſſured, of their
harmeleſse innocency and honeſt inclination.
            But, as it becommeth any true harted French-man,
(ſo much as in him lyeth) to diſcouer truth from falſehood,
and verity from lying; I haue ſent vnto your
ſacred view, the ſame booke of Peter Cottons, without
altering or adding thereunto any the very least
ſillable. And when your Highneſſe ſhall haue read it
ouer, that you would be pleaſed, to reade likewiſe a
much ſhorter diſcourſe following, to giue you a true
taſt of the Ieſuites doctrine, and whereby you may diſcerne
them in their kinde. So may you reſt fully perſwaded,
how neare their hollow harts and equiuocating
ſoules doe agree together, and how ſtudious they
are, in imploying their paines and vttermoſt endeauour,
to nurſe vp ſuch villaines as must become the
murderers of Kinges.
            Withall, if it might pleaſe you, but to remember
him, to whom (that monſter of men) Rauilliack, that
robde you of your richeſt iewell, and vs of our dearest
Lord; had ſhewne the fatall inſtrument, wherewith

he did the deede, and the man commending the beautifull
workemanſhip of the knife, ſeeing withall, that he
kept it curiously, and made no vſe thereof in his feeding;
was anſwered by the ſaid Rauilliack: That
that fayre knife, was to performe a faire deede, yea,
that it was to kill a King. Which wordes, whether he
vnderſtood not, or guiltily concealed them, he paied
the price of his life for: And with that, as alſo theſe
other ſerious conſiderations, I humbly intreate your
Highneſſe, to take an intire apprehenſion of
theſe dangerous men, how ſmooth ſoeuer
Cottons diſcourſe ſhall
appeare vnto you.
(*⁎*)
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE SECRET AND
hidden Myſterie, which the Ieſuites
doe vſe, when they reſolue
to haue a King murthered.
            
               WHen they would haue a man to
vndertake the reſolution of
murthering his King, this is
their order: After ſuch a wicked
perſon ſhall be entred into their
Meditation, or Chamber appointed
for ſuch prayers; then this infernall ofſpring
doe giue their attendance, and lay before
him a knife foulded vp in a Skarffe, and cloſed in a
little Casket of Iuorie, couered with an Agnus
Dei, written round about with many ſweete and
perfumed Characters. And taking the knife forth
of the ſaid Casket, they bedew it with diuers
ſprincklings of holy water, and ſaſtening to the
haſt or handle thereof, ſundry little beads of Corrall,
to the number of fiue or ſixe, bleſſed and hallowed
with their holy-water; they do giue therby
to vnderſtand, that he giuing ſo many ſtabbes

or wounds with that knife, ſhal (by that act) releaſe
as many ſoules out of the fire of Purgatory.
            Then, deliuering it into the hand of the murderer;
they vtter theſe words: Goe thou forth like
Iephtah; the ſword of Sampſon; the ſword wherby
Dauid did cut off the head of Goliah; the ſword of
Gedeon; the ſword wherewith Iudith did cut off
the head of Holofernes; and the ſame wherewith
Saint Peter did ſmite off the eare of Malchus, and
the ſword of Pope Iulius the ſecond, whereby he
brake the power of Princes, and (with great effuſion
of bloud) got out of their handes the Cities
of Setuſa, Imola, Fayenza, Furlie, Bologna, and
many other Citties: Goe thou forth (I ſay) be vertuous,
and God will ſtrengthen thine arme.
            After this, the helliſh company doe all fall
downe vpon their knees, and the moſt renouned
among them, or he that is the cheefe Prieſt, makes
the coniuration, ſaying theſe words that follow:
come Cherubins, come Seraphins, Thrones and
Dominations; come moſt bleſſed Angels, Angels
of charity; come and fill this holy vessell of glorie
and eternity, & carry him forthwith to the crown
of the Virgin Mary, of Patriarkes and of Martyrs:
for he is no more one of ours, but he is yours.
            And thou, O great and powerfull God, that
haſt reuealed vnto him, in his prayer and Meditation
that he muſt (of neceſſity) be the murtherer
of a Tyrant and Heretique, to giue his crowne to
a Catholique King, and he being (by vs) made apt

and diſpoſed vnto this murder: do thou fortefie his
ſenſes, and make bolde his courage, to the end,
that he may accompliſh thy will. Arme him with
a compleat Armour of thy prouidence, to eſcape
from them that would apprehend him. Giue him
winges, that the foule hands of the barbarous may
not touch his sanctified members. Spreade the
beams of thy ioyes vpon his ſoule, to the end that
thereby his body may bee ſo encouraged, that
cheerefully he may diſpoſe himſelfe to this fight,
without any feare.
            This coniuration being thus ended, they bring
him before an Altar, and there they ſhew him a
goodly picture, wherein the Angels doe beare
the body of Iames Clement the Iacobine Frier,
who murthered HENRY the third, King of
France, and preſent it before the Throne of God,
ſaying: O Lord, behold thy ſcholler; ſee the defender
and accompliſher of thy iuſtice, and all the
Saints ariſe out of their roomes, to giue him
place.
            When all theſe things are thus done and finiſhed,
then is there no more but foure Ieſuites, that
may be allowed to ſpeake vnto him, and when
they draw neere vnto him, they tell him, that it
appeares that there is ſome Diety dwelling in
him, and they are ſo affraide of the ſplendor ſhining
in him, as falling down, and kiſsing his hands
and feete, they holde him no more for a mortall
man, but ſtand by him, as halfe vnworthy of the

great glory and happineſſe, whereunto he hath
already attained, and breathing forth many ſighs,
they ſay vnto him. I would to God, that he had elected
and called me into your eſtate and condition:
for then ſhould I be certainly aſſured, to
go really and preſently into Paradice,
without euer comming
into Purgatory.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Declaratorie Letter, to the
Queene, Mother of the King,
Regent in France.
            
               MADAME,
            
            
               
                  GOD ordained in the old Teſtament,
that no man ſhould ſeethe
the Kidde in the Milke of her
Damme or Mother; to inſtruct
thereby, according to the expoſition
of Philo the Iew, that hée
ſhold not be charged with new afflictiō,
who in other caſes is oppreſſed.
According to this rule dictated of the ſame nature,
theſe men of our Society ſhold hope, that, by this
lamentable accident which hath ſhaken with dreadfulneſſe
the two Poles of Chriſtendome; they might
(at leaſt) haue a free breathing, to ſigh after their incomparable
loſſe: a loſſe which to them is as much
in particular, as it is to all in generall and common.
But they pay the ſame price, as happens to them who
meeting vnder the ruines of a crazed building, where
one ſtone ſtaies not for another, doe couer and ouerwhelme
them altogether vpon whom they fall: we
being with hart and body buſied, for tranſlation of
that precious pawne and remarkable gage, which it

pleaſed your Maieſtie to haue conſigned into our
handes, by them of my Lord the Prince de Conty, and
whereunto the principall Lordes of France rendered
their lateſt honours: when there were ſome, ſlenderly
affected to Catholique Religion, and to them that are
of our profeſſion; to diſcredit vs, and make benefit
of our abſence; who ſowed abroade ſuch bruites, ſo
farre off from true reſemblance and probability, as
a man would neuer haue imagined, that ſuch calumnies
could enter, (eſpecially in railing) into the opinion
of any reaſonable ſoule.
            This came by the occaſion of a very badde booke,
the doctrine whereof hath beene (by good right) condemned,
by the Court of Parliament: some maintaining,
that the doctrine contained in that booke,
was common to al the Ieſuites: Others, that it was
in ſuch ſort particuler to the Authour, as that many of
the ſelfe ſame company had written to the contrary,
and altogether had condemned it, in the body of the
Prouinciall congregation, ſome few yeares ſince.
A difference, which the leaſt paſſionate might determine,
concluding, that diſallowance ſhould be the
reaſon, and that it muſt be attended, what we ſhould
ſay thereof.
            Whereupon, I hauing beene named in particuler,
this is the cauſe, Madame, that inſtantly made mée
ſet hand to pen, to repreſent vnto you, (as to her that
is equally affected to the true Religion, the moſt intereſſed
in the good of this State, and the very ſafeſt
Sanctuarie that innocence can haue) that which the
Doctors of our company haue written vpon this ſubiect.
Knowing, that the greatneſſe of affaires wil not
eaſily permit you, to looke into this caſe your ſelfe,
nor the little loue which thoſe detractors doe beare
vs, make any true report vnto you.
            
               
After all this, I wil declare with the ſelfe ſame breuity,
what is the common ſenſe, and what is the opinion
of our Societie, diſperſed through the world
concerning the matter whereof queſtion is made.
They all preſuppoſing one verity, which cannot bée
called into controuerſie, no, not euen by the hatefull
and enuious of this flouriſhing Crowne: To wit,
that the ſubiect which was debated in the Councell
of Conſtance, and which (ſince then) hath beene declared
more amply by our Catholique Doctors, concerning
the expulſion of Tyrants: doth not any way
touch the happy renowne and moſt honourable memory,
of him whoſe death we deepely deplore, his
life hauing beene ſo farre from the detection of tyranny;
as it hath beene, and for euer ſhall bee to all the
Monarches in the world: the model of Piety, Iuſtice,
Clemency, Valour, Debonaritie, and Fatherly affection
towardes all his Subiects.
            In the firſt place, the moſt Illuſtrous Cardinall
Tolet preſents himſelfe to our eyes, a perſonage of
rare knowledge, a Spaniard by Nation, and a French-man
in affection. In the firſt Booke of his Summe,
the ſixt Chapter, there he teacheth in expreſſe tearmes
that it is not lawful to attempt on the life of a Prince
although he doe abuſe his power. And addeth, that to
maintaine the contrary, is an heretical doctrine, condemned
in the Councell of Conſtance.
            
            The moſt Illuſtrous and moſt learned Bellarmine,
anſwering to the ſelfe ſame obiection, in the third
Chapter of his Apologeticall anſwere to the booke of
the King of great Brittaine ſpeaketh thus. I haue
neuer read, nor heard it ſaid, that eternall life ſhould
bee promiſed, to them that attempt on the life of
Kinges. But contrariwiſe I haue read, that the Article
which ſaith: Euery Tyrant may and ought lawfully

bee ſlaine: was long ſince condemned in the firſt
Seſſion of the Councell of Conſtance. Very true it is,
that Iohn Wickliffe an Engliſh-man, hee whom the
Proteſtants doe praiſe ſo much, and of whoſe commendations
they haue made a Placarde in the frontiſpice
of their Hiſtories, teacheth: That he is no longer
a Lord, either Eccleſiaſticall or Ciuill, after the
one or other is fallen into any deadly ſinne. An errour
which the ſaid Councell condemned in the eight
Seſſion.
            
               Gregory of Valencia, a man of eminent knowledge,
as publique teſtimony maketh proofe, which is deliuered
of him in Italie, Spaine, and Germany; he writing
on the ſecond part of Saint Thomas, Queſtion 64
and conforming himſelfe to the Doctrine of other
Schoole Diuines, determineth: that it is no way permitted
to attempt vpon the life of a Prince, although
he ſhould abuſe his authority.
            
               Alphonſus Salmeron, in the thirteenth Tome of his
workes, expounding the thirteenth Chapter of the Epiſtle
to the Romans, inſtructeth the very ſame, he
citeth the Councell of Conſtance, and declareth the
fact of Aod on Eglon King of the Moabites,
               Or Ehud. by the expreſſe
and manifeſt commandement of God, of whom
no man ought to be Iudge, in his particuler caſe.
            
               Martin del Rio, who is in like manner famous in al
kinde of good writings, in his Commentaries vpon
Hercules Furens in Seneca, number 920. ſaith: That
the ſentence of the Poet is perilous, and alleageth to
the contrary, the decree of the Councell of Conſtance,
which cannot be too often inculcated, reiterated, and
declared to the people in this matter.
            
               Sebaſtian Heiſſius, in his Apologeticall declaration
of Aphoriſmes, attributed to the Ieſuites doctrine,
ſheweth by the very wordes of Mariana, that he ſpake

out of his owne head, and that he himſelfe, perceiuing
that he had exceeded the limites of the common
doctrine, did acknowledge, that he was ſubiect to errour,
and he ſhould be ſubmitted to the cenſure of
whomſoeuer would accept it, immediatly after, his
opinion was brought, and the common cenſure of all
the Diuines of our company, that he counterpointed
that of the ſaid Mariana.
            
            
               Martin Becanus, in his Anſwere to the ninth Aphoriſme,
ſendeth the Reader to the Councell of Conſtance,
ſhewing, that a lawfull Prince cannot looſe his
ſuperiority, although he ſhould become a Tyrant.
            
               Iaques Gretſerus, Reader in Diuinitie at Ingolſtad,
in his Booke intituled veſpertilio haereticopolicus, anſwering
to ſome obiections that had béene made vnto
him concerning the opinion of Mariana; ſaith with
Heiſſius: That hee ought to holde with the common
conſent, leauing the particular iudgement of Mariana,
and that hee himſelfe had ſubmitted to that of others.
            
               Leonard Leſſius Reader in Diuinitie at Louaine,
in his ſecond booke De iuſticia & iure, the ninth Chapter,
and fourth doubt; giueth his conſent likewiſe to
the common ſentence, That it is not lawfull to enterpriſe
on the perſon of a Prince, although hée ſhould
abuſe his power; grounding his ſaying on the aduertiſement
of the Prince of the Apoſtles, Seruants, be
yee ſubiect to your Maſters, and not onely to the good
and modeſt, but alſo to the ſharpe and troubleſome,
and then hée alleadgeth the aboue named Decrée of
the Councell.
            
               Nicholas Serier, writing on the third Chapter of
the booke of Iudges, in the firſt queſtion, declareth,
that the Act of Aod, neither can, or ought to ſerue, for
fore-iudging or example to deteſtable Aſſaſſinates,

Parricides, and murtherers of their Kings.
            
               Iohn Azor, in the ſecond part of his morall Inſtitutions,
the firſt booke, fift Chapter, and tenth Queſtion,
ſhewes himſelfe a much greater enemie of the
audacious and ſacrilegious attentates, of ſuch as ſhal
enterpriſe vpon the liues of Princes, Inſtructing, that
it is not lawfull, to attempt on the liues of them that
doe vniuſtly poſſeſſe themſelues of ane State, Grounding
his ſaying principally vpon this; that no man
ought to be condemned, before he be heard, and without
knowledge of the cauſe, in which caſe, any one
particular is no competent Iudge.
            As for Lewes Richeome, his Apologies doe make
peremptory proofe of the vnreconcilable hatred, which
he beares to the doctrine of ſuch, as dogmatiſe againſt
the authority of Kings, And that in ſuch maner, as the
Lord Paſquire himſelfe, a criticke cenſurer of his
workes, after he hath reported his words in the third
booke and firſt Chapter, hee commendeth him, and
ſaith, that he cannot chuſe but loue him, adding theſe
words, I cannot chuſe but honor thee, beholding thee,
to portraite the Idea of obedience, which the Subiect
oweth to his King. A praiſe which hee might giue to
many other of the ſame Societie, who, after they had
examined this matter with Saint Thomas and the
whole Schoole, concluded all conformably to the Sorbonne,
and to that which hath béene determined in the
Councell of Conſtance.
            
            Such then being the ſenſe, and ſuch the ſentences
of theſe Doctors, very graue and ſignall men of our
company, what preiudice can the particular opinion
of Mariana bring to the reputation of a whole Order?
which Order being (according to her Inſtitution) extreamely
iealous, for the manutention of thoſe holy
ordinances of the Church, and reſpecting the power

and authority of Kings, who, for their temporall eſtate,
doe depend onely vpon God: haue (of long time)
diſallowed the legertie of a drie penne, and namely
in the Prouinciall congregation of Fraunce, helde in
this Citie of Paris the yéere 1606. where moreouer,
the reuerend Father Claudius Aquanina, Generall of
our Company, was required, that ſuch as had written
to the preiudice of the Crowne of Fraunce, might
be reprooued, and their Bookes ſuppreſſed, which the
ſaide Reuerend Father (afterward) did very ſeriouſly
and exactly: being very ſorie, that by ouer-ſight
or negligence in his abſence, and without ſight of the
worke; any one ſhould preſume vpon his admittance.
The words which he vſeth in his anſwere, are theſe.
We haue approued the iudgment and care of your
congregation, and haue béene greatly gréeued, that
no man will looke after the impreſſions of ſuch
Bookes: which Bookes neuertheleſſe, wée haue
ſuddainly commaunded to be corrected, and shall
haue moſt exact care hence-forwarde, that ſuch
things ſhall not happen any more.
            
            So that very hardly now is to be found one onely
Copy of Mariana, except it be by the pernitious liberality,
of the inheritours of Wechell, who are knowne
to be of the pretended reformed Religion: and haue
cauſed the ſaid Booke to be imprinted at their owne
proper charges, not ſo much excited (as is eaſie to be
preſumed) by deſire to the publique ſeruice, as particularly
to hurt our Company. Some are of the mind,
that they haue added thereto ſomewhat of their own:
Others ſay, that thoſe Bookes of the firſt impreſſion
were much worſe, a controuerſie ſeruing to no purpoſe:
for albeit it were ſo, and that no man had lent
any charity, to this ill-handled penne: yet is there no
reaſon why it ſhould rather incommodate the body

of our Societie; then the writings of Iohn Petit, and
others, the Uniuerſities and Orders whereof they
were Schollers, Batchelers, Maiſters, and Doctours.
            But foraſmuch, Madame, as I made promiſe in
the beginning, to expoſe clearely and diſtinctly what
our opinion and credence is, touching the matter propoſed,
I come now to the point, which ſhall make vp
the laſt part of this declaration.
            1. All the Ieſuites in generall and particural, will
ſigne, yea, euen with their proper blood; that they do
not hold, either in this matter, or any other whatſoeuer,
any other faith, doctrine, or opinion, then that
of the whole vniuerſall Church.
            2. In the ſecond place, that among all the kindes
of gouernment, and publicke adminiſtration, Monarchie
only is the beſt.
            3. That ſuch is the ſpirituall gouernement of the
Church, as it came to the Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt the
ſucceſſor of Saint Peter, and ſuch the temporall of the
State and Kingdome of Fraunce, as it holdeth in
the perſon of the King, her soueraigne Lord and
Maiſter.
            4. That Kings are, as Homer calls them, the children,
and darlings of God, or rather his ſoules image,
as Meander ſaith.
            5. That they are annointed, and thereby ſurnamed
Chriſtes of the Lord, to the end, ſaith Simon
Archbiſhop of Theſſalonica, that each one may vnderſtand,
that they are inuiolable, and ought to be reſpected,
as things holy and ſacred.
            6. That it is a damnable hereſie (euen as Saint
Ireneus noted it fourtéene hundred yéeres agoe) to beléeue,
that Kings are giuen to men by chaunce or hap,S. Iren lib. 5. Cap 24.
conſidering that all power commeth of God. And becauſe,

ſaith Saint Iſidore of Damieta, in the moſt ancient
paintings, wée behold a hand comming out of
heauen, that ſets a Crowne vpon their head.
            7. That whoſoeuer reſiſteth Kings, or rebelleth
againſt them,Rom. 13. 2. begetteth his owne damnation according
to the doc
                  •
               rine of the Apoſtle.
            8. That obedience is due vnto them, not because
they are vertuous, wiſe, potent, or endued with other
commendable qualities: but becauſe they are Kings,
eſtabliſhed by God.
            9. That our Kings in Fraunce, are the eldeſt in
the Church, endowed with rare and ſignall priuiledges,
aboue the common condition of other Kings in
the world.
            10. That it is not lawfull to denie them obedience,
much leſſe then to reuolt or turne againſt them:
although they were vicious, hard to endure, and froward,
according as the ſame Apoſtle ſpeaketh.1. Pet. 2. 11.
            
            11. That in ſuch caſe, we ought to pray for them,
as the Prophet willed it to be done, for the proſperity
of Nabuchodonozer, and Balthazar his ſonne. And
that afflictions, loſſe of goods, perſecutions, and other
diſcommodities, are to be endured patiently: without
rebelling (for any of theſe) againſt ſuperiours,
becauſe ſuch things are moſt acceptable to God, and
conformable to the praiſe, which (in the like caſe) S.
Paule gaue to the Hebrewes, and to the ordinance
which he had publiſhed in the Church,Heb. 10. 34. ſaying, Let euery
ſoule be ſubiect to the ſuperiour powers.
            
            12. And therefore, that not only it is vnlawfull, to
attempt vpon their perſons; but alſo, that it is an execrable
paricide, a prodigious offence, and a deteſtable
ſacriledge.
            13. That the Decrée in the Councell of Conſtance
in the fiftéenth Seſſion, ought to bée receiued of all

men, and alſo to be maintained inuiolably.
            14. That the declaration of Sorbonne, in the yéere
141
                  •
               . and that of Iune this preſent yéere, is good, holy
and wholſome.
            15. What euery one is to be aduertiſed, to take
héede of diuers Bookes, which goe againſt the Edicts,
the reading whereof is not only in this matter greatly
dangerous: but much more to be feared, that their
Authors being (to our extreame gréef) themſelues deuided
from the Catholique Church, doe hold (as nothing)
the Councell of Conſtance, all Catholique cenſures,
and the Doctors before mentioned: but that
which is to be deplored, they doe fortifie themſelues
the ſtronger in their opinions, by their oppoſition,
and ſéeme to render themſelues ſo much the more recommendable
vnto their admirers.
            I would note downe the places, ſpecifie the paſſages,
and alledge the very words: were it not, that it
is much better, they ſhould remaine buried in the
bottomleſſe depth of obliuion: and fitteth more conueniently,
to make knowne, that innocencie hath better
arms, then this recrimination.
            And for this reaſon alſo, I could wholly haue abſtained
from this aduertiſement, had it not béene my
deſire to ſhew, that the body of our company, can no
more bee infected by the opinion of one man, then
thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion, doe finde
themſelues any way intereſſed, by the erronious doctrine
of ſome of their owne ranke: whom they reiect,
diſallowe, and condemne, as willing to liue (with vs)
vnder the lawes of the Kingdome, and with the obedience
and voluntarie ſubmiſſion, which wée render
to the Scepter of our Kings. And I am perſwaded,
that if they had the penne in hand, as I haue, they
would ſay with vs, and thunder out a curſe (euen

in common voyce) againſt ſuch infamous Authors.
            Which being maturely and wiſely conſidered, as
well by the Court of Parliament, as by the ſacred
College of Sorbonne: they haue made no mention at
all in their Arreſt and Decree, of the doctrine of the
Ieſuites. Knowing very well, like iuſt Iudges and
Doctors, that faults are perſonall; that there would
bee no innocencie in the world, if the offence of one
man ſhould be imputed to another, and that it hath
beene a deplorable and incommunicable property of
ſinne, which was committed by the firſt man, to haue
his extendure ouer others, becauſe his poſterity was
repreſented in his perſon. Knowing alſo elſe-where,
by the reiterated diſpoſition of the wicked, that Mariana
had not in any thing contributed to this execrable
parricide, neither could he doe it: conſidering,
that the villaine had not ſufficient intelligence, of the
tongue, wherein the ſaid booke was written.
            Wherein is diſcouered, the ſcarſe charitable intention
of ſuch as ſticke not to ſay, that he had it all by
hart, to the end, to throw the publique hatred of this
miſhappe, on others, then on the culpable himſelfe. It
is then in this caſe, Madame, that you are moſt humbly
intreated, to imploy your ſupreame authority,
and to ordaine, that all thoſe writings, which, in the
beginning are ſmall glimpſes of rebellion, and (in
few houres) will become flaming Beacons of ſedition;
may bee taken from the inſtant view of the
French: you are our Soueraigne Lady, endued by
God, with a high vnderſtanding, and with vertues
no way to be equalled, you can clearely diſcerne, how
much it importeth, that we ſhould liue vnited, which
ſéeing it cannot be, in one and the ſame faith, by reaſon
of the iniquity of time, at leaſt let it be in fidelity,
obedience and mutuall affection, for conſeruation of
our peace.
            
               
We haue a King, who in his young age repreſents
to vs, the ſpirit and ſubſtance of great Henry, his Father,
your huſband, and who with the increaſing of
his yeares, will haue, (while it pleaſeth God to continue
vpon him his benigne influences) his valour, his
wiſedome, his good fortune, and his experience. It is
for vs, to cheriſh this treaſure, to ſerue (with good
hearts) this great and little Maſter: And willingly
to obey you his moſt-honoured Mother, our Regent
and Miſtreſſe.
            And to the end, that nothing may trouble the vnion,
which onely can (next vnder God) preſerue this
puiſſant Monarchy, and render it euermore dreadfull
to her enimies, how much were it to be deſired, Madam,
that (among vs) there could no falſe ſpeakers be
found? If the impoſture were baniſhed, his fraternity
ſhould receiue the wages due to their calumny;
rancours would be rooted vp, and when any ſiniſter
report is brought vs, then iudgement would be ſuſſpended:
And in a word, according to the Councell of
the Apoſtle, each one would maintaine inuiolably the
band of charity.
            Thoſe Otaconſtes and Proſagogides of theſe times,
are greatly to be feared, and ſome doe holde aſſuredly,
that if it ſo liked your Maieſty, ſuch tongues ſhould
receiue the recompence of the auncient Quadruplatores.
But if they haue it not from men, let them attend
the ineuitable iuſtice of him, who is the Author,
protector, and (in the end) the rewarder of innocence.
            Our ſmall company is entred, and (aboue al other
Religious families) moſt expoſed to the hatred and
calumny of ſuch, as will not take the paines to know
them. And you doe know, Madam, how many times
the deceaſed King our good Maſter, did himſelfe doe
vs the fauour, to defend and make vs knowne: you

can witneſſe it, and no body knowes it better then
you, that whereſoeuer that great Prince was, we had
in him a King, a Father, and a Defender. But alas,
it can no more be ſo, great Henry is taken away from
vs.
            O Fraunce, the eye of Chriſtendome, Roſe of Empires,
and Pearle of the world, how great is this loſſe
for thée, and how horrible this ſhip-wracke? Fraunce,
the fauorite of heauen, and welbeloued of God; who
hath taken away the Mantle of glory, that couered
thée, and the crowne of honour, that exalted it ſelfe ſo
highly vpon thy head? who hath dealt with thée ſo,
thou choſen of God? who hath thus afflicted thée?
            But thou poore ſociety, that couldeſt not ſubſiſt, but
by the bleſſings of that Monarch, who hath made thée
ſo deſolate? ſo deplorably abaſed, and ſo miſerably
enthralled? the miſfortune is common to all, but it is
ſingularly particular to thée, this blow hath ſmitten
the whole body of the Kingdom, but it hath wounded
thee (almoſt) mortally. O how approuedly is it
true, and how ſenſibly doſt thou féele it; that griefe if
it had a tongue, could not call it ſelfe griefe? And I,
that write theſe things, how iuſt reaſon haue I, yea,
more then all others, to leaue my ſelfe to the ſadde accents
of a teares-drowned voyce, and to ſay, Adiew
O thou wonder of Kings, Adiew thou ornament of
this age, our ioy, our glory, and our honour, Adiew
thou father of the weale publick, reſtorer of the ſtate,
ſecond founder and chéefeſt benefactor of our companie.
            Adiew my King, my Prince and my defender, thou
haſt giuen vs in this vale of teares, the reſt that is
here to be had: reſt thée then in peace, liue for euer among
the Lillies and the Roſes, deliuered from the
thorny charge of this Monarchy, and enioy the bleſſedneſſe,

not of earth, but of heauen. Here thou haſt
bin the moſt eminent ſubiect of the grace of God, be
there now on high, and for euer ſo continue, the obiect
of his mercies. The laurels of this baſe earth,
doe wither very eaſily, let thy head weare them that
are alwaies verdant: Thoſe victories, triumphs,
and Empires, which thou beheldeſt here below; are
now changed into a more eminent glory, liue then for
euer reioycing in that poſſeſſion (of all men) moſt
deſired.
            Thy happineſſe giues vs leaue to reſpire, thy abſence
iuſtly compels vs to ſuſpire, and the place
where we make no doubt thou art, makes vs thither
to aſpire: for leaning on the mercy of God, the ſorrowful
circumſtances of thy deceaſe, cannot depriue
vs of hope, to méete thée in the goodly great day, euen
there, where we ſhall finde thy principall, and the wiſhed
arriuall, after ſo gréeuous a diuorce.
            And during the ſadneſſe of this expectation, you
Madam, with the King his liuely Image, ſhall wipe
away part of our teares. We doe acknowledge his
perſon in your perſons, his Crown, in your Crowns,
and his authority Royall, in yours: and though all
your ſubiects are bound thereto, by all kindes of
dueties; yet our company, being thereto extraordinarily
obliged: haue charged me to preſent at the
feet of your Maieſty, the moſt ſincereſt vowes of their
fidelity, and affectuous offers of their moſt humble
ſeruice, which I doe, Madam, and ſo much the▪more
willingly, becauſe I am tied thereto by a very ſingular
taſte of grace,
            From your Maieſty,
Your moſt humble ſeruant, moſt obedient
and faithfull ſubiect, Peter Cotton,
of the company of Iesus.
            
            
         
      
   