
      
         
            
            
            A TREATISE AGAINST TRAITORS. Meete for all faithfull Subiects in theſe dangerous dayes. Taken out of the 40. Chapter of Ieremye, the 13, 14, 15, 16. verſes, and the 41. 1, 2, 3, 4. Made and publiſhed for the benefite of the Church and common wealth of England: by Samuell Cottesford Miniſter and publique Preacher of the woord of God.
            
               Prouerb. 17. 14.
               The beginning of ſtrife is as one that openeth the waters: therfore ere the contention be medled with, leaue off.
            
            AT LONDON Printed by E. A. for William Holme.
            
         
         
            
            
               
               To the moſt Reuerend Father in God, Iohn by the diuine prouidence, Archbiſhop of Caunterbury, Metrapolitane of England his grace, and one of her Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Counſell, Samuell Cottesford, wiſheth euerlaſting felicitie.
            
            
               
                  I
                Am not ignorant (moſt Reuerend Father in God) how dangerous a matter it is to publiſh anything to the common view of the world, more dangerous by farre then all the aduenterous traffiques made by Sea, into the Indian coaſts for gold,

for if therin God giue ſucceſſe and proſperitie, their aduentures once made and trauailes ſafelye ended, their great perrilles and dangers they haue bene in: after nine dayes wonder (as we ſay) ſhalbe ſcarſe ſpoken off. But the caſe ſtandeth otherwiſe with them that ſhall put thēſelues vpon the multitude, whome if they either by their publike preaching or writing ſhall not affect, they ſhalbe ſure to beare the skarre of their reprochefull tungs to their graues, & hardly be thought off all their life after, let them in the ſetting downe of the trueth beare themſelues neuer ſo vprightly: Such is the miſerie of our dayes, ſo great are the diſcretions of mindes, the diuerſities of iudgementes, and the ouer ſpeedy taking of matters to hurt, without weighing before hand, or aduiſed counſaile taking before reſolution, contrary to Salomon his iudgement: who ſaith, Stabliſh thoughts by counſell. The conſideration whereof, partelye hath long ſtayed me from attempting anything, as alſo mine owne inſufficiencye in compariſon of many others more fit for this worke: yet by the matter which in this tretiſe I haue handled, wherin

I haue had ſome good times deliberation, at length thus farre J haue beene drawen, not in vanitye of minde, as delighted to heare my ſelfe, as perhaps ſome will not ſticke to iudge, whoſe miſiudging affections as of many others of our time I not weighing, being men heady and prepoſterous, ſome of them being carried by a proud conceite of themſelues: others led in reſpect of perſons, according to fauour, not weighing the trueth for it ſelfe ſake, which cauſeth that many of them in ſtead of light, haue taken holde of darkenes and walke therin: and in ſtead of the ſimple trueth, haue waded ouer head and eares into foul and abhominable errors. The reaſon therefore as I ſuppoſe is this, becauſe he that pleaſeth to run, before he can well goe, nay ſcarſe creepe, ſuch as are our multitude: ſhall ſtumble dangerouſlye and that moſt vnrecouerably, I ſpeake it J ſay, in regarde of the people of our daies, and thoſe alſo who pretend conſcience of religion before others, who, how offenſiuelye ſo euer themſelues walke before men, it matters not in their owne iudgement, ſo they can finde but one dart to caſt at the miniſter, and

haue neuer ſo little skill to comptroll their teachers, whome though we are not to ſeperate from being but weak in faith, yet when a caſe of controuerſies diſputable ſhalbe, they are to be put aſide. Rom. 14. 1. Eum vero quifide eſt infirmes aſſumite non tamen ad certamina diſceptationū, &c. Him that is weake in faith take vnto you, but not for cōtrouerſies of diſputations: ſuch are they that ſpeake euill of thoſe thinges which they know not, and in the things they knowe naturallye, as beaſtes without reaſon they corrupt themſelues: as ſaith Iude. Such they are as no kinde of teachers can long ſatisfie, whoſe affections therfore in laying forth the trueth to follow as concerning pleaſing of them is meere folly:
            But if we will ſtand vpon pleaſing of men, (and men pleaſers, miniſters in any wiſe may not be) except it be in matters tending to edification, according to the rule of Th'appoſtle Rom. 15. 2. We ſhall not pleaſe God, of which people I may ſay againe as a certaine heathen Poet ſpake of the people of his time.
            
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               Haud cunctis rector Olympi.
            
            
               Siue pluat, ſeu non Iupiter ipſe placet.
            
            
               That Ioue himſelfe in heauenly Skie,
               that rules the world in earth ouer all:
               Whuher raine he giues, or none, therby
               all for to pleaſe, diſpleaſe he ſhall.
            
            Some ſuch there be, who hauing ſnatched here a peece & catched there another, in holes and corners are (it is wonderfull to heare) become great teachers amongſt them ſelues, vtterlye deſpiſing the aſſemblyes of God in our Church, and haue deſired to be famous: but I feare me according to the fame of him that got a name by burning Dianaes Temple euen Heroſtratus, theſe doo not ſeeke to get themſelues a name by ſo tollerable a matter as the burning the temple of Diana of the Epheſians, the vanity of the Gentiles, but by laying waſte of the whole Church of God in a land, crying againſt it with the Papiſts: no church, no church in England ſay they, no true church: Beſides men they be proud, arogant, malicious, and of railing ſpirits againſt the paſtors

and teachers of the land, eſpeciallye, whoſe amendment in the Lord J wiſhe, admoniſhing them out of Th'appoſtle Paule to Titus 3. 2. That they blaſpheme and raile vpon no man, knowing this to be true, that the ſame Apoſtle. 1. Cor. 6. 10. affirmeth of them, that neither theeues, neither couetous perſons, neither Drunkards, nor raylers ſhal inherite the kingdome of heauen: concerning the which argument, J referre the reader ouer to the Sermon your grace made at Paules Croſſe, extant yet and open to the viewe of them that deſire to walke in a peaceable obedience to God and his Maieſtrates: as for the reſt vnto whome Gods peace is a burden, I leaue them to the Lords time, wherein he ſhall in his mercye humble them to ſee their errours: before whome to teach, and to whoſe viewe to publiſh ought, I may ſaye, or at the leaſt the whole miniſtery of our Land with Caſsidorus vpon the 39. Pſal. ver. 1. Quis eſt hominum ſic tantus vt ſi inter aemilos loquatur: nullum eius verbū incurrat aliquam quaeſtionem? What man is he ſo warye, that ſpeaking amongſt enuious perſons and contentious,

ſome one woord or other of his ſhall not be drawne into ſome queſtion? Of theſe queſtionaries and genealogie men, a matter in reſpect of circumſtance, rather then of ſubſtance or age is full whom I would to wit, that I neither doo improue honeſt and godly conference vpon the Scripture touching faith, neither yet the profitable vſe of the genealogies ſo farre as they doo edifie: but all curious and needleſſe queſtions, which while ſome do ſeeke egerly after, they looſe the ſubſtance of the Goſpell, the doctrine of faith in Chriſt, of regeneration and new birth, the effect of the ſpirite of God by the woord, againſt whom may be iuſtified euen againſt the curious queſtionaries of our age, the ſaying of Grigor. Lib. 8. Moral. Nonnulli dum plus exquirunt contemplando quam capiunt vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad peruerſa dogmata erumpunt, & dum veritatis diſcipuli eſſe negligunt humiliter magiſtri erroris fiunt. Many (ſaith he) whilſte they ouerbuſie their heads to ſeeke out more then they do either well conceiue or vnderſtand: they break out into peruerſe opinions, and in humility they neglecting to be diſciples vnto

trueth, they become great Clarkes and maſter teachers of errors: of whom whileſt amongſt many of their points they ſtand in this one: of calling, chuſing and ordeining Miniſters: they omit in the meane time all teachers and teaching, eſpeciallye all other that are not of their owne chooſing, and ſo with Aeſops Dogge, whilſte they ſnatche (not that I ſpeake it in contempt of the Church ordinance concerning that poynt) after ſhadows, in compariſon J may ſay, they leeſe the ſubſtance, by whom J could wiſh, that this one thing were conſidered, ſpoken though by a Heathen. Aliud eſtaliquid ſuadere quod faciun dum ſit aliud ferre quod recte mutari non poteſt. Jt is one thing to perſwade a matter to be doone, and an other thing to tollerate that which rightly or conueniently cannot be changed: Other people there are, whome our daies do breed, whoſe eyes the God of this worlde hath blinded, vnto whome the miniſtrie of the woord is but vile, being in their eyes as dung, which yet if we were as the fat dung is to the barren ground, it were well and profitable for them, and we could be contented

ſo to be accounted, conditionallye that our doctrine might make their barren harts more fruitfull: theſe are they that can make ſome reckoning of the trueth, ſo long as thier profit be not ſpoken againſt. Neere they be of alliance to Liſander the Lacedimonian, who affirmed by mouth that trueth was to be preferred before lyes, but in the valuing of them together according to their worthines, he made reckoning of them more or leſſe, according as they brought gaine to the cofers: vnto theſe of ſo many ſortes, ſo diuerſlye minded, if a man ſhould ſeeke to frame himſelfe in euery reſpect, in attempting any thing that might make either to the glory of God, or the benefite of his Church it would cauſe him to giue ouer his trauaile euen in the very mid way: To omit therfore the conſideration of all ſortes of people, with whome your grace in experience is better acquainted then my ſelfe, I hauing already borne the burden of their reproches, and to leaue them (if ſo be they will vouchſafe it) to the Treatiſe it ſelfe, which I to this ende in a louing affection to all (if it may be ſo accepted) haue

preſumed to publiſh that all degrees of perſons, might thence learn how to beare themſelues towards their Soueraign eſpecially: as alſo towards all other inferiour powers: and then how euery one is likewiſe to wa
                  •
               k
                  •
                to the help and mutuall comfort eche of other: which woorke of mine in this vocation of my miniſtrie not ſo publiquely profitable, being the firſt fruites of my labours, if not vntimely (I hope) I haue referred ouer to the protection of your graces name, and honorable credite, preſuming thereupon in regarde of the greatnes of your late honorable kindenes offred for my good.
            To omit to ſpeake of other your vertues of learning, knowledge and wiſdome, together with your great care, loue and affection towards the learned in all artes, eſpecially in the miniſtrye of the woord of God, approuing themſelues painefull in their callings, & ſtudious of the good & peace of the Church: Of theſe I ſpare to ſpeak, leaſt J be affirmed to flatter, wherin J wiſh not Dioniſius his medicine prouided for Democles that notable flatterer, in his Court: but alſo with Dauid as it is in the 12. Pſalm, 3. ver.

               The Lord cut of all flattering lips, and the tungs that ſpeak proud things. The which in moſt humble manner I craue at your graces hand, to accept according to a true meaning, and as a teſtimonie of my thankefull hart: the argument is of the diſcouerie of treaſon, the manner of it is hiſtoricall, in the which, wherin I haue fayled, I referre my ſelfe ouer to your graces cenſure, not doubting but whatſoeuer ouerſight either in the matter or manner hath paſſed me, it will pleaſe you to make therof a charitable conſtruction.
            Thus deſiring God (who hath vnto the principall place of our Church in reſpect of gouernement aduaunced you by and vnder her highnes, vpon her ſpeciall fauor (whom God long continue) that according to the riches of his grace, you may beſtowe all your knowledge, wiſedome, power, and auctoritie, in ſetting vp the kingdom of Chriſt Ieſus, by the preferring of the miniſtrye of the woord, amongſt his people: to the beating downe of the kingdome of Sathan, by ſupplanting all errours and corruptions yet remaining in the church, to the vttermoſt

of your power, that therin God being glorified, the church being bettered, corruptions reformed, eccleſiaſticall cenſures rightlye and vprightly executed, all controuerſies in cauſes of the church through Satans mallice firſt begun and yet continued amongeſt vs: by your grace, as the cheefe meanes therof and the reſt of the reuerend Fathers of our church, if it might pleaſe God in his mercy ſo to woork it, being at the laſt yet determined: and then your owne conſcience before God and men freely diſcharged.
            Finally, that name, honor, credit, glorye, and beauty of this worlde being ſo ended: you may reape increaſe of true glorye, and that euerlaſting, in the ſaluation of your Soule, to your endleſſe felicitie in the world to come. Woodgrange in Weſtham in Eſſex, the 6. of November. 1591.
            
            
               Your graces moſt humble to commaund in the Lord, Samuell Cottesford Preacher.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right honourable W. Webbe. L. Maior of the Cittie of London: the right worſhipfull Sir Richard Martin Knight, and to all the reſt of the Aldermen of the ſayde Cittie: Samuell Cotteſforde wiſheth increaſe of all ſpirituall and temporall bleſsings in this life, and euer laſting happines in the world to come.
            
               RIght honourable and beloued in the Lord, hauing had the greateſt part of my maintenāce or my ſtudies in that your houourable Citie, as alſo ſpent ſome time of my publique miniſtery there: in carrying therefore ſome louing affection therunto, could not otherwiſe ſatisfie my ſelfe, being held in conſcience, bound in ſome dutie to ſome of the ſame place of gouernement in your Cittie, but ſhewe

forth in outward appearance, ſome token of thankfulnes, thereby to remoue that cōmon blot of ingratitude, which to be guiltie off, I account it with him that ſaide: Omnia dixeris, ſtingratu dixeris. The cauſe that moued me to this, from whence in no wiſe I could be remoued, was the matter in this treatiſe, which concernes moſt thoſe places where greateſt aſſemblies are, ſuch as is your honourable Cittie, and beſides it none like in the Land. Maye it pleaſe your honor therefore in a woord, the matter of this treatiſe is, of the duety of euery ſubiect for the diſcouery of treaſons and traitors, ſet forth vnder an example in the holye Scripture, whence this treatiſe is drawne, as in the treatiſe itſelfe may appeare: And truelye as I conſider the perillous eſtate of our Church and commonwealth, by reaſon of ſome factions people both in the one and the other, whereof your Cittie is not vtterlye voide I feare: I cannot but humblye admoniſhe you (if euer)

now as you will approue your ſelues good watchmen and Shepheardes, to take heede and as Salomon Pro. 27. 23. ſaith: Be diligent to know the ſtate of the Flocke, and take heede to the heardes: Which howſoeuer it is to be referred to vs the watchmē & Shepheards ouer your ſoules, yet is it an inſtruction not impertinent vnto you that are gouernours: and if it concernal gouernours (as it doth) ſo moſt of all you my Lord and the reſt of your brethren, becauſe your Cittie waxes euery day more populous (and ſhal I ſay more vicious thē other) if I doe ſo affirme, I thinke your ſelues will ioyne with me in the ſame: for the multitudes, flockes, companies within that your Cittie, if a man do but view your theaters & publique places of reſorte for vanity, idlenes, pilferye, adultery, couſonage: what flockes in the feeldes? what thronges in your ſtretes? what reſorte to your Tauerns, Tabling houſes, places of dicing, carding and gaming? what matches in

bowling allyes? to conſideral theſe together it is a wonder to ſee, what companies of poore lying in euery ſtreete, it will make a Chriſtian hart bleede to ſee it: beſides, what crying out of the poore that are honeſtly minded in euerye corner of your Cittie for want of work, vtterly voide of any ſtock therby to maintaine the neceſsities of themſelues and their families, and very fewe or none at all that regarde to prouide in ſpeede for it. Thither alſo (becauſe your Cittie is the place of the largeſt receipt, where the whole cauſe of the Church and Commonwealth, in caſes of iuſtice is handled: according to the Tearmes thereunto appointed) vnder colour hereof, men of no buſines, of no calling, idle, vnprofitable, wicked and vtterlye godles, thither doo they flye making it their refuge, comming thither in flocks and ſwarmes, not as p infull Bees by their honeſt labour to bring honye into the Hiue, but as idle drones, ſeeking to deſtroye that which

others haue in the ſweate of their brows moſt painfully gotten. Thither alſo the companies of recuſants when they cannot finde harborough elſewhere, do they repaire, aſſuring themſelues there to finde birds of a feather, amongſt whome all the treaſons h ue hitherto beene hatched. Take heede therfore take heed, ſeeing your charge is ſo weighty and your burden ſo great: haue an eye to your Cittie, looke well to your wardes, watch and ward ouer it, neuer more neede, reſtraine wickednes in all without reſpect of perſons. For alas your cittie ſwarms wtth Atheiſtes, papiſts, ſectuaries: look diligentlye for Gods glorious ſake, for her maieſties ſake, for the ſafetye of your honourable Cittie and people therin: let not any Engliſh Seminarie, Italianated or rather Hiſpaniated as I may ſay, let not any ſuch reſt there in any peace: as you haue bene faithfull and carefull, as the daies growe more dangerous, be you ſo much the more watchfull: take

heede, for in your Cittie do hide themſelues the moſt wicked of the Land, ſuch bellygods, eatmeales, drunkards, whoremaiſters, dicers, carders, ruffians, pickethankes, quarrellers, couſiners, theeues, buſie bodies, malecontentes, harkeners after newes, newes tellers, forgerers, waiters for other dayes, diſlikers of the time preſent, neither liking the Church, nor fauouring the Common wealth, neither louing God, nor caring either for prince or Countrie: factious, ſeditious, vicious, and what not? The vnfaithfulnes of your ſeruantes, the vnthriftines of your ſonnes in all prodigalitye and laſciuiouſnes, drawen on by braſen faced companions for the purpoſe, maye teach you what vncleane birdes are concealed and kept cloſe within your Cittie, gaping after the praye thereof. Theſe thinges being laide together, the populouſnes of your Cittie on the one ſide, and the wickednes of the moſt of theſe on the other: as you loue

God, tender his Goſpell, honor her Maieſty, regarde her life (wherin your care hath not beene inferiour to anye Subiectes in her Maieſties Dominions) ſo goe one: as you regarde the ſoules and bodies of your ſelues and your ſonnes and daughters, your menſeruantes and maideſeruants: and as good fathers of the Common wealth, reſpecting the peace and proſperitye of your Citizens: take heede, keepe watche diligentlye, haue your eyes in euerye place, and ouer euerye perſon, and as your ſelues will not fauour any of theſe enemies to the ſtate, the decaye of the Church, the bane of the Common wealth: ſo ſhewe not anye fauourable countenance to any that within your precinctes ſhalbe abetters of them.
            Thus referring your honor and the reſt of you the worſhipfull of the Cittie, to the charitable viewe of the treatiſe it ſelfe, I commend you ouer to the protection of the almightie, who

ſo direct you in your gouernment to the glory of God, the proſperitie of her highnes, and the ſafetye of your Commonwealth: that finally after the long enioying of your earthly temporalties heere in this wo lde you maye finallye attaine to the bleſsinges of euerlaſting life with your good God through Chriſt in heauen for euer. Weſtham, in Eſſex, this 6. of Nouember. 1591.
            
               Your L. in the Lord to commaund, Samuell Cottesford Preacher.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TREATISE AGAINST TRAITORS.
            
               
                  
                     Taken out of the 40. Chapter of Ieremyes Propheſie, the 13, 14, 15, 16. verſes, and the 41. 1, 2, 3, 4.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Moreouer Johanan the Sonne of Kareah, and all the Captaines of the hoſte, that were in the fieldes, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And ſaid vnto him, Knoweſt thou not that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath ſent Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah to ſlaye thee? But Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam beleeued them not.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Then Johanan the ſonne of Kareah ſpake to Gedaliah in Mizpah ſecretlye, ſaying, Let me goe, J pray thee, and J will ſlay J ſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah, and no man ſhall know it. Wherfore ſhould hee kill thee, that all the Jewes, which are gathered vnto thee, ſhould be

ſcattered, and the remnant in Iudah periſh.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 But Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam ſaid vnto Johanan the Sonne of Kareah, Thou ſhalt not doe this thing: for thou ſpeakeſt falſely of Iſhmael.
               
               
                  And the. 41. 1, 2, 3, 4. &c.
                  
                     
                        verse 1 But in the ſeuenth moneth came Iſhmaelthe ſonne of Nethaniah, the Sonne of Eliſhama of the ſeede royall, and the princes of the King, and ten men with him, vnto Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam to Mizpah, and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Then aroſe Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah with theſe ten men that were with him, and ſmote Gedaliah the Sonne of Ahikam the ſonne of Shaphan with the ſworde, and ſlewe him, whome the King of Babel had made gouernour ouer the land.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Iſhmael alſo ſlew all the Jewes that were with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and all the Caldeans that were found there, and

the men of warre.
                  
                     4 Now the ſecond day that he had ſlaine Gedaliah, and no man knew it.
               
            
            
               SO infinite is the worde of GOD according to Dauids praiſe of it, in the 19. Pſalme, as that no euill or good in the world, can hide or conceale themſelues from the light thereof, but that it manifeſteth them in the holye Scriptures, being by the holye men of God indited, and to that ende and purpoſe by the Church from age to age retained. Yea there are no vices of any kinde, how abhominable ſoeuer committed by the euill: nor chriſtian vertues how commendable ſoeuer doone and practiſed by the good, which the holy Scriptures touch not, and the ſeruantes of God, in them, in one place or other teache not: whereof amongſt the reſt, this place of Jeremiahs Prophecie is a manifeſt witnes, wherin the Prophet led by the ſpirite

of God moſt learnedlye, both for the matter, and compendiouſlye for the manner doth lay downe & leaue to all ages vnto the worlds end to be recorded, memorable hiſtorye, and a diuine canonized for the benefit of his church concerning Princes and people: teaching Princes firſt, what care they are to haue of their owne ſafetye, and then how to demeane themſelues towards their Cuntry and people: likewiſe laying forth of people two ſorts one gody, good & carefull, for Prince, church, and Country: the other, wicked and rebollious. The ſumme of which Hiſtorye is this.
            Ieruſalem with the King Zedekiah Princes and people thereof (it being forewarned, the Iewes inſundrye of the Prophet Jeremiah his propheſies) is taken captiue by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel. Zedekiah his owne eyes put out, his nobles ſome ſlaine, and other ſome carried as bondſlaues into Babel. Yet according to Gods promiſe, a remnant muſt eſcape, it eſcapeth:

The meanes of their preſeruation and more ſecurity, is a Iewe named Gedaliah by Nebuchadnezzer, according to Gods prouidence for his people, in the time of their wofull diſtreſſe, made a Lord Deputy or Lieutenant, by which meanes ſome time of breathing is had: But (loe) what eaſe breedeth. Eaſe (ſaith Salomon) ſlayeth the fooliſh, certaine buſie bodies, or buſie heads, rather become Male-contents with the ſtate, not bearing the yoke, though otherwiſe light and eaſie in compariſon of their other bretheren: they ſet their heads on miſcheefe, one eſpeciall amongſt them a Iew, becomes a Traitor, the text cals him Iſhmaell, he conſpires Gedaliahs death, and to that purpoſe becomes an hireling to Baalis King of the Ammonites. Now then Gedaliah is enuied, treaſon againſt him conſpired: yet loe, God of a ſpeciall loue forewarnes Gedaliah by a certaine truſtie harted Subiect, one aboue the reſt named Johanan he reueales it. But where God wil puniſh,

what warning will ſerue? The Prince Gedaliah beleeues it not, the Danger he ſtands in foretolde, he preuents not, for his owne ſafety he prouides not, and execution of iuſtice vpon this Traitor demaunded, he in any wiſe willes not: and what then befalles? contempt of Gods warninges, immediatly go before his iudgemēts: Gedaliah the Prince is forewarned, Johanan the truſtie ſubiect is not beleeued, Iſhmael the traitor therby is hartened: Iſhmael vpon Gedaliah his ſecuritie makes his aduantage, he looſes no time, opportunitie is watched, when the Prince in the midſt of his ſecuritie maye be taken: The good gouernour, he eates, he drinkes, he is merrilye feaſting with this Archtraitor, and ten other Leaguers his aſſociates: Gedaliah the Prince in the middeſt of the feaſt being careleſſe, Iſhmael killeth: his captaines and other of the Iewes his ſeruants at bourde he butchereth: and foure ſcore other men zealous after Gods ſeruice, comming to Gedaliah,
               
he maſſacreth: and finallye himſelfe being extremely purſued by Johanan, flying vnto the King of the Ammonites, eſcapeth. This is the ſumme, the partes are theſe three that follow.
            1 The faithfulnes of Johanan and his aſſociates in diſcouering the treaſons of Iſhmael: and his zeale in proſecuting him to death, and the cauſes thereof.
            2 The incredulity of Gedaliah in not beleeuing his faithfull ſeruant Johanan, and the careleſnes ouer his own ſafety.
            3 The execution of Iſhmaels treaſon and the manner of it, &c.
            The firſt part which is the faithfulnes of Johanan, and thoſe that were with him in diſcouering the treaſon of Iſhmael, is ſet down in theſe words of the text.
            
               
                  
                     verse 13 Mooreouer Johanan the Sonne of Kareah and all the Captaines of the hoſte, that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 14
And ſaide to him, Knoweſt thou not that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath ſent Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah to ſlay thee? and againe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15 Then Johanan the ſonne of Kareah ſpake to Gedaliah in Mizpah ſecretly, ſaying, Let me goe, J pray thee, and I will ſlay Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah, and no man ſhall know it. Wherfore ſhould he kill thee, that all the Iewes which are gathered vnto thee, ſhould be ſcattered, and the remnant in Iudah perriſh?
            
            Moreouer Johanan, &c.
            Firſt then the manner of Jonanan his diſcloſing of the treaſon of Iſhmaell is to be obſerued: Who (notwithſtanding by Gedaliah he be vniuſtly repelled, as though he had beene a knowne flatterer, and a clawbacke, not reſpecting whom nor how he ſlaunders any, ſo hee might inſinuate himſelfe into fauour by curry-fauouring of the Prince: of which ſortes of perſons,

Kinges and Princes Courtes are ouer fraught many times: yet Johanan his conſcience cleering him, and it being trueth that hee vttered, and hie time that it were vttered: he therefore proceedes in proſecuting the diſcouerye with a zeale, and therewith becomes an humble ſuter for ſpeedye execution of iuſtice againſt the traitor. Wherin all ſorts of men, whether of hye or lowe place, the time eſpecially and the glory of God, the good of the Church, the preſeruation of the Prince requiring: What nippes, taunts, checks, and bitter reproofes ſoeuer are giuen thee, be it by Princes themſelues, whoſe good the diſcouery concerns: yet conſtancy in a knowne trueth, by lawe of God, by law of nature, and law of nations, requiſite to be reuealed, muſt firmelye be helde: and in that which may make for the preſeruation of the Church, Prince and Countrye, thou muſt proceede, although it be with hazard of thy ſelfe, or of thine. Heereunto may encourage thee, the boldnes

of Iacobs ſons after their firſt returne out of Egypt, hauing left Simeon dearely beloued vnto Jacob their father, behind them, when neceſsitie being impoſed vppon them, that ſo it muſt be, that eyther Beniamin the youngeſt and the darling of all, muſt be taken from Iacob their father, or elſe Simeon could not be recouered agayn, neyther durſt they any more ſhewe their faces in Egypt, whoſe ſute alſo was ſuch to their father, as that it had beene as eaſie to haue obteyned a member of his bodie, as the wordes of the text make mention Gen. 42. 6.in the 42. chapter of Geneſis. 36. Then Iacob their father ſaide to them, yee haue robbed me of my children: Ioſeph is not, and Simeon is not, and yee will take Beniamin: all theſe things are againſt me. And although Reuben offered the pawne of his two ſonnes, euen to the ſworde conditionally, yet Jacob replyed, ſaying: My ſonne ſhall not goe downe with you, for his brother is dead, & he is left alone: if death come to him by the way which ye goe, then

ye ſhall bring my gray head with ſorrowe vnto the graue: whoſe ſharpe wordes of a father, and a Prince too (as hee may bee called in reſpect of the Church then) had bin ynough to haue diſcouraged any, had hee not beene bolde ſpirited, and to haue cauſed the ſuite to fall vnto the grounde: but the wayghtines of the matter being ſuch, and the preſeruation of Gods Church in Jacobs houſe nowe requiring it, Iudah alſo ſteps forth, who in renewing his brothers ſute, receyued ſome further checkes at Iacobs hande, as Ruben before had done: and yet the extremitie of the daungers wherein Iacob and his whole houſe ſtoode, beyng by him in the ende throughly wayghed, the ſute with much a doo at length was obtayned.
            Vnto the which zealous and ſtrict manner of proceeding in this, or ſuch a like diſcouerie, wherein thou haſt not thy liberty, the perils and daungers whereinto the ſafetie of the Church, Prince and Countrey, by thy too remiſſe

dealing in ſo ſerious a matter, may bee an argument of ſufficient wayght to draw thee.
            But to leaue the manner of this earneſt proſecuting the cauſe of ſo great a villany (which yet may teach this age, which in bad thinges and concerning priuate pleaſure or profite, is bolde enough, but concerning publique affayres tending to the benefit of Prince & Countrey, are ſoone ſnybbed) to be therein more bold: and to proceede in the matter.
            Moreouer Iohanan and all the Captaynes of the hoſt, came vnto Gedaliah vnto Mizpah and ſayd vnto him:
Knoweſt thou not, &c.
            
            In the ſecond place is to be weighed the phrayſe of ſpeech, Knoweſt thou not? & the rather becauſe herein he ſeemes to be rude, vnciuile, homely, & prepoſterous, as though he knew not how to beare himſelf in Court in the preſence of a Prince. Knoweſt thou not? whereas in deede it is a ſpeech very forcible ſent foorth from a vehemency of ſpirit, ſtudious

both of the welfare & preſeruation of the Prince, and zealous of the Princes not being ſufficiently carefull for his owne ſafety: as though he ſhold ſay, it is a rumour cōmon, & in al mens mouthes, concerning Iſhmael his conſpiracy, and is it hid frō thee whom it moſt concernes? is he ſo trecherous, ſo villanous, and of ſo murthering a ſpirit, and doſt thou as yet harbour in thy boſome the ſerpent that wil ſting thee to death? Knoweſt thou not, ſayth he? art thou ſo blinded in him? art thou ſo deceyued by his diſſembling? canſt thou not at any time, either by face or countenance, or by his behauiour or priuate conference diſcry him? for to ſay the truth, it belongeth to Kings & Princes, although they according to Gods ordinance are by noble, wiſe, graue & learned Counſellors to be aduiſed, yet themſelues are to carry knowledge & wiſedome in their own breaſts, wherby they may be able to diſcerne ſpirits, and iudge cauſes, and diſcrie countenaunces if it were poſsible.
            
               
In deede good Counſellors are the ſpeciall props and pillers of Kings and Princes thrones, and the onely preſeruatiue of Countryes, according to Salomon 
               Prou. 11. 14.his ſpeech in the 11. of his Prouerbes. Where many Counſellers are, there is health. And againe in the 15. Prou. Prou. 15. 22.
               In the multitude of Counſellers there is ſtedfaſtneſſe. In the which moſt diuine ſentences, the holy Ghoſt in his ſeruant Salomon oppoſeth himſelfe to a moſt diueliſh concluſion of Machiauill (to whom our age I feare, is ouermuch addicted) wherein yet hee would ſeeme to colour out the matter with ſome ſhew of truth within his booke intituled, Machiauilli princeps, he thus ſetteth downe, Principi qui per ſe non ſapit, recte ei conſilia dari non facile poſſe, vnto a Prince not ſufficiently wiſe of himſelfe, it is no eaſie matter rightly to giue counſell or aduiſe: his firſt reaſon is this. Perhaps it may be (ſayth hee) that a Prince may well bee gouerned that ſhall reſigne himſelf fouer to ſome one of truſt for that purpoſe: But he

were like to bee but a while quiet in the ſame, becauſe that protector of him will not ſticke foorthwith by violence to thruſt him out of that his ſeat of gouernment: Likewiſe he improueth a Prince that ſhall ſuffer himſelfe to be counſelled of many, for (ſayth he) if an vnwiſe Prince ſhal admit into the counſell of his affayres more then one, they will ſeeldome agree in counſell, and hee himſelfe will be farre vnmeete to reconcile them: and againe (ſayth he) they will be too ſtudious of their owne commodities, as though a Prince, hauing ſome euill, as amongſt many, ſome ſuch often fall out to be: muſt therfore abandon all others, how good, wiſe and faithfull ſoeuer, and ſo in the end hee neceſſarily concludeth, that good counſayles muſt proceede from the Princes owne wiſedom, and in any wiſe not the wiſedome of the Prince to be deriued from good counſayle: which concluſions of his, though they ſeeme to be ſomewhat, yet are they of no waight, for alas what Machiauels

pollicies are, who that readeth may finde euen cōcluſions abandoning all chriſtian religion (which conſiſteth in trueth without diſsimulation) they ſeruing to no other end but to puffe vp Princes with pride, and ſelf loue, & ſelfe lyking of their owne wiſdomes, though they do turn in th'ende to the ruine of thēſelues, and of the ſtate of their whole Country. Indeede as Salomon 
               Pro. 25. 2.ſaith in the 25. Pro. The Kings honor is to ſearch out a thing, wherein his meaning is not, as Machiauell in another of his ſpeculatiue contemplations for th'auoiding of flatterers ſaith: that Princes ſhall proclaime by publicke Edict, that no one of his freendes or counſellers ſhall perſwade him to any thing, neither conferre with him of any matter, vnleſſe it be of that whereof he himſelfe ſhall offer voluntarilye to ſpeake. Which opinion of his had his firſt originall in the very ſinke of Hell: and is contrary to the doctrine of Salomon before mentioned, to the examples of all godly Kinges, in the time of

the Law, and Chriſtian Princes▪ ſince the goſpell, who haue alwaies retained about them wiſe, learned, and good counſellers, but rather Salomon ment that a King or ſole gouernour ſhould not ſo far adict themſelues vnto their vanities and ſenſuall delights, as not at all to examine the dealings yea of their Iudges and other inferiour powers towards their people: but herein to ſpare ſome time wherin both diligently and ſeriouſlye they ought to ſee into both the cauſes and perſons, and ſo to heare and ſee into them, as that they might be able to diſcearne betweene matter and matter, counſaile and counſaile, iudgement and iudgement: and accordinglye to knowe what to leaue, and what to take, ſo farre-foorth (not as pleaſeth themſelues) but as they ſhall ſee ſerue for the glorye of God, the proſperity and ſafety of their own perſon, Church and Country: to the fitting of them wherunto Moſes in the 17. Deut. 18, 19. ver. teacheth what Deut. 17. 18 19.ought to be the exerciſe of Kings and

Princes continually for the increaſe of their knowledge in al matters. So that to ſome purpoſe ſerueth this plain and blunt ſpeech of-Ionathan, that thereby Gedaliah being warned, might take knowledge of that which might keep him from capitall danger, and his people from vtter ouerthrow: concerning whoſe faithfulnes in diſcouery of this high treaſon, we are taught eſpeciallye the diſcharge of the duety of ſubiectes to their prince & ſole gouernours, as alſo to all inferiour magiſtrates: verye neceſſary to be laid forth in theſe dangerous daies, wherin Sathan ſeekes by this moſt foule ſin and abhominable of treaſons and diſloyalties, without remorſe in euery nation practiſed & comitted moſt villanouſly, to ſend many thouſands of ſoules to the deuill. This then is the doctrin that we muſt euery one of vs learne & lay vp in our harts, that is, that it is not ſufficiēt to abſtain our handes from blood, but our harts alſo frō the conſent of any matter tending thereunto: the reaſons to inforce

this doctrine, may be firſt, that the law of nature abhorreth it, whereby they that neuer knew God aright, are made inexcuſable, notwithſtanding before him being led by the inſtinct thereof onely into a feeling and knowledge of the ſame: how much more then doth that ſin become more ſinful to vs, whō the lawe of nature not only directeth, but the written lawe of God alſo as a ſound reaſon to draw vs to an execrable deteſtatiō therof, doth by the miniſtery of the word, & by the power of the ſpirite teach vs, and the ſame God hath included this ſin amongſt many others, within the ſecōd table of thoſe great and ten cōmaundements, wherof the negatiue preceptes forbidding whatſoeuer vice, doth infer the commaunding whatſoeuer contrarye vertues: and again, whatſoeuer people amongſt them affirmatiue teaching and cōmaunding any holy or chriſtian vertue doth therupon infer a flat forbidding of the vice cōtrary therunto, as in one among the reſt, the 6. in number, being a negatiue precept, and aiming

at the matter now in hand) Thou ſhalt not kill) wherin this point generally taught, that not onelye he that layeth violent handes vpon a man, but he alſo that ſtoppeth not bloodſhed when he may. Naye he that by negligence dooth omit the dutifull care of preſeruing his neighours life, is a mankiller before God, and is by the law of God ſo to be deputed and reckoned before men: to this purpoſe ſpeaketh Salomon. Eripe raptos ad mortem, &c. Deliuer thē that are drawen to death, and wilt not thou preſerue them that are ledde to be ſlaine? wherein the holy Ghoſt cenſureth not onely princes, Iudges, and Magiſtrates, for ſuffering (which falles out many times) the innocent to be puniſhed vnworthily: But all ſortes of men who not laying violent handes vpon their neighbours to kill them, but who ſeing their neighbours in any ſort diſtreſſed vnto death, and for want of comfort like to periſh vnder their noſes, when as they haue not onelye a ſufficiencie, but a ſuperfluitie

rather, or outward bleſsings for their releefe, yea and not denying the ſame, but neglecting onlye and deferring to help thē: of theſe it may wel be ſaide, though thou haſt not murdered with thy hand, yet Tot occidiſti quot Succurrere quum potuiſſes neglexeris, ofſo many haſt thou bin a cruell murderer, being diſtreſſed thou didſt meerlye neglect to releeue them, when thou haddeſt ſufficient therunto: a very neceſſarye thing againſt the vnmercifulnes of theſe our daies, and the hard har tednes of the richer ſort of people amongſt vs, who neither one waye nor other can be brought to that charitable conſideration of their poore miſerable and diſtreſſed neighbours, ready to perriſh euen at their dores, either by the ſuperfluitye of their meats, drinks or cloth, to comfort them, or otherwiſe by withdrawing from their own ſtore ſome good portion of their gold and ſiluer towards the ſetting on work the ſwarmes of men, women & children: that neither haue meate, drinke,

nor cloath in any good meaſure to feed and clothe themſelues, neither yet any thing to imploy their labors vpō, that therby yet though they wil not freely giue thē to their releef, yet they might prouide that by their meanes at the leaſt the poore by the ſweate of their browes, vnder them might more honeſtly and competently True then they do, wherunto each man is not onely in conſcience bound by the law of God, and the law of our land by ſtatute prouided, though by default of them who ſhould ſee the execution of it, this charitable duetie be to the diſhonor of God, in not prouiding againſt idlenes vtterly omitted. Is this true in general betweene man and man, and is it not more true againſt them, when not in outrage as too manye of that ſorte our late yeeres haue yeelded forth (a fruite vntimely) to paſſe ouer the actes done by the like villanous minded in other nations, and to ſpeake of thoſe that at home proudlye and preſumptuouſlye haue attempted the ſame againſt the

life of our naturall and moſt mercifull Soueraign? is the not releeuing the diſtreſſed; the oppreſsing of the widow and fatherleſſe, the cruel withholding the hire from the poore labourer, is the taking of thy neighbours pledge, the taking of Vſury of the decaied, and the labour of thy neighbour without wages, is this murder with God? nay, as it is indeed to take pleaſure at other mens miſeries, is it cruelty▪ & is not this then murder in the higheſt kinde, to conſeale a pretēded miſcheef againſt a Prince, whoſe life is thy life, my life, or the life (by Gods prouidence he will ſo haue it) of all men within this and her territory? Nay, ſhall the prince be culpable before God for not releeuing thee with iuſtice in any cauſe of thy diſtreſſe, & wilt thou hold it to be crueltie in a magiſtrate? whē as it may be thou alone ſhalt but ſuffer, or ſome one houſe or family with thee: & ſhalt not thou be reckoned in the higheſt degree of murtherers, who when it is in thy power by diſcloſing ſome pretended miſcheefe, againſt the ſtate of

a prince thou concealeſt it altogither, or elſe diſcloſeſt it when it is too late. When as vpon the ſafety of a prince relieth the proſperitie, peace, and ſecurity, of not an houſe, not a Towne, not a prouince, not a ſhire, not a land, but of many Lands and Countries, Shires, and prouinces, Townes and Citties, moſt populous. So that you ſee the point to be obſerued, wherein thoſe eſpecially to whom eſpeciall truſt is cō
               mitted in regarde of their honourable places, in the name of God are to be remēbred in all humble and ſubmiſſe duetye, that they for the preſeruation of the prince, are to watche ouer the knowne enemies to the ſtate, Church, and countrye: ſuch as vſually haue oppoſed themſelues to Kings & princes through all Chriſtendom, being ſpecially ſworn Papiſts for the Popes own ſide, ſuch as haue made it a ſpecial poīt of their faith, the groūd of which their hereſie reſts vpon that curſed counſell of Trent, which is, that they may lawfully depoſe and any way ouerthrowe

by ſecret and open practiſes, the ſtate of any Chriſtian prince profeſsing the Goſpell, of whom to ſpeak much, only by the waye to their honnors is not needefull, being alreadye a matter for the moſt parte knowne, and lawes againſt the ſame prouided, to the abating of their preſumption and pretenſed practiſes againſt the ſtate preſent: But alſo diligent watch by their honors, and all inferiour Magiſtrates vnder them muſt be kept, ouer that hereticall ſect of Anabaptiſts, who thorough Sathans malice vnder a cloake of the Goſpel, and a prepoſtrous zeale, doe wonderfully grow in the land: eſpecially in thoſe Cities and Townes populous, where the word of God is moſt diligently preached: and if the queſtion bee asked why there rather then elſe where, the anſwere is this:
            Becauſe there they doe moſt of all ariſe and ſpring vp, that the diligence of the miniſter in preaching of the word, is no more cauſe therof, then the truth is cauſe of error. But rather the ſubtiltie

of Sathan, who there more rageth then in any place elſe, becauſe his kingdome is more neere to the ouerthrow then where ignorance reignes, and the kingdome of Chriſt is not preached at all. Who although that they haue not put foorth, nor publiſhed that mayne poynt or Maxime of the profeſſed Anabaptiſtes, which is vtterly to denie the lawefull eſſence or being of a Magiſtrate, yet haue they daungerouſly ſought, and ſtill doe ſeeke to infringe the authoritie of the ſupreme Magiſtrate, making more reckning of their owne meetings in priuate, and their ſubtill decrees made (as we ſay) vnder a hedg, in euery aſſembly of their own, then of any publique edict, law, or ordinance, made by publique & lawfull Princes, Magiſtrates, Iudges, Miniſters, in a publique and nationall aſſembly lawfully, in the name of God met and aſſembled for the redreſsing of things amiſſe, either in Church or cō
               mon welth. By whō alſo it is to be feared, that that other point of the Anabaptiſticall

cōmunitie, a moſt diueliſh and damnable eliberty wil be reteined, if God by the power of his word of the one ſide, & the Magiſtrates ſword on the other, do not ſpeedily reclaym thē: whō when they haue giuen thēſelues liberty to rayle vppon, not onely the Church gouernors, but alſo vpon the ciuill Magiſtrates, in vnlawfull tearms and moſt reprochfull ſpeeches: what is to be feared they wil do if they ſhold grow to a head, if God in his rich mercy do not vouchſafe them the ſight of their groſſe & peſtiferous errors: and concerning thoſe knowne, ſworne, & purpoſed aduerſaries of the preſent cō
               dition & ſtate. Prouiſo alwaies being had that a true difference be made betweene the good ſubiect & the bad, & the one not to be takē for th'other, but the gilty perſon to be culpable of his owne fact. That I may come againe to the worde in Exodus chap. 21. to the admoniſhing of them that are carefull and forwarde, to bee more forwarde. Moſes in that place to

great purpoſe ſayth, If an Oxe gore a man or woman that he die, the Oxe ſhalbe ſtoned to death, and his fleſh ſhall not be eaten, but the owner of the Oxe ſhall goe quitte. 29. If the Oxe were woont to puſh in times paſt, and it hath beene tolde his maſter, and he hath not kept him, and after he killeth a man or woman, the Oxe ſhall be ſtoned, and his owner ſhall die alſo. So deare vnto the Lord hath the life of man in generall beene. Howe much more ſtraight will he be in taking account of the care that euery man hath had, eſpecially them to whome more then an ordinary care is committed of the ſafety of their Prince and ſole gouernour? But that this Treatiſe may be according to my purpoſe generall, and teaching all perſons how to beare thē
               ſelues in this caſe towardes their Prince: Salomon againe in his booke of the Preacher called Eccleſiaſtes, ſpeaketh moſt excellently in the 10. Eccl. 10. 20.Chapter, 20. verſe. Curſe not thy King no not in thy thought, neyther curſe the rich in thy bed chamber, for the foules of
               
               heauen ſhall carrie the voyce, & that which hath winges ſhal declare the matter. What ſay ſome to this, why (according to the cōmon prouerbe) thought is free, though a man dare not vſe his weapon vnto violence, nor his tongue to ill ſpeeches, yet who ſhall ſtay a mans thought? I anſwere thee, that the law of God, is made alſo for a bridle to thy very thoughtes, luſtes, and againſt the very motions of ſinne, which before that euer they come into the outward act, are then cenſured by the Lorde, as giltie of his wrath. When they do but make a proffer through Sathan of aſſaulting mans heart vnto a conſenting with them, ſo that in as much as mans hart is the lodging place, reſting ſeate and harborough for ſinne: it ſtandeth with the Lordes iuſtice to giue a lawe to the heart for to bridle and reſtrayne it with. Poperie brookes not this doctrine, it holdes the heart and affections of man to be ouermuch captiuated vnto Gods lawe ſayth it: yea Poperie which is wholy conuerſant in exalting

the corrupt nature of man aboue meaſure, doth thinke this doctrine to be an ouer great abacement of ſo glorious a creature as man is, and to ſette downe a principle of theirs in a worde and their reaſon flatte oppoſite to the 10. precept, which they neuer thoroughly vnderſtood, this is their principle: Concupiſcentia in Baptizat is non eſt peccatum, That is concupiſcence in thē that are baptized is no ſinne, their reaſon is: Quia ſtimulus eſt ad exercendam virtutem, becauſe (ſay they) it is a ſpur to the exercyſing of vertue. Paule is vtterly againſt them, For they that 
               Gal. 5. 24.
               are Chriſtes (ſayth hee) haue crucified the fleſhe, with the affections and Iuſtes thereof, to omitte what hee ſayth concerning the ſame at large, proouing it from himſelfe in the 7. chap. to the Romans.
            The thing then, that Salomon the pen man of the holy Ghoſt teacheth, is that ſo far muſt any perſon be from doing or ſpeaking ill of the ſtate of a Prince, as that the verye thought ſhould bee

brought vnder the obedience of God, and heerein helde captiues vnto his commaundementes. To this doctrine ſo many as (hauing not the feare of God in their tongues only, but fearing him in their heartes) will willinglye yeelde. To ſtande too much vpon the thoughtes of men, to be brought vnder no further then it ſhall concerne the matter in hande, I holde it here needeleſſe. A little to examine the reaſon of the wiſe man who affirmeth that the foules of the heauen will diſclayme thee, and thy thoughts ſhall be diſcouered by them. A reaſon of great weight to mooue men to take heed of treaſons and concealements of them, making eſpecially againſt the life of the Lordes annoynted, wherein if men doe but conſiderately marke the way that God hath taken of diſcloſing bloud and bloudie purpoſes, in cauſing (againſt order of nature) dum & ſenſeleſſe creatures to riſe vp as proclaymers of theſe villanies how cloſely ſoeuer don, & how priuily

ſo euer attempted, one or all: the earth it ſelfe ſhall diſcloſe Cains murther vpon his brother, rather then righteous Abels bloud ſhall goe vnpuniſhed, as is to ſee Gen. 4. 10. And the rather if we doe conſider the excellencie and the high prerogatiue that God hath giuen to Princes aboue other mē, who herein doe goe farre beyonde all others, in that together with others, they do not onely beare the image of God, but that more is, they do beare vpon them the very glorious image of his Maieſty here on earth, yea this may be ſayde of very Tyrants, that are and poſſeſſe the Pſal. 82. 6.throne of Iuſtice, as is Pſal. 82. 6. Dixi Dii quidem eſt is & filii excelſi vos omnes, I haue ſay de ye are Gods, and the ſons of the moſt high: that is, I haue put vpon you my ſacred perſon, which you are to reſemble vpon earth whileſt ye rule amongeſt the ſonnes of men. If this be ſo that a man hath not freedom of thought againſt a ruler of the people, how much then are they giltie of capitall crime before God and men,

who do proceed not to diſcloſing, but to counſell giuing: not to opening cō
               ſpiracies, but to open practiſing of them: not to ſtopping a monſtrous courſe of the ſhedding of the bloud, & that of a Prince: but to conſenting, agreeing, plats laying, and ioyning hand in hand with the ringleaders in ſuch an euill, ſaying as Salomon, chap. 1. deſcribing ſinners: Come with vs we will laye 
               Prou. 1. 10. 11.
               waight for bloud, &c. This is not with Iohanan to diſcouer betimes the treaſon of falſe hearted Jſhmaell. But yet to make this matter more playne by examples out of holy Scriptures. Firſt then let vs conſider howe God himſelfe, who could myraculouſly, and vppon the inſtant haue deliuered Joſeph: yet hee that hath ordeyned meanes for the preſeruation of his ſeruauntes, would not without the meanes of diſcouerie the daunger of Joſeph by the handes of his Angell, as it is in the ſecond Chapter of S. Mathewes goſpell:
            
               Mat. 2. 13. 
               Behold, the Angell of the Lorde appeareth
               
               to Ioſeph in a dreame, ſaying: ariſe and take the Babe and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee worde, for Herod will ſeeke the Babe to deſtroy him. Wherein wee ſee the Lorde preuenteth (by foretelling Ioſeph the daunger hee ſtoode in) the crueltie of Herod the King, that notwithſtanding his rage exceeded to the diſtruction of ſo many innocents, being babes and children, yet God in diſpight of him againſt whome, neyther counſell, nor wiſedome, nor ſtrength preuaileth: prouided that the Meſsias promiſed could not poſsibly by him be found out, but was mightily preſerued, to the glorie of God; and the redemption of all Gods choſen by his bloud.
            And as God vſed the miniſtery of a heauenly miniſter, euen his Angell: whome to this ende God had ordeyned to the ſeruice of his ſonne, in the diſcouerie of Herods pretended euill to ſtoppe it: ſo likewiſe he ſayth by the meanes of his Prophetes in

former times, diſcouered euill pretended, and platformes layde for the ouerthrowe of his people, that his glorie and power might be ſeene in their deliuerance. That I may remember vnto you, firſt, the entire loue of Ionathan to Dauid, when Saule oftentimes pretended his death. Sed Ionathan 
               1. Sam. 19. 1.
               filius Saulis delectabatur Dauide valde, 1. But Ionathan the ſonne of Saule had a great fauour to Dauid. 2. And Ionathan tolde Dauid, ſaying, Saule my father goeth about to ſlay thee: Nowe therefore J pray thee, take heede vnto thy ſelfe, vnto the morning, and abide in a ſecret place and hide thy ſelfe. 3. And I will goe out and ſtande by my father in the field where thou art, and wil commune with my father of thee, & J wil ſee what he ſaith, 
               1. Sam. 20. 38.
               and J will tell thee. And again in the 20. Chap. the diſcouerie of Saules minde being too ill towardes Dauid, was made by. Jonathan, by the ſhooting of three arrowes beyonde Dauid, where hee warned him to ſtande

to receiue the intelligence which afterward fel out, as in the 38. ver. of that chapter is mentioned.
            Now by the way, if it ſhould be obiected againſt Ionathan, that he did ill in bewraying his father and his Princes ſecrets, neyther did hee therein ſhewe anye loyaltie: it may be anſwered, that there was no want of dutie on Jonathans part to Saule, in the Lorde, becauſe the obedience of children to parentes, hath his limitation, Epheſ. 6. 1.as Paule Fpheſ. 6. 1. Children obey your Parentes in the Lorde, for this is right. And this act of Saule, Ionathan knewe was agaynſt the lawe of GOD, and could not bee warranted by the lawe of man: Beſides hee did not commit any diſloyaltie to Saule as hee was King, for the diſcouerie of the acte to Dauid, becauſe it neyther was preiudiciall to the ſtate of the King, nor Countrey anye way. And againe Ionathan knewe that Dauid ſought the good of Saule his father

and not the euill: and agayne Jonathan knewe that Saule was ledde with a ſpirite of malice and enuie, and not with any regarde of iuſtice in purſuing Dauid as a malefactour: finally, the Lorde was betweene Ionathan and Dauid in the league of friendſhippe couenaunted betweene them: and GOD it was who rayſed vppe Ionathan a ſpeciall inſtrument for Dauids deliueraunce from Saules frenticke furie. Nay, had hee not ſtayed Saules rage, and diſcouered it to Dauid, hee had doubtleſſe exceedingly ſinned againſt the Lorde and his Church. But to proceede, wee reade in the holy Hiſtorie in the ſeconde of the Kinges the 6. Chapter, howe 2. k. 6. 8. 9.it pleaſed GOD to deale mercifully with his people Iſraell, when the King of Aram warred againſt it: There could not be taken any counſell againſt Iſraell by the King of Syria, but the Lorde made it knowne to his Prophet Eliſha, to the ouerthrowe of the King of Arams purpoſes,

as the text maketh it playne. 8. verſe. Then the King of Aram warred againſt Jſraell, and tooke counſell with his ſeruauntes, and ſayde: in ſuch and ſuch a place ſhall be my Campe. 9. Therefore the man of God ſent vnto the King of Jſraell, ſaying: Beware thou goe not ouer to ſuch a place, for there the Aramytes are come downe. Theſe meanes of the diſcouerie of practiſes againſt Prince or Countrey, God hath ratified and ordeyned as preſidentes for all people to laye vp in their heartes, and to followe when and aſſoone as they may attayne to the notice of anie ſuch matter. That I may ſpeake of Huzhai, his faithfulneſſe to Dauid, in ouerthrowing Achitophels counſell, and in diſcloſing the purpoſe of Abſalon to Zadok and Abiather the Prieſts, to the end they might ſpeedily diſcouer Abſalons pretence to the King, as it is am. 17.in the ſecond booke of Samuel the 17. chap. verſe 15.
            Then ſayde Huzhai vnto Zadok and to Abiathar the Prieſtes, Of this and

that manner did Achitophell and the Elders of Jſraell counſell Abſalon: and thus and thus haue I counſelled. Nowe therefore ſend quickely and ſhewe Dauid ſaying, Tarrie not this night in the fieldes of the wilderneſſe, but rather gette thee ouer, leaſt the King bee deuoured, and all the people that are with him. To omitte many that I may with one other notable example drawe to an ende of this firſt part. In the booke of Heſter is recorded a woorthy example in the ſecond Chapter, the 21. 
               Heſt. 2. 21. 22.
               and 22. verſes. Jn thoſe dayes when Mordecai ſate in the Kinges gate, two of the Kinges Eunuches, Bighthan, and Tereſh, which kept the doore were wroth, and ſought to laye handes on the King Ahaſhueroſh.
            
               And the thing was knowne to Mordecai, and he toldeit to Queene Heſter, and Heſter certified the Kinge of it in Mordecai his name: and Mordecai his acte was Chronicled for a remembraunce of his faythfulneſſe, as is to

ſee the 6. Eſter 1. 2. And by the way to remember the mercy of God in diſcouering the plats layde for the ouerthrow of Prince, people and countrey: and how he approoueth this duty of ſubiectes by the execution which hee hath brought the traytour by conſpiratours of our time vnto, although to the prayſe of God, and the glorie of our wiſe Counſellers finding them out, and of good ſubiectes bringing their villanies to light: yet to the euerlaſting ſhame and inglorious reproch to the worldes ende to bee remembred, to Calender them out for memories ſake, ſome fewe of the famous in this action. The Earles of Northumberland & Weſtmerland, L. Paget, Charles Paget, Throgmorton, Shelley, a little to refreſh the readers memorie with calling to minde the practiſes of the late Babington, Iones, Tichborne, and al the confederats of that time with others yet remayning behind, attending her Maieſties mercifull hand ouer thē, the diſcouery of whom haue beene arguments

of Gods infinite mercies to our land, may be argumēts to draw vs on, being readye therein, to be more readye, it being a duetye that God requireth at our hands.
            But let vs return to the ſpeeches of Iohanan, where he ſaith, let me goe I pray thee, and I will ſlaye Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah and no man ſhall know it: wherein is further to be obſerued concerning Iohanan, that although he was carefull for the Prince, and zealous (not without cauſe) of the Princes careleſnes of himſelfe, yet would he not do that (alas to few ſuch Captaines theſe daies affordes) which in a matter iuſtice requiſite to be done, would neither without the law, attempt it, neither yet would run before the Magiſtrate in doing of it.
            A very neceſſarye thing to be obſerued in our age and time, wherein though ſome Johanans are found, that regarde to walke in the waies of iuſtice: though ſome Corneliuſſes that feare the Lord with their houſe, yet

theſe ſome, are too too feawe in compariſon of thoſe whome ſo long time of the Goſpell might haue bred.
            But not onely they, but men of great knowledge forſooth ſo recconing thē
               ſelues, of great zeale alſo (of greater it may be then iudgement) who in ſeeking after good thinges, faile in the manner fowly, dooing that which beſeemes them not to doo, in regarde they are but meere priuate, neither meete for controuerſies, nor the deciding of cauſes, in queſtion, neither armed with either power or warrant from God himſelfe immediatlye and extraordinarily, which to look after is meere dotage: neither yet hauing any calling from men, nor authoritie from the Magiſtrates: for let them know, that to doo euerye good thing is not lawfull for euerye man: To preach, to miniſter the ſacraments, offices in the Church. to rule by the Swoord, as a Magiſtrate, theſe all are good things,

lawfull and commaunded, but not all perſons: To reforme corruptions in the Church being once known and diſcouered, concerning either Gods ſeruice or manners of men in their conuerſation, a thing neceſſarye expedient, and hye time it were done, and yet this no priuate action, nor by priuate perſons to be done.
            Yet alas what our miſerable dayes haue bred, euery man and woman will ſee into a whole ſtate, and cenſure Prince, Miniſters, Magiſtrates, and all perſons of eche degree, and haue exquiſite knowledge in reforming others, and in the meane time ſtarke blinde to ſee their owne faultes, and as ignorant as beaſts in the knowledge of reforming themſelues: this is Sathans malice, this is the corruption of our owne nature.
            This thing that Johanan vrged, was good, neceſſarye, and a thing moſte conuenient: namelye, that Jſhmael might be executed for high treaſon, whereof he certainlye

knew he was guilty, but he would not in any wiſe proceede further then behoued him, he diſcouered the villanye and the villaine, the trecherye and the traitor: he diſcouers it where remedy might and ought to haue bene had. Further he proceedes not, God had called him to it: if any ſhall replye that concerning the danger the Prince and people ſtood in, and that the ſtate was growen into ſuch extremety, he therfore proceeded not ſo boldely, neither yet ſo far as he might haue done, and ſo thereby take occaſion to cenſure his manhoode, as the vnbrideled hotteſpurres of our time, with whom there is but a word and a blow, who it maye be will not ſticke to ſay if the caſe had beene theirs, they would haue cut off the traitor, & afterward required iuſtice: theſe are they who in euery priuate cauſe perſwaded themſelues that the quarrell cannot be euded without bloodſhed, they haue not learned this point: firſte that courage, manhoode, ſtrength and valure, are to be bounded

and limited within the compaſſe of the law of God: and as a mans life is not his owne to ſpill it at his pleaſure, ſo neither is the blood of any other to be ſpilt, except (God requiring it) the blood or life of a malefactor be lawfully taken away by the magiſtrat, and for that cauſe he holdes his handes referring the execution of iuſtice, and earneſtlye requiring at the ſupreame magiſtrates handes, who might or ought to haue authoriſed him or ſome other to the taking away of ſo vile a malefactor: And where he ſaith (and no man ſhal know it) his mening was, that he would ſo ſpeedily diſpatch the matter, as that before he had doone it no intelligence ſhould be had, no interim for begging of pardons, for it ſhould ſeeme that Iohanan feared that if the matter ſhouldbe too publiquely knowne, ſome ſtop would be made of iuſtice, and great ſute for an arrant Traitor. The daies belike then, were like to theſe daies now, wherin though a man be knowne to be a moſt filthye

perſon, a bloody murtherer, a ſorcerer, an idolator, yea a traitor too perhaps: ſome one or other in a land, wil in this interim of iuſtice not ſpare, and that to become a moſt earneſt ſuter for him, and therefore ſaith Iohanan, giue me authoritie, ſeale my commiſsion, let me but goe, and I will runne to diſpatche ſuch a monſter. Now followe the reaſons of his zealous demaund of iuſtice at Gedaliahs handes, which are two.
            The firſt, a reaſon expoſtulatorye, from the danger the Prince himſelfe, ſtood in theſe words: Wherefore ſhould he kill thee? The ſecond drawne from the danger of the whole bodie of the Iewes, in theſe woordes: That all the Iewes which are gathered to thee ſhould be ſcattered, and the remnant in Judah periſh?
            
            Firſt then mark the ſpeech of Iohanan, who ſeeing the Arch traitor to be in ſuch credit, dooth expoſtulate the matter with the Prince, and in a chiding manner dooth take him vp very roundly, ſtill biſſeuering his accuſation to be iuſt: Wherefore ſhould he kill
               
               thee? how abſurde a thing is this that thou ſo wilfullye ſtandeſt in? art thou wearye of thy welfare? art thou wearye of thy life, and of the liues of thy people? wilt thou holde thy throate while this villaine cut it? why ſhould he doo it? and he will doo it, aſſure thy ſelfe of it, if being in time forewarned thou do not preuēt him: A great matter it was that drew this faithfull ſubiect to deale thus earneſtlye with the Prince: wherin men are taught of all ſortes, that ſhall vpon the like occaſion concerning the Prince, the church, or common wealth, hauing acceſſe and conference vpon matters in extremety with princes, eſpeciallye thoſe in good place: whither of ciuile or eccleſiaſticall calling, when they ſhall ſee in them a wilfull ſtanding in matters againſt the ſtate of themſelues & their people, to the danger of both: that they are ſo much the more boldely to deale with thē, although therby they ſhall draw vpon thē (for the preſent) the ſeuere diſpleaſure of the Prince.

But ſome may obiect againſt this Salomon 
               Pro. 20. 2.his words. Pro. 20. 2. The feare of the King is like the roaring of a Lyon: he that prouoketh him vnto anger, ſinneth againſt his own ſoule. I ſaye indeede with Salomon, that regarde is to be had, that in any wiſe at no time ne vpon any occaſion, any Subiect doo growe into tearmes of collor with the prince, which to doo, is flat againſt the law of God as I noted before, and by common reaſon vnlawfull: conſidering that Princes although they fauourablye and of their owne free grace, admit a certaine familiaritie, betweene themſelues and ſome ſubiectes, yet equality within their owne territories, they will not with any perſon admit: How then maye the queſtion ſtill be, may we diſcharge a good duty towardes them if ſo be they be raſhe and furious, not abiding to heare what is meet to be done? The way is not to vſe Machiauels pollicie, as before I teached, which is to flatter, or elſe to ſay nothing how dangerouſlye ſo euer

all ſoftneſſe, meekeneſſe, and moſt reuerent ſubmiſſe maner, knowing this to be true, that the ſame wiſe man in the 25. 15. ſayth, A Prince is pacified by 
               Prou. 25. 15.
               ſtaying of anger, and a ſoft tongue breaketh bones, and indeede we may ſooner obtayn at the hands of Princes though angry, by pacience: that thing, which otherwiſe by a forceable withſtanding ofthem, wee ſhoulde neuer obtaine. And in this place very fittely may I bring in that I omitted, but as (parenthetically to inſert it by the way) that is, although men muſt regarde in all reuerence and feare, howe and what ſpeeches they paſſe againſt a Prince, and ſo to reſtrayne both ſpeeches and thoughtes: yea ſo as that they may not ſuffer their mindes to be carryed into an ill conceite againſt the perſon of their King or Queene: yet neyther is it my meaning, neyther then was to reſtrayne the libertie of Gods miniſters in deliuering their Meſſages frō God, to the face, and before Princes: neither yet to giue incouragement vnto

flatterie, which God forbid: for to proceede in the forme of this expoſtulatorie ſpeech. In the like manner did the Prophet Jſaiah deale with the king Hezekiah, when he in pride and vanitie of minde, did ſhew the riches and ſtrength of his lande to the ſtraunge Princes of Babell, Merodach, Baladam, the ſonne of Baladam King of Babell his ſeruants, who brought but letters and a preſent from the King to Hezekiah, wherein the Prophet doth in an expoſtulating manner with him, deale very roundly, hauing the King vppon an examination, as it were, that thereby he might make a way for the declaring of Gods iudgementes againſt the lande for this act done by the King.
            
               Then came Jſaiah the Prophet vnto King Hezekiah and ſayde vnto him, what ſayde theſe men? and from whence come they? to whome the King diſdeyned not to anſwere: but Hezekiah ſayde, they are come from a farre Countrey vnto me, euen from Babell: Then ſayde hee, what haue they ſeene in thine houſe, &c. Thus roūdly

dealt Eliah with Achab when hee ſlewe Naboth for his vineyeard: Haſt thou killed and alſo gotten a poſſeſsion? &c. For euen vnto Kings and Princes hath the Lord made his Prophets ſpokeſmē from him, as is to ſee in the firſt of his Prophecie, For J, beholde I this day haue made thee a defended Cuie, and an yron pillar, and wals of braſſe againſt the whole lande, againſt the Kinges of Iudah, and againſt the Princes thereof. Howe much more then lawefull and eaſie for Iohanan, and all neere vnto Princes is it, to be bolde, yea ſometimes beſides ordinarie, to debate with, and to ſtande againſt the Prince, beeing wilfully ſet in a matter which they knowe in their conſcience to be quite contrarie to equitie and iuſtice, and to make eſpecially againſt their owne perſons. And thus much for the manner of expoſtulating the matter with L Deputie.
            Now to the ſecond reaſon drawne from the perils and daungers, whereinto the people of Iewes are like to fal, in theſe wordes, And the Iewes which
               
               are gathered vnto thee, be ſcattered, and the remnant in Judah periſh: Wherein this eſpecially is taught, that as ſubiects are to be from all contempt and treacheries towardes their Gouernours, neither in thought conſenting, nor in act, yet practiſing any euill that might be offered to the preiudiſing of the ſtate of their perſons and kingdomes, but contrariwiſe as they are in all duty to honor, which is to loue, feare, obey, care and prouide for all thinges meete for the ſtate of their royalties: ſo on the other ſide, Princes are tyde and bound by the equitie and iuſtice of this commaundement, to doe all that may be for the comfort, peace, & preſeruation of their ſubiectes: for, for this end God hath placed them in his owne roome on earth, that they might be the preſeruers of them from perils and daungers, at home and abroad, as concerning both their liues & liuings. To this purpoſe the holy ghoſt calleth Kinges, Queenes, Gouernours, and all kinde of Magiſtrates, by the name

and title of Paſtors, or as we ſay Shepheards, in the 23. of Ieremie. Woe vnto 
               Ier. 23. 1.
               the Paſtours that deſtroy and ſcatter the ſheepe of my paſture, ſayth the Lord: and in this ſence the 78. Pſal. ſpeaking of Pſal. 78. 7 71.
               Dauids being called from the baſe eſtate of a ſhepherd ouer ſheepe, whēce he called him vnto the office of a king: 70. verſe. He choſe Dauid alſo his ſeruant, and tooke him from the ſhepfold. Euen from behinde the ewes with young, brought hee him to feede his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Iſraell. So he fed them according to the ſimplicitie of his heart, and guided them by the diſcretion of his handes. The Poet Homer, apud quem as one ſayth of him, ſolenne eſt illud, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                When he ſpake of a King, hee would in a ſolemne manner call him the ſhepheard of the people. The office of a ſhepheard is to gather together, and not to let the flocke runne at ſixe and ſeuens: the nature of which kinde of cattle, of all others, is to peke out of the way, ſtraggle, wander, and goe aſtray: wherein we ſee the wiſedome

of God doth in likening his people to ſheepe, therein inferre neceſſarily the great neede of a ſhepheard ouer them, to guide them, to gather thē in euery hande while: none can better ſpeake of the wandringes, and out ſtrayinges of man, then euery mans hart, hauing experience ouer his owne infirmities, whereof Dauid is a moſt excellent witneſſe in that moſt diuine Pſalme of meditation, playn in words, but hye in matter the very laſt verſe 
                  
                     •
                  . 119. 176.thereof. J haue gone aſtray like a loſt ſheep, oh ſeeke thy ſeruant, for J doe not forget thy commaundementes. The Prophet Iſaiah in the 32. chap. by an allegorie propheſieng what a one Chriſt ſhall be in his kingdome, doth therein teach earthly Kings in like manner, howe to beare themſelues towardes their people. Behold 
               Y. 32. 1. 2.
               a King ſhall reigne in iuſtice, & Princes ſhall rule in iudgement. And that man (ſpeaking of Chriſt) ſhall be a hyding place from the winde, and as a refuge for the tempeſt: as riuers of waters in dry places: and as the ſhadowe of a great rocke in
               
               a wearie lande. And thus ſhall Princes be euen a refuge for the oppreſſed againſt the oppreſſour, a hyding place of iuſtice againſt thoſe that in any wiſe ſhall offer iniuries to the people, comfortable and helpfull, like a good ſhepheard, who will with all care (to followe the ſpeech of Johanan, for the diſperſion of the Iewes) rather ſeeke to gather together, then otherwiſe ſuffer them to go wandring, as ſheepe without a ſhepheard, as ſubiects without a Prince, as a body without a head. Likewiſe the King or ſupreme Magiſtrate is to prouide not onely that all the diſtreſſed and afflicted people in generall be releiued, according to their ſeuerall diſtreſſes without delay of iuſtice, but eſpecially amongeſt the reſt that the martiall man, who vppon the aduenture of his life for Prince or Countrey, returning home out of the warres, although with ſafetie of life, yet with the loſſe of ſome of the principall members of his bodie, and therfore not able by the labour of his

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
handes, to procure a competent maintenance for the ſtay of his life, may therefore be aboue the reſt charitably prouided for, and that thoſe good ſtatutes to that purpoſe ordeyned, which for want of due execution, haue not their effect, may be with greater care looked vnto. So that the aſſembly of high Court of Parliament prouiding good lawes, may not be fruſtrated, but that according to the intent and meaning of the Prince and ſtate, they may be put in practiſe, to the comfort of the lame, maymed, impotent, and miſerably diſtreſſed ſouldiers: otherwiſe what auayleth it the Prince, for the common weales behoofe, to cauſe lawes and ſtatutes to be enacted, if there be not as great a regard to ſee on the other ſide, the execution of them by the adminiſters of iuſtice, with as great diligence to be practiſed. Furthermore, in the ſpeeches of Iohanan, why ſhould the Jewes be ſcattered, and the remnant in Judah periſh? it is as though he ſhould haue ſayde, although thou

doe no more regarde thy ſelfe, but in a ſelfe willingneſſe wilt thruſt thy ſelfe vpon the daunger of Iſhmaels treaſon: why yet ſhouldeſt thou together with thine owne perill, hazarde the liues of ſo many people after thou art gone, being committed vnto thee vpon ſpeciall truſt? wherein Johanan would lay downe this point: that it was Gedaliah his dutie, that not only for his time of gouernement, hee ſhould ſee the people well and peaceably prouided for, and defended againſt preſent perilles and daungers: but further alſo, that whatſoeuer ſhould befal him, yet they might afterwardes liue in ſome ſecuritie for their liues and poſſeſsions, and that he might in peace deliuer vp againe the people of God, that thereby he might not carrye with him to his graue any reproch or giltineſſe of the deſolation that afterwards might happily enſue vpon them.
            Thus ought all Chriſtian Princes to reckon with themſelues, that the people are as their Sheepe, and themſelues

Shepheards, and as all Fathers are to prouide, being led by naturall affection, for their ſonnes and daughters, not onelye while they are in their nonage, and while they liue with thē: but that after they are laide vp in their graues, their care paſt ouer their children might appeere, in leauing them in ſome good and honeſt ſtate, (which yet I neede the leſſe to ſpeake off, becauſe herein men are carefull enough) Such ought Princes to be, for they are as Fathers ouer their people, and vpon their wiſdome and good gouernment not onelye the preſent eſtate of their people in peace and pioſperitie, but alſo the contiuance of the ſame, and that after their liues doth depend. For to ſay as it is, God therfore hath entayled Princes into a propriety of their Subiectes goods, and liues if neede ſo require (wherin by way of digreſsion,) ſubiectes are not to ſtraine curteſie in the paimēt of whatſoeuer is to be impoſed vpon them, neither in leuying out of taxes or ſubſidies: the rich muſt

eaſe themſelues in ouerpreſsing the poore, as the wicked manner of many cormorants is, who eſteeme that peny or noble well ſaued, that either is laide vpon other mens ſhoulders, or elſe by fraudulent meanes can be retained, ſo it cloſelye be doone from the Prince: concerning whoſe dueties how farre they ſtretch towards the prince. 1. Sam 8. 11. Where he ſheweth at large what priuiledges God hath giuen to a king, and what claim and intereſt they may haue in the eſtate of their ſubiects.
            
               1. Sam. 8. 11, 12, 13. And he ſaide, This ſhalbe the manner of the King that ſhall raigne ouer you: he will take your ſonnes and appoint them vnto his Chariots, and to be his horſemen, and ſome ſhall runne before his chariot. Alſo he will make them his Captaines ouer thouſandes, and Captaines ouer fifties, and to eare his ground, and to reap his harueſt, & to make inſtruements of warre, and the thinges that ſerue for his chariots. He will alſo take your daughters and make them Apothecaries, and Cookes & Bakers, &c. And hath God then thus prouided, that all perſons
               
whatſoeuer, within a princes territorie, ſhall performe all ſeruices, and doo all homage and fealtie to them, without any duetye of the princes parts to be perfourmed on their ſides? no verily, you haue hard alreadye, how they likewiſe are as Shepheardes ouer their flocke, to maintaine them, their liues and libertyes.
            Beſides which, they are the principall inſtruementes of Gods mercies towardes his Church, for the planting of the Goſpell, for the ſaluation of the ſoules of the people, to which end God hath aduaunced them Iſay. 49. 23.on hie, according to Iſaiahs propheſie. 49. 23. And Kings ſhalbe thy nourſing fathers, and Queenes thy nourſing mothers, they ſhall worſhip thee with their faces towards the earth: and this authoritye haue they ouer the Church, that they are to prouide that the miniſters of God do their dueties, in feeding with the woord of God, themſelues and their people: the neglect wherof, as alſo the incorrigible miſdemeanours of

all eccleſiaſticall perſons, not to be brought into order by the Church cenſure and gouernours therof, are to be puniſhed by the ſeuerity of the magiſtrates ſworde.
            Now to come to the ſecond parte, which is the incredulity of Gedaliah in not beleeuing Iohanan. But Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam beleeued them not. And againe in the 16. ver.
            
               But Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam, ſaid vnto Iohanan the ſonne of Kareah: Thou ſhalt not do this thing, for thou ſpeakeſt falſely of Iſhmael.
            
            In theſe words followeth the anſwer of this gouernour to the faithfull captaine and the reſt with him.
            
               But he beleeued them not.
            
            The matter being ſo weightie, as the danger of the princes life, and the accuſation ſo ſeuere and importunate againſt Iſhmael, it was a wonder to ſee that this Gonernour ſo raſhlye and preſently, ſhaped ſo thwart and contrary

an anſwere vnto Johanan, for it ſtandes as a reaſon of ſome conſequence betweene the Prince and the people, that if it be ſo needfull for ſubiects vpon the leaſt ſuſpition that they may iuſtlye gather of anye ill meaſure pretended againſt the ſtate▪ preſentlye (at their perrils otherwiſe) to diſcouer it, that on th'other ſide the Prince, magiſtrate and Gouernour whoſoeuer, are in all louing affection to giue their eares with diligent attention to heare it, and to imploye their whole wiſedome and labours to ſearch out the trueth ſpeedily: for the dooing of the duty of the one, implieth in it a neceſſitie of ſome duety from th'other.
            But to remember againe that which in th'entrance of this treatiſe I did but touch by the waye: That where God will iudge in diſpleaſure, what way or meanes to auoide it; ſo heere it appeares true in the ſequell of the raſhe anſwere of Gedaliah and his vniuſtrepelling of ſo iuſt an accuſation by ſo truſtye a Subiect: whence is to be obſerued

how notwithſtanding God did deliuer Gedaliah for the good of his people out of death it ſelfe, making him to be gracious in the eyes of Nebuchadnezzer: yet he knowing the ſtiffeneckednes of his people, and purpoſing to proſecute this abuſe of his mercye in them with a further iudgement, did cauſe this vnto Gedaliah, to be but rather an euaſion or eſcape out of one danger, to be reſerued to a further: that by taking him (by the means of an ill perſon out of this life, he might thereby ſpeedilye execute his iudgementes vpon this vnrepehtant people, according to the ſpeech of the wiſe man in the 28. of the Prouerbs z. Pro. 28. 2.
               For the tranſgreſsion of the land there are many Princes therof: and as the Prophet Jſaiah in the 3. in laying down the heauy Iſay. 3. 
                     •
                  
               iudgemēts like to enſue vpon Ieruſalem and Iudah, noteth this to be one and a ſpeciall, to take away wiſe, graue and good rulers, &c. If anye ſhall demaund a reaſon of Gods dooings in this, it is that God reſerueth vnto him

ſelfe, his times and ſeaſons of doing his will, either in the full execution of his iudgements, or the performance of his mercies, wherof to be more curious in the inquirye of that which he will not haue knowne to man, is meere vanitie: this alwaies being carried in remembrance, that although we can rē
               der no reaſon of Gods iudgements either in the manner of executing them, or concerning the time, yet are they alwaies iuſtand vpright: and further, the purpoſe of God may eaſily be foūd out cōcerning this matter, who while he iudged theſe that remained vnder Gedaliah his gouernment in a fatherlye manner, in compariſon of the reſt of their Countrimen, of whome ſome were ſlaine, ſome hardlye entreated vnder Nebuchadnezzer, being as liuing yet halfe dead: it was to this ende by his patience & long ſuffering, to draw them to repentance, not minding ſo to fauour thē aboue the reſt, as that they continuing ſtill ſtiffenecked, ſhould ſcape ſcotfree, nay rather the deferring

of his wrath was an infallable token of the more heauy puniſhments to be inflicted vpon them, therby to make thē a monument of his fierce wrath, to the example of all ages for euer: from the which people we are to make our profite, and to learne, that the longer time of Gods mercies we doo inioye, as hitherto we haue, to the admiration of the whole world, of our great proſperitie (in compariſon of our neighbours about vs) the more heauilye ſhall his hand fall, ſo as he will leaue the print of his ſtripes behinde him vpon vs: and if lenitye will not amend vs, then as Salomon ſaith, The blewnes of the 
               Pro. 20. 30.
               wound ſerueth to purge the euill, and the ſtripes within the bowels of the belly. The Lord hath in the riches of his mercye concerning our ſoules, in calling vs by the voice of his miniſters, long time viſited vs: And as concerning both ſoules & bodies, vnder our moſt happie and renowmed Queen bleſſed vs, that thereby we might become more tractable, techable, and vnto Gods wil

more pliable.
            Now ſo many yeeres being paſſed of Gods mercifull and louing viſitation vpon vs, and his expectation being by vs and in vs deceaued (to ſpeake of God who properlye cannot be deceaued) after the manner of men, and to our capacity: let vs take heed that we do not enforce the Lord, who hath ſung vpon vs all this while, a ſong of mercy as Dauid ſaith, which hath bene ſo pleaſant in our eares, in this our long peace, libertye and plenty, in this long time of pleaſure, riches and proſperitie, to ſing a ſong of iudgement in iuſtice: in ſtead of our peace paſt ſo pleaſant and amiable, take heede that we heare not a ſong of warre, moſt dolefull and terrible: in ſtead of the libertie and freedome of our ſoules by the Goſpell of Chriſt preached, and of our bodies by the mercy of god vnder our moſt puiſſant Princeſſe maintained, and yet continued, that in ſtead therof we heare not a ſtrange ſong of ſpirituall and corporall bondage and

captiuitie, for the contempt of the word of God, and the abuſe of his graces, vnder the enemies of GOD, our Prince and country: whoſe teethe are ſet on edge to be dealing with vs, who thirſte greatlye after our blood: take heed that in ſtead of our ſonges had at our feaſtes, and our epicurial banquets full of filthines & abhomination, tickling vp the vile fleſhe vnto ſenſualitye and carnall luſts: we heare not a ſong of famine and hunger, our children crying and howling for the leaſt of theſe morſels, which in our fulnes they & we and our ſeruants haue loathed, though many our betters in Gods ſight wated them, and then we cannot haue them. And in this deſcription of the cauſes why God though he prolong his iudgmentes, yet in th'end he paieth home, Let vs not forget the great care of the fleſh that the whole land hath, concerning exceſſe in apparrell: take heede once more I ſay, that the diſguiſing of our ſelues in the attire of euerye land, not for the ſtuffe wherof the garments

are made, as cloth of Golde, ſiluer, embroidered worke, ſilkes, veluets, fine cloth, fine linnen, lawnes, and I knowe not what vſe wherof there is for al perſons, regarde being had to eche mans degree, but not thereby to fulfill the luſts of the fleſh to vanitie and exceſſe, not to pride and filthines, not in ſuch painting of faces, in deuiſing newe diſguiſed faſhions, but vnto decency and comelynes, euery one according to the law of God, continuallye beating our eares, and the ſtatutes of our own land for apparrell, to the keeping of euerye degree of perſons from breaking out of the bounds and lymits of their calling: knowing this and remembring it well, to the cutting of the combes of all degrees of perſons, that immediatly vpon the ſinne of Adam came nakednes, and ſo a prouiding by the Lord againſt our ſhame, euen in apparell and clothing of vs, and where we doo miſiudge of ſome by their apparrell, according to the ſtatelines of it, to be either in honorable place, or of

high degree (as one ſaith) when we loſt our honor in Paradiſe, then came we to be firſt apparrelled, being the ſigne of our ſinne, and the badge of our rebellion and our ſhame. Take heede we doo not here in ſtead of this ſong of our delightes, the lamentable ſong of Iheremiah and of Eſayah the Iſay. 3. 16.Prophet, the 3. Chapter, from the 16. verſe, againſt the pride both of men and women, whoſe woordes though they be long, I will not referre you ouer to them, but plainelye ſet them downe. The Lord alſo ſaith, Becauſe the daughters of Zion are hautie, and walke with ſtretched out neckes, and with wandring eyes, walking and minſing as they goe, and making a tinckling with their feet. 17. Therefore the Lord ſhall make the heads of the Daughters of Zion balde, and the Lord ſhall diſcouer their ſecret partes. 18. Jn that day ſhall the Lord take awaye the ornament of the ſlippers, and the calles, and the round tires. 19. The ſweete balles and the bracelets and the bonnets. 20. The tyres of the head, and the ſloppes, and the
               
               head bandes, and the tablets, and the eare ringes. 21. The ringes and mufflers. 22. The coſtly apparel and the vailes, and the wimples, and the craſping pinnes. 23. And the glaſſes, and the fine linnen, and the hoodes, and the launes. In ſteade of this ſong (which in as great pride and vanitie, we haue ſung to our fleſh) what ſhalbe the ſong of iudgement? 24. And in ſteade of ſweete ſauour (ſaith he) there ſhalbe ſtinke, and in ſtead of a girdle a rent, and in ſtead of dreſsing the haire, baldenes: and in ſteade of a ſtomacher, a girding of ſackecloth, and burning in ſtead of beautye.
            
            This ſong haue the Iewes in Ieruſalem the glorye of the world alreadye ſung, a people deerely beloued of the Lord, and ſhall we vpon whome the Lord hath looked with ſo amiable and fatherly a face, ſhall we (remaining in our ſinnes and vanities ſcape ſcotfree? Nay, take heede our owne toungs doe not alſo teſtifie againſt our ſelues, as concerning the deliverance from the Spaniſh enemies of late, that would in the pride of their harts, haue bourded

vs at home, the victorie ouer whōe we begun with ſongs of praiſe and thanks giuing to the Lord, to celebrate. Take heede that our praiſing of God for that day, and the memory of it being layde in water as we ſaye, that God doo not cauſe vs to ſing a dolfull dittie, of ſome ruinous ouerthrowe, which God in his mercy keepe back from vs: and he contrariwiſe that at one Ionas his preaching to the Niniuites, wrought their conuerſion: graunt to our Prince ſo mercifull, to our nobles ſo honorable, to our Biſhops and miniſters in their preaching of the word of God ſo comfortable, and to our people ſo innumerable, that ſo many ſermons of ſo ſundry Ionaſſes I hope, doe not return back againe vnto the Lord in vaine, without our repentance: but contrariwiſe, may as it hath begun faith in our Prince, nobles, and people, make it effectual to Gods glory, and the continuance of his mercy towards vs, in preſeruīg not Gedaliah a deputye, but our Elizabeth the onely monarch & princes of the world

(as thankes be to God he hath) from many of Iſhmaels crue, traitors of our time, & the people may dwell in peace and ſafetye vnder her, in all godlynes and proſperitie, during her happie reigne.
            But to leaue off to ſpeak concerning the will, end and purpoſe of God, in blinding the eyes of Gedaliah, in not beleeuing Iohanans reporte: and let vs returne to ſpeak of Gedaliah himſelfe, concerning his incredulitye in theſe wordes, And he beleeued them not.
            
            In whome this is to be obſerued, that he being a man as it ſeemed, of a milde ſpirite, and charitably affected towardes Iſhmaell, whom he had very familiarly conuerſed with, would not beledde with any ſuſpition of euill againſt him, following the rule of the Apoſtle Paule, concerning the ſeuerall offices of charitie or loue, as is to ſee, Cor. 13. 5.1. Cor. 13. 5. Loue thinketh not euill, or is not ſuſpicious of euill: and beſides, he had no great delight to heare il reports againſt any, leaſt therby he might giue

liberty to himſelfe oftentimes in ſtead of truth, to heare of falſhoode and lyes wherein his commendation ſtandeth iuſt. For all Kinges and Princes eſpecially aboue all other perſons, are not in any wiſe to maintayne flatterers, ſlaunderers, backbyters, nor tale-bearers, neyther yet alwayes to giue too eaſie credite to euerie tale brought them, though by perſons otherwiſe of good credite, as Iſhmael was with Gedaliah. For thoſe people, eſpecially the laſt, doe great hurt in Princes Courtes: of whom, Salomon ſpeaketh, 16. Prou. Prou. 16. 2828. And a tale-bearer maketh diuiſion among Princes, And in the 29. Prou. 12. Prou.verſe. Of a Prince that hearkdneth to lies, all his ſeruants are euill. For ſuch things as the eares of Princes are delighted to heare, ſuch things doe the ſlaunderers, flatterers, and moſt wicked backbyters, bring vnto them: for vppon the behauiour of the Princes, as vpon examples propounded them to followe, doe the ſubiectes caſt their eyes, and them, as neerely as may be, doe they

follow, according to a verſe commonly knowne.
            
               Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis,
            
            In Engliſh thus:
            
               The whole world doth caſt his eyes vpon
               ech Keiſar, and ech King:
               To frame themſelues in patterne wiſe,
               to him in euerie thing.
            
            Such a relation was there betweene the lew de ſeruants of Saule and Saule himſelfe: Doeg the Edomite from one 1. Sam. 22. 18.amongſt the reſt, as is, 1. Sam. 22. who maliciouſly complayned of Dauid, and of Ahimelech the prieſt, who thereuppon in Saules furie and malice, became an inſtrument of Saules for the bloudie murthering of 85. Prieſtes that did weare a lynnen Ephod. Such an other Pſal. 7.was Cuſh, againſt whoſe falſe accuſation Dauid compiled that 7. Pſalme, as a defence of his innocencie before God and men. Such a one was that Haman,
               
that falſe perſon and accuſer of Mordecai the faithfull ſubiect, and of the Iewes vnto Ahaſhurioſh as is to ſee Heſt. 3. 8. 9. Heſt. 3. 8 9.
            
            Theſe things conſidered, in reſpect Gedaliah did well in not ſoddenly admitting the accuſation of Iohanan, for as well hee in hearing, as Johanan in bringing falſe reportes, might haue openly tranſgreſſed the ninth commandement of God, wherein is taught, that loue to our neighbour ſtandeth in hauing regard to the credite, name, eſtimation, or good report of him, in the breach of which commandement, as well the hearers, as the bearers of falſe reportes, tales, and ſlaunders, are condemned, eſpecially ſuch as carrie falſe tales, to the ſheading of the bloud of the innocent: according to that reproofe which Ezechiell the Prophet hath againſt the people of Ierſalem, Ezek. 22. 9.
            
               Ezek. 22. 5 
               Jn thee are men that carry tales to ſhed bloud: to this purpoſe (that I may end to ſpeake of that which appeared to

be good in Gedaliah) Hierom: ad Nepotianum: affirmeth that as he that ſpeaketh euill, hath the diuell in his toung, ſo he that heareth euill, hath the diuell in his eare.
            But notwithſtanding all this in Gedaliah, which is approoued in him to be good. Lo theſe vertues they are not without their defectes: wherein wee learn that great, wiſe, & graue perſons may be deceiued, when they doe ouer much reſt vpon their owne wiſedome.
            It was a good thing in Gedaliah, if that were his purpoſe, as it ſeemes it was, to cut off the backbyting and malicious ſlaunders, as he ſuppoſed of Iohanan againſt Iſhmaell, that the cutting off Iohanan might be an example to others: but yet it had beene meete, that as hee would not receiue any tale ſoddenly againſt him, he ſhould yet haue firſt wiſely and thoroughly examined the cauſes brought by Iohanan and the reſt, before that he had ſo definitiuely proceeded, eyther clearing or iuſtifying Iſhmaell, or in ouer raſhly condemning

               Johanan.
            
            For how can it otherwiſe be, but that the Lorde muſt needes be heauily diſpleaſed, when he in mercy, for the deliuering of his ſeruants from the great perilles and dangers whereunto otherwiſe they ſhould haue fallen, giuing them fatherly warning before hand, he ſhall finde his ſeruantes to be fouly intreated, and for their paines returned backe with the lye. It is a matter condemned by Salomon, as is to ſee, Prou. 24. 24. He that ſayth to the wicked, Thou 
               Pro. 24. 24.
               art righteous, him ſhall the people curſe, and the multitude ſhall abhorre him. And on the other ſide: Woe is pronounced by the Prophet Eſay. 5. 23. verſe. againſt I ſay. 5. 23.them that take away the righteouſnes of the righteous, both which are foule and filthy vices, the ſame wiſe man in the 17. chapter of the Prou. 15. verſe, ſhutteth vp in one, ſaying: He that iuſt ifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the iuſt, euen theſe both are abhomination vnto the Lord.
            
            So that theſe places doe teach, eſpecially

Magiſtrates, in whome it is the greater ſinne, becauſe of their places wherein they are ſet, for the puniſhment of all ſuch backbyters and ſlaunderous perſons, like vnto Dauid, who would not in any wiſe permit to abide in his houſe any ſuch perſons: wherein they are admoniſhed to do vp rightly in iudgement, not reſpecting perſons, but to heare the ſmall, as well as the great, not ſuffering themſelues to be led by affection any way. For vnto ſuch as will be drawne by reſpect of perſons in iudgement, Salomon hath giuen this dome, That man (ſayth hee) will tranſgreſſe for a peece of bread, and thereby they ſhall become maintayners of the wicked, who will ſoone be encouraged to ſpeak in the defence of an euill cauſe, and of ill perſons, and alſo to accuſe moſt falſely and maliciouſly by all ſlaunderous reportes, the godly and innocent, for ſuch are the common idle perſons of the worlde, who not being at leaſure to heare that which is good, neither yet hauing skill

to beſtowe their tongues to the glory of God, and the good of their neighbours More for voluptuouſnes, then any neceſsitie.in their eating and drinking in houſes of libertie and licentiouſneſſe, doe feede, vpon (as one ſayth) the very fleſh of men: by the not puniſhing of whom, or to remiſſe dealing with thē, they ſpare not to ſpeake euill (on their ale bench it may be, if they were narnowly watched) of Princes, or at the leaſt, to rayle, reproch, and ſlaunderouſly to ſpeak againſt the Magiſtrates themſelues: whom to feare, reuerence, and obey as they ought, and againſt whom, not ſo much as to note any euill, the rude people of our time haue not yet learned. And therefore the way for a Magiſtrate to deale vp rightly in iudgement, is not lightly to heare the ſlaunderous perſon, but to ſet both his eares on worke indifferently, the one to heare the accuſer, & accuſation brought, and the other to heare the accuſed, & the defence that he can make for himſelfe: otherwiſe to be too ſpeedie in iudgement vppon the firſt tale

heard, is many times raſhly and falſely to be drawne to ſpeake for the bad, & vncharitably to giue ſentence againſt the iuſt and vpright, and ſo the way to deale vprightly in cauſes is, to cut off the lyar and falſe accuſer, of whome Hierom in one of his Epiſtles ſayth: Sicut ſagitta ſi mittatur contra duram materiam nonnunquam in mittentem reuertitur, & vulnerat vulnerantem: ita detractor quum triſtem faciem, viderit audientis, immo non audientis, ſed obturantis aures ſuas: ne audiat ſanguinem, illico conticeſtit, pallet vultus, haerent labia, ſalina ſiccatur: A very excellent ſentence to teach Magiſtrates what benefite they returne to themſelues and the cōmon wealth, when they ſhall wiſely, cut off ſlanderers: Euen as an arrowe, if it bee ſhott againſt a hard matter or marke, many times it recoyles vpon him that ſhotte it, and woundeth him that wold haue wounded: ſo the backbyter or falſe accuſer, when he ſhall ſee but the ſowre face, and grimme looke of him that heareth, or rather not heareth,

but ſtoppeth his eares, leaſt perhaps he might heare a matter of bloud: foorth with the ſlaunderer holdes his peace, his countenance chaunges, his lippes cleaue together, and his ſpittle is dryed vp: meaning that he ſeeth that his market is marred, his combe is cut, and not a worde more that he hath to ſpeake: herein fayled Ioſephes Maiſter, as in the 39. Geneſ. 20. in giuing too Gen. 39. 20.light credite to his wife, againſt chaſt and innocent Ioſeph his knowne and approoued faithfull ſeruaunt. Herein appeared his lightneſſe, that hauing heard his wife, being too much addicted to her wordes, thereupon hee caſt Joſeph into priſon, and neuer heard his cauſe, wherein he ſhe wed himſelfe ouer credulous. On the other ſide, how many haue we with Gedaliah, that run themſelues into daunger, being forewarned, and not giuing credite thereunto, and ſo receiued a worthy puniſhment of their incrudelitie?
            We reade of Ahab how he ſcorned Michaiah the Lords Prophet, whome

he ſent for, as many ſend for and call to their companies the miniſters, either to ſcorne them to their faces, or at the leaſt with Ahab not to beleeue what they ſay: or if they doo, not with any purpoſe to follow their counſell: who when he came, foretolde him of his ouerthrowe, but he beleeued him not, being ſeduced by the lying ſpirites of his falſe Prophets, as it is ſaide in the 1. kin. 22. 18.1. Kings. 22. 18. And the King of Iſraell ſaide vnto Iehoſaphat the King of Iudah: Did I not tell thee, that he would propheſie no good vnto me but euill? As though that Michaiah hauing receiued his charge and commiſsion from God, ſhould haue neceſſarilye ſpoken to the lyking or pleaſing of the wicked kings humor.
            Such a like example of incredulitie we finde to haue bene in a prince, on whoſe hand as the text ſaith, the king of Iſraell leaned.
            The prophet Eliſha foretelleth of great plentye of victalles to fall in Samaria ere the morrowe at that time,

and how it ſhalbe wonderfully cheap: The Prince would not beleeue it, but replyed vpon the prophet: though the Lord would make windowes from heauen, could this thing come to paſſe? and he ſaide, beholde thou ſhalt ſee it with thine eyes, but thou ſhalt not eate therof.
            Many are the examples in ſcripture concerning the incredulitie of men, but Gedaliah ſinned ſo much the more againſt the Lorde, in that he was not foretolde onely of this villanous pretence by Iohanan alone, but all the captaines of the hoſt with him, ſo that had he onely caſt off Johanan, the matter had not been ſo weightie, but refuſing ſo many witneſſes whome hee would not vouchſafe to call to their tryall, he did as it were pull the wrath of God vpon the people, and was (as we ſay) acceſſary to his owne death. But ſome man will ſay, it was very hard to haue found out ſuch a ſerious thing: it is not ſo, for this was plaine and eaſie enough to haue beene prooued by witneſſes,

had not Gedaliah beene led with a ſelfe will as concerning the diligent ſearching of it out, which indeede was the will of God for the blinding of him in ſo manifeſt a matter: but ſay it had bin ſo hard, the remedy had beene as in the booke of Eccleſiaſtes 10. 10. the Eccleſ. 10. 10wiſe man ſayth, If the yron be blunt, and a man hath not whet the edge, he muſt put to more ſtrength, the excellency to direct a thing is wiſedome. But yet God doth in the finding out of thinges very hard, and of great difficultie, giue vnto man wiſdome, eſpecially when it concernes equitie and vpright dealing betweene man and man, if they ſeeke for it, and therefore Gedaliah ſhoulde haue beſtowed the more labour in the examination of the matter, according as is to ſee in that wonderfull boulting out of the truth of the child, according to the holy hiſtorie, that was dead, that was chalenged by two harlottes, whoſe it was, Salomon to iudge the controuerſie betweene them being a matter verie intricate: but becauſe Salomon asked

aboue all thinges an vnderſtanding heart, refuſing to make demaunde of honour and riches, the Lord graunted his requeſt, and ſo hee found out the true mother of the childe, according to the ſpeech of the Apoſtle Iames. If any of you lacke wiſedome, let him aske of God which giueth to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it ſhall be giuen him. Thus much concerning Gedaliah his incredulitie.
            Now followeth the third part which is the execution of Iſhmaels treaſon, and the manner of it in theſe wordes:
            
               Chap. 41. ver. 1. But in the ſeuenth moneth came Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah, the ſonne of Eliſhama of the ſeede royall, and the Princes of the King, and ten men with him, vnto Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam to Mizpah, and there they did eate bread together in Mizpah.
            2 Then aroſe Iſhmaell the ſonne of Nethaniah with theſe ten men that were with him, and ſmote Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam, the ſon of Shaphan with the ſword,

and ſlew him, whom the king of Babell had made gouernour ouer the land.
            3 Iſhmaell alſo ſlew all the Jewes that were with Gedaliah in Mizpah, and al the Caldeans that were found there, and the men of warre.
            This third part concerneth Jſhmaell the Traytor, the execution of his treaſon, and the manner of it: wherein firſt we are to learne theſe principall heads or maximes: that is, how this wickedneſſe was not committed by Jſhmaell, but that the will of God did concurre and goe together with his will: wherein, if it be asked how this could be, the acte being ill and wicked in Jſhmaell, but that the Lord muſt needes be guiltie alſo of ſinne: the anſwere is, that the ſinne of the wicked is vnto God, as an other creature, in reſpect not that hee created it, for it is a thing proceeding from mans owne vile nature: but as concerning his power ouer it, to rule it, that it ſhall no further goe or paſſe, then he hath & doth limit it: and that by it, as by the creature that worketh

it, being euill and wicked: notwithſtanding he worketh and effecteth his owne will being good, being himſelfe guiltleſſe of any euill: for in this matter the ſolution or looſing of the point, ſtandeth in the diuerſitie of the endes: of the end of God his working, and of the end of man his working: the meaning, end, and purpoſe of God being good: the meaning, end, and purpoſe of the wicked being ill, which maketh them without excuſe, whereas Gods purpoſe and end in the wicked, and by them is eyther to be glorifyed in them to their confuſion, or to make tryall of his children by them in rayſing them vp as his puniſhments for ſinne: the end of the wicked being an vtter contempt of God him ſelfe, and the hurt of his creatures, which yet could neuer further proceede, then by the handie worke of God, they were ledde againſt their wils, to doe his will contrarie to their purpoſes, and to glorifie his name in deſpight of themſelues: the which matter is notably ſet foorth in the 3.

Acts. 23. Him I ſay (ſayth Peter, ſpeaking Act. 2. 23.of Chriſt) haue yee taken by the handes of the wicked, being deliuered vp by the determinate counſell and foreknowledge of God, and haue crucifyed and ſlaine: &c. But to ſpeake of this further I will not: But to Jſhmaell himſelfe, of whom firſt before in the wordes of the diſcouerie is to be remembred, what Iohanan ſayd of him, namely that Baalis the king of the Ammonites had ſent him to ſlaye Gedaliah, wherein we may ſee his baſe minde, who would not with his countrey men beare in the courage of a patient heart according to Gods will, the bondage of Nebuchadnezzer, but wold make himſelf ſeruile & ouermuch▪ thral to another ſtrāg king, & that againſt his own countreymen, ſo that in a word, he euery way ſold himſelf as a bōdſlaue to ſin. Not vnlike to him are our runagats and haue beene, that haue fled, not to Baaliſh king of the Ammonites, but to that Baaliſh Prieſt, that man of ſinne Antichriſt of Rome, whom to follow as their Pilot, whoſe lawes to liue after

as Rebels they haue not ſpared, choſing rather to be his thrals and bondmen, ſo their treacherous harts in hauing their will being naught, might be relieued, then otherwiſe according to the lawes of God, of nature, and of all nations, to be ſubiects at home in their own countrey, to their owne leige, naturall, and mercifull Princes. And ſo they whoſe hyrelinges and bondmen they bee, though they vſe them for their purpoſe a while, yet hardly will they cōmit any great truſt to thē, & ſome reaſon they haue for it: but if they doe commit any at all, it ſhall be no further then they play in ſight aboue the borde as we ſay, and in the end, if they ſende them not home, or make no ſale of them, as it may be they will when they haue once worne them out to the ſtumps, or otherwiſe they be not brought home by ſome other meanes, that in the iuſtice of God, they may be made publique ſpectacles to the whole world, continuing ſtill vnrepentant, they are like to periſh both in ſoule and body, moſt

damnably for euer.
            Now where it is ſaide of him that he was of the ſeede Royall, the holye ghoſt doth it not but to ſome purpoſe, wherein he ſhewed forth his diſdaine ouer Gedaliah, the which ſeemed to be the very foundation of all his outrage: Indeede to be noblye borne, and to come of a princes ſtocke, is a matter to be reſpected: but when God wil either by his own puniſhment vpon the lyne and race of a Prince, either for ſome ſecret in the Lord himſelfe, or otherwiſe pull down the kings themſelues, for ſome notable ſin, as he for pride did abace Nabuchadnezzer: what a vanitie is it for men to ſtand vpon theſe tearmes, I am a prince, or a Princes Sonne, or neere kinſeman, or of his race, I am a noble man, and can fetche my lyne and pedegree from (as we ſay) the conqueſt, what of all this? thou ſhouldſt for theſe cauſes the better approue thy ſelfe in holines, not in prophanes before God and before men, not in thy high parentage, to thinke

that in all righteouſnes & iuſt dealing, thou maiſt liue vncomptrollable, though otherwiſe it maye be: take away thy great birth, thou ſhalt ſhewe thy ſelfe a very monſter in life, as Iſhmael did. This coulde ſtand for no plea, for Iſhmael in Mizpah, though it were in the land of Iudah, ſeeing Nebuchadnezzer had brought it vnder, being as concerning birth of the familye of the Kings of Iudah, that needes he muſt therefore become a Gouernour: God had otherwiſe prouided. The King Zedekiah himſelf, reprochefully handled, as is 39. Chapter before to ſee, his eies put out, himſelfe bound in chaines, all his nobles for the moſt partſlaine, his ſonnes put to the ſword, and God had alreadye aduaunced vnder Nebuchadnezzer, Gedaliah.
            
            But ſome men that were noblye borne, cannot in any wiſe liue ſubiects in a land, although there want neither fauour of Prince, nor Lands, nor pleaſure, nor credit, nor honor, except they maye be Monarches, all that

will not ſatiſfie them. No maruel then though Iſhmael who wanted the hundreth penny of the maintenance that ſome haue had, and might ſtil haue enioyed amongſt vs, if their preſent ſtate could haue ſerued them: but well, let conſcience of religion be a colour for their treaſons, I am not to meddle in it: only this, a bad conſcience, and a bad religion, it is in my conſcience, which can giue libertye to the ſpilling of the bloud of the Lords annointed: But alas Iſhmael his hornes were cutte being of no ſuch abilitye in a ſtrange land, and yet he ſtands vpon his birth: in whome we ſee this pointe that men hauing bene hie and alofte, it is a hard matter for them to ſtoop and become ſubiects: for Iſhmael had ſmally profited concerning the good wil and pleaſure of God vpon his creatures, therin to referre himſelfe to his maker. Who 1. Sam. 2. 7.as Annah in the 1. Sam. 2. 7. The Lord maketh poore and maketh rich: bringeth low, & exalteth: 8. He raiſeth vp the poore out of the duſt, and lifteth vp the begger
               
               from the dung hill: (as it may be Gedaliah was but baſe in compariſon) to ſet him amongſt Princes, and to make thē inherite the ſeat of glory. &c.
            Well, art thou hye borne? art thou of a noble houſe and familie? as thou art, ſo wilt thou be honoured? then do the things that are worthy honor. For as one ſaith (Oſorius de gloria) Non enim diuitijs abundare nec tenniores affligere ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in Rep. dominari ſed animi bonis affluere vniuerſis charum eſſe Reipub ſalutarem exiſtimari eſt laudabile glorioſum et ſummus honoribus illuſtratum. For not to be rich, nor to afflict the poorer ſorte, neither to be a gouernour in the cōmon wealth: but to haue a minde enriched with good vertues, to be beloued of al, to be reckoned a good and profitable common-wealths man: this is laudable, glorious, and worthy to be honoured: againe ſaith he, Eſt enim honor diuinum quoddam praemium virtuti et honeſtati conſtitutum omnem turpitudinis conſortim repellens, & it a fit vt quianimum flagito et turpitudine, contaminatum gerunt
               
               nullo pacto honorem, ſed inane fortaſſe nomen honoris adepti, in ſummam ignomia verſentur. For honour is a certaine diuine reward appointed for vertue and honeſty, chaſing away all filthy company, and by that means they who beare a filthy and vicious minde, hauing got to themſelues no true honour, but a vaine name thereof, doe in the meane time remaine in great diſhonour and reproche: theſe ſpeeches of his are true, being referred to faith in Chriſt, without which whatſoeuer is, is ſinne: and therefore wilt thou be honoured in regarde thou art honourablye borne? then follow the counſaile of Salomon, who teacheth thee where true Pro. 4, 7.honor is to be had. Pro. 4. 7. Wiſedome is the beginning: get wiſedome therefore: aboue all thy poſſeſsion, get vnderſtanding: Exalte her, and ſhe ſhall exalte thee: ſhe ſhal bring thee to honor if thou imbrace her. Otherwiſe, if thou with Abſolon a Kings Sonne of the ſeede royall, and practiſe the like trecherye, ſhalt abandon from thee all duetye to God, to

Prince, to Father: ſetting thy delights onely vpon brauery, trechery, villany, and all manner of impietye (like to this Iſhmaell who was notable in his wickednes) delighting thy ſelfe in thy ſelf, and thy curled locks (a moſt mōſtrous thing in theſe our daies) but of late in compariſon (by the way to ſpeake in a word) being growne into cuſtome euen with thoſe of religion: Whereof heare not me, but th'appoſtle Paule. 1. Cor. 11. 14. who ſaith: Doth not nature it ſelfe teach you, that if a man haue 
               1. Cor. 11. 14
               long haire, it is a ſhame vnto him? And if the ſpirite of God call a thing euil, ſhal we pleade againſt it and ſay it is good? I tell thee, God wil make thee though thou be neuer ſo faire, proper, and comely with Abſolon: vile, ignominious, and reprochfull to alages after: of which like traiterous Abſolons amongſt vs, God hath of late yeeres diſcouered ſome, and made them an example of his iudgementes, to all poſterities to come after vs.
            And thus much of that he is ſaid to

be of the ſeede royall, whom nobilitie of birth nothing auailed vnto honeſtie & true honor: who rather ſhewed himſelfe a baſtard from Iſrael, yea an enemie to it, as it were ſome Canaanite or Amorit, for indeed by cōuerſing with Baaliſh in ſtead of being a true Iewe borne, he became a changeling in trāſforming himſelfe into an Ammonite, as appeareth by his monſtrous impietie, and that in a verye ſhorte time, as the text ſaith, In the ſeauenth moneth, which was no long time after the taking of the Cittie, and burning of the Temple, murthering of the Nobles, and butchering vp the people, all this miſerie with the diſhonour of his King, and the ſhamefull handling of his Sonnes, had this vnnaturall beaſt & merciles tirant forgot, ſetting his mind vpon no other matter but blood, and how to doe ſome cheate to be aduaunced by hauing vtterlye forgotten the Law of his God in ſo ſhort ſpace.
            Further, when it is ſaid, that 10. men came with him, ſuch as were principall

perſons about King Zedekiah that had conueied themſelues out of the way, with this archtraitor, vntill they might finde a fit time for the compaſsing of their trechery: he the principall of the faction, hauing once madeaway Gedaliah (the plot being ſo laide before) was to be made gouernour, the other tenne of his retinue that came with him, were alſo to doo their exploits vpon other, and they hauing euerye one as young princes, appointed themſelues to the beſt offices vnder him: ſuch factious heads lightlye goe not alone: ſuch as Solomon ſpeaketh of. Pro. 1. 11. Come ſay they with vs, we will lay weight for bloud, 
               Pro. 1▪ 11.
               and lay priuilye for th'innocent without a cauſe. 12. we will ſwallowe them vp quick like a graue, euen whole as thoſe that goe downe to the pit. 13. We ſhall finde all precious riches, and fill our houſes with ſpoile. 14. Caſt thy lot amongſt vs, we wil al haue one purſſe.
            
            For indeede, ſuch is the diſpoſition of wickednes and wicked men, that they doe deſire all other to be like to

themſelues: a theefe deſires a companion in his theft, a braſen fac'd whore deſires that all women were of her diſpoſition, ſo indeede might the deuill carrye away both th'one and th'other, and truely we had neede praye againſt the corruption of our nature, for euen as drie chippes doo eaſilye take fire: ſo our nature is by prouocation eaſilye drawen into wickednes, and if we doe not yeelde to the ſinnes of the moſt vile, as vnto open whordome, open theft, open villany, open papiſtry, open treaſon, whence is it that we are ſo reſtreined, being of the ſame nature with the moſt wicked? Let vs not reioyce ouer th'impieties of other men, and thence take occaſion to be proud in our ſelues: but rather let vs with the Apoſtle learne and beare away this leſſon. Let him that ſtandeth, take heede he fall not. It is God by his power that hath kept vs, otherwiſe had we bin loſt to our ſelues: we had, and haue a nature, as prone to the moſt vile ſinne as any whatſoeuer, and truely this age of

Libertines affoords too too many eggers and entiſers vnto wickednes of all kindes, and eſpeciallye of factious and ſeditious perſons, which are growne into companies, cloking and couering their wickednes as Iſhmael did, as it is to ſee in the 6. verſe following: with a vehement whotte zeale in religion, buſie heads of diuers ſortes, there are ſome buzie headed papiſts, ſome buſie headed proteſtants, ſome buſie headed Atheiſts, neuer in any age ſo ful of buſie heads: ſome buſie themſelues in matters of ſtate, ſome in matters of the Church, (though ſuch are to be had,) whom properly it concernes in church and commonwealth, in the Church, the Biſhops, miniſters, and Church gouernours: in Common wealth, the Magiſtrates and ciuill Officers: and in both Church and Common wealth as the head ouer the bodye, Princes and ſole Gouernours, as is before ſaide of them: as for other men more priuate, called to no one office but by intruſion it may be ſaide, Ne ſutor vltra crepidam.
               
Euerye man let him walke in that care of life wherin he liueth, and not being calde to preach Chriſt, but to profeſſe him, let him holde his profeſsion in all ſinglenes of hart, and in all loue towardes men.
            But the buſie heads that are plodding euery way for worldlye commoditye, laying plots, making ſhiftes, caſting a thouſand waies to maintain this life wretched though it be: how many of this ſorte of buſie headed perſons, a good Arithmetitian to finde out the number ſhalgreatly be troubled: & of al theſe ſorts of buſiheads, al in general are too too buſie in reforming others, but where is the head that is buſied ſufficiently as it ſhould be in reforming himſelf? I may not vſe too lōg a digreſſion in ſpeaking of theſe Iſhmael his companions in euill: it followes they came to Gedahah and there they did eate bread together in Mizpah, where who will ſay to the contrary, but that theſe iolly fellows comming to Court it out in their brauerye, to ſhew their

fidelitie to Gedaliah forſooth, but that they meant all good to him their Governour: Beſides by the way, mark the difference betweene theſe ill diſpoſed perſons and Gedaliah: he notwithſtanding he were but of a baſe and meane condition, no otherwiſe eſteemed off then before this his aduauncement: yet he knowes how to beare himſelfe towards all degrees, as princes fellowes, hee receiues them, intertaines them, and admits them to his owne table: a meane borne man ſo ſodainelye aduaunced, and of ſo rare vertues, ſo full of curteſie and clemencye: and the other comming of a Princes ſtocke, and therefore conſequentlye not without ſinguler education, ſo degenerate, ſo wicked, ſo baſe, ſo cruell and merciles a minde, it is ſtrange to ſee: but that God giues his graces, not according to the greatnes of birth, ne yet the good quallities of a godly Father, muſt needes by right of inheritance as it were, be appropriated vnto the Sonne: becauſe God reſerues

the giftes of all goodnes to himſelfe, who accordingly, where he will haue mercy, hath mercy: and where he hath mercy, there he adorns with graces meete for euery man according to his calling.
            Well, They did eate bread together in Gedalias Courte or Pallace houſe at Mizpah. Where is to be further obſerued the vilenes of this monſter, whoſe hart becauſe of his diſdaine, ambition and couetouſnes, being hardned therin, did nothing melt or a whit relent at the courteous and familiar entertainement of Gedaliah: but no maruaile though this fellowe walked as a freend, when indeede he was an enemye: and worſe then that, for an enemy he was, vnder a cloake of amitie and great freendlines: as one ſaith, Simulat a aequitas, non eſt aequitas, ſed duplex iniquitas, quia iniquitas eſt et ſimulatio. Fained equitie is no equitie, but a double iniquitie: becauſe it is iniquitie and diſsimulation: ſuch a one was this viperous varlet, in this outward ſhewe

ſo demure, as I remember an olde ſpeeche, Intus Nero, foris Cato: In hart a very Nero a moſt bloudye bloudſucker, and without in ſhewe as graue as Cato a wiſe and prudent Senator, euen as a beaſt compacted of many beaſtes: Secundum illud poeticum Leo pars prima, draco media, ipſa chymera. According to the Poets ſaying: The principall and foreparte, a Lyon, the middle parte a Dragon, a very chymera it ſelfe: this fellow as Salomon ſaith of him that inuites a man to his table in ſhew of curteſie, and meanes him no good at all, and he that offers himſelf in renewing of freendſhip to eate and drinke with thee, and as though he ſaid in his hart 
               Pro. 23. 7.ſaith Salomon Pro. 23. 7. eate and drinke, but his hart is not with thee.
            
            Such an other was Iudas, who accompanying Chriſt as his Diſciple, eating and drinking with him, with a Iudas kiſſe betrayed him: as the holye Euangeliſt Mathew 26. 48. Now he that betraied him had giuen thē a token ſaying: whomſoeuer J ſhall kiſſe, that is he, lay holde
               
               on him, &c. So that we ſee that there is no perfection in man as concerning this life, but all are full of blemiſhes and defects: neither could the degree of an Appoſtle in reſpect of it ſelfe keepe it ſelfe, no not from falling as Peter did: wherof all are guiltie, what holines ſoeuer is tyed vnto Peters chair at Rome, as his ſuppoſed ſucceſſors doe giue out: but from falling alſo vnrecouerably, which may teach vs in whatſoeuer place God hath ſet vs in Church or commonwealth, to be humbled in Gods ſight, and not to reſt ouermuch vpon our owne wiſedome, knowledge or calling, but ſtill to haue our refuge by praier vnto God for the continuance of his ſpirite vpon vs, and for the increace of faith, ſo full of flawes are the harts of men: ſuch like freends 
                  
                     •
                  ſal. 41. 9.had Dauid as he recordeth in the 41. Pſal. 9. Yea, my familiar freend, whome J truſted, which did eate of my bread, hath lifted vp the heele againſt me. And although Dauid ſpake of ſome ſuch freends that haunted his houſe, fawning

vpon him, yet couertly as he was a figure of Chriſt, he prophecieth of Judas as the Euangeliſt John recordeth 13. 18. And as Chriſt had one falſe harted Iohn. 13. 18.Apoſtle amongſt twelue, ſo vnto Chriſtes members it maye be referred not altogither without ſome ſuch freendes, who vnder a colour of a faire countenance ſhewed, became falſe diſſemblers: many ſuch Judas kiſſes, many wonderful ſhakings by the hand, greetings and ſalutation with ſuch cap and curteſie, and ſo amiable embraſings in theſe daies as it is wonderfull to ſee, and yet in ſome I feare, Solomon ſetteth downe their propertie to the ful. Pro. 26. 24. He that hateth will counterfeite 
               Pro. 26. 24.
               with his lippes, but in his hart he laieth vp deceite. And yet time diſcouers all diſſemblers, as followeth, 26. verſe. Hatred may be couered by deceite, but the mallice therof ſhalbe diſcouered in the congregation.
            
            
               Jſhmaell he pretendeth friendſhippe in comming to Gedaliah, for as the text ſayth, they did eate bread together: this

phraſe of ſpeech concerning the eating of bread together, is in the Acts of the Act. 2. 46.Apoſtles, 2. chap. 46. verſe. And they continued dayly with one accord in the temple (as an argument of loue) and breaking bread at home, did eate their meat together with gladneſſe. To note this, that as the Church encreaſed, and the Apoſtles gayned people vnto the Lord, by the Goſpell: ſo they ſhewed their fruits in this one point of communicating the bleſsinges of God, as meats and drinkes, and in receiuing them together in common, in token of amitie and true loue to be continued betweene them.
            But alas, what hypocriſie raignes amongeſt men now a dayes, who make ſhewes of that which is not, who can eat, drinke, and keepe company, laughing in the faces of them whoſe heartes (were it not for daunger of lawe, and open ſhame before men) they would well aforde to eate (as wee ſay) with ſalte: ſuch a notable beaſt was this, whom we are now handling: whome

the text payntes out in his colours, 2. verſe. Then aroſe Iſhmael the ſonne of Nethaniah with theſe tenne men that were with him, and ſmote Gedaliah the ſonne of Ahikam, the ſonne of Shaphan with the ſword. A great point of manhoode in good earneſt, of ſuch men of valure as they were, not the meaneſt men I warrant you that could be got, no cowards, nor ſtarters at a dead lift, ſuch as feare no mans face in the land, men that had mettall in them. Iſhmaell himſelfe a tough peice of fleſh, and a valiant cutter, a cutthrote I ſhould ſay. All the reſt like to him, birdes of a feather: as concerning courage and valure, boldneſſe and ſtrength, like quallified in euerie reſpect. Nymble at throtes cutting, and eſpecially when mens handes and feete are faſt bound, make them ſafe from reſiſting, and theſe be they that will be aſhamed to flie an ynch till they haue gotte the field, in calme ſeas, and fayre weather, men that will ſtande to their tackling, who but they, & where no ſhew of daunger is, they will neuer

giue it ouer. To conclude of thē, men euery ynch, and ſee you not their manhood what a wonderfull peece of ſeruice they did? Then aroſe Iſhmaell and ten men with him: Soddenly according to the appointment (faſt binde, faſt finde) on the backes of them they come, they ſet on them, and where is the place of meeting? and what weapons hath each part appointed to try it out? Gedaliah with his people, not prouided at all, nor purpoſing any quarrell: they I warrant you made ſure worke, euery man had his toole readie: at the borde they take them, no man ſtirres his foote, no flying ground, no giuing way, the one companye of Traytors with their ſwordes prouided for the turne, the other their meate in their mouthes, and the cuppes in their handes, without any ſuſpition of euill: eating, drinking, and making merrie, bidding welcome to theſe farre trauellers out of the coaſt of the king of the Ammonites, where and with whome they had layd their plot for the executing

of this treaſon.
            But ſuch a like manner of proceeding doe all Traytors take, with whom if a man ſhould but enter parle a while concerning magnanimitie and cowardiſe, oh, you ſhould finde them in their owne conceites the odde men in the world, like to the worthies of Dauid, of whom as the holy Ghoſt reporteth, 1. Chron. 12. 14. ſpeaking of the ſonnes 1. Chr. 12. 14.of Gad, of whom one of the leaſt could reſiſt an hundreth, and the greateſt a thouſande. But bring their manhood to the touch, and you ſhall find all their bragging to be nothing but meere wordes and cowardlineſſe, white-liuered gentlemen, ſuch as in the reuenge of a quarrell holde it the beſt way by treachery, and behinde the backe of their aduerſarie to make the onſet, and not the worſt point of their manhoode to end the matter with a ſure ſtab without fighting a blow, and after for them the beſt defence is, foure legs are better then twayne, a moſt horrible thing that the bloud of man is ſo little regarded

in theſe dayes of the Goſpell, and that there ſhould be any eſcape or pardon of life graunted to any one of ſo bloudie mindes, for whom the law of God hath prouided no refuge, who in their owne heartes carry the guiltines of the bloud of them to their graue. Prou. 28. 17.
               Salomon, Prou. 28. 17. deſcribeth them. A man that doth violence againſt the bloud of a perſon, ſhall flee vnto the graue, and no man ſhall ſtay him: that is, let no man pittie him, nor once take compaſsion Exod. 21. 14.on him. Exod. 21. 14. But if a man come preſumptuouſly vpon his neighbour to ſlay him with guile (ſayth Moſes) thou ſhalt take him from mine alter, that he may die.
            
            Examples of ſuch villanies committed we haue in the holy hyſtorie, ſome 
                  
                     •
                  . king. 16. 9.in the 16. chap. 1. Kings 9. we read of Elah the ſonne of Baaſha, who beeing King ouer Iſraell, was by Zimri his ſeruant Captaine of halfe his Chariotes, conſpired againſt him, as hee was in Tirzah drinking, till he was drunken in the houſe of Arza ſteward of his houſe. And Zimri came and ſmote him and killed him, and

what the end of Zimri was as followeth, 18. verſe. And when Zimri ſawe that the Citie was taken, he went into the pallace of the kings houſe and burnt himſelfe, and the kinges houſe with him. Theſe kinds of cruell murthering men at vnwares, the holy ſcripture condemneth of moſt impious crueltie, in the 2. Sam. 20. 9. 2. Sam. 20. 9.It is recorded that Ioab the Captaine of the hoſte, the cauſe being as it ſeemed in that Dauid had giuen the promiſe of his place to Amaſa, as appereth, 2. Sam. 19. 13. therfore Ioab pretending peace, came to him and ſayd: Art thou in helth 
               2. Sam. 19. 13
               my brother? And Joab tooke Amaſa by the beard with the right hand to kiſſe him. But Amaſa tooke no heede to the ſworde that was in Joabs hand, for therewith hee ſmote him in the fift ribbe and ſhed out his bowels to the ground, and ſmote him not the ſecond time ſo he died. In the like bloudie manner dealt Joab with Abner, pretending to ſpeake peaceably with him in the gate. 2. Sam. 3. 27. Concerning 2. Sam. 3. 27.which treacherous manner, Dauid left order with Salomon his ſonne, as is to

               1. king. 2. 5. ſee, 1. Kings 2. 5. to the which order Salomon agreed, and cauſed Benaiah to ſmite Joab, hauing caught hold on the hornes of the Alter: and there hee died.
            In the like treacherous ſorte dealt 2. Sam. 13. 28
               Abſolon with Amnon, 2. Sam. 13. making a great feaſt at a ſheep-ſhearing, whither as they, his brethren the ſons of Dauid were inuited by him, and Abſolon had giuen charge concerning Amnon to his ſeruants, that when they ſaw Amnons heart merry with wine, they ſhould ſmite him, and ſo they did. In which acte, although Amnon had done wickedly in defiling Thamar his ſiſter: who gaue Abſolon any ſuch commiſsion, in ſteede of publique iuſtice to be paſſed on him, that he ſhould ſo bloudily reuenge it, as his owne priuate quarrel?
            Some like feaſtes ſuch hipocrites make, and in the middeſt of their cups their hearts are moſt bloudy. To omit the butchery of Abimilech, vpō his brethren, for the placing of himſelfe in the

kingdome, Iudg. 9. 5. verſe. To omitte Iudg. 9. 5.(only glauncing wiſe to ſpeake of thē) the poyſoning of King Iohn King of England, by a Munke of Swinſthead Abbey: the murther freſh in memory done by a Fryer moſt bloudely, vpon Henry, the late King of France: the villanous attempt vpon the Prince of Orange. To paſſe ouer the abhominable crueltie of the Guizians, bathing thē
               ſelues in bloud, in the time of the Maſſacer, & that practiſe againſt the Lord Chaſtillon, the high Admirall of France: And finally to omit to ſpeake of Bothwell his villany, not a whit behinde any of the reſt in ſauage crueltie for his treſon againſt the late King of Scots. And to draw to an end of this treatiſe, wherin you haue ſeene layd forth the duties of faithful ſubiects towards their Princes, eſpecially cōcerning their outward eſtate, and towardes all other Magiſtrates: as alſo the partes and duties of Princes on the other ſide, towardes their ſubiects and people. And finally, the manner and forme of Traytors in

the execution of their villanyes, whēce I am firſt to craue humbly of ſo many as this treatiſe ſhal come into their hands to be ſeene and read, that they will eſpecially conſider the excellency of the hiſtory, & how it agrees with the preſent eſtate of this age vniuerſally thorough out al the parts of Chriſtendom, requiring all of euery condition in the feare of God, that according as they finde the truth ſet downe before their eyes, they wil lay it to their hearts, and make profite therof, and with greater care of practiſe to proceed vnto a more full purpoſe of obedience vnto our Prince, Counſellers and Magiſtrates: in not only bridling their owne tongs from ſpeaking, or hearts from conceiuing ill againſt the Prince, being expreſſely againſt the lawe of God prooued: but alſo they will care, not to giue their eares to heare ought frō others, (eſpecially thoſe runagates about the lande, the Seminary men) that eyther tendeth, or may tend to the impeachment of the glory, credite and eſtimation

of her Maieſtie, and of her royall Crowne & dignitie: But with all their care and diligent endeuour, they wold hence learne to diſcry theſe Seminaries and ſeedes men of high treaſons, that by diſcouering them, (and that in all conuenient time) thereby they may ſtoppe the cauſe of any ill concerning reports or other miſchiefes pretended againſt the preſent ſtate of her Maieſty and people, not giuing themſelues libertie to heare the licentious communications which in the houſes of libertie of many in their ignorance, not againſt the ſupreme Magiſtrate in plain tearms, which ſo openly they dare not, but againſt the inferiour Gouernours, alſo whom not to thinke euill of only, but in brode termes to ſpeake againſt (ſuch is the looſeneſſe of theſe dayes) as hardly as may be, is their common cuſtome.
            Secondly vpon the care and regard that ſubiectes haue ouer and towardes their Princes, and ſo conſequently towardes her Maieſtie our Soueraigne,

whō herein we are to prayſe God for, from our very hearts, vpryſing and downe lying, humbly vpon our knees Euening and Morning, conſidering how ſhe hath ſhewed and approoued her ſelfe, hitherto the only Prince and Paſtor moſt carefull and louing, moſt tender and mercifull, for mainteyning vs her people, for ſhedding the ſheepe from the goates, for prouiding for vs, that we haue liued, and doe yet, in all peace and proſperitie: for preuenting the woluiſh and deceitful troublers of our peace, for gathering vs together when we were like to be ſcattered, for preſeruing vs vnder God, when we were like to periſh, had not the Lorde beene on her ſide, had not the Lorde beene on her ſide, as Dauid in the 124. Pſalme, for the guiding, ſafelie conducting and preſeruing vs, when men roſe vp againſt vs, they had then ſwallowed vs vp quicke, when their wrath was kindled againſt vs. To the prayſe of the which God, let vs ſay as in the ſame Pſalme, Prayſed bee the Lord, which hath not giuen vs a pray
               
               vnto their teeth, our ſoule is eſcaped, &c. And this deliuerance through Gods mercy hath befallen vs vnder her highneſſe, ſhee hauing beene the onely Paſtor of all the Princes vppon the earth, for many yeares: whoſe watchings and carefulnes God hath bleſſed, of whom I hope, I may without flattery ſay that with Dauid, She hath fedde vs her people and ſheepe of her folde, according to the ſimplicitie of her heart, and guided vs by the diſcretion of her handes: For whoſe continuance wee are further to pray to God, that her Maieſty as ſhe hath now many yeares honorably ruled vs, ſo ſhe may in Gods feare proceede to play the part of a good Princeſſe ouer vs ſtill, to maintain vs by the law of God, and the wholſome lawes of our Countrey in all peace and godlineſſe during Gods will and pleaſure. And finally, that all other, to whoſe view this ſhall come, not aunſwering perhaps their iudgements being contrarily minded, as Papiſts, Recuſants, from whoſe profeſsion haue proceeded, eſpecially, the

Arch-traytors of this land (ſome one or fewe odde and frenticke ſpirits poſſeſſed with an vncleane ſpirite of rayling vppon Magiſtrates of late dayes, excepted) that the reſt remayning, vnto whom in matters of faith and conſcience, that Counſell of Trent is approoued, although it may be in that one point of rebelling againſt the lawfull & naturall Prince they differ ſome fewe of them: yet all of them will conſider in vprightneſſe betweene God and their owne hearts, what mercie they haue receiued from her Maieſtie in ſtead of crueltie by them contrariwiſe offered vnto her againe: what freedome? what libertie? what priuiledges and annuities they doe enioy, in compariſon of the hard meaſure offered to our brethren in the late dayes of Queene Mary, and yet might enioye what they would more▪ with greater freedome, were not their wilfulneſſe ſuch, that yet euen they alſo will learne not onely themſelues to reſtrayne vnnaturall & diſloyal words & thoughts:

but all concealementes of euill againſt Prince, Magiſtrate and the common ſtate of the lande. And thus deſiring God that the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt Ieſus his ſonne, and his kingdome by the preaching thereof may be continued, and more and more inlarged vpon our land, wee our Prince and Countrey may liue in the fellowſhipe of one ſayth agreeable to the holy Scriptures, thereby the higher powers learning to rule according to godlineſſe and we the people may liue in all obedience to our Princes & Gouernors according to the phraſe of the immortall, inuiſible, and onely wiſe God, three diſtinct perſons, the father, ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt, all one in the vnitie of the Godhead: to whom be all honour, prayſe and glorie now and for euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   