
      
         
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            I Beſeech you to peruſe this little Booke of my owne making: imprinted at my own coſt & charges. Which I humbly intreat you to accept at my hands: not weighing the worth, but reſpecting my good will. And deale therein (in your vertuous diſpoſition, and Chriſtian loue and charity) as God ſhall moue your minde.
            
               
                  I. A. Miniſter and Preacher of Gods Word.
            
         
         
            
            A CELESTIALL Looking-glaſſe: To behold the beauty of Heauen.
            
            Directed vnto all the Elect Children of God, very briefly compoſed, and authentically penned, that it may be effectually gained.
            
               
                  PSAL. 87.3.
               
               Glorious things are ſpoken of thee, O city of God.
               
                  PSAL. 107.43.
               
               Who ſo is wiſe, will ponder thoſe things.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, 1621.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, truly Noble, vertuous, and moſt worthy Lady, the Lady CATHERNE, Marchioneſſe Buckingham, wife vnto the right Honorable GEORGE, Marqueſſe of uckingham, Vicount VILLERS, Baron of Whaddon, Lord High Admirall of England, &c. grace and peace from God the Father, through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               RIght honorable and vertuous Ladie, ſo farre forth as the holy Scripture maketh mention of the Titles, Magnitude, Ioyes, and Eternity of heauen,

(the which I haue here intreated of) or any other diuine matter whatſoeuer: ſo farre I may bee bold, either to ſpeake, write, or intreate of, and no further; for the ſecret things belong vnto the Lord, but the reuealed belong vnto vs, and to our children for euer, Deut. 29.29. But yet it may bee thought great boldneſſe in mee, that am altogether vnacquanted or knowne vnto your Honor, being a Miniſter, and Preacher of Gods Word, to preſume to ſhrowde from the preiudice of contempt, this my ſmall and vnlearned Treatiſe, Intituled, A Celeſtiall Looking-glaſſe, to be patronized vnder your Honors protection, beeing

a Lady of ſuch dignity and vertue; (and ſo in ſome ſort I do my ſelfe acknowledge.)
            Yet as the Lord hath adorned you among other religious Ladyes, with whō yee ſhine as a cleere Lamp of light in the world, through your vnfeigned loue, and ſincere profeſſion of the Goſpell, (whereby you are an honor not onely to your houſe, but vnto your whole degree and Sexe:) which as it is a ſweete teſtimony to your owne heart, that you are beloued of God, and hath made you far and neere honored of all thoſe that loue God: ſo alſo as your religious zeale towards Gods Word doth exceed your honor or Greatneſſe, it likewiſe

maketh me very confident, that it will excuſe my boldneſſe; the rather, becauſe I haue receiued the ground of my worke from the direction of the word of God: but the method I ſubmit to the correction of man, and am ſorry it is no more worthy your honorable view. But although it bee rawly comprized in a fewe ſcattered leaues, and as rudely compoſed in a ſort of ſcribled and vnlettered lines, as the fruit of whoſe outward husk being vnpoliſhed, may ſeeme vnpleaſant; yet (no doubt) the inward kernell once taſted, and well digeſted, may proue cordiall, and right fruitfull.
            Right Honorable, and

Chriſtian deuoted Ladye, like as the Moraliſts ſheweth me, that where only the quality of the affection, and not the quantity of the preſent, is to be attended, Modicum non differt à magno, it is no matter whether the preſent bee great or ſmall. So was it with Alexander,, who receiued a fewe harſh lines of verſe from Choerilus; Artaxerxes a handful of water from poore Sinaeta, and our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt the poore widdowes mite.
            In like manner I am loth to trouble your Honor with a treatiſe of long circumſtance, leſt I ſhould feare you with the loſſe of time, and ſo make an end before I

beginne. But if the good liking of this Mite of my poore labours, could winne the hope of your fauour, to intreat you with patience, to peruſe the ſame: and withall, vouchſafe to grace mee with your honorable acceptance, to patronize this ſmall worke, which I in all dutifull manner, with as tender affection (as euer mother or nurſe gaue their breſts to their children, or the Pellican peckt out her blood to feed and cheriſh her young) doe here as kindly dedicate and preſent: then ſhall I (if God ſpare me life) be comforted and encouraged vnder ſo worthy a fauourer, to proceede in the like ſtudies, and according to my bounden

duty, inceſſātly with al humility pray to Amightie God, for his glory, not onely to preſerue your Honor in all happineſſe, to continue you honorable vpon earth, but alſo to bee farre more adorned, to reigne with a Celeſtiall Crowne of glory in the Kingdome of heauen.
            
               Your Honors in all Chriſtian duty to be commanded: I. A.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            An Apologie of the Author to the Reader.
            
            O Wretched man that I am! What am I, that dare vndertake (being but duſt and aſhes, wormes meate) to enter into a deſcription of the ſacred and Coeleſtiall Kingdome of heauen? which is in all things inſcrutable, and vnſearchable, and in all reſpects infinite. It exceedeth the power of our Eloquence, & the capacity of our Intelligence, in ſo much, that no mortall man can comprehend it.
            Much leſſe that I, of men one of the meaneſt, of a defiled heart, and polluted lips, of weak

memory, and of a ſhallow vnderstanding, ſhould attempt and preſume to define or deſcribe the vnſpeakeable Ioyes or ſecrets of heauen.
            Yet for as much as the Lords Pen-men haue, according to our capacity, deſcribed in ſundry places, diuers particulars of the heauenly bleſſedneſſe; I haue briefly, according to the rules of ſobriety, collected and conſidered the ſame for our instruction and comfort. And as the authority of the ſpeaker or writer is loſt, when as the voyce and life is not affected with the worke it ſelfe: I doe therefore hartily deſire al thoſe (although vnknowne vnto many) that ſhall either reade, or heare this ſhort and briefe Coeleſtiall Looking-glaſſe, and gather

comforts vnto their ſoules our of theſe my labours, to pray vnto our Lord Ieſus Chriſt for mee, to giue me his grace, and direct mee with his holy Spirit, that what I either preach or write, I may both in life and doctrine expreſſe and performe the ſame vnto my liues end: that whilſt I endeauour to raiſe others, I may raiſe my ſelfe from all my ſinnes, to the glory of Gods holy name, and the ſaluation of my owne ſoule. Amen.
            
            
               I. A.
            
            
               
                  Qui ceſſat eſſe melior, ceſſat eſſe bonus.
                  Hee that ceaſſeth to be better, ceaſſeth to be good,
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A Coeleſtiall Looking-glaſſe, to behold the Beauty of Heauen.
            
            
               
                  OF all the workes of God, Heauen is the moſt ancient; Gen. 1.1. Pſal. 33.6 Pſal. 136.5 Act. 14.15. Reu. 14.7. it was made at the beginning of the world, and it was the firſt of all Gods works:1 Cor. 2.9 Eſay 64.4. Pſal. 31.20 the felicity thereof cannot bee imagined, Mat. 5.12 1. Pet. 4.14 neither the bleſſings numbered: ſo incomparable as cannot be equalled; of ſuch value as none can comprize it, ſo

great ae cannot bee meaſured, Dani. 7.14. Luk. 1.33. Dan. 2.44. and of ſuch eternity, as neuer can be ended,
               The very name of heauen to all is louely, becauſe it is a hauen Math. 11.28.29. Iere. 6.16. for reſt, Reu. 2.7. a Paradiſe for pleaſure, Reu. 21.2 a City for beauty, Mat. 16.19. Luk. 19.12. a Kingdome of ſtate, 1. Pet. 5.4 2. Tim. 4.8. a Crowne of glory, Reu. 22 1 Mat. 19.28. Reu. 3.21. a Throne of Maieſty, Mat. 19.29 & life euerlaſting: it is deſired of all, hoped for of many, Ioh. 6.44 but onely enioyed of the beſt.
               All religions ayme at it, the wicked doe wiſh for it, the Iews expect it, the ſchiſmatiques ſeeke for it, the Turkes would enioy it, and the Papiſts thinke to merit it:Ioh. 3.3. Mat. 19.28 2 Cor. 5.17 Iam. 1.18. 1. Pet. 1.3.But the true Proteſtant, the regenerate

Chriſtian, Mat. 9.29 1. Pet. 1.9. by faith Ezech. 18.21. and repentance, begges it, Lu. 12.32 Ioh. 3.15.16 and he through the merits of Ieſus Chriſt ſhall enioy it.
               As Heauen is the2. Cor. 12.2. higheſt place, Reu. 3.21 the Throne of God, the Court of Deut. 10.17. the great King, Exo. 6.3. the mighty Iehouah: So it is the Reu. 21.2.10. Citty of ſafety,Pſ. 24.4. the harbour of the Iuſt, 1 Pet. 2.9 Titus 2.14 the peculiar people, 2. Cor. 5.17. the regenerate Chriſtians, the Iohn. 12.36. Ephe. 5.8. Children of Light, Mat. 25.34. the Elect by Gods Preordination, where al are Kings, Gal. 4.7. Rom. 8.17. and heires with Chriſt, Rom. 9.23. inueſted with glory,2. Tim. 4.8. 1. Pet. 5.4 crowned with Maieſty,Reu. 7.9. clothed with ſecurity, decked with delights, repleniſhed with pleaſure, garniſhed

with all graces, adorned with beauty, furniſhed with the beſt company, and flouriſhing with the flower of all Nations.
               
               The chiefeſt reaſons that the vnderſtanding of mortall man can comprehend to the deſcribing of Gods Kingdome, are ſpecially theſe foure:
               
                  Firſt, by the Titles.
               
               
                  Secondly, by the Magnitude.
               
               
                  Thirdly, by the Ioyes.
               
               
                  And fourthly, by the Eternity.
               
               Heauen is deſcribed by the titles. To ſet forth heauen more fully to our vnderſtanding, it hath diuers

glorious Titles, and names in the holy Scriptures:Mat. 25.14 Tim. 2.18. 2. Pet. 1-11 Luke 24. Reu. 21.11. Reu. 2.3. Marke 16. Luke 10. it is called an heauenly Kingdome, a bleſſed and euerlaſting Kingdome, a Celeſtiall and heauenly Ieruſalem, a Kingdome of glory, a Throne of Maieſty, a Paradiſe of pleaſure, the glory of God, and life euerlaſting.
               In the Kingdome of heauen are three ſacred and moſt bleſſed orders or dignities: The firſt of them is Superceleſtiall, containing Cherubins, Seraphins, and Thrones: The ſecond Celeſtiall, containing Dominions, Principalities and Powers: The third Subceleſtiall, containing Vertues, Arch-Angels, and Angels.
               
               
                  
                  Reu. 21.10
                  Iohn, to ſhew vnto vs in ſome meaſure, the vnſpeakable glory of heauen, deſcribes the place vnder the name of a great City; comparing it with the moſt precious things of this world; inuironed round about with a great wall for the ſafegard of the Citizens.
               The wall is made of Iaſper, to note the riches therof: in the wall are twelue gates, which doe open vnto euery quarter of the world, ſignifying the willingneſſe of heauen to accept the Elect in euery place, on euery ſide, and from euery Countrey and Nation.
               
                  Reue. 21.2 Eſay 60.11Theſe gates are made of pearles, and euery gate is a pearle vndiuided, without

blemiſh:Reu. 21.25 They are euer open, ſignifying ſecurity, to receiue with welcome, all that enter in.
               At thoſe gates are twelue Angels, whoſe names are written vpon the gates,Reu. 21.2. and they are the twelue Tribes of Iſrael. They are porters to keepe out all ſtrangers,Reu. 21.21 Reu. 22.15 and to admit with welcom all Citizens. Euery gate hath a porter, to ſhew vigilancy: Euery porter is a Tribe, to ſhew the dignity:Reu. 21, 2, Euery porters name is on the gate, to the end that euery one ſhould execute his owne charge.
               The wall wherein thoſe gates are,Reu. 21, 14 hath twelue foū
                  dations, to betoken a ſure & firme eſtabliſhed groundworke.

In thoſe foundations are writtē the names of the Lambes twelue Apoſtles, implying, that the foundation of the City is layde vpon the Rocke of Faith.
               
                  Reu. 21.2.The foundations of the wall of the City are garniſhed with all manner of pretious ſtones.
               
               The firſt is Iaſper, to figure proſperity; the ſecond Saphir, in ſigne of truth; the third a Chalcedony, to note perfection; the fourth an Emerald, in to-of victory; the fift Sardonix, implying ſecurity; the ſixt Sardius, to demonſtrate fidelity; the ſeuenth Chryſolite, to expreſſe purity; the eight Berill, to marke

out content; the ninth a Topaz, alluding vnto plenty; the tenth a Chryſopraſus, to deſigne beatitude; the eleuenth a Iacinth, to ſpeake of Eternity; the twelfth an Amethyſt, to manifeſt loue. And thus is the wall garniſhed, to ſhew vs the treaſure and felicity thereof.
               The City it ſelfe is all of pure gold,Reu. 21.21 Reu. 21, 23 Reu. 22, 1, 2, both the buildings and ſtreets are gold, ſhining like cleere glaſſe: the light of this City is Chriſt: from his ſeate proceedeth a riuer as cleere as Cryſtall; on both ſides the bankes growes the tree of Life, that yeelds continuall fruite; it beareth twelue times euery yeare, twelue

manner of fruits, to repreſent the quantity, and variety of the pleaſures and ioyes of heauen: of which riuer and fruits all the inhabitants may eate and drink their fill.Reue. 21.6
               
               The riuer is neuer drying, nor the fruits fayling, for the Lord maintaineth the ſame. There is no winter to nip the fruits, no ſommer to conſume the water; nor fall of the leafe to diſgarniſh the tree of his beauty: There is no heate to vexe, nor cold to grieue, no hunger nor thirſt, no malice nor ſtrife, no anger, no pride, no diſſimulation nor deceit, no couetouſnes nor griping, no whoredom or vncleanneſſe, no ſwearing

or profaning, no diſobedience.
               There is no coſener to collogue, no paraſite to diſſemble, no foe to fight, no inferiour to yeelde obedience, no forrainers but brethren, no ſtrangers but all of the houſhold of faith,Rom. 8.17 Titus 3.7, Children of one holy Father, coheires with Chriſt their elder brother.
               They ſhall not neede the helpe of any Doctor for Phyſicke, nor any Lawyer to pleade for their right:Mat. 24.25 the whole Kingdome is their owne, and their Letters patents of Donation are recorded.
               This is the principal inheritance of the Saints, and the habitation for all the

Elect children of God, prepared for them from the beginning of the world.
               To conclude this point, make vs, O Lord, to bee of the number of them whom thou haſt ordained to reign with thee in thy heauenly Kingdome: write vs in the booke of Life, that we may bee in the aſſembly of thy righteous Saints: and giue vs grace to bee ſorrowfull for our ſinnes, fearefull of thy Iudgements, thankefull for thy benefites, louers of thy mercies, and mindefull of thy preſence; that we may be diligent to pleaſe thee, haue grace to know thee and hope to embrace thee, through the merits of Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               Secondly, Heauen is deſcribed by the Magnitude.
               
               AS Heauen is a moſt glorious Kingdome, ſo it is a moſt ſpacious and large place: the Angel meaſuring the ſame,Reu. 21, 16, 17, findeth it to bee euery way 12000. furlongs, euery which furlong hauing in it twenty fiue Geometricall paces, eight of them doth make a mile, which is fiue thouſand foote: So that theſe twelue thouſand furlongs, are made fifteene thouſand miles, which beeing made ſquare by addition, there

are thrice ſo many, for the other three parts, or three ſquares of the City.
               This is that large Kingdome which containeth the innumerable multitude of all the Elect children of God. Thouſand thouſands doe miniſter vnto him, and ten thouſand times an hundred thouſand, doe ſtand about the ſeate and Throne of God:Reu. 7, 9, Of euery Tribe of Iſrael were ſealed twelue thouſand: and great multituds which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds and people: and the Inhabitants of heauen exceede in number the ſtars in the firmament, or the ſands by the Sea ſhore.
               
                  Baruch 3, 24.O Iſraell, how great is

the houſe of God, and how large is the place of his poſſeſſion. In domo Patris mei multae ſunt manſiones,
                  Iohn. 14, 2. In my Fathers houſe there are many manſions, ſayth our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt: Whereof this proportion may be made, that as far as the whole world in greatneſſe and compaſſe of place doth exceede the wombe of one priuat womā, ſo much doth the place of bliſſe paſſe all the whole worlde in greatneſſe and quantity. And as much as a man liuing in this world doth paſſe a child in his mothers wombe, in ſtrength of body, beauty, wit, vnderſtanding and knowledge; ſo much and ſo farre more

doth a Saint in heauen paſſe men of this world in all heauenly knowledge.
               This place is ſo great & ſpacious, as if wee compare the whole cōpaſſe of earthly things with the multitude of heauenly, all that euer God made beſides heauen it ſelfe, is but as a prick or ſmall point, or period, beeing matched with the workemanſhippe of heauen.
               This is that large and glorious Kingdom of God, which he hath prepared to ſet forth his glory, and to expreſſe vnto vs his mighty power.
               To conclude this point, though heauen be large and great, which no tongue can

expreſſe; yet ſtreight is the way, & narrow is the gate to goe into it: Many ſeeke it, and few finde it: for the ſtreitneſſe of the way is affliction; ye narrownes of the gate is true contrition; the Suburbs is the Church; & the dore is Chriſt, by whō (if we truly ſeek) we ſhal ſurely enter in. O let vs therefore ſtriue to auoyd ſin, ye our wayes may be verity; our paths piety; Gods holy ſpirit our cōductor; his Word our director; Our Faith holde the Anchor, while Grace ſteeres the Helme: Let our teares bée the ſeas, and our ſighes the gales of wind, to arriue at Gods heauenly Kingdom; which God hath prepared

vs; Chriſt hath merited for vs, the holy Spirit doth aſſure vs, and our godly life will witneſſe the ſame vnto vs: which the Father of mercy, euen for his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, for euer grant vnto vs. Amen.
               
            
            
               Thirdly, Heauen is deſcribed by the Ioyes.
               
               NOw as Heauen is a moſt glorious place, a Kingdome which hath no end or meaſure, either in power or glory:2. Pet. 1.11 1. Cor. 2, 9 So in the ſame are contained Ioyes vnſpeakeable. As a learned Father ſaith, that it is an eaſier matter to know

what God is not, then to know what hee is: It is much eaſier to tell what is not in heauen, then to tell what is there: the ioyes thereof are ſo great, that all the Arithmeticians in the world cannot number; the Geometricians meaſure, nor Rhetoricians with all their eloquence vtter and expreſſe the ſame: it doth exceede the power of our eloquence, and the capacity of all our intelligence.
               Saint Paule was rapt into Heauen,1 Cor. 2.9. Eſay 64.4, Pſ. 31.20. and ſaw the ioyes thereof: & they were ſo exceeding great, that his tongue was not able to expreſſe them: Therefore he ſaith, that neither eye hath ſeene, nor eare hath heard,

nor the heart of man conceiued the greatnes of heauenly ioyes. They which are there wiſh nothing but they haue it before them; they deſire nothing but they enioy it; they dwell in loue, they liue in peace, and continue in the fruition of all bleſſedneſſe.
               
                  Mat. 5.8, Reu. 19, 9, Pſal. 64.4. Ioh. 3.33,Bleſſed is their eſtate, bleſſed their beginning, their preſent beeing, and their neuer ending: They are crowned with ioy and gladneſſe, and remaine for euer in a moſt bleſſed eſtate. As they haue beene here members militant, there they are all triumphant, all Kings reigning, and all victoriouſly triumphing. There the King is

Verity,Rom. 3, 4. and the law Loue and Charity, the honor Equity, the peace Felicity, and the life Eternity.Luk. 9, 33,
               
               If Peter ſaid onely vpon Chriſt his transfiguration, it is good to be héere: O how much more ſhall the childrē of God reioyce in the Kingdome of heauen, when they enioy not onely Heauens beauty, and the beholding of Chriſt in his glory, but ſhall themſelues bée glorified,Mat. 13, 43 Dan. 12, 3, Mat. 13, 43, and ſhine as the Sunne in the Kingdome of their Father?
               All the Ioyes, Pleaſures,1 Cor. 2, 9 Delights, & comforts that this worlde can yéelde, are but ſhaddowes, if they bée compared vnto the true Ioyes in the Kingdome of

Heauen.Eſay 64.4, Phil. 3, 21 Dan. 12.3 The ioyes of our bodyes ſhall be infinite, the ioyes of our ſouls vnſpeakable: Our earthly and vile bodyes ſhall bée made like vnto the moſt glorious body of the Son of God, like vnto the brightneſſe of the Firmament, like vnto the Angels, like vnto the Sun in his ſtrength.
               
                  Reu. 22.4. 1 Ioh. 3, 2, Exo, 34, 30We ſhall ſée God face to face; we ſhall ſée him as hée is; all the parts and powers both of body and ſoule, ſhal be filled with the ſight, preſence, and fruition of God. As the Lords glory reflected vpon Moſes, did make his face to ſhine vpon the Mount: So will our Sauiour Jeſus Chriſt refine and beautifie with the

perfection of grace,Phil. 3, 21, that they may bee like vnto his glorious body. It was one of our Sauiors laſt requeſts in the behalf of his Church, Father, I will that thoſe whō thou haſt giuen me,
                  Ioh, 17, 24, 
                  be with mee where I am, that they may behold my glory. For the glory of Chriſt is ſo delightfull to be ſéene, ſo ſwéet to bée poſſeſſed, and ſo pleaſant to be inioyed; and his continuall preſence is ſo ioyfull vnto all the Saints in Heauen, that if the leaſt drop thereof ſhould deſcend into hell, it would ſweeten all the paines of the damned.
               The fountaine of Happineſſe is called by Diuines, viſio Dei beatifica, the ſight

of God which maketh vs happy. Haec ſola eſt ſummum bonum noſtrum, this onely ſight of God is our cheefeſt happineſſe: which Chriſt alſo confirmeth whē he ſaith to his Father, This is life euerlaſting,Ioh. 17, 3, that men know thee the liuing God, and Ieſus Chriſt whom thou haſt ſent.
               In ſeeing him, wée ſhall know the power of the Father, we ſhal know the wiſdome of the Sonne, and we ſhall know the goodneſſe of the holy Ghoſt; wee ſhall know the inuiſible nature of the moſt ſacred and bleſſed Trinity.
               
               This ſight of God is the full beatitude and glorification of man:Pſal. 16, 11 for in ſeeing

him, we ſhall poſſeſſe him; in poſſeſſing him, wee loue him; in louing him we ſhall praiſe him; and in praiſing him we ſhal liue and reigne with him: for hee is the Inheritance of his people, the poſſeſſion of their Felicity, and the reward of their expectation. He is ſupereminent aboue all, ſuperexcellent beyond all, and moſt abundant in Loue to all.
               All perſons generally haue the participation of ioy, and euery one in particular the fruition of glory. But this one thing let vs cōſider, that there is a twofold equality of proportion, & quantity of glory, which ariſeth not from the Obiect, Almighty God, which

is euer the ſame; but from man, the ſubiect, which is not in euery particular alike capable of glory: Yet happy, and thrice happy ſhall they bee, who ſhall bee partakers of the leaſt of heauenly glory.
               They that haue leaſt can deſire no more, and they that haue moſt, diſcerne no wants in others, but haue a contented pleaſure with profit; ſafety with ſolace, felicity with vnity, peace with perfection; and agreement with grace.
               Where Chriſt his righteouſneſſe is their holy rayment, and his perfect fulnes their ioyfull contentment: Their drinke is the moſt ſweete water of Life,Reu. 21.6. Angels

food their delicate nouriſhment: they ſhall haue the bleſſing of the holy Trinity, with all the ſpirituall riches & vnſpeakeable ioyes of heauen, to be powred vppon them.
               O who can tel the greatneſſe of this ioy? When & where togither ſhal meete the Head and the Body, Chriſt and his Church, the Prince of peace, and his Spouſe: our two old friends our ſoules and our bodyes, ſhall meete after ſo many yeeres of ſeparation, with Angels, Arch-angels, Cherubins and Seraphins, Patriarches, Prophets, Martyrs, Apoſtles, and all the bleſſed Saints of God: alſo fathers and mothers, huſbands

and wiues, maiſters and ſeruants, brothers and ſiſters, parents and childrē, neighbours and friends, all ſhall meete together: what cryes and ſhouts will there be for ioy? what clapping of hands and ſweete embracements one of another?
               O great ſhall be our ioyes when we behold our long-deſired purchaſe, which we haue ſo often wiſhed for: and moſt great ſhall bée our ioy, more then euer it was, when wee both with body and ſoule, ſhall ſée and behold our Creator as hee is; where wee all ſhall thinke one thing, and all ſhall ſing one ſong, Halleluiah, Saluation commeth of our God.
                  
O we ſhal not onely behold our moſt bleſſed Sauiour who ſo deerely bought vs, but we ſhal alſo reign with him, triumph with him, ſit in the iudgement ſeat with him, & iudge the very Angels with him. O what more hope could be thought vpon, except it were to bee Gods our ſelues? All the ioyes, all the riches, all the happines that heauen containeth, ſhall be powred vppon vs. To theſe ioyes, to theſe felicities, and to this bleſſed Inheritance, bring vs, O Lord, for thy deare Sonne Chriſt Ieſus his ſake.
            
            
               
               Fourthly, Heauen is deſcribed by the Eternity.
               
               As this Kingdome is full of ioyes vnſpeakeable, ſo the ioyes thereof are alſo eternall:Pſal. 145, Thy Kingdome is an euerlaſting kingdome, and thy Dominion indures throughout all generatiōs.
               
                  Dani. 2.3. Mat. 19.29, 2. Cor. 4 17 Ioh. 16.22.The God of heauen ſhal ſet vp a Kingdome which ſhal neuer be deſtroyed: this kingdom is life euerlaſting, this glory is eternall, theſe ioyes are permanent,1. Pet. 5.4. 1 Pet. 1.4. the Crowne neuer fadeth, the Saluation is perdurable, the Inheritance immortal, and the Habitation perpetuall.
               
                  The Author to the Hebrewes ſaith,Heb. 12.18. 
                  We receiue a kingdome which cannot be ſhaken. Saint Iohn heard in Pathmos great voyces from heauen, ſaying,Reu. 11. The Kingdomes of this world are our Lords, and his Chriſts, and he ſhall reigne for euermore.
               Thus God will beſtow vpon his Saints a glorious, ample, ioyfull, and a perpetuall kingdom, where they ſhall be ioyfull in an euerlaſting ioy. The ioyes of heauen are exquiſite, the felicity permanent, and the glory eternall: where faith hath her perfect worke in charity, Hope her deſired happineſſe, and loue a large ſcope in euerlaſting Vnity.
               
               
                  They that haue receiued here ſmal things for a time, ſhall receiue there great things for euer: they that haue beene faithfull here ouer a few things, ſhall bee made there rulers ouer many things: they that haue ſuffered ſorrow heere for a ſhort time, ſhall enter into ioy there for euer, which is called the ioy of the Lord: They that haue beleeued in God, ſhal reioice in his preſence for euer: they yt haue liued in his feare, ſhall liue without feare of any enemy for euer: they that haue kept holy the Lords Sabboths here, ſhall there kéepe holy day for euer: they that haue honored their Parēts, Miniſters, Maſters & Magiſtrates,

ſhall be honoured of God and Angels for euer: they that haue chaſtiſed their bodyes and ſuffered with Chriſt Ieſus, ſhall bee indued with the light of euerlaſting immortality, and reigne with him for euer: they that haue loued their neighbours ſhall be beloued of God for euer: they that haue mourned & ſorrowed, and truly lamented for their ſinne, ſhall receiue Crownes of glory for euer: they that haue watched & praied in the night, & faſted in the Bridegroomes abſence, ſhall now reſt in the day that hath no night, and be richly feaſted in the Kingdome of God for euer: They that haue labored in

the Lords Vineyard, ſhall there receiue the penny of eternall bliſſe for euer: they that haue ouercome the World, the Fleſh, and the Deuill, ſhall triumph in eternall glory with Chriſt, and his holy Angels for euer: and they that haue here wrung their hands for ſorrow, ſhal there clap their hands for ioy, for euer more.
               This ſhall be the bleſſed eſtate of all Gods Saints, that ſhall dwell in the kingdome of God for euer.
               Theſe cōſiderations cauſed the Patriarches, Prophets, and the Saints of the olde world to long for, & deſire that eternall, ſwéet, & moſt ioyfull inheritance

of Gods heauenly Kingdome. Toby, Iob,
                  2. King. 19. and Elias, wiſhed thēſelues in that Kingdome: Paule deſired to bee diſſolued,Phil. 3. and bee with Chriſt. Salomon counted all the glory of his Kingdome but vanity, and the continuance thereof but as a wéede. Dauid lamenteth yt hee is ſo long kept away frō this glorious & eternall Kingdome: Woe is mee, (ſaith hee) that I am conſtrained to dwell with Meſech, and to haue my habitation among the tents of Kedar. And againe, Like as the Hart deſireth the water brooks, ſo longeth my ſoule after thée, O God, my ſoule is athirſt for God; yea, euen for the liuing God: O

when ſhall I come to appeare before the preſence of God? And againe he ſaith that he ſhould vtterly haue fainted, but that he did reſt in hope of a better Kingdome, and beleeued verily in ſhort time, to ſee the goodneſſe of the Lord in the land of the Liuing.
               Why did Abraham forſake his own natural countrey, and his fathers houſe, and to goe out he knew not whither? Why did Moſes forſake Egypt,
                  Heb. 11. and refuſed to bee called the ſon of Pharaohs Daughter? Why did ſo many Saints, and holy men & women, leaue their ancient houſes and riches, and wander vp and downe in wilderneſſes & in mountaines,

and in dens & caues of the earth? Surely for this cauſe: they had reſpect vnto the recompence of the reward, that was Regnum Dei, the Kingdome of God: they counted their Countrey but baniſhment, and a curſed vale of miſery; their worldly glory but vanity; their dwelling and abode here but a Iayle, a priſō, or a dark dungeon; their pleaſures but ſorrow, mourning and teares: and all their doings were to this end, that they might enioy a better Inheritance, that is, this glorious kingdome of Almighty God.
               This is the Inheritance whereof the Apoſtle ſpeaketh,Heb. 12. 
                  Propoſito ſibi gaudio ſuſtinuit

crucem, He ſuffered affliction for the ioy that was ſet before him.
               This is that pretious pearle and treaſure, which the Merchant found in the field,Mat. 13. and ſold all that hee had, and bought it. This is that Inheritance,Phil. 3. in reſpect whereof S. Paul eſtéemeth all the world as dung. The ſame Inheritāce for which Ignatius, that godly Martyr, biddeth this price; Fire, gallowes,Hieron. in catalogo. 3. beaſts, breaking of bones, quartering of my members, cruſhing of my body, al the torments of the Deuill together, let them come vpon mee, ſo I may enioy the treaſure of Heauen.
               Thus you ſee, that our

                  Summum bonum, our chiefe good thing; our Vltimus finis, our laſt farewell; our Terminus ad qu
                        •
                     m, the end whereunto all our actions, endeauours, hopes and deſires doe tend, and bend, is that we may liue for euer.
               And ſo the end of all our preaching, the ſcope of all our hearing, the fruit of all our beleeuing, the effect of all our knowledge, and the maine point of all our profeſſion, is, to liue, that wee may enioy this euerlaſting Kingdome.
               To conclude, and briefly end, (though Gods kingdome of glory, and the glory of Gods kingdome hath no end:) The Lord in his mercy correct our preſent

ſinfulneſſe, erect our further weakneſſe, and direct our future frailty; that we may earneſtly deſire, aduiſedly ſearch, truly know, and perfectly fulfil al things that may pleaſe him, wherby we may walke vprightly in his wayes, and liue truly in his Loue, to our comfort and his glory; that in the end we may obtaine that long deſired and beautifull Diadem, wherewith he crowneth his Elect; and reigne with him in his euerlaſting Kingdome, to behold the delightful countenance of his moſt glorious Maieſty, & to be filled with the excéeding ſwéetnes of his moſt bleſſed preſence, which is life for euer.
            
         
         
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            If Logicks Art could heauenly ioyes define,
            or Geometry Coeleſtiall wayes but meaſure,
            here mortall man might ſhew thoſe works diuine
            Now in the heauens where Saints do reigne with pleaſure.
            arithmetitians ne're can number right,
            Nor yet the tongues of Rhetoricians rare,
            deſcribe that bliſſe which Saints haue in Gods ſight,
            Reioycing ſtill with Chriſt our Sauiour there.
            eſteeme you this Coeleſt
                     •
                  all Looking-glaſſe,
            
            Which I haue penn'd, Heauens beauty to behold;
            each day and night pray God may bring to paſſe
            Such ioyes vnto our ſoules for to vnfold.
            
               Nonne Deus eras via?
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   